 
18
Conservation Biology, Pages 18–30
Volume 14, No. 1, February 2000
Review of Ecological Effects of Roads on Terrestrial 
and Aquatic Communities
STEPHEN C. TROMBULAK* AND CHRISTOPHER A. FRISSELL†
*Department of Biology, Middlebury College, Middlebury, VT 05753, U.S.A., email trombulak@middlebury.edu 
†Flathead Lake Biological Station, University of Montana, 311 Bio Station Lane, Polson, MT 59860-9659, U.S.A.
Abstract: Roads are a widespread and increasing feature of most landscapes. We reviewed the scientific liter-
ature on the ecological effects of roads and found support for the general conclusion that they are associated
with negative effects on biotic integrity in both terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. Roads of all kinds have
seven general effects: mortality from road construction, mortality from collision with vehicles, modification
of animal behavior, alteration of the physical environment, alteration of the chemical environment, spread
of exotics, and increased use of areas by humans. Road construction kills sessile and slow-moving organisms,
injures organisms adjacent to a road, and alters physical conditions beneath a road. Vehicle collisions affect
the demography of many species, both vertebrates and invertebrates; mitigation measures to reduce roadkill
have been only partly successful. Roads alter animal behavior by causing changes in home ranges, move-
ment, reproductive success, escape response, and physiological state. Roads change soil density, temperature,
soil water content, light levels, dust, surface waters, patterns of runoff, and sedimentation, as well as adding
heavy metals (especially lead), salts, organic molecules, ozone, and nutrients to roadside environments.
Roads promote the dispersal of exotic species by altering habitats, stressing native species, and providing
movement corridors. Roads also promote increased hunting, fishing, passive harassment of animals, and
landscape modifications. Not all species and ecosystems are equally affected by roads, but overall the pres-
ence of roads is highly correlated with changes in species composition, population sizes, and hydrologic and
geomorphic processes that shape aquatic and riparian systems. More experimental research is needed to com-
plement post-hoc correlative studies. Our review underscores the importance to conservation of avoiding con-
struction of new roads in roadless or sparsely roaded areas and of removal or restoration of existing roads to
benefit both terrestrial and aquatic biota.
Revisión de los Efectos de Carreteras en Comunidades Terrestres y Acuáticas
Resumen: Las carreteras son una característica predominante y en incremento de la mayoría de los paisajes.
Revisamos la literatura científica sobre los efectos ecológicos de las carreteras y encontramos sustento para la
conclusión general de que las carreteras están asociadas con efectos negativos en la integridad biótica tanto
de ecosistemas terrestres como acuáticos. Las carreteras de cualquier tipo ocasionan siete efectos generales:
mortalidad ocasionada por la construcción de la carretera; mortalidad debida a la colisión con vehículos;
modificaciones en la conducta animal; alteración del ambiente físico; alteración del ambiente químico; dis-
persión de especies exóticas e incremento en el uso de áreas por humanos. La construcción de carreteras
elimina a organismos sésiles y a organismos de lento movimiento, lesiona a organismos adyacentes a la car-
retera y altera las condiciones físicas debajo ella misma. Las colisiones con vehículos afectan la demografía
de muchas especies tanto de vertebrados como invertebrados; las medidas de mitigación para reducir la pér-
dida de animales por colisiones con vehículos han sido exitosas solo de manera parcial. Las carreteras al-
teran la conducta animal al ocasionar cambios en el rango de hogar, movimientos, éxito reproductivo, re-
spuesta de escape y estado fisiológico. Las carreteras cambian la densidad del suelo, temperatura, contenido
de agua en el suelo, niveles de luz, polvo, aguas superficiales, patrones de escurrimiento y sedimentación,
además de agregar metales pesados (especialmente plomo), sales, moléculas orgánicas, ozono y mutrientes a
los ambientes que atraviesan. Las carreteras promueven la dispersión de especies exóticas al alterar los hábi-
Paper submitted February 8, 1999; revised manuscript accepted July 21, 1999.

Conservation Biology
Volume 14, No. 1, February 2000
Trombulak & Frissell
Ecological Effects of Roads
19
tats, al estresar a las especies nativas y proveer corredores para movimiento. Las carreteras también pro-
mueven el incremento de la caza y la pesca, el hostigamiento pasivo de animales y modificaciones del
paisaje. No todas las especies ni todos los ecosistemas son afectados por las carreteras de igual forma, pero en
general la presencia de carreteras está altamente correlacionada con cambios en la composición de especies,
los tamaños poblacionales y los procesos hidrológicos y geomorfológicos que afectan a la estructura de siste-
mas acuáticos y reparios. Se necesita más investigación experimental para complementar estudios correlati-
vos post-hoc. Nuestra revisión hace énfasis en que en trabajos de conservación es importante evitar la con-
strucción de nuevas carreteras en áreas carentes de ellas o en áreas con pocas carreteras, además de remover
o restaurar carreteras existentes con la finalidad de beneficiar tanto a la biota acuática como la terrestre.
construction contributes to direct mortality has not been
estimated as has direct mortality from other forms of
habitat destruction (e.g., Petranka et al. 1993). The fact
that road construction kills individual organisms is obvi-
ous, however. The magnitude of such construction is
not trivial; the 13,107,812 km of road lanes of all types
in the conterminous United States, with an average
width of 3.65 m per lane, have destroyed at least
4,784,351 ha of land and water bodies that formerly sup-
ported plants, animals, and other organisms (U.S. De-
partment of Transportation 1996). The actual number is
likely much higher because this estimate does not in-
clude shoulder pavement and land peripheral to the
roadbed that is cleared during construction.
Construction may physically injure organisms adjacent
to the path of construction. Roads built for extraction of
white fir result in damage to trees that is visible up to
30 m from the road (Trafela 1987). Such damage con-
tributes to a decline of up to 30% in forest productivity
per rotation, due in part to a decline in growth of dam-
aged trees. Construction also alters the physical condi-
tions of the soil underneath and adjacent to the road. Ri-
ley (1984) showed that road construction increases soil
compaction up to 200 times relative to undisturbed
sites. These changes likely decrease the survival of soil
biota that are not killed directly. Direct transfer of sedi-
ment and other material to streams and other water bod-
ies at road crossings is an inevitable consequence of
road construction (Richardson et al. 1975; Seyedbagheri
1996). High concentrations of suspended sediment may
directly kill aquatic organisms and impair aquatic pro-
ductivity (Newcombe & Jensen 1996).
Mortality from Collision with Vehicles
Mortality of animals from collision with vehicles is well
documented. Many reviews of the taxonomic breadth of
the victims of vehicle collision have been published
(e.g., Groot Bruinderink & Hazebroek 1996). Few if any
terrestrial species of animal are immune. Large mammals
ranging in size from moose (Alces alces) to armadillos
(Dasypus novemcinctus) are the best-documented road-
kills, probably due to interest in their demography and
to their size (Bellis & Graves 1971; Puglisi et al. 1974;
Introduction
Among the most widespread forms of modification of the
natural landscape during the past century has been the con-
struction and maintenance of roads (Diamondback 1990;
Bennett 1991; Noss & Cooperrider 1994). As conservation
biologists seek to understand the forces that influence the
viability of populations and the overall health of ecosys-
tems, it is important that we understand the scope of the
ecological effects of roads of all types, especially important
as conservation biologists are asked to participate in the de-
velopment and implementation of strategies to protect or
restore elements of biological diversity and integrity.
Roads of all kinds affect terrestrial and aquatic ecosys-
tems in seven general ways: (1) increased mortality from
road construction, (2) increased mortality from collision
with vehicles, (3) modification of animal behavior, (4) al-
teration of the physical environment, (5) alteration of the
chemical environment, (6) spread of exotic species, and
(7) increased alteration and use of habitats by humans.
These general effects overlap somewhat. In some cases
animals modify their behavior and avoid roads because of
concentrated human activity along roads. Roads may fa-
cilitate the spread of invasive species by disrupting native
communities and changing physical habitats. Roads may
fragment populations through roadkill and road avoid-
ance. Despite the difficulty of categorizing discretely the
causal basis in every example, these seven categories
provide a useful framework for assessing what is known
and unknown about the ecological effects of roads.
Selective road removal, relocation, or remediation may
provide ecological benefits in certain situations. Yet, al-
though roads are commonly identified as important cor-
relates or indicators of loss of ecological health (e.g.,
Noss & Cooperrider 1994), the specific mechanisms by
which biota are affected are often complicated or uncer-
tain. Therefore, mitigation or treatment of specific ef-
fects, whether during road design or in post-construction
remediation, can be costly and fraught with uncertainty.
Mortality from Road Construction
Road construction kills any sessile or slow-moving or-
ganism in the path of the road. The extent to which road

20
Ecological Effects of Roads
Trombulak & Frissell
Conservation Biology
Volume 14, No. 1, February 2000
Reilly & Green 1974; Holroyd 1979; Wilkins & Schmidly
1980; Bashore et al. 1985; Davies et al. 1987; Bangs et al.
1989; Palomares & Delibes 1992).
Roadkill among many other species includes American
Kestrels (Falco sparverius; Varland et al. 1993), Barn
Owls (Tyto alba; Newton et al. 1991), Northern Saw-
whet Owls and Eastern Screech Owls (Aegolius acadi-
cus and Otis asio; Loos & Kerlinger 1993), tropical for-
est birds (Novelli et al. 1988), garter snakes (Dalrymple
& Reichenbach 1984), granivorous birds (Dhindsa et al.
1988), American crocodile (Crocodylus acutus; Kushlan
1988), green iguanas (Iguana iguana; Rodda 1990),
desert snakes (Rosen & Lowe 1994), toads (van Gelder
1973), plus a wide range of invertebrates, especially in-
sects (H. C. Seibert & Conover 1991).
This form of mortality can have substantial effects on a
population’s demography. Vehicle collision is the pri-
mary cause of death for moose in the Kenai National
Wildlife Refuge in Alaska (Bangs et al. 1989) and for
Barn Owls in the United Kingdom (Newton et al. 1991),
the second highest form of mortality for Iberian lynx
(Felis pardina) in southwestern Spain (after hunting;
Ferreras et al. 1992), and the third highest form for
white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus) in New York
(Sarbello & Jackson 1985) and wolves (Canis lupus)
in Minnesota (Fuller 1989). Roadkill is a limiting factor
in the recovery of the endangered American crocodile in
southern Florida (Kushlan 1988) and is contributing to
the endangerment of the prairie garter snake (Thamno-
phis radix radix; Dalrymple & Reichenbach 1984).
Roadkill is often nonspecific with respect to age, sex,
and condition of the individual animal (e.g., Bangs et al.
1989).
Amphibians may be especially vulnerable to roadkill
because their life histories often involve migration be-
tween wetland and upland habitats, and individuals are
inconspicuous and sometimes slow-moving. Roads can
be demographic barriers that cause habitat and popula-
tion fragmentation ( Joly & Morand 1997). In the Nether-
lands, for example, roads with high traffic volume nega-
tively affect occupancy of ponds by moor frogs (Rana
arvilis; Vos & Chardon 1998). In Ontario, the local
abundance of toads and frogs is inversely related to traf-
fic density on adjacent roads, but the incidence of road-
kill relative to abundance is higher on highly trafficked
roads (Fahrig et al. 1995). Thus, even though popula-
tions in high-traffic areas have apparently already been
depressed from cumulative road mortality, they con-
tinue to suffer higher proportionate rates of roadkill.
Mitigation measures have been employed in different
locations with varying degrees of success (e.g., Yanes et
al. 1995). For example, underpasses on Interstate 75
have been only partially successful in reducing roadkill
of Florida panthers (Felis concolor coryi; Foster & Hum-
phrey 1991). Despite mitigation efforts, roads are likely
to be a persistent source of mortality for many species.
In general, mortality increases with traffic volume (e.g.,
Rosen & Lowe 1994; Fahrig et al. 1995). Some species
are less likely to be killed on high-speed roads than on
medium-speed roads because the former usually have
vegetation cleared back further from the road’s shoul-
der, creating less attractive habitat and greater visibility
for both animals and drivers. Other species, however,
are attracted to the modified habitat alongside and in the
meridians of high-speed roads (Cowardin et al. 1985),
making them population sinks.
Modification of Animal Behavior
The presence of a road may modify an animal’s behavior
either positively or negatively. This can occur through
five mechanisms: home range shifts, altered movement
patterns, altered reproductive success, altered escape re-
sponse, and altered physiological state.
Black bears (Ursus americanus) in North Carolina
shift their home ranges away from areas with high road
densities (Brody & Pelton 1989), as do grizzly bears in the
Rocky Mountains (Ursus horribilis; McLellan & Shackle-
ton 1988). Elk (Cervus elaphus) in Montana prefer
spring feeding sites away from visible roads (Grover &
Thompson 1986), and both elk and mule deer (Odocoileus
hemionus) in Colorado in winter prefer areas .200 m
from roads (Rost & Bailey 1979). Wolves will not estab-
lish themselves in areas with road densities greater than
a region-specific critical threshold ( Jensen et al. 1986;
Thurber et al. 1994), probably as a result of a relation-
ship between road density and hunting pressure. Moun-
tain lion (Felis concolor) home ranges are situated in ar-
eas with lower densities of improved dirt roads and
hard-surface roads (Van Dyke et al. 1986), suggesting
that either mountain lions avoid these areas or road con-
struction tends to avoid their prime habitat. Elephants
(Loxodonta africana) in northeastern Gabon preferen-
tially locate in forests away from both roads and villages
(Barnes et al. 1991). Both Black Vultures (Coragyps
atratus) and Turkey Vultures (Cathartes aura), on the
other hand, preferentially establish home ranges in areas
with greater road densities (Coleman & Fraser 1989),
probably because of the increase in carrion.
Roads may also alter patterns of animal movement.
Caribou (Rangifer tarandus) in Alaska preferentially
travel along cleared winter roads that lead in the direc-
tion of their migration (Banfield 1974). Although the
road may enhance caribou movement, it results in in-
creased mortality from vehicle collisions and predation
by wolves. After calving, female caribou with calves
avoid roads (Klein 1991). The land snail Arianta arbus-
torum avoids crossing roads, even those that are un-
paved and as narrow as 3 m (Baur & Baur 1990), and ex-
tend their movements along road verges. Reluctance to
cross roads is also seen in white-footed mice (Peromyscus

Conservation Biology
Volume 14, No. 1, February 2000
Trombulak & Frissell
Ecological Effects of Roads
21
leucopus; Merriam et al. 1989) and many other rodent
species (Oxley et al. 1974), even when the road is nar-
row and covered only with gravel. Cotton rats
(Sigmodon hispidus) and prairie voles (Microtus ochro-
gaster) avoid roads as narrow as 3 m (Swihart & Slade
1984). Black bear almost never cross interstate highways
in North Carolina (Brody & Pelton 1989) but will cross
roads with less traffic volume. Roads act as barriers to
gene flow in the common frog (Rana temporaria) in
Germany, leading to significant genetic differentiation
among populations (Reh & Seitz 1990). Other animals
that show a reluctance to cross roads include pronghorn
antelope (Antilocapra americana; Bruns 1977) and moun-
tain lions (Van Dyke et al. 1986).
Some animals seem unaffected by the presence of
roads, at least at some spatial scales. Based on a study of
20 wolverines, Hornocker and Hash (1981) concluded
that the sizes and shapes of home ranges of wolverines
where they are still found in northwestern Montana are
independent of the presence of highways. Similarly, the
presence of highways explained none of the allelic dif-
ferentiation among populations of brown hares (
 
Lepus
europaeus) in Austria (Hartl et al. 1989).
Roads may affect an animal’s reproductive success.
Productivity of Bald Eagles (Haliaeetus leucocephalus)
in Oregon (Anthony & Isaacs 1989) and Illinois (Paruk
1987) declines with proximity to roads, and they prefer-
entially nest away from roads. Golden Eagles (Aquila
chrysaetos) also prefer to nest away from human distur-
bances, including roads (Fernandez 1993). The reduced
nesting success of eagles in proximity to roads may be
more a function of the presence of humans than of the
road itself; nesting failure by Golden Eagles in Scotland
correlates with how easy it is for people to approach but
not with proximity to roads themselves (Watson and
Dennis 1992). Relative to habitat availability, Sandhill
Cranes (Grus canadensis) avoid nesting near paved and
gravel public roads (Norling et al. 1992); they do not
avoid private roads with low-traffic volume (Norling et
al. 1992) and can habituate to roads over time (Dwyer &
Tanner 1992). Mallards (Anas platyrhynchos) in North
Dakota, on the other hand, prefer road rights-of-way for
nesting (Cowardin et al. 1985), perhaps because of a
lower level of predation there.
Roads can also alter escape responses. Pink-footed
Geese (Anser brachyrhynchus) in Denmark are more
easily disturbed when feeding near roads, flying away
when humans approach within 500 m, a greater dis-
tance than when feeding in areas without roads
(Madsen 1985). Both the Lapwing (Vanellus vanellus)
and Black-tailed Godwit (Limosa limosa) are more eas-
ily disturbed near roads and have disturbance distances
of 480–2000 m depending on traffic volume (Van der
Zande et al. 1980). Less well known is the effect of roads
and vehicles on an animal’s physiological state. Mac-
Arthur et al. (1979) showed that heart rate and therefore
metabolic rate and energy expenditure of female big-
horn sheep (Ovis canadensis) increase near a road inde-
pendent of any use of the road. Roads contribute to frag-
mentation of populations through both increased
mortality and modification of behavior that makes ani-
mals less likely to cross roads. Fragmentation may be ac-
celerated by roads when spatially critical habitat patches
(e.g., “stepping stones”) become unoccupied as a result
of increased local mortality or reduced recolonization.
Disruption of the Physical Environment
A road transforms the physical conditions on and adja-
cent to it, creating edge effects with consequences that
extend beyond the time of the road’s construction. At
least eight physical characteristics of the environment
are altered by roads: soil density, temperature, soil water
content, light, dust, surface-water flow, pattern of run-
off, and sedimentation.
Long-term use of roads leads to soil compaction that
persists even after use is discontinued. Soil density on
closed forest roads continues to increase, particularly
during winter months (Helvey & Kochenderfer 1990).
Increased soil density can persist for decades: logging
skid trails in northeastern California over 40 years old
have soil that is 20% more compacted than soil in nearby
areas that have not been used as trails (Vora 1988).
The reduction of water vapor transport on a road with
a hard surface increases the surface temperature of a
road compared to bare soil, an effect that increases with
thickness of the road surface (Asaeda & Ca 1993). The
heat stored on the road surface is released into the atmo-
sphere at night, creating heat islands around roads. Ani-
mals respond to these heat islands: small birds (Whitford
1985) and snakes, for example, preferentially aggregate
on or near warm roads, increasing their risk of being hit
by cars and, at their northern range limits, reducing en-
ergetic demands for breeding.
During the dry season, the moisture content of soils
under roads declines even if the roads are not in use
(Helvey & Kochenderfer 1990), probably in response to
changes in soil porosity. Roads through forests also in-
crease the amount of light incident on the forest floor.
The amount of increase depends on how much of the
original canopy and lower strata remain, which depends
in turn on the width of the road and roadside verge. The
increase in light increases the density of species that pref-
erentially grow where light levels are high, such as early-
successional, disturbance-adapted species such as the
North American orchid Isotria medeoloides (Mehrhoff
1989).
Road traffic mobilizes and spreads dust, which when
settled on plants can block photosynthesis, respiration,
and transpiration and can cause physical injuries to
plants (Farmer 1993). These effects are sufficient to alter

22
Ecological Effects of Roads
Trombulak & Frissell
Conservation Biology
Volume 14, No. 1, February 2000
plant community structure, especially in communities
dominated by lichens and mosses (Auerbach et al. 1997).
Although most sediment enters water bodies through
overland flow or mass failure, dust from highly trafficked
roads can serve as a source of fine sediments, nutrients,
and contaminants to aquatic ecosystems (Gjessing et al.
1984).
Roads and bridges can alter the development of shore-
lines, stream channels, floodplains, and wetlands. Be-
cause of the energy associated with moving water, phys-
ical effects often propagate long distances from the site
of a direct road incursion (Richardson et al. 1975). Alter-
ation of hydrodynamics and sediment deposition can re-
sult in changes in channels or shorelines many kilome-
ters away, both down- and up-gradient of the road
crossing. The nature of such responses to channel and
shoreline alteration is not always predictable; it may de-
pend on the sequence of flood and sedimentation events
after the alteration is made. Roads on floodplains can re-
direct water, sediment, and nutrients between streams
and wetlands and their riparian ecosystems, to the detri-
ment of water quality and ecosystem health. Roads are
among the many human endeavors that impair natural
habitat development and woody debris dynamics in for-
ested floodplain rivers (Piégay & Landon 1997).
Road crossings commonly act as barriers to the move-
ment of fishes and other aquatic animals (Furniss et al.
1991). Although many headwater populations of salmo-
nid fishes are naturally migratory, they often persist to-
day as fragmented headwater isolates, largely because of
migration barriers created by road crossings and other
human developments that fail to provide for fish passage
(Kershner et al. 1997; Rieman et al. 1997). Salmonids
and other riverine fishes actively move into seasonal
floodplain wetlands and small valley-floor tributaries to
escape the stresses of main-channel flood flows (Copp
1989), but valley-bottom roads can destroy or block ac-
cess to these seasonally important habitats (Brown &
Hartman 1988). Persistent barriers may encourage local
selection for behaviors that do not include natural migra-
tion patterns, potentially reducing both the distribution
and productivity of a population.
Roads directly change the hydrology of slopes and
stream channels, resulting in alteration of surface-water
habitats that are often detrimental to native biota. Roads
intercept shallow groundwater flow paths, diverting the
water along the roadway and routing it efficiently to sur-
face-water systems at stream crossings (Megahan 1972;
Wemple et al. 1996). This can cause or contribute to
changes in the timing and routing of runoff (King & Ten-
nyson 1984; Jones & Grant 1996; Ziemer & Lisle 1998),
the effects of which may be more evident in smaller
streams than in larger rivers ( Jones & Grant 1996). Hy-
drologic effects are likely to persist for as long as the
road remains a physical feature altering flow routing—
often long after abandonment and revegetation of the
road surface. By altering surface or subsurface flow,
roads can destroy and create wetland habitats.
Changes in the routing of shallow groundwater and
surface flow may cause unusually high concentrations of
runoff on hillslopes that can trigger erosion through
channel downcutting, new gully or channel head initia-
tion, or slumping and debris flows (Megahan 1972; Rich-
ardson et al. 1975; Wemple et al. 1996; Seyedbagheri
1996). Once such processes occur, they can adversely
affect fishes and other biota far downstream for long pe-
riods of time (Hagans et al. 1986; Hicks et al. 1991).
Roads have been responsible for the majority of hill-
slope failures and gully erosion in most steep, forested
landscapes subject to logging activity (Furniss et al.
1991; Hagans et al. 1986). Because most of these more
catastrophic responses are triggered by the response of
roads during infrequent, intense storm events, lag times
of many years or decades pass before the full effects of
road construction are realized.
Chronic effects also occur, however. The surfaces of
unpaved roads can route fine sediments to streams,
lakes, and wetlands, increasing the turbidity of the wa-
ters (Reid & Dunne 1984), reducing productivity and
survival or growth of fishes (Newcombe & Jensen 1996),
and otherwise impairing fishing (Buck 1956). Existing
problem roads can be remediated to reduce future ero-
sion potential (e.g., Weaver et al. 1987; Harr & Nichols
1993). The consequences of past sediment delivery are
long-lasting and cumulative, however, and cannot be ef-
fectively mitigated (Hagans et al. 1986).
Alteration of the Chemical Environment
More has been written about the effects of roads on the
chemical environment than on all other effects com-
bined. Maintenance and use of roads contribute at least
five different general classes of chemicals to the environ-
ment: heavy metals, salt, organic molecules, ozone, and
nutrients.
A variety of heavy metals derived from gasoline addi-
tives and road deicing salts are put into the roadside en-
vironment. The most widely documented is lead, but
others include aluminum, iron, cadmium, copper, manga-
nese, titanium, nickel, zinc, and boron (Garcia-Miragaya
et al. 1981; Clift et al. 1983; Gjessing et al. 1984; Oberts
1986; Araratyan & Zakharyan 1988).
Heavy metal contamination exhibits five patterns. First,
the amount of contamination is related to vehicular traf-
fic (Goldsmith et al. 1976; Dale & Freedman 1982; Le-
harne et al. 1992). Second, contamination of soils, plants,
and animals decreases exponentially away from the road
(Quarles et al. 1974; Dale & Freedman 1982). Most stud-
ies indicate that contamination declines within 20 m but
that elevated levels of heavy metals often occur 200 m or
more from the road. The pattern of decline is influenced

Conservation Biology
Volume 14, No. 1, February 2000
Trombulak & Frissell
Ecological Effects of Roads
23
by prevailing wind patterns (Haqus & Hameed 1986).
Once metals reach aquatic environments, transport rates
and distances increase substantially (Gjessing et al.
1984).
Third, heavy metals can be localized in the soil, either
close to the surface if downward transport has not oc-
curred (Indu & Choudhri 1991) or deep below the sur-
face if pollution levels in the past exceeded those in the
present (Byrd et al. 1983). Transportation and localiza-
tion is largely affected by the physical properties of the
soil (Yassoglou et al. 1987). Metals and other persistent
chemicals fixed to soils may become remobilized once
they are inundated or transported to freshwater environ-
ments by wind, water, or gravity.
Fourth, heavy metals accumulate in the tissues of
plants (Datta & Ghosh 1985; Beslaneev & Kuchmazokova
1991) and animals (Collins 1984; Birdsall et al. 1986;
Grue et al. 1986). As with soil, contamination of plant tis-
sue occurs up to at least 200 m from a road and is great-
est for individuals along roads with high traffic volume.
Fifth, heavy metal concentrations in soil decline over
time where use of leaded gasoline has been stopped and
surface-water flow carries the metal ions away (Byrd et
al. 1983; Tong 1990). After they leave the terrestrial en-
vironment, however, the mobilized metals may cause
additional harm to aquatic biota. Also, some of the pro-
cesses of metal demobilization may be reversed rapidly
if environmental conditions, such as acidity of the soils,
sediments, or water, change (Nelson et al. 1991).
Deicing salts, particularly NaCl but also CaCl2, KCl,
and MgCl2, contribute ions to the soil, altering pH and
the soil’s chemical composition (Bogemans et al. 1989).
As with lead, discontinuation of the use of deicing salts
allows plants damaged by salt stress to recover (Leh
1990). The effects on aquatic biota of temporary surges
of salt that often accompany runoff from roads to sur-
face and groundwaters have received little study. Deic-
ing salts on roadways elevate chloride and sodium con-
centrations in streams (Molles & Gosz 1980; Hoffman et
al. 1981; Peters & Turk 1981; Mattson & Godfrey 1994)
and in bogs, where road salts can alter patterns of suc-
cession in aquatic vegetation (Wilcox 1986). Accumula-
tion of salts from chemicals used for road deicing or dust
control can disrupt natural stratification patterns and
thus potentially upset the ecological dynamics of mero-
mictic lakes (Hoffman et al. 1981; Kjensmo 1997).
Organic pollutants such as dioxins and polychlori-
nated biphenyls are present in higher concentrations
along roads (Benfenati et al. 1992). Hydrocarbons may
accumulate in aquatic ecosystems near roads (Gjessing
et al. 1984). In one stream along a British highway, nu-
merous contaminants were present at elevated levels in
the water column and sediments, including copper,
zinc, and various hydrocarbons, but polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons associated with stream sediments accounted
for most of the observed toxicity to aquatic amphipods
(Maltby et al. 1995). Comparatively little research has fo-
cused on the questions of the fate and effects of the or-
ganic chemicals associated with roads.
Vehicles produce ozone, which increases the concen-
tration of this harmful molecule in the air, especially in
areas where vehicle exhaust accumulates (Flueckiger et
al. 1984). Roads are also especially important vectors of
nutrients and other materials to aquatic ecosystems, be-
cause the buffering role normally played by riparian veg-
etation (Correll et al. 1992) is circumvented through di-
rect runoff of materials in water and sediment where
roads abut or cross water bodies. Water moving on and
alongside roadways can be charged with high levels of
dissolved nitrogen in various forms, and sediment brings
a phosphorus subsidy when it reaches surface waters.
Road deicing salts are an additional source of phospho-
rus (Oberts 1986). The degree to which roads directly
contribute to eutrophication problems in aquatic eco-
systems has been little investigated. Because roads de-
liver nutrients that originate in the contributing slope
area, the nutrient burden is probably largely controlled
by surrounding vegetation and land use. An increased
density of road crossings of water bodies can be ex-
pected to increase delivery of nutrients.
The alteration of the chemical environment by roads
results in a number of consequences for living organ-
isms. First, in the terrestrial environment the chemical
composition of some woody plants changes in response
to pollution. These changes include increased concen-
trations of chemicals produced by plants, such as terpe-
noids, which help them resist the toxic effects of pollu-
tion (Akimov et al. 1989) and salts (Bogemans et al.
1989), and decreased production of other chemicals,
such as soluble protein and chlorophyll a, which are
necessary for plant function (Banerjee et al. 1983).
Second, organisms may be killed or otherwise dis-
placed as a result of chemical exposure. Virtually all
measures of soil biotic diversity and function decline in
contaminated soil, including abundance, number of spe-
cies, species composition, index of species diversity, in-
dex of equability, and bulk soil respiration (Muskett &
Jones 1981; Guntner & Wilke 1983; Krzysztofiak 1991).
Third, the growth (Petersen et al. 1982) and overall
physical health (Flueckiger et al. 1984; Moritz & Breiten-
stein 1985) of many plants is depressed, even to the
point of death (Fleck et al. 1988). The sensitivity of
plants to pollutants may change during development;
for example, seedlings are more sensitive to salt than are
adults (Liem et al. 1984), which influences juvenile re-
cruitment. Pollutants may affect plant health by damag-
ing fine roots, mycorrhizae (Majdi & Persson 1989), and
leaves (Simini & Leone 1986) and by changing salt con-
centrations in plant tissues (Northover 1987). Secondary
effects on plant health include decreased resistance to
pathogens (Northover 1987), causing further declines.
In aquatic environments, plant (and animal) assemblages

24
Ecological Effects of Roads
Trombulak & Frissell
Conservation Biology
Volume 14, No. 1, February 2000
may change due to direct and indirect responses to nu-
trient increases and due to growth suppression or mor-
tality caused by other chemicals introduced by roads.
Fourth, plants (Graham & Kalman 1974; Nasralla & Ali
1985; Dickinson et al. 1987; Guttormsen 1993) and ani-
mals (Robel et al. 1981; Collins 1984; Harrison & Dyer
1984; Krzysztofiak 1991; Marino et al. 1992), including
those cultivated or raised for agriculture, may accumu-
late toxins at levels that pose health hazards, including
those for humans that consume exposed organisms (Jarosz
1994).
Fifth, increased concentrations near roadsides of some
pollutants, particularly salt, attract large mammals, put-
ting them more at risk of being killed by vehicles (Fraser
& Thomas 1982). Spills of edible products from trucks
and trains also attract wildlife to roadsides. Finally, evo-
lutionary processes may be affected through altered se-
lection pressures that result in local differentiation of
populations of both plants (Kiang 1982) and animals
(Minoranskii & Kuzina 1984).
Spread of Exotic Species
Roads provide dispersal of exotic species via three mech-
anisms: providing habitat by altering conditions, making
invasion more likely by stressing or removing native spe-
cies, and allowing easier movement by wild or human
vectors. It is often difficult to distinguish among these
factors. Soils modified during road construction can fa-
cilitate the spread of exotic plants along roadsides
(Greenberg et al. 1997). Some exotic plants establish
themselves preferentially along roadsides and in other
disturbed habitats (Wester & Juvik 1983; Henderson &
Wells 1986; Tyser & Worley 1992; Wein et al. 1992).
The spread of exotic diseases (Dawson & Weste 1985;
Gad et al. 1986) and insects (Pantaleoni 1989; Schedl
1991) is facilitated by increased density of roads and traf-
fic volume. Road construction that alters the canopy
structure of forests promotes invasion by exotic under-
story plants, which affects animal communities (Gaddy
& Kohlsaat 1987). Some roadside verges have been in-
vaded by maritime plants because of their ability to tol-
erate saline soil (Scott & Davison 1982). Feral fruit trees
are found preferentially along roadsides, and some pop-
ulations are maintained solely by seeds in fruit waste
thrown from vehicles (Smith 1986).
Exotic species are sometimes introduced along road-
sides for the purpose of erosion control (Niordson
1989). Native species are now more widely preferred
for this purpose, but Dunlap (1987) argues that in some
cases the need for rapid establishment of plant cover re-
quires the use of exotic species.
In another form of deliberate introduction, roads pro-
vide easy access to streams and lakes for fishery manag-
ers to stock nonnative hatchery fish (Lee et al. 1997),
which adversely affect native biota and disrupt aquatic
ecosystems in many ways (Allan & Flecker 1993). Un-
sanctioned, illegal, and unintentional introductions of
fishes, mollusks, plants, and other aquatic organisms
also occur frequently (Allan & Flecker 1993), and they
are facilitated by public road access to water bodies.
The dispersal of a biological agent such as a pathogen
along a roadway can affect both terrestrial and aquatic
ecosystems far from the road. In northern California and
southwest Oregon, for example, vehicle traffic and road-
way drainage along logging and mining roads during the
wet season disperse spores of an exotic root disease
(Phythoptera lateralis) that infects the endemic Port
Orford cedar (Chamaecyparis lawsoniana; Zobel et al.
1985). Transfer of the water-borne spores from forest
roads into headwater stream crossings can result in the
infection and nearly complete mortality of Port Orford
cedars along a much larger network of downstream
channel margins and floodplains, even deep inside oth-
erwise roadless areas. The progressive loss of this impor-
tant conifer species from riparian ecosystems may engen-
der substantial long-term consequences for the integrity
of stream biota, including endangered salmon species,
for which the Port Orford cedar provides shade, large
and long-lasting coarse woody debris, and stabilization
of channels and floodplains.
Changes in Human Use of Land and Water
Roads facilitate increased use of an area by humans, who
themselves often cause diverse and persistent ecological
effects. New roads increase ease of access by humans
into formerly remote areas. Perhaps more important,
roads often increase the efficiency with which natural
resources can be exported. At least three different kinds
of human use of the landscape, made increasingly possi-
ble by roads, can have major ecological effects: hunting
and fishing, recreation, and changes in use of land and
water.
Roads open up areas to increased poaching and legal
hunting. Hunting reduces population sizes of many
game species, including brown bear (Ursus arctos; Ca-
marra & Parde 1990), Iberian lynx (Ferreras et al. 1992),
wolves (Fuller 1989), black bear (Manville 1983), and
Egyptian mongooses (Herpestes ichneumon; Palomares
& Delibes 1992). Roads also increase both legal and ille-
gal fishing in streams and lakes. Native fish populations
in previously inaccessible areas are often vulnerable to
even small increases in fishing effort. Increased fishing
then often gives rise to public demand for fish stocking
as an attempt to artificially compensate for the effects of
unsustainable harvest, at the further expense of native
fishes and other species (e.g., Gresswell & Varley 1988).

Conservation Biology
Volume 14, No. 1, February 2000
Trombulak & Frissell
Ecological Effects of Roads
25
Visitors increase when roads make areas more accessi-
ble, leading to increased passive harassment of ani-
mals—such as elk on Mount St. Helens in Washington
State (Czech 1991) and the Oregon Coast Range
(Witmer & DeCalesta 1985), brown bear in Europe (Del
Campo et al. 1990), and mountain goats (Oreamnos
americanus) in Montana (Pedevillano & Wright 1987)—
and damage to plant communities (Matlack 1993).
Roads are often built into areas to promote logging,
agriculture, mining, and development of homes or in-
dustrial or commercial projects. Such changes in land
cover and land and water use result in major and persis-
tent adverse effects on the native flora and fauna of ter-
restrial (Van Dyke et al. 1986; Karnefelt & Mattsson
1989; P. Seibert 1993) and freshwater ecosystems
(Schlosser 1991; Allan & Flecker 1993; Roth et al. 1996).
Numerous studies have demonstrated declines in stream
health associated with roads. Because the nature and ex-
tent of land use within a region tend to be highly corre-
lated with road networks, however, it is often difficult
or impossible to separate the direct ecological effects of
roads from those of the accompanying land-use activi-
ties. For example, Eaglin and Hubert (1993) reported
that trout biomass and streambed habitat quality in Wyo-
ming streams declined in relation to the number of road
crossings and to the proportion of area logged in the
contributing catchment. Findlay and Houlahan (1997)
found that herptile species diversity in wetlands declined
in relation to the density of roads within 2 km of the pe-
rimeter. Among streams in the Pacific Northwest, the
status or abundance of bull trout populations has been
inversely correlated to road density (Rieman et al. 1997;
Baxter et al. 1999); these studies used roads as the best
available general proxy of cumulative effects associated
with land use and human access. On the other hand,
some studies (e.g., Roth et al. 1996) have demonstrated
correlations of stream biotic integrity with land-use pat-
terns across large catchments but did not investigate the
specific roles that roads might play in mediating the
causes and effects.
It appears that roads can serve as useful indicators of
the magnitude of land-use changes, but it remains un-
clear to what degree the associated ecological responses
result directly from roads themselves. If roads are largely
responsible, effects could be ameliorated through al-
tered road design, placement, remediation, or road re-
moval. Strong interactions between roads and land use
are likely, however. Forest roads in Idaho, for example,
are less prone to erosion when the surrounding landscape
remains in natural forest cover (Seyedbagheri 1996).
Discussion and Conclusions
Roads have diverse and systemic effects on many as-
pects of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. The ecologi-
cal effects of roads can resonate substantial distances
from the road in terrestrial ecosystems, creating habi-
tat fragmentation and facilitating ensuing fragmentation
through support of human exploitative activities (Fig. 1a).
Habitat deterioration is not widely appreciated as an as-
pect of ecological fragmentation in aquatic ecosystems.
At the scale of an extensive landscape or stream net-
work, however, roads produce a pattern of aquatic habi-
tat loss that differs from the terrestrial pattern yet never-
theless results in the ecological fragmentation of aquatic
ecosystems (Fig. 1b). We coin the term 
 
hyperfragmen-
tation
 
 to describe the multidimensional view of ecologi-
cal fragmentation and habitat loss that emerges when
the consequences of roads or any habitat alteration for
terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems are considered simul-
taneously (Fig. 1c). Hyperfragmentation is the result of a
spatial footprint of ecological effect that propagates
across the landscape differently in freshwater and
Figure 1. Spatial pattern of direct 
and indirect habitat alteration 
caused by human disturbance in a 
forested watershed: (a) classical 
forest edge effects contributing to 
terrestrial habitat fragmentation, 
(b) downstream-propagating hy-
drologic and biotic effects leading 
to large-scale fragmentation of 
freshwater habitats and popula-
tions, (c) combined terrestrial-
aquatic view of landscape alter-
ation that we term hyperfragmen-
tation because it considers multiple 
ecosystem dimensions on the same 
landscape. Arrows indicate pre-
dominant spatial vector of effects.

26
Ecological Effects of Roads
Trombulak & Frissell
Conservation Biology
Volume 14, No. 1, February 2000
aquatic ecosystems than in terrestrial systems. Even
where only a small percentage of the land’s surface is di-
rectly occupied by roads, few corners of the landscape
remain untouched by their off-site ecological effects.
The breadth of these effects cannot be appreciated un-
less one takes a broadly transdisciplinary view of ecosys-
tems and biological communities.
Road design, management, and restoration need to be
more carefully tailored to address the full range of eco-
logical processes and terrestrial and aquatic species that
may be affected. Deliberate monitoring is necessary to
ensure that projects have robust ecological benefits and
minimal adverse effects and that they are cost-efficient
relative to their actual benefits (e.g., Weaver et al.
1987). Of course, such assessments require time and
money that are usually unavailable. Most funds used to
remediate problem roads are earmarked for actual field
operations and are not available to support such assess-
ment and monitoring. Few of the experts building roads
or “restoring” them are trained to recognize and address
the full spectrum of ecological issues that we have iden-
tified. Moreover, by their nature roads have systemic
ecological effects that, even if recognized, cannot be
overcome.
If a broad view of the ecological effects of roads re-
veals a multiplicity of effects, it also suggests that it is un-
likely that the consequences of roads will ever be com-
pletely mitigated or remediated. Thus, it is critical to
retain remaining roadless or near-roadless portions of the
landscape in their natural state. Because of the increasing
rarity of roadless areas, especially roadless watersheds,
conservation efforts cannot rely entirely on protection of
existing natural areas. But neither can conservation ef-
forts depend entirely on tenuous and unexamined as-
sumptions about the capability of site- and species-spe-
cific mitigation and remediation measures to reduce the
ecological consequences of existing and proposed roads.
Acknowledgments
We thank M. Hourdequin for organizing the symposium at
the 1997 annual meeting of the Society for Conservation Bi-
ology at which we originally presented much of this mate-
rial and for her patience during the preparation of this
manuscript. We also thank R. Noss and an anonymous re-
viewer for improvement of the paper. The second author’s
contribution to this paper and his participation in the sym-
posium were supported by The Pacific Rivers Council.
Literature Cited
Akimov Y. A., V. V. Pushkar, and S. I. Kuznetsov. 1989. The content
and composition of volatile terpenoids in woody plants under con-
ditions of air pollution. Sbornik Nauchnykh Trudov 109:70-79.
Allan, J. D., and A. S. Flecker. 1993. Biodiversity conservation in run-
ning waters. BioScience 43:32–43.
Anthony, R. G., and F. B. Isaacs. 1989. Characteristics of bald eagle
nest sites in Oregon. Journal of Wildlife Management 53:148–159.
Araratyan, L. A., and S. A. Zakharyan. 1988. On the contamination of
snow along main highways. Biologicheskii Zhurnal Armenii 
 
41:
 
514–519.
Asaeda, T., and V. A. Ca. 1993. The subsurface transport of heat and
moisture and its effect on the environment: a numerical model.
Boundary Layer Meteorology 
 
65:
 
159–179.
Auerbach, N. A., M. D. Walker, and D. A. Walker. 1997. Effects of road-
side disturbance on substrate and vegetation properties in arctic
tundra. Ecological Applications 
 
7:
 
218–235.
Banerjee, A., R. K. Sarkar, and S. Mukherji. 1983. Reduction in soluble
protein and chlorophyll contents in a few plants as indicators of au-
tomobile exhaust pollution. International Journal of Environmental
Studies 
 
20:
 
239–243.
Banfield, A. W. F. 1974. The relationship of caribou migration behavior
to pipeline construction. Pages 797–804 in V. Geist and F. Walther,
editors. The behavior of ungulates and its relation to management.
International Union for the Conservation of Nature Press, Morges,
Switzerland.
Bangs, E. E., T. N. Bailey, and M. F. Portner. 1989. Survival rates of
adult female moose on the Kenai Peninsula, Alaska. Journal of Wild-
life Management 
 
53:
 
557–563.
Barnes, R. F. W., K. L. Barnes, M. P. T. Alers, and A. Blom. 1991. Man
determines the distribution of elephants in the rain forests of north-
eastern Gabon. African Journal of Ecology 
 
29:
 
54–63.
Bashore, T. L., W. M. Tzilkowski, and E. D. Bellis. 1985. Analysis of
deer-vehicle collision sites in Pennsylvania. Journal of Wildlife Man-
agement 
 
49:
 
769–774.
Baur, A., and B. Baur. 1990. Are roads barriers to dispersal in the land
snail 
 
Arianta arbustorum
 
? Canadian Journal of Zoology 
 
68:
 
613–617.
Baxter, C. V., C. A. Frissell, and F. R. Hauer. 1999. Geomorphology,
logging roads, and the distribution of bull trout (
 
Salvelinus conflu-
entus
 
) spawning in a forested river basin: implications for manage-
ment and conservation. Transactions of the American Fisheries So-
ciety 
 
128:
 
854–867.
Bellis, E. D., and H. B. Graves. 1971. Deer mortality on a Pennsylvania
interstate highway. Journal of Wildlife Management 
 
35:
 
232–237.
Benfenati, E., S. Valzacchi, G. Maniani, L. Airoldi, and R. Farnelli. 1992.
PCDD, PCDF, PCB, PAH, cadmium and lead in roadside soil: rela-
tionship between road distance and concentration. Chemosphere
 
24:
 
1077–1083.
Bennett, A. F. 1991. Roads, roadsides, and wildlife conservation: a re-
view. Pages 99–118 in D. A. Saunders and R. J. Hobbes, editors. Na-
ture conservation 2: the role of corridors. Surrey Beatty and Sons,
Chipping Norton, New South Wales, Australia.
Beslaneev, V. D., and F. A. Kuchmazokova. 1991. The effect of motor-
ways on the accumulation of toxic substances in walnuts. Sadovod-
stvo i Vinogradarstvo 
 
5:
 
38.
Birdsall, C. W., C. E. Grue, and A. Anderson. 1986. Lead concentrations
in bullfrog 
 
Rana catesbeiana
 
 and green frog 
 
Rana clamitans
 
 tad-
poles inhabiting highway drainages. Environmental Pollution Series
A Ecological and Biological 
 
40:
 
233–248.
Bogemans, J., L. Nierinck, and J. M. Stassart. 1989. Effect of deicing
chloride salts on ion accumulation in spruce (
 
Picea abies
 
 (L.) sp.).
Plant and Soil 
 
113:
 
3–11.
Brody, A. J., and M. R. Pelton. 1989. Effects of roads on black bear move-
ments in western North Carolina. Wildlife Society Bulletin 
 
17:
 
5–10.
Brown, T. G., and G. F. Hartman. 1988. Contribution of seasonally
flooded lands and minor tributaries to coho (
 
Oncorhynchus
kisutch
 
) salmon smolt production in Carnation Creek, a small
coastal stream in British Columbia. Transactions of the American
Fisheries Society 
 
117:
 
546–551.
Bruns, E. H. 1977. Winter behavior of pronghorns in relation to habi-
tat. Journal of Wildlife Management 
 
41:
 
560–571.
Buck, D. H. 1956. Effects of turbidity on fish and fishing. Transactions
of the North American Wildlife Conference 
 
21:
 
249–261.

Conservation Biology
Volume 14, No. 1, February 2000
Trombulak & Frissell
Ecological Effects of Roads
27
Byrd, D. S., J. T. Gilmore, and R. H. Lea. 1983. Effect of decreased use
of lead in gasoline on the soil of a highway. Environmental Science
and Technology 17:121–123.
Camarra, J. J., and J. M. Parde. 1990. The brown bear in France—status
and management in 1985. Aquilo, Serie Zoologica 27:93–96.
Clift, D., I. E. Dickson, T. Roos, P. Collins, M. Jolly, and A. Klindworth.
1983. Accumulation of lead beside the Mulgrave Freeway, Victoria.
Search 14:155–157.
Coleman, J. S., and J. D. Fraser. 1989. Habitat use and home ranges of
Black and Turkey Vultures. Journal of Wildlife Management 53:
782–792.
Collins, J. A. 1984. Roadside lead in New Zealand and its significance for
human and animal health. New Zealand Journal of Science 27:93–98.
Copp, G. H. 1989. The habitat diversity and fish reproductive function
of floodplain ecosystems. Environmental Biology of Fishes 26:1–27.
Correll, D. L., T. E. Jordan, and D. E. Weller. 1992. Cross media inputs
to eastern US watersheds and their significance to estuarine water
quality. Water Science and Technology 26:2675–2683.
Cowardin, L. M., D. S. Gilmer, and C. W. Shaiffer. 1985. Mallard recruit-
ment in the agricultural environment of North Dakota. Wildlife
Monographs 92:1–37.
Czech, B. 1991. Elk behavior in response to human disturbance at
Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument. Applied Animal Be-
havior Science 29:269–277.
Dale, J. M., and B. Freedman. 1982. Lead and zinc contamination of
roadside soil and vegetation in Halifax, Nova Scotia. Proceedings of
the Nova Scotian Institute of Science 32:327–336.
Dalrymple G. H., and N. G. Reichenbach. 1984. Management of an en-
dangered species of snake in Ohio, USA. Biological Conservation
30:195–200.
Datta, S. C., and J. J. Ghosh. 1985. A study of the distribution pattern of
lead in the leaves of banyan trees (Ficus benghalensis) from differ-
ent traffic density regions of Calcutta. Ecotoxicology and Environ-
mental Safety 9:101–106.
Davies, J. M., T. J. Roper, and D. J. Shepherdson. 1987. Seasonal distri-
bution of road kills in the European badger (Meles meles). Journal
of Zoology (London) 211:525–530.
Dawson, P., and G. Weste. 1985. Changes in the distribution of Phy-
tophthora cinnamomi in the Brisbane Ranges National Park be-
tween 1970 and 1980–81. Australian Journal of Botany 33:309–315.
Del Campo, J. C., J. L. Marquinez, J. Naves, and G. Palomero. 1990. The
brown bear in the Cantabrian Mountains. Aquilo, Serie Zoologica
27:97–101.
Dhindsa, M. S., J. S. Sandhu, P. S. Sandhu, and H. S. Toor. 1988. Road-
side birds in Punjab (India): relation to mortality from vehicles. En-
vironmental Conservation 15:303–310.
Diamondback. 1990. Ecological effects of roads (or, the road to de-
struction). Pages 1–5 in J. Davis, editor. Killing roads: a citizen’s
primer on the effects and removal of roads. Biodiversity special
publication. Earth First!, Tucson, Arizona.
Dickinson, N. M., N. W. Lepp, and G. T. K. Surtan. 1987. Lead and po-
tential health risks from subsistence food crops in urban Kenya. En-
vironmental Geochemistry and Health 9:37–42.
Dunlap, D. W. 1987. Development of grass-seeding specifications for use
on Texas highway rights-of-way: erosion control—you’re gambling
without it. International Erosion Control Association 18:161–172.
Dwyer, N., and G. W. Tanner. 1992. Nesting success in Florida Sandhill
Cranes. Wilson Bulletin 104:22–31.
Eaglin, G. S., and W. A. Hubert. 1993. Effects of logging roads on sub-
strate and trout in streams of the Medicine Bow National Forest,
Wyoming. North American Journal of Fisheries Management 13:
844–846.
Fahrig, L., J. H. Pedlar, S. E. Pope, P. D. Taylor, and J. F. Wenger. 1995.
Effect of road traffic on amphibian density. Biological Conservation
73:177–182.
Farmer, A. M. 1993. The effects of dust on vegetation—a review. Envi-
ronmental Pollution 79:63–75.
Fernandez, C. 1993. The choice of nesting cliffs by golden eagles
Aquila chrysaetos: the influence of accessibility and disturbance
by humans. Alauda 61:105–110.
Ferreras, P., J. J. Aldama, J. F. Beltran, and M. Delibes. 1992. Rates and
causes of mortality in a fragmented population of Iberian lynx Felis
pardina Temminck, 1824. Biological Conservation 61:197–202.
Findlay, C. S., and J. Houlahan. 1997. Anthropogenic correlates of spe-
cies richness in southeastern Ontario wetlands. Conservation Biol-
ogy 11:1000–1009.
Fleck, A. M., M. J. Lacki, and J. Sutherland. 1988. Response of white
birch (Betula papyrifera) to road salt applications at Cascade Lakes,
New York. Journal of Environmental Management 27:369–377.
Flueckiger, W., H. Fluckiger Keller, and S. Braun. 1984. Untersuchun-
gen ueber waldschaeden in der Nordwestschweiz. Schweizerische
Zeitschrift fuer Forstwesen 135:389–444.
Foster, M. L., and S. R. Humphrey. 1991. Effectiveness of wildlife cross-
ing structures on Alligator Alley (I-75) for reducing animal/auto col-
lisions. Report. Florida Game and Fresh Water Fish Commission
and Florida Department of Transportation, Tallahassee.
Fraser, D., and E. R. Thomas. 1982. Moose-vehicle accidents in Ontario:
relation to highway salt. Wildlife Society Bulletin 10:261–265.
Fuller, T. 1989. Population dynamics of wolves in north-central Minne-
sota. Wildlife Monographs 105:1–41.
Furniss, M. J., T. D. Roeloffs, and C. S. Yee. 1991. Road construction
and maintenance. Pages 297–323 in W. R. Meehan, editor. Influ-
ences of forest and rangeland management on salmonid fishes and
their habitats. Special publication 19. American Fisheries Society,
Bethesda, Maryland.
Gad, A. M., F. M. Feinsod, I. H. Allam, M. Eisa, A. N. Hassan, B. A. Soliman,
S. El Said, A. J. Saah, S. El Said, R. F. Sellers, and H. Hoogstraal. 1986. A
possible route for the introduction of Rift Valley fever virus into Egypt
during 1977. Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 89:233–236.
Gaddy, L. L., and T. L. Kohlsaat. 1987. Recreational impact on the natu-
ral vegetation, avifauna, and herpetofauna of four South Carolina
barrier islands (USA). Natural Areas Journal 7:55–64.
Garcia-Miragaya, J, S. Castro, and J. Paolini. 1981. Lead and zinc levels
and chemical fractionation in road-side soils of Caracas, Venezuela.
Water, Air and Soil Pollution 15:285–297.
Gjessing, E., E. Lygren, L. Berglind, T. Gulbrandsen, and R. Skanne.
1984. Effect of highway runoff on lake water quality. Science of the
Total Environment 33:247–257.
Goldsmith, C. D., P. F. Scanlon, and W. R. Pirie. 1976. Lead concentra-
tions in soil and vegetation associated with highways of different
traffic densities. Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and Tox-
icology 16:66–70.
Graham, D. L., and S. M. Kalman. 1974. Lead in forage grass from a subur-
ban area in northern California. Environmental Pollution 7:209–215.
Greenberg, C. H., S. H. Crownover, and D. R. Gordon. 1997. Roadside
soil: a corridor for invasion of xeric scrub by nonindigenous plants.
Natural Areas Journal 17:99–109.
Gresswell, R. E., and J. D. Varley. 1988. Effects of a century of human
influence on the cutthroat trout of Yellowstone Lake. Pages 45–52
in Symposium 4. American Fisheries Society, Bethesda, Maryland.
Groot Bruinderink, G. W. T. A., and E. Hazebroek. 1996. Ungulate traf-
fic collisions in Europe. Conservation Biology 10:1059–1067.
Grover, K. E., and M. J. Thompson. 1986. Factors influencing spring
feeding site selection by elk in the Elkhorn Mountains, Montana.
Journal of Wildlife Management 50:466–470.
Grue, C. E., D. J. Hoffman, W. N. Beyer, and L. P. Franson. 1986. Lead
concentrations and reproductive success in European starlings,
Sturnus vulgaris, nesting within highway roadside verges. Envi-
ronmental Pollution Series A Ecological and Biological 42:157–182.
Guntner, M., and B. M. Wilke. 1983. Effects of de-icing salt on soil en-
zyme activity. Water, Air and Soil Pollution 20:211–220.
Guttormsen, G. 1993. The content of lead, cadmium and PAH in vege-
tables and strawberries alongside the E18 motorway. Norsk Land-
bruksforsking 7:175–189.

28
Ecological Effects of Roads
Trombulak & Frissell
Conservation Biology
Volume 14, No. 1, February 2000
Hagans, D. K., W. E. Weaver, and M. A. Madej. 1986. Long-term on-site
and off-site effects of logging and erosion in the Redwood Creek
Basin, northern California. Pages 38–65 in Papers presented at the
American Geophysical Union meeting on cumulative effects. Tech-
nical bulletin 490. National Council for Air and Stream Improve-
ment, New York.
Haqus, M. D., and H. A. Hameed. 1986. Lead content of green forage
growing adjacent to expressways and roads connecting Erbil City
(Northern Iraq). Journal of Biological Science Research 17:151–164.
Harr, R. D., and R. A. Nichols. 1993. Stabilizing forest roads to help re-
store fish habitat: a northwest Washington example. Fisheries 18:
18–22.
Harrison, P. D., and M. I. Dyer. 1984. Lead in mule deer forage in
Rocky Mountain National Park, Colorado. Journal of Wildlife Man-
agement 48:510–517.
Hartl, G. B., F. Suchentrunk, R. Willing, and M. Grillitsch. 1989. Bio-
chemical-genetic variability and differentiation in the brown hare
(Lepus europaeus) of lower Austria. Wiener Tieraerztliche
Monatsschrif 76:279–284.
Helvey, J. D., and J. N. Kochenderfer. 1990. Soil density and moisture
content on two unused forest roads during first 30 months after
construction. Research paper NE-629. U.S. Forest Service, North-
east Forest Experiment Station, Broomhall, Pennsylvania.
Henderson, L., and M. J. Wells. 1986. Alien plant invasions in the grass-
land and savanna biomes. Pages 109–117 in I. A. W. Macdonald, F. J.
Kruger, and A. A. Ferrar, editors. The ecology and management of
biological invasions in southern Africa. Oxford University Press, Ca-
petown.
Hicks, B. J., J. D. Hall, P. A. Bisson, and J. R. Sedell. 1991. Response of
salmonids to habitat change. Pages 483–518 in W. R. Meehan, edi-
tor. Influences of forest and rangeland management on salmonid
fishes and their habitats. Special publication 19. American Fisheries
Society, Bethesda, Maryland.
Hoffman, R. W., C. R. Goldman, S. Paulson, and G. R. Winters. 1981.
Aquatic impacts of deicing salts in the central Sierra Nevada Moun-
tains, California. Water Resources Bulletin 17:280–285.
Holroyd, G. L. 1979. The impact of highway and railroad mortality on
the ungulate populations in the Bow Valley, Banff National Park.
Environment Canada, Canadian Wildlife Service, Edmonton, Al-
berta.
Hornocker, M. G., and H. S. Hash. 1981. Ecology of the wolverine in
northwestern Montana. Canadian Journal of Zoology 59:1286–
1301.
Indu, B., and G. N. Choudhri. 1991. Impact of automobile effusion on
plant and soil. International Journal of Ecology and Environmental
Sciences 17:121–127.
Jarosz, W. 1994. Heavy metals contamination of grass growing at the
road edges. Medycyna Weterynaryjna 50:23–26.
Jensen, W. F., T. K. Fuller, and W. L. Robinson. 1986. Wolf, Canis lu-
pus, distribution on the Ontario-Michigan border near Sault Ste.
Marie. Canadian Field Naturalist 100:363–366.
Joly, P., and A. Morand. 1997. Amphibian diversity and land-water eco-
tones. Pages 161–182 in J.-P. Bravard and R. Juge, editors. Biodiver-
sity in land-water ecotones. Man and biosphere series. Volume 18.
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Paris.
Jones, J. A., and G. E. Grant. 1996. Cumulative effects of forest harvest
on peak streamflow in the western Cascades of Oregon. Water Re-
sources Research 32:959–974.
Karnefelt, I., and J. E. Mattsson. 1989. Cetraria cucullata and Cetraria
nivalis, two vanishing lichens from southernmost Sweden. Interna-
tional Journal of Mycology and Lichenology 4:299–306.
Kershner, J. L., C. M. Bischoff, and D. L. Horan. 1997. Population, hab-
itat, and genetic characteristics of Colorado River cutthroat trout in
wilderness and nonwilderness stream sections in the Uinta Moun-
tains of Utah and Wyoming. North American Journal of Fisheries
Management 17:1134–1143.
Kiang, Y. T. 1982. Local differentiation of Anthoxanthum odoratum L.
populations on roadsides. American Midland Naturalist 107:340–350.
King, J. G., and L. C. Tennyson. 1984. Alteration of streamflow charac-
teristics following road construction in north central Idaho. Water
Resources Research 20:1159–1163.
Kjensmo, J. 1997. The influence of road salts on the salinity and the
meromictic stability of Lake Svinsjøen, Norway. Oecologia 347:
151–158.
Klein, D. R. 1991. Caribou in the changing North. Applied Animal Be-
havior Science 29:279–291.
Krzysztofiak, L. 1991. The effect of habitat pollution with heavy metals
on ant populations and ant-hill soil. Ekologia Polska 39:181–202.
Kushlan, J. A. 1988. Conservation and management of the American
crocodile. Environmental Management 12:777–790.
Lee, D. C., et al. 1997. Broadscale assessment of aquatic species and
habitats. Pages 1057–1496 in T. M. Quigley and S. J. Arbelbide, edi-
tors. An assessment of ecosystem components in the interior Co-
lumbia River Basin and portions of the Klamath and Great Basins.
Volume 3. General technical report PNW-GTR-405. U.S. Forest Ser-
vice, Portland, Oregon.
Leh, H. O. 1990. Investigations on health conditions of street trees af-
ter discontinued use of de-icing salts on streets in Berlin. Nachrich-
tenblatt des Deutschen Pflanzenschutzdienstes 42:134–142.
Leharne, S., D. Charlesworth, and B. Chowdhry. 1992. A survey of
metal levels in street dusts in an inner London neighbourhood. En-
vironment International 18:263–270.
Liem, A. S. N., A. Hendriks, H. Kraal, and M. Loenen. 1984. Effects of de-
icing salt on roadside grasses and herbs. Plant and Soil 84:299–310.
Loos, G., and P. Kerlinger. 1993. Road mortality of saw-whet and
Screech Owls on the Cape May peninsula. Journal of Raptor Re-
search 27:210–213.
MacArthur, R. A., R. H. Johnston, and V. Geist. 1979. Factors influenc-
ing heart rate in free ranging bighorn sheep: a physiological ap-
proach to the study of wildlife harrassment. Canadian Journal of
Zoology 57:2010–2021.
Madsen, J. 1985. Impact of disturbance on field utilization of pink-
footed geese in West Jutland, Denmark. Biological Conservation
33:53–64.
Majdi, H., and H. Persson. 1989. Effects of road-traffic pollutants (lead
and cadmium) on tree fine-roots along a motor road. Plant and Soil
119:1–5.
Maltby, L., A. B. A. Boxall, D. M. Farrow, P. Calow, and C. I. Betton.
1995. The effects of motorway runoff on freshwater ecosystems. 2.
Identifying major toxicants. Environmental Toxicology and Chem-
istry 14:1093–1101.
Manville, A. M. 1983. Human impact on the black bear in Michigan’s
lower peninsula. International Conference on Bear Research and
Management 5:20–33.
Marino, F., A. Ligero, and D. J. Diaz Cosin. 1992. Heavy metals and earth-
worms on the border of a road next to Santiago (Galicia, Northwest
of Spain): initial results. Soil Biology and Biochemistry 24:1705–1709.
Matlack, G. R. 1993. Sociological edge effects: spatial distribution of
human impact in suburban forest fragments. Environmental Man-
agement 17:829–835.
Mattson, M. D., and P. J. Godfrey. 1994. Identification of road salt con-
tamination using multiple regression and GIS. Environmental Man-
agement 18:767–773.
McLellan, B. N., and D. M. Shackleton. 1988. Grizzly bears and re-
source-extraction industries: effects of roads on behavior, habitat
use and demography. Journal of Applied Ecology 25:451–460.
Megahan, W. F. 1972. Subsurface flow interception by a logging road
in mountains of central Idaho. Pages 350–356 in Proceedings of a
national symposium on watersheds in transition. American Water
Resources Association, Bethesda, Maryland.
Mehrhoff, L. A. 1989. Reproductive vigor and environmental factors in
populations of an endangered North American orchid, Isotria medeo-
loides (Pursh) Rafinesque. Biological Conservation 47:281–296.

Conservation Biology
Volume 14, No. 1, February 2000
Trombulak & Frissell
Ecological Effects of Roads
29
Merriam, G., M. Kozakiewicz, E. Tsuchiya, and K. Hawley. 1989. Barri-
ers as boundaries for metapopulations and demes of Peromyscus
leucopus in farm landscapes. Landscape Ecology 2:227–236.
Minoranskii, V. A., and Z. R. Kuzina. 1984. Effect of environmental pol-
lution by motor transport on the reproduction and development of
Opatrum sabulosum.  Biologicheskie Nauki (Moscow) 11:43–47.
Molles, M. C., Jr., and J. R. Gosz. 1980. Effects of a ski area on the wa-
ter quality and invertebrates of a mountain stream. Water, Air, and
Soil Pollution 14:187–205.
Moritz, K., and J. Breitenstein. 1985. Damage by spreading salt on
West German federal trunk roads and possibilities of avoiding it. Al-
lgemeine Forstzeitschrift 44:1192–1193.
Muskett, C. J., and M. P. Jones. 1981. Soil respiratory activity in relation
to motor vehicle pollution. Water, Air and Soil Pollution 23:231–242.
Nasralla, M. M., and E. A. Ali. 1985. Lead accumulation in edible por-
tions of crops grown near Egyptian traffic roads. Agriculture Eco-
systems and Environment 13:73–82.
Nelson, R. L., M. L. McHenry, and W. S. Platts. 1991. Mining. Pages
425–457 in W. R. Meehan, editor. Influences of forest and range-
land management on salmonid fishes and their habitats. Special
publication 19. American Fisheries Society, Bethesda, Maryland.
Newcombe, C. P., and J. O. T. Jensen. 1996. Channel suspended sedi-
ment and fisheries: a synthesis for quantitative assessment of risk.
North American Journal of Fisheries Management 16:693–727.
Newton, I., I. Wyllie, and A. Asher. 1991. Mortality causes in British
barn owls Tyto alba, with a discussion of aldrin-dieldrin poisoning.
Ibis 133:162–169.
Niordson, N. 1989. Glyceria grandis found in south Sweden. Svensk
Botanisk Tidskrift 83:357–360.
Norling, B. S., S. H. Anderson, and W. A. Hubert. 1992. Roost sites used
by Sandhill Crane staging along the Platte River, Nebraska. Great
Basin Naturalist 52:253–261.
Northover, J. 1987. NaCl injury to dormant roadside peach trees and
its effect on the incidence of infections by Leucostoma spp. Phyto-
pathology 77:835–840.
Noss, R. F., and A. Y. Cooperrider. 1994. Saving nature’s legacy. Island
Press, Washington, D.C.
Novelli, R., E. Takase, and V. Castro. 1988. Study of birds killed by col-
lision with vehicles in a stretch of Highway BR-471, between
Quinta and Taim, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil. Revista Brasileira De
Zoologia 5:441–454.
Oberts, G. L. 1986. Pollutants associated with sand and silt applied to
roads in Minnesota. Water Resources Bulletin 22:479–483.
Oxley, D. J., M. B. Fenton, and G. R. Carmody. 1974. The effects of
roads on population of small mammals. Journal of Applied Ecology
11:51–59.
Palomares, F., and M. Delibes. 1992. Some physical and population char-
acteristics of Egyptian mongooses (Herpestes ichneumon L., 1758)
in southwestern Spain. Zeitschrift fuer Saeugetierkunde 57:94–99.
Pantaleoni, R. A. 1989. Ways of invasion of a new area by Metcalfa pru-
inosa (Say, 1830) (Auchenorrhyncha, Flatidae). Bollettino Dell’isti-
tuto Di Entomologia Della Universita Degli Studi Di Bologna 43:1–8.
Paruk, J. D. 1987. Habitat utilization by Bald Eagles wintering along the
Mississippi River (USA). Transactions of the Illinois State Academy
of Science 80:333–342.
Pedevillano, C., and R. G. Wright. 1987. The influence of visitors on
mountain goat activities in Glacier National Park, Montana. Biologi-
cal Conservation 39:1–11.
Peters, N. E., and J. T. Turk. 1981. Increases in sodium and chloride in
the Mohawk River, New York, from the 1950s to the 1970s attrib-
uted to road salt. Water Resources Bulletin 17:586–598.
Petersen, A., D. Eckstein, and W. Liese. 1982. Holzbiologische Untersu-
chungen ueber den Einfluss von Auftausalz auf Hamburger Stras-
senbaeume. Forstwissenschaftliches Centralblatt 101:353–364.
Petranka, J. W., M. E. Eldridge, and K. E. Haley. 1993. Effects of timber
harvesting on Southern Appalachian salamanders. Conservation Bi-
ology 7:363–370.
Piégay, H., and N. Landon. 1997. Promoting ecological management of
riparian forests on the Drôme River, France. Aquatic Conservation:
Marine and Freshwater Ecosystems 7:287–304.
Puglisi, M. J., J. S. Lindzey, and E. D. Bellis. 1974. Factors associated
with highway mortality of white-tailed deer. Journal of Wildlife
Management 38:799–807.
Quarles, H. D., R. B. Hanawalt, and W. E. Odum. 1974. Lead in small
mammals, plants and soil at varying distances from a highway. Jour-
nal of Applied Ecology 11:937–949.
Reh, W., and A. Seitz. 1990. The influence of land use on the genetic
structure of populations of the common frog Rana temporaria.
Biological Conservation 54:239–249.
Reid, L. M., and T. Dunne. 1984. Sediment production from forest road
surfaces. Water Resources Research 20:1753–1761.
Reilly, R. E., and H. E. Green. 1974. Deer mortality on a Michigan inter-
state highway. Journal of Wildlife Management 38:16–19.
Richardson, E. V., B. Simons, S. Karaki, M. Mahmood, and M. A.
Stevens. 1975. Highways in the river environment: hydraulic and
environmental design considerations training and design manual.
U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administra-
tion, Washington, D.C.
Rieman, B. E., D. C. Lee, and R. F. Thurow. 1997. Distribution, status,
and likely future trends of bull trout within the Columbia River and
Klamath River Basins. North American Journal of Fisheries Manage-
ment 17:1111–1125.
Riley, S. J. 1984. Effect of clearing and roading operations on the per-
meability of forest soils, Karuah catchment, New South Wales, Aus-
tralia. Forest Ecology and Management 9:283–293.
Robel, R. J., C. A. Howard, M. S. Udevitz, and B. Curnutte, Jr. 1981. Lead
contamination in vegetation, cattle dung, and dung beetles near an
interstate highway, Kansas. Environmental Entomology 10:262–263.
Rodda, G. H. 1990. Highway madness revisited: roadkilled Iguana iguana
in the llanos of Venezuela. Journal of Herpetology 24:209–211.
Rosen, P. C., and C. H. Lowe. 1994. Highway mortality of snakes in the So-
noran desert of southern Arizona. Biological Conservation 68:143–148.
Rost, G. R., and J. A. Bailey. 1979. Distribution of mule deer and elk in
relation to roads. Journal of Wildlife Management 43:634–641.
Roth, N. E., J. D. Allan, and D. L. Erickson. 1996. Landscape influences
on stream biotic integrity assessed at multiple spatial scales. Land-
scape Ecology 11:141–156.
Sarbello, W., and L. W. Jackson. 1985. Deer mortality in the town of
Malone. N. Y. Fish and Game Journal 32:141–157.
Schedl, W. 1991. Invasion of the American buffalo treehopper (Sticto-
cephala bisonia Kopp and Yonke, 1977) into Austria (Homoptera,
Auchenorrhyncha, Membracidae). Anzeiger fuer Schaedling-
skunde, Pflanzenschutz, Umweltschutz 64:9–13.
Schlosser, I. J. 1991. Stream fish ecology: a landscape perspective. Bio-
Science 41:704–712.
Scott, N. E., and A. W. Davison. 1982. De-icing salt and the invasion of
road verges by maritime plants. Watsonia 14:41–52.
Seibert, H. C., and J. H. Conover. 1991. Mortality of vertebrates and in-
vertebrates on an Athens County, Ohio, highway. Ohio Journal of
Science 91:163–166.
Seibert, P. 1993. Vegetation and man in South America from a histori-
cal perspective. Phytocoenologia 23:457–493.
Seyedbagheri, K. A. 1996. Idaho forestry best management practices:
compilation of research on their effectiveness. General technical
report INT-GTR-339. U.S. Forest Service, Intermountain Research
Station, Ogden, Utah.
Simini, M., and I. A. Leone. 1986. Studies on the effects of de-icing salts
on roadside trees. Arboricultural Journal 10:221–231.
Smith, J. M. B. 1986. Feral fruit trees on New England roadsides. Page
158 in R. H. Groves and J. J. Burdon, editors. Ecology of biological
invasions. Cambridge University Press, New York.
Swihart, R. K., and N. A. Slade. 1984. Road crossing in Sigmodon hispi-
dus and Microtus ochrogaster.  Journal of Mammalogy 65:357–360.
Thurber, J. M., R. O. Peterson, T. D. Drummer, and S. A. Thomasma.
1994. Gray wolf response to refuge boundaries and roads in Alaska.
Wildlife Society Bulletin 22:61–68.

30
Ecological Effects of Roads
Trombulak & Frissell
Conservation Biology
Volume 14, No. 1, February 2000
Tong, S. T. Y. 1990. Roadside dusts and soils contamination in Cincin-
nati, Ohio, USA. Environmental Management 14:107-114.
Trafela, E. 1987. The influence of the construction of forest roads on
forest production. Zbornik Gozdarstva Lesarstva 29:85–140.
Tyser, R. W., and C. A. Worley. 1992. Alien flora in grasslands adjacent
to road and trail corridors in Glacier National Park, Montana (USA).
Conservation Biology 6:253–262.
U.S. Department of Transportation. 1996. Highway statistics 1996.
FHWA–PL–98–003. U.S. Department of Transportation, Office of
Highway Information Management, Washington, D.C.
Van der Zande, A. N., W. J. ter Keurs, and W. J. Van der Weijden. 1980.
The impact of road on the densities of four bird species in an open
field habitat—evidence of a long-distance effect. Biological Conser-
vation 18:299–321.
Van Dyke, F. G., R. H. Brocke, and H. G. Shaw. 1986. Use of road track
counts as indices of mountain lion presence. Journal of Wildlife
Management 50:102–109.
van Gelder, J. J. 1973. A quantitative approach to the mortality result-
ing from traffic in a population of (Bufo bufo) L. Oecologia 13:93–
95.
Varland, D. E., E. E. Klaas, and T. M. Loughin. 1993. Use of habitat and
perches, causes of mortality and time until dispersal in post-fledg-
ing American Kestrels. Journal of Field Ornithology 64:169–178.
Vora, R. S. 1988. Potential soil compaction forty years after logging in
northeastern California. Great Basin Naturalist 48:117–120
Vos, C. C., and J. P. Chardon. 1998. Effects of habitat fragmentation
and road density on the distribution pattern of the moor frog,
Rana arvilis.  Journal of Applied Ecology 35:44–56.
Watson, J., and R. H. Dennis. 1992. Nest-site selection by Golden Ea-
gles in Scotland. British Birds 85:469–481.
Weaver, W. E., M. M. Hektner, D. K. Hagans, L. J. Reed, R. A. Sonneville,
and G. J. Bundros. 1987. An evaluation of experimental rehabilita-
tion work, Redwood National Park. Technical report 19. Redwood
National Park, Arcata, California.
Wein, R. W., G. Wein, S. Bahret, and W. J. Cody. 1992. Northward invad-
ing non-native vascular plant species in and adjacent to Wood Buf-
falo National Park, Canada. Canadian Field Naturalist 106:216–224.
Wemple, B. C., J. A. Jones, and G. E. Grant. 1996. Channel network ex-
tension by logging roads in two basins, western Cascades, Oregon.
Water Resources Bulletin 32:1195–1207.
Wester, L., and J. O. Juvik. 1983. Roadside plant communities on
Mauna Loa, Hawaii. Journal of Biogeography 10:307–316.
Whitford, P. C. 1985. Bird behavior in response to the warmth of
blacktop roads. Transactions of the Wisconsin Academy of Sci-
ences Arts and Letters 73:135–143.
Wilcox, D. A. 1986. The effects of deicing salts on vegetation in Pin-
hook Bog, Indiana. Canadian Journal of Botany 64:865–874.
Wilkins, K. T., and D. J. Schmidly. 1980. Highway mortality of verte-
brates in southeastern Texas. Texas Journal of Science 4:343–350.
Witmer, G. W., and D. S. DeCalesta. 1985. Effect of forest roads on
habitat use by Roosevelt elk. Northwest Science 59:122–125.
Yanes, M., J. M. Velasco, and F. Suárez. 1995. Premeability of roads and
railways to vertebrates: the importance of culverts. Biological Con-
servation 71:217–222.
Yassoglou, N., C. Kosmas, J. Asimakopoulos, and C. Kallianou. 1987.
Heavy metal contamination of roadside soils in the Greater Athens
(Greece) area. Environmental Pollution 47:293–304.
Ziemer, R. R., and T. E. Lisle. 1998. Hydrology. Pages 43–68 in R. J.
Naiman and R. E. Bilby, editors. River ecology and management: les-
sons from the Pacific coastal ecosystem. Springer-Verlag, New York.
Zobel, D. B., L. F. Roth, and G. M. Hawk. 1985. Ecology, pathology,
and management of Port Orford cedar (Chamaecyparis lawsoni-
ana). General Technical report PNW-184. U.S. Forest Service, Port-
land, Oregon.
