 
Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to reversing declines in the condition of forested communities throughout the Intermoun-
tain West, particularly those affected by severe wildfires and insect outbreaks.  Our efforts focus on science-based research of ecological 
and socio-economic matters related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach, and education. 
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928/523-7182, FAX 928/523-0296, www.eri.nau.edu 
Estimating Flagstaff Residents’ Willingness to Pay for Forest Restoration in the  
Lake Mary and Upper Rio de Flag Watersheds: A Pilot Study 
 
Introduction 
The quantity and quality of water from publically owned National Forests is highly dependent upon forest 
conditions and land management. Previous land management practices have predisposed forests to un-
healthy conditions and uncharacteristically severe wildfires. Severe wildfire can lead to increased post-fire 
run-off, erosion, and sedimentation.  
 
Ecological restoration helps to restore forest health and reduce the probability of catastrophic wildfire. 
Ecological restoration generally involves a combination of mechanical thinning and prescribed burning in 
order to restore health and resilience to forests. Maintaining forest health following restoration requires fol-
low-up management such as prescribed or managed burning and monitoring. 
 
Without large-scale restoration, fire suppression and post-fire rehabilitation costs will continue to grow. In 
order to treat forests at the pace and scale required, the Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI) was estab-
lished with the goal to treat one million acres over 20 years. Unfortunately, the cost of restoration is a sig-
nificant barrier to reaching this goal. Limited federal 
budgets impede the pace of restoration. However, nu-
merous economic analyses confirm that it is more cost
-effective to restore forests than to pay the full costs 
associated with severe wildfire.  The ability to protect 
the water and watersheds of Flagstaff may depend up-
on whether beneficiaries (Flagstaff residents) are will-
ing to help pay for restoration in order to obtain the 
benefits of improved watershed services. 
 
Purpose 
The purpose of the study was to estimate the willing-
ness to pay (WTP) of Flagstaff residents for forest res-
toration in the Lake Mary and Upper Rio de Flag wa-
tersheds. Both the Lake Mary and Upper Rio de Flag 
watersheds provide municipal water for residents of 
Flagstaff, Arizona.  
 
Method 
There were 490 surveys mailed to Flagstaff residents 
with 120 responses and 48 that were undeliverable, 
resulting in a response rate of 24 percent.  
 
Figure 1. Map of the City of Flagstaff Upper Rio de Flag and 
Lake Mary Watersheds. 
Fact Sheet: Willingness to Pay for Forest Restoration      
 
July 2012     

Results 
About the Study 
This study was conducted by Dr. Julie M. Mueller, Assistant Professor, The W.A. Franke College of Busi-
ness, with support and funding from the Ecological Restoration Institute, the Northern Arizona University 
Faculty Grants Program, the W.A. Franke College of Business, and the City of Flagstaff Utilities.  
 
 
 
 Wildfire prevention is a high priority to the residents responding to the survey. The survey asked, 
“Considering the full range of issues you face, how important is wildfire prevention to you?” On a scale 
of 1 to 5, where 1 indicates “Not Important” and 5 indicates “Extremely Important” the mean response 
was 4.52, indicating that wildfire prevention is a high priority for respondents.  
 
 Watershed health is a high priority to the residents responding to the survey (Figure 2). The survey 
asked, “Considering the full range of issues you face, how important is watershed health to you?” On a 
scale of 1 to 5, where 1 indicates “Not Important” and 5 indicates “Extremely Important,” the mean re-
sponse was 3.97, indicating that watershed health is a high priority for respondents. 
 
 Respondents were asked about their 
awareness of the link between forest res-
toration and watershed health. On a 
scale of 1 to 5, where 1 is “Not at All 
Aware” and 5 is “Very Aware,” the 
mean value was 2.9. The results show 
that most of the respondents consider 
themselves 
at 
least 
“Somewhat 
Aware” of the link between forest res-
toration and watershed health. 
 
 Based on the survey results and a pre-
liminary analysis, Flagstaff residents 
are willing to pay an average of $4.76 
per month on their water bills to fund 
monitoring and maintenance of the 
forest restoration in the Lake Mary 
and Upper Rio de Flag watersheds. 
This can result in a net annual benefit of 
approximately $1.1 million. These re-
sults provide evidence that a potentially sustainable outlet for funding maintenance of forest restoration 
thinning is through charging beneficiaries (Flagstaff residents) for forest restoration. 
 
 When asked to indicate how concerned they are about the threats to the Lake Mary and Upper 
Rio de Flag Watersheds that include catastrophic fire, drought, flooding and global climate 
change, they were most concerned about wildfire and drought.  
 
 Thirty-three percent of respondents were aware of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative prior to 
the survey. 
Figure 2. Graph displaying the importance of watershed health for  
Flagstaff residents. 
Contacts 
Diane Vosick, diane.vosick@nau.edu  
Abe Springer, abe.springer@nau.edu 
