164 
Utah Native Plant Society 
     Penstemon clutei (Sunset Crater beardtongue) is a 
narrow endemic that occurs on volcanic soils to the 
northeast of Flagstaff in northern Arizona. The species 
is primarily restricted to tephra deposits from the Sunset 
Crater eruption (estimated dates of eruption vary from 
approximately 1040-1100 AD) at an elevation of ap-
proximately 2135 m (7000 ft), but a disjunct population 
is also present on older cinder cones about 20 km to the 
northwest of Sunset Crater (Figure 1). P. clutei is typi-
cally found in open ponderosa pine forests and pinyon-
juniper woodlands in areas containing a sparse under-
story, commonly on fairly coarse and dry, cindery soils 
that lie over a series of finer textured sandy or silty 
bands, which may alternate with coarse layers of cinders 
(Abella and Covington 2006, Phillips et al. 1992). The 
type specimen was collected by Willard Clute in July 
1923  north  of  the  San  Francisco  Peaks  in  “lava  sand,”  
and was described and named by Aven Nelson from the 
University of Wyoming (Nelson 1927). Growing to 
about 50-75 cm (20-30 in) in height, P. clutei has blu-
ish-green glaucous leaves with serrated margins and 
gradually inflated, deep pink corollas. It is a very showy 
and attractive specimen plant and is readily available to 
gardeners through the horticultural trade. Flowering  
times vary by year, but it has been observed to flower   
 
Long-term Responses of Penstemon clutei (Sunset Crater Beardtongue)  
to Root Trenching and Prescribed Fire: Clues for Population Persistence 
 
Judith D. Springer1, Peter Z. Fulé2, and David W. Huffman1 
1Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ, and 
2School of Forestry, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 
 
Abstract.  Penstemon clutei  A. Nelson (Sunset Crater beardtongue) is narrowly endemic to the cinder hills and vol-
canic fields northeast of Flagstaff, Arizona. Disturbances such as wildfire, tornadoes, logging activity, and tree mor-
tality from bark beetle outbreaks appear to stimulate regeneration of this species, but the manner in which populations 
persist between events is still largely unknown. From 1994-2000, we examined P. clutei responses to prescribed 
burning and root trenching treatments that were experimentally implemented as proxies for surface fire and reduced 
tree densities that might be observed following natural disturbance. We revisited this experiment in 2008 to assess 
long-term effects of the treatments. We also collected soil samples at this time to evaluate the importance of a persis-
tent seed bank in population dynamics. In 2008, the mean number of P. clutei plants on trenched plots had declined 
with time, but was still significantly higher than on the control plots (mean density of 7.4 plants in trenched plots vs. 
0.6 plants in control plots). There was no significant difference in density between burned and unburned plots. Only 
21 P. clutei seedlings emerged from 176 soil seed bank samples, and we found no correlation between the number of 
P. clutei plants aboveground and the number of emergents from the samples. A targeted study to obtain samples near 
the base of reproductively mature plants produced 9 emergents from 30 samples. Results from this work suggest that 
disturbances that reduce competition for soil resources may be associated with long-term population persistence. La-
tent seed banks appear to be of only minor importance in recovery after disturbance; however, additional research 
with larger sample sizes would allow for greater confidence in this conclusion. We also recommend that additional 
long-term research be conducted on the response of this species to specific disturbances and stressors such as wild-
fire, tree mortality from bark beetle outbreaks, and water limitations.  
from April through early September. It is ranked G2 
(imperiled) by NatureServe (2009) and is on the U.S. 
Forest Service sensitive species list for Region 3 
(Southwestern Region) (Arizona Game and Fish Depart-
ment 2003; D. C. Crisp, personal communication, 
2009).  
     There is speculation that P. clutei is descended from 
P. pseudospectabilis (desert penstemon) and that geo-
graphic isolation occurred following the Sunset Crater 
eruption (Bateman 1980), or it may be intermediate be-
tween P. pseudospectabilis and P. palmeri (Palmer’s  
penstemon) (Clokey and Keck 1939). Phylogeny recon-
struction of the genus Penstemon using nuclear and 
chloroplast sequence data and parsimony analysis pro-
duced incongruent results (Wolfe et al. 2006). Strict 
consensus trees generated from ITS (Internal Tran-
scribed Spacers) placed P. clutei in a polytomy with P. 
bicolor (pinto beardtongue), P. floridus (Panamint 
beardtongue), P. palmeri, and P. rubicundus (Wassuk 
Range beardtongue). In contrast, strict consensus trees 
generated from chloroplast sequence data placed P. clu-
tei as sister to P. centranthifolius (scarlet bugler) (Wolfe 
et al. 2006). With both methods (ITS and chloroplast 
sequence), the genera within the tribe Cheloneae had 
high bootstrap values. However, few terminal line- 

165 
Calochortiana December 2012 Number 1 
It is believed to be a short-lived perennial like many 
other taxa in the genus Penstemon, perhaps living five 
to seven years on average. No long-term population 
studies following individual plants have been conducted 
to date in its natural habitat, so estimates of its longevity 
are purely speculative at this time. Observations in the 
field have suggested a link to disturbances. Prolific 
growth was observed following the Burnt Fire in 1973 
(Goodwin 1979) and the Hochderffer Fire in 1996 (Fulé 
et al. 2001). It has also been observed growing in large 
numbers in the path left by a tornado (Crisp 1996) as 
well as surrounding Pinus edulis (pinyon pine) trees that 
were killed by drought and bark beetles in 2002-2003 
(J.D. Springer, personal observations, 2008 and 2009). 
Phillips and others (1992) noted vigorous plants and 
high seedling numbers in areas of past disturbance, es-
pecially from logging operations. Plants were particu-
larly prevalent near decaying logs and stumps. Large 
numbers of reproductively mature plants are also some-
times found in a ring surrounding recent Pinus ponder-
osa (ponderosa pine) snags (Fulé et al. 2001).  
     Because plants had been noted to emerge in abun-
dance following wildfire, two prescribed burning studies  
Figure 1. Range of Penstemon clutei (Sunset Crater beardtongue) in northern Arizona.  
ages of sister taxa within the Penstemon clade had boot-
strap values above 70%, which is the generally accepted 
value for moderate to strong support. The contradictory 
results are likely due to hybridization and/or rapid speci-
ation among penstemons. Wolfe and her co-authors 
(1998) have documented hybridization among some 
Penstemon species and have also demonstrated that pol-
len-mediated gene flow occurs via hummingbird vec-
tors. 
     Many narrow endemics are found in extreme edaphic 
conditions, including recent volcanic soils (Lesica et al. 
2006). Characteristic of many of these species are high 
population growth rates but poor dispersal rates. Their 
restricted ranges may in some cases be due more to re-
cent evolution than to ecological tolerance: it may sim-
ply be the case that some species have not yet had time 
to spread across the landscape and may therefore be 
relatively young (neoendemics) (Lesica et al. 2006). 
Neoendemism is common in intermountain regions of  
western North America, and P. clutei is likely a fairly 
recently evolved species.  
     Little is currently known about the ecology of P. clu-
tei, and information in the scientific literature is sparse.  

166 
Utah Native Plant Society 
were established by the U.S. Forest Service, but results 
were inconclusive (Nagiller 1992). We initiated a study 
in 1992 to test the hypothesis that restoration of historic 
ecosystem conditions may enhance the sustainability of 
this species (Fulé et al. 2001). This study encompassed 
several components, including seed germination studies, 
a field seeding trial, a prescribed burning study and a 
trenching experiment. We initiated the prescribed burn-
ing component in 1994 to test the hypothesis that pre-
scribed fire would increase P. clutei density by remov-
ing litter and competing vegetation. The results suggest 
that prescribed burning caused a significant decline in 
density by as much as 75%. However, density also de-
clined in two of the three control areas (in one area also 
by as much as 75%). So, while prescribed burning ap-
pears to be responsible for the death of mature plants, 
natural population declines may also occur in the ab-
sence of disturbance.  
     After evaluating results from the prescribed burning 
experiment, we investigated the possibility that vigorous 
responses following fires were a result of mortality of 
overstory trees and removal of root competition (Fulé et 
al. 2001). We initiated a study in 1998 to test the hy-
pothesis that cutting root competition through trenching 
would increase P. clutei density. In 1999, one year fol-
lowing the trenching, there was a significant difference 
in density between trenched (mean of 104.9 plants/plot) 
and control plots (14.0 plants/plot), mostly in the form 
of seedlings. By 2000, densities had declined to an aver-
age of 30.6 vs. 1.5 plants in the trenched and control 
plots, respectively, mostly due to the death of seedlings. 
Two preliminary conclusions were drawn from the 
trenching study: 1) trenching had a positive effect on P. 
clutei reproduction, and this trend was still evident a 
year later, and 2) increases in P. clutei were likely due 
to reduced root competition with overstory trees. Al-
though our earlier germination experiments indicated 
that P. clutei did not exhibit innate seed dormancy under 
laboratory conditions (see Fulé et al. 2001), we were 
puzzled over the dramatic field response to root trench-
ing. A field seeding trial of P. clutei showed very poor 
rates of establishment (0.1-0.6%), with no seedlings es-
tablishing after an April seeding, and only a minimal 
number establishing following an October seeding (Fulé 
et al. 2001). Determining whether P. clutei maintains a 
persistent soil seed bank is crucial for conservation and 
management efforts. The combined results from our 
previous studies suggest that it does not form a persis-
tent seed bank, that there may be dissimilarities in ger-
mination rates between plants from different habitats, 
and that field emergence is extremely low and/or seed-
ling mortality is high. Collecting P. clutei seeds from 
additional habitats could yield new information on 
whether this species exhibits cyclic dormancy patterns 
or dormancy that differs in contrasting habitats. 
     It remains largely unknown, then, how long popula-
tions of P. clutei plants persist on the landscape follow-
ing disturbance, what mechanism this species employs 
to colonize an area following disturbance, or how it is 
able to disperse across the landscape. In an effort to gain 
answers to some of these questions, we revisited the 
study area ten years after root trenching and 13-14 years 
following prescribed burning. Our objectives were to 
assess the long-term effects of the prescribed burning 
and trenching treatments and to evaluate the importance 
of a persistent seed bank in population dynamics.   
 
METHODS 
     Fulé and others (2001) described methods of our pre-
vious prescribed burning and root trenching studies in 
detail, but we will also summarize them here. The ex-
perimental studies described in this and the 2001 paper 
were established in 1992-1994 and conducted on Co-
conino National Forest lands in the vicinity of O'Leary 
Peak, adjacent to Sunset Crater National Monument 
(Figure 1). The elevation of the study area is approxi-
mately 2100-2300 m (6890-7550 ft). Soils are cindery 
and deep, well-drained Vitrandic Ustochrepts and Typic 
Ustorthents (Miller et al. 1995). Weather records from 
Sunset Crater National Monument, 1 km south of the 
study area, include an annual precipitation average of 
42.7 cm (16.8 in) (1969-2008), with most precipitation 
occurring in winter and during the summer monsoon 
(July-September). However, annual precipitation has 
varied widely in recent decades from a low of 23.6 cm 
(9.3 in) in 1989 to 66 cm (26.0 in) in 1992. The average 
minimum temperature in January is -11o C and the aver-
age maximum temperature in July is 29o C. 
     We established an experiment to study the effects of 
prescribed burning on the P. clutei community in 1994. 
Forty P. clutei plant-centered plots were established, 
each with a 2.5 m radius circle (area = 19.6 m2) centered 
0.3 m northwest of an existing plant. P. clutei was tal-
lied in four categories: seedling, second-year plant, ma-
ture plant, and dead. Field experience indicated that the 
distinctions between the living plant categories were 
approximate. Plots were randomly selected for burn or 
control treatments, and burning was conducted in Sep-
tember 1994. Burn season effects were tested on a sec-
ond experimental site immediately north of the fall 
burning site, and twenty randomly selected plots were 
burned in April 1995. The fall burn plots were re-meas-
ured in July 1995. All 80 plots, including spring and fall 
burns, were re-measured in August/September 1996; 
August 1997; August 1998; and August/September 
2008. Changes in P. clutei density were analyzed with 
repeated measures analysis of variance (Systat 8.0, 
SPSS Science, Chicago). Data were square-root trans-
formed to meet ANOVA assumptions. In 2008, data  

167 
Calochortiana December 2012 Number 1 
were cube-root transformed, and the software used was 
JMP 8.0 (SAS, Cary, NC). 
     In October 1997 we established ten new experimen-
tal plots for root trenching within the low-elevation 
burning study area. Each plot was paired with a nearby 
control plot from the original burn experiment. The 
number of trenched plots was eventually dropped to 
eight due to off-road vehicle damage and other factors. 
The below ground effects of tree removal were simu-
lated by digging a narrow trench approximately 1 m 
deep around each plot. Trenches were located 50 cm 
outside the plot boundary to avoid physical disturbance 
within the measured area and were lined with plastic 
sheeting to minimize tree root regrowth (Milne 1979). 
Trenches were backfilled immediately after lining, and 
plots were re-measured in August 1998, September 
1999, August 2000 and August/September 2008. P. clu-
tei density was analyzed as described for the prescribed 
burning study above. 
     In 2008, we collected two soil seed bank samples 
from each of the 80 prescribed burning study plots and 
also from the trenched plots (176 total). Samples were 
collected to a depth of 5 cm, approximately 15 cm away  
from the original plot center to the east and west, and 
each core was approximately 70 cm3 in volume. We also 
collected 30 targeted seed bank samples 15 cm to the  
east and west of reproductively mature individuals that 
were located outside of plots. Seeds are dispersed in the  
fall and winter, and germination is thought to occur dur-
ing late spring and early summer rains, so we collected 
soil seed bank samples in late August and early Septem-
ber, presumably after germination occurred, but before 
new seeds were dispersed, in an effort to capture seeds 
in the persistent soil seed bank. We sieved samples to 
remove large cinders and placed the soil samples on pot-
ting soil in gallon-sized pots. Samples were placed in 
the greenhouse in September 2008 and received artifi-
cial light, one application of Miracle Gro® and daily 
watering for five months, using the seed emergence 
method (Ter Heedt et al. 1996).  
 
RESULTS 
     In 2008, thirteen and fourteen years after spring and 
fall burning, respectively, there was no significant dif-
ference in P. clutei density between burned and un-
burned plots (Figure 2). Mean density in burned plots 
(combined spring and fall burns) was 0.9 live plants, 
and mean density in control plots was 0.6 live plants.  
Over the course of this study, there has been a general 
decline in P. clutei in both burned and control plots. 
However, there was still a significant difference in mean 
density between trenched and control plots ten years  
Figure 2. Mean density of Penstemon clutei plants following a prescribed burn study near Sunset Crater National 
Monument in northern Arizona. Pre-treatment data were collected in 1994 and 1995. Bars indicate standard error.  

168 
Utah Native Plant Society 
after the first re-measurement, with mean density in  
trenched plots significantly higher (p<0.01; F=7.8). 
There was also a highly significant treatment effect over 
time (p <0.0001; F= 31.4) (Figure 3). In addition, 75% 
of the trenched plots contained living plants in 2008 
(mostly reproductively mature plants), whereas only 
43% of the control plots contained living individuals, 
and these were all young plants (one year or less). No 
control plots contained mature plants. Overall, the mean 
density of plants was 7.4 in trenched plots and 0.6 in 
control plots.  
     There was no correlation between the number of live 
P. clutei plants in the study plots and the number of 
emergent seedlings in the soil seed bank samples taken 
from these same plots (r2 = 0.008). Eighteen seedlings 
emerged from the samples collected from the plots used 
in the prescribed burning study. However, nearly all of 
these seedlings (94%) emerged from control (unburned) 
plots, and of the 40 unburned plots sampled, 8 of these 
produced seedlings (20%). Of the four seedlings that 
emerged from the soil seed bank samples collected from 
the trenching experiment, three (75%) emerged from the 
trenched plots, and one seedling emerged in a control 
plot. Thirteen percent of the soil seed bank samples 
taken from trenched plots produced seedlings. In the  
targeted study, nine seedlings emerged in total, and 17% 
of the samples produced seedlings.  
      
DISCUSSION 
     The results from our re-measurements suggest that P. 
clutei populations gradually decline over time in the 
absence of some type of disturbance, but that plants may 
remain in the area for at least a decade, or possibly 
much longer. Populations are still present around log-
ging slash left in place following operations in the early 
part of the 20th century (J.D. Springer, personal observa-
tions, 2009). We do not currently understand why this 
species may undergo long-term declines in established 
populations. Although the Southwest appears to be in a 
long-term dry period, weather records from Sunset Cra-
ter National Monument indicate that annual precipita-
tion was above average for 9 out of the 17 years since 
the study was initiated. However, the records from 
which we obtained our average have only been kept 
since 1969.   
     Our study indicates the positive effect of reduced 
root competition may last at least ten years. This effect 
is presumably due to increased soil moisture availability 
but is possibly also due to increased nutrient availability 
or a combination of the two. Coomes and Grubb (2000)  
Figure 3. Mean density of Penstemon clutei plants following a root trenching experiment near Sunset Crater National 
Monument in northern Arizona . Pre-treatment data were collected in 1997. Bars indicate standard error (each plot 
was 19.6 m2; n=80; p value in 2008 was <0.01). 

169 
Calochortiana December 2012 Number 1 
point to a number of studies showing that root trenching 
can lead to an increase in the availability of mineral ni-
trogen. Research by Selmants and Hart (2008) indicates 
that there are large carbon and nitrogen pools and fluxes 
under the canopies of one-seed juniper (Juniperus 
monosperma) in soils around Sunset Crater. Soils under 
juniper and pinyon pine canopies are generally higher in 
both carbon and nitrogen than are intercanopy sites, but 
these levels vary according to the age of the soils, which 
are of volcanic origin in this region.    
     Abella and Covington (2006) obtained samples from 
a number of soil types across the Coconino National 
Forest, including black and red cinder soils in the vicin-
ity of Sunset Crater, and determined that black cinder 
soils contain the driest surface soils among those tested. 
These soils are very sandy (>90% concentration at 0-15 
cm depth), and contained the fewest plant species per 
plot. Red cinder soils are also quite sandy (averaging 
63% concentration at 0-15 cm depth). Soil samples 
taken from red cinders contained no calcium carbonate, 
but these soils had higher organic carbon and total nitro-
gen than the black cinder soils, and they also had higher 
soil moisture. P. clutei populations in pinyon-juniper 
woodlands are typically found on these older, red cinder 
soils. 
     The soils on which P. clutei grows, then, are argua-
bly some of the harshest in northern Arizona and are 
susceptible to extreme environmental fluctuations. 
Seedling mortality is high, but once plants reach matur-
ity, they have adapted to the harsh, arid environment by 
means of a large taproot or thick lateral roots (D.W. 
Huffman, personal observations, 2008) and thick leaves. 
The species also must have developed adaptations to be 
able to rapidly colonize following disturbance, perhaps 
through longevity, rapid dispersal, high germinability, 
or a persistent soil seed bank. Soil seed banks buffer 
populations against environmental variation, and seed 
dormancy is a mechanism of escape from unfavorable 
conditions in time (compared to dispersal, which is an 
escape in space) (Doak et al. 2002). Short-lived perenni-
als in areas of high environmental variation, which in-
cludes most rare plants in the Southwest, often rely on 
the soil seed bank for recruitment (Doak et al. 2002). P. 
lemhiensis (Lemhi penstemon) and P. palmeri have 
been documented to buffer populations against environ-
mental fluctuations by maintaining a persistent soil seed 
bank (Heidel and Shelly 2001, Meyer and Kitchen 
1992). Conversely, long-lived perennials are often more 
reliant on growth and survival of established plants than 
on recruitment from seed or soil seed banks (Lesica 
1995). If a species does not exhibit innate dormancy, it 
is unlikely that it forms a soil seed bank. Because P. 
clutei plants have been observed to appear in large num-
bers following a disturbance such as the Hochderffer 
Fire (P.Z. Fulé, personal observation, 1997 and 1998),  
conventional thinking is that this species forms a persis-
tent soil seed bank (Phillips et al. 1992), but it may also 
maintain genetic diversity through existing reproduc-
tively mature plants scattered across the landscape, or 
exhibit rapid dispersal rates following disturbance. 
While it does seem from our study that P. clutei may 
form a minor persistent seed bank, the degree of its im-
portance in recovery following disturbance is unknown, 
and larger sample sizes from additional habitats are nec-
essary in order to make inferences about its significance 
for recruitment following disturbance.   
     Meyer et al. (1995) found a diversity of germination 
timing mechanisms in 38 Intermountain West Penste-
mon species. Seeds of many of these species diverge 
into two fractions. One fraction does not exhibit dor-
mancy and will germinate readily under optimal condi-
tions in the first year. The other fraction may respond to 
chilling cues and become nongerminable, allowing for 
between-year carryover in the soil seed bank. Meyer and 
her co-authors (1995) found this strategy to be espe-
cially common in populations of penstemons from mid-
dle elevation areas that have unpredictable winters. 
Meyer and Kitchen (1992) discovered that P. palmeri 
seeds undergo cyclic dormancy changes in the field. 
Moist chilling induces secondary dormancy in about 
half of the seeds, while moisture combined with summer 
temperatures removes secondary dormancy. These 
mechanisms allow for a persistent soil seed bank and for 
seeds that can persist from year to year without burial. 
The result is that some seeds germinate in the spring, 
while those seeds that are rendered dormant by chilling 
are carried over in the soil seed bank. Another fruitful 
area of research for this species could include seed aug-
mentation studies to determine if a paucity of viable 
seeds may be limiting establishment. Abella (2008) con-
ducted such a study with P. virgatus (upright blue 
beardtongue) in a ponderosa pine forest not far from our 
study site and found that under particular experimental 
conditions, the site environment (e.g., tree overstory) 
apparently was more limiting to recruitment than either 
leaf litter thickness or seed availability. 
     Our results also indicate that prescribed burning 
alone does not seem to be a useful management tool for 
this species, as it appears to kill reproductively mature 
individuals leading to potential decreases in available 
seeds for future recruitment. An experiment involving 
use of prescribed fire as a management tool for P. lem-
hiensis returned variable results (Heidel and Shelly 
2001). Fire appeared to cause mortality of adult plants 
ranging from 25-75%. However, the burning caused  
an increased recruitment rate of 4600-6400%. As we 
pointed out in our previous paper (Fulé et al. 2001), 
patchy tree mortality does appear to benefit P. clutei. 
Tree mortality from the 2002-2003 bark beetle outbreak 
among pinyon pines appears to be correlated with dra- 

170 
Utah Native Plant Society 
matic increases in the number of reproductively mature 
individuals on the south-facing slopes of cinder cones in 
the vicinity of Sunset Crater and Indian Flat (J.D. 
Springer, personal observations, 2008 and 2009).   
     Although some P. clutei populations contain hun-
dreds or thousands of individuals, populations are often 
widely dispersed, and there are a few major threats that 
could jeopardize this species in the future. The entire 
range of P. clutei has not yet been mapped; however, a 
large portion of its known range falls within the Cinder 
Hills OHV (off-highway vehicle) area (Figure 1). Most 
of this area is not fenced and OHV use spills outside the 
boundaries shown in the map. Although P. clutei ap-
pears to benefit from disturbance, whether disturbance 
is beneficial or detrimental depends on the type of dis-
turbance and the amount of impact. No quantifiable data 
has yet been collected on the impacts of OHV activity 
on this species, but anecdotal evidence points to OHVs 
as a direct factor in adult P. clutei mortality (J.D. 
Springer, personal observations, 2008). OHV activity 
causes above- and belowground soil impacts, resulting 
in decreased soil moisture, increased soil bulk density, 
and increased water infiltration time, which have been 
shown to negatively impact plant species in the area, 
such as ponderosa pine (Kennedy 2005).  
     While OHV use and impacts can be controlled, po-
tential negative changes to P. clutei habitat from climate 
change cannot. Climate models predict a more arid cli-
mate in the southwestern U.S. in the coming decades 
(Seager et al. 2007). This species already lives in a 
harsh environment, and any major decreases in available 
soil moisture could significantly impact its long-term 
viability. Additional threats include potential hybridiza-
tion with other Penstemon species brought to the area 
for horticulture or highway revegetation purposes, herb-
ivory, insect damage and urban expansion. 
     Determining the long-term population dynamics of 
this species is integral to future conservation manage-
ment planning and points out the direct need for long-
term monitoring, particularly in the face of potential 
climate change and unmanaged OHV use in the center 
of its habitat. Teasing out whether P. clutei population 
declines occur from disturbance, absence of disturbance, 
senescence, competition, drought, climate change, inter-
active effects, or other as yet undetermined factors will 
be critical for understanding future conservation and 
management needs for this species. 
 
 ACKNOWLDEGMENTS 
     We thank Deb Crisp, Barb Phillips, and Frank Tho-
mas (Coconino National Forest), Steve Rosenstock 
(Arizona Game and Fish Department), Paul Whitefield 
(National Park Service), and Susie Smith (Northern Ari-
zona University) for their assistance in gathering loca-
tions and for their input on ecology and experimental  
design; Scott Abella (UNLV and Public Lands Institute) 
and Nancy Brian (National Park Service) for their re-
view of the manuscript; and Joe Crouse, Mark Daniels, 
Chris McGlone, Mike Stoddard, Chelsea Green, Cat 
McGowan, Don Normandin and students and staff of 
the Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona 
University for assistance with data collection, mapping, 
greenhouse study maintenance and statistical analysis. 
 
LITERATURE CITED 
     Abella, S.R. 2008. Plant recruitment in a northern 
Arizona ponderosa pine forest: testing seed- and leaf 
litter-limitation hypotheses. Pp. 119-127 in Olberding, 
Susan D., and Moore, Margaret M., tech coords. 2008. 
Fort Valley Experimental Forest—A Century of Re-
search 1908-2008. Proceedings RMRS-P-53CD. Fort 
Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 408 p. 
     Abella, S.R. and W.W. Covington. 2006. Forest eco-
systems of an Arizona Pinus ponderosa landscape: mul-
tifactor classification and implications for ecological 
restoration. Journal of Biogeography. 33: 1368-1383. 
     Arizona Game and Fish Department. 2003. Penste-
mon clutei. Unpublished abstract compiled and edited 
by the Heritage Data Management System, Arizona 
Game and Fish Department, Phoenix, AZ. 5 pp. 
Bateman, Gary C. 1980. Natural Resource Survey and 
Analysis of Sunset Crater and Wupatki National Monu-
ments. Final Report (Phase III). Prepared for the Office 
of Natural Resources Management, Southwest Region, 
National Park Service. 
     Clokey, I.W. and D.D. Keck. 1939. Reconsideration 
of certain members of Penstemon subsection spectabilis. 
Bulletin of the Southern California Academy of Sci-
ence. 38: 8-13. 
     Coomes, D.A. and P.J. Grubb. 2000. Impacts of Root 
Competition in Forests and Woodlands: A Theoretical 
Framework and Review of Experiments. Ecological 
Monographs. 70(2): 171-207.  
     Crisp, D.L. 1996. Monitoring of Penstemon clutei A. 
Nels. on tornado salvage. In USDA Forest Service Gen-
eral Technical Report RM-GTR-283, pp. 243-246. 
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, 
Fort Collins, Colorado. 
     Doak, D.F., D. Thomson, and E.S. Jules. 2002. Popu-
lation Viability Analysis for Plants: Understanding the 
Demographic Consequence of Seed Banks for Popul-
ation Health. In: Steven R. Beissinger and Dale R. 
McCullough, Eds. Population Viability Analysis. Uni-
versity of Chicago Press.  
     Fulé, P.Z., J.D. Springer, D.W. Huffman, and W.W. 
Covington. 2001. Response of a rare endemic, Penste-
mon clutei, to burning and reduced belowground com-
petition. Pp 139-152 in Maschinski. J., and L. Holter  
  

171 
Calochortiana December 2012 Number 1 
(tech. coords.), Proceedings: Third Rare and Endan-
gered Plant Conference. Proceedings RMRS-P-23. 
     Goodwin, G. 1979. Observations on Penstemon clu-
tei on the Coconino National Forest. Unpublished report 
on file at Supervisor's Office, Coconino National Forest, 
Flagstaff, AZ. 7 pp. 
     Heidel, B. and J.S. Shelly. 2001. The Effects of Fire 
on Lemhi Penstemon (Penstemon lemhiensis) – Final 
Monitoring Report 1995-2000. Montana Natural Heri-
tage Program. Prepared for Beaverhead-Deerlodge Na-
tional Forest and Dillon Field Office – Bureau of Land 
Management.  
     Kennedy, K.J. 2005. Above- and belowground im-
pacts of off-road vehicles negatively affect establish-
ment  of  a  dominant  forest  tree.  Master’s  thesis,  North-­
ern Arizona University, Flagstaff. 39 pp. 
     Lesica, P. 1995. Demography of Astragalus sca-
phoides and effects of herbivory on population growth. 
Great Basin Naturalist. 55(2): 142-150. 
     Lesica, P., R. Yurkewycz, and E.E. Crone. 2006. 
Rare plants are common where you find them. Ameri-
can Journal of Botany. 93(3): 454-459.  
     Meyer, S.E., and S.G. Kitchen. 1992. Cyclic seed 
dormancy in the short-lived perennial Penstemon 
palmeri. Journal of Ecology 80: 115-122. 
     Meyer, S.E., S.G. Kitchen and S.L. Carlson. 1995. 
Seed germination timing patterns in intermountain Pen-
stemon (Scrophulariaceae). American Journal of Bot-
any. 82(3): 377-389. 
     Miller, G., N. Ambos, P. Boness, D. Reyher, G. 
Robertson, K. Scalzone, R. Steinke and T. Subirge. 
1995. Terrestrial ecosystems survey of the Coconino 
National Forest. USDA Forest Service, Southwestern 
Region. 
     Milne, M.M. 1979. The effects of burning, root 
trenching, and shading on mineral soil nutrients in 
southwestern  ponderosa  pine.  Master’s  thesis,  Northern  
Arizona University, Flagstaff.  
     Nagiller, S. 1992. Untitled report of prescribed burn-
ing results on file at Elden Ranger District, Coconino 
National Forest, Flagstaff, AZ. 2 pp. 
     NatureServe. 2009. NatureServe Explorer: An online 
encyclopedia of life [web application]. Version 7.1. 
NatureServe, Arlington, Virginia. Available http://
www.natureserve.org/explorer. (Accessed: May 27, 
2009 ).  
     Nelson, A. 1927. A new Penstemon from Arizona. 
American Botanist. 33: 109-110. 
     Phillips, A. M. III, M. B. Murov, and R. J. van Om-
meren. 1992. Distribution and ecology of Sunset Crater 
beard tongue (Penstemon clutei) in the Cinder Hills 
area, Coconino National Forest, Arizona. Unpublished 
report on file at the Supervisor's Office, Coconino Na-
tional Forest, Flagstaff, Arizona. 11 pp. 
     Seager, R., M. Ting, I. Held, Y. Kushnir, J. Lu, G. 
Vecchi, H. Huang, N. Harnik, A. Leetmaa, N. Lau, C. 
Li, J. Velez, and N. Naik. 2007. Model Projections of an 
Imminent Transition to a More Arid Climate in South-
western North America. Science. 316(5828): 1181-
1184. 
     Selmants, P.C. and S.C. Hart. 2008. Substrate age 
and tree islands influence carbon and nitrogen dynamics 
across a retrogressive semiarid chronosequence. Global 
Biogeochemical Cycles. 22, GB1021, doi: 
10.1029/2007GB003062, 2008. 
     Ter Heedt, G.N.J., G.L. Verwiej, R.M. Bekker and 
J.P. Bakker. 1996. An improved method for seed-bank 
analysis: seedling emergence after removing the soil by 
sieving. Functional Ecology. 10(1): 144-151. 
     Wolfe, A.D., Q. Ziang and S.R. Kephart. 1998. As-
sessing hybridization in natural populations of Penste-
mon (Scrophulariaceae) using hypervariable intersimple 
sequence repeat (ISSR) bands. Molecular Ecology. 
7:1107-1125. 
     Wolfe, A.D., C.P. Randle, S.L. Datwyler, J.J. 
Morawetz, N. Arguedas and J. Diaz. 2006. Phylogeny, 
taxonomic affinities and biogeography of Penstemon 
(Plantaginaceae) based on ITS and cpDNA sequence 
data. American Journal of Botany. 93(11): 1699-1713. 
