H a n d b o o k
TWO
Developing a multiparty
monitoring plan
Collaborative Forest Restoration Program
January 2005

The multiparty monitoring handbook series
This multiparty monitoring handbook is part of a series of guides to
monitoring collaborative forest restoration projects. The series was written
specifically for projects funded through the USDA Forest Service’s
Collaborative Forest Restoration Program (CFRP). The Handbooks in the
series are:
Handbook 1—What is multiparty monitoring?
Handbook 2—Developing a multiparty monitoring plan
Handbook 3—Budgeting for monitoring projects
Handbook 4—Monitoring ecological effects
Handbook 5—Monitoring social and economic effects
Handbook 6—Analyzing and interpreting monitoring data
Multiparty monitoring is required of all CFRP grantees; however, the
methods and approaches presented in these workbooks are to serve as
guides and references only. The specific methods are NOT required.
Because there is a wide diversity of projects funded through the CFRP,
many grantees will have different requirements for monitoring and/or
monitoring assistance.
The content of these handbooks was largely conceived at a series of
workshops held in 2003 that were sponsored by the following:
Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI), Forest Trust, Four Corners
Institute, National Forest Foundation, Pinchot Institute for
Conservation, USDA Forest Service—Collaborative Forest
Restoration Program.
These handbooks are updated periodically and the latest versions will
be available on the Collaborative Forest Restoration Program Web site
at www.fs.fed.us/r3/spf/cfrp/monitoring. For more information on this
series, contact the Ecological Restoration Institute, Box 15017, Flagstaff
AZ 86011-5017.
CFRP grantees are also eligible for multiparty monitoring training
workshops and technical assistance from the CFRP monitoring team. This
free service will be provided through September 2006. Call 866.614.8424
for details.
Handbook series authors/editors: Tori Derr, Ann Moote, Melissa Savage,
Martha Schumann, Jesse Abrams, Laura McCarthy, and Kimberly Lowe.
Design, copy-edit, and production Joel Viers, ERI; cover photo courtesy the
Forest Guild.
01.06.05
This Handbook series is
largely funded by the
USDA Forest Service
and is published by the
Ecological Restoration
Institute at Northern
Arizona University

Table of contents
Why develop a monitoring plan?.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
1
What monitoring approach to use .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
2
What to monitor—choosing goals .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
3
What to monitor—choosing indicators .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
4
How to gather good data.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
6
What is really doable?
.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
8
A monitoring plan template .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
8
Glossary .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
10
Table 1 – Sample goals and indicators .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
5
Table 2 – Monitoring plan template .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
9
Acknowledgments


1
Why develop a monitoring plan?
Developing a clear, concise plan for how monitoring will be done
is an essential part of any monitoring program. A monitoring plan
will help your group make sure that the data you gather are useful
and meaningful. It ensures that information is collected at the
right time and place and helps to provide transparency, an
important part of the multiparty monitoring process.
Your monitoring plan can be brief, but it should include these very
basic elements of the monitoring program:
w What will be monitored?
w How will it be monitored?
w Who will do the monitoring?
w When does the monitoring need to be done?
w Where does the monitoring need to occur?
w Where will monitoring data be stored?
w How, when, and by whom will monitoring data be
analyzed?
w How much will monitoring cost, and how will it be paid
for?
This handbook covers the basic steps in designing a monitoring
plan. You may want to refer to one or more of the other handbooks
in this series when developing your monitoring plan.
What monitoring approach to use_________________________________
Your multiparty monitoring group may want to consider whether
it is interested in monitoring project implementation, monitoring
project effectiveness, or validating project assumptions.
Handbook 3 provides funding ideas and sample budgets
Handbook 4 describes ecological monitoring methods
Handbook 5 describes social and economic monitoring methods
Handbook 6 explains how to analyze and interpret monitoring data
Transparency means that anyone
can access information and
understand the goals, actions, and
accomplishments of a project.
—
Transparency helps to build trust
among people with different
perspectives or values.

2
Implementation monitoring simply asks, “did we do what we said
we would do?” Monitoring with this approach might answer the
following sample questions: “Did our project provide jobs within
the local community?” or “Did our project thin 125 acres of
ponderosa pine forest?”
Effectiveness monitoring helps determine whether or not the
project goals were achieved by asking the question, “Did it work?”
Monitoring plans taking this approach might answer the following
sample questions: “Did our project reduce the number of small
trees that compete with old-growth ponderosa pine?” or “Did our
project increase forage for deer?”
Validation monitoring involves checking the assumptions upon
which restoration efforts are based. Monitoring with this approach
usually shows causality and might answer the following sample
question: “Did reducing crown cover actually reduce the threat of
catastrophic wildfire?”
Many CFRP projects use implementation or effectiveness
monitoring. These handbooks are generally oriented toward
effectiveness monitoring, as it provides useful feedback without
having to prove as much “causality” as validation monitoring may
require.
Stakeholders in a project may decide to use a combination of
monitoring approaches. For example, a group may wish to use
effectiveness monitoring to measure the ecological effects of their
project and implementation monitoring to assess social or
economic effects of the project.
What to monitor—choosing goals________________________________
Your multiparty monitoring group will be faced with the
challenge of choosing what exactly to monitor. These handbooks
include dozens of examples for what can be monitored, many
more than anyone could use for any given project. All monitoring
groups are faced with limitations of time and money, and you will
There are at least three approaches
to monitoring:
Implementation monitoring—“Did
the project do what it said it
would?”
Effectiveness monitoring —“Was
the project effective in achieving its
goals?”
Validation monitoring – “Were the
project assumptions correct?”
Causality is the extent to which an
action directly influences change in
something else.

3
have to carefully consider what data will provide you with the
most useful information.
A good place to start is by examining your project goals For
example,
Collaborative
Forest
Restoration
Program
grant
recipients might start by looking at the program goals outlined in
the Community Forest Restoration Act (Public Law 106-393, the
federal law that created CFRP):
1 – To promote healthy watersheds and reduce the threat of
large, high intensity wildfires, insect infestation, and
disease in the forests in New Mexico;
2 – To improve the functioning of forest ecosystems and
enhance plant and wildlife biodiversity by reducing the
unnaturally high number and density of small diameter
trees on federal, tribal, state, county, and municipal lands;
3 – To improve communication and joint problem-solving
among individuals and groups who are interested in
restoring the diversity and productivity of forested
watersheds in New Mexico;
4 – To improve the use of, or add value to, small diameter
trees;
5 – To encourage sustainable communities and sustainable
forests through collaborative partnerships, whose
objectives are forest restoration;
6 – To develop, demonstrate, and evaluate ecologically
sound forest restoration techniques.

4
Even more specifically, the CFRP legislation states that every
Collaborative Forest Restoration Program grant recipient
must include a multiparty assessment to:
w Identify both the existing ecological condition of the
proposed project area and the desired future
condition; and
w Report, upon project completion, on the positive or
negative impact and effectiveness of the project,
including improvements in local management skills
and on the ground results.
What to monitor—choosing indicators____________________________
Once your group has identified the goals that it wants to
monitor, it must select one or more indicators that can be
used to measure changes in that goal.
While a goal is a broad “vision” of what you hope to
accomplish with a project, and indicator is specific and
measurable, telling you whether you are achieving your
goals. For example, “forest canopy closure” is an indicator. If
we measure it over time, we can tell if and how the forest
canopy changed. In a thinning project, the canopy may
change by becoming more open in some areas.
Table 1 gives some examples of monitoring goals and
indicators that are discussed in later handbooks. Note that
the goals are broad ideals that would be difficult to measure
directly, while the indicators are more specific ways of
measuring progress toward those goals. Also note that a
single indicator can sometimes be used to measure change in
more than one goal.

5
A good indicator is measurable, precise, consistent, and sensitive
to changing conditions. When selecting indicators, multiparty
monitoring groups will want to ask themselves whether a
proposed indicator is:
w Relevant for the site and treatment?
w Sensitive to change so that it can detect change within
the monitoring timeframe?
w Measurable with available methods that multiparty
groups can use?
w Not subject to individual or organizational bias?
w Able to be measured by methods that are professionally
accepted and understood?
Table I –
Sample goals and indicators for monitoring ponderosa pine forest
restoration
Sample goals
Sample indicators
Reduce threat of large, high intensity wildfire
and re-establish low intensity surface-fire
regimes
Density and size of trees
Canopy closure
Height from the ground to tree crowns
Surface fuels cover and depth
Number and size of landscape openings
Conserve wildlife populations and their
habitats
Butterfly species abundance and composition
Number and size of landscape openings
Enhance community sustainability
Consistency of job opportunities (number of workers
employed by the project each month)
Pay rates for project workers
Processing capacity (amount and diversity of products)
Improve local workforce skills
Number of restoration-related job opportunities
Training opportunities in forest restoration work
An indicator is a measurable unit
that can be used to document
change.
See Handbook 4 and Handbook 5 for more information on choosing goals and indicators

6
How to gather good data_________________________________________
No one wants to spend valuable time and money collecting data
that in the end aren’t useful or don’t answer their questions.
Implementation monitoring allows for relatively easy data
collection. For example, it is fairly easy to state that 225 cords of
wood were cut and sold by a project. Effectiveness or validation
monitoring are more complicated, however, because it is more
difficult to show that a project directly caused the changes that were
measured.
There are a few precautions your group can take to help ensure
that your data will be useful. The following suggestions help
create “good” data, which can more clearly show the direct
influence of your project on the goals you want to measure. These
precautions are particularly important for effectiveness or
validation monitoring.
1 – Document conditions before a project starts
It is important to document the project site’s conditions before
beginning the project, in order to have some basis for comparison
later. Documenting pre-project conditions means gathering data
about those things the monitoring team is concerned about before
starting the project. This is often called collecting baseline data.
2 – Document conditions after a project is implemented
It is equally important to take the exact same measurements after a
project has been carried out as you took before the project started.
Comparisons of data collected before and after a project can
demonstrate changes that result from the project or that happen at
the same time the project is implemented.
For example, if a project is trying to reduce the number and
density of small-diameter trees, the group may decide to monitor
tree size and density. The group would need to measure these
indicators before and after thinning occurred. If the number of
Baseline data provide information
about the conditions in a project
area before the project was started.

7
trees was only measured after the project was completed, then
there would be no way to reliably show how many small diameter
trees were removed, because no one would know how many there
were before the project started.
3 – Document conditions in “control sites”
There are many factors other than project activities that could
influence changes in a project area. For example, a law or
regulation could change, new markets could develop for a small
diameter wood, there could be a long-term drought, or a wildfire
could destroy a project site. It is always possible that observed
changes have little to do with the project and a lot to do with
outside forces.
Because it is impossible to control all the outside influences on a
project, monitoring can be greatly strengthened by creating a
“control site.” A control site is an area similar to the project site but
where no project activities occur. The same indicators are
measured in the control area as in the project area. The control site
should be measured just as often and at the same time at he
treatment sites, including before treatment occurs. Data from
control sites help to show changes that result from outside
influences.
For example, a 10-year drought may cause many plants to die or
grow slowly. If data about plants were only collected within the
project area, it would be impossible to tell if changes were due to
the drought or to project activities. However, if the same data were
collected from a control site, comparisons between the control
and project areas might help show which changes were due to the
project and which were due to the drought.
A control site is an area that is
similar to the project area but
where no project activities take
place.
—
Controls help show which changes
occur from project activities and
which may be from outside factors.
Handbooks 4 and 5 describe data gathering methods in detail

8
What is really doable?___________________________________________
Monitoring is costly both in terms of dollars and in the time
commitment it requires. Too often, monitoring programs set out to
gather too much data. The result is that little information is actually
gathered, or the data gathered are of limited use. Your monitoring team
should be realistic about its financial, technical, and human resources
when developing its plan. Choose goals and indicators that are really
important to your group and that will help demonstrate important or
desired effects of the project.
A monitoring plan template______________________________________
Once project goals and monitoring indicators are clear, your multiparty
team must develop a monitoring plan that identifies who will collect
what information and when. Special care should be taken to ensure that
the plan can be easily understood and used by all stakeholders. The
following questions provide a starting point that you may find useful:
w What approach to monitoring will we take? (implementation,
effectiveness, validation, or some combination)
w What goals will be monitored?
w What indicators will be used to describe these goals?
w What method will be used to measure each indicator?
w When and how often will measurements be collected? Who
will collect these measurements?
w How and when will data be analyzed? Who will be involved in
data analysis?
w What kind of reporting and outreach will be used? When will
this take place?
Table 2 on the next page provides a template that your group can
adapt when developing its own monitoring plan. While some
monitoring plans may require more elaborate protocols that
describe exactly how to measure certain indicators, a basic outline
like this should be part of each monitoring plan.
Handbook 3 will help you create a monitoring budget to assist you in determining what is feasible

9
Project name:
Goals, indicators, methods, and timeline
Goal
Indicators
Monitoring approach*
Method
When/how often to
collect
Who collects
Data analysis
Who analyzes
How analyzed
When
Reports and outreach
What
When
Audience
Who is responsible
* Implementation, effectiveness, or validation
Table 2 –
Monitoring plan template

10
Project name: Improving forest health and community self-sufficiency in Villa Hermosa
Goals, indicators, methods, and timeline
Goal
Indicators
Monitoring approach*
Method
When/how often to collect
Who collects
1. Reduce wildfire
risk
Density and size of live and
dead trees
Effectiveness
Large plot sampling
Mid-summer, before, after,
and every 5 years after
treatment
Youth crew and community
forester
Height from ground to tree
crowns
Effectiveness
Large plot sampling
Mid-summer, before, after,
and every 3–5 years after
treatment
Youth crew and community
forester
Surface fuels cover and
depth
Effectiveness
Transect-based sampling
Mid-summer, before, after,
and every 3–5 years after
treatment
Youth crew and community
forester
2. Improve
community’s
economic
self-sufficiency
Number of wood products
produced
Implementation
Document review
Annually
Multiparty team (Ben,
Alicia, Marvin)
Income from wood
products sales (per product
and per person-hour)
Effectiveness
Document review and
participant observation
Annually
Project manager
3. Develop work-
force capacity to
manage our
forests and
woodlands
Number of workers who
complete chainsaw and
safety trainings
Implementation
Document review
Annually
Project manager
Percent of contracts
awarded to local
contractors
Effectiveness
Document review
Annually
Multiparty team (Ben,
Alicia, Marvin)
4. Sustain viability
of turkey and elk
hunts
Time activities to avoid
hunting seasons
Implementation
Document review and
participant observation
Annually
Multiparty team (Ben,
Alicia, Marvin)
Increase number and size
of landscape openings
Effectiveness
Transect-based sampling
Mid-summer, before, after,
and every 3–5 years after
treatment
Multiparty team (Ben,
Alicia, Marvin)
* Implementation, effectiveness, or validation
Table 3 –
Monitoring plan template example (partial sheet shown)

11
Glossary
Baseline data: Data collected at the beginning of a project to
document the existing situation. These data provide a
benchmark against which change that occurs during the project
period can be assessed.
Canopy:  The plant overstory, comprised of the dominant and
co-dominant trees.
Canopy cover:  The percentage of a fixed area covered by tree
crowns, measured as the horizontal cover of the ground that the
canopy covers.
Causality: The extent to which an action directly influences
change in something else.
Cause and effect: The extent to which one factor influences
another.
Control site: An area similar to the project site but where no
project activities occur. The same indicators are measured in the
control area as in the project area.
Data: A set of observations collected through monitoring.
Information is derived from data through analysis.
Ecosystem: An interacting system of living plants and animals
and the nonliving parts of their environment.
Factors: Specific events, situations, conditions, policies,
attitudes, beliefs, or behaviors that may affect the desired future
condition.
Goal: A general summary of the desired state that a project is
working to achieve. A good goal meets the criteria of being
visionary, relatively general, brief, and measurable. A goal is
typically less specific than an objective.

Indicator: A unit of information measured over time that
documents changes in a specific condition. A good indicator
meets the criteria of being measurable, precise, consistent, and
sensitive.
Implement: To put a plan or agreement into action.
Information: Knowledge that is extracted from data through
the process of analysis.
Monitoring: The periodic collection and evaluation of data
relative to stated project goals, objectives, and activities.
Implementation monitoring is important for multiparty monitoring
groups because it simply asks, ‘did we do what we said we would
do?’ Effectiveness monitoring helps determine whether or not the
project goals were attained by asking the question ‘did it work?’
Reducing the small trees that compete with old-growth
ponderosa pine, and increasing forage for deer are examples of
project goals that can be measured through effectiveness
monitoring. Validation monitoring involves checking the
assumptions upon which our restoration efforts are based. ‘Did
reducing crown cover actually reduce the threat of catastrophic
wildfire?’ is a validation monitoring question.
Monitoring plan: An outline for the steps you will undertake
to ensure that the project is on track.  It lists a project’s audience,
their information needs, the strategies that will be used for data
collection, the indicators, the methods that will be used to collect
data, and when, by whom, and where data will be collected.
Multiparty: Involving members from a variety of backgrounds
and perspectives.
Objective: A specific statement detailing the desired
accomplishments or outcomes of a project. If the project is well
conceptualized and well designed, meeting the project’s
objectives should lead to the fulfillment of the project’s goal.
Objectives are more specific than goals.

Resources: Items that a project needs, such as staff time,
managerial time, local knowledge, money, equipment, the
presence of trained people, and social and political opportunities.
Stakeholder: Person who has vested interest in the natural
resources or who potentially will be affected by project activities.
Transparent: Easily accessed and understood; obvious in
structure and meaning. Transparency means that all project
information, including goals, actions, and accomplishments, is
available to and clearly understood by anyone.
Unit: A single item or individual. For example, a community, a
household, a person, a garden plot, or a tree.


Acknowledgments
Many people offered their time and expertise toward the development of
the monitoring guidelines that form the basis of these handbooks. We
gratefully acknowledge the contribution of the following individuals:
Craig Allen, U.S. Geological Survey/Midcontinent Ecological Science Station
Gregory H. Aplet, The Wilderness Society
Dennis Becker, USDA Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station
William Block, USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station
Sam Burns, Fort Lewis College
Nils Christoffersen, Wallowa Resources
Geneva Chong, U.S. Geological Survey
Max Cordova, El Greco and La Montana de Trichas
Cecilia Danes, University of Vermont
Rick DeIaco, Village of Ruidoso
Tori Derr, Forest Trust
Carl Edminster, USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station
Don Falk, University of Arizona, Tree-Ring Research Lab
Deborah Finch, USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station
Cornelia Flora, Iowa State University, Center for Rural Development
Peter Fulé, Northern Arizona University, Ecological Restoration Institute
Peter Gaulke, USDA Forest Service, Region 3
John Gerritsma, USDA Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management
Quinn Griffin, Escalante Heritage Center
Richard Hart, Ashland, Oregon
Jan-Willem Jansens, Common Ground
Ajit Krishnaswamy, National Network of Forest Practitioners
Andrea Bedell Loucks, Pinchot Institute for Conservation
Taylor McKinnon, Grand Canyon Trust
Mary Mitsos, National Forest Foundation
Bob Moore, Catron County Citizens Group
Ann Moote, Northern Arizona University, Ecological Restoration Institute
Dan Neary, USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station
Brian Nowicki, Center for Biological Diversity
Melanie Parker, Northwest Connections
Deborah Potter, USDA Forest Service, Region 3
Michael Quintana, New Mexico Community-based Forestry Alliance
George Ramirez, Las Humanas Cooperative
William H. Romme, Colorado State University
Melissa Savage, Four Corners Institute
Todd Schulke, Center for Biological Diversity
David Seeholtz, USDA Forest Service, Region 3
Tom Stohlgren, Colorado State University
Joe Truett, Turner Endangered Species Fund
Bob Unnasch, The Nature Conservancy
Lisa Wilson, Watershed Research and Training Center
Barbara Wyckoff-Baird, The Aspen Institute


