policy
Social and Economic Contributions of
the White Mountain Stewardship Project:
Final 10-Year Assessment—Lessons Learned
and Implications for Future Forest
Management Initiatives
Anne Mottek Lucas, Yeon-Su Kim, Bruce Greco, Dennis R. Becker,
Evan E. Hjerpe, and Jesse Abrams
The White Mountain Stewardship Project (WMSP) was the ﬁrst forest stewardship project of its size and duration,
lasting 10 years (2004–2014). Based on in-depth interviews of local businesses, US Department of Agriculture
(USDA) Forest Service staff, and stakeholders, we present an assessment of the WMSP and lessons learned in
large-scale contracting. The assessment includes factors that promoted project initiation, the contractual process,
the overall impact to the local forest products industry and economy, and the formation of key partnerships.
Experiences from the WMSP offer unique social and economic perspectives that can inform other communities
at risk of wildﬁre. The recommendations were derived from ﬁnal WMSP performance metrics and respondents’
reﬂections on the outcomes of the WMSP. The lessons learned from the WMSP offer improvements for future
restoration initiatives in USDA Forest Service contracting mechanisms, industry capacity, and coordination of
stakeholder interests, including agency-to-industry, business-to-business, and agency-to-stakeholder partnerships.
Keywords: woody biomass utilization, collaborative partnerships, stewardship contracting, White Mountain
Stewardship Project, Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest
T
he Apache-Sitgreaves National For-
ests (ASNF) are located in the
White Mountains range of eastern
Arizona and encompass more than 2 million
acres of diverse vegetation including approx-
imately 1 million acres of ponderosa pine
(Pinus ponderosa) and mixed conifer forests
(US Department of Agriculture [USDA]
Forest Service 2016). The ASNF abuts the
White Mountain Apache Indian reservation
that consists of 1.67 million acres of diverse
vegetation (spanning a gradient of elevation
from 2,600 to 11,400 ft) (White Moun-
tain Apache Tribe 2016). This ﬁre-adapted
ecosystem, like many forests across the west-
ern United States, has experienced declining
ecological health and increased risk of un-
characteristically large and severe wildﬁres
(US Government Accountability Ofﬁce
2009, 2015). Twentieth century forest man-
agement actions such as ﬁre suppression,
logging, and grazing contributed to increas-
ing wildﬁre risk on the ASNF. In the early
1990s, the Mexican spotted owl (Strix occi-
dentalis lucida) was listed as a threatened spe-
cies, which led to increasing conﬂict be-
tween the USDA Forest Service and various
wildlife-based organizations, including state
and federal agencies and environmental ad-
vocacy groups. Groups such as the Center
for Biological Diversity sued the USDA For-
est Service for not consulting on the effects
on the owl within 11 regional forest plans
(Center for Biological Diversity 2016). List-
ing of the spotted owl reinforced an ongoing
decrease in timber supply within the region
that led to a dramatic reduction in regional
forest industries and workforces (Loomis
and Edgington 2012).
In 2002, the Rodeo-Chediski Fire
burned 462,614 ac, destroyed 490 struc-
tures, and led to community evacuations af-
Received June 27, 2016; accepted February 7, 2017; published online March 9, 2017.
Afﬁliations: Anne Mottek Lucas (mottekconsulting@infomagic.net), Mottek Consulting. Yeon-Su Kim, School of Forestry, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff,
AZ. Bruce Greco (bruce.greco@nau.edu), Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. Dennis R. Becker (drbecker@uidaho.edu), Department of
Natural Resources and Society, University of Idaho. Evan E. Hjerpe (evan@conservationecon.org), Conservation Economics Institute. Jesse Abrams
(jabrams@uoregon.edu), Ecosystem Workforce Program, Institute for a Sustainable Environment, University of Oregon.
PRACTICE OF FORESTRY
548
Journal of Forestry • November 2017
J. For. 115(6):548–558
https://doi.org/10.5849/JOF-2016-008R3
Copyright © 2017 Society of American Foresters

fecting 30,000 residents (Western Forestry
Leadership Coalition 2010). This ﬁre was by
far the largest and most destructive wildﬁre
recorded in Arizona’s history at the time,
and it galvanized local support for mitigat-
ing ﬁre risk through active forest manage-
ment (Abrams and Burns 2007). In 2003,
Congress gave the USDA Forest Service au-
thority to enter into stewardship contracting
projects for up to 10 years (USDA Forest
Service 2003). The Integrated Resource Ser-
vice Contract, one of two types of steward-
ship contracts, allowed the exchange of
goods for services in a single contract (Mose-
ley and Davis 2010). Thus, when contrac-
tors conduct activities such as removing a
mix of merchantable and submerchantable
trees, they are paid the difference between
the cost of removing the ﬁber and the re-
ceipts of merchantable timber removed.
These types of contracts could use appropri-
ated moneys, whereas the alternative con-
tract type, Integrated Resource Timber
Contracts, which also permitted the ex-
change of goods for services, were limited to
paying for all services with revenue from
wood ﬁber sales (Moseley and Davis 2010).
Later that same year, Congress passed the
Healthy Forests Restoration Act. ASNF
leadership believed that these policies would
facilitate the cooperation, funding, and sup-
port to implement wide-scale ﬁre risk reduc-
tion and community protection efforts.
ASNF leadership understood that part-
nering with the local forest products industry
wasvitalforimplementingaforestfuelsreduc-
tion program, and they proposed the White
Mountain Stewardship Project (WMSP) as
a means of comprehensively reducing ﬁre
risk in the wildland-urban interface and pro-
viding the certainty needed to spur invest-
ments in forest product utilization. The sin-
gle contract was approved by the USDA
Forest Service Southwestern Regional Ofﬁce
in 2004. Although several smaller pilot stew-
ardship contracts had been implemented be-
fore in the western United States, the
WMSP was the ﬁrst of its size and duration,
lasting 10 years (USDA Forest Service
2003). The WMSP was an unprecedented
opportunity to manage public lands through
a
public-private-community
partnership
(Abrams and Burns 2007). The WMSP rep-
resented a different type of forestry practice,
where the primary objective was wildﬁre risk
reduction in the wildland-urban interface
and community protection. To effectively
reduce wildﬁre potential, removing small di-
ameter trees that acted as ladder fuels and
excessive harvest residuals (limbs, bark, nee-
dles etc.) was essential. A secondary objec-
tive was to develop and support industry to
use the small diameter wood and harvest
residuals. As this was the ﬁrst large-scale for-
est stewardship project in the nation, there
were many unknowns and changing circum-
stances that affected its outcomes. These in-
cluded using novel harvesting methods and
processes, constructing the necessary infra-
structure and developing the technology to
process the small diameter trees and harvest
residuals, ﬁnding product niches that had
viable markets, and formulating the stew-
ardship contract itself.
Since the WMSP ended in August
2014, the Four Forest Restoration Initiative
(4FRI), which is composed of four forests
across Northern Arizona (2.4 million acres),
became the next largest stewardship contract
in the nation in 2012 (Four Forest Restora-
tion Initiative 2016). The main objectives of
the 4FRI are similar to those of the WMSP
but encapsulate more comprehensive forest
restoration and do not exclusively focus on
treating areas within the wildland-urban in-
terface. The vision of the 4FRI stakeholders
supports reintroducing natural ﬁre regimes,
functioning populations of native ﬂora and
fauna, reducing the risk of destructive wild-
ﬁre, and promoting sustainable forest indus-
tries that strengthen local economies (Four
Forest Restoration Initiative 2016). Experi-
ences from the WMSP offer unique perspec-
tives that can inform other communities at
risk of wildﬁre. Here we present an assess-
ment of the successes and challenges faced in
implementing the WMSP and offer lessons
learned and recommendations for large-
scale contracting.
Methodology
Qualitative interviews were adminis-
tered between December 2014 and April
2015 for the study region within Navajo and
Apache counties in eastern Arizona (Figure
1). A total of 21 in-depth interviews were
completed with 12 local businesses, 5 staff
from the ASNF, and 4 stakeholders repre-
senting distinct nongovernment organiza-
tions (e.g., conservation and rural economic
development).
A subsample of business owners (n 
11) were selected from a population of 24
forest product companies that had worked
on the WMSP and completed an economic
survey in the ﬁrst 8 years (2005–2012) (Kim
and Mottek Lucas 2015). One business
(outside of this population) that began
working on the project in late 2012 was also
selected for an interview. Businesses were se-
lected by consulting with key informants
(stakeholders and federal and state agency
staff) and by screening potential interview-
ees on the telephone. These 12 businesses
were selected because they had substantial
impacts on the outcomes of the project.
Businesses interviewed were involved in (1)
Management and Policy Implications
Key recommendations resulting from the assessment of the 10-year White Mountain Stewardship Project
(WMSP) focus on contracting processes, industry capacity, and partnerships. Recommendations for
improving contracting processes include deriving a concise and mutually agreed upon contractor
performance metric; conducting timely contract evaluations that track acre-to-volume relationship,
government and industry costs, and revenue by product source; evaluating contractor performance;
tracking the number and quality of jobs created and supported; providing an apprentice/journeyman
training program; and verifying the appropriate rate of local wage in wage requirements. A key
consideration for building industry’s capacity is ensuring long-term availability of ﬁber necessary to
amortize investments. Strategies include minimizing supply interruptions by estimating wood supply by
location, type, size, and harvest timing relative to industry needs and market demands; sequencing and
overlapping 10-year contracts with guaranteed supply and utilizing multiple contractors; and establishing
policies that include ﬁnancial incentives for research and development to harvest and process small
diameter wood. Cohesive agency, industry, and stakeholder partnerships are critical to the success of forest
restoration initiatives. Recommendations to nurture collaborative relationships include forming critical
partnerships to deﬁne the issues and scope of a project, reach agreements, select an appropriately scaled
mechanism, and ﬁnd resources to increase capacity; utilizing intermediaries to improve USDA Forest
Service-industry partnerships; convening a Multi-Party Monitoring Board to monitor ecological, social, and
economic effects and improve outcomes through an adaptive management process; and developing
transition plans for changing agency staff to assure continuity with a project’s goals and objectives.
Journal of Forestry • November 2017
549

harvesting operations (n  6), (2) small di-
ameter mills and ﬁnished products (n  3)
(pallets, cabin manufacturing products, di-
mensional lumber, and furniture parts), (3)
manufactured ﬁnished products (n  2)
(treated agriculture posts and poles and pel-
lets), and (4) biopower (n  1). Forest staff
and stakeholder respondents were selected
with key informant input (stakeholders and
state agency staff) and veriﬁed by using
snowball sampling methodology. Business
owners interviewed were asked to provide
contact information of USDA Forest Ser-
vice personnel and stakeholders most in-
volved with the WMSP. All invited respon-
dents agreed to participate in the study.
Although the research team attempted to in-
clude a diverse set of respondents, the inter-
viewees did not include timber workers that
were employed by the logging operators;
however, these businesses were so small that
business owners and their family members
represented the crux of their business’ work-
force. In addition, respondents who repre-
sented the White Mountain Apache Tribe
were not interviewed; however, several
businesses that worked on the reservation
before moving their operation over to the
WMSP provided insight to the Tribe’s
contributions.
The overarching question formulated
by the research team was: What were the
successes, challenges, and lessons learned
from the WMSP and how can these be ap-
plied to future stewardship projects? This
guided construction of two interview proto-
cols (Supplement S1 ) that were designed
to investigate the following: (1) the eco-
nomic development objectives of the WMSP
and whether they were met, as well as any
barriers, opportunities, innovations, and les-
sons learned; (2) the legacy of the WMSP
(e.g., How did the WMSP change the eco-
nomic viability of utilization efforts in the
area? Were follow-on or additional unfore-
seen opportunities created as a result of the
WMSP? What other ways do we measure
impacts of the WMSP?); (3) the WMSP’s
role in fostering woody biomass utilization;
(4) ways to improve future stewardship con-
tracts; and (5) strategies to foster utilization,
reduce treatment costs, and facilitate sus-
tainable rural economic development. Inter-
viewees were asked to provide ﬁrsthand se-
quential accounts of the social and economic
contributions of the WMSP before, during,
and after the WMSP. One interview guide
was constructed for businesses and one for
ASNF staff and stakeholders. The protocols
assisted in thematically organizing the data
into predetermined categories to evaluate
the economic legacy of the WMSP. The in-
terview data were coded into matrices to or-
ganize information systematically around
interview questions and research objectives.
However, inclusion of themes/data that
were signiﬁcant was not limited to these cat-
egories. In addition, multiple sources of data
(e.g., secondary data, studies and reports,
and follow-on inquiries with stakeholders
and ASNF staff) were used to triangulate
and verify interview data. Given the breadth
of interviewees, the ﬁndings represent vari-
ous perspectives and experiences throughout
the duration of the WMSP. The semistruc-
tured interviews were audio-recorded and
transcribed for analysis.
Key Findings
Economic Conditions, Employment
Trends, Acres Treated, and
Tons Removed
The Great Recession that peaked in
2008 and 2009 made transitioning to small
diameter ponderosa pine wood products dif-
ﬁcult as these products were largely tied to
the housing industry (e.g., sill plates, garden
mulch, moulding, and interior post/poles).
Businesses reported direct economic effects
of the WMSP were also not realized imme-
diately; there was a 2- to 3-year lag time as
established businesses transitioned to small
diameter wood utilization and as new busi-
nesses were created (Figures 2 and 3).
Figure 2 depicts the employment trends
of businesses that used raw ﬁber from the
WMSP in comparison to the trends of the
forestry product sector in Arizona (Kim and
Mottek Lucas 2015).1 Employment in “for-
estry and logging” and “wood product man-
ufacturing” sectors declined statewide dur-
ing the WMSP until 2011 (US Bureau of
Labor Statistics 2015). Although employ-
ment declined, the WMSP might have as-
sisted local ﬁrms in maintaining their busi-
nesses during this period of macroeconomic
decline (Kim and Mottek Lucas 2015).2
The WMSP Was Built on a Legacy of
Prior Collaboration
Several formative events contributed to
building capacity and partnerships that led
to the initiation of the WMSP. This was ex-
empliﬁed by the formation of the local col-
laborative entity, the Natural Resources
Working Group, and by one of the group’s
ﬁrst efforts, the Blue Ridge Demonstration
Project (Abrams and Burns 2007, Abrams
2011). As a forest staff member (Forest Re-
spondent 4) explained, the Blue Ridge Proj-
ect opened the door to test and develop
novel ideas and processes for the follow-
ing: (1) experimental prescriptions—a va-
riety of treatments prompted discussions
among various interest groups; (2) adminis-
trative processes—this was the precursor to
Figure 1. The White Mountain region.
Supplementary data are available with this article at http://dx.doi.org/10.5849/JOF-2016-008R3.
550
Journal of Forestry • November 2017

the White Mountain Stewardship Contract;
(3) adaptation of new technologies and
harvesting operational efﬁciencies for small
diameter trees; (4) collaborative relation-
ships—businesses believed this was key in
bringing the WMSP to the ASNF; and (5)
building capacity and the formation of a
new industry partnership—these businesses
formed Future Forest, LLC, the awardee of
the contract.
Key partners included the ASNF, county
and municipal governments, scientists, citi-
zens, and local environmental organizations.
One business owner (Industry Respondent
1) described these early relationships as “syn-
ergistic” and noted their importance in es-
tablishing trust among key groups. Another
galvanizing event was the Rodeo-Chediski
Fire. A forest supervisor recalled that com-
munity perceptions changed after the ﬁre.
The public now realized that industry was
essential in reducing ﬁre risk and was no lon-
ger viewed as an antagonistic entity. The
ASNF felt obligated to meet public de-
mands. A forest supervisor (Forest Respon-
dent 1) recounted this experience in saying,
To pull off what the public was demand-
ing…to treat these forests…this is the time
and place and we just needed to go do it. I
personally could not stand up to those com-
munities that had the big ﬁre like that and
say, well we’re just going to continue as we
always have. I just couldn’t do that any-
more.
Incentivizing Businesses in the White
Mountains Leveraged Signiﬁcant
Outcomes
Although other grant programs pro-
vided resources for an array of hazardous fu-
els reduction-related activities (e.g., USDA
Rural Development’s Business Cooperative
program, National Fire Plan of 2001) before
the WMSP, it is unclear whether restoration
and forest products businesses were success-
fully accessing them and these programs
were not speciﬁcally directed toward indus-
try faced with extracting and processing
small diameter trees and forest residuals
(Davis et al. 2014). However, grants and ﬁ-
nancial assistance directed to ﬂedgling in-
dustry in the White Mountains were rela-
tively abundant throughout the course of
the project. From 2005 to 2011, the Forest
Products Laboratory awarded Woody Bio-
mass Utilization Grants to 12 ﬁrms in the
White Mountains (Davis et al. 2014). In to-
tal, $2.6 million was invested in logging and
processing equipment acquisition. These in-
centives leveraged signiﬁcant outcomes in
supporting the redevelopment of local in-
dustry, such as construction of small diame-
ter mills and the development of value-
added products such as pressure-treated post
and poles (Davis et al. 2014). A stakeholder
(Stakeholder Respondent 1) explained this
value in saying, “Without the stewardship
contract as the foundation and without that
grant money as the seed, I don’t think the
White Mountains’ situation would have
been nearly as robust as it was.” Table 1
shows the accomplishments of the WMSP
tracked by the USDA Forest Service.
Contractual Process
Determination of Contractor Compen-
sation—An Accurately Forecasted
Acre-to-Volume Relationship Needed
To Be Better Understood
A forest staff member (Forest Respon-
dent 1) explained that having the ability to
exchange goods for services within the stew-
ardship contracting mechanism assisted the
ASNF in obtaining the two primary objec-
tives they set out to accomplish. As the main
objective of ﬁre risk reduction was achieved,
this opened the door for the contractor and
businesses in the White Mountains to inno-
vate by developing new products and the
Figure 2. Employment trends during the WMSP duration (2005–2014) (Kim and Mottek
Lucas 2015): FTE (full-time equivalent) was calculated by converting the hours worked by
part-time employees into the hours worked by full-time employees; the employment data
surveyed was converted to FTE values to facilitate comparisons between ﬁrms; FTE was
calculated for the WMSP businesses total (WMSP FTE Total) and those residing within the
predeﬁned WMSP economic area (WMSP FTE Local); Arizona Statewide is the total number
of employees in “forestry and logging” and “wood products manufacturing” sectors.
(Source: US Bureau of Labor Statistics 2015.)
Figure 3. Green tons removed and approximate acres treated during the WMSP.
Journal of Forestry • November 2017
551

subsequent infrastructure that was needed to
use forest byproducts and create local eco-
nomic beneﬁts.
As the contract was being developed,
the relationship between acres and volume
of small diameter material was not well un-
derstood by either the agency or industry.
The average amount of wood ﬁber (includ-
ing both sawlogs and harvest residuals) ulti-
mately removed was 25.8 tons/ac, which was
more than double the projected volume of
10.7 tons.
In line with inaccurately forecasting pro-
jected volume removed from the WMSP, in-
terviewees’ responses varied in identifying
the appropriate metric for contractor com-
pensation. Although green tons presented a
clear advantage to the contractor, producers
of ﬁnished goods preferred bone dry tons,
which eliminated the variable amounts of
water in the raw material. Another business
preferred acres and suggested longitudinally
comparing the number of acres treated with
the costs that were expended by both the
USDA Forest Service and industry. From
the agency’s perspective, compensating the
contractor on a per acre basis might incen-
tivize the contractor to treat acres where
costs are lowest and/or revenues are highest.
For example, under this model, the contrac-
tor might avoid treating areas that contain
larger portions of small diameter material or
that are difﬁcult to access.
Initially, the contract stipulated that the
awardee would be paid on a per acre basis.
Forest staff reported that 3 months after the
contract was awarded, an amendment was
devised stipulating the contractor would be
paid on volume (green tonnage) rather than
acres: a formula derived by the agency
equated this to $500/ac. According to forest
staff, given the experimental nature of the
project, coupled with the uncertainty of the
acre-to-volume relationship of small diame-
ter trees and biomass that needed to be re-
moved, the contractor was paid on a volume
basis. This provided necessary assurances and
advantages to industry on being paid for the
amount of ﬁber they extracted from the forest.
Since acres varied in density (volume) and ton-
nage was a concise measurement, being paid
by the ton eliminated uncertainty of the vari-
able tonnage of wood ﬁber on each acre.
As the WMSP matured, forest staff
reported that the agency’s decision to pay
the contractor on tonnage motivated the
contractor to increase productivity on each
acre. In addition, as agreements between the
agency and interest groups were reached, treat-
ment intensity increased; thereby, more small
trees and slash were removed from each acre.
Forest staff said that by 2013, treatments in-
tensiﬁed to almost double the volume re-
moved on the same number of acres.
These ﬁndings suggest the need to
have an upfront understanding of the acre-
to-volume relationship. In turn, the contract
could better reﬂect the appropriate metric
(acres versus volume) and contractor com-
pensation rate.
Flexibility in Contracting and Timely
Contract Evaluations Are Necessary
In looking back on the WMSP, most
respondents agreed that incentivizing the
contract was necessary to accomplish treated
acres. The assessments of the amount the
contractor was paid over the life of the con-
tract determined that the cost per acre was
on target with the original projection and
the amount did not decrease. Over the
course of the WMSP, there were several ex-
traneous factors that inﬂuenced a constant
contractor compensation rate: diminished
demand for forest products during the
“Great Recession,” especially those that were
tied to the housing industry; the effects of
the Wallow Fire; and the high costs of har-
vest residual removal and transportation.
To adequately assess the applicability
and appropriate rate of compensation to the
contractor, forest staff (Forest Respondent
2) suggested that there should be enough
ﬂexibility in the contract to “learn and take
advantage of new insights and opportuni-
ties.” The WMSP experienced changing cir-
cumstances over the course of 10 years; how-
ever, this amount was only evaluated every 2
years. From the perspective of forest staff,
this time frame was too long to effectively
expedite changes in the rate.
Single Contractor System Presented
Advantages and Disadvantages
Use of a single contractor for imple-
menting the project was perceived as pre-
senting both advantages and disadvan-
tages. Advantages reported by businesses
included the following: the brokering of
the raw material was streamlined; the com-
petitive bidding system, which can cause
“bidding wars” on timber sales, was elimi-
nated; payroll accountability for the subcon-
tractors was achieved; and the single con-
tractor assumed risks that might challenge
multiple timber sale contractors.
However, the lack of contractor compe-
tition was mostly perceived as a barrier, par-
ticularly in the project’s latter years. Con-
sumers of the raw ﬁber reported increased
prices over time and felt that the contractor’s
pricing structure and raw ﬁber distribution
were inequitable. Many businesses stated
that the asking price made it impossible to
realize a proﬁt. Businesses believed that the
contractor’s price was inﬂated because if a
company refused to buy the material at the
asking price, the contractor hauled the ﬁber
a longer distance to a competing buyer. In
addition, although businesses reported in-
creasing prices and revenues for the raw ma-
terial, especially in the latter years of the
project, it is unclear whether the contractor’s
revenues exceeded costs during the course of
the project. The fact that local businesses did
not receive the desired volume and price il-
lustrates a common challenge with a single
contractor arrangement. In turn, this situa-
tion created mistrust among local businesses
and depleted the collaborative spirit that ex-
isted during the initial years of the WMSP.
One business owner (Industry Respondent
2) put it this way, “collaboration nurtures
efﬁciency, but when supply is tight, this goes
by the wayside.”
Table 1. WMSP facts.
Accomplishments tracked by the USDA
Forest Service
Value
Initial offering of the contract
150,000 ac
Actual amount treated (trees thinned/removed)
70,603 ac (approximately 50% of projected acres)
Actual ﬁber removed, including harvest residuals
and sawlogs
1,820,340 tons; 69,469 truck-loads
Stumpage (sawlogs) removed
573,533 tons
Average ﬁber removed
25.8 tons/ac (approximately 1 truck-load/ac)
Average cost to the federal government
$500/ac (payment to Future Forest, LLC)
Annual budget
$5 million total  $2.5 million USDA Forest Service
(for administration, planning, and site
preparation); $2.5 million Future Forest, LLC
(operating expenses to treat 5,000 ac/yr)
Piles burned
681,693 tons
552
Journal of Forestry • November 2017

WMSP Treatments Reduced the Need
to Pile Burn and Lessened Impacts
from the Wallow Fire
Although the cost to the government
for the contract was $500/ac, several factors
allowed the agency to reduce costs. For ex-
ample, as more harvest residuals were re-
moved and used, the need for pile burning
was reduced: forest staff reported that this
averaged $75/ac. Improvements in forest
health also contributed to avoided economic
losses in infrastructure from the 2011 Wal-
low Fire, which burned more than 500,000
ac near the Arizona-New Mexico border
(USDA Forest Service 2011). Notably,
WMSP fuel treatments helped save all but
one structure in the town of Alpine, on the
eastern side of the White Mountains (USDA
Forest Service 2011). Many respondents re-
ported that the White Mountain Apache
Tribehadbeenproactiveinimplementingfor-
est treatments, which assisted in reducing the
ﬁre’s advance. A stakeholder (Stakeholder Re-
spondent 2) recalled, “When the Wallow Fire
came over the hill, it worked and what a great
feeling.” In addition, comparisons of treated
versus untreated sites after the Wallow Fire
showed that treatments reduced ﬁre severity
and increased forest resilience, which lessened
the negative impacts to overall forest health
and the ecosystem services that the forest pro-
vided (Waltz et al. 2014).
Length of the Contract, Federal Wage,
and Outdated Contractual Require-
ments Affected Project Outcomes
In addition to the challenges identiﬁed
with a single contractor, businesses noted
several barriers that originated from govern-
ment policies, which resulted in how the
WMSP was structured. These include the
length of the contract, federal wage require-
ments and outdated contractual requirements.
These offer lessons for future contracts.
Most respondents agreed that the 10-
year contract period was too short for busi-
nesses, particularly new ones, to amortize
large investments in equipment and infra-
structure. A mill operator reported that a
high-speed, high-production sawmill costs
$30–$50 million to construct. More time
was needed for businesses that were rein-
venting their operations to harvest and pro-
cess small diameter wood, given that owners
were learning to use new equipment and
machinery, while also establishing novel
products and market niches. Most ﬁrms
working with the WMSP were small, fam-
ily-owned and -operated businesses, which
were scaled for the size of the contract (an
average of 7,000 ac annually). Out of con-
cern about the stability of long-term supply,
larger enterprises that could affect long-term
restoration in the White Mountains steered
clear of the project.
The WMSP used a service contract,
rather than a timber sale contract, which in-
cluded several contractual stipulations that
were perceived as burdensome by most log-
ging operators because this negatively af-
fected their ﬁnancial returns. For example,
Davis Bacon Act wages, known as “prevail-
ing wages,” were mandatory for in-the-
woods operators. Contractors reported that
the prevailing wages required under the con-
tract were 15–20% higher than the local go-
ing industry rates at the time. This is in line
with other study results demonstrating that
the Davis Bacon Act sets the labor costs of
forest restoration projects well above those
initiated by other entities (Moseley 2006,
Davis et al. 2012, Quirke and Moseley
2016). However, these higher wages do not
appear to improve overall job quality as ex-
pressed in provision of beneﬁts and stable
employment (Moseley 2006) and may en-
courage projects to be awarded to nonlocal
contractors with higher capacity that can
lower overall labor cost (Davis et al. 2012).
In addition, the prevailing wage required the
same pay rate for operators with the highest
skill and experiential levels (“journeymen”)
as for those who were training for the job
(“apprentices”). Although this may have
beneﬁted apprentice employees, it nega-
tively affected both businesses’ proﬁt mar-
gins and the most valued employees’ (jour-
neymen) morale.
As the WMSP was initiated, harvesting
and in-the-woods processing of small diam-
eter trees (5–12 in. dbh) at this scale was
novel in the region (Davis et al. 2014).
USDA Forest Service contractual require-
ments were outdated and did not evolve to
keep pace with operational innovations and
incorporate the new processes and efﬁcien-
cies that were being developed as the WMSP
progressed. For example, the contract re-
quired ﬂagging skid trails, a practice that
logging operators reported was no longer
necessary. Contractors reported that this in-
creased both the time it took to complete
task orders and costs for material that had
little to no value. Businesses believed the re-
quirements for handling low-value materials
should have been lessened or omitted in cer-
tain cases. This was conﬁrmed by forest per-
sonnel (Forest Respondent 3), who said the
contract was “overregulated” and this in-
creased operational costs.
Overall Impact to the Forest
Products Industry
The WMSP Revitalized the Local Forest
Products Industry
The widespread perception of those in-
terviewed was that the WMSP revitalized
the local forest products industry. The proj-
ect also demonstrated that an appropriately
scaled industry could process small diameter
wood on a relatively large footprint, while
enhancing forest health. A forest staff mem-
ber (Forest Respondent 2) stated,
The Stewardship Project was a rather cre-
ative bold move by people inside and out-
side of the Forest Service to try to establish
an industry that could pay for those treat-
ments and the White Mountain Steward-
ship Project was a result of that.
This quote implies that the forest in-
dustry could pay for the treatments; how-
ever, this was expressed as an idealistic ulti-
mate goal by the forest staff member.
Although the amount paid to the contractor
remained constant throughout the project,
several costs to the agency were indirectly
avoided (e.g., pile burning and ecological,
social, and economic impacts after the Wal-
low Fire).
Business growth greatly affected family
businesses that included ﬁfth and sixth gen-
eration loggers. Many family-operated ﬁrms
believed that maintaining these businesses
was critical to the community’s well-being
and that the WMSP assisted in preserving a
local forest products culture. In thinking
about the heritage, pride, and skills that were
passed down, a business owner (Industry
Respondent 3) said, “We can’t stop, it’s in
our blood; we just keep trying and trying.”
Although more wood ﬁber was made avail-
able by the WMSP, demand dictated the
types and quantities of products that the
market was able to absorb. Business owners
emphasized the importance of developing
innovative products that had a market and
commanded the highest value.
The Stewardship Project Stimulated
the Creation of an Industry Cluster but
Critical Infrastructure Was Inconsistent
Businesses also noted the importance of
the WMSP in stimulating the creation of an
industry cluster that assured the viability of
all business sectors. The industry cluster
model supported the need for various levels
Journal of Forestry • November 2017
553

of expertise, innovation, and diversifying
raw material uses. Nicholls (2014) found
that the cluster model thrives when multiple
business sectors improve simultaneously and
respond to the quantities and types of wood
ﬁber being extracted. A business owner (In-
dustry Respondent 4) explained, “We have
to all exist; if just one of you is there, the
whole thing doesn’t work.” Businesses em-
phasized the types of industry that could
process various segments of a log were nec-
essary mechanisms to a productive cluster.
Businesses also believed that a power
plant that processed harvest residuals was a
“key mechanism” to fully integrate the wood
products industry in achieving fuels reduc-
tion objectives. A power plant created de-
mand for increased removal of residuals and
reduced the need to pile burn. To sustain an
economically viable model, many respon-
dents stated that transportation cost should
be minimized (50- to 70-mile radius). Al-
though this was identiﬁed as a critical link,
operation of the facility was inconsistent
during the contract period.
Finally, businesses expressed the need
for a high-production sawmill to anchor the
industrial cluster. This would allow for an
increase in the types of products produced,
the overall value of products sold, and total
production. Although smaller sawmills were
established and existed throughout the con-
tract, a high-production small diameter saw-
mill was operational for only 2 years. After
the Wallow Fire, the environmental plan-
ning necessary to approve areas for salvage
logging took too long, exceeding the harvest
window before insect infestations and dete-
rioration of the smaller logs. Subsequently,
this mill was unable to retool fast enough to
process the larger salvage logs and soon
closed. With the ending of the WMSP, con-
cern exists about the long-term stability of
supply and the ability to keep a sawmill and
associated businesses operational.
Key Partnerships
Regional Ofﬁce and ASNF Staff—
Inconsistent Funding, Staff Experience,
and Turnover Presented Challenges
At the start of the project, leadership at
the Southwestern Regional Ofﬁce and on
the ASNF was perceived by businesses as
“proponents” of the project. They were seen
as “champions” who worked with the Wash-
ington Ofﬁce to bring the WMSP to the
ASNF. An industry leader (Industry Re-
spondent 4) stated, “[There was], agreement
and total transparency [between the Forest
and the Region].” and “It was the right peo-
ple at the right time.”
The ASNF worked to raise the visibility
of the project by making its case to the
Washington Ofﬁce and, as a result, it re-
ceived two sources of supplemental funding:
unspent end-of-the-year funds from USDA
Forest Service units across the country be-
tween 2004 and 2007 (which helped these
forests to meet their fuel reduction target ob-
ligations with on-the-ground WMSP ac-
complishments); and American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act funding (Charnley et
al. 2012), an economic stimulus incentive
program promoted by President Barack
Obama’s administration and authorized by
Congress (2009–2010). Although project
funding was a notable and continuous strug-
gle, these innovations enabled the agency to
increase the 50,000-acre minimum commit-
ment to thinning approximately 70,000
acres, which was still less than half of the
initial target.
However, about halfway through the
project, the ASNF and Regional Ofﬁce were
challenged by a lack of congressional appro-
priations, which constrained funding for en-
vironmental planning and site preparation
and these costs had to come from internal
program dollars. At the time, the national
budget was reduced, which funneled down
and affected the agency’s budgets. The sub-
sequent choices made by the Regional Ofﬁce
in terms of prioritizing funds created tension
with the Regional Ofﬁce on one side of the
fence and the ASNF and local businesses on
the other.
Moreover, businesses and ASNF staff
reported that the geographic separation of
the Contracting Ofﬁcer’s Representatives
compounded these tensions. Most of the
Contracting Ofﬁcer’s Representatives that
were assigned to the WMSP lacked a timber-
sale contracting background and did not
have the experience needed to understand
the complexities of the novel harvesting op-
erations occurring on WMSP sites. At times,
this deterred harvesting operational efﬁcien-
cies and increased costs for the loggers. In
reﬂecting on this, a forest staff member (For-
est Respondent 2) said,
Continuity is probably a key item to focus
on in the future on these projects. How do
you maintain continuity from the incep-
tion of the project through its conclusion?
Continuity in intent, continuity in ﬁnan-
cial support to the project.
High staff turnover in the agency, both
in the Regional Ofﬁce and the ASNF, fur-
ther challenged collaboration. A stakeholder
(Stakeholder Respondent 1) said that with
the inevitable “revolving door” of key staff
from the USDA Forest Service, it was vital
that replacements share a “common vision”
about the project’s goals and objectives with
their predecessors.
ASNF Staff and Businesses—Link
Industry and Agency Processes
Although tensions arose between log-
ging operators and the Regional Ofﬁce,
these businesses reported cooperative and
productive working relationships with the
ASNF. Because ASNF staff were familiar
with the landscape and mechanical opera-
tions and worked directly with the logging
operators, contract administration and over-
sight was in line with on-the-ground opera-
tions. Said one business owner (Industry
Respondent 2), “[the Forest Service’s] open-
ness to sharing and learning stood out.”
However, this relationship changed in
the latter years of the project. ASNF person-
nel reported that industry leaders developed
plans for expansion without consulting for-
est staff. This led to unrealistic expectations
about future ﬁber supply and created ten-
sion and inﬁghting between the ASNF and
local businesses. From the wood products
industry perspective, the USDA Forest Ser-
vice and industry needed to better align tar-
gets to assure project success. A business
owner (Industry Respondent 4) stated, “The
only way to have well managed forest is to
have healthy industry and they are a true
partner.”
The USDA Forest Service needed a
comprehensive understanding of the eco-
nomic factors required for industry’s sus-
tainability, whereas industry had to adapt to
the agency’s structure and processes: its
funding processes and cycles, organizational
structure, political environment, and bud-
gets. Considering these divergent perspec-
tives, a mill operator suggested including a
neutral intermediary who could assist in
constructing pragmatic solutions to increase
the potential for positive outcomes.
Business-to-Business Partnerships
Were Challenged by Lack of Supply—
New Partnerships Formed
During the initial years of the project,
businesses reported that there was ample
supply and they worked together effectively
by developing product niches that used
554
Journal of Forestry • November 2017

the range of ﬁber generated from forest
treatments. A stakeholder (Stakeholder Re-
spondent 1) explained that the mix of busi-
nesses evolved “organically.” “The dramatic
change was they went from very little infra-
structure and very little capacity to get work
done, particularly in an organized manner,
to having a well-honed tool that was shaped
perfectly for the job.” Specialization largely
reduced competition and spurred innova-
tion.
However, this relationship also changed
when supply began to diminish, especially af-
ter the Wallow Fire. This ﬁre burned the
majority of the remaining 50,000 National
Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA)-
ready acres. Subsequently, competition
among businesses for the raw material lim-
ited its distribution. At times, the raw ﬁber
value was not optimized. Instead, whole
trees were chipped for lower valued products
such as pellets and biopower.
Although industry relationships were
challenged, shortly after the project ended
several businesses created a new partnership.
A logging operator, sawmill, and biopower
plant combined forces to efﬁciently process
the ﬁber and residuals. Formation of this en-
terprise reduced the high transportation cost
of the lowest value material of harvest slash
and promoted the production of value-
added products. In describing this new part-
nership, a ﬁrm’s owner (Industry Respon-
dent 5) said, “Twenty loads of logs turns
into 14 loads of biomass and instead of just
putting it on a truck and trucking it some-
where, [my company is] going to [use it lo-
cally].”
Interest Groups and Nongovernment
Organizations—Cooperative Agency-
Interest Group Interactions Facilitated
Lack of Legal Challenges
Before the WMSP, relationships be-
tween environmental organizations and the
agency were challenged by public concerns
over perceived “corruption” of “loggers’
choice,” where in the past loggers selected the
most valuable trees to harvest. During the
WMSP, key partners came together in a uni-
ﬁed approach that paved the way for a new
era in collaborative forest management.
These organizations developed the needed
trust, understood the value of listening to
others’ points of view, and were able to com-
promise to meet common goals. A forest line
ofﬁcer (Forest Respondent 1) understood
that compromise was needed and said, this
was not “business as usual.”
For example, ASNF staff informed con-
cerned stakeholders whether trees larger
than 16 in. dbh were considered for harvest-
ing. A forest staff member explained this
helped to keep interested parties apprised of
the proposed actions before any trees were
cut, rather than be challenged after harvest-
ing operations occurred. This strategy pro-
vided assurance to environmental groups that
harvesting large trees was not the priority and
helped to reduce environmental planning
complexity and costs (Abrams 2011). To
meet the objectives of the WMSP, treat-
ments were focused on the wildland-urban
interface, and issues surrounding the Mexi-
can spotted owl were minimized because the
majority of treatments did not occur in the
owl’s habitat. An environmental advocate
explained, “We moved from being a watch-
dog group to a true cooperator and collabo-
rator.” Notably, legal challenges that slowed
or halted harvesting operations were nonex-
istent throughout the life of the WMSP. In
reﬂecting on this, a stakeholder (Stakeholder
Respondent 1) explained, “[Our relation-
ships were] open, strong, and enduring. We
weren’t casual partners. The stakes were real
high.”
A forest staff member believed that the
diameter cap left an excessive number of
trees in some areas, thus deterring the proj-
ect from meeting the primary objective of
fuels reduction and restoring the forest to
resemble a historic structure. The staff mem-
ber (Forest Respondent 2) said that as the
goals of the public became more ambitious
(e.g., concerns with size of trees harvested
and threatened species), the environmental
planning documents became more compli-
cated, time-consuming, and costly.
A stakeholder recalled that a demon-
stration project, known as Eagar South, that
integrated ﬁre risk reduction with multiple
resource objectives (e.g., forest restoration
principles and northern goshawk [Accipiter
gentilis] management guidelines) was con-
ducted during the early years of the WMSP.
Trees greater than 16 in. dbh were cut, and
the forest structure resembled historical con-
ditions with clumps and groups of trees.
Based on ﬁre modeling that was conducted
by a forest staff member using a broad set of
treatments, Eagar South was the only treat-
ment area that revealed statistically signiﬁ-
cant reductions in predicted ﬁre behavior.
Lessons learned on the Eagar South Project
demonstrated that when a diameter cap is
not used and multiple resource objectives are
considered, a broad set of ecological objec-
tives could be achieved. To determine the
ecological consequences of a 16-in. diameter
cap, Egan et al. (2015) examined the differ-
ence in tree density and stand basal area be-
tween treatments with and without a cap
and included an assessment of how collabor-
ative relationships are affected by a cap. Sim-
ilar to those in the WMSP, the sites were
located in Arizona’s ponderosa pine forest,
and the practice was debated within a collab-
orative setting. The sites evaluated showed
that a diameter cap was unnecessary to pro-
tect old-growth trees and, because there
were limited numbers of trees available for
thinning (e.g., large young trees), this re-
striction increased both tree density and
basal area. Results of this study showed that
the way a site was managed over time is a
signiﬁcant factor in determining the stand
structure for variables such as tree density
and size. Subsequently, application of diam-
eter caps should account for both current
site conditions and management history.
Stakeholder surveys revealed that a diameter
cap caused tension within the collaborative
setting; however, overall forest restoration
goals were maintained and an imposed cap
avoided litigation.
Multi-Party Monitoring Board—Pro-
vided Assurances to Stakeholders and
the Community but Comprehensive
Monitoring and Adaptive Manage-
ment Is Necessary
The formation of a WMSP Multi-Party
Monitoring Board provided various stake-
holders, including environmental groups,
the opportunity to consistently and contin-
uously engage in the process by planning
and completing effectiveness monitoring of
the WMSP treatments. The Board moni-
tored a variety of treatment effects such as
wildlife, ﬁre behavior, and invasive species
(Sitko and Hurteau 2010, Huffman et al.
2013, Sensibaugh et al. 2015). The Board
was perceived as representing the needs of
multiple organizations and was trusted for
its inclusion of the best available science.
Forest staff explained that the monitoring
activities far exceeded the agency’s “normal
monitoring practices.” A nongovernment
organization played a key role in monitoring
and acted as an intermediary between the
ASNF and environmental groups. This or-
ganization was trusted by many and seen as
a neutral group that brought a level of as-
surance that project effects would be mea-
sured, tracked, and reported back to the
agency, stakeholders, and the community.
Journal of Forestry • November 2017
555

One stakeholder (Stakeholder Respondent
2) expressed it this way: “The Forest Service
as a whole got a better idea of how power-
ful collaborative stakeholder monitoring
could be.”
In reﬂecting on the Board’s monitoring
efforts, a stakeholder (Stakeholder Respon-
dent 1) explained, “[Based on the funding
that was available to the Board], it was a mod-
esteffortbutasigniﬁcantone.”Thissentiment
is reﬂected as a common challenge in large-
scale, collaborative USDA Forest Service
forest restoration projects, which have expe-
rienced limited monitoring of treatment ef-
fectiveness and incorporation of adaptive
management based on monitoring results
(Schultz et al. 2014, Cheng et al. 2016). Fur-
ther, new monitoring techniques and proto-
cols are being designed speciﬁcally for col-
laborative program-based forest treatments.
For example, Davis et al. (2016) and Under-
hill et al. (2014) provide ﬂexible, rapid eco-
logical monitoring techniques appropriate
for collaborative forest restoration and fuels
reduction programs. Given the lack of com-
prehensive monitoring that occurred during
the WMSP, greater attention to monitoring
and adaptive management components at
initiation and throughout future large-scale
USDA Forest Service stewardship projects is
paramount to the success of the respective
projects and to future initiatives.
Recommendations
The following recommendations were
derived from the ﬁnal WMSP performance
metrics and respondents’ reﬂections on how
to improve outcomes of the WMSP. The
degree to which project ﬁndings and the fol-
lowing recommendations can be applied to
other locations and restoration efforts is lim-
ited by the unique nature of the WMSP as
the ﬁrst in the nation of its size and scope
and the character of forest management and
industrial activity in the Southwest. Further,
recommendations may only apply to and be
carried forth by speciﬁc groups: the agency,
industry, or stakeholders. These recommen-
dations are further delineated by whether
they can be implemented locally and rela-
tively easily or require policy or regulatory
change and are more difﬁcult to implement.
Contracting Processes
Stewardship contracting authority emerged
as an important mechanism in conducting
treatments but was also a barrier to project
implementation and industry viability. Re-
spondents’ experiences with a groundbreak-
ing initiative highlighted the following rec-
ommendations that would improve future
contracting processes:
Implemented Locally
1. Based on the project’s primary objec-
tives, obtain agreement on the metric
used to compensate the contractor by all
parties and clearly articulate it in the con-
tract. In the case of the WMSP, consid-
ering the main objective of ﬁre risk re-
duction, it was necessary to derive a
metric that incentivizes treating areas
with high fuel loads and ﬁre risk.
2. To aid in contract evaluation, including
the amount the contractor is paid, estab-
lish a monitoring protocol that tracks
acre-to-volume relationship (e.g., aver-
age green tons per acre), harvest residual-
to-merchantable ﬁber ratio, government
costs (e.g., planning, administration, and
site preparation), industry costs (e.g.,
planning, administration, harvest opera-
tions, and transportation), and revenue
by sources (raw material, value-added
products, and market stability).
3. Evaluate and document contractor per-
formance to inform selection of future
contractors.
4. In addition to assessing the number of
jobs created, monitor quality (e.g., bene-
ﬁts, workforce training, and injuries),
duration, and locations of the workplace
and employees’ residence.
5. Support an apprentice/journeyman cer-
tiﬁcation program that would provide a
training period for the workforce and
lessen the burden of paying high wages to
those in training.
Requires Policy/Regulatory Change
6. Establish a contract evaluation protocol
that includes a reasonable time frame for
assessing and modifying, as necessary, con-
tract parameters that are based on opera-
tional efﬁciencies and innovations, market
conditions, and environmental conditions.
7. Verify the appropriate rate of the prevail-
ing local wage in wage requirements.
Industry Capacity
An important objective of the WMSP
was to increase industrial capacity that sup-
ported the harvest of a range of tree sizes. A
key consideration for the forest products in-
dustry was the long-term availability of ﬁber
necessary to amortize investments. In addi-
tion, it was important for industry to de-
velop economically efﬁcient product niches
that optimized the value of the raw ﬁber.
The following recommendations were iden-
tiﬁed by respondents to improve industry
capacity.
Implemented Locally
1. Minimize supply interruptions by care-
fully estimating wood supply by location,
type, size, and harvest timing relative to
business needs and market demand.
2. Pursue creative contracting strategies
that can respond to changing conditions.
Although WMSP industry leaders pro-
posed longer-term contracts and this was
the ﬁrst of its kind, the Eldorado Na-
tional Forest had built a consistent pro-
gram of work with an annual supply of
3-year contract offerings (Moseley and
Davis 2010). This strategy proved effec-
tive in creating sustained work opportu-
nities for contractors and offsetting the
high cost of removing forest residuals
with timber receipts. In addition, Mose-
ley and Davis (2010) found that commit-
ting to a 10-year contract would involve
risks for the agency in cultivating capac-
ity in a single contractor and potentially
not being able to respond to changes in
the economic climate. Although ecolog-
ical and economic conditions differ
across National Forests (e.g., in the case
of the Eldorado National Forest, the
USDA Forest Service selected units that
assured timber value exceeded extraction
costs), this provides an example of devel-
oping creative contracting strategies that
can respond to volatile conditions. Dur-
ing the 10 years of the WMSP, extrane-
ous factors inﬂuenced the project’s out-
comes (e.g., the recession and the
Wallow Fire). Rather than extending the
length of the contract (e.g., to 20 years),
multiple 10-year contracts could provide
opportunities to respond to changing
factors within a shorter time period.
However, the most salient factor in con-
tracting is the ability to guarantee a
steady stream of supply that will provide
the assurances needed for industry to
make large capital investments. Subse-
quently, sequencing overlapping 10-year
contracts with guaranteed supply and
with various contractors would encour-
age market competition, increase the
number of acres under contract, improve
the ability to respond to unpredictable
556
Journal of Forestry • November 2017

conditions, and improve business conﬁ-
dence.
Requires Policy/Regulatory Change
3. Coordinate and provide ﬁnancial incen-
tives for research and development of
harvest residuals and small diameter ma-
terial that increase utilization and opti-
mize market value. For example, the For-
est Products Laboratory awarded Woody
Biomass Utilization Grants to businesses
in the project area. This program spurred
innovations and business development
(Davis et al. 2014).
Partnerships
The cohesive agency, industry, and stake-
holder partnerships that developed were
critical throughout the implementation of
the WMSP. The following recommenda-
tions were identiﬁed by respondents to
improve partnerships and to nurture their
development.
Implemented Locally
1. Work with an already established collab-
orative group or form critical partner-
ships to deﬁne the issue and scope of the
project, reach agreements, develop solu-
tions, and seek support and funding to
increase capacity.
2. To advance an effective USDA Forest
Service-industry partnership that results
in realistic expectations and future plan-
ning throughout the life of the project,
use a neutral intermediary (e.g., a multi-
party monitoring board or nongovern-
ment organization) and/or conduct
workshops to facilitate understanding of
each entity’s structure, processes, bud-
getary/ﬁnancial constraints, and require-
ments.
3. Throughout the life of a project, conduct
evaluations that track strengths and
weaknesses of industry-agency relation-
ships and offer solutions for improved
communication and interaction.
4. Convene a Multi-Party Monitoring
Board with diverse stakeholder member-
ship to negotiate desired results and eval-
uate the effectiveness of ecological, social,
and economic outcomes; although eco-
logical indicators are often priorities for
monitoring, industry performance and
economic factors are also essential compo-
nents in a comprehensive monitoring
plan. Monitoring results should be ap-
plied through an adaptive management
process to improve current and future
project outcomes.
5. Select an appropriately scaled mecha-
nism and funding source (e.g., steward-
ship contract or payment for ecosystem
services) that facilitates cooperative part-
nerships.
6. Develop transition plans for agency staff
replacements, including mechanisms to
ensure continuity of project goals and
objectives.
Conclusion
From the outset, the WMSP was un-
precedented and faced many challenges and
uncertainties. The project was coined by one
forest staff respondent as “the experiment,”
with a diverse set of participants who had
seen massive shifts in industry, forest condi-
tions, and public perceptions. Despite chal-
lenges, the WMSP tallied many successes.
Thousands of acres were treated, treatments
were tested and proved effective in reducing
the impacts of severe wildﬁre, and the legal
battles that had previously delayed or halted
progress were eliminated.
The creative funding strategies em-
ployed by the ASNF (redirecting unspent
end-of-the-year USDA Forest Service funds),
along with the Woody Biomass Utilization
Grants and the American Recovery and Rein-
vestment Act funding, contributed substan-
tially to the creation and maintenance of a new
forest products industry that was linked to en-
hancing forest health. The WMSP also con-
tributed to adaptive regional planning by the
ASNF. The recently revised 2015 Apache-
Sitgreaves Land Management Plan high-
lights dramatic changes from the 1987 plan
in terms of acknowledging greater ﬁre risk
and the need for restoration treatments
(USDA Forest Service 2015), with much of
the new planning direction being informed
by the WMSP.
USDA Forest Service contracting mech-
anisms and coordination of stakeholder inter-
ests including agency-industry and business-
to-business partnerships offer lessons for
future restoration initiatives. The WMSP
stimulated private industry advances. Dur-
ing the WMSP, relatively abundant funding
prospects existed, including payment to the
contractor, which spurred the redevelop-
ment of infrastructure and industry in the
region. A key ﬁnding in Charnley et al.
(2012) is that the high funding levels that
existed during the WMSP (due to the Amer-
ican Recovery and Reinvestment Act) cre-
ated opportunities to accomplish fuel reduc-
tion work at a scale that otherwise would not
have been achieved. Regional capacity was
further supported by the White Mountain
Apache Timber Company’s wood ﬁber of-
ferings and a sawmill that was operational
through 2008. Although the 4FRI contract
did not include payment to the contractor,
the WMSP was perceived as a stepping stone
to the 4FRI.
With the WMSP, there was a funda-
mental shift from traditional timber extrac-
tion, where the primary goal is to maximize
proﬁts, to ﬁre risk reduction, where the tar-
gets were improved forest health, increased
community protection, and enhanced eco-
system services. A secondary objective was
to minimize costs and maximize returns for
small diameter wood utilization. Despite
the gains, private industry alone was unable
to fully offset treatment costs and still re-
quired substantial government investment.
Reframing challenges as lessons and formu-
lating pragmatic, applicable solutions and
acting on them can help facilitate the success
of future forest restoration initiatives in Ar-
izona and elsewhere.
Endnotes
1. The 2005 ﬁgure is skewed by a one-time
contribution of a business with 200 employ-
ees located in Phoenix, Arizona. WMSP
FTE Local represents those local employees
who reside in the deﬁned WMSP economic
area (Figure 2). The Arizona statewide ﬁgure
is total employees in all the subsectors in for-
estry and logging (NAICS [North American
Industry Classiﬁcation System]  113) and
wood product manufacturing (NAICS 
321). (Source: US Department of Labor Bu-
reau of Labor Statistics).
2. All economic assessment reports from 2005 to
2014 are available from the Apache-Sitgreaves
National Forests and the White Mountain
Stewardship Monitoring Board (www.fs.usda.
gov/detail/asnf/workingtogether/partnerships/
?cidstelprdb5207073).
Literature Cited
ABRAMS, J. 2011. The policy context of the White
Mountain Stewardship Contract. P. 163–176
in Human dimensions of ecological restoration:
Integrating science, nature, and culture, Egan,
D., E. Hjerpe, and J. Abrams (eds.). Island
Press, Washington, DC.
ABRAMS, J., AND S. BURNS. 2007. Case study of a
community stewardship success: The White Moun-
tainStewardshipContract.EcologicalRestoration
Institute, Northern Arizona Univ. Flagstaff,
AZ. 21 p.
CENTER FOR BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY. 2016. Sav-
ing the Mexican spotted owl. Available online
at www.biologicaldiversity.org/species/birds/
Mexican_spotted_owl/; last accessed Sept. 12,
2016.
Journal of Forestry • November 2017
557

CHARNLEY, S., P. JAKES, AND J. SCHELHAS. 2012.
Socioeconomic assessment of Forest Service Amer-
ican Recovery and Reinvestment Act projects: Key
ﬁndings and lessons learned. USDA Forest Ser-
vice, Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-GTR-832, Pa-
ciﬁc Northwest Research Station. Portland,
OR. 44 p. https://www.treesearch.fs.fed.us/
pubs/39802.
CHENG, A.S., R.J. GUTIE´RREZ, S. CASHEN, D.R.
BECKER, J. GUNN, A. MERRILL, D. GANZ, M.
LIQUORI, D.S. SAAH, AND W. PRICE. 2016. Is
there a place for legislating place-based collab-
orative forestry proposals?: Examining the
Herger-Feinstein Quincy Library Group For-
est Recovery Act Pilot Project. J. For. 114(4):
494–504. doi:10.5849/jof.15-074.
DAVIS, C.R., R.T. BELOTE, M.A. WILLIAMSON,
A.J. LARSON, AND B.E. ESCH. 2016. A rapid
forest assessment method for multiparty mon-
itoring across landscapes. J. For. 114(2):125–
133. doi:10.5849/jof.14-118.
DAVIS, E.J., N. CHRISTOFFERSEN, K. COUCH,
AND, C., MOSELEY. 2012. Forest restoration and
biomass utilization for multiple beneﬁts: A case
study for Wallowa County, Oregon. Working
Pap. No. 29, Ecosystem Workforce Program,
Univ. of Oregon, Eugene, OR. 8 p.
DAVIS, E.J., A. MOTTEK LUCAS, Y.S. KIM, C.
MOSELEY, M. NIELSEN-PINCUS, AND T. BILEK.
2014. The impacts of the woody biomass utili-
zation program in Eastern Oregon and Eastern
Arizona. Working Pap. No. 46, Ecosystem
Workforce Program, Univ. of Oregon, Eu-
gene, OR. 36 p.
EGAN, D., M. STODDARD, AND A. FORMANACK.
2015. Ecological and social implications of
employing diameter caps at a collaborative for-
est restoration project near Flagstaff, Arizona,
USA. For. Policy Econ. 52:39–45. doi:10.
1016/j.forpol.2014.11.013.
FOUR FOREST RESTORATION INITIATIVE. 2016.
4FRI goals. Available online at: www.4fri.org/
goals.html; last accessed Sept. 29, 2016.
HUFFMAN, D.W., B. GRECO, W.W. CHANCEL-
LOR, J. CROUSE, J.D. SPRINGER, AND A.E.M.
WALTZ. 2013. White Mountain Stewardship
Program monitoring report. Ecological Restora-
tion Institute, Northern Arizona Univ., Flag-
staff, AZ. 33 p.
KIM, Y.-S., AND A. MOTTEK LUCAS. 2015. 2013–
2014 White Mountain Stewardship Project eco-
nomic assessment. Ecological Restoration Insti-
tute, Northern Arizona Univ., Flagstaff, AZ.
38 p.
LOOMIS, E., AND R. EDGINGTON. 2012. Live un-
der the canopy: Spotted owls and loggers in
Western forests. Nat. Resour. J. 52(1):99–134.
http://digitalrepository.unm.edu/nrj/vol52/
iss1/4.
MOSELEY, C. 2006. Ethnic differences in job
quality among contract forest workers on six
national forests. Policy Sci. 39(2):113–133.
doi:10.1007/s11077-006-9005-8.
MOSELEY, C., AND E.J. DAVIS. 2010. Stewardship
contracting for landscape scale projects. Working
Pap. No. 25, Ecosystem Workforce Program,
Univ. of Oregon, Eugene, OR. 23 p.
NICHOLLS, D. 2014. Forest products cluster devel-
opment in central Arizona—Implications for
landscape-scale forest restoration. USDA Forest
Service, Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-GTR-898,
Paciﬁc Northwest Station, Portland, OR.
18 p.
https://www.treesearch.fs.fed.us/pubs/
46352.
QUIRKE, D., AND C. MOSELEY. 2016. Good neigh-
bor authority in Oregon: Comparison of state and
federal contracting provisions. Working Pap.
No. 63, Ecosystem Workforce Program, Univ.
of Oregon, Eugene, OR. 9 p.
SCHULTZ, C.A., D.L. COELHO, AND R.D. BEAM.
2014. Design and governance of multiparty
monitoring under the USDA Forest Service’s
Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration
Program. J. For. 112(2):198–206. doi:10.
5849/jof.13-070.
SENSIBAUGH, M.B., W.W. CHANCELLOR, J.E.
CROUSE, D.W. HUFFMAN, J.D. SPRINGER, AND
A.E.M. WALTZ. 2015. White Mountain Steward-
ship Program monitoring report. Ecological Resto-
ration Institute, Northern Arizona Univ., Flag-
staff, AZ. 28 p.
SITKO, S., AND S. HURTEAU. 2010. Evaluating the
impacts of forest treatments: The ﬁrst ﬁve years of
the White Mountain Stewardship Project. The
Nature Conservancy, Phoenix, AZ. 110 p.
UNDERHILL, J.L., Y. DICKINSON, A. RUDNEY, AND
J. THINNES. 2014. Silviculture of the Colorado
Front Range landscape restoration initiative.
J. For. 112(5):484–493. doi:10.5849/jof.13-
092.
US BUREAU OF LABOR STATISTICS. 2015. Employ-
ment and wages, annual averages archive. Avail-
able online at www.bls.gov/cew/cewbultns.
htm; last accessed June 30, 2015.
US DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE FOREST SER-
VICE. 2003. Stewardship contracting overview.
Available online at www.fs.fed.us/restoration/
Stewardship_Contracting/overview.shtml; last
accessed Feb. 8, 2016.
US DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE FOREST SER-
VICE. 2011. How fuel treatments saved homes
from the 2011 Wallow Fire. Fuel treatment ef-
fectiveness assessment report. Available online at
www.fs.usda.gov/Internet/FSE_DOCUMENTS/
stelprdb5318765.pdf; last accessed Feb. 8, 2016.
USDEPARTMENT OFAGRICULTUREFORESTSERVICE.
2015. Land Management Plan for the Apache-Sit-
greaves National Forests. Available online at www.
fs.usda.gov/Internet/FSE_DOCUMENTS/
stelprd3851851.pdf; last accessed Sept. 22,
2016.
US DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE FOREST SER-
VICE. 2016. Apache and Sitgreaves National
Forests—About the forest. Available online at
www.fs.usda.gov/main/asnf/about-forest; last
accessed Feb. 8, 2016.
US
GOVERNMENT
ACCOUNTABILITY
OFFICE.
2009. Wildland ﬁre management: Federal agen-
cies have taken important steps forward, but ad-
ditional, strategic action is needed to capitalize on
those steps. GAO Rep. GAO-09-877, Wash-
ington, DC. 49 p. http://www.gao.gov/
products/GAO-09-877.
US
GOVERNMENT
ACCOUNTABILITY
OFFICE.
2015. Forest restoration: Adjusting agencies’ in-
formation-sharing strategies could beneﬁt land-
scape-scale projects. GAO Rep. GAO-15–398,
Washington, DC. 56 p. http://www.gao.gov/
products/GAO-15-398.
WALTZ, A.E.M., M.T. STODDARD, E.L. KALIES,
J.D. SPRINGER, D.W. HUFFMAN, AND A.J. SA´N-
CHEZ MEADOR. 2014. Effectiveness of fuel re-
duction treatments: Assessing metrics of forest
resiliency and wildﬁre severity after the Wal-
low Fire, AZ. For. Ecol. Manage. 334:43–52.
doi:10.1016/j.foreco.2014.08.026.
WESTERN FORESTRY LEADERSHIP COALITION.
2010. The true cost of wildﬁre in the western US.
Western Forestry Leadership Coalition, Lake-
wood, CO. 15 p.
WHITE MOUNTAIN APACHE TRIBE. 2016. White
Mountain Apache history. Available online at
www.wmat.nsn.us/history.html. last accessed
Sept. 22, 2016.
558
Journal of Forestry • November 2017
