 
 
United front needed on Flagstaff forest thinning projects 
04/01/2004 
You can't tell an old-growth tree by its color after all.  
That's seems to be what the Grand Canyon Trust is telling foresters and scientists in its 
critique of a Forest Service plan to thin thousands of acres of overgrown forest off 
Woody Mountain Road southwest of Flagstaff.  
The Forest Service says that if a large ponderosa has yellow bark, indicating it has 
become fire resistant, it won't be cut. Otherwise, the plan, which will remove hundreds of 
thousands of trees, includes cutting about 20,000 fire-prone pines between 16 and 24 
inches in diameter. That comes out to about three large pines per acre in an area where 
there are hundreds of trees per acre.  
The Trust, however, has drawn a line in sand: No cutting any tree larger than 16 inches, 
even those in severely overgrown clusters that are not yet fire-resistant. When asked what 
is so magical about 16 inches, the Trust says that "science" finds no reason to remove 
trees any larger.  
Come again? The science of forest restoration says just the opposite. Led by NAU 
professor Wally Covington, experts have found that mature, healthy ponderosa pine 
forests should have as few as 40 trees per acre. Covington's test plots, which leave a 
range of tree sizes to avoid an even-age, plantation-style forest, often appear as denuded 
moonscapes to the lay observer accustomed to dense canopies that block out sunlight.  
Covington's prescription, if followed to the letter, would take out many more trees, both 
large and small, than the public is ready to accept. So the Forest Service has 
compromised, agreeing to leave all trees that have aged enough to become fire-resistant, 
regardless of their size.  
But apparently that's not good enough for the Trust, which wants size, not fire resistance, 
to be the determining factor in what gets cut. We challenge the Trust to produce scientific 
findings that no tree larger than 16 inches should be cut for sake of forest health.  
What's worrisome about the Trust's opposition to the Forest Service thinning plan is that 
it threatens to fray a forest restoration partnership that is a model for the nation. Unlike 
the Sierra Club and Southwest Forest Alliance, which have never joined the Greater 
Flagstaff Forests Partnership, the Trust has taken a leadership role in the group. That has 
meant making the necessary compromises with business, government and academic 
groups to get a series of forest restoration projects on and around the San Francisco Peaks 
off the ground. The key to the partnership's success has been the united front it has 

presented, despite internal differences in crafting the plans, as the projects have moved 
through the permitting and appeals stages.  
But now, in drawing that line in the sand at 16 inches, the Trust is signaling that 
consensus as a means to a desired end is worth sacrificing in the interest of what appears 
to be simplistic sloganeering. The implication behind the Trust's charge that the Forest 
Service is not following science when it approves the thinning of large trees is that such 
trees are being cut because they make harvesting contracts more lucrative. That may play 
well in forest activist circles that oppose any thinning as commercial logging, but it's 
beneath the measured approach to forest restoration that the Trust has taken in the past.  
Also worrisome is that the dispute, if it develops into an appeal and possible lawsuit, 
threatens to disrupt the forest thinning momentum just as the wood products industry is 
beginning to count on a consistent supply of trees. The announcement that a startup 
company, Savannah Pacific, is willing take a risk on small-diameter trees by building a 
sawmill in Bellemont should spur the partnership to develop a set of science-based 
guidelines for future projects that include tree type, size and cutting volume. Having 
individual members picking apart each project after the plan is released only undermines 
what a partnership is intended to be.  
Commercial use of small trees is the key toward accelerating the thinning of Flagstaff's 
overgrown forests. But if sawmills and other users don't have a predictable supply, then 
taxpayers will have to foot the bill. That means waiting for federal, state and local 
government grants and other funding while the threat of catastrophic wildfire grows. 
We've counted on the Trust in the past to show leadership on forest health, and now that 
includes assuring a wood supply to commercial markets. We don't see that the two are 
mutually exclusive -- as long as advocacy groups don't draw unnecessary lines in the 
sand.  
