21
Ecological Restoration Institute
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
www.eri.nau.edu
Working Papers in Southwestern 
Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
Managing Coarse Woody
Debris in Fire-adapted
Southwestern Forests
January 2008 

Working Papers in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native
species, structural characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological Restoration
International defines ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates
the recovery of an ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability….Restoration
attempts to return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration
International Science & Policy Working Group 2004).
In the southwestern United States, most ponderosa pine forests have been degraded during the last
150 years. Many ponderosa pine areas are now dominated by dense thickets of small trees, and
lack their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly
susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing fires and increased insect and disease epidemics.
Restoration of these forests centers on reintroducing frequent, low-intensity surface fires—often
after thinning dense stands—and reestablishing productive understory plant communities.
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching,
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. By
allowing natural processes, such as fire, to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish
healthy forests that provide ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The ERI Working Papers series presents findings and management recommendations from
research and observations by the ERI and its partner organizations. While the ERI staff recognizes
that every restoration project needs to be site specific, we feel that the information provided in the
Working Papers may help restoration practitioners elsewhere.
This publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Service.
The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be
interpreted as representing the opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of
trade names or commercial products does not constitute their endorsement by the United States
Government.
Cover: Several classes of coarse woody debris at Fort Valley Experimental Forest near Flagstaff, Arizona.
Photo by Dave Eganc 

Managing Coarse Woody Debris in Fire-adapted Southwestern Forests
Introduction
Fire-adapted forested ecosystems in the Southwest evolved
with a continual flux of downed woody material—a structural
component that is considered essential to a properly
functioning forest ecosystem. The creation and accumulation
of downed woody material depends on forest type, tree
species, stage of succession/decay, the amount of insect and
disease activity, climate, fire return intervals, windthrow, and
management activities. In general, more downed woody
material accumulates in forests with long fire return intervals
(subalpine, mixed conifer, pinyon-juniper woodlands) than in
forests with short fire return intervals, such as ponderosa pine.
While early foresters saw downed woody material as waste, a
potential source of insect and disease problems or a wildfire
hazard, today’s foresters and researchers have identified the
large-size component of downed woody material––coarse
woody debris (CWD)––for its vital role in the maintenance of
long-term site productivity, site protection, and wildlife
habitat in fire-adapted forested ecosystems. Many studies
(Harvey et al. 1979, 1980, 1987, 1988; Graham et al. 1994;
Brown et al. 2003, Cram et al. 2007) report that CWD is
important for developing nitrogen-fixing bacteria and
ectomycorrhizae, and for protecting the soil surface from
water erosion. Harvey et al. (1987) noted that decaying wood
and humus supply organic matter across the forested
landscape—material that not only serves as a growth medium
for seedlings but plays an integral part in supporting ongoing
tree growth. Brown et al. (2003), Carey and Johnson (1995),
and Patton (personal communication) point out the
importance of CWD to the life cycles of forest insects, reptiles,
mammals, and birds.
Published research by Graham et al. (1994) recommends
varying amounts of CWD depending on the type of forest
ecosystem. However, research and management
recommendations are lacking with regards to the spatial
distribution and amount of CWD by size class as well as the
different CWD decomposition states needed for maintaining
and improving site productivity, soil quality and wildlife
habitat (Bunnell et al. 2002), and for the safe use of natural or
prescribed fire.
This need for additional research and land management
recommendations regarding CWD is especially important in
order to maintain the levels of existing and future CWD
necessary to preserve fundamental ecological functions (e.g.,
site and soil productivity, wildlife habitat) in light of the
increasing interest in, and government support of, using large
quantities of woody biomass to produce wood products and
energy (Skog and Barbour 2006, Hubka 2007, U.S. Forest
Products Lab 2007).
In this ERI working paper, we provide insights into these and
other questions about CWD.
One key assumption that underlies this discussion is that the
site has been restored—that is, after treatment, a major
portion of the project area is within its natural range of
variability for tree density, the natural openings are restored,
the pre-European settlement fire regime is re-established, and
the soils are functioning properly. Without the benefit of lower
trees per acre, and the value that a more open forest structure
has in terms of bringing the site closer to its historic fire
regime, wildfires will be very difficult to control even when
CWD is managed within the scope of the recommendations
derived from Graham et al. (1994) and found in the Region 3
Supplement to the Soil and Water Management Handbook
(USDA Forest Service Region 3 1999).
Defining Coarse Woody Debris
Coarse woody debris consists of dead fallen logs, stumps, and
limbs that are at least 3 inches in diameter at the point where
they are sampled (Harmon et al. 1986, Brown et al. 2003).
Standing snags and upright stumps are not considered CWD
(USDA Forest Service 2004, U.S. Forest Service Region 3
Supplement 2509.18-99-1). Smaller material, including litter
or small twigs less than 3 inches in diameter (new residue with
little or no decay), are defined as fine woody debris (FWD)
(USDA Forest Service Northern Research Station 2007). Fine
fuels are beneficial to soil quality (primarily for stability) but
may be considered a fire hazard unless they are properly
managed to meet both soil- and fire-related objectives.
Coarse woody debris is also distinguished from FWD by the
length of time it takes to dry. Whereas the moisture content of
FWD reaches the same level as the moisture in the atmosphere
relatively quickly (1-100 hours depending on its diameter),
CWD is rated as 1,000+-hour fuels because it takes
significantly longer to reach the same moisture content level as
the atmosphere (Maser et al. 1979, USDA Forest Service
Northern Research Station 2007).
Coarse woody debris is classified into five categories according
to its degree of decay with class 1 being the most sound and
class 5 the most decayed (see Figure 1 and Table 1).
1
Ecological Restoration Institute
a
Figure 1. The classification of standing snags and decomposing
logs. From Thomas et al. 1979

Importance of Coarse Woody Debris: Soils,
Wildlife, and Fire Hazard
Soils
Coarse woody debris performs many physical, biological, and
chemical functions in forest ecosystems. Physically, CWD
protects the forest floor and mineral soil from erosion and
mechanical disturbances. Brown et al. (2003) report that
CWD helps protect soils from erosion on steep slopes, and
disrupts the flow of water near the ground reducing the
erosive potential of water and preventing losses to soil
productivity. Coarse woody debris also interrupts airflow and
provides shade, insulating and protecting new forest growth.
When decay is advanced (log decomposition classes 3-5),
CWD can hold large amounts of water, making it an
important source of moisture for vegetation during dry
periods (Graham et al. 1994).
Graham et al. (1994) noted that the breakdown of CWD
provides most of the nutrients that are recycled through the
ecosystem--the most important being sulfur, phosphorous,
and nitrogen. Microbial processes and the overall potential for
soils to provide nutrients is tied directly to the presence and
maintenance of soil organic matter, which is, ultimately, the
breakdown product from CWD and other organic materials
(Brown et al. 2003).
Nitrogen has been identified as the most limiting soil nutrient
in southwestern forest soils (Selmants et al. 2003). Moreover,
it is also well known that maintaining adequate levels of
organic matter, especially decayed wood, is important for
maintaining the microbes involved in nitrogen fixation
(Brown et al. 2003). Harvey et al. (1980, 1987) noted that
symbiotic nitrogen-fixing plants are infrequent in most forest
ecosystems and that non-symbiotic bacteria are widely
distributed and have the most influence on nitrogen fixation.
Decaying woody material that is not yet incorporated into the
soil, such as CWD, provides the highest per unit weight,
nitrogen-fixing capacity of any material available on the forest
floor (Harvey et al. 1979).
Harvey et al. (1981) found that ectomycorrhizae—a type of
fungus associated with pine tree roots––have a strong positive
relationship with soil organic materials. Graham and his
colleagues (1994) recognized this relationship when
developing their recommendations for the amount of CWD
to leave after timber harvesting. In general, they assumed that
more organic matter would result in more ectomycorrhizae.
However, they found that in drier forest types, such as
Southwestern ponderosa pine, the highest amounts of active
ectomychorrhizal root tips occurred when the organic volume
was relatively low—from 0-20 percent in ponderosa
pine/Gambel oak on basalt soils and from 21-30 percent in
ponderosa pine/Arizona fescue on limestone soils. This
finding suggested to them that the amounts of CWD in these
dry habitats should be relatively low compared to more mesic
vegetation types: 5-10 tons/acre of CWD on limestone soils
supporting ponderosa pine/Gambel oak, and 7-13 tons/acre
on basalt soils supporting ponderosa pine/Arizona fescue.
Recent studies that looked at the effects of forest restoration
treatments on mycorrhizae (Korb et al. 2003, Griffiths et al.
2005) revealed that, after thinning and burning,
endomycorrhizae increased significantly but there was little
effect on the levels of ectomycorrhizae. This finding suggests
that once ectomycorrhizae are in the soil they tend to
maintain their populations, and that even minimal levels of
CWD may have little correlation to sustaining adequate
amounts of ectomycorrhizae.
Wildlife
Wildlife benefit from the presence of CWD because downed
woody material is important in the life cycles of a wide variety
of animals from mites to mammals (Brown et al. 2003).
Patton (unpublished manuscript 2007) found that many
species of animals, including rabbits, snakes, lizards and small
rodents, use the openings that result from decayed roots for
tunnels and dens. Coarse woody debris adds another level of
diversity within forested ecosystems that can be beneficial for
several species of chipmunks, ground squirrels, rabbits,
turkeys, and ground-nesting birds (Patton unpublished
manuscript 2007).
Payne and Bryant (1994) noted that larger logs have more
wildlife potential than smaller logs. Carey and Johnson (1995)
stated that while a multiplicity of environmental factors
determine animal species abundances, two factors––CWD
Managing Coarse Woody Debris in Fire-adapted Southwestern Forests
a
Ecological Restoration Institute
2
Decay
Class
Structural
Integrity
Wood Texture
Wood
Color
Presence
of
Invading
Roots
Condition of
Branches/Twigs
1
Sound
Intact, no rot;
conks on stem
absent
Original
color
Absent
If branches present,
fine twigs still
attached with tight
bark
2
Heartwood
sound,
sapwood
somewhat
decayed
Mostly intact;
sapwood partly
soft and starting
to decay; wood
cannot be
pulled apart by
hand
Original
color
Absent
If branches present,
many fine twigs
gone; attached fine
twigs have peeling
bark
3
Heartwood
sound; log
supports its
weight
Large, hard
pieces of
sapwood can be
pulled apart by
hand
Red-brown
or original
color
Present in
sapwood
only
Large branch stubs
will not pull out
4
Heartwood
rotten; log does
not support its
own weight,
but shape is
maintained
Soft, small,
blocky pieces,
metal pin can
push heartwood
apart
Red-brown
or light
brown
Present
throughout
log
Large branch stubs
will pull out easily
5
No structural
integrity; no
longer
maintains
shape
Soft, powdery
when dry
Red-brown
to dark
brown
Present
throughout
log
Branch stubs and
pitch pockets have
rotted away
Table 1. Decay classes of coarse woody debris. From Waddell 2002

Managing Coarse Woody Debris in Fire-adapted Southwestern Forests a
Ecological Restoration Institute
and prevalence of shrub cover--play primary roles. They
concluded that CWD, especially large, standing or fallen dead
trees, is not only an important habitat component for forest
floor small mammals, it also provides critical habitat elements
for birds and amphibians.
Probably one of the most persuasive reasons for managing
CWD for wildlife exists in the Reynolds et al. (1992) report
about prey species for the northern goshawk. They listed the
following goshawk prey species and their relation to CWD:
Chipmunks: Downed logs and woody debris are important
for nesting, lookout points, shelter, escape cover, and
travel corridors.
Northern flicker: Downed logs and woody debris are
sources of insect food.
Red squirrel: Snags and downed logs are essential with the
smaller woody debris being of less value.
Stellar’s jay: Downed logs and woody debris are used as
habitats for insect food.
Tassel-eared squirrel: Downed logs and woody debris are
crucial for food substrate and cover.
Williamson’s sapsucker: Downed logs and woody debris are
significant foraging sites.
Almost half of the important prey species identified by
Reynolds and his colleagues are directly linked to CWD. Ward
and Block (1995) listed these same species as key food sources
for Mexican spotted owls, which indicates the importance of
maintaining specific levels and sizes of CWD for sustaining
populations of prey for these valuable birds.
Fire Hazard
Small and large woody debris contribute differently to a site’s
fire hazard (which I define as the potential fire behavior for a
given fuel type and its resistance to control). For instance, the
influence of duff and continuous FWD on the spread rate and
intensity of surface fires is substantial (Brown et al. 2003). In
contrast, models that predict the influence of CWD on the
spread and intensity of initiating surface fires show that this
size class of downed woody material has little influence on
fire hazard, although CWD can contribute to the
development of large fires and high fire severity (Brown et al.
2003). This same study noted that if large woody fuel is
decayed and broken up, its contribution is considerably
greater to a large fire event––similar to fire in heavy slash.
Graham et al. (2004) explained why this is the case when they
noted that decayed CWD (log decomposition classes 4 and 5)
produces firebrands that can create numerous ignitions points
far from of the main fire. Rotten wood is also more receptive
to ignition when sparks land on it. Brown et al. (2003) also
noted that burning large CWD can negatively affect nearby
soil surface horizons, causing, among other outcomes, an
increase in water repellency and a loss of soil nutrients and
microorganisms.
Given their findings, Brown et al. (2003) concluded that a
range of 5-20 tons per acre appeared reasonable in ponderosa
pine/dry mixed conifer, whereas a range of 10-30 tons per
acre could be allowed in cool, subalpine forest types without
creating a high fire hazard (Figure 2). The current
management recommendations for CWD for long-term forest
health in U.S. Forest Service Region 3 are below these
maximum amounts. Brown et al. (2003) also noted that
higher loadings of CWD are acceptable where larger pieces of
CWD predominate, which is typically the case once a forest’s
spatial pattern and structure are restored and frequent ground
fire is reintroduced.
Existing Forest Service Management
Recommendations 
The Forest Service Southwestern Region (Region 3) identifies
CWD as a critical component for sustaining ecosystem
functions (USDA Forest Service 1999). Region 3 recommends
that 5-10 tons/acre of CWD remain on-site in ponderosa
pine/Gambel oak forest, 7-14 tons/acre of CWD in areas
dominated by ponderosa pine/Arizona fescue, and 8-16
tons/acre are in the mixed conifer forest. These CWD
recommendations for ponderosa pine were derived from
research by Graham et al. (1994) and from an unpublished
document by Graham et al. (1996) for mixed conifer.
3
Figure 2. Optimum ranges of CWD that provide both
acceptable risks of fire hazard and desirable levels for soil
productivity, soil protection, and wildlife habitat. Dotted lines
indicate a range that meets all or most resource needs. Chart
A shows the range for warm, dry forest types, while Chart B
displays the range for cool and lower subalpine forest types.
From Brown et al. 2003

Managing Coarse Woody Debris in Fire-adapted Southwestern Forests
a
Ecological Restoration Institute
These recommendations, along with continued sustainable
management practices, will ensure that soil function is being
sustained and the soil is functioning properly. If CWD
requirements are less than what is recommended, a loss of soil
function could occur.
Additional direction for management of CWD, at least in U.S.
Forest Service Region 3, can be found in Appendix C,
Standards and Guidelines in Selected Alternative G, which
amended all existing forest plans in the region and clarified
management direction for Mexican spotted owl and northern
goshawk (USDA Forest Service 1996a). For example, the
recommended guidelines for northern goshawk in the
foraging areas are:
•
Ponderosa pine: Leave at least two snags, three downed
logs at least 12 inches in diameter and at least 8 feet
long, and 5-7 tons of CWD per acre.
•
Spruce-fir and mixed conifer: Leave at least three snags,
five downed logs at least 12 inches in diameter and at
least 8 feet long, and 10-15 tons of CWD.
While no specific Forest Service guidelines exist for CWD in
pinyon-juniper ecosystems, Region 3 has developed minimum
structural attributes criteria for determining old growth in
such ecosystems. These guidelines call for two 8- to 10-foot
downed logs, with a diameter of 9-10 inches, per acre (USDA
Forest Service 1996a). Observations of pinyon-juniper
ecosystems indicate that some level of CWD needs to be left
on-site for soil protection and to provide sites for the
regeneration of native grasses and trees (Dave Huffman
personnel communication, Gottfried and Severson 1994,
Stoddard 2006, see Figure 3).
Estimating the Amount of CWD Prior to
Twentieth Century Fire Suppression
Land managers in the frequent-fire regimes of the Southwest
often ask: How much CWD existed in pre-European
settlement southwestern forests? While the literature to
support the following idea is quite limited, it seems
reasonable that frequent ground fires during the pre-
European settlement period resulted in relatively low amounts
of CWD. Moir et al. (1997), for example, suggest that downed
woody material was “sparse” prior to the exclusion of fire.
Brown and his colleagues (2003) support this idea when they
state that high-frequency, surface-fire disturbances that were
typical in pre-European settlement warm/dry ponderosa pine
and Douglas fir ecosystems would result in less downed
woody material, including CWD.
However, unpublished research conducted by the Ecological
Restoration Institute on several infrequently burned
ponderosa pine sites within the Grand Canyon National Park
indicates that the average CWD ranged from a low of 6.7
tons/acre reported for Rainbow Point to a high of 19.3
tons/acre at Fire Point. A site on Powell Plateau averaged 8.3
tons per acre, with a low of 5.5 ton/acre and a high of 19.3
tons/acre. The amount of FWD ranged from 1.5-2.6 tons/acre
on Powell Plateau in the ponderosa pine zone. The mixed
conifer site on Powell Plateau averaged 41 tons/acre of CWD
and 6 tons/acre of FWD. These results for CWD fall roughly
within the range of 5-15 tons/acre recommended by Graham
et al. (1994) and by U.S. Forest Service Region 3 for CWD in
ponderosa pine forests in Arizona.
Prior to the exclusion of fire in the Southwest forest
landscape, there was probably a wide range of CWD
concentrations that surged and declined on a cyclical basis
depending on the frequency and intensity of fire. However, in
general, it seems reasonable to assume that with the frequent-
fire regime typical of the pre-fire suppression era, there would
have been more large, sound CWD (greater than 14 or 16
inches) and less FWD and rotten CWD (Covington and
Sackett 1984). Restoring the spatial pattern and structure of
today’s overstocked ponderosa pine forests, and reintroducing
fire will most likely result in similar concentrations of CWD
and FWD after some period of time.
Management Considerations
Most of the ponderosa pine and mixed conifer forests are
significantly outside their natural range of variability with
regards to trees per acre. This situation coupled with fuel
loadings, even when they are within the range recommended
by Graham et al. (1994), Brown et al. (2003) and Region 3 of
the Forest Service, presents land managers with a potentially
high fire hazard and calls for sound management of CWD.
4
Figure 3. Over time, coarse woody debris may function as a
“nucleus” around which woodlands develop after severe
disturbance. This image shows (A) coarse wood left after a fire
that probably occurred before 1900, (B) a juniper tree that has
established and grown since the fire, and (C) younger pinyon
pine trees that have established beneath the older juniper.
Photo courtesy of Dave Huffman, ERI

Managing Coarse Woody Debris in Fire-adapted Southwestern Forests a
Ecological Restoration Institute
In the restoration of frequent-fire forest ecosystems, land
managers need to make decisions about CWD based on their
resource goals. If, for example, the goal is to reduce the
potential for fire next to a human community (i.e., in a
Wildland-Urban Interface), it might be appropriate to have
CWD in amounts at the lowest end of the Forest Service’s
recommended range (5 tons/acre), or possibly lower. On the
other hand, if the goal is to maintain and improve prey
species for goshawks and other raptors, it might be best to
maintain a higher amount of CWD (20-25 tons/acre) in a
variety of decay classes.
From an ecological perspective, land managers should
concentrate on retaining a diversity of CWD classes that are
distributed across the landscape (Harvey et al. 1987, Graham
et al. 1994). Large CWD material, especially old logs that have
some level of advanced decay, should receive special attention
because of their importance for many species of animals.
Since fire is an evolutionary process that shaped the forests of
the Southwest, land managers can use it to manage CWD. As
Harvey et al. (1987) pointed out, moisture is so limiting in
southwestern ponderosa pine sites that it delays the biological
breakdown of organic matter and leads to accumulations of
CWD and other smaller materials. Under these conditions,
fire has as much influence or more on the cycling of
important soil nutrients, especially once the former openings
have sufficient grass cover to carry a fire (DeBano et al. 1998,
Brown et al. 2003).
Finally, land managers need to remember that adequate levels
of CWD calls for maintaining a sufficient population of
snags, not only for immediate use by cavity-nesting birds, bats
and other animals, but to serve as future CWD (see ERI
Working Paper 16 for information about snags).
Measuring Coarse Woody Debris
There are two basic ways to measure coarse woody debris: 1)
using a photo series estimation method and 2) planar transect
sampling. Both have advantages and disadvantages. Photo
series are considered easy-to-use, reasonably fast and
inexpensive, while transect sampling is more time consuming
and costly, but provides a much higher degree of accuracy
than photo series estimates.
Photo series are typically provided in a booklet than can be
taken to the field, where the photos can be compared with
existing field conditions in order to make an estimate of
CWD loading. Each booklet contains a number of photos sets
that are organized according to the dominant tree species, tree
size class, and management treatment (e.g., precommercial
thinning, partial cut, natural). A data sheet accompanies each
photograph and provides other information, such CWD
loading by size class, percent sound CWD, basic stand
information, and an assessment of fire behavior. Land
managers in the Southwest who want to use photo series to
estimate CWD, may be able to obtain a copy of Photo Series
for Quantifying Forest Residues in the Southwestern Region
(USDA Forest Service 1996b).
Transect sampling methods for CWD are well defined and
improved from the earlier work by Brown (1974), Brown and
Roussopoulos (1974), and Brown et al. (1982). See Waddell
(2002) for a summary of these methods and their biases. Fulé
and Covington (1994) suggested “double sampling” as an
alternative to these transect sampling procedures; their
method being as precise, but less costly and time-consuming,
than traditional transect sampling. A similar method,
although without the double sampling, is now used by the
Forest Service’s Forest Inventory and Analysis Program
(Woodall online, accessed 2007; Lutes and Kean online,
accessed 2007). For an even more thorough inventory and
monitoring method, consult the FIREMON, Fire Effects
Monitoring and Inventory Protocol (FIREMON online,
accessed 2007).
Removing Coarse Woody Debris
After inventorying and analyzing the amount of CWD in a
stand, land managers may decide that there is enough to meet
their resource goals and objectives, or they may decide to
decrease the amount. There are a number of standard
treatments for removing CWD—prescribed fire/broadcast
burn, mastication, pile and burn, and physical removal. While
they are described briefly here, more detailed discussion of
these methods can be found in ERI Working Paper 13
(https://library.eri.nau.edu:8443/handle/2019/170) or in
appropriate Forest Service manuals and handbooks.
Prescribed Fire/Broadcast Burn
Prescribed fire is the preferred method of treating excess
CWD to meet or maintain soil quality and long-term site
productivity goals. Prescribed fire will remove the needles and
small branches (the hazard fuels) while at the same time
maintaining much of the on-site organic matter (Graham et
al. 1994). Prescribed burns reduce the risk of stand-replacing
wildfire by decreasing the overall forest fuel load. Broadcast
burns can potentially consume heavy loads of CWD, which in
turn can be destructive to soils, fungi, the seedbank and
plants, and can kill trees remaining after thinning. Smoke
from large fires may require public safety measures (e.g., road
signs, public notices, etc.).
Work to ensure that burning is done at low intensity. Don’t
expect to reduce the CWD in one burn; several burns may be
required. Large CWD will likely only scorch (Maser et al.
1979) and will not be consumed, which is fine. Identify Class
5

Managing Coarse Woody Debris in Fire-adapted Southwestern Forests
a
Ecological Restoration Institute
6
4 and 5 CWD and make sure that they do not become the
source for a larger fire; fire line them or wet them down, as
necessary.
Mastication 
Mastication is a mechanical thinning treatment in which a
machine is used to reduce CWD and other woody material to
wood chips or wood mulch (Windell and Bradshaw 2000).
The resulting material is left on the ground to decompose or
be consumed by a prescribed burn. If done properly,
masticated CWD breaks down faster than undisturbed CWD
and it can help reduce the intensity of prescribed burns.
Compressed slash holds less oxygen and is not in a vertical
arrangement, resulting in lower tree mortality when broadcast
burned (Jerman et al. 2004). Mastication may be used as a
substitute for burning in areas where fire is not desirable (e.g.,
rights-of-way for utilities or transportation, areas where
smoke is a concern).
Roller chopping, chipping, smashing of logging slash should
be done with care, however, because deep compacted layers of
organic matter can develop. These layers insulate the mineral
soil, which can lead to lower soil temperatures, slow organic
matter decomposition, nitrogen deficiency, and retarded root
growth (Graham et al. 1994). Chopping and chipping of slash
destroys many of the attributes of CWD that are important to
nitrogen fixation, animal habitat, and site preparation
(Graham et al. 1994). Thick concentrations of chips or mulch
will also likely prevent the establishment or reduce the
herbaceous vegetation component until the masticated
material decomposes or is burned. Damage to tree roots and
erosion are real concerns (although see Hatchett et al. 2006).
Mastication is typically not effective in narrow areas (i.e., less
than 66 feet) or on steep slopes (i.e., greater than 20%) or
areas with broken terrain. Costs run from $150-$255/acre on
relatively flat sites with road access and wide spacing between
trees, and up to $1,500/acre on steeper, less accessible sites
(Rummer online, accessed 2007).
To minimize soil compaction, use low ground pressure
machines. Use a machine with either vertical or horizontal
shaft cutters if areas will be treated with a prescribed burn. If
no burn is planned, use horizontal shaft cutters because they
produce a finer material that will decompose quickly
(Rummer online, accessed 2007). Monitor the mastication
operation and check the soil for several months post-
treatment to see if there is any change in soil chemistry due to
the presence of the chips or mulch.
Pile and Burn
Unmarketable wood and debris can be mechanically or
manually gathered and piled throughout the site. The
advantages of this method are 1) piles can be burned in a
controlled manner and 2) it is relatively inexpensive.
However, burning piles causes excessive soil heating and slash
pile scars often remain bare for a long time unless
revegetated. In some cases, invasive species take hold at slash
pile sites and spread from them (Korb et al. 2004). Creating
piles with machines typically results in large, heavy piles that
can produce severe soil compaction. In addition, the
machinery used has the potential to compact soil in areas
near the piles. Hand-piling produces less severe and extensive
soil disturbances, but it is very labor intensive and produces
more piles within a project area. Grapple piling of logging
slash appears to more easily separate fine fuels from CWD
and provide more flexibility on steeper slopes (Graham et al.
1994).
When possible, build small slash piles on existing roads or
disturbed areas to minimize damage to undisturbed soils. If
piles are built on previously undisturbed forest soils,
inoculate the soil after the piles are burned with a
commercially purchased arbuscular mycorrhizae (see
http://www.AgBio-Inc.com) and then revegetate with certified
native seeds. Research suggests that, if properly done, this
action will increase the density of native forb and grass cover
(Korb et al. 2004).
Physical Removal
This method is generally used only if the project is small and
there is minimal CWD. In this process, the CWD is loaded on
trucks and taken to another location, where it is burned or
chipped. This can be a very expensive method and is often
not economically practical unless some value can be derived
from turning the CWD into chips or mulch.
Before choosing any of these treatment methods, a land
manager may want to run some different scenarios using a
U.S. Forest Service tool called My Fuel Treatment Planner
(http://www.fs.fed.us/pnw/data/myftp/myftp_home.htm).
Providing Additional Coarse 
Woody Debris
While in most cases there will be an abundance of CWD even
after restoration treatments (due to decades without ground
fires), there may be some instances where creating CWD is
necessary to meet resource goals and objectives. In such cases,
land managers can simply take logs or limbs from treatment
areas, and move them into areas where they will provide
effective wildlife habitat and soil protection (especially on
steep slopes). Managers can also designate trees to be cut and
dropped and left on site as CWD. These forms of CWD can
be tops, cull and sound logs, and snags, in situations where
snags are abundant and can be dropped safely.

Managing Coarse Woody Debris in Fire-adapted Southwestern Forests a
Ecological Restoration Institute
7
References
Brown, J.K. 1974. Handbook for inventorying downed woody
material. General Technical Report INT-16. Ogden, UT:
USDA Forest Service Intermountain Forest and Range
Experiment Station.
http://www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs_int/int_gtr016.pdf.
Brown, J.K. and P.J. Roussopoulos. 1974. Eliminating biases in
the planar intersect method for estimating volumes of
small fuels. Forest Science 20:350-356.
Brown, J.K., R.D. Oberhu, and C.M. Johnston. 1982.
Handbook for inventorying surface fuels and biomass in
the Interior West. General Technical Report INT-129.
Ogden, UT: USDA Forest Service Intermountain Forest
and Range Experiment Station.
Brown, J.K., E.D. Reinhardt, and K.A. Kylie. 2003. Coarse
woody debris: Managing benefits and fire hazard in the
recovering forest. General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-
105. Ogden, UT: USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain
Research Station.
Bunnell, F.L., M. Boyland, and E. Wind. 2002. How should we
spatially distribute dying and dead wood? Pages 739-752
in W.F. Laudenslayer, Jr., P.J. Shea, B.E. Valentine, C.P.
Weatherspoon, and T.E. Lisle, tech. coordinators.
Proceedings of the conference on the ecology and
management of dead wood in western forests. November
2-4, 1999 Reno, Nevada. General Technical Report PSW-
GTR-181. Albany, CA: USDA Forest Service Pacific
Southwest Research Station.
Carey, A.B. and M.L. Johnson. 1995. Small mammals in
managed, naturally young, and old-growth forests.
Ecological Applications 5(2):336-352.
Covington, W.W. and S.S. Sackett. 1984. The effect of a
prescribed burn in southwestern ponderosa pine on
organic matter and nutrients in woody debris and forest
floor. Forest Science 30(1):183-192.
Cram, D.S., T.T. Baker, A.G. Fernald, A. Madrid, and B.
Rummer. 2007. Mechanical thinning impacts on runoff,
infiltration, and sediment yield following fuel reduction
treatments in a southwestern dry mixed conifer forest.
Journal of Soil and Water Conservation 62(5):359-366.
DeBano, L.F., D.G. Neary, and P.F. Ffolliot. 1998. Fire’s effects
on ecosystems. New York: Wiley.
FIREMON (Fire Effects Monitoring and Inventory Protocol).
Online, accessed October 2007.
http://frames.nbii.gov/portal/server.pt?open=512&objID=
286&&PageID=495&mode=2&in_hi_userid=2&cached=t
rue.
Fulé, P.Z. and W.W. Covington. 1994. Double sampling
increases the efficiency of forest floor inventories for
Arizona ponderosa pine forests. International Journal of
Wildland Fire 4(1):3-10.
Gottfried, G.J. and K.E. Severson. 1994. Managing pinyon-
juniper woodlands. Rangelands 16(6):234-236.
Graham, R.T., A.E. Harvey, M.F. Jurgensen, T.B. Jain, J.R.
Tonn, and D.S. Page-Dumroese. 1994. Managing coarse
woody debris in forests of the Rocky Mountains. Research
Paper INT-RP-477. Ogden, UT: USDA Forest Service
Intermountain Research Station.
Re
Graham, R.T., T.B. Jain, A.E. Harvey, M.F. Jurgensen, J.R.
Tonn, D.S. Page-Dumroese. 1996. Recommendations for
managing coarse woody debris in mixed conifer forests of
Arizona and New Mexico. Unpublished.
Graham, R.T., S. McCaffrey, and T.B. Jain, tech.eds. 2004.
Science basis for changing forest structure to modify
wildfire behavior and severity. General Technical Report
RMRS-GTR-120. Fort Collins, CO: Rocky Mountain
Research Station.
Griffiths, R., M. Madritch, and A. Swanson. 2005. Conifer
invasion of forest meadows transforms soil characteristics
in the Pacific Northwest. Forest Ecology and Management
208:347–358.
Hatchett, B, M.P. Hogan, and M.E. Grismer. 2006. Mechanical
mastication thins Lake Tahoe forest with few adverse
impacts. California Agriculture 60(2):77-82. Online,
accessed October 2007
http://CaliforniaAgriculture.ucop.edu.
Harmon, M. E., J.F. Franklin, F.J. Swanson, P. Sollins, S.V.
Gregory, J.D. Lattin, N.H. Anderson, S.P. Cline, N.G.
Aumen, J.R. Sedell, G.W. Lienkaemper, K. Cromack, Jr.,
and K.W. Cummins. 1986. Ecology of coarse woody
debris in temperate ecosystems. Advances in Ecological
Research 15:133–302.
Harvey, A.E., M.F. Jurgenson, and M.J. Larson. 1979. Role of
forest fuels in the biology and management of soil.
General Technical Report INT-GTR-65. Ogden, UT:
USDA Forest Service Intermountain Forest and Range
Experiment Station.
___. 1981. Organic reserves: Importance of ectomycorrhizae
in forest soils of western Montana. Forest Science 27:442-
445.
Harvey, A.E., M.F. Jurgensen, and R.T. Graham. 1988. The role
of residues in soils of ponderosa pine forests. Pages 141-
147 in D.M. Baumgartner and J.E. Lotans, eds.
Proceedings of symposium--Ponderosa pine: The species
and its management. Pullman, WA: Washington State
University Cooperative Extension.
Harvey, A.E., M.F. Jurgenson, M.J. Larson, and R.T. Graham.
1987. Decaying organic materials and soil quality in the
Inland Northwest: A management opportunity. General
Technical Report INT-225. Ogden, UT: USDA Forest
Service Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment
Station.
Harvey, A.E., M.J. Larson, and M.F. Jurgenson. 1980.
Biological implications of increasing harvest intensity on
the maintenance and productivity of forest soils. Pages
211-220 in Proceedings of a symposium: Environmental
consequences of timber harvesting in Rocky Mountain
coniferous forests; September 11-13; Missoula, MT.
General Technical Report INT-90. Ogden, UT: USDA
Forest Service Intermountain Forest and Range
Experiment Station.
Hubka, T. 2007. Team studying ways to convert forest fodder
into energy. The Curry Pilot, September 29. Online,
accessed October 2007,
http://www.currypilot.com/news/story.cfm_no=15989.

Managing Coarse Woody Debris in Fire-adapted Southwestern Forests
a
8
Ecological Restoration Institute
Jerman, J.L., P.J. Gould, and P.Z. Fulé. 2004. Slash
compression treatment reduced tree mortality from
prescribed fire in southwestern ponderosa pine. Western
Journal of Applied Forestry 19(3):149-153.
Lutes, D.C. and R.E. Keane. Fuel Load (FL) Sampling Method.
Online, accessed October 2007,
http://frames.nbii.gov/projects/firemon/Fuel_Load.pdf.
Korb, J.E., N.C. Johnson, and W.W. Covington. 2003.
Arbuscular mycorrhizal propagule densities respond
rapidly to ponderosa pine restoration treatments. Journal
of Applied Ecology 40(1):101-110.
___. 2004. Slash pile burning effects on soil biotic and
chemical properties and plant establishment:
Recommendations for amelioration. Restoration Ecology
12(1):52-62.
Maser, C., R.G. Anderson, K. Cromack, Jr., J.T. Williams, and
R.E. Martin. 1979. Dead and down woody material. Pages
78-95 (Chapter 6) in J.W. Thomas, ed. Wildlife habitats in
managed forests in the Blue Mountains of Oregon and
Washington. Agricultural Handbook Number 53.
Portland, OR: USDA Forest Service Pacific Northwest
Region.
Moir, W. H., B. Geils, M.A. Benoit, and D. Scurlock. 1997.
Ecology of southwestern ponderosa pine forest. Pages 3-
27 in W.M. Block and D.M. Finch, tech. eds. Songbird
ecology in southwestern ponderosa pine forests: A
literature review. General Technical Report RM-GTR-292.
Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain
Forest and Range Experiment Station.
http://www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs_rm/rm_gtr292/rm_gtr292_
003_027.pdf.
Payne, N.F. and F.C. Bryant. 1994. Techniques for wildlife
management of uplands. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Reynolds, R.T., R.T. Graham, M.H. Reiser, R.L. Bassett, P.L.
Kennedy, D.A. Boyce, Jr., G. Goodwin, R. Smith, and E.L.
Fisher. 1992. Management recommendations for the
northern goshawk in the southwestern United States.
General Technical Report RM-217. Ft. Collins, CO: USDA
Forest Service Rocky Mountain Forest and Range
Experiment Station.
Rummer, R. Mechanical reduction equipment: Case studies.
Online, accessed October 2007,
http://www.srs.fs.usda.gov/forestops/presentations/Case%
20Studies.pdf.
Selmants, P.C., A. Elseroad, and S.C. Hart. 2003. Soils and
nutrients. Pages 144-160 in P. Friederici, ed. Ecological
restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests.
Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Skog, K.E. and R.J. Barbour. 2006. Estimating woody biomass
supply from thinning treatments to reduce fire hazard in
the U.S. West. Pages 657-672 in P.L. Andrews and B.W.
Butler, compilers. Conference proceedings RMRS-P-
41––Fuels management: How to measure success. Ft.
Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain
Research Station.
Stoddard, M.T. 2006. Slash addition: A tool for restoring
herbaceous communities in degraded pinyon-juniper
woodlands. Masters thesis. Northern Arizona University.
Online, accessed November 2007,
https://library.eri.nau.edu:8443/handle/2019/252.
Thomas, J.W., ed. 1979. Wildlife habitats in managed forests
in the Blue Mountains of Oregon and Washington.
Agricultural Handbook Number 53. Portland, OR: USDA
Forest Service Pacific Northwest Region.
U.S. Forest Products Laboratory. 2007. 2008 Woody biomass
grants. Online, accessed October 2007,
http://www.fpl.fs.fed.us/tum/.
USDA Forest Service. 1996a. Appendix C. Standards and
guidelines in selected alternative (G). Region 3 1996
Record of Decision for amendment of forest plans:
Arizona and New Mexico. Albuquerque, NM: USDA
Forest Service.
http://www.fs.fed.us/r3/projects/decisions/rod_appendix_
c.pdf.
___. 1996b. Photo series for quantify forest residues in the
southwestern region. Albuquerque, NM: USDA Forest
Service Southwestern Region.
___. 1999. Region 3 Supplement to the Soil and Water
Management Handbook R-3 Supplement No. 2509.18—
99-1. Albuquerque, NM: USDA Forest Service.
___. 2004. Down woody material field manual of 2004. St.
Paul, MN: USDA Forest Service North Central Research
Station, National Forest Inventory and Analysis Program
of the North Central Research Station. Online, accessed
November 2007, http://www.ncrs.fs.fed.us/4801/national-
programs/indicators/dwm/documents/dwm-field-
manual-2004.pdf.
___. 2007. Down wood materials: Glossary. USDA Forest
Service Indicator Advisor Band. Online, accessed
November 2007,
http://nrs.fs.fed.us/fia/topics/dwm/glossary.
Waddell, K.L. 2002. Sampling coarse woody debris for
multiple attributes in extensive resource inventories.
Ecological Indicators 1(3):139–153.
Ward, J.P., Jr. and W.M. Block. 1995. Mexican spotted owl
prey ecology. Pages 1-48 (Chapter 5) in Recovery plan for
the Mexican spotted owl, Volume 11. Albuquerque, NM:
USDI Fish and Wildlife Service.
Windell, K. and S. Bradshaw. 2000. Understory biomass
reduction methods and equipment catalog. Technical
Report 0051-2826-MTDC. Missoula, MT: USDA Forest
Service Missoula Technology Development Center.
Online, accessed December 2007,
http://www.fs.fed.us/eng/php/library_card.php?p_num=0
051%202826.
Woodall, C.W. The national inventory of down woody
materials: Methods, outputs and future directions. St.
Paul, MN: USDA Forest Service North Central Research
Station. Online, accessed October 2007,
http://ncrs.fs.fed.us/pubs/jrnl/2002/nc_2002_woodall_001
.pdf.

Written by David Brewer
Reviewed by Charles Denton, Dave Egan, Pete Fulé, Dennis Lund, George Robertson,
and Wayne Robbie
Series Editor: Dave Egan
For more information about forest restoration,
contact the ERI at 928-523-7182 or www.eri.nau.edu
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution   
NAU Printing Services/G64764/900/01-08
Working Papers in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
1:
Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons and Adaptive Management
Practices
2:
Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3:
Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
4:
Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits
5:
Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
6:
Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
7:
Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
8:
Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
9:
Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
10: The Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Restoration Model
11: Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration
12: Restoring Forest Roads
13: Treating Slash after Restoration Thinning
14: Integrating Forest Restoration Treatments with Mexican Spotted Owl Habitat Needs
15: Effects of Forest Thinning Treatments on Fire Behavior
16: Snags and Forest Restoration  
17: Bat Habitat and Forest Restoration Treatments
18: Prescribed and Wildland Use Fires in the Southwest: Do Timing and Frequency Matter? 
19: Understory Seeding in Southwestern Forests Following Wildfire and Ecological
Restoration Treatments
20: Controlling Cheatgrass in Ponderosa Pine and Pinyon-Juniper Restoration Areas 

Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
ERI34EV
