Ecosystem Workforce Program 
W o r k i n g 
P a P e r 
n U M B e r 
2 5 
S u m m e r 
2 0 1 0 
Stewardship Contracting 
for Landscape-Scale Projects 
Cassandra Moseley and eMily Jane davis 
institUte for a sUstainaBle environMent 

2 
e c o S y S t e m W o r k f o r c e P r o g r a m B r i e f i n g P a P e r n u m B e r 2 5 , S u m m e r 2 0 1 0 
About the Authors 
Cassandra Moseley is the director of the Ecosystem Workforce Program, Institute for a Sustain-
able Environment, University of Oregon 
Emily Jane Davis is a faculty research assistant in the Ecosystem Workforce Program, Institute for 
a Sustainable Environment, University of Oregon 
Acknowledgements 
This working paper was made possible with funding from the Ecological Restoration Institute at 
Northern Arizona University and the USDA Forest Service. Errors remain those of the authors. 
Contact information 
ecosysteM Workforce PrograM 
institUte for a sUstainaBle environMent 
5247 University of Oregon 
Eugene OR 97403-5247 
541-346-4545 
ewp@uoregon.edu 
ewp.uoregon.edu 

 
 
3
E c o s y s t E m  W o r k f o r c E  P r o g r a m  B r i E f i n g  P a P E r  n u m B E r  2 5 ,  s u m m E r  2 0 1 0  
S
tewardship end-result contracting is a flexible 
set of contracting tools designed to help federal 
land management agencies and their partners 
restore public lands and provide local community ben­
efits. Congress created a pilot stewardship-contracting 
program for the Forest Service in the late 1990s. In the 
FY 2003 Appropriation Bill (Section 323 of Public Law 
108-7), Congress granted the Forest Service and Bureau 
of Land Management (BLM) the authority, until Sep­
tember 30, 2013, to enter into stewardship-contracting 
projects for as much as ten years’ duration. Stewardship 
contracting has become an increasingly important means 
for the Forest Service and BLM to undertake complex, 
long-term projects that seek to restore ecosystems, reduce 
fire hazard, strengthen or develop the infrastructure to 
utilize restoration byproducts, and create local economic 
benefits. Stewardship contracting is a relatively new set 
of tools, however, and specific contracting approaches 
are rapidly evolving. For that reason, lessons from one 
area can help other regions of the country identify ap­
proaches that best fit their circumstances. 
Initially, agencies and their community partners focused 
on reaching agreement about proposed restoration proj­
ects and learning how to use stewardship contracting to 
achieve their goals. Consequently, many early steward­
ship-contracting projects were small in size—often only 
a few dozen acres. With time, the agencies have become 
more familiar with stewardship approaches, and local 
collaborative groups have become increasingly inter­
ested in treating larger landscapes and creating greater 
economic benefits. Agencies and their partners are now 
seeking to develop larger and more complex stewardship 
contracting strategies. 
The purpose of this report is to provide information 
about various approaches that the Forest Service, BLM, 
and their partners have used to create large restoration 
programs using stewardship contracts and agreements. 
These strategies have allowed for the treatment of large 
landscapes over long time frames, and have supported 
local contracting, forest products, and biomass utiliza­
tion capacity. This report describes and compares four 
approaches to stewardship contracting: 
•	 Single, large-scale, long-term, indefinite delivery, 
indefinite quantity contracts 
•	 Multiple-award, indefinite delivery, indefinite quan­
tity contracts 
•	 Consistent programs of work using multiple con­
tracts 
•	 Long-term stewardship agreements with nonprofit 
organizations 
Each of these contracting approaches reflects different 
innovations as well as different local circumstances. 
Features of these contracts could be mixed and matched 
to develop a stewardship contract or agreement that is 
adapted to other circumstances using a decision-based 
approach outlined at the end of the report. 
In the American West, federal agencies and their com­
munity partners frequently pursue stewardship contract­
ing to achieve a number of related goals. These common 
goals include the following: 

4 
 E c o s y s t E m  W o r k f o r c E  P r o g r a m  B r i E f i n g  P a P E r  n u m B E r  2 5 ,  s u m m E r  2 0 1 0  
• Conducting forest and watershed restoration, includ-
ing hazardous fuels reduction, habitat improvement 
(especially in plantations), road and river restora-
tion, and noxious weed abatement 
• Increasing the amount of restoration work that is 
possible by trading goods for services 
• Creating opportunities for local contractors to benefit 
from restoration activities 
• Supporting existing wood-processing infrastructure 
and local jobs 
• Developing new biomass utilization capacity to low-
er treatment costs through utilization of marginally 
valued material, and to create new local economic 
opportunities and renewable energy sources 
• Increasing administrative efficiency and lowering 
the costs of federal contracting 
• Building trust and implementing projects that ad-
dress the needs and values of multiple stakeholders 
Stewardship Contracting Basics 
As the law reads, stewardship contracting is a discrete 
set of contracting authorities (see text box). However, 
the effect of stewardship contracting is to bring together 
federal-service contracting and Forest Service and BLM 
timber-sale contracting authorities. Stewardship con-
tracting also brings service-contracting and timber-sale 
authorities into agreement authorities. Many of the 
greatest challenges of developing actual stewardship con-
tracts and agreements have been bringing these systems 
together in a way that both meets the goals of steward-
ship contracting and allows the agency to adhere to its 
prior legal obligations. This has required the agencies to 
bring together the separate cultures and staffs of acquisi-
tion management and timber management. These are two 
units that, before stewardship contracting, knew rela-
tively little about the other’s authorities and procedures. 
This section describes some of the separate contracting 
requirements that have to be addressed when developing 
stewardship contracts. 
Integrated resource contracts 
The Forest Service has drawn together service and 
timber-sale authorities to create two basic sets of con-
tracting templates. One is the Integrated Resource Ser-
vice Contract (IRSC); the other is the Integrated Resource 
Timber Contract (IRTC). Not surprisingly, the IRSC looks 
most like a service contract, while the IRTC looks more 
like a traditional timber-sale contract. Early on, many 
national forests used IRTC contracts, which were similar 
to traditional timber sales contracts but included service 
work and best-value evaluation. However, timber-sale 
contracts are more rigid than service contracts and, 
with time, the IRSC has become an increasingly im-
portant tool. This is particularly true for more complex 
and longer-term contracts, and, in some places, where 
service activities exceeded timber value. The IRTC has 
also fallen in use because it does not allow for the use of 
appropriated money; all service activities must be paid 
for with revenue from material sales. Moreover, because 
material removal is a byproduct of restoration, steward-
ship contracts are, from one perspective, a process for 
acquiring stewardship services. 
Contract types 
Within the IRSC type, there are several federal service 
contracts that can be used to fit particular circumstances. 
Contracts that agencies in this report have used include 
firm, fixed-price contracts and indefinite-delivery, indefi-
nite-quantity contracts (IDIQ). Firm, fixed-price contracts 
allow for the purchase of a fixed amount of service at 
a fixed price by a certain date, whereas IDIQ contracts 
allow the agency to order services at a future date via a 
task order. 
Solicitation types 
The cases described here also use a variety of contracting 
mechanisms to solicit bids. These include a request for 
proposals (RFP), which allows bidders to offer technical 
proposals and price offers, and commercial-items con-
tracts. Commercial-items contracts allow the Forest Ser-
vice to use simplified solicitation procedures to purchase 
goods and services that are available commercially—that 
is, there is a market for these services outside of the gov-
ernment. An invitation for bid (IFB) cannot be used for 
stewardship contracts because they cannot be awarded 
on a best-value basis. Similarly, requests for quotations 
(RFQ) are designed for projects that are smaller and less 
formal than most stewardship contracts and are not typi-
cally used. 
Cancellation ceilings 
When the federal government enters into long-term, 
fixed-price contracts that will require contractors to make 

 
 E c o s y s t E m  W o r k f o r c E  P r o g r a m  B r i E f i n g  P a P E r  n u m B E r  2 5 ,  s u m m E r  2 0 1 0  
5 
capital investments in order to fulfill the contract, the 
federal government is required to obligate the funds at the 
time of award (called a cancellation ceiling). These funds 
are not paid to the contractor but are set aside in the event 
the federal government cancels the contract. The obliga-
tion is calculated on the proportion of the investment that 
will be used for work under that contract. The obligation 
is amortized and the obligation is reduced and funds 
released with each passing year. Since the federal gov-
ernment must obligate cancellation funds at the time of 
award, along with the funds to execute the contract, con-
tract mechanisms that require cancellation ceilings may 
StewardShip ContraCting authoritieS1 
Best value—stewardship authority requires that the 
agencies use “best value” considerations when awarding 
contracts for stewardship projects. Best value contract-
ing allows the agency to consider factors other than price 
and to award contracts to businesses that will perform 
high-quality work and help the agency meet its objectives. 
this is a major change from timber-sale requirements 
that require the agency to award contracts to the highest 
qualified bidder. it mirrors acquisition regulations that allow 
awarding contracts on the basis of the best value to the 
government. 
goods for services—the exchange of goods for services 
can provide funding for ecosystem restoration by allowing 
the value of removed products to offset the cost of services 
in a single contract. these products could include timber, 
nontimber forest products, and grazing access. By allow-
ing the combination of timber removal and service activities 
in a single contract, goods for services can reduce the 
number of entries into an area and, thus, minimize the level 
of ecological impact. it can also help increase funding for 
restoration activities. in a stewardship contract, when con-
tractors undertake service activities, instead of being paid 
cash for the work, they often earn “stewardship credits.” 
these credits are then used as timber payment guarantees 
and, ultimately, to pay for harvested timber. 
retention of receipts—the forest service and BLm 
typically send the receipts of timber sales to the united 
states treasury. using receipt retention, the agency may 
retain the proceeds from the sale of commercial products 
removed through a stewardship contract, but must reinvest 
them in the same or another stewardship project. 
agreements— the stewardship contracting authority al-
lows the forest service and BLm to enter into agreements, 
not just contracts, with nonprofit organizations and other 
entities to implement stewardship projects. agreements are 
cooperative instruments between the forest service or the 
BLm and some nonprofit or government entity that allows 
them to undertake activities that have mutual benefits. 
 
designation by description— under this existing and 
expanded service contract authority, federal land managers 
can describe a desired “end result” in place of actual des-
ignation by timber marking. the contractor is responsible 
for developing and implementing a plan to meet the end 
result. failure to achieve the end result would result in pen-
alties against the contractor. under traditional timber-sale 
authority, the forest service must either designate trees to 
be removed or retained (usually by marking with paint) or 
describe what is to be removed or retained so that any two 
people would choose the same trees. 
Long-term contracts—this authority allows contracts 
and agreements for as much as ten years. 
Less than full and open competition—this authority 
exempts stewardship projects from the requirement that all 
timber sales valued at more than $10,000 be advertised 
and competitively bid. With this authority, preference may 
be given to, for example, small businesses or bidders in 
particular locations. Less than full and open competition is 
permitted (and sometimes required) for service contracts. 
exemption of timber payments to counties—the 
forest service and BLm are typically obligated to pay a 
percentage of revenue from timber sales (25 to 50 percent) 
to the counties where the timber is harvested. this authority 
exempts payments to counties when the timber is harvest-
ed using a stewardship contract or agreement. 
Multiparty Monitoring—the law requires that the for-
est service and BLm conduct multiparty monitoring to 
track contracting status, accomplishments, and the role of 
collaboration in stewardship contracting. unlike the pilot 
program, the current authority does not require monitoring 
at the project level. 

6 
 E c o s y s t E m  W o r k f o r c E  P r o g r a m  B r i E f i n g  P a P E r  n u m B E r  2 5 ,  s u m m E r  2 0 1 0  
be cost-prohibitive. Cancellation funds are not required 
in all types of long-term contracts. For example, IDIQ 
contracts do not have cancellation ceiling obligations. 
Best-value evaluation 
Evaluating proposals based on the best value to govern-
ment is required in stewardship contracting. For each 
proposal it receives, the agency evaluates factors such as 
past performance, operational plan, ecological impact, 
and potential for local benefit. Criteria for the extent of 
material utilization can also be a priority. The cases dis-
cussed in this report have all used different weightings 
of price and nonprice factors to evaluate proposals. The 
goal of best value is to identify and select contractors that 
provide a good price while helping the agency and its 
partners meet the broader goals of high-quality restora-
tion work and local economic benefit. 
Bonding and timber payment guarantees 
Acquiring bonding and payment guarantees can be an 
expensive proposition for contractors. This is particu-
larly true for smaller operators located in rural com-
munities. An early challenge to stewardship contracting 
was creating contracts with the correct type of bond-
ing, guarantees, and deposits that protected the federal 
government while not placing too much financial burden 
on the contractors. Although requirements for bonding 
and payments can still be confusing for nonexperts, the 
requirements have become clearer and more consistent. 
None of the example contracts in this report required 
either a service-contract performance bond or a timber-
sale performance bond, regardless of the type of contract 
involved. However, they all required a timber payment 
guarantee. In the context of stewardship contract-
ing, the timber payment guarantee need not be for the 
entire amount of timber anticipated to be harvested. For 
instance, in the contract examples in this report, the pay-
ment guarantee was required for thirty to sixty days of 
anticipated harvest, with no guarantee required when no 
harvest is anticipated in the next sixty days. In addition, 
the contracts allowed the use of stewardship credits to 
serve as payment guarantee. In these cases, the contractor 
performs the service work first to earn credits, but does 
not receive payment. The contractor then can harvest the 
timber. In these contracts and agreements, the contractor 
did have to pay base rates in cash. 
Case Examples 
This report offers five case examples of large-scale 
stewardship contracting efforts from across the western 
United States. Undoubtedly, there are many other ex-
amples across the country that could provide additional 
lessons. For example, the White Mountain Stewardship 
Contract (WMSC) on the Apache and Sitgreaves National 
Forests in east-central Arizona was the first ten-year 
stewardship contract. However, given that there has 
been considerable evaluation of this contract and since 
the Forest Service is currently conducting a review, this 
report focuses attention on other cases. Moreover, these 
more recent case examples offer a number of innovations 
that have emerged since the WMSC was awarded. 
SuStained YieLd reStoration 
StewardShip (FreMont-wineMa 
nationaL ForeStS) 
The Lakeview Federal Sustained Yield Unit (SYU) is 
located on the Fremont National Forest in arid south-
central Oregon. High-elevation lands support ponderosa 
pine and mixed conifer forests, while lower elevations 
contain rangelands and sagebrush. The Forest Service 
created the SYU shortly after World War II. It requires 
that timber harvested from the unit be milled in Lakev-
iew or Paisley, Oregon. For much of the postwar period, 
there were multiple mills operating within the unit. 
However, by the late 1990s, all but one mill has been 
closed. With only the Collins Pine Company sawmill in 
Lakeview still operating, the SYU was at risk of being de-
authorized. Local citizens invited Sustainable Northwest, 
a regional nongovernmental organization from Portland, 
to assist them in developing a collaborative group that 
could figure out how to move forward. Ultimately, a 
group of local citizens and elected officials along with 
representatives from regional and national environmen-
tal organizations built an agreement for land manage-
ment activities that would both restore the national forest 
to historic conditions and allow the sawmill to remain 
open. The collaborative came to believe that these two 
goals were interconnected. Without the sawmill, restora-
tion would be markedly more expensive. Without resto-
ration, there would not be enough logs for the sawmill, 
and it would likely close, putting the remaining loggers 
out of business. 

 
 E c o s y s t E m  W o r k f o r c E  P r o g r a m  B r i E f i n g  P a P E r  n u m B E r  2 5 ,  s u m m E r  2 0 1 0  
7 
In the mid-2000s, the collaborative in Lakeview decided 
that a long-term stewardship contract would help them 
achieve their restoration and economic development 
goals. However, it took a number of years to develop 
a ten-year contract. Development and approval of the 
contract involved not only the Washington office of the 
Forest Service but political appointees at the U.S. Depart-
ment of Agriculture. While they were determining how 
to develop a ten-year contract, they awarded several 
short-term, smaller stewardship contracts within the Sus-
tained Yield Unit. 
The ten-year contract and associated collaboration have 
allowed the Forest Service to sell green timber for the 
first time in nearly a decade. The contract and biomass 
MOU appear to be reducing supply risks for biomass 
investment. During the first two years of the contract, 
the national forest awarded seven task orders for a total 
of just under 5,000 acres of thinning including the re-
moval of several million board feet of timber, along with 
a number of road improvement and culvert replacement 
activities. Even with this supply and considerable federal 
and state biomass development incentives, it remains to 
be seen whether a biomass-electrical facility will come 
to fruition, as it is not clear whether there is adequate 
return on investment for the needed outside capital. 
Contract types: Integrated resource service contract 
(IRSC); indefinite-delivery, indefinite-quantity (IDIQ); 
awards occur via task order. 
Solicitation type: Request for proposal 
Resource goals: Hazardous fuels reduction and ecological 
restoration 
Local benefit goals: Keep the sawmill open and retain 
sawmilling and logging jobs; foster for new investment in 
biomass utilization; support local in-woods contracting 
capacity 
Duration: Ten years 
Size: Minimum order $100,000, not to exceed 
$25,000,000 
Initial award year: 2008 
Contractor: Collins Pine Company (they subcontract the 
logging and service work) 
Cancellation ceiling obligation: None; not required on 
IDIQ contracts 
Best-value evaluation: 
1. Compliance with Lakeview Federal Sustained Yield 
Unit Policy 
22.5% 
a. 
Log milling required to occur in Lakeview or 
Paisley, Oregon 
b. Labor contractors required to be located 
within Lake County or thirty-five air miles 
from Lake County Court House 
2. Past performance 
20.0% 
a. 
Quality of work 
b. Customer satisfaction 
c. 
Timeliness of performance 
d. Business relations 
3. Technical approach 
20.0% 
a. 
Method 
b. Equipment 
c. 
Timing 
4. Specialized experience of firm 
and key personnel 
15.0% 
a. 
Experience with similar stewardship con-
tracts 
b. Experience of project manager 
5. Workplace safety 
12.5% 
a. 
Quality control plan 
b. Traffic control plan 
c. 
Pedestrian safety 
6. Use of local work forces 
10.0% 
a. 
Local community economic enhancement 
Weighting criteria 
1. Price is less important than other factors combined 
with price of increasing importance when technical 
proposals are similar. 
Retained receipts: This contract allows for the use of ap-
propriated funds to pay for service activities; the use of 
stewardship credits to pay for timber as well as payments 
to the government of revenue for timber in excess of 
service obligations (which could be retained). 
Timber payment guarantee: Timber payment guarantee is 
required for sixty days worth of anticipated logging. The 
contract holder may use stewardship credits as payment 
guarantee. 
Price escalation or de-escalation: None; contractors 

8 
 E c o s y s t E m  W o r k f o r c E  P r o g r a m  B r i E f i n g  P a P E r  n u m B E r  2 5 ,  s u m m E r  2 0 1 0  
provide new price offers for service work and for timber-
biomass with each task order. 
CoLLaBorative reStoration StewardShip 
ContraCt (MaLheur, oChoCo, uMatiLLa, 
and waLLowa-whitMan nationaL ForeStS) 
The mixed conifer and ponderosa pine forests of the Blue 
Mountains in northeastern Oregon are typically over-
stocked due to past management and fire suppression 
practices. There are a number of collaborative groups in 
the region, and there has been growing consensus that 
the mid-elevation ponderosa pine needs thinning to 
restore forest resilience in these fire-adapted ecosystems. 
Several of the national forests in the area were early 
adaptors of stewardship contracting and have imple-
mented a number of IRSCs and IRTCs. The contracting 
staff from this part of Oregon has played a significant role 
in the national development of contracting innovations 
and templates, especially for stewardship contracting. 
Innovative contracting and field staff members have 
worked together to develop this new type of contract. 
Their strategic goals were to create an administratively 
efficient contract and increase biomass utilization to cre-
ate more revenue for hazardous fuels reduction. 
Since the awarding of the contract, the Malheur National 
Forest alone has issued sixteen task orders to seven 
contractors at a cost of $3,392,482 in economic recovery 
funds that will generate $2,163,993 in receipts for future 
fuels reduction and restoration activities. 
Contract Type: Commercial items, integrated resource 
service contract (IRSC); $50 million, multiple award, 
indefinite-delivery, indefinite-quantity (IDIQ). Work 
awarded via task orders, which are issued on a firm, 
fixed-price basis. Contractors deliver logs to specified 
location; sale of material occurs separately. 
There were several reasons that the national forests in 
northeastern Oregon chose a multiple award, IDIQ con-
tract. The contract developers felt that this IDIQ contract 
would 
• allow the Forest Service to enter into a long-term 
contract without the need for a cancellation-ceiling 
obligation. However, IDIQ does not guarantee future 
work for contractors or material supply 
• allow for quick turnaround in advertising, bidding, 
and awarding task orders compared to the develop-
ment of new contracts. This reduces administrative 
costs and allows for quick funding obligations when 
unexpected infusions of funds occur 
• eliminate price risk for the contractors because with 
each task order, the contractor creates a new price 
offer for either service work or timber sales to reflect 
current markets. Traditional service contracts are 
firm, fixed-price contracts that create considerable 
price risk for the contractor, especially when wood 
chip, lumber, and gasoline-diesel prices are volatile. 
• maintain competition through bidding among con-
tractors, which may serve to keep prices competitive 
for the government 
• minimize the risk of relying on a single contractor 
by spreading the work opportunity among multiple 
contractors 
• allow for a single contracting instrument to cover a 
larger area, but allow for the participation of contrac-
tors who may be only interested in working in part 
of the project area 
• ensure that the Forest Service shares the risk with 
purchasers as material bids are bought over short 
time frames (three months or less), thereby reducing 
the purchaser’s risk with volatile markets 
The national forests chose to separate the service work 
and sale activities (i.e., “separate the logger from the 
log”) in an effort to increase utilization and total revenue 
generated from material sales. Rather than requiring a 
purchaser to buy all of the material in order to get the 
material they most want, this contract allows contractors 
to bid on particular types of material, and for the For-
est Service to make multiple awards in order to get the 
best price. The end goal is to provide a sustainable, level 
supply of work for local contractors, and improve overall 
business costs by accomplishing single-entry treatments 
that allow for surface fire reintroduction the following 
season. The Forest Service awards task orders to jointly 
sell timber and biomass and other restoration service 
activities. The contract calls for the in-woods contractor 
to cut, remove, haul, and deliver the timber and biomass 
to the purchaser’s doorstep. The purchaser prepays for 
the material prior to delivery. 
For product sales, purchasers bid on standing material by 

 
 E c o s y s t E m  W o r k f o r c E  P r o g r a m  B r i E f i n g  P a P E r  n u m B E r  2 5 ,  s u m m E r  2 0 1 0  
9 
the load (28 to 30 tons per load) and enter into a contract. 
This allows the Forest Service to use the contractually 
obligated income as retained receipts to pay for the 
on-the-ground treatment and material removal. Entities 
interested in purchasing material bid for it prior to its 
harvest, but bid for delivered logs. This system allows 
the receipts generated from the sale to be used to pay for 
the service work that harvests and delivers the material 
to the processing facility. 
Solicitation type: Bidders develop technical and price 
proposals based on sample acres and haul distances. The 
Forest Service can issue task orders for additional work. 
Task order requests include instructions, evaluation 
criteria, and requests for needed information. Approved 
contractors have five days to prepare and submit quotes. 
Awardees may choose not to provide a quote. 
Resource goal: Hazardous fuels reduction; provide for a 
single-entry treatment to reduce administrative and over-
head costs, and allow for the reintroduction of surface 
fire in the treated areas the following season. 
Local benefit goals: Provide local, in-woods work oppor-
tunities for a diversity of contractors across the coun-
ties where the five national forests are located; provide 
timber and biomass for utilization in local existing and 
developing facilities; create local community economic 
benefit across the region. 
Duration: Five years; the contract developers decided to 
use a five-year rather than a ten-year contract because 
this was the first one of these types of contracts, and 
they wanted to be able to learn from this effort and make 
improvements in the next contract. 
Award date: September 2009 
Size: Minimum order $5,000, not to exceed $49,999,999. 
To businesses awarded a contract, Forest Service must 
provide a minimum amount of work ($5,000). 
Contractors: The Forest Service awarded twenty-nine 
base contracts—eight to industry and twenty-one to ser-
vice contractors and loggers, most of which are located in 
northeastern Oregon. Using the bid proposals, the Forest 
Service created a pool of contractors who could competi-
tively bid on subsequent task orders. To create the pool, a 
team of Forest Service employees evaluated the contracts 
based on the technical proposals and benefit to the local 
community. The contracting officer then selected propos-
als according to the technical ratings, price, and benefit 
to the local community. 
Cancellation-ceiling obligation: None; not required on 
IDIQ contracts 
Best-value evaluation: 
1. Relevant past performance of prime contractors and 
any subcontractors performing more than 20 percent 
of the work 
a. 
Quality of service 
b. Customer satisfaction 
c. 
Timeliness of performance 
d. Business relations 
e. 
Cost control 
2. Technical approach 
a. 
Use of equipment that provides resource 
protection; higher rating given to lower 
ground pressure, cut and lift, and maximum 
distance between skid trails 
b. Maximize use of harvested material (both 
saw timber and nonsaw timber) 
c. 
Reduce number entries 
3. Key personnel 
a. 
Highest ratings for experience with designa-
tion by prescription treatments 
4. Use of local workforce 
a. 
Highest for workforce from counties where 
work will be performed 
b. Secondary rating for workforce from coun-
ties where national forests are located 
5. Local industry (for those purchasing biomass) 
a. 
Highest rating for exiting local industry or 
ability to become local industry and im-
mediately receive task orders for biomass or 
saw logs in the counties were the national 
forests are located 
Weighting criteria: 
1. Within each criterion, high, medium, and low rank-
ings were defined 
2. Nonprice factors, when combined, are of equal 
important than price, with price being of increasing 
importance as differences between technical propos-
als decrease 

10 
 E c o s y s t E m  W o r k f o r c E  P r o g r a m  B r i E f i n g  P a P E r  n u m B E r  2 5 ,  s u m m E r  2 0 1 0  
Timber payment guarantee: Timber payments guarantees 
are not needed because the timber harvester is not pur-
chasing the timber, but delivering it to the mill gate. The 
purchaser pays total product value when task order is 
executed or on a schedule developed by the contracting 
officer. All timber is paid for prior to delivery. 
Retained receipts: Receipts from material sale task orders 
are used to pay for service work task orders. 
Price escalation and de-escalation: None; contractors 
provide new price offers for service work and for timber-
biomass with each task order. 
ConSiStent prograM oF StewardShip 
work (eLdorado nationaL ForeSt) 
The Eldorado National Forest is located east of Sac-
ramento, California, in the Sierra Nevada Mountains. 
Compared to nearby national forests, the Eldorado has 
had a relatively small appropriated budget. When the 
stewardship contracting pilot program was approved 
in the late 1990s, a few staff members saw stewardship 
contracting as a way to increase the amount of hazardous 
fuels reduction work. With time, the Eldorado has come 
to use stewardship contracting for nearly all of its timber 
removal and hazardous fuels reduction work. Neverthe-
less, given the limited number of timber purchasers in 
the region, the focus on hazardous fuels reduction, the 
lack of local biomass utilization capacity, and the fact the 
timber shop led the development of stewardship con-
tracting on this forest, the stewardship contracts from the 
Eldorado more closely resemble timber sales than any 
other examples in this report. 
Rather than seeking to develop a long-term contract, the 
Eldorado has built a consistent program of work with an 
annual supply of contract offerings. Although the con-
tracts have evolved somewhat, these contracts have been 
firm, fixed-price contracts awarded to a single offerer, 
typically for a term of three years. The contracts have 
been both IRTCs and IRSCs. Initially, these were almost 
exclusively IRTCs, and the Forest Service selected units 
to ensure that timber value exceeded treatment costs. 
Eventually, they built a small pool of retained receipts, 
which allowed them to offer contracts with service costs 
exceeding timber value. This approach became more 
common after timber prices crashed. 
The Eldorado has awarded many stewardship contracts 
during the past five years. For example, the Oski Bear 
Fuel Reduction Stewardship Project was solicited in fall 
2008. This project included small-diameter tree thin-
ning and removal, brush cutting, and machine piling on 
357 acres. The project also included some road recon-
struction to access the units. This IRTC generated about 
10,500 tons of saw timber. More recently, the Alder Fuel 
Reduction Stewardship Project awarded a 1,525-acre 
project. In the contract, the Forest Service agreed to pay 
the contractor slightly more than $50,000. By addition, 
there was at least $333,900 in product value generated 
for approximately 52,000 tons of saw logs to support the 
purchase of services across the project. Work activities 
included tree thinning and removal, brush cutting and 
piling, mastication, road tillage, and maintenance. 
Contract Types: Initially, primarily IRTCs; more recently, 
they have also begun to use IRSCs that involve solicita-
tion for commercial items. These contracts have been 
definite-quantity, fixed-price contracts involving trading 
goods for services. 
Solicitation type: For IRSCs, solicitations have typically 
been commercial items 
Resource goals: Hazardous fuels reduction; use goods for 
service and retained receipts to increase the amount of 
on-the-ground work performed 
Local benefit goals: Support local and small businesses 
Duration: Typically three years 
Initial award year: 2004 
Size: Varies, but similar in size to its timber sales 
Contractors: Varies, but has included both a sawmill 
owner (Sierra Pacific Industries) as well as forestry and 
logging contractors (e.g., Arens Mechanical Harvesting). 
With one sawmill owner and no biomass electrical or 
cogeneration facilities within hauling distance of the 
Eldorado, there was a need to have a willing purchaser, 
whether it was the logs of a contractor or the entire con-
tract, for stewardship contracting to succeed. Initially, 
the staff worked with a number of potential bidders to 

 
 E c o s y s t E m  W o r k f o r c E  P r o g r a m  B r i E f i n g  P a P E r  n u m B E r  2 5 ,  s u m m E r  2 0 1 0  
11 
structure contracts to appeal to its limited number of 
timber purchasers. 
Cancellation ceiling obligation: None 
Best-value evaluation examples 
Alder Fuels Reduction Stewardship Contract (IRCS– 
Commercial items) 
1. Past performance of offerer and key subcontractors 
a. 
Past compliance with federal, state, and 
local laws 
b. Reports from references reports regarding 
whether offerer and subcontractors 
i. 
were capable, efficient, and 
effective 
ii. were within terms and conditions 
iii. were on time 
iv. had satisfied customers 
2. Technical approach 
a. 
Coordination of work activities; acceptable 
methods of accomplishing work; use of 
equipment capable of performing work and 
protecting resources; achieving timely end 
results 
3. Supervision 
a. 
Experience of on-the-ground supervisor and 
quality-control plan 
4. Utilization of local workforce and small 
businesses 
a. 
Higher ratings to offerers with 
permanent place of operation and 
subcontractors closest to work site and 
within El Dorado, Amado, Sacramento, 
and Placer counties. Higher ratings to 
offerers who are small businesses; use 
local small businesses, including small 
business sawmills 
Weighting criteria: All nonprice factors are of equal 
importance. Nonprice factors, when combined, are less 
important than price with price being of increasing 
importance as differences between technical proposals 
decrease. 
Oski Bear Fuel Reduction Stewardship Project (2008)– 
Integrated Resource Timber Contract 
1. Organizational experience with activities similar to 
activities in the contract 
2. Organizational past performance, as described by ref-
erences 
3. Local community economic enhancement 
a. 
Utilization of local hires and subcontractors 
(from four counties) 
b. Use local and small businesses, including 
sawmills 
4. Understanding government requirements 
a. 
Names and résumé of contracts manager 
b. Plan of operation, including timeline 
c. 
Quality-control plan 
d. Equipment 
e. 
Production capability to complete contract 
on time 
Weighting criteria: Nonprice factors, combined, of equal 
importance to price. 
Retained receipts, goods for services: They have used the 
IRTC and retained receipts, which have then been used 
on subsequent stewardship contracts. 
Timber payment guarantee: May be paid for with stew-
ardship credits, payment bond, cash payment, deposit, 
or letter of credit; will be equal to the amount of timber 
the Forest Service estimates will be cut in thirty to sixty 
days. Neither contract requires a performance bond. 
Price escalation or de-escalation: IRTC contracts can 
have a variety of escalation arrangements; the firm, fixed-
price IRSC contracts typically would not have escalation 
arrangements. 
Additional notes: Although the Eldorado’s approach has 
provided a fairly steady supply of contract offerings, 
environmental organizations, citing the lack of a cumu-
lative-effects analysis, successfully sued the national 
forest for its use of categorical exclusions for hazardous 
fuels reduction projects. The court injunction has slowed 
contract offering, as a number of projects developed 
using categorical exclusions have to be redone using 
environmental assessments. However, this sort of delay 
is not unique to this type of contract structure. All of the 
contract structures described in this report would have 
resulted in similar delays in the event of an injunction, 
whether they were new contracts, task orders, or supple-
mental project agreements. 

12 
 E c o s y s t E m  W o r k f o r c E  P r o g r a m  B r i E f i n g  P a P E r  n u m B E r  2 5 ,  s u m m E r  2 0 1 0  
wiLd riverS MaSter StewardShip 
agreeMent with hope Mountain 
StewardShip SuppLeMentaL projeCt 
agreeMent (rogue river–SiSkiYou 
nationaL ForeSt) 
The ecologically diverse region of southwestern Oregon 
has been the home to considerable conflict about forest 
management. It is also the birthplace of some of the 
earliest and most active collaborative groups seeking to 
develop forest management that restores resilience and 
recovers endangered species. As part of this movement, 
the Lomakatsi Restoration Project has been working 
collaboratively with the Forest Service, BLM, county 
and city governments, and private citizens and nonprofit 
organizations for more than a decade. They train work-
ers in ecological restoration principles in addition to 
offering local employment. 
The Wild Rivers Ranger District has seen significant con-
version to plantations of even-aged stands. In addition, 
the area is heavily roaded because of historic mining 
and logging activities. Due to the age of the roads and 
steep, unstable topography, many of these roads are sub-
ject to mass wasting, contributing significant sedimenta-
tion into salmon-bearing streams. The purpose of this 
project is to restore stand complexity and improve road 
conditions while creating local economic benefit and 
workforce training. The project also has had an outreach 
and monitoring component that plays a critical role in 
mutual learning and trust building. 
The Wild Rivers Stewardship Master Agreement was 
developed to allow for treatments across 10,000 acres of 
the Wild Rivers Ranger District of the Rogue River–Siski-
you National Forest. The national forest, Lomakatsi, the 
Siskiyou Project (a local environmental organization), 
and other local stakeholders developed the agreement 
through a collaborative process. Somewhat like an IDIQ 
contract, the master agreement lays out the structure for 
future work activities. It describes the mutual benefits 
shared among the Forest Service and the partner orga-
nizations, and describes how subsequent supplemental 
project agreements will be developed and executed, 
along with a number of other technical issues. 
During the first year after the agreement was signed, the 
Rogue River–Siskiyou National Forest and the partners 
entered into a supplemental project agreement for a two-
year Hope Mountain Stewardship Project. The supple-
mental project agreement includes a detailed scope of 
work, operating and financial plans, and a description of 
how best value was determined. 
In 2009, the national forest used money from the 
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act to fund the 
Hope Mountain Stewardship Project Supplemental 
Project Agreement. The project included 1,222 acres 
of treatment. These treatments were largely plantation 
thinnings and road restorations to reduce the spread of 
Port Orford cedar root rot and reduce stream sedimenta-
tion. During 2009, project partners treated 1,300 acres, 
employed ninety-eight people and seven contractors 
(creating $951,000 in wages and salary), and trained 
thirty-two local workers.2 Work has continued in 2010. 
Agreement Type: Master stewardship agreement with 
supplemental agreements developed collaboratively 
between the national forest, Lomakatsi, the Siskiyou 
Project (a local environmental organization), and other 
local stakeholders 
Resource goals: Hazardous fuels reduction, restoration 
of even-aged plantations, restoration of former logging 
and mining roads, and maintenance to reduce sedimen-
tation in salmon-bearing streams and the spread of Port 
Orford Cedar root rot 
Local benefit goals: Workforce training in ecological 
restoration including outreach and monitoring; increase 
local economic benefits 
Duration: Master agreement, ten years; Hope Mountain 
supplemental, approximately two years 
Size: Master project area, 10,000 acres; Hope Mountain 
Stewardship supplemental, 1,222 acres. In 2009, the 
Forest Service obligated $2.1 million, of which nearly 
$1.3 million was for use in the first field season; partners 
obligated $238,000 in matching funds.3 
Initial award year: 2008 
Agreement holders: Lomakatsi Restoration Project and 
Siskiyou Project, both local nonprofit organizations 

 
 E c o s y s t E m  W o r k f o r c E  P r o g r a m  B r i E f i n g  P a P E r  n u m B E r  2 5 ,  s u m m E r  2 0 1 0  
13 
Cancellation-ceiling obligation: None; there is no can-
cellation ceiling obligation under an agreement, since 
agreements typically prohibit the purchase of major 
equipment using funds from these agreements 
Best-value evaluation: When entering into this supple-
mental project agreement, the Forest Service conducts a 
best-value determination, which is to reflect the purpos-
es of the master agreement. In this agreement, the best 
value considerations include 
1. achievement of land-management goals of the forest 
that meet local and rural community needs 
2. extent of mutual benefit and interest, including 
education and interpretation opportunities 
3. advantages and effectiveness of mutual participa-
tion 
4. joint expertise 
5. factors relevant to costs, such as volunteer partici-
pation, contributions from other partners, and cost 
sharing 
6. ability to use local workforce 
7. ability to complete work in a timely manner 
8. experience 
9. ability to conduct work in environmentally sound 
manner 
Weighting criteria: nonprice factors are considered more 
important than cost 
Retained receipts: Permitted, but none anticipated; 
would modify the agreement to increase activities 
rather than collect receipts 
Timber payment guarantee: Deposits must be made 
prior to cutting; deposits may be cash, payment bond, 
earned stewardship credit, or some combination; base 
rate of timber must be paid for in cash 
Price escalation or de-escalation: The supplemental 
project agreement is to be amended to increase or de-
crease the amount of product and/or reflect the actual 
product rate that the partner is paid, which will in-
crease or decrease the amount of service work provided 
by the partner 
wYoMing Front aSpen StewardShip 
aSSiStanCe agreeMent (high deSert 
diStriCt, Bureau oF Land ManageMent) 
Hunting and fishing organizations, such as the Rocky 
Mountain Elk Foundation (RMEF), the Wild Turkey 
Federation, and others, have long collaborated with the 
national forests and BLM to improve wildlife habitat. 
During the past several years, for example, the RMEF 
has entered into a number of ten-year stewardship 
agreements with both the Forest Service and the BLM 
to implement wildlife restoration across the West. The 
Wyoming Front Aspen Restoration Project is one of 
these projects. It is located in western Wyoming on the 
Pinedale field office of the BLM, where aspen stands are 
suffering from conifer encroachment. 
Prior to creating a ten-year agreement, the RMEF and 
the Wyoming BLM initially signed a memorandum of 
understanding in 2005. A year later, they created the 
Wyoming Front Aspen Stewardship Assistance Agree-
ment for work on 9,000 acres on the Pinedale field office 
lands and adjacent private lands. Each subsequent year, 
they have amended this agreement to develop an an-
nual operating plan and budget for the coming year. As 
with the Wild Rivers master stewardship agreement, this 
agreement revolves around mutual goals. This is differ-
ent from a stewardship contract, which assumes that the 
federal government is purchasing services from a con-
tractor. Because of these mutual goals, both parties bring 
financial resources to the project. In this case, the master 
agreement anticipates that the RMEF will contribute as 
much, if not more, funding than the BLM. 
This agreement includes the possibility of trading goods 
for services. As with other contracts in this report, the 
RMEF earns stewardship credits by conducting service 
activities and then offsets those services with revenue 
from material sales. Stewardship credits may be used as 
a timber payment guarantee. Because the cost of service 
work far exceeds any product value, the BLM has also 
made payments for services through the agreement. 
The RMEF subcontracts much the service work through 
a competitive bidding process. The agreement directs 
the RMEF to make efforts to award contract to small, 
minority-owned, and women-owned businesses. Un-
like the Forest Service agreement discussed above, this 

14 
 E c o s y s t E m  W o r k f o r c E  P r o g r a m  B r i E f i n g  P a P E r  n u m B E r  2 5 ,  s u m m E r  2 0 1 0  
agreement does not discuss evaluation of best value in ei-
ther the selection of the RMEF or how the RMEF should 
select its contractors. 
This project has focused on conifer removal from aspen 
stands and preparing the stands for prescribed burning. 
Work has occurred on BLM lands as well as adjacent 
lands of willing private landowners. During the first 
three years of the agreement, the RMEF treated 2,000 
acres of at-risk aspen stands. The BLM obligated about 
$125,000 annually with the RMEF spending between 
$150,000 and $200,000. Timber and biomass value is 
limited from this project, due, in part, to the lack of mar-
kets and the material involved. Total product value dur-
ing that period was small—less than $10,000. Products 
removed have included 3,000 Christmas trees and more 
than 9,000 tons of biomass in the form of logs, firewood, 
and wood chips. The RMEF worked aggressively to find 
markets for these materials, and have found a new mar-
ket for chip use in oil well mitigation. 
The 2010 operating plan anticipates continuing conifer 
removal, cutting, and slashing in preparation of pre-
scribed fire on 860 acres. This may include treatments 
on adjacent private lands (authorized under the Wyden 
Amendment). The plan also includes temporary fence 
building to exclude cattle and wildlife from regenerating 
aspen stands; monitoring effects of previous treatments, 
including the impact of prescribed burning and noxious 
weeds; and cultural resource surveys. In 2010, the part-
ners anticipate selling Christmas trees and firewood as 
well as wood chips for oil well mitigation. 
Agreement Type: Master stewardship agreement with 
supplemental agreements that add work items and funds 
by both parties 
Resource goals: Restore habitat for elk and other wildlife, 
restore aspen stands, and reduce hazardous fuels across 
federal, state, and private lands 
Local benefit goals: Identify markets for products as well 
as create economic benefit through subcontractin 
Duration: Ten years 
Project Size: 240,000 acres across federal (174,000 acres), 
state (12,000 acres), and private lands (57,300 acres); 
total treatment area anticipated to be 9,000 acres during 
the ten-year agreement period 
Initial award year: 2006 
Agreement holder: Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation, 
which uses a best-value competitive bidding process 
to subcontract work activities. The agreement directs 
the RMEF to make efforts to award contract to small, 
minority-owned, and women-owned businesses. Unlike 
the agreement discussed above, this agreement does not 
discuss evaluation of best value for either the selection of 
the RMEF or how the RMEF should select its contractors. 
Cancellation-ceiling obligation: None 
Best-value evaluation: Not described in agreement docu-
ments 
Retained receipts: None anticipated, since there is very 
little product value associated with this project—less 
than $10,000 during the first three years. The product 
value has been applied to service activities within the 
agreement. 
Decision Points in a 
Challenging Environment 
Across the West, we have seen a considerable decline in 
wood products and logging capacity during the past two 
decades. This is particularly common in parts of the in-
terior West where timber production was marginal even 
at the height of the western timber industry. Conducting 
forest restoration and creating local community benefits 
in areas with little or no contracting, nearby processing 
capacity, or markets can be particularly difficult.4 Stew-
ardship contracting or agreements can provide an an-
swer, as seen in the case studies above, but they must be 
carefully designed to fit the particulars of a given region. 
Stewardship contracting inherently requires nonfed-
eral entities to perform restoration activities—be they 
nonprofit organizations or for-profit companies. At a 
minimum, local businesses that can conduct work in the 
woods are necessary to undertake stewardship contracts. 
Typically, stewardship contracts also call for the removal 
and sale of some sort of woody material, so logging and 

 
 E c o s y s t E m  W o r k f o r c E  P r o g r a m  B r i E f i n g  P a P E r  n u m B E r  2 5 ,  s u m m E r  2 0 1 0  
15 
processing capacity is important. However, stewardship 
contracting can also be used to foster the development of 
contracting capacity and new markets for biomass. 
Given this context, the Forest Service, BLM, and their 
collaborators need to make a series of decisions about 
contract structure, type of contract, contract duration, 
and trading goods for services when developing a stew-
ardship-contracting strategy. Some of the major decision 
points include the following: 
• Contract or agreement 
• One contract or a series of contracts 
• Contract structure (IRCT or IRCS) 
• Within IRCS, 
o whether the contract will be firm, fixed-price 
or IDIQ 
o whether the contract will be awarded to a 
single contractor or multiple contractors 
• Contract duration 
• Whether contractor performing service activities 
will also own the products or whether product sales 
will occur through separate transaction (commonly 
called “separating logger from the log”) 
• Bid solicitation type 
• Best-value evaluation criteria 
o Components of the technical proposal 
 Past performance 
 Operation plan, ecological impacts 
 Structure of local benefit criteria 
 Whether extent of utilization will be 
given higher ranking 
o Relative weighting of price and nonprice 
factors 
In addition to these major decisions, there are many 
other decisions and technical details involved in devel-
oping stewardship contracts and agreements. Some of 
these may have a greater impact than others on the abil-
ity of the agency and its partners to achieve its ecological 
and community benefit goals. In many cases, the ways in 
which these have been addressed have become standard 
procedure, such as the process around so-called stew-
ardship credits in the trade of goods for services and the 
ways in which timber payments can be guaranteed. In 
other instances, national forests and their partners have 
used their discretion to make these decisions. 
Workforce and Market Assessment 
Because stewardship contracting is a flexible and diverse 
tool, there are many different decisions to make when 
developing contracts and agreements. However, before 
making any decisions, it is best to conduct a workforce 
and market assessment because agencies and their part-
ners need to understand what kinds businesses are avail-
able to perform work in the woods and utilize materials. 
By understanding existing business capacity, national 
forests and their community partners can structure 
contracts to create local socio-economic benefits through 
local forest-based businesses as well as identify types 
of contracting and utilization capacity that needs to be 
fostered. 
A good workforce and market assessment will determine 
the interests and capabilities of local businesses engaged 
in logging, forestry, landscaping, and fire suppression. 
This is necessary because these are the businesses that 
are likely to bid on stewardship contracts or act as sub-
contractors. On the Fremont-Winema and northeastern 
Oregon national forests, collaborative groups conducted 
workforce assessments early to understand the contract-
ing capacity and develop strategies to strengthen it. It 
is also a good idea to identify potential and existing 
uses for material beyond traditional wood products and 
biomass electricity because this can help local businesses 
take advantage of existing and growing markets. Even in 
places with virtually no forest products industry, there 
may be demands for biomass for animal bedding, land-
scaping and composting products, commercial firewood, 
and heat for industrial and space heat. For example, 
when faced with extremely limited local biomass mar-
kets in Wyoming, the Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation 
worked to identify an emerging market for wood-chip 
use in the oil-drilling sector. Moreover, understand-
ing the range of possible options can help broaden the 
ways in which contracts may be developed to achieve 
ecological and economic development goals and attract 
contractors. For example, in places with limited saw log 
and biomass markets, it may be worth targeting in-woods 
logging or forestry services businesses as contractors. In 
places with virtually no local in-woods contractors, it 
may be worth considering identifying a nonprofit orga-
nization to partner with, especially one that can provide 
business assistance and workforce training. 

16 
 E c o s y s t E m  W o r k f o r c E  P r o g r a m  B r i E f i n g  P a P E r  n u m B E r  2 5 ,  s u m m E r  2 0 1 0  
With a clear understanding of the potential in-woods 
contracting capacity and the full range of local material 
utilization options, agencies and their partners can move 
toward structuring stewardship contracts or agreements 
for their restoration and local benefit goals. For example, 
developing contract solicitations that appeal to exist-
ing contracting capacity and biomass markets and using 
best-value process to reward contractors who find new 
markets can help create incentives to take advantage of 
existing and growing markets while larger-scale utiliza-
tion capacity is developed, or in the event that it never 
becomes financially viable. Understanding this capacity 
can also help shape the structure of subsequent steward-
ship contracts, which increases the likelihood of receiv-
ing competitive bids and achieving local economic ben-
efits. A guide to conducting workforce assessments with 
sample contractors surveys and examples of completed 
workforce assessment can be found at ewp.uoregon.edu/ 
resources/workforce-qualityjobs. 
Stewardship contract or agreement? 
As seen in the case studies, contracts offer many benefits 
and are particularly useful in situations where for-profit, 
service-oriented entities are found that can perform the 
needed restoration service and product removal. Howev-
er, stewardship agreements can also serve an important 
role because they allow the Forest Service and BLM to 
work with nonprofit organizations, state and local gov-
ernments, and other entities to achieve mutual goals. Be-
cause agreements are organized around mutual goals and 
benefits, both parties typically bring financial resources 
to the project. In the case of the RMEF, for example, they 
have to date contributed more than half the total funds to 
the Wyoming Front Aspen Restoration Project. In addi-
tion, agreements often include additional activities that 
might not be readily included in a contract. For example, 
the Wild Rivers master stewardship agreement involves 
workforce training for displaced forest workers in the 
rural communities of the ranger district. Using matching 
funds, it also included for education and outreach activi-
ties. Similarly, the agreement with the RMEF included 
not only work on BLM lands but also work on adjacent 
private lands as well as monitoring. 
Integrated Resource Timber Contract or Integrated 
Resource Service Contract? 
As stated above, an IRTC operates more like a traditional 
timber-sale contract while an IRSC is more like a service 
contract. Either one is a viable choice, although many 
national forests that use stewardship contracting are now 
using the IRSC. This is often due to the fact that an IRTC, 
like a timber-sale contract, is more rigid than a service 
contract. In addition, an IRTC does not allow for the use 
of appropriated money; all service activities must be paid 
for with revenue from material sales. Nevertheless, some 
national forests, like the Eldorado in California, have 
found them useful. The IRSC is becoming increasingly 
popular, especially for more complex, long-term con-
tracts. It also is used in some places where service activi-
ties exceeded timber value or where material removal is 
seen as a process for acquiring stewardship services. 
If an IRSC is the choice, then there is another deci-
sion: Will the IRSC be a firm, fixed-price contract or an 
indefinite-delivery, indefinite-quantity (IDIQ) contract? 
As stated earlier, firm, fixed-price contracts allow for the 
purchase of a fixed amount of service at a fixed price by 
a certain date, whereas IDIQ contracts allow the agency 
to order services at a future date by means of a task order. 
The three stewardship contract case studies in this report 
have used IDIQ contracts because of their flexibility, both 
for the agency and the contractors. Although IDIQ con-
tracts lack guarantees of work and timber supply, they 
can increase flexibility in positive ways. 
First, multiple-award, IDIQ contracts are typically struc-
tured to allow the contractors to provide new price offers 
with each task order. When contracts are structured this 
way, contractors can adjust their pricing to reflect chang-
ing conditions, such as fluctuating commodity market 
prices for wood products and energy. In firm contracts, 
prices are often fixed and the risk of price volatility rests 
with the contractor, unless some sort of price index was 
built into the contract from the beginning. 
In addition, IDIQ contracts allow the agency to award 
new work quickly when it finds itself with a sudden in-
fusion of funds, whether those are unspent funds toward 
the end of the fiscal year, funds made available by an 
administration initiative, or an influx of appropriations. 
For example, the Rogue River–Siskiyou National For-
est received American Recovery and Reinvestment Act 
funds to support work through its master stewardship 
agreements. National forests that have IDIQ contracts and 

 
 E c o s y s t E m  W o r k f o r c E  P r o g r a m  B r i E f i n g  P a P E r  n u m B E r  2 5 ,  s u m m E r  2 0 1 0  
17 
IDIQ-like master agreements in place may be in better 
position to advocate for additional funds because they 
have demonstrated efficient spending in the past. Firm, 
fixed-price contracts do not typically allow for the addi-
tion of more funds; instead a new contract needs to be 
developed, solicited, and awarded. 
Finally, IDIQ contracts do not require cancellation-ceil-
ing obligations, which greatly reduce the cost for the gov-
ernment agencies. However, IDIQ contracts do not pro-
vide the security of firm, fixed-price contracts in terms of 
guaranteeing a steady supply of work and biomass. 
What size and number of contracts? 
The size of contracts as well as the number of different 
contracting opportunities will determine who benefits 
from the economic opportunities. It will also affect the 
ability to foster new contracting and biomass utilization 
capacity. Strategies will likely need to vary, depending 
on contractor and processing capacity. For example, in 
areas with limited contracting capacity, the agency could 
structure stewardship contracting to help increase local 
capacity or help provide equal work opportunities in 
areas with many existing businesses. 
There are several approaches that an agency can take to 
structure contracts to enhance local benefits. One option, 
to concentrate all the work into a single contract, may 
allow that contractor and its subcontractors to make 
new investments in equipment and utilization capacity. 
Among the examples in this report, only the Fremont-
Winema developed a strategy that concentrates the work 
into a single contractor, but it did so because the stew-
ardship contract is located on a designated sustained 
yield unit where there is only one sawmill that is permit-
ted to mill timber. 
However, putting all of the work into the hands of a sin-
gle contractor for a long period risks shutting out other 
contractors or entrepreneurs, which may cause existing 
businesses to wither and discourage future development. 
In addition, it exposes the federal government to risk 
if the sole contractor goes out of business or falls short 
in meeting contract goals and objectives. The second 
option, then, is to create multiple contracts of smaller 
size. This option is especially appropriate in areas where 
there are a number of contractors and wood processors. 
For instance, although the Rogue River–Siskiyou Nation-
al Forest made substantial investments in two ten-year 
stewardship agreements with Lomakatsi Restoration 
Project, the nearby communities are home to a high con-
centration of forestry support businesses, and the Forest 
Service has pursued other stewardship contracts without 
Lomakatsi. In northeastern Oregon, the national forests 
involved in the Collaborative Restoration Stewardship 
Contract used a multiple contract approach because they 
deliberately sought to provide work opportunities and 
materials for utilization to a wide variety of contractors, 
in part to help sustain and foster local capacity. 
Contract duration? 
Since stewardship contracting allows for a ten-year con-
tract and much of the conversation has focused on how 
to stimulate biomass utilization investment, there has 
been significant focus on how to create ten-year steward-
ship contracts. However, executing a ten-year contract 
has proven difficult for a variety of reasons, and there 
are only a few ten-year contracts nationally. Even in the 
absence of a ten-year contract, the Eldorado case sug-
gests that developing a consistent program of work can 
create sustained work opportunities for contractors and a 
biomass supply for sawmills. There are also risks associ-
ated with committing to a ten-year contract in a rapidly 
changing economic climate. Finally, there may be some 
advantages to creating shorter-term contracts when the 
contract is particularly innovative. The developers of the 
northeast Oregon contract chose a five-year duration so 
they could learn from their experimentation and build a 
better ten-year contract in the future. 
Separate the logger from the log? 
In some instances nationally, stewardship contracts have 
been used to separate the process of harvesting from the 
sale of timber. This approach is possible because of the 
retained-receipts authority of stewardship contracting, 
which allows the national forest to retain the funds from 
the sale of the timber to pay for the service activities. 
In some cases, such as in western Montana, where this 
strategy was pioneered, the purpose has been to take the 
financial incentives out of the process of tree selection and 
to reward contractors for high-quality work in the woods. 
This sort of approach can be particularly important where 
there is low trust of loggers or other traditional timber-sale 
purchasers. Others have been interested in this approach 

18 
 E c o s y s t E m  W o r k f o r c E  P r o g r a m  B r i E f i n g  P a P E r  n u m B E r  2 5 ,  s u m m E r  2 0 1 0  
in order to foster utilization and revenue, allowing for a 
process that divides up the material and sells it separately 
by type. This has been the approach in the northeastern 
Oregon IDIQ contract. Although separating the logger from 
the log can be appealing in some instances, there are tech-
nical issues associated with payments that can make this 
approach a challenge. By selling material on the stump, 
the northeast Oregon contract developers hope they have 
addressed these key technical issues. 
What are the criteria for best-value evaluation? 
Criteria for best value in stewardship contracting will 
vary with local needs and agency priorities. The case 
examples describe in some detail the range of specific 
evaluation criteria used in each case as well as the rela-
tive weighting of price and nonprice factors. Best-value 
criteria can be used to strategically focus the benefits of 
stewardship contracting in a number of key areas (e.g., 
toward existing businesses, communities, and the envi-
ronment). 
On the Eldorado, for example, the criteria emphasized 
price and the performance of the offerer and subcontrac-
tors. The forest seeks efficient and technically sound 
proposals from contractors with proven past experience. 
The forest also gives higher ratings to proposals from lo-
cal businesses. All nonprice criteria are of equal impor-
tance, but are less important than price. The Eldorado’s 
strategy is likely to support established contractors with 
local experience rather than create opportunities for any 
less experienced businesses that may be starting up in 
the area. 
The Wild Rivers agreement, on the other hand, has a set 
of criteria with a community-oriented focus, and weighs 
nonprice over price considerations. Like the Eldorado, 
the Rogue River–Siskiyou gives priority to an experi-
enced, efficient local workforce for restoration. However, 
their criteria also include education and interpretation 
opportunities, collaboration, and community needs. 
Their approach demonstrates how stewardship contract-
ing may produce a broad suite of benefits while ensuring 
high-quality performance. 
In northeastern Oregon, criteria for the Collaborative Res-
toration Stewardship Contract regard price and nonprice 
values as equal. In addition to local economic benefit, the 
five forests seek proposals from contractors in their IDIQ 
pool who are experienced with the type of prescribed 
project treatment, will use equipment that minimizes 
damage, and who plan for the least number of entries. 
Using these best-value criteria helps the forests prioritize 
ecological restoration and limit negative environmental 
impacts. 
Flexibility or certainty in terms of work and 
supply availability? 
One promise of stewardship contracting is its potential 
to provide relatively secure work and material supply 
flows. These flows can help stabilize local businesses 
that rely on public lands. Another promise of steward-
ship contracting is that it may provide an avenue for the 
expansion of biomass utilization businesses because it 
could help ensure a stable supply of materials. Many bio-
mass development strategies rely on capital investments 
to develop new biomass utilization capacity. It can be 
difficult to find capital for investments when supply of 
raw materials is uncertain, particularly when the return 
on investment may be inherently low or rely on govern-
ment subsidies for profitability. 
There are several five- and ten-year contracts and agree-
ments among the case studies described in this report. 
In reality, there are few instances in which the Forest 
Service or other federal entities can truly guarantee a 
supply of material. It is difficult for the agency to make 
firm commitments beyond the funds available in their 
current appropriation and beyond their National Envi-
ronmental Policy Act (NEPA)–ready acres. The agency 
cannot know what next year’s budget will look like or if 
a lawsuit could enjoin future planning and implementa-
tion. Moreover, obligating the cancellation ceiling for a 
firm, ten-year contract may be cost prohibitive. 
In all of the cases described here, the Forest Service and 
BLM have not entered into firm, ten-year commitments 
to purchase services or sell material. Instead, they have 
entered into contracts and agreements that allow them 
to acquire future stewardship services. In two instances, 
the Forest Service used IDIQ contracts. In those cases, 
the Forest Service has some minimum obligations to 
purchase services, but future task orders depend on 
available funds and NEPA-ready projects as well as the 
priorities of the national forest. Similarly, the steward-

 
 E c o s y s t E m  W o r k f o r c E  P r o g r a m  B r i E f i n g  P a P E r  n u m B E r  2 5 ,  s u m m E r  2 0 1 0  
19 
ship agreements create master agreements with potential 
subsequent amendments for future work as NEPA docu-
mentation is completed and funds become available. 
In many of these cases, robust collaboratives have helped 
build social agreement and political support for restora-
tion activities, which, in turn, appears to contribute to a 
consistent supply of work opportunities. For example, 
in the case of the Sustained Yield Restoration Steward-
ship project on the Fremont-Winema, project partners 
preceded the stewardship contract with a memorandum 
of understanding (MOU) between the Forest Service and 
the Collins Company wherein each entity committed 
in principle to annual targets for how many acres each 
entity will treat. This may provide supply for biomass in-
vestors. While the MOU is nonbinding, it does set goals 
and provide some accountability for accomplishments as 
part of the collaborative process. Finally, in the cases of 
the stewardship agreements, project partners are bringing 
financial resources to the effort. This reduces costs for 
the national forest, making it appealing for the national 
forest to invest in these projects. 
Conclusion 
Although a number of national forests have made stew-
ardship contracting a centerpiece of their restoration 
strategies, it remains a new and rapidly evolving set of 
tools that federal agencies and their partners are still 
discovering how to use. Because of the flexibility and 
diversity of stewardship-contracting approaches, there 
are a large number of detailed decisions to make about 
contract form and structure in order to develop an imple-
mentation program that can help achieve local goals. We 
have sought to bring forward these decision points and 
provide some examples and lessons from national forests 
that have been through the process. 
One of the important lessons we have observed in our 
study of stewardship contracting is the need to view it 
as means of creating biomass supply availability, albeit 
often without solid guarantees of wood supply or work 
opportunities.5 People interested in forest restoration 
should realize that by combining timber-sale and service-
contracting authorities, stewardship contracting allows 
for the removal of material that cannot otherwise pay its 
way out of the woods. Moreover, it allows for the treat-
ment of stands that include both commercially valuable 
and noncommercially valuable materials. This authority 
creates supply availability in ways that traditional timber 
sales and service contracts cannot. For many places, the 
availability of this sort of woody biomass is a significant 
change. In some cases, such as the Fremont National For-
est, stewardship contracting has created significant new 
supplies of saw and nonsaw logs in a place that only 
had removal of fire salvage harvested for years. Restora-
tion thinning was largely accomplished through pile and 
burning. 
Yet supply availability is not the same as a firm guaran-
tee. The Fremont’s ten-year contract creates no guaran-
tee. Neither do the ten-year agreements discussed in the 
report. This brings us to our next point. It is extremely 
important to conduct a workforce and market assessment 
before deciding which combination of stewardship-con-
tracting tools will work best in a given situation. Such 
an assessment will dispel assumptions and remove a lot 
of the guesswork that will otherwise inevitably be part 
of the stewardship-contracting decision-making process. 
Moreover, it will help overcome concerns about avail-
ability and guarantees. Finally, it is always important to 
remember that stewardship contracting is a tool and is as 
good as the people who wield it effectively. 

20 
 E c o s y s t E m  W o r k f o r c E  P r o g r a m  B r i E f i n g  P a P E r  n u m B E r  2 5 ,  s u m m E r  2 0 1 0  
Resources 
Becker, D., D. Abbas, K. E. Halvorsen, P. J. Jakes, S. 
McCaffrey, and C. Moseley. Conventional Wisdoms of 
Woody Biomass Utilization. Available online at www. 
forestguild.org/biomass/resources/ISE_Biomass.pdf. 
Federal Business Opportunities. Alder Fuel Reduction 
Stewardship Project. Available online at https://www. 
fbo.gov/?s=opportunity&mode=form&id=d544738f8c7e4 
90a32eb019c55790ae1&tab=core&_cview=1. 
___. Collaborative Restoration Stewardship Contract 
for Malheur, Umatilla, Wallowa, Whitman, and Ochoco 
National Forests. Available online at 
https://www.fbo.gov/index?s=opportunity&mode=for 
m&tab=core&id=503bdc3590b0264d739e0d9a78f1c0 
9c&_cview=0. 
___. Sustained Yield Restoration Stewardship Project. 
Available online at https://www.fbo.gov/index?s=opport 
unity&mode=form&tab=core&id=6fd5f33a38337c287866 
e0ade6b2c32d&_cview=1. 
Government Accountability Office. 2008. Federal Land 
Management: Use of Stewardship Contracting Is Increas-
ing, but Agencies Could Benefit from Better Data and 
Contracting Strategies. GAO-08-23. Washington, D.C.: 
Government Accountability Office. 
___. 2004. Federal Land Management: Additional 
Guidance on Community Involvement Could Enhance 
Effectiveness of Stewardship Contracting. GAO-04-652. 
Washington, D.C. General Accounting Office. 
Lake County Resource Initiative, Inc. Available online at 
www.lcri.org. 
Lomakatsi Restoration Project and the Siskiyou Project. 
2009. Restoring Sustainability: 2009 Annual Report of 
the Wild Rivers Master Stewardship Agreement. Avail-
able online at www.siskiyou.org/c-far/MSAAR2010.pdf. 
Moseley, C. 2010. Strategies for Supporting Front Line 
Collaboration: Lessons from Stewardship Contracting. 
IBM Center for the Business of Government. http://www. 
businessofgovernment.org/report/strategies-supporting-
frontline-collaboration-lessons-stewardship-contracting 
Pinchot Institute for Conservation. Stewardship Contract-
ing on Federal Lands. Available online at www.pinchot. 
org/current_projects/sustainable/contracting. 
Red Lodge Clearing House. Lakeview Stewardship 
Group, July 2006. Available online at original.rlch.org/ 
stories/lakeview.html. 
Sustainable Northwest. Stewardship Contracting and 
Collaboration: Best Practices Guidebook. Available on-
line at www.sustainablenorthwest.org/resources/publica-
tions/StewConCollabBPG.pdf. 
USDA Forest Service. Stewardship Contracting. Avail-
able online at www.fs.fed.us/forestmanagement/projects/ 
stewardship/index.shtml. 
USDA Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Region. Stew-
ardship. Available online at www.fs.fed.us/r6/nr/fp/FP-
WebPage/FP70104A/Stewardship.htm. 
USDA Forest Service, Fremont-Winema National Forests. 
Sustained Yield Unit Stewardship Contracting Proposal. 
Available online at www.fs.fed.us/r6/nr/fp/Stewardship/ 
sp_fre-win_lakeview_syu.doc. 

 
 E c o s y s t E m  W o r k f o r c E  P r o g r a m  B r i E f i n g  P a P E r  n u m B E r  2 5 ,  s u m m E r  2 0 1 0  
21 
Endnotes 
1 Adopted from Cassandra Moseley, “Procurement and Timber Sale Definitions,” Ecosystem Workforce Program, University of Oregon, 2003, ewp. 
uoregon.edu/pdfs/resources/contrdefns3.pdf, and Moseley, Cassandra. Strategies for Supporting Front Line Collaboration: Lessons from Steward-
ship Contracting. IBM Center for the Business of Government, 2010.  http://www.businessofgovernment.org/report/strategies-supporting-frontline-
collaboration-lessons-stewardship-contracting 
2  Lomakatsi Restoration Project and the Siskiyou Project. 2009. Restoring Sustainability: 2009 Annual Report of the Wild Rivers Master Stewardship 
Agreement. www.siskiyou.org/c-far/MSAAR2010.pdf. 
3  Dollar figures are from www.usaspending.gov. 
4 See also, Becker, Dennis, Dalia Abbas, Kathleen E. Halvorsen, Pamela J. Jakes, Sarah McCaffrey, Cassandra Moseley, Conventional Wisdoms of 
Woody Biomass Utilization www.forestguild.org/biomass/resources/ISE_Biomass.pdf 
5 Ibid. 

22 
 E c o s y s t E m  W o r k f o r c E  P r o g r a m  B r i E f i n g  P a P E r  n u m B E r  2 5 ,  s u m m E r  2 0 1 0  

23 
 
 E c o s y s t E m  W o r k f o r c E  P r o g r a m  B r i E f i n g  P a P E r  n u m B E r  2 2 ,  s P r i n g  2 0 1 0  
the university of oregon is an equal-opportunity, affirmative-action institution committed to cultural diversity and compliance with the americans with Disabilities act. 
this publication will be made available in accessible formats upon request.  Design: tim Jordan, Design and Editing services. © 2010 university of oregon.  
DEs0810-044p-H00000 

 
 E c o s y s t E m  W o r k f o r c E  P r o g r a m  B r i E f i n g  P a P E r  n u m B E r  2 2 ,  s P r i n g  2 0 1 0  
