 
1 
 
 
 
Collaboration for Environmental Evidence 
 
 
 
 
Systematic Review No. 87 
 
 
WORKING TITLE: Have arid land springs restoration projects been 
effective in restoring hydrology, geomorphology, and invertebrates and 
plant species composition comparable to natural springs with minimal 
anthropogenic disturbance? 
 
 
 
Review Protocol 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lead Reviewer: 
Abe Springer 
 
 
Postal Address: 
School of Earth Sciences and  
 
Environmental Sustainability  
 
Northern Arizona University 
 
P.O. Box 4099 
 
Flagstaff, AZ 86011 
 
 
U.S.A. 
 
E-Mail Address: 
abe.springer@nau.edu  
Telephone: 
00+1+928-523-7198  
Fax: 
00+1+928-523-9220 
 
 

 
2 
Cover Sheet 
 
Title 
Working title: Have arid land springs restoration projects 
in been effective in restoring hydrology, geomorphology, 
soils, and invertebrate and plant species composition 
comparable to natural springs with minimal anthropogenic 
disturbance? 
 
Systematic review  
No.87 
Reviewer(s) 
Abe Springer, Christina Davis, & Larry Stevens 
Date draft protocol 
published on website 
15 January 2010 
Date final protocol 
published on website 
13 July 2010 
Date of most recent 
amendment 
22 June 2010  
Date of most recent 
SUBSTANTIVE 
amendment 
- 
Details of most recent 
changes 
1. Widened scope from south western U.S. to arid 
land regions; 
2. Added more background detail; 
3. Addressed other comments from 1st peer review. 
Contact address 
 School of Earth Sciences and Environmental 
Sustainability  
Northern Arizona University 
P.O. Box 4099  
Flagstaff, AZ 86011 
U.S.A. 
Abe.springer@nau.edu 
Sources of support 
Northern Arizona University’s  
Ecological Restoration Institute  
Conflicts of interest 
-  
 

 
3 
1. 
BACKGROUND 
Springs are places where groundwater is exposed at the earth’s surface, often flowing 
naturally from bedrock or soil onto the land surface or into a body of surface water. 
There may be 105-106 springs in the United States, occupying a total area of 500-1000 
km2 (less than 0.01 % of the nation’s land area). Springs, particularly those in arid 
regions, are vastly more complex, diverse, and productive than those in adjacent 
uplands; however, at a national and continental scale, springs are among our most 
threatened ecosystems, with estimates of ecological impairment in the West 
exceeding 90% (Stevens and Meretsky 2008). Although Odum’s (1957) studies of 
Silver Springs in Florida laid the groundwork for much of the science of ecosystem 
ecology, his study remains one of the few comprehensive examples of springs 
ecosystem function. Springs are important resources because they are largely non-
renewable ecological and cultural resources which provide habitats for a diverse 
variety of aquatic, wetland, plant and mammal species, many which are endangered or 
endemic (Anderson et al., 2003; Springer and Stevens, 2009).  
 
While there have been some arid land springs ecosystem restoration efforts (e.g., 
Anderson et al., 2003; Anderson et al., 2004; Otis Bay, 2006), few have been 
continually monitored to evaluate their successes. There also still lacks baseline 
knowledge of many springs ecosystems conditions to determine restoration potential. 
This lack of knowledge may be a result of the expense of long-term monitoring, or the 
lack of funding to continue monitoring springs ecosystems after restoration has been 
completed. In addition, development and adherence to one springs inventory and 
monitoring protocol has been a challenge for scientists. This is in part because of the 
many different jurisdictions under which researchers and land managers operate, 
along with the lack of cross-jurisdictional coordination. Lack of scientific study and 
conservation has limited the knowledge available to translate to appropriate springs 
restoration theory and methods. Knowledge of the location, quantity, and quality of a 
resource is the start toward effective riparian area conservation and restoration in 
semi-arid and arid regions (Thompson et al., 2002). If more information about springs 
ecosystems were available, then there may be compelling evidence to promote a 
greater effort to restore and monitor these ecosystems.  
 
This review aimhopes to resolve deficiencies in the state of knowledge of arid land 
springs ecosystems restoration and monitoring, thus moving toward a more consistent 
way of monitoring springs ecosystems. If these issues are left unresolved, it could be 
detrimental to the future of springs ecosystems and ultimately water resources in arid 
regions. This review will also be beneficial for the future improvement of restoration 
and monitoring projects by summarizing the state of knowledge of past restoration 
monitoring efforts, thus limiting the amount unknown attributes of arid land springs.  
It will also provide information to help springs ecosystems managers to better 
prioritize management or restoration actions with generally limited and precious 
financial resources. 
 
2. 
OBJECTIVE OF THE REVIEW 
 
2.1 
Primary question 
Have springs restoration projects in the southwestern United States been 
effective in restoring hydrology, geomorphology, and plant and invertebrates 

 
4 
species composition comparable to conditions of natural springs with minimal 
anthropogenic disturbances? 
 
3. 
METHODS 
 
3.1 
Search strategy  
 Electronic databases available through Northern Arizona 
University’s Cline Library will be a primary source, including at a 
minimum: 
 Academic Search Premier 
 Environmental Science and Pollution Management 
 Forest Science Database (Ovid)  
 JSTOR  
 ProQuest: Dissertations and Theses Full Text 
 Science Direct 
 Wilson OmniFile 
 GeoRef (CAS Illumina) 
 GeoScienceWorld GSW 
 SpringerLink 
 Additional sources of information will include at a minimum: 
 ISI Web of Science 
 Google Scholar 
 Government and university websites and libraries (e.g., 
USDA Forest Service’s TreeSearch, Ecological 
Restoration Institute and School of Forestry electronic 
libraries, Arizona Water Protection fund archives, state 
game and fish agency websites and libraries) 
 Unpublished reports (e.g., project monitoring reports, 
interviews, and agency report) will be sought directly 
from individuals and organizations responsible for 
restoration projects. 
 Search terms to include all combinations of the following: 
 Springs, natural springs, riparian springs, watersheds, 
catchments AND 
 Restoration, prescribed burns, natural fire, wildfire, 
management, hydrology, geomorphology, conservation, 
fencing, diversion, stabilization. 
 
3.2 
Study inclusion criteria  
 Relevant subject(s):  
Natural occurrences where aquifers meet the ground surface 
through seepage or fractures, classified as natural springs, in arid 
lands:  
 Riparian environments sourced from springs 
 Lakes/pools sourced from springs 
 Catchments 
 Watersheds 
 

 
5 
 Types of intervention:  
Hydrologic restoration techniques: 
 Check dams  
 Weirs 
 Weather stations 
 Watershed gauges 
Geomorphological and/or soil restoration techniques: 
 Channel relocation 
 Site re-contouring 
 Topsoil placement or removal 
Vegetation restoration techniques: 
 Seeding 
 Planting 
 Herbivore exclusion 
 Excavation of non-native species, such as Tamarisk and 
Russian Olive 
Historic fish distribution restoration: 
 Eradication of non-native fish species, including 
crayfish 
 Re-introduction of native fish species 
Modifications of adjacent areas:  
 Thinning or prescribed burning of adjacent forests to 
increase water yields 
 Reduction in groundwater withdrawals 
 Fencing enclosures to reduce access 
 Natural or anthropogenic induced erosion 
 Types of comparator:  
 Experiments with controls (no intervention) and 
treatments (restoration)  
 Before-after control-impact (BACI) studies 
 Predictive (modelling) studies 
 Types of outcome:  
Hydrologic outcomes such as changes: 
 Water table level 
 Flow from springs 
 Duration and/or timing of flow  
 Natural or anthropogenic induced erosion 
Geomorphological and soil outcomes such as:  
 Channel presence and/or stability 
 Rockfall & slope processes 
 Integrity and restoration of soils 
Vegetation outcomes such as:  
 Species composition 
 Percent cover and architectural structure, biomass 
 Survival of planted material 
Invertebrate outcomes such as:  
 Species composition 
 Presence percentages 

 
6 
                  Vertebrate populations 
 Native fish, herpetofaunal, avifaunal, mammalian 
population and habitat use 
 Types of study:  
Primary, peer-reviewed studies will be considered the most 
dependable; however, it is expected that much of the available 
information will be from unpublished sources such as theses and 
dissertations, monitoring reports, observational studies, and other 
types of grey literature.  
 
3.3 
Potential effect modifiers and reasons for heterogeneity:  
Among arid land regions, heterogeneity exists between elevation, 
topography, disturbances, and land use history. Extensive 
heterogeneity exists between springs sites from the type of species 
present to species abundance and where the springs emerge. Springs 
species richness varies by geomorphic setting (sloping bedrock 
surfaces and backwalls generally supported fewer plant species than 
channel terraces and colluvial slopes), and by elevation. The manner in 
which springs are restored also varies considerably due to the 
disturbance level or management goals.  
 
3.4 
Study quality assessment:  
Studies will be evaluated based on the types of methods used and 
outcomes, if any, achieved. It is recognized that some works, which 
have not been published or subjected to diligent peer review, may be of 
high quality; however, careful consideration will be exercised when 
reviewing these sources, and Pullin’s and Knight’s (2003) hierarchy of 
evidence quality will be used to determine whether studies will be 
included (see Table 1). Evidence from Categories I through II-3 will be 
included, while evidence that falls under Categories III and IV will be 
considered with caution. If all authors agree, and if appropriate 
qualifiers are included from Categories III and IV (e.g., an explanation 
of why a particular set of evidence falls into Category IV and why we 
still think it is appropriate to mention), studies may still be included. If 
any Category IV evidence is reported, it will be for the purpose of 
indicating where future research can be beneficial, and not for 
definitive interpretations about treatments. To assist in the 
consideration process, all studies will be assigned based  on one of the 
categories in Table 1. In addition, authors will be familiar with and use 
Pullin’s and Stewart’s (2006) guidelines for assessing evidence quality 
(e.g., possibly contacting authors of some papers to request additional 
data). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
7 
 
 
 
 
Table 1. Hierarchy of evidence quality, as modified by Pullin and Knight (2003). 
 
Category
Quality of Evidence
I
Strong evidence obtained from at least one properly designed; 
randomized controlled trial of appropriate size. 
II-1
Evidence from well designed controlled trials with 
randomization. 
II-2
Evidence from a comparison of differences between sites with 
and without (controls) a desired species or community. 
II-3
Evidence obtained from multiple time series or from dramatic 
results in uncontrolled experiments. 
III
Opinions of respected authorities based on qualitative field 
evidence, descriptive studies or reports of expert committees. 
IV
Evidence inadequate owing to problems of methodology (e.g. 
sample size, length or comprehensiveness of monitoring) or 
conflicts of evidence. 
 
3.5 
Data extraction strategy  
 
Three primary reviewers will conduct the initial database and library 
searches and identify publications of potential value based primarily on 
an assessment of titles and abstracts.  One reviewer will then review all 
potentially useful publications and papers, and eliminate irrelevant 
articles based on abstracts.  Material determined to be of use will then 
summarized in a master spreadsheet (Table 2) by one of the primary 
reviewers (Christina Davis). Reviewers will then check references of 
remaining papers to find additional material. 
 
If a sufficient amount of quantitative data on the effects of specific 
restoration treatments can be extracted, a meta-analysis will be 
conducted. However, the amount of good quality data on effect sizes is 
believed to be quite limited, which in turn may limit the use of formal 
meta-analysis methods. We will be looking for papers that describe 
quantitative effects on springs hydrology (esp. flow changes) and 
riparian environment changes (presence, or lack there-of, of vegetation 
and invertebrates).  Some of the other variables, such as types of 
outcomes, may also be subject to meta-analysis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
8 
 
 
 
Table 2. Data to be extracted from literature for analysis: 
 
Data to be recorded from literature:
Author(s)
Publication year
Project name
Project objective
Restoration treatments (methods)
Focused site measurements
Baseline comparisons
Pre-intervention disturbances (yes/no):
- 
Roads w/in 100 m? 
- 
Agriculture?  
- 
Grazing? 
- 
Channel alterations? 
- 
Culverts, dams, or water boxes? 
- 
Recreation? 
Interventions (i.e. Restoration recommendations/actions)
Replication or previous restoration actions/recommendations
Year restoration complete
Year monitoring/follow up complete
Duration of monitoring
Number of times monitored
Intra-treatment variations
- 
Negative changes 
- 
Positive changes 
Project objectives met (yes/no)?
Successful measurements
Quality assurance measures
Criteria met for successful restorations?*
Post-restoration actions/assessments
 
           *Successful restoration determined based on The SER International Primer 
                       on Ecological Restoration (2004). 
 
3.6 
Data synthesis and presentation  
  
The reviewers will read all publications and discuss the results, but two 
reviewers (Abe Springer and Larry Stevens) will take the primary 
responsibility for synthesizing and presenting the results.  The results 
of this review will be organized around the components listed in the 
primary question and Table 2, which involve the responses of 
hydrology, geomorphology, vegetation, and invertebrates to restoration 
treatments.  
 
4.  
POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST AND SOURCES OF SUPPORT 
 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is providing funding for this review, 
along with additional support from Northern Arizona University’s School of 
Earth Sciences and Environmental Sustainability (SESES) and the Museum of 
Northern Arizona (MNA).  Although there is no known conflict of interest, 
independent reviews will be sought both through the CEE and directly from 

 
9 
scientists not affiliated with the Ecological Restoration Institute, the SESES, 
and the MNA. 
 
5. 
REFERENCES 
 
Anderson, D. A. Springer, J. Kennedy, W. Odem, and L. DeWald, 2003,  
Verde River Headwaters Restoration Demonstration Project: Final 
Report, Arizona Department of Water Resources Water Protection 
Fund, Grant No. 98-059. 
 
Anderson, D., S. Welch, D. Fleishman, W. Odem, A. Springer, L. DeWald,  
 
and J. Kennedy, 2004, Wetland Revitalization and Channel  
Stabilization at Clover Springs, Mogollon Rim, Arizona, in Sada, D.W. 
and S.E. Sharpe, eds., Conference Proceedings, Spring-fed Wetlands:  
Important Scientific and Cultural Resources of the Intermountain  
Region, May 7-9, 2002, Las Vegas, Nevada. DHS Publication No.  
41210. Retrieved Jan. 8, 2010 from Desert Research Institute web site:  
http://www.wetlands.dri.edu. 
 
Odum, H.T. 1957. Trophic structure and productivity of Silver Springs, 
Floroida, Ecological Monographs 27:55-112. 
 
Otis Bay, Inc., 2006, Ash Meadows geomorphic and biological assessment:  
 
Final Report, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Las Vegas.  
 
Pullin, A.S. and T.M. Knight. 2003. Support for decision making in 
conservation practice: An evidence-based approach. Journal for Nature 
Conservation 11: 83-90. 
 
Pullin, A.S. and G.B. Stewart. 2006. Guidelines for systematic review in 
conservation and environmental management. Conservation Biology, 
20(6): 1647-1656. 
 
Society for Ecological Restoration International Science & Policy Working  
Group. 2004. The SER International Primer on Ecological 
Restoration. www.ser.org & Tucson: Society for Ecological 
Restoration International. 
 
Springer, A.E., and L.E. Stevens, 2009, Spheres of Discharge. Hydrogeology 
Journal, v. 17, p.  83-93.  
 
Stevens, L.E. and V.J. Meretsky. 2008. Aridland Springs in North America: 
Ecology and Conservation. University of Arizona Press, Tucson. 
 
Thompson, B.C., P.L. Matuski-Rowan, and K.G. Boykin, 2002, Prioritizing  
 
conservation potential of arid-land montane natural springs and  
associated riparian areas. Journal of Arid Environments, v. 50, p. 527- 
547.  
 
