25
Ecological Restoration Institute 
Working Paper No. 25
Strategies for Enhancing and 
Restoring Rare Plants and Their 
Habitats in the Face of 
Climate Change and Habitat 
Destruction in the Intermountain 
West
July 2012

Working Papers in Intermountain West Frequent-ﬁre Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing 
native species, structural characteristics, and ecological processes. Te Society for Ecologi-
cal Restoration International deﬁnes ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that 
initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity and 
sustainability….Restoration attempts to return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Soci-
ety for Ecological Restoration International Science & Policy Working Group 2004).
Most frequent-ﬁre forests throughout the Intermountain West have been degraded during 
the last 150 years. Many of these forests are now dominated by unnaturally dense thickets 
of small trees, and lack their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests 
in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing ﬁres and increased 
insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers on reintroducing frequent, 
low-severity surface ﬁres—ofen afer thinning dense stands—and reestablishing productive 
understory plant communities. 
Te Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in research-
ing, implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of frequent-ﬁre forests of the 
Intermountain West. By allowing natural processes, such as low-severity ﬁre, to resume self-
sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem services, 
wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
 
Te ERI Working Papers series presents ﬁndings and management recommendations from 
research and observations by the ERI and its partner organizations. While the ERI staﬀ 
recognizes that every restoration project needs to be site speciﬁc, we feel that the information 
provided in the Working Papers may help restoration practitioners elsewhere.
 
Tis publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Ser-
vice and the Southwest Fire Science Consortium. Te views and conclusions contained in 
this document are those of the author(s) and should not be interpreted as representing the 
opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of trade names or commercial 
products does not constitute their endorsement by the United States Government or the ERI.
Cover Photo: Pediocactus knowltonii (Knowlton’s cactus). A case study outlining reintroduction eﬀorts 
for this species is described in Falk et al. 1996. Photo by Robert Sivinski.

Ecological Restoration Institute
1
Introduction
"If the land mechanism as a whole is good, then every part is good, 
whether we understand it or not. If the biota, in the course of aeons, 
has built something we like but do not understand, then who but a 
fool would discard seemingly useless parts? To keep every cog and 
wheel is the ﬁrst precaution of intelligent tinkering.” – Aldo Leopold 
(A Sand County Almanac, p. 190)
Adopting Leopold’s sage advice to “keep every cog and wheel,” the In-
ternational Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources 
regards “the maintenance of existing genetic diversity and viable 
populations of all taxa in the wild in order to maintain biological 
interactions, ecological processes and function” (IUCN 2002, p. 1) as 
a fundamental conservation goal. Such an outlook is shared by many 
conservation-oriented organizations, including federal land manage-
ment agencies in the United States. Tis Ecological Restoration Insti-
tute working paper will review various strategies land managers can 
use to maintain one segment of the plant world—rare plants—as we 
experience the current period of changing climate.  Rare plants may 
be seen as the “seemingly useless parts,” but they deserve attention. 
“Intelligent tinkering” through innovative biological conservation and 
ecological restoration strategies will be necessary to provide them with 
the kinds of habitat they will need for their continued survival and 
growth. 
Rare Plants and Climate Change
Climate change is the latest in a long list of threats to plant diversity, 
in general, and rare plants, in particular. A study by Kew Gardens 
(2011) indicates that human activities, such as agriculture, harvest-
ing, development, logging, and livestock grazing, account for nearly 
70 percent of the global threats to plant diversity. However, given its 
potential to aﬀect plant habitats both regionally and globally, even in 
protected areas where typical human disturbances are less likely, the 
eﬀects of climate change on rare and endangered plants cannot be 
ignored (Society for Ecological Restoration 2009).  
Foden and colleagues (2008) outline ﬁve basic traits that inﬂuence a 
rare plant species’ susceptibility to climate change: 1) need for special-
ized habitat and/or microhabitat that may be lost or reduced due to 
climate change, 2) narrow environmental tolerances or thresholds 
that are likely to be exceeded due to climate change at any stage in the 
species’ life cycle, 3) dependence on speciﬁc environmental triggers or 
cues that are likely to be disrupted by climate change, 4) dependence 
on interspeciﬁc interactions that are likely to be disrupted by climate 
change, and 5) poor ability or limited opportunity to disperse to, or 
colonize, a new or more suitable range. In addition to these, a sixth 
trait to consider is genetic variability.  Each of these traits, which in 
large part have to do with site suitability and dispersal potential, may 
be dramatically aﬀected by changes in climate that are likely to alter 
the geographic location and extent of habitable sites for many plant 
species and create what some are describing as no-analog communi-
ties or novel ecosystems (Williams and Jackson 2007, Hobbs et al. 
2009). Perhaps not surprising then, simulated climate change research 
indicates that some rare plants will have a diﬃcult time adapting to a 
new climate in their existing location and will have an equally diﬃcult 
time migrating as climate changes (Jump and Peñuelas 2005).
Rare, endemic species in the West will probably be heavily aﬀected 
by such change. For example, the Colorado Plateau contains more 
than 300 species of endemic vascular plants (10 percent of the ﬂora) 
(Krause 2010), with many of them restricted to specialized habitats, 
such as speciﬁc soil types, hanging gardens (i.e., seeps along canyon 
walls), and alpine zones. Modeling of this region predicts that 40-65 
percent of endemic species may experience range reductions as early 
as 2040, and 2-11 percent may be faced with extinction. Some special-
ized groups, such as succulents, may face even greater chances of 
extinction (Krause 2010). 
   
Planning for Climate Change 
While policymakers, supported by the general public, continue to 
move forward with incentives and strategies designed to forestall or 
reverse changes in climate, land managers will need to develop strate-
gies to address the various possibilities that a changing climate could 
bring to natural resources, including rare plant species.
At this point, managers have three basic options for managing 
climate-aﬀected rare plants—in situ (“on site”) conservation, ex situ 
(“oﬀ site”) conservation, or doing nothing—depending on the species 
and situation in question. If the primary goal is conservation of biodi-
versity, this points to the need for greater human intervention in the 
form of in situ and/or ex situ strategies. Te do-nothing option may be 
preferred in some situations, particularly for non-listed species or for 
those rare plant populations that appear demographically viable, con-
tain enough heritable variation in necessary adaptive traits, and/or are 
not limited by barriers to migration. Monitoring, whether short-term 
or long-term, can be used to determine what type of action would be 
best suited for attaining management goals. 
In situ conservation involves protection and/or restoration of habitats 
and ecosystems along with their associated species, and remains the 
highest priority among conservationists. Ex situ approaches involve 
the long-term, oﬀ-site maintenance and protection of living genetic 
samples of species (Morse 1996).  Both approaches have a place in 
the ﬁeld of conservation and are natural complements of each other. 
Tey are not always mutually exclusive of one another, however. For 
example, some actions, such as augmentation, reintroduction and 
assisted migration, may bring ex situ plant materials into an in situ 
management situation. 
In addition, there are several other approaches worthy of exploration 
that will not be detailed in this working paper, such as modifying 
existing laws and providing incentives for landowners to participate in 
preservation and rare plant eﬀorts, including agreements between co-
operating non-federal property owners and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service (USFWS 2012).
In Situ Approaches to Rare Plant Habitat 
Enhancement
Currently, there are ﬁve basic in situ strategies for enhancing or 
conserving rare plant habitat. Tey include: 1) addressing habitat frag-
mentation, 2) identifying refugia, 3) augmenting existing plant popu-
lations, 4) managing habitat or genetic diversity to increase resiliency, 
and 5) restoring of degraded habitat. Reintroduction, which may be 
considered to be in situ if within the historical range of a species, will 
be discussed in the section on ex situ conservation practices.
Addressing Habitat Fragmentation
Habitat fragmentation, due to road building, construction, and other 
land uses, is a well-known barrier to seed dispersal. A number of 
methods have been proposed to increase landscape permeability and 
to “sofen” intensively managed landscapes. Tese fairly traditional 
methods promote habitat for pollinators and seed dispersers. Tey 
Strategies for Enhancing and Restoring Rare Plants and Their Habitats in the Face 
of  Climate Change and Habitat Destruction in the Intermountain West
Photo 1.  Reintroduction eﬀorts for the federally endangered 
Astragalus cremnophylax var. cremnophylax (sentry milkvetch) 
are underway at the South Rim of the Grand Canyon in Arizona.  
Photo by Janice Busco.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2
include hedgerow planting, ditch management, pond creation, water 
level management, grass strip creation, and reduced pesticide and 
fertilizer applications (Donald and Evans 2006). 
Creating corridors to improve landscape connectivity has long been 
proposed as a restoration/conservation method to allow gene ﬂow and 
increased intra-species genetic diversity, facilitate seed dispersal, and 
as an aid in range shifs (Loss et al. 2011). Experimental creation of 
corridors is a fairly new area of research, so results have been mixed. 
However, a study by Kirchner and colleagues (2003) in France indi-
cated that ﬂooding events along natural channels increased gene ﬂow 
and allowed for colonization of new habitat by a rare freshwater spe-
cies, Ranunculus nodiﬂorus. In a study in South Carolina, Damschen 
and colleagues (2006) found that 100-m2 patches of thinned longleaf 
pine (Pinus palustris) forests that were connected by 150-m by 25-m 
wooded corridors contained more species than the surrounding, un-
thinned forest. With time, the thinned, connected patches developed 
a 20-percent higher level of plant species richness than unconnected, 
thinned patches. Higher species richness of animal-dispersed plants 
in corridors and near patch edges may be driven by seed-dispersing 
birds (Brudvig et al. 2009). Wind dispersal of seeds may also be aided 
within patches and corridors. 
One untested, but widely accepted, assumption is that thinned patches 
used as corridors within forests will promote weedy or invasive spe-
cies. While this may be a concern, there are a small number of studies 
that indicate corridors have no detectable eﬀect on the number of 
exotic species (e.g., Damschen et al. 2006, Brudvig et al. 2009). An 
advantage of such corridors is increased movement of butterﬂies and 
other pollinators between connected patches, but little similar move-
ment to unconnected patches (Tewksbury et al. 2002). 
Whether these same general patterns of movement and dispersal 
will be observed in other ecosystems remains to be seen. Regardless, 
migration by standard dispersal mechanisms may still be insuﬃcient 
for species to stay ahead of projected climate change (Pearson and 
Dawson 2005). Gravity- and ant-dispersed plant species are particu-
larly vulnerable due to dispersal limitations. Gravity-dispersed seeds 
fall to the ground below the plant while ants are known to disperse 
individual seeds a few meters, at most (Cain et al. 1998). Tose spe-
cies whose seeds are ingested or adhesive have the most potential for 
migratory success (Cain et al. 2000, Takahashi and Kamitani 2004). 
Identifying Refugia
Refugia are deﬁned by Keppel and colleagues (2011, p. 1) as “habitats 
that components of biodiversity retreat to, persist in and can poten-
tially expand from under changing environmental conditions.” Land 
managers and planners need to understand where potential future 
refugia may exist in order to protect the character and physical envi-
ronment of these areas, which may serve as valuable habitat for rare 
plants and other species. Keppel and colleagues (2011) suggest two 
approaches for identifying potential refugia to protect species from 
climate change. One approach relies on determining biogeographic 
patterns and paleoecological evidence for refugia. Te other approach 
involves identifying environmental and physical geographic processes, 
such as high-intensity ﬁre or glaciation, that deﬁne the environmental 
conditions which can or might support the formation of refugia. Both 
require a multi-disciplinary approach with multiple lines of evidence 
to identify future potential areas that might act as refugia (Figure 1).
 
Augmenting Existing Plant Populations 
Augmentation (ofen referred to as “restocking”) involves reintroduc-
tion of plants or seeds into pre-existing habitat or populations.  In 
about half of seed augmentation studies, in which seeds were applied 
to existing populations, there was evidence of seed limitation (Turn-
bull et. al 2000). Seed limitation is demonstrated by an increase in 
population size following the addition of seed. Seed sowing experi-
ments can be used to determine if limitation is present for a given 
species and may also be used to increase existing population numbers 
(Turnbull et al. 2000). Another strategy to increase population size in-
volves management eﬀorts, such as protecting plants from herbivores, 
pathogens, and seed predators that may theoretically lead to increased 
vigor of the population overall and to increases in population num-
bers (Bevill et al. 1999).
Figure 1. Two synthetic methods for identifying rare plant refugia. Te 
lef branch is based on gathering evidence from the past while the right 
branch relies on knowledge of current conditions for predicting future 
habitats (Adopted from Keppel et al. 2011).
Managing Habitat or Genetic Diversity to 
Increase Resilience
Ecosystem resilience has been deﬁned as “the capacity of a system to 
absorb disturbance and reorganize while undergoing change so as 
to still retain essentially the same function, structure, identity, and 
feedbacks” (Walker et al. 2004). Increasing ecosystem resiliency at the 
habitat level, although potentially risky, can be fostered by returning 
natural processes (e.g., ﬁre regime, hydrology) to the ecosystem, or by 
protecting and restoring quality habitat and creating robust plant com-
munities. Tis, in eﬀect, provides a potential buﬀer to the short-term 
eﬀects of climate change (Rice and Emery 2003, Fulé 2008). 
 
A plant species’ resilience also depends on the genetic variations found 
within populations. Such genetic variations allow species to adapt and 
evolve to meet changing conditions like those that could occur with 
changes in climate (Srgò et al. 2011). Population sizes of hundreds or 
even thousands of individuals may be necessary for maintaining this 
level of resilience. Augmentation is a plausible in situ conservation 
tool for helping to increase genetic diversity in a rare plant population. 
However, land managers need to consider the consequences of such a 
strategy in order to avoid genetic swamping and the loss of uniquely 
adapted alleles in the recipient population (Weeks et al. 2011). Srgò and 
colleagues (2011) list two situations in which augmentation might war-
rant consideration: 1) when populations have experienced reductions 
in genetic diversity and their dispersal processes have been hampered 
by fragmented habitats, and 2) populations with strong local adapta-
tion, which may lessen their ability to adapt to environmental changes.
 
Ecological Restoration of Degraded Habitats 
Restoration ecology and conservation biology share many of the same 
basic goals, although they have some fundamental diﬀerences that can 
lead to conﬂicts in practice, based mainly on their historical founda-
tions (Seddon et al. 2007). Te core of restoration ecology is that some 
measures of habitat loss and population decline are temporary and 
reversible whereas conservation biology seeks to minimize permanent 
losses (Young 2000). 
 
Tese two ﬁelds can come together to work toward preventing further 
habitat degradation and restoring the remnants that remain (Noss et 
al. 2006).  Passive restoration of degraded habitats may take signiﬁcant 
periods of time, and ecological restoration is one way to speed up natu-
ral processes in order to enhance habitat for conservation of various 
species (Dobson et al. 1997).
Ex Situ Approaches to Rare Plant Habitat 
Enhancement
Conservationists generally argue that in situ approaches should be used 
wherever feasible because they involve less risk of accidentally altering 
ecosystems by introducing a species that may have invasive tendencies 
Strategies for Enhancing and Restoring Rare Plants and Their Habitats in the Face 
of  Climate Change and Habitat Destruction in the Intermountain West

Ecological Restoration Institute
3
outside of its native habitat. With the exception of seed banking, ex 
situ management strategies should be considered as an alternative only 
in exceptional circumstances (IUCN 2002) and afer much delibera-
tion among aﬀected entities. In the following section, four ex situ 
strategies are discussed in some detail: 1) seed banking, 2) reintroduc-
tion, 3) assisted migration, and 4) seed transfer zones (along with in-
formation about reciprocal transplant studies and common gardens).
Seed Banking 
Seed banking (i.e., the systematic saving of seeds and other propa-
gules) is another way to provide a safety net for rare species and 
hopefully ward oﬀ extinction of individual species. It may be useful 
in both in situ and ex situ conservation and restoration approaches. 
One example of such an eﬀort is the Seeds of Success (SOS) Program, 
which is an initiative that partners the Bureau of Land Management 
(BLM) with botanic gardens and other organizations to “increase the 
number of species and the amount of native seed that is available for 
use to stabilize, rehabilitate, and restore lands in the United States by 
partnering with the seed producing industry” (BLM 2011). While 
SOS currently supports ex situ collection of seeds of more common 
species (G3-G5—ranked globally as vulnerable, apparently secure, and 
secure, respectively), rare plant ex situ conservation is the specialty 
of the Center for Plant Conservation (CPC) in St. Louis, Missouri. 
Te mission of the CPC is to “conserve and restore the imperiled 
native plants of the United States to secure them from extinction” 
(CPC 2012).  Along with SOS and CPC, there are other organizations, 
such as the Dixon National Tallgrass Prairie Seed Bank (located at 
the Chicago Botanic Garden), that are also involved in seed banking 
eﬀorts for research and restoration purposes (Vitt et al. 2010). Te 
seed collection protocols of one of these organizations are outlined 
in Box 1. Improving overall ecosystem health by ensuring that plant 
communities contain a full and healthy complement of common 
species is important—which is why the collaboration and restoration 
eﬀorts of the seed-banking organization are so critical to plant species 
conservation.
Box 1. Seed collection protocols for common (G3-G5) plant species 
from Vitt et al. 2010 (originally a synthesis of protocols developed for 
the Millennium Seed Bank; Brown and Briggs 1991; Vitt and Havens 
2004; Guerrant et al. 2004b.
• Collect from a minimum of 50 maternal plants to capture 95 
percent of the genetic diversity
• Collect no more than 10–20 percent of the available seed on 
any given day to ensure that collection eﬀorts do not aﬀect vital 
(reproductive) rates of the target populations
• Collect across any obvious environmental gradients
• Collect both from within the center of population density and 
from the periphery to ensure the greatest genetic diversity, and 
to ensure collection from individuals that may perform better in 
marginal portions of the habitat
• Search out and collect even the smallest plants because they may 
contain trait variation that would pre-adapt them to an alternate 
site
• In general, collections are bulked within a population, but ma-
ternal lines may be stored separately in some target species:
- to facilitate research eﬀorts
- when a species has naturally low reproduction
- to ensure equalization of the plants used as 
   foundation stock so that no one line has more weight   
   than another 
- when collecting from small or marginal populations
- when collecting species known to be self-incompatible
• Collect a minimum of 3,000 seeds of common or abundant 
species, with an optimal target of 30,000 (adjusting amounts ac-
cordingly for rare or uncommon species). It may be necessary to 
collect across years in the same populations. If so:
 
- collect no more than 10 percent of the seeds
 
- consider maternal-line collections (where seeds from   
 
  individual plants are maintained separately in order to
 
  facilitate better tracking and control for future seeding   
 
  projects) rather than bulked collections
 
- annual collections should be accessioned individually
• Collect at peak seed maturity, recognizing that some phenotypes 
(and sires) will be excluded, or collect on multiple days
• Collect from within the entire inﬂorescence, recognizing that 
proximal patterns of maternal plant development as well as 
patterns of embryo development might be inﬂuenced by genetic 
makeup of the embryos and, therefore, skew genetic contribu-
tions
• Collect voucher specimens for conﬁrmation of species identiﬁ-
cation. Leaf tissue samples can ultimately become DNA vouch-
ers. Collection information is critical to establish provenance of 
each accession. Standard collection protocols that include the 
collector’s name, locality information (particularly GPS coordi-
nates with the correct datum noted), property ownership, terms 
of the collecting permit if it limits the use of the seeds, etc., are 
essential. Information about the habitat that might be critical 
for habitat matching includes basic soil type, description of the 
terrain and hydrologic qualities of the site as well as community 
dominants and other associated plant species. Additional infor-
mation about the status of the target population should include 
an estimate of population size, percentage of reproductive plants, 
and the number of plants from which the seeds were collected, 
which is particularly important when the seeds are not separated 
by maternal line.
Diﬀerent approaches can be taken when choosing the appropriate 
genotypes to conserve through seed banking. High-latitude and high-
elevation populations presumably contain the necessary genotypes to 
expand populations afer the last ice age and may still have the advan-
tage in colonizing these areas (McLachlan et al. 2007, Loss et al. 2011). 
Tere are also advantages to increasing genetic diversity by collecting 
genotypes from 1) the low-latitude and low-elevation edges of a spe-
cies range (i.e., those plants most likely to colonize)) 2) the interior 
of the range (i.e., those plants most likely to be adversely aﬀected by 
climate change) or 3) poor or harsh sites, where populations may have 
developed traits that allow them to tolerate more extreme conditions 
(McLachlan et al. 2007, SER 2009, Loss et al. 2011).
Reintroduction
Reintroduction is an attempt to establish a species in an area that was 
once part of its historical range, but from which it has been extirpated 
or become extinct (Note: the term “reestablishment” is sometimes 
used interchangeably but it implies that the reintroduction has been 
successful). Any reintroduction or translocation project (note that 
both terms are used interchangeably and are deﬁned as the intentional 
movement of species across landscapes to maintain or enhance biodi-
versity (Weeks et al. 2011)) should begin with a well-researched plan 
(see reintroduction guidelines in Maschinski and Haskins (2012)). 
Methods for obtaining plant stock for reintroduction and transloca-
tion include collecting seed, preparing cuttings, separating clumps, 
micropropagation techniques, direct seeding at the translocation site, 
and salvage of mature plants (Vallee et al. 2004). One little used but 
promising technique is the transfer of soil containing seeds of the 
target species in the soil seed bank (Vallee et al. 2004). 
Strategies for Enhancing and Restoring Rare Plants and Their Habitats in the Face 
of  Climate Change and Habitat Destruction in the Intermountain West

Ecological Restoration Institute
4
Tere are many examples of reintroduction projects in the literature. 
Seeds and soil from donor vernal pools have been successfully trans-
located, leading to the successful establishment of threatened and 
endangered plant species (Dodero and Hanson 2000). “Living mats” 
cut from a bog have been transferred to other degraded sections of 
the bog to aid in plant community establishment (Wilcox and Ray 
1989). Large “oﬀ-the-shelf” landscaping equipment can be used to 
move salvaged plants, entire pieces of sod, and even small trees, such 
as ponderosa and pinyon pine, to new locations (Munro 1994, Heim 
1994, Ross and Travis 1997). Indeed, Curtis Prairie (in Madison, 
Wisconsin), one of the earliest restorations (1936-1941), was ac-
complished using plants dug from a prairie remnant about 35 miles 
away as well as seeds and sod obtained from roadsides and railway 
rights-of-way (Jordan 1983, Sperry 1994). 
Salvaged plants should be relocated to sites with similar aspect, soil 
type, elevation, hydrology, precipitation, and community associations 
in order to increase chances of success (Bowler and Hager 2000), 
which, in terms of plant reintroduction, is generally measured by 
the successful reproduction of reintroduced individuals. Research 
indicates that the current rates of survival, ﬂowering, and fruiting are 
low on average in reintroduction projects worldwide (Albrecht et al. 
2011, Godefroid et al. 2011, Maschinski et al. 2012). 
In the southwestern United States, a survey of land managers tasked 
with conserving rare species revealed that herbivory and trampling, 
invasive plant species encroachment, oﬀ-road vehicle use, and ﬁre 
suppression or ﬁre regime disruption present the greatest threats 
to rare species (Springer et al. 2011). Respondents focused their 
conservation eﬀorts mainly on occupied habitat, with only 11 percent 
reporting attempts to establish species on unoccupied, but seem-
ingly suitable, habitat. Survey responses indicated that attempts to 
introduce species to new habitat have had a fairly low success rate, 
with two species showing indications of successful establishment—
Kearney’s bluestar (Amsonia kearneyana) and Chiricahua Mountain 
dock (Rumex orthoneurus)—and the other three attempts unsuccess-
ful: Charleston Mountain angelica (Angelica scabrida), Charleston 
Mountain goldenbush (Ericameria compacta), and Siler’s pincushion 
cactus (Sclerocactus sileri). Reasons given for the failed attempts 
include mortality of transplants at the relocation sites, failure of 
seeds to germinate, and death of seedlings shortly afer germination 
(Springer et al. 2011).
In their study of reintroduction programs, Godefroid and colleagues 
(2011) identiﬁed several programmatic failings including: 1) insuﬃ-
cient monitoring (most projects collect monitoring data for four years 
or less), 2) inadequate documentation, particularly for failed projects, 
3) lack of understanding of species biology and the reasons for popu-
lation declines, 4) overly optimistic evaluation of success based on 
short-term results, and 5) poorly deﬁned success criteria. Similarly, 
to some of the ﬁndings in the Springer et al. (2011) survey, Vallee and 
colleagues (2004) found that unsuccessful, single species transloca-
tions were due to the following: 1) failure to adequately control or 
manage the threats aﬀecting the species or its new habitat, 2) lack of 
adequate consideration of the biological and ecological requirements 
of the species (including mycorrhizal associations, pollinators, and 
seed/fruit dispersers), 3) use of inappropriate translocation methods, 
4) failure to use an experimental approach to determine variables that 
might aﬀect success, 5) absence of ongoing commitment of resources 
to monitoring, evaluation and follow-up maintenance, and 6) failure 
to consider genetic variability.
Moving the plants is not the only concern, because some rare species, 
such as orchids, rely on mycorrhizal fungi for seed germination, and 
even seedling development in some species. Tey may also require 
specialized pollinators (Keel 2007). Attempts have been made to 
restore plant-pollinator mutualisms, but increasing ﬂowering plants 
to draw in pollinators has the potential to backﬁre if pollinators 
concentrate on the more common planted species, rather than the in-
conspicuous targeted species in need of pollinators (Menz et al. 2011). 
In addition, rare species may already be hampered by constraints to 
reproduction, dispersal, or other factors, making range shifs particu-
larly diﬃcult (Marsico and Hellmann 2009).  To complicate matters, 
ﬂowering and reproduction may be curtailed in years of below average 
precipitation, further impeding unassisted plant migration eﬀorts if 
the climate in a given area becomes warmer and drier over a long time 
period. 
With these problems in mind, the CPC has developed a checklist of 
actions needed to advance successful rare plant reintroduction proj-
ects (Maschinski et al. 2012). Tis list (Box 2) is generally supported 
by the ﬁndings of other plant reintroduction researchers (e.g., Vallee et 
al. 2004, Godefroid et al. 2011).
Box 2. Te Center for Plant Conservation’s proposed best manage-
ment practices guidelines for rare plant reintroduction (Maschinski et 
al. 2012).
 
✓  Secure adequate funding to support the project.
 
✓  Keep detailed records throughout the process and store  
 
     documentation in multiple locations. Document the    
 
     species status and distribution.
 
✓  Ascertain the threats to a particular rare species and,
 
     when possible, take action to remove, control or manage
 
     these threats, such as removal of invasive species or
 
     thinning tree canopy. Engage land managers in 
 
     discussion about options for conservation of the species.
 
     Consider whether the proposed reintroduction will do  
 
     any harm to the recipient community or to existing
 
     wild populations. If so, consider alternative 
 
     conservation strategies.
 
✓  Determine whether the reintroduction is feasible legally,
 
      logistically, and socially.
 
✓  If a reintroduction effort cannot be justified, do not   
 
     proceed. 
 
✓  Examine other conservation options.
 
✓  Develop a reintroduction plan. Whenever possible
 
     design the reintroduction as an experiment and seek
 
     peer review.
 
✓  Obtain legal permission to conduct the reintroduction.
 
✓  Ensure that land owners and managers are supportive of
 
     the project and can account for possible changes in the  
 
     future.
 
✓  Know the species biology and ecology.
 
✓  Ascertain whether genetic studies are needed before
 
     conducting the reintroduction and, if possible, conduct
 
     studies to measure genetic structure of the focal species.
 
     At a minimum, gather information about life history
 
     traits.
Strategies for Enhancing and Restoring Rare Plants and Their Habitats in the Face 
of  Climate Change and Habitat Destruction in the Intermountain West
Photo 2.  A National Park Service employee tends endangered As-
tragalus cremnophylax var. cremnophylax (sentry milkvetch) plants 
in the greenhouse in preparation for reintroduction into the ﬁeld.  
Photo by Janice Busco.

Ecological Restoration Institute
5
✓  Select appropriate source material that has been 
     collected from a location with similar climatic and
     environmental conditions to the restoration/
     reintroduction site.
✓  Where possible, use ex situ source material before 
     collecting new material from wild populations.
✓  Confirm that the species can be successfully propagated 
     and that adequate numbers of high-quality healthy, 
     genetically diverse founder plants are available. Allow 
     enough time to generate adequate numbers of plants for 
     reintroduction efforts.
✓  Choose a suitable recipient site, preferably one that 
     has connectivity to additional suitable habitat to allow 
     for dispersal opportunities. Seek or develop growing 
     conditions with the intention of improving germination, 
     establishment, and survival of next generation seedlings.
✓  Determine the necessary timing, materials, personnel, 
     and logistics to implement the reintroduction.
✓  Reintroduce at least 50 plants of varying size and 
     life-stage to account for variable success of life stages in 
     different microsites, using whole plants rather than 
     seeds, where possible.
 
✓  Plant in a spatial pattern and at a density that will 
     promote effective pollination, seed production and 
     recruitment and minimize competition. Pattern and 
     density can often be determined from observations of 
     natural populations or by conducting a spatial point 
     pattern analysis. Label plants and plots with color
     coded, long-lasting tags.
✓  Provide additional care following planting to ensure
     establishment, including watering and weeding.
✓  Develop a monitoring plan and determine how success 
     will be measured. Collect demographic or life history 
     data about the reintroduced population and, if possible, 
     about wild reference populations for comparison 
     purposes.
✓  Monitor for a minimum of three years. Additional years 
     of monitoring are necessary to legitimately define 
     success, so ten years or more is ideal. As short-term
     goals are achieved, monitoring intensity may change 
     from experimental to observational.
✓  Analyze data in a timely fashion and publish results in
     several forms of media, including newsletters, websites, 
     and popular news media in addition to scientific 
     journals. 
Assisted Migration
Assisted migration (AM), also known as managed translocation, 
managed relocation or assisted colonization, is a more recent, and 
controversial, ex situ strategy (Holmes 2007, Camacho 2010, Hewitt 
et al. 2011).  The Managed Relocation Working Group, a collabora-
tion of researchers, land managers and conservationists, has defined 
this strategy as the “purposeful translocation of species adversely 
affected by global change, particularly climate change (2008).”  A 
small number of assisted migration projects involving plant species 
are already under way around the world (McLachlan et al. 2007, 
Marris 2009). At least one experiment was initiated to examine the 
effects of climate change and to test assisted migration approaches by 
translocating an intact piece of meadow soil and vegetation to a site 
at higher elevation (see Bruelheide 2003). Thus far, these experi-
ments and projects have been on a very small scale and may or may 
not be a part of well-researched scientific studies. As a result, there is 
little published scientific literature available to document long-term 
success or failure. For the conservation of rare species in a changing 
climate, there are risks with both action and inaction, particularly in 
relation to biodiversity (Schwartz et al. 2009, Lawler and Olden 2011). 
The main potential benefits of AM are the possibility of preventing 
the extinction of species vulnerable to climate change and protecting 
species that are confined to fragmented or specialized habitats (Hewitt 
et al. 2011). On the other hand, researchers have identified numerous 
risks, including:
• 
Introduced species may become invasive (Ricciardi and Sim-
berloff 2009) and/or undesirable pathogens may be introduced 
(Hoegh-Guldberg et al. 2008)
• 
Funds may be diverted away from critical conservation projects, 
including restoration or reversal of habitat fragmentation
• 
Single species may be valued more highly than communities or 
ecosystems
• 
Climate modeling may be incorrect for future bioclimatic enve-
lopes (Hewitt et al. 2011, Haskins and Keel 2012)
• 
Success rates may be even lower than typical due to uncertainty 
of climatic conditions (Haskins and Keel 2012)
• 
Introduced and native populations may hybridize and cause 
genetic swamping of native populations in the recipient com-
munity (Minteer and Collins 2010) 
• 
Socioeconomic risks involve financial and cultural harm to the 
recipient community with AM (Richardson et al. 2009) 
• 
Unresolved legal issues (Camacho 2010)
Despite these acknowledged risks, increasing numbers of scientists 
and conservation organizations are beginning to explore how AM 
might be most effectively implemented, should a conservation need 
arise (Swarts and Dixon 2009, Liu et al. 2010). Haskins and Keel 
(2012) suggest that to make AM an acceptable option would require 
research that would include ecology, climate research, and ethics. 
Planning, conducting weed risk assessments for the species be-
ing moved, and following the reintroduction guidelines outlined in 
Maschinski and Haskins (2012), or similar guidelines, will also likely 
be essential to ensure that any AM project is implemented success-
fully.  Hoegh-Guldberg and colleagues (2008) provide an excellent 
flow chart for making decisions about whether to proceed with AM or 
take some other course of action (see Fig. 2). Likewise, Gordon (1994) 
compiled a very useful dichotomous key in the early 1990s to assist 
with decision-making in situations involving translocation. Although 
this key was created prior to our present concern over climate change, 
it remains an invaluable tool for land managers needing to make 
decisions about whether or not to take the AM approach. Key deci-
sion elements include: 1) degree of threat to the species that is being 
considered for translocation, 2) dispersal from site of introduction, 3) 
interspecific genetic risks, 4) cause of threat, 5) propagule source, 6) 
competitive interactions, 7) consumptive interactions, 8) contamina-
tion risks, and 9) site management.
Strategies for Enhancing and Restoring Rare Plants and Their Habitats in the Face 
of  Climate Change and Habitat Destruction in the Intermountain West
Photo 3.  Transplanting the rare Phemeranthus validulus (Tusayan 
ﬂameﬂower) from a construction site to a more protected site.  
Photo by Janice Busco.

Ecological Restoration Institute
6
Figure 2. Decision framework for assessing possible species translo-
cation (Adapted from Hoegh-Guldberg et al. 2008)
Determining Rare Plant Translocation 
Suitability
Whatever type of rare plant translocation is chosen (i.e., reintroduc-
tion or assisted migration), the land manager will have to determine 
the suitability of a species for the proposed project. Fortunately, there 
are some existing tools to use for this purpose—seed transfer zone 
maps, reciprocal transplant studies, and common garden studies—as 
will be explained in the following section. These tools may help iden-
tify whether a plant species might survive translocation to a given site 
as well as provide important information about its genotype. 
Seed transfer zones are “geographic areas within which plant materi-
als can be moved freely with little disruption of genetic patterns or 
loss of local adaptation” (Miller et al. 2011, see also U.S. Forest Ser-
vice 2012). Researchers at the U.S. Forest Service Pacific Northwest 
Research Station and at the Western Wildland Environmental Threat 
Assessment Center have put together several useful tools, including 
the Wildland Threat Mapper: Seed Zones for Native Plants (USFS 
2012). While these tools are helpful, the researchers caution that, 
at this point in time, the maps are not species specific and are only 
intended as guidelines or a starting point for more detailed, site-
specific study. In addition, seed transfer zones may change over time 
as climate shifts occur.
Johnson and colleagues (2004) conducted long-term trials of tree 
seed zones and found that poorly adapted tree seed sources were gen-
erally able to tolerate average conditions, but were unable to tolerate 
rare climatic events that occurred every ten or more years. A similar 
pattern may be observable in herbaceous species. This is cause for 
concern as weather events become more extreme, and it points to the 
need for longer term studies that will be able to capture responses to 
these extreme events.
If populations are tested in various environments through recipro-
cal transplant studies (i.e., in experiments where species from two 
or more habitats are introduced into each other’s habitats), and local 
sources of plant material outperform more distant sources, then using 
material from appropriate seed zones may be necessary to protect the 
adaptive patterns within populations from those zones (Kitzmiller 
2009). Using only local sources of plant material to augment popula-
tions may lead to genetically depauperate populations, with insuf-
ficient evolutionary potential to meet new environmental challenges 
across a highly degraded landscape (Broadhurst et al. 2008, Srgò et al. 
2011). In addition, distant populations may be more able to adapt to 
these changes than local sources (Srgò et al. 2011).  “Composite prov-
enancing” is a strategy that uses local seed sources, along with sources 
from areas farther away with matching soil type, aspect, elevation and 
community type, with the hope that new genetic combinations able 
to adapt and to withstand climate changes will be produced (Broad-
urst et al. 2008). These approaches are somewhat novel and, like 
assisted migration, require additional research and discussion among 
scientists and practitioners prior to implementation.  
Common garden experiments involve bringing species from various 
habitats into one locale to determine genetic differences within and 
among populations. They can also be helpful for matching seed sourc-
es of individual species to restoration sites that have suitable ecological 
conditions. Low-stress environments may mask genetic variation in 
certain traits such as survival, germination, and flowering (Kitzmiller 
2009). When seeds of various populations are brought together to 
grow in common environmental conditions, phenological differences 
that are observed among the different sources may be assumed to be 
due to genetic differences.  Caution is warranted, however, with the 
use of these techniques in terms of AM programs. Species that experi-
ence vigorous growth or adaptations to a wide variety of environments 
in common garden experiments may have the potential to displace 
other species and reduce diversity both within species and within the 
plant community as a whole (Johnson et al. 2010). 
Conclusions
In this working paper, we have described several strategies that land 
managers may find useful in their efforts to conserve and/or restore 
rare plant species. To summarize, these include:
• In situ strategies (on-site protection and/or restoration of  habi-
tats and ecosystems along with their associated species)
 
▶  Manage or restore habitat to increase resiliency (e.g., 
 
     restore disturbances such as fire to reduce 
 
     competition, move threatened plants to a safer locale 
 
     within their current range)
 
▶  Reduce habitat fragmentation to increase dispersal  
 
     (e.g., habitat corridors)
 
▶  Identify and protect potential plant refugia
 
▶  Augment existing plant populations (e.g., reintroduce 
 
     plants/seeds into existing habitat or populations, 
 
     protect existing plants from disturbance, herbivory)
• Ex situ strategies (off-site maintenance and protection of living 
genetic material of species)
 
▶  Seed banking (collection and storage of rare plant seed 
Strategies for Enhancing and Restoring Rare Plants and Their Habitats in the Face 
of  Climate Change and Habitat Destruction in the Intermountain West
Photo 4.  An NPS employee displays an Astragalus cremnophylax 
var. cremnophylax (sentry milkvetch) reintroduced into the ﬁeld. 
Tis plant will be monitored for several years to gauge the success 
of the project.  Photo by Janice Busco.
Is there a high risk of decline or
extinction under climate change?
Are translocation and
establishment of species
technically possible?
Do beneﬁts of translocation
outweigh the biological and
socioeconomic cost and
constraints?
Go to options 2 and 3
High
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Low
Moderate
Continue and improve conventional approaches
(i) Improve landscape connectivity in required direction of
colonization, (ii) genetically enhance to improve climate 
robustness of populations within existing geographic range, and 
(iii) reduce local stressors on population.
Invoke ex situ conservation practices (e.g. store seed).
Is it possible to create habitat (e.g. wetlands, meadows) at higher 
latitudes to accommodate “natural” movement?
Will the organisms arrive on their own new habitat?
Wait and facilitate establishment (protect organisms as the arrive).
Undertake translocation (assisted migration).
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Ecological Restoration Institute
7
     for use as needed in both ex situ or in situ situations; 
     collaborative efforts are under way between federal 
     agencies and botanic gardens/arboreta)
▶  Reintroduction (establish a species in an area that was 
     once part of its historical range, but from which it has 
     been extirpated or become extinct; also known as trans-
     location)
▶  Assisted migration (controversial, experimental strategy 
     that involves moving species specifically to overcome 
     the expectations/predictions of climate change 
     occurring within the species’ current habitat/range)
We have also discussed the potential of seed transfer zone maps, 
reciprocal transplant studies, and common garden studies to help the 
land manager determine the likelihood of success in reintroduction, 
translocation, and assisted migration projects. 
There are a number of excellent resources for land managers and oth-
ers about in situ and ex situ approaches to rare plant conservation and 
restoration. These include Genetics and Conservation of Rare Plants 
(Falk and Holsinger 1991), Restoration of Endangered Species: Concep-
tual Issues, Planning, and Implementation (Bowles and Whelan 1995), 
Restoring Diversity: Strategies for the Reintroduction of Endangered 
Plants (Falk et al. 1996), Ex Situ Plant Conservation: Supporting Species 
Survival in the Wild (Guerrant et al. 2004a), and Plant Reintroduction 
in a Changing Climate: Promises and Perils (Maschinski and Haskins 
2012).
While saving all the “pieces” is probably unlikely, a logical first step for 
any land manager is to conserve as many species as possible through 
seed banking while at the same time protecting and restoring as much 
critical habitat as possible. Other strategies include increasing the 
permeability of the landscape by creating corridors, working with 
policymakers and the public to modify existing laws, such as the En-
dangered Species Act (under which many translocated species would 
be considered non-native outside of their historic range (Camacho 
2010)), and providing incentives for landowners to participate in rare 
plant conservation efforts. 
Land managers and others concerned about or mandated to conserve 
rare plants will face unprecedented challenges as the climate changes. 
Planning for these changes should begin now, so that decisions will 
be made that follow existing, well-planned frameworks. Fortunately, 
steps are now being taken to lay the groundwork for solutions and 
guidelines for conserving the most imperiled species. This paper and 
the references it cites provide helpful information and promote an 
active, engaged dialogue among natural resource professionals for 
planning to meet these challenges.
Acknowledgments
Thanks to Mark Daniels for assistance with literature searches, and 
to Joyce Maschinski and Kris Haskins of Fairchild Tropical Botanical 
Garden and The Arboretum at Flagstaff, respectively, for their willing-
ness to share the latest drafts from their upcoming book related to 
plant reintroductions.
References
Albrecht, M.A., E.O. Guerrant Jr., J. Maschinski and K.L.Kennedy. 
2011. A long-term view of rare plant reintroduction. 
Biological Conservation 144:2557-2558.
Bevill, R.L., S.M. Louda, and L.M. Stanforth. 1999. Protection from 
natural enemies in managing rare plant species. 
Conservation Biology 13(6):1323-1331.
Bowler, P.A. and C.A. Hager. 2000. The ethics of plant and animal 
salvage in ecological restoration projects. Ecological 
Restoration 18(4):262-263. 
Bowles, M.L. and C.J. Whelan. 1995. Restoring endangered species: 
Conceptual issues, planning, and implementation. 
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Broadhurst, L.M., A. Lowe, D.J. Coates, S.A. Cunningham, M.
McDonald, P.A. Vesk, and C. Yates. 2008. Seed supply for 
broadscale restoration: Maximizing evolutionary potential.   
Evolutionary Applications 1:587-597. 
Brown, A.H.D., Briggs, J.D., 1991. Sampling strategies for genetic 
variation in ex situ collections of endangered plant species. 
Pages 99-119 in D.A. Falk and K.E. Holsinger (eds.), In: 
Falk, D.A., Holsinger, K.E. (eds.), Genetics and 
 
conservation of rare plants. New York: Oxford University Press.
Brudvig, L.A., E.I. Damschen, J J. Tewksbury, N M. Haddad and D.J. 
 
Levey. 2009. Landscape connectivity promotes plant
 
biodiversity spillover into non-target habitats. Proceedings 
 
of the National Academies of Science 106(23):9328-9332.
Bruelheide, H. 2003. Translocation of a montane meadow to simulate 
 
the potential impact of climate change. Applied Vegeta- 
                
 
 
tion Science 6:23-34.Bureau of Land Management. 2011.  
 
 
 
Seeds of Success. Available online at: 
 
http://www.blm.gov/mt/st/en/prog/botany/sos.html. 
 
Accessed November 21, 2011.
Cain, M.L., H.Damman, and A. Muir. 1998. Seed dispersal and the 
 
Holocene migration of woodland herbs. Ecological Mono-
 
graphs 68(3):325-347.
Cain, M.L., B.G. Milligan, and A.E. Strand. 2000. Long-distance 
 
seed dispersal in plant populations. American Journal of 
 
Botany 87(9):1217-1227.
Camacho, A.E. 2010. Assisted migration: Redefining nature and 
 
natural resource law under climate change. Yale Journal  
 
 
 
on Regulation 27(2):171-255.
Center for Plant Conservation. 2012. Mission statement. Available 
 
online at: http://www.centerforplantconservation.org/
 
About/Mission/Mission.asp. Accessed March 5, 2012.
Damschen, E.I., N.M. Haddad, J.L. Orrock, J.J. Tewksbury, and D.J. 
 
Levey. 2006. Corridors increase plant species richness at 
 
large scales. Science 313:1284-1286.
Dobson, A.P., A.D. Bradshaw, and A.J.M. Baker. 1997. Hopes for 
 
the future: Restoration ecology and conservation biology. 
 
Science 277:515-522.
Dodero, M. and B. Hanson. 2000. Wet-season translocation of vernal 
 
pool species improves results (California). Ecological 
 
Restoration 18(2):197-198.
Donald, P.F. and A.D. Evans. 2006. Habitat connectivity and matrix 
 
restoration: The wider implications of agri-environment 
 
schemes. Journal of Applied Ecology 43:209-218.
Falk, D.A., and K.E. Holsinger. 1991. Genetics and conservation of 
 
rare plants. New York: Oxford University Press.
Falk, D.A., C.I. Millar, and M.Olwell. 1996. Restoring diversity: 
 
Strategies for reintroduction of endangered plants. 
 
Washington, DC: Island Press. 
Foden, W., G. Mace, J.-C. Vié, A. Angulo, S. Butchart, L. DeVantier, H. 
 
Dublin, A. Gutsche, S. Stuart, and E. Turak. 2008. Species 
 
susceptibility to climate change impacts. In J.C. Vié, C. 
 
Hilton-Taylor and S.N. Stuart (eds.), The 2008 Review of 
 
The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. IUCN Gland, 
 
Switzerland. Available online: http://training.fws.gov/EC/
 
resources/SHC/species_susceptibility_to_climate_ 
 
 
 
change_impacts.pdf.  Accessed December 9, 2011. 
Fulé, P.Z. 2008. Does it make sense to restore wildland fire in changing  
 
 
 
climate? Restoration Ecology 16(4):526-531.
Godefroid, S., C. Piazza, G. Rossi, S. Buord, A.-D. Stevens, R. 
 
Aguraiuja, C. Cowell, C. W. Weekley, G. Vogg, J. M. 
 
Irondo, I. Johnson, B. Dixon, D. Gordon, S. Magnanon,  
 
B. Valentin, K. Bjureke, R. Koopman, M. Vicens, M. 
 
Virevaires and T. Vanderborght.  2011. How successful are 
 
plant species reintroductions? Biological Conservation 
 
144:672-682.
Gordon, D.R. 1994. Translocation of species into conservation areas: 
 
A key for natural resource managers. Natural Areas Journal   
 
 
14(1):31-37.
Guerrant, E.O., K. Havens, and M. Maunder. 2004a. Ex situ plant 
 
conservation: Supporting species survival in the wild. 
 
Washington, DC: Island Press. 
Guerrant, E.O., P.L. Fiedler, K. Havens, and M. Maunder. 2004b. Revised
 
genetic sampling guidelines for conservation 
 
collections of rare and endangered plants. Pages 419-441 
 
in E.O. Guerrant, K. Havens, and M. Maunder, (eds.), Ex 
 
situ plant conservation: Supporting species survival in the 
 
wild. Washington, DC: Island Press.
Haskins, K.E. and B.G. Keel. 2012. Managed relocation: Panacea or 
 
pandemonium? In J. Maschinski and K.E. Haskins (eds.), 
 
Plant reintroduction in a changing climate: Promises and 
 
perils. Washington, DC: Island Press. 
Heim, M. 1994. Successful salvage of arid land trees and shrubs 
 
(Nevada). Restoration & Management Notes 12(2):216-
 
217.
Hewitt, N., N. Klenk, A.L. Smith, D.R. Basely, N. Yan, S. Wood, J.I. 
 
MacLellan, C. Lipsig-Mumme, and I. Henriques. 2011. 
 
Taking stock of the assisted migration debate. Biological 
 
Conservation 144:2560-2572.
Hobbs, R.J., E. Higgs, and J.A. Harris. 2009. Novel ecosystems: 
 
Implications for conservation and restoration. Trends in 
 
Ecology and Evolution 24(11):599-605.
Hoegh-Guldberg, O., L. Hughes, S. McIntyre, D.B. Lindenmayer, C.  
 
 
 
Parmesan, H.P. Possingham, and C.D. Thomas. 2008. 
 
Assisted colonization and rapid climate change. Science 
 
321:345-346.
Holmes, B. 2007. Assisted migration: Helping nature to relocate. New 
 
Scientist 2624:46-49.
IUCN. 2002. IUCN technical guidelines on the management of 
 
ex-situ populations for conservation. Approved at the 14th 
 
Meeting of the Programme Committee of Council, Gland, 
 
Switzerland, 10 December 2002. Available online at:
 
http://data.iucn.org/dbtw-wpd/edocs/Rep-2002-017.pdf. 
 
Accessed November 11, 2011.  
Johnson, G.R., F.C. Sorensen, J.B. St. Clair, and R.C. Cronn. 2004. 
 
Pacific Northwest forest tree seed zones: A template for 
 
native plants? Native Plants 2:131-140.
Strategies for Enhancing and Restoring Rare Plants and Their Habitats in the Face 
of  Climate Change and Habitat Destruction in the Intermountain West

Ecological Restoration Institute
8
Johnson, R.C., V.J. Erickson, N.L. Mandel, J.B St. Clair and K.W. 
 
Vance-Borland. 2010. Mapping genetic variation and seed 
 
zones for Bromus carinatus in the Blue Mountains of 
 
eastern Oregon, USA. Botany 88:725-736.
Jordan III, W.R. 1983. Looking back: A pioneering restoration project 
 
turns fifty. Restoration & Management Notes 1(3):4-10. 
Jump, A.S. and Peñuelas, J. 2005, Running to stand still: Adaptation 
 
and the response of plants to rapid climate change. 
 
Ecology Letters 8:1010–1020.
Keel, B.G. 2007. Assisted migration as a conservation strategy for 
 
rapid climate change: investigating extended photoperiod 
 
and mycobiont distributions for Habenaria repens 
 
 
 
Nuttall (Orchidaceae) as a case study. PhD dissertation.  
 
 
 
Antioch University New England. 
Keppel, G., K.P. Van Niel, G.W. Wardell-Johnson, C.J. Yates, M. 
                     
Byrne, L. Mucina, A.G.T. Schut, S.D. Hopper and S.E.
 
Franklin. 2011. Refugia: Identifying and understanding  
 
 
safe havens for biodiversity under climate change. Global
 
Ecology and Biogeography, DOI: 10.1111/j.1466- 
 
 
 
8238.2011.00686.x
Kew Gardens. 2011. What poses the biggest threat to plant life?
 
Available online at: http://www.kew.org/science/plants-at-  
 
 
risk/threats.htm. Accessed November 18, 2011.
Kirchner, F., J.-B. Ferdy, C. Andalo, B. Colas and J. Moret. 2003. Role  
 
 
of corridors in plant dispersal: An example with the 
 
endangered Ranunculus nodiflorus. Conservation Biology  
 
 
 
17(2):401-410.
Kitzmiller, J.H. 2009. Regional genetic variation in three native 
 
grasses in northern California. Native Plants 10(3):263-
 
280.
Krause, C.M. 2010. Conservation ecology of endemic plants of the 
 
Colorado Plateau: Climate change impacts on range shifts. 
 
PhD dissertation. Northern Arizona University. 
Lawler, J.L. and J.D. Olden. 2011. Reframing the debate over assisted 
 
colonization. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 
 
9:569-574. 
Leopold, A. 1949. A sand county almanac and sketches from here and 
 
there. New York: Oxford University Press.
Liu, H., C.-L.Feng, Y.-B. Luo, B.-S. Chen, Z.-S. Wang and H.-Y. Gu. 
 
2010. Potential challenges of climate change to orchid 
 
conservation in a wild orchid hotspot in southwestern 
 
China. The Botanical Review 76(2):174-192.
Loss, S.R., L.A. Terwilliger and A. C. Peterson. 2011. Assisted colo-
 
nization: Integrating conservation strategies in the face of 
 
climate change. Biological Conservation 144:92-100.
Managed Relocation Working Group. 2008. Info about MR. Available 
 
online at: http://www.nd.edu/~hellmann/MRWorking 
 
 
 
Group/Info_about_MR.html. Accessed February 1, 2012.
Marris, E. 2009. Planting the forests of the future. Nature 459:906-
 
908.
Marsico, T.D. and J.J. Hellmann. 2009. Dispersal limitation inferred 
 
from an experimental translocation of Lomatium (Apia-
 
ceae) species outside their geographic ranges. Oikos 
 
118:1783-1792.
Maschinski, J. and K.E. Haskins. 2012. Plant reintroduction in a 
 
changing climate: Promises and perils. Washington, DC: 
 
Island Press. 
Maschinski, J., M.A. Albrecht, L. Monks and K.E. Haskins. 2012. 
 
Appendix 1: Center for Plant Conservation best reintro-
 
duction practice guidelines. In J. Maschinski and K.E. 
 
Haskins (eds.), Plant reintroduction in a changing climate: 
 
Promises and perils. Washington, DC: Island Press. 
McLachlan, J.S., J.J. Hellmann, and M.W. Schwartz. 2007. A frame-
 
work for debate of assisted migration in an era of climate 
 
change. Conservation Biology 21(2):297-302.
Menz, M.H.M., R. Phillips, R. Winfree, C. Kremen, M.A. Aizen, S.D. 
 
Johnson, and K.W. Dixon. 2011. Reconnecting plants and 
 
pollinators: challenges in the restoration of pollination 
 
mutualisms. Trends in Plant Science 16(1):4-12.
Miller, S.A., A. Bartow, M. Gisler, K. Ward, A.S. Young, and T.N. 
 
Kaye. 2011. Can an ecoregion serve as a seed transfer 
 
zone? Evidence from a common garden study with five  
 
 
 
native species. Restoration Ecology 19(201):268-276.
Minteer, B.A. and J.P. Collins. 2010. Move it or lose it? The ecological 
 
ethics of relocating species under climate change. 
 
Ecological Applications 20(7):1801-1804.
Morse, L.E. 1996. Plant rarity and endangerment in North America. 
 
Pages 7-22 in E.O. Guerrant, K. Havens, and M. Maunder, 
 
(eds.), Ex situ plant conservation: Supporting species 
 
survival in the wild. Washington, DC: Island Press.
Munro, J. 1994. Equipment developed to salvage plant communities 
 
(Pennsylvania). Restoration & Management Notes 
 
12(2):210.
Noss, R.F., P.Beier, W.W. Covington, R. E. Grumbine, D.B. Linden- 
 
mayer, J.W. Prather, F.Schmiegelow, T.D. Sisk, and D.J. 
 
Vosick. 2006. Recommendations for integrating restora-
 
tion ecology and conservation biology in ponderosa 
 
pine forests of the southwestern United States. Restoration 
 
Ecology 14(1):4-10.
Pearson, R.G. and T.P. Dawson. 2005. Long-distance plant dispersal 
 
and habitat fragmentation: Identifying conservation 
 
targets for spatial landscape planning under climate  
 
change. Biological Conservation 123:389-401.
Ricciardi, A. and D. Simberloff. 2009. Assisted colonization is not a 
 
viable conservation strategy. Trends in Ecology and Evolu-
 
tion 24:248-53.
Rice, K.J. and N.C. Emery. 2003. Managing microevolution: Restora-
 
tion in the face of global change. Frontiers in Ecology and 
 
the Environment 1(9):469-478.
Richardson, D.M., J.J. Hellmann, J.S. McLachlan, D.F. Sax, M.W. 
 
Schwartz, P. Gonzalez, E. J. Brennan, A. Camacho, T.L. 
 
Root, O.E. Sala, S.H. Schneider, D.M. Ashe, J.R. Clark, R. 
 
Early, J.R. Etterson, E.D. Fielder, J.L. Gill, B.A. Minteer, S. 
 
Polasky, H.D. Safford, A.R. Thompson and M. Vellend. 
 
2009. Multidimensional evaluation of managed relocation. 
 
Proceedings of the National Academies of Science  
 
 
 
106(24):9721-9724.
Ross, P.R. and C. Travis. 1997. “Off-the-shelf” machinery moves 
 
salvaged plant material (New Jersey). Restoration & 
 
Management Notes 15(1):97-98.
Schwartz, M.W., J.J. Hellmann, and J.S. McLachlan. 2009. The 
 
precautionary principle in managed relocation is miguided   
 
 
advice. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 24(9):474.
Seddon, P.J., D.P. Armstrong, and R.F. Maloney. 2007. Combining the 
 
fields of reintroduction biology and restoration ecology. 
 
Conservation Biology 21(6):1387-1390.
Society for Ecological Restoration. 2009. Ecological restoration and 
 
rare species management in response to climate change. 
 
Policy position statement. Available online at: http://www.
 
ser.org/pdf/PPS_on_Rare_Species_Final2.pdf. Accessed 
 
November 11, 2011.
 Sperry, T.M. 1994. The Curtis Prairie restoration, using the single-
 
species planting method. Natural Areas Journal 14(2):124-
 
127.
Springer, J.D., S.R. Abella, and T.D. DeKoker. 2011. A survey of  
 
monitoring and management activities for conserving rare 
 
plants in national parks and protected areas, Arizona and   
 
 
Nevada, USA. Advances in Environmental Research 8:307-
 
317.
Srgò, C.M., A.J. Lowe, and A.A. Hoffman. 2011. Building evolutionary 
 
resilience for conserving biodiversity under climate 
 
change. Evolutionary Applications 4:326-337.
Swarts N.D. and K.W. Dixon. 2009. Terrestrial orchid conservation in 
 
the age of extinction. Annals of Botany 104: 543–556.
Takahashi, K. and T. Kamitani. 2004. Effect of dispersal capacity on 
 
forest plant migration at a landscape scale. Journal of 
 
Ecology 92:778-785.
Tewksbury, J.T., D.J. Levey, N.M. Haddad, S. Sargent, J.L. 
 
Orrock, A. Weldon, B.J. Danielson, J. Brinkerhoff, E.I. 
 
Damschen and P.Townsend. 2002. Corridors affect plants, 
 
animals, and their interactions in fragmented landscapes. 
 
Proceedings of the National Academies of Science 
 
99(20):12923-12926.
Turnbull, L.A., M.J. Crawley, and M. Rees. 2000. Are plant populations 
 
seed-limited? A review of seed sowing experiments. Oikos 
 
88:225-238.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 2012. For landowners; Safe Harbor 
 
agreements. Available online at: http://www.fws.gov/
 
endangered/landowners/safe-harbor-agreements.html. 
 
Accessed February 3, 2012.
U.S. Forest Service. 2012. Seed Zone Mapper: A Mapping and 
 
Planning Tool for Plant Material Development, Gene 
 
Conservation and Native Plant Restoration. Available 
 
online at: http://www.fs.fed.us/wwetac/threat_map/Seed
 
Zones_Intro.html. Accessed February 23, 2012.
Vallee, L., T. Hogbin, L. Monks, B. Makinson, M. Matthes, and M. 
 
Rossetto. 2004. Guidelines for the translocation of 
 
threatened plants in Australia. Second edition. Canberra: 
 
Australian Network for Plant Conservation, Canberra. 
Vitt, P., Havens, K., 2004. Integrating quantitative genetics into ex situ 
 
conservation and restoration practices. Pages 286-304 in 
 
E.O. Guerrant, K. Havens, and M. Maunder, (eds.), Ex situ 
 
plant conservation: Supporting species survival in the wild. 
 
Washington, DC: Island Press.
Vitt, P, K., Havens, A.T. Kramer, D.Sollenberger and E.Yates. 2010. 
 
Assisted migration of plants: Changes in latitudes, changes 
 
in attitudes. Biological Conservation 143:18-27.
Walker, B., Holling, C. S., Carpenter, S. R., Kinzig, A. 2004. Resilience, 
 
adaptability, and transformability in social–ecological 
 
systems. Ecology and Society 9(2):5. http://www.ecolog-
 
yandsociety.org/vol9/iss2/art5/.
Weeks, A.R., C.M. Sgro, A.G.  Young, R.Frankham, N.J. Mitchell, 
 
K.A. Miller, M.Byrne, D.J. Coates, M.D.B. Eldridge, P. 
 
Sunnucks, M.F. Breed, E.A. James and A.A. Hoffmann.  
 
2011. Assessing the benefits and risks of translocations in 
 
changing environments: a genetic perspective. Evolution-
 
ary Applications 4(6):709-725.
Wilcox, D.A. and G.Ray. 1989. Using “living mat” transplants to 
 
restore a salt-impacted bog (Indiana). Restoration & Man-
 
agement Notes 7(1):39. 
Williams, J.W. and S.T. Jackson. 2007. Novel climates, no-analog com-
 
munities, and ecological surprises. Frontiers in Ecology 
 
and Environment 5(9):475-482.
Young, T.P. 2000. Restoration ecology and conservation biology. 
 
Biological Conservation 92:73-83.
Strategies for Enhancing and Restoring Rare Plants and Their Habitats in the Face 
of  Climate Change and Habitat Destruction in the Intermountain West

Working Papers in Intermountain West Frequent-ﬁre Forest Restoration
1: 
Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons and Adaptive Management  
 
Practices
2:  
Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3:  
Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
4:  
Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Beneﬁts
5:  
Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
6:  
Butterﬂies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
7:  
Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
8:  
Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
9:  
Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
10:  Te Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Restoration Model
11:  Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration
12:  Restoring Forest Roads
13:  Treating Slash afer Restoration Tinning
14:  Integrating Forest Restoration Treatments with Mexican Spotted Owl Habitat Needs
15:  Eﬀects of Forest Tinning Treatments on Fire Behavior
16:  Snags and Forest Restoration  
17:  Bat Habitat and Forest Restoration Treatments
18:  Prescribed and Wildland Use Fires in the Southwest: Do Timing and Frequency   
 
Matter? 
19:  Understory Seeding in Southwestern Forests Following Wildﬁre and Ecological   
 
Restoration Treatments
20:  Controlling Cheatgrass in Ponderosa Pine and Pinyon-Juniper Restoration Areas 
21:  Managing Coarse Woody Debris in Frequent-ﬁre Southwestern Forests
22:  Restoring Spatial Pattern to Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
23:  Guidelines for Managing Small Mammals in Restored Ponderosa Pine Forests of   
 
Northern Arizona
24:  Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Burning 
25: 
Strategies for Enhancing and Restoring Rare Plants and Teir Habitats in the Face of 
 
Climate Change and Habitat Destruction in the Intermountain West
Written by Judith Springer and Dave Egan
Reviewed by W. Wallace Covington, Kristin E. Haskins, David Huﬀman, Jim Jacobi, 
Johnny Randall, and Diane Vosick
Series Editor: Dave Egan
For more information about forest restoration, 
contact the ERI at 928-523-7182 or eri.nau.edu
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Aﬃrmative Action Institution   
 NAU Printing Services/71109/250/02-11

Ecological Restoration Institute
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
eri.nau.edu
1859000
