November 1999
1189
HISTORICAL VARIABILITY
1189
Ecological Applications, 9(4), 1999, pp. 1189–1206
q 1999 by the Ecological Society of America
APPLIED HISTORICAL ECOLOGY:
USING THE PAST TO MANAGE FOR THE FUTURE
THOMAS W. SWETNAM,1,4 CRAIG D. ALLEN,2 AND JULIO L. BETANCOURT3
1Laboratory of Tree-Ring Research, The University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona 85721 USA
2U.S. Geological Survey, Jemez Mountains Field Station, Los Alamos, New Mexico 87544 USA
3U.S. Geological Survey, Desert Laboratory, 1675 West Anklam Road, Tucson, Arizona 85745 USA
Abstract.
Applied historical ecology is the use of historical knowledge in the man-
agement of ecosystems. Historical perspectives increase our understanding of the dynamic
nature of landscapes and provide a frame of reference for assessing modern patterns and
processes. Historical records, however, are often too brief or fragmentary to be useful, or
they are not obtainable for the process or structure of interest. Even where long historical
time series can be assembled, selection of appropriate reference conditions may be com-
plicated by the past inﬂuence of humans and the many potential reference conditions
encompassed by nonequilibrium dynamics. These complications, however, do not lessen
the value of history; rather they underscore the need for multiple, comparative histories
from many locations for evaluating both cultural and natural causes of variability, as well
as for characterizing the overall dynamical properties of ecosystems. Historical knowledge
may not simplify the task of setting management goals and making decisions, but 20th
century trends, such as increasingly severe wildﬁres, suggest that disregarding history can
be perilous.
We describe examples from our research in the southwestern United States to illustrate
some of the values and limitations of applied historical ecology. Paleoecological data from
packrat middens and other natural archives have been useful for deﬁning baseline conditions
of vegetation communities, determining histories and rates of species range expansions and
contractions, and discriminating between natural and cultural causes of environmental
change. We describe a montane grassland restoration project in northern New Mexico that
was justiﬁed and guided by an historical sequence of aerial photographs showing progressive
tree invasion during the 20th century. Likewise, ﬁre scar chronologies have been widely
used to justify and guide fuel reduction and natural ﬁre reintroduction in forests. A south-
western network of ﬁre histories illustrates the power of aggregating historical time series
across spatial scales. Regional ﬁre patterns evident in these aggregations point to the key
role of interannual lags in responses of fuels and ﬁre regimes to the El Nin˜o–Southern
Oscillation (wet/dry cycles), with important implications for long-range ﬁre hazard fore-
casting. These examples of applied historical ecology emphasize that detection and expla-
nation of historical trends and variability are essential to informed management.
Key words:
climate change; disturbance; ﬁre history; historical ecology; packrat middens; pa-
leoecology; range of natural variation; repeat photography; restoration; southwestern United States;
tree rings; vegetation change.
INTRODUCTION
A science of land health needs, ﬁrst of all, a base
datum of normality, a picture of how healthy land
maintains itself as a organism.
—Aldo Leopold (1941)
Scientists and managers alike are increasingly using
environmental history as a ‘‘base datum’’ for under-
standing and managing ecosystems. This expanding in-
Manuscript received 18 May 1998; revised 11 January
1999; accepted 10 February 1999; ﬁnal version received 4
March 1999. For reprints of this Invited Feature, see footnote
1, p. 1177.
4 E-mail: tswetnam@ltrr.arizona.edu
terest in applying history is evident in a recent prolif-
eration of land and water management agency reports
that outline planning stages dependent upon the gath-
ering and interpretation of historical ecology infor-
mation. These documents recommend the use of history
to determine the range and variability of ecological
processes and structures during times when ecosystems
were less affected by humans (e.g., Brenner et al. 1993,
Kaufmann et al. 1994, Manley et al. 1995, Dahm and
Geils 1997). Reference conditions may be used, along
with current condition assessments, social and eco-
nomic considerations, and other practical constraints,
for the setting of achievable and sustainable manage-
ment goals. Several recent regional assessments have

1190
INVITED FEATURE
Ecological Applications
Vol. 9, No. 4
also extensively utilized historical information as base
data for identifying spatiotemporal trends and vari-
ability (e.g., Quigley et al. 1996, Sierra Nevada Eco-
system Project 1996, Kaufmann et al. 1998). Moreover,
a central tenet of the expanding ﬁeld of restoration
ecology is that reference conditions are useful for de-
ciding upon ecologically justiﬁable goals for restora-
tion programs (Allen et al. 1996, Covington et al. 1997,
Fule´ et al. 1997, White and Walker 1997, Moore et al.
1999). Holling and Meffe (1996) deﬁne a ‘‘Golden
Rule’’ of natural resource management that asserts:
‘‘management should strive to retain critical types and
ranges of natural variation in resource systems in order
to maintain their resiliency.’’
There remains, however, much debate about how,
where, and to what extent natural variations or refer-
ence conditions derived from historical ecology should
be applied to land management (Landres et al. 1999,
Millar and Wolfenden 1999). Although applied histor-
ical ecology is an evolving ﬁeld, there appears to be a
building consensus that, at a minimum, it is very useful
to know and understand the past to properly manage
ecosystems for the future.
Recent reviews of the use of reference conditions
and the concepts of historical (or ‘‘natural’’) range of
variability have carefully deﬁned terminology and
some of the theoretical and practical constraints in ap-
plying history to restoration and management (Allen
1994, Kaufmann et al. 1994, Morgan et al. 1994, Swan-
son et al. 1994, Foster et al. 1996, Jackson et al. 1997,
Millar 1997, White and Walker 1997, Landres et al.
1999). As might be expected in the development of a
relatively new concept, the early stages have been
marked by some confusion and missed opportunities
for better communication between scientists and man-
agers. Initial confusion about seemingly vague termi-
nology, and perhaps a lack of familiarity with resource
managers’ information needs, may have led some sci-
entists to dismiss the concept of ‘‘range of natural vari-
ability’’ as misguided. Despite the lack of involvement
by a broad spectrum of ecologists, (i.e., before the late
1990s), some land management agencies forged ahead
with implementation of some of the basic ideas (e.g.,
Manley et al. 1995).
Many ecologists have recognized the importance of
historical knowledge for understanding and managing
ecosystems (Christensen et al. 1996), but with notable
exceptions (e.g., Foster et al. 1996, Hunter et al. 1988,
Tausch 1996, Delcourt and Delcourt 1998), relatively
few paleoecologists have addressed the topic directly.
In contrast, paleolimnologists and paleohydrologists
have been more directly involved in using historical
perspectives in aquatic restoration and management
programs (Smol 1992, Brenner et al. 1993, Schmidt et
al. 1998; and see Carlton’s [1998] plea for more his-
torical oceanographic research). Historical trends in
water quality, for example, are determined by chemical
analyses of dated sediment cores from lakes, reservoirs,
and estuaries (e.g., Van Metre et al. 1997). Undesirable
trends (e.g., increasing acidity from pollution) have
been used to justify restoration treatments (Brenner et
al. 1993). Similarly, there are many examples of the
applications of paleohydrology for assessment of ﬂood
hazards (e.g, Kochel and Baker 1982, Ely et al. 1991),
and historical perspectives have been useful in evalu-
ating restoration and management alternatives in reg-
ulated river systems (e.g., the Colorado River; Schmidt
et al. 1998).
The objective of this paper is to provide an overview
of some key applications of historical ecology for in-
forming land management. We brieﬂy review the pri-
mary historical ecology data types and methods, as well
as their temporal and spatial scope, resolutions, and
general limitations. We use examples of our own re-
search in the southwestern United States to illustrate
speciﬁc insights and limitations of applied historical
ecology. We conclude by discussing some general is-
sues raised by our examples. Overall, our emphasis is
on the importance of knowing the history of land-
scapes.
HISTORICAL ECOLOGY: SCOPE, RESOLUTION, AND
LIMITATIONS
Data and techniques
Historical ecology encompasses all of the data, tech-
niques, and perspectives derived from paleoecology,
land use history from archival and documentary re-
search, and long-term ecological research from moni-
toring and experiments extending over decades. Also
included are time series from instrument-based obser-
vations of the environment, such as weather records,
stream gauges, and data from satellites. The essential
feature of historical ecology is a sufﬁciently long time
sequence (chronology) of measurements or observa-
tions so that meaningful information can be gained
about changes in populations, ecosystem structures,
disturbance frequencies, process rates, trends, perio-
dicities, and other dynamical behaviors. To understand
ecosystem patterns, we must obtain and evaluate data
that match the spatial and temporal scales of the pro-
cesses responsible for those patterns (Ricklefs 1987,
Levin 1992). Relatively short time frames may be ad-
equate for evaluating dynamics of some ecosystem
components, but by ‘‘long time’’ sequences we mean
the longer temporal scales that are usually most rele-
vant to understanding and managing landscapes with
long-lived organisms, such as trees. In this context,
‘‘history’’ typically encompasses time frames from de-
cades to millennia.
The sources, time frames, and temporal/spatial res-
olutions of archival information are highly diverse (Fig.
1). These archival records are classiﬁable as ‘‘natural’’
and ‘‘documentary.’’ The natural archives are those
‘‘recorded’’ by earth-system processes, such as sedi-

November 1999
1191
HISTORICAL VARIABILITY
FIG. 1.
The range of temporal and spatial scales typically encompassed by historical-ecology data (modiﬁed from Foster
et al. [1990]).
mentation (e.g., pollen, charcoal, plant macrofossils,
phytoliths, etc., found in lakes, bogs, and soils; Davis
1989, Jackson 1984, Jackson et al. 1997), animal de-
posits (packrat middens; Betancourt et al. 1990), annual
plant and animal growth cycles (e.g., tree rings and
coral layers; Fritts and Swetnam 1989, Dunbar and
Cole 1993), and other layered records, (e.g., ice cores;
(Thompson et al. 1998). Documentary archives are
written, tabulated, mapped, or photographic records
(e.g., chronicles, diaries, cultural histories, land sur-
veys, maps, plot measurements, weather observations,
etc.; Foster et al. 1990, 1996, Galatowitsch 1990, Rus-
sell 1997). (A useful and expanding worldwide data
bank for many of these types of records is located at
the National Geophysical Data Center, National Oce-
anic and Atmospheric Administration, Boulder, Colo-
rado, USA. Data, bibliographies, and search tools are
accessible on the World Wide Web.)
Reconstructions of environmental history are im-
proved by complementary and comparative analyses of
both natural and documentary records. For example,
interpretation of tree-ring reconstructions of climate
history are most speciﬁc and reliable when tree
growth–climate models are statistically calibrated with
meteorological observations and then veriﬁed with in-
dependent observations (Fritts 1976). Another example
of combining multiple lines of evidence is the use of
both repeat photography and tree demographic data
(e.g., based on tree rings) to describe and explain veg-
etation change in the late 19–20th centuries as a con-
sequence of human actions (e.g., Veblen and Lorenz
1986, 1991). Blending different methods and data types
can extend information about environmental change
across a broad range of temporal and spatial scales.
Examples include comparative analyses of climate, dis-
turbance, vegetation, and land use histories derived
from charcoal and pollen in lakes and bog sediments,
plant remains in packrat middens, tree rings, and doc-
umentary records (Foster et al. 1990, Anderson and
Carpenter 1991, Bahre 1991, Betancourt et al. 1991,
Fastie 1995, Millspaugh and Whitlock 1995, Baisan
and Swetnam 1997, Lloyd and Graumlich 1997, Rus-
sell 1997, Allen et al. 1998, Allen and Breshears 1998,
Swetnam and Betancourt 1998).
Limitations
Historical ecology data and methods have a number
of inherent limitations. Natural archives, often referred
to as ‘‘proxy records,’’ are subject to the ﬁltering of
past environmental information through physical and
biological processes. The ﬁdelity of the reconstructed
environmental variable, therefore, depends on how well
this ﬁltering process is understood and modeled. Some
specialized ﬁelds, such as dendrochronology and pal-
ynology, are based upon a solid foundation of extensive
ﬁeld and laboratory observations and experimental re-
search on mechanisms of the proxy record formation.
These ﬁelds have also developed rigorous standards of
statistical model development and testing that are par-
simonious with this physical and biological under-
standing (Fritts 1976, Crowley and North 1991). Even
with careful model calibration and validation, however,
interpretations of proxy records of past environments
are often subject to multiple assumptions. Although
paleoecologists and paleoclimatologists seek to mini-
mize the effects of confounding environmental factors

1192
INVITED FEATURE
Ecological Applications
Vol. 9, No. 4
on the recording unit (i.e., trees, corals, etc.) through
sampling and analytical techniques, it is not possible
to completely control multiple environmental factors
of the past (White and Walker 1997).
Historical data and interpretations are further chal-
lenged by the possibility of changing relations between
the physical and biological recording processes and the
environment that are not captured in modern calibration
periods. This so-called ‘‘no analogue’’ problem arises
from the lack of modern analogues for past conditions,
or vice versa, resulting in violation of some assump-
tions of uniformitarianism. The resolution or avail-
ability of historical data also tends to be limited by the
lack of preservation, degradation, or loss of evidence
through time. The transient, stochastic, and incomplete
nature of the paleorecord development and preserva-
tion results in missing, patchy, or altered records. The
chief consequences are that (1) most historical time
series suffer from a ‘‘fading record’’ problem, where
the reliability of the time series decreases with increas-
ing time before the present, and/or (2) no record is
available at all for some ecosystem processes or struc-
tures that may be of primary management concern.
Documentary records are also limited in quantity and
quality by a kind of ‘‘cultural’’ ﬁltering that affects
their availability, completeness, and reliability. Most
areas of the western United States, for example, lack
any written, continuous records of weather observa-
tions before the late 19th or early 20th century. Even
where old weather records, photographs, or other doc-
umentary records can be found, they are subject to
various biases associated with the locations and periods
for which they are available. For example, weather-
recording stations were often located primarily in low
elevations near or within settlements, and they were
sometimes moved from one location to another. Over-
all, these and other limitations of documentary records
do not invalidate their use in environmental history,
but they do call for judicious and careful interpreta-
tions, with cognizance of their potential biases and dis-
tortions.
Because historical records may not be available for
a particular place or time of interest, extrapolation of
reference conditions may be the only resort. White and
Walker (1997) point out that all ecosystems and their
histories are unique at some scale of analysis. There-
fore, the validity of extrapolating reference conditions
probably decreases as a function of both increasing
spatial and temporal distance from the current ecosys-
tem to which those reference conditions might be ap-
plied. White and Walker refer to this as the ‘‘distance
decay’’ problem. Representative sampling is an im-
portant concern of landscape ecology (Stohlgren et al.
1995), and the added dimension of time further in-
creases the need to carefully consider the scales and
location of available data in judging the validity of
extrapolations. This problem highlights the need for
multiple places and times for reference.
Historical science is largely inductive, and the in-
terpretation of gathered historical facts can be highly
subjective. This challenges ecologists and managers to
quantify the historical evidence as thoroughly as pos-
sible, and to carefully interpret historical facts with
knowledge from other sources (e.g., present-day ob-
servations and experiments). A primary strategy for
increasing objectivity and conﬁdence in historical in-
terpretations is a combination of comparative analyses
and testing with multiple, independent data sources and
methods, and the use of converging lines of evidence
(White and Walker 1997, Foster and Motzkin 1998).
This strategy includes combining historical reconstruc-
tions with ﬁeld experiments (e.g., Fastie 1995, Lloyd
1996, Lloyd and Graumlich 1997), and comparing
model simulations with historical data (e.g., Anderson
1995, Miller and Urban 1999). Despite the constraints
and limitations of history, the power and utility of his-
torical insight should not be underestimated. Indeed, it
is arguable that historical approaches have been as es-
sential and effective in advancing basic understanding
in ecology as they have been in other natural and phys-
ical sciences, such as geology and astronomy (Brown
1995).
EXAMPLES FROM THE SOUTHWESTERN
UNITED STATES
We focus here on a few examples from our research
in the southwestern USA to illustrate some basic in-
sights and uses of historical ecology. These examples
draw mainly upon the natural archives of packrat mid-
dens and tree rings, as well as the documentary archives
of land use history and repeat photography. Our ex-
amples begin with millennia-length perspectives of
plant migrations and invasions. These perspectives em-
phasize the importance of historical knowledge that is
speciﬁc to particular landscapes and the danger in ex-
trapolating causation of ecosystem changes from one
area or time period to another. We follow with examples
where more recent ecological history has been directly
used in justifying and guiding land management de-
cisions.
Long-term perspectives of 20th century invasions
and changing forest structure
Managers of ecosystems sometimes justify their ac-
tions based on historical assumptions, if not actual ev-
idence. In the Southwest, there is no better example
than blanket acceptance that grazing and ﬁre suppres-
sion triggered wholesale encroachment of trees and
shrubs into rangelands (Archer 1994) and higher stem
densities across woodlands and forests (Covington and
Moore 1994). Beginning in the 1950s, assumptions
about so-called ‘‘invasions’’ rationalized an aggressive
campaign of pinyon and juniper eradication (through

November 1999
1193
HISTORICAL VARIABILITY
chaining, cabling, burning, and herbicides), presum-
ably to increase forage and water yield (Gottfried et
al. 1995, Lanner and Van Devender 1998). Having lost
popularity in the Southwest, a similar campaign may
now be contemplated in the Great Basin, where pinyon
and juniper are apparently on the move (Miller and
Wigand 1994).
The intent in this section is not to question that graz-
ing can shift the balance from grasses to trees and
shrubs, or that decades of ﬁre suppression beget ‘‘dog
hair’’ thickets in many forest ecosystems. Rather, we
use the fossil record to point out that modern invasions
and changes in forest and woodland structure can be
driven by something other than human action. That
invasions are occurring in the midst of human distur-
bance does not invalidate their roots in Holocene mi-
gration, demographic responses to climatic variability,
or even recovery from past disturbances, including pre-
historic humans. We provide some important examples
from historical ecology in the Southwest.
Maps comparing latest Pleistocene and modern veg-
etation of the Southwest, based on the packrat midden
record, illustrate the massive redistribution of species
and reorganization of plant communities that has oc-
curred over the past 11 000 yr (Fig. 2; Van Devender
et al. 1987, Betancourt et al. 1990, Thompson et al.
1993). These redistributons were regulated not only by
intrinsic dispersal rates, but also by climatic variability
during the Holocene. Ongoing plant migrations char-
acterize the Holocene and surely carry into the modern
era. Population dynamics at the leading (northern) edge
of migrations may confound inferences about human
impacts on present invasions. Notable examples of on-
going migrations related to climate change include ex-
pansion of creosote bush (Larrea tridentata) in the mid-
dle Rio Grande Basin and Borderlands of Arizona and
New Mexico (Grover and Musik 1990, Betancourt
1996), Colorado pinyon (Pinus edulis) on both sides
of the Rockies (Betancourt et al. 1991, Betancourt et
al. 1993), single-needle pinyon (Pinus monophylla) in
northern Nevada (Miller and Wigand 1994, Nowak et
al. 1994), Utah juniper (Juniperus osteosperma) in Wy-
oming and Montana (Wight and Fisser 1968; J. L. Be-
tancourt, S. J. Jackson, and M. Lyford, unpublished
data), western juniper (Juniperus occidentalis) in east-
ern Oregon (Miller and Rose 1995), and ponderosa pine
in the northern Rocky Mountain states (Betancourt et
al. 1990, Anderson 1989, Weng and Jackson, in press).
Postglacial expansion of pinyon pine offers a well-
documented example of broadscale, climate-related
change in a species range (Betancourt et al. 1993, Lan-
ner and Van Devender 1998). Fig. 3 tracks the migra-
tion of Colorado pinyon from the northern Chihuahuan
Desert to the Colorado Plateau and along both ﬂanks
of the Rocky Mountains. Prior to 11 000
14C yr BP,
Colorado pinyon was widespread in the northern Chi-
huahuan Desert. In New Mexico, USA, its northern
limits were near Albuquerque and the Sevilleta Long-
Term Ecological Research (LTER) Site, coinciding
with the modern northern limits of creosote bush. After
11 000 14C yr BP, pinyon was extirpated from desert
lowlands and began expanding to higher and more
northerly sites. Many sites in Colorado, USA, were
colonized by pinyon only in the last 2000 yr. The north-
ernmost outpost at Owl Canyon, north of Fort Collins,
represents a long-distance dispersal event ;500 yr ago
(Betancourt et al. 1991). Interestingly, this natural ‘‘in-
vasion’’ is taking place in the increasingly urbanized
and disturbed landscapes of the Colorado Front Range
(see Mast et al. [1996] for interpretations of tree in-
vasion and higher stem densities in the pine–grassland
ecotone of the Front Range).
Owl Canyon offers one paradigm of how recent mi-
grations might be imprinted on what we regard as 20th
century phenomena. This isolated 5-km2 stand, 200 km
from the nearest populations to the south, is charac-
terized by relatively young trees radiating out from a
cluster of older pinyons (Wright 1952). The recency of
this invasion is also evident in increasing stem density
(population growth) during the past 40 yr and second-
ary colonizations 2–30 km from Owl Canyon (Premoli
et al. 1994). Secondary outliers are clearly in the early
stages of expansion; the largest population contains 100
trees, all ,60-yr-old. These expansions probably rep-
resent the rising limb of exponential pinyon population
growth, which will be followed rapidly by secondary
colonizations and population inﬁlling.
In the early stages of invasion, an isolated population
like Owl Canyon may be little more than a curiosity.
Prior to our paleoecological study, Front Range ecol-
ogists speculated on whether it was a relict population,
or the result of long-distance dispersal. If we were to
fast forward 200–300 yr, however, a full-ﬂedged pin-
yon invasion might be underway in the Front Range.
Projecting current rates of urbanization and its effects
on ecosystems, would we be able to distinguish natural
from cultural causes of invasion in the absence of pa-
leoecological perspectives?
Another source of ambiguity in assigning cause to
ecological change in the 20th century stems from the
lack of regionally scaled, high-resolution demographic
histories. Such histories, based on cross dating of births
and deaths for thousands of trees, are essential to un-
derstanding demographic responses to decadal-scale
climatic variability (Swetnam and Betancourt 1998).
At the Sevilleta LTER Site, we compared demographic
trends in pinyon populations with regional climate re-
constructions from tree rings. This comparison sug-
gests the following model for the long-term behavior
of these woodlands: Broad-scale mortality during ex-
treme, regional drought releases existing seedlings and
saplings from competition for light, water, and nutrients
and opens up niches for recruitment. Recruitment puls-
es tend to occur in the ﬁrst sustained wet period fol-

1194
INVITED FEATURE
Ecological Applications
Vol. 9, No. 4
FIG. 2.
As this comparison of modern and Pleistocene vegetation shows, Southwestern landscapes have changed dra-
matically since the end of the last ice age, 12 000 BP. The Pleistocene map is based on packrat midden vegetation recon-
structions (Van Devender et al. 1987, Betancourt et al. 1990, Thompson et al. 1993) and extrapolations using elevations.
The modern map is also based on elevations and known distributions of vegetation (adapted from Betancourt et al. [1990]).
lowing the drought and associated mortality. An ex-
ample of this process may be the large pulse in pinyon
recruitment during the last 20 yr. Anomalous seedling
survivorship followed the 1950s drought, arguably the
worst drought in the last 1000 yr (Grissino-Mayer
1996, Swetnam and Betancourt 1998). Pinyon estab-
lishment has been sustained by a string of warm, wet
springs associated with anomalous warming of the
tropical Paciﬁc since 1976 (Swetnam and Betancourt
1998). This surge in pinyon recruitment will become
conspicuous on the landscape in another 50 yr and
would likely invoke anthropogenic explanations in the
absence of a comprehensive, demographic history.
Although ﬁre suppression and grazing may be elim-

November 1999
1195
HISTORICAL VARIABILITY
FIG. 3.
Pinyon–juniper woodlands presently cover 20 3 106 ha above 1500 m elevation in the western United States,
the third largest vegetation type in the contiguous United States. During the late Pleistocene, these woodlands covered what
are now the hot deserts of the southwestern United States, mostly below 1500 m elevation. This diagram shows fossil packrat
midden records of pinyon pine along a north–south transect from Mexico to Colorado, USA. The tick marks on each vertical
line represent .350 radiocarbon-dated middens that show the presence or absence of pinyon pines along a 158 latitude
(;1600 km) transect from Bermejillo, Mexico (Durango Province) to Fort Collins, Colorado. The diagram depicts the local
extinction of pinyon populations growing at desert elevations during the last deglaciation (;11 000 radiocarbon yr BP) and
the sequential migration to higher elevations and more northerly latitudes during the Holocene (the last 11 000 yr). Note that
pinyon’s distribution in the state of Colorado may be just a few centuries old and probably is not yet in equilibrium with
modern climate. In Colorado, and probably northern New Mexico, this makes it difﬁcult to distinguish natural migration
during the late Holocene from historical tree expansion due to ﬁre suppression and overgrazing. Tick marks on the y-axes
of site graphs represent individual radiocarbon-dated middens, whereas tick marks on the y-axis of the ﬁgure indicate
increments of 1000 yr. Abbreviations: DGO, Durango, Mexico; COA, Coahuila, Mexico; TX, Texas, USA; NM, New Mexico,
USA; AZ, Arizona, USA; UT, Utah, USA; CO, Colorado, USA.
inated as reasons for at least some of the ecological
shifts in the 20th century, global change may further
muddle the distinction between natural and cultural ef-
fects. Hypothetically, atmospheric CO2 enrichment
should affect plant performance in the southwest; some
authors have been quick to suggest that it is already
playing a role in driving encroachment of C3 trees and
shrubs into C4 grasslands of the southwest (Idso 1992,
Johnson et al. 1993; see objections by Archer et al.
[1995]). The fossil record of the last deglaciation, when
CO2 increased from 180 to 280 ppmv (mL CO2/L), of-
fers some perspective. Based on reduced stomatal den-
sities on limber pine needles from packrat middens,
Van de Water et al. (1994) inferred an increase in water
use efﬁciency (WUE) in response to the 30% CO2 en-
richment (from 180 to 280 ppmv [mL CO2/L]) during

1196
INVITED FEATURE
Ecological Applications
Vol. 9, No. 4
the last deglaciation. However, the increase in WUE
apparently was not enough to offset increasing Holo-
cene aridity, and desert scrub replaced conifer wood-
lands throughout much of the southwest. Clearly, cli-
mate variability strongly modulates the importance of
CO2 variations in these water-limited ecosystems; e.g.,
the frequency and intensity of summer drought will
largely determine the pace of shrub invasion and de-
sertiﬁcation (Betancourt 1996, Neilson 1986). A blan-
ket acceptance of large CO2 effects sends an erroneous
message to land managers and ranchers that shrub in-
vasion of grasslands is inevitable, no matter what the
climate.
Southwestern paleoecology also instructs us that
Europeans do not have a monopoly on human impacts.
At Chaco Canyon, New Mexico, the Anasazi appar-
ently overharvested pinyon populations for fuelwood
800–1000 yr ago (Betancourt and Van Devender 1981,
Samuels and Betancourt 1982). In some places, this
woodland has yet to recover; in others, relatively young
pinyon populations suggest that recovery in these mar-
ginal woodlands is sluggish. Given the density and per-
sistence of prehistoric humans across the Southwest, it
is not farfetched to imagine that, at least in some places,
what may seem like invasion is actually recovery. A
similar case has been made for the apparent invasion
of one-needle pinyon (P. monophylla) in the Great Ba-
sin, which in some areas may actually represent re-
covery from 19th century clear-cutting for charcoal
manufacture (Lanner and Van Devender 1998).
Although highly informative, the long-term histori-
cal record has several shortcomings. For example,
packrat middens are limited to rocky terrain and, and
as such, fail to census the open terrain and deeper soils
that are the typical staging grounds for modern en-
croachments (Connin et al. 1998). Historical demo-
graphic data are similarly patchy in time and space,
and there are important limitations in reconstructing
dynamics of forests and woodlands from extant, living
populations or dead tees (Gore et al. 1985, Johnson et
al. 1994). Moreover, whether the Anasazi or drought
wiped out the Chaco woodland is still subject to in-
terpretation. Nevertheless, our brief examples of nat-
ural migration, demographic responses to climate, and
prehistoric human impact testify that management de-
cisions to halt or reverse woody plant encroachments
or changes in forest structure can easily be misguided.
Repeat photography: 20th century landscape change
Historical photographs of landscapes, from forests
to wetlands, are available for practically any area of
the western United States (Rogers et al. 1984). As a
ﬁrst approximation, past environmental change can be
measured by ﬁnding the site of a historical photograph,
reoccupying the original camera position, and making
a new photograph of the same scene. Differences be-
tween then and now provide a basis for identifying and
quantifying changes, while the new photograph estab-
lishes a benchmark for future evaluation (Malde 1973).
Repeat photography is a simple, inexpensive, and el-
egant
tool
for
reconstructing
past
environmental
changes and monitoring future ones; it is particularly
well suited for the relatively open landscapes of the
western U.S. Rephotography in the southwest, for ex-
ample, has focused on key ecological concerns that are
relevant to management of public lands, including
shrub and tree encroachment upon grasslands, climatic
effects on demographic trends in woodlands, postdis-
turbance histories, and geomorphic, hydrologic, and
vegetation changes in riparian areas (Hastings and Tur-
ner 1965, Dutton and Bunting 1981, Rogers et al. 1984,
Humphrey 1987, Bahre 1991, Webb 1996, Allen et al.
1998). Matched photographs and their graphic evi-
dence of change have the unique potential of galva-
nizing public dialogue about the timing, magnitude,
and causes of environmental change.
Repeat photography has a variety of limitations that
must be considered to accurately interpret apparent
landscape changes (Rogers et al. 1984). Early equip-
ment had constraints, such as the fading of distant ob-
jects on blue-sensitive plates. Bellows lenses could dis-
tort the appearance of an image on the photographic
plate. Artistic motives of early photographers some-
times resulted in misleading images, and old photo-
graphs could have been altered deliberately. Individual
photographs can be unrepresentative of overall land-
scape conditions, while retakes may also be selectively
biased if only unrepresentative scenes are chosen to be
relocated. Interpretation errors may occur from an in-
complete understanding of the natural and cultural pro-
cesses responsible for landscape changes documented
in the images. Photographs are also simply unavailable
for many time periods and locations.
Repeated photographs from the air or space can pro-
vide broadscale perspectives of landscape to regional-
scale ecological change, thereby overcoming some of
the biases of selecting speciﬁc, smaller localities. Re-
peat aerial photography and other remote sensing data
(e.g., satellite imagery) can be very useful for assessing
landscape changes in recent decades, particularly when
used in concert with geographic information systems
(Mast et al. 1996, Allen 1994, Allen and Breshears
1998). For example, repeat aerial photography and geo-
graphic information systems were extensively used to
assess twentieth century landscape changes in the in-
terior Columbia River Basin in one of the largest re-
gional ecosystem studies ever conducted (Quigley et
al. 1996, Hessburg et al. 1999).
Our example from the Southwest is a repeat aerial
photography study of landscape change in support of
a montane grassland restoration project in the Jemez
Mountains of northern New Mexico (Allen 1989, 1994)
(Fig. 4). These grasslands have a restricted distribution
in northern New Mexico where soil patterns show they

November 1999
1197
HISTORICAL VARIABILITY
FIG. 4.
Aerial photographs of the Cerro Grande montane grassland show vegetation changes between 1935 (left) and
1979 (right). Recent invasion by ponderosa pine and Douglas-ﬁr trees has overwhelmed most of this ancient grassland. The
ﬁeld of view is ;2 km across each photo.
have been persistent landscape features for millennia
(Allen 1989). Tree-ring evidence indicated that during
this century conifer trees had greatly encroached upon
the ancient grasslands. Aerial photographs conﬁrmed
these observations and revealed the extent of the tree
invasion, which reduced the area of open montane
grasslands by 55% across a 100 000-ha region during
1935–1981 (Fig. 4). Comparative study of tree de-
mography, soils, ﬁre, climate, and land use history at
multiple sites across the study area showed that tree
invasion was a modern process caused primarily by
humans. Speciﬁcally, tree invasion was due to changes
in livestock grazing and ﬁre exclusion, and not climatic
changes (Allen 1989).
Before this historical assessment of tree invasion and
its causes, neither ecologists nor local land managers
recognized that major vegetation changes had recently
occurred in these grasslands. Initial assessments by ex-
perienced ecologists focused only on the current con-
ﬁguration of forests and grasslands, noting that these
areas had the highest grass density and productivity in
a forest understory that they had ever seen in the South-
west (Potter and Foxx, unpublished manuscript). The
dense understory coverage appears less unusual once
it is recognized as a formerly open, montane grassland
that has been invaded by trees. Lacking a historical-
ecology perspective, the National Park Service failed
to discern the anomalous, human-induced changes in
the ancient vegetation patterns, and so incorrectly be-
lieved that the best management option was to leave
the area in its current state.
Now, a restoration program has been initiated based
on (1) historical knowledge that the ancient grasslands
were declining in extent because of 20th century human
actions, and (2) the National Park Service’s mandate
to preserve natural biotic communities. Historical ev-
idence of grassland extent early in the twentieth century
and tree recruitment patterns in the area have served
as objective guides to the restoration procedures in-
volving tree cutting and prescribed burning. Managers
on the adjoining Santa Fe National Forest have recently
conducted a similar grassland restoration project in a
nearby area and are considering other sites for treat-
ment. The multiple lines of historical evidence mar-
shaled in this case were scientiﬁcally compelling, but
the visual presentation of the extensive tree invasion
clearly evident in the air photo time series (Fig. 4)
probably had the largest effect in mustering support
for grassland restoration among resource managers and
the public.
Fire scar histories: local and regional patterns
Prior to the 19th century westward expansion and
Euro-American settlement in North America, frequent,
low-intensity surface ﬁres were a dominant ecological
process in most pine and mixed-conifer forests (Agee
1993, Swetnam 1993, Swetnam and Baisan 1996). De-
tailed and long chronologies of surface ﬁres can be

1198
INVITED FEATURE
Ecological Applications
Vol. 9, No. 4
assembled by sampling ﬁre scars preserved within the
boles of surviving trees (Swetnam and Baisan 1996,
Arno et al. 1997, Fule´ et al. 1997, Brown et al. 1999).
Most trees producing annual growth rings have also
developed a physiological capacity to grow new rings
over injuries caused by ﬁres. This capacity, plus the
enhanced ﬂammability of exposed wood and seeping
resin within previously formed wounds, often leads to
multiple, overlapping ﬁre scars on individual trees. The
calendar years, and usually the approximate seasons,
of past ﬁres can be determined by cross dating the
annual rings and by carefully observing the position of
ﬁre scars within the dated rings (Dieterich and Swet-
nam 1984). Compiled ﬁre scar records from numerous
specimens collected throughout forest stands often pro-
vide nearly complete inventories of ﬁre events over
periods of centuries (Baisan and Swetnam 1990, 1997,
Swetnam 1993, Fule´ et al. 1997, Brown et al. 1999).
Fire scar based ﬁre histories are limited in a number
of important ways. First, as with most historical re-
constructions, they depend upon the development and
preservation of the record; in this case, ﬁre scarred trees
that can be dated by dendrochronological techniques.
Hence, ﬁre history reconstructions are generally pre-
cluded across large areas by the absence of annual ring
producing trees or shrubs. Past harvesting and recent,
intense ﬁres can also remove the accumulated ﬁre scar
record from some landscapes where it might have pre-
viously been preserved in the resinous lower boles of
living and dead trees (i.e., snags, stumps, and logs).
The ﬁre scar record generally decreases in complete-
ness with increasing time before the present because
of burning and decay processes. Another limitation of
tree-ring-based ﬁre history reconstructions is relatively
low spatial resolution of past ﬁre perimeters. Fire
scarred trees are essentially ‘‘point’’ recorders of ﬁre
events, and they probably do not record every ﬁre that
burns near their base. In low to moderate severity sur-
face ﬁre regimes, there may be no other recoverable
evidence of past ﬁres than a fragmentary and incom-
plete ﬁre scar record.
Although these problems constrain our ability to re-
construct or use ﬁre history in some locations and for
some purposes, the tree-ring record has an advantage
of high temporal resolution. Seasonal or annual dating
resolution of ﬁre scars enables ﬁre historians to eval-
uate patterns of ﬁre event synchrony across multiple
spatial scales. From evaluation of these patterns, it is
possible to make reasonable inferences about past ﬁre
extent, and human vs. natural causes of change (Allen
et al. 1998). Networks of systematically collected ﬁre-
scarred trees, for example, have been used to infer ﬁre
extent within forest stands (Arno et al. 1997, Fule´ et
al. 1997) and across large landscapes (Allen 1989,
Brown et al. 1999).
Our example from the Southwest is a composite of
ﬁre event chronologies from very widely dispersed
mountain ranges over the entire region. The regional
ﬁre years evident in the southwestern composite (Fig.
5), were almost certainly related to regional climatic
patterns, since no other known regional-scale factor is
likely to have caused such a high degree of repeated
ﬁre synchrony at this spatial scale over such a long
period of time. Comparison of these multicentury chro-
nologies with independent tree-ring-based drought re-
constructions conﬁrms that extreme climatic oscilla-
tions of wet and dry years were strongly related to
regional ﬁre years (Swetnam and Betancourt 1990,
1998).
Numerous ﬁre and land use histories in the South-
west indicate that intense livestock grazing was the
initial cause of decline in natural ﬁre regimes at re-
gional and local scales in the late 1800s (Leopold 1924,
Swetnam and Baisan 1996, Swetnam et al. in press).
The general pattern documented in these histories was
a decrease in widespread, frequent ﬁres that coincided
closely with the beginning of intense grazing by large
numbers of sheep, goats, cattle, or horses in that par-
ticular area (Leopold 1924, Dahm and Geils 1997,
Swetnam and Baisan 1996, Swetnam et al. in press).
While these events occurred during the late 1800s in
most locations, a few exceptions offer further support
to the interpretation that livestock grazing was the ini-
tial cause of ﬁre regime disruptions. A few sites in
northern New Mexico and Arizona, for example, show
ﬁre frequencies declining in the early 19th century (or
earlier) and corresponding to within a few years of the
documented timing of pastoral activities by Spanish
colonists and Navajos in these areas (Allen et al. 1995,
Touchan et al. 1995, Baisan and Swetnam 1997). (Note
the decreased ﬁre occurrence in the early 1800s in the
uppermost chronology labeled (a) in Fig. 5 from tra-
ditional Navajo pasturelands in the Chuska Mountains
[Savage and Swetnam 1990].) In contrast, remote forest
stands surrounded by lava ﬂows, with no evidence of
intensive grazing, sustained some surface ﬁres into the
middle of the 20th century, when aerial ﬁre-ﬁghting
resources began to be most effective in suppressing
ﬁres (chronologies labeled (b) in Fig. 5, from El Mal-
pais National Monument [Grissino-Mayer and Swet-
nam 1997]). Finally, a remote mountain in northern
Sonora, Mexico (lowermost ﬁre scar chronology la-
beled (c) in Fig. 5), where neither intensive livestock
grazing nor effective ﬁre suppression occurred, shows
episodic surface ﬁres burning throughout the 20th cen-
tury in the highest elevations of this range (Swetnam
et al. in press). A similar ﬁre history from remote areas
near Durango, Mexico shows continued occurrence of
surface ﬁres until the middle of the 20th century (Fule´
and Covington 1997).
One of the ways that ﬁre history research has been
useful to managers in the southwestern United States
is in providing the primary evidence of frequent surface
ﬁres in pine and mixed conifer forests before circa

November 1999
1199
HISTORICAL VARIABILITY
FIG. 5.
Composite ﬁre scar chronologies from 55 forest and woodland sites in Arizona, New Mexico, and northern Mexico
(AD 1600–present) reveal regional synchrony. In the upper chart, each horizontal line represents the composite ﬁre chronology
from a different site, and the tick marks are the ﬁre dates recorded by $10% ﬁre-scarred trees (and $2 trees) within that
site. The long tick marks are ﬁre dates recorded by $10 sites in the southwestern network. Note that when adjacent chronologies
have long tick marks for the same year, i.e., a regional ﬁre event, this forms a continuous vertical line between the chronologies.
Most of the sites were in ponderosa pine or mixed conifer forests, and the sampled areas typically ranged from ;10 to 100
ha, although a few sites exceeded 1000 ha. The average number of trees sampled per site was ;20, with a maximum of 56
trees. See the text (Examples from the southwestern United States: Fire scar histories) for explanations of the speciﬁc ﬁre
chronologies that are labeled (a, b, c) on the right side. The line graph on the bottom shows the total number of sites recording
ﬁre dates each year. The labeled years with arrows were regional ﬁre dates, i.e., ﬁres occurred in $10 sites across the network.
1900. These histories also indicate that large, high in-
tensity, stand replacement ﬁres in southwestern pon-
derosa pine forests were rare. Other historical data sup-
porting this interpretation include forest age structure
and stand density reconstructions from dendrochro-
nology, repeat photographs, historical writings, and
early land survey records (Covington and Moore 1994).
These data also show that the end of frequent surface
ﬁre regimes was followed in subsequent decades by
massive tree ‘‘irruptions,’’ leading to highly anoma-

1200
INVITED FEATURE
Ecological Applications
Vol. 9, No. 4
lous, dense stands of dog hair thickets (Covington and
Moore 1994, Fule´ et al. 1997). These thickets are now
a key factor contributing to catastrophic, stand-replac-
ing ﬁres in some areas (Covington and Moore 1994).
Twentieth century ﬁre statistics from the Southwest
show clear trends of increasing number, size, and in-
tensity of such catastrophic ﬁres (Swetnam 1990, Dahm
and Geils 1997, Swetnam and Betancourt 1998). The
combination of all of these lines of historical evidence
is the strongest argument managers have for forest res-
toration initiatives involving tree thinning and reintro-
duction of natural ﬁre patterns (Moore et al. 1999).
Without such compelling historical evidence, public
opposition would probably preclude most ecological
restoration work.
Thus, at the most basic level, ﬁre history research
has been a major impetus and justiﬁcation for reintro-
duction of surface ﬁre in pine and mixed-conifer for-
ests. This is especially the case in landscapes where
natural-process maintenance is legally mandated, such
as in designated wilderness areas and in some park
lands (Christensen 1989, Parsons et al. 1986, Allen et
al. 1995). Even on landscapes where restoration or
preservation of ‘‘naturalness’’ per se is not a goal, ﬁre
histories still provide basic information about the mag-
nitude and extent of changes that have occurred in the
20th century, relative to earlier centuries. This infor-
mation is often crucial for determining if current con-
ditions are practically sustainable, or if they are so
anomalous in both a historical and ecological sense,
that ecosystem sustainability is degraded.
Although ﬁre histories have so far had the greatest
impact in simply justifying ﬁre restoration programs,
ultimately, the speciﬁc characteristics of past ﬁre in-
terval distributions may also serve as a guide to ﬁre
restoration programs involving repeat, interval burn-
ing. Measures of central tendency (e.g., means, me-
dians, modes, etc.), range, and higher moments (e.g.,
variance, skewness, etc.) of ﬁre interval distributions
determined from ﬁre chronologies, for example, may
provide a basis for modeling, planning, and imple-
menting ﬁre restoration programs designed to emulate
natural processes. An ecological reason for concerning
ourselves with the distinctiveness of historical ﬁre in-
terval distributions on particular landscapes is that the
character of these distributions is intimately linked with
the presence or absence of certain species (e.g., see
Clark 1996), as well as the age structure, composition,
and spatial arrangement of extant communities (Arno
et al. 1997, Fule´ et al. 1997, Brown et al. 1999).
A potential application of ﬁre history studies is to
identify regional-scale, seasonal to decadal climate–ﬁre
relations that might be used in ﬁre hazard forecasting
models. Using historical data, for example, several re-
searchers have found that years of increased or de-
creased regional burning were closely related to the
extreme phases of the El Nin˜o–Southern Oscillation
(ENSO) (Simard et al. 1985, Swetnam and Betancourt
1990, 1998, Brenner 1991). In the southwestern U.S.,
extreme El Nin˜o events typically result in increased
cool season moisture with reduced ﬁre activity in the
following spring and summer. These wet conditions
also lead to growth and accumulation of ﬁne fuels im-
portant to ﬁre ignition and spread in subsequent dry
seasons. A key situation for regional ﬁre years is the
contingency of a series of wet years, reduced ﬁre ac-
tivity, and fuel accumulation, followed by a La Nin˜a
event when precipitation is reduced and extreme burn-
ing conditions arise (Swetnam and Betancourt 1998).
The inverse of this ﬁre–climate pattern may exist in
the Northern Rockies and Paciﬁc Northwest, because
ENSO-related precipitation amounts tend to be oppo-
site between this region and the Southwest (Dettinger
et al. 1998). Useful interseasonal ﬁre hazard forecasting
systems might be developed using a combination of
lagged climate–fuel patterns and lagged ENSO–pre-
cipitation relations.
ADVANTAGES AND CONSTRAINTS OF APPLIED
HISTORICAL ECOLOGY
Historical ecology can be very useful to manage-
ment, but there are number of constraints in its appli-
cation to management problems. Speciﬁc limitations of
data and methods were brieﬂy pointed out in our ex-
amples from the Southwest. Now, we will further dis-
cuss several general advantages and constraints in us-
ing history.
Predictability and historical context
Although direct or simple extrapolation of historical
patterns or trends into the future is usually erroneous,
history can be useful for guiding the development and
testing of predictive models. The ﬁre and climate his-
tory ﬁndings in the Southwest are encouraging in this
regard, because they indicate that there is some poten-
tial for using historical knowledge to help develop
long-range, ﬁre hazard forecasting models. Part of this
potential derives from recent understanding that the
global climate system includes oscillatory dynamics
(e.g., ENSO, North American Oscillation, and Quasi-
Biennial Oscillation), driven by long temporal lags in
the transfer of energy (heat) through and between the
oceans and the atmosphere. Improved physical knowl-
edge of these seasonal to decadal-scale patterns and
their impacts on regional climates have resulted in ma-
jor improvements in long-range climate forecasting
models (Barnett et al. 1994, U.S. Global Change Re-
search Program 1999).
Historical climatology has played an important role
in this scientiﬁc advance by discovering the existence
of some of the long-term, regional- to global-scale pat-
terns, and by providing important clues to the under-
lying mechanisms. Knowledge of past patterns often
generates hypotheses or interpretations that can be test-

November 1999
1201
HISTORICAL VARIABILITY
ed and evaluated with modern observations, experi-
ments, and models. Historical ecology offers similar
opportunities for evaluating our understanding of eco-
systems by comparing model simulations with histor-
ical reconstructions of processes and structures (e.g.,
Anderson 1995, Miller and Urban 1999). Although pre-
diction (or forecasting) of many ecological processes,
particularly chaotic ones, probably will never be pos-
sible, it is premature to assume that this is true for all
situations. Some forest insect population outbreaks, for
example, are quasiperiodic and inﬂuenced by long-term
climatic ﬂuctuations (Swetnam and Lynch 1993).
Therefore, they might hold some promise for predict-
ability with statistical or mechanistic models.
Rather than a direct use of history for prediction,
most historical ecologists emphasize the importance of
knowing history, because it informs us about what is
possible within the context of certain locations and
times, and it places current conditions into this context.
This knowledge often informs us about the potential
causes of change and the historical pathways that
brought ecosystems to their current condition (Kauf-
mann et al. 1994, Morgan et al. 1994, Swanson et al.
1994). Because history provides multiple points of tem-
poral reference, it can also tell us if current conditions
are highly anomalous and, therefore, in some cases
deserving of greater priority in management decisions
and actions. Providing a historical context for evalu-
ating present conditions may be one of the most im-
portant uses of historical knowledge as we face in-
creasing concerns about human-caused environmental
changes in the 20th century (e.g., global warming). For
example, the unusual rate and magnitude of 20th cen-
tury atmospheric CO2 enrichment is placed in historical
context by the records from monitoring at Mauna Loa,
Hawaii, USA, and from gas bubbles trapped in Green-
land and Antarctic ice. We also know from historical
studies that the 1990s included the warmest years of
the 20th century on a global scale (U.S. Global Change
Research Program 1999) and that it was probably the
warmest decade in the Northern Hemisphere over the
past 600 yr (Mann et al. 1998). In light of the enormous
consequences of these environmental changes, it is cru-
cial that we evaluate them within a long-term historical
context.
Fragmentary nature of history
In our view, the most important limitation of his-
torical ecology is that the record of the past is often
brief, fragmentary, or simply unobtainable for the pro-
cess or structure of interest. Almost all historical re-
constructions also suffer from a ‘‘fading record’’ prob-
lem; i.e., the completeness and reliability of the record
decreases with increasing time before the present. This
is usually due to progressive loss of older evidence.
Most historical-ecology studies partially deal with this
limitation by truncating the period of analyses to the
best replicated and most reliable period. When histor-
ical reconstructions are possible, they are often limited
to only a few ecological variables or processes. In the
best circumstances, these are reconstructions of essen-
tial processes, such as climate and ﬁre for many ter-
restrial ecosystems.
Although lack of historical evidence can not be rem-
edied for many localities and speciﬁc ecosystem pro-
cesses, it is usually possible to assemble time series of
at least some relevant variables at broader spatial scales
(e.g., regions) using spatial networks, as in our packrat
midden and ﬁre history examples. Historical processes
and patterns for speciﬁc locations and ecosystems may
not be recoverable or justiﬁably extrapolated from
broader scale histories. When lacking local historical
evidence, ecologists and managers should be particu-
larly cautious about making assumptions based on
knowledge of historical pathways of vegetation change
from other regions or ecosystem types.
Because of the fragmentary nature of the historical
record, and uncertainties about causation and the po-
tential role of unmeasured variables, the highest degree
of conﬁdence is achieved by combining multiple, in-
dependent data sources and historical methods (e.g.,
our example of tree invasion in montane grasslands).
Converging lines of historical evidence from many lo-
cations are most convincing, particularly when coupled
with sound knowledge of mechanisms established by
modern observations and experiments.
Nonequilibrium paradigm
Other challenges to the usefulness or relevance of
history derive from the nonequilibrium paradigm. If
ecosystems are necessarily dynamic, then it may be
misguided and fruitless to choose a single ﬁxed point
or period of time in the past for establishing a static,
desired future condition (Sprugel 1991). The Holocene
history of southwestern plant communities is a graphic
example of the remarkable changeability of ecosystems
(Fig. 2). The use of historical information for identi-
fying desired future conditions, however, does not im-
ply management for static conditions. The importance
of temporal change is partly reﬂected in the phrase
‘‘range of natural variability’’ (or ‘‘historical range of
variability’’), i.e., the focus is not on a single condition,
but on a range of conditions and the variability under
which ecosystems were sustained in the past. Recog-
nition of the importance of maintaining or reestablish-
ing the changing nature of ecosystems is reﬂected in a
policy adopted by some ‘‘natural’’ ﬁre programs in
parks and wilderness areas. In the Sierra Nevada Na-
tional Parks, for example, restoration of the historical
or natural ﬁre process is preferred over restoration of
a particular ecosystem structure that existed at some
point of time in the past (Parsons et al. 1986, Chris-
tensen 1988, 1989, Parsons 1990). Natural ﬁre regimes,
however, cannot be safely or effectively reintroduced

1202
INVITED FEATURE
Ecological Applications
Vol. 9, No. 4
in many ecosystems without ﬁrst restoring related for-
est structures (see Stephenson 1999, Moore et al. 1999).
Ultimately, decisions about ‘‘desired’’ conditions,
and what is ‘‘natural’’ are inherently subjective and
value laden. History can inform this decision process,
but it does not provide unequivocal policy or manage-
ment guidelines (Foster and Motzkin 1998, Schmidt et
al. 1998). People must decide if past mechanisms of
change and the dynamical processes involved are de-
sirable for today’s landscapes. There are some land-
scapes where maintenance or restoration of natural or
historical processes and structures are probably desired
by most people and are legally mandated (e.g., des-
ignated wilderness and some parks). There are many
other places where it is very difﬁcult to determine what
historical processes and structures are compatible with
current human desires, as well as being necessary to
sustain ecosystems. We suspect, however, that the high
costs and consequences of excluding necessary eco-
logical processes (e.g., ﬁre) will soon shape human
desires and decisions more than they have in the past.
Humans and nature
A problem with using history to identify ‘‘natural’’
conditions is the fact that humans were an important
cause of past variability in most ecosystems (Shrader-
Frechette and McCoy 1995, Hunter 1996). Our south-
western research, for example, indicates that Native
Americans were probably very inﬂuential, at least at
local scales, in the pre-Columbian era (e.g., at Chaco
Canyon). Extreme ﬁre regime changes in some forests
were also caused by human activities in the 19–20th
centuries (e.g., livestock grazing and active ﬁre sup-
pression). Pre-Columbian human impacts on North
American landscapes have often been underestimated
(Denevan 1992), but there seems to be a tendency in
recent years to overgeneralize these impacts (Vale
1998). Population densities, resource demands, and
consequent ecological effects of humans were highly
variable through space and time (Russell 1997). Some
landscapes were managed and manipulated for millen-
nia, while it is likely that some large regions and eco-
systems were not substantially altered by humans until
the 19th or 20th centuries (Vale 1998).
It is obvious that many ecosystems are greatly mod-
iﬁed today by humans, and for many areas restoration
of historical processes or structures is impossible or
undesirable. In these areas, we often trade off ecolog-
ical integrity for short-term economic gains, as many
ecosystem components (e.g., biodiversity) and pro-
cesses (e.g., ecosystem services, like water puriﬁca-
tion) are lost in humanized landscapes. Moreover, hu-
man needs are increasing, and humans will largely de-
termine the future of all ecosystems, perhaps regardless
of history. Despite the prevalence of high temporal
variability in many ecosystems, whether caused by hu-
mans or climate, this does not mean that we can prac-
tically manage and sustain ecosystems under any con-
dition that we choose, regardless of the inherent limits
and tolerances of species and communities. As pointed
out by Pickett et al. (1992) and a recent Ecological
Society of America report:
. . . Human-generated changes must be constrained
because nature has functional, historical, and evo-
lutionary limits. Nature has a range of ways to be,
but there is a limit to those ways, and therefore,
human changes must be within those limits.
—Christensen et al. (1996)
A primary objective of historical ecology should be
to help deﬁne those limits. In the face of imperfect
understanding of ecosystem functional and evolution-
ary limits, knowledge of historical patterns and pro-
cesses can be of considerable value. Applying histor-
ical knowledge to guiding and constraining manage-
ment actions is then an informed and conservative ap-
proach to managing ecosystems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
For discussions and ideas we thank all participants of a
1996 workshop held near Missoula, Montana, USA, spon-
sored by the U.S. Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research
Station, and Aldo Leopold Wilderness Research Institute. We
also thank Chris Baisan, Wally Covington, Amy Hessl, Emily
Heyerdahl,
Steve
Jackson,
Kurt
Kipfmueller,
Margaret
Moore, Dave Parsons, Matt Rollins, and two anonymous re-
viewers for comments on review drafts. Our research was
supported by the U.S. Geological Survey, U.S. Forest Ser-
vice, National Park Service, The Nature Conservancy, The
University of Arizona, and the National Science Foundation
(Geography, Atmospheric Dynamics, and Earth System His-
tory programs).
LITERATURE CITED
Agee, J. K. 1993. Fire ecology of Paciﬁc Northwest forests.
Island Press, Washington, D.C., USA.
Allen, C. D. 1989. Changes in the landscape of the Jemez
Mountains, New Mexico. Dissertation. University of Cal-
ifornia, Berkeley, California, USA.
. 1994. Ecological perspective: linking ecology, GIS,
and remote sensing to ecosystem management. Pages 111–
139 in A. V. Sample, editor. Remote sensing and GIS in
ecosystem management. Island Press, Washington, D.C.,
USA.
Allen, C. D., J. L. Betancourt, and T. W. Swetnam. 1998.
Landscape changes in the southwestern United States: tech-
niques, long-term data sets, and trends. Pages 71–84 in T.
Sisk, editor. Perspectives on the land use history of North
America: a context for understanding our changing envi-
ronment. U.S. Geological Survey, Biological Science Re-
port USGS/BRD/BSR-1998-0003.
Allen, C. D., and D. D. Breshears. 1998. Drought-induced
shift of a forest–woodland ecotone: rapid landscape re-
sponse to climate variation. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Science USA 95:14839–14842.
Allen, C. D., R. Touchan, and T. W. Swetnam. 1995. Land-
scape–scale ﬁre history studies support ﬁre management
action at Bandelier. Park Science 15:18–19.
Allen, E. B., W. W. Covington, and D. Falk. 1996. Supporting
research in restoration biology; NSF workshop offers rec-
ommendations. Restoration and Management Notes 14:
148–150.

November 1999
1203
HISTORICAL VARIABILITY
Anderson, N. J. 1995. Using the past to predict the future:
lake sediments and the modeling of limnological distur-
bance. Ecological Modelling 78:149–172.
Anderson, R. S. 1989. Development of the southwestern pon-
derosa pine forests: what do we really know? Pages 15–22
in Multiresource management of ponderosa pine forests.
U.S. Forest Service General Technical Report RM-185.
Anderson, R. S., and S. L. Carpenter. 1991. Vegetation
change in Yosemite Valley, Yosemite National Park, Cal-
ifornia, during the protohistoric period. Madrono 38:1–13.
Archer, S. 1994. Woody plant encroachment into south-
western grasslands and savannas: rates, patterns and prox-
imate causes. Pages 13–68 in M. Vavra, W. Laycock, and
R. Pierper, editors. Ecological implications of livestock her-
bivory in the west. Society for Range Management, Denver,
Colorado, USA.
Archer, S., D. S. Schimel, and E. A. Holland. 1995. Mech-
anisms of shrubland expansion: land use, climate or CO2.
Climate Change 28:91–99.
Arno, S. F., H. Y. Smith, and M. A. Krebs. 1997. Old growth
ponderosa pine and western larch stand structures: inﬂu-
ences of pre-1900 ﬁres and ﬁre exclusion. U.S. Forest Ser-
vice Research Paper INT-RP-495.
Bahre, C. J. 1991. A legacy of change: historic human impact
on vegetation in the Arizona borderlands. University of
Arizona Press, Tucson, Arizona, USA.
Baisan, C. H., and T. W. Swetnam. 1990. Fire history on a
desert mountain range: Rincon Mountain, Wilderness, Ar-
izona, USA. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 20:1559–
1569.
Baisan, C. H., and T. W. Swetnam. 1997. Interactions of ﬁre
regimes and land use history in the central Rio Grande
Valley. U.S. Forest Research Paper RM-RP-330.
Barnett, T. P., L. Bengtsson, K. Arpe, M. Flu¨gel, N. Graham,
M. Latif, J. Ritchie, E. Roeckner, U. Schlese, U. Schul-
zweida, and M. Tyree. 1994. Forecasting global ENSO-
related climate anomalies. Tellus 46A:381–397.
Betancourt, J. L. 1996. Long- and short-term climate inﬂu-
ences on southwestern shrublands. Pages 5–9 in J. R. Bar-
row, E. D McArthur, R. E. Sosebee, and R. J. Tausch,
compilers. Proceedings: shrubland ecosystem dynamics in
a changing environment; 1995, May 23–25; Las Cruces,
New Mexico, USA. U.S. Forest Service General Technical
Report INT-GTR-338.
Betancourt, J. L., E. A. Pierson, K. Aasen-Rylander, J. A.
Fairchild-Parks, and J. S. Dean. 1993. Inﬂuence of history
and climate on New Mexico pinyon–juniper woodlands.
Pages 42–62 in E. F. Aldon and D. W. Shaw, editors. Man-
aging pinyon–juniper ecosystems for sustainability and so-
cial needs; proceedings of the symposium April 26–30,
Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA. U.S. Forest Service General
Technical Report RM-236.
Betancourt, J. L., W. S. Schuster, J. B. Mitton, and R. S.
Anderson. 1991. Fossil and genetic history of a pinyon
pine (Pinus edulis) isolate. Ecology 72:1685–1697.
Betancourt, J. L., and T. R. Van Devender. 1981. Holocene
vegetation in Chaco Canyon, New Mexico, USA. Science
214:656–658.
Betancourt, J. L., T. R. Van Devender, and P. S. Martin. 1990.
Packrat middens: the last 40 000 years of biotic change.
University of Arizona Press, Tucson, Arizona, USA.
Brenner, J., 1991. Southern Oscillation anomalies and their
relation to Florida wildﬁres. International Journal of Wild-
land Fire 1:73–78.
Brenner, M., T. J. Whitmore, M. S. Flannery, and M. W.
Binford. 1993. Paleolimnological methods for deﬁning tar-
get conditions for lake restoration: Florida case studies.
Lake and Reservoir Management 7:209–217.
Brown, J. H. 1995. Macroecology. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
Brown, P. M., M. R. Kaufmann, and W. D. Shepperd. 1999.
Long-term, landscape patterns of past ﬁre events in a mon-
tane ponderosa pine forest of central Colorado. Landscape
Ecology, in press.
Carlton, J. T. 1998. Apostrophe to the ocean. Conservation
Biology 12:1165–1167.
Christensen, N. L. 1988. Succession and natural disturbance:
paradigms, problems, and preservation of natural ecosys-
tems. Pages 62–86 in J. K. Agee and D. R. Johnson, editors.
Ecosystem management for parks and wilderness. Univer-
sity of Washington Press, Seattle, Washington, USA.
. 1989. Wilderness and natural disturbance. Forum
for Applied Research and Public Policy (Summer 1989):
46–49.
Christensen, N. L., et al. 1996. The report of the Ecological
Society of America committee on the scientiﬁc basis for
ecosystem management. Ecological Applications 6:665–
691.
Clark, J. S. 1996. Testing disturbance theory with long-term
data: alternative life history solutions to the distributions
of events. American Naturalist 148:976–996.
Connin, S. L., J. L. Betancourt, and J. Quade. 1998. Late
Pleistocene C4 plant dominance and summer rainfall in the
southwestern USA from isotopic study of herbivore teeth.
Quaternary Research 50:179–193
Covington, W. W., P. Z. Fule´, M. M. Moore, S. C. Hart, T.
E. Kolb, J. N. Mast, S. S. Sackett, and M. R. Wagner. 1997.
Restoring ecosystem health in ponderosa pine forests of
the Southwest. Journal of Forestry 95:23–29.
Covington, W. W., and M. M. Moore. 1994. Southwestern
ponderosa pine forest structure and resource conditions:
changes since Euro-American settlement. Journal of For-
estry 92:39–47.
Crowley, T. J., G. R. North. 1991. Paleoclimatology. Oxford
University Press, New York, New York, USA.
Dahm, C. W., and B. W. Geils. 1997. An assessment of
ecosystem health in the Southwest. U.S. Forest Service
General Technical Report RM-GTR-295.
Davis, M. B. 1989. Retrospective studies. Pages 71–89 in
G. E. Likens, editor. Long-term studies in ecology. Spring-
er-Verlag, New York, New York, USA.
Delcourt, P. A., and H. R. Delcourt. 1998. Paleoecological
insights on conservation of biodiversity: a focus on species,
ecosystems, and landscapes. Ecological Applications 8:
921–934.
Denevan, W. M. 1992. The pristine myth: the landscape of
the Americas in 1492. Annals of the Association of Amer-
ican Geographers 82:369–385.
Dettinger, M. D., D. R. Cayan, H. F. Diaz, and D. M. Meko.
1998. North–south precipitation patterns in western North
America on interannual-to-decadal time scales. Journal of
Climate 11:3095–3111.
Dieterich, J. H., and T. W. Swetnam. 1984. Dendrochronol-
ogy of a ﬁre scarred ponderosa pine. Forest Science 30:
238–247.
Dunbar, R. B., and J. E. Cole. 1993. Coral records of ocean–
atmosphere variability: Report from the Workshop on Coral
Paleoclimate Reconstruction, Nov. 5–8, 1992, La Parguera,
Puerto Rico, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Admin-
istration, Climate and Global Change Program, Special Re-
port No. 10.
Dutton, A. A., and D. T. Bunting. 1981. Arizona then and
now: a comprehensive rephotographic project. Ag2 Press,
Phoenix, Arizona, USA.
Ely, L. L., Y. Enzel, J. E. O’Conner, and V. R. Baker. 1991.
Paleoﬂood records and risk assessment: examples from the
Colorado River Basin. Pages 105–110 in J. Ganoulis, ed-
itor. Water resources engineering and risk assessment.
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Advanced

1204
INVITED FEATURE
Ecological Applications
Vol. 9, No. 4
Study Institute Series G: Ecological Sciences, Volume 29.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany.
Fastie, C. L. 1995. Causes and ecosystem consequences of
multiple pathways of primary succession at Glacier Bay,
Alaska. Ecology 76:1899–1916.
Foster, D. R., and G. Motzkin. 1998. Ecology and conser-
vation in the cultural landscape of New England: lessons
from nature’s history. Northeastern Naturalist 5:111–126.
Foster, D. R., D. A. Orwig, and J. S. McLachlan. 1996.
Ecological and conservation insights from reconstructive
studies of temperate old-growth forests. Trends in Ecology
and Evolution 11:419–425.
Foster, D. R., P. K. Schoonmaker, and S. T. A. Pickett. 1990.
Insights from paleoecology to community ecology. Trends
in Ecology and Evolution 5:119–122.
Fritts, H. C. 1976. Tree rings and climate. Academic Press,
New York, New York, USA.
Fritts, H. C., and T. W. Swetnam. 1989. Dendroecology: a
tool for evaluating variations in past and present forest
environments. Advances in Ecological Research 19:111–
189.
Fule´, P. Z., and W. W. Covington. 1997. Changing ﬁre re-
gimes in Mexican pine forests: ecological and management
implications. Journal of Forestry 94:33–38.
Fule´, P. Z., W. W. Covington, and M. M. Moore. 1997. De-
termining reference conditions for ecosystem management
of southwestern ponderosa pine. Ecological Applications
7:895–908.
Galatowitsch, S. M. 1990. Using the original land survey
notes to reconstruct presettlement landscapes in the Amer-
ican West. Great Basin Naturalist 50:181–191.
Gore, A. P., E. A. Johnson, and H. P. Lo. 1985. Estimating
the time a dead tree has been on the ground. Ecology 66:
1981–1983.
Gottfried, G. J., T. W. Swetnam, C. D. Allen, J. L. Betancourt,
and A. L. Chung-McCoubrey.
1995.
Pinyon–juniper
woodlands. Pages 95–132 in D. M. Finch and J. A. Tainter,
technical editors. Ecology, diversity, and sustainability of
the Middle Rio Grande Basin. U.S. Forest Service General
Technical Report RM-GTR-268.
Grissino-Mayer, H. D. 1996. A 2129-year reconstruction of
precipitation for northwestern New Mexico, USA. Pages
191–204, in J. S. Dean, D. M. Meko, and T. W. Swetnam,
editors. Tree rings, environment, and humanity. Radiocar-
bon, Tucson, Arizona, USA.
Grissino-Mayer, H. D., and T. W. Swetnam. 1997. Multi-
century history of wildﬁre in the ponderosa pine forests of
El Malpais National Monument. New Mexico Bureau of
Mines and Mineral Resources Bulletin 156:163–171.
Grover, H. D., and H. B. Musick. 1990. Shrubland en-
croachment in southern New Mexico, U.S.A.: an analysis
of desertiﬁcation processes in the American Southwest. Cli-
matic Change 17:305–330.
Hastings, J. R., and R. M. Turner. 1965. The changing mile:
an ecological study of vegetation change with time in the
lower mile of an arid and semiarid region. University of
Arizona Press, Tucson, Arizona, USA.
Hessburg, P. F., B. G. Smith, and R. B. Salter. 1999. De-
tecting change in forest spatial patterns from reference con-
ditions. Ecological Applications 9:1232–1252.
Holling, C. S., and G. K. Meffe. 1996. Command and control
and the pathology of natural resource management. Con-
servation Biology 10:328–337.
Humphrey, R. R. 1987. Ninety years and 535 miles: vege-
tation changes along the Mexican border. University of
New Mexico Press, Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA.
Hunter, M. L., Jr. 1996. Benchmarks for managing ecosys-
tems: Are human activities natural? Conservation Biology
10:695–697.
Hunter, M. L., Jr., G. L. Jacobson, and T. Webb III. 1988.
Paleoecology and the coarse-ﬁlter approach to maintaining
biological diversity. Conservation Biology 2:375–385.
Idso, S. B. 1992. Shrubland expansion in the American
Southwest. Climate Change 22:85–86.
Jackson, S. T. 1994. Pollen and spores in Quaternary lake
sediments as sensors of vegetation composition: theoretical
models and empirical evidence. Pages 253–286 in: A. Tra-
verse, editor. Sedimentation of organic particles. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
. 1997. Documenting natural and human-caused plant
invasions using paleoecological methods. Pages 37–55 in:
J. O. Luken and J. W. Thieret, editors. Assessment and
management of plant invasions. Springer-Verlag, New
York, New York, USA.
Jackson, S. T., J. T. Overpeck, T. Webb, III, S. E. Keattch,
and K. H. Anderson. 1997. Mapped plant-macrofossil and
pollen records of late Quaternary vegetation change in east-
ern North America. Quaternary Science Reviews 16:1–70.
Johnson, E. A., K. Miyanishi, and H. Kleb. 1994. The haz-
ards of interpretation of static age structures as shown by
stand reconstructions in a Pinus contorta Picea–Engelman-
nii forest. Journal of Ecology 82:923–931.
Johnson, H. B., H. W. Polley, and H. S. Mayeux. 1993. In-
creasing CO2 and plant–plant interactions: effects on nat-
ural vegetation. Vegetatio 104–105:157–170.
Kaufmann, M. R., R. T. Graham, D. A. Boyce, Jr., W. H.
Moir, L. Perry, R. T. Reynolds, R. L. Bassett, P. Mehlhop,
C. B. Edminster, W. M. Block, and P. S. Corn. 1994. An
ecological basis for ecosystem management. U.S. Forest
Service General Technical Report RM-GTR-246.
Kaufmann, M. R., L. S. Huckaby, C. Regan, and J. Popp.
1998. Forest reference conditions for ecosystem manage-
ment in the Sacramento Mountains, New Mexico. U.S. For-
est Service General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-19.
Kochel, R. C., and V. R. Baker. 1982. Paleoﬂood hydrology.
Science 215:353–360.
Landres, P., P. Morgan, and F. Swanson. 1999. Overview of
the use of natural variability in managing ecological sys-
tems. Ecological Applications 9:1279–1288.
Lanner, R. M., and T. R. Van Devender. 1998. The recent
history of pinyon pines in the American Southwest. Pages
171–182 in D. M. Richardson, editor. Ecology and bio-
geography of pinus. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, UK.
Leopold, A. 1924. Grass, brush, timber, and ﬁre in southern
Arizona. Journal of Forestry 22:2–10.
. 1941. Wilderness as a land laboratory. Living Wil-
derness 6:3.
Levin, S. A. 1992. The problem of pattern and scale in ecol-
ogy: the Robert H. MacArthur award lecture. Ecology 73:
1943–1967.
Lloyd, A. H. 1996. Patterns and processes of treeline forest
response to late Holocene climate change in the Sierra Ne-
vada, California. Dissertation. University of Arizona, Tuc-
son, Arizona, USA.
Lloyd, A. H., and L. J. Graumlich. 1997. Holocene dynamics
of treeline forests in the Sierra Nevada. Ecology 78:1199–
1210.
Malde, H. E. 1973. Geologic benchmarks by terrestrial pho-
tography. U.S. Geological Survey Journal of Research 1:
193–206.
Manley, P. N., et al. 1995. Sustaining ecosystems: a con-
ceptual framework. Version 1.0. U.S. Forest Service Paciﬁc
Southwest Region and Research Station R5-EM-TP-001.
Mann, M. E., R. S. Bradley, and M. K. Hughes. 1998. Glob-
al-scale temperature patterns and climate forcing over the
past six centuries. Nature 392:779–787.
Mast, J., T. T. Veblen, and M. E. Hodgson. 1996. Tree in-
vasion within a pine–grassland ecotone: an approach with

November 1999
1205
HISTORICAL VARIABILITY
historic aerial photography and GIS modeling. Forest Ecol-
ogy and Management 93:181–194.
Millar, C. I. 1997. Comments on historical variation and
desired future condition as tools for terrestrial landscape
analysis. Pages 105–131, in S. Sommarstrom, editor. Pro-
ceedings of the Sixth Biennial Watershed Management
Conference, Water Resources Center Report No. 92, Uni-
versity of California, Davis, California, USA.
Millar, C. I., and W. Wolfenden. 1999. The role of climate
change in interpreting historic variability. Ecological Ap-
plications 9:1207–1216.
Miller, C., and D. L. Urban. 1999. A model of surface ﬁre,
climate, and forest pattern in Sierra Nevada, California.
Ecological Modelling 114:113–135.
Miller, R. F., and J. A. Rose. 1995. Historic expansion of
Juniperus occidentalis (western juniper) in southeastern
Oregon. Great Basin Naturalist 55:37–45.
Miller, R. F., and P. E. Wigand. 1994. Holocene changes in
semi-arid pinyon–juniper woodlands. Bioscience 44:465–
474.
Millspaugh, S. H., and C. Whitlock. 1995. A 750-year ﬁre
history based on lake sediment records in central Yellow-
stone National Park, USA. The Holocene 5:283–292.
Moore, M. M., W. W. Covington, and P. Z. Fule´. 1999. Ref-
erence conditions and ecological restoration: a southwest-
ern ponderosa pine perspective. Ecological Applications 9:
1266–1277.
Morgan, P., G. H. Aplet, J. B. Hauﬂer, H. C. Humphries, M.
M. Moore, and W. D. Wilson. 1994. Historical range of
variability: a useful tool for evaluating ecosystem change.
Journal of Sustainable Forestry 2:87–111.
Neilson, R. P. 1986. High-resolution climatic analysis and
Southwest biogeography. Science 232:27–34.
Nowak, C. L., R. S. Nowak, R. J. Tausch, and P. E. Wigand.
1994. Tree and shrub dynamics in northwestern Great Ba-
sin woodland and shrub steppe during the late Pleistocene
and Holocene. American Journal of Botany 81:265–277.
Parsons, D. J. 1990. Restoring ﬁre to the Sierra Nevada
mixed conifer forest: reconciling science, policy and prac-
ticality. Pages 271–299 in H. H. Glenn and T. M. Bon-
nicksen, editors. Restoration ’89: the new management
challenge. First annual meeting of the Society for Ecolog-
ical Restoration, 16–20 January 1989, Oakland, California,
USA. Society for Ecological Restoration, Madison, Wis-
consin, USA.
Parsons, D. J., D. M. Graber, J. K. Agee, and J. W. van
Wagtendonk. 1986. Natural ﬁre management in National
Parks. Environmental Management 10:21–24.
Pickett, S. T. A., V. T. Parker, and P. L. Fiedler. 1992. The
new paradigm in ecology: implications for conservation
biology above the species level. Pages 65–88 in P. L. Fiedler
and S. K. Jain, editors. Conservation biology: the theory
and practice of nature conservation, preservation, and man-
agement. Chapman and Hall, New York, New York, USA.
Premoli, A., S. Chischilly, and J. B. Mitton. 1994. Genetic
variation in the establishment of new populations of pinyon
pine. Biodiversity and Conservation 3:331–340.
Quigley, T. M., R. W. Hayes, and R. T. Graham, technical
editors. 1996. Integrated scientiﬁc assessment for ecosys-
tem management in the Interior Columbia Basin and por-
tions of the Klamath and Great Basins. U.S. Forest Service
General Technical Report PNW-GTR-382.
Ricklefs, R. E. 1987. Community diversity: relative roles of
local and regional processes. Science 235:167–171.
Rogers, G. F., H. E. Malde, and R. M. Turner. 1984. Bib-
liography of repeat photography for evaluating landscape
change. University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City, Utah,
USA.
Russell, E. W. B. 1997. People and the land through time:
linking ecology and history. Yale University Press, Cam-
bridge, Massachusetts, USA.
Samuels, M. L., and J. L. Betancourt. 1982. Modeling the
long-term effects of fuelwood harvesting on pinyon–juni-
per woodlands. Environmental Management 6:505–515.
Savage, M., and T. W. Swetnam. 1990. Early and persistent
ﬁre decline in a Navajo ponderosa pine forest. Ecology 70:
2374–2378.
Schmidt, J. C., R. H. Webb, R. A. Valdez, G. R. Marzolf,
and L. E. Stevens. 1998. Science and values in river res-
toration in the Grand Canyon. Bioscience 48:735–747.
Shrader-Frechette, K. S., and E. D. McCoy. 1995. Natural
landscapes, natural communities, and natural ecosystems.
Forest and Conservation History 39 July:138–142.
Simard, A. J., D. A. Haines, and W. A. Main. 1985. Relations
between El Nin˜o/Southern Oscillation anomalies and wild-
land ﬁre activity in the United States. Agricultural and For-
est Meteorology 36:93–104.
Smol, J. P. 1992. Paleolimnology: an important tool for ef-
fective ecosystem management. Journal of Aquatic Eco-
system Health 1:49–58.
Sierra Nevada Ecosystem Project (SNEP). 1996. Final Re-
port to Congress: status of the Sierra Nevada. Volume 1.
Assessment summaries and management strategies. Wild-
land Resources Center Report No. 36. Centers for Water
and Wildland Resources, University of California, Davis,
California, USA.
Sprugel, D. G. 1991. Disturbance, equilibrium, and envi-
ronmental variability: what is ‘‘natural’’ vegetation in a
changing environment. Biological Conservation 58:1–18.
Stephenson, N. L. 1999. Reference conditions for giant se-
quoia forest restoration: structure, process, and precision.
Ecological Applications 9:1253–1265.
Stohlgren, T. J., D. Binkley, T. T. Veblen, and W. L. Baker.
1995.
Attributes of reliable long-term landscape-scale
studies: malpractice insurance for landscape ecologists. En-
vironmental Monitoring and Assessment 36:1–25.
Swanson, F. J., J. A. Jones, D. O. Wallin, and J. H. Cissel.
1994.
Natural variability—implications for ecosystem
management. Volume II: ecosystem management principles
and applications. Pages 80–94 in M. E. Jensen and P. S.
Bourgeron, technical editors; R. L. Everett, assessment
team leader. Eastside forest ecosystem health assessment.
U.S. Forest Service General Technical Report PNW-GTR-
318.
Swetnam, T. W. 1990. Fire history and climate in the south-
western United States. Pages 6–17 in J. S. Krammes, tech-
nical coordinator. Proceedings of symposium on effects of
ﬁre in management of southwestern U.S. natural resources,
November 15–17, 1988, Tucson, Arizona. U.S. Forest Ser-
vice General Techncial Report RM-GTRH-191.
. 1993. Fire history and climate change in giant se-
quoia groves. Science 262:885–889.
Swetnam, T. W., and C. H. Baisan. 1996. Historical ﬁre re-
gime patterns in the southwestern United States since AD
1700. Pages 11–32 in C. D. Allen, technical editor. Fire
effects in southwestern forests, proceedings of the second
La Mesa Fire symposium, March 29–31, 1994, Los Ala-
mos, New Mexico. U.S. Forest Service General Technical
Report RM-GTR-286.
Swetnam, T. W., C. H. Baisan, and J. M. Kaib. In press.
Forest ﬁre histories of the Sky Islands of La Frontera. In
G. L. Webster and C. J. Bahre, editors. Changing plant life
of La Frontera: observations of vegetation in the United
States/Mexico borderlands. University of New Mexico
Press, Albuquerque, New Mexico.
Swetnam, T. W., and J. L. Betancourt. 1990. Fire–southern
oscillation relations in the southwestern United States. Sci-
ence 249:1017–1020.
Swetnam, T. W., and J. L. Betancourt. 1998. Mesoscale dis-

1206
INVITED FEATURE
Ecological Applications
Vol. 9, No. 4
turbance and ecological response to decadal climatic vari-
ability in the American Southwest. Journal of Climate 11:
3128–3147.
Swetnam, T. W., and A. M. Lynch. 1993. Mulitcentury, re-
gional-scale patterns of western spruce budworm out-
breaks. Ecological Monographs 63:399–424.
Tausch, R. J. 1996. Past changes, present and future impacts,
and the assessment of community or ecosystem condition.
Pages 97–101 in J. R Barrow, E. McArthur, E. Durant, and
R. J. Tausch, compilers. Proceedings: shrublands ecosys-
tem dynamics in a changing environment, 1995 May 23–
25, Las Cruces, New Mexico. U.S. Forest Service General
Technical Report INT-GTR-388.
Thompson, L. G., et al. 1998. A 25 000-year tropical climate
history from Bolivian ice cores. Science 282:1858–1864.
Thompson, R. S., C. Whitlock, S. P. Harrison, W. G. Spauld-
ing, and P. J. Bartlein. 1993. Vegetation, lake levels and
climate in the western United States. Pages 468–513 in H.
E. Wright et al., editors. Global climates since the last
glacial maximum. University of Minnesota Press, Minne-
apolis, Minnesota, USA.
Touchan, R., T. W. Swetnam, and H. D. Grissino-Mayer.
1995. Effects of livestock grazing on pre-settlement ﬁre
regimes in New Mexico. Pages 268–272 in J. K. Brown,
R. W. Mutch, C. W. Spoon, and R. H. Wakimoto, technical
coordinators. Proceedings: symposium on ﬁre in wilderness
and park management, Missoula, Montana, March 30–
April 1, 1993. U.S. Forest Service General Technical Re-
port INT-GTR-320.
U.S. Global Change Research Program (USGCRP). 1999.
Our changing planet. A report by the subcommittee on
global change research. Committee on Environment and
Natural Resources of the National Science and Technology
Council. A supplement to the president’s ﬁscal year 1999
budget. Washington, D.C., USA.
Vale, T. R. 1998. The myth of the humanized landscape: an
example from Yosemite National Park. Natural Areas Jour-
nal 18:231–236.
Van Devender, T. R., R. S. Thompson, and J. L. Betancourt.
1987. Vegetation history of the deserts of the southwest
North America, the nature and timing of the late Wiscon-
sin–Holocene transition. Pages 323–325 in W. F. Ruddiman
and H. E. Wright, Jr., editors. North America and adjacent
oceans during the last deglaciation. The geology of North
America, K-3, Geological Society of America.
Van de Water, P. K., S. W. Leavitt, and J. L. Betancourt. 1994.
Trends in stomatal density and 13C/12C ratios of Pinus ﬂexilis
needles during the last glacial–interglacial cycle. Science
264:239–243.
Van Metre, P. C., E. Callendar, and C. Fuller. 1997. Historical
trends in organochlorine compounds in river basins using
sediment cores from reservoirs. Environmental Science and
Technology 31:2339–2344.
Veblen, T. T., and D. C. Lorenz. 1986. Anthropogenic dis-
turbance and recovery patterns in montane forests, Colo-
rado Front Range. Physical Geography 7:1–24.
Veblen, T. T., and D. C. Lorenz. 1991. The Colorado Front
Range: a century of ecological change. University of Utah
Press, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
Webb, R. H. 1996. Grand Canyon, a century of change:
rephotography of the 1889–1890 Stanton expedition. Uni-
versity of Arizona Press, Tucson, Arizona, USA.
Weng, C. and S. J. Jackson. In press. Late-glacial and Ho-
locene vegetation history and paleoclimate of the Kaibab
Plateau. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecol-
ogy.
White, P. S., and J. L. Walker. 1997. Approximating nature’s
variation: selecting and using reference information in res-
toration ecology. Restoration Ecology 5:338–349.
Wight, J. R., and H. J. Fisser. 1968. Juniperus osteosperma
in northwestern Wyoming: their distribution and ecology.
University of Wyoming, Agricultural Experiment Station,
Science Monograph 6:1–31.
Wright, C. W. 1952. An ecological description of an isolated
pinyon pine grove. Thesis. University of Colorado, Boul-
der, Colorado, USA.
