
"The ~r('alf':>l threet to th« sustninebilits . 
tlivrrsity find sociel viebllit V or the Iorest and 
cotnmunitirs olthc IV"sl jour Inilun: to 
restore Iorest hcnlth in the Irequetu fire fore IS 
0/rhe Wesr. Sill/p~ l" instulling fuel breaks 
around our citirs and rural developments nnd 
torseking th e wildlands would be an ebdirtuion 
o! out responsibilttv 10 Iuture generations. 
Attention cannot be nnrrow (\ focused on a ring 
around the developed areas. ~lI ch setions will fail 10 
address one a/the most contentious is ues olour 
rime. the protection otendnngered specie. . Severe 
wildfires in Irequent fin' Iorests oftlu: West are (hi' 
greatest single threst to criticel luibiter Ior man -' of 
these vulnerable specie beceu (' IhrJ' are not 
edapted to '[and replacing fires. .. 
Wallace Covington , Ph.D., Regents ' Professor and Director of the Ecological Restoration Institute , Northern Arizona University; in 
testimony before the Committee on Resources , Subcommittee on Forests and Forest Health, Flagstaff, March 3, 2003 
T ime isrunning out for forests in 
the Southwest. Wildfires and insects are 
devouring them in a death-dance unlike 
anythinganyone haseverseen: unlike 
anything for which scientists can find 
precedent in nature. If Congressdoes not 
soonheed the urgent warningsof 
eminent scholars-among them fire 
ecologist Wally Covington-the region's 
forests will be lost. 
Ofthe dozens ofscientistswhosense 
the urgency of the West's wildfire crisis, 
noneseems to feel it more keenly than 
Dr. Covington.asoft-spoken,self-effacing 
forest ecologist whosecredentialsand 
research have thrust him to the forefront 
ofthe debate overwhat-if anything-to 
do about the West's wildfire crisis. 
"The current rate ofacceleration in 
the severityandsize ofwildfires in the 
West indicates that average annual losses 
overthe next two decades willbe in 
excess of five to ten millionacresper 
year," an increasingly impatient Dr. 
Covington told members ofthe House 
Subcommittee on Forests and Forest 
Health at a March 7 field hearing in 
Flagstaff. "Using the reasonable assump­
tion that preventive restoration treat­
ments should at least be at the paceand 
scaleoflosses to severe stand replacing 
fire, one would conclude that weshould 
be treating five to ten million acres per 
year. Our current pace and scale is 
woefully inadequategiven the scope of 
the problem." 
Cov er: Columb ia Helicopter twin-roto r Boeing 
107 with its ponderosa pine payload high 
above the blackened remains of White 
Mountain Apache timberland in northern 
Arizona. Last summer's Rodeo-Ched iski Fire 
destroyed 276,000 acres of tribal timberl and. 
(Jim Petersen) 
2 EVERGREEN 
An essay byJim Petersen 
exist in the Southwest and never have. 
Stressed by drought and the onset of 
unprecedented insect infestations, 
countless millions oftreesaredying. 
Short ofa large-scale thinning program, 
like the one Dr. Covington envisions, the 
region's alreadyfrighteningwildfire 
crisis-
fueled by thesesamedeadand 
dying trees-will get worse. West-wide, 
the UniversityofIdaho Policy and Analysis 
Group reportsmore than 50 million acres 
are in Condition Class 3, meaningthe risk 
ofcatastrophic fire resulting in the lossof 
majorecosystem components is high. 
But help may be on the way, thanks to 
President Bush's Healthy Forests Initia­
tive, beyonddoubt the mostsweeping set 
ofenvironmental reforms proposed since 
the Nixon Administration championed 
the Endangered Species Act, the National 
Environmental Policy Act and the 
NationalForestManagement Act back in 
the early 1970s. Assuming quick congres­
sionalapproval the wildfirecrisis facing 
the Westwill finallyget some much­
needed attention in the form of a more 
localized. less political forest restora­
tion strategy for which there is a strong 
scientific basis. 
"There isabundant scientific research 
that began in the 1890s and continues 
today that providesa sound scientific 
frameworkfor implementing thescience 
and practiceofrestoration in ponderosa 
pine and related frequent fire ecosystems," 
Dr. Covington toldsubcommittee 
members. "We have solid information 
about presettlement forest conditions, 
changes in fire regimes overthe last 
century. deterioration ofoverall ecosystem 
healthy and ecological responses to 
thinning and prescribed burning-the key 
elements ofanyattempt to restore 
Several hundred north ern Arizona residents 
rallied in Phoenix in late March in support of 
President Bush's Healthy Forests Initiative. 
The West's forestscontain too many 
trees to sustain healthy growth. And more 
aresprouting everyyear. Picture asolid 
blockofwood the dimensions ofa football 
fieldstretching a mile into thesky.That is 
the amount of new wood fiber that nature 
is addingto forests in Arizonaand New 
Mexicoeveryyear. For thestatistically 
rrtinded. net annual growth in the 
Southwest's federal forestsis 25 times 
greater than harvest andyearlymortality 
exceeds harvest bya factor of4.4 to 1. 
Suffice it tosay the moisture, nutrient 
reserves and growingspaceneededto 
sustainsuch mind boggling growth don't 

ecosystem health in [the Interior West)" 
Noteveryone agreeswith Dr. 
Covington'sassessment. Atleastthree 
southwest environmentalgroups­
ForestGuardians, Centerfor Biological 
Diversity and the Forest Conservation 
Council-adamantly oppose the kind of 
restorationworkadvocated byscientists 
most familiar with the West's Ilre 
dependent forests. But other groups­
most notably the Greater Flagstaff 
Forests Partnership - favor restoration. 
In fact, GFFP has partnered with Dr. 
Covington and Northern Arizona 
University's EcologicalRestoration 
Institute on several demonstration 
thinnings in the 
Flagstaff area. 
Thesplit in 
opinionamong 
environmentalists 
underscores the fact 
that the publichas 
but twochoices for 
dealingwith the 
West'swildfire crisis: 
they can follow the 
advice ofgroups that 
favor allowing 
wildfires to run their 
course, no matter 
the environmental 
consequences, or 
they can sidewith 
groups that favor 
strong proponent of both forest 
restoration and development of the 
milling infrastructure needed to 
process wood fiber scientists say must 
be removed from the region's diseased 
and dying forests. "It will not take too 
many half-million-acre wildfires on 
the Mogollon Rim and we won't have 
any forest left here." 
But nowthere are newreasons for 
worry. Edward Collins, ForestService 
DistrictRangerat Lakeside, fears the 
visual impactofa pinebeetleinfestation 
that isspreadingrapidly through two 
nationalforests between ShowLow and 
Payson will be "much more significant" 
A bird's-eye view of the devastation the 468 ,OOO-acre Rodeo-Chediski caused in White 
forest restoration 
transferexpert, is 
Mountain Apache forests. The tribe lost 267,000 acres of centuries-old ponderosa pine. But 
programsscientists 
workingwith lab 
because the tribe is a soverign nation it was able to promptly salvage its fire-killed timber in  
saywill slowly 
full compliance with federal environmenta l laws. Replanting will begin during the Southwest's 
colleagues on what  
reducethe riskof 
late summer monsoon season . The Forest Service wants to restore a small portion of the 
he calls"Forestry's  
catastrophicwildfire. 
public 's fire losses too, but environmentalists have appealed the plan . 
Judging from 
polling and focus group workdonein 
recent months byThe Luntz Research 
Companies, Arlington, Virginia, the 
publichas no appetite forcatastrophic 
wildfire, which it consistently identiftes 
with polluted air and water, sterile 
landscapes, the death offish and wildlife, 
lives lostand propertyruined. Equally 
clear is the fact most Americans see 
wildflre as a threat to forest legacies they 
want to leave fortheir childrenand 
grandchildren. 
But nothing seems to harden opinion 
against wildfire more than firsthand 
experience. Lastsummer, Arizona 
witnessed its largest, most destructive 
wildfire in history-the 468,000-acre 
Rodeo-Chediski Fire,a colossus that 
destroyed more than 400 homesand 
propertyworth $72.8 million. 
"Do the math,"saysenvironmentalist 
BrianCottam, coordinatorthe Greater 
Flagstaff ForestsPartnershipand a 
than the fire-killed ghost-of-a-forest that 
nowlinesmileafter mileofthe once 
scenic mountain highway that links the 
twocommunities. 
"It's pretty bad," concedes John 
Anhold, an entomologistwith the Forest 
Service's Rocky Mountain Research 
Station at Flagstaff. "In fact, we'venever 
seenanything likethis in the Southwest." 
According to Mr. Anhold prolonged 
drought and forest density have combined 
forces to create "the perfect setup" for 
several beetlespecies that are attacking 
pines-old andyoung alike- in unison. 
"In the short term there isn't much we 
can do to slowtheir advance," he says. 
"Long term, this is definitely a teaching 
moment and the lesson is that if wedon't 
thin our forests, nature will." 
It is no better in forests south of the 
White Mountains. Residents in historic 
Prescott,one ofArizona's hottest retire­
ment markets,are bracingfor the factthat 
beetleswill eventually wipe out all of 
their ponderosa forests. In February, 
Prescott National Forest District Ranger 
Ernie Del Rio told residents of Crown 
King, 30 milessouth ofPrescott, that he 
expects 100percent of the ponderosa 
pines in the area will be killed by bark 
beetles. As a fire prevention measure, 
the Forest Service has laid out a ten ­
year plan for removing brush and dead 
trees, but BobHennkens, a Prescott 
resident who nearly lost his home 
when fire veered into his neighbor­
hood last year, expects the plan will be 
appealed by environmentalists. 
"The fires willstart in the dead trees 
in Crown Kingthis 
year and roar over 
the mountain to 
hit Prescott head-
on with a 300 foot 
wall ofllameat 
2000degrees," he 
predicted in a 
recent e-mail 
exchange with 
colleagues from 
the Federal labor­
atoryConsortium. 
"Thehistoric 
capitaland home 
to 34,000 will 
indeed be history." 
Mr. Hennkens, a 
technology 
Marshall Plan," a 
sweeping pri­
vately financed proposal for incubat­
ing small bio-mass and bio-Iuel 
enterprises capable of consuming 
large amounts of low quality wood 
fiber scientists say must be removed 
from the West's fire-prone forests 
before disaster strikes. 
"Our most abundant source of 
renewable energyrests in the creative 
genius ofthe 73 millionAmericans 
whose communities, homesand lives are 
threatened by the West's wildfire crisis," 
he said in a recent Evergreen interview, 
noting the government'sestimate that 
some 20,000western communities now 
lie in harm's way. "Unleashing this 
creativityrequiresthat Congress grant 
at-riskcommunities the authority to 
makedecisions about their forests. I 
knowthat radical environmentalists hate 
this idea, but their claim that local 
people aren't capable ofmakingcom­
mon sense decisions that balance 
evergreenmagazine. com 3 

economic and environmentalgoalsissilly 
and unsubstantiated. 
"We havea moral obligation to protect 
our forests from catastrophic fire," he 
continued. "With access and enlightened 
localdecision-makingwecan do it 
withoutdrainingthe federal treasury. 
Given the opportunity, I'm confident 
entrepreneurs will commit their capital to 
businesses that will makeand market 
value-added bioproducts and bio fuels 
from fiber that will otherwise burn, 
polluting our air and water, destroying the 
very forests we allwant to saveforour 
children and grandchildren." 
Ifever there was a case forCongress 
breathing life into Mr. Hennken's vision, 
or anyofthe other entrepreneurialvisions 
stirring in the Southwest, it lies in the 
sorrowful webofironysewn in the 
aftermath oflastsummer's Rodeo­
Chediski Fire. Originally two fires. high 
winds drovethem intoa singleflrestorm 
that forced the evacuation of32,000 
families.The fire overran parts ofHeber, 
Overgaard,Cibeque, Claysprings, Pinedale 
and Linden but ShowLow, Pinetopand 
Lakeside were spared. 
No one has suffered more in the 
aftermath than the White Mountain 
Apache tribe, which lost 276,000 acres of 
centuries-old ponderosas that, forall their 
economic value, are regarded as priceless 
bytribal members forwhomthere is no 
distinctionbetween landand self. And 
now the land isscarred. August 2002 rains 
stripped already denudedstreambeds to 
bedrock. From the air, a black and white 
moonscapestretchesfromhorizon to 
horizon, accented bythe red-orangeof 
exposedmineralsoiland the needle-less 
skeletons of trees. 
"Our losses are great,"says tribal 
chairman Dallas Massey. "It will take 
generationsfor our foreststo recover." 
Although the tribe lost nearly 35 
percent ofits forestlandbase, it is not 
without the meansto helpitself. Because 
the 1.6 million acre White Mountain 
reservation is a sovereign nation admis­
sion to its forests isbyinvitationonly­
and sue-happyenvironmentalists aren't 
welcome. Further. because the tribe's 
Mexicanspotted owl habitat management 
plan has the blessing of the U.S. Fish & 
Wildlife Serviceit isfree to manageits 
forestsanyway it wantsso longas it does 
not run afoul ofthe Endangered Species 
Act or other federal environmental laws. 
Thus, the tribe isdoingwhat the U'S. 
ForestServicecan onlyWistfully watch: it 
is salvaging its fife-killed timberand 
preparing to plant a newforest. 
Meanwhile,the ForestConservation 
4 EVERGREEN 
Council.a Santa Fe-basedgroup, has 
appealed the Forest Service's quite modest 
plan forcleaning up fire-ravaged forests 
adjacent to the tribe'ssalvageoperation. 
Spokesman John Talberth said, "the 
councilobjects to the basic idea oflogging 
trees damaged in the fife." FCC sued in 
federalcourt January9, the day after the 
Forest Servicesoldfour salvage sales to 
Arizona and New Mexico firms. Although 
officials don't expect FCC's suit will be 
upheldtheyconcede it will have the 
desiredeffect:delaysalvage and restora­
tion workuntil the deadwoodproposed 
forremoval no longerhasanycommercial 
value. Unlike flf, ponderosa deteriorates in 
a matter ofmonths. 
Theenormityofthe taskfacing the 
tribe-and the needto complete the 
salvageoperation while the wood still has 
value- caused the tribe to take the 
extraordinary step ofseeking outside help. 
For the first time in nearly 50 years, it 
sold some of its prized timber to outside 
contractors, most notablySierra Pacific 
Industries, California's largest lumber 
manufacturer. Sierra, in turn , hired 
Oregon-based Columbia Helicopters to 
log remote never before logged canyons 
the tribe's conventional logging crews 
could not reach. Notsurprisingly, many 
tribal members are angry about the fact 
that their biggest and best trees are 
going by rail to Sierra Pacific mills at 
Sonora and Susanville, California and 
not to the tribe's own mills at nearby 
White River and Cibecue. 
"They don't understand that our mills 
can't possibly millall that dead timber 
before it rots," explains tribal forester Paul 
DeClay,Ir.,an Apache himselfanda White 
River native. "Besides. the tribe is broke. 
We couldnot afford to hire Columbia, so 
wedidthe nextbest thing. We soldthe 
timber we couldnot reach to a company 
that could afford to hire them. Tribal 
crewsare working in smaller timber in 
well roadedareas that have been logged 
two to three times before." 
Since last October more than 250 
Columbialoggers, contract timber fallers 
and truckers have been bivouacked in 
ShowLow area motels, but most ofthe 
$3 million the companyhad paidout 
through February is leaving the state, 
underscoringtwo ironies: first that there 
are nosawmillsleftin northern Arizona 
capable ofcapturing the revenue that is 
rolling through Show Low and Heber 
more than a hundred times a day on 
logging trucksbound forrail heads at 
Globeand Snowflake;second that these 
loggers and truckersfromIdaho, Mon­
tana, California, Oregon, Washington and 
Alaska are here because there is no work 
forthem backhome. 
"I understand and respect local anger 
andfrustration,"says Columbia project 
manager John Carroll, an Oregonian who 
has been living at ShowLow's Holiday Inn 
Expresssince October. "It's sad that there's 
no industry left here. You can besure our 
crew would a lot rather be going home 
after work instead ofback to a motel 
room. But we can all hope the day will 
Near Heber, Arizo na, the beetle-killed aftermath of last s 
overran more than 400 homes in Heber, Overgaard , Cibe 
from the fact that its forests contain far too many trees to 
[see chart] annual growth is almost 25 times harvest and 
173,839  
Growth, Mortal, 
Arizona & New Mexi 
Non-Reserve: 

comewhen the publicrealizes that 
protecting forests meansstand density has 
to becontrolled. Ifwedon't do it, nature 
will. We're seeingthe result nowin the 
formoflarge, increasingly frequent 
wildfires. As a logger I can tellyou that 
thinning in green timber and watching 
the flushofnewgrowththat follows isa 
lot moresatisfying than picking up the 
pieces aftera terribleflre likethis." 
Nevertheless, the workColumbia's big 
ummer's 468 ,OOO-acre Rodeo-Chediski Fire.The fire 
ique and Claysprings. The West's wildfire crisis results 
sustain healthy growth . According to the Forest Service 
yearly mortality exceeds harvest by a factor of 4.4 to 1. 
6,980 
Thousand cubic feet 
Net Annual 
Growth 
Annual 
Mortality 
Annual 
Harvest 
ity and Harvest 
co National Forests 
j Timberland 
twin-rotorshipsdo isremarkable in its 
ownright. Although theyare expensive to 
operate, the five Vietnam-era Boeing 107s 
the company brought here are capable of 
moving enormous amounts of wood in a 
matter of hours. Almost without a 
trace, they can retrieve valuable trees 
from steep slopes and remote canyons 
where road construction might well 
trigger erosion or landslides. 
"They are tools, just like any other 
piece of logging equipment," Mr. 
Carroll says of helicopters . "In the 
right setting in the hands of skilled 
crews they do an excellent job." 
Ofall the ironies foisted on the tribe by 
the tragedy offire the cruelest would seem 
to liein the bittersweet knowledge that 
their most valuable trees-once milled in 
California-are destined formarketsin 
nearby Phoenix and Albuquerque. 
"It'sunbelievable isn't it?" observes 
JackChase, SierraPacific pinelumber 
salesman. "Butwe're sellingseveral 
truckloads a month to remanufactures in 
both markets." 
Unbelievable indeed says Lee Nelms, a 
furniture manufacturerin Phoenix, 
confirming that his company buys 15 
truckloads ofpinea month fromSierra 
Paciflc. Mr. Nelms' company, Trendwood, 
employs about 360people in the manufac­
ture ofgenericpinebedroom furniture for 
several specialty furniture retailers. 
"We usedto buy75 percentofour pine 
from millsin the Southwest," he says. 
"Butthey're allgone nowso webuypine 
wherewecan find it, mostlyfrom 
California. Our rawmaterialcostsare up 
$25-30 a thousand. Meanwhile, the trees 
downherearestillgrowinglikecrazy. It's 
ridiculous. Someone needs to compare 
what is happening in the tribe'sforests 
with what is not happeningin national 
forests. Oncethe burned timberis 
salvaged the tribe will planta newforest. 
Meanwhile, the ForestService is in court 
and probably won'tget anythingdone." 
Over the nextten yearsthe tribe will 
plant about 12 millionseedlings on an 
estimated 73,000 severely burned acres. 
Theywould alsoliketo builda newmillat 
White River,one largeenough to bring 
someVitality backinto the region's 
lumberand logging industries. But 
ChairmanMassey saysthe tribalcouncil 
is reluctant to commit its' scarcecapital, 
or anyone else's for that matter, without 
an ironclad 20-year agreementwiththe 
ForestService. 
"Environmentalist litigation is the 
problem," Mr. Massey saysflatly. "There is 
no certaintyinsupply. We can't invest in a 
newmillwithout knowing wherethe 
wood will comefrom, so while weseea 
great potentialin processing wood that 
needsto be removed fromfederal forests, 
wedon't see much certainty." 
Adding insult to injury, the tribe 
recently announcedit will close its' 
Cibeque millonce the current salvage 
operation ends. There isn't enough tribal 
timber left nearby to keep it running. Nor 
is there any federal wood available, deador 
otherwise. Under the circumstances one 
couldeasily forgive Mr. Massey for being 
discouraged about tribe's future in 
forestry and wood products , but he 
remains passionate about their Widely 
admired forest management program 
and what it portends for future 
generations of Apachejob-seekers. 
"We practicethe kind offorestry I 
think most people wish the Forest 
Servicewere practicingin national 
forests," he said. "We thin to promote 
tree growth, reduce the risk of fire, 
insects and diseases, and protect our 
neighbors from wildfire." 
Mr. DeClay concurs, noting that the 
tribe'sforesters aren't constrained bytree 
diameter limits that impede the Forest 
Service's ability in increase biological 
diversity in nationalforests. "We let nature 
tellus whatthe forest needs," he explains. 
"We use thinning to createa diverse mix 
ofwildlife habitattypes-elk, deer, 
turkeys, lions, bighorn sheep. Mexican 
wolvesand spotted owls-featuring 
ground -level vegetation and trees of all 
ages and sizes." 
OflateMr. Massey hasbeen making 
the rounds at congressional and state 
sponsored hearings, pleading the casefor 
restorationforestry and the needfor 
federal assistance fortribal forests and the 
tribe's White River sawmill. In Marchhe 
and Dr. Covington shared the stage in 
Flagstaff and Prescott, where Gov.Janet 
Napolitano hosted the state's annual 
forest health forum. His message, packed 
in a stunning Powerpointpresentation 
nevervaries: restoration forestry is the 
way-and here are the before and after 
pictures to proveit. 
"Most Arizonans get it" declares Sylvia 
Allen, a grassroots organizerfrom the 
Heber-Overgaard area. "They see huge 
flres and theyknowthat thinning is the 
onlysafe solution. What's so frustratingis 
that wecan't do anythingabout it until 
Congress modernizes regulations that 
allow radical environmentalists to stop 
everything, no matter the public will. We 
nearly lostour townin the Rodeo­
Chediski Fire. Real estatevalues, tourism. 
ranchtng-sour entire economic base­
depend on the presence ofhealthyand 
evergreenmagazine.com 5 

attractive forests. We're lookingat total 
mile annually- a fact that does not 
economic collapse if it happens again." 
surprise George Duda, an Albuquerque­
Ms Allen and her northern Arizona 
based urban forester with the New Mexico 
neighbors took their fears and frustra­
Energy, Minerals and Natural Resources 
tions to Phoenixin late March,staging a 
Department. 
half-day rally in a park across the street 
"Many private landowners have told 
from the state capital. Several hundred 
us that following forest thinning 
people made the trip to register their 
mountain springs that have not run for 
displeasure with radical environmental­
decades suddenly reappear," he says. 
ists and to signal their strong support for 
"Clearly, we have too much living 
the President's Healthy Forests Initiative 
biomass for the carrying capacity of the 
and for state and federal 
legislators who are support ­
inghim. 
"It is no longer a timber 
or ajobs issue," MsAllen 
says. "It is an environmental 
issue. Forests are dying and 
burning. Our air and water 
are polluted. Once beautiful 
forests are gone. Our 
heritage is burning. People 
who don't know much 
about forestry nowrecog­
nize that our forests need to 
be thinned." 
Gila County Commis­
sioner Ron Christianson, 
who heads the Public Lands 
Steering Committee for the 
powerful NationalAssocia­
tion of Counties,seemed to 
speak foreveryoneat the 
rally. In words clearly 
intended for Phoenixarea 
residents who don't yet 
understand the wildfire crisis 
and its ramifications for 
desert communities, he said, 
"We are in a war for preser­
vation of our culture, 
economy and way of life. 
There is suffering all around 
us, brought on by people 
who don't live here and have 
no vested interest in our 
families, businesses,schools 
or communities. lfwe don't 
restore our forests you will 
loseyour source ofwater." 
Increasingly, the public is 
making the connection 
between catastrophic wildfire 
and loss ofwatersheds, but 
[Top] This log deck on the White Mountain Apache Reservation holds about 
80 truckloads of logs salvaged from the Rodeo-Chedis ki Fire-enough to 
fires cause seem to have 
construct about 48 three-bedroom homes . The tribe is thought to have lost 
concluded that societycan do 
about 430 million board feet of timber. [Below] The tribe loss is Jake 
a better job." 
Goetzinger' s gain. Mr. Goetzinger, who hails from Tangent, Oregon, was 
The pretending has ended 
grateful he found work in Arizona. Many Oregon log truckers went broke after 
the federal timber sale program collapsed. 
there isless understanding of the loss of 
land. Loss of water, increasingly large 
stream flow scientists attribute to the 
wildfires, insect and disease infestations 
presence of too much vegetation. 
and 100-year-old trees barely five inches 
An Oregon State Universitystudy 
in diameter are the result. The big old 
estimates that a 12-inch diameter western 
ponderosas we all want to save have 
juniper consumes 17.7gallons ofwater 
become like prisoners on death row 
daily. Juniper thickets,which stretch for 
waiting for their time to die." 
mile after mile across much ofthe 
The executioner willcome forNew 
Southwest,are thus consuming about 
Mexico's largest and last sawmillon June 
413 milliongallonsofwater per square 
7. Rio Grande Forest Products, Espanola, 
6 EVERGREEN 
willclose forgood, a victim oflitigation 
that has completely shut down the state's 
fed eral timber sale program. The mill, 
built byDukeCityLumber Company in 
1968, underwent a $3 million re-tooling 
in 1989so that it could handle small 
diameter logs. Yet according to the Forest 
Service, less than three percent of net 
annual national forest growth in the state 
has been harvested armually since 1998. 
"This is devastating," declares 
Espanola mayor Richard 
Lucero. "Rio Grande not only 
employed a lot of people [152 
counting contract loggers 
and truckers] theyalsospent 
a lot of money in stores 
around here." 
Ironically, it is the death 
gasp of the Southwest's 
timber industry that is 
fueling renewed public 
interest in wood consuming 
businesses. Minus mills and 
loggers to demagogue, the 
region's forest combatants 
have but one choice left: 
manage their forests or let 
them burn. 
"It is easier to see the real 
question when you no longer 
have to pretend that the 
timber industry isgone," 
observes Bruce Vincent, a 
grass roots organizer and 
former logger who spoke at 
the Phoenix rally. "The 
industry isgonein the 
Southwest, but the final 
question looms larger than 
ever: 'Will society care for its 
forests or abdicate that 
responsibility to wildfire?' 
Some sayfire is the answer, 
but most folks who have seen 
the environmental and 
economic devastation big 
in Mr. Vincent's hometown, 
Libby,Montana. The town's 
last and largest mill closed 
earlier this year after nearly 100years of 
continuous operation. 
Hopesfor picking up the pieces in 
more than a hundred western timber 
communities rest on matching the 
public's environmental expectations with 
market realities. It willbe easier said than 
done. The milling industry that survived 
the collapse ofthe federal limber sale 
program buys its logs all over the world 

now. Among the nation's largestlumber 
that cutting fire breaks around the 
and papermakers there isscant interest in 
West'sat risk communities solves the 
againdoingbusiness with the federal 
problem." 
government. and even lessinterest in 
"It won't stop wildfires and it won't 
seeingfederal wood fiber flood brutally 
protect forest communities," says Dr. 
competitive global markets that are 
Bonnicksen, a founding member of the 
already awash in cheapwood. 
Society for EcologicalRestoration and 
"The West's few survivingfamily­
author of "America's Ancient Forests," a 
ownedsawmillswouldseem to be a 
fine history offorests and forest use in 
good place to start," Mr. Vincentsays. 
America. 
"Most of the technological advance­
"I am reminded of the walled cities 
ments that have fueled 
progress in our 
homebuilding industry 
started out in these mills 
as strategies for recovering 
more wood fiber from 
expensive logs. It seems 
reasonable-even likely­
that the capital and 
entrepreneurial genius 
needed to develop viable 
new markets for woodwill 
be tried-and perfected­
here first." 
Ever sensitive to sea 
changes in public mood, 
environmentalists appear 
to be trying to moderate a 
litigation strategy that has 
driven most of the West's 
family-owned sawmills out 
of business. Three frequent 
litigators- the Sierra 
Club, Southwest Forest 
Alliance and the Center 
For Biological Diversity ­
recently decided against 
appealing Forest Service 
plans for thinning in the 
lO,OOO-acre Kachina 
Village-Forest Highlands 
tract south of Flagstaff. 
"I think they are trying 
to salvagewhat little 
credibilitythey haveleft in 
the Southwest." observes 
Allen Ribelin, co-owner of 
High Desert Investments, a 
Flagstaff logging company 
his father started. "Forest 
Highlands is a world-class 
gated golfing community. I 
understand that the 
[Top] Aftermath of a thinning project in the Fort Valley area west of Flagstaff, 
Arizona, desiqned by Northern Arizona University forest ecologist Dr. Wallace 
Covington. One local environmentalist called this view "a dearcul" and said 
the site had been "nuked."You decide. [Below] Dr. Covington's thinning 
produced hundreds of truckloads of good quality, small-diameter logs like 
these . But because there is only one sawmill left in the Southwest it took 
many months to find a buyer for these logs. 
homeowners' association had threat ­
of medieval Europe," Dr. Bonnicksen 
ened to counter-sue. I admire their 
says of the Sierra Club's Community 
tenacity but with no mills left I have no 
Protection Fire Plan. "Zones where 
layingwaste to the countryside before 
they crashed through the walls. 
Wildfires behave the same way, which is 
why we have to deal with the problem at 
its source-out in the woods where big 
fires get started." 
As evidenceof his beliefthat today's 
super-heated forest fires are not slowed 
by defensible spaces cut from forests on 
community perimeters, Dr. Bonnicksen 
cites the disastrous Los Alamos Fire, 
which spared thinned areas 
adjacent to the New Mexico 
town, but sent wind-driven 
embers into nearby residen­
tial areas, destroying 405 
homes. 
Apartfrom their limited 
value, Dr. Bonnicksen points 
out that the firebreaks the 
Sierra Clubadvocates willdo 
nothing to protect more 
distant forest resources the 
public values, including 
watersheds that provide 
drinking water for an 
estimated 80 percent of the 
entire West. 
"Forests in the West's 
remote canyons and valleys 
produce most of the water 
stored in reservoirs and 
aquifers," he says. "Healthy 
forests promote ground 
water absorption and slow 
snowmelt giving down­
stream water districts the 
ability to handle spring 
runoff. Wildfires compromise 
water production, washing 
tons ofsoil into watercourses 
and hardeningsurfacesoils 
so they can't absorb water. 
The forest restoration plan 
offered byPresident Bush is 
our best hope for protecting 
communities, watersheds 
and other forestvalues. The 
fortress mentality the Sierra 
Clubadvocates didn't workin 
the DarkAges and it won't 
work now." 
Decision time has come 
in the Southwest.The 
choicesare inevitable and 
unavoidable: restoration forestry or ash 
and ruin. The clockis ticking. 
idea who will buy the wood. We haven't 
sold a pine log out of our decksince last 
December." 
The scramble by environmentalists 
to save face has also spawned what 
noted forest ecologist Tom Bonnicksen 
calls "a fortress mentality-the idea 
most of the trees and brush are re­
movedare supposed to keepout the 
enemy fire in the same way that moats 
and high walls were supposed to keep 
out enemy armies in the Middle Age. 
But walled cities were abandoned after 
it wasdiscovered invadingarmies were 
Jim Petersen is executive director of the 
non-profit Evergreen Foundation and editor 
of Evergreen Magazine, the foundat ion's 
periodic journal. He has reported widely on 
the West's looming wildfire crisis since 1987 
evergreenmagazine.com 7 

White Mountain Apa he Tribe 
We appreciat the a s' tance 0 th Whi e 
Mountain pacheTribe for again gra­
~011 
QL:~ll2L: 
Aftermath of New Mexico's 2000 Viveash Fire 
Aftermath of White Mountain Apache thinning 
A streambed scoured to bedrock by post-fire flooding 
Lush vegetation in a managed, privately owned forest 
in western Oregon 
ciously welcoming us into their overign
The Evergreen 
nation. Thank al 0 to tribal hairman 
Foundation 
Dalla Ma eyand tribalforesterPaul 
The vergreen Founda­
D la Jr. for their assistance with 
ion isa non profit 
this report. 
50I lc] (3) orporauon 
d dicat d to til advanc -
Reprints of thi report 
ment ofsci nce-ba ed fore ury 
Reprints of th i report maybe 
and fore t policy. We publi h 
orderedon-line for95 cents 
Evergreen Magazine periodi­
each including hippingat: 
cally to keepFoundation 
evergreenmagazine.com or 
members and other abrea t of 
e-mail to: 
our re arch. You may conta t us 
cvergreen@ 
by mail. P.O. Box 1290. Bigfork. 
centurytel.net 
Montana 59911; be-mail: 
evergr 'n@c nturytel.net or b 
telephone: 40 -838-09 6 
Helpful Web ites 
www.evergrenmagazine.com 
www.land n e.us 
www.fireplan.go / 
www.f.fed.uslfirelfuelman 
wwv .whltehouse.gov/ 
www.nifc.gov/fireinfo/nfn.hrml 
www.wrnat.us/ 
www.azcemral.com/newslspecial wildfire 
www.greenplrlt.com 
Ford Motor Company 
We are indebted to the FordMotorCompan . he 
Montana Foret Dealer Advertising A ocianon, 
Depratu Ford. Whitefish. Montana and Timberline 
Auto Center. Libb , Montana for their ongoing upport 
forour education mi sion 
