Ecological Restoration 
Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to reversing declines in the condition of forested communities throughout the Intermoun-
tain West, particularly those affected by severe wildfires and insect outbreaks.  Our efforts focus on science-based research of ecological 
and socio-economic matters related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach, and education. 
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928/523-7182, FAX 928/523-0296, www.eri.nau.edu 
Fact Sheet: Forest Restoration and Carbon Sequestration  March 2009 
Introduction 
Global climate change is the environmental issue of the 
twenty-first century. Its negative impacts are already being 
observed with more expected to occur during the coming 
decades. However, international, national, corporate, and 
individual efforts are underway to soften the blow of cli-
mate change and eventually decrease its influence. These 
actions include changes in land use; developing better, car-
bon-neutral technologies; and resource conservation and 
recycling.  
One area of interest to policymakers and researchers is 
carbon sequestration because storing carbon in various 
forms other than in the atmosphere will help lower carbon 
emissions and, consequently, reduce greenhouse gases 
(GHG), such as carbon dioxide (CO2). 
 
 
Forests as Part of the Solution 
Since vegetation and soils are a primary means of se-
questering carbon, forested ecosystems have a role to play 
in this effort. Forests constitute both a sink and a source of 
atmospheric CO2. Forests absorb carbon through photosyn-
thesis and growth, but emit carbon through decomposition 
or when trees are destroyed due to human and natural 
causes. Researchers also indicate that forest products, such 
as furniture and building materials, sequester carbon. They 
also note that using woody biomass to produce energy can 
help replace the petroleum-based fuels that produce GHG 
when burned in our cars and factories. 
Forests in the United States currently sequester 71,000 
metric tons of carbon (Heath et al. 2003) or roughly 10,500 
metric tons/acre. While the amount of carbon sequestered 
per acre is less than this average in the frequent-fire forests 
of the western United States, the amount of carbon storage 
capacity is still significant because of the hundreds of mil-
lions of forested acres in the Intermountain West that are 
overseen by public land management agencies. 
Unfortunately, the semi-arid, frequent-fire forest ecosys-
tems of the western United States (e.g, ponderosa pine, pinyon
-juniper) are beset with problems that leave them in an un-
healthy state and susceptible to destruction from catastrophic 
wildfires and/or insects and disease. This level of disturbance 
is unnatural to these systems and releases considerable 
amounts of CO2 to the atmosphere either through burning or 
losses of soil-bound carbon due to erosion following fires. In 
the last 15 years, unnatural disturbances to these ecosystems 
have been dramatic, so dramatic that they have led to the pas-
sage of legislation (e.g., The Healthy Forests Restoration Act 
of 2003) and the funding of research efforts to correct the 
situation. Forest restoration, because it seeks to return the for-
ested ecosystem to a healthy condition with large trees, abun-
dant grasses and protected soils, is a key management tech-
nique that can help us correct this situation. 
 
Forest Restoration and Carbon Sequestration 
The restoration of frequent-fire forest in the western United 
States requires the removal of small-diameter trees either 
through mechanical thinning, prescribed burning, or a combi-
nation of the two. These practices:  
Temporarily lower the amount of biomass in the for-
est and, thus, the amount of CO2 the forest sequesters 
over the short term  
Reduce the amount of competition for precious water 
and nutrients, allowing the remaining trees to grow 
larger and, subsequently, sequester more CO2 over 
the long term  
Produce small-diameter logs that can be used for 
either wood products or to produce energy  
Produce minimal levels of emissions due to logging 
practices and burning 
 
While forest restoration, like all management strategies, 
has its advantages and disadvantages, it does two things that 
are vital for protecting the carbon within a forested ecosystem.   
It works with the ecology of the given forest ecosys-
tem to produce a situation in which the carbon is 
stored in its most stable form within the vegetation 
and soil.  
It dramatically softens the effects of catastrophic 
disturbances (e.g., wildfires, insects, disease) and 
allows natural disturbances (e.g., low-intensity, 
ground-level fires) to play their essential role. 
 
 

A recent study by Finkral and Evans (2008) examined the 
full effects on carbon of an actual restoration thinning treatment 
in a ponderosa pine forest. They found that while the treatment 
initially produced a 30-percent reduction in the carbon held in 
trees, it significantly reduced the threat of an active crown fire, 
which they predicted would kill all the trees and release 3.7 tons 
of carbon per acre in any untreated areas. Such findings are espe-
cially important when one considers that global climate change 
will likely make the conditions for catastrophic fire and insect 
outbreaks even more prevalent in the western United States.  
 
Paying for Forest Restoration with Carbon Credits 
Efforts to control and abate GHG in the United States are pres-
ently configured on a market-based format. One of the key instru-
ments in this scheme is emission trading, which is a transaction-
based market where emission-reduction project credits, such as 
those produced by forest projects (e.g., afforestation, reforesta-
tion, restoration) are traded to offset allowed emissions produced 
by industry, utility companies, and others. Forest restoration ef-
forts are recognized in these markets as “forest management pro-
jects” because they can offset GHG emissions by sequestering 
carbon as well as prevent the loss of carbon due to catastrophic 
wildfires or insect outbreaks. People and organizations undertak-
ing such restoration efforts have the potential to receive monies 
for their work. This is a welcome possibility because paying for 
forest restoration remains one of the key roadblocks to imple-
menting large-scale projects on federal lands. 
Presently there are two voluntary markets for trading forestry 
offsets: the Chicago Climate Exchange (CXX), which is rela-
tively well established, and the new Green Exchange. These mar-
kets serve as trading centers, much like the stock exchanges, for 
entities on both sides of the carbon mitigation equation. They 
also are engaged with other carbon registries (e.g., Department of 
Energy National Voluntary Reporting of Greenhouse Gases Pro-
gram, California Climate Action Registry, Regional Greenhouse 
Gas Initiative), aggregators, and non-government organizations 
(e.g., Carbonfund, The Climate Trust, Powertree) to match car-
bon buyers with offset projects.  
Each market has its protocols to assure that the offsets pro-
duced by the project mitigate the emissions they were traded for. 
As a result, there are verification procedures both prior to accept-
ing the project and at its completion. These protocols help over-
come the various problems of additionality, permanence, leakage, 
saturation, and equivalence that can arise in such projects. These 
problems produce transaction costs for the project that project 
operators must be aware of and figure into their balance sheets 
(Ruddel et al. 2006). 
Because carbon is presently selling at slightly less than $1per 
metric ton on the CXX, there is little incentive now to try to ob-
tain carbon credits for forest restoration projects—the income 
would not offset the costs. However, as Yale Forestry’s Deborah 
Spalding reports “Most participants expect this depressed price is 
a temporary phenomenon which will reverse itself when a federal 
mandatory market is put in place” (Spalding unpublished). In 
fact, there is much anticipation within these markets that the Con-
gress will pass cap-and-trade legislation sometime in 2009 or 
2010, and it will be signed by President Obama (Kharouf 2009). 
This could mean that within a few years the United States could 
be the largest carbon market in the world with as much as 
$1trillion traded annually (Kharouf 2009). 
 
 
Being Ready for the Future 
Federal agencies, such as the Forest Service, are now publicly 
declaring their interest in managing public lands, including for-
ests, to reduce GHG and mitigate global climate, while maintain-
ing the ecosystem and other services provided by these lands (US 
Forest Service 2008). While now may not be the time to sell car-
bon credits from federal lands, planning to do so could be under-
taken in order to be prepared for the time when prices rise, as 
most experts suggest they will. 
Federally managed forest restoration projects, in particular, 
have several advantages that make them unique in a carbon mar-
ket. They:  
Provide environmental and social co-benefits that many 
buyers and trading markets desire  
Contribute to biodiversity conservation  
Demonstrate an ability to reduce GHG emission levels 
beyond what would have occurred had nothing been 
done (i.e., they address the problem of additionality)  
Provide a relatively high degree of permanence by re-
ducing risk from wildfire and/or insect outbreak, and, 
because they are federal lands, from deforestation due to 
land-use changes  
Are being offered by a known, reputable entity with 
sizable land holdings and a staff that includes people 
familiar with carbon markets and forestry issues. 
 
In general, preparing for the carbon market will likely in-
volve new accounting tasks to ensure that the problems of carbon 
trading are handled properly. However, these tasks do not appear 
insurmountable and the benefits of increased monies for restora-
tion treatments will make the frequent-fire forests of the western 
United States healthy, resistant to catastrophic disturbances, and a 
sink for GHG-mitigating carbon. 
 
References 
Finkral, A.J. and A.M. Evans. 2008. The effects of a thinning 
treatment on carbon stocks in a northern Arizona pine forest. 
Forest Ecology and Management 255: 2743-2750. 
Heath, J.S., J.A. Smith, and R.A. Birdsey. 2003. Carbon trends in 
U.S. forestlands: A context for the role of forest soils in for-
est carbon sequestration. In J.M Kimble, L.S. Heath, R.A. 
Birdsey, and R. Lal (eds.), The potential of U.S. forests soils 
to sequester carbon and mitigate the greenhouse effect. 
Kharouf, J. 2009. New day dawns in carbon market: U.S. poised 
to mandate national emissions trading scheme. Futures In-
dustry Jan/Feb: 22-25. 
Ruddel, S., M.J. Walsh, and M. Kanakasabai. 2006. Forest car-
bon trading and marketing in the United States. Report to the 
North Carolina Division of the Society of American Forest-
ers. Available on-line at: 
www.foreconecomarketsolutionsllc.com. 
Spaulding, D. Unpublished. Analysis of carbon market opportu-
nities from managed ponderosa pine forests. 
United States Forest Service. 2008. Forest Service strategic 
framework for responding to climate change. Version 1.0. 
Available on-line at: http://www.fs.fed.us/climatechange/
documents/strategic-framework-climate-change-1-0.pdf. 
