Ecological Restoration Institute
 
ERI–Issues in Forest Restoration
What to Expect from Collaboration 
in Natural Resource Management:
A Research Synthesis for Practitioners

The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching,
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. These forests
have been significantly altered over the last century, with decreased ecological and recreational values, near-
elimination of natural low-intensity fire regimes, and greatly increased risk of large-scale fires. The ERI is
working with public agencies and other partners to restore these forests to a more ecologically healthy
condition and trajectory—in the process helping to significantly reduce the threat of catastrophic wildfire and
its effects on human, animal, and plant communities.
Cover photo: Collaborative meetings take place in all sorts of settings, like this gathering at the Parks-
Bellemont Fire Department between Flagstaff and Williams, Arizona.
Ecological Restoration Institute
 
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
928-523-7182
www.eri.nau.edu
Publication date: February 2008
Authors: Ann Moote and Kimberly Lowe
Editor: Dave Egan
Cover Photo: Hiram “Doc” Smith
Series Editor: Dave Egan
Please contact ERI for reproduction policies, 928-523-5697
All material copyright © 2007 ERI, NAU
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution   
NAU Printing Services/G63633/500/08-07

Table of Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Defining Collaboration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Collaborative Groups: Their Forms and Functions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
What to Expect From Collaboration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Benefits of Collaboration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Costs of Collaboration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Factors Influencing Success or Failure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Adequate Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Common Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Recognized Authority . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Capacity for Collaboration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Fair and Effective Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Realistic Expectations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Endnotes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
1

Introduction
Collaborative approaches to natural resource management have become increasingly popular since the 1980s in the
United States, to the point where the federal government now mandates them for some federal activities and
federally funded projects. For example, through the Healthy Forests Restoration Act and appropriations for the
National Fire Plan, Congress has directed that federal land management agencies should make the states and local
governments “full partners” in collaborative resource management, and work closely with citizens and governments
at all levels.i In August 2004, President Bush released an Executive Order calling for “cooperative conservation, with
an emphasis on appropriate inclusion of local participation in federal decisionmaking, … [including] collaborative
activity among federal, state, local, and tribal governments, private for-profit and nonprofit institutions, other
nongovernmental entities and individuals.” ii
Collaboration in governance is certainly not a new phenomenon. Town halls, government commissions and advisory
councils, and public meetings are mainstays of American governance. The requirement that resource management
be conducted through a collaborative process is fairly new, however, and there is considerable confusion about how
it is being defined and how it should be implemented. Requests for definitions of, and guidelines for, “good”
collaboration are becoming more frequent.
In order to address the need for more clarity about the expected outcomes and characteristics of effective
collaborative resource management, we reviewed the literature on collaboration, including theoretical, prescriptive,
and empirical research literature. In the first part of this paper, we identify what collaboration is––and what it is not.
We then turn to comparative empirical research on collaborative resource management to identify outcomes that are
commonly reported (and, therefore, can reasonably be expected from) collaboration, and, lastly, to identify best
practices and guidelines for effective collaborative resource management.
Methods
The literature on collaboration is rich and varied. There are several collections of “lessons learned” and prescriptions
for how to do collaboration. These are usually grounded in considerable experience, but without the standards of
formal research.iii A more theoretical body of literature attempts to frame collaboration by describing its social,
political and organizational underpinnings, and developing typologies that differentiate types of collaborative
efforts.iv The vast majority of both the popular literature and research on collaboration consists of single case studies.
These studies offer important insights into collaborative group process but are not readily generalizable. They are
important for developing definitions and descriptions of collaboration, but do not provide a defensible basis for
defining expected outcomes or identifying variables likely to influence the success or failure of a collaborative effort.
To understand the positive and negative outcomes likely to result from collaboration and to identify factors that
might be considered predictors of collaboration success or failure, we reviewed empirical research that compares and
evaluates several collaborative efforts. Several of these studies focused on watershed groups or councils,v while others
examined collaborative forestry.vi Some looked across a range of collaborative resource management efforts, some at
international cases,vii and still others did not look at cases per se, but interviewed individual community or agency
leaders for their perspectives on collaboration.viii We also considered research on collaboration in the social service
sectorix and previous research synthesis efforts.x
From these, we selected the ten studies that compared at least five cases of collaboration, using systematic and
accepted methods to test assumptions about collaborative resource management, and clearly based their findings on
their research data. We coded these ten studies to identify costs, benefits, and factors that the researchers found
influenced success or failure of collaborative efforts. We reviewed the other comparative studies to further elucidate
these factors.
2

Defining Collaboration
Collaboration is a process by which multiple stakeholders work together to solve a common problem or achieve a
common goal. It involves sharing information and perceptions to encourage innovation and mutual learning, and is
often viewed as an opportunity to improve planning and decisionmaking by finding ways to work beyond gridlock
and inefficiency. Although collaborative resource management efforts are highly variable, diversity of participation
and group process are their defining characteristics.
Frequently, collaboration is confused with more traditional public participation processes. Collaboration is not just a
means of informing the public or gathering feedback; a process is generally not considered collaborative unless
stakeholders representing diverse interests participate directly in the development and review of proposed actions.xi
Some proponents further suggest that collaboration is achieved only through shared responsibility, shared
decisionmaking, or shared authority.xii
In practice, the extent to which participants in a collaborative process engage in government planning and
decisionmaking activities is open to debate. More than one study has shown that agency employees consider
collaborative planning to be primarily an advisory function (i.e., the collaborative group makes recommendations to
the agency and the agency retains full decisionmaking authority), while external groups want their role to be
expanded beyond simply sharing information or advising to shared decisionmaking.xiii To fully engage in shared
decisionmaking, most agencies would have to change their planning, management, and decisionmaking procedures,
if not law. Nonetheless, there is a common expectation that collaboration means government will be more open and
willing to engage in ongoing dialogue about their plans and procedures.
Figure 1 illustrates different types and levels of public participation.xiv Activities that would commonly be considered
collaborative fall in the “high” and “highest” levels of participation, where groups are involved in planning and
assessment, and provide informed recommendations or actually make final policy or management decisions. On the
continuum of public participation activities, collaboration is found in the form of town halls, government advisory
councils, partnerships, and watershed councils. Activities such as traditional public hearings, open houses, and public
comment periods, which typically do not involve multi-stakeholder dialogue, are not collaborative.
Figure 1. Collaboration on the ladder of public participation. Activities that would commonly
be considered collaborative have high levels of participation and encourage information
exchange and learning among participants. These include most networks, dialogue groups,
advisory councils, partnerships, and watershed councils. 
3

Collaborative Groups: Their Forms and Functions 
It is difficult to describe and classify collaborative processes because they vary widely in their scope, participants,
goals, and activities. Collaborative resource management may focus on geographic areas ranging from hundreds to
millions of acres of land and water.The region of concern may include only one or several governmental jurisdictions.
There may be fewer than ten or more than hundred active participants, who may include any combination of
government agencies, nonprofit/interest groups, and others (including individual concerned citizens). Some
collaborative groups exist solely for information exchange, communication, and mutual education. Others engage in
project planning and review, and some take on project and program monitoring. Still others engage in project
implementation, sharing resources to get a job done.
Table 1 describes the goals, structures, and procedures typical to different kinds of processes that are considered
collaborative, including networks, dialogue groups, advisory groups, partnerships, and watershed councils. While
these types of collaboration are presented separately, they are perhaps best viewed as examples along a continuum
that generally ranges from less formal to more formal. The categories are not mutually exclusive. For instance, a
collaborative group could have a shared vision and common purpose but function more as a network than a
partnership. Some people consider only partnerships and councils to be true collaboratives because they are the most
open and give participants responsibility for setting their own goals and actions, while advisory councils and dialogue
groups are often presented with a predetermined task and procedure. Others consider co-management––a formal
process of sharing decisionmaking and management authority between government and local resource users––to be
a form of collaboration.xv However, most co-management in the United States limits participation to those with legal
authority over the resource and does not represent a broad range of interests, so we do not include it here.
Table 1. Forms and functions of collaborative groups.xvi
4
Type
Networks
Dialogue groups 
(e.g., town hall,
search conference,
community
visioning)
Advisory groups 
(e.g., advisory
council, planning
committee)
Partnerships and
Councils
(e.g., watershed
council,
coordinated
resource
management
group)  
Purpose and goals
A loosely defined group of individuals and/or organizations with overlapping interests or
responsibilities that engages in intermittent, informal communication over extended
periods of time. Their goal is information exchange and resource sharing, not conflict
resolution or shared decisionmaking. Participation is voluntary and often ad hoc, and
there are no formal rules of operation. 
Individuals with diverse interests participating in single events or ongoing gatherings to
share ideas and create a vision for future action. Participants share information and ideas,
explore issues, and attempt to identify common values, but do not attempt to reach
agreement or make decisions. Participation may be open or by invitation only. Meetings
are semi-formal and facilitated.
Regular, facilitated meetings of individuals who are usually invited or appointed based on
their expertise. Participants often represent specific interests or agencies rather than their
individual perspectives. The group works together to develop guidelines or plans for
others, analyze trends, review plans or proposals and make recommendations, but has
no decisionmaking authority.
Participants with diverse interests working together, both formally and informally, to
achieve a common purpose. Typical group activities include developing and advancing a
shared vision, mission, and goals; collectively identifying issues, gathering information,
and learning about the issues of concern; generating options and developing
recommended actions; engaging in joint projects; and monitoring and evaluating
activities. Participation is open to any interested group or individual, but membership
may be formally defined. The group makes decisions through a formal, defined process.
It will typically develop a budget and seek funding independent of its members, who may
represent organizations or stakeholder groups, or participate as individuals independent
of their other affiliations.  

What to Expect from Collaboration
Just as forms of collaboration vary widely, so too do expectations of collaborative resource management. While there
are many desired and presumed outcomes of collaboration, those listed in Table 2 are commonly reported in the
empirical research of multiple cases.
Table 2. Costs and benefits of collaborative resource management.
5

Benefits of Collaboration
Many of the benefits of collaborative resource management are social, not ecological. In fact, the most commonly
reported benefit of collaboration is that it builds social capital, thereby improving participants’ capacity for future
collaboration. Collaborative efforts have been found to reduce conflict, build trust among participants, and create
new networks and institutions for information sharing and undertaking collective projects. These professional and
interpersonal networks can increase participants’ capacity for innovation and their collective flexibility to adapt to
changing conditions.xvii
Collaboration is commonly found to foster information exchange and mutual learning as well, leading to a better
understanding of issues and constraints. In addition to encouraging learning among participants, a number of
collaborative efforts operate as information clearinghouses and engage in public education to improve understanding
of the local ecology, jurisdictional interdependencies, and management problems.
Collaborative resource management frequently results in decisions or projects that are expected to improve resource
conditions, including new plans, new policies, and on-the-ground projects. For example, collaborative processes have
been found to use better science, address more issues, and be more innovative than traditional planning processes. In
some cases, collaboration has allowed for planning and projects that would not otherwise be possible, such as those
that extend across management jurisdictions. Collaboration has made stakeholders more likely to support decisions
and project implementation and, in some cases, collaborative processes have actually been more efficient than
traditional resource management planning and decisionmaking processes. Collaboration has also been found to be
more democratic than traditional bureaucratic decisionmaking processes when it increases public participation,
solicits input from a broader representation of stakeholders, makes decisions more transparent, or empowers the
public.
Costs of Collaboration
Some of the normative literature on collaboration in resource management warns of potentially negative results of
collaboration, including the likelihood of lowest common denominator decisions, increased conflict, and unbalanced
representation.xviii However, most of the empirical research we examined does not substantiate these claims,
suggesting that they are rarely a problem. One study of 70 watershed groups in Washington and California, for
example, found results contrary to all three of these fears: collaborative efforts had the most positive effect on the
issues participants considered most serious, conflict was positively related to outcomes, and commodity and
environmental interests were equally well represented.xix
Nor has the fear that collaboration will undermine government authority been borne out. For instance, in a study of
collaborative planning in 200 cities, Agranoff and McGuire (2003, p. 1410) found, “while there was a great deal of
collaboration and sharing, the city government was at the core of local decisions” and retained ultimate
decisionmaking authority. On the other hand, participants in collaboration efforts sometimes report that they believe
results are inequitable or the process is unrepresentative.xx
While many collaborative resource management efforts have resulted in tangible products that are expected to
improve resource conditions,xxi collaboration also has very real costs in terms of participants’ time and energy, which
frequently results in frustration and burnout among collaborative group participants.xxii These costs, which
sociologists refer to as transaction costs, reflect the challenges inherent to building and maintaining communication
among several different organizations, individuals and interests, and the unpredictability of collaborative process.
Other costs of collaboration occasionally reported include a tendency to focus on the easiest problems first,xxiii
increased conflict,xxiv and increased economic costs.xxv
6

7
Factors Influencing Success or Failure 
Factors that influence success and failure within collaborative efforts are often reciprocal, that is, if the factor is
present, it tends to promote success; if not, failure is more likely the outcome. Our analysis of the more rigorous,
multi-case empirical research found five broad variables to be highly associated with success or failure of collaborative
resource management: 1) adequate resources (particularly funding), 2) a common purpose, 3) recognized authority,
4) capacity for collaboration, and 5) a fair and effective process (Table 3). All of the empirical research literature we
examined found that each of these variables influenced the success or failure of collaborative efforts. As discussed
below, however, in practice these variables take many different forms.
Adequate Resources
Adequate, consistent funding to support operations, usually including paid staff, is almost always linked to successful
collaboration. Some research points not only to adequate funding, but to government funding as essential to successful
collaboration.xxvi In addition to money and staffing, adequate time is a critical ingredient. At least three research
studies found that collaborative groups rarely achieve measurable outcomes during their first three years and suggest
that it is unrealistic to expect measurable outcomes any sooner.xxvii Several others cite time and participants’ patience
as factors influencing success.xxviii
Table 3. Factors associated with success or failure in collaborative resource management.

8
Common Purpose
Another key to success is having a common problem or need. Some researchers have found that the urgency of that
purpose or need is also important; that is, a mandate, crisis, or other incentive for people to collaborate increases the
likelihood of success.xxix An important, but often overlooked, aspect of this factor is that all stakeholders share the
same expectations of the collaborative effort, which may be reflected in a common vision and clear, agreed-upon
goals. Research also shows that collaborative efforts are most likely to succeed when their goals are manageable:
relatively small-scale and technically feasible. Tackling overly complex projects or projects with too large a scope can
result in failure.xxx
Recognized Authority
Collaborative resource management is most credible when it involves the right people, including those with the
authority or power to implement or undermine the group’s effort. Although not often mentioned in the theoretical
literature, empirical research shows that active support from government agencies and political leaders is often a
critical factor in the success of a collaborative venture. Failure to involve key interests or power brokers is sometimes
reported as a reason for group failure,xxxi as are lack of government support and lack of legal authority or a mandate.
For instance, one study comparing 23 cases of collaborative resource management found “The case studies
demonstrated that to move beyond a purely advocacy and education role, government laws and policies had to be
conducive to integration.…The cases also revealed that legislation and policies can constrain or prevent integration
through a focus on single issues and objectives.”xxxii Born and Genskow (2000, p. 50) suggest “measures of formal
governmental support…include the degree to which [collaborative] efforts…are formally recognized and given
standing by governmental units; and whether they formally adopt or incorporate [the collaborative group’s] actions
and plans into their own activities, thus fostering implementation.”
Every research study we coded mentioned the importance of broad representation, or involving all stakeholders in
collaboration, as a means of guaranteeing the legitimacy of the effort. In Australian cases where elected officials had
“excluded certain groups, weighted committees in favor of certain political affiliations, and even rejected individuals
nominated by organizations as their representative…many participants specifically cited this as undermining their
credibility.”xxxiii In a contrasting example of alleged exclusion, Magerum (1999) reports that “in several cases in the
United States, stakeholder group recommendations were challenged on the ground that the selection of the
stakeholder group biased the outcome. Participants were able to overcome this challenge by demonstrating a clearly
defined process, which was open membership to any interested party.”xxxiv In other cases, community involvement or
community support has been important to success.xxxv For example, a study of 69 watershed groups in Ohio found
that “groups with a broader array of participants tend to excel in watershed plan creation, identifying/prioritizing
issues, and group development and maintenance.”xxxvi
Although some literature on collaboration emphasizes the importance of local leadership, this is not a definitive
finding. In their study of 70 watershed partnerships, Sabatier and others (2002, p. 38) found “local leadership is
associated with fewer agreements, less monitoring, and stakeholders who perceive less progress on improving
watershed conditions….Success in terms of reaching agreements and implementing projects depends on active
participation by state and federal agencies.” This finding likely reflects the reality that state and federal agencies, not
local authorities, manage most natural resources.
Capacity for Collaboration 
Collaboration is not effective in all situations. Frequently, its success depends on social structures and individuals
(social capacity) that facilitate this form of planning and decisionmaking. Deep-seated ideological differences,
interests pitted against each other, or dissimilarities in fundamental values are all associated with failed collaborative
efforts.xxxvii On the other hand, several factors have been correlated with effective collaborative efforts: a history of
collaboration among different interests in the community, resource management and regulatory agencies that
coordinate their research and management efforts, an established communication network including formal channels
of communication, and personal connections among the interested parties.xxxviii Individual participants’ attitudes and
behaviors, such as commitment to the collaborative process, a willingness to work together, willingness to
compromise, and flexibility were almost always found to influence success or failure.

9
Mutual respect, embracing diversity, and an understanding of others’ cultures are also important success factors. In
several cases, trust has been reported to be an important factor for successful collaboration. On the other hand, some
research suggests that while honesty and accountability (doing what one said one would do) are important predictors
of success, building trust and interpersonal relationships are not.xxix In these cases, the characteristic influencing
success is not trust but accountability: “The emphasis is not just on building trust but rather on establishing
predictability and reducing vulnerability.”xl If the primary concerns of the group are to reduce resource management
redundancy and achieve tangible environmental benefits, participants may well consider trust-building exercises a
waste of time.xli
Leadership has proven to be highly correlated with success. For collaborative resource management, determinants of
“good” leadership include individuals with recognized authority; good communication, facilitation, and problem-
solving skills; and the ability to inspire commitment and action from others.xlii However, finding people with these
skills can be a challenge because most leaders have traditional hierarchical leadership and qualities, such as
competitiveness and the ability to take unilateral action, which can actually undermine a collaborative effort.xliii
Perhaps because federal and state agencies play a central role in resource management, agency behavior or
“organizational culture” is frequently singled out as a reason why collaborative efforts fail. Agency participants are
sometimes said to be non-responsive, overly bureaucratic, and excessively reliant on rules and procedures.xliv In a
survey of USDA Forest Service personnel and their partners from outside the agency, Carr and others (1998) found
that both groups viewed the organizational culture of the agency as the most significant obstacle to successful
collaboration.
At least two factors make it difficult for agency personnel to collaborate. First, they have been trained as “technical
experts” with the expectation that they will make decisions on the basis of objective data and science, not values.
Secondly, the obligations created by the collaborative effort may be onerous enough that agency staff would either
have to neglect other commitments or even completely revise their planning, decisionmaking, and project
implementation procedures to fully meet the expectations of their fellow collaborators. For these reasons, perhaps,
some research has concluded that if upper management is not committed to collaboration, collaborative efforts are
more likely to fail.xlv
Fair and Effective Process
Public participation research has shown that procedural justice--the perceived fairness of the decisionmaking
process––positively affects people’s reactions to agency decisions. To most people a “fair” process 1) is open and
inclusive, 2) provides equal opportunities for meaningful input, and 3) is rational and transparent.xlvi An “open and
inclusive” process is one that encourages participation from all interested parties and strives to involve all stakeholders
without being dominated by any particular stakeholder group. Participants want to know that their views and ideas
are considered in the decisionmaking process. They want equal access to decisionmakers and opportunities for
meaningful input, such as participation in the identification of problems and potential projects, and the development
and analysis of alternatives.xlvii Thirdly, people want rational, fact-based decisions and want to know how those
decisions were made, even if they don’t contribute to making them.xlviii Sometimes, basing work on “sound science” or
“the best available information” is important for the credibility of the process. Monitoring and evaluation also can be
important because they offer a way for the group to determine whether it is making progress toward its goals and
encourage adaptive management.
Collaboration research similarly shows that equitable and accountable processes––with incentives for cooperative
behavior and consequences for uncooperative behavior––are more likely to produce desired outcomes.xlix Some level
of formality, which may be spelled out in a charter or memorandum of agreement, helps clarify roles and manage
power differentials among partners and can be important for accountability. Margerum (2001) has identified six
strategies collaborative groups used to encourage commitment to the group’s project and plan: 1) legislative (changes
in power and jurisdiction), 2) contractual (joint written agreement--politically, morally, and sometimes legally
binding), 3) facilitational (shared knowledge of agreement reached in a facilitated process), 4) interorganizational
coordination (formalized process of information sharing and joint decisionmaking), 5) financial (funds placed in

10
common pool), and 6) interpersonal (mutual trust and understanding). As this range of strategies suggests, the
appropriate level of formality is a function of the collaborative group’s goals and interpersonal dynamics. Some
collaborative activities can be accomplished by simply assigning discrete tasks to different organizations, while those
that require the partners to work together closely are more likely to need roles to clarify roles and responsibilities.
Much of the normative literature on collaboration emphasizes the importance of spending time coming to
understand others’ concerns and viewpoints, and the empirical research does suggest that processes emphasizing
information exchange, dialogue, and mutual learning are highly correlated with success. Yet research also suggests
that collaborative efforts should not spend all their time in dialogue without moving forward on actions and
outcomes; collaborative groups that develop an implementation or management plan and on-the-ground projects are
more successful than groups that do not.
Realistic Expectations
Attempting to define indicators of success for collaborative efforts is an inherently challenging task. After a review
of 450 collaborative groups, Coughlin and others (1999, p. 21-1 ) concluded, “Collaborative partnerships are
immensely variable.… The sheer numbers of groups arising, in addition to their multiple decisionmaking processes
and organizational structures, make it impossible to neatly fit groups into divisible boxes. As such, drafting
prescriptive advice that applies to all seems absurd and not useful.” Webler and Tuler (2001, p. 37) similarly state,
“It is inappropriate to expect that criteria will be universally held.… Different participants chose to emphasize
different normative aspects of the process.” Yet, in a time of mandated collaboration, there is a real need for a
common understanding of what collaboration is, what we can expect from it, and when it is likely to work.
Our review of the comparative empirical research identifies outcomes that can be realistically expected from
collaboration. These include reduced conflict and a greater capacity for joint problem-solving, better information
exchange and collective learning, and more innovative and effective outcomes. Because the process is often perceived
to provide more opportunities for substantive input, outcomes are sometimes more readily accepted and
implemented. On the other hand, reaching these decisions and outcomes takes considerable effort and time--usually
on the order of years. And in some cases, the process is perceived to be undemocratic and results are perceived to be
ineffective or undesirable.
Five broad factors are highly correlated with successful collaboration. These are 1) adequate resources, 2) commonly
held and achievable goals, 3) recognized authority, 4) stakeholders’ ability and willingness to work together, and 5) a
fair and effective process. The specific form that each of these factors takes will necessarily vary with the nature of
the collaborative effort: its participant makeup, context, scope, and issues being addressed. In other words, a fair and
effective process in one instance may look quite different in structure than an equally fair and effective process in
another situation.
Given the diversity of collaborative efforts, we likely will never be able to identify a recipe for “good collaboration”
or specific indicators of success that will apply to all collaborative groups. However, the five broad factors identified
here are highly correlated with successful collaboration and can be used in both the design and evaluation of
collaborative resource management efforts.

11
References
Anderson, E.W. and R.C. Baum. 1988. How to do
coordinated resource management planning. Journal of
Soil and Water Conservation 43:216-220.
Arganoff, R. and M. McGuire. 1999. Managing in network
settings. Policy Studies Journal 16:18-41.
___. 2003. Inside the matrix: Integrating the paradigms of
intergovernmental and network management.
International Journal of Public Administration 26:1401-
1422.
Belden Russonello and Stewart Research and
Communications. 2001. Collaborative process: Better
outcomes for all of us: Communications recommendations
and analysis of 54 interviews with decisionmakers on
environmental issues in the western U.S. Washington,
D.C.: The Emily Hall Tremaine Foundation and
Partners. 36 pages.
Beierle, T.C. 2002. The quality of stakeholder-based
decisions. Risk Analysis 22:739-749.
Blahna, D.J. and S. Yonts-Shepard. 1989. Public
involvement in resource planning: Toward bridging the
gap between policy and implementation. Society and
Natural Resources 2:209-227.
Born, S.M. and K.D. Genskow. 2000. The watershed
approach: An empirical assessment of innovation in
environmental management. In DeWitt John and
Richard A. Minard, Jr. (proj. coords.), Learning from
innovations in environmental protection, Research Note
7. Washington, D.C.: National Academy of Public
Administration. [Accessed January 28, 2008], available
at
http://www.napawash.org/pc_economy_environment/ep
afile0701.pdf.
Bush, G.W. 2004. Facilitation of Cooperative Conservation.
Executive Order 13352 of August 26, 2004.
Bryan, T. 2004. Tragedy averted: The promise of
collaboration. Society and Natural Resources 17:881-896.
Bureau of Land Management (BLM) and Sonoran
Institute. 2000. A desktop reference guide to
collaborative, community-based planning. Washington,
D.C: U.S. Department of the Interior Bureau of Land
Management. 20 pages.
Carr, D.S., S.W. Selin, and M.A. Schuett. 1998. Managing
public forests: Understanding the role of collaborative
planning. Environmental Management 22:767-776.
Ref
Cestero, B. 1999. Beyond the hundreth meeting: A field guide
to collaborative conservation on the West's public lands.
Tuscon, AZ: Sonoran Institute. 80 pages.
Chrislip, D. and C. Larson. 1994. Collaborative leadership:
How citizens and civic leaders can make a difference. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 192 pages.
Cigler, B.A. 1999. Pre-conditions for the emergence of
multicommunity collaborative organizations. Policy
Studies Review 16:86-102.
Coughlin, C.W., M.L. Hoben, D.W. Manskopf, and S.W.
Quesada. 1999. A systematic assessment of collaborative
resource management partnerships. Master's project,
School of Natural Resources, University of Michigan
[Accessed January 28, 2008], available at
www.snre.umich.edu/emi/pubs/crmp.htm.
Curtis, A. and M. Lockwood. 2000. Landcare and
catchment management in Australia: Lessons for state-
sponsored community participation. Society and Natural
Resources 13:61-73.
Curtis, A., B. Shindler, and A. Wright. 2002. Sustaining
local watershed initiatives: Lessons from landcare and
watershed councils. Journal of the American Water
Resources Association 38:1207-1216.
Doppelt, B., C. Shinn, and D. John. 2002. Review of USDA
Forest Service Community-Based Watershed Restoration
Partnerships. Portland, OR: Mark O. Hatfield School of
Government, Portland State University. [Accessed
January 28, 2008], available at
http://www.fs.fed.us/largewatershedprojects/DoppeltRep
ort/  
Dukes, E.F. and K. Firehock. 2001. Collaboration: A guide for
environmental advocates. Charlottesville, VA: University
of Virginia. 71 pages.
Gray, B. 1989. Collaborating: Finding common ground for
multi-party problems. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 358
pages.
Hummel, M. and B. Freet. 1999. Collaborative processes for
improving land stewardship and sustainability. Pages 97-
129 in W. T. Sexton, A. J. Malk, R. C. Szaro and N. C.
Johnson (eds.), Ecological stewardship: A common
reference for ecosystem management. Oxford, England:
Elsevier Science Ltd.
Hunt, L. and W. Haider. 2001. Fair and effective decision
making in forest management planning. Society and
Natural Resources 14:873-887.

12
Huntington, C.W. and S. Sommarstrom. 2000. An
evaluation of selected watershed councils in the Pacific
Northwest and northern California. Report prepared for
Trout Unlimited and Pacific Rivers Council. [Accessed
January 28, 2008], available at
http://www.pacrivers.org/article_view.cfm?ArticleID=10
54&RandSeed=26135.
Imperial, M.T. and T. Hennessey. 2000. Environmental
governance in watersheds: The role of collaboration.
Prepared for presentation at the 8th Biennial
Conference of the International Association for the
Study of Common Property (IASCP), May 31-June 3,
2000. Bloomington, Indiana: School of Public and
Environmental Affairs, Indiana University. [Accessed
January 28, 2008], available at
http://dlc.dlib.indiana.edu/archive/00000279/00/imperi
alm041500.pdf.
Ingles, A.W., A. Musch, and H. Qwist-Hoffman. 1999.
The participatory process for supporting collaborative
management of natural resources: An overview. Rome:
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations. 84 pages.
Johnson, L.J., D. Zorn, B.K. Yung Tam, M. Lamontagne,
and S.A. Johnson. 2003. Stakeholders' views of factors
that impact successful interagency collaboration.
Exceptional Children 69:195-209.
Kellert, S.R., J.N. Mehta, S.A. Ebbin, and L.L. Lichtenfeld.
2000. Community natural resources management:
Promise, rhetoric, and reality. Society and Natural
Resources 13:705-715.
Kenney, D. S. 2000. Arguing about consensus: Examining the
case against western watershed initiatives and other
collaborative groups active in natural resources management.
Boulder, CO: University of Colorado, Natural Resources
Law Center.
Kenney, D.S., S.T. McAllister, W.H. Caile, and J.S.
Peckham. 2000. The new watershed source book: A
directory and review of watershed initiatives in the western
United States. Boulder, CO: University of Colorado,
Natural Resources Law Center.
Koontz, T.M. and E. Moore-Johnson. 2004. One size does
not fit all: Matching breadth of stakeholder
participation to watershed group accomplishments.
Policy Sciences 37:185-204.
Kusel, J. and E. Adler (eds.). 2003. Forest communities,
community forests. New York: Rowman and Littlefield
Publishers, Inc. 301 pages.
Leach, W.D. 2004. Is devolution democratic?: Assessing
collaborative environmental management. Sacramento,
CA: Center for Collaborative Policy. [Accessed January
28, 2008], available at
http://www.csus.edu/ccp/publications/Devolution_CCP
_2004.pdf.
Leach, W.D., N.W. Pelkey, and P.A. Sabatier. 2002.
Stakeholder partnerships as collaborative policymaking:
Evaluation criteria applied to watershed management in
California and Washington. Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management 21:645-670.
London, S. 1995. Collaboration and community. A paper
prepared for Pew Partnership for Civic Change.
[Accessed January 28, 2008], available at
http://www.scottlondon.com/reports/ppcc.html.
Lubell, M. 2004a. Collaborative environmental institutions:
All talk and no action? Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management 23:549-573.
Lubell, M. 2004c. Resolving conflict and building
cooperation in the National Estuary Program.
Environmental Management 33:677-691.
Mandell, M. 1999. The impact of collaborative efforts:
Changing the face of public policy through networks
and network structures. Policy Studies Review 16:4-15.
Manring, N.J. 1998. Collaborative resource management:
Organizational benefits and individual costs.
Administration and Society 30:274-290.
Margerum, R.D. 1999. Integrated environmental
management: The foundations for successful practice.
Environmental Management 24:151-166.
___. 2001. Organizational commitment to integrated and
collaborative management: Matching strategies to
constraints. Environmental Management 28:421-431.
Mattessich, P.W., M. Murray-Close, and B.R. Monsey.
2001. Collaboration: What makes it work. In A review
of research literature on factors influencing successful
collaboration, 2nd ed. Saint Paul, MN: Amherst H.
Wilder Foundation. 82 pages.
Moore, E.A. and T.M. Koontz. 2003. A typology of
collaborative watershed groups: Citizen-based, agency-
based, and mixed partnerships. Society and Natural
Resources 16:451-460.

13
Moote, A. and D. Becker (eds.). 2003. Exploring barriers to
collaborative forestry. Flagstaff, AZ: Ecological
Restoration Institute. 23 pages.
Olsson, P., C. Folke, and F. Berkes. 2004. Adaptive co-
management for building resilience in social-ecological
systems. Environmental Management 34:75-90.
Oregon Public Policy Dispute Resolution Program. 2000.
Collaborative approaches: A handbook for public policy
decisionmaking and conflict resolution. Portland:
Oregon Dispute Resolution Commission. 48 pages.
[Accessed January 28, 2008], available at
http://www.odrc.state.or.us/documents/CollaborativeAp
proachesHandbook-March2006.pdf.
Pipkin, J. and H. Doerksen. 2000. Collaboration in natural
resource management: Selected case studies.
Washington, D.C: U.S. Department of the Interior.
Plummer, R., and J. Fitzgibbon. 2004. Co-management of
natural resources: A proposed framework. Environmental
Management 33:876-885.
Sabatier, P.A., J. Quinn, N. Pelkey, and W. Leach. 2002.
When do stakeholder negotiations work?: A multiple
lens analysis of watershed restorations in California and
Washington. Final Report to U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, National Center for Environmental
Research. 47 pages.
Schuett, M.A., S.W. Selin, and D.S. Carr. 2001. Making it
work: Keys to successful collaboration in natural
resource management. Environmental Management
27:587-593.
Schuett, M.A. and S. Selin. 2002. Profiling collaborative
natural resource initiatives and active participants.
Northern Journal of Applied Forestry 19:155-160.
Selin, S. and D. Chavez. 1995. Developing a collaborative
model for environmental planning and management.
Environmental Management 19:189-195.
Selin, S.W., M.A. Schuett, and D. Carr. 2000. Modeling
stakeholder perceptions of collaborative initiative
effectiveness. Society and Natural Resources 13:735-745.
Sherlock, K.L., E.A. Kirk, and A.D. Reeves. 2004. Just the
usual suspects? Partnerships and environmental
regulation. Environment & Planning C: Government and
Policy 22:651-667.
Smith, C.L. and J. Gilden 2002. Assets to move watershed
councils from assessment to action. Journal of the
American Water Resources Association 38:653-662.
Smith, P.D. and M.H. McDonough. 2001. Beyond public
participation: Fairness in natural resource decision
making. Society and Natural Resources 14:239-249.
Society of Professionals in Dispute Resolution (SPIDR).
1997. Best practices for government agencies: Guidelines for
using collaborative agreement-seeking processes.
Washington, D.C.: Society of Professionals in Dispute
Resolution. 17 pages.
Takahashi, L.M. and G. Smutny. 2001. Collaboration
among small, community-based organizations: Strategies
and challenges in turbulent environments. Journal of
Planning Education and Research 21:141-153.
Webler, T. and S. Tuler. 2001. Public participation in
watershed management planning: Views on process
from people in the field. Human Ecology Review 8:29-
39.
Webler, T., S. Tuler, I. Shockey, P. Stern, and R. Beattie.
2003. Participation by local government officials in
watershed management planning. Society and Natural
Resources 16:105-121.
White, A.T., L.Z. Hale, Y. Renard, and L. Cortesi. 1994.
Lessons to be learned from experience. Pages 107-120
in A.T. White, L.Z. Hale, Y. Renard, and L. Cortesi
(eds.), Collaboration and community-based
management of coral reefs: Lessons from experience.
West Hartford, CT: Kumarian Press.
Williams, E.M. and P.V. Ellefson. 1997. Going into
partnership to manage a landscape. Journal of Forestry
95:29-33.
Wondelleck, J.M. and S.L. Yaffee. 2000. Making
collaboration work: Lessons from innovation in natural
resource management. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
277 pages.

14
Endnotes
i
Public Law 108-148.
ii
Bush 2004.
iii
See for example, Anderson and Baum 1988, BLM and Sonoran Institute 2000, Dukes and Firehock 2001, Ingles and
others 1999, Oregon 2000.
iv
See for example, Bryan 2004, Cestero 1999, Cigler 1999, Gray 1989, Hummel and Freet 1999, London 1995, Mandell
1999, Moore and Koontz 2003, Plummer and Fitzgibbon 2004, Selin and Chavez 1995, SPIDR 1997.
v
Born and Genskow 2000, Kenney and others 2000, Leach and others 2002, Sabatier and others 2002, Huntington and
Sommerstrom 2000, Imperial and Hennessey 2000, Lubell 2004a.
vi
Carr and others 1998, Doppelt and others 2002, Selin and others 2000, Williams and Ellefson 1997.
vii
Curtis and others 2002, Coughlin and others 1999, Margerum 1999 and 2001, Kellert and others 2000, Pitkin and
Doerksen 2000, Wondolleck and Yaffee 2000,
viii
Belden and others 2001, Carr and others 1998.
ix
Agranoff and McGuire 1999, Chrislip and Larson 1994, Cigler 1999, Johnson and others 2003, Takahashi and Smutny
2001.
x
Mattesich and others 2000, Smith and Gilden 2003.
xi
Gray 1989, Koontz and Moore-Johnson 2004, Oregon 2000, London 1995, Sherlock and others 2004, Beierle 2002.
xii
Ingles and others 1999, Hummel and Freet 1999, Mattessich and others 2001, BLM and Sonoran Institute n.d., Bryan
2004.
xiii
Carr and others 1998, Moote and Becker 2003, Sherlock and others 2004.
xiv
Modeled after Arnstein’s 1969 ladder of public participation.
xv
Plummer and Fitzgibbon 2004, Olsson and others 2004.
xvi
This table draws upon the works of Bergstrom and others1996, Cigler 1999, Cestero and others 1999, Dukes and
Firehock 2001, Gray 1989, Hummel and Freet 1999, Ingles and others 1999, London 1995, Mandell 1999, Selin and
Chavez 1995, and SPIDR 1997.
xvii
Agranoff and McGuire 1999, Lubell 2004b, Wondolleck and Yaffee 2000.
xviii
Kenney 2000, Dukes and Firehock 2001, BLM and Sonoran Institute 2000.
xix
Sabatier and others 2002.
xx
Leach and others 2002, Lubell 2004b, Huntington and Sommerstrom 2000.
xxi
Coughlin and others 1999, Belden and others 2001, Kenney and others 2000, Leach and others 2002, Imperial and
Hennessey 2000, Leach 2004, Born and Genskow 2000, Curtis and others 2002, Kellert and others 2000, Koontz and
Moore-Johnson 2004.
xxii
Born and Genskow 2000, Carr and others 1998, Lubell 2004b, Imperial and Hennessey 2000, Margerum 1999, Manring
1998, Kellert and others 2000, Curtis and others 2002, Cestero 1999, Cigler 1999.
xxiii
Doppelt and others 2002, Huntington and Sommerstrom 2000.
xxiv
Sabatier and others 2002, Lubell 2004b, Kellert and others 2000.
xxv
Leach and others 2002, Schuett and others 2001.
xxvi
Curtis and Lockwood 2000, Curtis and others 2002, Born and Genskow 2000.
xxvii
Born and Genskow 2000, Leach and others 2002, Sabatier and others 2002, White and others 1994.

15
xxviii
Born and Genskow 2000, Coughlin and others 1999, Belden and others 2001, Leach and others 2002, Huntington and
Sommerstrom 2000, Schuett and Selin 2002, Pipkin and Doerksen 2000, Williams and Ellefson 1997, Kusel and Adler
2003.
xxix
Belden and others 2001, Born and Genskow 2000, Chrislip and Larson 1994, Kenney and others 2000, Johnson and others
2003, Schuett and others 2001, Cigler 1999, Doppelt and others 2002, Wondolleck and Yaffee 2000.
xxx
Belden and others 2001, Coughlin and others 1999, Leach and others 2002, Lubell 2004b, Huntington and Sommerstrom
2000.
xxxi
Born and Genskow 2000, Coughlin and others 1999, Mattessich and others 2001.
xxxii
Margerum 1999, pg.155.
xxxiii
Margerum 1999, pg. 157.
xxxiv
Margerum 1999, pg. 157.
xxxv
Born and Genskow 2000, Coughlin and others 1999, Huntington and Sommerstrom 2000, Schuett and others 2001,
Schuett and Selin 2002.
xxxvi
Koontz and Moore-Johnson 2004 p.185.
xxxvii Huntington and Sommerstrom 2000, Williams and Ellefson 1997, Belden and others 1999, Johnson and others 2002.
xxxviii Born and Genskow 2000, Chrislip and Larson 1994, Coughlin and others 1999, Lubell 2004b, Huntington and
Sommerstrom 2000, Mattessich and others 2001, Schuett and others 2001, Doppelt and others 2002, Imperial and
Hennessey 2000, Williams and Ellefson 1997, Wondolleck and Yaffee 2000.
xxxix
Mandell 1999, Takahashi and Smutny 2001, Webler and Tuler 2001, Webler and others 2003.
xl
Mandell 1999; p.13.
xli
Webler and others 2003, Sabatier and others 2002, London 1995.
xlii
Pikpin and Doerksen 2000, Selin and others 2000, Born and Genskow 2000, Chrislip and Larson 1994.
xliii
Takahashi and Smutny 2001, London 1995, Chrislip and Larson 1994.
xliv
Carr and others 1998, Coughlin and others 1999, Johnson and others 2003.
xlv
Johnson and others 2003, Pipkin and Doerksen 2000, Mattessich and others 2001, Wondolleck and Yaffee 2000.
xlvi
Hunt and Haider 2001, Smith and McDonough 2001.
xlvii
Blahna and Yonts-Shepard 1989, Chrislip and Larson 1994, Smith and McDonough 2001, Hunt and Haider 2001,
Wondolleck and Yaffee 2000.
xlviii
Smith and McDonough 2001, Webler and Tuler 2001.
xlix
Coughlin and others 1999, Lubell 2004b, Huntington and Sommerstrom 2000, Schuett and others 2001, Doppelt and
others 2002, Imperial and Hennessey 2000, Williams and Ellefson 1997.
.

16

Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native species,
structural characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological Restoration International
defines ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem
with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability...Restoration attempts to return an ecosystem to its
historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration International Science & Policy Working Group 2004).
In the southwestern United States, most ponderosa pine forests have been degraded during the last 150 years.
Many ponderosa pine areas are now dominated by dense thickets of small trees, and lack their once diverse
understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, stand-
replacing fires and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers on reintroducing
frequent, low-intensity surface fires––often after thinning dense stands––and reestablishing productive
understory plant communities.
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching,
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. By allowing
natural processes, such as fire, to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that
provide ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The ERI White Papers series provides overviews and policy recommendations derived from research and
observations by the ERI and its partner organizations. While the ERI staff recognizes that every forest
restoration is site specific, we feel that the information provided in the ERI White Papers may help
decisionmakers elsewhere.
This publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Service.The views and
conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing
the opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products
does not constitute their endorsement by the United States Government or the ERI.
ERI White Papers: Issues in Forest Restoration
1. Forestlands Health and Carbon Sequestration: Strengthening the Case for Western Forest Restoration
2. Smoke from Prescribed Burning: Issues on Public Forestlands of the Western United States
3. Public Perceptions of Forest Restoration in the Southwest: A Synthesis of Selected Literature and Surveys
4. Integrating Ecological Restoration and Conservation Biology: A Case Study from Southwestern Ponderosa
Pine Forests
5. Communications Between Forest Managers and Property Owners in Pine Flat, Arizona: A Case Study of
Community Interactions in a High Fire Hazard Area
6. Wilderness Management and the Restoration of Fire: An Analysis of Laws and Regulations in Northern
Arizona
7. Navigating the Motives and Mandates of Multiparty Monitoring  
8. Forest Service Contracting: A Basic Guide for Restoration Practitioners
9. Case Study of Community Stewardship Success: The White Mountain Stewardship Contract

