 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Unsupported inferences of high-severity fire in historical dry forests of the  
western United States: A response to Williams and Baker 
By Dr. Pete Fulé, Professor of Forestry, Northern Arizona University 
Introduction 
 
A recent study in Global Ecology and Biogeography (Williams and Baker 2012, hereafter W&B) described 
the historical conditions of forest structure and fire regimes on four large landscapes in Arizona, Colorado 
and Oregon. W&B used notes made by land surveyors who worked in these landscapes in the late 1800s and 
early 1900s, a period before many impacts of modern land uses, such as large-scale fire control, took place. 
Based on these data, W&B developed an interpretation of past conditions in ponderosa pine and dry mixed 
conifer forests that differs from previous research. W&B asserted that these forests historically included rela-
tively high densities because of past fire regimes of moderate to high severity fires. Natural regeneration fol-
lowing such fires would lead to numerous, small and similar aged trees. W&B concluded that current man-
agement practices of thinning small trees and using low-severity prescribed burns would damage forests, ra-
ther than restore them. The inferences drawn by W&B about past forest ecology contrast sharply with those 
reported by numerous previous researchers, who used tree-ring and historical data to show that dry forests 
had predominantly surface fire regimes with relatively open, uneven-aged forests. A group of 18 forest ecol-
ogists, concerned about the lack of scientific support for the conclusions by W&B, wrote a response (Fulé et 
al. 2013). This fact sheet summarizes the key issues of our response. A rebuttal to the response was pub-
lished by Williams and Baker (2014).  
 
Issue No. 1: Fire Severity 
The land surveyors for the General Land Office (GLO) 
marked trees around the corner points that delineated 
square miles and quarter-miles. Calculations can be ap-
plied to these tree lists to estimate the forest density, 
species, and diameters of the trees at the time of the sur-
vey. However, W&B made a major leap from recon-
structions of forest structure to infer details of the his-
torical fire regime. They argued that 1) tree size is relat-
ed to tree age, and 2) trees established after severe fires. 
Thus wherever small trees made up a certain proportion 
of a tree list, they interpreted this result to mean that a 
severe fire had burned at that point within approximate-
ly the last century. By assembling all the GLO points 
that met thresholds of “severe” or “moderate” burning, 
they concluded that relatively high percentages of past 
landscapes had burned with “higher-severity” fire, rang-
ing from 38% on the Mogollon Plateau, Arizona, to 
nearly 98% on the Front Range in Colorado.  
 
 
 
    Fact Sheet: Unsupported inferences of high-severity fire in historical dry forests of the western United          
States: A response to Williams and Baker 
August 2014 
 
General Land Office (GLO) surveyor in Oregon, in an 
undated photograph courtesy of the Bureau of Land Man-
agement. 

 
 
In response, we noted that tree size is not a strong predictor of tree age, especially for many of the species in 
the study, because growth is affected by many other factors. The second argument, that trees establish after 
fire, is true but incomplete. Trees also establish after many other disturbances in the forest: insect outbreaks, 
windstorms, or droughts. Trees often fail to establish after fire, sometimes for decades or indefinitely. Early 
reports by foresters consistently refer to predominantly surface fire behavior in dry forests, even while not-
ing severe burning in higher-elevation forests. Fire regime studies based on fire scarred trees and tree-ring 
dating within the landscapes studied by W&B also show mostly low-severity burning. In sum, a portion of 
the small-diameter trees that were present in the forest at the time of GLO surveys may have become estab-
lished as the result of a patch of severe fire. But tree regeneration recorded on GLO plots is likely to have 
established through multiple pathways. Additionally, tree size is not reliably linked to time since a severe 
fire. For these reasons, we argue that W&B’s conclusion of abundant “higher-severity” fire in the past is not 
supported by the evidence.  
Issue No. 2: Historical vs. Current Fire Severity 
Comparing their reconstruction of past fire severity to percentages of area burned at different severities in 
modern fires, W&B conclude that the modern occurrence of large, severe wildfires is ‘not unprecedented, 
and has not increased, relative to the historical record’. This conclusion is not supported by the evidence for 
two reasons: 1) the methods for estimating past fire severity based on tree size are not reliable, as described 
in Issue No. 1, and 2) there are fundamental differences between the classification of severe fire in the W&B 
reconstruction (70% or more of trees killed) vs. the modern classification. Modern fire severity classifica-
tion, taken from the Monitoring Trends in Burn Severity (MTBS) project (www.mtbs.gov), includes tree 
mortality as one factor in a multi-variable assessment based on satellite imagery. It is not appropriate to 
compare percentages of severity between entirely different systems. Furthermore, the scale of high severity 
disturbance is important to consider. A fire that left 30% of the trees alive across a landscape would be 
called “severe” by W&B, but dry forests are resilient to that level of disturbance, particularly if the losses 
were small diameter trees, with less ecological impact. In contrast, modern high-severity fires have large, 
contiguous patches of severe burning that expose soils to erosion and eliminate seed sources for the future. 
 
Issue No. 3: Comparisons with Other Studies 
W&B said that they found it “surprising” that dry forests “commonly thought to have been open and park-
like” were heterogeneous and relatively dense, a finding that they interpreted as indicating high fire severity 
in the past. Their approach was to group together GLO data from relatively dry ponderosa pine and pine-oak 
forests with wetter and denser mixed conifer forests, after which they compared the results to a selected list 
of other forest reconstructions from dry pine sites only. However, had W&B compared the GLO data with 
other studies using the same forest types, they would have found the densities were similar.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
GLO surveyors in Oregon, 1923. 
Photo courtesy of the Bureau of 
Land Management 

Contact 
Dr. Pete Fulé, Pete.Fule@nau.edu 
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
 
 
Why is this important? 
Understanding the long-term processes of an ecosystem is important for its restoration and protection. 
Therefore the contribution of a large historical data set by W&B is welcome. Furthermore, there are many 
points of agreement about past variability in forest structure and fire regime; we explicitly note that there is 
ample evidence that past forests were heterogeneous and that all fire regimes include a mosaic of low- to 
high-severity burning. However, W&B made an unsupported leap in logic from tree diameters on GLO 
plots to inferring high past fire severity that is not consistent with other empirical evidence. Their study 
methods were consistently biased toward interpretations of higher fire severity. As a result, we disagree with 
their conclusion that current attempts to reduce forest fuels and fire severity have “negative consequences.” 
In fact, dry western forests are documented to be two to ten times denser than in the late 1800s. These for-
ests are vulnerable to even larger severe fires in drought and warming climate. The weight of scientific evi-
dence indicates that conserving these ecosystems and the valuable services they provide to society is not 
consistent with the modern pattern of increasingly larger and more severe wildfires. Following the recom-
mendations of W&B would be an experiment we cannot afford to conduct.  
References 
Fulé, P.Z, T.W. Swetnam, P.M. Brown, D.A. Falk, D.L. Peterson, C.D. Allen, G.H. Aplet, M.A. Battaglia, 
D. Binkley, C. Farris, R.E. Keane, E.Q. Margolis, H. Grissino-Mayer, C. Miller, C. Hull Sieg, C. 
Skinner, S.L. Stephens, A. Taylor. 2013. Unsupported inferences of high severity fire in historical 
western United States dry forests: Response to Williams and Baker. Global Ecology and Biogeogra-
phy. DOI: 10.1111/geb.12136. 
 
Williams, M.A., and W.L. Baker. 2012. Spatially extensive reconstructions show variable-severity fire and 
heterogeneous structure in historical western United States dry forests. Global Ecology and Biogeog-
raphy 21: 1042–1052. 
 
Williams, M.A., and W.L. Baker. 2014. High-severity fire corroborated in historical dry forests of the west-
ern United States: response to Fulé et al. Global Ecology and Biogeography. DOI: 10.1111/
geb.12136. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
This Fact Sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
 
Fulé, P.Z, T.W. Swetnam, P.M. Brown, D.A. Falk, D.L. Peterson, C.D. Allen, G.H. Aplet, M.A. Battaglia, D. 
Binkley, C. Farris, R.E. Keane, E.Q. Margolis, H. Grissino-Mayer, C. Miller, C. Hull Sieg, C. Skinner, 
S.L. Stephens, A. Taylor. 2013. Unsupported inferences of high severity fire in historical western Unit-
ed States dry forests: Response to Williams and Baker. Global Ecology and Biogeography. DOI: 
10.1111/geb.12136. 
 
