After the smoke clears 
By GARY GHIOTO 
Sun Staff Reporter 
09/01/2000 
 
As the tab for fighting wildfires across the West approaches $1 billion, the Clinton 
administration and Congress are working on competing plans to prevent future blazes 
which may include millions of dollars for restoration efforts in northern Arizona.  
In both proposals, the forest health restoration programs of the Ecological Restoration 
Institute at Northern Arizona University may play a key role.  
But funding for forest thinning contained in both plans is likely to prompt a battle 
between some environmental groups and logging interests over how to spend money on 
preventive measures.  
Arizona Republican Sen. Jon Kyl pushed an amendment to the Interior Department 
budget through the Senate recently that calls for spending $240 million next year on 
forest thinning and fuel reduction on public lands in the West.  
The amendment, which is currently before a House-Senate conference committee, 
includes $13 million for the Ecological Restoration Institute. Nearly $4 million of the 
funds is targeted for "forest restoration and sustainable forestry efforts" in Arizona.  
Meanwhile, the Clinton administration is preparing to ask Congress to spend $1.2 billion 
on firefighting, training and forest fire prevention.  
Some environmentalists are wary of a section of the plan that calls for spending $117 
million next year as part of a five-year effort to remove trees and brush from 16 million 
acres of Forest Service land.  
The report says thinning and prescribed burns will be limited to mostly smaller trees on 
public lands near fast-growing communities in  
western states. No environmental laws will be skirted to carry out the effort, the report 
said, though the final determination will be made by Congress.  
The Grand Canyon Forests Partnership, a coalition of 15 conservation, municipal, federal 
and state groups, is preparing to move ahead with a 1,700-acre thinning project in Fort 
Valley.  

Brad Ack of Grand Canyon Trust, a member of the Partnership, said it's good news that 
both Congress and the Clinton administration have come around to the need for 
restoration to prevent wildfires.  
"There are however a variety of potential pitfalls on how this problem is addressed," said 
Ack, "We certainly hope that ecological restoration is the framework for any kind of 
large-scale program and it doesn't become an excuse to do commercial logging."  
Ack added: "We need the opposite of logging. We need the removal of very small trees 
leaving all the healthy and vigorous trees and we need an ecological restoration 
framework."  
But the forest restoration proposals supported by the Flagstaff-based Partnership and the 
Ecological Institute that may be funded in both plans is still looked at with suspicion by 
some environmental groups.  
"We certainly don't favor a massive thinning program," said Mike Bader of the Alliance 
for the Wild Rockies in Missoula, Mont.  
Some environmentalists fear a repeat of 1995, when after a bad year for wildfires 
Congress passed legislation allowing loggers to temporarily waive environmental laws to 
harvest timber to reduce the fire threat. The measure was signed by President Clinton -- a 
move some environmentalists view as the president's worst conservation decision.  
Ken Rait, conservation director of the Oregon Natural Resources Council, said the Forest 
Service has a reputation in local offices for promoting thinning over other fire prevention 
efforts because it brings in money from logging companies.  
"There's a trust issue there," he said. "Every (thinning) project is going to have to be 
looked at basically through a magnifying glass."  
The situation presents a challenge for Vice President Al Gore, who wants to show 
compassion toward fire victims but needs the support of environmentalists in the key 
Western states of California, Washington and Oregon.  
"It's going to be a political tap dance, there's no question about it," Bader said.  
The funding request comes as the federal government has tallied at least $626 million in 
costs to battle scores of fires from Montana to New Mexico, spending as much as $18 
million a day. Fires have charred 6.4 million acres in the West during what is termed the 
worst fire season in a half-century.  
Some fires cannot be staffed due to a shortage of firefighters and equipment, the report 
noted.  

Clinton requested the report in early August in response to the wildfires. The draft plan 
calls for $342 million for training, equipment and supplies; $300 million for fighting 
fires; and would place $200 million in a fund for firefighting emergencies.  
It also would set aside $115 million for clearing debris, stabilizing soils and cleaning up 
watersheds that have been hit by fires. The cleanup effort could create as many as 20,000 
jobs in rural communities, the report said, though many would be temporary.  
Agency officials cautioned the report could change before a final version is produced 
next week.  
"We've been through many drafts already and we expect to have many more before we 
submit the report to the president," said Susan McAvoy, an Agriculture Department 
spokeswoman.  
The Senate appropriations bill for the Interior Department already has passed and 
includes $1.4 billion for fire prevention. The House-passed version contains $1 billion. 
Both measures are in a conference committee.  
If the new request is approved -- which lawmakers are eager to do with Election Day 
looming -- it would double what Clinton originally proposed.  
Marty Hayden, legislative director of Earthjustice Legal Defense Fund, said while he is 
concerned about the size of the administration's plan for thinning, he is more worried 
Republicans will seek to expand it to boost commercial logging of national forests.  
"What the administration sends up is one thing, but what Congress gives back is 
something else," he said.  
Doug Crandall, chief of staff for the Republican-controlled House Resources Forests and 
Forest Health Subcommittee, said the plan can't be carried out without the help of 
commercial loggers.  
"It's going to take outside help to treat that many acres," he said.  
Gary Ghioto can be reached at gghioto@azdailysun.com or 556-2251. The Associated 
Press contributed to this report.  
 
