Surveys: Most support prescribed burning, thinning 
10/14/2005 
 
By Cyndy Cole  
Sun Staff Reporter  
Northern Arizona and Southwest residents support prescribed burning and thinning on 
Forest Service land, particularly those who live closest to the forest, a compilation of 
surveys shows.  
Northern Arizona University's Ecological Restoration Institute analyzed 13 surveys 
conducted in the Southwest to get a reading of public opinion on forest management, 
burning, logging and smoke.  
The public overwhelmingly trusts the Forest Service to manage forests, believes in 
thinning and trusts government and university sources much more than television news or 
newspapers to deliver information about the forest, findings show.  
"People, for the most part, did understand that fire is a natural part of Southwest forests," 
ERI research specialist Jesse Abrams said.  
So where it used to be Smokey Bear's message that you should only prevent forest fires, 
over the last 30 years or so that message has been changing to: "Wildfires can be good or 
bad depending on the context," he said.  
The study combined surveys of people in the Four Corners states, Tucson, Arizona's pine 
forests and Grand Canyon. One of the 13 surveys was financed in part by the Sierra Club 
and Southwest Forest Alliance but conducted by a private firm, Abrams said.  
One secondary finding: Survey respondents rejected the idea of cutting "old growth" but 
didn't object as strongly to cutting "large-diameter" trees.  
Twenty percent of those surveyed thought environmental groups were the best source of 
information on forest health issues in two surveys.  
In one survey, 6 percent thought logging companies were the best source of information 
on forest health.  
Cyndy Cole can be reached at ccole@azdailysun.com or at 913-8607.  
Public views on prescribed burning, forest health  

Fire is a natural part of the ecosystem: 67 to 87 percent agree  
It is acceptable to remove large trees during thinning operations: 12 to 55 percent agree  
Wildfires should not burn, even if no lives are threatened: 47 to 48 percent agree  
I support use of prescribed fire: 76 percent agree  
I believe smoke from prescribed fire is acceptable: 56 to 76 percent agree  
I believe mechanical thinning reduces wildfire risk and intensity: 61 percent to 90 percent 
agree  
Source: Jesse Abrams and Kimberly Lowe, NAU's Ecological Restoration Institute. 
Figures show range of answers to multiple surveys.  
 
