i
27
Ecological Restoration Institute 
Working Paper No. 27
Fuel Treatment  
Longevity
October 2013

Working Papers in Intermountain West Frequent-ﬁre Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing 
native species, structural characteristics, and ecological processes. Te Society for Ecologi-
cal Restoration International deﬁnes ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that 
initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity and 
sustainability….Restoration attempts to return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Soci-
ety for Ecological Restoration International Science & Policy Working Group 2004).
Most frequent-ﬁre forests throughout the Intermountain West have been degraded during 
the last 150 years. Many of these forests are now dominated by unnaturally dense thickets 
of small trees, and lack their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests 
in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing ﬁres and increased 
insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers on reintroducing frequent, 
low-severity surface ﬁres—ofen afer thinning dense stands—and reestablishing productive 
understory plant communities. 
Te Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in research-
ing, implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of frequent-ﬁre forests of the 
Intermountain West. By allowing natural processes, such as low-severity ﬁre, to resume self-
sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem services, 
wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
 
Te ERI Working Papers series presents ﬁndings and management recommendations from 
research and observations by the ERI and its partner organizations. While the ERI staﬀ 
recognizes that every restoration project needs to be site speciﬁc, we feel that the information 
provided in the Working Papers may help restoration practitioners elsewhere.
 
Tis publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Ser-
vice and the Southwest Fire Science Consortium. Te views and conclusions contained in 
this document are those of the author(s) and should not be interpreted as representing the 
opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of trade names or commercial 
products does not constitute their endorsement by the United States Government or the ERI.
Cover Photo: Research shows that treating forested areas with prescribed ground-level 
ﬁre, as seen in this photo, is eﬀective in raising canopy base height if it scorches the lower 
branches. However, such ﬁres can also result in increased fuel loads by killing small 
trees and causing lower branches and needles to fall to the surface. As a result, it may be 
necessary to reburn an area to maintain the eﬀectiveness of the treatment. Researchers 
generally consider thinning followed by prescribed ﬁre to be the most eﬀective fuel 
treatment. Photo courtesy of the Ecological Restoration Institute

1
Ecological Restoration Institute
FUEL TREATMENT LONGEVITY
Introduction
Dry forests of the western United States have been 
altered by long-term fire exclusion, resulting in a 
more dense forest structure and an increased risk of 
crown fire. Recently, thinning and prescribed fire 
treatments have been implemented in these forests 
for two main reasons: ecological restoration and 
fire hazard reduction. Ecological restoration is a 
holistic endeavor that focuses on restoring ecological 
patterns, processes, and functions. Ecological 
restoration goals often include restoring the process 
of fire to forested ecosystems and changing forest 
structure to fall within the historical range of 
variability as indicated by reference information. 
While fire hazard reduction is often a goal or an 
outcome of ecological restoration, not all treatments 
specifically designed to reduce fuels also restore 
ecosystem patterns, processes, and functions 
(Reinhardt et al. 2008). Fire hazard reduction 
treatments are designed specifically to reduce fire 
intensity, reduce fire severity, and increase the ability 
of firefighters to control wildfires (Table 1).
Fuel treatments are common and are generally 
regarded as beneficial for reducing fire behavior, 
as well as for ecological reasons such as increasing 
understory diversity and reducing competition 
among trees for nutrients and water. What remains 
unclear is how long such fuel treatments are effective 
in reducing undesirable fire behavior. This working 
paper addresses the following management questions 
regarding fuel treatment longevity: What factors 
influence fuel treatment longevity? How long will fuel 
treatments last before sites need to be retreated? Do 
some types of treatments last longer than others? 
Goal
Reduce surface fuels
Increase height to live crown
Decrease crown density
Keep big trees of resistant species 
Eﬀect
Reduces potential ﬂame length, 
reduces ﬁre intensity/severity
Requires longer ﬂame length to 
begin torching
Makes tree-to-tree crown ﬁre less 
likely
Less mortality with same ﬁre 
intensity
Advantage
Easier to control wildﬁres, less 
torching
Less torching
Reduces crown ﬁre potential
Generally restores historic structure
Table 1. Goals, effects, and advantages of different ﬁre  
hazard reduction treatments (modiﬁed from Agee and Skinner 2005).
Evaluating the longevity of fuel treatments
Tere are several ways to evaluate fuel treatment 
eﬀectiveness: observations, case studies, mathematical 
models, and empirical studies (Carey and Schumann 
2003). Within these four categories, there are several 
methods that can be used to evaluate the eﬀectiveness 
of fuel treatments both immediately afer treatment and 
over time (Table 2).
Te immediate eﬀectiveness of a fuel treatment can 
be evaluated by measuring the reduction in fuels that 
the treatment causes. For example, prescribed ﬁre 
objectives usually include information about how much 
fuel of diﬀerent size classes must be removed to reach 
desired fuel loads. Fuel treatments are deemed eﬀective 
if they meet those fuel reduction objectives. Another 
way to judge the eﬀectiveness of a fuel treatment is 
to run ﬁre simulation models with fuel loads from 
before and afer the treatment to determine how 
much the fuel treatment changed the potential ﬁre 
behavior (Fernandes and Botelho 2003). Both of these 
methods can also be used to evaluate eﬀectiveness of 
fuel treatments over time, although most modeling 
studies do not incorporate treatment longevity into 
their ﬁre behavior modeling because assumptions have 
to be made about regeneration rates, mortality, growth, 
climate, and other variables that are diﬃcult to predict 
accurately. Another method to evaluate fuel treatment 
eﬀectiveness over time is to quantify wildﬁre eﬀects 
in treated and untreated areas, and determine the age 
of treatments in which wildﬁre severity is eﬀectively 
reduced (Fernandes and Botelho 2003).

2
Ecological Restoration Institute
FUEL TREATMENT LONGEVITY
Multiple factors inﬂuence  
fuel treatment longevity 
Fuel treatment longevity depends on a multitude of 
factors (see Figure 1), including:
• Treatment design
• Treatment outcome
• Site-speciﬁc characteristics
• Stand-speciﬁc characteristics
• Fuel accumulation
• Climate
Treatment design factors inﬂuencing fuel 
treatment longevity
Fuel strata targeted
According to Stephens et al. (2012), surface fuels 
(e.g., grass, litter, coarse woody debris) may be the 
most important fuels to treat because a reduction in 
surface fuels helps reduce ﬁreline intensity and gives 
ﬁre ﬁghters a better chance of managing ﬁre. However, 
fuel treatments can target other fuels besides surface 
fuels, including trees and tree limbs to increase height-
to- live crown and removing whole trees to decrease 
crown density. Tere may be tradeoﬀs between these 
diﬀerent types of fuel treatments. For example, thinning 
to reduce crown ﬁre hazard may result in increased rates 
of ﬁre spread by allowing higher wind speeds under the 
canopy, more sunlight to reach the surface, and more 
understory vegetation growth (Reinhardt et al. 2008). 
Fuel treatment longevity may vary widely depending 
on which fuel stratum is targeted. Vaillant et al. (2009) 
studied plots in 14 national forests in California in 
mixed-conifer, yellow pine, and red ﬁr forests that 
were treated with either prescribed ﬁre or mechanical 
thinning. Tey found that live surface fuels equaled or 
exceeded initial loadings within eight years afer the 
treatments in almost all cases, but canopy base height 
remained higher than initial measurements for up to ten 
years post-treatment. Chiono et al. (2012) studied fuel 
treatments from 2 to 15 years old in mixed conifer and 
drier pine-dominated sites in northeastern California. 
Overstory characteristics in treated areas, including 
stand density, basal area and species composition, were 
still signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from untreated control areas 
even 8 to 15 years afer treatment. However, other fuel 
categories, including shrub cover and seedling density, 
were so variable that the researchers were not able to see 
a pattern in those fuel loads over time afer a treatment.
Fuel treatment type
Depending on management objectives and a site’s 
proximity to human development, land managers may 
choose to use mechanical thinning, prescribed ﬁre, or 
combinations of those methods to reduce fuels. In a 
study in a Sierra Nevada mixed-conifer forest, Stephens 
and colleagues (2012) compared fuel loads one year 
and seven years afer fuel treatments. Te treatments 
consisted of mechanical only, mechanical plus ﬁre, ﬁre 
only, and an untreated control. Te team measured 
overstory and understory vegetation along with fuels. 
Tey modeled potential ﬁre behavior with the Fire and 
Fuels Extension to the Forest Vegetation Simulator 
(FFE-FVS), focusing on the outputs “total ﬂame length” 
and “torching probability.” Te mechanical-only 
treatment did not change ﬂame length and torching 
probability one year afer treatment, while the two 
treatments using ﬁre signiﬁcantly reduced ﬂame length 
and torching probability afer that ﬁrst year. However,  
afer seven years there were no diﬀerences between the 
In the absence of wildﬁre 
Post-wildﬁre
Fire hazard ratings 
Anecdotal observations of ﬁre behavior
Fuel inventory 
Remote sensing of ﬁre size and location
Fire behavior model predictions 
Remote sensing of ﬁre severity
Estimates by experts 
Field measurements of ﬁre severity  
 
(e.g., tree mortality, scorch height,  
 
tree crown damage, or soil damage)
Table 2. Methods to evaluate fuel treatment effectiveness, immediately after treatment or over time 
(based on ideas from Omi and Martinson 2002, Fernandes and Botelho 2003).
Box 1:  When are prescribed ﬁres most 
effective as a fuel treatment?
Land managers must wait until enough surface 
fuels have accumulated to allow another ﬁre to 
burn and spread, but not so long that a prescribed 
ﬁre will no longer meet management objectives 
(Stephens etal. 2012). For example, Battaglia et al. 
(2008) found that if managers waited more than 
about ten years to re-apply ﬁre in the Black Hills 
of South Dakota, they would not be able to reduce 
sapling density using prescribed ﬁre alone. 

3
Ecological Restoration Institute
FUEL TREATMENT LONGEVITY
Figure 1. Factors affecting fuel treatment longevity.

4
Ecological Restoration Institute
FUEL TREATMENT LONGEVITY
mechanical-only, mechanical plus ﬁre, and ﬁre-only 
treatments—all signiﬁcantly reduced ﬂame lengths 
and torching probabilities. Te team concluded that an 
ideal treatment might consist of a mechanical thinning 
with a prescribed ﬁre two to four years later because 
tree mortality from prescribed ﬁre would be low in a 
thinned forest and surface fuel consumption would be 
high. Tese results, the researchers suggested, would 
lead to increased fuel treatment longevity.
Fulé et al. (2012) carried out a systematic review of fuel 
treatments in ponderosa and Jeﬀrey pine-dominated 
forests in the western United States. Te authors found 
that thinning and burning treatments, on average, 
tended to be more eﬀective than either thinning or 
burning treatments alone in reducing surface fuels and 
stand densities, while increasing crowning and torching 
indices. However, the results were highly mixed among 
individual studies, and the researchers did not include 
an analysis of fuel treatment eﬀectiveness over time. 
Reinhardt et al. (2010) modeled forest structure and 
potential tree mortality following wildﬁre in stands 
of ponderosa pine and lodgepole pine in Montana 
that were subjected to various simulated treatments. 
Similar to Fulé et al. (2012), they found that thinning 
(commercial) followed by prescribed burning tended to 
be more eﬀective than other treatment types in positively 
altering a suite of ﬁre potential variables, including 
crowning index, torching index, potential mortality as a 
percentage of basal area, canopy base height, and canopy 
bulk density. Tis was the case in both lodgepole and 
ponderosa pine forests. Again, however, the results were 
highly variable and site-dependent. 
Prescribed ﬁre is eﬀective in raising canopy base height 
if it scorches lower branches in a stand. However, it can 
also result in increased fuel loads by killing small trees 
and causing lower branches and needles to fall to the 
surface (Agee and Skinner 2005, Reinhardt et al. 2008). 
Because of this eﬀect, it may be necessary to reburn an 
area to increase treatment longevity and maintain the 
eﬀectiveness of the treatment (Stephens et al. 2012). In a 
management-focused report on “lessons learned” from 
prescribed burning in mixed-conifer and ponderosa 
pine forests in northern California, McCandliss reports 
that once an initial prescribed ﬁre has been completed, 
it is scheduled for reentry in three to ﬁve years in order 
to kill newly-regenerated shrubs and consume the fuel 
created by the ﬁrst burn. “It is clearly a waste of time, 
money, and eﬀort to burn once and not come back to 
reburn at an appropriate interval” (McCandliss 2002).
Treatment size
Treatment size can make a diﬀerence in fuel treatment 
longevity because small treatments may be less eﬀective 
at reducing potential extreme ﬁre behavior across a 
landscape. “If fuel treatments are small and scattered, 
or a long time has elapsed since treatment (generally 
10 to 15 years or more), they will be less eﬀective in 
fragmenting the landscape fuel loads, and their eﬃcacy 
at the stand level can be overwhelmed by intense ﬁres 
burning in adjacent areas” (Agee and Skinner 2005, pp. 
92-93). In a study in ponderosa pine forests afer the 
Rodeo-Chediski Fire in Arizona, researchers found that 
treatment longevity increased with treatment size; they 
also noted that lower ﬁre severity was associated with 
repeated fuel treatments (Finney et al. 2005).
Other treatment design factors that may inﬂuence the 
longevity of fuel treatments include: 
• the original fuel treatment goals and objectives
• intensity of the treatment (Sackett and Hasse 
1998) 
• slash treatment (Weatherspoon and Skinner 
1996) 
• spatial pattern of the treatment (Finney et al. 2007).
Fuel accumulation factors inﬂuencing fuel 
treatment longevity
Site productivity strongly aﬀects how long a fuel 
treatment will last. As Reinhardt and others (2008) 
write, “Tree crowns will eventually expand to 
ﬁll canopy voids created by the treatment, tree 
regeneration will eventually lower canopy base height, 
and undergrowth will respond to increased light 
and water to achieve greater cover and height. More 
importantly, intact tree canopies will continue to drop 
leaf, cone, and woody litter at a rate that is dictated 
by ecosystem productivity and stand composition” (p. 
2002). As an example, Stephens et al. (2012) noted that 
fuels accumulated faster in the Sierra Nevada than in 
the Rocky Mountains, because of higher productivity 
of Sierra Nevada forests. Many of the factors that 
inﬂuence productivity and fuel accumulation rates 
cannot be disentangled. 
Rate of biomass accumulation
In northern California, Keifer et al. (2006) found that 
afer a prescribed burn in ponderosa pine forests, 
surface fuels rebounded to 84% of pre-ﬁre levels within 
ten years. Tey speculated that the rapid buildup of 
surface fuels may have been due to the high number 
of small trees killed in the prescribed ﬁre or, perhaps, 
litterfall exceeded decomposition rates. In this same 
study, surface fuels were similar to untreated areas 31 
years afer a prescribed ﬁre in ponderosa pine. In mixed 
conifer stands, surface fuels reached 66-83% of pre-ﬁre 
levels within ten years. Te authors recommend that to 
keep surface fuels below pre-ﬁre levels, mixed conifer 
stands should be retreated every ten years (Keifer et al. 
2006). Further, retreating with prescribed ﬁre would 
be cheaper and result in less ground disturbance than 
repeated thinning treatments.

5
Ecological Restoration Institute
FUEL TREATMENT LONGEVITY
Surface fuel loads are notoriously diﬃcult to predict 
because variability is very high across a landscape and 
even within a stand. Reinhardt et al. (2010) quoted 
Brown and See (1981), who analyzed fuel data from 
thousands of plots in the Rocky Mountains and found 
that “very little of the observed variation in loading was 
explained by any of the factors” such as stand age, aspect, 
slope, elevation, habitat type, and cover type. Terefore, 
it is very diﬃcult to predict how fast surface fuels will 
accumulate afer a fuel treatment. 
Other fuel accumulation factors that aﬀect fuel treatment 
longevity include:
• decomposition rates
• rates of understory plant growth
• mast years and regeneration rates
• rates of shrub encroachment
• level of animal grazing.
Treatment outcomes and  
fuel treatment longevity
Treatment eﬀectiveness
Te ﬁrst treatment outcome factor that can inﬂuence 
fuel treatment longevity is the eﬀectiveness of the 
treatment itself (i.e., prescription implementation). For 
example, land managers may want to kill tree seedlings 
and small trees with a prescribed ﬁre, but if the ﬁre is 
not hot enough, those goals will not be met and the 
eﬀectiveness of the fuel treatment will not last long, if it 
is eﬀective at all.
Vegetation responses to treatment
Mature vegetation on a site may respond positively 
or negatively to a fuel reduction treatment. A positive 
response would result if a treatment opened up growing 
space and allowed vegetation to grow at a faster rate, while 
a treatment that damages the remaining vegetation would 
result in a negative response. For example, Peterson et al. 
(1994) studied the eﬀects of burning on tree growth and 
fuels in ponderosa pine forests in northern Arizona at 
seven diﬀerent annual intervals. Tey found that burning 
at four- and six-year intervals did not negatively aﬀect tree 
growth and these intervals were also the most eﬀective in 
terms of fuel consumption. Burning at shorter and longer 
intervals resulted in less complete fuel consumption and 
had a negative impact on tree growth.
Regeneration responses to treatment
Regeneration rates inﬂuence fuel treatment longevity 
because saplings can become ladder fuels in a stand. 
According to Bailey and Covington (2002), “tree 
regeneration rates are regulated by the presence of 
suﬃcient seed-producing adults, periodicity of their 
cone/seed crops, predation on cones/ seeds, seed viability 
rates, seedbed conditions and germinant survival, and 
early seedling growth relative to microclimate, ﬁre and 
competitive stresses” (p. 272). Similarly, Puhlick et al. 
(2012) showed that elevation, precipitation, temperature, 
seed tree presence, overstory basal area, understory 
species, and soil parameters can be important factors for 
ponderosa pine regeneration in the Southwest. 
Although prescribed ﬁre can kill seedlings, fuel treatments 
can also increase seedling density by opening the canopy 
and enhancing the seedbed for species such as ponderosa 
pine. In northern Arizona, higher-intensity treatments 
were found to have twice the number of ponderosa pine 
seedlings as low-intensity restoration treatments (Bailey 
and Covington 2002). Other researchers have found 
more seedlings germinated in burned treatments than in 
unburned treatments (Sackett and Haase 1998). Fajardo et 
al. (2007) noted that regeneration rates for Douglas-ﬁr and 
ponderosa pine in Montana were higher ten years afer 
cut-and-burn and cut-only treatments than they were in 
control plots. In ponderosa pine-Gambel oak forests on 
the South Rim of the Grand Canyon, Fulé et al. (2005) 
monitored the results ﬁve years afer areas were treated 
with thinning and prescribed burning (full restoration), 
minimal thinning around old trees and prescribed 
burning (minimum restoration), and  burning alone. 
Tey found relatively high rates of oak regeneration in all 
treatments, especially in full restoration and burn plots, 
and relatively low rates of ponderosa pine regeneration in 
all treatments, although burn plots exhibited higher pine 
regeneration than the others. Te researchers noted that 
results were likely aﬀected by pre-existing site diﬀerences 
and a drought as well as treatment eﬀects. 
In the Black Hills, Battaglia et al. (2008) found that 
ponderosa pine seedlings germinated, grew, and 
contributed to ladder fuels within 10 to 20 years afer 
treatment. However, if a prescribed ﬁre was applied 
within ten years afer the ﬁrst treatment, it would 
signiﬁcantly reduce seedling density and prolong the 
eﬀectiveness of the original treatment. Palmer (2012) 
used FVS to simulate ponderosa pine forest dynamics 
for a 50-year period at Grand Canyon National Park. 
She found that if regeneration rates were low (16.2 trees/
acre for ponderosa pine), burning every eight years was 
an eﬀective way to keep tree density at desired levels 
while, when regeneration was high (162 trees/acre for 
ponderosa pine), eight-year intervals were not enough.
Other factors 
Tree additional groups of factors aﬀect fuel treatment 
longevity. Te ﬁrst group, stand-speciﬁc factors, includes 
the species composition of the treated forest and pre-
treatment conditions. Te third group are climatic factors 
because both average climatic conditions and yearly 
variations in weather can play a role in how long fuel 
treatments last. 

6
Ecological Restoration Institute
FUEL TREATMENT LONGEVITY
Post-wildﬁre evidence  
of fuel treatment longevity
Research studies of areas burned by wildﬁres provide 
another means of assessing the longevity of fuel 
treatments. Pollet and Omi (2002), for example, 
evaluated the ﬁre severity of four wildﬁres in western 
ponderosa pine-dominated forests treated from 4 to 11 
years before the wildﬁre. Treatments include thinning, 
prescribed ﬁre, and thinning and burning. All four 
wildﬁres had a higher crown scorch percentage and ﬁre 
severity rating in untreated stands compared to treated 
stands. Tis suggests that fuel treatment eﬀectiveness 
lasted at least 11 years in the study sites. Similarly, 
Saﬀord et al. (2012) found no diﬀerence between 
one- to nine-year-old treatments (mostly thinning-
and-burning treatments) in their eﬀect on ﬁre severity 
and tree survival in 12 wildﬁres in yellow pine and 
mixed-conifer forests in California. Tis suggests that 
fuel treatments in those areas were eﬀective for at least 
nine years.
Agee and Skinner (2005) report that under less extreme 
conditions during the 2002 Hayman Fire in Colorado, 
fuel treatments such as prescribed ﬁre altered ﬁre 
severity, except where treatments were small (less than 
~250 acres) or where treatments were more than 10–15 
years old. Tis suggests that 10-15 years is how long 
fuel treatments may be eﬀective in the eastern Rocky 
Mountains in Colorado. In Yosemite National Park, 
managers and researchers have observed that most 
wildﬁres stop at old ﬁre boundaries that are 15 years 
old or less (van Wagtendonk 1995, cited by Agee and 
Skinner 2005). Collins et al. (2009) also examined ﬁre 
perimeters in mixed-conifer forest in Yosemite National 
Park and found that the probability of a wildﬁre burning 
into an area that had burned within the previous nine 
years was extremely low. Omi and Martinson (2007) 
reported that treatments were eﬀective in reducing the 
wildﬁre severity of ﬁve ﬁres in mixed-conifer forests in 
Washington, Oregon, California, Arizona, and Colorado 
for up to ten years, and were not eﬀective in treatments 
older than that.
Finney and others (2005) analyzed remote sensing data 
afer the Rodeo-Chediski Fire in Arizona to compare 
ﬁre severity in areas of ponderosa pine forest that had 
been treated with prescribed ﬁre  and areas that had 
been untreated. Tey found that treated areas burned 
less severely than untreated areas, although severity 
increased with the age of the treatments. For instance, 
treatments less than two years old experienced lower 
ﬁre severity than two- to three-year-old treatments, 
which did better than treatments more than four years 
old. However, ﬁre severity in treatments up to nine 
years old was lower than in untreated areas. Tese 
results imply that although fuel treatment eﬀectiveness 
declines over time, treatments in this area were 
noticeable up to nine years afer treatments. In the 
same area, Strom (2005) found that areas treated with 
prescribed ﬁre more than 11 years before the Rodeo-
Chediski Fire were indistinguishable from untreated 
areas; treatments up to 11 years old made a diﬀerence 
in ﬁre severity.
Finally, in a meta-analysis, Omi and Martinson (2010) 
found that fuel treatment eﬀectiveness lasted about 
ten years, although longevity depended on ecosystem 
productivity. Tey write, “Fuel treatment eﬀectiveness 
ultimately depends on the cumulative impact of 
a treatment regime applied across landscapes and 
maintained through time” (p. 9). Tere is clearly a wide 
range of fuel treatment eﬀectiveness across the western 
United States.
Box 2: Can historical ﬁre frequency be used 
as a benchmark for how frequently fuels 
should be treated?
Researchers and land managers know that in 
many dry western forests, surface ﬁres or mixed-
severity ﬁres were historically frequent. Frequent, 
low-intensity surface ﬁres kept surface fuels, 
ladder fuels, and canopy fuels from increasing to 
the point that crown ﬁre could be carried across 
large landscapes. For instance, Harold Weaver 
(1951) reported, “Te data indicate that in earlier 
days ﬁres occurred just as frequently as fuel 
accumulated in suﬃcient quantity on the forest 
ﬂoor, when weather conditions were favorable, 
and when some natural or human agency caused 
them to start” (p. 94). 
Where available, using historical ﬁre frequency 
as a benchmark may give land managers a 
ballpark idea of how ofen fuel treatments need 
to be repeated. For example, some of the earliest 
reports about how ofen fuel treatments should 
be repeated in the Southwest came from Harold 
Biswell. He reported that on the Fort Apache 
Reservation in Arizona, the historical ﬁre interval 
was six to seven years, and prescribed burns were 
eﬀective in reducing wildﬁre hazard for ﬁve to 
seven years (Biswell et al. 1973). Researchers in 
recent years have suggested that using historical 
ﬁre frequency as a benchmark for fuel treatment 
longevity is reasonable (Saﬀord et al. 2012). 
However, it should be noted that there is a 
diﬀerence between how long it takes fuels to build 
up to a level that will support surface ﬁre and how 
long managers can wait between fuel treatments 
before they are faced with ﬁre behavior problems. 

7
Ecological Restoration Institute
FUEL TREATMENT LONGEVITY
Using local data to schedule fuel treatments 
Tere is no substitute for local knowledge, data, 
observations, and monitoring given the numerous 
factors that aﬀect fuel treatment longevity and the 
variation that can occur across landscapes. As Reinhardt 
et al. (2010) point out, “Te outcomes of treatments 
varied between stands, indicating that cookbook, one 
size-ﬁts-all fuel treatment prescriptions are likely to be 
unsatisfactory” (p. 40).
Land managers may choose to use local data in models 
in order to schedule fuel treatments.  For example, 
the Fire and Fuels Extension to the Forest Vegetation 
Simulator can be used to predict vegetation development 
over time. If managers have designated target fuel loads 
below which ﬁre hazard is deemed acceptable, they can 
use this sofware to help schedule fuel treatments that 
will keep fuel loads below those target levels (Peterson et 
al. 2005). Land managers may also ﬁnd useful a method 
developed by Keyes and O’Hara (2002) for developing 
silvicultural prescriptions. It is based on the BEHAVE 
surface ﬁre model and modiﬁed versions of the Van 
Wagner crown ignition and crown ﬁre spread equations. 
Whether land managers are concerned about surface 
fuels or canopy fuels, crowning index or rate of spread, 
ﬁre-induced tree mortality or soil damage, there is an 
appropriate metric they can use to determine whether the 
forest in a given location has moved out of prescription 
and is in need of further treatment. Although there is no 
single metric that will work for all areas and objectives, 
managers can use the metric(s) that work the best for their 
needs and closely monitor those variables. Researchers 
have identiﬁed potential thresholds of fuel levels that are 
unacceptable for particular situations. For example, crown 
bulk density above 0.1 kg/ha may be used as a threshold 
because research indicates that active crowning may occur 
above that threshold during extreme ﬁre conditions (Agee 
1996, cited by Omi and Martinson 2002). Height-to-live 
crown is also strongly associated with ﬁre severity (Omi 
and Martinson 2002) and may serve as a metric when 
developing treatment schedules. Seedling density is another 
potentially useful metric because it has been suggested 
that to avoid the development of dense ladder fuels, 
regeneration densities should not exceed 500 stems per 
hectare or about 200 stems per acre (Battaglia et al. 2008).   
Climate and drought
Climate change and drought are critical considerations 
for future forest management, including fuel treatments 
(Diggins et al. 2010). Many factors that aﬀect fuel 
treatment longevity are likely to be aﬀected by climate 
change, including the rate of fuel buildup, regeneration 
rates, and decomposition rates. In addition, fuel 
treatments that were once eﬀective in a past climate 
may no longer be eﬀective if ﬁre seasons become longer, 
droughts more extensive, or other climate-driven 
changes to the ﬁre regime occur. Finally, although fuel 
treatment eﬀectiveness and longevity are uncertain 
given a changing climate, they may become even more 
important, to give native species and ecosystems the best 
possible chance to persist.
Future research needs        
Several gaps in knowledge can be identiﬁed. One 
research need is better information about fuel buildup 
over time, in diﬀerent forest types, afer diﬀerent fuel 
treatments, and in diﬀerent climate regimes. Another 
need is more systematic studies of wildﬁre behavior in 
treated and untreated areas. Although we spend millions 
of dollars a year on fuel treatments and they are a high 
priority for policy-makers, managers, and the general 
public, we have surprisingly little information about 
their eﬀectiveness over time.
Summary
• Fuel treatment longevity depends on a multitude 
of factors, including site- and stand-speciﬁc 
factors, treatment design and treatment outcome 
factors, climatic factors, and fuel accumulation 
factors.
• In studies of wildﬁre severity, treatments ranging 
in age from 2 to 15 years were eﬀective in 
changing ﬁre outcomes across the western United 
States. 
• Although the evidence is limited, thinning and 
prescribed burning may be the most eﬀective 
treatment combination. 
• Tere is no “one-size-ﬁts-all” number for fuel 
treatment longevity; local monitoring is essential.
• Climate change may impact fuel treatment 
longevity, but also may make fuel treatments even 
more essential in the future.
• Research needs include information about fuel 
accumulation rates in diﬀerent forest types, afer 
diﬀerent fuel treatments, and in diﬀerent climate 
regimes. Systematic studies of wildﬁre behavior 
in treated and untreated areas are also a high 
priority.

8
Ecological Restoration Institute
FUEL TREATMENT LONGEVITY
References
Agee, J.K. 1996. Te inﬂuence of forest structure on ﬁre behavior. Pages 
52-68 in J. Sherlock. (chair). Proceedings of the 17th Annual Forest 
and Vegetation Management Conference. Redding, CA.
Agee, J.K. and C.N. Skinner. 2005. Basic principles of forest fuel 
reduction treatments. Forest Ecology and Management 211:83-96.
Bailey, J.D. and W.W. Covington. 2002. Evaluating ponderosa pine 
regeneration rates following ecological restoration treatments 
in northern Arizona, USA. Forest Ecology and Management 
155:271-278.
Battaglia, M.A., F.W. Smith and W.D. Shepperd. 2008. Can prescribed 
ﬁre be used to maintain fuel treatment eﬀectiveness over time 
in Black Hills ponderosa pine forests? Forest Ecology and 
Management 256:2029-2038.
Biswell, H.H., H.R. Kallander, R. Komarek, R.J. Vogl, and H. Weaver. 
1973. Ponderosa ﬁre management: A task force evaluation of 
controlled burning in ponderosa pine forest of central Arizona. 
Tall Timbers Research Station Miscellaneous Publication 2:1-49.
Brown, J.K. and T.E. See. 1981. Downed dead woody fuel and biomass 
in the northern Rocky Mountains. General Technical Report 
INT-117. USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station, Ogden, UT.
Carey, H. and M. Schumann. 2003. Modifying wildﬁre behavior – the 
eﬀectiveness of fuel treatments. National Community Forestry 
Center Southwest Region Working Paper #2. Santa Fe, NM.
Chiono, L.A., K.L. O’Hara, M.J. De Lasaux, G.A. Nader, and S.L. 
Stephens. 2012. Development of vegetation and surface fuels 
following ﬁre hazard reduction treatment. Forests 3:700-722.
Collins, B.M., J.D. Miller, A.E. Thode, M. Kelly, J.W. van 
Wagtendonk, S.L. Stephens. 2009. Interactions among wildland 
fires in a long-established Sierra Nevada natural fire area. 
Ecosystems 12(1):114-128.
Diggins, C., P.Z. Fulé, J.P. Kaye, and W.W. Covington. 2010. Future 
climate aﬀects management strategies for maintaining forest 
restoration treatments. International Journal of Wildland Fire 
19:903-913.
Fajardo, A., J.M. Graham, J.M. Goodburn, and C.E. Fiedler. 2007. Ten-
year responses of ponderosa pine growth, vigor, and recruitment to 
restoration treatments in the Bitterroot Mountains, Montana, USA. 
Forest Ecology and Management 243:50-60.
Fernandes, P.M. and H.S. Botelho. 2003. A review of prescribed 
burning eﬀectiveness in ﬁre hazard reduction. International 
Journal of Wildland Fire 12:117-128.
Finney, M.A., C.W. McHugh, and I.C. Grenfell. 2005. Stand- and 
landscape-level eﬀects of prescribed burning on two Arizona 
wildﬁres. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 35:1714-1722.
Finney, M.A., R.C. Seli, C.W. McHugh, A.A. Ager, B. Bahro and J.K. 
Agee. 2007. Simulation of long-term landscape-level fuel treatment 
eﬀects on large wildﬁres. International Journal of Wildland Fire 16: 
712-727.
Fulé, P.Z., D.C. Laughlin, and W.W. Covington. 2005. Pine-oak forest 
dynamics ﬁve years afer ecological restoration treatments, 
Arizona, USA. Forest Ecology and Management 218:129-145.
Fulé, P.Z., J.E. Crouse, J.P. Roccaforte, and E.L. Kalies. 2012. Do 
thinning and/or burning treatments in western USA ponderosa or 
Jeﬀrey pine-dominated forests help restore natural ﬁre behavior? 
Forest Ecology and Management 269:68-81.
Keifer, M., J.W. van Wagtendonk, and M. Buhler. 2006. Long-term 
surface fuel accumulation in burned and unburned mixed-conifer 
forests of the central and southern Sierra Nevada, CA (USA). Fire 
Ecology 2(1):53-72.
Keyes, C.R. and K.L. O’Hara. 2002. Quantifying stand targets for 
silvicultural prevention of crown ﬁres. Western Journal of Applied 
Forestry 17(12):101-109.
McCandliss, D.S. 2002. Prescribed burning in the Kings River 
Ecosystems Project Area: lessons learned. In: Proceedings of a 
Symposium on the Kings River Sustainable Forest Ecosystems 
Project: Progress and current status. USDA Forest Service General 
Technical Report PSW-GTR-183:37-46, Albany, CA.
Omi, P.N. and E.J. Martinson. 2002. Eﬀect of fuels treatment on 
wildﬁre severity. Final report to the Joint Fire Science Program 
Governing Board. Colorado State University, Fort Collins.
___. 2007. Tested by ﬁre: what happens when wildﬁres meet fuel 
treatments? Joint Fire Science Program Fire Science Brief 1:1-6.
___. 2010. Eﬀectiveness of fuel treatments for mitigating wildﬁre 
severity: A manager-focused review and synthesis - Final Report to 
the Joint Fire Science Program. JFSP Project No. 08-2-1-09. 
Palmer, K.E. 2012. Modeling long-term changes to the ponderosa pine 
forests of Grand Canyon National Park. M.S. Tesis. School of 
Forestry, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaﬀ, AZ.
Peterson, D.L., S.S. Sackett, L.J. Robinson, and S.M. Haase. 1994. Te 
eﬀects of repeated prescribed burning on Pinus ponderosa growth. 
International Journal of Wildland Fire 4(4):239-247.
Peterson, D.L., M.C. Johnson, J.K. Agee, T.B. Jain, D. McKenzie, and 
E.D. Reinhardt. 2005. Forest structure and ﬁre hazard in dry 
forests of the western United States. USDA Forest Service General 
Technical Report PNW-GTR-628, Portland, OR.
Pollet, J. and P.N. Omi. 2002. Eﬀect of thinning and prescribed burning 
on crown ﬁre severity in ponderosa pine forests. International 
Journal of Wildland Fire 11:1-10.
Puhlick, J.J., D.C. Laughlin, and M.M. Moore. 2012. Factors inﬂuencing 
ponderosa pine regeneration in the southwestern USA. Forest 
Ecology and Management 264:10-19.
Reinhardt, E.D., R.E. Keane, D.E. Calkin, and J.D. Cohen. 2008. 
Objectives and considerations for wildland fuel treatment in 
forested ecosystems of the interior western United States. Forest 
Ecology and Management 256:1997-2006.
Reinhardt, E.D., L. Holsinger, and R. Keane. 2010. Eﬀects of biomass 
removal treatments on stand-level ﬁre characteristics in major 
forest types of the northern Rocky Mountains. Western Journal of 
Applied Forestry 25(1):34-41.
Sackett, S.S. and S.M. Haase. 1998. Two case histories for using 
prescribed ﬁre to restore ponderosa pine ecosystems in northern 
Arizona. Pages 380-389 in Fire in ecosystem management: shifing 
the paradigm from suppression to prescription. Proceedings of the 
20th Tall Timbers Fire Ecology Conference, May 7-10, 1996, Boise, 
ID. Tall Timbers Research Station, Tallahassee, FL.
Saﬀord, H.D., J.T. Stevens, K. Merriam, M.D. Meyer, A.M. Latimer. 
2012. Fuel treatment eﬀectiveness in California yellow pine and 
mixed conifer forests. Forest Ecology and Management 274:17-28.
Stephens, S.L., B.M. Collins, and G. Roller. 2012. Fuel treatment 
longevity in a Sierra Nevada mixed conifer forest. Forest Ecology 
and Management 285:204-212.
Strom, B. 2005. Pre-ﬁre treatment eﬀects and post-ﬁre forest dynamics 
on the Rodeo-Chediski burn area, Arizona. M.S. Tesis, School of 
Forestry, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaﬀ, AZ.
Vaillant, N., E. Noonan-Wright, S. Dailey, C. Ewell, and A. Reiner. 
2009. Eﬀectiveness and longevity of fuel treatments in coniferous 
forests across California. Final Report to the Joint Fire Science 
Program, Project ID 09-1-01-1.
van Wagtendonk, J.W. 1995. Large ﬁres in wilderness areas. Pages 113-
116 in Proceedings of a Symposium on Fire in Wilderness and 
Park Management. USDA Forest Service General Technical Report 
INT-GTR-320, Ogden, UT.
Weatherspoon, C.P. and C.N. Skinner. 1996. Landscape-level strategies 
for forest fuel management. Pages 1471-1492 in Sierra Nevada 
Ecosystem Project: Final Report to Congress. Vol. II. Assessments 
and Scientiﬁc Basis for Management Options. Wildland Resources 
Center Report No. 37. Centers for Water and Wildland Resources, 
University of California, Davis.
Weaver, H. 1951. Fire as an ecological factor in the southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests. Journal of Forestry 49(2):93-98.

Working Papers in Intermountain West Frequent-ﬁre Forest Restoration
1: 
Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons and Adaptive Management  
 
Practices
2:  
Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3:  
Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
4:  
Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Beneﬁts
5:  
Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
6:  
Butterﬂies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
7:  
Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
8:  
Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
9:  
Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
10:  Te Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Restoration Model
11:  Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration
12:  Restoring Forest Roads
13:  Treating Slash afer Restoration Tinning
14:  Integrating Forest Restoration Treatments with Mexican Spotted Owl Habitat Needs
15:  Eﬀects of Forest Tinning Treatments on Fire Behavior
16:  Snags and Forest Restoration  
17:  Bat Habitat and Forest Restoration Treatments
18:  Prescribed and Wildland Use Fires in the Southwest: Do Timing and Frequency   
 
Matter? 
19:  Understory Seeding in Southwestern Forests Following Wildﬁre and Ecological   
 
Restoration Treatments
20:  Controlling Cheatgrass in Ponderosa Pine and Pinyon-Juniper Restoration Areas 
21:  Managing Coarse Woody Debris in Frequent-ﬁre Southwestern Forests
22:  Restoring Spatial Pattern to Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
23:  Guidelines for Managing Small Mammals in Restored Ponderosa Pine Forests of   
 
Northern Arizona
24:  Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Burning 
25: 
Strategies for Enhancing and Restoring Rare Plants and Teir Habitats in the Face of 
 
Climate Change and Habitat Destruction in the Intermountain West
26: 
Wildlife Habitat Values and Forest Structure in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine: 
 
Implications for Restoration
Author: Larissa Yocom
Reviewers: Pete Fulé, David Huﬀman, Andrea Tode
Series Editor: Dave Egan
For more information about forest restoration, 
contact the ERI at 928-523-7182 or eri.nau.edu
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Aﬃrmative Action Institution   
 NAU Printing Services/74375/300/02-13

Ecological Restoration Institute
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
eri.nau.edu
1000372
