ERI earmarked for permanent line of federal funding 
By SETH MULLER 
Sun Staff Reporter 
09/22/2004 
 
A Flagstaff-based institute that has advanced forest science to help curb catastrophic 
wildfire is poised to secure permanent federal funding.  
The Southwest Forest Health and Wildfire Prevention Act, backed by U.S. Sen Jon Kyl, 
R-Ariz., recently passed the Senate. It includes $15 million for Northern Arizona 
University's Ecological Restoration Institute and two other such forest science entities in 
the Southwest.  
Matching legislation passed in the House in February, so the resolution awaits President 
Bush's signature, expected within the next 10 days. For the ERI, it's a major coup that 
will allow it to "strengthen the bridge between forest science and action," said Diane 
Vosik, the institute's associate director.  
"We will probably add more community and agency outreach to get the science to the 
landscape," Vosik said of how the money could be used, but she noted that the Forest 
Service will set specific guidelines on how the funds can be spent. "We are looking at 
hiring a Ph.D. scientist who can provide consultation to more places implementing 
treatments."  
Currently, the ERI operates with a $3.5 million annual budget, but how much the 
expected $15 million authorization, which will be in next year's federal budget, will boost 
that figure is uncertain. The total will be divided by the ERI, New Mexico Highlands 
University and a to-be-determined institute in Colorado, but it's not clear as to how that 
will happen.  
"The amount of money going to the institutions will vary, depending on the programs and 
where they head," Vosik said.  
"This doesn't assure that the money is divided $5 million each way. Also, this 
authorization allows Congress to put up to $15 million. It could choose a lesser amount."  
In the past, the ERI has mostly secured funding through earmarks, where Congress 
approved a portion of funding instead of having the annual authorization. "With this, the 
Congress basically says, 'This institution does good work, and we need to fund it,'" Vosik 
said.  

Kyl has long been an ardent and vocal ERI supporter. When he secured $2 million in 
funds for the institute late last year, he said that it has heavily advanced forest treatment 
science and how it can curb catastrophic wildfire. He has specifically cited the work by 
ERI Director Wallace Covington, who testified in Congress for the Healthy Forest 
Restoration Act.  
"There is no question that Dr. Covington's work and his testimony significantly 
influenced this legislation," Kyl told the Daily Sun after the Health Forests Act passed. 
"Without his scientific work and without his willingness to be coming back here and 
pushing good science, we wouldn't have this legislation today."  
Elements of forest restoration became part of NAU's forestry program under Covington 
in the late 1970s. Ecological restoration became an NAU department in 1996 and, three 
years later, the Arizona Board of Regents formally approved creation of the Ecological 
Restoration Institute.  
The institute now has 58 employees and 42 undergraduate and graduate students on the 
payroll, and has taken the lead on forest health research. In its first year, ERI landed $8.8 
million in federal funds, and Kyl, along with U.S. Rep. J.D. Hayworth, R-Cave Creek, 
has provided major support.  
A spate of catastrophic wildfires in Arizona in recent years -- from the Rodeo-Chediski 
fire in 2002 to this year's Mount Graham fire near Safford -- have joined blazes in 
California and Oregon wildfires to prompt federal response and legislation.  
Reporter Seth Muller can be reached at 913-8607 or at smuller@azdailysun.com.  
 
