Songbird Ecology in Southwestern 
Forest Service 
Ponderosa Pine Forests: 
A Literature Review 

Block, William M.; Finch, Deborah M., technical editors. 1997. Songbird ecology in 
southwestern ponderosa pine forests: a literature review. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 
Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest 
and Range Experiment Station. 152 p. 
This publication reviews and synthesizes the literature about ponderosa pine forests of 
the Southwest, with emphasis on the biology, ecology, and conservation of songbirds. 
Critical bird-habitat management issues related to succession, snags, old growth, fire, 
logging, grazing, recreation, and landscape scale are addressed. Overviews of the ecol- 
ogy, current use, and history of Southwestern ponderosa pine forests are also provided. 
This report is one of the outcomes of the Silver vs ~hom'as court-settlement agreement 
of 1996. It is intended for planners, scientists, and conservationists in solving some of 
the controversies over managing forests and birds in the Southwest. 
Keywords: ponderosa pine, Southwest, songbirds 
Technical Editors: 
The order of editorship was determined by coin toss. William M. Block is project leader 
and research wildlife biologist with the Southwestern Terrestrial Ecosystem research work 
unit, Southwest Forest Sciences Complex, 2500 S. Pine Knoll, Flagstaff, AZ 86001. Deborah 
M. Finch is project leader and research wildlife biologist with the Southwestern Grassland 
and Riparian research work unit, Forestry Sciences Laboratory, 2205 Columbia SE, 
Albuquerque, NM 871 06. 
Publisher: 
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station 
Fort Collins, Colorado 
You may order additional copies of this publication by sending your mailing informa- 
tion in label form through one of the following media. Please send the publication title 
and number. 
Telephone 
(970) 498-1 71 9 
DG message 
R.Schneider:S28A 
FAX 
(970) 498-1 660 
E-mail 
/s=r.schneider/oul =s28a@ mhs-fswa.attmail.com 
Mailing Address 
Publications Distribution 
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station 
3825 E. Mulberry Street 
Fort Collins, CO 80524 
May 1997 
Front Cover: Grace's warbler, pygmy nuthatch, and violet-green swallow. 
Artwork by Joyce Patterson. 

Songbird Ecology in 
Southwestern Ponderosa 
Pine Forests: 
A Literature Review 
William M. Block and Deborah M. Finch 
Technical Editors 
Contents 
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  i i 
TheAuthors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  iii 
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1 
Deborah M. Finch and William M. Block 
Chapter 1 
Ecology of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
3 
~ i l l i a m  
H. Moir, Brian W Geils, Mary Ann Benoit, and Dan Scurlock 
Chapter 2 
Contemporary Human Use of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests . . 
Carol Raish, Wang Yong, and John M. Marzluff 
Chapter 3 
A Historical Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Dan Scurlock and Deborah M. Finch 
Chapter 4 
Songbird Status and Roles. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Linnea S. Hall, Michael L. Morrison, and William M. Block 
Chapter 5 
Effects of Urbanization and Recreation on Songbirds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
John M. Marzluff 
Chapter 6 
Effects and Interactions of Fire, Logging, and Grazing . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Deborah M. Finch, Joseph L. Ganey, Wang Yong, Rebecca T: Kimball, 
and Rex Sallabanks 
Chapter 7 
Landscape Dynamics and Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Kevin M. Rich and Patricia Mehlhop 
Chapter 8 
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
145 
William M. Block, Deborah M. Finch, Joseph L. Ganey, and William H. Moir 
Appendix: Birds Referenced in This Book. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  151 

Preface 
Denver P. Burns 
As part of a settlement agreement related to the Silver 
us. Thomas (1996) litigation, the Rocky Mountain Forest 
and Range Experiment Station agreed to summarize the 
current knowledge on songbirds inhabiting ponderosa 
pine forests in the Southwest. This review represents the 
state-of-knowledge of songbird ecology in Southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests. 
Ponderosa pine is the major forest type in the South- 
west, encompassing over 3 million hectares. rhe forest belt 
extending above the Mogollon Rim is the largest contigu- 
ous ponderosa pine forest in the world. These forests have 
been occupied by humans for thousands of years, during 
which time humans derived multiple benefits from a va- 
riety of resources. Not only have these forests provided 
human needs, but they also provide for the needs of nu- 
merous plants and animals. 
A group of animals of particular interest are the song- 
birds, which occupy numerous habitats and stages. Each 
species uses a unique combination of habitat conditions, and 
changes to the forest may influence that species' population 
status. To a certain extent, birds can act as indicators of envi- 
ronmental conditions. By examining trends in bird popula- 
tions, one might hope to index forest health, and vice versa. 
Thus, understanding the ecology of birds in ponderosa 
pine forest, including their habitat requirements and popu- 
lation trends, is key to gauging health of this forested eco- 
system. The chapters presented in this document sum- 
marize what we know about ponderosa pine forest 
ecology as well as about the birds that inhabitat those for- 
ests. They represent a compilation of numerous indepen- 
dent studies and provide a springboard for the develop- 
ment of new studies. The information presented herein 
may also be used to assess current management direction 
for these forests and to fine-tune management to more 
effectively provide conditions to sustain populations of 
the native ponderosa pine avifauna well into the future. 
The information provided in this document represents 
independent contributions by biologists, ecologists, and 
social scientists that summarize and synthesize current 
knowledge about ponderosa pine songbirds, including the 
ecology and use of these forests. Because topics presented 
in these chapters were broadly overlapping, some redun- 
dancy in materials present was unavoidable. I must also 
acknowldge the valuable contribution of reviewers to 
improving this document. Peer reviews were solicited for 
&. 
each chapter, and the entire document underwent rigor- 
ous blind review from three professional societies: Ameri- 
can Ornithologists' Union, Cooper Ornithological Society, 
and The Wildlife Society. Collectively, these reviews pro- 
vided a quality check, and response to revew comments 
resulted in a quality document. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

ships, conservation biology, and the effects of land-man- 
The Authors 
agement practices on native wildlife. 
Mary Ann Benoit (chapter 1) is a zone wildlife biologist 
for the USDA Forest Service, Region 3, on the Coconino 
National Forest. She earned a B.S. in biology from North- 
ern Arizona University and a B.A. in interior design from 
Mount Vernon College. Benoit currently serves as the bi- 
ologist and GIS/database manager on the West and East 
Clear Creek Ecosystem Management Projects. Her re- 
search interests include wildlife habitat relationships in 
forested ecosystems, effects of forest management prac- 
tices on wildlife, and geographic information systems. 
William M. Block (chapters 4 and 8) is project leader and 
research wildlife biologist of the Southwestern Terrestrial 
Ecosystem research work unit in Flagstaff, Arizona, and 
leader of the Mexican Spotted Owl Recovery Team. He has 
been with the USDA Forest Service's Rocky Mountain For- 
est and Range Experiment Station since 1990. He received 
his Ph.D. from the University of California, Berkeley in wild- 
land resource sciences; his M.S. in wildlife from Humboldt 
State University; a B.A. in economics from California State 
University, San Diego; and a B.S. in wildlife from Michigan 
State University. His current research interests include, and 
he has published widely on, avian ecology, vertebrate-habi- 
tat relationships, community ecology, threatened and endan- 
gered species, and the development of conservation plans. 
Deborah M. Finch (chapters 3,6, and 8) is project leader 
and research wildlife biologist of the Southwestern Grass- 
land Watersheds research work unit and team leader of 
the Middle Rio Grande Ecosystem Program research work 
unit in Albuquerque, New Mexico. Finch has been with the 
USDA Forest Service's Rocky Mountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station since 1978. She graduated with a B.S. in 
wildlife management from Humboldt State University; an 
M.S. in zoology from Arizona State University; and a Ph.D. 
in zoology and physiology from the University of Wyoming. 
Her interests include avian reproductive ecology; bird and 
mammal habitat relationships; threatened, endangered and 
sensitive species; and technology transfer. 
Joseph L. Ganey (chapters 6 and 8) is a research wildlife 
biologist with the Terrestrial Ecosystems research work 
unit located in Flagstaff, Arizona. He has been with the 
USDA Forest Service's Rocky Mountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station since 1991. He received a B.S. in wild- 
life management from Humboldt State University; an M.S. 
in biology from Northern Arizona University; and a Ph.D. 
in zoology from Northern Arizona University. He has 
worked on ecology and habitat relationships of the Mexi- 
can spotted owl for the past 13 years. His general research 
interests include avian ecology, wildlife habitat relation- 
Brian W. Geils (chapter 1) is a research plant pathologist 
for the USDA Forest Service's Rocky Mountain Forest and 
Range Experiment Station in Flagstaff, Arizona. He has a 
B.S. in wildlife biology from Utah State University; a MS. 
in forest science from the University of Idaho; and a Ph.D. 
in botany-plant pathology from Colorado State Univer- 
sity. Geils' current work addresses the impacts of natural 
disturbance agents on western conifers. His research inter- 
ests include the ecological effects, spread, and intensifica- 
tion of dwarf mistletoe, the distribution and epidemiology 
of stem rust in pine, and development of survey methods 
and spatial models for describing interactions among dwarf 
mistletoe, stem rust, root disease, and other natural distur- 
bance agents in coniferous forests of the Rocky Mountains. 
Linnea S. Hall (chapter 4) is assistant professor of wild- 
life biology/avian ecology in the Department of Biologi- 
cal Sciences, California State University, Sacramento. Hall 
received her Ph.D. in wildlife ecology from the University 
of Arizona, where she studied the elegant trogon for her dis- 
sertation, and helped implement a monitoring program for 
neotropical migrant birds on lands administered by the For- 
est Service. Her research background includes publications 
in bird population trends and habitat use; ecology and physi- 
ology of rodents; and habitat use of amphibians and rep- 
tiles. Her current research involves studies of neotropical 
migrant birds, rodent ecology, and habitat quality. 
Rebecca T. Kimball (chapter 6) is a lecturer and research 
assistant professor in the Department of Biology at the 
University of New Mexico. She received her B.A. from 
Dartmouth College in 1985 with a degree in biology. Fol- 
lowing that, Kimball took courses at the University of 
Michigan's Biological Station and at the University of Utah. 
She completed graduate work at the University of New 
Mexico where she received her Ph.D. in biology in 1995. Her 
interests are in avian ecology and evolution, and she has 
conducted research on reproductive behavior, basic ecology, 
morphological relationships and phylogenetics of birds. 
John M. Marzluff (chapters 2 and 5) is the senior scientist 
at the Sustainable Ecosystems Institute in Meridian, Idaho. 
He has a B.S. in wildlife biology from the University of 
Montana and a M.S. and Ph.D. from Northern Arizona 
University. Marzluff has spent the last four years on the 
U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service's Hawaiian Crow Recov- 
ery Team. His research interests include the effects of sil- 
viculture on nest predators and raptors, crow and raven 
ecology, vertebrate habitat relationships, effects of urban- 
ization on bird populations, conservation of endangered 
species on island ecosystems, and captive propagation and 
reintroduction. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
iii 

Patricia Mehlhop (chapter 7) is director of the New 
Mexico Natural Heritage Program at the University of 
New Mexico and a research scientist with The Nature 
Conservancy, specializing in animal ecology. She gradu- 
ated with a B.S. and M.S. in zoology from the University 
of Maryland and with a Ph.D. in biology from the Uni- 
versity of New Mexico. Her research interests include 
animal habitat relationships, animal community ecology, 
and rare species conservation. Current research includes 
a study of habitat patch use by migrating and breeding 
birds in small montane "islands" of the Southwest and 
conservation designs at regional scales. 
William H. Moir (chapters 1 and 8) is a research ecologist 
for the USDA Forest Service's Rocky Mountain Forest and 
Range Experiment Station in Flagstaff, Arizona. Before his 
present position, Moir was a regional ecologist for Region 
3 in Albuquerque, New Mexico. Moir earned a B.S. in 
physics from Purdue University, a M.S. in biology from 
New Mexico State University, and a Ph.D. in botany and 
soils from Washington State University. His research in- 
terests include overstory/understory relationships, habi- 
tat types, succession, and fire ecology. 
Michael L. Morrison (chapter 4) is adjunct professor of 
wildlife biology in the Department of Biological Sciences, 
California State University, Sacramento, and in the School 
of Renewable Natural Resources, University of Arizona, 
Tucson. He received a B.S. in zoology from Northern Ari- 
zona University; an M.S. in wildlife science from Texas 
A&M; and a Ph.D. in wildlife ecology from Oregon State 
University. He has published widely on habitat relation- 
ships of terrestrial vertebrates, including studies of bird 
foraging behavior, population trends, and the influence 
of land-use practices. He is senior author of the book Wild- 
life-Habitat Relationships: Concepts and Applications (with B. 
G. Marcot and R. W. Mannan), published by the Univer- 
sity of Wisconsin Press (1992), and has edited or co-ed- 
ited several other works on foraging ecology and habitat 
relationships. He is currently working with various pub- 
lic and private organizations on environmental impact 
assessment, studies of sensitive species, and development 
of habitat restoration plans. 
Carol Raish (chapter 2) is a research social scientist with 
the USDA Forest Service's Rocky Mountain Forest and 
Range Experiment Station in Albuquerque, New Mexico. 
She received a B.A. degree in Spanish from Washburn 
University; an M.A. in anthropology from the University 
of Nebraska; and a Ph.D. in archeology from the Univer- 
sity of New Mexico. Her current research interests focus 
on intercultural conflict and reassertion of cultural iden- 
tity among indigenous and traditional groups and on the 
economic, social, and cultural contributions of traditional 
stockraising operations. Prior to joining the Rocky Moun- 
tain Station in 1995, Carol served as Heritage Resource Staff 
on the Jemez Ranger District, Santa Fe National Forest. 
Kevin M. Rich (chapter 7) is a research assistant at the 
New Mexico Natural Heritage Program, where he is work- 
ing with staff from the Arizona Game and Fish Depart- 
ment, the Navajo Natural Heritage Program, and The 
Nature Conservancy to develop a conservation strategy 
for the Arizona-New Mexico Mountains Ecoregion. He 
also is atPh.D. candidate at the University of New Mexico 
studying conservation biology and ecosystem management 
with Dr. James H. Brown. He received a B.S. in biology with 
distinction from Stanford University and has worked as a 
Museum Technician at the Smithsonian Institution's National 
Museum of Natural History and as a Senior Conservation 
Systems Specialist at The Nature Conservancy. 
Rex Sallabanks (chapter 6) is senior research biologist with 
the Sustainable Ecosystems Institute (SEI) in Meridian, Idaho. 
Rex has been with the Institute for three years. He gradu- 
ated from the University of Plymouth in the United King- 
dom in 1987 with a B.S. in ecology and conservation biology 
and a Ph.D. from the University of Oregon in 1992. Prior to 
his position with SEI, Rex was a postdoctoral research asso- 
ciate at the North Carolina State University where he stud- 
ied the effects of fragmentation of bottomland hardwood 
forests on breeding songbird communities. His current re- 
search projects focus on the effects of forest management, 
fragmentation, and wildfire on bird communities in the in- 
land Pacific Northwest. Rex is the co-editor (with John 
Marzluff) of the forthcoming book, Avian Conservation: Re- 
search and kbIfZgemenf, to be published by Island Press. 
Dan Scurlock (chapters 1 and 3) is a consulting environ- 
mental historian and naturalist. He has worked for uni- 
versities, public schools, government agencies, private 
organizations, and businesses as a researcher, instructor, 
planner, writer, photographer, and trip leader for 30 years 
in the American Southwest, Mexico, and Canada. His more 
than 70 academic and popular publications in history, ar- 
chaeology, architectural history, and natural history range 
from articles to book-length reports. He holds an A.B.S. 
in science and B.A. and M.A. degrees in anthropology. 
Wang Yong (chapters 2 and 6) is a forest and wildlife re- 
search associate at the University of Rhode Island. He 
worked as a post-doctoral visiting wildlife biologist from 
1994 to 1996 at the USDA Forest Service's Rocky Moun- 
tain Forest and Range Experiment Station in Albuquer- 
que, New Mexico. He graduated with a B.S. in biology 
from Shanghai Normal university and a Ph.D. in biology 
from the University of Southern Mississippi. His research 
interests include wildlife conservation, animal physiologi- 
cal ecology, avian migration, wildlife population dynam- 
ics, and research design and statistics. 
* 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Deborah M. Finch and William M. Block 
This book reviews and synthesizes the diverse litera- 
ture about ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest, em- 
phasizing the biology and ecology of songbirds in rela- 
tion to habitat changes resulting from natural events such 
as succession and fire, and management activities such as 
logging, grazing, and recreation. This product is one of 
the outcomes of a 1996 court-ordered settlement agree- 
ment pertaining to protection of the Mexican spotted owl 
(Strix occidentalis lucida) that included a section requiring 
a report on the habitat requirements of and threats to song- 
birds inhabiting Southwestern ponderosa pine. This book 
fulfills those objectives by emphasizing critical habitat is- 
sues and identifying bird species that may be sensitive to 
changes in availability of habitat types, structures, sera1 
stages, and special features such as snags, aspen and oak, 
and old trees. 
To write the chapters, we assembled a team of experts 
from a cross-section of disciplines representing forestry, 
plant ecology, avian biology and ecology, endangered spe- 
cies conservation, environmental history, and social sci- 
ences. Biographical sketches of authors are included at 
the beginning of the book. Authors were instructed to ad- 
dress all passerines as well as doves, hummingbirds, and 
woodpeckers; that is, birds with sizes and behavioral re- 
sponses to habitats and spatial scales that were deemed rel- 
atively similar to passerines. A comprehensive list of com- 
mon and scientific names of birds known to occupy 
Southwestern ponderosa pine forests is in Appendix A. 
Blind reviews for the entire book were obtained from 
three professional societies: The Wildlife Society, the 
American Ornithologists' Union, and the Cooper Orni- 
thological Society. Blind reviews were sought to strengthen 
manuscripts and establish the book's authority. 
The book starts with a chapter that summarizes the state 
of knowledge of the geography, ecology and diversity of 
Southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Chapter 1 highlights 
the complexity and range of variation of contemporary 
Southwestern forests and sets the stage for more special- 
ized chapters. Current human uses of Southwestern pon- 
derosa pine forests are described in Chapter 2. An under- 
standing of how current forests are managed and how 
such management may alter environmental conditions is 
important to identify the principal causes of changes in 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
songbird habitats and songbird populations. Chapter 3, 
an environmental history of Southwestern ponderosa 
pine, establishes reference conditions and an understand- 
ing: of past human activities that may have influenced 
what we think and see today. This chapter also includes a 
discussion of prehistoric and historic human uses of birds, 
avian archaelogical findings, and avifaunal accounts and 
checklists by early ornithologists. Such information is a 
useful reminder of how our knowledge of Southwestern 
ponderosa pine and its avifauna has evolved. 
Chapter 4 launches the ornithological expedition to the 
heart of the book by summarizing the general biology and 
habitat use of songbirds found in Southwestern ponde- 
rosa pine forests. This chapter clarifies the basic patterns 
of habitat use by different species and groups of birds and 
identifies habitat elements of high management priority. 
Chapter 5 is a thought-provoking review and analysis of 
the effects of urbanization and recreation on birds of pon- 
derosa pine. This chapter is an example of the emerging 
body of literature that seeks to evaluate direct and indi- 
rect impacts of human population growth on wildlife. The 
subject of land management effects on songbirds, with a 
focus on fire, logging, and grazing, is tackled in Chapter 
6. Because different kinds of land management are fre- 
quently practiced simultaneously, their interactions and 
effects are difficult to interpret. However, the authors rise 
to the occasion with an exhaustive discussion and inter- 
pretation of issues. Chapter 7 is a landscape overview of 
issues identified in previous chapters and ends with a plea 
for more studies at the landscape level. The book ends 
with a summary of key issues and a call for more research, 
especially research of an experimental nature. 
In conclusion, the editors and authors of this book have 
compiled a comprehensive review of the literature on the 
topic of Southwestern ponderosa pine forests and its song- 
bird inhabitants. We hope that this publication will be a 
useful source of information for natural resource manag- 
ers, scientists, and environmentalists and will supply the 
basis for new standards in research and management. In 
addition, we hope that this review will help to solve some 
of the controversies pertaining to management of forests 
and birds in the Southwest. 

Acknowledgments 
We thank the Publications Office of the Rocky Moun- 
tain Forest and Range Experiment Station, especially 
Madelyn Dillon and Lane Eskew, for their patience in han- 
dling the time-sensitive editorial work on this book. We 
thank Bob Dana for conducting electronic literature 
searches for various chapters and Mike Means and Brenda 
Strohmeyer for tracking down references. We are grateful 
to Nora Altamirano for formatting the manuscripts ac- 
cording to Station guidelines. The Southwestern Region 
(Region 3) of the USDA Forest Service supplied financial 
support for the writing and publication of this product. 
We thank all authors for their contributions and patience, 
and finally we thank Denver Burns, Station Director, for 
suggesting that we coordinate this project. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 1 
Ecology of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests 
William H. Moir, Brian Geils, Mary Ann Benoit, and Dan Scurlock 
What Is Ponderosa Pine Forest 
and Why Is It Important? 
Forests dominated by ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa 
var. scopulorurn) are a major forest type of western North 
America (figure 1; Steele 1988; Daubenmire 1978; Oliver 
and Ryker 1990). In this publication, a ponderosa pine 
forest has an overstory, regardless of successional stage, 
dominated by ponderosa pine. This definition corresponds 
to the interior ponderosa pine cover type of the Society of 
American Foresters (Eyre 1980). At lower elevations in the 
mountainous West, ponderosa pine forests are generally 
bordered by grasslands, pinyon-juniper woodlands, or 
chaparral (shrublands). The ecotone may be wide or nar- 
row, and a ponderosa pine forest is recognized when the 
overstory contains at least 5 percent ponderosa pine (USFS 
1986). At upper elevations ponderosa pine forests usually 
adjoin or grade into mixed conifer forests. A mixed coni- 
fer stand where ponderosa pine has more overstory 
canopy than any other tree species or there is a plurality 
of tree stocking, is an interior ponderosa pine forest (Eyre 
1980). 
Two distinct ponderosa pine forests occur in the South- 
west. The xerophytic (drier) forests have ponderosa pine 
as a climax tree (reproducing successfully in mid- to late 
succession) and comprise the ponderosa pine life zone 
(transition or lower montane forest) (USFS 1991; Dick- 
Peddie 1993). The mesophytic (wetter) forests have pon- 
derosa pine as a sera1 tree (regeneration occurs only in 
early- to mid-succession although older trees may persist 
into late succession) and are part of the mixed conifer life 
zone or upper montane forest (USFS 1991; Dick-Peddie 
1993). 
Ponderosa pine forests are important because of their 
wide distribution (figure I), commercial value, and be- 
cause they provide habitat for many plants and animals. 
Ponderosa pine forests are noted for their variety of pas- 
serine birds resulting from variation in forest composi- 
tion and structure modified by past and present human 
use. Subsequent chapters discuss how ponderosa pine 
forests are associated with different types and number of 
passerine birds and how humans have modified these 
forests and affected its occupancy and use by passerine 
birds. This chapter discusses the ecology and dynamics 
of ponderosa pine forests and wildlife use in general and 
describes natural and human induced changes in the com- 
position and structure of these forests. 
Paleoecology 
The oldest remains of ponderosa pine in the Western 
United States are 600,000 year old fossils found in west 
central Nevada. Examination of pack rat middens in New 
Mexico and Texas, shows that ponderosa pine was absent 
during the Wisconsin period (about 10,400 to 43,000 years 
ago), although pinyon-juniper woodlands and mixed co- 
nifer forests were extensive (Betancourt 1990). From the 
late Pleistocene epoch (24,000 years ago) to the end of the 
last ice age (about 10,400 years ago), the vegetation of the 
Colorado Plateau moved southward or northward with 
glacial advance or retreat. Regional temperatures over the 
Southwest during the glacial advances may have been 6 "C 
lower and annual precipitation 220 mm higher in the low- 
lands than today. Ponderosa pine in the mountains of New 
Mexico occurred about 400 m lower than where it is found 
today (Dick-Peddie 1993; Murphy 1994). 
With the beginning of warming in the early Holocene, 
ponderosa pine began colonization of the Colorado Pla- 
teau. Pinyon-juniper woodlands shifted upward and 
northward from a low elevation of just over 450 m to 1,500 
m. Pinyon pine 
edulis) reached its present upper limit 
(about 2,100 m) between 4,000 and 6,000 years ago. The 
present distribution of ponderosa pine forests in the inte- 
rior West and Southwest was apparently the result of this 
rapid Holocene expansion, but the exact cause and man- 
ner of this expansion is unknown (Anderson 1989; 
Betancourt 1987). 
Climate and Soils 
Climates in ponderosa pine forests are similar through- 
out the interior Western United States. For example, a com- 
parison of climates at Spokane, Washington and Flagstaff, 
Arizona where ponderosa pine forests occur with a grassy 
understory, shows that levels of mean annual precipita- 
tion (MAP) at Spokane is 41 cm and at Flagstaff is 57 cm. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Figure 1. Distribution of ponderosa pine in North America. Arizona and New Mexico comprise the Southwest area 
discussed in this chapter (Little 1971). 
4 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Ecology of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests 
Both locations have a pronounced dry season during sev- 
eral warm months when precipitation is insufficient to 
maintain plant growth. This drought is in July and Au- 
gust at Spokane and May and June at Flagstaff. 
Climates of Arizona and New Mexico are described in 
the General Ecosystem Survey (USFS 1991; table 1). Pon- 
derosa pine forests mostly occur within the High Sun Cold 
(HSC) and High Sun Mild (HSM) climate zones (table 1). 
Mean annual air temperatures (MAAT) for xerophytic and 
mesophytic forests are 9 "C and 6 "C in the HSM zone, 
and 5 to 7 "C and 4 "C the HSC zone, respectively (table 1). 
For these climate zones, mean annual precipitation (MAP) 
is 520 to 560 mm and 660 mm, respectively (table 1). The 
climate (figure 2a) for xerophytic forests of ponderosa 
pine/Arizona fescue (PIPO/FEAR) is near the mid-range 
of MAAT and MAP at Flagstaff (FLA), Pinetop (PIN), and 
Ruidoso (RUI). In contrast, ponderosa pine/blue grama 
(PIPO/BOGR) forests at Los Alarnos (LOS) are near the lower 
limit of MAP, and forests of ponderosa pine/silverleaf oak 
(PIPO/QUHY) at Mt. Lernmon (MTL) are near the upper 
limit of MAP. Ponderosa pine/Arizona white oak (PIPO/ 
QUAR) forests at Payson (PAY) have the warmest MAAT 
and ponderosa pine/mountain muhly (PIPO/MUMO) for- 
ests around Jacob Lake (JAC) have the coldest MAAT. 
The soil moisture regime (SMR) of xerophytic Forests is 
ustic (dry) (USFS 1991). At the stations examined (figures 
2b-f), seasonal drought is most severe in May and June 
and understory vegetation, mostly grasses, becomes dry 
and flammable. Relationships between fire and climate 
in the Southwest have been studied by Swetnam and col- 
leagues (Swetnam 1990; Swetnam and Baisan 1996; 
Swetnam and Betancourt 1990). The SMR of mesophytic 
forests is udic (wet) (USFS 1991); in these forests there is 
no drought in upper soil horizons during the average 
growing season. Therefore, at higher elevations where 
ponderosa pine is a seral tree of mixed conifer forests, the 
growing season precipitation is usually sufficient to main- 
tain plant growth. 
The soil temperature regime (STR) of ponderosa pine 
forests in Arizona and New Mexico is generally frigid; in 
the southern portions of these states at lower elevations it 
is mesic (USFS 1991). This shift to warmer soils, coinci- 
dent with May through June droughts, is indicated by an 
understory vegetation of broadleafed, evergreen species 
such as Emory, gray, wavyleaf and silverleaf oaks (Quercus 
emoryi, Q, grisea, Q. undulata, Q. hypoleucoides), manzanita 
(Arctostaphylos pungens), madrones (Arbutus xalapensis, A. 
arizonica), yuccas (Yucca spp.), and other shrubs and trees 
(table 1). Although Arizona pine (Pinus arizonica) replaces 
P. pdnderosa on some mesic soils in southeastern Arizona, 
forest dynamics and structure are similar. 
The distinction between xerophytic and mesophytic 
zones is essential to understand plant succession in pon- 
derosa pine forests in the Southwest. Beschta (1976) de- 
scribed the climate of a single ponderosa pine type in cen- 
tral Arizona without differentiating the ustic zone, where 
the pine is climax, from the udic zone, where it is seral. 
Similarly, both zones were combined in early forest in- 
ventories in Arizona and New Mexico (Eyre 1980; choate 
1966; Spencer 1966) and showed considerably more pon- 
derosa pine cover type than there is today (Johnson 1994). 
Winter snow storms do occur in Southwestern ponde- 
rosa pine forests. In central Arizona annual snowfall 
ranges from 130 to 250 mm for the ponderosa pine zone 
to about 250 to 320 mm in the mixed conifer zone (Beschta 
1976). South of the Mogollon Rim, the average annual 
snowfall is estimated at 90 to 165 mm, but reliable snow 
measurements are unavailable. 
Vegetation 
Xerophytic Forests 
In the lower montane zone at elevations 2,150 to 2,600 
m (elevations vary according to latitude and local condi- 
tions), there are 37 ponderosa pine forest types based on 
associated understory vegetation (Dick-Peddie 1993; Moir 
Table 1. Summary of climates of Southwestern ponderosa pine forests (USFS 1991). 
MAAT("C) 
MAP (mm) 
Six-month season with 
Winter 
Climate 
Vegetation 
more than 112 annual precip. 
temp. 
category 
indicators 
XERO 
MESO 
XERO 
MESO 
High sun (HS) Apr 1 to Sep 30 
Mild (M) 
HSM 
QUGR, QUEM 
9 
6 
600 
700 
High sun (HS) Apr 1 to Sep 30 
Cold (C) 
HSC 
PIED, QUGA 
5-7 
4 
520-560 
660 
Low sun (LS) Oct 1 to Mar 30 
Mild (M) 
LSM 
PICA, QUUN 
9 
7 
600 
700 
Low sun (LS) Oct 1 to Mar 30 
Cold (C) 
LSC 
ARTR 
5-7 
4 
480-560 
660 
ARTR = Artemisia tridentata 
PICA = Pinus californiarum 
MAAT = mean annual air temp 
PIED = Pinus edulis 
QUGA = Quercus gambelii 
MAP = mean annual precipation 
QUGR = Quercus grisea 
QUUN = Quercus undulata 
XERO = xerophytic forests 
QUEM = Quercus emoryi 
MESO = mesophytc forest 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 1 
Xerophytic ponderosa pine climate 
Precipitation/temperature summary 
Payson (PAY) 1498 m 
Mean Temp 
Mean Pncip 
Total precip = 553 mm 
Avg temp = 13.1 C 
9 
w 
P 
i FLA 
/ 
PIP0,&0 
! 
I 
i 
JAC 
8 
I 
Avg annual preclpltatlon (mm) (MAP) 
600 - 
120 
E 
E - 
Total precip = 678 mm 
P 
6 
400 
P 
80 
c t 
B . - 
d - 
200% 
40 
e 
a 
2 
0 
0 
12 
Month 
Month 
c) 
/ Flagstaff (FLA) 2135 m 
Avg temp = 6.8 C 
1 
12 
Total precip = 564 mm 
Avg temp - 7.7 C 
i, 
OC 
I 
,A 
Month 
e) 
Month 
f) 
Figure 2. Climate summaries for xerophytic ponderosa pine in North America. PIPO, ponderosa pine; QUAR, Arizona white oak; 
BOGR, blue grama; FEAR, Arizona fescue; QUHL: silverleaf oak; MUMO, mountain muhly; PAL: Payson; LOS, Los Alamos; 
RUI, Ruidoso; PIN, Pinetop; MTL, Mt. Lemmon; FLA, Flagstaff; JAC, Jacob Lake. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Ecology of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests 
and Fletcher 1996; USFS 1986,1987a, 198%). These types 
can be combined into 3 major groups, based on similari- 
ties in structure, composition, and fire response. 
The fringe pine forest types are at dry, warm, lower el- 
evations where ponderosa pine occurs with woody spe- 
cies that are common in the adjoining pinyon/juniper and 
pinyon/oak/juniper woodlands. Depending on geo- 
graphic location, typical associated species are P. edulis, P. 
discolor, P. californiarurn, Juniperus spp., Quercus grisea, Q. 
arizonica, Q. emoryi, Arctostaphylos pungens, Artemisia 
tridentata, and Chrysothamnus nauseosus. Associated trees 
form a mid-level canopy layer below the ponderosa pine 
overstory (Marshall 1957). These additional species pro- 
vide resources for a wide variety of animals; discussed in 
the wildlife section of this chapter. Blue grama (Bouteloua 
gracilis) is a diagnostic species, and ponderosa pine/blue 
grama has widespread forest association throughout the 
Southwest (USFS 1986). 
Where precipitation is greater than about 480 mm, blue 
grama is absent or minor and ponderosa pine occurs with 
understory bunchgrass species, mainly Festuca arizonica, 
Muhlenbergia montana, and/or M. virescens. There may be 
a mid-level canopy of shrubs, copses of oaks, or even an 
occasional oak tree (Kruse 1992), but these are minor veg- 
etation components. Fires, either lightning- or human- 
caused, are frequent in these dry forests. Southwestern 
pine forests can be grouped with ponderosa pine forests 
in other areas of in the Western United States that share a 
similar fire ecology. Southwestern ponderosa pine/bunch- 
grass forests are similar to warm, dry forests in Idaho, 
Montana, and Utah (Davis et al. 1980; Crane and Fischer 
1986; Fischer and Bradley 1987; Bradley et al. 1992). Nu- 
merous descriptions of presettlement forests in the South- 
west (Woolsey 1911; reviews Cooper 1960; Covington and 
Moore 1994; Moir and Dieterich 1988) apply to this group 
of forests. 
The third group of xerophytic ponderosa pine forests 
are those with understories dominated by shrubs and mid- 
level trees. Bunchgrasses may still be abundant, especially 
as patches in open areas. Common woody associates in- 
clude Quercus gambelii, Q. undulata, Robinia neomexicana, 
Cercocarpus montana, and Symphoricarpos oreophilus. These 
forests are similar in structure and fire responses to the 
warm, moist ponderosa forests of central Idaho and Utah 
(Crane and Fischer 1986; Bradley et al. 1992). 
Mesophytic Forests 
In mesophytic forests at elevations 2,400 to 3,000 m (el- 
evations vary according to latitude and local conditions), 
ponderosa pine is a major sera1 tree in 11 forest associa- 
tions (USFS 1986, 1987a). These forests are identified by 
increasing importance of Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas- 
fir), Abies concolor (white fir), Picea pungens (blue spruce), 
and Pinus strobiformis (Southwestern white pine) as cli- 
max trees (Dick-Peddie 1993; USFS 1986,1987a, 198%; fig- 
ure 3). Thousands of hectares of ponderosa pine-domi- 
nated mixed conifer forest existed in the Southwest in the 
early- to mid-20th century and were inventoried as part 
of the ponderosa pine cover type (johnson 1993,1994; Eyre 
1980). Ponderosa pine and the other conifers were often 
associated with aspen (Populus tremuloides), which occurs 
where previous fires favored its regeneration (Jones 1974; 
Abolt et al. 1995). Without recurring fires, however, coni- 
fers !eventually replace aspen (Moir and Ludwig 1979; 
Dick-Peddie 1993). The aspen and coniferous mesophytic 
forests of the Southwest have structures and fire responses 
similar to those of mesic forests in the central and north- 
em Rocky Mountains (Crane and Fischer 1986; Fischer and 
Bradley 1987, Bradley et al. 1992). 
A number of mesophytic forest types in the Southwest 
include a bunchgrass understory of Festuca arizonica, 
Muhlenbergia montana, and/or M. virescens. In these types, 
ponderosa pine, Douglas-fir, and sometimes Southwest- 
ern white pine are the most important trees. The occa- 
sional white fir or blue spruce in these forests are evidence 
of the udic soil depicted in figure 3. Counterparts in west- 
em Montana and central Idaho are the warm, dry Dou- 
glas-fir forest types (Fischer and Bradley 1987; Crane and 
Fischer 1986). 
Ponderosa pine and other conifers also occur with an 
understory of shrubs or mid-level trees such as Quercus 
gambelii, Robinia neomexicana, Symphoricarpos oreophila, 
Holodiscus dumosus, or Salix scouleriana (for more complete 
lists of associated species see Moir and Ludwig 1979). 
Rather than bunchgrasses, the herbaceous layer is com- 
posed of mesic species such as Bromus richardsonii, Arte- 
misia fianserioides, Osmorhiza chilensis, Geranium richard- 
sonii, and Viola canadensis. Similar forests of moist 
Douglas-fir occur in Idaho (Crane and Fischer 1986), west- 
em Montana (Fischer and Clayton 1983), and Utah (Fischer 
and Bradley 1987; Bradley et al. 1992). 
Finally, there are mixed conifer forests in the Southwest 
where ponderosa pine is minor or absent. These are the 
cold coniferous forests (Dick-Peddie 1993; USFS 1986, 
1987a, 198%) where stand-replacing fires favor regenera- 
tion to aspen or tall shrubs such as Acer glabrum, Salix 
scouleriana, or Holodiscus dumosus. The coniferous species 
of these forests are Douglas-fir, white fir, blue spruce, 
Southwestern white pine, and sometimes bristlecone pine 
(Pinus aristata). 
Fire 
In the last decade forest fires have increased in Arizona 
and New Mexico (figure 4). Fire, the most important natu- 
ral abiotic disturbance in ponderosa pine forests (Moir and 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 1 
Dry (ustic) soil 
Wet (udic) soil 
4 - 
Dry (ustic) soil 
Wet (udic) soil 
Fir and spruce 
Pine 
Figure 3. Generalized climate-differentiated ponderosa pine forests in Arizona and New Mexico. Diagram a) depicts the open, grassy 
pine forests described around the turn of the century (1890 to 1925). The open forest has a grassy understory, sparse 
ponderosa pine regeneration in the dry end, and, as precipitation increases, poor regeneration of ponderosa pine, Douglas- 
fir, blue spruce, or white fir. Diagram b) illustrates the same forest under average conditions in the 1990s (Johnson 1993, 
1994). Diagram c) depicts the same forest 10 to 15 years after a fire holocaust. Natural or managed reforestation is occurring, 
although understory grasses may not be the same composition or density as that in diagram a) (Foxx 1996). Artwork by 
Joyce Patterson. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Ecology of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests 
Dieterich 1988; Moody et al. 1992; Covington and Moore 
1994), determines plant composition, succession, and for- 
est structure. Fire ecology, especially since the 1930s and 
in the xerophytic ponderosa pine/bunchgrass forests, is 
well studied (Weaver 1943 and 1967; Biswell 1972; Coo- 
per 1960; Ahlgren and Ahlgren 1960; Biswell et al. 1973; 
Habeck and Mutch 1973; Wright 1978; Moir and Dieterich 
1988; Morgan 1994; Pyne 1996; Allen 1996). Forest succes- 
sion under different fire regimes is generalized in the pa- 
pers cited above and should be considered as hypotheses. 
Although they present sequences of species replacement 
and stand structure, these models generally do not specify 
the time between stages. 
Frequent, low-intensity fires were part of the ecology 
and evolutionary history of ponderosa pine forests. Crown 
fires seldom occurred or were confined to small thickets 
(Woolsey 1911; Pyne 1996). Fires in the xerophytic pine 
forests occurred every 2 to 12 years and maintained an 
open canopy structure and a variable, patchy tree distri- 
bution (White 1985; Cooper 1961; Covington and Moore 
1994; figure 3). The open, patchy tree distribution from 
fires and other disturbances, such as bark beetles and 
mistletoe, reduced the risk of fire holocausts. Downed 
woody material was sparse, and fires before about 1890 
were fueled mostly by herbaceous material that accumu- 
lated at the end of the annual drought period. These low- 
intensity, surface fires reduced ground fuel, thinned 
smaller trees, and invigorated the understory maintain- 
ing the open forest structure (Ahlgren and Ahlgren 1960; 
Ffolliott et al. 1977). 
Understory burns occurring over millennia helped for- 
est vegetation adapt to fire (Habeck and Mutch 1973; Rap- 
port and Yazvenko 1996). For example, the thick, corky 
bark of mature (15 to 20 cm diameter at breast height [dbh]) 
ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir insulates the cambium 
Year 
A 
20- a!... -- 
- 
.. - 
A'? 
A 
,Au 
-40 
: 
4 
k
A
 
* A  
Figure 4. Forest fires in Arizona and New Mexico, 191 0-1 995 
(US. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Southwest Region). 
A 
lo------ 
AdA C 
01 
from killing temperatures. Another adaptation to fire, as 
well as drought, is the longevity of seed trees. Successful 
tree reproduction occurs only when heavy seed crops and 
germination coincide with moist springs and summers 
and a long fire-free period (Pearson 1950). Because these 
factors only occasionally occur simultaneously, tree repro- 
duction is episodic. Decades may pass before conditions 
for reproduction and seedling survival are favorable 
(White 1985). However, ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir 
areilong-lived (4 to 5 centuries) and over that time nu- 
merous opportunities for reproduction and establishment 
exist (Pearson 1950). Although ponderosa pine and Dou- 
glas-fir have high genetic diversity over broad areas, hu- 
man impacts, primarily by harvest and fire suppression, 
may have modified their fitness for future environments 
and human uses (Ledig 1992). 
Many other plants of ponderosa pine forests are either 
fire resistant or fire dependent. For example, since most 
fires begin near the end of a warm season drought, un- 
derstory species whose seeds have long dormancy and 
whose germination is stimulated by high soil tempera- 
tures (Arctostaphylos pungens and Ceanothus fendleri ), are 
unaffected or benefitted by fire. Another fire adaptation 
is rapid sprouting after fire. Examples include oaks 
(Quercus spp.), alligator juniper (Juniperus deppeana), as- 
pen, maples (Acer spp.), Scouler willow (Salix scouleriana), 
and serviceberry (Amelanchier alnifolia). 
The length of fire-free intervals is an important attribute 
of an area's fire regime. Long fire-free periods allow trees 
to grow adequately thick bark to protect the cambial cells 
of the lower stem and root crown from the lethal tem- 
peratures of the next surface fire. But during a long inter- 
val between fires, woody fuels and mistletoe brooms 
(dense, woody structures that develop in tree crowns para- 
sitized by dwarf mistletoe) accumulate, increasing the 
probability that the crown will be scorched and/or the 
roots killed (Harrington and Sackett 1992). To prevent 
destructive, high-intensity fires, tree thinning and manual 
fuel removal (especially around the base of large trees) is 
performed as part of fuel-reduction burn prescriptions 
(Kurmes 1989; Brown et al. 1994; Covington and Moore 
1992; Harrington and Sackett 1992). 
Much current research is dedicated to estimating fire 
frequencies in the xerophytic and mesophytic ponderosa 
pine forests of the Southwest (Swetnam and Baisan 1996). 
Working in a ponderosa pine/Arizona white oak stand 
surrounded by chaparral in Arizona, Dieterich and 
Hibbert (1990) reported that low-intensity, surface fires 
occurred somewhere within the 87 hectare (ha) study site 
in 67 of the years between 1770 and 1870. In similar open 
pine forests of the Rincon Mountains, Baisan and Swetnam 
(1990) reported a mean fire interval (MFI) of 7 years in the 
century before 1890; these were low-intensity, surface fires. 
In the earliest study of a mixed conifer forest containing 
ponderosa pine, Dieterich (1983) reported a 22-year MFI 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
1910 
1930 
1950 
1970 
1990 1995 
' " 
~ ~ - &  
rO 
A 
k; 
A 
& 

Chapter 1 
(combining fires in several forest communities) in the 
Thomas Creek drainages in Arizona before 1890. The lack 
of fire since then allowed shade tolerant trees, such as 
white fir and Engelmann spruce, to establish and increase 
overall tree density in the study area. 
There is evidence that ponderosa pine forests with 
grassy understories in the xerophytic or mesophytic zones 
have similar fire regimes. Unpublished data from the Sac- 
ramento and White Mountains, New Mexico (Huckaby 
and Brown 1996) reveal high fire frequencies in Douglas- 
fir and white fir forests where grasses were a major com- 
ponent of the forest understory. Between 1712 and 1876, a 
Douglas-fir climax site on James Ridge had 25 fires (MFI 
= 7 years). Between 1790 and 1890, the MFI was 4.5 years 
for a white fir climax site (white fir/Arizona fescue asso- 
ciation) on Buck Mountain. Fires at each of these sites were 
low-intensity, surface fires that maintained an open for- 
est structure. High fire frequencies (low MFIs) were also 
found in a wide variety of other ponderosa pine and mixed 
conifer forest types, with or without present-day grassy 
understories. 
Data indicating frequent ground fires before the 20th 
century have been collected for the Pinaleno Mountains, 
Arizona (Grissino-Meyer et al. 1995), the Jemez Moun- 
tains, New Mexico (Allen et a1 1995; Touchan et al. 1996), 
the Mogollon Mountains, New Mexico (Abolt et al. 1995), 
and the Sandia and Manzano Mountains, New Mexico 
(Baisan and Swetnam 1995b). In all cases, the MFI before 
1890 was 12 years or less. Savage and Swetnam (1990), 
Abolt et al. (1995), and Touchan et al. (1995) suggest that 
continuity of understory fuels, especially the grass layer, 
maintained high frequencies of low-intensity, surface fires 
along the entire gradient from woodlands to the spruce- 
fir forests. This hypothesis is supported by evidence that 
forests with grassy understories were once extensive and 
continuous over a large elevational range. Descriptions 
of forests around the turn of the century noted open, large 
areas not confined to xerophytic pine forests. Most ecolo- 
gists agree that hot, crown fires were not extensive in these 
open ponderosa pine forests, although small thickets 
would have been destroyed by spot crown fires. Because 
fires have been suppressed in the last 100 years, much of 
the area classified as ponderosa pine cover type was pre- 
viously within the mesophytic mixed conifer climate 
(Beschta 1976; Johnson 1994; Covington and Moore 1994). 
Other Natural Disturbances 
Although only a few species of forest insects and patho- 
gens described are the principal natural agents of change 
in Southwestern ponderosa pine forests, they interact with 
each other and with other abiotic factors to generate for- 
ests with varying species composition and landscape pat- 
terns (Lundquist 1995a). Some of these organisms have 
coevolved with host trees, while others, such as white pine 
blister rust, were recently introduced (Wilson and Tkacz 
1996). Each insect or pathogen attacks only certain host 
species and parts (foliage, stems, roots) and is controlled 
by various host and environmental conditions. Tree com- 
petition, drought, lightning strike, wind damage, site con- 
ditions, and fire can stress a tree and increase its vulner- 
ability to &pportunistic insects and fungi. The initial attack 
can lead to invasion by other insects and pathogens, tree 
death, and deterioration. Many insect and pathogen spe- 
cies do not require the host tree to be stressed before at- 
tack, instead they proceed rapidly as host resistance is 
overcome (Franklin et al. 1987). Injury from biotic agents 
can also increase damage from abiotic factors. For ex- 
ample, decay increases the likelihood of stem failure, and 
mistletoe brooms provide fuel continuity from the ground 
to the crown. 
In addition to fire, important abiotic factors affecting 
ponderosa pine in the Southwest are drought, lightning, 
winter drying, and hail (Rogers and Hessburg 1985). 
Droughts several years long occur periodically across the 
region and are frequently severe. Pine mortality is usu- 
ally associated with secondary bark beetles at the end of 
the drought (Lightle 1967). Lightning is a common cause 
of mortality for large ponderosa pine, especially in cer- 
tain geographic areas with high lightning frequency such 
as the Mogollon Rim, Arizona (Pearson 1950). Winter dry- 
ing is the result of foliage desiccation when soil and roots 
are frozen (Schmid et al. 1991). The affect on ponderosa 
pine can be devestating but most trees recover, as in 1985 
in northern New Mexico (Owen 1986). Violent summer 
thunderstorms can produce severe hail, stripping trees of 
much of their foliage. Such a storm occurred on the 
Mescalero Apache Indian Reservation in the 1950s (Shaw 
et al. 1994). 
Insects 
Although many insect species feed on nearly every part 
of ponderosa pine (Furness and Carolin 1977)) ecologi- 
cally the most severe are the defoliators and bark beetles. 
Conifer sawflies (Diprionidae) and various moths, espe- 
cially the pandora moth (Coloradia pandora), occasionally 
reach outbreak status; however, although foliage is re- 
moved, trees usually recover. In the mesophytic ponde- 
rosa pine zone, the western spruce budworm (Choristo- 
neura occidentalis) can induce a temporary increase in 
ponderosa pine growth while depressing the growth of 
competing Douglas-fir and white fir, which are the prin- 
cipal budworm hosts (Swetnam and Lynch 1993). Pine 
bark beetles (Dendroctonus and Ips) feed on the cortex and 
cambium and introduce fungi that promote rapid tree 
death and decay. 
10 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Ecology of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests 
The roundheaded pine beetle (D. adjunctus) is the most 
common bark beetle that attacks pines in the Southwest 
(Chansler 1967; Furness and Carolin 1977). This beetle 
infests ponderosa and related pines from Colorado and 
Utah south to Guatemala (Massey et al. 1977). Outbreaks 
have occurred periodically and killed large numbers of 
pole-and sawtimber-sized ponderosa pine (trees larger 
than 23 cm dbh), especially in the White and Sacramento 
Mountains in 1950, 1960s, 1970s, and 1990s (Lucht et al. 
1974; Chansler 1967; Flake et al. 1972). Eruptions of 
roundheaded pine beetle are often accompanied by the 
western pine beetle, Mexican pine beetle, and Ips beetles, 
which establish on poor sites or in mistletoe infested ar- 
eas. Trees are attacked in groups of 3 to over 100; smaller 
trees and those in dense thickets are most likely to be at- 
tacked. Killed trees rapidly develop a brown cubical de- 
cay and break near the groundline. 
The western pine beetle (D. brevicomis) is most damag- 
ing in the far western United States and British Colum- 
bia, but its range extends into the Southwest and Mexico 
(DeMars and Roettgering 1982). This beetle usually oc- 
curs in one or a few widely scattered trees already weak- 
ened by drought, lightning, stagnation, root disease, or 
other disturbances. Although it usually creates small 
canopy gaps, the western pine beetle can cause signifi- 
cant mortality and increased fire hazard in drought and 
competition-stressed stands; an outbreak occurred near 
Flagstaff, Arizona from 1980 to 1982 (Telfer 1982). 
The mountain pine beetle (D, ponderosae) is the most ex- 
tensive bark beetle to attack ponderosa pine in western North 
America. In the Southwest, however, outbreaks have been 
restricted to the north Kaibab Plateau (Parker 1980). Like the 
roundheaded pine beetle, the mountain pine beetle can de- 
velop large populations in dense stands and then disperse 
to kill large numbers of otherwise vigorous trees. 
The Arizona five-spined engraver beetle (Ips lecontei) is 
the most common bark beetle in central and southern 
Arizona. Although this beetle usually occurs in slash and 
small, weakened trees, it has multiple generations per year 
that allow populations to build quickly (Parker 1991). 
Dwarf Mistletoe 
Southwestern dwarf mistletoe (Arceuthobiurn vaginatum 
subsp. cryptopodum) is a widely distributed parasitic plant 
that causes severe damage and mortality to its principal 
host, ponderosa pine (Hawksworth and Wiens 1995). 
Southwestern dwarf mistletoe occurs throughout the 
range of ponderosa pine in New Mexico and Arizona and 
extends into neighboring states. Other infected pines in- 
clude Arizona pine, Apache pine (Pinus engelmannii), and 
Colorado bristlecone pine (P. aristata). Region-wide, 40 
percent of the commercial pine forest is infested. Infec- 
tion is more common in some forests; 70 percent of the 
stands in the Lincoln National Forest are infested (Maffei 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
and Beatty 1988). Growth loss and mortality from this 
mistletoe in the Southwest is estimated at 150 to 200 mil- 
lion board feet per year (Walters 1978). The severity of 
growth loss for infected trees is related to disease inten- 
sity (Hawksworth 1977). Radial growth increment is re- 
duced by 9 percent, 23 percent, or 53 percent for trees 
moderately infected (class 4), heavily infected (class 5), or 
very heavily infected (class 6), respectively (Hawksworth 
1961). Survival of infected trees is also reduced; 10-year 
modality rates of 9 percent, 12 percent, and 38 percent for 
trees rated class 4, 5, and 6, respectively, have been ob- 
served (Hawksworth and Lusher 1956). Other effects of 
mistletoe infestation include reduced reproductive out- 
put (Koristan and Long 1922) and increased likelihood of 
attack and mortality from bark beetles and pandora moth. 
In mesophytic forests, selective loss of ponderosa pine 
from dwarf mistletoe can accelerate conversion to Dou- 
glas-fir or white fir. However, Douglas-fir in ponderosa 
pine stands is a principal host for the Douglas-fir dwarf 
mistletoe (Arceuthobium douglasii), which is very damag- 
ing to that species. The dense swollen and branching struc- 
tures resulting from mistletoe infection, known as witches' 
brooms, often form near the ground. Broomed trees are 
more readily killed by even a low-intensity fire, and these 
brooms provide a fuel ladder into the crown (Alexander 
and Hawksworth 1974; Harrington and Hawksworth 
1990). Mistletoe spread and intensification is greatest in 
stands with a multiple story structure. 
Although there is evidence that mistletoe abundance 
has increased in the last century (Maffei and Beatty 1988), 
it has long been an important natural disturbance (figure 
5). In addition to mistletoe shoots and associated insects 
providing wildlife forage, infections and brooms are es- 
pecially suitable for roosting and nesting birds. Dead tops 
and snags created by mistletoe also enhance wildlife habi- 
tat (Bennetts et al. 1996; Hall et al. this volume; Rich and 
Mehlhop this volume). Although mistletoe infestation can 
increase canopy and wildlife diversity (Mathiasen 1996), 
the desired amounts or tolerable levels for resource ob- 
jectives other than timber production are unknown. 
Plant Pathogens 
Root disease fungi, including Arrnillaria ostoyae and 
Heterbasidion annosum, are a major cause of tree mortality 
and growth loss in the Western United States. In the South- 
west, 446 thousand ha are seriously affected by root dis- 
eases (DeNitto 1985), which reduce growth by 10 percent 
region-wide or by 25 percent in severely damaged stands 
(Rogers and Hessburg 1985). Complexes of root disease 
with insects and pathogens were associated with 34 per- 
cent of the mortality in all stands (Wood 1983). Root dis- 
ease is more common in the mesophytic than xerophytic 
ponderosa pine zone. Armillaria is generally found in 
stands 10 to 25 years old, but in the Jemez Mountains, 

Chapter I 
New Mexico, 50 years of selective logging intensified dis- 
high canopy densities and increase patchiness. As discussed 
ease severity and lead to extensive mortality in all ages of 
in the wildlife section of this chapter, these changes to forest 
ponderosa pine (Marsden et al. 1993). Annosus root disease 
structure are important to wildlife. Many of the organisms 
also infects ponderosa pine throughout the Southwest but is 
described here contribute to gap dynamics, forest structural 
less common than other diseases. Like the mortality patches 
diversity, and wildlife use in ponderosa pine forests 
caused by dwarf mistletoe, centers of root disease reduce 
(Lundquist 1995a, 199%). 
Figure 5. Stand of ponderosa pine June 4, 1990, Tonto Basin, Arizona. The multistory structure and high incidence of dwarf mistletoe 
disturbance is evidenced by the many large brooms in lower crowns and progressive dieback of upper crowns. Giffort 
Pinchot, the photographer, noted the sparsity of understory vegetation, consisting of only a little lupine. 
12 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Ecology of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests 
The white pine blister rust caused by the fungus 
Cronartium ribicola, was discovered in the Sacramento 
Mountains of New Mexico in 1990. This fungus infects 
Southwestern white pine but has an indirect impact on 
ponderosa pine because as these tree species compete in 
mixed conifer forests, southwestern white pine is less sus- 
ceptible to insects and diseases than ponderosa pine. Rust 
mortality of Southwestern white pine could possibly de- 
crease its buffering affect on various other disturbances 
and will have a major impact as the disease progresses 
(Wilson and Tkacz 1996); at present the ecological conse- 
quences are speculation. 
Wood Decay Fungi 
Although there are many wood decay fungi (Basidi- 
omycetes) of ponderosa pine (Gilbertson 1974), a few spe- 
cies commonly cause trunk rot. Red rot (Dichomitus 
squalens) is a major stem decay fungus of live ponderosa 
pine in the Southwest (Andrews 1955). An estimated 15 
to 25 percent of the gross volume in old-growth ponde- 
rosa pine was decayed by red rot (Andrews 1955; Lightle 
and Andrews 1968). Common decay fungi that cause 
brown cubical rots of ponderosa pine include Phellinus 
pini (red ring rot), Fomitopsis oficialis, Phaeolus schweinitzii 
(more common on Douglas-fir), Veluticeps berkeleyi, and 
Lentinus lepideus (usually associated with fire scars). In 
addition to their important roles in nutrient recycling and 
organic decomposition, decay fungi provide the soft wood 
habitat in snags that is required by numerous cavity-depen- 
dent species as discussed in later chapters. 
Overstory-Understory 
Relationships 
General 
Rather than directly affecting passerine birds, land man- 
agers manipulate forest composition and structure. To 
understand why and how the environment of passerine 
birds in ponderosa pine forests is always changing, it is 
necessary to comprehend the interactions that determine 
forest composition and structure. Plant succession in pon- 
derosa pine forests is a complex of overstory-understory 
(0-U) dynamics responding to disturbances. Overstory- 
understory refers to the effects of tree canopies (overstory) 
and ground-layer plants (understory) including shrubs, 
herbaceous vegetation, cryptogams (mostly mosses and 
lichens) on the soil surface, and tree seedlings. The heights 
that species display canopies is a continuum, so there is 
no precise definition the 0 and U classes. Trees, shrubs, 
herbs, and nonvascular plants (such as mosses and lichens) 
are usually easily distinguished, and their canopy levels 
can be assigned to local condition classes. Competition 
also occurs in the soil; for example, as root competition 
for soil water or the mycorrhizal differences between her- 
baceous and coniferous vegetation (Kendrik 1992; 
Klopatek 1995). Figure 6a, a generalized model, shows 0 
and \U competing, but their affects cannot be separated 
from other abiotic and biotic factors such as prescribed or 
wild fires, forest insects and pathogens, and soil microor- 
ganisms. At any location, both climate and soil influence 
the reactions shown in figure 6b. This climate, soil, veg- 
etation influence is the basis of ecosystem classification, 
mapping, and interpretation used by the USDA Forest 
Service Southwest Region (USFS 1991). Plant succession, 
which after a fire holocaust killed virtually all of the above- 
ground vegetation, has been studied quantitatively, most 
notably after the La Mesa fire near Los Alamos, New 
Mexico (Foxx 1996) 
A large class of 0-U relationships are associated with 
tree death and falls (Denslow and Spies 1990). Canopy 
gaps operate on individual trees, especially the larger 
dominant or codominant trees. In open, low density pine 
forests before European settlement, gap processes may 
have been unimportant because recurrent fires determined 
tree and understory spatial patterns. However, in this cen- 
tury as tree densities greatly increased, new spatial pat- 
terns were created by expanding root rot pockets (Wood 
1983) and other diseases, increased abundance of dwarf 
mistletoe, insect outbreaks, and rapid filling of former 
open areas by tree regeneration (Allen 1989). Today, espe- 
cially in xerophytic forests, canopy gap processes may be 
dominant in 0-U dynamics (Lundquist 1995b, 1995~). 
In mesophytic pine forests, the death of large trees may 
be important to maintain shade intolerant trees such as 
ponderosa pine, aspen, and gambel oak. Forest pattern is 
determined by combinations of patchy, natural fires (Jones 
1974) and other gap-creating factors that stress trees and 
expose them to numerous mortality agents (Franklin et 
al. 1987; Lundquist 1995~). In both xerophytic and meso- 
phytic pine forests, silvicultural (Schubert 1974; Oliver and 
Ryker 1990) or disturbance management (Geils et al. 1995) 
are used to create or maintain gaps in the absence of fire. 
In mesophytic forests, however, small canopy gaps are 
usually filled by shade tolerant trees (Dieterich 1983; 
Ffolliott and Gottfried 1991). Small gaps do not ensure 
that shade intolerant trees, such as ponderosa pine, gambel 
oak, or aspen, or herbs, will be maintained (Moir 1966). 
Understory Influence on Trees 
Research has focused on competition between the her- 
baceous layer, particularly grasses and tree seedlings 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

  
Chapter 1 
ABIOTIC 
CLIMATE \ 
Vertebrates 
lnvertebrates 
Soil organisms 
Wood rot fungi 
Forest Succession 
(exte 
ABIOTIC 
/ 
\\ 
BIOTIC 
(external factor) 
(external factor) 
Climate 
Vertebrates 
Geology 
Invertebrates 
Fire 
Topography 
Etc. 
h / 
Forest stand 
(internal factor) 
(internal factor) 
other invatebrates 
I 
I 
Figure 6, a) Simplified, schematic representation of overstory-understory relationships and ecological associations (Verner et al. 
1992). b) A forest stand (internal factors) and the surrounding environment (external factors) that influence the nature and 
intensity of stand dynamics. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Ecology of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests 
(figure 6a). Competition can be for light (Moir 1966), nu- 
trients (Elliott and White 1987; Moir 1966), water (Larson 
and Schubert 1969; Embry 1971; Miller 1988), and combi- 
nations of these (Moir 1966). Sometimes, shrubs can lessen 
tree seedling survival or diameter growth (White 1987; 
Rejmanek and Messina 1989). In the Southwest, Festuca 
arizonica is particularly competitive because it consumes 
soil moisture during the drought season of April and May 
(Pearson 1931,1942,1950). Allelopathy (compounds pro- 
duced by one plant species that inhibit the establishment 
or growth of another species) has also been suggested as a 
means of tree control (Rietveld 1975; Stewart 1965); how- 
ever, this subject has received little recent attention. The det- 
rimental effects of understory vegetation on tree establish- 
ment can be mitigated by grazing and burrowing animals. 
Browsing, grazing, or burrowing animals create microsites 
where reduced herb or shrub competition and exposed min- 
eral seedbeds enhance pine seed germination, seedling sur- 
vival, and growth (Rummell1951; Doescher 1987). 
Fire also has direct affects on small trees and ground 
cover (figure 6a). Generally, fire stimulates the understory 
while killing tree seedlings, saplings, or entire thickets. 
Fire is the principal means of restoring cover and grass 
vigor and maintaining or invigorating shrubs (Martin 
1983; Harper and Buchanan 1983; Biswell1972; Bunting 
et al. 1985; Pearson et al. 1972; Harris and Covington 1983; 
Andariese and Covington 1986; Ffolliott et al. 1977; Moir 
1966). Fire favors understory vegetation by reducing tree 
competition for sunlight, moisture, and nutrients, accel- 
erates the nutrient cycle, and, by killing trees, changes the 
soil-water relationship usually to the benefit of ground 
vegetation. In the past, fire was often carried by extensive 
and continuous understory vegetation, resulting in small- 
tree mortality over large areas (Abolt et al. 1995). Before 
European settlement, recurrent fire was the principal agent 
maintaining the relationship between overstory trees and 
understory vegetation. When the herbaceous or herb- 
shrub vegetation became depleted by overgrazing 
(Touchan et al. 1995; Savage and Swetnam 1990), heavy 
tree seedling occurred in the Southwest and elsewhere. 
The effects of grazing are discussed in Chapters 2,3 and 
6. Fuel reduction and reduced competition between trees 
and the understory have resulted in increasing tree den- 
sities during this century (Pearson 1950; Allen 1989; Sav- 
age and Swetnam 1990; Brown et al. 1994; Touchan et al. 
1996; Moir and Fletcher 1996). 
Tree Influence on Understory 
Once past their seedling stage, continued growth of 
pines or other trees reduces cover, vigor, density, and bio- 
mass of many understory species. Particularly affected are 
species that grow best in open meadows or full sunlight 
(Ffolliott and Clary 1982). However, O-U dynamics vary 
greatly among sites and forest types, so generalized sta- 
tistical models are unsatisfactory (Mitchell and Bartling 
1991). Gap processes may be important, depending on fire 
history, gap size, and gap microclimate. Dense thickets of 
conifers in their sapling or pole stages of succession can 
extinguish understory vegetation. In livestock grazing 
allotments, the adverse influence of trees on ground veg- 
etation is well-known in ponderosa pine/bunchgrass and 
ponderosa pine/blue grama rangelands (Arnold 1950; 
Reid 1965; Clary and Ffolliott 1966; Currie 1975; Johnson 
1953; Smith 1967; Brown et al. 1974). Biswe11(1972), citing 
data from research in the Black Hills, reported declines in 
herbage biomass from 1,860 kg/ha in openings to 39 kg/ 
ha under closed ponderosa pine canopies. In northern 
Arizona pine/bunchgrass ranges, Jameson (1967), using 
negative exponential equations to fit tree basal areas to 
herbage harvest data, showed declines from 784 kg/ha in 
areas without trees to less than 56 kg/ha where pine basal 
areas exceeded 23 m2/ha. Working in ponderosa pine 
stands with a grassy understory in eastern Washington, 
Moir (1966) reported that low supplies of nitrogen and 
reduced light acted additively and interactively under 
developing pine thickets to suppress Festuca idahoensis. 
Moir found reduced inflorescence production in stressed 
grasses followed by reduced foliar cover. 
Oaks are a valuable resource used by numerous birds 
and mammals. The adverse relationships between pines 
and oaks can be severe. Neither deciduous nor evergreen 
oaks tolerate shade. They grow best in full sunlight and 
are often quickly started by hot, stand-replacing fires that 
induce sprouting. Sprouts grow rapidly, soon dominate 
burned sites, and often suppress pine regeneration and 
growth (Hanks and Dick-Peddie 1974; Harper et al. 1985). 
However, oaks are suppressed and die back once conifers 
overtop them. In open stands where oaks and junipers 
form a distinctive mid-layer canopy, such as the pine-oak 
woodlands of Marshall 1957 and ponderosa pine/gambel 
oak forests, oaks persist as mid-level trees or as groups of 
clustered stems if the density or basal area of taller, emer- 
gent pines is low. But as pine canopies close during ad- 
vanced stages of forest succession, oaks die back and are 
maintained as suckers from below-ground rootstock. 
Suckering can take place for decades until the next crown 
fire occurs (USFS 1986, 1987a, 198%). Oaks growing in 
full sunlight will coppice from basal portions of the stem 
and grow rapidly if fire or cutting kills the overstory trees. 
Both coppicing and suckering are adaptations to fire. If 
large oak trees, those greater than a specified diameter 
and taller than a specified height, are part of the desired 
landscape, then overtopping by conifers must be pre- 
vented until the desired heights and diameters of oak are 
attained. Before about 1890, recurrent surface fires helped 
maintain oak and pine codominance (Dieterich and 
Hibbert 1990; Moir 1982; Swetnam et al. 1992). Marshall 
(1963) claimed that the grassy pine-oak savannas in north- 
ern Mexico were maintained by natural fires, whereas 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 1 
comparable, densely stocked and grass deficient pine-oak 
forests in the United States were due to aggressive fire 
suppression programs. 
Plant-Animal Relationships 
Overstory-understory relationships are directly and 
indirectly linked by numerous food webs. Some of the 
more well-known relationships are mentioned in this 
chapter. Nearly all ponderosa pine forests in the South- 
west contain livestock grazing allotments (Raish et al. this 
volume; Finch et al. this volume) and many areas contain 
elk and deer. Mitchell and Freeman (1993) discuss the com- 
plex interactions of fire, deer, livestock, predators (espe- 
cially mountain lions), and understory vegetation on the 
North Kaibab Plateau, which contains extensive ponde- 
rosa pine forests (Madany and West 1983). Herbivores 
directly affect tree structures by trampling or browsing 
on tree seedlings and saplings (Cassidy 1937; Currie et al. 
1978; Eissenstat et al. 1982; Pearson 1950; Crouch 1979). 
Browsing on small trees may affect both conifers and 
deciduous trees. Aspen regeneration is a preferred food 
by domestic livestock, elk, and deer; severe browsing pre- 
vents regeneration where small aspen patches are part of 
a larger landscape (Crouch 1986). By contrast, aspen re- 
generates well in mesophytic forests after extensive stand- 
replacing fires as, for example, the Escudilla Mountain 
burn in Arizona. Browsing can also affect other impor- 
tant understory species such as gambel oak (Quercus 
gambelii), antelope bitterbrush (Purskia tridentata), junipers, 
snowberry (Sympkoricarpos spp.), and deerbrush (Ceano- 
thus fendleri) (Harper et al. 1985; Harper and Buchanan 
1983; Kruse 1992). 
Bark damage by bears, porcupines (whose principal 
food in winter includes pine phloem), antlered animals, 
and humans affects individual trees. Feeding impacts on 
selected ponderosa pines by porcupines and Abert's squir- 
rels may have substantial affect on tree genetics ( Linhart 
et al. 1989). The Abert's squirrel was described by Pearson 
(1950) as "one of the most destructive of all animals" be- 
cause of twig cutting, seed and cone herbivory, and defo- 
liation of terminal twigs of ponderosa pine. As mentioned, 
animals feeding on understory shrubs and herbs increase 
tree densities and dominance by reducing understory 
competition. Doescher (1987) and others suggested live- 
stock grazing practices that create a favorable balance 
between livestock numbers and season of grazing, forest 
or plantation pine growth, and maintenance of understory 
productivity. 
Animals have an important role through mycophagy 
(fungus eating) in forest regeneration and tree growth. 
Hypogeous fungi (fruiting below ground) are a major 
source food of small rodents, deer, and javelinas (Kotter 
and Farentinos 1984a, 1984b; Hunt and Z. Maser 1985; 
Fogel and Trappe 1978). Nitrogen fixing bacteria and ger- 
minating spores of mycorrhizal fungi in the fecal pellets 
of these animals can enhance pine seedling survival and 
growth. Given the important but complex roles of mycor- 
rhizal fungi, trees, and understory vegetation (Brundrett 
1993; Klopatek 1995; States 1985), animals that disperse 
fungal spores, including small mammals, grasshoppers, 
worms, ants, wasps, and some birds, play an indirect but 
significant role in 0-U relationships. 
As t~ee strata develop they modify the composition, 
cover, and density of understory shrubs and herbs. As the 
understory changes, so does the composition of prey spe- 
cies dependent on it. Examples are the predator-prey re- 
lationships of the Mexican spotted owl and northern gos- 
hawk during various stages of forest succession (figure 
6b). Both of these raptors are found in ponderosa pine 
forests of the Southwest. Their persistence may involve 
treatment of tree structure and density to ensure that un- 
derstory shrubs and herbs have cover characteristic~ 
needed by prey populations (Ward and Block 1995; 
Reynolds et al. 1992, 1996). The complexity of these eco- 
logical interactions (figure 6b) was described for the Cali- 
fornia spotted owl by Verner et al. in 1992 but also applies 
to the Mexican spotted owl in the Southwest. 
Hidden Diversity Organisms 
Hidden diversity organisms (soil and litter inverte- 
brates, plant pollinators, cone and seed predators, wood 
decay organisms, vertebrate parasites, mycorrhizal fungi, 
and other seldom studied organisms) are important in 
nutrient cycling and plant-water relationships in ponde- 
rosa pine forests (Castellano 1994; Mason 1995; Gilbertson 
1974; Maser and Trappe 1984; States 1985). Some of these 
organisms are related to decay processes in litter and 
coarse woody debris. However, their role in ecosystem 
dynamics of litter and coarse woody debris has changed 
from what it was before European settlement. Recurrent 
ground fires in pine forests before about 1890 kept pine- 
derived fuels to a minimum. Ponderosa pine snags may 
have persisted for a time, but downed fuels were mostly 
burned off by frequent surface fires. Early settlers de- 
scribed grassy pine savannas, not woody ground debris, 
although some old photos do show some logs (Woolsey 
1911; figure 5). Wood decay organisms and their associ- 
ated food webs were present in pre-1900 forests, but their 
abundance and their roles in fire-adapted forests is un- 
known. The stand replacing fire holocausts experienced 
in the past 10 years burned the aboveground vegetation 
and destroyed mycorrhizae in scorched soils (Klopatek 
1995; Klopatek and Klopatek 1993; Vilarino and Arines 
1991). However, plant succession after these stand replac- 
ing fires has hardly been studied (see Foxx 1996). 
There is concern that diversity in forest ecosystems is 
decreasing. Wilson (1992) discusses this situation for tropi- 
cal forests, and it is also relevant to ponderosa pine for- 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Ecology of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests 
ests. Among functions, such as in carbon and nutrient 
cycles, hidden diversity organisms possibly contribute to 
ecosystem resilience, which is the ability of ecosystems to 
recover or adjust to disturbances. Management should 
maintain hidden and other kinds of diversity of native 
organisms to restore or sustain pine ecosystems (Kauffman 
et al. 1994; Opler 1995; Maser and Trappe 1984; Reynolds 
et al. 1992; Rapport and Yazenko 1996 ). 
Wildlife 
Ponderosa forests provide habitat for birds, mammals, 
reptiles, and amphibians including threatened or endan- 
gered species, neotropical migratory birds, and game spe- 
cies. Detailed information about ponderosa pine forest 
habitat use by passerine birds is in Chapters 3 and 6. The 
following section reviews the importance and use of suc- 
cessional stages in ponderosa pine forests by vertebrates. 
Overstory Tree Influence on Wildlife 
The overstory structure and plant diversity of ponderosa 
pine forests affect their use by wildlife. Important forest fea- 
tures include age, size class, and of canopy cover trees, patch 
size of tree groups, multiple or single canopy layers, and 
presence of other vegetation such as gambel oak and juni- 
per. Review of the literature and analysis of R3HARE, which 
is a computerized wildlife relational database for Southwest- 
em forests (Patton 1995), document wildlife use patterns of 
these ponderosa pine forest structures (Benoit 1996). The fol- 
lowing descriptions of forest structural stages mention a few 
of the vertebrates associated with the stages. 
Structural Stages 
Six vegetative structural stages, VSSl to VSS6 (Thomas 
1979; Moir and Dieterich 1988), occur within ponderosa 
pine forests through timber harvest, wild or prescribed 
fires, diseases, insects, or windfall, which all affect the 
dynamics of overstory and understory of forest succes- 
sion. The VSS stages apply to forest stands during succes- 
sion or stand development; each stage is important to dif- 
ferent species of wildlife for feeding, cover, or reproduction. 
Canopy cover classes of trees (A=O to 40 percent, B=40 to 
60 percent, C=60 percent and over) within each stage also 
influence how the area is used. Cover includes thermal, 
hiding, and reproductive cover. Many habitat generalists, 
such as bear, turkey, elk, mule deer, bobcat, coyote, and 
northern goshawks, use all structural stages. 
Openings (VSS1) occur after significant disturbance, 
such as fire or timber harvest (Hoover and Wills 1984), or 
gap processes (Lundquist 1995b). Openings may be main- 
tained as meadows or parks in pine savannas where re- 
current surface fires occur and may include a snag stage 
after a stand replacing fire (Moir and Dieterich 1988). Deer 
and elk rely heavily on openings for forage (Hoover and 
Wills 1984). Openings provide primary habitat for numer- 
ous other vertebrates that use grasses for shelter or feed 
on grasses, seeds, or insects. 
Seedlings and saplings (VSS2, trees d2.7 cm dbh) pro- 
vide some hiding cover but may have little forage value 
depending on tree density (Hoover and Wills 1984). Small 
tree seedlings of low density often grow in an herbaceous 
or shrubby environment, which can provide some forage 
and cover and are used primarily by habitat generalists, 
some of the VSSl species, and shrub nesting birds. As seed- 
lings grow to saplings the tree canopies close and forage 
declines. 
Young stands (VSS3, trees 12.7 to 30.2 cm dbh) are usu- 
ally dense and clumped in unmanaged stands. Tree 
canopy cover often exceeds 70 percent. Stands have sparse 
herbaceous understory, few snags, and single-storied 
structure (Hoover and Wills 1984). Denser stands provide 
thermal cover for habitat generalists and some raptors, 
but their value for forage and hiding cover is mi;imal. 
With sparse understories there is little use by other verte- 
brates, except possibly animals feeding on fungi. 
Mid-aged stands (VSS4, trees 30.5 to 45.5 cm dbh) be- 
gin cone production, tend to be multi-storied, and pro- 
vide small snags suitable for some cavity nesters (Hoover 
and Wills 1984). Species other than generalists in this stage 
include squirrels, pygmy nuthatches, and various raptors. 
Mature stands (VSS5, trees< 45.5 cm dbh) may be single 
or multi-storied, with more litter and dead and downed 
debris in stands without fire for a long period. Mature 
stands may contain larger snags than in the VSS4 stage. 
These stands provide a good seed crop and are used for 
thermal cover by big game (Hoover and Wills 1984). Spe- 
cies found in the V S S ~  stage also use mature stands, In 
addition, mature stands have high value for feeding and/ 
or cover for flickers and some owls, hawks, eagles and 
passerine birds. 
Old growth forests (VSS6) provide single and multiple 
stories with many mature trees and dense canopies (>40 
percent) in stands not experiencing ground fires in their 
VSSl and VSS2 stages. Old, yellow-pine forests, which 
were extensive before European settlement, are open and 
relatively devoid of coarse woody debris. In ponderosa 
pine/ bunchgrass environments before about 1890 in Ari- 
zona and New Mexico, ponderosa pine required at least 
300 years beyond the herbaceous or burned snag stages 
to develop old growth characteristics (Moir and Dieterich 
1988). Today old growth stands are heavily stocked, have 
much dead and downed material and numerous large 
snags, and contain trees that are >61 cm dbh (Moir 1992). 
Without restoration, most of these decaying, old growth 
stands are at risk of fire holocaust similar to the La Mesa 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
17 

Chapter 1 
and other large burns in the last few decades (figure 4; 
Allen 1996; Moir and Dieterich 1988). Large trees and 
snags provide the best source of carities for vertebrates. 
The primary users of this stage are passerine birds (Hall 
et al. this volume; Rich and Mehlhop this volume) and 
raptors. 
Understory Tree Influence on Wildlife 
All plants contribute to the ecology of ponderosa pine 
forests and influence the number of vertebrates and in- 
vertebrates. Gambel oak (Quercus gambelii) and alligator 
juniper (Juniperus deppeana) are often associated with pon- 
derosa pine and provide additional structural diversity, 
food, thermal and hiding cover, and nest sites for numer- 
ous species. The numbers of species below are from 
R3HARE (Patton 1995) and Nagiller et al. (1991). 
Gambel oak provides a key habitat component for birds 
in pine-oak forests and offers valuable alternate cavity 
nesting sites when pine snags are limited (Rosenstock 
1996). All stages of oak, but especially large trees, are im- 
portant to wildlife (Kruse 1992). Mature trees benefit the 
most species with regard to food and nesting sites. 
Shrubby oaks result from suckering and coppicing, as dis- 
cussed above. The sprouts and trunks provide food, hid- 
ing and thermal cover for deer, elk, and numerous birds 
(Nagiller et al. 1991). Areas of brush and sprouts may pro- 
vide important fawning grounds for deer, and cover and 
foraging habitat for rabbits and rodents (Kruse 1992). 
Taller clonal oak groups provide habitat for foliage nest- 
ing birds (Szaro and Balda 1979). Foliage and buds pro- 
vide food for deer, elk, and birds (mourning dove, band- 
tailed pigeon, turkey, rufous-crowned and chipping 
sparrows, and spotted towhee). Arthropods living in the 
foliage and on twigs provide food for birds such as the 
screech owl, pygmy and white-breasted nuthatches, and 
brown creeper (Patton 1995). 
Some clonal oak and mature trees produce acorns that 
feed 21 species of mammals and 20 species of birds such 
as corvids and woodpeckers (Patton 1995). Acorns are the 
preferred food of Abert squirrels, band-tailed pigeons, 
turkeys, deer, elk, and acorn woodpeckers. Acorn crops 
may influence the numbers of these species. Large trunks 
provide hiding and thermal cover for deer, elk, rabbits, 
and birds (Nagiller et al. 1991). As the trees age and be- 
come less vigorous, acorn production drops, but hollow 
boles and limbs offer cavities sheltering 10 species of mam- 
mals and 19 species of birds such as bats, squirrels, 
racoons, owls, woodpeckers, and passerine birds (Nagiller 
et al. 1991). 
Young alligator junipers provide hiding cover for elk, 
deer, rabbits, turkey, small mammals, and birds (Nagiller 
et al. 1991). Large trees provide nesting cover for birds 
such as pinyon jays, scrub jays, and blue-gray gnatcatch- 
ers (Degraff et al. 1991); thermal cover for deer, elk, and 
small mammals (Abbott 1991); and juniper berries as food 
for several species of birds and small and large mammals. 
Alligator juniper provides food and cover for wildlife all 
year long and is critically important when deep snows 
make other food sources unavailable. 
Wildlife Communities 
Althoygh overstory and understory tree structure and 
diversity provide important habitat components for wild- 
life, no particular structure or species can satisfy the needs 
of the entire wildlife community. Wildlife community use 
of Southwestern ponderosa pine forests is illustrated us- 
ing the R3HARE database (Patton 1995) and the Coconino 
National Forest. This forest has xerophytic and mesophytic 
ponderosa pine stands and numerous other habitats such 
as desert scrub, pinyon-juniper, riparian, mixed conifer, 
and grasslands (Benoit 1996). Of the 435 species that oc- 
cur in the Coconino National Forest, 50 percent use pon- 
derosa pine forests to meet some or all of their habitat 
needs. This includes 56 percent of the mammals, 46 per- 
cent of the birds, 61 percent of the reptiles, and 54 percent 
of the amphibians. Eighteen percent of Coconino species 
(mainly mammals, reptiles, and amphibians) use the pon- 
derosa pine habitat year round. Thirteen percent use it in 
summer only, 2 percent in winter only, and 17 percent as 
fringe habitat or transient habitat. The majority of birds 
(75 percent) use it as fringe, transient or summer habitat 
(Benoit 1996). 
Overall vegetative structural stage use by wildlife 
(Patton 1995; Benoit 1996) is fairly evenly distributed with 
slightly higher use in mature and old growth forests and 
B (40 to 60 percent) and C (60 percent and over) canopies. 
Young stands and A (0 to 40 percent) canopies are used 
the least. The distribution is also somewhat uniform across 
all stages for species for which certain vegetative struc- 
tural stages have high value. Use by threatened, endan- 
gered, sensitive, or dependent species (those that depend 
on certain structures in ponderosa pine for survival), and 
birds is also fairly uniform across all stages. Mammals 
follow an opposing pattern, with higher use occurring in 
openings, seedlings, and saplings than in mature or old 
growth areas. Forest indicator species occur predomi- 
nately in mid-aged and mature stands, and do not indi- 
cate overall use patterns in the community or those of 
species of special concern. Information on structural stages 
use by amphibians and reptiles is limited, but they ap- 
pear to prefer VSSl and 2 and probably respond prima- 
rily on the microsite level. 
Sixty-one percent of birds using ponderosa pine in the 
Coconino National Forest are passerines (Patton 1995; 
Benoit 1996). Use is primarily in summer (44 percent) or 
as fringe habitat (23 percent). Passerine use is highest in 
mature and especially old growth stands. Eight of the 12 
dependent species are passerine birds associated with old 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Ecology of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests 
growth. Use by canopy density is evenly distributed with 
a slight preference for B canopies. 
Literature Cited 
Abolt, R.P., C.H. Baisan, and T.W. Swetnam. 1995. Fire 
history along an elevation transect in the Mogollon 
Mountains, Gila National Forest. Progress Report Coop. 
Agr. 28-C4-858. 10 p. + 9 figures. 
Abbott, M.L. 1991. Structural characteristics of cover on 
elk winter range in north central Arizona. MS thesis, 
Northern Arizona Univ., Flagstaff. 
Ahlgren, I.F., and C.E. Ahlgren. 1960. Ecological effects of 
forest fires. Botanical Review 26: 483-533. 
Alexander, M.E., and F.G. Hawksworth. 1974. Fire and 
dwarf mistletoes in North American forests. Journal of 
Forestry 74(7): 446-449. 
Allen, C.D. 1989. Changes in the landscape of the Jemez 
Mountains, New Mexico. PhD thesis, Univ. California, 
Berkeley, CA. 346 p. 
Allen, C.D. (technical editor). 1996. Fire effects in South- 
western forests, proceedings of the second La Mesa fire 
symposium. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-286. Fort Collins, 
CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 
216 p. 
Allen, C.D., R. Touchan, and T.W. Swetnam. 1995. Land- 
scape-scale fire history studies support fire management 
action at Bandolier. Park Science (Summer): 18-19. 
Anderson, R.S. 1989. Development of Southwestern pon- 
derosa pine forests: what do we really know? Pages 15- 
22 in A. Tecle, W.W. Covington and R.H. Hamre, tech. 
coords. Multiresource management of ponderosa pine 
forests. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-185. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Moun- 
tain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 282 p. 
Andariese, S.W., and W.W. Covington. 1986. Changes in 
understory production for three prescribed burns of 
different ages in ponderosa pine. Forest Ecology and 
Management 14: 193-203. 
Andrews, S.R. 1955. Red rot of ponderosa pine. Agricul- 
ture Monograph 23. Washington, DC: US. Department 
of Agriculture. 34 p. 
Arnold, J.F. 1950. Changes in ponderosa pine bunchgrass 
ranges in northern Arizona from pine regeneration and 
grazing. Journal of Forestry 48: 118-126. 
Baisan, C.H., and T.W. Swetnam. 1990. Fire history on a 
desert mountain range: Rincon Mountain Wilderness, 
Arizona, U.S.A. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 
20: 1559-1569. 
Baisan, C.H., and T.W. Swetnam. 1995a. Historical fire 
occurrence in remote mountains of Southwestern New 
Mexico and northern Mexico. Pages 153-156 in J.K. 
Brown (compiler), Proceedings: symposium on fire in 
wilderness and park management, 30 March 1993; 
Missoula, Montana. Gen.Tech.Rep.INT-GTR-320. 
Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Ser- 
vice, Intermountain Research Station, 283 p. 
Baisan, C.H., and T.W. Swetnam. 199513. Sandia /Manzano 
fire history. Final Report to Cibola National Forest, Al- 
buquerque, NM. 42 p. 
Bedetts, R.E, G.C. White, and F.G. Hawksworth. 1996. 
The influence of dwarf mistletoe on bird communities 
in Colorado ponderosa pine forests. Ecological Appli- 
cations 6: 899-909. 
Benoit, Mary Ann, 1996. Wildlife assessment for the West 
Clear Creek ecosystem assessment. Manuscript on file 
Coconino National Forest, Flagstaff, Arizona. 
Beschta, R.L. 1976. Climatology of the ponderosa pine type 
in central Arizona. Technical Bulletin 228. Arizona Ag- 
ricultural Experiment Station. iv, 24 p. 
Betancourt, J.L. 1990. Late Quaternary biogeography of 
the Colorado Plateau. Pages 259-292 In J.L. Betancourt, 
T.R. Van Devender and P.S. Martin, eds. Packrat 
middens, the last 40,000 years of biotic change. Tucson, 
AZ: Univ. Arizona Press. vii, 468 p. 
Betancourt, J.L. 1987. Paleoecology of pinyon-juniper 
woodlands: summary. Pages 129-139 in Everitt, R.L., 
comp. Proceedings, Pinyon-juniper conference; 1986 
January 13-16; Reno, Nevada. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-215. 
Ogden UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Ser- 
vice, Intermountain Research Station. 581 p. 
Biswell, H.H. 1972. Fire ecology in ponderosa pine-grass- 
land. Proceedings Annual Tall Timbers Fire Ecology 
Conference 12: 69-96. 
Biswell, H.H., H.R. Kallander, R. Komarek, R.J. Vogl, and 
H. Weaver. 1973. A ponderosa fire management: a task 
force evaluation of controlled burning in ponderosa pine 
forests of central Arizona. Miscellaneous Publications 
2. Tallahassee, FL: Tall Timbers Research Station. 49 p. 
Bradley, Anne F., Nonan V. Noste, and William C. Fischer. 
1992. Fire ecology of forests and woodlands in Utah. 
Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-287. Ogden UT: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research 
Station. 128 p. 
Brown, H.E., M.B. Baker Jr., J.J. Rogers, et al. 1974. Oppor- 
tunities for increasing water yield and other multiple 
use values on ponderosa pine forest lands. Res. Pap. 
RM-129. Fort Collins, CO: US. Department of Agricul- 
ture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station. 36 p. 
Brown, J.K., S.F. Arno, S. W. Barrett, and J.P. Menakis. 1994. 
Comparing the prescribed natural fire program with 
presettlement fires in the Selway-Bitterroot Wilderness. 
International Journal of Wildland Fire 4: 157-168. 
Brundrett, M. 1993. Mycorrhizas in natural ecosystems. 
Advances in Ecological Research 21: 171-313. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
19 

Chapter 1 
Bunting, S.C., L.F. Neuenschwander, and G.E. Gruell. 1985. 
Fire ecology of antelope bitterbrush in the northern 
Rocky Mountains. Pages 48-57 in J.E. Lotan, J.E. and 
J.K. Brown, comp. Fire's effects on wildlife habitat- sym- 
posium proceedings. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-186. Ogden, 
UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, In- 
termountain Research Station. 96 p. 
Cassidy, H.O. 1937. How cattle may use cut-over ponde- 
rosa pine bunchgrass ranges with minimum injury to 
reproduction. Research Note 15. U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service. 3 p. 
Castellano, M.A. 1994. Current status of outplanting stud- 
ies using ecotmycorrhizal-inoculated forest trees. Pages 
261-268 in F.L. Pfleger and R.G. Linderman, eds. Myc- 
orrhizae and plant health. Pfleger. x, 344 p. 
Chansler, J.F. 1967. Biology and life history of Dendroctonus 
adjunctus (Coleoptera: Scolytidae). Annals of the Ento- 
mological Society of America 60(40): 760-767. 
Choate, G.A. 1966. New Mexico's forest resource. Resource 
Bulletin INT-5. Ogden, UT U.S. Department of Agri- 
culture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station. 
iii, 58 p, + map dated 1964. 
Clary, W.P.; Ffolliott, P.F. 1966. Differences in herbage-tim- 
ber relationships between thinned and unthinned pon- 
derosa pine stands. Research Note RM-74. Fort Collins, 
CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 
4 P. 
Cooper, C.F. 1960. Changes in vegetation, structure, and 
growth of Southwestern pine forests since white settle- 
ment. Ecological Monographs 30: 129-164. 
Cooper, C.F. 1961. Pattern in ponderosa pine forests. Ecol- 
ogy 42: 493499. 
Covington, W.W., and Moore, M.M. 1992. Postsettlement 
changes in natural fire regimes: implications for resto- 
ration of old-growth ponderosa pine forests. Pages 81- 
99 in M.R. Kaufmann; Moir, W.H.; Bassett, R.L., tech. 
coords. Old-growth forests in the Southwest and Rocky 
Mountain Regions; proceedings of a workshop; 1992 
March 9; Portal, Arizona. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-213, Fort 
Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station. 201 p. 
Covington, W.W., and M.M. Moore. 1994. Southwestern 
ponderosa forest structure: changes since Euro-Ameri- 
can settlement. Journal of Forestry 92(1): 3947. 
Crane, M. F., and W.C. Fischer. 1986. Fire ecology of the 
forest habitat types of central Idaho. Gen. Tech. Rep. 
INT-218. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station. 86 p. 
Crouch, G.L. 1986. Aspen regeneration in 6- to 10-year- 
old clearcuts in Southwestern Colorado. Res. Note RM- 
467. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Ex- 
periment Station. 4 p. 
Crouch, G.L. 1979. Atrazine improves survival and 
growth of ponderosa pine threatened by vegetation 
competition and pocket gophers. Forest Science 25: 
99-111. 
Currie, P.O., C.E. Edminster, and F.W. Knott. 1978. Effects 
of cattle grazing on ponderosa pine regeneration in cen- 
tral Colorado. Res. Pap. RM-201. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Moun- 
tain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 7 p. 
Currie, f ? ~ .  
1975. Grazing management of ponderosa pine- 
bunchgrass ranges of the central Rocky Mountains: the 
status of our knowledge. Res. Pap. RM-159. Fort Collins, 
CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 
24 p. 
Daubenmire, R. 1978. Plant geography with special refer- 
ence to North America. New York: Academic Press. vi, 
338 p. 
Davis, K.M., B.D. Clayton, and W.C. Fischer. 1980. Fire 
ecology of Lolo National Forest habitat types. Gen. Tech. 
Rep. INT-79. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agricul- 
ture, Forest 'Service, Intermountain Research Station. 
77 p. 
Degraff, R.M., B.D. Clayton, R.H. Hamre, L. Ernst, and 
S.H. Anderson. 1991. Forest and rangeland birds of the 
United States. Agriculture Handbook 688. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture. 625 p. 
DeMars, C.J., and B.H. Roettgering. 1982. Western pine 
beetle. Forest Insect and Disease Leaflet 1. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 
8 ~ .  
DeNitto, G. 1985. Root diseases -will we be able to con- 
trol their spread? Pages 76-83 in Loomis, R.C.; Tucker, 
S.; Hofacker, T.H., eds. Insect and disease conditions in 
the United States 1979-83 - What else is growing in 
our forests? Gen. Tech. Rep. WO-46. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 
Denslow, J.S., and T.A. Spies. 1990. Canopy gaps in forest 
ecosystems: an introduction. Canadian Journal of For- 
est Research 20: 619. 
Dick-Peddie, W.A. 1993. New Mexico vegetation, past, 
present and future. Albuquerque, NM: Univ. New 
Mexico Press. xxxii, 244 p.+ insert map = Vegetation of 
New Mexico. 
Dieterich, J.H., and A.R. Hibbert. 1990. Fire history in a 
small ponderosa pine stand surrounded by chaparral. 
Pages 168-173 in Krammes, J.S., tech. coord. Proceed- 
ings, Effects of fire management of Southwestern natu- 
ral resources; 1988 November 15; Tucson, Arizona. Gen. 
Tech. Rep. RM-191. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest 
and Range Experiment Station. 293 p. 
Dieterich, J.H. 1983. Fire history of Southwestern mixed 
conifer: a case study. Forest Ecology and Management 
6: 13-31. 
20 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Ecology of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests 
Doescher, P.S. 1987. Livestock grazing: a silvicultural tool 
for plantation establishment. Journal of Forestry 85: 
29-37. 
Eissenstat, D.M., J.E. Mitchell, and W.W. Pope. 1982. Tram- 
pling damage by cattle on northern Idaho forest plan- 
tations. Journal of Range Management 35: 715-716. 
Elliott, K.J., and A.S. White. 1987. Competitive effects of 
various grasses and forbs on ponderosa pine seedlings. 
Forest Science 33: 356-366. 
Embry, R.S. 1971. Soil water availability in an Arizona 
mixed conifer clearcutting. Res. Note RM-206. Fort 
Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station. 4 p. 
Eyre, F.H. 1980. Forest cover types of the United States 
and Canada. Washington, DC: Society of American For- 
esters. 148 p + map. 
Ffolliott, P.F., W.P. Clary, and F.R. Larson. 1977. Effects of 
a prescribed fire in an Arizona ponderosa pine forest. 
Res. Note RM-336. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest 
and Range Experiment Station. 4 p. 
Ffolliott, P.F., and W.P. Clary. 1982. Understory-overstory 
vegetation relationships: an annotated bibliography. 
Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-136. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research 
Station. 39 p. 
Ffolliott, P.F., and G.J. Gottfried. 1991. Mixed conifer and 
aspen regeneration in small clearcuts within a partially 
harvested Arizona mixed conifer forest. Res. Pap. RM- 
294. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Ex- 
periment Station. 9 p. 
Fischer, W.C., and A.F. Bradley. 1987. Fire ecology of west- 
ern Montana forest habitat types. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT- 
223. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, For- 
est Service, Intermountain Research Station. 95 p. 
Fischer, W.C., and B.D. Clayton. 1983. Fire ecology of 
Montana habitat types east of the Continental Divide. 
Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-141. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research 
Station. 83 p. 
Flake Jr., H.W., C. J. Germain, M. J. Weiss, and R.C. Loomis, 
R.C. 1972. Southwestern States. Pages 3844 in Forest 
insect and disease conditions in the United States, 1971. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture, For- 
est Service. 
Fogel, R., and J.M. Trappe. 1978. Fungus consumption 
(mycophagy) by small animals. Northwest Science 52: 
1-31. 
Foxx, Teralene S.. 1996. Vegetation succession after the La 
Mesa fire in Bandolier National Monument. Pages 47- 
69 in Allen, C.D., tech. ed. Fire effects in Southwestern 
forests, proceedings of the Second La Mesa fire sympo- 
sium. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-286. Fort Collins, CO: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 216 p. 
Franklin, J.F., H.H. Shugart, and M.A. Harmon. 1987. Tree 
death as an ecological process. Bioscience 37: 550-556. 
Furness, R.L., and V.M. Carolin. 1977. Western forest in- 
sects. Misc. Pub. 1339. Washington, DC: U.S. Depart- 
ment of Agriculture, Forest Service. 654 p. 
Geils, B.W., J.E. Lundquist, J.F. Negron, and J.S. Beatty. 
1995. Disturbance regimes and their relationships to 
forest health. Pages 67-73 in Eskew, L. G., comp. Forest 
health through silviculture. Proceedings of the 1995 
National Silviculture Workshop; 1995 May 8-11; 
Mescalero, New Mexico. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-267. 
Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, For- 
est Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experi- 
ment Station. 246 p. 
Gilbertson, R.L. 1974. Fungi that decay ponderosa pine. 
Tucson, AZ: Univ. Arizona Press. 197 p. 
Grissino-Mayer, H.D., C.H. Baisan, and T.W. Swetnam. 
1995, Fire history in the Pinaleno Mountains of south- 
eastern Arizona, Pages 399407 in DeBano, L.F., Ffolliott, 
P.F; Ortega-Rubio, A.; Gottfried, G.J.; Hamre, R. H.; and 
Edminiser, C.B. tech. coords. Biodiversity and manage- 
ment of the Madrean Archipelago: the sky islands of 
Southwestern United States and northwestern Mexico; 
1994 Sept. 19-23; Tuscon, AZ. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR- 
264. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Ex- 
periment Station. 669 p. 
Habeck, J.R., and R.W. Mutch. 1973. Fire-dependent for- 
ests in the northern Rocky Mountains. Quaternary Re- 
search 3: 408424. 
Hanks, J.P., and W.A. Dick-Peddie. 1974. Vegetation pat- 
terns of the White Mountains, New Mexico. Southwest- 
ern Naturalist 18: 372-382. 
Harper, K.T., and H. Buchanan. 1983. The ecology of 
shrubs in Bryce Canyon National Park with special ref- 
erence to Purshia tridentata. Pages 91-98 in Tiedemann, 
A.R. and K.L. Johnson, comp. Proceedings, research and 
management of bitterbrush and cliffrose in western 
North America; 1982 April 13; Salt Lake City, Utah. Gen. 
Tech. Rep. INT-152, Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research 
Station. 279 p. 
Harper, K.T., F.J. Wagstaff, and L.M. Kunzler. 1985. Biol- 
ogy and management of the gambel oak vegetative type: 
a literature review. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-179. Ogden, UT: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Inter- 
mountain Research Station. 31 p. 
Harrington, M.G., and F.G. Hawksworth. 1990. Interac- 
tions of fire and dwarf mistletoe on mortality of South- 
western ponderosa pine. Pages 234-240 in Krammes, 
S.J., tech. coord. Effects of fire management of South- 
western natural resources; Proceedings of the sympo- 
sium; 1988 November 15-17, Tucson, AZ. Gen. Tech. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
2 1 

Chapter 1 
Rep. RM-191. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and 
Range Experiment Station. 
Harrington, M.G., and S.S. Sackett. 1992. Past and present 
fire influences on Southwestern ponderosa pine old 
growth. Pages 44-50 in M.R. Kaufmann, W.H. Moir and 
R.L. Bassett, tech. coords. Old-growth forests in the 
Southwest and Rocky Mountain regions; proceedings 
of a workshop; 1992 March 9; Portal, Arizona. Gen. Tech. 
Rep. RM-213. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and 
Range Experiment Station. 201 p. 
Harris, G.R., and W.W. Covington. 1983. The effect of a 
prescribed fire on nutrient concentration and standing 
crop of understory vegetation in ponderosa pine. Ca- 
nadian Journal of Forest Research 13: 501-507. 
Hawksworth, F.G. 1961. Dwarf mistletoe of ponderosa 
pine in the Southwest. Tech. Bull. 1246. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 112 p. 
Hawksworth, F.G. 1977. The 6-class dwarf mistletoe rat- 
ing system. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-48. Fort Collins, CO: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 7 p. 
Hawksworth, F.G., and Lusher, 1956. Dwarf mistletoe sur- 
vey and control on the Mescalero Apache Reservation, 
New Mexico. Journal of Forestry 54: 587-591. 
Hawksworth, F.G., and D. Wiens. 1995. Dwarf mistletoes: 
Biology,pathology, and systematics. Agriculture Hand- 
book 709. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agri- 
culture, Forest Service. 410 p. 
Hoover, R.L. and D.L. Wills (editors). 1984. Managing for- 
est lands for wildlife. Denver, CO: Colorado Division 
of Wildlife and U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain Region. 459 p. 
Huckaby, L.S., and P.M. Brown. 1996. Fire history in mixed- 
conifer forests of the Sacramento Mountains, southern 
New Mexico. Final Report. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. De- 
partment of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Moun- 
tain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 33 p. 
Hunt, G.A., and Z. Maser. 1985. Consumption of hypo- 
geous fungi by the deer mouse Peromyscus maniculatus. 
Pages 272 in Molina, R., comp-ed. Proceedings 6th North 
American conference on mycorrhizae; 1984 June 25; 
Bend, Oregon. 
Jameson, D.A. 1967. The relationship of tree overstory and 
herbaceous understory vegetation. Journal of Range 
Management 20: 247-249. 
Johnson, M. 1994. Changes in Southwestern forests: stew- 
ardship implications. Journal of Forestry 92: 16-19. 
Johnson, M. 1993. Changing conditions in Southwestern 
forests and implications on land stewardship. Albuquer- 
que, NM: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Ser- 
vice, Southwestern Region. 8 p. 
Johnson, W.M. 1953. Effects of grazing intensity upon veg- 
etation and cattle gains on ponderosa pine-bunchgrass 
ranges of the Front Range of Colorado. Circular 929. 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 36 p. 
Jones, J.R. 1974. Silviculture of Southwestern mixed coni- 
fer and aspen: the status of our knowledge. Res. Pap. 
RM-122. Fort Collins, CO: US. Department of Agricul- 
ture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station. 44 p. 
Kaufmann, M.R.; Graham, R.T.; Boyce Jr.; D.A., Moir, W.H.; 
Perry, L.R.; Bassett R. L.; Mehlhop, P., C.B. Edminster, 
W.M! Block, and P.S. Corn. 1994. An ecological basis for 
ecosystem management. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-246. Fort 
Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station. 22 p. 
Kendrick, B. 1992. The Fifth Kingdom, Mycologue Publi- 
cations, Waterloo, Ontario. 
Klopatek, C. C. 1995. Belowground ecosystems. Pages 176- 
186 in D. M. Finch, and J. A. Tainter, tech. eds. Ecology, 
diversity, and sustainability of the middle Rio Grande 
Basin. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-268. Fort Collins, CO: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 186 p. 
Klopatek, C.C. and J.M. Klopatek. 1993. The effects of a 
catastrophic fire on the patch dynamics of VA mycor- 
rhizae and biogeochemical cycling of nutrients in pin- 
yon-juniper woodlands. Pages 125-126 in Integrated 
ecological and resource inventories: proceedings of a 
national workshop, Washington, DC: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Watershed and Air Man- 
agement. 
Korstian, C.F., and W.H. Long. 1922. The western yellow 
pine mistletoe: effect on growth and suggestions for 
control. Ag. Bull. 1112. Washington, DC: US. Depart- 
ment of Agriculture, Forest Service. 35 p. 
Kotter, M.M. and R.C. Farentinos. 1984a. Formation of 
ponderosa pine ectomycorrhizae after inoculation with 
feces of tassel-eared squirels. Mycologia 76: 758-760. 
Kotter, M.M. and R.C. Farentinos. 1984b. Tassel-eared 
squirrels as spore dispersal agents of hypogeous myc- 
orrhizal fungi. Journal of Mammology 65: 684-687. 
Kruse, W.H. 1992. Quantifying wildlife habitats within 
gambel oak/forest/woodland vegetation associations 
in Arizona. Pages 182-186 in Ffolliott, P.F.; Gottfried, 
G.J.; Bennett, D.A.; Hernandez C., V.M.; Ortega-Rubio, 
A.; and Hamre, R.H., tech. coords. Ecology and Man- 
agement of oak and associated woodlands: perspectives 
in the Southwestern United States and northern Mexico. 
Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-218. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Depart- 
ment of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Forest and Range Experiment Station. 224 p. 
Kufeld, Roland C., O.C. Wallmo, and C. Feddema, C. 1973. 
Food of the Rocky Mountain mule deer. Res. Pap. RM- 
111. Fort Collins, CO: US. Department of Agriculture. 
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Ex- 
periment Station. 31 p. 
22 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Ecology of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests 
Kurmes, E.A. 1989. The development of thinning prac- 
tices of Southwestern ponderosa pine. Pages 23-25 in 
Tecle, A.; Covington, W.W.; and Hamre, R.H., tech. 
coords. Multiresource management of ponderosa pine 
forests. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-185. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Moun- 
tain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 282 p. 
Larson, MM., and G.H. Schubert. 1969. Root competition 
between ponderosa pine seedlings and grass. Res. Pap. 
RM-54. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agricul- 
ture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station. 12 p. 
Ledig, F. Thomas, 1992. Human impacts on genetic diver- 
sity in forest ecosystems. Oikos 63: 87-108. 
Lightle, PC. 1967, Major disease problems and status of 
research in the Southwestern United States. Pages 7-11 
in Proceedings 15th Western International Forest Dis- 
ease Work Conference; 1967 September 11-15; Santa Fe, 
New Mexico. 
Lightle, P.C., and S.R. Andrews. 1968. Red rot in residual 
ponderosa pine stands on the Navajo Indian Reserva- 
tion. Res. Pap. RM-37. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Depart- 
ment of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Forest and Range Experiment Station. 12 p. 
Linhart, Y.B., M.A. Snyder, and S.A. Habeck. 1989. The 
influence of animals on genetic variability within pon- 
derosa pine stands, illustrated by the effects of Abert's 
squirrel and porcupine. Pages 141-148 in Tecle, A.; 
Covington, W.W.; and Hamre, R.H., tech. coords. Gen. 
Tech. Rep. RM-185. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest 
and Range Experiment Station. 282 p. 
Little, E.L. 1971. Atlas of United States Trees. Volume 1. 
Conifers and important hardwoods. Misc. Pub. 1146. 
Washington DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture, For- 
est Service. 
Lucht, D.D.; Frye, R.H.; Schmid, J.M. 1974. Emergence and 
attack behavior of Dendroctonus adjunctus Blanford near 
Cloudcroft, New Mexico. Annals of the Entomological 
Society of America 67(4): 610-612. 
Lundquist, J.E. 1995a. Pest management and canopy gaps 
in ponderosa pine stands in the Black Hills, South Da- 
kota, USA. Forest Ecology and Management 74: 3748. 
Lundquist, J.E. 199513. Disturbance profile - a measure 
of small-scale disturbance patterns in ponderosa pine 
stands. Forest Ecology and Management 74: 49-59. 
Lundquist, J.E. 1995c. Characterizing disturbance in man- 
aged ponderosa pine stands in the Black Hills. Forest 
Ecology and Management 74: 61-74. 
Madany, M.H., and N.E. West. 1983. Livestock grazing- 
fire regime interactions within montane forests of Zion 
National Park, Utah. Ecology 64: 661-667. 
Maffei, H., and J. Beatty. 1988. Changes in the incidence 
of dwarf mistletoe over 30 years in the Southwest. Pages 
88-90 in van der Kamp, B.J., ed. Proceedings 36th West- 
ern International Forest Disease Work Conference; 1988 
September 19-23; Park City, Utah. Vancouver, B.C. 
Canada: Department of Forest Sciences, University of 
British Columbia. 
Marsden, M.A., C.G. Shaw Jr., and M. Morrison. 1993. 
Simulation of management options for stands of South- 
western ponderosa pine attacked by Armillaria root 
disease and dwarf mistletoe. Res. Pap. RM-308. Fort 
Collins, CO: US. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Srvice, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station. 5 p. 
Marshall Jr., J.T. 1957. Birds of the pine-oak woodland in 
southern Arizona and adjacent Mexico. Pacific Coast 
Avifauna 32: 1-125. 
Marshall Jr., J.T. 1963. Fire and birds in the mountains of 
southern Arizona. Proceedings of the Second Annual 
Tall Timbers Fire Ecology Conference 2: 135-141. 
Martin, R.E. 1983. Antelope bitterbrush seedling establish- 
ment following prescribed burning in the pumice zone 
of the southern Cascade Mountains. Pages 82-90 in A.R. 
Tiedemann and K.L. Johnson, comp. Proceedings, re- 
search and management of bitterbrush and cliffrose in 
western North Americas. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-152. 
Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Ser- 
vice, Intermountain Research Station. 279 p. 
Maser, C., and J.M. Trappe, (editors). 1984. The seen and 
unseen world of the fallen tree. Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW- 
164. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, For- 
est Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. 56 p. 
Mason Jr., W.T. 1995. Invertebrates. Pages 159-160 in 
LaRoe, E.T,; Farris, G.S.; Puckett, C.E.; Doran, P.D.; and 
Mac, M.J., eds. Our living resources: a report to the na- 
tion on the distribution, abundance, and health of U.S. 
plants, animals, and ecosystems. Washington, DC: U.S. 
Department of the Interior, National Biological Service. 
530 p. 
Massey, C.L., D.D. Lucht, and J.M. Schmid. 1977. 
Roundheaded pine beetle. Forest Insect and Disease 
Leaflet 155. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agri- 
culture, Forest Service. 8 p. 
Mathiasen, R.L. 1996. Dwarf mistletoes in forest canopies. 
Northwest Science 70: 61-71. 
McKell, C.M., and E. Garcia-Moya. 1989. North Ameri- 
can shrublands. Pages 3-23 in C.M. McKell, ed. The bi- 
ology and utilization of shrubs. xx, 656 p. 
Miller, D.L. 1988. The influence of competing vegetation 
in ponderosa pine forests. Pages 115-121 in Baum- 
gartner, D.M.; Lotan, J.E. eds. Ponderosa pine: the spe- 
cies and its management; conference at Washington 
State University; Pullman, Washington. 
Mitchell, J.E., and P.N.S. Bartling. 1991. Comparison of lin- 
ear and nonlinear overstory-understory models for pon- 
derosa pine. Forest Ecology and Management 42: 195-204. 
Mitchell, J.E., and D.R. Freeman. 1993. Wildlife-livestock- 
fire interactions on the North Kaibab: a historical re- 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
23 

Chapter 1 
view. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-222. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Moun- 
tain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 12 p. 
Moir, W.H., and J.H. Dieterich. 1988.Old-growth ponde- 
rosa pine from succession on pine-bunchgrass habitat 
types in Arizona and New Mexico. Natural Areas Jour- 
nal 8: 17-24. 
Moir, W.H., and J.A Ludwig. 1979. A classification of 
spruce-fir and mixed conifer habitat types of Arizona 
and New Mexico. Res. Pap. RM-207. Fort Collins, CO: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 47 p. 
Moir, W.H. 1966. Influence of ponderosa pine on herba- 
ceous vegetation. Ecology 47(6): 1045-48. 
Moir, W.H. 1982. A fire history of the high Chisos, Big Bend 
National Park, Texas. Southwestern Naturalist 27: 87-98. 
Moir, W.H. 1992. Ecological concepts in old-growth forest 
definition. Pages 18-23 in Kaufmann, M.R.; Moir, W.H.; 
Bassett, R.L., tech. coords. Old-growth forests in the 
Southwest and Rocky Mountain Regions; proceedings 
of a workshop; 1992 March 9; Portal, Arizona. Gen. Tech. 
Rep. RM-213. Fort Collins, CO: US. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and 
Range Experiment Station. 201 p. 
Moir, W.H. and R. Fletcher. 1996. Forest diversity in New 
Mexico. Pages 232-254 in Herrera, E.A. and L.F. 
Huenneke, eds., New Mexico's natural heritage: biologi- 
cal diversity in the land of enchantment. New Mexico 
Journal of Science, Vol36, viii, 374 p. 
Moody, R., L. Buchanan, R. Melcher, and Wistrand. 1992. 
Fire and forest health. Albuquerque, NM: U.S. Depart- 
ment of Agriculture, Forest Service, Southwestern Re- 
gion. 23 p. 
Morgan, P. 1994. Dynamics of ponderosa and Jeffrey pine 
forests. Pages 47-73 in Hayward, G.D.; and Verner, J., 
tech. eds. Flammulated, boreal, and great gray owls in 
the United States: a technical conservation assessment. 
Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-253. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Depart- 
ment of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Forest and Range Experiment Station. 214 p + 3 maps. 
Murphy, A. 1994. Graced by pines: the ponderosa pine in 
the American West. Missoula, MT: Mountain Press. 
Nagiller, S., H. Green, and M. Whitney. 1991. Wildlife habi- 
tat damage assessment - US, 
vs. Thompson, et al.; on 
file U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Coconino National Forest. Flagstaff, AZ. 
Oliver, W.W., and R.A. Ryker. 1990. Pinus ponderosa Dougl. 
ex Laws., Ponderosa pine, Pages 413-424 in Burns, R.M.; 
Honkala, B.H. tech. coords. Silvics of North America, 
Volume 1, Conifers. Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Office. vi, 675 p. 
Opler, P.A. 1995. Species richness and trends of western 
butterflies and moths. Pages 172-174 in LaRoe, E.T,; 
Farris, G.S.; Puckett, C.E.; Doran, P.D.; and Mac, M.J., 
eds. Our living resources: a report to the nation on the 
distribution, abundance, and health of U.S. plants, ani- 
mals, and ecosystems. Washington, DC: U.S. Depart- 
ment of the Interior, National Biological Service. 530 p. 
Owen, D.R. 1986. Annual Southwestern Region pest con- 
ditions report - 
1985. Forest Pest Management Report 
R-3 85-9. Albuquerque, NM: U.S. Department of Agri- 
culture, Forest Service, Southwestern Region. 17 p. 
Parker, D.L. 1980. Integrated pest management guide, 
mountain pine beetle, Dendrocfonus ponderosae Hopkins, 
in pbnderosa pine, Kaibab Plateau, Arizona. Pest Man- 
agement Report R-3 80-8. Albuquerque, NM: U.S. De- 
partment of Agriculture, Forest Service, Southwestern 
Region. 12 p. 
Parker, D.L. 1991. Integrated pest management guide, 
Arizona five-spined Ips, Ips lecontei Swaine, and pine 
engraver, Ips pini Say, in ponderosa pine. Forest Pest 
Management Report R-3 91-8. Albuquerque, NM: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Southwest- 
em Region. 12 p. 
Patton, David R. 1995. R3HARE - 
a logical wildlife rela- 
tionships data model for Southwestern national forests. 
Flagstaff, AZ: Northern Arizona University, School of 
Forestry, computerized database. 
Pearson, G.A. 1931. Forest types in the Southwest as de- 
termined by climate and soil. Tech. Bull. 247. Washing- 
ton DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture. 144 p. 
Pearson, G.A. 1942. Herbaceous vegetation as a factor in 
natural regeneration of ponderosa pine in the South- 
west. Ecological Monographs 12: 315-338. 
Pearson, G.A. 1950. Management of ponderosa pine in the 
Southwest. Agriculture Monograph 6. Washington, DC: 
Government Printing Office. viii, 218 p. 
Pearson, H.A., J.R. Davis, and G.H. Schubert. 1972. Effects 
of wildfire on timber and forage production in Arizona. 
Journal of Range Management 25: 250-253. 
Pyne, S.J. 1996. Nouvelle Southwest. Pages 10-16 in 
Covington, W.W.; Wagner, P.K., tech. coords. Confer- 
ence on adaptive ecosystem restoration and manage- 
ment: restoration of cordilleran conifer landscapes of 
North America; 1996 June 6-8; Flagstaff, Arizona. Gen. 
Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-278. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Depart- 
ment of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Forest and Range Experiment Station. 91 p. 
Rapport, D.J., and S.B. Yazvenko. 1996. Ecosystem distress 
syndrome in ponderosa pine forests. Pages 3-9 in 
Covington, W.W.; Wagner, P.K., tech. coords. Confer- 
ence on adaptive ecosystem restoration and manage- 
ment: Restoration of cordilleran conifer landscapes of 
North America; 1996 June 6-8; Flagstaff, Arizona. Gen. 
Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-278. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Depart- 
ment of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Forest and Range Experiment Station. 91 p. 
Reid, E.H. 1965. Forage production in ponderosa pine for- 
ests. Proceedings American Society of Foresters (1964): 
61-64. 
24 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Ecology of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests 
Rejmanek, M., and J.J. Messina. 1989. Quantification and 
prediction of woody weed competition in ponderosa 
pine plantations. Pages 97-102 in Tecle, A.; Covington, 
W.W.; and Hamre, R.H., tech. coords. Multiresource 
management of ponderosa pine forests. Gen. Tech. Rep. 
RM-185. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agricul- 
ture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station. 282 p. 
Reynolds, R.T., R.T. Graham, M.H. Reiser, R.L. Bassett, P.L. 
Kennedy, D.A. Boyce Jr., G. Goodwin, R. Smith, and E.L. 
Fisher. 1992. Management recommendations for the 
northern goshawk in the Southwestern United States, 
Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-217. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Depart- 
ment of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Forest and Range Experiment Station. 90 p. 
Reynolds, R.T., W.M. Block, and D.A. Boyce Jr. 1996. Us- 
ing ecological relationships of wildlife as templates for 
restoring Southwestern forests. Pages 35-43 in Covington, 
W.W.; Wagner, P.K., tech. coords. Conference on adap- 
tive ecosystem restoration and management: Restora- 
tion of cordilleran conifer landscapes of North America; 
1996 June 6-8; Flagstaff, Arizona. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM- 
GTR-278. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agri- 
culture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and 
Range Experiment Station. 91 p. 
Rietveld, W.J. 1975. Phytotoxic grass residues reduce ger- 
mination and initial root growth of ponderosa pine. Res. 
Pap. RM-153. Fort Collins CO: U.S. Department of Ag- 
riculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and 
Range Experiment Station. 15 p. 
Rogers, T.J., and P.F. Hessburg. 1985. Annual Southwest- 
em Region pest conditions report - 1984. Forest Pest 
Management Report R-3 85-9. Albuquerque, New 
Mexico: US. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Southwestern Region. 18 p. 
Rosenstock, S.S. 1996. Habitat relations of breeding birds 
in northern Arizona ponderosa pine and pine-oak for- 
ests. Tech. Rep. 23. Phoenix, AZ: Arizona Game and Fish 
Department. 53 p. 
Rummell, R.S. 1951. Some effects of livestock on ponde- 
rosa pine forest and range in central Washington. Ecol- 
ogy 32: 594-607. 
Savage, M., and T.W. Swetnam. 1990. Early 19th century 
fire decline following sheep pasturing in a Navajo pon- 
derosa pine forest. Ecology 71: 2374-2378. 
Schmid, J.M., S.A. Mata, and A.M. Lynch. 1991. Red belt 
in lodgepole pine in the Front Range of Colorado. Res. 
Note RM-503. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and 
Range Experiment Station. 2 p. 
Schubert, G.H. 1974. Silviculture of Southwestern ponde- 
rosa pine: the status of our knowledge. Res. Pap. RM- 
123. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Ex- 
periment Station. 71 p. 
Shaw 111, C.G., F.G. Hawksworth, D. Bennett, G. Sanchez- 
Martinez, and B.M. Tkacz. 1994. Diseases and insects 
of pine and their implications for sustainability in for- 
ests of the Southwestern United States and northern 
Mexico. Pages 36-50 in Covington, W.W.; DeBano, L.F., 
tech. coords. Sustainable ecological systems: Imple- 
menting an ecological approach to land management; 
1993 July 12-15; Flagstaff, Arizona. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM- 
247. Fort Collins, CO: US. Department of Agriculture, 
Fqrest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Ex- 
periment Station. 363 p. 
Smith, D.R. 1967. Effects of cattle grazing on a ponderosa 
pine-bunchgrass range in Colorado. Tech. Bull. 1371. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture. 60 p. 
Spencer Jr. J.S. 1966. Arizona's forests. Resource Bull. INT- 
6. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Intermountain Research Station. 56 p, map 
dated 1964. 
States, J. 1985. Hypogeous, mycorrhizal fungi associated 
with ponderosa pine: sporocarp phenology. Pages 271 
in Molina, R., comp-ed. Proceedings 6th North Ameri- 
can conference on mycorrhizae; 1984 June 25; Bend, 
Oregon. 
Steele, R.W. 1988. Ecological relationships of ponderosa 
pine. Pages 71-76 in Baumgartner, D.M.; Lotan, J.E., 
comp.-eds. Ponderosa pine the species and its manage- 
ment; symposium proceedings; 1987 September 29- 
October 1; Spokane, Washington. Pullman, WA: Wash- 
ington State University, Cooperative Extension. 281 p. 
Stewart, R.E. 1965. Allelopathic potential of western 
bracken. Journal of Chemical Ecology 1: 161-169. 
Swetnam, T.W. 1990. Fire history and climate in the United 
States. Pages 6-17 in Krammes, J.S., tech. coord. Effects 
of fire management of Southwestern natural resources; 
proceedings of the symposium; 1988 November 15; 
Tucson, Arizona. 
Swetnam, T.W., C.H. Baisan, A.C. Caprio, and P.M. Brown. 
1992. Fire history in a Mexican pine-oak woodland and 
adjacent montane conifer gallery forest in southeastern 
Arizona. Pages 165-173 in Ffolliott, P.F., G.J. Gottfried, 
D.A. Bennett, V.M.C. Hernandez and A.H.; Ortega- 
Rubio, R.H., tech. coords. Ecology and management of 
oak and associated woodlands: Perspectives in the 
Southwestern United States and northern Mexico; 1992 
April 27; Sierra Vista, Arizona. Gen. Tech. Rep. GTR- 
RM-218. Fort Collins, CO: US. Department of Agricul- 
ture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station. 224 p. 
Swetnam, T. W., and C. H. Baisan. 1996. Historical fire re- 
gime patterns in the Southwestern United States since 
AD 1700. Pages 11-32 in C. D. Allen, tech. ed. Proceed- 
ings of the second La Mesa fire symposium. Gen. Tech. 
Rep. RM-GTR-286. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest 
and Range Experiment Station. 216 p. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 1 
Swetnam, T.W., and J.L. Betancourt. 1990. Fire-Southern 
Oscillation relations in the Southwestern United States. 
Science 249: 1017-1020. 
Swetnam, T.W., and A.M. Lynch. 1993. Multicentury, re- 
gional-scale patterns of western spruce budworm out- 
breaks. Ecological Monographs 63: 399-424. 
Szaro, R.C., and R.P. Balda. 1979. Effects of harvesting 
ponderosa pine on nongame bird populations. Res. Pap. 
RM-212. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agricul- 
ture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station. 8 p. 
Telfer, W.G. 1982. Forest insect and disease conditions in 
the Southwest - 
1981. Forest Pest Management Report 
R3-82-4. Albuquerque, NM: U.S. Department of Agri- 
culture, Forest Service, Southwestern Region. 18 p. 
Thomas, J.W., ed. 1979. Wildlife habitats in managed for- 
ests - the Blue Mountains of Washington and Oregon. 
Agriculture Handbook 553. Washington, DC: U.S. De- 
partment of Agriculture. 24 p. 
Touchan, R., T.W. Swetnam, and H.D. Grissino-Meyer. 
1995. Effects of livestock grazing on pre-settlement fire 
regimes in New Mexico. Pp 268-274 in Brown, J.K. et 
al., (Compilers), Proceedings, symposium on fire in 
wilderness and park management; 1990 March 30; 
Missoula, Montana. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-GTR-320. 
Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Ser- 
vice, Intermountain Research Station. 283 p. 
Touchan, R., C. D. Allen, and T. W. Swetnam. 1996. Fire 
history and climatic patterns in ponderosa pine and 
mixed-conifer forests of the Jemez Mountains, north- 
ern New Mexico. Pages 3346 in C. D. Allen, tech. ed. 
Fire effects in Southwestern forests; proceedings of the 
second La Mesa fire symposium. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM- 
GTR-286. Fort Collins, CO: US. Department of Agri- 
culture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and 
Range Experiment Station. 216 p 
Urness, P.J. 1989. Shrubs as habitats for wildlife. Pages 441- 
458 in C.M. McKell, ed. The biology and utilization of 
shrubs. xx, 656 p. 
Verner, J., R.J. Gutierrez, and G.I. Gould Jr. 1992. The Cali- 
fornia spotted owl: general biology and ecological rela- 
tions. Pages 55-77 in Verner, J.; McKelvey, K.S.; Noon, 
B.R.; Gutierrez, R. J.; Gould, Jr. G.I.; and Beck, T.W., tech. 
coords. The California spotted owl: a technical assess- 
ment of its current status. Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-GTR- 
133. Albany, CA: U.S. Department of Agriculture, For- 
est Service, Pacific Southwest Research Station. 285 p. 
U.S. Forest Service (USFS) 1986. Forest and woodland 
habitat types (plant associations) of southern New 
Mexico and central Arizona (north of the Mogollon 
Rim), 2nd edition. Albuquerque, NM: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture Forest Service, Southwestern Region. 140 
p. + insert. 
U.S. Forest Service (USFS) 1987a. Forest and woodland 
habitat types (plant associations) of northern New 
Mexico and northern Arizona, 2nd edition. Albuquer- 
que, NM: US. Department of Agriculture, Forest Ser- 
vice, Southwestern Region. 170 p. + insert. 
US. Forest Service (USFS) 198% Forest and woodland 
habitat types (plant associations) of Arizona south of 
the Mogollon Rim and Southwestern New Mexico, 2nd 
edition. Albuquerque, NM: US. Department of Agricul- 
ture Forest Service, Southwestern Region. 168 p. + insert. 
U.S. Forest Service (USFS) March 1991. General ecosys- 
tem survey. Albuquerque, NM: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Southwestern Region, 4th 
printing, variable pagination. 
Vilarino, A. and J. Arines. 1991. Numbers and viability of 
vesicular-arbuscular fungal propagules in field soil 
samples after wildfire. Soil Biology and Biochemistry 
23: 1083-1087. 
Walters, J.W. 1978. Impact evaluation for dwarf mistle- 
toe-infested ponderosa pine in the Southwest. in 
Scharpf, R.F.; Parmeter, J.R., Jr., tech. coords. Dwarf 
mistletoe control through forest management; Proceed- 
ings of the symposium; 1978 April 11-13; Berkeley, Cali- 
fornia. Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-31. Berkeley, CA: U.S. De- 
partment of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific 
Southwest Research Station. 190 p. 
Ward Jr., J.P., and W.M. Block. 1995. Mexican spotted owl 
prey ecology. Pages 1 4 8  in Recovery plan for the Mexi- 
can spotted owl (Strix occidentalis lucida), Volume 11. 
Albuquerque, NM: U.S. Department of the Interior, Fish 
and Wildlife Service, 172 p. 
Weaver, H. 1967. Fire and its relationship to ponderosa 
pine. Proceedings Tall Timbers Fire Ecology Conference 
6: 127-149. 
Weaver, H. 1943. Fire as an ecological and silvicultural 
factor in the ponderosa pine region of the Pacific slope. 
Journal of Forestry 41: 7-15. 
White, A.S. 1985. Presettlement regeneration patterns in a 
Southwestern ponderosa pine stand. Ecology 66: 589-594. 
White, D.E. 1987. Competitive interactions between Dou- 
glas-fir or ponderosa pine and whiteleaf manzanita. 
Ph.D dissertation, Oregon State University, 148 p. 
Wilson, E.O. 1992. The diversity of life. New York: W.W. 
Norton & Co. iv, 424 p. 
Wilson, J.L., and B.M. Tkacz. 1996. Historical perspectives 
on forest insects and pathogens in the Southwest: Im- 
plications for restoration of ponderosa pine and mixed 
conifer forests. Pages 25-31 in Covington, W.W.; Wagner, 
P.K., tech. coords. Conference on adaptive ecosystem 
restoration and management: Restoration of cordille- 
ran conifer landscapes of North America; 1996 June 6- 
8; Flagstaff, Arizona. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-278. Fort 
Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station. 91 p. 
Wood, R.E. 1983. Mortality caused by root diseases and 
associated pests on six national forests in Arizona and 
26 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Ecology of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests 
New Mexico. Forest Pest Management Report R-3 83- 
Wright, H.A. 1978. The effect of fire on vegetation in pon- 
13. Albuquerque, NM: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
derosa pine forests: a state-of-the-art review. Science 
Forest Service, Southwestern Region. 31 p. 
Publication T-9-99. Texas Technical University College 
Woolsey Jr., Theodore S. 1911. Western yellow pine in Ari- 
of Agriculture. 
zona and New Mexico. Bulletin 101. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 64 p. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 2 
Contemporary Human Use of Southwestern 
Ponderosa Pine Forests 
Carol Raish, Wang Yong, and John Marzluff 
Introduction 
The ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest provide 
land, resources, products, and recreational opportunities 
for both urban and rural communities of the region and 
the nation. These human uses and activities affect resi- 
dent and migratory bird populations in both negative and 
positive ways. This brief review focuses on three major 
kinds of human use that have the greatest potential to af- 
fect bird populations of the area: 1) commercial and per- 
sonal-use wood harvest; 2) livestock grazing; and 3) rec- 
reation (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 1995). In addition, 
growing urbanization, which also has the potential to af- 
fect bird populations, is briefly reviewed. The geographic 
focus is the USDA Forest Service land within the South- 
western Region (Region 3), located in Arizona and New 
Mexico, with a special emphasis on New Mexico and some 
of the long-standing, traditional use patterns of the state. 
Since another portion of this overview presents a history 
of human use of the ponderosa pine forest, this review is 
concentrated upon present-day uses and issues. 
Commercial and Personal-Use 
Wood Harvest 
Southwestern ponderosa pine forests provide wood and 
wood products for both commercial and personal pur- 
poses. Large-scale and small-scale commercial activities 
include the harvest gf sawtimber, poles, posts, and 
fuelwood. Personal-use fuelwood and Christmas trees 
constitute the major noncommercial products. Data from 
Region 3 indicate that there were 58,733 wood and wood 
product sales of all types during fiscal year 1995. Timber 
of all types cut on Forest Service lands in Arizona and 
New Mexico during the same period had a value ap- 
proaching $9 million.' 
All figures on timber and wood producf sales and volume throughout 
this chapter were obtained from the USDA Forest Service Southwest- 
ern Region 3, Regional Office, Albuquerque, New Mexico, with the 
help of Milo Larson, Marlin Johnson, and Paul Fink. 
Ponderosa Pine as a Timber Resource 
To understand the effect of the various human uses on 
the ponderosa pine forest, it is helpful to review back- 
ground information concerning these lands and their tim- 
ber resources. 
Forest land falls into two major categories-timberland 
or woodland-based on levels of tree stocking. Timber- 
land is forest land on which tree species, such as indus- 
trial roundwood products like ponderosa pine and 
Douglas-fir, make up at least 10 percent of the stocking 
level. Woodland areas are other forest lands on which tim- 
ber species are not present at the minimum stocking level. 
Woodland tree species, such as pinyon and juniper, are 
typically not used for roundwood products other than 
fence posts but are an important source of fuelwood and, 
in some cases, Christmas trees (Conner et al. 1990). 
In 1986, of the 61 million hectares (ha) in Arizona and 
New Mexico, about 17 million ha or 28 percent were for- 
est lands (Conner et al. 1990; Van Hooser et al. 1993). One- 
fourth of the forest land is reserved or withdrawn from 
timber harvest through statutes or administrative desig- 
nations. More than 3.5 million ha are designated as 
nonreserved, commercial timberland. The ponderosa pine 
forest is the most extensive nonreserved timberland, ac- 
counting for more than 2.5 million ha, or over 72 percent 
of the timberland available for harvesting roundwood 
products in the Southwest. Nearly two-thirds (64 percent) 
of the ponderosa pine timberland is administered by pub- 
lic agencies (figure 1). The National Forest Service, with 
over 1.56 million ha, manages the largest area of ponde- 
rosa pine forest in the Southwest. Other public agencies 
such as the Bureau of Land Management and various state, 
county, and municipal governments administer just over 
57,000 ha. Ponderosa pine timberland in private owner- 
ship equals over 914,000 ha. Owners vary from individuals 
to large corporations, including Indian tribes, farmers, and 
ranchers (Connor et al. 1990; Van Hooser et al. 1993). 
Silvicultural Systems 
Silviculture has been defined as: 1) the art of producing 
and tending a forest; 2) the application of the knowledge 
of silvics in forest culture; and 3) the theory and practices 
of controlling forest establishment, composition, and 
growth (Smith 1962). In essence, silvicultural practices can 
be used to mold the forest in desired directions, forms, or 
USDA Forest Service Gen.Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Contemporary Human Use of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests 
Area by ownership 
(in thousand ha) 
National Forest . 
Other public 
Private and tribal 
Figure 1. Ownership and adminstration of ponderosa pine tim- 
berland in Arizona and New Mexico (data summarized 
from Conner et al. 1990; Van Hooser et al. 1993). 
conditions. Economical wood production is commonly the 
primary objective. 
A silvicultural system that includes harvest cutting, re- 
generation, and intermediate treatments manages a stand 
of trees for an entire rotation. Regeneration cuts usually 
harvest timber and establish tree reproduction simulta- 
neously. Silvicultural techniques used to manage ponde- 
rosa pine forests in the Southwest produce stands with 
two types of age structure: even-aged and uneven-aged 
(Schubert 1974; Alexander and Edminster 1980). Regen- 
eration techniques that mimic natural disturbance regimes 
lead to forests that are similar to "natural (unrnanaged) 
forests," which are generally uneven-aged. 
Even-Aged Management 
Under even-aged management, harvest and regenera- 
tion are planned by area and are a function of rotation 
age, which is the age at which a stand is considered to be 
regenerated on the basis of management objectives. Trees 
of a given stand are of one or two age classes. Sustained 
yield is maintained at the forest, not the stand, level 
(Alexander 1987). Historically, techniques leading to even- 
aged stand management have been favored for timber 
harvest on public lands in the Southwest for reasons of 
economy and efficiency (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 
1995). Cutting methods traditionally used to harvest or 
regenerate stands under even-aged systems include: 1) the 
shelterwood method, which consists of the gradual re- 
moval of most or all trees in a series of partial cuttings 
extending over a portion of the rotation; 2) the seed tree 
method, which consists of removing all trees in a stand 
except a small number (left singly or in groups) to reseed 
the harvested area; and 3) the clearcutting method, which 
consists of harvesting the timber crop in one step to es- 
tablish a new stand (USDA Forest Service 1983). 
Uneven-Aged Management 
Under uneven-aged management, individual trees or 
small groups of trees are selectively removed throughout 
the stand on the basis of age, diameter, vigor, form, and 
species to maintain a relatively consistent stand structure. 
The individual tree selection cutting method is used to 
produce uneven-aged stands, which regenerate continu- 
ously. The objective is to produce a stand with trees of 
different sizes and age classes intermingled on the same 
site (USDA Forest Service 1983). The group selection cut- 
ting method is also used to selectively harvest trees in 
groups from geographic areas ranging from a fraction of 
a hectare up to about 5 ha (USDA Forest Service 1983). 
The area cut is generally smaller than the minimum fea- 
sible for a single stand under even-aged management. 
Regeneration and Intermediate Treatments 
Following or during harvest, a ponderosa pine stand is 
treated to create conditions favorable for regeneration of 
desired species. Site preparation may involve removal of 
slash, preparation of a loose seedbed, and removal of the 
competing ground vegetation by mechanical, chemical, 
or burning treatments (Johnsen et al. 1973; Thompson et 
al. 1995). Slash may be removed to reduce the fuel load 
for wildfires or because it physically impedes stand re- 
generation or causes too much shade. Slash is commonly 
removed in combination with planting by means of broad- 
cast burning, piling and burning, lopping and scattering, 
windrowing, or chopping on site. Seedbed preparation 
involves removing organic matter to expose mineral soil. 
Predominant methods of seedbed preparation include 
prescribed burning and scarification, which is the me- 
chanical removal or mixing of the organic matter and the 
mineral soil. Competing vegetation is usually controlled 
by prescribed burning, mechanical treatment, or herbi- 
cides. Prescribed burning can also be used to encourage 
the growth of desired fire-adapted or dependent species 
(Thompson et al. 1995). 
Natural regeneration of ponderosa pine depends on 
moisture conditions. Since the seed of ponderosa pine of- 
ten does not germinate until the coming of the summer 
rains, its vitality is impaired by the usual period of drought 
between April and June. The seedlings that do come up 
are subjected to another drought from the latter part of 
September to November (Woolsey 1911). Artificial regen- 
eration is accomplished by planting young trees or by 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
29 

Chapter 2 
seeding before or after removing the old stand. This tech- 
nique is often used with conifers because of low natural re- 
generation, high probability of successful artificial regenera- 
tion, and high financial yield (Thompson et al. 1995). 
Intermediate cuts include all the cutting treatments 
made from establishment of the new stand until replace- 
ment. Cuts are made when needed, but normally at spe- 
cific intervals, to increase the quantity and quality of tim- 
ber produced and to salvage material that would be lost. 
Common intermediate cuts in the Southwestern ponde- 
rosa pine forests include: 1) thinning, in which the small- 
est trees and rough dominants are removed; 2) release 
cutting, to release young trees from the competition of 
grass, brush, or trees to provide adequate growing space, 
light, and moisture for early rapid development; 3) im- 
provement cutting, which resembles a sanitation-salvage 
cutting to improve the quality of the residual stand and 
reduce mortality; 4) sanitation cutting, which eliminates 
trees that have been attacked or are likely candidates for 
attack by insects or disease to prevent spread to other trees; 
and 5) salvage-cutting dead, dying, damaged, or deterio- 
rating trees to derive economic benefits before decay pro- 
cesses reduce such values. Salvage cutting is a widespread 
practice often employed after insect outbreaks, fire, wind- 
storms, and other natural disturbances (Schubert 1974; 
Thompson et al. 1995). 
History of Management of Ponderosa Pine 
Forests 
Prior to European settlement and management, the 
ponderosa pine forests in the Southwest were uneven- 
aged, with the trees usually arranged by even-aged groups 
(Myers and Martin 1963). Since forest management be- 
gan in the area, both even-aged and, to a lesser extent, 
uneven-aged systems have been used. In the early 1900s 
unmanaged ponderosa pine forests were converted to 
managed stands to maintain higher growing stock levels 
and timber production (Woolsey 1911; Pearson 1950; 
Myers and Martin 1963). 
The primitive application of the shelterwood method 
was the major harvest and regeneration practice used on 
widely adopted in the early and mid-1900s. Cutover ar- 
eas were allowed to restock naturally regardless of the 
time required or the stocking achieved. Management in- 
tensity was increased by the 1970s. Managers were increas- 
ingly concerned with prompt restocking of cutover areas 
and with increasing the growth rate of the new stand by 
control of stand density. They sought to improve quan- 
tity and quality of yields by periodic thinning (Alexander 
and Edminster 1980). 
Silvicultural practices create edges and alter landscape 
structure, forest age, and structure that affect bird popu- 
lations. Concern over these effects is often greater when 
timber is harvested on public forest lands since they are 
some of the least fragmented forests remaining in North 
America (Wilcove 1988; Thompson et al. 1995). The prob- 
lems of meeting avian habitat needs while managing other 
forest resources on public lands became an important is- 
sue in selecting silvicultural practices in the late 1970s and 
early 1980s. A series of workshops and symposia were 
organized to bring together avian ecologists and forest 
resource managers to discuss common problems (see 
Smith 1975; DeGraff 1978,1980; McComb 1984). In the late 
1980s and early 1990s concern mounted over the effects 
of timber harvest on bird and other wildlife habitat, lead- 
ing to court actions and legislatively mandated studies of 
habitat and wildlife populations on public land (USDI Fish 
and Wildlife Service 1995). A review of the status of cur- 
rent knowledge derived from these and other research 
projects and a discussion of critical future issues are pre- 
sented in Martin and Finch (1995). 
To manage forests for habitat requirements of bird popu- 
lations (as well as other species and resources), biologists 
now recommend a shift away from an over-emphasis on 
even-aged management strategies (Szaro and Balda 1979; 
Thompson et al. 1995; USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 
1995). They recommend a mix of silvicultural practices, 
including both even-aged and uneven-aged management 
strategies, that maximize landscape and regional diver- 
sity. A review of information gathered from bird commu- 
nity studies in Rocky Mountain habitats suggests that 
species respond individually to different silvicultural 
treatments. The authors (Hejl et al. 1995:236) state: 
ponderosa pine forest on   ore st Service land in the South- 
. . . many forest birds were less abundant in 
west. Two-thirds of an original stand was cut and the re- 
clearcuts than in uncut forests, and species that 
mainder was removed when the new crop was established 
frequent open forests or open habitats were more 
(Woolsey 1911), which usually took 15 to 20 years. On 
abundant in clearcuts than in uncut forests. Most 
many of the federal forests, selective cuttings were made 
permanent residents were less abundant after 
in a series of light cuts, which generally amounted to the 
either kind of harvesting treatment (clearcut or 
shelterwood method (Clapp 1912; Pearson 1910). These 
partial logging), whereas about half the migrants 
light cuts eventually removed 60 to 70 percent of the vol- 
were less abundant and half more abundant in 
ume, and the rest was cut 10 to 20 years later after re- 
harvested areas. 
production was established (Schubert 1974). 
"Loggers' selection" (high-grading), sanitation salvage, 
Thus, emphasizing any one silvicultural technique or 
and improvement selection cutting, which removed trees 
management strategy would favor some birds at the ex- 
in a series of cuts on an individual or group basis, were 
pense of others. Broad-scale management strategies and 
30 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Contemporary Human Use of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests 
those that use many different techniques to mimic natu- 
ral patterns and processes are recommended (Hejl et al. 
1995). Researchers urge that stand-level management 
should occur with knowledge of the regional status of the 
species and the ecosystem and that local-level manage- 
ment should complement regional goals (Hejl et al. 1995; 
Thompson et al. 1995). The goal, admittedly difficult and 
unattainable if too much is asked of the land, should be to 
manage the forest system for simultaneous production of 
goods and services in an optimal manner, while maintain- 
ing a healthy and balanced environment. 
Forest Changes and Silvicultural Practices 
Silvicultural practices have changed the availability, 
structure, and conformation of the ponderosa pine tim- 
berland in the Southwest. Silvicultural prescriptions have 
changed as our knowledge of forest ecologies has in- 
creased. Public opinion, political expediency, and indi- 
vidual personalities have also affected how the land has 
been managed, often irrespective of silvicultural require- 
ments, site conditions, and conflicting objectives (Hejl et 
al. 1995). In-depth discussions of historical human activi- 
ties and pre-European settlement conditions in ponderosa 
pine forests of the Southwest are presented in Scurlock 
(this volume) and Moir et al. (this volume). Thus, we fo- 
cus here on presenting some of the more detailed infor- 
mation on changing forest condition and composition. 
In the following review, we use information gathered 
by the Forest Service since most ponderosa pine is under 
Forest Service management. Growth, mortality, and re- 
movals through harvest are the principal elements of 
change of ponderosa pine timberland in the Southwest 
today. Based on surveys conducted by the Forest Service 
in 1962 and 1986, it is estimated that the annual growth of 
ponderosa pine forests is about 4.62 million m3 in the 
Southwest. About 6 percent of the growing stock dies, 
leaving a net increase of 4.34 million m3. If one subtracts 
an annual logging harvest (from those years) of 2.24 mil- 
lion m3, the net annual addition is about 2.10 million m3. 
The causes of mortality in ponderosa pine that could be 
determined include insect infestation, disease, fire, ani- 
mal damage, logging, suppression of growth by weather, 
and suppression by thinning and other silvicultural tech- 
niques (figure 2). In 1986, weather killed 72,000 m3 and 
disease accounted for another 14,000 m3. 
Ponderosa pine forests have always been the mainstay 
of the timber industry in the Southwest (Clapp 1912; 
Pearson 1910; Pearson and Marsh 1935). In New Mexico, 
about 73 percent of the lumber cut by sawmills has been 
ponderosa pine (Van Hooser 1993). Although other spe- 
cies have gradually become more important, ponderosa 
pine still accounted for 54 percent of the total lumber out- 
put for New Mexico in 1962. It increased to 69 percent in 
1986 (Choate 1966; Van Hooser et al. 1993). In 1986, 91 
Mortality of growing stock 
(in thousand cubic meters) 
Insect 
Disease 
Fire . 
Animal 
fl Weather . 
Suppression 
Logging 
Unknown 
Figure 2. Distribution of annual mortality of growing stock on 
ponderosa pine timberland by cause of death in Ari- 
zona and New Mexico (data summarized from Conner 
et a/. 1990; Van Hooser et al. 1993). 
percent of the 1.8 million m3 harvested in Arizona was 
ponderosa pine. In the two states combined, a total of 2.24 
million m3 of ponderosa pine was logged in 1986, and 
sawtimber trees accounted for 90 percent of the total cut. 
Based on surveys by Choate (1966), Spencer (1966), 
Conner et al. (1990), and Van Hooser et al. (1993), we found 
that in New Mexico and Arizona ponderosa pine ac- 
counted for 3.2 million ha of timber lands (78 percent of 
all the commercial forest types) in 1962 and 2.5 million ha 
in 1986 for a 22 percent decrease. This trend toward de- 
crease is not consistent among stand classes. While the 
area of small tree stands (poletimber, sapling, and seed- 
ling) increased 238,000 ha or more than 2.5 times between 
1962 and 1986, sawtimber stands decreased 892,000 ha. 
The sawtimber stands accounted for 92 percent of 3.2 mil- 
lion ha of timberland in 1962 with a 10 percent reduction 
in the intervening 24 years (figure 3). Within the sawtim- 
ber stands, the volume of trees of dbh 243.2 cm (17 inches) 
decreased 992 million board feet, while the volume of trees 
of dbh below 43.2 cm increased 708 million board feet (fig- 
ure 4). This resulted in a net decrease of 284 million board 
feet of sawtimber volume. The volume of growing stock 
showed similar trends between 1962 and 1986. The aver- 
age growing stock volume of ponderosa pine timberland 
was 79 m3/ha in 1962 and 72 m3/ha in 1986 (figure 5). 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 2 
100 
80 
- 
a 
C 
60 
.m 0 
C 
C a 
0 40 
z 
n 
20 
0 
Sawtimber 
Pdetimber 
Sspilngl~edling 
Nonstocked 
Stand size class 
Figure 3. Change of stand size of ponderosa pine timberland in 
Arizona and New Mexico between 1962 and 1986 
(data summarized from Choate 1966; Spencer 1966; 
Conner et al. 1990; Van Hooser et al. 1993). 
Because the general rule of historic logging was that 
the most accessible and commercially valuable trees were 
logged before less accessible and less valuable trees, log- 
ging and other silvicultural practices affected availabil- 
ity, structure, and species composition not only at the stand 
level, but also at the landscape level. For example, even- 
aged management creates a specific age-class distribution 
of forest habitats that usually differs from forests with no 
timber harvest. A common trend among forests managed 
under even-aged systems is that the oldest age classes are 
often absent because rotation ages are generally shorter 
than tree longevity. Depending on rotation age and fre- 
quency of natural disturbances, forests managed by even- 
aged management could have more or less early succes- 
sional forest than natural landscapes (Thompson et al. 
1995). Even-aged management can result in an unnatural 
uniformity of habitat patch size and distribution, exclud- 
ing small and very large patches. Our analysis suggests 
that current ponderosa pine forests in the Southwest con- 
tained more early successional forest in 1986 than in 1962. 
Contemporary Sawtimber Harvest 
In 1995,27 million board feet of ponderosa pine were 
cut on Forest Service lands in Arizona, while 3.7 million 
board feet were cut in New Mexico for a Region 3 total of 
over 30.8 million board feet. Ponderosa pine still is the 
largest component of the sawtimber cut from Forest Ser- 
vice lands in both states, though there have been changes 
in the size and number of commercial sawtimber sales. A 
comparison of the figures from 1979, the first year for 
maintaining the regional data base in the current format, 
with 1995 figures is instructive in this regard. In 1979,227 
Figure 4. 
8 1 
Tree size (d.b.h. cm) 
Change of sawtimber volume of ponderosa pine tim- 
berland in Arizona and New Mexico between 1962 and 
1986 (data summarized from Choate 1966; Spencer 
1966; Conner et al. 1990; Van Hooser et al. 1993). 
Tree size (d.b.h. cm) 
Figure 5. Change of growing stock volume of ponderosa pine 
timber stands in Arizona and New Mexico between 
1962 and 1986 (data summarized from Choate 1966; 
Spencer 1966; Conner et a/. 1990; Van Hooser et a/. 
1993). 
million board feet of ponderosa pine were cut on the for- 
ests of Region 3. In 1995, that figure was about 30.8 mil- 
lion board feet. The number of large sales over 2 million 
board feet has also dropped substantially over the years 
from 34 in 1979 to 5 in 1995. These declines have affected 
the commercial timber-related industries of Arizona and 
New Mexico. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Contemporary Human Use of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests 
A Southwestern Region Forest Service white paper pre- 
sents figures from 1984-1993 describing conditions and 
trends in the timber industry (USDA Forest Service Re- 
gion 3 1994). During that period, the volume of all species 
cut declined from a high of 434 million board feet in 1989 
to a low of 159 million board feet in 1993. In 1995, the 
figure had declined further to 99.6 million board feet. Vol- 
ume under contract also showed a steady decline through- 
out the period. In 1989, most of the major mills of the re- 
gion were operating two shifts but were becoming 
concerned about the supply problem and were consider- 
ing reducing to one shift. Toward the end of that year, 
several mills shut down for a short period and several 
reduced from two shifts to one owing to low volume un- 
der contract and market conditions. During this period, 
520 mill workers and 355 forestry workers were affected 
in New Mexico and Arizona (USDA Forest Service Re- 
gion 3 1994). In the period from 1991 to 1993, all operat- 
ing mills in New Mexico and Arizona reduced to one shift 
and eight shut down leaving about half the mill capacity 
that existed in 1984 (USDA Forest Service Region 3 1994). 
In 1984,24 large and small mills were listed by the Forest 
Service in the two states, excluding mills on Indian lands. 
By mid-1996, 10 were operating (Buddy Stewart, USFS 
Regional Economist, personal communication, 1996). 
Timber Industry in Rural Northern New Mexico 
Information from New Mexico provides an example of 
the role of the timber industry in local communities. 
Though the timber industry in the state is modest when 
viewed on a national scale, lumbering is a substantial 
business in New Mexico (Baker et al. 1988 cited in Van 
Hooser et al. 1993). In 1963,2,200 people-ane of every 
seven manufacturing workers-were employed in logging, 
milling, or some other wood products-related industry 
(Choate 1966). The number of jobs in the lumber and wood 
products sector peaked between 1972 and 1977 at 3,200 per 
year, or approximately 10 percent of the manufacturing jobs. 
By 1989, the number had declined to 2,500, or 6 percent of 
the manufacturing workforce (Van Hooser et al. 1993). 
Historically, almost two-thirds of the wood processing 
plants were located in the northern and central portions 
of the state (Van Hooser et al. 1993). Especially in the small, 
rural communities of the north, industries based on for- 
est products have been major sources of employment. Six 
small mills that processed products from the Carson and 
Santa Fe National Forests have closed in the 1980s and 
1990s in places such as Chama, Alamosa (Colorado), Taos, 
Costilla, Espafiola, and Las Vegas (New Mexico). A larger 
mill operated by Duke City Lumber Company at Cuba 
was also shut down in 1992. Lack of supply was given as 
the reason for the closures (USDA Forest Service Region 3 
1994). In a pattern seen commonly across the state, tim- 
ber industry officials often blame closings on the lack of 
Forest Service timber sales resulting from environmental 
legislation and litigation. Local environmental groups, on 
the other hand, stress the role of competition with timber 
coming in from Canada and the southeastern US. and 
alleged Forest Service mismanagement in the closings 
(Eichstaedt 1995; McClellan 1995; Toppo 1995; Korte 1996; 
Ragan 1996). 
Small-Scale Commercial and Personal-Use 
W ~ o d  
Harvest 
The smaller scale harvest of both commercial and per- 
sonal-use wood products is also important, even though 
these types of industries do not have the overall economic 
impact of large-scale, sawtimber harvests. Across the re- 
gion in 1995, fuelwood formed the largest component of 
the non-sawtimber harvest from Forest Service lands fol- 
lowed by poles and posts. Christmas trees also comprise 
a substantial component. They are not discussed further 
here since ponderosa pine does not make up a large por- 
tion of this cut, ranking fourth well after pinyon, other 
softwoods, and true fir. 
The fuelwood cut for 1995 in Region 3 was 42.5 million 
board feet for both personal and commercial use. Poles 
accounted for 7.8 million board feet, while posts com- 
prised 455,000 board feet. Of these cuts, ponderosa pine 
forms the largest component of the pole harvest at over 
4.5 million board feet with aspen forming the second larg- 
est component. With respect to both fuelwood and posts, 
ponderosa ranks second to pinyon and juniper. Of the 
large fuelwood harvest, ponderosa comprises only 3.3 
million board feet, while it makes up 61,500 board feet of 
the posts. As discussed by Van Hooser et al. (1993) for 
New Mexico, the pinyon-juniper woodlands provide the 
majority of the fuelwood and fenceposts for the state. Pin- 
yon is the favored fuelwood for both heating and cooking 
because it burns hot and is long-lasting. Green pinyon is es- 
pecially favored for these reasons. "Dead and down" pon- 
derosa is also used, however, because of its availability as a 
byproduct of timber sales (Van Hooser et al. 1993). 
Fuelwood and small products harvests have the great- 
est potential to disturb bird habitat when they occur as 
unregulated activities. Habitat destruction and damage 
can occur through removal of snags, large downed logs 
(230 cm midpoint diameter), and particularly critical spe- 
cies (Brawn and Balda 1988; USDI Fish and Wildlife Ser- 
vice 1995). Poaching live trees, as well as snags and large 
downed logs, from undesignated areas are common oc- 
currences in some locales that can threaten the integrity 
of bird habitat. In order to minimize negative impacts to 
habitat, fuelwood harvest should be regulated to control 
access and the kinds of materials that are taken. Desig- 
nated harvest areas can be useful but may be difficult to 
enforce, especially in areas with a long tradition of ready 
access to forest resources and scant personnel for patrol 
(USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 1995). 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
33 

Chapter 2 
In many rural portions of the Southwest, fuelwood gath- 
ering is a necessity, not a luxury. Homes are often heated 
solely with wood and cooking is done on wood stoves. 
This is especially true of many rural areas of northern and 
central New Mexico. To complicate matters, much of the 
Forest Service land where the wood is gathered is former 
Spanish land grant land lost by the original owners in the 
aftermath of the Mexican War of 1846-1848 (Harper et al. 
1943; Eastman et al. 1971). Harvesting wood is consid- 
ered to be a traditional "right" in these areas that ties the 
people of the villages back to their ancestral lands. Thus, 
many villagers often resent federal restrictions on land 
they consider to be rightfully theirs. 
A case in point is the local response to the federal in- 
junction issued in August 1995 placing restrictions on log- 
ging and fuelwood harvesting on Forest Service land in 
Arizona and New Mexico to protect Mexican Spotted Owl 
habitat. The court ruling stemmed from a lawsuit filed by 
several environmental groups against the Forest Service, 
charging that the agency failed to consider adequately the 
cumulative impacts on the owl in planning its timber pro- 
gram. The resulting injunction restricting wood cutting 
and gathering hit the rural, primarily Hispanic, commu- 
nities of northern New Mexico especially hard. Most of 
their heating and cooking wood comes from the Carson 
and Santa Fe National Forests. For example, since the early 
1700s people from the villages of Truchas, Las Trampas, 
and PeAasco have cut and gathered their fuelwood from 
the surrounding area-first from the Truchas Land Grant, 
and after portions of the grant became National Forest, 
from the Carson Forest (Eichstaedt 1995). Under Carson 
Forest policy, residents could obtain a permit to gather 
"dead and down" wood anywhere on the Forest and could 
even cut some snags. Part of the reason for allowing For- 
est-wide fuelwood harvesting, rare among Forests of Re- 
gion 3, was that many of the wood gathering areas were 
part of the old land grant lost under U.S. takeover 
(Eichstaedt 1995). 
After the injunction, gathering "dead and down" wood 
was limited to specific marked areas, and the species of 
standing dead trees that could be cut were also limited 
(Eichstaedt 1995). No live or green trees could be cut, and 
sales of these types of trees were barred. Residents feared 
inadequate fuelwood supplies from the designated har- 
vest areas, many of which were also farther away than 
local people normally travel to obtain wood (Ragan 1996). 
They were also concerned about job losses from the pre- 
viously discussed mill closures (Ragan 1996). 
The villagers, as well as the loggers, lumber company 
officials, and sawmill owners and operators, blamed the 
environmentalists and the Forest Service for their plight. 
The environmentalists responded by blaming the Forest 
Service for inefficiency and mismanagement, and the big 
timber companies for greed. There were angry words and 
confrontations with charges of racism and "new- 
comerism" reported in both the local and national press 
(Eichstaedt 1995; McClellan 1995; Toppo 1995; Korte 1996). 
A new activist group, La Herencia de Nortefios Unidos, 
was formed to represent ranching, land, and logging in- 
terests in northern New Mexico. In late November 1995, 
the Herencia group staged a protest rally and hanged two 
Santa Fe environmental group leaders in effigy. Some lum- 
ber company officials and others with extractive interests 
on forest lands were also on hand to lend their support 
( ~ c ~ l e l l a n  
1995). 
After the rally the situation calmed somewhat. Discus- 
sions began between the opposing groups, and commu- 
nity drives and donations of wood (some from the 
"hanged" environmentalists) allayed most residents' fears 
about having sufficient wood to make it through the win- 
ter. Community leaders have urged compromise and un- 
derstanding that would allow both protection of wildlife 
species and maintenance of traditional lifeways (de Buys 
1995). Whether or not compromises will be made remains 
to be seen, as does local community response to what are 
perceived as growing restrictions on forest use. These 
types of challenges are not unique to northern New Mexico 
but seem to occur with regularity throughout the West, as 
the economic orientation and values of local and newly 
arrived populations come into conflict. 
Livestock Grazing 
Livestock grazing in the ponderosa pine forest has a 
long history in Arizona and New Mexico and has been 
examined by various researchers. Range management in 
the ponderosa pine type of Arizona and prior range stud- 
ies were discussed in detail by Clary (1975) and formed a 
portion of the symposium on Multiresource Management 
of Ponderosa Pine Forests, held in Flagstaff in 1989 (Tecle 
et al. 1989). Recently, several studies have reviewed the 
status of range research in varying geographic areas and 
vegetation types in terms of needed future direction 
(Evans 1990; Everett 1992; Kennedy et al. 1995; Vavra 1995). 
Understanding both the needs of wildlife and the needs 
of society concerning rangelands is mentioned as a key 
issue requiring study in the coming years (Kennedy et al. 
1995; Vavra 1995). 
Effect of Grazing on Bird Populations and 
Habitat 
Saab et al. (1995) reviewed research on the effect of cattle 
grazing on bird populations and habitat in western North 
America. Finch et al. (this volume) present a more spe- 
cific review pertaining to the effects of livestock grazing 
on bird species in ponderosa pine. They state that the de- 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Contemporary Human Use of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests 
gree to which grazing affects habitat, and the birds using 
that habitat, relates to the number of animals grazing in 
an area (intensity), the timing of grazing, and the grazing 
system used. Not surprisingly, greater habitat changes 
occur as grazing intensity increases (Johnson 1956; Skovlin 
et al. 1976 cited in Finch et al. this volume). Grazing dur- 
ing the spring and early summer can directly affect re- 
productive success of breeding birds through destruction 
or disturbance of nests of ground or shrub nesting spe- 
cies (Finch et al. this volume). Heavy grazing during the 
growing season can also negatively affect regeneration of 
favored plant species. Vegetation in riparian areas may 
be especially susceptible since these zones are often over- 
used by cattle in forested habitats (Samson 1980; Roath 
and Krueger 1982 a, b; Willard 1990 cited in Finch et al. 
this volume). 
Cattle compact soil by hoof action, remove plant mate- 
rials, and indirectly reduce water infiltration, all of which 
can result in decreased vegetation density (Holecheck et 
a1 1989; Saab et al. 1995). Intense grazing pressure in co- 
niferous forests, in conjunction with fire suppression, 
sometimes leads to enhanced establishment of conifer 
seedlings and consequent conversion of montane shrub, 
meadow, and grassland areas to forested habitat (Saab et 
al. 1995). As with varying responses to silvicultural treat- 
-
-
 
- 
ments, some bird species respond positively to the effects 
of cattle grazing while others respond negatively (Saab et 
al. 1995). 
From their literature reviews, both Saab et al. (1995) and 
Finch et al. (this volume) conclude that little is known 
about the effects of different grazing systems on bird habi- 
tat in western coniferous forests. Saab et al. (1995) specu- 
late that birds most likely to be negatively affected by graz- 
ing are those that are dependent upon herbaceous and 
shrubby ground cover for nesting and/or foraging and 
those requiring open savannahs as opposed to closed- 
canopy forests. They also suggest that as a result of forag- 
ing, the diminished fine fuels reduce fire frequency which 
results in a decrease in fire-caused snags. This decrease 
would negatively affect primary and secondary cavity 
nesters (Saab et al. 1995). Research is needed, however, to 
confirm these suggestions. Species that have increased or 
decreased with grazing are reviewed in Finch et al. (this 
volume). 
Saab et al. (1995) recommend a concerted study effort 
to provide information where little currently exists con- 
cerning the impacts of grazing on neotropical migrants in 
western coniferous forests. They suggest monitoring, with 
attention to matched forest habitats differing in grazing 
regimes or grazing histories, as a means of supplying this 
much-needed data. In addition, studies which examine 
the status of bird habitat and populations in areas that 
have been both grazed and logged are much needed. We 
were unable to find reported studies from these types of 
areas. 
Grazing on National Forest Lands in Region 3 
Livestock grazing is a major, long-standing use of Na- 
tional Forest lands throughout the Southwe~t.~ 
Table 1 
gives figures on the numbers of permittees, animals, and 
animal unit months (AUMs) in Region 3 in 1995. An AUM 
is the amount of forage required to support a mature 1000 
lb cow or its equivalent for one month (USDA Forest Ser- 
vice 1996). 
vationally, Region 2 (Colorado, Nebraska, South Da- 
kota, and eastern Wyoming) and Region 3 rank second 
only to Region 4 (southern Idaho, Nevada, Utah, and 
western Wyoming) in amount of grazing use based on 
permitted head months (the time in months livestock 
spend on Forest Service land). Table 2 presents figures on 
the Region 3 allotments with a vegetation type composed 
of 50 percent or greater ponderosa pine and mixed coni- 
fer in 1995. 
Of the 253 ponderosa pine-mixed conifer allotments in 
Region 3, we have information on the grazing system in 
use on 232 of them. Seven allotments have combination 
systems which are not discussed here, and the remainder 
do not have information on the grazing system. The sys- 
tems in use are seasonal, rest rotation, deferred, and year- 
long. Under a seasonal system, the allotment is grazed 
All range figures were obtained from the USDA Forest Service South- 
western Region 3, Regional Office, Albuquerque, New Mexico, with 
the help of Dave Stewart and George Martinez. George Martinez also 
obtained information from Region 3 Forests on the number of allot- 
ments in ponderosa pine and mixed conifer and the types of grazing 
systems used on those allotments. 
Table 1. Livestockgrazing by permittees on National Forests 
in Region 3, 19958. 
No. of 
No. of 
State 
permittees 
animals 
AUMs 
Arizona 
469 
137,830 
1 ,I 13,230 
New Mexico 
1066 
90,585 
791,953 
Total 
1535 
228,415 
1,905,183 
a Figures obtained from the USDA Forest Service Southwestern Region 3, 
Regional Office. 
Table 2. Grazing allotments on National Forests in Region 3 
with a vegetation type consisting of 250% ponderosa pine 
and mixed conifer, 1 9958. 
No. of 
Ha of 
State 
allotments 
allotments 
AUMs 
Arizona 
100 
1,139,813 
249,472 
New Mexico 
153 
1,248,185 
195,041 
Total 
253 
2,387,998 
444,513 
a Figures obtained from the USDA Forest Service Southwestern Region 3, 
Regional Office. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
35 

Chapter 2 
continuously throughout the growing season on an an- 
nual basis, while under a year-long system the allotment 
is grazed continuously throughout the year (Saab et al. 
1995). Under rest rotation, the allotment is divided into 
pastures or segments with one being rested (usually for 
12 months) while the others are grazed. The period of non- 
use is rotated among the pastures. Under deferred rota- 
tion, at least one pasture is rested during part of the graz- 
ing season and the deferment is rotated among pastures 
in succeeding years. This system is often used to graze 
one pasture during the early part of the growing season 
and the remaining pastures later in the season (discussed 
in Saab et al. 1995). 
Region 3 has the following breakdown of systems in 
use on the ponderosa pine-mixed conifer allotments: year- 
long-2 allotments, seasonal-54, rest rotation-69, and 
deferred-107. The year-long systems are in the southern 
part of New Mexico on the Lincoln and Gila National For- 
ests, while the seasonal systems are concentrated in the 
northern part of New Mexico on the Carson and Santa Fe 
National Forests (43 of the seasonal systems). The remain- 
der are scattered throughout the Region. In future stud- 
ies, this type of information will be valuable for the kinds 
of research that are needed to assess the effect of different 
types of grazing systems on bird populations and habitat 
as discussed by Finch et al. (this volume). In addition to 
different grazing systems, the types of Southwestern 
ranching operations themselves also have a significant 
impact on wildlife habitat and management, as discussed 
in the following section. 
Commercial and Traditional Ranching 
Operations 
Throughout the West, the rural ranching lifestyle is a 
deeply rooted tradition. Ranching on public lands is a 
strong, though not universally appreciated, aspect of this 
tradition, as demonstrated by the recent congressional 
debates and public controversy over range and grazing 
fee reform (Richardson 1995; Varela 1996). Scurlock (this 
volume) describes the history and development of range 
resource use in Arizona and New Mexico, from its begin- 
nings in 1598 with Spanish colonization and the introduc- 
tion of domesticated herbivores. Range statistics from 
Region 3 show a fluctuating but generally downward 
trend in numbers of permittees, animals authorized to 
graze, and AUMs from 1982-1995. Numbers of permit- 
tees in both states have dropped by about 25 percent, while 
animals authorized to graze have dropped by roughly 25 
percent in Arizona and 20 percent in New Mexico. These 
declines relate to climatic and market fluctuations, con- 
solidation of permits, and growing urbanization in the 
region. The larger commercial operations generally fare 
better than smaller ones in terms of profit and maximiz- 
ing the opportunities of technological advances and ad- 
ditional land acquisitions (Clary 1975; Harris et al. 1995). 
Smaller commercial operations tend to be hit more heavily 
by environmental and market fluctuations. 
There are many small operations in the region, and 
many that can be considered non-commercial (or tradi- 
tional) on the basis of herd size (Eastman and Gray 1987). 
According to a recent statement by Congressman Bill 
Richardson in the discussions over grazing fee and range 
reform, 70 percent of federal permittees (on lands from 
all agehcies) in New Mexico have fewer than 100 head 
(Richardson 1995), which is about the minimum size of a 
small commercially viable operation as discussed by 
Eastman and Gray (1987). The willingness of these ranch- 
ers to implement grazing system practices and range im- 
provements that benefit wildlife habitat will definitely be 
a factor in the success of habitat management strategies. 
Small, traditional operations occur throughout the re- 
gion but tend to be concentrated in the more mountain- 
ous, ponderosa pine zones, with a special clustering in the 
small Hispanic villages of northern and central New Mexico. 
Owning animals is a very important aspect of these oper- 
ations. The animals provide the villagers with a means of 
reaffirming ties to their ancestral lands and heritage. In many 
cases, the extra buffer that the animals provide allows the 
family to remain in the ancestral, rural community and con- 
tinue at least a part of the traditional lifestyle (Eastman et al. 
1971; Eastman and Gray 1987; William de Buys [personal 
communication] 1995; Raish 1996;Varela 1996). 
Herd sizes, goals, and methods of operation differ sig- 
nificantly between the small-scale, traditional ventures 
and even small, commercial cattle ranches. Average herd 
sizes for the traditional enterprises are around 19, while 
small commercial ranches have about 100 head. Making a 
profit is the number one goal of commercial ranchers (even 
small-scale ones), followed by maintaining a good qual- 
ity of life. These producers tailor their methods to maxi- 
mize profit by increasing production. They tend to seek 
out and adopt new practices and range improvements that 
increase production and the quality of the herds. They are 
willing to invest cash, borrow, and take risks in the hope 
of eventual profit (Eastman and Gray 1987). 
The small-scale, traditional operators, on the other hand, 
rank quality of life first, followed by avoidance of being 
forced out of ranching, with making a profit last on the 
list. These goals condition their behavior and methods of 
operation. They are less willing to invest cash in what they 
perceive to be risky improvements or new techniques that 
may not work out. New technology often requires con- 
siderable time and effort to learn, while the benefits to 
the very small operation may be limited. Any increases in 
operational costs hit this group harder than the commer- 
cial stock raisers who sell many more animals and realize 
greater profits with which to fund rising costs (Eastman 
and Gray 1987; Richardson 1995). Thus, the small-scale 
operators may oppose actions that increase the cost of their 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Contemporary Human Use of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests 
operations, such as increases in grazing fees or range im- 
provements mandated to improve environmental condi- 
tions. Since small operators are prevalent in the region, 
their education and cooperation on issues of wildlife im- 
provements may be critical to the success of habitat man- 
agement programs. 
Urbanization and Recreation 
The ponderosa pine forests of the Southwestern United 
States, although currently sparsely inhabited, are dispro- 
portionately affected by increasing human population. 
Many small towns have grown exponentially in the last 
three decades as tourism and retirement industries 
boomed. Moreover, cool temperatures and scenic beauty 
attract many recreationists to the forests, especially dur- 
ing the summer months when desert dwellers try to es- 
cape extreme temperatures. The importance of ponderosa 
pine forests as recreation sites indicates that the potential 
impacts of humans on the forest are likely to be far greater 
than resident population censuses alone might suggest. 
Human pressures on the ponderosa pine forest will cer- 
tainly continue to increase. Urban populations are pro- 
jected to increase (e.g., Anderson 1995), and recreation de- 
mands throughout the United States are projected to 
accelerate (Boyle and Samson 1985; Flather and Cordel 1995). 
Urban Growth in Ponderosa Pine Forests 
The ponderosa pine forests of Arizona and New Mexico 
are sparsely populated by full-time residents. Flagstaff, 
Arizona, is the largest city situated wholly in ponderosa 
pine. It occupied 164 km2 and held 50,000 residents in 1990 
(U.S. Census Bureau). However, from 1960 to the present, 
Flagstaff has grown tremendously and is currently increas- 
ing at a rate of 15 percent per year (figure 6). The Arizona 
Department of Economic Security projects its population 
will exceed 100,000 in the year 2040.3 
Flagstaff's growth is not unique among cities in ponde- 
rosa pine forests or adjacent pinyon-juniper woodlands. 
Other important urban centers in or adjacent to ponde- 
rosa pine are Santa Fe, New Mexico (primarily in pinyon- 
juniper), and Prescott, Arizona, both of which are increas- 
ing rapidly ( Fig. 6). Five smaller cities (Payson, Pinetop, 
Judy Burding (Flagstaff Chamber of Commerce), Joyce Wachter (U.S. 
Census Bureau), Colleen Marzluff (S.E.I.), and A1 Sanford (NM Insti- 
tute of Mining and Technology) provided information on economic 
growth and population size in Southwestern cities. Britta Morner, Tah 
Yang, Bill Larsen, Lorie Long, and Buddy Stewart of the USDA Forest 
Service Southwestern Region 3 provided recreation use and occu- 
pancy data. 
- 
~la~staff, 
AZ 
-e - Santa Fe, NM 
-4- Payson. AZ 
. - A  -. Ruidoso, NM 
4.. 
Pinetop, AZ 
-v.. Showlow, AZ 
- 
Taos, NM 
- 
Grand Canyon, AZ 
- 
Chama, NM 
P 
4 . Cloudcrofl. NM 
/ \-+dV 
--v- 
Los Alarnos, NM 
..*.. Cuba. NM 1 
Year 
Figure 6. Human population changes in towns in and adjacent 
to ponderosa pine forests in Arizona and New Mexico. 
Towns experiencing growth are plotted in the top panel. 
Towns of relatively stable size are plotted in the lower 
panel. Data from the time records were kept until 1990 
and were provided by the U.S. Census Bureau Library. 
Data for 1995 were obtained from local chambers of 
commerce or city clerks. 
and Showlow in Arizona; and Ruidoso and Taos in New 
Mexico) are showing the first stages of rapid growth (figure 
6). Payson and Ruidoso will likely follow Flagstaff's steep 
trajectory in the next few decades. The economic fuel for 
much of this rapid growth in ponderosa pine forest cities is 
provided by retirees, tourists, and recreationists. 
Not all towns in ponderosa pine forest are increasing in 
size. In contrast to those in the top panel of figure 6, five 
towns appear relatively stable in size (lower panel of fig- 
ure 6). They apparently have not grown because of their 
isolation and proximity to federal or private land that is 
unavailable for subdivision. In the interesting case of Los 
Alamos, New Mexico, which was built in 1942 to house 
those developing the atom bomb, the lack of growth has 
resulted because the U.S. 
Department of Energy has not 
expanded operations. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 2 
Recreation in Ponderosa Pine Forests 
The national trend toward increased recreation (Boyle 
and Samson 1985; Flather and Cordel 1995) is evident 
within the ponderosa pine forests of Arizona and New 
Mexico. Most significant in this respect is Grand Canyon 
National Park, which includes campgrounds, lodges, 
roads, and scenic viewpoints in the ponderosa pine forest 
of northern Arizona. Visitation to the Park has grown tre- 
mendously since its opening in 1915 (figure 7). Nearly 5 
million people visited the Park in 1995. Even if each per- 
son only stayed one day, and visitation was evenly spread 
throughout the year, over 13,500 visitors would have been 
present each day of 1995. In reality, most visitation is dur- 
ing the summer when numbers of visitors per day can 
reach a total half as large as Flagstaff's population. 
Recreational use of National Forests in Arizona and 
New Mexico is also on the rise. Specific figures have been 
recorded only recently and are unavailable by forest type. 
However, recreation in the region is primarily in ponde- 
rosa pine and is useful for defining trends and activities. 
Recreation use increased from 1992 to 1995 in Region 3; 
over 40 million visitor-days of recreation were recorded 
in 1995 (figure 8). Most visitors were viewing scenery or 
camping, picnicking, and swimming (figure 8). Non-mo- 
torized travel (hiking, horseback riding, and river raft- 
Year 
Figure 7. Visitation to Grand Canyon National Park from 1915 
to 1995. Data were collected by the U. S. National Park 
Service. The visitor-per-day vehicle multipliers were 
updated during 1992. Visitation in 1995 was estimated 
to be reduced by 50,000 people due to a government 
shutdown. 
ing) has increased most rapidly, as also noted for the na- 
tion as a whole (Flather and Cordel 1995). Hunting, fish- 
ing, winter sports, and resort camping have remained 
fairly stable and include many fewer people than travel 
and camping (figure 8). Nonconsumptive wildlife recre- 
ation (bird watching, nature study/viewing/photogra- 
phy) has increased each year, but involves relatively few 
p e ~ p l e . ~  
However, nonconsumptive activities can have 
significapt impacts on species of great interest if individu- 
als of these species are disturbed repeatedly. 
Marzluff presents a detailed discussion of the effects of 
the various different types of recreational activities on bird 
populations and habitat in another section of this volume. 
He reviews motorized travel and viewing scenery; camp- 
ing and picnicking; hiking, nature study, and wildlife 
photography; resorts and recreation residences; and win- 
ter sports and mechanized off-road travel in his discus- 
sion. This section also describes the types of research re- 
quired to address the effects of both urbanization and 
recreation on songbirds in Southwestern ponderosa pine 
forests (Marzluff this volume). 
Increased recreational use of the National Forests has 
led to an expansion of public facilities. Current (1995) fa- 
cilities have the capacity to hold over 130,000 visitors per 
day, up from 98,000 in 1990 (U.S. Forest Service Annual 
Mechanized travel & view scenery 
- + - 4  
--- 
w 
Camping, picnicking, 8 swimming 
/ 
~iking, 
horseback. 8 water travel 
&.A 
.--.-. 
-.-.-.-A 
/ 
Hunting and fshing 
Resorts, ?bins, 8 camps 
b-Y. -.*.... 
\.......-.A 
- 
Wnter --.*-
sports 
a 
- 
..-.. * 
+.-..-.* 
Nonconsumpthre wildlife use 
Year 
Figure 8. Recreation use in Region 3 of the USDA Forest Ser- 
vice (Arizona, New Mexico, and a small portion of 
Texas and Oklahoma). Data were collected by survey- 
ing visitors to local facilities. Data before 1992 were 
obtained with varying methods and are not directly 
comparable to those presented. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Contemporary Human Use of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests 
Recreation Site and Area Information). The number of 
campgrounds and picnic areas increased slightly from 
1990 to 1995 (figure 9). The number of recreational resi- 
dences in and adjacent to a National Forest has declined 
recently. Since Forest Service Region 3 recreation infor- 
mation is not maintained by vegetation type, it is difficult 
to determine the nature and extent of activities focusing 
in the ponderosa pine type. More research is needed on 
this topic, just as more research is needed concerning the 
effects of the various different types of recreational activi- 
ties on bird species and habitat. 
Conclusion 
The issue of land use and its effects is a complex one. 
The environmental effects of a particular land use can be 
singular, synergistic, or cumulative with long- and short- 
term consequences. Both synergistic and cumulative land 
use effects require considerably more research. An espe- 
cially important area that should be targeted for future 
studies concerns the combined effects of logging and graz- 
ing on birds and bird habitat. 
Although we have focused primarily on human land 
uses and their negative effects to wildlife species, results 
of land use activities can also be positive or neutral for 
.- 
1 - 
Number of campgrounds 
- 
Number of ~icnic 
sites 
c 
.- 
1 
I 
- Number of iesidences 
1- 
Total number of recreation sites 
0 
1 
1 
I 
I 
I 
1990 
1991 
1992 
1993 
1994 
1995 
Year 
Figure 9. Number of developed recreation sites in Region 3 of 
the USDA Forest Service. 
these species. Both Thompson et al. (1995) and Hejl et al. 
(1995) review positive, negative, and neutral effects of 
varying silvicultural treatments on selected species. Saab 
et al. (1995) provide a similar discussion with respect to 
grazing in western habitats. 
Since the 1960s and 1970s, the precedence of human 
resource consumption and use over other considerations 
has been under increasing scrutiny as demonstrated by 
environmental protection legislation and court actions. 
The'National Environmental Policy Act, the Endangered 
Species Act, the National Forest Management Act, and the 
Migratory Bird Treaty Act are examples of legislation de- 
signed to help protect the environment, as well as wild- 
life species and habitat. This legislation indicates the 
strength of the environmental movement and the general 
importance of wildlife protection to at least a certain seg- 
ment of the American public. 
Despite the increase in environmental protection legis- 
lation, ponderosa pine habitat declined in geographic ex- 
tent and tree volume in the period from 1962 through 1986 
in Arizona and New Mexico. Though the geographic ex- 
tent and volume of small trees (poletimber, saplings, seed- 
lings, and trees with a dbh below 43.2 cm) increased, these 
measures decreased for large trees, yielding an overall 
decrease. As discussed previously, logging is generally the 
prime cause of changes in stand geographic extent and 
volume (Choate 1966; Spencer 1966; Comer et al. 1990; Van 
Hooser et al. 1993). Historically, ponderosa pine has been a 
main, heavily cut component of the Southwestern timber 
harvest (Schubert 1974), and this pattern continued into the 
1980s. Since the beginning of the 1990s, both timber sales 
and cut volume of all species have declined on Forest Ser- 
vice land. Many factors contributed to these declines, includ- 
ing implementation of the Mexican Spotted Owl and Gos- 
hawk Habitat Protection Guidelines (USDA Forest Service 
Region 3 1994). The effect of these declines on the health and 
extent of ponderosa pine habitat remains to be seen. 
In addition to wood harvest, cattle grazing (as well as 
the grazing of wild herbivores such as elk) can alter pon- 
derosa pine habitat. There is less information on the ef- 
fects of grazing (Finch et al. this volume) than on the ef- 
fects of timber cutting and even less on the combined 
effects of timber harvest and grazing. Grazing on public 
lands is now coming under increasing scrutiny and dis- 
cussion. Recent congressional debates and public contro- 
versy over range and grazing fee reform show a chang- 
ing, more negative public perception of ranching on 
federal lands (Kennedy et al. 1995; Richardson 1995; 
Mitchell and Fletcher 1996; Varela 1996). Judging the ex- 
tent to which perceptions and attitudes of the general 
public differ from those of non-governmental organiza- 
tions and advocacy groups is difficult and is becoming an 
area of concern to federal land managers (Mitchell and 
Fletcher 1996). In any event, there is growing awareness 
of the potentially harmful effects of grazing on birds and 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 2 
other wildlife species and recognition that future range 
studies must consider both the needs of wildlife and the 
needs of society if they are to be effective (Kennedy et al. 
1995; Vavra 1995). 
Since the 1920s and 1930s, there has been a downward 
trend in the number of animals grazing on public lands in 
the Southwest (discussed in Raish 1996). As discussed 
previously, in the years from 1982 through 1995 the num- 
bers of Forest Service permittees dropped by about 25 
percent in Arizona and New Mexico, while the number 
of animals authorized to graze dropped by 25 percent in 
Arizona and 20 percent in New Mexico. However, the 
ways in which these figures relate to the various different 
grazing systems in use and the effects of these systems on 
wildlife and wildlife habitat are not well known. The ef- 
fect of wild herbivore grazing in conjunction with cattle 
grazing is also a topic that requires additional research. 
Answering these questions requires a concerted program 
of study focusing on the effects of different grazing sys- 
tems on wildlife in matched habitat types (Saab et al. 1995). 
In addition to studies focusing on the effects of cattle 
grazing, more information is needed on the effects of ur- 
banization and recreation on wildlife species and habitat. 
With urban populations projected to increase and recre- 
ation demands projected to accelerate throughout the 
United States (Boyle and Samson 1985; Anderson 1995; 
Flather and Cordel 1995), the potential for considerable 
negative effects from these activities is high. Studies de- 
signed to assess the impacts of these types of activities 
can assist planners to prepare growth models and recre- 
ation development strategies that are the least harmful to 
species and habitat. 
Though there are indeed many human activities occur- 
ring in the ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest, this 
review has examined those that have the greatest poten- 
tial to affect bird species and their habitat. Thus, commer- 
cial and personal-use wood harvest, livestock grazing, 
recreation, and urbanization have been considered. Of 
these, we have the greatest amount of research informa- 
tion on the effects of large-scale timber harvesting on habi- 
tat. Considerably more research is needed concerning the 
effects of different types of grazing systems and the ef- 
fects of combined grazing and logging. Different types of 
recreational activities and growing urbanization in the 
region also require additional research. Studies of the ef- 
fects of these activities are crucial for planning future de- 
velopments that consider both human and wildlife needs. 
Literature Cited 
Alexander, R.R. 1987. Silvicultural systems, cutting methods, 
and cultural practices from Black Hills ponderosa pine. 
GTR RM-139, USDAForest Service, Rocky Mountain For- 
est and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, CO. 
Alexander, R.R., and C.B. Edminster. 1980. Management 
of ponderosa pine in even-aged stands in the South- 
west. Res. Pap. RM-225, USDA Forest Service Rocky 
Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort 
Collins, CO. 
Anderson, S.H. 1995. Recreational disturbance and wild- 
life populations. Pages 157-168 in R.L. Knight and K.J. 
Gutziiriller, editors. Wildlife and recreationists. Island 
Press, Washington, DC. 
Baker, Robert D., Robert S. Maxwell, Victor H. Treat, and 
Henry C. Dethloff. 1988. Timeless heritage: a history of 
the Forest Service in the Southwest. FS-409, USDA For- 
est Service. Washington, DC. 
Boyle, S.A., and F.B. Samson. 1985. Effects of noncon- 
sumptive recreation on wildlife: a review. Wildlife So- 
ciety Bulletin 13:llO-116. 
Brawn, Jeffrey D., and Russell P. Balda. 1988. The influ- 
ence of silvicultural activity on ponderosa pine forest 
bird communities in the Southwestern United States. 
Bird Conservation 3:3-21: 
Choate, G.A. 1966. New Mexico's forest resource. Res. Bull. 
INT-6, USDAForest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and 
Range Experiment Station and Intermountain Forest 
and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, CO and 
Ogden, UT. 
Clapp, E.H. 1912. Silvicultural systems for western yel- 
low pine. Soc. Am. For. Proc. 7:168-176. 
Clary, Warren P. 1975. Range management and its ecologi- 
cal basis in the ponderosa pine type of Arizona: the sta- 
tus of our knowledge. Res. Pap. RM-158, USDA Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station. Fort Collins, CO. 
Conner, R.C., J.D. Born, A.W. Green, and R.A. O'Brien. 
1990. Forest resources of Arizona. Res. Bull. INT-69, 
USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station, Ogden, UT. 
de Buys, William. 1995. Forest fight isn't "us," "themn- 
just us. The New Mexican. December 21. 
DeGraff, R.M. 1978. Proceedings of the workshop on non- 
game bird habitat management in the coniferous for- 
ests of the western United States. GTR PNW-64, USDA 
Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Forest and Range Ex- 
periment Station, La Grande, OR. 
DeGraff, R.M. 1980. Management of western forests and 
grasslands for nongame birds. GTR INT-86, USDA For- 
est Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station and Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experi- 
ment Station, Ogden, UT. 
Diem, K.L. 1980. Ponderosa pine bird communities. Pages 
170-197 in R.M. DeGraff, technical coordinator. Man- 
agement of western forests and grasslands for nongame 
birds. GTR INT-86, USDA Forest Service, Intermoun- 
tain Forest and Range Experiment Station and Rocky 
40 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Contemporary Human Use of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests 
Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Ogden, 
UT. 
Dodd, Norris L., and Sharen L. Adams. 1989. Integrating 
wildlife needs into National Forest timber sale planning: 
a state agency perspective. Pages 131-140 in Tecle, Aregai; 
Covington, W. Wallace; Hamre, RH., editors. Multiresomre 
management of ponderosa pine forests. Gen. Tech. Rep. 
RM-185. USDAForest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and 
Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, CO. 
Eastman, Clyde, Garrey Carruthers, and James A. Liefer. 
1971. Evaluation of attitudes toward land in north-cen- 
tral New Mexico. Agric. Exp. Sta. Bull. 577. New Mexico 
State University, Las Cruces, NM. 
Eastman, Clyde, and James R. Gray. 1987. Community 
grazing: practice and potential in New Mexico. Univer- 
sity of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque, NM.. 
Eichstaedt, Peter. 1995. Truchas firewood crisis rooted in 
tradition, suspicion. Albuquerque Journal. December 29. 
Evans, Keith. 1990. Rangeland research: past, present, and 
future. USDA Forest Service, Forest Environment Re- 
search. Washington, DC. 
Everett, Richard L. 1992. Change on the range: new perspec- 
tives for rangeland research in the 90's. USDA Forest Ser- 
vice, Forest Environment Research. Washington, DC. 
Flather, C.H., and H.K. Cordel. 1995. Outdoor recreation: 
historical and anticipated trends. Pages 3-16 in R.L. 
Knight and K.J. Gutzwiller, editors. Wildlife and 
Recreationists. Island Press, Washington, DC. 
Forest Conservation Council. 1995. A conservation plan 
for forests of the American Southwest. Southwest For- 
est Alliance. Santa Fe, NM. 
Franzreb, Kathleen E., and Robert D. Ohmart. 1978. The 
effects of timber harvesting on breeding birds in a 
mixed-coniferous forest. Condor 80:431441. 
Harper, Allan G. Andrew R. Cordova, and Kalvero Oberg. 
1943. Man and resources in the middle Rio Grande val- 
ley. University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque, NM. 
Harris, Thomas R., Arunava Bhattacharyya, William G. 
Kvasnicka, and Gary M. Veserat. 1995. What type of 
rancher looks for new technology? Rangelands 
17(6):217-221. 
Hejl, Sallie J., Richard L. Hutto, Charles R. Preston, and 
Deborah M. Finch. 1995. Effects of silvicultural treat- 
ments in the Rocky Mountains. Pages 220-244 in Mar- 
tin, Thomas E.; Finch, Deborah M., editors. Ecology and 
management of neotropical migratory birds: a synthe- 
sis and review of critical issues. Oxford University Press, 
New York, NY. 
Holechek, J.L., R.D. Piper, and C.H. Herbel. 1989. Range 
management: principles and practices. Prentice-Hall, 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ. 
Johnsen Jr., T.N., G.H. Schubert, and D.P. Almas. 1973. 
Rehabilitation of forest land: the Rocky Mountain-In- 
termountain Region. Journal of Forestry 71:144-147. 
Johnson, W.M. 1956. The effect of grazing intensity on 
plant composition, vigor, and growth of pine-bunch- 
grass ranges in central Colorado. Ecology 37:790-798. 
Kennedy, J.J., B.L. Fox, and T.D. Osen. 1995. Changing 
social values and images of public rangeland manage- 
ment. Rangelands 17(4):127-132. 
Korte, Tim. 1996. Tradition vs. environmentalists: fight 
flares over wood gathering. The Press Democrat (Santa 
Rosa, California). January 13. 
Martin, Thomas E., and Deborah M. Finch, editors. 1995. 
dcology and management of neotropical migratory 
birds: a synthesis and review of critical issues. Oxford 
University Press, New York, NY. 
McClellan, Doug. 1995. Protesters hang environmental- 
ists in effigy: rival rally takes issue with message. Al- 
buquerque Journal. November 25. 
McComb, W.C. 1984. Proceedings - workshop on manage- 
ment of nongame species & ecological communities. 
Department of Forestry, University of Kentucky, Lex- 
ington, KY. 
Mitchell, John, and Rick Fletcher. 1996. Perceptions of graz- 
ing on Forest Service land. USDA Forest Service, For- 
estry Research West. 
Myers, C.A., and E.C. Martin. 1963. Fifty years' progress 
in converting virgin Southwestern ponderosa pine to 
managed stands. Journal of Forestry 61: 583-586. 
Pearson, G.A. 1910. Reproduction of western yellow pine 
in the Southwest. Service Circ. 174,16 pp. USDA Forest 
Service. 
Pearson, G.A. 1950. Management of ponderosa pine in the 
Southwest. USDA Monogr. 6.218 pp. Washington, DC. 
Pearson, G.A., and R.E. Marsh. 1935. Timber growing and 
logging practice in the Southwest and in the Black Hills 
Region. USDA Tech. Bull. 480,80 pp. 
Ragan, Tom. 1996. Operator dismantles Vallecitos sawmill. 
Albuquerque Journal. January 10. 
Raish, Carol. 1996. Historic land use and grazing patterns 
in northern New Mexico. Pages 189-197 in Shaw, Dou- 
glas W.; Finch, Deborah M., editors. Desired future con- 
ditions for Southwestern riparian ecosystems: bringing 
interests and concerns together. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM- 
268. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and 
Range Experiment Station. Fort Collins, CO. 
Richardson, Bill. 1995. Domenici grazing bill will benefit 
big ranches. Albuquerque Journal (Op-Ed Page). Sep- 
tember 10. 
Roath, L.R., and W.C. Krueger. 1982a. Cattle grazing and 
behavior on a forested range. Journal of Range Man- 
agement 35:332-338. 
Roath, L.R., and W.C. Krueger. 1982b. Cattle grazing in- 
fluence on a mountain riparian zone. Journal of Range 
Management 35: 100-1 03. 
Saab, Victoria A., Carl E. Bock, Terrell D. Rich, and David S. 
Dobkin. 1995. Livestock grazing effects in western North 
America. Pages 311-353 in Martin, Thomas E.; Finch, 
Deborah M., editors. Ecology and management of 
USDA Forest Service Gen.Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 2 
neotropical migratory birds: a synthesis and review of criti- 
cal issues. Oxford University Press, New York, NY. 
Samson, F.B. 1980. Use of montane meadows by birds 
Pages 113-129 in DeGraff, R.M., technical coordinator. 
Management of western forests and grasslands for non- 
game birds. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-86. USDA Forest Ser- 
vice, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Sta- 
tion, Ogden, UT. 
Schubert, G.H. 1974. Silviculture of Southwestern ponde- 
rosa pine: the status of our knowledge. Res. Pap. RM- 
123,71 pp. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain. For- 
est and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, CO. 
Skovlin, J.M., R.W. Harris, G.S. Strickler, and G.A. Garri- 
son. 1976. Effects of cattle grazing methods on ponde- 
rosa pine-bunchgrass range in the pacific northwest. 
Tech. Bull. 1531. USDA Forest Service. 
Smith, D.M. 1962. The practice of silviculture. 7th ed., 578 
pp. John Wiley and Sons Inc., New York, NY. 
Smith, D.R. 1975. Symposium on management of forest 
and range habitat for nongame birds. GTR WO-1, USDA 
Forest Service, Washington, DC. 
Spencer, J.S. 1966. Arizona's forests. Resource Bull. INT-6, 
USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station and Intermountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station, Fort Collins, CO and Ogden, UT. 
Szaro, Robert C., and Russell P. Balda. 1979. Effects of 
harvesting ponderosa pine on nongame bird populations. 
Res. Pap. RM-212. USDAForest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, CO. 
Tecle, Aregai, Wallace W. Covington, and R.H. Hamre, 
editors. 1989. Multiresource management of ponderosa 
pine forests. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-185. USDA Forest Ser- 
vice, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station, Fort Collins, CO. 
Thompson 111, Frank R., John R. Probst, and Martin G. 
Raphael. 1995. Impacts of silviculture: overview and 
management recommendations. Pages 201-219 in Mar- 
tin, Thomas E.; Finch, Deborah M., editors. Ecology and 
management of neotropical migratory birds: a synthe- 
sis and review of critical issues. Oxford University Press, 
New York, NY. 
Toppo, Greg. 1995. Striking an emotional cord: environ- 
mentalists hanged in effigy during logging ban confron- 
tation. The New Mexican. November 25. 
USDA Forest Service Region 3.1994. Condition and trends 
of timber industry in Region 3: 06/05/94. White paper 
on file. USDA Forest Service, Southwestern Regional 
Office. Albuquerque, NM. 
USDA Forest Service. 1983. Silvicultural systems for the 
major forest types of the United States. R.E. Burns, tech- 
nical cdmpiler. USDA Agriculture Handbook 445, 191 
pp. Washington, DC. 
USDA Forest Service. 1996. Grazing Statistical Summary 
1995. USDA Forest Service, Range Management Staff, 
Washington, DC:. 
USDI Fish and Wildlife Service. 1995. Recovery plan for 
the Mexican spotted owl: Vol. I. US. Department of In- 
terior, Fish and Wildlife Service. Albuquerque, NM. 
Van Hooser, Dwane D., Renee A. O'Brien, and Dennis C. 
Collins. 1993. New Mexico's forest resources. Res. Bull. 
INT-79, USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and 
Range Experiment Station. Ogden, UT. 
Varela, Maria. 1996. State's ranchers hardly fit image of 
welfare kings. Albuquerque Journal (Op-Ed Page). 
March 22. 
Vavra, Martin, editor. 1995. Rangeland research: strategies 
for providing sustainability and stewardship to the 
rangelands of America and the world. Rangelands 17(6). 
Wilcove, D.S. 1988. Forest fragmentation as a wildlife 
management issue in the eastern United States. Pages 
146-150 in Healthy forests, healthy world. Proceedings 
1988 Soc. Amer. Foresters Natl. Convention, Rochester, 
NY. 
Willard, E.E. 1990. Use and impact of domestic livestock 
in whitebark pine forests. Pages 201- 207 in Schmidt, 
W.C.; McDonald, K.J., editors. Proceedings - Symposium 
on whitebark pine ecosystems: ecology and manage- 
ment of a high-mountain resource. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT- 
270. USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and 
Range Experiment Station, Ogden, UT. 
Woolsey Jr., T.S. 1911. Western yellow pine in Arizona and 
New Mexico. USDA Bull. 101,64 pp. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 3 
A Historical Review 
Dan Scurlock and Deborah M. Finch 
Introduction 
Many groups of people in the Southwest have been 
closely associated with ponderosa pine forests for at least 
12,000 years. In the last 150 years, activities, such as log- 
ging, fire suppression, and grazing, have caused exten- 
sive modifications to ponderosa pine forests including 
changes in distribution, species composition, stand age, 
and a general decline in forest health. Climatic changes 
have also contributed to forest modification. Forest habi- 
tat alterations have affected the distribution and abun- 
dance of bird populations, resulting in population de- 
creases or increases of some species. 
This chapter reviews the historical: 1) occupancy, use 
of and impacts on ponderosa pine forests by early Ameri- 
can Indians and European settlers; and 2) the human use of 
and impacts on birds in ponderosa pine forests. Contempo- 
rary ecology and human use of ponderosa pine forests are 
described in this publication by Moir et al. and Raish et al. 
Recent human impacts on ponderosa pine birds are discussed 
by Marzluff and Finch, also in this volume. 
Historical Observations of 
Ponderosa Pine Forests 
Perhaps the first European to see a ponderosa pine for- 
est in the Southwest United States was Alvar Nunez 
Cabeza de Vaca, who traveled across southeastern New 
his aimy eventually reached present Taos and Pecos, New 
Mexico. The term "pino" was used by the chronicler of 
the expedition when describing the trees observed. Ref- 
erence was made to "pillars of pine," which may have 
been ponderosa pine, that were used by the Pueblo Indi- 
ans to construct footbridges (Strout 1971). Extensive mon- 
tane pine forests in the region were mentioned by Coronado, 
as they were by several subsequent Spanish explorers in the 
late 1500s. The earliest description of ponderosa pines in the 
region was by Don Pedro Baptista Pino in 1812, who re- 
marked that the trees he observed were more than 110 ft tall 
and 14 to 19 ft thick (Bustamante and Simmons 1995). 
Descriptions of ponderosa pine forests in New Mexico 
and Arizona were made by early United States military 
personnel and scientists. Lt. James H. Simpson, on an 1849 
expedition at the present border of New Mexico and Ari- 
zona, referred to "yellow pine" describing them as "about 
eighty feet high and twelve feet in circumference at the 
trunk" (McNitt 1964). In 1853, Lt. A. W. Whipple described 
extensive pine forests on the flanks of the San Francisco 
Peaks. To the west of the range he observed, "groves of 
magnificent pines, intermingled with cedars and dwarf 
oaks" (Foreman 1946). Later, C. E. Dutton wrote about the 
ponderosa pine forests of the Kaibab Plateau in northern 
Arizona: 
"The trees are large and noble in aspect and stand 
widely apart . . . . Instead of dense forests, we 
can look far beyond and see the tree trunks van- 
ishing away like an infinite colonnade" (quoted 
in Mitchell and Freeman 1993). 
C. Hart Merriam (1890) described the ponderosa pine for- 
est on the Coconino Plateau. 
Mexico in 1536. Although Vaca did not specifically refer 
"The pine forest is thoroughly mature, nearly all 
to ponderosa pine, he did describe pinyon and another 
of the trees being of large size, and rarely 
pine growing in the region's mountains (Covey 1983). Fray 
crowded. It is a noteworthy forest, not alone on 
Marcos de Niza led a small expedition from western Mexico 
account of the size and beauty of the single spe- 
into present southeastern Arizona and then north in search 
cies of tree of which it is composed (Pinus ponde- 
of Pueblo Indians. Niza probably observed ponderosa pine 
rosa), but also because of its openness, freedom 
in eastern Arizona near the New Mexico border (Simmons 
1977). 
from undergrowth, and its grassy carpet. . . ." 
1nlate 1540, Francisco Vasquez de Coronado traveled 
This openness was also noted by Leiberg et al. (1904); 
north to the upper Rio Grande to reach Zuni Indian vil- 
however, by 1904, logging was fragmenting the extensive, 
lages. From there he marched east to present Socorro, New 
open stands of ponderosa pine. Cooper (1960) has pub- 
Mexico before joining a second contingent at a Pueblo vil- 
lished other similar historical descriptions of ponderosa 
lage near present Bernalillo, New Mexico. Coronado and 
pine forests. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
43 

Chapter 3 
Prehistoric and Historic Use of 
Ponderosa Pine Forests 
American Indian 
The first human contact with ponderosa pine forest oc- 
curred approximately 12,000 years ago when the earliest 
Paleo-Indians migrated south from Alaska and Canada 
into present Western United States. Although the groups 
that settled in this area over the next 5 millennia probably 
used ponderosa pine, its specific use in the Southwest was 
not archeologically documented until about 100 A.D. Ini- 
tially, poles and small logs of ponderosa pine were used 
to construct the roofs of pithouses (semi-subterranean 
dome-shaped wooden structure with a roof of grass, sticks, 
and mud). Ponderosa pine was used as village architecture 
evolved into multiple-room surface structures and eventu- 
ally into multi-storied, apartment-styled complexes after 950 
A.D. (Cordell 1984; Nabokov and Easton 1989). 
Many Anasazi village sites were located in pinyon-ju- 
niper woodlands where residents used nearby ponderosa 
pine stands for construction material. Ponderosa pine re- 
mains have been recorded at Arroyo Hondo Pueblo south 
of Santa Fe and at the Pajarito Plateau to the west. Chaco 
Canyon is the most extensive and best known prehistoric 
(12,000 B.P. to 1540) archeological site where ponderosa 
pine house beams have been found. The use of ponde- 
rosa pine by the prehistoric Pueblo for roof and other con- 
struction material continued into the historic period (1540 
to 1945). The Hohokam and Mogollon of southern Ari- 
zona used ponderosa pine to build roofs (Kelley 1980; 
Mindeleff 1891; Nabokov and Easton 1989). 
Although dead trees were generally used for fuelwood 
(Hughes 1983) and wood from older, abandoned rooms 
or villages was recycled into new construction (Ford 1987), 
living trees were harvested in certain locations. Packrat 
midden and pollen analyses at Chaco Canyon and Anasazi 
sites in Southwestern Colorado indicate that use of forest 
resources could be relatively intense, leading to soil ero- 
sion and other associated impacts that eventually caused 
village abandonment. Besides harvesting for construction 
timbers and fuelwood, the Anasazi also cleared relatively 
extensive acreage to farm (Betancourt and Van Devender 
1981; Petersen and Matthews 1987; Wyckoff 1977). 
At some large villages or village clusters, such as Chaco 
Canyon, ponderosa pine logs were widely used, especially 
as vigas (supporting rafters) in roof construction. Between 
1050 and 1125, approximately 100,000 ponderosa pine logs 
were cut in mountain ranges 45 to 60 miles away and 
hauled to Chaco villages where they were used in con- 
structing the roofs of residential rooms and kivas (round, 
partly underground ceremonial structures). Area pinyon- 
juniper woodlands and sparse ponderosa pine forests 
were extensively harvested between 900 and 1125 for con- 
struction and fuelwood use (Betancourt and Van Devender 
1981; Hall 1977; Murphy 1994; Toll 1985). 
During the historic period, Pueblo uses of ponderosa 
pine included chewing the needles as a cold sore remedy, 
drinking a concentrate made from the roots to treat urinary 
problems, and making cradle boards. Ponderosa pine con- 
tinued to be commonly used in construction and as fuelwood 
(Dunmire and Tierney 1995). The Hopi of northeastern Ari- 
zona usdd ponderosa pine from the San Francisco Peaks for 
prayer sticks and kiva roof beams (Houk 1993; Whiting 1966). 
The Navajo, Southern Ute, and various Apache tribes 
in the Southwest used the inner bark of the ponderosa 
pine (Castetter 1935), which was collected by removing a 
rectangular or oval patch of the scaly outer bark. The 
stringy layer of phloem and cambium cells was removed 
and eaten raw, made into a flour for bread making, and 
used to make a tea. Sap in the spring made the inner bark 
more palatable than at other times of the year when it was 
used only as an emergency food (Cassells 1983; Swetnam 
1984). The Utes placed those who were ill next to peeled 
ponderosa pine trees believing that doing so would help 
them recover (Cassells 1983). Trees scarred in the 18th, 19th, 
or early 20th centuries by this collecting activity are still vis- 
ible on National Forest System (NFS) land in the Southwest. 
The Navajo, from their late prehistoric arrival in the 
Southwest until recently, have also used ponderosa pine as 
construction material in the hogan (a building made of logs 
and mud and used as a dwelling). Trees that were wind- 
felled or lightning-struck were preferred, as was timber from 
prehistoric ruins or abandoned hogans; hogan sites were 
usually located in or close to ponderosa pine stands. Ponde- 
rosa pine was and is used by the Navajo for fencing. The 
Navajo used ponderosa pine for fuelwood (Jett and Spencer 
1981) and obtained a reddish dye and pigment from the bark, 
which they used in sand paintings (Houk 1993). 
European Settlers 
Spanish settlers used ponderosa pine wood for bv.ild- 
ing material, furniture, and tool handles. They extracted 
yellow dye from ponderosa pine to use in leather tanning 
and resin to treat scaly skin, smallpox, and liver spots 
(Boyd 1974; Curtin 1965). Although not as important as 
juniper and pinyon, ponderosa pine wood has and is used 
as a fuel. Ponderosa pine was used to make retablos (reli- 
gious images painted on a piece of wood or metal) that 
were used as either part of an altar screen or as a decora- 
tive hanging in a home or business (Dickey 1970). 
Anglo-American settlers in northern New Mexico be- 
gan to harvest ponderosa pine for construction and 
fuelwood in the late 1840s. Logging operations and saw- 
mills were established across the region from the 1850s to 
the 1930s to meet the demand for timber at military posts, 
mine and railroad construction sites, and settlements. Pon- 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

A Historical Overview 
derosa pine has been cultivated in the West since 1827 and 
used as ornamental, shade, or shelter-belt plantings (Vines 
1960). 
Grazing 
New Mexico 
Livestock grazing and settlement began in the South- 
west in 1598, when Juan de Oiiate led the first Spanish 
settlers and 4,000 sheep, 1,000 cattle, 1,000 goats, and 150 
mares with colts to the upper Rio Grande Basin in present 
New Mexico. Some of the wealthier individuals brought 
their own livestock (Baxter 1987; table 1). As these early 
herds grew, livestock grazing operations began at a num- 
ber of missions and land grant (a grant of land made by 
the government) settlements in northern and central New 
Mexico. As early as 1630, overgrazing at these locations 
was documented (Baxter 1987; Ford 1987; Simmons 1991). 
Following the appearance of spring grasses and shrubs 
from the pinyon-juniper to the mixed conifer zones, sheep, 
goats, and cattle were moved from their lower, protected 
winter pastures and herded into the uplands. By early 
summer the stock was herded as high as subalpine mead- 
ows or to the tundra above 12,000 ft. These uplands, in- 
cluding pinyon-juniper woodlands and/or ponderosa 
pine forests, were ejidos (common lands) shared by the 
villagers (Bailey 1890; Briggs and Ness 1987). 
The development of livestock raising in New Mexico 
was interrupted for 13 years during the Pueblo Revolt of 
1680. In 1693, the Spaniards began raising livestock again 
with more than 4,000 sheep, cattle, and goats. By the 
middle of the next century, livestock numbers had in- 
creased to more than 135,000 animals, which were grazing 
from Taos to Belen, New Mexico (Baxter 1987; table 1). 
Montane woodlands and/or forests, part of every Span- 
ish land grant in north central New Mexico, were inten- 
sively grazed from the 18th century until the mid-1800s. 
In the 18th century, some land grants in northern New 
Table 1. Livestock numbers in the Southwest, 1598-1820~.~ 
Year 
Sheep 
Cattle Goats Horses Mules 
Total 
a Does not include Navajo flocks. 
Includes Hopi flocks. 
Includes sheep. 
Data not recorded. 
Source: Baxter 1987; Denevan 1967; Simmons 1988. 
Mexico were awarded exclusively for grazing livestock 
(Bailey 1980; Briggs and Ness 1987). Meadows and springs 
were camping areas for herders and bedding grounds for 
goats and sheep (Scurlock 1983,1997). 
By the early 1700s, Navajos in northwestern New 
Mexico and northeastern Arizona had adopted Spanish 
sheep and herding techniques. Animal numbers ranged 
from 8,000 head in 1721 to 64,000 by 1742. A century later, 
the total number of Navajo sheep was estimated at 500,000. 
Thede numbers dropped dramatically to 30,000 in 1870 
following the reduction of American Indian land hold- 
ings and placement of many tribes in the reservation sys- 
tem. Through land allotment, American Indians resettled 
most of their former territory and again raised livestock. 
By 1930, Navajo flocks had increased to over 1 million 
sheep and goats. Horse and cattle numbers had also in- 
creased significantly to 80,000 and 27,000, respectively 
(Bailey 1980). 
Escaped horses and burros across the Southwest led to 
the increase of wild herds in the middle to late colonial 
period (1750-1821). Raids by nomadic American Indians 
also spread and increased the number of wild horses who 
ranged, in unknown numbers, into the ponderosa pine 
forests to graze. By the late 1700s, wild herds were locally 
abundant. The decline of wild horses, burros, and goats 
began in the 1860s with the arrival of Anglo-American 
ranchers who shot or captured wild horses that were com- 
peting with their cattle for grass and water (Bustamante 
and Simmons 1995; Wyman 1945). 
In the early BOOS, some 30,000 Spanish New Mexican 
sheep were exported annually to Mexico. By the 1820s, 
the number of sheep in New Mexico, excluding the Na- 
vajo herds, had increased to between 1 and 3 million head. 
Cattle numbered 5,000 head, horses 850, and mules 2,150. 
Apache and Navajo raids on sheep flocks reduced the 
sheep numbers to 377,000 by 1850 (table 2). Losses due to 
droughts, blizzards, and predators also contributed to the 
decline (Baxter 1987; Denevan 1967). 
Table 2. Livestock numbers in New Mexico, 1850-1900.a 
Year 
Sheep 
Cattle 
Total 
1850 
377,000 
b 
377,000 
1860 
830,000 
b 
830,000 
1870 
619,000 
137,314 
756,314 
1880s 
2,000,000 
500,000 
2,500,000 
to 
to 
5,400,000 
5,000,000 
1890 
4,000,000 
210,000 
1,517,000 
1900 
3,500,000 
843,OO 
4,343,000 
1935 
669,000 
212,000 
881,000 
a Does not include Navajo flocks. 
Data not recorded. 
Source: Baxter 1987; Carlson 1969; Dcnevan 1967; Miller 1989; Simmons 1988. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
45 

Chapter 3 
The first Anglo-American owned cattle were driven into 
New Mexico from Texas in 1865 and 1866 to supply beef 
to military posts and miners. In 1866, about 7,000 head of 
cattle were sold to the army, whose increasing demand 
for beef fueled the cattle drives in the late 1860s and 1870s 
from Texas to eastern and southern New Mexico. In 1870, 
there were over 137,000 cattle in New Mexico. Military 
contracts for beef from New Mexican ranchers ended in 
the early 1880s (Miller 1989). 
Cattle numbers grew to over a half million head by the 
early 1880s. Some ranchers were attracted to New Mexico 
following completion of 2 major rail lines in 1879 and 1881. 
Droughts and overgrazing in west Texas in the 1870s and 
1880s also caused many ranchers to drive their herds into 
New Mexico. Many of the Texas cattle herds that were 
moved to New Mexico grazed during the summer in the 
woodlands and forests of the Jemez, Sangre de Cristo, and 
other mountain ranges in northern and central New 
Mexico. Other herds went to southeast Arizona and south- 
ern Colorado (Scurlock 1997). 
In 1870, there were 619,000 sheep in New Mexico 
(Carlson 1969; table 2). These numbers reached an esti- 
mated peak of 4 to 5 million head in the 1880s. At the be- 
ginning of the 20th century, due to range deterioration 
caused by overgrazing and droughts, there was a decrease 
in sheep to 3.5 million. (Carlson 1969; deBuys 1985; 
Denevan 1967). Extensive grazing continued in New 
Mexico uplands until the end of the century. Passage of 
the General Revision Act on March 3, 1891, authorized 
the President of the United States to establish Forest Re- 
serves (now called National Forests) on public land, in 
any state or territory, wholly of partly covered with tim- 
ber or undergrowth with or without commercial value. 
Many local residents who lost their grazing rights to the 
previously common land, continued to graze their stock 
on the Forest Reserve land (Bahre 1991; Carlson 1969; 
deBuys 1985). By 1938, about 203,000 sheep were grazing 
during the summer on public and private lands in north- 
ern New Mexico (Workers of the Writers' Program 1940a). 
Arizona 
The first livestock in Arizona was brought by Franciscan 
missionaries to the Hopi Pueblo in 1629. Herds of sheep, 
goats, cattle, oxen, horses, and burros were grazed around 
the Hopi missions and villages for the next 50 years. By the 
early 1700s, the Hopi were raising their own livestock; one 
of the pueblos had 30,000 sheep in 1776 (Schickedanz 1980). 
The Spanish brought the first herds of livestock into 
southern Arizona after 1690. Missions were established 
with herds of primarily sheep and cattle. Spanish ranch- 
ing operations were also established in the Santa Cruz and 
San Pedro drainages (Faulk 1970). Some 100,000 head of 
cattle were grazing on the headwaters of the San Pedro in 
southern Arizona in 1694 (Schickedanz 1980). However, 
Apache raids on Spanish livestock during much of the 
1700s prevented settlement of new ranches and kept the 
number of herds low. In the early 1800s, there were 26,000 
sheep and 1,200 horses grazing around Tucson and 1,000 
cattle grazing at Tubac. Several Arizona land grants were 
made in the first 2 decades of the century; one near San 
Bernardino on the Mexican border grazed 100,000 head 
of cattle (Faulk 1970). By the early 1820s, large cattle herds 
were grazing at these locations, but Apache raids forced 
many tqabandon their ranches. Thousands of abandoned 
cattle became feral and roamed the area into the 1850s 
(Hirt 1989; Workers of the Writers' Program 1940b). 
One Spanish rancher grazed 10,000 sheep and 600 goats 
in southern Arizona in the mid-1800s. One of the earliest 
Anglo-American ranch was established on the Santa Cruz 
River in 1857; another small ranch began operating south 
of Tucson in 1858. The Apaches increased their livestock 
raids, which discouraged upland grazing (Hirt 1989). 
To the north, on the pinyon-juniper and ponderosa pine- 
covered Defiance Plateau, the Navajo began herding 
sheep, cattle, and horses, mules, and burros in the late 
1700s. By 1850, about 500,000 sheep, 30,000 cattle, and 
10,000 horses, mules and burros were grazing on the pla- 
teau. At the same time, the ponderosa pine and conifer 
forest understories of the Chuska Mountains were inten- 
sively grazed by relatively large sheep and other livestock 
herds (Bailey 1980; Cooper 1960). 
United States military posts, mine activity, and settle- 
ment growth, increased the demand for beef and mutton, 
which produced significant growth in southern Arizona's 
ranching industry (Pratt and Scurlock 1991). The military 
continued to contract with Arizona ranchers until the mid- 
1870s. Navajo herds numbered about 225,000 head in 1873. 
Sheep herds were moved from California and New Mexico 
to new operations in northern Arizona beginning in the 
late 1860s and early 1870s. 
In 1880, there were 8,000 cattle and 10,000 to 12,000 
sheep in the San Pedro Valley, Arizona. The arrival of rail- 
roads in the early 1880s caused livestock numbers across 
most of Arizona to rapidly increase. One sheep rancher 
near Flagstaff had 50,000 animals grazing in the mid-1880s. 
By the end of the decade, many ranges were overstocked 
as the total number of cattle rose from 5,000 head in 1870 
to 8,000 head in 1880 to more than a half million head in 
1890. By 1891, there were more than 700,000 head of sheep 
in Arizona. When a drought struck the overgrazed range 
in 1891, livestock losses averaged 50 to 75 percent in south- 
eastern Arizona. 
Introduction of livestock and overgrazing continued on 
private and public lands into the next century. Sheep out- 
numbered cattle 10 to 1 in northeastern Arizona, partly 
due to new Navajo flocks; cattle were common in the south. 
By 1938, there were 367,000 head of cattle shipped out of 
Arizona; some 121,000 more were slaughtered in Arizona. 
There were an estimated 811,000 sheep in the state that 
same year, with about half of this total on Navajo range- 
46 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

A Historical Overview 
land (Bahre 1991; Hirt 1989; Workers of the Writers' Program 
Table 3. Grazing leases and livestock numbers in the 
1940b; Bailey 1980; Cooper 1960; Faulk 1970; Miller 1989). 
South west, 1909.1 958. 
National Forests 
By the time the first Forest Reserves were established 
in New Mexico and Arizona in the 1890s, most of the un- 
derstory in accessible ponderosa pine forests had been 
intensively grazed. Although ranchers thought that free 
use of public land was a right and stocking was heavy, 
most realized that limiting herd size on Forest Reserve 
land was necessary to continue business (Baker et al. 1988; 
Eastman and Gray 1987). 
From 1893 to 1902,8 Forest Reserves were established 
in Arizona including Grand Canyon, Prescott, San Fran- 
cisco Mountains, Black Mesa, Santa Rita, Santa Catalina, 
Mount Graham, and Chiricahua. These are now part of 
the Kaibab and Coconino National Forests, Prescott Na- 
tional Forest, Coconino National Forest, Coconino and 
Sitgreaves National Forests, and Coronado National For- 
est, respectively (Baker et al. 1988). Twelve more Forest 
Reserves were added from 1905 to 1906. 
In 1900, while surveying grazing at the headwaters of 
the upper Salt River and its affects on the lower valley, 
Gifford Pinchot, head of the Bureau of Forestry (now called 
the Forest Service) in the Department of Agriculture, noted 
that sheep overgrazing had destroyed young ponderosa 
pine seedlings (Frome 1962). Although grazing permits 
for horses and sheep were issued by the Bureau of For- 
estry during this period, it was not until 1906 that fees 
were collected for all livestock grazed on the Forest Re- 
serves. From 1901 to 1906, there were 581 permits issued 
for approximately 98,000 cattle and horses, and 87 per- 
mits issued for approxmately 347,000 sheep and goats to 
graze on Forest Reserves in Arizona (Rowley 1985). 
In the early years of the 20th century, heavy stocking of 
Forest Reserves was thought a viable way to reduce veg- 
etation and diminish the fire threat. Protests, noncompli- 
ance, and trespass by ranchers hindered effective manage- 
ment of grazing lands (Eastman and Gray 1987; Rowley 
1985). Additionally, the demand for food and wool during 
World War I caused livestock numbers to soar on public and 
private lands (Brown 1985; deBuys 1985; Donart 1984). 
The Forest Service began to reduce the number of per- 
mitted livestock on NFS land in the Southwest due to ex- 
treme range deterioration and erosion caused by overgraz- 
ing; numbers went from approximately 738,000 in 1919 to 
less than 536,000 in 1929 (Baker et al. 1988; table 3). Many 
ranchers in the Southwest sold their livestock during the 
post-war agricultural depression from 1919 to 1921, which 
further reduced the grazing numbers. Over the remain- 
der of the decade, livestock numbers on NFS land contin- 
ued to decline. This reduction in numbers grazed and 
permitted continued into the 1950s (table 3). Increases in 
grazing fees continued to be controversial (Baker et al. 
1988; Rowley 1985). 
Cattle and 
Sheep and 
Year 
Permit 
horses 
goats 
Total 
1909 
3 , m  
235,946 
512,130 
748,076 
1914 
3,321 
270,623 
398,134 
688,766 
1919 
3,590 
366,520 
371,457 
737,977 
1924, 
3,032 
279,520 
262,492 
542,012 
1929 
a 
183,076 
352,618 
535,694 
1934 
3,l 70 
189,299 
245,189 
437,658 
1 
3,886 
371,862 
1 
3,504 
266,721 
1 
a 
a 
1958 
2,538 
145,247 
75,217 
223,002 
a Data not recorded. 
Source: Baker et al. 1988. 
In an ,attempt to reduce grazing pressure by trespass 
livestock, fencing of NFS land began in the 1930s and con- 
tinued into the 1940s. Passage of the Taylor Grazing Act 
of 1934 was prompted by overgrazing on NFS and Graz- 
ing Service (later called the Bureau of Land Management) 
land. This grazing regulation program resulted in a sig- 
nificant reduction of livestock numbers on public and 
Pueblo and Navajo land (Bahre 1991; deBuys 1985; 
Mortensen 1978). 
From the 1920s to the 1940s, Forest Service permittees 
typically grazed more animals than authorized. Also, large 
livestock operations were buying permits from smaller 
ranchers. The Forest Service stepped up enforcement to 
correct these 2 problems. In additiion, to prevent control 
of large areas of rangeland by a small number of indi- 
viduals, the agency began limiting the maximum num- 
ber of animals that could be grazed on a single permit. 
On the Carson and Santa Fe National Forests in New 
Mexico, the maximum number of animals authorized to 
graze on 1 permit was 400. In the 1940s, ranchers in New 
Mexico and southern Colorado began to abandon labor- 
intensive sheep herding in favor of cattle, which range 
without herders. Changing economics also resulted in a 
steady decline in the number of permittees on forest lands 
(deBuys 1985). 
Forest Service reports for the 1950s through 1960s on 
ponderosa pine grasslands were mixed. According to a 
1952 study, ranges on the Kaibab National Forest were 
improving. A 1964 report noted that the Santa Fe National 
Forest was overstocked by 20 percent, while a report is- 
sued in 1965 for the Lincoln National Forest indicated that 
range management was improving. Inspectors found that 
many areas of Coronado National Forest were in unsatis- 
factory conditions (Baker et al. 1988). 
Grazing pressure during this period also resulted from 
feral horses and burros. Many of these animals sought 
secluded ranges in the uplands of Southwestern NFS, 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
47 

Chapter 3 
Bureau of Land Management (BLM) and National Park 
Service (NPS) land. Although the Forest Service, BLM, and 
NPS began round-ups and reductions in the early part of 
this century, some animals eluded their efforts. Small herds 
of horses and burros continue to exist on public and 
Ameican Indian reservation lands in the Southwest (Bahre 
1991; deBuys 1985; Symanski 1985). 
The long-lasting effect of overgrazing on NFS land dur- 
ing this century was noted in a 1986 Environmental Im- 
pact Statement for the grasslands of the Coronado Na- 
tional Forest. The observation was that, "The grazed 
portion of the range was severely overgrazed" [in 19021 
and "to this day ranges show signs of stress" (quoted in 
Hirt 1989). 
Logging 
Prehistoric Indian harvesting of ponderosa pine timber 
was localized. However, extensive use of ponderosa and 
pinyon pine at Chaco Canyon and other prehistoric popu- 
lation centers between 900 and 1125 resulted in severe 
environmental degradation. More than 100,000 trees were 
cut in at least 3 distant mountain ranges and hauled back 
to Chaco between 1000 and 1125. At other large village 
complexes (Mogollon, Hohokam, and Hakataya) ponde- 
rosa and pinyon pine species were commonly used to con- 
struct jacales (a hut in the Southwestern United States with 
a thatched roof and walls made of upright poles covered 
with mud or clay), pithouses, or surface houses (Gumer- 
man and Haury 1979; Martin 1979; Schroeder 1979). Both 
ponderosa and pinyon pine were used to construct and 
renovate hundreds of other post- 500 to 1500 small, pre- 
historic sites in the Southwest. 
Logging by Spainish settlers during the colonial period 
(1540 to 1821) was limited to local forests near either land- 
grant villages or mission churches, where the surround- 
ing pinyon juniper woodlands and ponderosa pine for- 
ests were commonly exploited. As nearby fuelwood was 
exhausted, pack mules, burros, and horses transported 
wood from increasingly greater distances (Adams and 
Chavez 1956; Fogg 1966). Ponderosa pine was often found 
in central and northern New Mexico on common land 
where resources were available for use by the Spanish land 
grantees. Early mission establishments among the Pueblo, 
including the Hopi of northeastern Arizona, also used 
ponderosa pine for building and fuelwood but impacts 
were limited to small areas (Jones 1932; Scurlock 1997). In 
southern Arizona, ponderosa pine use was minimal be- 
cause Spanish land grants and missions, which all dated 
from the late colonial and Mexican (1821 to 1846) periods, 
were generally not near ponderosa pine forests. 
The first Anglo-American people who arrived in the 
Southwest in the 1820s and 1830s were fur trappers and 
traders. Some settled in northern or central New Mexico 
and southern Arizona. Their small numbers and lifestyle 
generated minimal impact to ponderosa pine forests, 
which they used primarily as a source of fuelwood (We- 
ber 1971). 
In 1846, at the beginning of the Mexican War, the United 
States Army began to establish forts in the Southwest. 
Posts were established across Arizona and New Mexico 
over the next 2 decades to protect European settlers against 
American Indian tribes. Construction and occupation of 
these forts required lumber and fuelwood. The military 
set up sawmills or contracted for needed material. Wood 
cutting' by military troops also provided fuel and timber 
(Giese 1976; Miller 1989; Walker and Bufkin 1979). 
Mining in territorial New Mexico and Arizona (1846 to 
1880) and construction of the early railroads to New 
Mexico and Arizona (1879 to 1881) resulted in the first 
major commercial use of pinyon and ponderosa pine and 
juniper in the historic period (Scurlock 1997; Walker and 
Bufkin 1979). Harvesting ponderosa pine for railroad ties, 
mine timbers, or lumber caused local reduction in wood- 
lands and forests in the late 19th century. One railroad 
company constructing a line across New Mexico in 1885, 
used over 930,000 ft of "native pine," which included pin- 
yon and ponderosa (Christiansen 1974; Hirt 1989; Ensign 
1888; Perry 1922; Tratman 1889). A logging-sawmill op- 
eration was established in the Chiricahua Mountains in 
1879 and by 1902,ll sawmills were operating. About 30 
percent of the coniferous forest in the Chiricahuas was 
logged by 1902 (Bahre 1991). 
Timber consumption in New Mexico and Arizona 
steadily increased over the last 4 decades of the 19th cen- 
tury. Approximately 8 million board feet (MBF) and 22 
MBF was cut in 1869 and 1879, respectively. An estimated 
5 MBF of lumber was consumed in New Mexico alone in 
1886. By 1900, the annual cut in Arizona and New Mexico 
was 67 MBF (Houk 1993; table 4). Although fuelwood 
cutting was extensive during this period, little or no pon- 
derosa pine was harvested. 
Authorized timber sales from Forests Reserves began 
in 1897, but the harvest was limited to $100 worth of tim- 
ber per year for each permitee. Free use of dead timber 
was permitted. The Forest Service began timber sales on 
the 25 reserves in Arizona and New Mexico in fiscal year 
1906. Regulations limiting the cut remained until after 
1907, when 5 more National Forests (passage of the Act of 
March 4,1907, renamed the Forest Reserves) were estab- 
lished in Arizona and New Mexico (Baker et al. 1988); 
however, unauthorized cutting was widespread. Millions 
of board feet were illegally cut in the Prescott Forest Re- 
serve in the early years of the century and by 1908, most 
of the timber in the Manzano National Forest had been 
harvested illegally for use as railroad construction mate- 
rial (Baker et al. 1988). 
In 1907, there was 90 MBF of standing ponderosa pine 
on the San Francisco Mountains Reserve, now part of the 
Coconino National Forest in Arizona. That year, this tim- 
ber was cut and sold, enough mature trees were left to 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

A Historical Overview 
Table 4. TimbeP consumption in Arizona and New Mexico, 
1869- 1992. 
Year 
Lumber production (million board feet) 
a Primarily ponderosa pine. 
Fiscal year, October 1 - September 30. 
Source: Baker et al. 1988; Houk 1993. 
seed the cut areas, and a sufficient number of young trees 
were left to ensure a future cut. Ponderosa pine was also 
being cut on the Kaibab Plateau. The mill at Fredonia pro- 
cessed about 20 MBF of timber annually from 1910 to 1912. 
From 1912 to 1926, there were several lumber and timber 
companies operating in the Flagstaff-Williams area that 
processed logs from north central Arizona (Tucker and 
Fitzpatrick 1972). 
From 1912 to 1914, intensive logging occurred on 
Penasco Hill in the Carson National Forest. This opera- 
tion was producing railroad ties for a second set of tracks 
across northern New Mexico. The Santa Barbara Pole and 
Tie Company was established in 1909 in the Santa Fe Na- 
tional Forest. From 1909 to 1926, all of the trees suitable 
for making railroad ties from the pinyon-juniper zone to 
the spruce-fir zone were cut on approximately 66,000 acres 
of this forest (deBuys 1985). 
During the latter part of World War I (1916-1918), log- 
ging of ponderosa pine in the Southwest increased sharply 
to meet United States market demands (table 4). Some 6 
billion board feet (BBF) of lumber was consumed during 
the United States war involvement. The regional lumber 
industry experienced a sharp production decline in 1920 
and 1921, but recovered quickly. Timber cutting, mostly 
ponderosa pine, increased during the remainder of the 
1920s (Baker et al. 1988). Sawmills and lumber companies 
operated in north central Arizona, primarily in the 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
Coconino National Forest. The Apache Lumber Company 
purchased 600 MBF in the Sitgreaves and Apache National 
Forests in 1919 and 1920 (Baker et al. 1988). 
Every accessible ponderosa pine forest in New Mexico 
and Arizona was heavily logged in the 1930s and 1940s. 
Only stands on steep slopes were spared in Southwestern 
public and private forests. Logging activity increased 
during World War 11; from 1942 through 1946, the War 
Department purchased about 8 BBF per year. New Mexico 
and Arizona contributed from over 242 million to almost 
385 MBF during this period (table 4). The Fort Apache 
Indian Reservation was a major timber source, where over 
445 MBF, mainly ponderosa pine, was harvested in 1943. 
About 75 percent of the 675,000-acre reservation was cov- 
ered by ponderosa pine (Gomez and Tier 1990; Lindh 1949). 
In 1941, there were 72 lumber mills in the upper Rio 
Grande Basin, New Mexico. These operations processed 
60 MBF that year, where 94 percent of the harvest was 
ponderosa pine. By 1950, the annual cut increased to 70 
MBF. This cut was more than 25 percent greater than the 
net annual tree growth in the watershed (Dortignac 1956). 
In 1948, ponderosa pine accounted for 88 percent of the 
total commercial species cut in the Southwest (Lindh 1949). 
In 1955, almost 246 MBF of lumber was harvested from 
public and private lands in New Mexico (Anonymous 
1959). Timber production for New Mexico and Arizona in 
1964 exceeded 399 MBF (table 4). A decline occurred from 
1972 to 1984, but by 1990 a record high of 433 MBF was 
reached (Baker et al. 1988; Houk 1993). Due to growing 
concerns for threatened, endangered, and sensitive spe- 
cies and their habitat, timber harvest on NFS land dropped 
to 145 MBF in 1992 (Houk 1993). 
Prehistoric and Historic 
Ecological Disturbances 
Before European settlement, naturally occurring and 
human-caused fire in ponderosa pine forests was a rela- 
tively frequent change agent. Fires, combined with 
drought, wet years, periodic regeneration, localized clear- 
ing, logging, and wood collecting, produced a complex 
mosaic in the distribution, age, structure, and composi- 
tion of Southwestern ponderosa pine forests (Covington 
and Moore 1994). 
Fire 
Observations from 1850 to 1900, report an understory 
of abundant or luxuriant bunch grass species in ponde- 
rosa pine forests. This vegetation subcommunity gener- 
ally existed from the beginning of the colonial period to 

Chapter 3 
the early part of this century. This condition, as well as 
scattered grassy "parks," was maintained by relatively 
frequent (every 2 to 12 years), low intensity fires and light 
grazing by indigenous mammals. Interspersed among 
these grasses were various annual or perennial herbaceous 
species. Soil erosion was minimal (Cooper 1960). Crown 
fires in mature timber were rare and some seedlings es- 
caped ground fires. Young trees were generally killed in 
logged areas as the unburned slash burned hot during 
fires. Ground fires caused little damage due to "little un- 
derbrush and litter" (Plummer 1904). 
The effects of fire, both human-caused and natural, and 
other factors on ponderosa pine forests over the past 150 
years have been of interest to a number of investigators in 
the last 4 decades. Among those who have documented 
change in the range, structure, and floral composition of his- 
toric ponderosa pine forests are Cooper (1960), Johnson 
(1995), Covington and Moore (1994), and Weaver (1951). 
Weaver (1951) wrote, "Older whites and Jhdians remember 
when the ground under the ponderosa pines was grassy, 
open, and park-like, with but few windfalls, snags, and other 
debris." He concluded that fire was a significant factor in 
the development and maintenance of these conditions in 
ponderosa pine forests and that the subsequent change was 
caused by fire suppression beginning in the late 1800s. A 
policy of fire suppression was adopted for the Forest Re- 
serves beginning in the 1890s, but effective fire control was 
not developed until after 1900. In that year, a fire in the Santa 
Fe Forest Reserve burned 40,000 acres (Baker et al. 1988). 
Dominance of Gambel oak, New Mexico locust, or pin- 
yon-juniper occur following ponderosa pine stand-replac- 
ing fires or clear-cutting in some mountain ranges in the 
northern areas of the region. In the southern portion of 
the Southwest, ponderosa pine and gray oak or silverleaf 
oak occur. Associated aspen stand acreage has decreased 
significantly due primarily to fire suppression (Dick- 
Peddie 1993). Fire suppression and other human activi- 
ties have also created oak-juniper thickets or young black- 
jack pine stands. Fire suppression, intensive livestock 
grazing, and/or logging, combined with periodic drought, 
led to regeneration of stands of dense, young pine, com- 
monly called "dog hair thickets." Limited or no seedling 
regeneration, soil erosion, crown fires, structural changes, 
and a general decline of forest health also result from fire 
suppression (Cooper 1960; Covington and Moore 1994; 
Saab et al. 1995). Recently, ponderosa pine loss due to 
dwarf mistletoe and bark beetle epidemics, once regulated 
by periodic fires, has increased significantly (Harrington 
and Sackett 1992; Johnson 1995). 
Other changes in ponderosa pine forest attributed to 
fire suppression include "decreased decomposition rates, 
stagnated nutrient cycles, eruption of insects and diseases, 
decreased herbaceous and shrub forage quality and quan- 
tity, ecosystem simplification, increased vertical fuel con- 
tinuity due to dense sampling and pole patches, higher 
severity and destructive potential of wildfire, decreased 
stream flow and on-site water balance, and less wildlife 
habitat for species dependent on herbaceous vegetation, 
and greater canopy closure and landscape homogeneity" 
(Covington and Moore 1994). 
Drought 
Drou ht, combined with changes in fire regime, graz- 
ing, an d logging, have produced significant changes in 
Southwestern ponderosa pine forests. The drought from 
1896 to 1904 in east central Arizona was severe, killing 
some ponderosa pine and alligator juniper. Recent, ex- 
tended droughts, such as the one in the early to mid-1950s, 
killed juniper and ponderosa pine in the region including 
the Sevilleta National Wildlife Refuge in central New 
Mexico. Both of these climatic events resulted in the pon- 
derosa pine zone spreading to higher elevations (Plummer 
1904; Scurlock 1996). In contrast, the wet year of 1919 was 
a time of exceptional ponderosa pine regeneration. 
Grazing 
As mentioned, the beginning of Spanish settlement and 
livestock grazing in the Southwest in 1598 brought dra- 
matic changes to riparian, bajada (a long, gradual slope), 
mesa, mountain grasslands, and other vegetative commu- 
nities. Grasses and shrubs were decimated by sheep, goats, 
cattle, and horses for up to several miles around major 
settlements. Removal of ground cover, soil compaction 
due to trampling, and droughts, resulted in severe, local 
sheet erosion and gullying (Ford 1987; MacCameron 1994). 
Early in the century, Leiberg et al. (1904) documented 
livestock damage to seedling ponderosa pine and young 
aspen shoots. Cattle and sheep trampled young trees, es- 
pecially in riparian areas. When the grass cover was 
sparse, sheep nibbled seedlings, which caused stunting. 
However, goats were the most destructive. 
A study of grass plots excluded from grazing for 25 
years in ponderosa pine at several National Forests in New 
Mexico, showed a marked increase in blue grama, Ari- 
zona fescue, prairie junegrass, and creeping muhly. Forbs 
and browse cover increased, but under grazing conditions 
browse increase was inhibited. Ponderosa pine increased 
when protected from grazing (Potter and Krenetsky 1967). 
More recent studies of ponderosa pine forests have 
shown that livestock grazing, combined with fire suppres- 
sion, resulted in denser stands of trees and shrubs that 
spread due to denudation of understory grass cover (Saab 
et al. 1995). 
Logging 
As mentioned, many ponderosa pine forests in the re- 
gion were extensively cut from the 1870s to the 1940s. In 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1907 

A Historical Overview 
1898, the US. Geological Survey appraised regional for- 
ests and estimated that 19 percent of New Mexico and 22 
percent of Arizona were forested. By 1924, these figures 
had decreased due to logging to approximately 16 and 21 
percent, respectively. More than 50 years later, the figures 
had increased to 17 and 25 percent, respectively (Baker et 
al. 1988). 
The estimated amount of canopy coverage of ponde- 
rosa pine stands before Anglo-American settlement 
ranged from 17 to 22 percent (Covington and Sackett 1986). 
By the early 1990s, the canopy coverage had increased 
from 40 percent to more than 70 percent (Johnson 1995). 
In a recent paper, Johnson (1995) reported that ponde- 
rosa pine forests decreased by 206,000 acres from 1962 to 
1986 in New Mexico and Arizona, mainly due to logging. 
Increased density of pines during this period was attrib- 
uted to partial cutting in some areas and no cutting in 
others. Effective fire suppression was a third factor in caus- 
ing this density condition. 
Exotic Plants Species 
A number of exotic plant species have become estab- 
lished in Southwestern ponderosa pine forests following 
accidental or intentional introduction (table 5). Two in- 
troduced grasses are major understory components in the 
central and northern portions of the region. These are 
sheep fescue (Festuca ovina), a bunch grass, and Kentucky 
blue grass (Poa pratensis), a sod grass, which are both 
highly palatable to all livestock (Dick-Peddie 1993; Gay 
and Dwyer 1970). The fescue may have been introduced 
early in the colonial period, while the blue grass is a 20th- 
century introduction (deBuys 1985). Hoarhound (Mar- 
rubium vulgare), another early naturalized species, is much 
less common. Yellow and white sweet-clovers (Melilotus 
albus and M. oficinalis), probably introduced by the Span- 
ish, are found along roadways and other disturbed areas 
Table 5. Exotlc plant species In the Southwest. 
(Dick-Peddie 1993; Hermann 1966; Hitchcock 1935; 
Stefferud 1948). Mullein (Verbascum thaspus), an impor- 
tant medicinal plant for at least 3 centuries, has thrived in 
disturbed areas, especially in burned ponderosa pine 
stands (Scurlock 1997). 
Early in this century, the Eurasian crested wheatgrass 
(Agropyron cristatum) was introduced to National Forests 
in New Mexico and Arizona because of its forage value 
(Scurlock 1997). This species is now established across the 
Southwest. These species have diminished the cover of 
more livestock palatable, native bunch grasses and have al- 
tered understory plant composition and general ecology. 
Prehistoric and Historic Human 
Uses of and Impacts on Birds 
The uses of and impacts on raptors, game birds, and 
other non-passerines in ponderosa pine forests is poorly 
understood. Localized use of birds in forests near large 
population centers, such as Chaco Canyon, was probably 
relatively high. Intensive logging may have occurred in 
the closer stands of ponderosa pine. Spanish modifica- 
tions to forest habitats in the colonial period were mini- 
mal, although growth of major settlements such as Taos, 
Santa Fe, Albuquerque, Belen, and Tucson steadily in- 
creased from 1821 to 1846. The subsequent increase of 
Anglo-American populations, combined with the Span- 
ish and American Indian populations, adversely affected 
ponderosa pine forest habitats and associated bird spe- 
cies. Subsequent impacts due to urbanization and recre- 
ation after 1945 are addressed by Marzluff in Chapter 5 of 
this volume. 
Date of 
Common name 
Scientific name 
introduction 
Source 
Alferilio 
Hoarhound 
Crested wheatgrass 
Kentucky bluegrass 
Meadow fescue 
Sheep fescue 
Mullein 
Shepherd purse 
Sweetclover(s) 
Oxeye daisy 
Dandelion 
x"* 
Erodjum cicutarium 
Marrubium vulgare 
Agropymn cristaivm 
Poa pratensis 
Festuca elatior 
Festuca ovina 
Verbascum thaspus 
Capsella bursapastoris 
Melilotus alba M. officinalis 
Chrysanthemum leucanthemum 
? 
pre-l600? 
post-1935 
post-1 598 
late 19th c. 
1598? 
post-1 800? 
? 
pre-1915 
? 
Curtin 1965 
Wooton 191 5 Tierney 1983 
Hitchcock 1935 
Gay and Dwyer 1970 
Hoover et at. 1948 
deBuys 1985 
Haughton 1978 
Reed 1970 
Wooton 191 5 McKee 1948 
Reed 1970 
faraxacum officinak 
pre- 1 600? 
Reed 1 970 Tierney 1 983 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
5 1 

Chapter 3 
American Indian 
Bird Remains from Archaeological Sites 
The close relationship that American Indians in the 
Southwest have had with local bird species extends back 
more than 10,000 years and involves activities such as 
hunting, trapping, gathering eggs, raising and keeping live 
birds, and using birds or their parts in rituals. 
Birds collected by early American Indians living in or 
near ponderosa pine forests were either used or traded, 
sometimes over long distances, turning up at archaeologi- 
cal sites far from ponderosa pine forests. Remains of small 
passerines at Southwestern archeological sites are less 
common than large birds such as raptors. Remains of 
Mexican parrots, such as military macaw and thick-billed 
parrot, were found at excavations at Chaco Canyon in 
northwestern New Mexico, where they were probably 
used for their feathers and skins. Also uncovered at Chaco, 
were sandhill crane, several raptors, black-billed magpie, 
and common raven bones (Judd 1954; Ladd 1963; 
Schroeder 1968; Akins 1985). 
At Anasazi sites at Canyon de Chelly in northeastern 
Arizona, the bone or feather remains of 34 wild bird spe- 
cies have been recovered. Among these remains the 
mourning dove, northern flicker, yellow-bellied sapsucker, 
common raven, house wren, and western bluebird are 
found in ponderosa pine forests. Two varieties of domes- 
ticated turkey and a scarlet macaw have also been identi- 
fied (Morris 1986). Nine of the 12 species found at Can- 
yon de Chelly have also been recovered at Mesa Verde 
National Park and 6 of the 12 species have been found at 
Wupatki National Monument, a site in east central Ari- 
zona with ponderosa pine (Morris 1986). 
Spanish documents from the early colonial period (1540 
to 1598) for New Mexico and Arizona indicate that geese, 
cranes, American kestrel, eagles, wild and domesticated 
turkeys, macaws, parrots, quail, and black-billed magpie 
were kept in American Indian villages and used for their 
meat or feathers (Schroeder 1968). 
Birds as Spiritual Symbols 
Birds were incorporated into every aspect of American 
Indian life. They were associated with numerous natural 
elements, such as sky, earth, sun, and moon and with daily 
activities such as crop planting, hunting, racing, and war. 
Some birds were thought of as messengers between gods 
and humans, while others were connected to weather phe- 
nomenon. At Taos Pueblo, the saying, "we are in one nest" 
reflects how closely the Taos Pueblo Indians identified 
with birds (Hughes 1983). 
About 100 bird species had roles in the myths, folklore, 
rituals, and ceremonies of Pueblo Navajo, Apache, and 
other tribes (Buskirk 1986; Petit 1990; Schroeder 1968; 
Tyler 1979; Russell 1975). A majority of these 100 species 
occurred in the prehistoric and historic ponderosa pine 
forests of the Southwest, which were inhabited by vari- 
ous American Indian tribes through time. Among the most 
important birds to the American Indians were the golden 
and bald eagles, red-tailed hawks, owls, indigenous and 
imported parrots, macaws, wild and domestic turkeys, 
hummingbirds, ravens, pinyon jays, nuthatches, and some 
warbler species. 
Eagles and red-tailed hawks were sky-related. Owls 
were considered symbols of the dark and, among some 
Rio Ghnde Pueblos, were associated with witchcraft. Be- 
cause the wild turkey was the only domestic native bird, 
both domestic and wild turkeys were believed "bound to 
the earth." Brightly colored macaws and parrots were con- 
nected to the sun and rainbow, while hummingbirds were 
"rain birds" due to their association with summer flow- 
ers and precipitation. Ravens and crows were affiliated 
with war and dark rain clouds, while pinyon jays were 
revered for their aggressive behavior, large "warrior" 
flocks, and "war cries." The red-shafted northern flicker 
was associated with war and sunrise because of its red 
wing feathers and tree "drumming." Nuthatches who 
move down tree trunks, were also affiliated with war be- 
cause their movement was opposite normal behavior 
(Tyler 1979). 
Birds in Prehistoric and Historic Art 
Fetishes (small-scale likenesses of animals usually 
shaped from stone) have been made by various South- 
western American Indian tribes for over a thousand years. 
These objects were believed to bring good luck, power, or 
protection to the bearer. Eagles, owls, ducks, and ravens 
were the major bird forms produced as fetishes by Ameri- 
can Indians in Arizona and New Mexico (McManis 1995). 
The Navajo made bird fetishes of stone and cottonwood. 
Bird forms resembling mourning dove, black-billed mag- 
pie, macaw, and an unidentified woodpecker have been 
recovered (Kluckhohn et al. 1971). 
Bird figures or feathers were sometimes painted on 
pottery; ceramic vessels in the shape of birds were less 
frequently crafted. The Anasazi fashioned pottery vessels 
into bird forms such as ducks, parrots, and turkeys 
(Peckham 1990). Bird figures were commonly used on 
pottery at Zuni, Acoma, and Zia. The late prehistoric 
Mimbres of Southwestern New Mexico painted quails, 
turkeys, parrots, cranes, herons, hummingbirds, owls, 
crows, ravens, roadrunners, swallows, or swifts on the 
inside of their pottery (Brody 1977). 
Prehistoric and historic petroglyphs (images chiseled 
into rock) and pictographs (images painted on rock) of 
birds are relatively common images produced by Ameri- 
can Indians across the Southwest. Petroglyphs date from 
over 3,000 years old to as recent as this century, while pic- 
tographs are less common and more recently created. Bird 
figures occur in southeast Utah, southwest Colorado, and 
northeast Arizona. Petroglyphs dating from 900 A.D. to 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

A Historical Overview 
present in north, central, and southern New Mexico com- 
monly have bird forms. The 18th-century Navajo in north- 
west New Mexico created pictographs and petroglyphs 
of birds (Schaafsma 1980). 
At 2 Anasazi archeological sites near Los Lunas and 
Bernalillo, New Mexico, 30 bird species have been identi- 
fied on kiva wall murals including bald eagle, parrots, 
macaws, whooping and sandhill cranes, hummingbird, 
mountain bluebird, swallow, raven and/or crow, magpie, 
jay, and loggerhead shrike (Hibben 1975; Dutton 1963). 
Many of the mural species are common to ponderosa pine 
forests and other Southwestern vegetation types, but ex- 
otic or unusual species such as quetzal and pileated wood- 
pecker are also featured. 
Birds Captured for Feathers, Pets, and Food 
The extent that trapping and hunting by early Ameri- 
can Indians influenced the bird populations of ponderosa 
pine forests is difficult to assess without written record 
and only minimal archeological evidence. Although hunt- 
ing was not considered a sport, it was practiced by some 
tribes to control population numbers. Bands or families 
of Utes were assigned territories where they monitored 
bird numbers. One section within the territory was hunted 
only as an emergency food source (Hughes 1983). Birds 
were taken with bow, traps, snares, and by hand 
(Kluckhohn et al. 1971). 
Feathers and/or skins of numerous species were used 
in rituals and ceremonies and particular species, such as 
eagles and parrots, were traded great distances. A pre- 
sentation of feathers was made by the Pueblo Indians 
when planting or building. Wild turkey feathers and ma- 
caw or parrot feathers decorated Anasazi and Pueblo 
prayer sticks. Other uses of feathers by the Pueblo in- 
cluded robes, blankets, clothing, fetishes, ceremonial head- 
dresses, quivers, shields, masks and basket decorations, 
and arrows (Hill 1982; Ladd 1963; Tyler 1979). 
Hill (1982) reported that the Santa Clara Pueblo used 
feathers of many ponderosa pine passerines for dance and 
hair ornaments and other ceremonial purposes. He cites 
feather use of flycatchers, Steller's jay, pinyon jay, black- 
billed magpie, mountain and western bluebirds, Scott's 
and Bullock's orioles, western and hepatic tanager, and 
Grace's warbler. In a more comprehensive account, Ladd 
(1963) listed 45 bird species found in ponderosa pine for- 
ests that were important to Zuni Pueblo people (table 6). 
Most of these were used for feathers, but parrots, Steller's 
jay, American robin, and western and mountain bluebird 
were also considered pets. Turkey, mourning dove, north- 
em flicker, Steller's jay, and common raven, were identi- 
fied as food sources (table 6). 
The Navajo also used feathers from various species of 
birds (Kluckhohn et al.). The feathers of eagles, which were 
ritually hunted, and turkeys were used on arrow shafts. 
Feathers from both of these birds were used to decorate 
Table 6. Zuni Indian uses of ponderosa pine birds. 
Common name 
Feathers 
Pets 
Food 
Turkey 
Mourning dove 
P a m  
Great horned owl 
Common nighthawk 
White-throated swift 
Broad-tailed hummingbird 
Northern flicker 
W s '  woodpecker 
Hairy woodpecker 
Downy woodpdar 
Cassin's kingbird 
Ash-throated flycatcher 
Say's phoebe 
Violet-green swallow 
Rough-winged swallow 
Purple martin 
Steller's jay 
Black-billed magpie 
Common crow 
Common raven 
Pinyon jay 
White-bnrasted nuthatch 
Canyon wren 
Rock,m 
American robin 
Western Wwebird 
Mountain bluebird 
Townsend3 solitaire 
Loggerhead shrike 
Brewer's blackbird 
Western tanager 
Black-headed g m h k  
Lesser goldfinch 
Green-tailed tm&w 
Spotted towhee 
Lark sparrow 
Dark-eyed junco 
Source: Ladd 1963. 
baskets, hats, masks, and prayer and medicine sticks. 
Feathers or skins of hawks, crows, owls, bluebirds, war- 
blers, blackbirds, and other small birds were used to deco- 
rate ceremonial clothing and items such as prayer sticks. 
Eagle claws were sometimes strung on necklaces. 
A number of birds were also used as food by the Apache 
and Navajo (Mayes et al. 1977). The western Apache ate 
wild turkey, quail, dove, geese, duck, some small birds, 
and various bird eggs (Buskirk 1986). Vulture feathers 
were used by the Mescalero Indians for adornment and 
ritual cermonies (Basehart 1973; Opler 1965). 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 3 
European 
Only general references to birds of ponderosa pine for- 
ests were recorded by early Spanish explorers in the late 
16th and early 17th centuries. The species noted includes 
waterfowl, wading birds, turkeys, quail, and blackbirds. 
Spanish impacts on these birds species was limited by 
seasonal hunting with bow or snares. The earliest refer- 
ence to birds, specifically turkey, was made by Pedro de 
Castaneda, one of the chroniclers of Coronado's expedi- 
tion (1540 to 1542). Castaneda wrote, "There are a very 
great many native fowl in these provinces, and cocks with 
great hanging chins" (Hodge 1946). In May 1583, explorer 
Antonio de Espejo, in the Verde River Valley, Arizona, re- 
ferred to parrots; several historians have suggested that 
these were thick-billed parrots (Hammond and Rey 1966; 
Schroeder 1968). 
Spanish bird hunting was minimal in the colonial pe- 
riod; turkeys were usually acquired through trade with 
the Pueblos. Hunting of quail, partridges, and grouse is 
mentioned in documents, but was not intensive (Carroll 
and Haggard 1942). In 1766, one Spanish explorer, Nicolas 
de Lafora, commented that, "Partridges are abundant and 
are caught by hand" in New Mexico (Kinnaird 1967). 
Populations of species, such as wild turkey, prairie 
chicken, and partridges (probably quail), were larger in 
the colonial period than in more recent history, and their 
ranges were more extensive than today (Bolton 1946; 
Hodge 1956; Kinnaird 1967). 
Anglo-American settlers who arrived in the Southwest 
" 
in the early to mid-1800s used firearms extensively and 
hunted birds for sport. Most of these settlers, primarily 
trappers and traders, killed wild turkeys for food. Tur- 
keys, described as abundant, were noted by United States 
Army contingents in Arizona in 1846 and 1847. In the 
1850s, travelers bound for California and boundary and 
road surveyors also noted the abundance of turkeys. Dr. 
B.J.D. Irwin observed mourning dove, "wild pigeon" (pos- 
sibly band-tailed) and wild turkey while stationed at Fort 
Buchanan in southeastern Arizona (Davis 1982). 
From the 1860s to the early 1900s, commercial hunting 
was practiced by Anglo-American settlers in the South- 
west. Army expeditions had hunters, as did railroad work 
crews. Miners shot or trapped birds for food for boarding 
house dining rooms, restaurants, and personal use. Al- 
though mammals were the main meat species hunted, 
geese, ducks, wild turkey, grouse, doves, quail, crows, 
ravens, robins, and blackbirds were also food sources. Bird 
eggs were intensively collected during this period. 
Women's fashions, especially feathers or skin for hats, also 
placed significant demand on bird populations. Passage 
of the Lacey Act in 1900 ended commercial hunting activ- 
ity (Borland 1975). 
Early Ornithological Surveys 
The first scientific studies of birds in New Mexico and 
Arizona were conducted during the mid- to late 1800s 
(table 7). Recorded field observations, bird specimen col- 
lecting, and, less frequently, egg collecting comprised this 
work. Some of the earliest field professionals were trained 
in orniihology or a related field. Some military officers 
also collected and recorded bird field observations in Ari- 
zona and New Mexico. By the late 1800s and into this cen- 
tury, professional ornithologists were conducting field 
work and specimen collecting. 
Dr. Thomas Say, eminent ornithologist and entomolo- 
gist, was the first trained observer and collector in New 
Mexico. In 1820, he accompanied Stephen H. Long to Colo- 
rado where the expedition split into 2 groups. Say's party 
traveled south to the headwaters of the Canadian River, 
then followed the river through northeastern New Mexico, 
eventually reaching Fort Smith, Arkansas. Among Say's 
collected specimens were the blue grouse and a flycatcher, 
later named Say's phoebe (Eifert 1962). 
Of the early United States Army observers, Lt. James 
Abert's collections and descriptions were perhaps the most 
Table 7. Ornithologists in New Mexico and Arizona, 182& 
1960s. 
Ornithologist 
Time period 
Thomas Say and Edwin James 
t820 
James Abert 
1846 
George A. McCall 
1850 
Samuel Woodhouse 
1850-1 851 
Fullerton Spencer &M 
v 
1 856-1 887 
Caleb Burwell Kennerly 
1853 
T. Charlton Henry 
1853-1 854 
Dewitt Clinton Peters 
1854-1 856 
W. W. Anderson 
1858 
Elliott Coues 
1860,1880s 
Charles Emil Bendire 
1872-1 873 
Henry Weatherbee Henshaw 
1873-1 874 
Edgar Alexander Mearns 
1884-1 893 
Florence Merriam Bailey 
late 1800s-early 1900s 
Junius Henderson & John P. Harrington 191 0-1 91 3 
Fannie Ford 
191 1 
J. Stokely Ligon 
1926-1 950s 
Lyndon L. Hargrave 
1926-1 970s 
Gale Monson 
1934-1 980s 
Allan R. Phillips 
1930s-1958 
Herbert Brandt 
% 
1930s-1940s 
Edmund Ladd 
1960s 
Source: Abert 1962; Brown 1982; Eifert 1962; Henderson and Harrington 1914; 
Ligon 1961 ; Norwood 1993. 
54 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

A Historical Overview 
comprehensive. Abert recorded many mammals and 26 
species of birds along the Middle Rio Grande. Ten of these 
species were found in the montane ponderosa pine in- 
cluding the bald eagle, sparrow-hawk (American kestrel), 
wild turkey, red-winged flicker (northern), sapsucker 
(probably red-naped or yellow-bellied), Steller's jay, com- 
mon raven, Mexican bluebird (possibly western), Ameri- 
can robin, and loggerhead shrike (Abert 1962). 
Perhaps the earliest naturalist to collect and report on 
mammals and birds of the Southwest was Samuel 
Woodhouse, assistant surgeon, United States Army. He 
accompanied an army expedition in 1850 and 1851 that 
traveled up the Rio Grande from El Paso to Santa Fe (Li- 
gon 1961). During this trip, Woodhouse became the first 
to observe and collect white-throated swifts, which he 
found at El Morro, New Mexico. He also collected the 
scrub jay, the black-capped vireo, and a finch (Eifert 1962). 
In 1853 and 1854, another army doctor, T. Charlton Henry, 
recorded 170 species of birds while stationed at Forts Thorn, 
Fillmore, and Webster in New Mexico. His lists include com- 
ments on range and seasonal occurrences (Ligon 1961). 
Colonel George A. McCall, who conducted an inspec- 
tion of New Mexico's military posts from March to Octo- 
ber 1850, published his observations on birds made during 
his travels around the territory (McCall 1852). He reported 
67 species and collected a few bird specimens such as a per- 
egrine falcon taken at Santa Fe. McCall noted that the brown- 
headed cowbird was "not numerous" and that the common 
nighthawk was numerous in the Southwest (McCall1852). 
Army surgeon Elliott Coues collected over 200 species 
of birds in Arizona and parts of New Mexico in the 1860s 
and 1880s. Coues, while traveling with an army unit 
bound for Whipple, Arizona, collected a new species of 
warbler near Old Fort Wingate, New Mexico. This bird 
was collected in July 1864 and was later named for his 
sister Grace (Eifert 1962). He published A Key to North 
American Birds and Birds of the Colorado Valley. Coues has 
been called the "most prodigious of all American orni- 
thologists" (Kastner 1986; Ligon 1961). 
One of Arizona's best known ornithologists of the 19th 
century was Major Charles Emil Bendire who was sta- 
tioned at Forts Bowie, Lowell, and Whipple, Arizona and 
Fort Burgwyn, New Mexico from 1872 to 1873. His spe- 
cialty was bird eggs, which he widely collected. His best 
known published work was Life Histories of North Ameri- 
can Birds (1892). Bendire had several bird species named 
for him; he was also a founder of the American Ornitholo- 
gists' Union (Ligon 1961). 
An early ornithologist who worked in New Mexico was 
Henry Wetherbee Henshaw who served with the U.S. 
Geographical and Geological Explorations and Surveys. 
Henshaw observed and collected birds from 1873 to 1874 
in the northern part of New Mexico and around Old Fort 
Wingate, New Mexico. He published his work in 1885 and 
1886 in issues of The Auk. (Ligon 1961). 
All of the foregoing military ornithologists worked un- 
der Fullerton Spencer Baird who was Assistant Secretary, 
then Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution from 1850 
to 1887. Baird, along with T. M. Brewer and R. Ridgway, 
produced A History of North American Birds, published in 
1874 (Eifert 1962; Ligon 1961). 
The best known woman ornithologist in the Southwest 
was Florence Merriam Bailey, who conducted field obser- 
vations, collected bird specimens, and wrote several sig- 
nificant publications from the late 1800s through the early 
1900s. Her best known publications are the Handbook of 
Birds of the Western United States (1902) and Birds of New 
Mexico (1928). Bailey was the first female fellow of the 
American Ornithologists' Union (Behle 1990; Ligon 1961) 
and the first woman to receive the Brewster Medal for her 
publication Birds of New Mexico (Norwood 1993). 
A relatively comprehensive list of New Mexico birds 
was compiled by Fannie Ford in 1911 for the State Game 
and Fish Department. She reported 314 species and sub- 
species. At about the same time, the earliest major work 
on the ethno-ornithology of an American Indian tribe in 
the Southwest was conducted by Junius Henderson and 
John Peabody Harrington of the Bureau of American Eth- 
nology, Smithsonian Institution. This field and literature 
review, made from 1910 to 1913 and published in 1914, 
focused on the relationship between the Tewa Pueblo of 
New Mexico and regional birds and other fauna (Hender- 
son and Harrington 1914). 
J. Stokely Ligon, who with Aldo Leopold directed the 
predator control program in New Mexico, headed up a 
wild game survey in New Mexico from 1926 to 1927. Birds 
surveyed included golden eagles, which Ligon viewed as 
"a serious enemy of certain species of game" and young 
cattle, goats, and sheep. He noted that killing hawks had 
severely reduced their numbers. Ligon believed that birds 
of prey helped control the rodent population and lobbied 
for protecting legislation. Magpies were considered "en- 
emies" of quail, pheasants, and turkeys, and Ligon rec- 
ommended that federal and state wildlife personnel ini- 
tiate control programs for this species (Ligon 1927). Ligon 
later published his New Mexico Birds and Where to Find 
Them, which includes historical data on 399 bird species 
in the state. Included with species descriptions are notes 
on former ranges and status of rare, endangered, or threat- 
ened species. 
Archeologist-ornithologist Lyndon L. Hargrave, who 
primarily worked in Arizona from 1926 into the 1970s, 
accumulated a comparative collection of more than 
300,000 bird bones. He conducted field work with orni- 
thologists Alex Wetmore, the late Allan R. Phillips, and 
Herbert Brandt, and worked with numerous archeologists. 
Hargrave's best known publication is "Mexican Macaws" 
(1970). 
Phillips and Brandt began fieldwork in Arizona in the 
1930s. Phillips' M.A. thesis at the University of Arizona 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 3 
was, "The Faunal Areas of Arizona: Based on Bird Distri- 
bution" (Brown 1982). He moved to Mexico to study birds 
in 1958 and collaborated with Gale Monson on A n  Anno- 
tated Checklist of the Birds of Arizona (1981). Herbert Brandt 
also worked in Arizona in the middle of this century. His 
best known work is Arizona and Its Birdlife (1951). Monson 
also began his ornithological investigations in Arizona in 
the 1930s and worked for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Ser- 
vice for 29 years. Monson, Phillips, and Joe Marshall col- 
laborated on The Birds of Arizona (1964) (Monson and 
Phillips 1981). 
Edmund Ladd of Zuni Pueblo completed a thesis on 
the ethno-ornithology of his village at the University of 
New Mexico in 1963. Much of this work focused on the 
ritual use of bird feathers, especially those decorating 
prayer sticks, and includes a discussion of specific bird 
species and their historical uses. 
Historical Bird Accounts and 
Avifaunal Changes 
Abundances from Early Studies 
The composition, distribution, and populations of avian 
species in Southwestern ponderosa pine forests have 
changed over time due to climatic fluctuations, lightning 
or human-caused fires, and/or other human disturbances 
that impact birds directly or indirectly through habitat 
change (Foxx and Tiemey 1984; Hejl1994; Jehl and Johnson 
1994; Johnson 1994; Newman 1979). Human-generated, 
historical disturbances include snaring or trapping, hunt- 
ing, poisoning, pesticide use, specimen-collecting, egg- 
collecting, logging, snag removal, grazing, mining, erect- 
ing flight obstacles, exotic species introduction, recreation, 
and urbanization (Behle 1990; Hejl 1994). The probable 
impacts of historical human use of birds and their habi- 
tats are considered in this section. 
By evaluating relative abundances (abundant, common, 
uncommon, rare, extinct) of birds reported in 3 New 
Mexico bird publications from 1911 to 1961, species whose 
abundance changed were identified (Ford 1911; Bailey 
1928; Ligon 1961). Because differences in observer style 
and locale experience is likely to have produced biases, 
results should be cautiously interpreted. We identified 32 
species whose populations in New Mexico ponderosa pine 
forests were reported as abundant or common in 1911 but 
less abundant or rare in 1961 (table 8). Species of special 
interest based on declines or management problems are 
reported in Hejl's (1994) contemporary analysis and in 
other chapters of this volume. They include the band- 
tailed pigeon, olive-sided flycatcher, violet-green swallow, 
mountain chickadee, golden-crowned kinglet, pygmy 
nuthatch, and chipping sparrow. Decreases could be re- 
lated to habitat loss or modification through logging, fire 
exclusion, grazing, hunting, and herbicide and pesticide 
use. However, 14 species reported as rare, uncommon, or 
common in the 1911 study were potentially more abun- 
dant by 1961. Real or apparent increases of these species 
may have been due to habitat changes, range expansion, 
observer variability, or incomplete inventories during the 
late 19th to early 20th centuries. Contemporary accounts 
report general population increases for Grace's warbler 
and range expansion for red-faced warbler; 2 of the spe- 
cies noted in table 8 have increased in New Mexico. 
To document specific historical information on avifau- 
nas occupying ponderosa pine forests, we listed species 
surveyed in 4 mountain ranges in New Mexico from the 
1920s to the mid-1970s (table 9). In addition, we used 
Gilman (1908), Mayes et al. (1977), and Bradfield (1974) 
to compile avifaunal lists for the Navajo Reservation in 
northeastern Arizona and the Hopi Reservation adjacent 
to the Navajo lands (table 10). Gilman (1908) recorded 
presence/absence rather than abundance. Ponderosa pine 
forests and habitat variety are more extensive on Navajo 
lands than on Hopi, which may account for the difference 
in species number listed. These tables are included in this 
chapter to mark occurrences and relative abundances of 
bird species in time as a ready historical summary for fu- 
ture investigators of Southwestern ponderosa pine 
avifaunas. 
Changes in Species Ranges 
One avian species (thick-billed parrot) and a subspe- 
cies (Merrian's turkey) found in the ponderosa pine for- 
est were extirpated historically but have been reintro- 
duced, one unsuccessfully and the other successfully. The 
thick-billed parrot, which may have ranged as far north 
as the Verde River Basin in central Arizona in the early 
colonial period, was exterminated in the 20th century. This 
specie$ sporadically visited the Animas and Peloncillo 
Mountains in New Mexico as recently as the early part of 
this century; it was last seen in 1938 in the Chiricahua 
Mountains of southeastern Arizona (Ligon 1961; Monson 
and Phillips 1981). A small number of these parrots were 
released into the Chiricahuas in 1986 by the U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service, but they have not been seen since the 
1989 to 1990 drought (Snyder et al. 1995). Merriam's tur- 
key was historically widespread in riparian woodlands 
and montane conifer forests in New Mexico and Arizona, 
but was locally extirpated between 1900 and 1920. Since 
1920, reintroduction by game and fish departments in both 
states has restored viable populations of this subspecies 
(Ligon 1961; Monson and Phillips 1981). 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

A Historical Overview 
Table 8. Recorded abundances of ponderosa pine avifauna in New Mexico. A = abundant; C = common; U = uncommon; 
R = rare; E = extinct. 
Common name 
Population 
Source 
Increase (I) 
Decrease (D) 
Ford 191 1 
Bailey 1928 
Ligon 1961 
Stable (S) 
Blue grouse 
C 
D 
Merriam's turkey 
C 
D 
Band-tailed pigeon 
C 
D 
Mourning dove 
A 
S 
Thick-billed parrot 
a 
D 
Greater roadrunner 
a 
U 
I 
Common nighthawk 
C 
C 
S 
Poor-will 
U 
I 
Common poor-will 
U 
I 
Whip-poor-will 
U 
S 
White-throated swift 
C 
S 
Calliope hummingbir 
C 
D 
Broad-tailed hummin 
C 
S 
Rufous hummingbird 
C 
C 
C to A 
I 
Lewis' woodpecker 
LC 
Locally U to C 
S 
Acorn woodpecker 
C 
S 
Williamson's sapsucker 
C 
U to C 
U 
D 
Yellow-bellied sapsucker 
S 
Downy woodpecker 
S 
Hairy woodpecker 
S 
Three-toed woodpecker 
S 
Northern flicker 
Olive-sided flycatcher 
Western wood pewee 
Dusky flycatcher 
S 
Say's phoebe 
S 
Cordilleran (western) flycatcher 
J to C 
I 
Ash-throated flycatcher 
S 
Cassin's kingbird 
C 
J 
D 
Purple martin 
Tree swallow 
Violet-green swallow 
Black-billed magpie 
Steller's jay 
Pinyon jay 
Gray jay 
Clark's nutcra 
Locally R 1 
U 
D 
American croi 
U to A 
Common rave 
Black-capped chickadee 
Mountain chickadee 
Golden-crowned kinglet 
Ruby-crowned kinglet 
Red-breasted nuthatch 
White-breasted nuthatch 
Pygmy nuthatch 
Brown creeper 
Winter wren 
a 
Rock wren 
S 
Canyon wren 
Locally C 
R 
Locally C 
S 
continued on next page 
USDA Forest Service Gen.Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 3 
Table 8. (continued) 
Population 
Source 
Increase (I) 
Decrease (D) 
Common name 
Ford 191 1 
Bailey 1928 
Ligon 1961 
Stable (S) 
Mountain bluebi 
Townsend's warble 
Brewer's blackbir 
Lincoln's sparrow 
C 
U 
U 
D 
a Data not recorded. 
58 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

A Historical Overview 
Table 9. Recorded ponderosa pine avifauna occurrence in 4 New Mexico mountain ranges. 
La Mesa 
Sangre de 
Crlsto Mtns 
Sandla Mtns 
Jemez Mtns 
Guadalupe Mtns 
1 920-1 950s" 
19208-1 950sb 
pre-1 977c 
1972-1 974d 
Common name 
Merriam's turkey 
Wild turkey 
E 
n 
c 
3and-tailed pigeon 
X 
. X 
Aourning dove 
X 
X 
h a t e r  roadrunner 
Common nighthawk 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Poor-will 
Whip-poor-will 
White-throated swifi 
Calliope hummingbi 
Broad-tailed hummi 
Rufous humminabird 
Black-chinnt 
Blue-throate 
Lewis' wood 
Acorn woodpec~er 
Williamson's sapsucker 
Yellow-bellied sapsucker 
Downy woodpecker 
I rd 
ngbird 
sd h;;mmingbird 
X 
sd hummingbird 
X 
peeker 
. , 
. , 
. , 
. . 
Hairy woodpecker 
Three-toed woodpecker 
Ash-throated flycatcher 
Wright's flycatcher 
Hammond's flycatcher 
Cassin's kin1 gbird 
X 
Purple marti 
Violet-green 
Black-billed magple 
n 
swallow 
Steller's jay 
Pinyon jay 
Gray jay 
Clark's nutcracker 
Mountain c 
Bushtit 
Red-breasted nuthatch 
White-breasted nuthatch 
continued on next page 
59 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 3 
Table 9. (continued) 
La Mesa 
Sangre de 
Cristo Mtns 
Sandia Mtns 
Jemez Mtns 
Guadalupe Mtns 
Common name 
1920-1 950s' 
1920s-1 950sb 
pre-1977= 
1972-1 974d 
Canyon wren 
X 
X 
X 
. 
. 
Townsend's solitaire 
X 
X 
X 
Swainson's thrush 
X 
American robin 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Townsend's warbler 
X 
X 
American goldfinch 
X 
Evening grosb 
Baird's sparrow 
X 
Vesper sparrow 
X 
Sava 
Song 
Source: 
a Ligon 1961 
Schwarz 1995 
Foxx 8Tierney 1984 
Newman 1979 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

A Historical Overview 
Table 10. Ponderosa pine avifauna on Navajo and Hopi reservations. A = abundant; C = common; U = uncommon; R = rare; 
S = sparse; E = extinct; X = abundance not given in paper. 
Common Name 
Gilman 1908a 
- -- 
Mayes et al. 1 977b 
Bradfield 1974= 
Merriam's turkey 
Mourning dove 
Common nighthawk 
Whip-poor-will 
White-throated swift 
Broad-tailed hummingbird 
Rufous hummingbird 
Lewis' woodpecker 
Acorn woodpecker 
Williamson's sapsucker 
Yellow-bellied sapsucker 
Downy woodpecker 
Hairy woodpecker 
Northern flicker 
Olive-sided flycatc 
Cassin's kingbird 
Western wood pewee 
Cordilleran (weste 
Say's phoebe 
Ash-throated flycatcher 
Purple martin 
Violet-green swallow 
Black-billed magpie 
Steller's jay 
Pinyon jay 
Clark's nutcracker 
Common raven 
Mountain chickadee 
Red-breasted nuthatch 
White-breasted nuthatc 
Pygmy nuthatch 
Brown creeper 
Rock wren 
Canyon wren 
House wren 
Western bluebird 
Mountain bluebird 
Townsend's solitaire 
Hermit thrush 
American robin 
Golden-crowned 
Black-throated 
Virginia's warbler 
Townsend's warbler 
Grace's warbler 
MacGillivray's warbler 
Western tanager 
Black-headed grosbe 
Spotted towhee 
USDA Forest Service Gen.Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
continued on next page 
6 1 

Chapter 3 
Table 10. (continued) 
Common Name 
Giiman 1908a 
Mayes et al. 1977b 
Bradfield 1974= 
ailed towhee 
sparrow 
,arrow 
unco 
ickbird 
ill 
Green4 
Vesper ! 
Song sl: 
Chipping sparrow 
Dark-eyed j 
Brewer's b l ~  
Red crossbi 
Cassin's finch 
Pine siskin 
Lesser goldfinch 
Year of record: 
a 1907. 
1958-1 976. 
pre-1974. 
Source: Bradfield 1974. 
Several Southwestern species associated with ponde- 
rosa pine have moved north in the last 40 years or so (Jehl 
and Johnson 1994; Johnson 1994). These include the whip- 
poor-will, which now ranges across much of Arizona into 
southwest Utah and over most of New Mexico into south 
central Colorado, and the red-faced warbler, which is now 
found over all but northern and eastern New Mexico and 
northwestern and northeastern Arizona. The summer 
tanager occupies portions of north central and west cen- 
tral Arizona and New Mexico. The white-winged cross- 
bill has moved southward into the Rocky Mountains of 
southern Colorado and northern New Mexico where it 
bred in the late 1970s and 1980s. Two explanations for this 
phenomenon are: 1) climatic trends with moister and 
warmer summers since 1965; and 2) reoccupation of 
former range Uehl and Johnson 1994; Johnson 1994). 
Conclusion 
Of the various human activities that have impacted for- 
est composition and structure, logging and fire suppres- 
sion had the greatest influence on ponderosa pine forest 
ecosystems since European settlement. Every accessible 
ponderosa pine forest in New Mexico and Arizona was 
heavily logged from the 1870s to the 1930s (Baker et al. 
1988; Houk 1993). Demand for timber was primarily gen- 
erated by railroad and mine operations. The effects of log- 
ging on southwestern birds were unknown before Euro- 
pean settlement; therefore, it is difficult to document 
alterations of bird populations caused by early American 
Indian use of ponderosa pine. 
Hejl (?994), when reviewing human-induced changes 
that occurred over the last 100 years in birds inhabiting 
Western coniferous forests, proposed that logging, fire 
exclusion, snag removal, loss of herbaceous understory, 
and/or increased densities of small trees resulted in popu- 
lation declines in bird species associated with burns, old- 
growth forests, open forests, or snags. Canopy and bark 
foragers, which historically dominated ponderosa pine 
forests, were impacted the most. According to Hejl, spe- 
cies exhibiting historical declines include broad-tailed 
hummingbird, acorn woodpecker, violet-green swallow, 
purple martin, mountain chickadee, white-breasted 
nuthatch, pygmy nuthatch, brown creeper, western blue- 
bird, mountain bluebird, American robin, red-faced war- 
bler, lark sparrow, and chipping sparrow. 
DeSante and George (1994) identified 9 avian species 
whose breeding populations in ponderosa pine forests 
have decreased in Arizona (AZ) or New Mexico (NM) over 
the last 100 years. These are blue grouse (AZ, NM), wild 
turkey (AZ, NM), spotted owl (AZ), lesser nighthawk 
(NM), white-throated swift (AZ), purple martin (AZ), 
western bluebird (AZ), Lucy's warbler (AZ), and song 
sparrow (AZ). Since 1890, wild turkey and evening gros- 
beak have experienced range reductions. 
In contrast to those species with historical declines, 10 
species (American crow, cordilleran flycatcher, house 
wren, Townsend's solitaire, hermit thrush, solitary vireo, 
Virginia's warbler, yellow-rumped warbler, Grace's war- 
bler, and western tanager) have apparently increased in 
numbers in the Western United States (DeSante and 
George 1994; Hejl1994). The downy woodpecker, black- 
capped chickadee, red-faced warbler, and brown-headed 
cowbird have increased their breeding distribution. These 
changes are believed to be caused by climatic shifts, land- 
USDA Forest Service Gen.Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

A Historical Overview 
scape modification, grazing, and/or vegetative shifts 
(Brown and Davis 1995). 
Research Needs 
Systematic searches of published and unpublished ar- 
cheological and historic reports that contain data on pon- 
derosa pine avifauna use by prehistoric and historic 
American Indians is needed. This information would pro- 
vide a data base for determining: 1) species range; 2) use 
of native and exotic bird species for food, tools, personal 
adornment, ritual, pets, etc.; and 3) impacts on popula- 
tions from existing and future fire history studies. 
Little research on the pre-1900 relationship between 
European settlers and Southwestern ponderosa pine for- 
est birds has been conducted. Various published and un- 
published reports, papers, and other documents need to 
be searched, and pertinent data extracted and synthesized. 
Careful scrutiny of climatic records, and logging, ranch- 
ing, farming, and other recorded activities would produce 
useful information on impacts and population changes. 
As a baseline for determining these phenomena, early 
(1850 to 1940) published and unpublished field notes and 
lists recorded by ornithologists in the Southwest should 
be examined for seasonal occurrence and population size 
of species associated with ponderosa pine forests. These 
data might indicate impacts on avian populations near his- 
toric villages and towns or those species obtained from far- 
ther distances. 
Literature Cited 
Abert, J.W. 1962. Abert's New Mexico report. 1846-1947. 
Horn and Wallace Publishers, Albuquerque, NM. 
Adam, Eleanor B., and Fray Angelico Chavez, editors. 1956. 
The missions of New Mexico: a description by Fray Fran- 
cisco Atanasio Dominguez with other contemporary docu- 
ments. University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque, NM. 
Akins, Nancy J. 1985. Prehistoric faunal utilization in 
Chaco Canyon Basketmaker I11 through Pueblo 111. In: 
Environment and subsistence of Chaco Canyon, New 
Mexico, Publications in Archaeology ME, Chaco Can- 
yon Studies, Frances Joan Mathien, ed. Pp. 305445, 
National Park Service, Albuquerque, NM. 
Anonymous. 1959. New Mexico forest facts. American 
Forest Products Industries, Washington, DC. 
Bahre, Conrad Joseph. 1991. A legacy of change: Historic 
human impact on vegetation of the Arizona border- 
lands. University of Arizona Press, Tucson, AZ. 
Bailey, Florence Merriam. 1902. Handbook of birds of the 
western United States. Houghton-MiMin, Boston, MA. 
Bailey, Florence Merriam. 1904. Additions to Mitchell's list 
of the summer birds of San Miguel County, New Mexico. 
The Auk 21(4): 443449. 
1928. Birds of New Mexico. New Mexico Game 
and Fish, Santa Fe, NM. 
Bailey, Lynn R. 1980. If you take my sheep: The evolution 
and conflicts of Navajo pastoralism, 1630-1868. 
Westernlore Publications, Pasadena, CA. 
Barnett, Franklin. 1968. Birds on Rio Grande pottery. Pri- 
vately printed, Yuma, AZ. 
Basehart, Harry W. 1973. Mescalero Apache subsistence 
patterns. In: Technical Manual: 1973 survey of the 
Tularosa Basin Research Design. Pp 145-181. Human 
Systems Research. Tularosa, NM. 
Baxter, John 0.1987. Las Carneradas: Sheep trade in New 
Mexico, 1700-1860. University of New Mexico Press, 
Albuquerque, NM. 
Behle, William H. 1990. Utah birds: Historical perspective 
and bibliography. Utah Museum of Natural History No. 
9, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT. 
Betancourt, Julio L., and Thomas R.Van Devender. 1981. 
Holocene vegetation in Chaco Canyon, New Mexico. 
Science 214(4521): 656-659. 
Bolton, Herbert Eugene, editor. 1946. Spanish Exploration 
in the Southwest, 1542-1706. Charles Scribner's Sons. 
New York, NY. 
Borland, Hal. 1975. The history of wildlife in America. 
National Wildlife Federation, Washington, DC. 
Boyd, E. 1974. Popular arts of Spanish New Mexico. Mu- 
seum of New Mexico Press, Santa Fe, NM. 
Bradfield, Maitland. 1974. Birds of the Hopi region, their 
Hopi names, and notes on their ecology. Museum of 
Northern Arizona Bulletin No. 48. Northern Arizona 
Society of Science and Art, Flagstaff, AZ. 
Brandt, Herbert. 1951. Arizona and its birdlife. Bird Re- 
search Foundation, Cleveland, OH. 
Brew, J.O. 1979. Hopi prehistory and history to 1850. Pp. 
514-523 in Handbook of North American Indians: 
Southwest, Vol. 9. Smithsonian Institution, Washington, 
DC. 
Briggs, Charles L., and John R. Van Ness (editors). 1987. 
Land, water, and culture: New perspectives on Hispanic 
land grants. University of New Mexico Press, Albuquer- 
que, NM. 
Brody, J.J. 1977. Mimbres painted pottery. School of Ameri- 
can Research, Santa Fe and University of New Mexico 
Press, Albuquerque, NM. 
Brown, David E., editor. 1982. Biotic communities of the 
American Southwest-United States and Mexico. Desert 
Plants 4(14): 1-342. 
Brown, David E., and Neil B. Carmony, editors. 1995. Aldo 
Leopold's Southwest. University of New Mexico Press, 
Albuquerque, NM. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 3 
Brown, David E., and Russell Davis. 1995. One hundred 
years of vicissitude: Terrestrial bird and mammal dis- 
tribution changes in the American Southwest, 1890- 
1990. Pages 231-243 in Biodiversity and management 
of the Madrean Archipelago: The sky islands of South- 
western United States and northwestern Mexico, 
Leonard F. DeBano, coordinator. USDA Forest Service 
General Technical Report RM-GTR-264, Rocky Moun- 
tain Range and Experiment Station, Fort Collins, CO. 
Brown, David E., W.L. Minckley, and James P Collins. 1982. 
Historical background to Southwestern ecological stud- 
ies in Biotic communities of the American Southwest- 
United States and Mexico, David E. Brown, editor. 
Desert Plants. University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ. Vol. 
4(14): 17-23. 
Buskirk, Winfred. 1986. The Western Apache: Living with 
the land before 1950. University of Oklahoma Press, 
Norman, OK. 
Bustamante, Adrian, and Marc Simmons, translators and 
editors. 1995. The exposition on the province of New 
Mexico, 1812 by Don Pedro Baptista Pino. University 
of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque, NM. 
Carlson, Alvar Ward. 1969. New Mexico's sheep indus- 
try: 1850-1900. Its role in the history of the territory. 
New Mexico Historical Review. 44(1): 25-49. 
Cassells, E. Steve. 1983. The archaeology of Colorado. 
Johnson Books, Boulder, CO. 
Castetter, Edward F. 1935. Ethnobiological studies of the 
Southwest. Uncultivated native plants used as sources 
of food. University of New Mexico Biological Series, 
Bulletin No. 4(1), Albuquerque, NM. 
Christiansen, Paige W. 1974. The story of mining in New 
Mexico. Scenic Trips to the Geological Past. No. 12. New 
Mexico Bureau of Mines and Mineral Resources, 
Socorro, NM. 
Clary, David. 1986. Timber and the Forest Service. Uni- 
versity of Kansas Press, Lawrence, KS. 
Cooper, C.F. 1960. Changes in vegetation structure and 
growth of Southwestern pine forests since white settle- 
ment. Ecological Monographs. 30: 129-164. 
Cordell, Linda S. 1984. Prehistory of the Southwest. Aca- 
demic Press, San Diego, CA. 
Covey, Cyclone, translator and editor. 1983. Cabeza de 
Vaca's adventures in the unknown interior of America. 
University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque, NM. 
Covington, W. Wallace, and Margaret M. Moore, 1994. 
Southwestern ponderosa forest structure: Changes since 
Euro-American settlement. Journal of Sustainable For- 
estry 92(1): 3947. 
Covington, W. Wallace, and Margaret M. Moore. 1994. 
Post-settlement changes in natural fire regimes and for- 
est structure: Ecological restoration of old-growth pon- 
derosa pine forest. Journal of Sustainable Forestry 2(1- 
2): 153-181. 
Covington, Wallace W., and S.S. Sacket. 1986. Effect of 
periodic burning on soil nitrogen concentrations in pon- 
derosa pine. Soil Science Society of America Journal 50: 
452457. 
Curtin, L.M.S. 1965. Healing herbs of the upper Rio 
Grande. Southwest Museum, Los Angeles, CA. 
Davis Jr., Goode P. 1982. Man and wildlife in Arizona: The 
American exploration period, 1824-1865. Neil 8. 
Carmony and David E. Brown, editors. Arizona Game 
and Fish Department, Phoenix, AZ. 
deBuys) William. 1985. Enchantment and exploitation: The 
life and hard times of a New Mexico mountain range. 
University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque, NM. 
Denevan, William M. 1967. Livestock numbers in nine- 
teenth century New Mexico and the problem of gully- 
ing in the Southwest. Annals, Association of American 
Geographers. 57(4): 691-703. 
DeSante and T. Luke George. 1994. Population trends in 
the landbirds of western North America. Pp 232-246. 
In: Joseph R. Jehl, Jr. and Ned K. Johnson, editors., A 
Century of avifaunal change in western North America. 
Cooper Ornithological Society Studies in Avian Biology 
No. 15, Berkeley, CA. 
Dick-Peddie, William A. 1993. New Mexico vegetation: 
Past, present, and future. University of New Mexico 
Press, Albuquerque, NM. 
Dickey, Roland F. 1970. New Mexico village arts. Univer- 
sity of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque, NM. 
Dortignac, E.J. 1956. Watershed resources and problems 
of the upper Rio Grande Basin. USDA Rocky Mountain 
Forest and Range Experiment Station, Forest Service, 
Fort Collins, CO. 
Dunmire, William W., and Gail D. Tierney. 1995. Wild 
plants of the Pueblo province: Exploring ancient and 
enduring uses. Museum of New Mexico Press, Santa 
Fe, NM. 
Dutton, Bertha P. 1963. Sun father's way: The kiva mural 
of Kuaua. University of New Mexico Press, Albuquer- 
que, NM. 
Eastman, Clyde, and James R. Gray. 1987. Community 
grazing: Practice and potential in New Mexico. Univer- 
sity of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque, NM. 
Edlin, Herbert L. 1976. Trees and man. Columbia Univer- 
sity Press, New York. 
Eifert, Virginia S. 1962. Men, birds, and adventure: The 
thrilling story of the discovery of American birds. Dodd, 
Mead and Company, New York, NY. 
Ellison, Lincoln. 1954. Subalpine vegetation of the Wasatch 
Plateau. Ecological Monographs. 24: 89-184. 
Ensign, Edgar T. 1888. Report on the forest conditions of 
the Rocky Mountains. U.S. Department of Agriculture 
Forestry Division Bulletin No. 2. Washington, DC. 
Faulk, Odie B. 1970. Arizona: A short history. University 
of Oklahoma Press, Norman, OK. 
Fogg, G.G. 1966. The pinyon pines and man. Economic 
Botany. 20: 103-105. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

A Historical Overview 
Ford, Fannie. 1911. Ornithology: Natural resources sur- 
vey. Conservation and Natural Resources Commission 
of New Mexico Report No. 1. Santa Fe, NM. 
Ford, Richard I. 1987. The new Pueblo economy. In: When 
cultures meet: Remembering San Gabriel del Yunge 
Oweenge, pp. 73-87. Sunstone Press, Santa Fe, NM. 
Foxx, Teralene S., compiler and editor. 1984. La Mesa Fire 
Symposium, Los Alamos, New Mexico, October 6 and 
7,1981. Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, 
NM. 
Foxx, Teralene S., and Gail D Tierney. 1984. Status of the 
flora of the Los Alamos National Environmental Re- 
search Park: A historical perspective. LA-8050-NERP, 
Vol. 11, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, 
NM. 
Frome, Michael. 1962. Whose woods these are: The story 
of the national forests. Doubleday and Company, Gar- 
den City, New York. 
Gay Jr., Charles W., and Don D. Dwyer. 1970. New Mexico 
range plants. New Mexico State University Circular 374, 
Las Cruces, NM. 
Giese, Dale F. 1976. Echoes of the bugle. Phelps Dodge 
Corporation, Tyrone, NM. 
Gilman, M. French. 1908. Birds of the Navajo reservation 
in New Mexico. The Condor lO(4): 146-152. 
Gomez, Arthur R., and Veronica E. Tiller. 1990. Fort Apache 
forestry: A history of timber management and forest 
protection on the Fort Apache Indian reservation, 1870- 
1985. Tiller Research, Albuquerque, NM. 
Grant, Campbell. 1978. Canyon de Chelly: Its people and 
rock art. University of Arizona Press, Tucson, AZ. 
Gumerman, George J., and Emil W. Haury. 1979. Prehis- 
tory: Hohokam. Pages 75-99 in Alfonso Ortiz, Ed. Hand- 
book of North American Indians: Southwest, Smith- 
sonian Institution, Washington, DC. 
Hall, Stephen A. 1977. Late quaternary sedimentation and 
paleoecologic history of Chaco Canyon, New Mexico. 
Geological Society of America Bulletin 88(11): 1593- 
1618. 
Hammond, George P., and Agapito Rey. 1966. The redis- 
covery of New Mexico. 1580-1594. University of New 
Mexico Press, Albuquerque, NM. 
Hammond, John Fox. 1966. A surgeon's report on Socorro, 
New Mexico. Stagecoach Press, Santa Fe, NM. 
Hargrave, Lyndon L. 1939. Bird bones from abandoned 
Indian dwellings in Arizona and Utah. The Condor 
41(5): 206-210. 
, 1970. Mexican macaws. Anthropological Pa- 
pers of the University of Arizona 20, Tucson, AZ. 
Harrington, Michael G., and Stephen S. Sackett. 1992. Past 
and present fire influences on Southwestern ponderosa 
pine old growth. Pages 44-51 in Proceedings of the 
workshop on old-growth forests in the Rocky Moun- 
tains and Southwest: The status of our knowledge, co- 
ordinated by M. R. Kaufman, et al. USDA Forest Ser- 
vice General Technical Report RM-213, Rocky Mountain 
Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, CO. 
Haughton, Claire Shaver. 1978. Green immigrants: The 
plants that transformed America. Harcourt, Brace and 
Jovanovich, New York. 
Hejl, Sallie J. 1994. Human-induced changes in bird popu- 
lations in coniferous forests in western North America 
during the past 100 years. Pages 232-246 in Joseph R. 
Jehl, Jr. and Ned K. Johnson, editors. A century of avi- 
fdunal change in western North America, Cooper Or- 
nithological Society Studies in Avian Biology No. 15, 
Berkley, CA. 
Henderson, Junius, and John Peabody Harrington. 1914. 
Ethnozoology of the Tewa Indians. Bureau of Ameri- 
can Ethnology Bulletin 56. Smithsonian Institution, 
Washington, DC. 
Henry, T. Charlton. 1859. Notes derived from observations 
made on the birds of New Mexico during the years 1853 
and 1854. Proceedings of the Academy of Natural Sci- 
ences of Philadelphia. Vol. VII: 306-317. 
Hermann, F.J. 1966. Notes on western range forbs: 
Cruciferae through Compositae. USDA Forest Service 
Agriculture Handbook No. 293, Washington, D.C. 
Hibben, Frank C. 1975. Kiva art of the Anasazi at Pottery 
Mound. K.C. Publications. Las Vegas, NV. 
Hill, W.W. 1982. An ethnography of Santa Clara Pueblo, 
New Mexico. University of New Mexico Press, Albu- 
querque, NM. 
Hirt, Paul. 1989. The transformation of a landscape: Cul- 
ture and ecology in southeastern Arizona. Environmen- 
tal Review 13(3-4): 167-189. 
Hitchcock, A.S. 1935. Manual of grasses of the United 
States. USDA Miscellaneous Publication No. 200, U.S., 
Washington, D.C. 
Hodge, F.W., editor. 1946. The narrative of the expedition 
of Coronado, by Pedro de Castaneda. Pages 273-387 in 
Spanish explorers in the southern United States, 1528- 
1543. Barnes and Noble, New York, NY. 
Houk, Rose. 1993. The magnificent ponderosa. Plateau 
64(2): 1-32. 
Hughes, J. Donald. 1983. American Indian ecology. Texas 
Western Press, El Paso, TX. 
Jehl Jr., Joseph R., and Ned K. Johnson. 1994. A century of 
avifaunal change in western North America. Cooper Or- 
nithological Society Studies in Avian Biology No. 15, 
Berkely, CA. 
Johnson, Marlin A. 1995. Changes in Southwestern for- 
ests: Stewardship implications. Southwestern Region, 
USDA Forest Service, Washington, D.C. 
Johnson, Ned K. 1994. Pioneering and natural expansion 
of breeding distributions in western North American 
birds. Pages 2744 in Joseph R. Jehl, Jr. and Ned W. 
Johnson, editors., A century of avifaunal change in west- 
ern North America, Cooper Ornithological Society Stud- 
ies in Avian Biology No. 15, Berkeley, CA. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
65 

Chapter 3 
Jones, Hester. 1932. Use of wood by the Spanish colonists 
in New Mexico. New Mexico Historical Review 7(3): 
273-291. 
Judd, Neil M. 1954. The material culture of Pueblo Bo- 
nito. Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections. Vol. 124. 
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC. 
Kastner, Joseph. 1986. A world of watchers. Alfred A. 
Knopf, New York. 
Kelley, N. Edmund. 1980. The contemporary ecology of 
Arroyo Hondo, New Mexico. School of American Re- 
search Press, Santa Fe, NM. 
Kennerly, C.B.R. 1856. Report on the zoology of the expe- 
dition. Pages 1-17 in Reports of explorations and sur- 
veys to ascertain the most practicable and economical 
route for a railroad from the Mississippi River to the 
Pacific Ocean, Vol. 4, Pt. 6. Washington, DC. 
Kinnaird, Lawrence. 1967. The frontiers of New Spain: 
Nicolas de Lafora's description, 1766-1768. Arno Press, 
New York. 
Kluckhohn, Clyde, W.W. Hill, and Lucy Wales Kluckhohn. 
1971. Navaho material culture. Belknap Press of 
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Kohler, Timothy, and Meredith H. Matthews. 1988. Long- 
term Anasazi land use and forest reduction: A case study 
from southwest Colorado. American Antiquity 53(3): 
537-564. 
Ladd, Edmund J. 1963. Zuni ethno-ornithology. M.A. the- 
sis, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM. 
Leiberg, John B., Theodore F. Rixon, and Arthur Dodwell. 
1904. Forest conditions in the San Francisco Mountains 
Forest Reserve, Arizona. U.S. Geological Survey Pro- 
fessional Paper 22. Washington, DC. 
Ligon, J. Stokley. 1927. Wildlife of New Mexico: Its con- 
servation and management. State Game Commission, 
Department of Game and Fish, Santa Fe, NM. 
. 1961. New Mexico birds and where to find 
them. University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque, 
NM. 
Lindh, C. Otto. 1949. Ponderosa pine in the Southwest. 
Pages 347-352 in Trees: The yearbook of agriculture, 
edited by Alfred Stefferud. USDA, Washington, D.C. 
MacCameron, Robert. 1994. Environmental change in co- 
lonial New Mexico. Environmental History. 18(2): 
17-39. 
Martin, Laura C. 1993. The folklore of birds.The Globe 
Pequot Press, Old Saybrook, CT. 
Martin, Paul S. 1979. Prehistory: Mogollon. Pages 61-74 
in Handbook of North American Indians: Southwest. 
Alfonso Ortiz, editor. Smithsonian Institution, Washing- 
ton, DC. 
Mayes, Vernon, Russell Balda, Garnet Draper, Francis 
Draper, Sadie Johnson, and Edith Mike. 1977. Birds of 
Navajo land. Navajo Publications Series 8. Navajo Tribal 
Museum, Window Rock, AZ. 
McCall, Colonel George A. 1852. Some remarks on the 
habits of birds met with in western Texas, between San 
Antonio and the Rio Grande, and in New Mexico. Pro- 
ceedings of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Phila- 
delphia for 1851. Vol. V: 213-224. 
McKee, Roland. 1948. The main species of legumes. Pages 
701-726 in Grass: The yearbook of agriculture, Alfred 
Stefferud, editor. USDA, Washington, DC. 
McManis, Kent. 1995. A guide to Zuni fetishes and carv- 
ings.,Treasure Chest Books, Tucson, AZ. 
Mc~itt: Frank, editor and annotator. 1964. Navaho expe- 
dition: Journal of a military reconnaissance from Santa 
Fe, New Mexico to the Navaho country made in 1849 
by Lieutenant James H. Simpson. University of Okla- 
homa Press, Norman, OK. 
Merriam, C. Hart. 1890. Results of a biological survey of 
the San Francisco Mountain's region and desert of the 
Little Colorado in Arizona. USDA North American 
Fauna 3, Washington, DC. 
Miller, Darlis A. 1989. Soldiers and settlers: Military sup- 
ply in the Southwest, 1861-1885. University of New 
Mexico Press, Albuquerque, NM. 
Mindeleff, Victor. 1891. A study of Pueblo architecture, 
Tusayan and Cibola. Pages 3-228 in Eighth Annual Re- 
port of the Bureau of Ethnology to the Secretary of the 
Smithsonian Institution, 1886-'87, by J. W. Powell. 
Washington, DC. 
Mitchell, John E., and Duane R. Freeman. 1993. Wildlife- 
livestock-fire interactions on the north Kaibab: A his- 
torical review. USDA Forest Service General Technical 
Report RM-222. Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Ex- 
periment Station, Fort Collins, CO. 
Monson, Gale, and Allan R. Phillips. 1981. Annotated 
checklist of the birds of Arizona. 2nd ed. University of 
Arizona Press, Tucson, AZ. 
Monson, Gale, Allan Phillips, and Joe Marshall, 1964. The 
birds of Arizona. University of Arizona Press, Tucson, 
AZ. 
Morris, Don P. 1986. Archeological investigations at An- 
telope House. USDI National Park Service, Washing- 
ton, D. C. 
Mortensen, Daniel R. 1978. The deterioration of forest 
grazing land: A wider context for the effects of World 
War I. Journal of Forest History 22(4): 224-225. 
Murphy, Alexandra. 1994. Graced by pines: The ponde- 
rosa pine in the American West. Mountain Press Pub- 
lishing Company, Missoula, MT. 
Nabokov, Peter, and Robert Easton. 1989. Native American 
architecture. Oxford University Press, New York, NY. 
Newman, George A. 1979. Compositional aspects of breed- 
ing avifaunas in selected woodland of the southern 
Guadalupe Mountains, Texas. Pages 181-237 in Biologi- 
cal investigations in the Guadalupe Mountains National 
Park, Texas, National Park Service Proceedings and 
Transactions Series Number Four, Hugh H. Genoways 
and Robert J. Baker, editors. Washington, DC. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

A Historical Overview 
Norwood, Vera. 1993. Made from this earth: American 
women and nature. University of North Carolina Press, 
Chapel Hill, NC. 
Opler, Morris. 1965. An Apache lifeway: The economic, 
social and religious institutions of the Chiricahua Indi- 
ans. Cooper Square Pulbishers, New York, NY. 
Patterson, Alex. 1992. A field guide to rock art symbols of 
the Greater Southwest. Johnson Books, Boulder, CO. 
Peckham, Stewart. 1990. From this earth: The ancient art 
of Pueblo pottery. Museum of New Mexico Press, San:a 
Fe, NM. 
Perry, W.J. 1922. A word for the lowly pinyon. Journal of 
Forestry 20(5): 521-526. 
Pettit, Jan. 1990. Utes: The mountain people. Johnson Pub- 
lishing Company, Boulder, CO. 
Petersen, Kenneth Lee, and Meredith H. Matthews. 1987. 
Man's impact on the landscape: A prehistoric example 
from the Dolores River Anasazi, Southwestern Colo- 
rado. Journal of the West 26(3): 4-16. 
Plummer, F.G. 1904. Forest conditions in the Black Mesa 
Forest Reserve, Arizona. USGS Professional Paper No. 
23, Washington, DC. 
Potter, L.D., and J C. Krenetsky. 1967. Plant succession with 
released grazing pressure on New Mexico rangelands. 
Journal of Range Management 20(3): 145-151. 
Pratt, Boyd C., and Dan Scurlock. 1991. The Southwest 
New Mexico Regional Overview. Historic Preservation 
Division, Sante Fe, New Mexico. 
Reed, Clyde F. 1970. Selected weeds of the United States. 
USDA Agriculture Handbook No. 366. Agriculture Re- 
search Service, Washington, D.C. 
Robbins, Wilfred William, John Peabody Harrington, and 
Barbara Freire-Marreco. 1916. Ethnobotany of the Tewa 
Indians. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 55. 
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC. 
Rothman, Hal. 1989. Cultural and environmental change 
on the Pajarito Plateau. New Mexico Historical Review 
64(2): 185-211. 
Rowley, William D. 1985. U.S. Forest Service grazing and 
rangelands: A history. Texas A and M University Press, 
College Station, TX. 
Russell, Frank. 1975. The Pima Indians. University of Ari- 
zona Press, Tucson. 
Saab, Victoria A., Carl E. Bock, Terrell D. Rich, and David 
S. Dobkin. 1995. Livestock grazing effects in western 
North America. Pages 311-353 in Ecology and manage- 
ment of neotropical migratory birds: A synthesis and 
review of critical issues, edited by Thomas E. Martin 
and Deborah M. Finch. Oxford University Press, New 
York, NY. 
Samuels, Michael L., and Julio L. Betancourt. 1982. Mod- 
eling the long-term effects of fuelwood harvests on pin- 
yon-juniper woodlands. Environmental Management 
6(6): 505-515. 
Schaafsma, Polly. 1980. Indian rock art of the Southwest. 
School of American Research, Santa Fe, and University 
of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque, NM. 
Schickedanz, J.G. 1980. History of grazing in the South- 
west. Pages 1-9 in Grazing management systems for 
Southwest rangelands: A symposium, K.G. McDaniel 
and C. Allison, editors. New Mexico State University, 
Las Cruces, NM. 
Schroeder, Albert H. 1968. Birds and feathers in documents 
relating to Indians of the Southwest. Pages 95-114 in 
Gollected papers in honor of Lyndon Lane Hargrave, 
Papers of the Archaeological Society of New Mexico 1, 
Albert H. Schroeder, editor. Museum of New Mexico 
Press, Santa Fe, NM. 
Schroeder, Albert H. 1979. Prehistory: Hakataya. Pages 
100-107 in Handbook of North American Indians: 
Southwest, vol. 9, Alfonso Ortiz, editor. Smithsonian 
Institution, Washington, DC. 
Schwarz, Hart R. 1995. Birds of the Sandia and Manza- 
nita Mountains. Sandia Ranger District, Cibola National 
Forest, Tijeras, NM. 
Scurlock, Dan. 1983. Euro-American sites and history. 
Pages 93-156 in The Arco CO, pipeline archeology 
project. Vol 11. Joseph C. Winter, editor. Office of Con- 
tract Archeology, University of New Mexico, Albuquer- 
que, NM. 
Scurlock, Dan. 1995. Environmental history. Pages 12-28 
in Ecology, diversity, and sustainability of the Middle 
Rio Grande Basin, Deborah M. Finch and Joseph A. 
Tainter, editors. USDA General Technical Report RM- 
TTR-268, USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest 
and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, CO. 
Scurlock, Dan. 1997. From the rio to the sierra: An envi- 
ronmental history of the Middle Rio Grande Basin. 
USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Range and Ex- 
periment Station, Fort Collins, CO. General Technical 
Report RM-GTR. [I: (In press). 
Simmons, Marc. 1977. New Mexico: A bicentennial his- 
tory. W. W. Norton & Co., New York. 
. 1988. The rise of New Mexico cattle ranching. 
El Palacio 93(3): 4-13. 
. 1991. Coronado's land: Essays on daily life in 
colonial New Mexico. University of New Mexico Press, 
Albuquerque, NM. 
Snyder, Noel F.R., Susan Koenig, and Terry B. Johnson. 
1995. Ecological relationships of the thick-billed parrot 
with the pine forests of southeastern Arizona. Pages 
288-293 in Biodiversity and management of the 
Madrean Archipelago: The sky islands of Southwest- 
ern United States and northwestern Mexico, Leonard 
F. DeBano, coordintor. USDA Forest Service General 
Technical Report RM-GTR-264, Rocky Mountain Range 
and Experiment Station, Fort Collins, CO. 
Stefferud, Alfred, editor. 1948. Grass: The yearbook of ag- 
riculture. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, 
DC. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 3 
Strout, Clevy Lloyd. 1971. Flora and fauna mentioned in 
the journals of the Coronado expedition. Great Plains 
Journal ll(1): 5-40. 
Swetnam, Thomas. 1984. Peeled ponderosa pine trees: A 
record of inner bark utilization by Native Americans. 
Journal of Ethnobiology 4(2): 177-190. 
Symanski, Richard. 1985. Wild horses and sacred cows. 
Northland Press, Flagstaff, AZ. 
Tierney, Gail D. 1983. How domesticated plants came to 
the prehistoric southwest. El Palacio 89(1): 11-12, 
15-17. 
Toll, Mollie S. 1985. An overview of Chaco Canyon 
macrobotanical materials and analysis to date. Pages 
247-277 in Environment and subsistence of Chaco Can- 
yon, New Mexico, ed. by Frances Joan Mathien. Chaco 
Canyon Studies Publications in Archeology 18E, USDI 
National Park Service, Albuquerque, NM. 
Tratman, E.E. Russell. 1889. The use of metal track on rail- 
ways as a substitute for wooden ties. USDA Forestry 
Bulletin. No. 3. Washington, DC. 
Tucker, Edwin A., and George Fitzpatrick. 1972. Men who 
matched the mountains: The Forest Service in the South- 
west. Southwestern Region, U.S. Forest Service, Albu- 
querque, NM. 
Tyler, Hamilton A. 1979. Pueblo birds and myths. Univer- 
sity of Oklahoma Press, Norman, OK. 
Vines, Robert A. 1960. Trees, shrubs and woody vines of 
the Southwest. University of Texas Press, Austin, TX. 
Walker, Henry P., and Don Bufkin. 1979. Historical atlas 
of Arizona. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman, OK. 
Weaver, Harold. 1951. Fire as an ecological factor in the 
Southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Journal of For- 
estry 49(2): 93-98. 
Weber, David J. 1971. The Taos trappers: The fur trade in 
the far Southwest, 1540-1846. University of Oklahoma 
Press, Norman, OK. 
Whiting, Alfred F. 1966. Ethnobotany of the Hopi. Mu- 
seum of Northern Arizona, Flagstaff, AZ. 
Wooton, E.O. 1915. Factors affecting range management 
in New Mexico. U.S. Department of Agriculture Bulle- 
tin No. 211, Bureau of Plant Industry, Washington, DC. 
Workers of the Writers' Program. 1940a. New Mexico: A 
guide to the colorful state. Hastings House Publishers, 
New York. 
Workers of the Writers' Program. 1940b. Arizona: A state 
guide. Hastings House Publishers, New York. 
Wyckoff, D. 1977. Secondary forest succession following 
abandonment of Mesa Verde. The Kiva 42(3-4): 
215-231. 
Wyman, Walker D. 1945. The wild horse of the West. Uni- 
versity of Nebraska Press, Lincoln, NE. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 4 
Songbird Status and Roles 
Linnea S. Hall, Michael L. Morrison, and William M. Block 
Introduction 
This chapter reviews studies on songbird ecology con- 
ducted in Arizona, New Mexico, and Colorado; studies 
from outside this region are mentioned when they bear 
direct relevance to our primary region. The studies were 
conducted in sites where ponderosa pine occurred at least 
in equal coverage with other trees. We also include stud- 
ies conducted in pine-oak (pine predominant) or oak-pine 
(oak predominant) woodlands of southeastern Arizona 
and Southwestern New Mexico. Our review begins with 
population studies, including research on distribution, 
abundance, and trends in population numbers. We then 
discuss the various roles of birds in the ponderosa pine 
forest. Next we cover the multifaceted topic of avian natu- 
ral history and habitat preferences, including use of veg- 
etation and special habitat features, nest predation, for- 
aging habits, and migration habits. We also review the 
prioritization systems for identifying species of special 
research and management concern. 
Population Status 
Research Limitations 
Long-term data sets such as Breeding Bird Surveys 
(Robbins et al. 1986; Pete john et al. 1995) and Christmas 
Bird Counts (Bock and Root 1981) usually allow for in- 
dices of relative abundance. Results of many research stud- 
ies compare absolute or relative abundance of birds among 
different impacts (such as logging and fire) or conditions 
(such as varying tree density and season). But few data 
exist to estimate population parameters such as survival 
and reproduction. Few data are available to examine 
nonbreeding or migrating populations because most of 
the data are collected during the breeding season. Trend 
data are limited to Breeding Bird Surveys (BBS) and Christ- 
mas Bird Counts (CBC); we found no relevant Breeding 
Bird Census trend data (Marshall 1991). Breeding Bird 
Atlas data for the Southwest are too recent (collecting started 
in 1994) to provide trend information (T. Corman, Arizona 
Dept. of Game and Fish, personal communication). 
Therefore, we review here the information on popula- 
tions by summarizing relevant research results and by 
summarizing BBS data to examine population trends. Rig- 
orous comparisons of population estimates from differ- 
ent research projects are difficult because of different data 
collection methods, different sampling intensities, differ- 
ent skill levels of observers, and different analytic tech- 
niques. Also, methods used to sample avian populations 
have inherent biases (compare Verner 1985, for a review 
of avian census methods). Thus, we limit our discussion 
of research results to brief descriptions of major studies 
and to generalizations based on the collective results of 
these studies. 
Research Results 
Szaro and Balda (1979) measured breeding bird popu- 
lations within the Beaver Creek watershed of the Coconino 
National Forest, Arizona. Vegetation within their study 
area was dominated by ponderosa pine with Gambel oak 
and alligator juniper in the understory. They used spot 
mapping to index densities of individual species and se- 
lected guilds (as defined by Root 1967:335) on five plots 
representing different intensities of logging, from clearcut 
to control (that is, no logging). As might be expected, bird 
densities varied among plots and among years. Whether 
the variations in numbers represented effects of different 
cutting regimes, however, is difficult to assess; inferences 
about cause-effect relationships of logging will be covered 
in the following chapters and we will not duplicate that 
material here. However, bird populations were generally 
greatest on the "strip cut" and "silviculturally cut" plots 
and lowest on the clearcut plots; densities of birds on the 
control (unlogged) plot were intermediate to these ex- 
tremes (table 1). Spotted towhees and rock wrens were 
the most abundant species on the clearcut plot; dark-eyed 
junco, Steller's jay, and white-breasted nuthatch were most 
abundant on the "severely thinned" plot; Grace's warbler, 
solitary vireo, dark-eyed junco, and chipping sparrow on 
the strip cut plot; dark-eyed junco, pygmy nuthatch, and 
Grace's warbler on the silviculturally cut plot; and white- 
breasted nuthatch, pygmy nuthatch, dark-eyed junco, and 
Grace's warbler on the control plot. 
Siege1 (1989) examined habitats and populations of 
breeding birds in old-growth ponderosa pine forests on 
the Kaibab Plateau, Arizona. He compared bird numbers 
among stands representing different densities of trees: 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 4 
Table 1. Comparison of population estimates in ponderosa pine forests. See text for details of each study. Numbers provided 
are ranges of population estimates from study sites sampled in each study. 
Species 
Blakee 
Haldeman et al! 
Szaro & 
Horton & 
Baldaa 
Siegelb 
OverturfC 
Mannand 
Fall 
Winter 
Spring 
Spring Winter 
Br-tailed hurnrni 
0.0-0.8 
9 
Common raven 
0.0-1 .O 
0.0-0.: 
Mountain chickad 
Plain titmouse 
Red-breasted nuthatc 
Pygmy nuthatch 
Brown creeper 
House wren 
Ruby-crowned kinglet 
Loggerhead shrike 
American robin 
Townsend's soli 
Hermit thrush 
Western bluebir 
Cedar waxwing 
Solitary vireo 
1.5-12.0 9.1-18.1 
0.0-0.7 
Yellow-rumped war 
3.0-1 5.0 
23.447.0 0.0-1 3.0 
0.2-2.8 0.0-1.6 8 
Townsend's warbler 
0.0-1.8 
Red-faced warbl 
Grace's warbler 
3.8-19.5 
29.7-50.2 0.0-7.0 
Virginia warbler 
Brown-headed cowbird 
0.4-0.8 
0.0-7.0 
continued 011 next page 
USDA Forest Service Gen.Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Songbird Status and Roles 
Table I .  (continued) 
Species 
Blakee 
Haldeman et al! 
Szaro & 
Horton 81 
Baldaa 
Siegelb 
OverturfC Mannand 
Fall 
Winter 
Spring 
Spring Winter 
Hepatic tanager 
0.0-3.0 
0.0-0.2 
Chi~~ina 
sparrow 
1.5-1 2.0 
0.6-4.3 
0.0-29.0 
0.0-0.2 
0.0-8.8 
. .  - . 
Spotted towhee 
5.5-7.3 
0.0-0.2 
0.0-3.6 
Evenina arosbeak 
0.2 
a Szaro and Balda (1 979); units are number of pair140 ha. 
Siegel (1989); units are number of birds140 ha. 
Overturf (1 979); units are number of pair140 ha. 
Horton and Mannan (1 988); units are number of birds140 ha. 
Blake (1982); units represent an index of occurrence based on numbers and distribution of a species with a sampling site. 
~aldeman 
et al. 1973: 
open, medium, and dense. Species richness showed little 
difference among stands, although dense stands had more 
individuals, particularly warbling vireos, violet-green 
swallows, western wood pewees, and Williamson's sap- 
suckers. He also found that Grace's warbler, yellow- 
rumped warbler, and dark-eyed junco were the three most 
abundant species in all stands, collectively accounting for 
>40 percent of all birds detected. 
Overturf (1979) indexed populations using a spot map- 
ping method to examine the effects of fire on ponderosa 
pine birds in northern Arizona. Populations were sampled 
from three to nine years post fire, with the exception of 
one control area where fire had not occurred recently (table 
1). The control area was the Gus Pearson Natural Area, 
Ft. Valley Experimental Forest. Generally, burned areas 
supported fewer numbers of birds and fewer species than 
the unburned area. Species found on the control but not 
found on the burned areas included violet-green swallow, 
mountain chickadee, hermit thrush, yellow-rumped war- 
bler, Grace's warbler, and pine siskin. Burned areas, how- 
ever, tended to have more species that nested or foraged 
on the ground than were found on the control site. Spe- 
cies that appeared to exhibit positive numerical responses 
to fire included the chipping sparrow, lark sparrow, dark- 
eyed junco, green-tailed towhee, western bluebird, north- 
em flicker, and house wren. Overturf attributed this dif- 
ference to burned sites possessing a more well developed 
herbaceous understory than that in the control plot. 
In one of the few studies to examine populations of 
nonbreeding birds, Blake (1982) found pronounced sea- 
sonal differences between fall, winter, and spring in bird 
species composition and bird abundances in ponderosa 
pine forests of the Prescott National Forest, Arizona (table 
1). He also noted spatial differences that corresponded to 
differences in fire and logging histories. Generally, burned 
areas contained more individuals, but they were distrib- 
uted among fewer species than unburned sites. Species 
restricted to burned areas included common poorwill, 
western wood-pewee, scrub jay, house wren, hermit 
thrush, and lesser goldfinch during the fall; and Cassin's 
kingbird, rock wren, American robin, solitary vireo, 
Grace's warbler, hepatic tanager, and black-headed gros- 
beak during the spring. Species restricted to unburned 
areas included band-tailed pigeon, acorn woodpecker, 
Lewis' woodpecker, Steller's jay, pygmy nuthatch, can- 
yon wren, American robin, ruby-crowned kinglet, black- 
throated gray warbler, spotted towhee, chipping sparrow, 
and fox sparrow during the fall; yellow-bellied sapsucker, 
Lewis' woodpecker, Steller's jay, plain titmouse, pygmy 
nuthatch, ruby-crowned kinglet, and cedar waxwing dur- 
ing the winter; and band-tailed pigeon, acorn woodpecker, 
ash-throated flycatcher, Steller's jay, pygmy nuthatch, 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 4 
brown creeper, Bewick's wren, ruby-crowned kinglet, log- 
gerhead shrike, Virginia's warbler, black-throated gray 
warbler, Townsend's warbler, and spotted towhee during 
the spring. 
Haldeman et al. (1973) reported breeding season and 
wintering populations of birds from a ponderosa pine for- 
est northwest of Flagstaff, Arizona (table 1). Their single 
study area was the 13-ha Gus Pearson Natural Area that 
they characterized as undisturbed. They recorded 18 spe- 
cies during winter counts and 69 species during breeding 
counts. Because they used different methods to calculate 
relative abundance for each season, comparisons between 
seasons are difficult. However, of the resident species (that 
is, those present year round), the pygmy nuthatch was 
the most common species during both seasons. Other com- 
mon wintering birds were the mountain chickadee, white- 
breasted nuthatch, western bluebird, and dark-eyed junco. 
Besides the pygmy nuthatch, other common breeding 
birds included the violet-green swallow, dark-eyed junco, 
mountain chickadee, American robin, and western bluebird. 
Horton and Mannan (1988) sampled populations of cav- 
ity-nesting birds in the Santa Catalina Mountains, south- 
eastern Arizona, as part of a study to evaluate the effects 
of prescribed fire. The violet-green swallow and northern 
flicker exhibited population declines following the fire, 
whereas the mountain chickadee population appeared to 
increase. Horton and Mannan (1988) speculated that the 
population shifts were possibly attributable to changes in 
prey abundance and shifts in habitat use following fire. 
Bennetts (1991) investigated the relationship of breed- 
ing birds and dwarf mistletoe in Colorado ponderosa pine 
forests. He found positive correlations between mistletoe 
and total bird abundance and number of species, as well 
as with abundances of eight foraging guilds. He also found 
strong positive correlations of mistletoe with snag num- 
bers and the abundance of cavity nesting birds. 
General Comparisons Among Studies 
As noted previously, differences in how studies were 
conducted preclude rigorous comparisons. However, 
some generalizations are possible. Species richness (num- 
ber of species) during the breeding season ranged from 
23 (Haldeman et al. 1973) to 47 (Siegel 1989). Fewer spe- 
cies were detected during winter (14 to 16, Blake 1982 and 
Haldeman et al. 1973) or fall (27, Blake 1982) than during 
the breeding season. The range in species richness during 
the breeding season could have resulted from temporal 
or geographic differences, or variations in methodologies 
or skill levels of observers. 
Across the studies, there was a mixture of responses to 
heavy alteration of forest vegetation. In regard to fire, 
abundances of birds either increased (Blake 1982) or de- 
creased (Overturf 1979), whereas species composition was 
lower on burned sites in both studies. In clearcuts stud- 
ied by Szaro and Balda (1979)) bird numbers decreased, 
but in open stands studied by Siegel (1989), species 
richnesses were similar among open and "closed" stands. 
These differences indicate that treatments can elicit vari- 
able responses from bird species, probably because of 
variations in geographic location, and because of the his- 
toric (prior) conditions of the areas. 
Population Trends 
BBS data provide one of only a few sources of long- 
term population data from which trends may be inferred. 
However, without going into details here, it must be noted 
that many problems have been identified with BBS data 
and analyses (Peterjohn et al. 1995, Thomas and Martin 
1996). These problems include observer bias and biases 
associated with sampling design. Furthermore, a lot of 
discussion has been devoted to identifying the correct way 
to analyze BBS data (Thomas and Martin 1996). 
Regardless of these potential limitations, Miller (1992) 
evaluated population trends of ponderosa pine birds us- 
ing BBS data. BBS routes were selected from Colorado (n 
= 5), Utah (n = 5), Arizona (n = 5), and New Mexico (n = 6) 
that sampled managed ponderosa pine forests. Whether 
or not these managed pine forests were a representative 
sample of pine forest of the southwest is unknown, but 
population trends in unmanaged pine forests (for example, 
old-growth forest, wilderness lands) may have differed 
from those in managed forests. To ensure that standard- 
ized methods were used, analyses were done by the U.S. 
Fish and Wildlife Service, Patuxent Research Center. 
Miller examined trends of individual species and groups 
of species as defined by nesting strategy (for example, 
primary-cavity, secondary-cavity, or cup nesters), nesting 
habitat (woodland or coniferous forest), or residency sta- 
tus (resident, short-distant migrant, neotropical migrant). 
Analyses were done at the state level for New Mexico (be- 
cause this was the only state with adequate samples); New 
Mexico and Arizona combined; Colorado and Utah com- 
bined; and all four states combined. For New Mexico, 
Miller found declining populations of 77 percent of all 
birds examined (46 of 61), and from 50 to 100 percent of 
the species within any of the groups that he evaluated 
(table 2). Fewer population declines were noted when cen- 
sus routes from states were pooled (table 2). Of particular 
interest was that about two-thirds (50) of the species found 
in New Mexico and Arizona (75 total bird species) exhib- 
ited significant population declines (table 2), and many 
of these were birds that nested in open cups and species 
that tended to be year-round residents. Miller identified 
50 species that exhibited declines and 25 that exhibited 
population increases (table 3). 
The Christmas Bird Count program, sponsored by the 
National Audubon Society, provides information on the 
abundance of birds wintering in various locations in North 
America. There are, however, only two count locations 
72 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Songbird Status and Roles 
Table 2. Proportion of bird species declining 1968 to 1990 along managed ponderosa pine breeding bird survey routes, for 
species with 25 routes counted, and an average of 20.5 birds per route (modified from Miller 1992). 
New Mexico & 
Colorado & 
All four 
Guild 
New Mexico 
Arizona 
Utah 
states 
Woodland nesting 
Coniferous nesting 
Primary cavity nesting 
Secondary cavity nesting 
Open cup nesting 
Permanent resident 
Short distance migrant 
Neotropical migrant 
All birds 
that have been regularly surveyed in Southwestern pon- 
derosa pine forest: one centered near Flagstaff, Arizona, 
which has been surveyed since 1968, and another centered 
near Mormon Lake, Arizona, which has been surveyed 
since 1982. CBC data have been shown to produce reli- 
able indications of trends in bird abundance when a count 
has been conducted for a sufficient period of time (that is, 
about 20 years), and when a sufficient count effort has 
been expended each year (Bock and Root 1981). Although 
the Flagstaff count meets these requirements, trend analy- 
ses should not be based on only one or a few counting 
locations (Bock and Root 1981). Therefore, we have not 
included analyses of CBC data in this report. 
Several authors have recently documented range and 
population shifts for particular Southwestern bird species. 
For example, Johnson (1994) suggested northward expan- 
sion of the ranges of Grace's warbler, painted redstart, 
hepatic tanager, and summer tanager in response to "natu- 
ral" climate change over the past century. Based on an 
extensive literature review, DeSante and George (1994) 
concluded that willow flycatcher, buff-breasted flycatcher, 
western bluebird, Bell's vireo, summer tanager, and song 
sparrow populations were decreasing across the west, 
whereas berryline hummingbird, violet-crowned hum- 
mingbird, black phoebe, European starling, red-faced 
warbler, and brown-headed cowbird populations were 
increasing. Whether or not these range shifts and popula- 
tion trends apply to Southwestern ponderosa pine forest 
is unclear, however, because the western region reviewed 
by DeSante and George encompasses many different veg- 
etation types. 
Brawn and Balda (1988a) reviewed the population sta- 
tus of Southwestern ponderosa pine birds and suggested 
that broad-tailed hummingbird, acorn woodpecker, three- 
toed woodpecker, purple martin, violet-green swallow, 
mountain chickadee, white-breasted nuthatch, pygmy 
nuthatch, brown creeper, western bluebird, mountain 
bluebird, American robin, red-faced warbler, chipping 
sparrow, and lark sparrow populations would also be 
likely to decline over time in response to past and present 
land-use activities. Many of these species are ones that 
nest in cavities or rely on a well-developed herbaceous 
understory. We can presume that the synergistic and cu- 
mulative effects of natural vegetation change, livestock 
grazing, logging, fuelwood harvest, and fire suppression 
will underlie many of the predicted population declines 
(discussed in detail in Finch et al., this volume). 
Carothers et al. (1973a) briefly summarized the status 
of selected species in northern Arizona. They noted that 
the Lewis' woodpecker had become a fairly common per- 
manent resident, and the evening grosbeak a locally com- 
mon permanent resident in ponderosa pine forest around 
Flagstaff. In contrast, they noted a decline in numbers of 
red-breasted nuthatches in ponderosa pine. They also 
noted that the exotic European starling had changed in 
status from a rare winter visitor or transient to a common 
winter resident and an uncommon summer resident in 
the Flagstaff area. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 4 
Table 3. Increasing and decreasing bird species on managed 
ponderosa pine Breeding Bird Survey routes in Arizona and 
New Mexico, for species with 2?J routes and 20.5 birds per 
route (modifled from Miller 1992). These lists include both 
songbirds and non-songbirds. 
Decreasing 
Increasing 
Mallard 
Killdeer 
Band-tailed pigeon 
Mourning dove 
Hairy woodpecker 
Acorn woodpecker 
Common nighthawk 
Broad-tailed hummingbird 
Western Kingbird 
Ash-throated flycatcher 
Say's phoebe 
Western wood-pewee 
Gray flycatcher 
Horned lark 
Western scrub jay 
Common raven 
American crow 
Clark's nutcracker 
Pinyon jay 
Red-winged blackbird 
Eastern meadowlark 
Western meadowlark 
Brewer's blackbird 
House finch 
Red crossbill 
Lesser goldfinch 
Pine siskin 
Lark sparrow 
Chipping sparrow 
Canyon towhee 
Black-headed grosbeak 
Cliff swallow 
Violet-green swallow 
Loggerhead shrike 
Warbling vireo 
Solitary vireo 
Virginia's warbler 
Yellow-rumped warbler 
Grace's warbler 
Black-throated gray warbler 
House sparrow 
Northern mockingbird 
Rock wren 
White-breasted nuthatch 
Pygmy nuthatch 
Plain titmouse 
Mountain chickadee 
Common bushtit 
Ruby-crowned kinglet 
Mountain bluebird 
Turkey vulture 
Red-tailed hawk 
American kestrel 
Northern flicker 
Cassin's kingbird 
Cordilleran flycatcher 
Steller's jay 
European starling 
Brown-headed cowbird 
Vesper sparrow 
Spotted towhee 
Green-tailed towhee 
Blue grosbeak 
Western tanager 
Hepatic tanager 
Purple martin 
Barn swallow 
Rough-winged swallow 
Bewick's wren 
House wren 
Red-breasted nuthatch 
Townsend's solitaire 
Hermit thrush 
American robin 
Western bluebird 
Ecological Roles 
Seed Dissemination 
Mistletoe 
Hudler et al. (1979) studied the role of birds in the spread 
of dwarf mistletoe (Arceuthobium spp.) in a Colorado pon- 
derosa pine forest. Long-distance seed transmission (that 
is, farther than possible by normal seed discharge) oc- 
curred infrequently; successful infection occurred once 
every four years on average. Mountain chickadees and 
pygmy nuthatches were the primary vectors of the para- 
site. Laboratory studies showed that seeds seldom re- 
mained viable when ingested by birds. Rather, successful 
movement of the seeds occurred when they became at- 
tached to bird feathers and later transferred to foliage. 
Bennetts (1991) and Bennetts and Hawksworth (1991) 
studied the indirect effects of dwarf mistletoe on birds in 
a Colorado ponderosa pine forest. The total number of 
birds and the total number of bird species detected in- 
creased with increasing levels of mistletoe infestation; this 
pattern was consistent across most foraging assemblages 
of birds. In addition, the number of snags and the abun- 
dance of cavity-nesting birds increased with increasing 
levels of mistletoe. The authors suggested that dwarf 
mistletoe should not be viewed solely as a forest pest (be- 
cause of its often negative influence on commercial tim- 
ber volume), but rather in the context of an ecological dis- 
turbance process and its influence on wildlife communities. 
That is, mistletoe is a disturbance process that changes 
the structure and function of ponderosa pine and other 
host communities. In their review of the literature, they 
also found that the witches' brooms caused by the mistle- 
toe are an important nesting and roosting substrate for 
many species of birds and squirrels, and that some spe- 
cies use mistletoe as a food source. Mistletoe has been 
shown to serve as a nesting substrate by Forsman et al. 
(1984), Bull and Henjum (1990), Bull et al. (1989); as a roost- 
ing substrate by Martinka (1972); and as a food source for 
birds and other animals by Taylor (1935), Broadbooks 
(1958), Urness (1969), Farentinos (1972), Craighead et al. 
(1973), Currie et al. (1977), Ha11 (1981), and Severson (1986). 
Pine Seeds 
Balda and his coworkers (for example, Balda and 
Bateman 1971; Balda 1973, Bateman and Balda 1973) con- 
ducted a long-term, intensive study of the ecology and 
behavior of the pinyon jay in a northern Arizona ponde- 
rosa pine forest. Pinyon jays are year-round residents and 
obtain part of their winter food from pine seeds that they 
cached during the fall. This caching behavior helps spread 
pine seeds and thus plays a major role in the population 
dynamics of these trees. Clark's nutcrackers are also a 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Songbird Status and Roles 
seed-predator and a very important seed-disperser for 
wingless seeds (for example, Pinus edulis) (Tomback and 
Linhart 1990). Nutcrackers have been found to affect for- 
est regeneration and to possibly extend the range of pin- 
yon pines (reviewed in Christensen et al. 1991). They also 
forage on ponderosa pine seeds, when they are available, 
and may therefore play a part in the dynamics of ponde- 
rosa pine forests. Another ponderosa pine seed-predator 
is the red crossbill. The crossbill is nomadic, following 
sporadic, scattered pine seed crops (Gill 1995:290). In the 
Rocky Mountains, crossbills will nest in January and Feb- 
ruary if pine seeds are abundant (Gill 1995:275). 
Indicators of Forest Conditions 
Szaro and Balda (1982) discussed the selection and sub- 
sequent monitoring of birds as indicators of environmen- 
tal change, using their data from a ponderosa pine forest 
of northern Arizona as an example. They noted that many 
different definitions have been applied to the term "indi- 
cator" for use in environmental management, including: 
1) endangered and threatened plants and animals; 2) spe- 
cies commonly hunted, fished, or trapped; 3) species with 
specialized habitat needs; and 4) plants or animals selected 
because changes in their populations are thought to indi- 
cate the effects of natural- or human-induced changes on 
the collective species of a major biological community. The 
use of birds as indicators is controversial (for example, 
see Morrison et al. 1992), primarily because indicator spe- 
cies may be affected differently from other species by habi- 
tat changes. Nevertheless, the concept is important here 
because there are diverse opinions on the subject, and 
because in certain situations (for example, chemically 
polluted environments) birds can indicate habitat condi- 
tions (Morrison 1986). 
Szaro and Balda (1982) found that species such as the 
hermit thrush, red-faced warbler, Cordilleran flycatcher, 
and pygmy nuthatch, which are found in old-growth pon- 
derosa pine forest and only lightly disturbed areas, are 
replaced in moderately to heavily cut areas by species such 
as the western wood-pewee, yellow-rumped warbler, and 
rock wren. Therefore, those species that are most sensi- 
tive to habitat perturbations may potentially make the best 
indicator species. Some species that are too rare to be use- 
ful as indicators of the general community-such as 
Virginia's warbler, brown creeper, and hepatic tanager- 
may be useful indicators of special habitat needs because 
they breed in ponderosa pine. Szaro and Balda concluded 
that the two species that best indicated the overall "health" 
of the bird community were the pygmy nuthatch and vio- 
let-green swallow. They based this finding on the fact that, 
when they found high densities of pygmy nuthatches and 
violet-green swallows, they also found high densities of 
most of the other ponderosa pine forest bird species (see 
Szaro and Balda 1982, table 1). 
"Habitat specialists" as indicator species are discussed 
in Rich and Mehlhop (this volume). 
Roost and Nest Cavity Formation 
Scott (1978) summarized the frequent use of cavities in 
dead or partially dead trees in ponderosa pine forest and 
mixed pine woodlands in Arizona and New Mexico by 
the American kestrel, 7 species of owls, the elegant trogon, 
11 species of woodpeckers, 2 flycatchers, 3 swallows, 5 
chickadees and titmice, 3 nuthatches, the brown creeper, 
4 wrens, and 3 bluebirds. Similarly, Ffolliott (1983) sum- 
marized the scant literature on cavity-nesting animals in 
Southwestern ponderosa pine forests and found that at 
least 49 species of birds, 10 species of mammals, and nu- 
merous species of insects and herpetofauna used tree cavi- 
ties in these forests. In addition, he noted that 63 percent 
of the birds and 75 percent of the mammals that are snag- 
dependent in Southwestern forests are insectivorous. This 
diet preference is important because birds and mammals 
have been credited with insect control that helps main- 
tain ecosystem functioning. 
An important interaction exists in ponderosa pine for- 
ests involving the location and suitability of potential nest 
trees, the type and number of primary cavity excavating 
species (especially woodpeckers), and the number and 
distribution of secondary cavity nesting species. Although 
secondary cavity nesting species will use non-bird exca- 
vated holes (for example, holes resulting from disease or 
broken branches) for nesting, their frequent use of bird- 
excavated holes indicates a likely preference for such cavi- 
ties or a limitation of alternative nest sites. 
Brawn and Balda (1988b; see also Brawn 1985, Brawn 
and Balda 1983) tested the common assumption that nest 
sites limit the breeding density of secondary cavity nest- 
ers in an Arizona ponderosa pine forest. They found this 
assumption to be only partially correct. They found that 
secondary cavity nesters, as a group, can indeed be lim- 
ited by nest sites. But only three of the six species they 
studied significantly increased in density when provided 
with artificial nest boxes; these were the violet-green swal- 
low, pygmy nuthatch (which can also be a primary cav- 
ity-nesting species), and western bluebird. Numbers of 
house wrens, mountain chickadees, and white-breasted 
nuthatches did not differ. They concluded that a given 
population appears to be limited by nest sites if it is suffi- 
ciently common during the breeding season and depen- 
dent upon snags as a source of nest sites. Within species 
that are nest site limited, availability of food or foraging 
substrates and territoriality may determine an upper limit 
to breeding densities if nest sites are in ample supply. Thus, 
a dynamic exists between nest sites, food availability, and 
intra- and interspecific competition for nest sites. 
A study of secondary cavity nesters in northern Ari- 
zona by Cunningham et al. (1980) found pronounced in- 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 4 
terspecific variation in the use of snags for nest sites; cer- 
tain species were reliant on snags, whereas others rarely 
used snags. For example, nearly all violet-green swallows 
and pygmy nuthatches nested in snags, whereas white- 
breasted nuthatches were not so dependent upon snags. 
Cunningham et al. also found that mountain chickadees, 
white-breasted nuthatches, and house wrens were rela- 
tively uncommon regardless of the availability of snags 
and foraging substrate. It is the common species that seem 
to increase the most after provision of nest boxes. Brawn 
and Balda (1988b) speculated that this was because rela- 
tively rare populations do not contain enough non- 
breeding individuals (that is, floaters) to be able to take 
advantage of the increase in nesting sites. Common spe- 
cies thus can be nest-site limited, whereas rare species are 
being suppressed by other factors. Brawn et al. (1987) also 
found that, during the breeding season, interspecific com- 
petition for food among secondary cavity nesters appeared 
to be unimportant in ponderosa pine bird communities. 
The factors holding down numbers of rare species are still 
generally unknown. 
There is apparently an interaction between the species 
of snag retained after treatments and the response of birds 
to total snag density. Scott (1979) found that populations 
of some species of cavity-nesting birds can be reduced sig- 
nificantly by removal of conifer snags even when some 
aspen snags are left. Other hardwoods, such as oak, pro- 
vide nesting sites for some species of birds within the 
ponderosa pine type. Some birds such as swallows, how- 
ever, may not make the change from ponderosa pine snags 
to the smaller hardwood snags. 
Hay and Guntert (1983) examined the seasonal require- 
ments for snags by pygmy nuthatches in northern Ari- 
zona ponderosa pine forest. They found that trees with 
nest cavities were shorter and consequently had a small 
diameter at breast height (dbh) compared to those used 
for roosting during other seasons. Greater cavity height 
of the fall and spring roosts compared to summer roosts 
was related to more absorption of spring-fall radiation by 
the former. In contrast, nest cavities appeared to be posi- 
tioned to obtain moderate insolation and shielding from 
the wind. Hay and Guntert stated that cavity selection is 
interrelated with the overall biology of the species, and 
management should emphasize snag and/or cavity qual- 
ity, rather than the absolute quantity of snags available. 
They also concluded that additional baseline research into 
the seasonal quality of cavities and snags needed for cav- 
ity-dependent species in ponderosa pine forests was 
needed. 
Horton and Mannan (1988) studied the interrelation- 
ship between fire and snag dynamics in southeastern Ari- 
zona ponderosa pine and mixed pine-oak forest. Natural 
fires burned every 2 to 12 years in Southwestern ponde- 
rosa pine before suppression by humans beginning in the 
late 19th century (for more details, see Moir et al. and Finch 
et al., this volume). These fires were usually light surface 
fires that produced generally open, park-like conditions. 
Modern forest management uses broadcast understory 
fires to reduce accumulations of woody debris left by log- 
ging or natural processes to reduce the risk of catastrophic 
crown fires. These fires also impact snag dynamics by con- 
suming existing snags and creating others by killing trees. 
Horton and Mannan found that a single application of 
moderately intense surface fire resulted in a net decrease 
of 33 pbrcent of snags preferred for nesting. However, no 
species of cavity-nesting bird disappeared in the first 
breeding season following the fires, and only the north- 
ern flicker and violet-green swallow declined in abun- 
dance. They concluded that these changes were not due 
to a shortage of snags. Their study, however, was con- 
ducted for only one year following fire treatment. 
Snag Management 
According to Scott (1978), little information existed on 
management guidelines for cavity nesting birds in South- 
western ponderosa pine forests prior to the late 1970s. 
Before that time, snags were removed during forest har- 
vest because of potential fire and safety hazards, and many 
thought they had poor aesthetic value and were indic- 
ative of an unhealthy forest. Using his own research and 
that of Balda (1975), Scott (1978) concluded that, on aver- 
age, at least 2.5 large (243 cm dbh) snags per acre should 
be retained in ponderosa pine forests. In addition, all natu- 
rally occurring snags should be left during timber har- 
vest. Specifically, he found that 1) snags usually did not 
become suitable for nesting until 6 years after the trees 
died; 2) snags that retained more than 40 percent of their 
bark were used more frequently and contained more holes 
than those with less bark; 3) snags in higher dbh classes 
(243 cm) were used significantly more than smaller snags 
and the larger snags also contained more holes; 4) snags 
on northern and southern aspects were used at about the 
same frequency, but those on northern exposures aver- 
aged more holes per snag; and 5) snags over 23 m tall 
were used at a significantly higher rate than shorter snags, 
but comprised only 16 percent of the available snags. 
Balda (1975) found that 4.2 snags/ha were necessary in 
ponderosa pine forests to achieve average densities and natu- 
ral species diversity of secondary cavity nesters. He also 
stated that 6.7 snags/ha were necessary to maintain maxi- 
mum densities and natural species diversity of these birds. 
Ffolliott (1983) examined the implementation of USDA 
Forest Service snag guidelines on study areas across the 
ponderosa pine belt of northern Arizona, examining both 
present conditions and simulated (modeled) conditions 
at the end of a 20-year period. Snags were defined as stand- 
ing dead trees at least 30 cm dbh and 3.1 m in height; no 
differentiation was made between hard and soft snags. 
His analyses showed that none of his study areas that had 
been subjected to various silvicultural treatments met any 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Songbird Status and Roles 
of the suggested polices for snag retention (USDA Forest 
Service 1977). From his analysis, only virgin forest would 
meet a retention policy of 2.5 to 5.0 snags/ha through 
natural mortality. 
Rosenstock (1996) found that snags >46 cm dbh and >10 
m tall were frequently used for nesting in ponderosa pine 
forest. Cunningham et al. (1980) found a preference for 
snags >58 cm dbh and >20 m tall on the Beaver Creek 
Watershed in northern Arizona. Paine and Martin (1995, 
as cited in Rosenstock 1996) found that 84 percent of pon- 
derosa snags used for nesting on their Mogollon Rim study 
sites were >30 cm dbh and >10 m tall. Horton and Man- 
nan (1988) found a preference for snags >51 cm dbh. 
This review indicates that little research has been con- 
ducted on snag requirements in ponderosa pine forests. 
Studies that have been conducted demonstrate that at least 
5 large snags/ha may be necessary to maintain popula- 
tions of cavity-nesting species. However, it also appears 
that these guidelines are not being attained on at least 
some of the forested lands. 
Predator-Prey RelationshipsIPest Control 
As reviewed by Holmes (1990), numerous bird species 
respond both functionally and numerically to increasing 
prey densities. While birds seem unable to prevent popu- 
lation epidemics of their prey, they do appear to have a 
substantial impact when prey populations are at endemic 
levels. From his review of the literature, Holmes concluded 
that birds could delay the onset of an insect outbreak. For 
example, modeling of spruce budworm populations sug- 
gested that predation by birds may be a significant factor 
in maintaining endemic population levels of this species. 
As reviewed by Dahlsten et al. (1990) for western mixed- 
conifer forests (which include ponderosa pine as a major 
component), many species of forest birds concentrate their 
foraging activities on insect species considered to be for- 
est pests. In addition, Koplin (1969) demonstrated a func- 
tional response of woodpeckers to insect outbreaks. In- 
sectivorous birds may also increase the fitness of the plants 
on which they forage for arthropod prey. For example, 
Marquis and Whelan (1994) examined the effect of insec- 
tivorous birds on white oak (Quercus alba) growth in a 
deciduous forest in Missouri. Through experimental ma- 
nipulations they demonstrated that the presence of birds 
enhanced the growth of juvenile oaks via bird consumption 
of leaf-chewing insects (primarily Lepidopteran larvae). They 
suggested that forest management practices that promote 
the conservation of insectivorous bird species will help main- 
tain forest productivity. The extension of this to ponderosa 
pine forests (with or without an oak component) is obvious. 
Marquis and Whelan further suggest that although insecti- 
cide spraying and handpicking insects off trees can reduce 
their numbers, these are not necessarily feasible alternatives 
for controlling arthropod numbers in forests. 
Insect consumption of cones and seeds can negatively 
impact vertebrate use of such resources. Christensen and 
Whitham (1993) found that stem- and cone-boring insects, 
birds (Clark's nutcrackers, pinyon jays, and [western] 
scrub jays), and mammals competed for pinyon pine 
seeds. And insect herbivores indirectly affected resource 
use by the vertebrates through a 57 percent average re- 
duction in crop sizes. Thus, the foraging of birds on in- 
sects plays several important roles and is a significant fac- 
tor to consider in the management of ponderosa pine 
forests. There is a paucity of information on this subject, 
however, so this is an important area for research. 
Habitat Use 
General Habitat Use 
Balda (1967,1969) studied the use of foliage by breed- 
ing birds in ponderosa pine and oak-juniper forests of the 
Chiricahua Mountains, Arizona. He found that certain 
species (such as the pygmy nuthatch) were closely asso- 
ciated with ponderosa pine of many heights, whereas 
other species (such as the chipping sparrow) were found 
in specific height layers regardless of the tree species in- 
volved. Other species such as Grace's warbler were re- 
stricted to particular heights in pines. The models for pines 
strongly suggested that foliage volume may be an impor- 
tant factor in limiting the densities of the pygmy nuthatch 
and Grace's warbler, even though the former species is a 
cavity nester. Balda (1970) also described the bird com- 
munity present in oak and oak-juniper-pine woodlands. 
Marshall (1957) summarized surveys he conducted in 
pine-oak woodlands during the summers of the early 
1950s from the Pinaleno and Santa Catalina mountains in 
Arizona, south into central Sonora and to the Sierra Madre 
Occidental of northwestern Chihuahua, Mexico. Ponde- 
rosa pine entered his pine-oak woodlands only occasion- 
ally. The related Apache pine was more frequently encoun- 
tered on his sites, along with chihuahua pine (I? leiophylla). 
Marshall provided descriptions of the overall relationship 
between the distribution of birds and plants in the region 
and summarized his observations in annotated species 
notes. Of particular interest are his observations of pine 
(and pine-oak) forest birds of current special concern, in- 
cluding the thick-billed parrot, buff-breasted flycatcher, 
elegant trogon, spotted owl, and Montezuma quail, be- 
cause he details the population status and describes the 
habitat affinities of these species. 
Carothers et al. (1973a) edited a volume that summa- 
rized the status and general habitat preferences of birds 
in the San Francisco and White mountains of Arizona, 
concentrating on breeding birds. A paper by Haldeman 
et al. (1973) included a brief section on wintering birds, 
where 18 species were observed during the winter in pon- 
derosa pine forest, and 69 species were observed during 
summer, of which 23 were known to nest. They consid- 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
77 

Chapter 4 
ered the following species to be exclusive users of the 
ponderosa pine forest during their study in this region: 
solitary vireo, western bluebird, and Brewer's blackbird. 
The pygmy nuthatch, violet-green swallow, American 
robin, white-breasted nuthatch, and Grace's warbler were 
considered to be "characteristic" of ponderosa pine forest 
(that is, found to be two to three times as abundant than 
in a comparison area). 
Franzreb published a series of papers (1978,1983,1984) 
that detailed results of her study of birds in a mixed Dou- 
glas-fir, ponderosa pine, and Southwestern white pine 
forest in the White Mountains, Arizona. In this mixed-co- 
- Afer forestshefound that pnderosapine and Southwest- 
- 
- 
ern white pine were used less frequently than expected 
- 
based on total foliage volume, whereas use exceeded avail- 
ability for Douglas-fir, white fir, and Engelmann spruce. 
She also showed, however, that certain species, especially 
the Grace's warbler, relied upon pines for foraging. 
Franzreb's 1978 and 1983 papers also discussed the influ- 
ence of logging on bird abundance and foraging behav- 
ior. Her 1984 paper detailed the foraging behaviors of the 
ruby-crowned and golden-crowned kinglets. Both species 
strongly preferred spruce and Douglas-fir and avoided 
pines for foraging. 
Salomonson and Balda (1977) examined the winter be- 
havior of the Townsend's solitaire in a pinyon-juniper- 
ponderosa pine ecotone in northern Arizona. Territory 
size, and ultimately survival, were related to the abun- 
dance of juniper berries. Laudenslayer and Balda (1976; 
- alsotaudenilayer I9732 studied the breeding birds of-a 
- 
pinyon-juniper-ponderosa pine ecotone in northern Ari- 
zona. They concentrated on five bird species and described 
their densities, foliage preferences, and foraging habitats. 
The mountain chickadee and solitary vireo preferred pon- 
derosa pine; the bushtit and plain titmouse preferred pin- 
yon-juniper; and chipping sparrows were found through- 
out the ecotone. 
Overturf (1979) compared the breeding bird communi- 
ties on burned and unburned sites in ponderosa pine of 
northern Arizona. The burned sites showed a decreased 
number of bird species and bird abundance, which were 
related to the decrease in habitat heterogeneity and loss 
of the canopy and shrub-sapling vegetation layer. In ad- 
dition, burning caused a shift in bird species composition 
from foliage users to ground-using birds because burn- 
- 
ingcaused an increase in herbaceous plants: Overturf con- 
- 
- 
cluded that burning in this "pyroclimatic monocdture" 
would be an effective management strategy because it 
simulated natural fires and increased the overall habitat 
heterogeneity in the forest (for more details, see Finch et 
al., this volume). 
Szaro and Balda (1979, 1986) and Szaro et al. (1990) 
found that significant temporal variations occurred in 
habitat use and foraging behavior of ponderosa pine birds 
in northern Arizona. Szaro and Balda (1986) showed that 
bird density and species richness were influenced by both 
weather and timber harvest. The effects of weather on 
birds varied depending on the type of timber harvest con- 
ducted, although the harvest type was of primary impor- 
tance in determining community structure. The impact of 
harvest was clearly more pronounced after the mildest 
winter and tended to be minimized after the severest win- 
ter. They concluded that studies must be conducted dur- 
ing a variety of weather conditions (over many years) to 
determtne the trend of bird responses in different forest 
types (including different harvest types). Similarly, Szaro 
et al. (1990) showed that weather and harvest type sig- 
nificantly influenced foraging behaviors of ponderosa pine 
birdsover a three-year period. They urged that studies b e  
- 
- 
conducted that identified the proximate mechanisms that 
caused this variation in foraging behavior. They suggested 
that such causes would include resource availability, 
weather conditions, predation, and plant phenology. 
Szaro and Balda (1982) summarized the habitat prefer- 
ences of ponderosa pine forest species based on their study 
of various seral stages (see also Szaro and Balda 1986; 
Szaro et al. 1990; and as summarized above). The distur- 
bance regime they used to simulate seral stages ranged 
from uncut, mature forest to severely thinned forest (see 
table 4). Six species (of 25 total species, or 24 percent) 
showed no distinct habitat preferences: the northern 
flicker, hairy woodpecker, Steller's jay, common night- 
hawk, mourning dove, and white-breasted nuthatch. Six 
species (24 percent) preferred undisturbed or only lightly 
thinned-maiure forest~the 
red-fared warbler, hermit 
- 
- 
thrush, Cordilleran flycatcher, pygmy nuthatch, violet- 
green swallow, and black-headed grosbeak. Similarly, two 
additional species (8 percent; dark-eyed junco and moun- 
tain chickadee) preferred undisturbed to moderately dis- 
turbed (cut) forest, and another four species (16 percent) 
preferred lightly to moderately disturbed areas (Grace's 
warbler, yellow-rumped warbler, western tanager, west- 
ern bluebird). Thus, up to 18 species (72 percent) seemed 
to prefer mature forest with some disturbance (includes 
those species showing no distinct preferences). An addi- 
tional six species (24 percent) preferred lightly to heavily 
disturbed (chipping sparrow and solitary vireo), moder- 
ately to heavily disturbed (western wood-pewee, Ameri- 
can robin, and broad-tailed hummingbird), or heavily dis- 
turbed (rock wren) areas. Finally, the acorn woodpecker 
was confined to oak groves. The authors concluded that 
thehermitthrush, red-faced warbkr, Cordilleran-fly= 
- 
- 
catcher, and pygmy nuthatch showed strong preference 
for undisturbed to only slightly disturbed forest. 
Stallcup (1968) studied habitat segregation of foraging 
nuthatches and woodpeckers in a Colorado ponderosa 
pine forest and described the density and composition of 
this group of birds throughout the year. Birds studied were 
the white-breasted, red-breasted, and pygmy nuthatches, 
hairy woodpecker, northern (red-shafted) flicker, and 
78 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Songbird Status and Roles 
Table 4. Habitat preferences of birds in selected ponderosa 
pine stands in northern Arizona (from Szaro and Balda 
1982). The disturbance regime ranged from (in increasing 
intensity of disturbance): untreated mature forest, 
silviculturally cut, irregular strip cut, to severely thinned cut. 
Preference 
Species 
None 
Northern flicker 
Hairy woodpecker 
Steller's jay 
Common nighthawk 
Mourning dove 
White-breasted nuthatch 
Nondisturbed or lightly disturbed areas 
Red-faced warbler 
Hermit thrush 
Cordilleran flycatcher 
Pygmy nuthatch 
Violet-green swallow 
Black-headed grosbeak 
Nondisturbed to moderately disturbed areas 
Dark-eyed junco 
Mountain chickadee 
Moderately to heavily disturbed areas 
Western wood pewee 
American robin 
Broad-tailed hummingbird 
Heavily disturbed areas 
Rock wren 
Lightly or moderately disturbed areas 
Grace's warbler 
Yellow-rumped warbler 
Western tanager 
Western bluebird 
Lightly to heavily disturbed areas 
Chipping sparrow 
Solitary vireo 
Oak groves 
Acorn woodpecker 
Williamson's sapsucker. Red-naped sapsuckers, downy 
woodpeckers, and northern three-toed woodpeckers were 
present but rare. The absence of the red-breasted nuthatch 
during breeding may have resulted from a shortage of nest 
sites, or more likely, a lack of foraging space because of com- 
petition from other species. Stallcup suggested that food 
shortages might be responsible for segregating bird species. 
Apparently the most recent study available on the gen- 
eral habitat affinities of ponderosa pine birds was con- 
ducted by Rosenstock (1996). He noted that previous stud- 
ies on the effects of forest treatments on birds in 
Southwestern ponderosa pine (for example, Szaro and 
Balda 1979) examined treatments that are no longer in 
common use (for example, clear-cuttings, strip cuttings). 
As such, he examined the abundance of birds across a 
wider gradient of pine and pine-oak sera1 stages than had 
previously been conducted. In summary, he found 43 spe- 
cies in pine-oak, and 38 in pine. Two rather uncommon 
species (Clark's nutcracker and evening grosbeak) were 
found only in pine, whereas seven species were unique to 
pine-oak (dusky flycatcher, downy woodpecker, lesser 
goldfinch, rock wren, spotted towhee, Virginia's warbler, 
an4 warbling vireo), and all but the Virginia's warbler 
were rare or uncommon. Four common species-acorn 
woodpecker, black-headed grosbeak, house wren, and red- 
faced warbler-were found primarily in pine-oak. Densi- 
ties of violet-green swallows and western wood pewees 
were higher in pine patches, whereas American robins, 
hermit thrushes, and white-breasted nuthatches were 
more abundant at pine-oak sites. By vegetative structural 
stage (VSS; see Moir et al., this volume, for definitions of 
VSSs), neotropical migrant abundances and species rich- 
ness were similar across VSS classes at pine-oak sites but 
were highest at VSS class 4 and 6 in pine. Residents and 
short-distance migrants had similar abundances and spe- 
cies richness in all VSS classes in pine-oak. At pine sites, 
however, abundance of these groups of species was lower 
in VSS class 3 stands but similar in all other classes; class 
6 had a higher species richness than the other classes. Cav- 
ity nesting species had similar abundances and richnesses 
across all pine-oak classes, and across all pine classes except 
class 6, which had considerably higher values. 
Although Rosenstock noted that previous studies in 
Southwestern ponderosa pine were conducted before the 
importance of spatial variables on bird communities was 
widely acknowledged, he was not able to determine the 
influence of patch size and other spatial attributes on the 
bird community he studied. 
Nesting Habitat 
Martin (1988) studied the ability of nest predation to 
explain patterns of covariation in species numbers with 
area and habitat in mixed ponderosa pine forest and 
maple-dominated stands in central Arizona. Variation in 
numbers of species among drainages was positively cor- 
related with variation in the density of foraging and nest- 
ing substrates. His results were consistent with a predic- 
tion that birds select nest sites based in part on the 
availability of sites that minimized their risk of nest pre- 
dation, and that these sites increase in number with den- 
sity of foliage at nest height. His results were also consis- 
tent with a hypothesis that availability of suitable nest sites 
is one of the bases for the relationship between species 
numbers and foliage density for foliage-nesting species. 
In a related study, Martin and Roper (1988) detailed their 
findings for the hermit thrush. They found that hermit 
thrushes had low nesting success (7 to 20 percent), due 
mostly to nest predation. The structure of vegetation 
around the nest influenced the predation rate and likely 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
79 

Chapter 4 
the nest-site availability. Likewise, Li and Martin (1991) 
presented results from the same study region for cavity- 
nesting species. Although aspens accounted for only 12 
percent of all trees present in the study area, dead aspen 
accounted for 88 percent of all nest sites. Li and Martin 
also identified specific aspen-conifer patches that were 
chosen for nesting and foraging. Nest cavity height influ- 
enced nesting success, with the lower nests showing the 
lowest success. The authors noted that populations of cav- 
ity nesters might decrease if aspen snags decreased in 
height and abundance; alternative conifer snags were rare 
because most large trees were harvested before they died. 
Siege1 (1989) examined the distribution and abundance 
of birds in virgin old growth and mature managed pon- 
derosa pine forest in northern Arizona (table 1). The ma- 
ture managed stands met the "minimum" USDA Forest 
Service standards for old-growth forest. Siegel reached the 
following conclusions. First, brown creepers used large 
(>20 inches dbh) snags, in denser stands of older trees, 
with large pieces of sloughing bark. Such conditions pro- 
vided the necessary microsites for nest placement and also 
served as foraging sites. Second, hermit thrushes nested 
in the canopies of mature trees, in contrast to the much 
smaller trees this species uses in other parts of its range. 
Siegel felt that small pine were not used because they did 
not provide the necessary support branches for their nests 
nor the foliage necessary to conceal the nests. He also 
thought that placement of nests in the canopy served bet- 
ter to regulate nest temperatures. In addition, hermit 
thrushes also foraged in moist, cool sites. Third, a higher 
total density of birds was found in dense stands of pine 
compared to other stands and was apparently due to the 
greater abundance of aspen and the concomitant wetter 
conditions in these stands. The warbling vireo, violet- 
green swallow, western wood-pewee, Williamson's sap- 
sucker, and three-toed woodpecker were more common 
in the dense stands because they used the groves of pine- 
aspen for nesting and foraging. Also, the mesic, dense 
stands may have supported higher bird abundances be- 
cause of their greater total foliage volume, and concomi- 
tantly, higher densities of invertebrate prey. In contrast, 
species richness was only slightly higher in older and 
denser stands, indicating that this situation did not fol- 
low the standard positive relationship between foliage 
height diversity and bird species diversity. 
Finally, Siegel (1988) concluded that the mesic con- 
ditions created in dense old growth likewise created con- 
ditions that were more characteristic of forests at higher 
elevations or latitudes (that is, Canadian and Hudsonian 
life zones). These conditions apparently provided the re- 
sources used by the brown creeper, hermit thrush, tluee- 
toed woodpecker, northern goshawk, and saw-whet owl in 
ponderosa pine. Warm and dry exposures in more open old- 
growth stands were either unsuitable or marginal locations 
for these species. 
McEllin (1979) compared the demography, territorial 
spacing, and foraging behavior of white-breasted and 
pygmy nuthatches in Colorado ponderosa pine and mixed 
ponderosa pine-aspen stands. White-breasted nuthatches 
nested primarily in natural cavities in live pines, whereas 
pygmy nuthatches nested in pre-existing cavities in dead 
pines; cavity availability was higher for the latter species. 
Significant differences were shown for the foraging be- 
haviors,within sexes of each species and between species: 
differences in foraging heights, and foraging locations 
within trees (for example, limbs versus trunks). McEllin 
concluded that these species exploited different aspects 
of forest structure; that is, white-breasted nuthatches were 
more specialized in the vertical, horizontal, and tree struc- 
ture dimensions, whereas pygmy nuthatches showed 
greater specialization in food items and prey acquisition 
behaviors. With regard to forest management, McEllin 
stated that careful analyses of these ecological relationships 
is a necessary requirement of any program. Artificial repro- 
duction of favorable conditions for one species or one sea- 
son might result in unfavorable conditions for another spe- 
cies or season. Detailed analyses of space utilization patterns 
within and between species under different forest conditions 
can provide ecological information that will be important in 
designing forest management strategies. 
Brawn (1991) studied the reproduction and foraging of 
western bluebirds on two ponderosa pine sites in northern 
Arizona and found that breeding phenology and allocation 
of parental care were adjusted by bluebirds in response to 
local environmental conditions. Brawn also found that feed- 
ing rates of nestlings and fledging success were greater on 
the moderately logged site than on the heavily logged site. 
Migrant Use of Ponderosa Pine 
Very little information exists on use of stopover areas 
by migrant birds, including what vegetation types and 
habitats are most important to birds during migration, 
where these sites occur, and how their distribution and 
abundance are changing over time (Moore et al. 1995). 
Also, because more migrants pass through the eastern 
two-thirds of the United States, most of the literature on 
stopover sites concerns eastern migrants. Hence, there are 
few papers describing the specific use of Southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests as stopover sites. For example, 
Phillips et al. (1964) presented information on bird spe- 
cies in Arizona; and although in the species accounts they 
implied that several of the species migrated through pon- 
derosa pine forests in the state, they did not state it ex- 
plicitly (table 5). Hejl(1994, table 3), summarizing Brawn 
and Balda (1988a), also listed species that occur in South- 
western ponderosa pine forests but did not indicate those 
that were only migrating through the forests. On the other 
hand, Hutto (1985) found that stopover periods for tran- 
sient (migrant) birds in fall and spring rarely exceeded 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Songbird Status and Roles 
Table 5. Breeding (B), winterlng (W), and probable strictly migrant (M) birds in ponderosa pine forests (with oak or other 
plant species co-dominant) in Arizona and New Mexico, based on Phillips et a/. (1964) and the New Mexico Partners in Flight 
list of sensitive bird species. Includes both Cordilleran (ponderosa pine) and Madrean (ponderosa and Apache) pine-oak 
forest types together. An asterisk (*) indicates a species for which there is some question about its use of ponderosa pine 
when it is in Arizona. 
State 
Species 
Arizona 
Band-tailed pigeon (B) 
Mourning dove (B) 
Whi p-poor-will (B) 
Vaux's swift* (M) 
White-throated swift (B) 
Black-chinned hummingbird (M) 
Broad-tailed hummingbird (B) 
Rufous hummingbird* (M?) 
Allen's hummingbird* (M?) 
Calliope hummingbird (M) 
Rivoli's hummingbird (B) 
Elegant trogon (B) 
Northern flicker (B,W) 
Acorn woodpecker (B,W) 
Lewis' woodpecker (B,M) 
Red-naped spasucker (W) 
Yellow-breasted sapsucker (W) 
Williamson's sapsucker* (B?,W,M) 
Hairy woodpecker (B,W) 
Downy woodpecker (B,W) 
Three-toed woodpecker (B,W) 
Cassin's kingbird (B) 
Sulphur-bellied flycatcher (B) 
Dusky-capped flycatcher (B) 
Black phoebe' (B,W?) 
Buff-breasted flycatcher (B) 
Cordilleran flycatcher (B) 
Southwest willow flycatcher (B) 
Greater pewee (B) 
Olive-sided flycatcher (B,M) 
Western wood-pewee (B) 
Violet-green swallow (B) 
Tree swallow* (B?) 
Rough-winged swallow (B) 
Purple martin (B) 
Steller's jay (B,W) 
Western scrub jay* (M?) 
Mexican jay (B,W) 
Common raven* (B,W) 
Pinyon jay (B,W) 
Mexican chickadee (B,W) 
Mountain chickadee (B,W) 
White-breasted nuthatch (B,W) 
Red-breasted nuthatch (W) 
Pygmy nuthatch (B,W) 
Brown creeper (B,W) 
American dipper* (B,W) 
Winter wren (W) 
House wren (B) 
Canyon wren* (B) 
Rock wren* (B) 
American robin (B,W) 
Hermit thrush (B) 
Eastern bluebird (B,W) 
Western bluebird (B,W) 
Mountain bluebird (B,W) 
Townsend's solitaire (B,M) 
Blue-gray gnatcatcher* (M) 
Golden-crowned kinglet* (W) 
Ruby-crowned kinglet* (M) 
Olive warbler (B) 
Water pipit* (M) 
Cedar waxwing* (M) 
Loggerhead shrike (M) 
Hutton's vireo (W) 
Solitary vireo (B,M) 
Warbling vireo (B,M) 
Orange-crowned warbler (B) 
Virginia's warbler (B) 
Yellow-rumped warbler (B,M) 
Townsend's warbler (M) 
Hermit warbler (M) 
Grace's warbler (B) 
Common yellow-throat* (M) 
Red-faced warbler (B) 
Wilson's warbler* (M) 
Painted redstart (B) 
Red-winged blackbird (B,W) 
Brown-headed cowbird (B) 
Bronzed cowbird (B 
Western tanager (B,M) 
Hepatic tanager (B) 
Black-headed grosbeak (B,M) 
Evening grosbeak (B,W) 
Red crossbill (B,W) 
Cassin's finch (B,W) 
House finch* (B,W) 
Pine siskin (B) 
Lesser goldfinch (B,W) 
Green-tailed towhee* (B) 
Spotted towhee (B) 
Savannah sparrow* (W) 
Lark sparrow* (B) 
Tree sparrow* (W) 
Chipping sparrow (B,M,W) 
Dark-eyed junco (B,M,W) 
Yellow-eyed junco (B,W) 
White-crowned sparrow* (M) 
Lincoln's sparrow* (B) 
Song sparrow* (B,W) 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
State 
Species 
New Mexico 
Red-tailed hawk (B,W) 
Virginia's warbler (B) 
American kestrel (B,W) 
Olive-sided flycatcher (B) 
American robin (B,W) 
Grace's warbler (B) 
Band-tailed pigeon (B) 
Red-naped sapsucker (B,W) 
Willow flycatcher (B) 
Hammond's flycatcher (B) 
Peregrine falcon (B) 
Williamson's sapsucker (B,W) 
Dusky flycatcher (B) 
Cordilleran flycatcher (B) 
Olive warbler (M) 
Hepatic tanager (B) 
Broad-tailed hummingbird (B) 
Cassin's kingbird (B) 
Western bluebird (B,W) 
Townsend's solitaire (B,W) 
Northern goshawk (B,W) 
Flammulated owl (B) 
Mountain bluebird (B,W) 
Swainson's thrush (B) 
Wilson's warbler (B) 
Cooper's hawk (B,W) 
White-throated swift (B) 
Magnificent hummingbird (M) 
Greater pewee (M) 
Purple martin (B) 
Golden-crowned kinglet (B,W) 
Hermit thrush (B,W) 
Veery (B) 
Warbling vireo (B) 
Orange-crowned warbler (B) 
Western tanager (B) 
Black-headed grosbeak (B) 
Sharp-shinned hawk (B,W) 
Western wood-pewee (B) 
Cassin's finch (B,W) 
Ash-throated flycatcher (B) 
Tree swallow (B,W) 
Violet-green swallow (B) 
Ruby-crowned kinglet (B,W) 
Spotted towhee (B,W) 
Chipping sparrow (B) 
Lincoln's sparrow (B) 
Brown creeper (B,W) 
Yellow-rumped warbler (B,W) 
Northern flicker (B,W) 
Dark-eyed junco (B,W) 
Pine siskin (B,W) 
House wren (B) 

Chapter 4 
four to six days in pine (mostly Apache; P. engelrnanii) and 
other vegetation in the Chiricahua Mountains, Arizona; 
and Moore et al. (1995) demonstrated that riparian or riv- 
erine areas in the southwest are vital for Southwestern 
migrants, notably the woodland species. 
In general, stopover sites are used for depositing and 
replenishing lipid stores, molting, and resting (Moore et 
al. 1995). Stopover sites are crucial to a migrant bird's sur- 
vival, especially long-distance migrants. Migration, al- 
though it allows birds to avoid overwintering in harsh 
environments, also has large costs associated with it, in- 
cluding the high energetic demands of transport (espe- 
- cially whenthere are climatic stresses); the multiplead-- 
justments necessary to exploit unfamiliar sites; the 
conflicting demands of predator avoidance and food ac- 
quisition at stopover sites; and competition with other 
migrants and resident species for resources (Morse 
1989:205; Moore et al. 1995). 
Various features may cue migrants into selecting stop- 
over sites in ponderosa pine forests, such as the proxim- 
ity to riparian corridors, the forest structure, or the feed- 
ing rates or numbers of other migrants at sites (Moore et 
al. 1995). In a study of spring migrants crossing the Gulf 
of Mexico, Moore et al. (1995) found that the birds clearly 
selected areas with greater structural diversity following 
the flight. The areas were comprised of forests with com- 
plex mixed-shrub layers and contained the greatest di- 
versity and abundance of migrants. However, Morse 
- (1989:96) summarized studies of habitat selection by mi- 
grating warblers and foun&thaT habitat selection issub- 
ject to immediate and major fitness payoffs, indicating that 
selection of stopover sites may be influenced by factors 
other than vegetative structure. Climate changes, for ex- 
ample, may affect the choice of stopover sites, and ulti- 
mately wintering sites. Terrill and Ohmart (1984) found 
that the wintering ranges of yellow-rumped warblers dif- 
fered from year to year in Arizona and adjacent Mexico 
apparently because the birds were retreating farther south 
in years when the winters were severe. 
The amount of habitat actually available to migrants 
along the migration route is probably inherently limited, 
however, because migrants cannot take the time to search 
extensively for the "best" stopover sites (Moore and 
Simons 1992). This is due to a bird's need to reach the 
breeding area before it is saturated with conspecifics, or 
- t o  reach the wintering area before the onsetof severe - 
weather. Studies of warbler species have demonstrated 
that some species use stopover sites that resemble those 
used on the breeding grounds, whereas other species do 
not use similar sites (reviewed in Morse 1989, chapter 9). 
Furthermore, the distributions of migrant birds are often 
correlated with changes in food availabilities (Morse 1989; 
Martin and Karr 1990; Moore et al. 1995). Because migra- 
tion is a period of exceptional energy demand, it prob- 
ably exerts strong selective pressures on the maximiza- 
tion of foraging efficiency (Moore and Simm 1985). Hutto 
(1985) found that the distribution of most insectivorous 
migrant birds in the Chiricahua Mountains, Arizona, was 
correlated with the abundance of arthropods in those veg- 
etation types. He concluded that birds forage where they 
can be most efficient, unless interspecific competitive in- 
teractions force them to modify their first choice. 
Species of Special Concern in 
Ponderosa Pine Forests - 
- 
- 
In this section we summarize current information on 
species of special concern in Southwestern ponderosa pine 
forests. To identify such species, we consulted the 1995 
Arizona Partners in Flight (AZPIF) and 1994 New Mexico 
Partners in Flight (NMPIF) lists of sensitive breeding and 
wintering terrestrial bird species in the states. For these 
lists, bird species were ranked according to scores derived 
from their local and global distributions and abundances; 
the severity of threats on their breeding and wintering 
grounds; and the "importance" of Arizona and New 
Mexico to their overall distributions. 
AZPIF and NMPIF also summarized the primary veg- 
etation associations used by each bird species. The lists 
were created based on species accounts in the literature 
(for example Phillips et al. L964), a s ~ e l l  
as unpublished 
data. We did not consult state wildlife agency publications 
on threatened and sensitive species (for example, Threatened 
Native Wildlife in Arizona, Arizona Department of Game 
and Fish, 1988; BISON-M database, New Mexico Department 
of Game and Fish, 1996) because Atwood (1994) demon- 
strated that these publications were often incomplete and 
erroneous. We caution that the AZPIF and NMPIF lists may 
also suffer from the same weaknesses, but at a minimum the 
lists have been reviewed by authorities who are familiar with 
the distribution of birds in each state. 
Arizona 
Species of special concern received ranks from 1 to 100. 
Of the approximately 240 species given ranks in Arizona, 
100 of these use ponderosa pine for breeding, wintering, 
- 
- 
- 
and/or migratingof these hundred, 11 specieswere given- 
ranks 150 (table 6), indicating that they are very high pri- 
ority species-ones of special concern in the state-either 
because of low local or global abundances; restricted glo- 
bal or Arizona breeding distributions; substantial poten- 
tial for extirpation on the breeding or wintering grounds; 
and/or a high importance of Arizona to the total breed- 
ing distribution of the species. Of these species, the whip- 
poor-will, elegant trogon, buff -breasted flycatcher, and sul- 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Songbird Status and Roles 
phur-bellied flycatcher are at the northern edge of their 
ranges in Arizona, with the majority of their numbers oc- 
curring in Mexico. Atwood (1994) suggested that the in- 
clusion of these species based solely on their limited oc- 
currence at the northern extension of their ranges may 
ultimately divert research and management attention that 
should be given to truly threatened species. Two species 
on the list, the southwest willow flycatcher and olive-sided 
flycatcher, have shown declines in the state (and else- 
where), probably due to habitat destruction, and for the 
willow flycatcher, cowbird parasitism (Robinson et al. 
1995). The remaining species on the list were placed there 
because of perceived moderate to extensive threats on the 
breeding and/or wintering grounds, and/or localized and 
isolated breeding distributions. 
Another 20 ponderosa pine species were given ranks 
between 51 and 100 (table 6), indicating that they are of 
moderate concern but not exposed to threats as severe as 
the species with scores 150. These species were mostly 
considered uncommon (in abundance) in Arizona and 
globally. They were also considered to have moderate 
threats on their breeding and/or wintering grounds. 
The 69 remaining species had ranks >loo, indicating 
that their populations may be stable. 
New Mexico 
Of the 156 total species given ranks in New Mexico, 52 
of these use ponderosa pine for breeding, wintering, and/ 
or migrating. Of these fifty-two, 31 species were given 
ranks >2.50 (table 6) by NMPIF, indicating that they ei- 
ther had experienced declines in abundances over the past 
26 years; their trends were unknown; they had low local 
or global abundances; they had restricted global or New 
Mexico breeding distributions; there was substantial poten- 
tial for extirpation on the breeding or wintering grounds; 
and/or New Mexico is important to the total breeding dis- 
tribution of the species. Of the special concern species oc- 
curring in ponderosa pine forests, only the peregrine falcon 
is currently listed as federally endangered or threatened. 
Another 12 species occurring in ponderosa pine were given 
ranks between 2.10 and 2.45 (table 6), indicating that their 
status is of moderate, rather than high, concern in the state. 
Comparison of Lists 
In both Arizona and New Mexico, the (southwest) wil- 
low flycatcher, olive-sided flycatcher, olive warbler, 
Virginia's warbler, and Grace's warbler were given high 
priority ranks. The NMPIF database listed six species of 
high concern that were considered of only moderate con- 
cern in Arizona: the band-tailed pigeon, Cordilleran fly- 
catcher, greater pewee, Townsend's solitaire, orange- 
crowned warbler, and hepatic tanager. The NMPIF list also 
contained an additional 21 species of high concern, ver- 
sus Arizona's six other species of high concern. For spe- 
cies of moderate concern, the AZPIF database listed an- 
Table 6. Southwestern ponderosa pine forest birds in 
Arizona and New Mexico with ranks indicating that they are 
of high or moderate concern In each state. Criteria for 
rankings are given in the text. 
Rank 
Species 
Arizona 
so 
Whip-poor-will 
Elegant trogon 
Buff-breasted flycatcher 
Southwest willow 
flycatcher 
Olive-sided flycatcher 
Olive warbler 
Solitary vireo 
Virginia's warbler 
Red-faced warbler 
Sulphur-bellied 
flycatcher 
Grace's warbler 
51 -1 00 
Band-tailed pigeon 
Northern (glided) flicker 
Lewis' woodpecker 
Red-naped sapsucker 
Yellow-breasted 
sapsucker 
Williamson's sapsucker 
Three-toed woodpecker 
Cordilleran flycatcher 
Greater pewee 
Tree swallow 
Pygmy nuthatch 
Eastern bluebird 
Townsend's solitaire 
Loggerhead shrike 
Orange-crowned 
warbler 
Painted redstart 
Hepatic tanager 
Lazuli bunting 
Red crossbill 
Green-tailed towhee 
Rank 
Species 
New Mexico 
>2.50 
Virginia's warbler 
Olive-sided flycatcher 
Grace's warbler 
Band-tailed pigeon 
Red-naped sapsucker 
Willow flycatcher 
Hammond's flycatcher 
Peregrine falcon 
Williamson's sapsucker 
Dusky flycatcher 
Cordilleran flycatcher 
Olive warbler 
Hepatic tanager 
Broad-tailed hummingbird 
Cassin's kingbird 
Western bluebird 
Townsend's solitaire 
Northern goshawk 
Flammulated owl 
Mountain bluebird 
Swainson's thrush 
Wilson's warbler 
Cooper's hawk 
White-throated swift 
Magnificent hummingbird 
Greater pewee 
Purple martin 
Golden-crowned kinglet 
Hermit thrush 
Veery 
Warbling vireo 
Orange-crowned warbler 
2.1 0-2.45 
Western tanager 
Black-headed grosbeak 
Sharp-shinned hawk 
Western wood-pewee 
Cassin's finch 
Ash-throated flycatcher 
Tree swallow 
Violet-green swallow 
Ruby-crowned kinglet 
Spotted towhee 
Chipping sparrow 
Lincoln's sparrow 
USDA Forest Service Gen.Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 4 
other 14 beyond the six mentioned above, whereas New 
Mexico had only 12 total species listed (table 6). 
Changes in Abundance 
Hejl(1994), summarizing Brawn and Balda (1988a), pro- 
posed that 15 Southwestern ponderosa pine forest bird 
species have probably decreased in abundance from 
presettlement times to the present because of decreases 
in the prevalence of these forest conditions. Hejl based 
this on the birds' requirements for burned sites, old- 
growth forests, and/or snags. The species were the broad- 
tailed hummingbird (AZPIF ranking # 113; NMPIF rank- 
ing # 48), acorn woodpecker (AZPIF #129), three-toed 
woodpecker (AZPIF #52), purple martin (#116, #82), vio- 
let-green swallow (#172, #119), mountain chickadee 
(AZPIF #170), white-breasted nuthatch (AZPIF #206), 
pygmy nuthatch (AZPIF #68), brown creeper (#189, #138), 
western bluebird (#132, #51), mountain bluebird (#160, 
#66), American robin (#225, #156), red-faced warbler (#16, 
#17), chipping sparrow (#205, #129), and lark sparrow 
(#177, #93). For the most part, however, Hejl's projections 
do not coincide with the species of special concern on the 
AZPIF and NMPIF lists, and the purple martin, western 
bluebird, and American robin were shown by Miller (1992) 
to be increasing in Arizona and New Mexico. Hejl(1994) 
also proposed that nine other bird species have probably 
increased in abundance from presettlement times to the 
present because of fire suppression and increased amounts 
of second-growth forests. These species were the Cordil- 
leran flycatcher (AZPIF #74, NMPIF #37), house wren 
(#224, #152), Townsend's solitaire (#98, #52), hermit thrush 
(#150, #85), solitary vireo (#45, #53), Virginia's warbler 
(#33, #11), yellow-rumped warbler (#217, #140), Grace's 
warbler (#49, #16), and western tanager (#145, MI). Miller 
(1992) found that numbers of solitary vireos, Virginia's 
warblers, and Grace's warblers have actually decreased 
in managed ponderosa pine forests. However, Johnson 
(1994) determined that Grace's warblers, painted redstarts, 
and hepatic tanagers have expanded their ranges north- 
ward in this century. On the AZPIF and NMPIF lists, these 
latter two species are considered fairly high priority ones 
for study because of their rarity and localization. In addi- 
tion, the solitary vireo and Virginia's warbler are also ranked 
as species of special concern in Arizona and New Mexico, 
despite Hejl's indications that they should be responding 
positively to habitat changes in Southwestern forests. 
As mentioned previously for the southwest willow fly- 
catcher, a significant factor in the decline of some other 
bird species in the western United States is the increase in 
parasitism by brown-headed cowbirds. This species, along 
with two grackle species, has experienced the greatest rate 
of increase and largest expansion of any native bird spe- 
cies in the United States (Marzluff 1994). There are about 
11 to 20 cowbirds per Breeding Bird Survey route in Ari- 
zona and 0 to 10 per route in New Mexico (Robinson et al. 
1995). Because of their parasitic nature, cowbirds can breed 
in a wider range of vegetation types than probably any 
other North American passerine (Robinson et al. 1995). In 
the west, cowbirds occur regularly in coniferous forests 
but in fewer numbers than in other nearby areas such as 
meadows and riparian zones (for example, Rothstein et 
al. 1984). 
Host species of cowbirds tend to be small-sized, open- 
cup-nesting birds with long incubation periods, includ- 
ing Empidonax flycatchers and phoebes, vireos, warblers, 
and sparrows such as the chipping sparrow. Hosts inhab- 
iting forest edges and/or second-growth forests also tend 
to be more heavily parasitized. The largest declines in host 
numbers are seen in species with restricted geographic 
breeding ranges and with habitat that is fragmented, is 
threatened by direct destruction (such as that of the south- 
west willow flycatcher), and/or has been subject to fire 
suppression (reviewed in Robinson et al. 1995; see also 
Moir et al., this volume). 
Despite concerns about increased parasitism by cow- 
birds in the western United States, parasitism has not been 
documented in several birds that would seem to be likely 
candidates. For example, Martin (1992, table 1) summa- 
rized reproductive data for neotropical migrant birds in 
Arizona and New Mexico. Black-headed grosbeaks in 
deciduous (oak) forests in New Mexico were not parasit- 
ized by cowbirds. Neither were warbling vireos, orange- 
crowned warblers, Virginia's warblers, yellow-rumped 
warblers, MacGillivray's warblers, red-faced warblers, 
western tanagers, and black-headed grosbeaks in mixed- 
conifer/deciduous forests in Arizona according to several 
recent studies. On the other hand, parasitism rates in other 
small flycatchers and warblers (such as western wood- 
pewees and painted redstarts in Arizona) can be quite high 
(L. Christoferson, unpubl. manuscript, University of Ari- 
zona). For example, Marvil and Cruz (1989) documented 
the fate of solitary vireo nests in ponderosa pine/Dou- 
glas-fir forests in Colorado. Approximately 49 percent of 
all vireo nests were parasitized with one to three brown- 
headed cowbird eggs during the breeding seasons of 1984 
1986, leading to a significant decrease in the reproductive 
success of the nests. 
Conclusions 
We found specific information on the use of Southwest- 
ern ponderosa pine forests by approximately 50 bird spe- 
cies. However, of these species, only about 35 percent ap- 
pear to restrict their vegetation use to primarily ponderosa 
pine, whereas about 65 percent are associated with other 
plant components (for example, aspen, oak, Douglas-fir, 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Songbird Status and Roles 
fir, spruce, and pinyon-juniper) within ponderosa pine 
forests. This shows that most ponderosa pine bird species 
require features in addition to pine. It also implies that 
forest management must include consideration of these 
features if the retention of diverse bird communities is 
desired. Although many species are declining in abun- 
dance, few species are nearing extirpation. More effort 
could thus be expended on monitoring trends of species 
of special concern and on monitoring their demographies. 
The factors causing the apparent declines are still largely 
speculative and thus need to be investigated. 
In regard to "disturbed" sites (either from fire or log- 
ging), bird species showed different responses, although 
most speciesappeared to tolerate (at least in terms of their 
abundances) light to moderate disturbance. With heavy 
alteration of the forest structure (for example, via fires, 
clearcutting, or strip-cutting), species composition varied 
in a predictable way, with more understory species using 
cleared forest stands. Nest predation apparently influ- 
enced the placement of nests to the extent that birds se- 
lected denser foliage. Nest success-as might be ex- 
pected-varied among species and study areas, but 
bluebird nesting success decreased on heavily altered sites. 
Forest management must be site- and time-specific and 
management objectives must consider all of the different 
components that are used by the numerous species of 
ponderosa pine forests. Data also indicate a strong need 
for intensive studies of the reproductive success of pon- 
derosa pine birds; without these data, any conclusions 
about the current status or current habitat requirements 
of the species are tenuous. 
We know little specifically about the use of ponderosa 
pine forests by migrating birds. However, we can estimate 
that Southwestern pine forests are probably used as stop- 
over sites by at least 25 migrant bird species in a given 
year. Research on migratory birds in other vegetation types 
suggests that forest structure, food availability, inter- and 
intraspecific competition for resources, and climate con- 
ditions all influence the use of these forests by migrant 
species. Therefore, we can probably assume that these 
same factors would influence the use of Southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests as stopover sites. And as such, the 
number of species that may depend on ponderosa pine 
forests for replenishment of lipids or as resting sites makes 
this vegetation type important to their survival. However, 
we need more research on how migratory birds use pon- 
derosa pine forests. Most studies have also concentrated 
on breeding birds; more work needs to be conducted on 
non-breeding (wintering) birds. This information is criti- 
cal for developing appropriate forest management plans 
because of the role that stopover sites can play in main- 
taining bird populations. 
Natural expansions and increases in populations of 
some ponderosa pine forest species have been docu- 
mented (DeSante and George 1994, Johnson 1994); how- 
ever, a large percentage of species have declined, due prob- 
ably to various causes. The many factors that may affect 
ponderosa pine songbird numbers (such as fire, logging, 
grazing, and climate change) and the variations in local 
site conditions make it difficult to predict exact trends in 
bird numbers. Again, the implications of this for manage- 
ment of ponderosa pine forests are that one treatment, or 
one management style, will not elicit the same popula- 
tion response from all bird species. Similarly, effects of past 
manigement practices may vary depending on location. 
Literature Cited 
Atwood, J.L. 1994. Endangered small landbirds of the 
western United States. Studies in Avian Biol. No. 15: 
328-339. 
Balda, R.P. 1967. Ecological relationships of the breeding 
birds of the Chiricahua Mountains, Arizona. Ph.D the- 
sis, Univ. Illinois, Urbana, IL. 
Balda, R.P. 1969. Foliage use by birds of the oak-juniper 
woodland and ponderosa pine forest in southeastern 
Arizona. Condor 71:399-412. 
Balda, R.P. 1970. Effects of spring leaf-fall on composition 
and density of breeding birds in two southern Arizona 
woodlands. Condor 72:325-331. 
Balda, R.P. 1973. The breeding biology of the pinon jay. 
Living Bird 11:542. 
Balda, R.P. 1975. The relationship of secondary cavity nest- 
ers to snag densities in western coniferous forests. USDA 
Forest Service Southwestern Region, Wildlife Habitat 
Tech. Bull. 1 . 3 7 ~ ~ .  
Balda, R.P., and G.C. Bateman. 1971. Flocking and annual 
cycle of the pinon jay, Gymnorhinus cyanocephalus. Con- 
dor 73:287-302. 
Bateman, G.C., and R.P. Balda. 1973. Growth, develop- 
ment, and food habits of young pinon jays. Auk 90: 
3941. 
Bennetts, R.E. 1991. The influence of dwarf mistletoe on 
bird communities in Colorado ponderosa pine forests. 
M.S. thesis, Colorado State Univ., Fort Collins, CO. 
83 PP. 
Bennetts, R.E., and F.G. Hawksworth. 1991. The indirect ef- 
fects of dwarf mistletoe on bird communities in Colorado 
ponderosa pine forests. Proceedings Annual Western In- 
ternational Forest Disease Work Conference 39:14-17. 
Blake, J. G. 1982. Influence of fire and logging on 
nonbreeding bird communities of ponderosa pine for- 
ests. J. Wildl. Manage. 46:404-415. 
Bock, C.E., and T.L. Root. 1981. The Christmas Bird Count 
and avian ecology. Studies in Avian Biology 6:17-23. 
Brawn, J.D. 1985. Population biology, community struc- 
ture, and habitat selection of birds in ponderosa pine 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
85 

Chapter 4 
forest habitat. Ph.D thesis, Northern Arizona Univer- 
sity, Flagstaff, AZ. 
Brawn, J. D. 1991. Environmental effects on variation and 
covariation in reproductive traits of western bluebirds. 
Oecologia 86:193-201. 
Brawn, J.D., and R.P. Balda. 1983. Use of nest boxes in 
ponderosa pine forests. Pages 159-164 in Snag habitat 
management: proceedings of the symposium. Davis, 
J.W., G.A. Goodwin, and R.A. Ockenfels, editors. USDA 
Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-99. 
Brawn, J. D., and R. I? Balda. 1988a. The influence of silvicul- 
tural activity on ponderosa pine forest bird communities 
in the Southwestern United States. Bird Conserv. 3: 3-21. 
Brawn, J.D., and R.P. Balda. 1988b. Population biology of 
cavity nesters in northern Arizona: do nest sites limit 
breeding densities? Condor 90:61-71. 
Brawn, J.D., W.J. Boecklen, and R.P. Balda. 1987. Investi- 
gations of density interactions among breeding birds 
in ponderosa pine forests: correlative and experimen- 
tal evidence. Oecologia 72:348-357. 
Broadbrooks, H.E. 1958. Life history and ecology of the 
chipmunk, Eutamias amdenus, in eastern Washington. 
Univ. Michigan Mus. Zool. Publ. 103.42 pp. 
Bull, E.L., and M.G. Henjum. 1990. Ecology of the great 
gray owl. USDA Forest Service, Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW- 
GTR-265.39 pp. 
Bull, E.L., A.L. Wright, and M.G. Henjum. 1989. Nesting 
and diet of long-eared owls in coniferous forests, Or- 
egon. Condor 91:908-912. 
Carothers, S.W., J.R. Haldeman, and R.P. Balda, editors. 
1973a. Breeding birds of the San Francisco Mountain 
area and the White Mountains, Arizona. Museum of 
Northern Arizona Tech. Ser. No. 12. 
Carothers, S.W., J.R. Haldeman, R.P. Balda, and G.F. Fos- 
ter. 197313. Recent changes in status and distribution of 
some northern Arizona birds. Pages 37-46 in Carothers, 
S. W., J.R. Haldeman, and R.P. Balda, editors. Breeding 
birds of the San Francisco Mountain area and the White 
Mountains, Arizona. Museum of Northern Arizona 
Tech. Ser. No. 12. 
Christensen, K.M., and T.G. Whitham. 1993. Impact of 
insect herbivores on competition between birds and 
mammals for pinyon pine seeds. Ecology 74:2270-2278. 
Christensen, K.M., T.G. Whitham, and R.P. Balda. 1991. 
Discrimination among pinyon trees by Clark's nutcrack- 
ers: effects of cone crop size and cone characters. 
Oecologia 86:402-407. 
Craighead, J.J., F.C. Craighead, R.L. Roff, and B.W. O'Gara. 
1973. Home ranges and activity patterns of non- 
migratory elf of the Madison drainage herd as deter- 
mined by biotelemetry. Wildlife Monograph 33.50 pp. 
Cunningham, J.G., R.P. Balda, and W.S. Gaud. 1980. Se- 
lection and use of snags by secondary cavity nesters of 
the ponderosa pine forest. USDA Forest Service Res. 
Pap. RM-222. 
Currie, P.O., D.W. Reichert, J.C. Malechek, and C. Wallmo. 
1977. Forage selection comparisons for mule deer and 
cattle in undermanaged ponderosa pine. J. Range Man- 
agement 30:352-356. 
Dahlsten, D.L., W.A. Copper, D.L. Rowney, and P.K. 
Kleintjes. 1990. Quantifying bird predation of arthro- 
pods in forests. Studies in Avian Biology 13:44-52. 
DeSante, D.F, and T. Luke George. 1994. Population trends 
in the landbirds of western North America. Studies in 
Avian Biology. No. 15:173-190. 
Farentinos, R.C. 1972. Nests of the tassel-eared squirrel. J. 
Mammalogy 53:900-903. 
Ffolliott, P.F. 1983. Implications of snag policies on manage- 
ment of Southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Pages 28- 
32 in Proceedings of the Snag Habitat Management Sym- 
posium. USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-99. 
Forsman, E.D., E.C. Meslow, and A.M. Wright. 1984. Biol- 
ogy and management of the spotted owl in Oregon. 
Wildlife Monograph 87.64 pp. 
Franzreb, K.E. 1978. Tree species used by birds in logged 
and unlogged mix-coniferous forests. Wilson Bull. 
90:221-238. 
Franzreb, K.E. 1983. A comparison of avian foraging be- 
havior in unlogged and logged mixed-coniferous for- 
est. Wilson Bull. 95:60-76. 
Franzreb, K.E. 1984. Foraging habits of ruby-crowned and 
golden-crowned kinglets in an Arizona montain forest. 
Condor 86: 139-145. 
Gill, F.B. 1995. Ornithology, second edition. W.H. Freeman 
and Co., New York. 763pp. 
Haldeman, J.R., R.P. Balda, and S.W. Carothers. 1973. 
Breeding birds of a ponderosa pine forest and a fir, pine, 
aspen forest in the San Francisco Mountain area, Ari- 
zona. Pages 1-21 in Carothers, S.W., J.R. Haldeman, and 
R.P. Balda, editors. Breeding birds of the San Francisco 
Mountain area and the White Mountains, Arizona. 
Museum of Northern Arizona Tech. Ser. No. 12. 
Hall, J.G. 1981. A field study of the Kaibab squirrel in 
Grand Canyon National Park. Wildlife Monograph 75. 
54 PP. 
Hay, D.B., and M. Guntert. 1983. Seasonal selection of tree 
cavities by pygmy nuthatches based on cavity charac- 
teristics. Pages 117-120 in Proceedings of the Snag Habi- 
tat Management Symposium. USDAForest Service Gen. 
Tech. Rep. RM-99. 
Hejl, S. J. 1994. Human-induced changes in bird popula- 
tions in coniferous forests in western North America 
during the past 100 years. Studies in Avian Biol. No. 
15:232-246. 
Holmes, R.T. 1990. Ecological and evolutionary impacts 
of bird predation on forest insects: an overview. Stud- 
ies in Avian Biology 13:6-13. 
Horton, S.P., and R.W. Mannan. 1988. Effects of prescribed 
fire on snags and cavity-nesting birds in southeastern 
Arizona pine forests. Wildlife Society Bull. 16:37-44. 
86 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Songbird Status and Roles 
Hudler, G.W., N. Oshima, and F.G. Hawksworth. 1979. 
Bird dissemination of dwarf mistletoe on ponderosa 
pine in Colorado. Am. Midland Nat. 102:273-280. 
Hutto, R.L. 1985. Seasonal changes in the habitat 
distribution of transient insectivorous birds in south- 
eastern Arizona: competition mediated? Auk 102: 
120-132. 
James, F.C., and C.E. McCulloch. 1995. The strength of 
inferences about causes of trends in populations. Pages 
40-51 in T.E. Martin and D.M. Finch, editors. Ecology 
and management of neotropical migratory birds. Ox- 
ford Univ. Press, New York. 
Johnson, N.K. 1994. Pioneering and natural expansion of 
breeding distributions in western North American birds. 
Studies in Avian Biol. No. 15:27-44. 
Koplin, J.R. 1969. The numerical response of woodpeck- 
ers to insect prey in a subalpine forest in Colorado. Con- 
dor 71:436438. 
Laudenslayer Jr., W.F. 1973. Foraging strategies by breed- 
ing birds of a pinyon-juniper, ponderosa pine ecotone. 
M.S. thesis, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ. 
42 PP. 
Laudenslayer Jr., W.F., and R.P. Balda. 1976. Breeding bird 
use of a pinyon-juniper-ponderosa pine ecotone. Auk 
93:571-586. 
Li, P., and T.E. Martin. 1991. Nest-site selection and nest- 
ing success of cavity-nesting birds in high elevation for- 
est drainages. Auk 108:405418. 
Marquis, R.J., and C.J. Whelm. 1994. Insectivorous birds 
increase growth of white oak through consumption of 
leaf-chewing insects. Ecology 75:2007-2014. 
Marshall Jr., J.T. 1957. Birds of pine-oak woodland in 
southern Arizona and adjacent Mexico. Pacific Coast 
Avifauna No. 32:l-125. 
Marshall, R.M. 1991. Resident bird counts 1990. J. Field 
Ornith. 62 (Suppl.):3-5. 
Martin, T.E. 1988. Habitat and area effects on forest bird 
assemblages: is nest predation an influence? Ecology 
69374434. 
Martin, T.E. 1992. Breeding productivity considerations: 
what are the appropriate habitat features for manage- 
ment? Pages 455-473 in J.M. Hagan 111, and D.W. 
Johnston, editors, Ecology and conservation of 
neotropical migrant landbirds. Smithsonian Inst. Press, 
Washington, DC. 
Martin, T.E., and J.R. Karr. 1990. Behavioral plasticity of 
froaging maneuvers of migratory warblers: multiple 
selection periods for niches? Studies in Avian Biol. No. 
13:353-359. 
Martin, T.E., and J. J. Roper. 1988. Nest predation and nest- 
site selection of a western population of the hermit 
thrush. Condor 90:51-57. 
Martinka, R.R. 1972. Structural characteristics of blue 
grouse territories in Southwestern Montana. J. Wildlife 
Management 36:49&510. 
Marvil, R.E., and A. Cruz. 1989. Impact of brown-headed 
cowbird parasitism on the reproductive success of the 
solitary vireo. Auk 106:476-480. 
Marzluff, J.M., R.B. Boone, and G.W. Cox. 1994. Histori- 
cal changes in populations and perceptions of native 
pest bird species in the west. Studies in Avian Biol. No. 
15:202-220. 
McEllin, S.M. 1979. Population demographics, spacing, 
and foraging behaviors of white-breasted and pygmy 
nhthatches in ponderosa pine habitat. Pages 301-329 in 
The role of insectivorous birds in forest ecosystems. 
Dickson, J.G., R.N. Comer, R.R. Fleet, J.C. Kroll, and 
J.A. Jackson, editors. Academic Press, New York, NY. 
Miller, R. 1992. Preliminary results from breeding bird 
survey data estimates of trends in bird populations in or 
near managed ponderosa pine in the Southwest. Unpubl. 
Rep., Arizona Dept. Game and Fish, Flagstaff, AZ. 
Moore, F.R., and P.A. Simm. 1985. Migratory disposition 
and choice of diet by the yellow-rumped warbler 
(Dendroica coronata). Auk 102: 820-826. 
Moore, F.R., S.A. Gauthreaux Jr., P.Kerlinger, and T.R. 
Simons. 1995. Pages 121-144 in T.E. Martin and 
D.M.Finch, editors, Ecology and management of 
neotropical migratory birds: a synthesis and review of 
critical issues. Oxford Univ. Press, New York, NY. 
Moore, F.R., and T.R. Simons. 1992. Habitat suitability and 
stopover ecology of neotropical landbird migrants. 
Pages 345-355 in J. M. Hagan I11 and D. W. Johnston, 
editors, Ecology and conservation of neotropical migrant 
landbirds. Smithsonian Inst. Press, Washington, DC. 
Morrison, M. L. 1986. Bird populations as indicators of 
environmental change. Pages 429-451 in Johnson, R.F., 
ed. Current Ornithology, Vol. 3. Plenum Press, NY. 
Morrison, M.L., B.G. Marcot, and R.W. Mannan. 1992. 
Wildlife-habitat relationships: concepts and applica- 
tions. University of Wisconsin Press, Madison. 343 pp. 
Morrison, M.L., W.M. Block, L.S. Hall, L.C. Christoferson, 
and J.A. Martin. 1996. Linking research and manage- 
ment: conceptual designs and case studies. Trans. N. 
Am. Wildl. and Natur. Resour. Conf. 61:463-471. 
Morse, D. H. 1989. American warblers: an ecological and 
behavioral perspective. Harvard University Press, Cam- 
bridge, MA. 406pp. 
Overturf, J.H. 1979. The effects of forest fire on breeding 
bird populations of ponderosa pine forests of northern 
Arizona. M.S. thesis, Northern Arizona University, Flag- 
staff, AZ. 108 pp. 
Pete john, B.G., J.R. Sauer, and C.S. Robbins. 1995. Popu- 
lation trends from the North American Breeding Bird 
Survey. Pages 3-39 in T.E. Martin and D.M. Finch, edi- 
tors. Ecology and management of neotropical migra- 
tory birds. Oxford Univ. Press, New York, NY. 
Phillips, A., J. Marshall, and G. Monson. 1964. The birds 
of Arizona. University of Arizona Press, Tucson, AZ. 
22%~. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 4 
Robbins, C.S., D.Bystrak, and P.H. Geissler. 1986. The 
Breeding Bird Survey: its first fifteen years, 1965-1979. 
USDI Fish and Wildl. Serv. Resource Publ. 157. 
Robinson, S.K., S.I. Rothstein, M.C. Brittingham, L.J. Petit, 
and J.A. Grzybowski. 1995. Ecology and behavior of 
cowbirds and their impact on host populations. Pages 
428-460 in T.E. Martin and D.M. Finch, editors. Ecol- 
ogy and management of neotropical migratory birds: a 
synthesis and review of critical issues. Oxford Univer- 
sity Press, New York, NY. 
Rosenstock, S.S. 1996. Habitat relationships of breeding 
birds in northern Arizona ponderosa pine and pine-oak 
forests. Arizona Game and Fish Dept., Res. Branch, Tech. 
Rep. 2 3 . 5 3 ~ ~ .  
Rothstein, S.I., J. Verner, and E. Stevens. 1984. Radio-track- 
ing confirms a unique diurnal pattern of spatial occur- 
rence in the parasitic brown-headed cowbird. Ecol. 
65:77-88. 
Salomonson, M.G., and R.P. Balda. 1977. Winter territorial- 
ity of Townsend's solitaires (Myadestes townsendi) in a pi- 
non-juniper-ponderosa pine ecotone. Condor 79:148-161. 
Scott, V.E. 1978. Characteristics of ponderosa pine snags 
used by cavity-nesting birds in Arizona. J. Forestry 
76:26-28. 
Scott, V.E. 1979. Bird response to snag removal in ponde- 
rosa pine. J. Forestry 77:26-28. 
Severson, K.R. 1986. Spring and early summer habitats 
and foods of male blue grouse in Arizona. J. Arizona- 
New Mexico Academy of Science 21:13-18. 
Siegel, J.J. 1989. An evaluation of the minimum habitat 
quality standards for birds in old-growth ponderosa 
pine forests, northern Arizona. M.S. thesis, Univ. Ari- 
zona, Tucson, AZ. 94pp. 
Stallcup, P.L. 1968. Spatio-temporal relationships of 
nuthatches and woodpeckers in ponderosa pine of Colo- 
rado. Ecology 492331443. 
Szaro, R.C., and R.P. Balda. 1979. Bird community dynam- 
ics in a ponderosa pine forest. Studies in Avian Biology 
3:1-66. 
Szaro, R.C., and RJ? Balda. 1982. Selection and monitor- 
ing of avian indicator species: an example from a pon- 
derosa pine forest in the southwest. USDA Forest Ser- 
vice Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-89. 7 pp. 
Szaro, R.C., and R.P. Balda. 1986. Relationships among 
weather, habitat structure, and ponderosa pine forest 
birds. J. Wildlife Management 50:253-260. 
Szaro, R.C., J.D. Brawn, and R.P. Balda. 1990. Yearly varia- 
tion in resource-use behavior by ponderosa pine forest 
birds. Studies in Avian Biology 13:226-236. 
Taylor, W.P. 1936. Ecology and life history of the porcu- 
pine (Erethizon epixanthum) as related to the forests of 
Arizona and the Southwestern United States. Univ. Ari- 
zona Biol. Sci. Bull. 3. 117 pp. 
Terrill, S. B., and R. D. Ohmart. 1984. Facultative exten- 
sion of fall migration by yellow-rumped warblers 
(Dendroica coronata). Auk 101:427-438. 
Thomas, L., and K. Martin. 1996. The importance of analy- 
sis method for Breeding Bird Survey population trend 
estimates. Conserv. Biol. 10:479-490. 
Tomback, D.F., and Y.B. Linhart. 1990. The evolution of 
bird-dispersed pines. Evolu. Ecol. 4:185-219. 
Urness, 
1969. Nutritional analyses and in vitro digest- 
ibility of mistletoes browsed by deer. Am. Midland Nat. 
107:351-359. 
USDA Forest Service. 1977. Forest Service Manual, Title 
5151.13~ (Policy), Fire Management, np. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 5 
Effects of Urbanization and Recreation on Songbirds 
John M. Marzluff 
Introduction 
The world's population has grown to over 5 billion 
people and shows no sign of slowing (Horiuchi 1992). Our 
increasing population and natural resource use is the fun- 
damental reason that much of the natural world is in cri- 
sis (Mange1 et al. 1996). In the United States, the greatest 
recent increases in human population are in the Western 
states. Nevada leads in population growth, followed by 
Arizona; New Mexico ranks ninth (U.S. Department of 
Commerce). As a result, human impacts on western bird 
communities, which are already severe (Jehl and Johnson 
1994), will probably increase. 
The human population in the ponderosa pine forests of 
Arizona and New Mexico, although currently low, is on 
the rise due to tourism and retirement industries (Raish 
et al. this volume). Computers have enabled many people 
to conduct business remotely. Work-at-home individuals 
are choosing ponderosa pine forest towns because of their 
small size, safety, cleanliness, scenic beauty, and friendly 
inhabitants (J. Burding, Flagstaff Chamber of Commerce, 
personal communication). Moreover, cool temperatures 
and scenic beauty attract large numbers of recreationists 
to the forests, especially during the summer months when 
desert dwellers want to escape extreme temperatures. 
The importance of ponderosa pine forests as recreation 
sites (Raish et al. this volume) indicates that the poten- 
tial impacts of humans on the forest will probably 
be greater than resident population censuses might 
suggest. 
Human pressures on ponderosa pine forests will con- 
tinue to increase (Boyle and Samson 1985; Anderson 1995; 
Flather and Cordel 1995; Raish et al. this volume). The 
potential effects of these increases on songbirds in pon- 
derosa pine forests are not well studied, but many results 
are predictable if human use of the forests can be quanti- 
fied (Foin et al. 1977). This chapter discusses how urban- 
ization and recreation in Southwestern ponderosa pine 
forests might influence songbirds and comments on the 
research necessary to provide an assessment of future af- 
fects. Other important human impacts on ponderosa 
pine forest birds, including fire suppression, logging, 
and grazing, are discussed in Chapters 2,6, and 7 of this 
publication. 
Effects of Urbanization and 
Recreation on Songbirds 
There have been few studies documenting the effects 
of urbanization and recreation on songbirds and only 2 
that test the affects on Southwestern ponderosa pine for- 
ests (Aitchison 1977; Yarnell 1993). However, a general 
study review is useful because many affects are consis- 
tent over large geographic areas (Rosenberg et al. 1987) 
and are predictable given knowledge of local avian natu- 
ral history (Foin et al. 1977). 
In this chapter, the words "urban" and "urbanization" 
reference towns and their associated affects. Concentrated 
human presence is the key feature that distinguishes ur- 
banization from other forms of disturbance. 
Urbanization 
Urbanization directly influences songbird populations 
and communities by changing ecosystem processes, habi- 
tat, and/or food supply. Urbanization indirectly influences 
songbirds by affecting their predators, competitors, or 
disease organisms. Individual birds may adjust their be- 
havior in response to human factors in urban environ- 
ments. In forested North America, urbanized habitats typi- 
cally support larger (measured by biomass) and richer 
(more species) but less even in relative abundance avian 
communities because they are dominated by a few, abun- 
dant species (Pitelka 1942; Emlen 1974; DeGraff and 
Wentworth 1981; Rosenberg et al. 1987; Mills et al. 1989). 
Urbanization also favors some species but selects against 
others so that the composition of urban avian communities 
differs from those in native environments (Beissinger and 
Osbome 1982; Rosenberg et al. 1987; Mills et al. 1989; Blair 
1996). While many studies have documented these findings, 
none have specifically measured the effects of urbanization 
on avian demography. Many urban populations may be sink 
(area of population decline) populations (Pulliam 1988) that 
attract many recruits but produce few (Blair 1996). Marzluff 
and Balda (1992) suggested that this was the case for pinyon 
jays in Flagstaff, Arizona during the 1980s, and this is prob- 
ably also true for many flycatchers, Steller's jays, wrens, 
thrushes, warblers, tanagers, grosbeaks, and sparrows. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 5 
Changes in Ecosystem Processes 
The affects likely to have the greatest impact on ponde- 
rosa pine forest birds are changes in the basic functioning 
of the ponderosa pine ecosystem; specifically, reduction in 
natural processes such as fire, altered nutrient cycling, and 
disrupted water cycling. These changes are accentuated by 
urbanization and can lead to long-term forest degradation. 
Existence of buildings has prompted intense efforts to 
suppress fire near urban areas, which disrupts the natu- 
ral fire regime that has evolved with ponderosa pine for- 
est birds. Detailed discussion of the effects of fire suppres- 
sion on forest structure and function and forest avifauna 
are in Chapters 1 and 6, respectively. 
The energy and building requirements of humans dis- 
rupts the natural nutrient cycling of ponderosa pine for- 
ests. Forests are thinned to reduce the fire threat and some 
dead woody material is removed for fuelwood. Loss of 
snags leads to reductions in insectivores, which can lead 
to a reduction in forest health (Hall et al. this volume). 
The combination of fire suppression, logging, and fuel 
wood harvest has created a new, unbalanced nutrient cycle 
where nutrients in living trees are removed from the for- 
est as wood products and nutrients in dead debris are re- 
moved as firewood. The most important effect of urban- 
ization on nutrient cycling is probably a lengthening of 
cycles. Fire suppression around urban areas has eliminated 
the primary mechanism of nutrient cycling in ponderosa 
pine forests. The lack of fire causes living and dead biom- 
ass to accumulate much faster than it degrades and re- 
cycles (Covington and Moore 1994). Prescriptions to re- 
duce the Future fire threat, such as thinning (Edminster 
and Olsen 1996), are then used rather than prescribed 
burning. As a result, the urban pine forest, although ac- 
cumulating nutrients and energy, typically exports them 
rather than recycles them. This nutrient and energy loss 
may steadily degrade forest growth with long-lasting af- 
fect on forest birds. 
Water is an important, often limiting, resource in pon- 
derosa pine forests. Permeable, volcanic soils hold little 
water above ground and permanent streams, lakes, and 
ponds are rare. Runoff patterns are affected by urbaniza- 
tion as native soils are replaced by impermeable concrete 
and surrounding forest substrates are compacted by ve- 
hicular and foot traffic. Urban centers have tremendous 
water requirements that affect water distribution and cy- 
cling in surrounding forests. Water tables are lowered as 
aquifers are used at greater than replacement rates (Thorn 
et al. 1993; Haneberg and Friesen 1995). As forest health 
declines, springs and seeps important to wildlife may dry 
up causing bird reductions or redistributions. Songbirds 
that are able to tolerate human activity will become in- 
creasingly dependent on urban areas for water. 
Habitat Changes 
cally more fragmented, includes less coverage at mid- and 
upper levels, and has more ground level coverage than in 
natural environments (Beissinger and Osborne 1982; Blair 
1996). Not only are patches of vegetation isolated in ur- 
ban environments, they also rarely include the full comple- 
ment of species found in natural forests (Beissinger and 
Osborne 1982). Native plant species are often removed 
from urban environments and replaced by exotic orna- 
mentals (Beissinger and Osborne 1982; Rosenberg et al. 
1987). Even moderately urban environments contain few 
standing or downed dead trees to provide nest and for- 
aging sites for cavity nesters and timber drillers. Extreme 
urbanization leads to decreases in vegetation at all levels 
as man-made structures replace vegetation (Blair 1996). 
In heavily urbanized areas, forest structure may be modi- 
fied well beyond the city boundaries (Kamada and 
Nakagoshi 1993). 
Urbanization in ponderosa pine forests produces most 
of the vegetation effects previously noted. Native shrub 
and oak understories are usually replaced by lawns and 
ornamental shrubs. The ponderosa pine canopy is frag- 
mented by houses and roads, but this forest type is not 
typified by a closed canopy. Even with fragmentation, the 
actual density of trees in and around urban centers is prob- 
ably much greater than during presettlement times be- 
cause of smaller average tree size and fire suppression 
(Morgan 1994). Snags and downed woody debris are 
found at low densities in urban ponderosa pine forests 
because of safety, fire, and aesthetic concerns. Exotic juni- 
pers and Colorado pinyon pine trees, commonly planted 
in urban yards, supply food for wintering Townsend's 
solitaires, western bluebirds, American robins, and jays. 
However, exotic plant communities disproportionately 
favor a few bird species at the expense of preserving the 
entire native avifauna. Despite these changes, towns in 
ponderosa pine are less likely to modify natural habitat 
than other urban centers (eastern United States, West 
Coast, desert Southwest) because they are modestly sized 
and have housing developments that are often widely dis- 
persed to enjoy the natural scenic beauty. Where heavily 
urbanized areas do occur, opportunities for ground for- 
agers are greatly reduced. 
Direct habitat modification by urbanization in ponde- 
rosa pine forests will likely: 1) benefit ground-gleaning 
and probing birds that are tolerant of human activity 
(American robin, European starling, Brewer's blackbird, 
and American crow); 2) benefit species that nest in man- 
made structures or ornamental vegetation (rock dove, 
house sparrow, European starling, house wren, purple 
martin, barn swallow, house finch, and eastern kingbird); 
3) reduce shrub and canopy nesters and foragers (war- 
blers, vireos, tanagers, grosbeaks, wrens, creepers, chicka- 
dees, and nuthatches); and 4) reduce burn specialists, cav- 
ity nesters, and bark drillers (olive-sided flycatcher, 
Vegetation in moderately urban environments is typi- 
swallows, woodpeckers, chickadees, nuthatches,-creepers, 
90 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Effects of Urbanization and Recreation on Songbirds 
and bluebirds). These effects have been noted on similar 
species in other environments (Beissinger and Osborne 
1982; Rosenberg et al. 1987; Mills et al. 1989; Blair 1996). 
Yarnell's (1993) study of annual trends in birds counted 
on Flagstaff's National Audubon Society's Christmas Bird 
Count suggests that urban obligates and grassland spe- 
cies have increased around Flagstaff from 1967 to 1991. 
Food Changes 
Urban centers provide food to birds directly at feeders 
and indirectly at areas of waste treatment, collection, and 
transfer. Seed eaters and nectivores (hummingbirds, jays, 
woodpeckers, chickadees, nuthatches, juncos, sparrows, 
finches, and grosbeaks) benefit from feeders. Scavenging 
omnivores (gulls, jays, crows, and ravens, blackbirds, and 
European starlings) benefit from spilled waste (Robbins 
et al. 1986; Boarman 1993; Marzluff et al. 1994). 
Food resources are also affected indirectly by changes 
in vegetation as previously discussed. In particular, ex- 
otic plants have fewer insects than native plants and ur- 
ban lawns are rich and consistent feeding grounds 
(Rosenberg et al. 1987). These changes favor ground for- 
agers and granivores while selecting against shrub and 
mid-canopy foliage gleaners as previously mentioned. 
Predator Changes 
Introduced predators (cats, dogs) are more abundant 
in urban areas than in native forests and may have sub- 
stantial affects on the avifauna (Churcher and Lawton 
1987). Other avian predators (sharp-shinned hawk, north- 
ern pygmy owl, merlin, and Cooper's hawk) may increase 
in urban areas and concentrate their activities at feeders 
where prey are abundant. Human predators can also se- 
riously deplete local songbirds, sometimes just for sport. 
An example of this occurred in Flagstaff when a teenager 
shooting pinyon jays during one breeding season caused 
most of the nest failure and mortality experienced by the 
flock that year (Marzluff and Balda 1992). Large preda- 
tors are usually eliminated from areas of human habita- 
tion. If northern goshawks in urban ponderosa pine for- 
ests are also reduced, songbird populations may increase. 
Coyotes (Canis latrans) and mountain lions (Felis concolor) 
have increased in and around urban areas recently. These 
predators may benefit many songbirds by reducing mam- 
malian nest predators, especially cats (Quinn 1992). 
Perhaps even more important than the increasing mor- 
tality experienced by free-flying birds, urbanization re- 
duces nesting productivity by escalating the number of 
predators that destroy bird nests. Nest predation is prob- 
ably the most important limiting factor on songbirds (Mar- 
tin 1993a, b), even outweighing winter mortality for mi- 
gratory species (Bohninggaese et al. 1993). Nest predators, 
often more abundant in urban areas than native habitats, 
have increased dramatically in the Western United States 
during the last century (Robbins et al. 1986; Boarman 1993; 
Marzluff et al. 1994). As predator density increases so does 
the predation rate (Andren 1992; Marzluff et al. 1995). 
Important nest predators in ponderosa pine include 
domestic cats, striped skunks (Mephitus mephitus), rock 
squirrels (Citellus variegatus), Abert squirrels (Sciurus 
aberti), gopher snakes (Pituophis melanoleucus), Steller's 
jays, American crows, and common ravens (Marzluff and 
Balda 1992). Surveys of jays, crows, and ravens conducted 
at several locations in and adjacent to Southwest ponde- 
roBa pine each winter since about 1960, suggest that ravens 
are more abundant and increasing quicker at urban than 
at rural sites (figure 1; Yarnell 1993). Moreover, the great- 
est densities of ravens in rural areas are at sites near ur- 
ban areas. Figure Ib shows that Mormon Lake, which is 
25 km from Flagstaff, has the highest density of ravens of 
the rural sites studied. American crows are also more typi- 
cally abundant at urban than rural sites (figure 2). Crows 
in Flagstaff continued to increase in 1996 (R. Balda, per- 
sonal communication). However, Prescott, Arizona has yet 
to be colonized by crows and rural areas near urban cen- 
ters (Sandia Mountains, New Mexico; Mormon Lake, Ari- 
zona) are occasionally visited by many crows. Steller's jays 
vary greatly in abundance from year to year at rural and 
urban sites without a consistent tendency to be more abun- 
dant in urban sites (figure 3). Other jays, such as scrub 
and Mexican, may actually respond positively to urban- 
ization (Marzluff et al. 1994). These lower-elevation spe- 
cies are invading ponderosa pine towns most notably 
Payson, Prescott, and Flagstaff, Arizona (Yarnell 1993). 
Counts during the breeding season at rural sites (none 
are available for urban sites) suggest that crows, ravens, 
and Steller's jays are common, and that typically urban 
nest predators, such as crows, can be abundant in rural 
sites (figure 4). 
The increasing number of nest predators, especially 
ravens, in urban ponderosa pine forests reduces produc- 
tivity of native songbirds. Nearly half of all pinyon jay 
nests in Flagstaff failed from predation in the 1980s. This 
was a significant increase over predation in the 1970s and 
was closely correlated with increasing raven populations 
in the city (Marzluff and Balda 1992). Reduced jay pro- 
ductivity led to a decrease in population size and an in- 
creased reliance on immigration to sustain the Flagstaff 
population. Thus, the population functioned as a sink 
population during the 1980s although it was probably a 
source (area of population increase) population in the 
1970s. Perhaps other open-nesting songbirds suffer simi- 
lar fates in urban environments. 
Disease 
Disease rarely regulates temperate bird populations. Ur- 
ban populations are probably more susceptible to disease 
than those in native forests because artificial feeders con- 
centrate birds and increase the incidence of disease spread. 
Moreover, some urban species, such as rock doves and 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 5 
a) Urban sites 
* 
Flagstaff, AZ 
4 
- Santa Fe, NM 
b) Rural sites 
* 
Mormon Lake, AZ 
- Grand Canyon, AZ 
--v- 
Sandia Mtns., NM 
2 
Year 
Figure I. Number of common ravens counted during winter sur- 
veys in Southwestern ponderosa pine areas. Birds 
were counted each winter at the same location as part 
of the National Audubon Society's Christmas Bird 
Count. Counts were standardized by observers, which 
varies annually, by dividing the total number of birds 
counted by total observation time (party hours). All 
sites in Arizona and New Mexico that had relatively 
complete counts from 1960 through 1995 were used. 
Sites inside the city limits of urban centers are plotted 
in the top panel and those outside city limits are plot- 
ted in the bottom panel. 
blackbirds, may be reservoirs for disease (Garner 1978). 
Rock doves, more common in urban ponderosa pine for- 
ests than in natural forests (figure 5; Yarnell 1993), are 
known to carry diseases such as Trichornonas. This proto- 
zoan may survive in urban settings better than in rural 
areas because of the large rock dove population. In addi- 
5 
P 
1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1085 1990 1995 
b) Rural sites 
- 
a) Urban sites 
C 
+ii 
d 
3 
-e- 
Sandia Mtns., NM 
8 
- 
Santa Catalina Mtns., AZ 
0 
E 
z 
UJ f 
2 -  
CI 
V) .- 2 
0 
- Mormon Lake, AZ 
I 
I I --- 
Grand Canyon. AL 
1 
n 
Year 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  
Figure 2. Number of American crows counted at urban and E-- 
ral sites during the annual National Audubon Society's 
Christmas Bird Counts. Counts were standardized by 
observers, which varies annually, by dividing the total 
number of birds counted by total observation time 
(party hours). All sites in Arizona and New Mexico that 
had relatively complete counts from 1960 through 1995 
were used. Sites inside the city limits of urban centers 
are plotted in the top panel and those outside city lim- 
its are plotted in the bottom panel. 
tion, when environmental conditions, such as warm 
springs, favor Trichornonas growth, it is quickly transmit- 
ted at communal feeding sites. During the spring of 1996 
in Flagstaff, Trichomonas growth and transmission resulted 
in the death of several evening grosbeaks and pine siskins 
(Bill Watt, Arizona Department of Fish and Game, per- 
sonal communication). Seed eaters and nectivores are most 
susceptible to such diseases because they frequent urban 
feeders. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Effects of Urbanization and Recreation on Songbirds 
a) Urban sites 
4- Prescotl, AZ 
- 
Flagstaff, AZ 
4 
- Santa Fe. NM 1 
b) Rural sites 
- 
Mormon Lake, AZ 
4 . Grand Canyon, AZ 
--o- Sandia Mtns., NM 
Year 
Figure 3. Number of Steller's jays counted at urban and rural 
sites during the annual National Audubon Society's 
Christmas Bird Counts. Counts were standardized by 
observers, which varies annually, by dividing the total 
number of birds counted by total observation time 
(party hours). All sites in Arizona and New Mexico that 
had relatively complete counts from 1960 through 1995 
were used. Sites inside the city limits of urban centers 
are plotted in the top panel and those outside city lim- 
its are plotted in the bottom panel. 
Competition 
Availability of nest sites helps determine the popula- 
tion density of cavity-nesting birds in ponderosa pine for- 
ests (Brawn and Balda 1988). Cavity nest sites are usually 
at a premium in urban sites because of snag removal. The 
increased abundance of European starlings at urban sites 
(Johnston and Garrett 1994) suggests that the limited num- 
- 
AZ Route.115 
--c - NM Route 3 
0 
30 , 
Common raven 1 
American crow 
20 , 
1 
Year 
Figure 4. Number of nest predators counted during breeding 
season surveys in ponderosa pine forests of New 
Mexico and Arizona. These counts are part of the 
National Biological Service's Breeding Bird Survey 
program that began in 1966. Birds are counted along 
a 49.5 mile route that is driven by an observer once 
per year. The observer counts birds while stopping for 
3 minutes at each of 50 locations spaced at 0.5 mile 
intervals along the route. All routes with fairly com- 
plete data in New Mexico and Arizona were in rural 
locations. 
ber of urban cavity nest sites may be difficult for native 
birds to obtain. Starlings commonly outcompete native 
birds for cavities (Feare 1984)' which affects native cav- 
ity-nester populations in urban forests. Even the best pub- 
lic intentions can exacerbate this problem; nest boxes for 
native birds often support breeding starlings and house 
sparrows. House wrens may also use these boxes and prey 
on eggs and nestlings of other species. 
Behavioral Adjustment to Urbanization 
Individuals may adjust their behavior in response to 
features of urban environments. Such adjustments may 
enhance a species' ability to persist in the urban environ- 
ment and may have ramifications beyond the urban setting. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 5 
The best documented behavior changes in urban envi- 
(Marzluff and Balda 1992). Songbirds that are repeatedly 
ronments involve nesting. Birds breeding in urban envi- 
disturbed at their nest may increase their aggressiveness 
ronrnents often nest earlier than those in rural environ- 
(Knight and Temple 1986). Persecution by humans may se- 
ments because of supplemental food (Balda and Bateman 
lect for reduced aggressiveness (Knight et al. 1989). Species 
1972). This may be detrimental in ponderosa pine forests 
that live closely with humans, such as American crows, may 
where late spring snow storms often destroy early nests 
become accustom to human presence in urban areas (Knight 
Figure 5. 
a) Urban sites 
* 
Flagstaff, AZ 
--P - Santa Fe, NM 
'I"" 
b) Rural sites 
* 
Santa Catalina Mtns., AZ 
- 
Mormon Lake, AZ 
--P - Grand Canyon, AZ 
--9- Sandia Mtns., NM I
. - 
et al. 1987). Lncreased nest prehation in urban areas may cause 
some birds to change nest placement to minimize losses 
(Knight and Fitzner 1985; Marzluff 1988). 
Foraking behavior also may be modified in urban envi- 
ronments. Species that use human food sources may re- 
duce their use of natural foods and change their temporal 
and spatial foraging behavior to include provisioning sites. 
Reduced reliance on natural foods may interrupt seed 
dispersal and pollination far beyond the urban center. 
Clark's nutcrackers, for example, are important dispersal 
agents for whitebark pine in Colorado. Nutcracker reli- 
ance on human handouts in Rocky Mountain National 
Park may have decreased the dispersal of whitebark pine 
in the region (Tomback and Taylor 1986). This may also 
occur with pinyon pine, which depends on jays, crows, 
and ravens, especially the pinyon jay, for dispersal 
(Marzluff and Balda 1992). However, pinyon jays in Flag- 
staff that regularly visited feeders, abandoned them in the 
fall when pinyon pine seeds were ripe. They cached seeds 
from the lower elevation pinyon pine forest in the ponde- 
rosa forest. Many of the pinyon seeds germinated and 
became established trees. Pinyon pine is now encroach- 
ing into ponderosa pine habitat because of the actions of 
this bird. Ironically, the pinyon jay may only survive in 
ponderosa pine forests because of urbanization and 
supplemental food provided at bird feeders. 
Recreation 
Recreation can affect wildlife through harvest, habitat 
modification, predation, and disturbance (Knight and Cole 
1995b). Habitat modification and disturbance are most 
relevant for songbirds because their affects on behavior 
may modify vigor, productivity, or survival of individu- 
als. Individual demographics and behavior may affect 
abundance, distribution, and population viability (Ander- 
son 1995; Knight and Cole 1995b). Populations may influ- 
ence community organization and interactions among 
- 
- 
Year 
community members (Gutzwiller 1995). The general ef- 
fect of and impacts on specific types of recreation in pon- 
Number of rock doves counted at urban and rural sites 
derosa pine forests are discussed in this section. 
during the annual National Audubon Society's Christ- 
mas Bird Counts. Counts were standardized by ob- 
Habitat Modification 
servers, which varies annually, by dividing the total 
number of birds counted by total observation time 
Habitat modification indirectly affects wildlife and can 
(party hours). All sites in Arizona and New Mexico that 
have long-lasting effects. Recreationists modify habitat 
had relatively complete counts from 1960 through 1995 
primarily 
and harvesting fire 
were used. Sites inside the city limits of urban centers 
wood. Trampling from hiking, camping, fishing, and na- 
are plotted in the top panel and those outside city lim- 
ture study compacts soil, decreases its porosity, and in- 
its are plotted in the bottom panel. 
creases erosion (Cole and Landres 1995). This, along with 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Effects of Urbanization and Recreation on Songbirds 
vegetation crushing, reduces seed germination, seedling 
establishment, plant growth, and reproduction. Trails may 
be used by predators and parasites, such as cowbirds, to 
gain access to forest interiors. Plant species composition 
often changes in recreation sites as disturbance favors very 
small or very large species, low growing species, species 
with tough leaves, and annuals with rapid growth and 
copious seed production (Cole and Landres 1995). Above- 
ground vegetation, dead wood, and brush piles are re- 
duced. Plant species diversity is reduced under extreme 
disturbance but may increase with low to moderate rec- 
reation levels (Cole and Landres 1995; Blair 1996). 
Recreationists may increase the spread of exotic plants by 
acting as dispersal agents. Habitat contiguity and hori- 
zontal and vertical diversity is reduced by recreation. 
Habitat changes will generally cause the greatest reduc- 
tion in bird species that rely on shrub and ground cover 
(juncos, thrushes, warblers, sparrows, vireos, and wrens) 
and those that depend on standing dead and downed 
woody debris (woodpeckers, secondary cavity nesters). 
Human Disturbance 
Disturbance from recreation on wildlife depends on the 
recreationist and the animals (Knight and Cole 1995a). The 
predictability, frequency, magnitude, timing, and location 
of recreation are important to songbirds. Birds may ha- 
bituate to predictable disturbances such as walking, driv- 
ing, or camping in consistent locations. This may reduce 
the recreation disturbance, but it can also be detrimental 
if habituated birds later approach humans and are perse- 
cuted (Snyder and Snyder 1974). The potential influence 
of disturbance increases with its frequency and intensity. 
Increases in visitor use of a park in the Netherlands was 
correlated with reductions in songbird density (van der 
Zande and Vos 1984). Most songbirds use ponderosa pine 
forests only during the breeding season, so the timing of 
recreation has important implications. Effects may be es- 
pecially pronounced during the early part of the nesting 
cycle when nest construction and incubation occur 
(Gotmark 1992). Disturbance during the winter may be 
important to permanent residents, especially when cold 
temperatures and deep snow increase energetic require- 
ments and decrease foraging efficiency. 
Ponderosa pine songbirds are less affected by recreation 
than many animals because of their life history traits. The 
degree of ecological specialization, body size, and social- 
ity of animals may influence their responses to recreation 
(Knight and Cole 1995a). Specialized birds that require 
specific foods or habitats (hummingbirds, cavity nesters, 
pinyon jays, Clark's nutcrackers, and crossbills) are more 
vulnerable to disturbance because they have less ability 
to respond to environmental changes (Croonquist and 
Brooks 1991). The variable temperature, precipitation re- 
gime, and seed crops characteristic of ponderosa pine for- 
ests (Marzluff and Balda 1992), has favored birds' abili- 
ties to exploit alternative resources when necessary. Thus, 
even specialists in ponderosa pine forests may be more 
resilient to change than species in less variable climates. 
This is especially relevant for permanent residents that 
may adjust better to recreational disturbance than mi- 
grants. Large animals are more affected by disturbance 
than small ones possibly because of historical persecution 
and energetics (Knight and Cole 1995a). This suggests that 
most songbirds will tolerate recreational disturbance better 
than'larger birds or mammals. Animals that feed in social 
groups may respond quicker to disturbance than solitary 
ones because of increased vigilance and the past experiences 
of other individuals (Knight and Cole 1995a). Therefore, al- 
though songbirds in general may tolerate disturbance from 
recreation, social species in ponderosa pine forests (pygmy 
nuthatch, pinyon jay, red crossbill, evening grosbeak, pine 
siskin) may be less tolerant than solitary species. 
The influence of recreation on individuals and popula- 
tions can affect communities by altering competitive, sym- 
biotic, and predator-prey relationships (Gutzwiller 1995). 
If interacting species differ in their tolerance of humans, 
then recreation may affect some participants more than 
others and unbalance the relationship. Scavenging birds 
include tolerant crows and wary ravens and raptors. In 
one study, disturbance by fisherman favored crows be- 
cause eagles and ravens quickly flushed when humans 
approached allowing crows to obtain more meat from 
salmon carcasses (Knight et al. 1991; Skagen et al. 1991). 
A similar effect could occur in ponderosa pine forests 
where eagles are flushed by nature viewers from big game 
carcasses during the winter. Recreationists may upset 
predator-prey relationships by disturbing nesting birds 
and advertising nest locations to predators (Gutzwiller 
1995). Predators may be more tolerant of human activity 
than nesting birds or may actually cue in on human activ- 
ity to locate nests (Gotmark 1992). 
Effects of Recreation in Ponderosa Pine Forests 
Motorized travel and scenery viewing - Although 
motorized travel and scenery viewing are the most popu- 
lar forms of recreation in Southwestern ponderosa pine 
forests (Raish et al. this volume), they probably have mi- 
nor, indirect affects on songbirds. Forest fragmentation by 
unimproved roads is unlikely to significantly affect song- 
bird movements because the nonforested areas around 
such roads are small and ponderosa pine forests do not 
naturally have closed canopies. Paved, heavily-traveled 
roads may constrain movement by relatively sedentary 
songbirds, such as winter wrens, and affect their selec- 
tion of breeding habitat (S. J. Hejl, personal communica- 
tion). Roads may decrease songbird productivity because 
increased road-kills and litter may subsidize nest preda- 
tors and provide them with foraging corridors into the 
forest interior (Knight et al. 1995). People stopping at sce- 
nic overlooks also may subsidize jays, crows, and ravens 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
95 

Chapter 5 
and perhaps disrupt nearby breeding songbirds. Seed- 
eating songbirds (finches, sparrows, juncos) may benefit 
from roads that concentrate rain water run-off and increase 
annual plant productivity along roadsides. However, such 
benefits may be countered by increases in cowbirds that 
may also use annual plant seeds. 
Camping - 
Camping, one of the most common forms 
of recreation in Southwestern ponderosa pine forests 
(Raish et al. this volume), is perhaps the most destructive 
recreational pursuit (Jim 1989). Most responses by song- 
birds to camping are indirect reactions to human intru- 
sion; songbirds respond directly to habitat change and 
food supplementation (Foin et al. 1977). Although these 
responses are usually concentrated in relatively small ar- 
eas, how far they extend beyond the campground is poorly 
understood. Vegetation in newly established campsites 
usually changes within a year as it is trampled and soil 
becomes compacted (Cole and Landres 1995; Marion and 
Cole 1996). Cover declines, especially in ground and shrub 
layers, and erosion increases. Dead and downed wood is 
quickly scavenged for fires or removed for safety (Foin et 
al. 1977; Cole and Landres 1995). Plant species diversity 
and horizontal and vertical structural diversity decline. 
Bird communities change in response to habitat 
changes. Bird species richness and density increases, but 
evenness of abundance generally declines as camp- 
grounds become dominated by a few widespread, per- 
manent, generalist residents (Foin et al. 1977; Boyle and 
Samson 1985; Guth 1978). Density and diversity declined 
at one Arizona campground immediately after it was 
opened to the public for the summer season (Aitchison 
1977). Brewer's blackbirds, mountain chickadees, Steller 's 
jays, American crows, and common ravens will probably 
increase at campgrounds in ponderosa pine forests, as they 
have elsewhere in the West (Foin et al. 1977; Marzluff et 
al. 1995). However, Aitchison (1977) noted a severe de- 
cline in Steller's jays after an Arizona campground was 
opened, primarily because many nests were destroyed by 
removal of trees and slash. Dark-eyed juncos, American 
robins, hermit thrushes, warblers, vireos, wrens, and deep 
forest species will decline as ground, shrub, and mid- 
canopy cover is removed and isolated (Aitchison 1977; 
Foin et al. 1977; Guth 1978; Blakesley and Reese 1988). 
Cavity nesters, bark drillers, and other birds that forage 
on downed woody debris will decline. Productivity of 
open-nesting birds will decline as nest predators and para- 
sites (brown-headed cowbirds) increase in response to 
food supplementation (Clevenger and Workman 1977; 
Rothstein 1994; Marzluff et al. 1995). 
Pack animals have the potential to disrupt ponderosa 
pine forest bird communities. Spilled feed, feces, and lit- 
ter attracts and supports brown-headed cowbirds that 
parasitize native songbirds reducing their productivity 
(Rothstein 1994). Establishment of pack stations or cor- 
rals in remote ponderosa pine locations could pave the 
way for these parasites into areas with minimal human 
disturbance. Warblers, vireos, and flycatchers are most 
susceptible to cowbird parasitism (Rothstein 1994). Al- 
though it is unlikely that parasitism alone would cause 
significant declines in such species, it could contribute to 
declines in conjunction with habitat destruction, nest pre- 
dation, and disruption of ecosystem functioning (Roth- 
stein 1994). 
Hiking, Nature Study, and Wildlife Photography - 
These Aonconsumptive recreational pursuits are usually 
thought inconsequential to wildlife. However, their recent 
surge in popularity (Boyle and Samson 1985; Raish et al. 
this volume) has prompted evaluation of their impacts 
(Boyle and Samson 1985; Riffell et al. 1996). These activi- 
ties can affect songbirds as humans intrude into their ter- 
ritories to observe nests or unique behavioral activities. 
Nature study and photography may be of special concern 
because they tend to repeatedly disturb rare and unusual 
species (Boyle and Samson 1985). 
Repeated intrusions in songbird territories during the 
breeding season can decrease singing (Gutzwiller et al. 
1994), increase or decrease nest defense (Knight and 
Temple 1986; Keller 1989), and increase predation 
(Gotmark 1992). These changes may reduce the produc- 
tivity of individuals and influence community composi- 
tion (Riffell et al. 1996). In fact, intrusion involving 8 to 37 
people/ha/day was correlated with declining songbird 
(warblers, wrens, thrushes) density in the Netherlands 
(van der Zande and Vos 1984; van der Zande et al. 1984). 
More dispersed intrusions (1 person for 1 to 2 hrs/ha/ 
week), even if repeated for up to 5 breeding seasons, did 
not cause widespread impacts to the birds living in mixed- 
conifer forests in Wyoming (Riffell et al. 1996). Such wide- 
spread recreation may influence songbirds as community 
diversity and density of common species declined in some 
years. Nearly all songbirds in Southwestern ponderosa 
pine forests were included in this study, but no affects on 
individual species were noted. Therefore, although com- 
mon species rLay be affected by disturbance in a given 
year, the effects of hiking, nature study, and photography 
are unlikely to be cumulative in ponderosa pine forests 
except where visitor densities are high such as in Grand 
Canyon National Park and large recreation areas. 
Resorts and Recreation Residences - The number of 
resorts, established camps, and recreational residences in 
Southwestern national forests has fluctuated and recently 
declined (Raish et al. this volume). However, the effects 
of the substantial number of resorts and residences that 
remain are similar to the impacts from urbanization, camp- 
ing, and hiking. The most important results of these de- 
velopments are habitat loss and fragmentation, supple- 
menting nest predators, habitat structure simplification, 
snag removal, and increased intrusion into surrounding 
forests by residents. Birds near resorts often have breed- 
ing disrupted (Lehtonen 1973; Vermeer 1973; Robertson 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Effects of Urbanization and Recreation on Songbirds 
and Flood 1980). Avian diversity decreases and density 
increases as common, widespread species dominate these 
areas (Robertson and Flood 1980). 
Winter Sports and Mechanized Off-road Travel - 
Snowmobiling and off-road vehicles, which are increas- 
ing in popularity across the United States (Boyle and 
Samson 1985), have great potential to destroy vegetation, 
alter habitat, and increase wildlife harassment (Berry 1980; 
Boyle and Samson 1985; Cole and Landres 1995). These 
forms of recreation are less common in ponderosa pine 
forests than in higher or lower elevation areas and do not 
appear to significantly affect songbirds in Southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests. 
More important to ponderosa pine forests is ski-area 
development in adjacent, higher elevations. There is an 
increased abundance of scavengers that prey on nests at 
such developments (Watson 1979). More importantly, ski- 
area development often increases urbanization in ponde- 
rosa pine towns. Flagstaff, Showlow, Pinetop, Ruidoso, 
and Taos are all expanding (Raish et al. this volume), partly 
because of increased recreation at nearby ski areas. 
Cumulative Effects of 
Urbanization and Recreation 
Table 1 qualitatively assesses the variety of the poten- 
tial effects of urbanization and recreation on songbirds in 
the ponderosa pine forest. This assessment summarizes 
the affects discussed in this chapter and are hypotheses rather 
than known influences; many potential affects are unknown 
and many may depend on context. 
The following assumptions were made based on stud- 
ies conducted elsewhere and species natural history: 1) 
disease negatively affects seed eaters and nectarivores that 
frequent urban feeders; 2) nest predation negatively in- 
fluences open nesters, especially those in urban areas; 3) 
competition with European starlings negatively affects 
urban cavity nesters; 4) habitat for species that nest in or- 
namental vegetation or man-made structures improves 
with urbanization, but habitat for natural cavity, canopy, 
shrub, and ground nesters is degraded by urbanization; 
5) urbanization provides increased food for species using 
feeders, lawns, and those able to scavenge refuse; 6) road 
construction favors scavengers and small seed eaters; 7) 
campgrounds are associated with reduced ground and 
shrub coverage, increased nest predation, and supplemen- 
tal food; 8) hiking, nature study, and photography have 
minor, negative affects on open-nesting species that are 
relatively intolerant of humans; and 9) resorts and recre- 
ation residences favor scavengers and birds able to ex- 
ploit lawns and feeders. 
Few species benefit from urbanization and recreation. 
Large jays, crows, and ravens, human commensals (purple 
martin, brown-headed cowbird, house sparrow, house 
wren, barn swallow, rock dove), and widespread gener- 
alists (European starling, Brewer's blackbird) will probably 
increase in ponderosa pine forests as human populations 
continue to increase. Several other species (hummingbirds, 
jays and nutcrackers, chickadees, nuthatches, American 
robin, grosbeaks, juncos, small finches, and chipping spar- 
ro&) that exploit some aspect of human activity (prima- 
rily food supplements) should remain stable with increas- 
ing human populations. The remaining species require 
habitat features that humans disrupt most severely. These 
species (flycatchers, swallows, brown creeper, wrens, blue- 
birds, Townsend's solitaire, hermit thrush, vireos, war- 
blers, tanagers, song sparrow, and red crossbill) will prob- 
ably decline in areas of high human use and perhaps 
throughout the ponderosa pine forest if human activities 
continue to increase. 
Research Needs 
Future research should investigate the potential effects 
of urbanization and outdoor recreation in ponderosa pine 
forests. None of the studies reviewed in this chapter di- 
rectly assessed urbanization and recreation in Southwest- 
ern ponderosa pine forests. Nearly every relationship 
hypothesized in table 1 should be tested with designed ex- 
periments. Studies of urbanization are especially important 
because affects on birds are significant and human popula- 
tions are expanding rapidly in ponderosa pine forests. In 
addition, even though many forms of recreation may have 
minor affects on birds, recreation is widespread and increas- 
ing in popularity throughout the ponderosa pine forest. 
Investigations should be rigorous, carefully designed 
experiments to establish causal relationships between 
human activity and songbird population viability 
(Gutzwiller 1995; Knight and Cole 1995b). Experiments 
should address the direct and indirect effects of humans 
on songbirds and identify short-term, behavioral and long- 
term affects on inclusive fitness. Demonstration of human 
impacts on avian fitness is crucial to understand how 
people affect bird populations (Van Horne 1983; Vickery 
et al. 1992). Experiments must be designed to consider 
natural factors, such as weather and food availability, and 
should test the interaction of natural factors with recre- 
ation and urbanization on bird populations. An adaptive 
management approach should be used where managers 
implement ideas in a controlled, experimental way and 
researchers test specific management hypotheses. 
Critical evaluation of human influence requires long- 
term monitoring of abundance, distribution, and fitness 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
97 

Chapter 5 
of uniquely-marked songbirds. Rather than focusing on a 
European starlings, and house wrens that appear to ben- 
single species, researchers should monitor all members 
efit from human activities, should be carefully monitored 
of the avian community simultaneously, perhaps conduct- 
because they can affect songbirds that may not decline 
ing detailed fitness measurements on representatives of 
from direct human actions. 
those species most likely to be affected by human activi- 
Some of the most important research questions concern- 
ties. Species, such as American crows, common ravens, 
ing urbanization impacts are: 1) How do bird communi- 
Table 1. Hypothesized changes in songbird abundance in response to urbanization and recreation in Southwestern ponderosa 
pine forests. Species groups are listed if all members are expected to respond in similar ways; otherwise individual species 
are listed. 
Species 
Recreation 
Urbanization 
Camp1 
Hikel 
Resort1 
Disease Predation Competition Habitat Food Roads Picnic 
StudylPhoto Residence 
- 
Western kingbird 
Other flycatchers 
Purple martina 
Barn swallow 
Other swallows 
American crow 
- 
Nuthatches 
- 
Brown creeper 
House wren 
Other wrens 
- 
Bluebirds 
Townsend's solitaire 
- 
Hermit thrush 
- 
American robin 
- 
Vireos 
- 
Ground nesting warblers 
- 
Shrub nesting warblers 
- 
Canopy nesting warblers 
- 
Tanagers 
- 
Grosbeaks 
- 
- 
Song sparrow 
- 
House sparrow 
- 
- 
Chipping sparrow 
- 
Juncos 
- 
Blackbirds/cowbirds 
- - 
European starling 
- 
Red crossbill 
- 
Other finches 
- 
- 
a Natural purple martin nesting sites are reduced with snag removal, but this may be overcompensated for by martin houses placed near urban residences. 
+Affects that may moderately increase a species' abundance or productivity. 
++ Affects that may strongly increase a species' abundance or productivity. 
-Affects that may moderately decrease a species' abundance or productivity. 
-Affects that may strongly decrease a species' abundance or productivity. 
Blank, no affect suspected. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Effects of Urbanization and Recreation on Songbirds 
ties change with increasing urbanization? Standardized 
surveys should be expanded to include urban areas and 
similar rural controls so that changes through time can be 
assessed. Specific comparisons of bird abundance and 
productivity in towns of various size and through time 
would help answer this question. 2) How does a particu- 
lar type and level of urban development affect birds? Com- 
parisons of bird abundance and productivity among dif- 
ferent intensities of urbanization have not been done in 
ponderosa pine forests. In particular, the effects of dis- 
persed housing in the forest, which is growing rapidly, 
should be studied. 3) What types of urban developments 
are most compatible with native songbirds? Research 
about the benefits of landscaping with native plants, us- 
ing alternative energy sources, and educating home- 
owners would help identify long-term adjustments that 
government could encourage to minimize human impacts 
on the ponderosa pine avifauna. 4) Do nest predators dis- 
proportionately decrease productivity in urban areas rela- 
tive to rural areas? If so, how does this affect various types 
of birds (open nesters versus cavity nesters, ground ver- 
sus canopy nesters, social versus solitary species, etc.)? 5) 
How do birds respond to the urban/rural interface? How 
far from urban centers do the effects of urbanization ex- 
tend into the surrounding forest? How important is the 
impact from house cats and other subsidized predators at 
varying distances from urban sources? Detailed studies 
of radio tagged predators are needed. 
Some of the more important research questions about 
recreation impacts are: 1) What motivates people to pur- 
sue various recreational activities? This information will 
better quantify the behavior of people in the forest and 
improve estimation of the amount and projected increase 
in the activity. 2) How do various forms of recreation syn- 
ergistically affect songbirds? Many forms of recreation 
occur at the same place and at the same or different times, 
yet we know nothing about how they combine to influ- 
ence songbirds (Gutzwiller 1995). Comparisons of bird 
abundance and productivity across areas with increasing 
multiple recreation use could address this question. 3) 
What influence does Grand Canyon National Park, which 
attracts millions of visitors for a variety of recreational 
pursuits, have on songbirds? This question could be ad- 
dressed in a broad study comparing bird abundance and 
productivity in and around recreation areas of various size 
in ponderosa pine forests. 4) How long should camps be 
closed to reduce subsidized predator populations? How 
much recovery is needed in camps before sensitive ground 
foragers or cavity nesters return? Assuming that camp- 
ing affects songbirds as hypothesized, research should be 
conducted to determine how various degrees of camp clo- 
sure would reduce affects. 5) How can campsites be made 
more beneficial to forest birds and less attractive to hu- 
man commensals? Research is needed to determine how 
to effectively reduce food supplementation at camp- 
grounds and pack stations, and how to determine if ac- 
tions, such as increasing habitat diversity or erecting nest 
boxes, would benefit shrub, canopy, and cavity nesters. 
Acknowledgments 
Jddy Burding (Flagstaff Chamber of Commerce), Joyce 
Wachter (U. S. Census Bureau), Colleen Marzluff (S.E.I.), 
and A1 Sanford (New Mexico Institute of Mining and Tech- 
nology) provided information on economic growth and 
population size in Southwestern cities. Recreation use and 
occupancy data were provided by Britta Morner, Tah Yang, 
Bill Larsen, Lorie Long, and Buddy Stewart of the USDA 
Forest Service. Bird count data were provided by Brett 
Hoover and Keith Pardieck of the National Biological Ser- 
vice. Bill Haneberg provided information on ground wa- 
ter subsidence in New Mexico. Kevin Gutzwiller and Joe 
Ganey helped locate references. Russ Balda supplemented 
the bird count data from Flagstaff. Kevin Gutzwiller, Sallie 
Hejl, and Russ Balda provided manuscript comments. 
Literature Cited 
Aitchison, S.W. 1977. Some effects of a campground on 
breeding birds in Arizona. Pages 175-182 in R.R. 
Johnson and D.A. Jones, editors. Importance, preserva- 
tion and management of riparian habitat: a symposium. 
USDA Forest Service, General Technical Report RM-43, 
Fort Collins, CO. USA. 
Anderson, K. 1995. Flagstaff's business growth is posi- 
tive for 1995. Business Trends 1 4 .  
Anderson, S.H. 1995. Recreational disturbance and wild- 
life populations. Pages 157-168 in R.L. Knight and K.J. 
Gutzwiller, editors. Wildlife and recreationists: coexist- 
ence through management and research. Island Press, 
Washington, DC. USA. 
Andren, H. 1992. Corvid density and nest predation in 
relation to forest fragmentation: a landscape perspec- 
tive. Ecology 73:794-804. 
Balda, R. P. and G. C. Bateman. 1972. The breeding biol- 
ogy of the pinon jay. Living Bird 11:542. 
Beissinger, S.R., and D.R. Osborne. 1982. Effects of urban- 
ization on avian community organization. Condor 
84: 75-83. 
Berry, K.H. 1980. A review of the effects of off-road ve- 
hicles on birds and other vertebrates. Pages 451-467 in 
R.M. DeGraff, editor. Management of western forests 
and grasslands for nongame birds. US. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Ogden, UT. USA. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
99 

Chapter 5 
Blair, R.B. 1996. Land use and avian species diversity along 
an urban gradient. Ecological Applications 6:506-519. 
Blakesley, J.A., and K.P. Reese. 1988. Avian use of camp- 
ground and noncampground sites in riparian zones. 
Journal of Wildlife Management 52:399402. 
Boarman, W.I. 1993. When a native predator becomes a pest: 
a case study. Pages 186-201 in S.K. Majumdar, E.W. Miller, 
D.E. Miller, J.R. Pratt, R.F. Schrnalz, and E.K. Brown, edi- 
tors. Conservation and Resource Management. The Penn- 
sylvania Academy of Science, Easton, PA. USA. 
Bohninggaese, K., M.L. Taper, and J.H. Brown. 1993. Are 
declines in North American insectivorous songbirds due 
to causes on the breeding range. Conservation Biology 
7:76-86. 
Boyle, S.A., and F.B. Samson. 1985. Effects of non- 
consumptive recreation on wildlife: a review. Wildlife 
Society Bulletin 13:llO-116. 
Brawn, J.D., and R.P. Balda. 1988. Population biology of 
cavity nesters in northern Arizona: do nest sites limit 
breeding densities? Condor 90:61-71. 
Churcher, P.B., and J.H. Lawton. 1987. Predation by do- 
mestic cats in a English village. Journal of Zoology 
212:439-455. 
Clevenger, G.A., and G.W. Workman. 1977. The effects of 
campgrounds on small mammals in Canyonlands and 
Arches National Parks, Utah. Transactions of the North 
American Wildlife and Natural Resources Conference 
42:473484. 
Cole, D.N., and P.B. Landres. 1995. Indirect effects of rec- 
reation on wildlife. Pages 183-202 in R. L. Knight and 
K.J. Gutzwiller, editors. Wildlife and recreationists: co- 
existence through management and research. Island 
Press, Washington, DC. USA. 
Covington, W.W., and M.M. Moore. 1994. Post settlement 
changes in natural fire regimes and forest structure: eco- 
logical restoration of old-growth ponderosa pine for- 
ests. Journal of Sustainable Forestry 2:153-181. 
Croonquist, M.J., and R.P. Brooks. 1991. Use of avian and 
mammalian guilds as indicators of cumulative impacts 
in riparian-wetland areas. Environmental Management 
15:701-714. 
DeGraaf, R.M., and J.M. Wentworth. 1981. Urban bird 
communities and habitats in New England. Transactions 
of the North American Wildlife Conference 46:396413. 
Edminster, C.B,. and W.K Olsen. 1996. Thinning as a tool 
in restoring and maintaining diverse structure in stands 
of Southwestern ponderosa pine. Pages 62-68 in W. W. 
Covington and P. K. Wagner, technical coordinators. 
Conference on adaptive ecosystem restoration and man- 
agement: restoration of Cordilleran conifer landscapes 
of North America. RM-GTR-278. U. S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Fort Collins, CO. USA. 
Emlen, J.T. 1974. An urban bird community in Tucson, 
Arizona: derivation, structure, regulation. Condor 
76:184-197. 
Feare, C. 1984. The starling. Oxford University Press, Ox- 
ford, England. UK. 
Flather, C.H., and H.K. Cordel. 1995. Outdoor recreation: 
historical and anticipated trends. Pages 3-16 in R. L. 
Knight and K. J. Gutzwiller, editors. Wildlife and 
recreationists: coexistence through management and 
research. Island Press, Washington, DC. USA. 
Foin, T.C., E.O. Garton, C.W. Bowen, J.M. Everingham, 
R.O. Schultz, and B.J. Holton. 1977. Quantitative stud- 
ies of visitor impacts on environments of Yosemite Na- 
tional Park, California, and their implications for park 
management policy. Journal of Environmental Manage- 
ment 5: 1-22. 
Garner, K.M. 1978. Management of blackbird and starling 
winter roost problems in Kentucky and Tennessee. 
Pages 54-59 in W.E. Howard and R.E. Marsh, editors. 
Proceedings Eighth Vertebrate Pest Conference. Univer- 
sity of California, Davis, CA. USA. 
Gotmark, F. 1992. The effects of investigator disturbance 
on nesting birds. Pages 63-104 in D. M. Power, editor. 
Current Ornithology. Plenum Press, New York, NY. 
USA. 
Guth, R.W. 1978. Forest and campground bird communi- 
ties of Peninsula State Park, Wisconsin. Passenger Pi- 
geon 40:489493. 
Gutzwiller, K.J. 1995. Recreational disturbance and wild- 
life communities. Pages 169-181 in R. L. Knight and K. 
J. Gutzwiller, editors. Wildlife and recreationists: coex- 
istence through management and research. Island Press, 
Washington, DC. USA. 
Gutzwiller, K.J., R.T. Wiedenmann, K.L. Clements, and 
S.H. Anderson. 1994. Effects of human intrusion on song 
occurrence and singing consistency in subalpine birds. 
Auk 111:28-37. 
Haneberg, W. C., and R.L. Friesen. 1995. Tilts, strains, and 
ground-water levels near an earth fissure in the Mimbres 
Basin, New Mexico. Geological Society of America Bul- 
letin 107:316-326. 
Horiuchi, S. 1992. Stagnation in the decline of the world 
population growth rate during the 1980s. Science 
257:761-765. 
Jehl Jr., J.R., and N.K. Johnson., editors. 1994. A century of 
avifaunal change in western North America. Cooper 
Ornithological Society, Lawrence, KS. USA. 
Jim, C.Y. 1989. Visitor management in recreation areas. 
Environmental Conservation 16:19-32,40. 
Johnston, R.F., and K.L. Garrett. 1994. Population trends 
of introduced birds in western North America. Studies 
in Avian Biology 15:221-231. 
Kamada, M., and N. Nakagoshi. 1993. Pine Forest Struc- 
ture in a Human-Dominated Landscape System in Ko- 
rea. Ecological Research 8:3546. 
Keller, V. 1989. Variations in the response of Great Crested 
Grebes Podiceps cristatus to human disturbance-a sign 
of adaptation? Biological Conservation 34:3145. 
100 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Effects of Urbanization and Recreation on Songbirds 
Knight, R.L., and D.N. Cole. 1995a. Factors that influence 
wildlife responses to recreationists. Pages 71-79 in R.L. 
Knight and K.J. Gutzwiller, editors. Wildlife and 
recreationists: coexistence through management and 
research. Island Press, Washington, DC, USA. 
. 1995b. Wildlife responses to recreationists. 
Pages 51-69 in R. L. Knight and K. J. Gutzwiller, edi- 
tors. Wildlife and recreationists: coexistence through 
management and research. Island Press, Washington, 
DC. USA. 
Knight, R.L., and R.E. Fitzner. 1985. Human disturbance 
and nest site placement in Black-billed Magpies. Jour- 
nal of Field Ornithology 56:153-157. 
Knight, R.L., and S.A. Temple. 1986. Why does intensity 
of avian nest defense increase during the nesting cycle? 
Auk 103:318-327. 
Knight, R.L., D.J. Grout, and S.A. Temple. 1987. Nest de- 
fense behavior of the American crow in urban and ru- 
ral areas. Condor 89:175-177. 
Knight, R.L., D.E. Andersen, M. J. Bechard, and N.V. Marr. 
1989. Geographic variation in nest-defence behaviour 
of the Red-tailed Hawk Buteo jarnaicensis. Ibis 131:22- 
26. 
Knight, R.L., D.P. Anderson, and N.V. Marr. 1991. Re- 
sponses of an avian scavenging guild to anglers. Bio- 
logical Conservation 56:195-205. 
Knight, R.L., H.A.L. Knight, and R.J. Camp. 1995. Com- 
mon Ravens and number and type of linear rights-of- 
way. Biological Conservation 74:65-67. 
Lehtonen, L. 1970. Zur Biologie des Prachttauchers. Gavia 
a. arctica (L.). Annals Zoologica Fennici 7:25-60. 
Mangel, M., L.M. Talbot, G.K. Meffe, M.T. Agardy, D.L. 
Alverson, J. Barlow, D.B. Botkin, G. Budowski, T. Clark, 
J. Cooke, R.H. Crozier, P.K. Dayton, D.L. Elder, C.W. 
Fowler, S. Funtowicz, J. Giske, R.J. Hofman, S.J. Holt, 
S.R. Kellert, L.A. Kimball, D. Ludwig, K. Magnusson, 
B.S.I.I.I. Malayang, C. Mann, E.A. Norse, S.P. North- 
ridge, W.F. Perrin, C. Perrings, R.M. Peterman, G.B. 
Rabb, H.A. Regier, J.E.I.I.I. Reynolds, K. Sherman, M.P. 
Sissenwine, T.D. Smith, A. Starfield, R.J. Taylor, M.F. 
Tillman, C. Toft, J.R.J. Twiss, J. Wilen, and T.P. Young. 
1996. Principles for the conservation of wild living re- 
sources. Ecological Applications 6:338-362. 
Marion, J.L., and D.N. Cole. 1996. Spatial and temporal 
variation in soil and vegetation impacts on campsites. 
Ecological Applications 6:520-530. 
Martin, T.E. 1993a. Nest predation among vegetation lay- 
ers and habitat types: revising the dogmas. American 
Naturalist 1415397-913. 
1993b. Nest predation and nest sites. BioScience 
43:523-532. 
Mariluff, J.M. 1988. Do pinyon jays alter nest placement 
based on prior experience? Animal Behaviour 36:l-10. 
Marzluff, J.M., and R.P. Balda. 1992. The Pinyon Jay. T & 
A D Poyser, London, England.UK. 
Marzluff, J.M., R.B. Boone, and G.W. Cox. 1994. Histori- 
cal changes in populations and perceptions of native 
pest bird species in the west. Studies in Avian Biology 
15:202-220. 
Marzluff, J.M., J.M. Luginbuhl, M.G. Raphael, D.M. Evans, 
D.E. Varland, L.S. Young, S.P. Horton, and S.P. Courtney. 
1995. The influence of stand structure, proximity to 
human activity, and forest fragmentation on the risk of 
predation to nests of Marbled Murrelets on the Olym- 
$ic Peninsula. Annual Report, Sustainable Ecosystems 
Institute, Meridian, ID. USA. 
Mills, G.S., J.B.J. Dunning, and J.M. Bates. 1989. Effects of 
urbanization on breeding bird community structure in 
Southwestern desert habitats. Condor 91:416428. 
Morgan, P. 1994. Dynamics of Ponderosa and Jeffrey pine 
forests. Pages 47-73 in G. D. Hayward and J. Verner, 
editors. Flamulated, boreal, and great gray owls in the 
United States: a technical conservation assessment. U. 
S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Fort 
Collins, CO. USA. 
Pitelka, F.A. 1942. High population of breeding birds 
within an artificial habitat. Condor 44:172-174. 
Pulliam, H.R. 1988. Sources, sinks, and population regu- 
lation. American Naturalist 132:652-661. 
Quinn, T. 1992. Distribution, movements, and diets of coy- 
otes in urban areas of western Washington. Ph.D. Dis- 
sertation. University of Washington, Seattle. USA. 
Riffell, S.K., K.J. Gutzwiller, and S.H. Anderson. 1996. Does 
repeated human intrusion cause cumulative declines in 
avian richness and abundance? Ecological Applications 
6:492-505. 
Robbins, C.S., D. Bystrak, and P.H. Geissler. 1986. The 
breeding bird survey: its first fifteen years, 1965-1979. 
United States Department of the Interior, Washington, 
DC. USA. 
Robertson, R.J., and N.J. Flood. 1980. Effects of recreational 
use of shorelines on breeding bird populations. Cana- 
dian Field-Naturalist 94:131-138. 
Rosenberg, K.V., S.B. Terrill, and G.H. Rosenberg. 1987. 
Value of suburban habitats to desert riparian birds. 
Wilson Bulletin 99:642-654. 
Rothstein, S.I. 1994. The cowbird's invasion of the far west: 
history, causes, and consequences experienced by host 
species. Studies in Avian Biology 15:301-315. 
Skagen, S.K., R.L. Knight, and G.H. Orians. 1991. Human 
disturbance of an avian scavenging guild. Ecological 
Applications 1:215-225. 
Snyder, H.A., and N.F.R. Snyder. 1974. Increased mortal- 
ity of Cooper's Hawks accustomed to man. Condor 
76:215-216. 
Thorn, C. R., D.P. McAda, and J. M. Kernodle. 1993. Geo- 
hydrologic framework and hydrologic conditions in the 
Albuquerque Basin, central New Mexico. U. S. Geologi- 
cal Survey Water Resources Investigations Report 93- 
4149.106~~. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 5 
Tomback, D.F., and C.L. Taylor. 1986. Tourist impact on 
Clark's Nutcracker foraging activities in Rocky Moun- 
tain National Park. Pages 158-172 in F. J. Singer, ed. Pro- 
ceedings of the Fourth Triennial Conference on Research 
in National Parks and Equivalent Reserves. Colorado 
State University, Fort Collins, CO. USA. 
van der Zande, A.N., and P. Vos. 1984. Impact of a semi- 
experimental increase in recreation intensity on the den- 
sities of birds in groves and hedges on a lake shore in 
The Netherlands. Biological Conservation 30:237-259. 
van der Zande, A.N., J.C. Berkhuizen, H.C. van Latesteijn, 
W.J. ter Keurs, and A.J. Poppelaars. 1984. Impact of out- 
door recreation on the density of a number of breeding 
bird species in woods adjacent to urban residential ar- 
eas. Biological Conservation 30:l-39. 
Van Horne, B. 1983. Density as a misleading indicator of 
habitat quality. Journal of Wildlife Management 47: 
893-901. 
Vermeer, K. 1973. Some aspects of the nesting requirements 
of common loons in Alberta. Wilson Bulletin 85: 
429435. 
Vickery, P.D., M.L. Hunter, and J.V. Wells. 1992. Is Density 
an indicator of breeding success. Auk 109: 706-710. 
Watson, A. 1979. Bird and mammal numbers in relation 
to h u m h  impact at ski lifts on Scottish hills. Journal of 
Applied Ecology 16:753-764. 
Yarnell, K. 1993. An analysis of Christmas bird counts from 
1967 to 1991: Flagstaff Arizona transect. M. Sc. Thesis. 
Northern Arizona University. Flagstaff, AZ. USA. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 6 
Effects and Interactions of Fire, Logging, and Grazing 
Deborah M. Finch, Joseph L. Ganey, Wang Yong, Rebecca T. Kimball, and Rex Sallabanks 
Introduction 
Logging and livestock grazing are widespread manage- 
ment practices in Southwestern ponderosa pine forests 
that may act either independently or synergistically with 
fire management to influence habitat availability and use, 
reproductive success, and songbird population levels. Fire, 
historically an important natural process in Southwest- 
ern ponderosa pine forests, had far-reaching affects on 
forest structure and composition (Moir et al. this volume). 
Because of its influence on forest habitats, and because 
birds respond strongly to habitat structure and composi- 
tion (MacArthur and MacArthur 1961; Rotenberry 1985), 
historic fires had a powerful impact on forest bird 
communities. 
Contemporary fire suppression and prescribed burn- 
ing have affected or could affect forest birds and their 
habitat in Southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Fire sup- 
pression has disrupted natural fire regimes by removing 
its influence in structuring Southwestern forests (Moir et 
al. this volume). This directly affects structures, stages, 
densities, and landscape patterns of ponderosa pine for- 
ests and influences composition and diversity of bird com- 
munities at site and landscape levels. Prescribed fire also 
directly alters bird habitat and may be used to create or 
open habitats for some bird species while eliminating or 
reducing habitats needed by others. 
While logging may simulate some aspects of habitat 
alteration caused by natural fire (killing live trees and thin- 
ning tree density), current logging practices in ponderosa 
pine typically remove larger trees rather than saplings and 
poles or dead and dying trees (salvage logging). Fire does 
not typically select for tree size and health. Fire-killed trees 
are frequently left standing after a natural fire, providing 
nesting and foraging habitat for many bird species, 
whereas salvage logging deliberately culls trees killed by 
fire, disease, and insect infestation. 
While the interactions between fire and logging com- 
plicate our understanding of forested ecosystems and for- 
est use by birds, they are easier to interpret without the 
added effects of grazing. Unfortunately, the relationship 
between livestock grazing and bird habitat use in conifer- 
ous forests has been neglected. Consequently, our inter- 
pretation of how fire, logging, and their interactions struc- 
ture forests is uncertain considering the pervasive, subtle 
influence that livestock management has in altering for- 
est habitats. If livestock grazing causes an increased den- 
sity of young ponderosa pine trees, as some studies show 
(Cooper 1960; Madany and West 1983), then prescribed 
fire and tree thinning may be important management tools 
to restore habitats for birds that use open forests with large, 
old trees or age-structure diversity. 
In this chapter, we summarize current knowledge about 
the effects of fire, logging, and grazing on coniferous for- 
est birds and their habitats. We critically review the re- 
sults of studies evaluating how these individual factors 
influence bird numbers, species diversity, nesting success, 
and habitat use in ponderosa pine forests. Documented 
and potential interactions among fire, fire exclusion, log- 
ging, livestock grazing, and range management are dis- 
cussed in relation to habitat structure, succession, and 
avian use. Finally, we outline some areas where further 
research is needed to better understand the effects of fire, 
logging, grazing, and their interactions on birds and their 
habitats in Southwestern ponderosa pine forests. 
Fire 
Effects of Fire on Forest Birds 
Fire can affect forest birds directly or indirectly, posi- 
tively or negatively. A number of factors determine how 
fire influences particular bird species including: 1) fire ex- 
tent and intensity; 2) temporal scale at which effects are 
evaluated; 3) the particular life history of the species in- 
volved; and 4) whether salvage logging follows the fire. 
Fire can affect birds directly by causing mortality or re- 
duced reproduction (Patton and Gordon 1995; Rotenberry 
et al. 1995). Mortality due to fire is generally considered 
minor for adult birds (Rotenberry et al. 1995). However, 
mortality of nestlings or fledglings or reduced reproduc- 
tion due to reductions in food supply is possible if fires 
occur during the breeding season (Patton and Gordon 
1995). 
Fires typically affect birds indirectly through habitat 
modification, changes in food supply, or changes in abun- 
dance of competitors and/or predators (Rotenberry et al. 
1995). The effects of fire on habitat structure, food re- 
sources, and floristic composition may be especially im- 
portant because many birds respond strongly to these 
habitat features (MacArthur and MacArthur 1961; Koplin 
1969; Lovejoy 1974; Tomoff 1974; Power 1975; Willson 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 6 
1974; James and Wamer 1982; Rotenberry 1985; Terrill 
1990). 
Many authors have reviewed the effects of fire on for- 
est birds (Bendell 1974; Hutto et al. 1992; Dobkin 1994; 
Hejl 1994; James and Hess 1994; Hejl et al. 1995; Patton 
and Gordon 1995; Rotenberry et al. 1995; Ganey et al. 1996). 
Several recent reviewers (Hutto et al. 1992; Dobkin 1994; 
Hejl 1994; Ganey et al. 1996) have concluded that the lit- 
erature on fire and birds suffers from serious methodologi- 
cal problems. Most studies on the effects of fire on birds 
were opportunistic rather than planned, were restricted 
in spatial and temporal scale, and lacked sufficient repli- 
cation to show general patterns (Dobkin 1994;, Hejl1994; 
Hutto 1995). Many studies comparing bird communities 
between burned and unburned areas relied on composite 
statistics, such as total bird abundance or species richness, 
rather than examining the response patterns of individual 
species. These composite measures may hide rather than 
reveal patterns where individual species respond in an 
opposite manner (Mannan et al. 1984; Rotenberry 1985; 
Hejl et al. 1995; Hutto 1995). Most studies focused on the 
effects of fire on breeding bird communities, ignoring 
nonbreeding bird communities (but see Blake 1982). Fi- 
nally, few studies examined demographic parameters 
(Hejl 1994). Without information on parameters, such as 
nest success and survival rates of birds occupying burned 
areas, we cannot assess how well such areas provide for 
the needs of the species occurring there. These problems 
limit our ability to draw inferences and, in some studies, 
the inferences drawn are unsupported by the data. De- 
spite these problems, some generalizations are possible. 
First, the effect of fire on birds and their habitat varies 
Third, life history characteristics also influence the re- 
sponse of particular bird species to fire. Cavity-nesting 
birds, timber-drilling birds, granivores, and some flycatch- 
ers generally respond positively to burns in the short term 
because of increased nesting substrates and/or food sup- 
plies (Blackford 1955; Stoddard 1963; Koplin 1969; Bock 
and Lynch 1970; Kilgore 1971; Lowe et al. 1978; Overturf 
1979; Taylor and Barmore 1980; Granholm 1982; Harris 
1982; Raphael et al. 1987; Hejl1994; Hejl et al. 1995; Hutto 
1995; Sallabanks 1995; Caton 1996; Hitchcox 1996). Some 
species may even require intense burns for long-term 
population maintenance (black-backed woodpecker) 
(Hutto 1995). In contrast, foliage-gleaning insectivores 
generally respond negatively to fire due to decreased for- 
aging substrate (Bock and Lynch 1970; Roppe and Hein 
1978; Overturf 1979; Blake 1982; Granholm 1982; 
Sallabanks 1995). Response patterns may vary even within 
guilds (Skinner 1989; Hutto 1995; Mannan et al. 1984; 
Rotenberry 1985). For this reason, summary statistics, such 
as species diversity or total abundance, which are com- 
monly reported, should be used to compare pre- and post- 
fire bird communities. Diversity and abundance may be 
similar between these communities, but species composi- 
tion is often strikingly different (Hutto 1995; Sallabanks 
1995). 
Fourth, the response of birds or bird communities to 
fire may also vary depending on whether salvage logging 
follows the fire. As mentioned, snags created by fire can 
provide nest and foraging sites. Removal of some or all of 
these snags eliminates or reduces the benefits they pro- 
vide (Moeur and Guthrie 1984; Hutto 1995; Hitchcox 1996). 
with the extent and intensity of the fire. Large fires gener- 
ally affect more habitat and therefore more birds than do 
Studies on the Effects of Fire on Ponderosa 
small fires, and hot fires alter forest structure more than 
Pine Birds 
cool fires. A stand-replacing fire may result in many or 
most of the species present before the fire being replaced 
by a new species (Hutto 1995). In contrast, cool under- 
story burns may have little affect on species composition 
(Horton and Mannan 1988). How individual species re- 
spond to fire may depend on the size of the fire. 
Second, fire effects also vary across temporal scales. 
Intense burns initially produce numerous snags for cav- 
ity-nesting birds (Hejl et al. 1995; Hutto 1995; Caton 1996; 
Hitchcox 1996) and abundant food resources for timber- 
drilling species such as woodpeckers (Koplin 1969; Wauer 
and Johnson 1984; Hutto 1995). However, habitat suitabil- 
ity for woodpeckers will decline over time as these snags 
fall and food resources decrease (Koplin 1969; Bock et al. 
1978; Raphael and Morrison 1987; Raphael et al. 1987; 
Johnson and Wauer 1996). Although large, intense burns 
greatly alter bird habitat in the short-term, they may be 
necessary for long-term maintenance of natural forest suc- 
cession patterns of some forest types (Hejl et al. 1995; Hutto 
1995) or for habitat diversity in others. 
Less is known about the effects of fire on birds in pon- 
derosa pine forests than about the effects of fire on forest 
birds in general. We located only 7 studies about the ef- 
fects of fire on birds in ponderosa pine forests, and only 5 
of these were conducted in Southwestern ponderosa pine 
forests. An additional 2 studies were conducted in pine- 
oak forests in southeastern Arizona. Because these forests 
contain ponderosa pine, they have been included; how- 
ever, their applicability to pure Southwestern ponderosa 
pine forests is unknown. 
Most studies about the effect of fire on birds in ponde- 
rosa pine forest contained methodological problems (table 
1). In addition, some studies (Bock and Bock 1983; Horton 
and Mannan 1988) focused on prescribed fire while oth- 
ers (Lowe et al. 1978; Overturf 1979; Blake 1982;Aulenbach 
and OrShea-Stone 1983; Wauer and Johnson 1984; Johnson 
and Wauer 1996) focused on wildfires. This makes it diffi- 
cult to compare these studies because different types of 
fires should have different affects on vegetation and on 
birds. The situation is further complicated because some 
1 04 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Effects and Interactions of Fire, Logging, and Grazing 
Table 1. Descriptive characteristics of studies of the effects of fire on birds in ponderosa pine and Southwestern pine-oak 
forests. 
Reference 
Forest 
tY Pea 
Locationb 
Number 
Fire 
Fire 
of plotsC 
typed 
sizee 
Limitationsf 
Lowe et al. 
(1 978) 
Overturf 
(1 979) 
Blake 
(1 982) 
Aulenbach and 
O'Shea-Stone 
(1 983) 
Bock and 
Bock (1 983) 
Horton and 
Mannan (1 988) 
Johnsonand 
Wauer (1 996); 
Johnson (1 984) 
ecdotal; no replication; 
>graphic effect possibly c 
h fire effects 
M-L 
No replication; some or 
all sites logged; sample reas crossed 
burn boundaries 
No replication; all burned 
y confused with logging effects 
, few observations for most 
4B,4C 
P 
S, M 
Not in the Southwest; Bock 
(2) 
data averaged across woodland and 
nnah habitats 
250% PP; data averaged Wauer and 
across forest types within transects 
a Forest types: PO = pine-oak; PP = ponderosa pine; M = mixture (mixed-conifer, ponderosa pinelmixed-conifer, ponderosa pine, ponderosa pinelpinyon-juniper, and 
pinyon-juniper). 
Location: SE = southeast; N = northern; C = central; AZ = Arizona; NM = New Mexico; CO = Colorado; SD = South Dakota. 
Plots: 0 = burned; C = unburned control. Number of separate burns studied shown in parentheses. 
Fire type: W = wildfire; P = prescribed fire. 
Fire size (after Heinselman 1981): S = small (<40 ha); M = medium (41-405 ha); L= large (406-4050 ha); VL = very large (> 4050 ha). 
Aspects of study design that may limit inferences drawn about the effects of fire on birds in Southwestern ponderosa pine forest. 
studies focused on small and others on large fires, and 
because several studies examined birds in areas that were 
salvage-logged following fire, confounding logging effects 
with fire effects. Methods differed between studies, and 
studies were conducted at varying times following fires. 
All of the above problems limit our ability to draw in- 
ferences from these studies. Careful examination of study 
designs, sampling methods, and results also suggests that 
some of the inferences drawn by the authors are unsup- 
ported. We review these studies below in chronological 
order and briefly discuss methods, important results, and 
limitations of those results. 
Marshall (1963) noted parallel variation in fire regime, 
habitat conditions, and bird communities between the 
mountains of southern Arizona and northern Mexico 
(Sonora and Chihuahua). Although his observations re- 
lated to Madrean pine-oak forests dominated by Chihua- 
hua and Apache pines, the natural fire regime was simi- 
lar to that in ponderosa pine (Ful6 and Covington 1995). 
Marshall's observations may be relevant to Southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests. 
Wildfires were suppressed as quickly as possible in Ari- 
zona, but most were allowed to bum in Mexico (Marshall 
1963). Consequently, forests and woodlands in Arizona were 
denser than similar types in Mexico. Several bird species 
common to brush or dense forest were more abundant in 
Arizona than in Mexico including the ash-throated flycatcher, 
blue-gray gnatcatcher, black-throated gray warbler, Scott's 
oriole, and spotted towhee. In contrast, several species pre- 
ferring open forest conditions were either more abundant in 
Mexico or occurred at higher elevations. Marshall (1963) at- 
tributed this pattern to the existence of open forest condi- 
tions at higher elevations in Mexico. Examples of these spe- 
cies included the violet-green swallow, Cassin's kingbird, 
curve-billed thrasher, canyon towhee, purple martin, chip- 
ping sparrow, and both eastern and western bluebirds. Al- 
though these observations are interesting, no quantitative 
data were presented on differences in bird communities 
among areas. Further, we cannot rule out the possibility that 
the observed variation in bird communities was related to 
geographic or climatic variation or to other unknown fac- 
tors rather than only to differences in fire policy. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 6 
Lowe et al. (1978) sampled birds in 1 year on 4 sites in 
northern Arizona ponderosa pine forests that had under- 
gone stand-replacing fires at various times, and also on 
one unburned plot. Their sampling occurred either 1,3,7, 
or 20 years post-fire, depending on the particular site. They 
reported dramatic increases in populations of ground-for- 
aging birds immediately after the fires, followed by a 
gradual decline as canopy cover increased. Timber-drill- 
ing birds also increased in burned areas, apparently in 
response to increased numbers of wood-boring insects. 
Timber-gleaning or bark-foraging birds decreased follow- 
ing fire, with populations remaining depressed for up to 
20 years. Tree-foliage-searching birds increased immedi- 
ately after fire, then declined dramatically over time. Fly- 
catcher populations peaked approximately 7 years after 
fire. 
Lowe et al. (1978) assumed that the observed variation 
in bird communities across sites was due to the length 
time after fire, rather than to site differences. This assump- 
tion may be unjustified (see Hejl and Woods 1991) and is 
impossible to test because different post-fire periods were 
not replicated. Also, at least some and probably all of the 
burned sites were salvage logged, making it difficult to 
distinguish fire effects from logging effects. Finally, areas 
on which birds were sampled crossed the boundaries be- 
tween burned and unburned areas. 
Overturf (1979) compared breeding bird communities 
on an unburned site with those on 3 sites burned by wild- 
fire and salvage-logged on the Coconino National Forest, 
northern Arizona. One of the 3 burns studied was also 
studied by Lowe et al. (1978). Species composition varied 
between burned and unburned sites. Bird communities 
on burned sites were dominated by ground-foraging birds 
(chipping sparrow, lark sparrow, dark-eyed junco, green- 
tailed towhee, western bluebird, northern flicker, and 
house wren) (Overturf 1979). Some birds using the shrub- 
sapling and canopy layers were lost from the burned sites 
(Grace's warbler, mountain chickadee, solitary vireo, 
Steller's jay, pygmy nuthatch, pine siskin, and mourning 
dove) (Overturf 1979). Large snags on burned areas were 
used for nesting by numerous woodpeckers, nuthatches, 
bluebirds, and house wrens. Woodpeckers, especially 
hairy and three-toed woodpeckers, foraged on large and 
small snags. Although the unburned site contained the 
greatest richness and abundance of birds, the 4 sites to- 
gether housed more species than any single site. Overturf 
(1979) concluded that, although avian diversity might be 
reduced on an individual burn, the patchiness caused by 
burns across the landscape might enhance avian diver- 
sity. Similar to Lowe et al. (1978), Overturf (1979) studied 
birds on sites that were salvage-logged following fire, 
which makes it impossible to separate fire effects from 
logging effects. 
Blake (1982) studied the effects of a large wildfire and 
logging on nonbreeding bird communities on the Prescott 
National Forest, Arizona. He established 6 study plots, 3 
in the burned area and 3 in unburned areas. Each burned 
plot was paired with an unburned plot based on 3 levels 
of logging activity. Plots were either unlogged, selectively- 
logged, or clear cut. Some species of birds were observed 
only on either burned or unburned sites. More of these 
were restricted to unburned than to burned sites. Foliage- 
gleaning insectivores were more abundant on unburned 
sites than on burned sites, whereas aerial insectivores (fly- 
catchers hnd swallows) were more abundant on burned 
sites. Hairy woodpeckers were most abundant on burned 
sites, but bark-gleaning birds were most abundant on 
unburned sites. 
Blake (1982) concluded that habitat openness was a prf- 
mary determinant of nonbreeding bird community struc- 
ture, and that habitat alterations caused by fire and log- 
ging had similar affects on the nonbreeding avian 
community. This conclusion was largely based on simi- 
larities in summary statistics such as species diversity and 
total bird abundance. Examination of his table 2 suggests 
that there were differences in community composition 
between burned and unburned sites within logging treat- 
ments. Blake also lacked replication within cells of his 
experimental design and studied birds primarily in areas 
that were logged (4 of 6 plots). Although inferences from 
this study on the effects of fire on forest birds are limited, 
this study is one of the best of its kind in the Southwest. 
Aulenbach and O'Shea-Stone (1983) compared bird 
communities between a small (2 ha) area burned by wild- 
fire and a similar control site in ponderosa pine forest in 
Colorado. Pygmy and white-breasted nuthatches, downy 
woodpeckers, and mountain chickadees were observed 
only on the unburned site. Red-breasted nuthatches, chip- 
ping sparrows, yellow-rumped warblers, spotted towhees, 
and northern flickers were seen only on the burned site. 
The American robin, Steller's jay, and dark-eyed junco 
were seen on both plots but were most common on the 
burned plot. This study is particularly problematic. Study 
sites were not replicated and were separated by only 60 
m, making their treatment as independent sampling units 
questionable given the high mobility of many birds. The 
total number of individuals observed per site in all cen- 
suses was >2 for only 4 species (Aulenbach and O'Shea- 
Stone 1983), suggesting that sample sizes for individual 
species were inadequate to support conclusions on their 
response to fire. For these reasons, it is impossible to draw 
any meaningful inference from this study. 
Bock and Bock (1983) studied the response of breeding 
birds to cool-season prescribed burning in ponderosa pine 
forest in South Dakota. Populations of breeding birds were 
monitored for 2 years following the fires. Six species 
(mountain bluebird, solitary vireo, yellow-rumped war- 
bler, western tanager, dark-eyed junco, and chipping spar- 
row) were more abundant on the burned areas than on 
unburned areas in at least 1 year (Bock and Bock 1983). 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Effects and Interactions of Fire, Logging, and Grazing 
Table 2. Response patterns of selected birds to fire in ponderosa pine or Southwestern pine-oak forest. Only species with an 
apparent trend are listed. 
Species 
Locationa 
Seasonb 
ResponseC 
Referencesd 
Mourning dove 
More common on burned plots 
Hairy woodpecker 
More common on burned plots 
C AZ 
N B 
More common on burned plots 
Declined on burned plots 
Peclined on burned plots 
Declined on burned plots 
re common on burned plots 
mon on burned plots 
on burned plots 
n burned plots 
Pygmy nuthatch 
ore common on unburned plots 
White-breasted 
More common on unburned plots 
Nuthatch Red-breasted Nuthatch 
SD 
B 
Declined on burned plots in 1 of 2 yrs 
Brown creeper 
N AZ 
B 
More common on unburned plots 
House wren 
N NM 
B 
Increased on burned plots 
American robin 
SD 
B 
More common on burned plots in 1 yr, 
on unburned the other yr 
Hermit thrush 
N NM 
B 
Declined on burned plots 
Mountain bluebird 
S D 
B 
More common on burned plots in 1 yr 
N NM 
B 
Increased on burned plots 
C AZ 
NB 
More common on burned plots 
N NM 
B 
Increased on burned plots 
N B 
More common on unburned plots 
B 
More common on burned plots in 1 yr 
Virginia's warbler 
B 
Declined on burned plots 
Grace's warbler 
B 
More common on unburned plots 
B 
Declined on burned plots 
Yellow-rumped Warbler 
B 
More common on burned plots in 1 yr 
Western tanager 
B 
More common on burned plots in 1 yr 
Dark-eyed junco 
B 
More common on burned plots in 1 yr 
Chipping sparrow 
B 
More common on burned plots in 1 yr 
B 
More common on burned plots 
White-crowned Sparrow 
C AZ 
N B 
More common on burned plots 
Green-tailed 
B 
More common on burned plots 
Towhee Spotted towhee 
N NM 
B 
Increased on burned plots 
a Location: SE = southeast; N = northern; C = central; AZ = Arizona; NM = New Mexico; SD = South Dakota. 
Season: B = breeding; NB = nonbreeding. 
Only Bock and Bock (1983) and Horton and Mannan (1988) tested for differences in abundance of individual species between treatments. Results from other studies 
are based on data examination or statements in text. Note that increases or decreases may vary across temporal scale. 
References: 1 = Lowe et al. (1978); 2 = Blake (1982); 3 = Horton and Mannan (1988); 4 = Johnson and Wauer (1996); 5 = Bock and Bock (1983); 6 = Overturf (1979). 
The red-breasted nuthatch was more abundant on the 
unburned areas in 1 year, but not in the other year. The 
American robin was more abundant on burned plots in 
the first year, and on unburned plots in the second year. 
This study avoided many of the pitfalls discussed previ- 
ously. Results were averaged across woodland and savan- 
nah habitat. However, the applicability of results obtained 
in South Dakota woodlands and savannahs to Southwest- 
ern ponderosa pine forest is unknown. 
Horton and Mannan (1988) studied the effects of pre- 
scribed burning on cavity-nesting birds in pine-oak for- 
est in the Santa Catalina Mountains, southern Arizona. 
They sampled birds on 6 plots in 6 separate stands; 3 were 
burned and 3 were unburned. The prescribed burn re- 
sulted in a moderately-intense surface fire that remained 
within prescription. Few differences were observed in bird 
populations before and after fire. Only northern flickers 
and violet-green swallows declined in abundance in 
burned stands and only mountain chickadees increased. 
Horton and Mannan (1988) concluded that the observed 
declines in northern flickers and violet-green swallows 
were not due to a shortage of nest sites because post-fire 
densities of suitable snags (snags >50 cm dbh [diameter 
at breast height] in particular decay classes) exceeded 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
107 

Chapter 6 
densities theoretically required to support pre-fire num- 
bers of cavity-nesting birds. 
The plots studied by Horton and Mannan (1988) were 
dominated by ponderosa pine but also contained 2 spe- 
cies of evergreen oak, Mexican white pine, and Douglas- 
fir. They were not pure Southwestern ponderosa pine for- 
ests and the results may not be applicable to pure 
ponderosa pine forest. 
Patton and Gordon (1995) briefly summarized the ef- 
fects of fire on individual bird species, many of which in- 
habit ponderosa pine forest. This summary was based on 
evidence in the scientific literature, supplemented by per- 
sonal experience ("in many cases the relationships are in- 
tuitive or self-evident from experience;" Patton and Gor- 
don 1995). We will not repeat this summary by species, 
but instead refer to Appendix B in Patton and Gordon 
(1995). Many of the references used in evaluating the ef- 
fects of fire on birds were from habitat types other than pon- 
derosa pine forest or from geographic areas outside of the 
Southwestern United States. Their conclusions may not be 
relevant to birds in Southwestern ponderosa pine forests. 
Johnson and Wauer (1996; see also Wauer and Johnson 
1984) sampled birds before and after the 1977 La Mesa 
fire in the Jemez Mountains, northern New Mexico. Birds 
were sampled in 1977 (pre-fire), 1978,1979,1981,1983, and 
1991 on 4 transects; 3 burned and 1 unburned. Only 1 of 
these transects consisted of 250 percent ponderosa pine 
forests; the others were dominated by mixed-conifer for- 
est, ponderosa pine/mixed-conifer forest, ponderosa 
pine/pinyon-juniper forest, and/or pinyon-juniper wood- 
land (Johnson and Wauer 1996). 
Many changes in community composition were noted 
through time. The most pronounced change was a marked 
increase in woodpeckers. Some flycatchers also increased 
following fire, but the ash-throated flycatcher declined on 
the transect dominated by ponderosa pine. Mountain 
chickadees, hermit thrush, Grace's warblers, and Virginia's 
warblers also declined, whereas house wrens, western 
bluebirds, mountain bluebirds, and spotted towhees all 
increased on this transect at some point in time (Johnson 
and Wauer 1996). 
This study and Wauer and Johnson (1984) are the only 
ones that directly examined the composition of bird com- 
munities on particular sites over time; they therefore pro- 
vide some intriguing results on succession in bird com- 
munities. However, two factors limit the strength of this 
data set for evaluating effects of fire on birds in Southwest- 
ern ponderosa pine forest. The first is that only 1 year of pre- 
fire data on bird abundance and composition is available. 
Consequently, it is impossible to estimate the annual vari- 
ability in bird abundance before the fire on any transect. This 
would not be such a large problem if strong comparisons 
could be made between the burned transects and the un- 
burned transect. The marked differences in vegetation types 
across transects weaken such comparisons. 
Effects of Fire on Important Habitat 
Components 
Because little is known about the effects of fire on birds 
in Southwestern ponderosa pine forest, we reviewed cur- 
rent knowledge regarding the effects of fire on important 
habitat components for forest birds. Although many habi- 
tat components may be important, we focus on snags, logs, 
and oalfrs, which are particularly relevant to evaluating 
the effects of fire on birds in Southwestern ponderosa pine 
forests. We summarize below the available information 
on the potential importance of these components to for- 
est birds and discuss the results of studies on the effects 
of fire on these habitat components. 
Snags 
The importance of snags to ponderosa pine bird com- 
munities is well documented (Balda 1975; Scott 1978,1979; 
Cunningham et al. 1980). Snags are preferentially used 
for foraging and nesting by many birds inhabiting South- 
western ponderosa pine forests (Balda 1975; Cunningham 
et al. 1980). Large snags are particularly important to bird 
communities. Nesting use is concentrated in large snags 
(Scott 1978; Cunningham et al. 1980; Raphael and White 
1984; Horton and Mannan 1988; Caton 1996; Hitchcox 
1996), and they also tend to stand longer than smaller 
snags (Raphael et al. 1987; Morrison and Raphael 1993). 
Snags appear to have a finite period during which they 
are heavily used for foraging and nesting. In northern 
Arizona, most nesting occurred in snags that were 5 to 20 
years old, whereas most foraging occurred on snags that 
were 1 to 5 years old (Cunningham et al. 1980). This was 
presumably because although insects colonized these 
snags rapidly, their numbers declined over time (Cun- 
ningham et al. 1980). Thus, snags in this area are most 
useful to birds for a 20-year period following death. 
Fire can create, modify, or destroy snags depending on 
its behavior and local conditions. Intense burns can cre- 
ate numerous snags that provide foraging and nesting 
resources for many birds (Blackford 1955; Koplin 1969; 
Overturf 1979; Taylor and Barmore 1980; Wauer and 
Johnson 1984; Raphael et al. 1987; Hutto 1995; Sallabanks 
1995; Caton 1996; Hitchcox 1996; Johnson and Wauer 
1996). Granholm (1982), however, noted that snags re- 
cently killed by fire in the Sierra Nevada Mountains lacked 
the soft heartwood required for nest excavation, whereas 
many suitable snags were consumed by fire. Thus, both 
prescribed and natural fires can negatively or positively 
affect availability of suitable snags for cavity-nesting birds. 
Gaines et al. (1958) quantified the effects of 2 prescribed 
burns on snags in Southwestern ponderosa pine forest. 
Snags >30 cm dbh declined by 56 percent in the first burn 
and increased by 175 percent in a second burn. However, 
this large increase in snag abundance was in an area con- 
taining only 1 snag/ha before burning (Gaines et al. 1958). 
108 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Effects and Interactions of Fire, Logging, and Grazing 
Horton and Mannan (1988) studied the effects of pre- 
scribed fire on snags in a Southwestern pine-oak forest 
dominated by ponderosa pine. They observed a net 45 
percent decrease in snags following prescribed burning. 
Proportional snag loss was greatest in the size (>50 cm 
dbh) and decay (111 and IV) classes containing the most 
nest cavities. Horton and Mannan (1988) attributed much 
of the snag loss to the amount and type of woody debris 
at the base of the snag; snags surrounded by large amounts 
of loose, relatively undecayed debris were likely to burn. 
Many small (<I5 cm dbh) snags were created in these 
burns, which may provide foraging opportunities but are 
unlikely to be used for nesting (Balda 1975; Scott 1978; 
Cunningham et al. 1980; Horton and Mannan 1988). 
Gordon (1996) quantified the effects of 3 prescribed 
burns on snags in northern Arizona ponderosa pine for- 
ests. She considered all snags with dbh 220.3 cm, height 
22.4 m, and <90 percent of the surface charred as suitable 
for use by nesting birds. Of 61 suitable snags tagged on 
experimental plots, 32 remained suitable for use by nest- 
ing birds following the burns and 12 could not be relo- 
cated. Thus, the proportion of snags lost or rendered un- 
suitable ranged from 35 to 48 percent, depending on 
whether or not snags that could not be relocated were 
actually burned. Constructing fire lines around snags in- 
fluenced their fate; 50 percent of unlined snags versus 27 
percent of lined snags were unsuitable after the fire. Many 
snags that were unsuitable for nesting were partially 
charred. These had fallen and broken into large pieces be- 
coming part of the log component. Although fire can have 
detrimental affects on pre-burn snags, it can also cause 
pre-burn live trees to die and become snags. 
Logs 
Downed logs can also provide foraging opportunities 
for forest birds (Horton and Mannan 1988; Bullet al. 1995), 
but generally their importance to communities of forest 
birds is not well documented. Horton and Mannan (1988) 
observed signs of foraging activity before burning by cav- 
ity-nesting birds on 37 percent of ponderosa pine logs in 
their study area. Foraging activity was more common on 
logs with sapwood; 43 percent of logs with sapwood 
showed signs of foraging activity versus 28 percent of logs 
without sapwood. Following prescribed fire, log number 
and volume declined by 42 and 56 percent, respectively. 
Number and proportion of logs with sapwood declined by 
62 and 16 percent, respectively (Horton and Mannan 1988). 
Foraging activity was not quantified in post-fire plots. 
Gaines et al. (1958) also reported on effects of prescribed 
burning on logs. Total weight of large logs (defined as 
230.5 cm maximum diameter) declined by 63 and 74 per- 
cent on the 2 burns they sampled (Gaines et al. 1958). To- 
tal weight of small logs (5 to 30 cm maximum diameter) 
declined by 62 percent in one burn and increased by 83 
percent in another. 
Gordon (1996) tagged 62 logs before prescribed burn- 
ing on 3 experimental plots. Using a modification of USDA 
Forest Service guidelines (no citation given in Gordon 
1996), she defined all logs with diameter (unspecified 
point of measurement) 220.3 cm, length 22.4 m, and <90 
percent of the surface charred as suitable. Gordon relo- 
cated 59 of these following burning; 43 (69 to 72 percent 
depending on whether logs that could not be relocated ac- 
tually burned) were classed as unsuitable following the fire. 
Of these, 77 percent suffered severe charring and reduction 
in diameter and 23 percent were completely consumed. 
Oaks 
Oaks (and possibly other hardwoods) also provide im- 
portant resources for birds in Southwestern ponderosa 
pine forests. For example, Szaro and Balda (1979a) noted 
that several species of birds foraged extensively in Gambel 
oak in northern Arizona pine forests. Patterns of tree-spe- 
cies selection varied among bird species and with silvi- 
culture type, but some forest birds (yellow-rumped war- 
bler, Grace's warbler, and white-breasted nuthatch) used 
oak foliage more than expected considering its contribu- 
tion to the total foliage volume (Szaro and Balda 1979a). 
Brawn and Balda (1988a) also commented on the im- 
portance of Gambel oak to bird communities. They noted 
that oaks could provide nest sites for secondary cavity 
nesters and important food resources, and they observed 
that densities of insectivorous birds were higher on plots 
with oaks than on similar plots containing only pines. 
Both Gambel and evergreen oaks, including Emory, 
Arizona white, and silverleaf, also provide important re- 
sources for birds in other pine-oak forest types in the 
Southwestern United States (Marshall 1957; Balda 1967; 
Block et al. 1992). Some or all of these species resprout 
after fire (Babb 1992; Caprio and Zwolinski 1992; 1995; 
Barton 1995), and they can rapidly recolonize burned ar- 
eas. Generally, however, the effects of fire on these spe- 
cies are not well understood, particularly in a ponderosa 
pine forest. 
Many oak species resprout after fire and may be able to 
quickly recolonize sites following burns even if topkill 
occurs (Barton 1995; Caprio and Zwolinski 1995). Some 
species of oaks may need more sunlight than they would 
get in the shade of closed-canopy forests. Therefore, al- 
though fire may reduce the number of large oaks in the 
short-term, in the long-term, fire-created openings could 
be beneficial (or even necessary) in maintaining oak as a 
landscape component (but see Barton 1995). 
Conclusion 
The literature on the effects of fire on bird communities 
in Southwestern ponderosa pine forest is replete with 
problems. Available evidence about such results is anec- 
dotal (Marshall 1963), without replication (Lowe et al. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
109 

Chapter 6 
1978; Overturf 1979; Blake 1982; Aulenbach and O'Shea- 
Stone 1983; Wauer and Johnson 1984; Johnson and Wauer 
1996), has limited replication (Bock and Bock 1983; Horton 
and Mannan 1988), or confounds the effects of fire with 
those of logging (Lowe et al. 1978; Overturf 1979; Blake 
1982). The picture is further clouded because some stud- 
ies evaluated effects of low-intensity prescribed burns 
(Bock and Bock 1983; Horton and Mannan 1988), whereas 
others studied areas subjected to intense wildfire (Lowe 
et al. 1978; Overturf 1979; Blake 1982; Wauer and Johnson 
1984; Johnson and Wauer 1996). Some studies were con- 
ducted in areas outside the Southwestern United States 
(Aulenbach and O'Shea-Stone 1983; Bock and Bock 1983) 
or in forest types related but not equivalent to ponderosa 
pine forest (Marshall 1963; Horton and Mannan 1988). 
Only 1 study (Johnson and Wauer 1996; see also Wauer 
and Johnson 1984) actually monitored bird communities 
over time on a burned area, and only 2 studies (Bock and 
Bock 1983; Horton and Mannan 1988) provided statistical 
comparisons of abundances of individual species of birds 
between burned and unburned areas. Many authors 
evaluated results primarily in terms of summary statis- 
tics, such as diversity or total abundance, which can mask 
large variation in community composition. 
All of these factors limit the inferences that can be drawn 
about the effects of fire on birds in Southwestern ponde- 
rosa pine forests and, in some cases, cause us to question 
inferences drawn by the original authors. Despite these 
problems, however, there are some relatively consistent 
results when trends are evaluated about guilds or indi- 
vidual species. For example, large stand-replacing fires 
radically alter vegetation structure and bird community 
composition. Although the effects of cool prescribed burns 
are less extreme than those of intense wildfires, they fol- 
low the same trend. In general, granivores, timber-drill- 
ing birds, and some aerial insectivores increase after fires, 
whereas timber- and foliage-gleaning birds generally de- 
crease (table 2). Even within these guilds, there is some- 
times variation. For example, ash-throated flycatchers re- 
sponded opposite of other flycatchers in the area studied 
by Johnson and Wauer (1996). Finally, community composi- 
tion will change over time. For example, granivores such as 
dark-eyed junco, chipping sparrow, white-crowned sparrow, 
and towhees often increase significantly shortly after fire 
(table 2), followed by woodpeckers, which often peak in the 
first decade following fire, then gradually decline. Birds more 
closely tied to foliage availability (hermit thmsh, solitary 
vireo; table 2) generally decline immediately after fire, then 
begin recovering as foliage volume increases in subsequent 
years. The effects of fire on birds is best understood by con- 
sidering the type of fire, the amount of time that has elapsed 
since the fire, the response patterns of individual species, 
and the extent of post-fire salvage logging. 
The effects of fire on important habitat components also 
depends on fire type. Intense bums may create different 
size snags, but these may not be immediately suitable for 
excavation of nesting cavities (Granholm 1982) and many 
will not last long (Cunningham et al. 1980; Raphael et al. 
1987; Morrison and Raphael 1993). Prescribed bums may 
also create snags. When such burns are low intensity, how- 
ever, they are unlikely to kill many large trees but may 
destroy large snags, which results in a decrease in avail- 
ability of the large snags preferentially used by forest birds 
(Horton,and Mannan 1988). Intense wildfires and lower- 
intensity prescribed burns probably decrease the amount 
of downed logs (Gaines et al. 1958; Horton and Mannan 
1988; Gordon 1996). This decrease may be alleviated in 
subsequent years as fire-killed snags fall, but these logs 
may not contain the sapwood preferred by foraging birds 
(Horton and Mannan 1988). Finally, the effects of fire on 
oaks in ponderosa pine forests is unclear. 
Because fire is an important natural process in South- 
western ponderosa pine forests (Moir et al. this volume), 
communities of forest birds are well-adapted to cope with 
the natural fire regime in these forests. Disruption of that 
fire regime, however, along with grazing, timber harvest, 
and fuelwood cutting, has caused pronounced structural 
changes in these forests. As a result, wildfires today may 
burn more intensely and over larger areas than historical 
fires (Moir et al. this volume), which could have signifi- 
cant negative affects on communities of forest birds and 
their habitat. Currently, these effects are impossible to quan- 
tify, but they may be particularly important where past fire 
suppression efforts have been most successful. 
Numerous authors have called for restoring fire as a 
natural process in ponderosa pine forests (Covington and 
Moore 1994a; Sackett et al. 1994; Arno et al. 1995; Fule 
and Covington 1995). Fire will continue to operate in these 
systems in spite of our attempts to exclude it (Boucher 
and Moody 1996). Given current forest conditions, restor- 
ing natural fire regimes will require substantial increases 
in prescribed burning to reduce fuel loads (Harrington 
and Sackett 1990; Covington and Moore 1994a; Sackett et 
al. 1994; Arno et al. 1995). Limited evidence on the effects 
of prescribed fire on forest birds and their habitat sug- 
gests that important habitat components of forest birds 
may be affected by prescribed fire, at least in the short 
term. To avoid large-scale loss of important habitat com- 
ponents, special techniques, including thinning dense stands 
and creating fire lines for snags and logs, may be required to 
reintroduce fire into areas where it has been excluded. 
Logging 
The following section evaluates the relationship of log- 
ging to habitat use by songbirds occupying Southwest- 
em ponderosa pine forests. A review of historic and con- 
110 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Effects and Interactions of Fire, Logging, and Grazing 
temporary silviculture is provided by Raish et al. (this 
volume). Today's forests have been altered by fire exclu- 
sion, a decrease in the frequency of natural fires due to 
diminished fuel availability, and a reduction of herbaceous 
fuels caused by grazing and trampling by cattle and sheep 
in the 1880s and 1890s (Weaver 1951; Cooper 1960; 
Covington and Moore 1994a,b). Fire exclusion has been 
proposed as a primary reason for the development of over- 
stocked forests in the Southwest (Covington and Moore 
1994a,b). Covington and Moore (1994b) report that 
presettlement tree density was about 56 trees/ha in con- 
trast to the current density of about 2,100 trees/ha, which 
is mostly small-diameter trees. 
Logging contributes about 18 percent to growing stock 
mortality in the Southwest (Raish et al. this volume). In- 
terpreting changes in stocking rates and volume of pon- 
derosa pine over time is complicated by logging effects. 
The general rule for historic logging was to harvest the 
most accessible and commercially valuable trees (Scurlock 
and Finch this volume), which contributed to the decline 
of large trees. In the late 1980s, ponderosa pine accounted 
for about 73 percent of the lumber cut by sawmills in New 
Mexico and about 91 percent of the timber harvested in 
Arizona (Van Hooser et al. 1993). Sawtimber accounted 
for 90 percent of the total ponderosa pine cut in both states 
(Van Hooser et al. 1993). Between 1962 and 1986, sawtim- 
ber stands decreased by 10 percent in Arizona, while small 
trees (seedling, poletimber, sapling) increased by 3 times 
over the amount present in 1962 (Spencer 1966; Conner et 
al. 1990; Johnson 1995). While stocking volume of saw- 
timber with dbh < 43.2 cm increased between 1962 and 
1986, volume of sawtimber with dbh 143.2 cm decreased 
during the same period (Raish et al. this volume). 
In addition, even-aged management commonly prac- 
ticed in the Southwest creates an age-class distribution of 
forest habitats that differs from forests without timber 
harvest. Depending on rotation age, natural disturbance 
frequency, and moisture regime, forests harvested using 
even-aged management could have more or less early suc- 
cessional forest rather than natural landscapes (Thomp- 
son et al. 1995). In the Southwest, contemporary ponde- 
rosa pine forests contain more midsuccessional growth 
than do unharvested forests that have a greater uniformity 
of habitat patch sizes and distributions (Raish et al. this vol- 
ume). Given these changes in tree size, density, and sera1 
stage distribution over time, it seems clear that logging and 
other types of silviculture have affected the availability, struc- 
ture, age, and composition of stands at the local stand level 
and at the landscape and regional levels. Such changes 
have potentially affected the number and distribution of 
bird populations using ponderosa pine habitats. Unfortu- 
nately, few studies have evaluated effects of landscape-level 
or large-scale changes on Southwestern ponderosa pine birds 
(Rich and Mehlhop this volume). Further experimental re- 
search on this topic is needed (Block et al. this volume). 
Bird Use of Successional Stages Created by 
Logging 
Documented changes in the structure, density, age, and 
diversity of Southwestern ponderosa pine forests could 
potentially affect the breeding, wintering, and migration 
success of birds, and hence, the population status of bird 
species. Successional changes in habitat are produced by 
natyral events, such as fire, or by management such as 
logging or prescribed burns. These effects could be posi- 
tive or negative, long- or short-term, and local or regional. 
In this section, we review and evaluate studies that com- 
pare bird response to successional habitats created by log- 
ging. Most published studies of bird responses to logging 
of Southwestern ponderosa pine have been descriptive, 
lacking the rigor of experimental research with pretreat- 
ment periods and replicated study sites and treatments. 
Southwestern ponderosa pine forests evolve through 
the following generalized successional stages: 1) grass- 
forb, shrub-seedling (0 to 10 years); 2) pole-sapling (11 to 
40 years); 3) young forest (41 to 100 years); 4) mature for- 
est (101 to 200 years); and 5) old growth (201+ years). 
Canopy volume, understory productivity, and plant and 
animal diversity varies among these successional stages. 
Forest management, especially silvicultural, alters the di- 
rection and pace of forest succession so that it that may be 
accelerated or shortened or stages may be bypassed. Sev- 
eral bird species inhabiting ponderosa pine forest feed and 
nest in mature and old-growth successional stages (Hejl 
1994; Hall et al. this volume). In the past, emphasis on 
wood production of Southwestern ponderosa pine fre- 
quently determined silvicultural practices that favored es- 
tablishment of the most economically valuable trees, em- 
phasized rapid growth, and shortened harvest time. 
Ecologically, the result was a truncated successional pat- 
tern in which early and late stages were shortened or elimi- 
nated (Edgerton and Thomas 1978). Multi-storied mature 
and old-growth ponderosa pine forests provide feeding 
and nesting habitats for many bird species; several are 
considered specialized and adapted only to those envi- 
ronments. Mid-sera1 stages, such as pole-sapling and 
young forest, which are emphasized by intensive timber 
management, could significantly alter avian species com- 
position and relative abundance because they lack the 
structural diversity qualities of older stands. 
Meslow (1978) suggested that wood-production prac- 
tices alter forest habitats by: 1) shortening the grass-forb 
and shrub stage; 2) creating an even-aged monoculture; 
3) eliminating snags; and 4) eliminating old-growth. Even- 
aged regeneration methods almost completely remove 
previous stands, which can lead to a complete turnover 
in breeding birds. Even-aged silviculture within poten- 
tial Mexican spotted owl (Strix occidentalis lucida) habitats 
in ponderosa pine forests tends to simplify stand struc- 
ture and establishes stands without the key habitat char- 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 6 
acteristics used by owls (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 
1995). Selection cutting maintains a specific tree-diameter 
distribution through periodic removal of selected trees; 
this results in less change to vegetation structure and bird 
communities within stands than even-aged management. 
Selectively-cut stands retain much of the mature forest- 
bird community and provide habitats for some species 
that use the ground-shrub-sapling layer (USDI Fish and 
Wildlife Service 1995). However, selection cutting ulti- 
mately tends to homogenize the landscape by reducing 
or eliminating stand differences, thereby reducing hori- 
zontal patchiness across the landscape. 
Reviews of Bird Use of Logged Western 
Forests 
Hejl (1994) summarized information on the effects of 
human-induced environmental change on avian popula- 
tions in Western North America during the past 100 years. 
She reported that 13 species (three-toed woodpecker, 
black-capped chickadee, mountain chickadee, red- 
breasted nuthatch, winter wren, ruby-crowned kinglet, 
Swainson's thrush, varied thrush, solitary vireo, Town- 
send's warbler, evening grosbeak) were always less abun- 
dant in recent clearcuts than in uncut forest. In contrast, 
the mountain bluebird was always more abundant in re- 
cent clearcuts. Differences were less dramatic between 
partially-logged forests and unlogged forests. Pygmy 
nuthatch and pine grosbeak were always less abundant 
in partially-logged forests than in unlogged forests. Cal- 
liope hummingbird was always more abundant in par- 
tially-logged forests. In general, forest species were found 
less often in clearcuts, and species that frequent open for- 
ests or habitats were found more often in clearcuts. Resi- 
dent species tended to decrease after any kind of harvest- 
ing, whereas only about half of the migrants decreased. 
In contrast, almost all the species that increased after par- 
tial cutting or soon after clearcutting were migrants, and 
most of the species using recent clearcuts were short-dis- 
tance migrants. 
To evaluate relationships between Southwestern bird 
populations and logged forests, we extracted information 
on ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest from a com- 
prehensive review of bird use of logged and unlogged 
conifer forests of the Rocky Mountains (Hejl et al. 1995). 
For their analysis of widespread bird population re- 
sponses, Hejl et al. (1995) compared population responses 
of bird species inhabiting uncut forests to those observed 
using 4 vegetation classes: 1) low shrub clearcuts (from 
grass-forb to small shrub stage; generally 0 to10 years old); 
2) tall shrub clearcuts (including tall shrubs and seedlings; 
generally 11 to 20 years old); 3) pole sapling clearcuts (gen- 
erally 21 to 40 years old); and 4) partial cuts (any cutting 
treatment other than clearcutting). Their inclusion of stud- 
ies from the Southwest provides an index about how bird 
populations and silviculture in the Southwest compared 
to other geographical areas. While clearcutting is common 
in many forests of the Rocky Mountains, partial cuts are 
common in Southwestern ponderosa pine; therefore, we 
are cautious about interpreting abstracted results. Even 
so, the following analysis has merit because it compares 
bird population responses along a successional spectrum 
of stages that can be found in the Southwest. 
Hejl et al. (1995) scored each bird species as less abun- 
dant (-I), similarly abundant (0), or more abundant (+I) 
at each logged and unlogged site cited in the literature. 
The potential relationship between each harvest class and 
each bird species was determined by calculating the av- 
erage score over all such studies. An index of 1.0 indi- 
cated that every study reported more birds in treated than 
in untreated areas. An index of -1.0 indicated that every 
study reported more birds in the untreated than treated 
areas. An index of 0.0 indicated that either a species had 
similar abundances in treated and untreated areas in ev- 
ery study, or that no obvious trend was detected across 
studies. Researchers had sufficient data on 40 bird spe- 
cies known to use Southwestern ponderosa pine forests 
to evaluate responses to partial or clearcut treatments. Of 
these, 11 (red-breasted nuthatch, ruby-crowned kinglet, 
western tanager, three-toed woodpecker, white-breasted 
nuthatch, hermit thrush, orange-crowned warbler, west- 
ern wood-pewee, and common nighthawk) were consis- 
tently less abundant (score = < 0) in all stages of clearcuts 
than in unlogged areas (table 3). Six species (mountain 
chickadee, red-breasted nuthatch, ruby-crowned kinglet, 
three-toed woodpecker, solitary vireo, white-breasted 
nuthatch) were always less abundant (score = -1) in re- 
cent, low-shrub clearcuts than in untreated sites. An ad- 
ditional 17 bird species were frequently less abundant (0 
< score > -1) in low-shrub clearcuts (table 3). All perma- 
nent resident species were less abundant in low-shrub 
clearcuts. In addition, pygmy nuthatch was always less 
abundant (score = -1) in partially-logged areas than in 
untreated areas. 
In contrast, 9 migrant species (chipping sparrow, broad- 
tailed hummingbird, dark-eyed junco, mourning dove, 
white-crowned sparrow, Townsend's solitaire, dusky fly- 
catcher, mountain bluebird, and rock wren) were gener- 
ally more abundant (score > 0) in low-shrub clearcuts than 
in unlogged areas although this trend was inconsistent 
among studies for some species. The rock wren was more 
numerous in partially logged areas than in unlogged ar- 
eas in all studies (score = 1). In addition, Steller's jay, war- 
bling vireo, black-headed grosbeak, northern flicker, red- 
raped sapsucker, fox sparrow, American robin, chipping 
sparrow, Townsend's solitaire, broad-tailed hummingbird, 
dark-eyed junco, dusky flycatcher, and mountain blue- 
bird were generally more abundant (scored > 0) in either 
tall-shrub and/or pole-sapling clearcuts than in untreated 
areas. 
USDA Forest Service Gen.Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Effects and Interactions of Fire, Logging, and Grazing 
Table 3. Abundance of bird species that occur in clearcut, partially cut, and uncut Southwestern ponderosa pine forest. A 
species was more abundant (+I), less abundant (-I), or similarly abundant (0) in treated versus untreated areas. Values in 
the table are averages of these scores over all studies on which the species was recorded. Species are ranked in ascending 
in order from -1.00 based on low-shrub clearcut column. Sample sizes are in parentheses (analyses were only performed on 
the species with sample size 2 3). Table modified from Hejl et a/. 1995. 
NTMB 
Low 
statusb 
shrub 
Clearcuts 
Tall 
Pole 
Partially 
shrub 
sapling 
cut 
Mountain chickadee 
-1 .OO 
-1 .oo 
Brown creeper 
-1 .OO 
Golden-crowned kinglet 
-1 .OO 
Ruby-crowned kinglet 
-1 .OO 
Three-toed woodpecker 
0.33 
White-breasted nutha 
Pygmy nuthatch 
Western tanager 
-1 .OO 
Hermit thrush 
Steller's jay 
0.33 
Warbling vireo 
1 .OO 
Yellow-rumped warbler 
-0.50 
Black-headed grosbeak 
0.40 
Violet-green swall 
Pine siskin 
0.00 
Western wood-pewee 
House wren 
0.00 
-0.33 
-0.33 
0.67 
0.67 
Red-naped sapsucker 
-0.14 
(7) 
0.00 
American robin 
0.50 
Cassin's finch 
-0.20 
Cordilleran flycatc 
Williamson's saps 
Chipping sparrow 
0.67 
Western bluebird 
Olive-sided flycatch 
0.25 
1 .oo 
1 .oo 
Townsend's sol 
0.25 
1 .oo 
Mountain bluebird 
0.90 
(10) 
1 .OO 
Rock wren 
B 
a Species list is based on Szaro and Balda (1979), Franzreb and Ohmart (1978), Scott and Gottfried (1983), Blake (1982), and Franzreb (1978). 
As designated by the Partners in Flight preliminary list:A = long-distance migrant species, those that breed in North America and spend their nonbreeding period primarily south 
of the United States; B = short-distance migrant species, those that breed and winter extensively in North America; C = migrants whose breeding range is primarily south of the 
United StatedMexican border and enter the United States along the Rio Grande Valley or where the Mexican highlands extend across the United States border (these 
populations largely vacate the United States during the winter months) R = permanent resident species that primarily have overlapping breeding and nonbreeding areas. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
113 

Chapter 6 
Studies in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine 
Forests 
The most extensive series of studies about bird re- 
sponses to ponderosa pine logging in the Southwest were 
conducted at the Beaver Creek Watershed, central Arizona 
(Szaro and Balda 1979a, 1979b, 1986; Gaud et al. 1986; 
Brawn and Balda 1988a, 1988b). Szaro and Balda (1979a) 
compared species diversity and relative abundance of 
birds among different timber management practices. 
These practices were: 1) clearcut (removal of all commer- 
cial woody vegetation), 2) severely thin (removal of most 
of the timber stock); 3) strip cut (alternate "level" strips 
were thinned to improve production); and 4) silvicultur- 
ally cut (mature and old trees were selectively cut) (see 
Szaro and Balda [1979a] for more information about treat- 
ments). Because clearcuts and strip cuts are now uncom- 
mon in the Southwest, the Beaver Creek Watershed study 
is a historical study rather than a current standard. In ad- 
dition, habitat characteristics differed among plots within 
treatments, making it difficult to eliminate the possibility 
that plot variation was due to plot differences rather than 
silviculture. 
Compared to the control plot, bird abundance and spe- 
cies diversity was lower on the clearcut and severely- 
thinned plots but higher on strip-cut and silviculturally- 
cut plots (table 4). Rock wren, American robin, dark-eyed 
junco, spotted towhee, northern flicker, and mountain 
bluebird used the clearcut plot, but only rock wren and 
spotted towhee were favored by clearcutting. On the other 
hand, removal of some mature and old ponderosa pines 
using strip cuts and silvicultural cuts favored house wren, 
solitary vireo, yellow-rumped warbler, Grace's warbler, 
rock wren, American robin, chipping sparrow, white- 
breasted nuthatch, western wood-pewee, and western 
bluebird. The uncut control plot had higher abundances 
of pygmy nuthatch, red-faced warbler, hermit thrush, 
western flycatcher, and violet-green swallow. Four forag- 
ing guilds (pickers and gleaners, ground feeders, ham- 
merers and tearers, and aerial feeders) were either favored 
or not affected by strip-cut and silvicultural-cut methods. 
Three nest guilds (cavity and depression nesters, foliage 
nesters, and ground nesters) were positively affected by 
the silvicultural cut. 
Szaro and Balda (1986) concluded that openings gener- 
ated by logging could result in major shifts in local avail- 
ability of habitats for a given bird species and might be a 
primary factor in the selection of breeding sites. Those 
species that typically used more open habitats (rock wren, 
American robin, western wood-pewee, and western blue- 
bird) were most abundant on either medium or heavy cuts. 
Those species that prefer dense foliage (western flycatcher, 
pygmy nuthatch, red-faced warbler, hermit thrush, and 
black-headed grosbeak) were less abundant in more modi- 
fied habitats. Of the 15 species found on all forested plots, 
33 percent (chipping sparrow, western bluebird, broad- 
tailed hummingbird, Grace's warbler, and dark-eyed 
junco) had highest population densities on treated plots, 
suggesting preference for a more open canopy. 
Szaro and Balda (1986) predicted that inter- and in- 
traspecific competition for food resources should be 
greater on heavy and medium treated sites where the fo- 
liage/bird pair was lower than on the lightly cut and un- 
treateq sites. However, an examination of the insect food 
base on the sites indicated that mean bird density was not 
correlated with either insect numbers or biomass on ei- 
ther relative or absolute bases. They concluded that the 
foliage available on these sites was not being fully used, 
and that other factor(s) (territoriality, lack of suitable nest- 
ing sites, non-insect food supply, lack of openings or other 
habitat configurations) might limit ponderosa pine bird 
communities on sites with dense foliage. Brawn et al. 
(1987) further suggested that interspecific competition for 
food during the breeding season was not important in 
structuring ponderosa pine bird communities. 
Franzreb (1978) and Franzreb and Ohmart (1978) stud- 
ied the effects of moderately heavy overstory removal in 
a mixed-conifer forest in the White Mountains of Arizona. 
Avian species richness was equal on the treated area and 
an adjacent unharvested comparison area; however, over- 
all abundance was significantly higher on the latter. 
Franzreb and Ohmart (1978) also found no relationship 
between avian diversity and measures of vertical habitat 
complexity. Bird abundances on treated and untreated 
areas varied among species and guilds, probably reflect- 
ing differential responses to availability of foraging and 
nesting substrates. Thirteen species, primarily bark/foli- 
age foragers and cup-nesters, were more abundant on the 
unharvested area, whereas 10 species of aerial and ground 
foragers were more abundant on the treated portion. 
Franzreb and Ohrnart suggested that numerical reductions 
of some species on treated stands could be related to more 
restricted or more specialized vegetation preferences. 
Scott and Gottfried (1983) examined the combined ef- 
fects of several management prescriptions (individual 
selection, group selection, and patch cutting) on avian 
communities in a mixed-conifer forest of Arizona. Spe- 
cies richness increased by 25 percent on the harvested area 
but decreased by 7 percent on an adjacent, unharvested 
area. Post-treatment avian abundance decreased 12 and 3 
percent on the 2 areas, respectively. Only 1 species showed 
a significant decrease in density on the treated area. These 
results were considerably different than those reported 
by Franzreb and Ohmart (1978); this was attributed by 
Scott and Gottfried (1983) to heavier timber harvest in their 
study area. However, given the absence of replicated treat- 
ment sites in both studies, we do not believe that strong 
inferences can be made about treatment effects for either 
study. In addition, results from mixed-conifer forests may 
differ from those in pure ponderosa pine. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Effects and Interactions of Fire, Logging, and Grazing 
Table 4. Effect of silvlcultural treatment on avian abundance and diversity in Southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Numbers 
are average breeding pairs/40 ha. Table was modified from Szaro and Balda (1979a). 
Species 
Clearcut 
Thinned 
Strip cut 
Silv cut 
Control 
Mountain chickadee 
Pygmy nuthatch 
House wren 
Solitary vireo 
Yellow-ru 
Grace's \F 
Red-facet 
mped warbler 
varbler 
d warbler 
Western tanager 
Hepatic tanager 
Mourning dove 
3.5 
1 
2 
Rock wren 
American r 
Hermit thru 
Dark-eyed junco 
1.8 
7.5 
9.5 
16.7 
13 
Spotted towh 
6.4 
Ch~pping spa 
Northern flick 
0.5 
Acorn woodpecker 
1 
3 
4 
8.5 
Black-headed 
2.5 
1 
2 
- 
catcher 
be 
~ o d  
pewee 
Broad-tailed humminabird 
6.5 
Western fly 
Say's phoe 
Western wc 
Violet-green swallow 
Western bluebird 
Ground feeders 
Hammerers and tearers 
16.5 
Aerial f~ 
Cavity 2 
Foliage 
Ground nesters 
6.8 
14.3 
seders 
0.3 
17.3 
3 d  
wid depressio 
0.8 
0 
3' 
nesters 
6.8 
8.8 
64 
Mannan and Siegel (1988) and Siegel (1989) sampled avian 
communities in managed stands and in 3 types of old-growth 
(open, dense, and minimum) in northern Arizona. Managed 
stands were even-aged and dominated by densely-spaced, 
younger (80-year-old) trees. Open old-growth stands had 
numerous large (> 50 cm dbh) trees with an open under- 
story and were chosen to represent presettlement conditions. 
Dense old-growth stands had an overstory of large trees and 
a well-developed understory of smaller trees; a common 
condition in remaining old-growth ponderosa pine in Ari- 
zona. Minimum old-growth stands had received previous 
light harvest but met old-growth standards set by the USDA 
Forest Service. AU 4 stand types differed significantly in habi- 
tat stmcture, although the old-growth stands often contained 
patches resembling other stages. Avian species richness was 
similar across all 3 old-growth conditions (41 to 47 species) 
but lower in managed stands (32 to 34 species). The highest 
avian abundance was in dense old-growth, whereas the low- 
est was in managed stands. Within the 3 old-growth types, 
several species varied considerably in their abundance. This 
was attributed to the availability of mesic microenviron- 
ments, openings, and other habitat requisites. 
USDA Forest Service Gen.Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
115 

Chapter 6 
Keller (1992) conducted a survey of breeding birds in 
several ponderosa pine stand types in north central Ari- 
zona. He found that bird species diversity and density 
were greatest in stands containing L 14 yellow pines/acre 
and lowest in pure stands of pole timber. Keller suggested 
that avian species richness and abundance might be linked 
to the availability of large, mature ponderosa pines. 
Rosenstock (1996) studied habitat relationships of pas- 
serine breeding birds in ponderosa pine and pine-oak for- 
ests of northern Arizona from 1993-1995. He sampled 23 
study sites representing a broad habitat gradient from 
intensively-managed stands with large openings to 
unmanaged stands with dense thickets of young trees 
under a mature pine overstory. Rosenstock found that 
breeding birds showed strong responses to stand struc- 
ture at both the community and species levels. Species 
composition and bird numbers differed based on pine 
canopy configuration, tree size and density, and the den- 
sity and physical characteristics of Gambel oaks and snags. 
Five species (pygmy nuthatch, violet-green swallow, Cor- 
dilleran flycatcher, house wren, and brown creeper) were 
positively correlated with high canopy density, low 
canopy patchiness, and vertical diversity. Five species 
(Townsend's solitaire, white-breasted nuthatch, hermit 
thrush, hairy woodpecker, and brown-headed cowbird) 
were also correlated with low horizontal patchiness and/ 
or vertical diversity, but not with canopy density. Six spe- 
cies (chipping sparrow, hairy woodpecker, house wren, 
pine siskin, pygmy nuthatch, and violet-green swallow) 
were positively correlated with the coefficient of varia- 
tion in pine size (dbh); given that 5 of these 7 species nest 
in holes or under bark, this relationship may be related to 
nesting preferences. 
Nonbreeding Studies 
Few studies have investigated the influence of logging 
on nonbreeding bird communities in Southwestern pon- 
derosa pine forests. Hagar (1960) found that fall and win- 
ter densities on logged areas in California were 2 to 3 times 
higher than those on unlogged areas; high values were 
due to large numbers of granivorous birds. Blake (1982) 
reported that granivores in Southwestern ponderosa pine 
forests were more abundant than other guilds on clearcut 
areas in fall and winter. Most granivores left by spring, 
reducing overall abundance levels; following their depar- 
ture, bird assemblages were dominated by insectivorous 
species. Blake (1982) also reported that logging produced 
an open canopy that was correlated with increased num- 
bers of flycatchers and aerial and ground-feeding insecti- 
vores. He concluded that responses to logging were simi- 
lar for both nonbreeding-season (spring, fall, and winter) 
and breeding-season bird communities and suggested that 
the extent of habitat modification might be more influen- 
tial than the precise type of alteration. As mentioned, how- 
ever, caution must be used in interpreting Blake's results 
because the study design was confounded by interactions 
with fire and by lack of replication of study plots. 
Studies of Nest Site Use in Relation to 
Silviculture 
Few demographic studies of songbird communities in 
Southyestern ponderosa pine forests have been con- 
ducted. Based on a study of cavity-nesting birds using a 
mixed ponderosa pine forest on the Mogollon Rim, cen- 
tral Arizona, Li and Martin (1991) reported that live and, 
more commonly, dead aspens (Populus trernuloides) were 
used in 88 percent of cavity nest sites, although aspens 
constituted only 12 percent of the trees. Preference for as- 
pen may be related to ease of excavation of this soft wood, 
which is often decayed even in live trees. Aspen suckers 
frequently sprout in cleared mixed forests after logging 
or fires. The amount of large aspens in the area studied 
by Li and Martin (1991) may be explained by early suc- 
cession of aspens after extensive conifer logging years ago. 
Aspen numbers and acreage in fire-excluded forests 
have gradually declined in the Southwest as conifers have 
replaced them (USDA Forest Service 1994). According to 
the USDA Forest Service (1993), the acreage of aspen- 
dominated forests in Arizona and New Mexico has de- 
creased from 486,000 acres in 1962 to 263,000 acres in 1986. 
Continued loss of aspens due to fire suppression and co- 
nifer succession may escalate competition for favored nest 
sites by cavity-nesting birds and may result in decreased 
populations of cavity-nesting birds. Logging and fire in 
forests mixed with aspens may improve nesting habitat 
for cavity-nesting birds by allowing aspen to regenerate. 
However, logging may also reduce the quantity of pon- 
derosa pine snags available for nest sites by reducing the 
number of live mature pine trees that eventually die and 
become snags. 
Brawn and Balda (1988b) suggested that the breeding 
density of cavity-nesting birds was nest-site limited for 
species that were locally common and relied on dead trees 
for nest sites in ponderosa pine forests of northern Ari- 
zona. Martin (1988) found that predation rates in Arizona 
ponderosa pine forests were lower at nest sites with higher 
foliage density at nest height and proposed that breeding 
birds selected habitats based in part on the availability of 
nest sites that minimize risk of nest predation. Because 
variation in foliage density in nesting layers influences 
the reproductive outcome of some open-cup nesting song- 
bird species of ponderosa pine forests, for example, her- 
mit thrush (Martin and Roper 1988), silvicultural alter- 
ation of foliage density could influence nesting success. 
The above studies suggest that silviculture alters avail- 
ability of desirable nest sites and may influence popula- 
tions of bird species that place nests in specialized ways. 
Our personal observations suggest that demographic re- 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Effects and Interactions of Fire, Logging, and Grazing 
sponses to silviculture are likely to differ greatly among 
species and treatments. Tom Martin and colleagues are 
studying the reproductive success of songbirds in South- 
western forests along the Mogollon Rim, and their publica- 
tions should help to clarify interactions between habitat fea- 
tures and reproductive success. In the mean time, further 
speculation pertaining to the relationship between silvi- 
culture and nesting success of songbirds in ponderosa pine 
forest is unwarranted until specific hypotheses are tested. 
(Bock and Webb 1984). Assuming this is true in conifer- 
ous forests as well, it is necessary to understand how graz- 
ing affects habitat structure and composition to assess the 
possible effects of grazing in ponderosa pine forests on 
songbird populations. Unfortunately, it may not be pos- 
sible to assess the impact of grazing on ponderosa pine 
songbirds by extrapolating from studies in other habitats, 
as birds respond differently to grazing in different grass- 
land habitats (Saab et al. 1995). 
Landscapes 
Grazers 
As discussed earlier, even-aged silviculture affects the 
spatial distribution of different-aged stands, while uneven- 
aged treatments tend to reduce differences among stands. 
Stand size determines the size of habitat patches created 
by regeneration cuts and is usually in the range of 5 to 20 
ha on public lands. Natural disturbances and openings 
are more frequent at small scales than at large scales, but 
these vary widely in magnitude and size. Even-aged man- 
agement tends to exclude very small and very large 
patches, resulting in artificial uniformity of habitat patch 
sizes and distributions. The juxtaposition of different-aged 
stands may result in increased amounts of edge in the for- 
est, which may affect the reproductive success and abun- 
dance of songbirds (see review by Thompson et al. 1995). 
Logging clearly modifies ponderosa pine landscapes in 
the Southwest. How altered landscapes ultimately affect 
bird populations and assemblages is discussed in more 
detail by Rich and Mehlhop (this volume). 
Grazing and Range Management 
Practices 
There have been many studies assessing the impact of 
grazing on bird populations in the West but few that fo- 
cus on ponderosa pine forests (for reviews, see Bock et al. 
1993; Fleischner 1994; Saab et al. 1995). Livestock grazing 
in Southwestern ponderosa pine forests has been common 
since the 19th century (Cooper 1960; Dutton 1953; Scurlock 
and Finch this volume), so it is likely that habitat changes 
due to grazing exist in most forested areas of the South- 
west. These habitat changes may alter species abundances 
and composition in avian and other wildlife communi- 
ties. While the need to study the impacts of grazing in 
coniferous forests on wildlife populations has long been 
recognized (Clary 1975), no studies have yet assessed how 
grazing in Western coniferous forests might affect bird popu- 
lations (Bock et al. 1993; Dobkin 1994; Saab et al. 1995). 
Studies in grasslands have concluded that birds do not 
respond to grazing per se but rather to habitat changes 
Several domesticated species graze in Southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests. Cattle currently are the most com- 
mon livestock species; sheep populations have greatly 
decreased since the turn of the century (Cooper 1960). Big 
game, such as elk (Cervus canadensis) and mule deer 
(Odocoileus virginianus) are also frequently present. Game 
species probably have similar impacts on plant growth 
and composition as do livestock (Barnes et al. 1991). Sup- 
porting this idea, several studies in a variety of forest eco- 
systems in the Western United States have indicated that 
there is overlap between the diets of cattle, deer, and elk 
(MacCracken and Hansen 1981; Skovlin et al. 1976; 
Thilenius and Hungerford 1967). The degree to which big 
game species alter the habitat depends on population 
sizes, but they can have measurable impacts on the quan- 
tity and composition of plant species when population 
sizes are large. In a Douglas-fir/ponderosa pine forest in 
Oregon, there was no statistical difference in herbaceous 
species between plots grazed and not grazed by big game; 
but presence of game species did lead to a statistical dif- 
ference in browse species (Krueger and Winward 1974). 
Earlier in the century, the mule deer population on the 
Kaibab Plateau in northern Arizona greatly increased caus- 
ing damage to the habitat by overgrazing (Mitchell and 
Freeman 1993; Rasmussen 1941). All grazing species, not 
just domestic livestock, may affect ponderosa pine habi- 
tats in ways that could influence songbird populations. 
Grazing Systems 
The mere presence of livestock does not mean that long- 
term habitat destruction is occurring (Clary 1987). Instead, 
the degree to which grazing affects the habitat, and hence 
the birds using that habitat, depends on several factors. 
These include the: 1) number of animals grazing in an area; 
2) time of grazing; and 3) grazing system used. Greater 
habitat changes occur as grazing intensity increases in 
ponderosa pine habitats outside the Southwest (Johnson 
1956; Skovlin et al. 1976), and this is likely to occur in the 
Southwest as well. Grazing during the spring and early 
summer may directly decrease the reproductive success 
of breeding birds through destruction or disturbance of 
nests on the ground or in low shrubs. Grazing during other 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
117 

Chapter 6 
seasons can indirectly affect bird communities through 
habitat changes. 
Little is known about the effects of different grazing 
systems in Western coniferous forests (Saab et al. 1995). 
In ponderosa pine forests in the Blue Mountains of Or- 
egon and Washington, deferred rotation grazing increased 
vegetation cover in open grassland areas but not in for- 
ested areas, as compared with season-long grazing 
(Skovlin et al. 1976). Pearson et al. (1971) used a 3-pasture 
rest rotation system in a ponderosa pine forest in Arizona. 
Since cattle tended to avoid mature grasses, concentrat- 
ing instead on succulent growth, the timing was adjusted 
so that no plant species was overgrazed. This system was 
effective in achieving good weight gain in cattle while 
maintaining a diverse balance of plant species. Some graz- 
ing systems may be less detrimental to riparian zones than 
others. Marlow and Pogacnik (1985) found that cattle had 
a lower impact on stream banks when soil moisture was 
high, while Clary and Webster (1989) suggested that spring 
grazing may have the lowest impact on riparian zones. The 
results of studies comparing different grazing systems in 
other habitats have been variable (Dwyer et al. 1984) and 
probably no single system will give the same results in all 
areas. Hence, even if more data were available from ponde- 
rosa pine forests, it may be difficult to predict what effect 
specific grazing practices will have on avian habitat. 
Effects of Grazing on Birds 
As stated, the primary effects of grazing on songbirds 
should be caused by habitat alterations. At least 2 species 
of ponderosa pine birds, the buff-breasted flycatcher and 
the western bluebird, have exhibited population declines 
that were attributed to habitat overgrazing (DeSante and 
George 1994). This speculative conclusion was derived 
from a review of historical information rather than from 
an analysis involving a replicated experiment. Taylor and 
Littlefield (1986) reported that when grazing levels were 
reduced in the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge in Or- 
egon, populations of the willow flycatcher and yellow 
warbler increased. 
Changes in the Understory 
Grazing can reduce the volume of grasses and, to a lesser 
extent, the forbs and shrubs, which form much of the un- 
derstory vegetation in ponderosa pine habitats of the 
Southwest (Koehler et al. 1989; Madany and West 1983) 
and other Western regions (Johnson 1956; Laudenslayer 
et al. 1989; Rummell1951; Skovlin et al. 1976; Zimmerman 
and Neuenschwander 1984). Some of the more common 
species that may decrease in abundance are mountain 
muhly (Mulzlenbergia montana), muttongrass (Poa fendler- 
iana), Arizona fescue (Festuca arizonica), squirreltail (Sitan- 
ion kystrix) and blue gramma (Bouteloua gracilis). Common 
shrub species affected by grazing include servicebeny (Ame- 
lanchier spp.), bear-berry (Arctostaphylos spp.), (Holodiscus 
discolor), willow (Salix spp.), and spiraea (Spiraea spp.). 
In addition to reducing the understory volume, graz- 
ing also alters the composition and structure of under- 
story plant communities (Arnold 1950; Clary 1975; 
Johnson 1956; Knopf 1996; Madany and West 1983; 
Rummell 1951; Skovlin et al. 1976; Zimmerman and 
Neuenschwander 1984). This can involve changes in the 
abundance of different species, as plants preferred by graz- 
ers are reduced and those tolerant of grazing become 
dominant. Grazing also reduces the number of plant spe- 
cies present. 
In addition to the direct reduction of understory veg- 
etation due to grazing, grazing can also indirectly decrease 
understory vegetation. Growth of understory vegetation 
is lower in areas of high canopy cover (Arnold 1950; Moir 
1966; Severson 1987). Since increases in tree density occur 
in response to grazing (see below), grazed areas may have 
greater canopy cover, leading to a further reduction in the 
understory vegetation. 
Importance of Understory Structure to Birds - 
Several 
studies have examined the relationship between the quan- 
tity and diversity of vegetation and how this affects bird 
densities. In a variety of different habitats, there is a posi- 
tive relationship between the volume and structural di- 
versity of the vegetation and the density of birds in the 
area (Bull and Skovlin 1982; Karr 1968; Martin 1984; Mills 
et al. 1991; Tomoff 1974; Verner and Larson 1989; Willson 
1974). While no studies have assessed these relationships 
in Southwestern ponderosa pine forests, understory di- 
versity in a coniferous forest in Utah was positively re- 
lated to bird community diversity (Wine 1976). Species 
composition of the vegetation is also important in avian 
community composition in grassland communities 
(Rotenberry 1985). This suggests that replacement of a 
plant species, even if the structure of the plant is the same, 
may affect bird species using the habitat. 
Some ponderosa pine bird species are only found in 
areas with dense understory vegetation. These species, 
which include dusky flycatcher (Sedgwick 1993), Bewick's 
wren (DeGraaf and Rappole 1995), solitary vireo (DeGraaf 
and Rappole 1995), orange-crowned warbler (Sogge et al. 
1994), MacGillivrayfs warbler (Pitocchelli 1995), Virginia's 
warbler (DeGraaf and Rappole 1995) and spotted towhee 
(DeGraaf and Rappole 1995), are likely to decrease in 
abundance if the volume of understory vegetation is re- 
duced. Since grazing alters species composition, reduces 
the number of species in the understory, and decreases 
the volume of the understory, changes in the abundances, 
compositions, and richness of songbird species may oc- 
cur in areas of Southwestern ponderosa pine forests that 
are heavily grazed. Such changes may involve a decrease 
in abundance or the disappearance of species preferring 
dense vegetation. However, species that prefer a more 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Effects and Interactions of Fire, Logging, and Grazing 
open understory may then colonize the area or increase 
in abundance. 
Nesting in Relation to Understory Changes - 
Species 
that nest on the ground or in shrubs may be negatively 
affected by changes in the understory, as sites suitable for 
nesting may be eliminated for some species (Knopf 1996). 
Spruce/ fir forests in the Rocky Mountains generally have 
only 1 species of ground nester (dark-eyed junco); the low 
number of ground-nesting species has been attributed to 
the lack of understory cover necessary for other avian 
ground nesting species (Smith 1980). Therefore, ground 
and shrub nesting species, such as those listed in table 5, 
may suffer reduced reproductive success and may de- 
crease in abundance when the understory vegetation nec- 
essary for structural support, cover, and protection of the 
nest has been reduced or altered. 
The avian species in table 5 are nesting generalists; 
multiple species of grasses and shrubs can provide suit- 
able nesting sites. Therefore, as long as sufficient volume 
in the understory remains, a loss of 1 or a few understory 
species may not affect nesting habitat for those species. 
We suggest that even if all plant species are retained in 
grazed areas, the amount or suitability of nesting habitat 
will be reduced if the abundance or volume of each plant 
species decreases. To test this hypothesis, experiments that 
test the effects of shrub or grass removal on nesting suc- 
cess of understory-nesting birds are needed. 
Foraging in Relation to Understory Changes - Struc- 
ture and composition of the understory is also important 
for foraging. Green vegetation is relatively unimportant 
for ponderosa pine birds; no bird species heavily depends 
on greens (Ehrlich et al. 1988). However, seeds and ber- 
ries, many of which are produced by understory vegeta- 
tion (see list of shrubs above), are important for many bird 
species. When grazing changes the quantity and compo- 
sition of the understory, the amount of available food for 
some bird species also changes. 
Because most ponderosa pine birds that use understory 
plants are generalized feeders, they are less likely to de- 
pend on specific plant species than on plant structure and 
abundance (Rotenberry 1985). The species most likely to 
be affected by changes in plant composition are broad- 
tailed and rufous hummingbirds, since these species are 
specialized to forage on suitably shaped flowers, such as 
columbine (Aquilegia spp.), scarlet gilia (Ipomopsis aggre- 
gate), and penstemon (Penstemon spp.). Although hum- 
mingbirds may be adapted to forage on specific flower 
shapes, they will also forage on a variety of other plant 
species (Carder and Calder 1992; Calder 1993). Penstemon 
spp! increased in a grazed ponderosa pine forest in Ari- 
zona (Arnold 1950); thus, grazing of understory plants is 
not necessarily correlated with reductions of humming- 
bird food. No studies have specifically addressed whether 
variation in seed and berry production or quantity and 
species richness of flowering or fruiting plants affects bird 
species that forage on understory substrates. 
Insects are an important food source for songbird spe- 
cies, as they are the primary food for offspring. Abundance 
and species composition of insects may be affected by 
changes in the understory vegetation, as many insect spe- 
cies depend on specific plants to provide food and ovipo- 
sition sites. Brawn et al. (1987) concluded that competi- 
tion for food among breeding insectivorous birds was 
absent in Arizona ponderosa pine forests, even though 
densities of breeding birds had been increased through 
habitat manipulation. Further studies are needed to de- 
termine whether abundance and species composition of 
arthropods in Southwestern ponderosa pine forests vary 
in relation to grazing patterns, and whether such varia- 
tion can affect species composition or bird reproduction. 
The structure and density of the vegetation may be more 
important when foraging for insects than the number or 
species of insects available, as has been found in an East- 
ern deciduous forest (Robinson and Holmes 1984). Foli- 
age gleaners will probably be most affected by changes in 
the structure of the understory, though some species are ca- 
pable of adapting foraging strategies in response to changes 
in the vegetative structure (Robinson and Holmes 1984). 
Many avian species forage, at least in part, on the 
ground. As more bare ground becomes available due to a 
Table 5. Bird species in ponderosa pine forests that nest primarily on the ground or in low shrubs. 
Species 
Dusky flycatcher 
Hermit thrush 
Orange-crowned warbler 
Virginia's warbler 
MacGillivray's warbler 
Red-faced warbler 
Green-tailed towhee 
Dark-eyed junco 
Song sparrow 
Nest Locality 
Shrub 
Shrub 
Ground 
Ground 
Shrub 
Ground 
Shrub 
Ground 
Shrub 
Reference 
Sedgwick 1993 
Martin 1993 
Martin 1993; Sogge et al. 1994 
Martin 1993 
Martin 1993; Pitocchelli 1995 
Martin 1993; Martin and Barber 1995 
Martin 1993 
Martin 1993 
Kern et al. 1993 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
119 

Chapter 6 
reduction in the grasses and other understory vegetation, 
foraging may become more efficient for some ground feed- 
ers, although conversely, there may be less to forage on. 
Those species that frequently forage on bare ground, such 
as northern flicker (Moore 1995), pinyon jay (Balda et al. 
1977), chipping sparrow (Mannan and Meslow 1984), 
dark-eyed junco (Deborah M. Finch and Rebecca Kimball 
pers. obs.), and green-tailed and spotted towhees 
(Deborah M. Finch and Rebecca Kimball pers. obs.) may 
be favored by removal of patches of dense understory 
vegetation through grazing. Even when grass cover re- 
mains, shorter grasses may be preferred foraging habitat 
for some species, such as American robin (Eiserer 1980) 
and mountain bluebird (Power and Lambert 1996). How- 
ever, ground feeders that forage among leaf litter, for ex- 
ample, towhees, may be negatively affected if high levels 
of grazing reduce all or most of the litter. 
Changes in Tree Density 
the trees are small and young. Therefore, bird species that 
prefer dense, old-growth forests may decrease in abundance 
in grazed forests dominated by young trees even though tree 
densities are high. 
Grazing may also lead to increases in the density of tree 
species other than ponderosa pine. In southern Utah, com- 
parison of a grazed and ungrazed area indicated that graz- 
ing had greatly increased the number of oak and juniper 
trees in ponderosa pine forests (Madany and West 1983). 
Grazing also increased juniper densities in a ponderosa 
forest in California (Laudenslayer et al. 1989). Oak 
(Quercus spp.), juniper (Juniperus spp.), and pinyon pine 
(Pinus edulis) provide important food resources, particu- 
larly for birds that are winter residents and whose winter 
diets depend heavily on access to their nuts and berries, 
such as Lewis' woodpecker, acorn woodpecker, Clark's 
nutcracker, and Townsend's solitaire. Increases in these 
tree species should positively affect the ability of those 
bird species, as wellas other bird species that consume 
nuts and berries, to overwinter successfully in ponderosa 
-
.
 
Grazing generally leads to an increase in the density of 
pine forests. 
ponderosa pines in the Southwest (Cooper 1960; Madden 
and West 1983) and in other Western forests (Laudenslayer 
et al. 1989; Rummell 1951; Zimmerman and Neuen- 
Effects in Riparian Zones 
schwander 1984). The reduction in grass and other un- 
derstory vegetation reduces competition for pine seed- 
lings, and hence greater establishment of seedlings occurs 
in areas that have been grazed (Covington and Moore 
1994a,b; Doescher et al. 1987; Karl and Doescher 1993). In 
addition, several grass species (Arizona fescue, mountain 
muhly, and squirreltail) produce allelopathic compounds 
that inhibit germination of ponderosa pine seeds (Jameson 
1968; Rietveld 1975). If these grass species are reduced 
through grazing, germination of pine seedlings may in- 
crease, leading to further increases in pine densities. 
Through this same process, pine trees may also encroach 
into meadows and clearings within the forest. 
Many bird species of ponderosa pine prefer more open 
woods (table 6). As tree densities increase in relation to 
fire exclusion and overgrazing, populations of these bird 
species may begin to decrease. Supporting this hypoth- 
esis, Verner (1980) observed the greatest number of bird 
species in areas of lower canopy cover in coniferous for- 
ests of the Sierra Nevadas of California. In addition, sev- 
eral bird species associated with ponderosa pine forests 
primarily live in these meadows or clearings (table 6), and 
these species could be excluded from the area as clear- 
ings become forested. 
While increases in tree density may lead to decreases in 
many avian species, it is less clear whether any species 
will increase in abundance. Several species are thought to 
prefer dense, old-growth forests including hairy wood- 
pecker (Hejl1994). However, old-growth forest is charac- 
terized by large trees, which may be more important than 
tree density. When tree densities increase due to grazing, 
Cattle forage disproportionately in and around ripar- 
ian zones in forested habitats (Roath and Krueger 1982a, 
b; Samson 1980; Willard 1990) including Southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests (Glendening 1944). Clary et al. 
(1978) suggested that cattle preference for riparian zones 
in ponderosa pine forests may be minimized by careful 
range management practices that increase forage in sur- 
rounding areas by thinning trees to promote understory 
growth. 
Vegetation in riparian zones of Rocky Mountain forests 
often differs from that in the surrounding area (Peet 1988) 
and may provide unique habitats for some nesting birds. 
Grazing, particularly since cattle selectively forage in ri- 
parian zones, can change the composition and structure 
of the unique riparian community. Observations in a va- 
riety of habitats have shown that herbaceous and woody 
vegetation may be trampled or removed, changed in plant 
form or habitat structure, or transformed to different se- 
ral stages or vegetation types in response to grazing (Bock 
et al. 1993; Fleischner 1994; Krueper 1996; Rinne 1985; 
Szaro 1989). Heavy grazing in combination with drought 
or dewatering of streams due to irrigation or flood con- 
trol can reduce regeneration of deciduous native trees, 
altering plant species composition and age structure, and 
encouraging invasion of aggressive alien plants (Finch et 
al. 1995). These alterations in the vegetation may greatly 
affect bird communities in riparian areas. 
Riparian zones of the Western United States have been 
identified as important habitats for breeding birds since 
more species and individuals are often found in the ripar- 
ian zone than in the surrounding vegetation (reviews in 
120 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Effects and Interactions of Fire, Logging, and Grazing 
Table 6. Bird species in ponderosa pine forests that prefer 
an open habitat or that use meadows or clearings within 
the forest. 
Species 
Reference 
Open forest species 
Rufous hummingbird 
Northern flicker 
Olive-sided flycatcher 
Western wood-pewee 
Dusky flycatcher 
Gray flycatcher 
Buff-breasted flycatcher 
Ash-throated flycatcher 
Cassin's kingbird 
Violet-green swallow 
Pinyon jay 
Black-capped chickadee 
White-breasted nuthatch 
House wren 
Ruby-crowned kinglet 
Western bluebird 
Townsend's solitaire 
Solitary vireo 
Warbling vireo 
Yellow-rumped warbler 
Calder 1993 
Moore 1995 
Hejl 1994 
DeGraaf and Rappole 1995 
Sedgwick 1993 
Cannings 1987; DeGraaf and 
Rappole 1995 
Bowers and Dunning 1994 
DeGraaf and Rappole 1995 
DeGraaf and Rappole 1995 
Brown et al. 1992 
Balda and Bateman 1972; 
Marzluff (this volume) 
Smith 1993 
Pravosudov and Grubb 1993 
Belles-Isles and Picman 
1986 
Mannan and Meslow 1984 
DeGraaf and Rappole 1995 
DeGraaf and Rappole 1995 
DeGraaf and Rappole 1995 
DeGraaf and Rappole 1995 
DeGraaf and Rappole 1995 
 lack-throated gray warbler DeGraaf and ~appole 
1995 
Hepatic tanager 
Western tanager 
Black-headed grosbeak 
Chipping sparrow 
Meadow and clearing species 
Tree swallow 
Mountain bluebird 
Yellow warbler 
MacGillivray's warbler 
Common yellowthroat 
Indigo bunting 
Spotted towhee 
Green-tailed towhee 
Lincoln's sparrow 
American goldfinch 
Lesser goldfinch 
DeGraaf and Rappole 1995 
DeGraaf and Rappole 1995 
DeGraaf and Rappole 1995 
Mannan and Meslow 1984 
Robertson et al. 1992 
Power and Lombardo 1996 
DeGraaf and Rappole 1995 
Pitocchelli 1995 
DeGraaf and Rappole 1995 
DeGraaf and Rappole 1995 
DeGraaf and Rappole 1995 
DeGraaf and Rappole 1995 
DeGraaf and Rappole 1995 
Middleton 1993 
Deborah M. Finch 
(personal observation) 
Bock et al. 1993; Fleischner 1994; Krueper 1993,1996; Saab 
et al. 1995). However, this may not be true in all ponde- 
rosa pine forests. A study in Colorado found few unique 
breeding species in a ponderosa pine riparian zone, 
though riparian zones in other habitats were character- 
ized by unique breeding species (Knopf 1985). In addi- 
tion, in 1 of 2 years of the study, the density of breeding 
birds was not different between the riparian zone and the 
Table 7. Bird species that use riparian tones adjacent to 
ponderosa pine for nesting and foraging. 
Species 
Broad-tailed hummingbird 
Rufous hummingbird 
Acorn woodpecker 
Northern flicker 
Olive-sided flycatcher 
Cordilleran flycatacher 
Buff-breasted flycatcher 
Ash-throated flycatcher 
Cassin's kingbird 
Gray-breasted jay 
Black-capped chickadee 
Canyon wren 
Orange-crowned warbler 
Virginia's warbler 
Yellow warbler 
MacGillivray's warbler 
Red-faced warbler 
Common yellowthroat 
Black-headed grosbeak 
Spotted towhee 
Lincoln's sparrow 
Reference 
Calder and Calder 1992 
DeGraaf and Rappole 1995 
Koenig et al. 1995 
Moore 1995 
DeGraaf and Rappole 1995 
DeGraaf and Rappole 1995 
Bowers and Dunning 1994 
DeGraaf and Rappole 1995 
Blancher and Robertson 1984 
Brown 1994 
Smith 1993 
Jones and Dieni 1995 
Sogge et al. 1994 
DeGraaf and Rappole 1995 
DeGraaf and Rappole 1995 
Pitocchelli 1995 
Martin and Barber 1995 
DeGraaf and Rappole 1995 
Hill 1995 
DeGraaf and Rappole 1995 
DeGraaf and Rappole 1995 
surrounding vegetation. Therefore, riparian zones in some 
ponderosa pine forests and in some years may be less 
important for bird communities than are riparian zones 
in most other habitats. 
Cattle grazing in riparian zones has negatively affected 
bird communities in a variety of Western habitats (Bock 
et al. 1993; Fleischner 1994; Krueper 1993,1996; Saab et al. 
1995). Although there may be few or no species that breed 
exclusively in riparian zones of ponderosa pine forests 
(Knopf 1985), many species do use riparian habitats (table 
7) and may be affected by grazing or trampling of ripar- 
ian vegetation. Studies of a montane river in New Mexico 
showed that grazed areas had fewer bird species and fewer 
individuals, as compared with an ungrazed portion of the 
same river (Szaro and Rinne 1988). However, studies of 
montane riparian zones in Idaho and Nevada found no 
decrease in species numbers in a grazed as compared to 
an ungrazed area (Medin and Clary 1990,1991). In addi- 
tion, northern flicker and American robin increased in 
abundance in a grazed riparian habitat (Mosconi and 
Hutto 1982; Schulz and Leininger 1991), probably due to 
an increase in open ground on which to forage (Knopf 
1996). Therefore, grazing does not always reduce bird 
abundance and species richness in riparian habitats. In- 
deed, population responses to changes in riparian habitat 
resulting from grazing appear to be species dependent 
(Saab et al. 1995). Populations of individual bird species 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 6 
may increase, decrease, or remain constant in relation to 
grazing, contributing to changes in avian community 
structure. Since riparian zones in ponderosa pine forests 
are likely to vary in structure and vegetative composition, 
grazing may negatively affect some bird populations in 
some areas but probably not all species in all areas. High 
grazing intensity (high stocking rate), continuous year- 
round grazing, and grazing during the critical breeding 
season are perhaps the most significant management prac- 
tices that alter avian habitats in riparian zones. 
Cattle can also affect other aspects of the stream, which 
may indirectly affect birds in the area. Studies in South- 
western forests have shown that cattle can damage stream 
banks (Rinne 1985), which leads to stream widening. Graz- 
ing also reduces vegetation around and overhanging 
streams in the Southwest and elsewhere (Platte and Ra- 
leigh 1984; Rinne 1985), leading to an increase in stream 
temperature and a reduction in the amount of detritus in 
the stream. Silt loads in the streams may also increase, 
reducing the size or presence of interstitial spaces that are 
used by aquatic invertebrates (Rinne 1985). While these 
changes might negatively affect aquatic insects, an impor- 
tant food for birds, comparison of a grazed and ungrazed 
region of a montane stream in New Mexico found that 
the grazed region had increased numbers and biomass of 
aquatic insects (Rinne 1988). Thus, grazing may make 
some streams more hospitable for aquatic insect larvae 
that emerge as flying insects and become food for birds. 
Assuming that many bird species in ponderosa pine for- 
ests are insect generalists (Brawn et al. 1987), increases in 
insect abundances, even if the species composition of the 
insects has changed, may benefit some bird species. 
Other Effects of Livestock Management on 
Birds 
Added Water Sources 
While cattle grazing may affect ponderosa pine bird 
communities by altering the habitat, birds may also be 
affected by other range management practices. Areas 
where cattle are grazed are often supplied with stock tanks 
or other artificially created water supplies. These water 
sources can benefit bird communities because they pro- 
vide water for drinking and bathing and emergent insects 
to feed upon. However, additional water sources may have 
some negative affects on bird communities. Livestock traf- 
fic may greatly reduce the vegetation around the water 
source, possibly damaging nesting and foraging sites (But- 
tery and Shields 1975). In addition, the water source may 
attract predatory mammals and snakes, which may in- 
crease avian nest predation in the area (Buttery and Shields 
1975). Other bird species or individuals may colonize the 
site, increasing site activity and competing for local re- 
sources. Stagnant water also provides prime breeding 
habitat for mosquitoes. While mosquitoes provide food for 
many avian species, they also carry malaria (Plasmodium 
spp.), which can infect avian populations. Avian malaria is 
common in most bird communities and can be detrimental 
to an individual's health or survival, particularly for birds 
that may be under stress (Hayworth and Weathers 1987). 
Brown-Headed Cowbirds 
In addition to grazing in forested areas, cattle may be 
moved to feedlots outside forest boundaries. Although, 
few forest birds are likely to travel far from forests to for- 
age at open feedlots, brown-headed cowbirds in many 
regions of the United States are attracted to areas with 
supplemental food such as feedlots and pack stations 
(Lowther 1993; Rothstein et al. 1980; Thompson 1994; Trail 
and Baptista 1993; Verner and Ritter 1983). Radio-telem- 
etry studies in the Sierra Nevada Mountains and the Mid- 
west have shown that cowbirds will travel long distances 
(up to 10 km) between feeding and nesting areas 
(Rothstein et al. 1984; Thompson 1994). Therefore, even when 
feedlots are placed outside forested areas, they may increase 
the presence of cowbirds in local ponderosa pine forests. 
The range expansion of the brown-headed cowbird into 
the Western United States has been well documented 
(Rothstein 1994). In addition to foraging for insects in feed- 
lots, dairy farms, pastures, and other artificial habitats, 
cowbirds also follow cattle to scavenge insects and seeds 
from dung (Terborgh 1992). Therefore, the expansion of 
cowbirds into new habitats and geographic areas may be 
facilitated by the presence of agriculture and cattle (Hanka 
1985; Rothstein 1994; Sharp 1995). Cowbird populations 
in New Mexico, but not Arizona, are increasing (Mehlman 
1995) and further studies may help clarify whether cow- 
bird densities are related to numbers of feedlots and cattle. 
Some habitat changes associated with grazing may ac- 
tually decrease the presence of brown-headed cowbirds 
in ponderosa pine forests. Cowbirds typically prefer open 
habitats, and they travel into forested areas primarily to 
lay eggs in host nests (Verner and Ritter 1983). Verner and 
Ritter (1983) suggest that differences in the cowbird dis- 
tribution in the Sierra Nevada Mountains may be due to 
differences in forest density, with cowbirds avoiding dense 
coniferous forests. If this is true for Southwestern ponde- 
rosa pine forests, increases in tree density due to grazing 
and fire exclusion may make these forests less hospitable 
to cowbird invasions. 
Since brown-headed cowbirds lay their eggs in the nests 
of other species, the reproductive output for parasitized 
individuals is greatly reduced because the nest is either 
abandoned or the host young do not survive to fledgling 
(Robinson et al. 1995a). Female cowbirds can lay up to 30 
or 40 eggs a year (Scott and Ankney 1980); 1 female can 
affect the reproductive success of many different breed- 
ing pairs. However, while they affect host species, they 
may not be the primary cause of population declines of 
most host species. Instead, cowbirds may cause additional 
122 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Effects and lnteractions of Fire, Logging, and Grazing 
stress to populations already stressed from other factors 
such as habitat loss (Rothstein 1994). 
Brown-headed cowbirds occur at least occasionally in 
ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest especially along 
edges, riparian zones, campgrounds, and clearings. Cow- 
birds are generalist brood parasites, and many songbird 
species in ponderosa pine forests have been observed to 
raise cowbird young (Friedmann and Kiff 1985; Martin 
and Barber 1995), although other species reject cowbird 
eggs by ejecting them from the nest. Most ponderosa pine 
birds suffer only low levels of parasitism, but vireos, war- 
blers, sparrows, gnatcatchers, tanagers, and towhees are 
commonly parasitized in at least some habitats (riparian 
zones) (Friedmann and Kiff 1985; Goguen 1994; Schweitzer 
and Leslie 1996). It is unknown whether levels of parasit- 
ism would increase for all species if cowbirds became more 
abundant or whether the few commonly parasitized spe- 
cies would be the primary targets, with other species re- 
maining occasional hosts. 
Little information is available on cowbird populations, 
parasitism rates, host selection, and host nesting success 
for Southwestern ponderosa pine forests. In pinyon-juni- 
per woodlands near Raton, north central New Mexico, 
Goguen (1994) reported cowbird parasitism rates of 80 to 
100 percent for solitary vireo; 78 to 92 percent for western 
tanager; 63 to 75 percent for blue-gray gnatcatcher; 0 to 
13 percent for chipping sparrow; 0 to 25 percent for spot- 
ted towhee; and 0 to 14 percent for western wood-pewee. 
According to Goguen (1994), cowbird parasitism rates 
were usually greater in areas where cattle were present. 
In addition, the nesting success of parasitized nests var- 
ied greatly by host species (Goguen 1994). These same host 
species also occupy Southwestern ponderosa pine forests 
and may be parasitized in these forests. 
Southwestern studies focusing on cowbird abundances 
and affects on hosts are limited to riparian zones at eleva- 
tions lower than the ponderosa pine zone. According to 
Schweitzer and Leslie (1996), cowbird densities and para- 
sitism rates vary greatly by locality. We suggest that cow- 
bird parasitism may pose a problem for some ponderosa 
pine hosts in areas where forests are within 4 to 6 miles of 
open pastures, stockyards, corrals, stock tanks, and agri- 
cultural fields (Rothstein et al. 1984,1987). More research 
is needed to determine whether and where cowbird den- 
sities and parasitism rates are high or low in ponderosa 
pine compared to other habitats, and whether rates of 
parasitism are associated with characteristics such as prox- 
imity to and extent of edge, habitat fragmentation and 
isolation, density of ponderosa pines, forest successional 
stage, dispersed or concentrated grazing, host species 
presence or absence, and host densities. 
Vulnerable species may include small, open-nest, 
neotropical migrants that produce only 1 brood a year (fly- 
catchers, vireos, warblers) (Mayfield 1977), and hosts oc- 
cupying isolated, patchy habitats (Rothstein et al. 1987; 
Rothstein and Robinson 1994). Small, disjunct host popu- 
lations are more at risk of extirpation from cowbird 
parastism than abundant hosts because cowbirds do not 
reduce parasitism rates as preferred hosts become rare 
(Mayfield 1978; May and Robinson 1985). Birds nesting 
in Southwestern riparian habitats are considered espe- 
cially vulnerable to cowbird parasitism because this habi- 
tat is typically patchy, linear, and ecotonal; often near or 
within cattle pastures or agricultural fields; and preferred 
as bongregation grounds by cows (Harris 1991; Schweitzer 
and Leslie 1996; Schweitzer et al. 1996). 
Subdivision of Private Ranches 
Increases in grazing fees may lead ranchers to subdi- 
vide their land. While subdivisions replace wildlife habi- 
tat, developments are generally concentrated and use a 
relatively small proportion of the land (Wuerthner 1994). 
As such, subdivision may benefit avian communities, as 
grazing would cease while much land would still remain 
undeveloped. However, development requires water and 
this will damage or destroy riparian habitats (Brown and 
McDonald 1995), which will negatively affect many bird 
species. Subdivision also fragments the habitat, increas- 
ing edges and establishing possible barriers to dispersal. 
Additional problems associated with subdividing land 
into developed properties are described by Marzluff (this 
volume). Fragmentation and the associated increase in 
edges increases nest predation and nest parasitism by cow- 
birds (Gates and Giffen 1991; Paton 1994; Robinson et al. 
1995b), although not all studies have found that edge nests 
were more heavily parasitized than were interior nests 
(Hahn and Hatfield 1995). Subdivisions also reduce patch 
size of suitable habitat. Large patches of forest habitat are 
preferred by species, such as the hermit thrush (Keller and 
Anderson 1992), and these may decrease in abundance if 
fragmentation occurs. While these species may decrease, 
other species, such as the pine siskin and the Cassin's finch, 
may increase in abundance (Keller and Anderson 1992). 
Both grazing and subdivision of ranch land will, on aver- 
age, negatively affect some bird species. Given existing 
data, it is difficult to determine which factor, grazing or 
subdivision, will have the lowest negative impact on avian 
communities. 
lnteractions of Fire, Grazing, and 
Logging 
Fire, Salvage Logging, and Forest Health 
Salvage logging primarily occurs in response to 3 causes 
of tree mortality: 1) insect attack; 2) tree diseases; and 3) 
fire. Salvage operations can help control insect pests and 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 6 
pathogens by removing dead, dying, or high risk trees, 
and by helping to make a stand less susceptible to future 
catastrophic fire and insect outbreaks. Wood fiber that 
would deteriorate is salvaged. However, salvage logging 
in response to forest disease treats only the effect and not 
the cause of the problem. Following intense fire, salvage 
logging is implemented to help recover the economic 
value of fire-killed trees. Whether or not dead and dying 
trees should be removed from a site is possibly the most 
controversial aspect of forest health management today 
(OfLaughlin et al. 1993; Filip et al. 1996). 
Regardless of the reason for a salvage operation, the 
result is the removal of dead and dying trees from a forest 
stand. Bird species that depend on dead and dying trees 
(snags) are most impacted by any type of salvage logging, 
whether it be selective harvest of individual trees or com- 
plete stand removal. Cavity nesters in ponderosa pine 
forests of the Southwest, such as the acorn woodpecker, 
hairy woodpecker, northern flicker, pygmy nuthatch, 
white-breasted nuthatch, western bluebird, mountain 
chickadee, house wren, Cordilleran flycatcher, and vio- 
let-green swallow (Szaro and Balda 1979a), will potentially 
be affected the most. Snags also provide important habi- 
tat features for other species (Glinski et al. 1983; Hutto 
1995; Sallabanks 1995). 
Empirical data on the response of ponderosa pine bird 
communities to salvage logging is limited and currently 
restricted to fire-related snag removal (Overturf 1979; 
Moeur and Guthrie 1984). Other studies offer insights into 
the response of general forest bird communities to snag 
harvest following fire, which can be cautiously extrapo- 
lated to ponderosa pine bird communities. 
Raphael and White (1984) found 77 percent fewer pairs 
of cavity-nesting birds 5 years after complete snag removal 
on a burned plot in the Sierra Nevada Mountains. This 
decline was largely due to the disappearance of moun- 
tain bluebirds. Pairs of noncavity-nesters declined by only 
6 percent during the 5 years after harvest. Of 3 cavity- 
nesting species reported before snag removal, only the 
northern flicker still bred on the plot post-harvest. 
Raphael (1983) explored the bird response to reduced 
snag densities by simulating various snag-harvest levels 
immediately following fire. The 19 snag-harvest treat- 
ments simulated varied from leaving 1 to 10 percent of 
the pretreatment snag density (in 1 percent increments) 
to leaving 20 to 100 percent (in 10 percent increments). 
Total bird numbers rose dramatically from the 1 to 10 per- 
cent treatment level (corresponding to 0 to 4.5 snags >38cm 
dbh per hectare). Beyond the 30 percent treatment level 
(15 snags/ha), bird response rose relatively slowly. The 
model predicted that optimum snag densities under the 
constraints tested would be 7 to 15 snags/ha. 
Hutto (1995) reported on ongoing studies of bird com- 
munities in burned forests in the northern Rocky Moun- 
tains. These studies suggested that some bird species re- 
quire burned forests to maintain viable populations. Fur- 
ther, bird species differed in the microhabitats that they 
occupy within a burn. Therefore, salvage prescriptions that 
tend to homogenize forest structure (selective removal of 
all trees of a certain size) are unlikely to maintain the nec- 
essary variety of microhabitats within a burned forest. 
Consequently, Hutto (1995) suggested that where salvage 
logging is necessary, it may be better to take trees from 
one part of a bum and leave another part completely un- 
touched rather than selectively remove trees from the en- 
tire burn area. Noting that up to 60 percent of all timber 
sales on some forests in the northern Rocky Mountains in- 
volve salvaged timber, Hutto (1995) also argued that post- 
fire salvage cutting may be conducted more frequently than 
justified on the basis of sound ecosystem management. 
In addition to these studies, 3 studies in progress will 
offer much-needed data on the effects of salvage logging 
on songbird communities. Because these are not occur- 
ring in ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest, their rel- 
evance is unknown. The first is a study of subalpine fir 
(Abies lasiocarpa) forests in the Blue Mountains of north- 
eastern Oregon where fire-killed trees will be salvage 
logged (Sallabanks 1995). The second study examines how 
fire and salvage logging in ponderosa pine forests of west 
central Idaho influence the nest success of 10 cavity-nest- 
ing bird species (V. A. Saab pers. comm.). Salvage logging 
is underway in the third study in lodgepole pine (Pinus 
contorta) forests in south central Oregon (Arnett et al. 1996). 
This study is important because it will examine salvage 
of trees killed by the mountain pine beetle (Dendroctonus 
ponderosae) rather than wildfire. All 3 studies have collected 
presalvage data on breeding bird community composition 
so that pre- and post-salvage data may be compared. 
Although little empirical data exists on the effects of 
snag harvest on wildlife populations following fire, even 
less is known about the effects of salvaging diseased and 
insect-infested trees on bird communities. Because bird 
communities differ between burned and unburned sites, 
the effects of salvage operations on birds may also differ 
between these sites. Therefore, extrapolating results from 
studies of salvage logging in burned sites to unburned 
sites may be unjustified. This area needs further research. 
Relationships between bird communities and general 
forest health are also poorly defined for ponderosa pine 
forests. When forests are overstocked due to a recent his- 
tory of fire suppression, trees are susceptible to a variety 
of insects and diseases and severe wildfires, especially 
during drought conditions. In some Western states, pon- 
derosa pine forests are dying faster than they are grow- 
ing (O'Laughlin et al. 1993). Insectivorous bird species 
would presumably benefit from insect outbreaks such as 
those by the Douglas-fir tussock moth. Similarly, cavity- 
nesters should benefit in the short term from tree mortal- 
ity that occurs as a result of insect attack, disease, or wild- 
fire. In the long term, however, processes that result in 
124 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Effects and Interactions of Fire, Logging, and Grazing 
tree mortality exceeding tree recruitment are problems for 
forest birds. 
Bird regulation of insects that cause tree mortality is 
pertinent to forest health conditions. Birds consume large 
numbers of defoliating insects (Crawford et al. 1983). With- 
out bird predation, it is estimated that spruce budworm 
populations would reach epidemic densities every 3 years 
in the Pacific Northwest (Takekawa and Garton 1984); 
actual epidemics occur about every 28 years (Dolph 1980). 
When insects are at endemic levels, avian predation is 
most effective. Crawford et al. (1983) report that in north- 
ern New England, the percentage of spruce budworm lar- 
vae and pupae eaten by birds declined from 87 percent to 
2 percent of the budworm population at endemic and 
epidemic levels, respectively. 
The relationship between forest health, salvage logging, 
and bird communities in Southwestern ponderosa pine 
forests is complex and poorly understood. The apparent 
decline in some species of forest-breeding neotropical 
migrant songbirds (Finch 1991) may profoundly affect 
forest health if the insects normally eaten by these bird 
species are frequently allowed to reach epidemic levels. 
Increases in insect attack may lead to weaker trees that are 
more susceptible to disease. This, combined with drought 
and management to suppress fires, could increase fuel loads 
and the chance of large, catastrophic, stand-replacing wild- 
fires. Such fires could lead to more salvage logging and fur- 
ther changes in the ponderosa pine bird communities. Given 
the complex nature of these interactions among components 
of the ponderosa pine ecosystem, more research is needed 
on the effects of salvage logging on bird communities, the 
role of songbirds in maintaining forest health, and the rela- 
tionship between insects, disease, fire, and birds. 
Cumulative Effects of Fire, Grazing, and 
Logging 
Pre-European forests of the Southwest tended toward 
a wider range and diversity of tree sizes and ages, health 
states, patch ages, structural stages, inter- and intra-patch 
diversity, and landscape designs than do contemporary 
ponderosa pine forests. Historically, bird species with spe- 
cialized needs were found at varying abundances at dif- 
ferent, but overlapping, intervals along this temporal and 
spatial continuum of forest age, health, and diversity. 
Based on the analyses and studies described above, bird 
species that historically preferred open, park-like ponde- 
rosa pine forests are likely to be negatively affected by 
contemporary forest management that emphasizes con- 
tinuous or long-term grazing in combination with fire 
exclusion because these practices produce a closed forest 
of dense, young to mid-aged trees with few grasses, forbs, 
or shrubs. Such vegetation changes result in poor grazing 
conditions for cattle, too. In addition, modem-day culling 
and salvage logging of snags, diseased trees, and old trees, 
and clearing of old growth patches reduces the diversity and 
heterogeneity of stand ages and structures, intensifymg the 
trend toward younger, more uniform, even-aged forests. 
When the influences of fire exclusion, long-term graz- 
ing, and old-growth logging (heaviest in the first half of 
the 20th century) are fused into one management pack- 
age, the resulting forests of the Southwest tend to be more 
mid-aged than young or old, more dense than open, and 
more plantation-like than variable in tree size, spacing, 
aAd understory structure. Midsuccessional stages domi- 
nate contemporary Southwestern ponderosa pine forests 
and are probably used to the greatest extent by bird spe- 
cies generalists adapted to a broad range of forest and 
structural types (American robin, dark-eyed junco). They 
may be avoided by bird species that require special habi- 
tat elements only found in open forests, old growth, burns, 
snags, heterogeneous landscapes, or a combination of 
these conditions. However, Brawn and Balda (1988a) re- 
ported that no bird species of Southwestern ponderosa 
pine forests has gone extinct since early turn-of-the cen- 
tury surveys (Scurlock and Finch this volume), which 
suggests that habitat changes caused by forest manage- 
ment have not been so extreme as to eliminate any spe- 
cies, at least at the broadest spatial scales. 
Species of concern that are likely to be negatively af- 
fected by forest management that emphasizes continuous 
grazing, fire exclusion, and post-fire salvage logging in- 
clude those that nest in or forage on or from standing dead 
trees or large, old trees in open forests; for example, the 
three-toed woodpecker, pygmy nuthatch, white-breasted 
nuthatch, and mountain and western bluebirds. Addi- 
tional open-forest species that may benefit from prescribed 
fire or thinning of young trees include Grace's warbler, 
rock wren, western wood-pewee, and chipping sparrow. 
Shrub-using species of open or heterogeneous forests that 
may benefit from livestock pasture rotation in combina- 
tion with burning or clearing to increase amounts of early 
successional shrubs are broad-tailed hummingbird, dusky 
flycatcher, MacGillivrayls warbler, orange-crowned war- 
bler, Virginia's warbler, Bewick's wren, solitary vireo, 
white-crowned sparrow, Lincoln's sparrow, and spotted 
towhee. 
Species whose abundances in Southwestern ponderosa 
pine are known or suspected to decline in relation to burns, 
clearcuts, natural clearings, or partial-logging, for ex- 
ample, the pygmy nuthatch, mountain chickadee, red- 
faced warbler, hermit thrush, violet-green swallow, Cor- 
dilleran flycatcher, pine grosbeak, and black-headed 
grosbeak, may respond negatively to local management 
implemented for economic gain or to benefit open-forest 
species. Such immediate reactions are short-lived for spe- 
cies that can occupy subsequent successional stages, but 
are longer-lasting for those that reach peak abundance in 
the oldest forests. While old-growth species may avoid 
open patches created by intense burns or clearcutting, 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
125 

Chapter 6 
fewer of them avoid larger, more diverse landscapes, which 
can include small and large patches of dense old trees, open 
young forest, and open old-growth forest. For example, the 
pygmy nuthatch, a species that uses snags created by fires, 
old age, and disease to nest and roost in, avoids local bums 
that may increase snag density. The solution to maintaining 
populations of all songbird species in Southwestem ponde- 
rosa pine may be to ensure that suitable habitat resources 
are available at the landscape and physiographic levels, while 
acknowledging that local resources may not always be suf- 
ficient to satisfy the needs of all species. 
Research Needs 
The effects of fire, logging, and grazing on bird com- 
munities in ponderosa pine forest need further study. We 
describe some specific areas where further research is 
needed for each management practice. Probably the most 
critical research need is to understand the interactive ef- 
fects of fire, logging, and grazing. For example, what bird 
species can be expected in ponderosa pine forests when 
managing along a gradient ranging from wilderness and 
research natural areas to areas combining fire exclusion, 
prescribed fire, continuous and rotational grazing, even- 
aged and uneven-aged silviculture, and salvage logging? 
Evaluating interactive effects will require complex study 
designs, high amounts of funding, close working relation- 
ships between management and research organizations, 
and a large team of scientists, land managers, and techni- 
cal support staff. Research goals can most realistically be 
met if fewer interactions and objectives are addressed in 
each individual study. Research needs specific to each 
management practice are discussed below. 
Research in Relation to Fire 
Bird communities should be monitored through time 
on areas burned by large, intense wildfires to evaluate the 
effects of such fires on bird communities and how these 
communities change through time following fire. This will 
require opportunistic rather than planned studies. Stud- 
ies should focus on fires that differ in size and intensity, 
so that changes in bird communities can be documented 
over a wide range of fire behavior. Long-term studies are 
needed to document changes in bird communities through 
various phases of post-fire succession. Studies should fo- 
cus on response patterns of individual species and should 
Bird communities should be studied experimentally in 
conjunction with prescribed burning. Studies should con- 
sider the above factors and the effects of a wide range of 
fire prescriptions on important habitat components. Be- 
cause current forest conditions may result in an unaccept- 
ably high loss of some important habitat components even 
with applications of cool fire, it may be necessary to take 
special steps to protect these components in the short term. 
Therefore, techniques to mitigate the negative effects of 
fire on'important habitat components, such as snags, 
should be tested and evaluated. As more natural fire re- 
gimes are restored, this problem should be alleviated and 
special protective measures may no longer be required. 
The effects of salvage logging on post-fire bird commu- 
nities and on recovery of forest structure should be stud- 
ied experimentally, keeping in mind the factors listed 
above. Studies should include a wide range of logging 
prescriptions, as different prescriptions have different af- 
fects on birds and their habitat. 
Efforts should be made to identify any species that are 
dependent on or sensitive to fire, and to evaluate the posi- 
tive and negative effects of fire on those species. The three- 
toed woodpecker may be the species most closely linked 
to fire in the Southwest. This woodpecker is generally rare, 
but is capable of colonizing burned areas rapidly and in 
relatively high numbers (Koplin 1969; Wauer and Johnson 
1984), suggesting that recruitment may occur over large 
distances (Wauer and Johnson 1984). Other species may 
also be partially dependent on fire to create and maintain 
suitable habitat. 
To the extent possible, the range of variation in patch sizes 
of natural (pre-European settlement) bums should be evalu- 
ated so that managers can attempt to mimic natural distur- 
bance patterns through prescribed burning (DesGranges and 
Rondeau 1993). In addition, the natural (pre-European settle- 
ment) range of fuel loadings should be determined so that 
fire managers can bring current conditions in line with his- 
torical conditions. Studies comparing the effects of fire to 
those of timber harvest are also needed. Studies should evalu- 
ate whether or not timber harvest can simulate the effect of 
fire on forest birds and, if so, under what prescriptions. 
Studies exploring the relationship between grazing, fire 
suppression, forest structure, and bird communities are 
also required. Many areas now contain dense forest stands 
as a result of heavy grazing pressure in the past, coupled 
with fire suppression (Rummel 1951; Madany and West 
1983). Restoring fire to these areas may require special 
considerations such as those described in the second para- 
graph of this section. 
evaluate demographic patterns and patterns of resource 
use. Studies should consider breeding and nonbreeding 
Research Pertaining to Silviculture 
birds and year-round residents and migratory birds, as 
Conclusions based on our literature review are ham- 
all of these groups are important parts of the overall bird 
pered by the rarity of studies addressing bird responses 
community. 
to different kinds of logging and by inconsistencies in re- 
126 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Effects and Interactions of Fire, Logging, and Grazing 
search designs. Most reports have considered only the 
effects of timber harvesting and were limited to relatively 
small spatial and temporal scales. In addition, most of 
these studies used secondary variables such as presence, 
absence, or relative abundance of species rather than de- 
mographic attributes such as reproductive output, mor- 
tality, and recruitment and return rates to indicate popu- 
lation trends and habitat suitability (Martin 1992). More 
importantly, past studies have lacked pretreatment moni- 
toring, controls, and/or replicates, and relied on correlative 
evidence instead of direct experimental manipulations to 
assess avian habitat relationships. Present ponderosa pine 
forests, although relatively simple in species composition, 
are nevertheless a complex spatial mosaic that vary in age, 
health (related to disease and insects), germination his- 
tory, fire history, elevation, slope exposure, microclimate, soil 
conditions, composition of flora and fauna, livestock man- 
agement, and silviculture (Brawn and Balda 1988). Although 
most researchers attempt to standardize study plots by se- 
lecting "similar" stands and site characteristics for different 
treatments, stand vegetation may be perceived differently 
by avian species. In addition, logging treatments vary in size, 
selection criteria, treatment type, and time of treatment. 
We recommend that long-term research and monitoring 
of bird populations, bird demographics, habitat use, and 
habitat structure be implemented in relation to different types 
of silviculture, successional stages, and landscape patterns. 
Studies should be designed to address local and landscape 
levels simultaneously to determine if patterns in bird habi- 
tat use shift with scale of resolution. Whereas changes in 
densities and diversities of birds may be relatively small 
within each treatment plot, they may be significant when 
summed across a landscape. Improved techniques and in- 
creased applications for inventorying, mapping, and moni- 
toring stages and types of ponderosa pine at large geographic 
and temporal scales are needed to understand where and 
how ponderosa pine forests and associated avifaunas have 
changed at any given time and to enable adjustments in for- 
est management when undesirable trends are identified. 
Further research on songbirds is needed to determine 
population size and age structure, rate and direction of 
population changes, age-specific fecundity and survival, 
adult and juvenile dispersal, breeding success, mortality, 
predation rates, and return rates in relation to timber har- 
vesting, stand age and regeneration time, intermediate 
treatments, and logging rotation schedules, and size, het- 
erogeneity, and isolation of managed forests. Whitcomb 
et al. (1981) reported that species sensitive to fragmenta- 
tion in Eastern deciduous forests were neotropical mi- 
grants that inhabited forest interiors, nested on or near 
the ground in open nests, and had relatively low repro- 
ductive potential. Such information is critical for under- 
standing why, where, and which bird species are positively 
or negatively affected by logging directly and/or by as- 
sociated sera1 fragmentation of forested landscapes. 
Whether similar or different population and demographic 
associations exist among avian species using ponderosa 
pine forests in the Southwest has yet to be discovered; 
however, based on exploratory studies of bird habitat re- 
lationships, more resident bird species in Western conif- 
erous forests seem to respond negatively to reductions in 
densities and amounts of mature and old growth forests 
than do nontropical migrants (Hejl et al. 1995). 
Many avian species that use Southwestern ponderosa pine 
forksts are transients or wintering residents. While past re- 
search has mostly focused on breeding birds, responses of 
nonbreeding populations to habitat alterations should be 
studied. During migration and winter, most bird species use 
a wider range of habitats, indicating greater habitat plastic- 
ity (James 1971; Anderson and Shugart 1974; Moore et al. 
1995). Research is needed to investigate the degree or scale 
at which different bird species discriminate among habitats 
of different ages, structures, spatial patterns, and treatments. 
Given that over one-third of ponderosa pine forests in the 
United States are privately owned (Raish et al. this volume), 
research partnerships between public agencies and private 
entities are strongly recommended. 
Research in Relation to Grazing 
Grazing in ponderosa pine forests is likely to affect the 
abundance and species composition of bird communities 
breeding and living in Southwestern forests. Changes in 
the density and composition of the understory will greatly 
affect birds that nest on or near the ground. 
Understory changes will also affect foraging behavior, 
potentially reducing the foragmg efficiency of foliage glean- 
ers, but increasing the foragmg efficiency of at least some 
ground foragers. Many ponderosa pine bird species prefer 
more open forest habitats and may decrease in response to 
increasing tree density. Grazing also affects riparian zones 
in ponderosa pine forests, although this may not reduce avian 
diversity and abundances. Bird populations may also be af- 
fected by other range management practices such as the pres- 
ence of stock tanks or feedlots. However, these practices are 
likely to have less of an impact on bird communities in pon- 
derosa pine forests than the influence of habitat changes. 
There are several areas of research that need to be ad- 
dressed before the effects of grazing on ponderosa pine 
bird communities can be understood. Many prior studies 
have suffered from poor experimental design (Brown and 
McDonald 1995), and it is critical to conduct carefully con- 
trolled experiments involving replication and either the 
exclusion or addition of cattle. These studies should ad- 
dress such questions as whether breeding and wintering 
bird communities differ between grazed and ungrazed 
forests, whether trampling reduces resting success, 
whether increases in tree density negatively affect many 
species, and whether cowbird populations increase in 
grazed areas. In addition, studies addressing the impact 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
127 

Chapter 6 
of different grazing systems and cattle densities will pro- 
vide the information necessary to make management de- 
cisions that will minimize the impact of grazing on avian 
communities. Although riparian zones are more difficult 
to study due to the many confounding physical factors 
involved (Brussard et al. 1994), it is important to deter- 
mine whether grazing negatively affects bird communities 
in these areas as well. Finally, other practices associated with 
range management should be investigated to determine if 
and how these might affect songbird populations. 
Acknowledgments 
Barnes, T. G.; Heitschmidt, R. K.; Varner, L. W. 1991. Wild- 
life. In: Heitschmidt, R. K.; Stuth, J. W., eds. Grazing 
management: an ecological perspective. Portland, OR. 
Timber Press, Inc. 179-189 pp. 
Barton, A. M. 1995. Fire adaptations in pines end' oaks: 
Tree population responses to fire suppression in 
Arizona's Madrean forests. Pp. 159-163. In: J.K. Brown, 
R.W. Mutch, C. W. Spoon, and R. H. Wakimoto, tech. 
coords. Proceedings: Symposium on fire in wilderness 
and pbrk management. USDA Forest Service, Gen. Tech. 
Rep. INT-320. Intermtn. Res. Stn. Ogden, UT. 
Belles-Isles, J. C.; Picman, J. 1986. Nesting losses and nest 
site preferences in House Wrens. Condor 88:483486. 
  end ell, J. F. 1974. Effects of fire on birds and mammals. 
Pp. 73-138. In: T. T. Kozlowski and C. E. Ahlgren, eds. 
 ire and ecosystems. Academic Press. New ~Grk. 
We thank S. J. Hejl, R. L. Hutto, D. J. Ligon, and M. 
Blackford, J. L. 1955. Woodpecker concentration inbumed 
Skupski for their insightful comments on earlier drafts of 
forest. Condor 57:28-30. 
this manuscript or its sections. 
Blake, J. G. 1982. Influence of fire and logging on 
nonbreeding bird communities of ponderosa pine for- 
ests. J. Wildl. Manage. 46:404-415. 
Blancher, P. J.; Robertson, R. J. 1984. Resource use by sym- 
Literature Cited 
Arnett, E. B.; Altman, B.; Erickson, W. P. 1996. Relation- 
ships between salvage logging and forest avifauna in 
Lodgepole Pine forests of the central Oregon pumice 
zone. Unpublished Annual Report, Weyerhaeuser Com- 
pany, Springfield, OR. 28 p. 
Amo, S. F.; Harrington, M. G.; Fiedler, C. E.; Carlson, C. 
E. 1995. Restoring fire-dependent ponderosa pine for- 
ests in western Montana. Restoration and Management 
Notes 13:32-36. 
Arnold, J. F. 1950. Changes in ponderosa pine bunchgrass 
ranges in northern Arizona resulting from pine regen- 
eration and grazing. Journal of Forestry 48:118-126. 
Aulenbach, S.; O'Shea-Stone, M. 1983. Bird utilization of 
a ponderosa pine forest after a fire. Colorado Field 
Ornith. J. 17(1):14-19. 
Babb, G. D. 1992. Sprouting response of Quercus arizon-ca 
and Q. emory following fire. M. S. thesis. Univ. of Ari- 
zona, Tucson. 78 pp. 
Balda, R. P. 1967. Ecological relationships of the breeding 
birds of the Chiricahua Mountains, Arizona. Ph.D, diss. 
Univ. of Illinois. Urbana. 218 pp. 
1975. The relationship of secondary cavity nest- 
ers and snag densities in western coniferous forests. 
USDA Forest Service, Wildl. Hab. Tech. Bull 1. South- 
western Region. Albuquerque, NM. 
Balda, R. P.; Bateman, G.C. 1972. The breeding biology of 
the pinyon jay. Living Bird 11 :542. 
Balda, R. P.; Morrison, M. L.; Bement, T. R. 1977. Roosting 
behavior of the Pinyon Jay in autumn and winter. Auk 
94:494-504. 
. . 
patric kingbirds. Condor 86:305-313. 
Block, W. M.; Ganey, J. L.; Severson, K. E.; Morrison, M. L. 
1992. Use of oaks by Neotropical migratory birds in the 
southwest. Pp. 65-70. In: P. F. Ffolliott, G. J. Gottfried, 
D. A. Bennett, V. M. Hernandez C., A. Ortega-Rubio, 
and R. H. Hamre, tech. coords. Ecology and manage- 
ment of oak and associated woodlands: perspectives in 
the southwestern United States and northem Mexico. 
USDA Forest Service, Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-218. Rocky 
Mtn. For. and Range Exper. Stn. Fort Collins, CO. 
Bock, C. E.; Bock, J. H. 1983. Responses of birds and deer 
mice to prescribed burning in ponderosa pine. J. Wildl. 
Manage. 47:836-840. 
Bock, C. E.; Lynch, J. F. 1970. Breeding bird populations of 
burned and unburned conifer forest in the Sierra Ne- 
vada. Condor 7232-189. 
Bock, C. E.; Raphael, M. G.; Bock, J. H. 1978. Changing 
avian community structure during early post-fire suc- 
cession in the Sierra Nevada. Wilson Bull. 90:119-123. 
Bock, C. E.; Saab, V. A.; Rich, T. D.; Dobkin, D. S. 1993. 
Effects of livestock grazing on neotropical migratory 
landbirds in western North America. In: Finch, D. M.; 
Stangel, P. W., eds. Status and management of neo- 
tropical birds. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-229. Fort Collins, CO: 
USDAForest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station: 296-309. 
Bock, C. E.; Webb, B. 1984. Birds as grazing indicator spe- 
cies in southeastern Arizona. Journal of Wildlife Man- 
age. 48: 1045-1049. 
Boucher, P. F.; Moody, R. D. 1996. The historic role of fire 
and current attempts at ecosystem management on the 
Gila National Forest, New Mexico. P. 21. In: Fire in eco- 
system management: Shifting the paradigm from sup- 
128 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Effects and Interactions of Fire, Logging, and Grazing 
pression to prescription. Program abstracts. Tall Tim- 
bers Res. Stn. Tallahassee, FL. 
Bowers, R. K.; Dunning, J. B. J. 1994. Buff-breasted Fly- 
catcher (Empidonax fulvifvons). In: Poole, A.; Gill, F., eds. 
The Birds of North America, No. 125. Philadelphia: The 
Academy of Natural Sciences and Washington, DC: The 
American Ornithologists' Union. 
Brawn, W. J.; Balda, R. P. 1988a. The influence of silvicul- 
tural activity on ponderosa pine forest bird communi- 
ties in the southwestern United States. In: J. A. Jackson 
(ed.), Bird Conservation 3, University of Wisconsin 
Press, Madison. 3: 3-21. 
. 1988b. Population biology of cavity nesters in 
northern Arizona: do nest sites limit breeding densi- 
ties. Condor 90:61-71. 
Brawn, J. D.; Boecklen, W. J.; Balda, R. P. 1987. Investiga- 
tions of density interactions among breeding birds in 
ponderosa pine forests: correlative and experimental 
evidence. Oecologia 72:348-357. 
Brown, C. R.; Knott, A. M.; Damrose, E. J. 1992. Violet- 
green Swallow (Tachycineta thalassina). In: Poole, A.; 
Stettenheim, P.; Gill, F., eds. The Birds of North America, 
No. 14. Philadelphia: The Academy of Natural Sciences 
and Washington, DC: The American Ornithologists' 
Union. 
Brown, J. H.; McDonald, W. 1995. Livestock grazing and 
conservation on Southwestern rangelands. Conserva- 
tion Biology 9:1644-1647. 
Brown, J. L. 1994. Mexican Jay (Aphelocoma ultramarina) 
In: Poole, A.; Gill, F., eds. The Birds of North America, 
No. 118. Philadelphia: The Academy of Natural Sciences 
and Washington, DC: The American Ornithologists' 
Union. 
Brussard, P. F.; Murphy, D. D.; Tracy, C. R. 1994. Cattle 
and conservation biology - another view. Conservation 
Biology 8:919-921. 
Bull, E. L.; Skovlin, J. M. 1982. Relationships between avi- 
fauna and streamside vegetation. Transactions of the 
47th North American Wildlife Conference: 496-506. 
Bull, E. L.; Torgersen, T. R.; Blumton, A. K.; McKenzie, C. 
M.; Wyland, D. S. 1995. Treatment of an old-growth 
stand and the effect on birds, ants, and large woody 
debris: a case study. Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-GTR-353. 
Portland, OR: U.S. Dept. Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Pacific Northwest Research Station. 12 p. 
Buttery, R. F.; Shields, P. W. 1975. Range management prac- 
tices and bird habitat values. In: Smith, D. R., ed. Pro- 
ceedings of the symposium on management of forest 
and range habitats for nongame birds. Gen. Tech. Rep. 
WO-1. USDA Forest Service. 183-189 pp. 
Calder, W. A. 1993. Rufous Hummingbird (Selasphorus 
rufus). In: Poole, A.; Gill, F., eds. The Birds of North 
America, No. 53. Philadelphia: The Academy of Natu- 
ral Sciences and Washington, DC: The American Orni- 
thologists' Union. 
Calder, W. A.; Calder, L. L. 1992. Broad-tailed Humrninghird 
(Selasphorus platycercus). In: Poole, A.; Stettenheim, P.; 
Gill, F., eds. The Birds of North America, No. 16. Philadel- 
phia: The Academy of Natural Sciences and Washington, 
DC: The American Ornithologists' Union. 
Cannings, R. J. 1987. Gray Flycatcher: a new breeding bird 
for Canada. American Birds 41:376378. 
Caprio, A. C.; Zwolinski, M. J. 1992. Fire effects on two 
oak species, Quercus emoryi and Q. Oblongifolia, in south- 
Gastern Arizona. Pp. 150-154. In: P. F. Ffolliott, G. J. 
Gotttried, D. A. Bennett, V. M. Hernandez C., A. Ortega- 
Rubio, and R. H. Hamre, tech. coords. Ecology and man- 
agement of oak and associated woodlands: perspectives 
in the southwestern United States and northern Mexico. 
USDA Forest Service, Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-218. Rocky 
Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. Fort 
Collins, CO. 
. 1995. Fire and vegetation in a Madrean oak 
woodland, Santa Catalina Mountains, Southeastern 
Arizona. Pp. 389-398. In: L. F. DeBano, P. F. Ffolliott,A. 
Ortega-Rubio, G. J. GottPried, R. H. Hamre, and C. B. 
Edminster, tech.j coords. Biodiversity and management 
of the Madrean Archipelago: The Sky Islands of south- 
western United States and northwestern Mexico. USDA 
Forest Service, Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-264. Rocky Mtn. 
Forest and Range Experiment Station. Fort Collins, CO. 
Caton, E. L. 1996. Post-fire habitat use by cavity-nesting 
birds in northwestern Montana. P. 25. In: Fire in ecosys- 
tem management: Shifting the paradigm from suppres- 
sion to prescription. Program abstracts. Tall Timbers 
Research Station. Tallahassee, FL. 
Clary, W. P. ] 975. Range management and its ecological 
basis in the ponderosa pine type of Arizona: The status 
of our knowledge. Res. Pap. RM-158. USDA Forest Ser- 
vice, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station. Fort Collins, CO. 
1987. Overview of ponderosa pine bunchgrass 
ecology and wildlife habitat enhancement with empha- 
sis on Southwestern United States. Wyoming Shrub- 
lands 16:ll-21. 
Clary, W. P.; Webster, B. F. 1989. Managing grazing of ri- 
parian areas in the intermountain region. Gen. Tech. 
Rep. INT-263. USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Re- 
search Station. Ogden, UT. 
Clary, W. P.; Ffolliott, P. F.; Larson, F. R. 1978. Factors af- 
fecting forage consumption by cattle in Arizona pon- 
derosa pine forests. Journal of Range Manage. 31 :9-10. 
Cooper, C. F. 1960. Changes in vegetation, structure, and 
growth of southwestern pine forests since white settle- 
ment. Ecological Monographs 30:129-164. 
Comer, R. C.; Born, J. D.; Green, A. W.; O'Brien, R. A. 1990. 
Forest resources of Arizona. USDA Forest Service. Res. 
Bull. INT-69, Ogden, UT. 
Covington, W. W.; Moore, M. M. 1994. Postsettlement 
changes in natural fire regimes and forest structure: 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 6 
Ecological restoration of old-growth ponderosa pine 
forests. J. Sustain. For. 2:153181. 
1994. Southwestern ponderosa forest structure: 
changes since Euro-American settlement. Journal of 
Forestry. January: 39-47. 
Crawford, H. S.; Titterington, R. W.; Jennings, D. T. 1983. 
Bird predation and spruce budworm populations. Jour- 
nal of Forestry 81:433435. 
Cunningham, J. B.; Balda, R. P.; Gaud, W. S. 1980. Selec- 
tion and use of snags by secondary cavity-nesting birds 
of the ponderosa pine forest. USDA Forest Service, Res. 
Pap. RM-222. Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Ex- 
periment Station. Fort Collins, CO. 
DeGraaf, R. M.; Rappole, J. H. 1995. Neotropical migra- 
tory birds: natural history, distribution, and population 
change. Ithaca, New York: Comstock Publishing Asso- 
ciates. 
DeSante, D. F.; George, T. L. 1994. Population trends in 
the landbirds of western North America. In: Jehl, J. R. 
J.; Johnson, N. K., eds. A century of avifaunal change in 
western North America. Studies in Avian Biology. No. 
15: 173-190. 
DesGranges, J.; Rondeau, G. 1993. Forest bird response to 
natural perturbations and silvicultural practices: Does 
logging mimic nature? Pp. 80-92 In: D. H. Kuhnke, ed. 
Birds in the boreal forest: Proc. of a workshop held 
March 10-12 in Prince Albert, Saskatchewan. Northern 
Forestry Centre. Forestry Canada, Northwest Region. 
Edmonton, Alberta. 
Dobkin, D. S. 1994. Conservation and management of 
Neotropical migrant landbirds in the northern Rockies 
and Great Plains. Univ. of Idaho Press. Moscow, ID. 
220pp. 
Doescher, P. S.; Tesch, S. D.; Alejandro-Castro, M. 1987. 
Livestock grazing: A silvicultural tool for plantation 
establishment. Journal of Forestry. October:29-37. 
Dolph, R. E. 1980. Budworm activity in Oregon and Wash- 
ington, 1947-1979. USDAForest Service, R6-FIDM-033, 
Insect and Disease Management, State and Private For- 
estry, Pacific Northwest Region, Portland, OR. 54 p. 
Dutton, W. L. 1953. Forest grazing in the United States. 
Journal of Forestry 51:248-251. 
Dwyer, D. D.; Buckhouse, J. C.; Huey, W. S. 1984. Impacts 
of grazing intensity and specialized grazing systems on 
the use and value of rangeland: summary and recom- 
mendations. In: 
Developing strategies for rangeland management: a re- 
port prepared by the committee on developing strate- 
gies for rangeland management. Boulder, CO: Westview 
Press: 867-884. 
Edgerton, P. J.; Thomas, J. W. 1978. Silvicultural options 
and habitat values in coniferous forests. Pages 56-64. 
In Proceedings of the workshop on nongame bird habi- 
tat management in the coniferous Forests on the west- 
ern United States. R. M. DeGraaf Tech. Coor. USDA 
Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Forest and Range Exp. 
Stn. GTR PNW-64, La Grande, OR. 
Ehrlich, P. R.; Dobkin, D. S.; Wheye, D. 1988. The birder's 
handbook: a field guide to the natural history of North 
American birds. New York: Simon and Schuster Inc. 
Eiserer, L. A. 1980. Effects of grass length and mowing on 
foraging behavior of the American robin (Turdus 
migratorius). Auk 97:576-580. 
Filip, G. M.; Torgersen, T. R.; Parks, C. A.; Mason, R. R.; 
Wickman, B. E. 1996. Insect and disease factors in the 
Blue Mountains. In: Jaindl, R. G. and T. M. Quigley, eds. 
Search for a solution: Sustaining the land, people, and 
economy of the Blue Mountains. American Forests, 
Washington, D.C.: 169-202. 
Finch, D. M. 1991. Population ecology, habitat require- 
ments, and conservation of neotropical migratory birds. 
Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-205. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Depart- 
ment of Agriculture, Forest Service. Rocky Mountain 
Forest and Range Experiment Station. 26 p. 
Finch, D. M.; Wolters, G. L.; Yong, W.; Mund, M. J. 1995. 
Chapter 7. Plants, arthropods, and birds of the Rio 
Grande. Pages 133-164. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-268. 
Fort Collins, CO: U. S. Department of Agriculture, For- 
est Service. Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experi- 
ment Station. 
Fleischner, T. L. 1994. Ecological costs of livestock graz- 
ing in western North America. Conservation Biology 
8:629-644. 
Franzreb, K. E. 1978. Tree species used by birds in logged 
and unlogged mixed-coniferous forests. Wilson Bull. 
90:221-238. 
Franzreb, K. E.; Ohmart, R. D. 1978. The effects of timber 
harvesting on breeding birds in a mixed coniferous for- 
est. Condor 80:431441. 
Friedmann, H.; Kiff, L. F. 1985. The parasitic cowbirds and 
their hosts. Proceedings Western Foundation Vertebrate 
Zoology 2:226-302. 
Ful6, P. Z.; Covington, W. W. 1995. Changes in fire regimes 
and forest structures of unharvested Petran and 
Madrean pine forests. Pp. 408415. In: L. F. DeBano, P. 
F. Ffolliott, A. Ortega-Rubio, G. J. Gotttried, R. H. 
Hamre, and C. B. Edminster, tech. coords. Biodiversity 
and management of the Madrean Archipelago: The Sky 
Islands of southwestern United States and northwest- 
ern Mexico. USDA Forest Service, Gen. Tech. Rep. RM- 
264. Rocky Mtn. For. and Range Exper. Stn. Fort Collins, 
CO. 
Gaines, E. M., H. R. Kallander, and J. A. Wagner. 1958. 
Controlled burning in southwestern ponderosa pine: 
results from the Blue Mountain plots, Fort Apache In- 
dian Reservation. J. For. 56:323-327. 
Ganey, J. L.; Block, W. M.; Boucher, P. F. 1996. Effects of 
fire on birds in Madrean forests and woodlands. Pp. 
146-154 In: P. F. Ffolliott, L. F. Debano, M. B. Baker, G. J. 
Gottfried, G. Solis-Garza, C. B. Edminster, D. G. Neary, 
130 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Effects and Interactions of Fire, Logging, and Grazing 
L. S. Allen, and R. H. Hamre, tech. coords. Effects of fire 
on the Madrean Province ecosystems. USDA For. Serv. 
Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-289. Rocky Mtn. For. and 
Range Exper. Stn. Fort Collins, CO. 
Gates, J. E.; Giffen, N. R. 1991. Neotropical migrant birds 
and edge effects at a forest-stream ecotone. Wilson Bul- 
letin 103 :204-217. 
Gaud, W. S.; Balda, R. P.; Brawn, J. D. 1986. The dilemma 
of plots or years: A case for longterm studies. Pp. 223- 
228, In: J. Verner, M. L. Morrison, and C. J. Ralph (eds.), 
Wildlife 2000: Modeling habitat relationships of terres- 
trial vertebrates. Univ. of Wisconsin Press. Madison. 
Glendening, G. E. 1944. Some factors affecting cattle use 
of northern Arizona pine-bunchgrass ranges. Res. Rep. 
6. Tucson, AZ: USDA Forest Service, Southwest Forest 
and Range Experiment Station. 
Glinski, R. L.; Grubb, T. G.; Forbis, L. A. 1983. Snag use by 
selected raptors. In: Davis, J. W., G. A. Goodwin, and R. 
A. Ockenfels, tech. coords. Snag habitat management: 
Proc. of the Symposium. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-99. Fort 
Collins, CO: US. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service. Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station. 26 p.: 130-133. 
Goguen, C.B. 1994. The effects of domestic livestock graz- 
ing on nongame birds in northeastern New Mexico. M.S. 
Thesis, Texas Tech. Univ., Lubbock, TX. 
Gordon, J. V. 1996. Effects of prescribed fire on snags and 
logs in northern Arizona ponderosa pine forests. M.S. 
thesis. Northern Arizona Univ. Flagstaff. 58pp. 
Granholm, S. L. 1982. Effects of surface fires on birds and 
their habitat associations in coniferous forests of the Si- 
erra Nevada, California. Ph.D. diss. Univ. of Calif. Davis. 
Hagar, D.C. 1960. The interaction of logging, birds, and 
timber regeneration in the Douglas fir region of north- 
western California. Ecology 41: 116-125. 
Hahn, D. C.; Hatfield, J. S. 1995. Parasitism at the land- 
scape scale: cowbirds prefer forests. Conservation Biol- 
ogy 9:1415-1424. 
Hanka, L. R. 1985. Recent altitudinal range expansion by 
the brown-headed cowbird in Colorado. Western Birds 
16:183-184. 
Harrington, M. G.; Sackett, S. S. 1990. Using fire as a man- 
agement tool in southwestern ponderosa pine. Pp. 122- 
133 In: J. S. Krammes, tech. coord. Effects of fire man- 
agement on southwestern natural resources. USDA 
Forest Service, Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-191. Rocky Mtn. For. 
and Range Exper. Stn. Fort Collins, CO. 
Harris, M. A. 1982. Habitat use among woodpeckers in 
forest burns. M.S. thesis. Univ. of Montana. Missoula. 
Harris, J.H. 1991. Effects of brood parasitism by Brown- 
headed Cowbirds on Willow Flycatcher nesting success 
along the Kern River, California. Western Birds 22: 
13-26. 
Hayworth, A. M.; Weathers, W.W. 1987. Effects of Plas- 
modium relictum on the metabolic rate and body tem- 
perature in Canaries (Serinus canarius). Journal of Para- 
sitology 73: 850-853. 
Heinselman, M. L. 1981. Fire intensity and frequency as 
factors in the distribution and structure of northern eco- 
systems. Pp. 7-57. In: Fire regimes and ecosystem prop- 
erties. USDA Forest Service, Gen. Tech. Rep. WO-26. 
594pp. 
Hejl, S. J. 1994. Human-induced changes in bird popula- 
tions in coniferous forests in western North America 
during the past 100 years. In: Jehl, J. R. J.; Johnson, N. 
K., eds. A century of avifaunal change in western North 
America. Studies in Avian Biology No. 15: 232-246. 
Hejl, S. J.; Woods, R. E. 1991. Bird assemblages in old- 
growth and rotation-aged Douglasfir/ponderosa pine 
stands in the northern Rocky Mountains: Apreliminary 
assessment. Pp. 93100 In: D. M. Baumgartner and J. E. 
Lotan, eds. Interior Douglas-fir: The species and its 
management. Symp. Proc. Washington State Univ. Pull- 
man. 
Hejl, S. J.; Hutto, R. L.; Preston, C. R.; Finch, D. M. 1995. 
Effects of silvicultural treatments in the Rocky Moun- 
tains. Pp. 55-84. In: T. E. Martin and D. M. Finch, eds. 
Ecology and management of Neotropical migratory 
birds. Oxford Univ. Press. Oxford, UK. 489pp. 
Hill, G. E. 1995. Black-headed Grosbeak (Pheucticus 
melanocephalus). In: Poole, A.; Gill, F., eds. The Birds of 
North America, No. 143. Philadelphia: The Academy 
of Natural Sciences and Washington, DC: The Ameri- 
can Ornithologists' Union. 
Hitchcox, S. M. 1996. A comparison of abundance, nest- 
ing success, and nest-site characteristics of cavity-nest- 
ing birds in salvage-logged and uncut patches within a 
burned forest in northwestern Montana. Pp. 36 In: Fire 
in ecosystem management: Shifting the paradigm from 
suppression to prescription. Program abstracts. Tall Tim- 
bers Res. Stn. Tallahassee, FL. 
Horton, S. P.; Mannan, R. W. 1988. Effects of prescribed 
fire on snags and cavity-nesting birds in southeastern 
Arizona pine forests. Wildl. Soc. Bull 16:37-44. 
Hutto, R. L. 1995. Composition of bird communities fol- 
lowing stand-replacement fires in northern Rocky 
Mountain conifer forests. Conservation Biol. 9: 1041- 
1058. 
Hutto, R. L.; Hejl, S. J.; Preston, C. R.; Finch, D. M. 1992. 
Effects of silvicultural treatments on forest birds in the 
Rocky Mountains: Implications and management rec- 
ommendations. Pp. 386-391 In: D. M. Finch and 
W. 
Stangel, eds. Status and management of Neotropical 
migratory birds. USDA Forest Service, Gen. Tech. Rep. 
RM-229. Rocky Mtn. For. and Range Exper. Stn. Ft. 
Collins, CO. 
James, F. C. 1971. Ordination of habitat relationships 
among breeding birds. Wilson Bull. 83:215236. 
James, F. C.; Hess, C. A. 1994. Overview of fire ecology 
and avian conservation. J. Fur Ornithologie 135:489. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 6 
James, F. C.; Wamer, N. D. 1982. Relationships between 
temperate forest bird communities and vegetation struc- 
ture. Ecol. 63:159-171. 
Jameson, D. A. 1968. Species interactions of growth in- 
hibitors in native plants of northern Arizona. Res. Note 
RM-113. Fort Collins, Colorado: USDA Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 
Johnson, M. A. 1995. Changes in southwestern forest: stew- 
ardships implications. USDA Forest Service, SW Region. 
Johnson, T. H.; Wauer, R. H. 1996. Avifaunal response to 
the 1977 La Mesa fire. Pp. 70-94 In: C. D. Allen, tech. 
ed. Fire effects in southwestern forests. Proc. of the sec- 
ond La Mesa fire syrnp. USDA Forest Service, Gen. Tech. 
Rep. RM-GRT-286. Rocky Mtn. For. and Range Exper. 
Stn. Ft. Collins, CO. 
Johnson, W. M. 1956. The effect of grazing intensity on 
plant composition, vigor, and growth of pine-bunch- 
grass ranges in central Colorado. Ecology 37:790-798. 
Jones, S. L.; Dieni, J. S. 1995. Canyon Wren (Cafherpes 
mexicanus). In: Poole, A.; Gill, F., eds. The Birds of North 
America, No. 197. Philadelphia: The Academy of Natu- 
ral Sciences and Washington, DC: The American Orni- 
thologists' Union. 
Karl, M. G.; Doescher, P. S. 1993. Regulating competition 
on conifer plantations with prescribed cattle grazing. 
Forest Science 39:405418. 
Karr, J. R. 1968. Habitat and avian diversity on strip-mined 
land in east-central Illinois. Condor 70:348-357. 
Keller, M. E.; Anderson, S. H. 1992. Avian use of habitat 
configurations created by forest cutting in southeast- 
ern Wyoming. Condor 94:55-65. 
Keller, R. 1992. Effect of ponderosa pine overstory and 
snags on the songbird community, northern Arizona. 
Unpublished Report, Arizona Game and Fish Depart- 
ment, Flagstaff, AZ. 
Kern, M. D.; Sogge, M. K.; Kern, R. B.; van Riper, C. 111. 
1993. Nests and nest sites of the San Miguel Island Song 
Sparrow. Journal of Field Ornithology 64:367-381. 
Kilgore, B. M. 1971. Response of breeding bird popula- 
tions to habitat changes in a giant sequoia forest. Am. 
Midland Naturalist 85:135-152. 
Knopf, F. L. 1985. Significance of riparian vegetation to 
breeding birds across an altitudinal cline. In: Johnson, 
R. R.; Ziebell, C. D.; Patton, D. R.; Ffolliott, P. F.; Hamre, 
R. H., eds. Riparian ecosystems and their management: 
reconciling conflicting uses. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-120. 
Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service, Rocky Moun- 
tain Forest and Range Experiment Station: 105- 110. 
. 1996. Perspectives on grazing nongame bird 
habitats. In: Krausman, P. R., ed. Rangeland Wildlife. 
Denver, Colorado: The Society for Range Management: 
51-58. 
Koehler, D. A.; Thomas, S. D.; Russell, H. D.; Mastel, J. A. 
1989. Effects of controlled grazing of understory grasses 
and fortes on survival and growth of ponderosa pine 
seedlings. In: Tecle, A.; Wallace, W.; Hamre, R. H., eds. 
Multiresource management of ponderosa pine forests. 
Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-185. Fort Collins, CO: USDA For- 
est Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experi- 
ment Station: 65-70. 
Koenig, W. D.; Stacey, P.B.; Stanback, M. T.; Mumme, R. L. 
1995. Acorn Woodpecker (Melanepes formicivorus). In: 
Poole, A.; Gill, F., eds. The Birds of North America, No. 
194. Philadelphia: The Academy of Natural Sciences and 
Washirigton, DC: The American Ornithologists' Union. 
Koplin, J. R. 1969. The numerical response of woodpeck- 
ers to insect prey in a subalpine forest in Colorado. Con- 
dor 71 :436438. 
Krueger, W. C.; Winward, A. H. 1974. Influence of cattle 
and big game grazing on understory structure of a 
douglas fir-ponderosa pine-kentucky bluegrass commu- 
nity. Journal of Range Manage. 27:450453. 
Krueper, D. J. 1993. Effects of land use practices on west- 
ern riparian ecosystems. In: Finch, D.M.; Stangel, P. W., 
eds. Status and management of migratory landbirds. 
Gen. Tech. Rep. RM229. Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station: 321-330. 
1996. Effects of livestock management of south- 
western riparian ecosystems. In: Shaw, D. W.; Finch, D. 
M., eds. Desired future conditions for southwestern ri- 
parian ecosystems: bringing interests and concerns to- 
gether. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-272. Fort Collins, CO: 
USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range 
Experimental Station: 281-301. 
Laudenslayer, W. F. J.; Darr, H. H.; Smith, S. 1989. His- 
torical effects of forest management practices on eastside 
pine communities in northeastern California. In: Tecle, 
A.; Wallace, W.; Hamre, R. H., eds. Multiresource man- 
agement of ponderosa pine forests. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM- 
185. Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station: 26-34. 
Li, P.; Martin, T. E. 1991. Nest-site selection and nesting 
success of cavity-nesting birds in high elevation forest 
drainages. Auk 108:405418. 
Lovejoy, T. E. 1974. Bird diversity and abundance in Ama- 
zon forest communities. Living Bird 13: 127-191. 
Lowe, P. 0.; Ffolliott, P. F.; Dieterich, J. H.; Patton, D. R. 
1978. Determining potential benefits from wildfire in 
Arizona ponderosa pine forests. USDA Forest Service, 
Gen. Tech. Rep. RM52. Rocky Mtn. For. and Range 
Exper. Stn. Ft. Collins, CO. 
Lowther, P. E. 1993. Brown-headed Cowbird (Molothrus 
afer). In: Poole, A.; Gill, F., eds. The Birds of North 
America, No. 47. Philadelphia: The Academy of Natu- 
ral Sciences and Washington, DC: The American Orni- 
thologists' Union. 
MacArthur, R. H.; MacArthur, J. W. 1961. On bird species 
diversity. Ecology 42:594-598. 
MacCracken, J. G.; Hansen, R. M. 1981. Diets of domestic 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Effects and Interactions of Fire, Logging, and Grazing 
sheep and other large herbivores in south-central Colo- 
rado. Journal of Range Manage. 34:242-243. 
Madany, M. H.; West, N. E. 1983. Livestock grazing-fire 
regime interactions within montane forests of Zion 
National Park, Utah. Ecology 64:661-667. 
Mannan, R. W.; Meslow, E. C. 1984. Bird populations and 
vegetation characteristics in managed and old-growth 
forests, northeastern Oregon. Journal of Wildlife Man- 
agement 48:1219-1238. 
Mannan, R. W.; Siegel, J. J. 1988. Bird populations and 
vegetation characteristics in immature and old growth 
ponderosa pine forests. Final Rep., Ref. G500016, con- 
tract with USDAForest Service, Univ. of Arizona, School 
of Renewable Nat. Res., Tucson. 
Mannan, R. W.; Morrison, M. L.; Meslow, E. C. 1984. Com- 
ment: The use of guilds in forest management. Wildl. 
Soc. Bull. 12:426-430. 
Marlow, C. B.; Pogacnik, T. M. 1985. Time of grazing and 
cattle-induced damage to streambanks. In: Johnson, R. 
R.; Ziebell, C. D.; Patton, D. R.; Ffolliott, P. F.; Hamre, R. 
H., eds. Riparian ecosystems and their management: 
reconciling conflicting uses. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-120. 
Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service, Rocky Moun- 
tain Forest and Range Experiment Station: 279-284. 
Marshall Jr., J. T. 1957. Birds ofthe pine-oak woodland in 
southern Arizona and adjacent Mexico. Pac. Coast Avi- 
fauna 32:l-125. 
1963. Fire and birds in the mountains of south- 
ern Arizona. Proc. Tall Timbers Fire Ecol. Conf. 2:134- 
141. 
Martin, T. E. 1984. Impact of livestock grazing on birds of 
a Colombian cloud forest. Tropical Ecology 25:158-171. 
. 1988. Habitat and area effects on forest bird 
assemblages: is nest predation an influence? Ecology 
69:74-84. 
. 1992. Breeding productivity considerations: 
What are the appropriate habitat features for manage- 
ment? Pages 455-473 in Ecology and conservation of 
neotropical migratory landbirds (J. M. Hagan 111 and 
D. W. Johnston, eds.). Smithsonian Institution Press, 
Washington, D.C. 609 p. 
. 1993. Nest predation among vegetation layers 
and habitat types: revising the dogmas. American Natu- 
ralist 141 $97-913. 
Martin, T. E.; Barber, P. M. 1995. Red-faced Warbler 
(Cardellina rubrifrons). In: Poole, A.; Gill, F., eds. The Birds 
of North America, No. 152. Philadelphia: The Academy 
of Natural Sciences and Washington, DC: The Ameri- 
can Ornithologists' Union. 
Martin, T. E.; Roper, J.J. 1988. Nest predation and nest-site 
selection of a western population of the Hermit Thrush. 
Condor 90:51-57. 
May, R.M.; Robinson, S.K. 1985. Population dynamics of 
avian brood parasitism. American Naturalist 126: 
475- 494. 
Mayfield, H. F. 1977. Brown-headed Cowbird: Agent of 
extirmination? American Birds 31: 107113. 
Mayfield, H. F. 1978. Brood parasitism reducing interac- 
tions between Kirtland's Warblers and Brown-headed 
Cowbirds. Pp. 85-91 In: S. A. Temple, ed. Endangered 
birds: Management techniques for preserving threat- 
ened species. Proceedings Symposium Management 
Techniques for Preserving Endangered Birds. Univ. 
F o n s i n  Press. 
Medin, D. E.; Clary, W. P. 1990. Bird and small mammal 
populations in a grazed and ungrazed riparian habitat 
in Idaho. Res. Pap. INT-425. Ogden, UT: USDA Forest 
Service, Intermountain Research Station. 
. 1991. Breeding bird populations in a grazed 
and ungrazed riparian habitat in Nevada. Res. Pap. INT- 
441. Ogden, UT: USDA Forest Service, Intermountain 
Research Station. 
Mehlman, D. W. 1995. Notes on the increase of the Brown- 
headed Cowbird in New Mexico. NMOS Bulletin 23: 
59-63. 
Meslow, C. 1978. The relationship of birds to habitat struc- 
ture - plant communities and successional stages. Page 
12-18. In Proceedings of the workshop on nongame bird 
habitat management in the coniferous forests on the 
western United States. R. M. DeGraaf, Tech. Coor. USDA 
Forest Service,, Pacific Northwest Forest and Range Exp. 
Stn. GTR PNW-64, La Grande, OR. 
Middleton, A. L. A. 1993. American Goldfinch (Carduelis 
tristis). In: Poole, A.; Gill, F., eds. The Birds of North 
America, No. 80. Philadelphia: The Academy of Natu- 
ral Sciences and Washington, DC: The American Orni- 
thologists' Union. 
Mills, G. S.; Dunning, J. B. J.; Bates, J. M. 1991. The rela- 
tionship between breeding bird density and vegetation 
volume. Wilson Bulletin 103:468479. 
Mitchell, J. E.; Freeman, D. R. 1993. Wildlife-livestock-fire 
interactions of the north Kaibab: A historical review. 
Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-222. Fort Collins, CO: USDA For- 
est Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experi- 
ment Station. 
Moeur, S., and D. Guthrie. 1984. The effects of clearing 
fire-killed trees on wildlife Pp. 135-144 In: T. S. Fox, 
compiler. La Mesa fire symp. LA-9236-NERP. Los 
Alamos Natl. Lab. Los Alamos, NM. 
Moir, W. H. 1966. Influence of ponderosa pine on herba- 
ceous vegetation. Ecology 47: 10451048. 
Moore, F. R.; Gauthreaux Jr., S. A.; Kerlinger, P.; Simons, 
T. R. 1995. Habitat requirements during migration: im- 
portant link in conservation. Pp. 121-144. In: Ecology and 
Management of Neotropical migratory Birds. T. E. Martin 
and D. M. Finch, eds. Oxford University Press, New York. 
Moore, W. S. 1995. Northern Flicker (Colapter aurafus). In: 
Poole, A.; Gill, F., eds. The Birds of North America, No. 
166. Philadelphia: The Academy of Natural Sciences and 
Washington, DC: The American Ornithologists' Union. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 6 
Morrison, M. L.; Raphael, M. G. 1993. Modeling the dy- 
namics of snags. Ecol. Applic. 3:322-330. 
Mosconi, S. L.; Hutto, R L. 1982. The effect of grazing on 
the land birds of a western Montana riparian habitat. 
In: Peek, J. M.; Dalke, P. D., eds. Wildlife-livestock rela- 
tionships symposium: proceedings 10. Moscow, Idaho: 
Forest, Wildlife and Range Experimental Station: 221-233. 
O'Laughlin, J.; MacCracken, J. G.; Adams, D. L.; Bunting, 
S. C.; Blatner, K. A.; Keegan, C. E. 1993. Forest health 
conditions in Idaho. Idaho Forest, Wildlife and Range 
Policy Analysis Group, Report No. 11. University of 
Idaho Press, Moscow. 244 pp. 
Overturf, J. H. 1979. The effects of forest fire on breeding 
bird populations of ponderosa pine forests of northern 
Arizona. M.S. thesis. Northern Arizona Univ. Flagstaff. 
108 pp. 
Paton, P. W. 1994. The effect of edge on avian nest suc- 
cess: how strong is the evidence. Conservation Biology 
8: 17-26. 
Patton, D. R., and J. Gordon. 1995. Fire, habitats, and wild- 
life. Final Report. USDA Forest Service, Coconino Natl. 
For. Flagstaff, AZ. 85pp. 
Pearson, H. A.; Mann, J. F.; Howard, D. A. 1971. Timing 
use of cool- and warm-season grasses on pine ranges. 
Journal of Range Management 24:162-163. 
Peet, R. K. 1988. Forests of the Rocky Mountains. In: 
Barbour, M. G.; Billings, W. D., eds. North American 
terrestrial vegetation. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer- 
sity Press: 63-101. 
Pitocchelli , J. 1995. MacGillivray's Warbler (Oporornis 
tolmiei). In: Poole, A.; Gill, F., eds. The Birds of North 
America, No. 159. Philadelphia: The Academy of Natu- 
ral Sciences and Washington, DC: The American Orni- 
thologists' Union. 
Platts, W. S.; Raleigh, R. F. 1984. Impacts of grazing on 
wetlands and riparian habitat. In: Developing strate- 
gies for rangeland management: a report prepared by 
the committee on developing strategies for rangeland 
management. Boulder, CO: Westview Press: 1105-1118. 
Power, D. M. 1975. Similarity among avifaunas of the 
Galapagos Islands. Ecology 56:616-626. 
Power, H. W.; Lombardo, M. P. 1996. Mountain Bluebird 
(Sialia currucoides) In: Poole, A.; Gill, F., eds. The Birds 
of North America, No. 222. Philadelphia: The Academy 
of Natural Sciences and Washington, DC: The Ameri- 
can Ornithologists' Union. 
Pravosudov, V. V.; Grubb, T. C. J. 1993. White-breasted 
Nuthatch (Sitta carolinensis). In: Poole, A.; Gill, F., eds. 
The Birds of North America, No. 54. Philadelphia: The 
Academy of Natural Sciences and Washington, DC: The 
American Ornithologists' Union. 
Raphael, M. G. 1983. Cavity-nesting bird response to de- 
clining snags on a burned forest: A simulation model. 
In: Davis, J. W., G. A. Goodwin, and R. A. Ockenfels, 
tech. coords. Snag habitat management: Proc. of the 
Symposium. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-99. Fort Collins, CO: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Rocky 
Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 26 p.: 
211-215. 
Raphael, M. G., and M. L. Morrison. 1987. Decay and dy- 
namics of snags in the Sierra Nevada, California. For- 
est Science 33:774-783. 
Raphael, M. G.; White, M. 1984. Use of snags by cavity- 
nesting birds in the Sierra Nevada. Wildl. Monogr. 86: 
1-66. ' 
Raphael, M. G.; Morrison, M. L.; Yoder-Williams, M. P. 
1987. Breeding bird populations during twenty-five 
years of postfire succession in the Sierra Nevada. Con- 
dor. 89: 614-626. 
Rasmussen, D. I. 1941. Biotic communities of kaibab Pla- 
teau, Arizona. Ecological Monographs 11: 229-275. 
Rietveld, W. J. 1975. Phytotoxic grass residues reduce germi- 
nation and initial root growth of ponderosa pine. Res. Pa- 
per RM-153. Fort Collins, Colorado: USDA Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 
Rime, J. N. 1985. Time of grazing and cattle-induced dam- 
age to streambanks. In: Johnson, R. R.; Ziebell, C. D.; 
Patton, D. R.; Ffolliott, P. F.; Hamre, R. H., eds. Riparian 
ecosystems and their management: reconciling conflict- 
ing uses. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-120. Fort Collins, CO: 
USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station: 295-299. 
. 1988. Effects of livestock grazing enclosure on 
aquatic macroinvertebrates in a montane stream, New 
Mexico. Great Basin Naturalist 48: 146- 153. 
Roath, L. R.; Krueger, W. C. 1982a. Cattle grazing and be- 
havior on a forested range. Journal of Range Manage- 
ment 35:332-338. 
1982b. Cattle grazing influence on a mountain 
riparian zone. Journal of Range Management 35: 
100- 103. 
Robertson, R. J.; Stutchbury, B. J.; Cohen, R. R. 1992. Tree 
Swallow (Tachycineta bicolor). In: Poole, A.; Stettenheim, 
P.; Gill, F., eds. The Birds of North America, No. 11. Phila- 
delphia: The Academy of Natural Sciences and Wash- 
ington, DC: The American Ornithologists' Union. 
Robinson, S. K.; Holmes, R. T. 1984. Effects of plant spe- 
cies and foliage structure on the foraging behavior of 
forest birds. Auk 101 :672-684. 
Robinson, S. K.; Rothstein, S. I.; Brittingham, M. C.; Petit, 
L. J.; Grzybowski, J. A. 1995a. Ecology and behavior of 
cowbirds and their impact on host populations. In: 
Martin, T. E.; Finch, D. M., eds. Ecology and manage- 
ment of neotropical migratory birds: a synthesis and 
review of critical issues. New York: Oxford University 
Press: 428-460. 
Robinson, S. K.; Thompson, F. R. 111; Donovan, T. M.; 
Whitehead, D. R.; Faaborg, J. 1995b. Regional forest frag- 
mentation and the nesting success of migratory birds. 
Science 267: 19871990. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Effects and Interactions of Fire, Logging, and Grazing 
Roppe, J. A., and D. Hein. 1978. Effects of fire on wildlife 
in a lodgepole pine forest. Southwestern Naturalist 
23:279-288. 
Rosenstock, S. S. 1996. Habitat relationships of breeding 
birds in northern Arizona ponderosa pine and pine-oak 
forests.Ariz. Game and Fish Department Technical Re- 
port 23, Phoenix, AZ. 53 p 
Rotenberry, J. T. 1985. The role of habitat in avian com- 
munity composition: physiognomy or floristics? 
Oecologia 67:213-217. 
Rotenberry, J. T., R. J. Cooper, J. M. Wunderle, and K. G. 
Smith. 1995. When and how are populations limited? 
The roles of insect outbreaks, fires, and other natural 
perturbations. Pp. 55-84 In: T. E. Martin and D. M. Finch, 
eds. Ecology and management of Neotropical migra- 
tory birds. Oxford Univ. Press. Oxford, UK. 489pp. 
Rothstein, S. I. 1994. The cowbird's invasion of the far west: 
history, causes and consequences experienced by host 
species. In: Jehl, J. R. J.; Johnson, N. R., eds. A century of 
avifaunal change in western North America. Studies in 
Avian Biology. No. 15:301-315. 
Rothstein, S. I.; Robinson, S.K. 1994. Conservation and 
coevolutionary implications of brood parasitism by 
cowbirds. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 9:162-164. 
Rothstein, S. I.; Verner, J.; Stevens, E. 1980. Range expan- 
sion and diurnal changes in dispersion of the brown- 
headed cowbird in the Sierra Nevada. Auk 97:253-267. 
. 1984. Radio-tracking confirms a unique diur- 
nal pattern of spatial occurrence in the parasitic brown- 
headed cowbird. Ecology 65:77-88. 
Rothstein, S.I.; Verner, J.; Stevens, E; Ritter, L.V. 1987. Be- 
havioral changes among sex and age classes of the 
Brown-headed Cowbird and their relation to the effi- 
cacy of a control program. Wilson Bull. 99:322-327. 
Rummel, R. S. 1951. Some effects of livestock grazing on 
ponderosa pine forest and range in central Washing- 
ton. Ecology 32:594-607. 
Saab, V. A.; Bock, C. E.; Rich, T. D.; Dobkin, D. S. 1995. 
Livestock grazing effects in western North America. In: 
Martin, T. E.; Finch, D. M., eds. Ecology and manage- 
ment of neotropical migratory birds: a synthesis and 
review of critical issues. New York: Oxford University 
Press: 311-353. 
Sackett, S. S.; Haase, S.; Harrington, M. G. 1994. Restora- 
tion of southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems with 
fire. Pp. 115-121 In: W. W. Covington and L. F. DeBano, 
tech. coords. Sustainable ecological systems: Imple- 
menting an ecological approach to land management. 
USDA Forest Service, Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-247. Rocky 
Mtn. For. and Range Exper. Stn. Ft. Collins, CO. 
Sallabanks, R. 1995. Effects of wildfire on breeding bird 
communities in coniferous forests of northeastern Or- 
egon. Unpublished Annual Report, Sustainable Ecosys- 
tems Institute, Meridian, ID. 44 p. 
Samson, F. B. 1980. Use of montane meadows by birds. In: 
DeGraff, R. M.; Tilghman, N. G., eds. Management of 
western forests and grasslands for nongame birds. Gen. 
Tech. Rep. INT86. Ogden, UT: USDA Forest Service, Inter- 
mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station: 113-129. 
Schulz, T. T.; Leininger, W. C. 1991. Nongame wildlife com- 
munities in grazed and ungrazed montane riparian 
sites. Great Basin Naturalist 51 :286-292. 
Schweitzer, S. H.; Finch, D. M.; Leslie, D. M., Jr. 1996. Re- 
ducing impacts of brood parasitism by Brown-headed 
~dwbirds 
on riparian-nesting migratory songbirds. 
Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-272. Fort Collins, CO: USDA 
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Ex- 
periment Station: 267-276. 
Schweitzer, S. H.; Leslie, D. M., Jr. 1996. The Brown-headed 
Cowbird and its riparian dependent hosts in New 
Mexico. Final Report, Cooperative Agreement No. 28- 
C4-853. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest 
and Range Experiment Station, Albuquerque, NM. 47 p. 
Scott, D. M.; Ankney, C. D. 1980. Fecundity of the brown- 
headed cowbird in southern Ontario. Auk 97:677-683. 
Scott, V. E. 1978. Characteristics of ponderosa pine snags used 
by cavity-nesting birds in Arizona. J. For. 7626-28. 
1979. Bird response to snag removal in ponde- 
rosa pine. J. For. 77:26-28. 
Scott, V. E.; Gotttried, G. J. 1983. Bird response to timber 
harvest in a mixed conifer forest in Arizona. USDA For- 
est Service, Rocky Mountain For. and Range Exp. Stn. 
Res. Pap. RM 245. Fort Collins, CO. 
Sedgwick, J. A. 1993. Dusky Flycatcher (Empidonax 
oberholseri). In: Poole, A.; Gill, F., eds. The Birds of North 
America, No. 78. Philadelphia: The Academy of Natu- 
ral Sciences and Washington, DC: The American Orni- 
thologists' Union. 
Severson, K. E. 1987. Deer and elk nutrition in Rocky 
Mountain ponderosa pine forests. Wyoming Shrublands 
16:23-27. 
Sharp, B. E. 1995. Brown-headed cowbirds and grazing 
on National Forests in the Pacific Northwest. North- 
western Naturalist 76: 121-126. 
Siegel, J. J. 1989. An evaluation of the minimum habitat 
quality standards for birds in old-growth ponderosa 
pine forests. MS Thesis, Univ. of Arizona, Tucson. 
Skinner, N. G. 1989. Seasonal avifauna use of burned and 
unburned lodgepole pine forest ecotones. M.S. thesis. 
Univ, of Montana. Missoula, MT. 
Skovlin, J. M.; Harris, R. W.; Strickler, G. S.; Garrison, G. 
A. 1976. Effects of cattle grazing methods on ponde- 
rosa pine-bunchgrass range in the pacific northwest. 
Tech. Bull. 1531.: USDA Forest Service. 
Smith, K. G. 1980. Bird communities of mixed-conifer for- 
ests of the Sierra Nevada. In: DeGraff, R. M.; Tilghman, 
N. G., eds.;Management of western forests and grass- 
lands for nongame birds. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-86. 
Ogden, UT: USDA Forest Service, Intermountain For- 
est and Range Experiment Station: 258-279. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 6 
Smith, S. M. 1993. Black-capped Chickadee (Parus 
atricapillus). In: Poole, A.; Stettenheim, P.; Gill, F., eds. 
The Birds of North America, No. 39. Philadelphia: The 
Academy of Natural Sciences and Washington, DC: The 
American Ornithologists' Union. 
Sogge, M. K.; Gilbert, W. M.; van Ripper, C. 111. 1994. Or- 
ange-crowned Warbler (Vermivora celata). In: Poole, A.; 
Gill, F., eds. The Birds of North America, No. 101. Phila- 
delphia: The Academy of Natural Sciences and Wash- 
ington, DC: The American Ornithologists' Union. 
Spencer, J. S. 1966. Arizona's forests. USDA Forest Ser- 
vice, Rocky Mountain Experiment Station and Inter- 
mountain Experiment Station, Resource Bull. INT-6. 
Fort Collins, CO. 
Stoddard, H. L. 1963. Bird habitat and fire. Proceedings: 
Tall Timbers Fire Ecol. Conf. 2: 163-175. 
Taylor, D.M.; Littlefield, C.D. 1986. Willow Flycatcher and 
Yellow Warbler response to cattle grazing. American 
Birds 40: 1169-1173. 
Tomoff, C. S. 1974. Avian species diversity in desert scrub. 
Ecology 55:396403. 
Trail, P. W.; Baptista, L. F. 1993. The impact of brown- 
headed cowbird parasitism on populations of the 
Nuttall's white-crowned sparrow. Conservation Biology 
7:309-315. 
USDI, Fish & Wildlife Service. 1995. Recovery plan for the 
Mexican spotted owl (Strix occidentalis lucida). Vol. I. 
Albuquerque, NM. 172p. 
USDA, Forest Service. 1993. Changing conditions in south- 
western forests and implications on land stewardship. 
July, 1993. US. Forest Service, Southwestern Region. 
Albuquerque, NM. 
USDA, Forest Service. 1994. Sustaining our aspen heri- 
tage into the twenty-first century. August, 1994. U.S. 
Forest Service, Southwestern Region, Albuquerque, 
NM, and Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station, Fort Collins, CO. 
Van Hooser, D. D.; Collins, D.C.; O'Brien, R. A. 1993. For- 
est resources of New Mexico. USDA Forest Service, INT 
Res. Stn, Resource Bull. INT-79. Ogden, UT. 
Verner, J. 1980. Bird communities of mixed-conifer forests 
of the Sierra Nevada. In: DeGraff, R. M.; Tilghman, N. 
G., eds. Management of western forests and grasslands 
for nongame birds. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-86. Ogden, UT: 
USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station: 198-223. 
Verner, J.; Larson, T. A. 1989. Richness of breeding bird 
species in mixed-conifer forests of the Sierra Nevada, 
California. Auk 106:447-463. 
Verner, J.; Ritterpi, L. V. 1983. Current status of the brown- 
head6d cowbird in the Sierra National Forest. Auk 
100:355-368. 
Wauer, R. H.; Johnson, T. 1984. La Mesa fire effects on avi- 
fauna - Changes in avian populations and biomass. Pp. 
145-171 In: T. S. Fox, compiler. La Mesa fire symp. LA- 
9236-NERR Los Alamos Natl. Lab. Los Alamos, NM. 
Weaver, H. 1951. Fire as an ecological factor in the south- 
western ponderosa pine forests. J. For. 49:93 -98. 
Whitcomb, R. F.; Robbins, C. S.; Lynch, J. F.; Whitcomb, B. 
L.; Klimkiewiez, K.; Bystrak, D. 1982. Effects of forest 
fragmentation on avifauna of the eastern deciduous 
forest. In Forest inland dynamics in man-dominated 
landscapes. Pp. 125-205. R. L. Burgess and D. M. Sharpe, 
eds. Springer-Verlag, New York, NY. 
Willard, E. E. 1990. Use and impact of domestic livestock 
in whitebark pine forests. In: Schmidt, W. C.; McDonald, 
K. J., eds.Proceedings - Symposium on whitebark pine 
ecosystems: ecology and management of a high-moun- 
tain resource. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-270. Ogden, UT: USDA 
Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station: 201-207. 
Willson, M. F. 1974. Avian community organization and 
habitat structure. Ecology 55:1017-1029. 
Winn, D. S. 1976. Terrestrial vertebrate fauna and selected 
coniferous forest habitat types of the north slope of the 
Unita Mountains. Ogden, UT: USDA Forest Service Re- 
gion 4, Wasatch National Forest. 
Wuerthner, G. 1994. Subdivisions versus agriculture. Con- 
servation Biology 8:905-908. 
Zimmerman, G. T.; Neuenschwander, L. F. 1984. Livestock 
grazing influences on community structure, fire inten- 
sity, and fire frequency within the douglas-fir/ninebark 
habitat type. Journal of Range Management 37: 104-110. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 7 
Landscape Dynamics and Considerations 
Kevin M. Rich and Patricia Mehlhop 
Introduction 
Landscape ecology is the study of spatial heterogene- 
ity and its influence on organisms and ecological processes 
(Risser et al. 1984). Recent advances in remote sensing 
technologies, computer software and hardware, and meth- 
ods for quantifymg spatial heterogeneity have contributed 
to the emergence of landscape ecology as a powerful ap- 
proach for analyzing spatial patterns and their ecological 
consequences. The following references provide a good 
overview of the field of landscape ecology: Forman and 
Godron (1986), Naveh and Leiberman (1994), Pickett and 
Cadenasso (1995), Risser et al. (1984), Turner and Gardner 
(1991), and Urban et al. (1987). 
Table 1 defines key terms in landscape ecology used in 
this chapter. Exact definitions of landscape, patch type, 
and patch depend on the specific organisms and processes 
being studied (Dunning et al. 1992; McGarigal and Marks 
1995; Wiens 1976; Wiens and Milne 1989). Typically, land- 
scapes occupy a spatial scale intermediate between an 
organism's home range and its regional distribution (Dun- 
ning et al. 1992). Thus, for songbirds in the Southwest, 
landscapes may be defined ranging in size from a few 
hectares to thousands of square kilometers. The patch type 
Table 1. Definition of several key terms used in landscape ecology. 
of primary interest here is ponderosa pine forest, or forest 
in which ponderosa pine is the sole dominant plant spe- 
cies. Individual patches may range in size from a few trees 
to hundreds of square kilometers, depending on the phe- 
nomena and species under investigation, the scale of the 
study and the resolution of any remote sensing imagery used. 
Landscape ecologists generally divide spatial patterns 
observed in landscapes into two categories: landscape 
composition and landscape configuration. Landscape 
composition refers to the variety and abundance of patch 
types within a landscape without considering the loca- 
tion of individual patches (Dunning et al. 1992; McGarigal 
and Marks 1995). An example of a measure of landscape 
composition is the proportion of a given landscape cov- 
ered by ponderosa pine forest. Landscape configuration 
refers to the spatial relationships between patches in a 
landscape (McGarigal and Marks 1995). For example, one 
might be interested not only in the total amount of pon- 
derosa pine present in a landscape but also in the degree 
to which individual ponderosa pine patches are isolated 
from each other. Both landscape composition and configu- 
ration have been shown to have significant influences on 
the distribution and abundance of songbirds (Freemark 
et al. 1995). 
Many studies in Southwestern ponderosa pine forests 
have investigated the relationships between songbirds and 
Term 
Definition 
Referencea 
landscape 
a mosaic of patches relevant to the phenomenon under consideration 
(at any scale) 
1 
distinguished by discontinuities in environmental character states from its surround 
implicit is the notion that the discontinuities have biological significance 
a description of the environmental character states differentiating a patch or group of 
similar patches from surrounding areasb 
1 
res associated with the presence and amount of each patch type within the landscape 
ut being spatially explicit 
1 
distribution or spatial character of patches within the landsc 
lution of the data, that is, the area represented by each data 
e overall size of the study areaC 
t of individuals that all interact with each other with a high probability 
metapopulation 
set of local populations that interact via individuals moving among populations 
4 
a References: 1. McGarigal and Marks (1995); 2. Wiens (1976); 3.Turner et ai. (1989); 4. Hanski and Gilpin (1991). 
Our definition. The term is used, although not explicitly defined, by McGarigal and Marks (1995). 
The terms "grain" and "extent" are also used to refer to the smallest and largest scales at which an organism responds to spatial heterogeneity (Kotliar and Wiens 1990). 
We present the above definitions because we use these terms in describing spatial data sets in the text. 
USDA Forest Service Gen.Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
137 

Chapter 7 
habitat characteristics at the level of individual patches 
(Hall et al. and Finch et al., this volume). To date, though, 
no published studies from Southwestern ponderosa pine 
forests have examined the relationships between song- 
birds and spatial patterns at the level of entire landscapes. 
In this chapter, we will discuss the importance of scale in 
ecological research, highlight several tools available for 
characterizing landscape patterns in Southwestern pon- 
derosa pine forests, and describe specific research needs 
at fine, intermediate, and large spatial scales. We will also 
address research needs relevant to habitats and species of 
special concern. 
The Importance of Scale 
Different ecological processes occur at different spatial 
scales (Kotliar and Wiens 1990; Urban et al. 1987; Wiens 
1989). Factors affecting habitat selection by individuals 
within patches may differ from factors influencing the 
distribution and abundance of organisms across land- 
scapes (Wiens 1989; Wiens et al. 1987; McGarigal and 
McComb 1995). To fully understand the ecology of song- 
birds in Southwestern ponderosa pine forests, additional 
research is needed at multiple spatial scales, including fine- 
scale studies at the level of individual patches; intermedi- 
ate-scale studies at the level of landscapes several hundred 
hectares in size; and large-scale studies at the level of land- 
scapes hundreds to thousands of square kilometers in size. 
At different scales, different spatial patterns emerge for 
ponderosa pine forests in the Southwest. At a scale of sev- 
eral hundred hectares, ponderosa pine forests generally 
appear as integral components of larger forests. Ponde- 
rosa pine forests often meet and blend with pinyon-juni- 
per along lower elevational boundaries and with Douglas- 
fir and mixed-conifer along upper elevational boundaries. 
At a scale of hundreds to thousands of square kilometers, 
though, Southwestern ponderosa pine forests tend to ap- 
pear highly fragmented. 
How these spatial patterns influence the songbirds that 
use these forests is unknown. Many studies in forests of 
eastern and central North America have found that 
smaller, more isolated patches tend to have fewer song- 
bird species and fewer individuals of those species than 
larger, less isolated patches (for example, Ambuel and 
Temple 1983; Askins and Philbrick 1987; Blake 1986; Blake 
1991; Blake and Karr 1984; Blake and Karr 1987; Freemark 
and Collins 1992; Freemark and Merriam 1986; Lynch and 
Whigham 1984; Robbins et al. 1989; Whitcomb et al. 1981). 
These studies have generally focused on patches of forest 
surrounded by non-forested agricultural and suburban 
areas. In contrast, several studies in western North 
America have shown little relationship between patch size 
and songbird species richness or abundance in forest 
patches surrounded by forests of different species com- 
position or age and size class (Aney 1984; Lehmkuhl et al. 
1991; Rosenberg and Raphael 1986). Conceivably, song- 
birds in ponderosa pine forests may show responses char- 
acteristic of birds in Eastern fragmented forests at large 
spatial scales, while showing responses characteristic of 
birds in other Western forests at intermediate spatial scales. 
Until landscape-level research on songbirds in Southwest- 
ern ponderosa pine forests is carried out, though, such 
comparisons will remain speculative. 
Characterization of Landscape 
Patterns 
A prerequisite for most research in landscape ecology 
is the availability of data on the spatial patterns of inter- 
est. All spatial data sets have a certain grain and extent. 
"Grain" refers to the resolution of the data (Turner et al. 
1989). For example, on a relatively fine-grain map, it might 
be possible to distinguish features 1 m in size, while on a 
relatively coarse-grain map these features might not be 
visible. Extent refers to the area covered by the data set. A 
spatial data set is only useful for a given study if it has a 
grain and extent appropriate for the research being car- 
ried out (McGarigal and Marks 1995; Turner et al. 1989). 
The data must have a fine enough grain that patch types 
and patches relevant to the organisms and phenomena 
being investigated can be readily distinguished. In addi- 
tion, the extent must be large enough that meaningful 
spatial patterns can be identified. 
Table 2 provides information on several spatial data sets 
currently available or soon to be available that include 
data on Southwestern ponderosa pine forests. The USDA 
Forest Service General Ecosystem Survey and Terrestrial 
Ecosystem Surveys are limited in their applicability for 
research on songbirds since only Forest Service land is 
included, and since map units are based on potential natu- 
ral vegetation rather than current vegetation. The data sets 
based on advanced very high resolution radiometer 
(AVHRR) imagery are limited in their applicability, as well. 
They are very coarse-grain, with a resolution of 1 km. Keitt 
et al. (1995) suggest that some details of the Earth Re- 
sources Observation Systems (EROS) classification are 
rather suspect from a biogeographic standpoint, and they 
use the USDA Forest Service classification in their analy- 
sis of potential habitat patches for the Mexican spotted 
owl. However, the Forest Service classification does not 
distinguish between forest dominated by ponderosa pine 
and forest dominated by Douglas-fir, rendering it inad- 
equate for studies focusing on ponderosa pine forest. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Landscape Dynamics and Considerations 
Table 2. Selected data sets currently available or soon to be available for characterizing landscape patterns lnfluenclng 
songblrds in Southwestern ponderosa pine forests. 
Data set 
Source of imagery 
Scale or resolution 
Availabilitya 
Referencesb 
USDA Forest Service (Southwestern Region) 
General Ecosystem Survey 
aerial photography 
1 :250,000 
currently available 
1 
USDA Forest Service Terrestrial 
Ecosystem Surveys 
aerial photography 
1 :24,000 
currently available 
2 
Vegetative cover types from EROS 
AVHRR 
1 km 
currently available 
3 
USDA Forest Service forest cover types 
AVHRR 
1 Km 
currently available 
4, 5, 6 
AZ Gap Analysis 
TM 
30 m 
fa11 1997 
7 
NM Gap Analysis 
TM 
30 m 
currently available 
8, 9 
a Currently available refers to data sets available as of August 1996. 
References: 1. USDA Forest Service (1989); 2. USDA Forest Service (1986); 3. Loveland et al. (1991); 4. Evans and Zhu (1993); 5. Powell et al. (1993); 6. Zhu and Evans 
(1 992); 7. K. Thomas, personal communication; 8. Muldavin (1994); 9. 6. Thompson, personal communication. 
The Arizona and New Mexico Gap Analysis data sets 
will provide a valuable addition to the spatial data avail- 
able for landscape ecological studies of songbirds in pon- 
derosa pine forests. Since they are based on Landsat the- 
matic mapper (TM) imagery with a 30-m resolution, 
though, they will be somewhat limited in their usefulness 
for addressing questions requiring very detailed, fine- 
grain data on forest composition and structure. The de- 
velopment of spatial data sets with a relatively high reso- 
lution, on the order of 1 m, would provide an extremely 
useful resource for studies on the effects of fine-grain for- 
est attributes on songbirds in the Southwest. 
McGarigal and Marks (1995) have published a computer 
program called FRAGSTATS that provides researchers 
with a powerful tool for quantifying landscape composi- 
tion and configuration. Versions of FRAGSTATS are avail- 
able for use with either vector or raster image files. 
FRAGSTATS computes a comprehensive array of land- 
scape metrics including area metrics, patch size metrics, 
edge metrics, shape metrics, core area metrics, nearest 
neighbor metrics, patch diversity metrics, and contagion 
and interspersion metrics. The accompanying documen- 
tation includes a thorough description of each metric, in- 
cluding mathematical definitions and a discussion of each 
metric's ecological applications and limitations (McGarigal 
and Marks 1995). 
Fine-Scale Studies 
needed to determine the effects of vegetation species com- 
position, tree size and age class, density of overstory and 
understory vegetation, and fire and grazing history on 
songbird diversity and abundance at the patch level (Hall 
et al. and Finch et al., this volume). Such information will 
be useful for managing forest patches (for example, for- 
est stands) to maintain local songbird diversity and 
abundance. 
In addition, research is needed to determine the extent 
to which individual species are obligate users of ponde- 
rosa pine forest. Many songbird species are known to oc- 
cur in ponderosa pine forest. Some species, such as Grace's 
warbler, appear to be ponderosa pine specialists and may 
require the presence of ponderosa pine forest to survive 
and reproduce (Hall et al., this volume). Other species, 
such as the mountain chickadee, appear to be forest gen- 
eralists and may be able to thrive in a variety of forest 
types. Still other species, such as the American robin, ap- 
pear to be extreme generalists and are frequently found 
in a wide variety of forest and non-forest habitats. Clearly, 
individual songbird species can differ greatly in their habi- 
tat requirements, and research is needed to elucidate the 
specific habitat requirements for songbirds found in pon- 
derosa pine forests. Information is needed on the extent 
to which individual songbird species require ponderosa 
pine habitat in the breeding season, during migration, and 
as winter residents. 
The degree to which songbird species are ponderosa 
pine specialists versus broader habitat generalists has 
potengal implications for the scale at which those species 
respond to spatial heterogeneity. Ponderosa pine special- 
ists are likely to respond to spatial heterogeneity at a finer 
Although studies of the relationships between habitat 
scale than habitat generalists. For example, Grace's war- 
characteristics and songbird species' richness and abun- 
blers may be more sensitive than American robins to dif- 
dance have been carried out at the individual patch level 
ferences in tree size and age class, density of overstory 
in Southwestern ponderosa pine forests, more research is 
and understory vegetation, and grazing intensity within 
needed to clarify these relationships. More research is 
a ponderosa pine forest. Such hypotheses need to be tested 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
139 

Chapter 7 
in field studies that compare the responses of habitat spe- 
cialists and generalists to different fine-scale patterns of 
spatial heterogeneity. This type of study will likely reveal 
indicator species (presumably habitat specialists) useful 
for monitoring ponderosa pine forest habitat quality. 
Ponderosa pine specialists also undoubtedly differ from 
habitat generalists in their responses to broad-scale pat- 
terns of spatial heterogeneity. For a Grace's warbler, a se- 
ries of ponderosa pine forests separated by pinyon-juni- 
per woodland might appear to be a fragmented landscape. 
For an American robin, however, the same landscape may 
appear relatively continuous. Understanding the finescale 
habitat requirements of individual species is an impor- 
tant element in understanding the responses of those spe- 
cies to spatial patterns at broader scales. 
Intermediate-Scale Studies 
In addition to studies at the patch level in which indi- 
vidual patches represent independent data points, stud- 
ies at the landscape level in which landscapes represent 
independent data points are needed to examine the rela- 
tionships between landscape characteristics and songbird 
distribution and abundance. Examples of such studies 
carried out in other regions include a study by McGarigal 
and McComb (1995) in mixed-conifer forest in the central 
Oregon Coast Range, and a study by Evans (1995) in 
mixed-conifer forest in west-central Idaho. In both stud- 
ies, landscapes were defined at a scale of several hundred 
hectares and chosen to represent a wide spectrum of spa- 
tial patterns reflecting different forest management re- 
gimes. McGarigal and McComb (1995) used ground- 
truthed aerial photographs for baseline data on spatial 
attributes, while Evans (1995) used a ground-truthed tim- 
ber strata map generated from a Payette National Forest 
timber inventory. In both studies, FRAGSTATS (McGarigal 
and Marks 1995) was used to compute measures of land- 
scape composition and configuration. 
McGarigal and McComb (1995) and Evans (1995) both 
found significant relationships between several measures 
of landscape composition and configuration and the abun- 
dance of one or more songbird species. Interestingly, 
McGarigal and McComb (1995) found that for species 
strongly associated with a particular patch type at the 
patch level, the relationships between abundance and the 
amount of preferred patch type present at the landscape 
level varied greatly. McGarigal and McComb's (1995) 
study supports the idea that different processes occur at 
different spatial scales, and that relationships seen at the 
patch level cannot necessarily be extrapolated over land- 
scapes. 
Large-Scale Studies 
Research is also needed at a relatively large scale of 
hundreds to thousands of square kilometers to determine 
patterns of songbird distribution and abundance and shed 
light on ecological processes at this scale. Ecological in- 
teracti~ns between individuals of a given species and bi- 
otic and abiotic factors in the environment are likely to 
vary across the range of that species. To understand the 
ecology of a species, one must understand ecological pro- 
cesses occurring throughout its range. Thus, to fully un- 
derstand the ecology of songbirds in Southwestern pon- 
derosa pine forests, one must understand ecological 
processes occurring across the ranges of these species. 
At large spatial scales, ponderosa pine forests in the 
Southwest tend to occur within "Sky Islands" of moun- 
tain forest surrounded by seas of arid grassland and desert 
(DeBano et al. 1995; Gehlbach 1981). One area of potential 
interest in studying songbirds in these forests is the area 
of metapopulation dynamics. Metapopulations are groups 
of two or more populations connected by infrequently 
dispersing individuals, and they typically occur when 
populations occupy areas of suitable habitat separated by 
areas of unsuitable habitat (Hanski and Gilpin 1991). Some 
metapopulations may exhibit "source-sink" characteristics 
(Brawn and Robinson 1996; Howe et al. 1991; Pulliam 1988; 
Pulliam and Danielson 1991). In these cases, it is believed 
that individuals from source populations, in which produc- 
tivity exceeds mortality, disperse to sink populations, which 
would go locally extinct in the absence of such migration. 
Little is known about the extent to which songbird spe- 
cies in Southwestern ponderosa pine forests exhibit 
metapopulation dynamics. Given the fragmented patterns 
of ponderosa pine forest found at large spatial scales in 
the Southwest, it is likely that at least some songbird spe- 
cies found in this habitat exist as metapopulations. How- 
ever, the degree to which a given species exists as a 
metapopulation is no doubt influenced by the habitat pref- 
erences and requirements of the species and the extent to 
which it can disperse through unsuitable habitat. Over- 
all, one would predict that ponderosa pine specialists, such 
as Grace's warbler, would exhibit very different meta- 
population dynamics than broader forest generalists, such 
as the mountain chickadee. Mountain chickadees may in 
turn exhibit very different metapopulation dynamics than 
extreme habitat generalists, such as the American robin. 
Likewise, the nature of source-sink dynamics within 
metapopulations undoubtedly varies from species to spe- 
cies. For some species, ponderosa pine forest may repre- 
sent source habitat in which productivity is relatively high. 
For other species, ponderosa pine forest may represent 
sink habitat in which mortality and emigration exceed 
productivity. Source-sink dynamics are further compli- 
USDA Forest Service Gen.Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Landscape Dynamics and Considerations 
cated in migratory species by the fact that some areas may 
be unimportant for breeding but critical as stopover sites 
during migration or as wintering habitat. 
Attempting to understand metapopulation dynamics 
is an ideal example of an endeavor that requires research 
at multiple spatial scales. Studies at fine scales are needed 
to determine exactly how the species in question uses dif- 
ferent habitat types. Studies at intermediate scales are 
needed to learn more about habitat requirements, includ- 
ing how landscape composition and configuration affect 
habitat selection. Studies at larger scales are needed to 
determine overall patterns of habitat availability, how 
habitat use varies throughout the range, and how patterns 
of habitat availability and use relate to metapopulation 
dynamics. For migratory species, information at each spa- 
tial scale is needed for breeding areas, for stopover sites 
used during migration, and for wintering habitat. 
One key aspect of understanding the population dy- 
namics of a species is understanding dispersal patterns 
of individuals through different habitat types. We know 
that most songbirds are capable of traveling great dis- 
tances (many migrate to the tropics for the winter). How- 
ever, vagility, or the physical ability of a species to move, 
should not be equated with dispersal, or the movement 
of individuals to new areas to settle there and breed 
(Villard et al. 1995). Little is known about dispersal in song- 
birds. Some studies (Drilling and Thompson 1988; Holmes 
and Sherry 1992; Kendeigh 1941) suggest that typical dis- 
persal distances for adults in some species of songbirds 
may be less than 350 m. However, these studies provide 
limited data for a small number of species. Even less is 
known about dispersal in first-year songbirds, that is, how 
far first-year birds tend to nest from their birth sites. Green- 
wood and Harvey (1982) suggest that the median first- 
year dispersal for both sexes is usually less than 10 terri- 
tories away from the birth site. However, Villard et al. 
(1995) argue that this generalization may not be valid since 
recapture rates of songbirds banded as nestlings are usu- 
ally lower than 10 percent. In forest patches of central Illi- 
nois, Robinson (1992) observes that songbirds have very 
low reproductive success, and he suggests that popula- 
tions in the area may be maintained by individuals dis- 
persing from forests over 200 km away. 
To date, no studies have been published estimating dis- 
persal distances for songbirds in ponderosa pine forests 
in the Southwest. Information on dispersal distances could 
potentially be gathered through extensive banding opera- 
tions and attempts at recapture across large areas. Another 
alternative would be to identify isolated patches in which 
one or more species have been extirpated due to stochas- 
tic processes, forest fires, or human activities such as log- 
ging, and then survey those patches to determine whether 
those species reappear over time. If those species do re- 
appear, this would suggest that they were able to disperse 
from an area at least as far away as the nearest suitable 
habitat (Villard et al. 1995). Such studies would be espe- 
cially useful when the areas of nearest suitable habitat are 
a considerable distance away (for example, in another Sky 
Island), as they might provide insights into maximum dis- 
persal distances for songbirds over different habitat types. 
Spatial data sets from the Arizona and New Mexico Gap 
Analysis projects should provide information useful for 
large-scale studies on songbirds in Southwestern ponde- 
rosa pine forests (table 2). To adequately study most eco- 
logical patterns and processes important for songbirds in 
ponderosa pine forests, though, analyses of spatial data 
from imagery will need to be accompanied by field inves- 
tigations. This will likely present some logistical challenges 
at scales of hundreds to thousands of square kilometers. 
Nonetheless, data from imagery are generally of little use 
unless they are ground-truthed and closely linked with 
data collected in the field. The collection of field data across 
large spatial scales may be facilitated by collaboration 
among researchers and by the careful selection of field 
sites based on high-quality imagery. 
Habitats and Species of Special 
Concern 
Because of the relatively small area of old-growth pon- 
derosa pine forests remaining in the Southwest and eco- 
nomic pressures to harvest these forests, research into 
songbird responses to landscape characteristics of old- 
growth ponderosa pine forests at multiple scales should 
be a top priority. At the patch level, more research is 
needed to determine exactly how songbirds use old- 
growth ponderosa pine forests and the extent to which 
they depend on them. At larger landscape levels, research 
is needed to determine how the proportion and spatial 
configuration of old-growth ponderosa pine forest in a land- 
scape influences songbird distribution and abundance. 
Research on songbird responses to landscape composi- 
tion and configuration at multiple scales is needed that 
considers both overall songbird diversity and the abun- 
dance of individual species. Measuring the local diver- 
sity of songbird species in an area provides insight into 
the ability of that area to support a variety of different 
kinds of songbirds. However, from a regional perspective, 
the number of species in a given area may not be as im- 
portant as which species are present. For example, a 
clearcut patch may be found to have a relatively high di- 
versity of songbird species, but those species may be com- 
mon throughout the region. Thus, widespread clearcutting 
in the region might produce areas of high local species 
diversity while dramatically reducing overall regional 
diversity. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 7 
Studies that focus on individual songbird species are 
necessary for understanding the relationships between 
individual species and different types of habitat and for 
gaining insights into population and metapopulation dy- 
namics. Landscape-level studies focusing on those song- 
bird species most vulnerable to local extirpation or 
rangewide extinction are especially urgent. No such stud- 
ies have been carried out, and landscape-level informa- 
tion is needed to inform management decisions affecting 
regional avian diversity and the long-term viability of 
those species. 
A list of bird species on managed ponderosa pine Breed- 
ing Bird Survey routes in Arizona and New Mexico whose 
populations have been declining is provided in Chapter 4 
of this volume (from Miller 1992), as is a list of bird spe- 
cies found in ponderosa pine forests ranked as being of 
high or moderate concern by the Arizona and New Mexico 
Partners in Flight programs. These lists offer a starting 
point for identifying target species for landscape-level 
studies in Southwestern ponderosa pine forests. 
Typically, landscape-level studies of songbirds in other 
regions have involved sampling all songbird species en- 
countered across different landscapes using standardized 
techniques. In many studies, rare species were not con- 
sidered in the analysis of abundance data because they 
did not lend themselves well to the statistical methods used 
(for example, Evans 1995; Hagan et al. 1996; Knick and 
Rotenberry 1995; McGarigal and McComb 1995; Rosenberg 
and Raphael 1986). To overcome this problem in Southwest- 
ern ponderosa pine forests, research must be carried out over 
broad enough spatial and temporal scales that sufficient data 
on rare species are gathered for statistical analysis. 
Rare species form a critical component of bird commu- 
nities. In most studies of bird communities, a small num- 
ber of species are found at all or most sites while many 
species occur at only a few (for example, Evans 1995; 
Hansen et al. 1995; Hejl and Woods 1991; Rosenberg and 
Raphael 1986; Verner and Larson 1989). Landscape-level 
research that focuses on rare species is needed to gather 
more information about these species and to provide a 
scientific basis for managing rare species and their habi- 
tats. Maintaining viable populations of rare species is es- 
sential for maintaining overall avian diversity in the South- 
west, as well as for maintaining healthy, intact communities 
and ecosystems. 
Acknowledgments 
We thank John Dunning, Natasha Kotliar, Kevin 
McGarigal, Deborah Finch, Joseph Ganey, William Block, 
and three anonymous reviewers for comments that greatly 
improved this manuscript. 
Literature Cited 
Ambuel, B., and S.A. Temple. 1983. Area-dependent 
changes in the bird communities and vegetation of 
southern Wisconsin forests. Ecology 64:1057-1068. 
Aney, W.C. 1984. The effects of patch size on bird com- 
munities of remnant old-growth pine stands in west- 
ern Idontana. Thesis. University of Montana, Missoula, 
Montana, USA. 
Askins, R.A., and M.J. Philbrick. 1987. Effect of changes 
in regional forest abundance on the decline and recov- 
ery of a forest bird community. Wilson Bulletin 99:7-21. 
Blake, J.G. 1986. Species-area relationship of migrants in 
isolated woodlots in east-central Illinois. Wilson Bulle- 
tin 98:291-296. 
Blake, J.G. 1991. Nested subsets and the distribution of 
birds of isolated woodlots. Conservation Biology 5: 
58-66. 
Blake, J.G., and J.R. Karr. 1984. Species composition of bird 
communities and the conservation benefit of large ver- 
sus small forests. Biological Conservation 30:173-187. 
Blake, J.G., and J.R. Karr. 1987. Breeding birds of isolated 
woodlots: area and habitat relationships. Ecology 
68:1724-1734. 
Brawn, J.D., and S.K. Robinson. 1996. Source-sink popu- 
lation dynamics may complicate the interpretation of 
long-term census data. Ecology 77:3-12. 
DeBano, L.F., P.F. Ffolliott, A. Ortega-Rubio, G.J. Gottfried, 
R.H. Hamre, and C.B. Edminster, technical coordina- 
tors. 1995. Biodiversity and management of the Madrean 
Archipelago: the Sky Islands of Southwestern United 
States and northwestern Mexico, September 19-23,1994, 
Tucson, Arizona. General Technical Report RM-GTR- 
264. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and 
Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA. 
Drilling, N.E., and C.F. Thompson. 1988. Natal and breed- 
ing dispersal in house wrens (Troglodytes aedon). Auk 
lO5:480-491. 
Dunning, J.B., B.J. Danielson, and H.R. Pulliam. 1992. Eco- 
logical processes that affect populations in complex 
landscapes. Oikos 65:169-175. 
Evans, D.L., and Z. Zhu. 1993. AVHRR for forest map- 
ping: national applications and global implications. 
Pages 76-79 in A.J. Lewis, editor. 1993 American Con- 
gress on Surveying and Mapping/ American Society for 
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing Annual Conven- 
tion and Exposition technical papers: looking to the fu- 
ture with an eye on the past. Volume 2. American Soci- 
ety for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing and 
American Congress on Surveying and Mapping. 
Evans, D.M. 1995. Relationships between landscape pat- 
tern and songbird abundance. Thesis. Northern Arizona 
University, Flagstaff, Arizona, USA. 
142 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Landscape Dynamics and Considerations 
Forman, R.T.T., and M. Godron. 1986. Landscape ecology. 
John Wiley & Sons, New York, New York, USA. 
Freemark, K.E., and 8. Collins. 1992. Landscape ecology of 
birds breeding in temperate forest fragments. Pages 443- 
454 in J.M. Hagan, 111, and D.W. Johnston, editors. Ecol- 
ogy and conservation of neotropical migrant landbirds. 
Srnithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C., USA. 
Freemark, K.E., J.B. Dunning, S.J. Hejl, and J.R. Probst. 
1995. A landscape ecology perspective for research, con- 
servation, and management. Pages 381427 in T.E. Mar- 
tin and D.M. Finch, editors. Ecology and management 
of neotropical migratory birds: a review and synthesis 
of the critical issues. Oxford University Press, New York, 
New York, USA. 
Freemark, K.E., and H.G. Merriam. 1986. Importance of 
area and habitat heterogeneity to bird assemblages in 
temperate forest fragments. Biological Conservation 
36:115-141. 
Gehlbach, F.R. 1981. Mountain islands and desert seas: a 
natural history of the U.S.-Mexican Borderlands. Texas 
A&M University Press, College Station, Texas, USA. 
Greenwood, P.J., and P.H. Harvey. 1982. The natal and 
breeding dispersal of birds. Annual Review of Ecology 
and Systematics 13:l-21. 
Hagan, J.M., W.M. Vanderhaegen, and P.S. McKinley. 1996. 
The early development of forest fragmentation effects 
on birds. Conservation Biology 10:188-202. 
Hansen, A.J., W.C. McComb, R. Vega, M.G. Raphael, and 
M. Hunter. 1995. Bird habitat relationships in natural 
and managed forests in the west Cascades of Oregon. 
Ecological Applications 5:555-569. 
Hanski, I., and M. Gilpin. 1991. Metapopulation dynam- 
ics: brief history and conceptual domain. Biological Jour- 
nal of the Linnean Society 42:3-16. 
Hejl, S.J., and R.E. Woods. 1991. Bird assemblages in old- 
growth and rotation-aged Douglas-fir/ponderosa pine 
stands in the northern Rocky Mountains: a preliminary 
assessment. Pages 93-100 in D.M. Baumgartner and J.E. 
Lotan, editors. Interior Douglas-fir, the species and its 
management. Symposium proceedings. 
Holmes, R.T., and T.W. Sherry. 1992. Site fidelity of mi- 
gratory warblers in temperate breeding and neotropical 
wintering areas: implications for population dynamics, 
habitat selection, and conservation. Pages 563-575 in 
J.M. Hagan, 111, and D. W. Johnston, editors. Ecology and 
conservation of neotropical migrant landbirds. Smith- 
sonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C., USA. 
Howe, R.W., G.J. Davis, and V. Mosca. 1991. Demographic 
significance of sink populations. Biological Conserva- 
tion 57:239-255. 
Keitt, T., A. Franklin, and D. Urban. 1995. Landscape analy- 
sis and metapopulation structure. Pages 1-12 in USDI 
Fish and Wildlife Service. Recovery plan for the Mexi- 
can spotted owl. Volume 11, Chapter 3. USDI Fish and 
Wildlife Service, Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA. 
Kendeigh, S.C. 1941. Territorial and mating behavior of 
the house wren. Illinois Biological Monographs XVIII(3). 
University of Illinois Press, Urbana, Illinois, USA. 
Knick, S.T., and J.T. Rotenberry. 1995. Landscape charac- 
teristics of fragmented shrubsteppe habitats and breed- 
ing passerine birds. Conservation Biology 9:1059-1071. 
Kotliar, N.B., and J.A. Wiens. 1990. Multiple scales of 
patchiness and patch structure: a hierarchical frame- 
work for the study of heterogeneity. Oikos 59:253-260. 
Lehmkuhl, J.F., L.F. Ruggiero, and P.A. Hall. 1991. Land- 
scape-scale patterns of forest fragmentation and wild- 
life richness and abundance in the southern Washington 
Cascade Range. Pages 42542 in Wildlife and vegetation 
of unmanaged Douglas-fir forests. General Technical Re- 
port PNW-GTR-285. USDA Forest Service, Pacific North- 
west Research Station, Portland, Oregon, USA. 
Loveland, T.R., J.W. Merchant, D.O. Ohlen, and J.F. Brown. 
1991. Development of a land-cover characteristics da- 
tabase for the conterminous US. Photogrammetric En- 
gineering and Remote Sensing 57:1453-1463. 
Lynch, J.F., and D.F. Whigham. 1984. Effects of forest frag- 
mentation on breeding bird communities in Maryland, 
USA. Biological Conservation 28:287-324. 
McGarigal, K., and B.J. Marks. 1995. FRAGSTATS: spatial 
pattern analysis program for quantifying landscape 
structure. General Technical Report PNW-GTR-351. 
USDA Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Sta- 
tion, Portland, Oregon, USA. 
McGarigal, K., and W.C. McComb. 1995. Relationships 
between landscape structure and breeding birds in the 
Oregon coast range. Ecological Monographs 65:235-260. 
Miller, R. 1992. Preliminary results from Breeding Bird 
Survey data estimates of trends in bird populations in 
or near managed ponderosa pine in the Southwest. 
Unpublished report. Arizona Department of Game and 
Fish, Flagstaff, Arizona, USA. 
Muldavin, E. 1994. A vegetation map legend for application 
to the New Mexico Gap Analysis Project. New Mexico 
Natural Heritage Program, Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA. 
Naveh, Z., and AS. Lieberman. 1994. Landscape ecology: 
theory and application. Springer-Verlag, New York, 
New York, USA. 
Pickett, S.T.A., and M.L. Cadenasso. 1995. Landscape ecol- 
ogy: spatial heterogeneity in ecological systems. Science 
269:331-334. 
Powell, D.S., J.L. Faulkner, D.R. Darr, Z. Zhu, and D. W. 
MacCleery. 1993. Forest resources of the United States, 
1992. General Technical Report RM-234. USDA Forest Ser- 
vice, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Sta- 
tion, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA. [Revised, June 19941 
Pulliam, H.R. 1988. Sources, sinks, and population regu- 
lation. American Naturalist 132:652-661. 
Pulliam, H.R., and B.J. Danielson. 1991. Sources, sinks, and 
habitat selection: a landscape perspective on popula- 
tion dynamics. American Naturalist 137:550-566. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
143 

Chapter 7 
Risser, pG., J.R. Karr, and R.T.T. Forman. 1984. Landscape 
ecology: directions and approaches. Special Publication 
Number 2. Illinois Natural History Survey, Champaign, 
Illinois, USA. 
Robbins, C.S., D.K. Dawson, and B.A. Dowell. 1989. Habi- 
tat area requirements of breeding forest birds of the 
middle Atlantic states. Wildlife Monographs 103:l-34. 
Robinson, S.K. 1992. Population dynamics of breeding 
neotropical migrants in a fragmented Illinois landscape. 
Pages 408418 in J.M. Hagan, 111, and D.W. Johnston, 
editors. Ecology and conservation of neotropical mi- 
grant landbirds. Smithsonian Institution Press, Wash- 
ington, D.C., USA. 
Rosenberg, K.V., and M.G. Raphael. 1986. Effects of forest 
fragmentation on vertebrates in Douglas-fir forests. 
Pages 263-272 in J. Verner, M.L. Morrison, and C.J. 
Ralph, editors. Wildlife 2000: modeling habitat relation- 
ships of terrestrial vertebrates. University of Wisconsin 
Press, Madison, Wisconsin, USA. 
Turner, M.G., and R.H. Gardner, editors. 1991. Quantita- 
tive methods in landscape ecology. Springer-Verlag, 
New York, New York, USA. 
Turner, M.G., R.V. O'Neill, R.H. Gardner, and B.T. Milne. 
1989. Effects of changing spatial scale on the analysis of 
landscape pattern. Landscape Ecology 3:153-162. 
Urban, D.L., R.V. O'Neill, and H.H. Shugart, Jr. 1987. Land- 
scape ecology: a hierarchical perspective can help scien- 
tists understand spatial patterns. BioScience 37:119-127. 
USDA Forest Service. 1986. Terrestrial ecosystem survey 
handbook. USDA Forest Service, Region 3, Albuquer- 
que, New Mexico, USA. 
USDA Forest Service. 1989. General ecosystem survey. 
USDA Forest Service, Southwestern Region, Albuquer- 
que, New Mexico, USA. 
Verner, J., and T.A. Larson. 1989. Richness of breeding bird 
species in mixed-conifer forests of the Sierra Nevada, 
California. Auk 106:447463. 
Villard, M.-A., G. Merriam, and B.A. Maurer. 1995. Dy- 
namics in subdivided populations of neotropical mi- 
gratory birds in a fragmented temperate forest. Ecol- 
ogy ?6:2740. 
Whitcomb, R.F., D. Bystrak, M.K. Klimkiewicz, J.F. Lynch, 
C.S. Robbins, and B.L. Whitcomb. 1981. Effects of for- 
est fragmentation on avifauna on the eastern decidu- 
ous forest. Pages 125-205 in R.L. Burgess and D.M. 
Sharpe, editors. Forest island dynamics in man-domi- 
nated landscapes. Springer-Verlag, New York, New 
York, USA. 
Wiens, J.A. 1976. Population responses to patchy environ- 
ments. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 7:81- 
120. 
Wiens, J.A. 1989. Spatial scaling in ecology. Functional 
Ecology 3:385-397. 
Wiens, J.A., and B.T. Milne. 1989. Scaling of 'landscapes' 
in landscape ecology, or, landscape ecology from a 
beetle's perspective. Landscape Ecology 3:87-96. 
Wiens, J.A., J.T. Rotenberry, and B. Van Horne. 1987. Habi- 
tat occupancy patterns of North American shrubsteppe 
birds: the effects of spatial scale. Oikos 48:132-147. 
Zhu, Z., and D.L. Evans. 1992. Mapping midsouth forest 
distributions with AVHRR data. Journal of Forestry 
90:27-30. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 8 
Summary 
William M. Block, Deborah M. Finch, Joseph L. Ganey, and William H. Moir 
Most ornithological studies in Southwestern ponderosa 
pine forests have yielded results that are applicable only 
to the specific location and particular conditions of the 
study areas (for example, Green 1979 and Hurlbert 1984). 
In addition, varying interpretation of similar study results 
by investigators has limited our ability to extend or syn- 
thesize research results from Southwestern ponderosa 
pine forests beyond the scope of any individual study. In 
studies that address similar questions and have similar 
results, broader inferences are possible. 
Isolated studies of selected aspects of songbird ecology 
will not provide the level of resolution required to answer 
complex research questions and management problems. 
Therefore, decision makers should review our research 
recommendations and commit adequate financial and 
institutional support to incorporate them into a coordi- 
nated research program that systematically addresses 
these research needs. Developing management ap- 
proaches to research needs that also meet societal demands 
will only occur when the USDA Forest Service, USDI Fish 
and Wildlife Service, state resource agencies, public ad- 
vocacy groups, and other organizations agree that a more 
comprehensive understanding of ponderosa pine forest 
ecology is mandatory for management of Southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests and their avifauna. 
Ponderosa Pine Forest Ecology 
Ponderosa pine forests today differ drastically from 
those before European settlement of the Southwest 
(Covington and Wagner 1996; Moir et al., this volume). 
Many of these changes resulted from past land-use ac- 
tivities, primarily since European settlement (Raish et al, 
this volume; Scurlock and Finch, this volume). The fore- 
most activities leading to forest change include logging, 
fuelwood harvest, fire suppression, livestock grazing, and 
urban development (Finch et al., this volume; Raish et al, 
this volume; Scurlock and Finch, this volume). The sin- 
gular, synergistic, and cumulative impacts of these land 
uses have resulted in overstocked forests that exhibit 1) 
size-class distributions skewed toward smaller trees, 2) 
unnaturally high levels of disease and pathogens, 3) high 
susceptibility to catastrophic crown fires, 4) depleted 
woody and herbaceous understories, and 5) altered eco- 
logical relationships and ecosystem processes (Moir et al., 
this volume). 
If we hope to evaluate population changes of birds in- 
habiting ponderosa pine forests, we must understand how 
their habitats have changed. Our knowledge of preset- 
tlembnt or reference ponderosa pine forests is limited to 
the results of retrospective studies, archaeological records, 
and exploration narratives (for example, Covington and 
Wagner 1996; and Scurlock and Finch, this volume). Al- 
though these descriptions provide useful models of 
presettlement forest patterns, the models are general, lack- 
ing detail about the range of variation that existed before 
intensive forest management (Reynolds et al. 1996). 
Presettlement or reference states for Southwestern forests 
are typically inferred from conditions existing in the late 
1800s (Covington and Moore 1994). This assumes that his- 
torical conditions recorded during this time period are 
representative of prehistoric and Mexican periods, but as 
Scurlock and Finch (this volume) described, American 
Indians and Spanish people used Southwestern forests 
and wildlife to varying degrees before Anglo-American 
colonization of the Southwest through the 1800s. There- 
fore, we question the reliance on the late 1800s as the ap- 
propriate period for inferring reference forest conditions 
demonstrating minimal human impact. 
Ponderosa pine occupies a gradient from the upper el- 
evation of the pinyon-juniper woodland to mixed-conifer 
forests. Most knowledge of presettlement conditions is 
derived from studies conducted within the mid-elevation 
zone (between pinyon-juniper and mixed-conifer) where 
ponderosa occurs as a climax species. Researchers gener- 
ally agree that xerophytic ponderosa pine forests were 
more open with clumps of pine trees interspersed among 
grassy openings. These conditions were maintained by 
low-intensity ground fires every 2 to 12 years that limited 
tree regeneration and dense forests (Moir et al., this vol- 
ume). Given these conditions and disturbance regimes, 
much of the presettlement xerophytic pine forest prob- 
ably tended toward older, mature conditions (Covington 
and Moore 1994). Descriptions of mesophytic forests (for 
example, mixed conifer) where ponderosa pine is a sera1 
species are less available, but many of these forests were 
more open before 1880 (Moir et al., this volume). 
Our ability to characterize existing ponderosa pine for- 
ests is also somewhat limited. We have detailed informa- 
tion on forest structure and composition for some areas, 
but information is limited for most. From what we do 
know, much of the existing ponderosa pine forests are rela- 
tively dense because small, relatively young (do0 years 
old) trees have proliferated in response to human use of 
forested lands. Logging, fuelwood harvest, and cata- 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Chapter 8 
strophic fire have reduced the numbers of large, mature 
ponderosa pine trees and snags over time (Raish et al., 
this volume). Areas where the forest was originally a 
mosaic of tree clumps and grassy openings have become 
continuous tree canopies as trees have invaded these open- 
ings. Fire regimes and disease pathways have been altered, 
rendering these forests at far more risk than they were 
historically. Where fire, insects, and disease once played 
key roles in maintaining forests, they can now devastate 
forests. 
We are also observing shifts in the composition of these 
forests as a result of past forest management. In some 
ponderosa pine stands, the number of shade-tolerant co- 
nifers is increasing, moving the classification of some 
stands from ponderosa pine to mixed-conifer (Johnson 
1994a). In existing mixed-conifer forests, an emphasis on 
harvesting mature ponderosa pine trees over other coni- 
fer species may be altering both stand structure and com- 
position in favor of more shade-tolerant conifers such as 
Douglas-fir and white fir (USDI 1995). 
A cornerstone to conserving avian populations in pon- 
derosa pine forests is acquiring more detailed informa- 
tion about past and current forest conditions. Published 
research and existing knowledge (this volume) provide a 
good foundation from which we can proceed, but signifi- 
cant information gaps remain. In particular, we must un- 
derstand the range of variation in key forest attributes both 
in reference ponderosa pine forests and in the forests that 
exist today. Managing ponderosa pine forests for one eco- 
logical condition may not provide the variation in condi- 
tions needed to support the variety of birds native to 
Southwestern pine forests (Miller 1996). Also required is 
the information and technology needed to evaluate forest 
conditions over large geographic areas. The ability to 
quantify and model spatial relationships of vegetative 
conditions, especially at the landscape and regional scales, 
is critical to understanding the dynamics of ponderosa 
pine ecosystems and evaluating areas in greatest need of 
remedial management actions. 
Songbird Ecology 
Most insightful studies of the ecology of ponderosa pine 
birds have been conducted within the past 40 years. These 
studies have been largely descriptive, although some 
small-scale experiments have been conducted. The most 
extensive descriptive study examined bird-habitat rela- 
tionships within 23 stands representing gradients of eco- 
logical conditions in ponderosa pine and pine-oak forests 
of northern Arizona (Rosenstock 1996). This work with 
major studies by Szaro, Brawn, Blake, Balda, and others 
(for example, T. Martin's study in progress through the 
Montana Cooperative Wildlife Research Unit, University 
of Montana) provides the basis for much of our current 
knowledge of songbird community ecology in Southwest- 
ern ponderosa pine forests (Finch et al., this volume; Hall 
et al., this volume). Knowledge gaps not addressed by 
community-level studies are captured to some extent by 
single-species studies conducted by investigators such as 
Marzluff and Martin (Marzluff, this volume; Finch et al., 
this volume; Hall et al., this volume). 
Because most published studies of passerines are rela- 
tively recent, their results largely reflect ecological rela- 
tionships in forests altered by human activities over the 
past century. Although archaeological records from pre- 
historic periods and historical ornithological accounts 
from expeditions and collections exist for the Southwest 
(Scurlock and Finch, this volume), these records document 
mostly presence and absence of bird species rather than 
avian abundances. Therefore, bird use of ponderosa pine 
forests reported in contemporary studies cannot be readily 
compared to historical accounts or archaeological finds. 
Consequently, we do not know if patterns of abundance 
and species composition of birds that we see today are 
similar to those of presettlement forests. Because the 
Southwest has undergone extensive climatic changes such 
as warming over geologic time, contemporary avifaunas 
in Southwestern ponderosa pine forests likely differ from 
prehistoric or historical avifaunas in response to natural 
forest changes alone (Johnson 1994b). That the Southwest 
was settled by different cultural groups at different peri- 
ods of time, each group using forest and avian resources 
to different extents (Scurlock and Finch, this volume), fur- 
ther confounds interpretation of temporal and spatial 
changes in avifaunas. 
If we assume, however, that the strongest or most con- 
sistent relationships that we detect in contemporary stud- 
ies also existed in the past, then it could be instructive to 
evaluate whether habitat resources essential for specific 
bird species were available in presettlement forests. We 
could then speculate whether temporal changes in re- 
source distributions or quantities would have been ben- 
eficial or detrimental to species' populations. For example, 
species that rely on large trees for an important aspect of 
their life history (such as nesting) may have been more 
abundant in the past when large trees were more abun- 
dant, whereas species that favor dense stands may have 
been less abundant historically. 
Cavity-nesting species are perhaps the most studied 
group of birds in the Southwest (Balda 1975; Cunningham 
et al. 1980; Ffolliot 1983; Brawn and Balda 1983, Rosenstock 
1996). Collectively, these studies emphasize the impor- 
tance of snags, particularly large snags, as potential nest- 
ing substrates for these species. Results of Brawn's (1985) 
experimental research on secondary cavity-nesting birds 
and Rosenstock's (1996) observational research on both 
primary and secondary cavity nesters concur that snags 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Summary 
and nest substrates are limiting factors for many of these 
species. Miller's (1992) analysis of Breeding Bird Survey 
(BBS) data suggests that populations of the hairy wood- 
pecker, acorn woodpecker, violet-green swallow, white- 
breasted nuthatch, pygmy nuthatch, mountain chickadee, 
and mountain bluebird are declining in the Southwest. If 
these declines are indeed real, then loss of snags that pro- 
vide nest, foraging, and perch sites could be a contributing 
or even a primary factor explaining declining populations. 
The loss of large trees in many ponderosa pine forests 
has also likely impacted populations and habitats of nu- 
merous species. Rosenstock (1996) found positive relation- 
ships between the relative abundance of large trees and 
breeding populations of violet-green swallows, brown 
creepers, house wrens, chipping sparrows, pygmy 
nuthatches, and northern flickers. All of these species ex- 
cept the chipping sparrow are bark-foraging species or 
require snags for nesting. Large trees may provide habi- 
tat for many arthropod prey of bark-foraging birds, and 
these bark-foraging birds may be morphologically 
adapted to forage more efficiently on the bark furrows of 
larger trees (Richardson 1942). For species such as the chip- 
ping sparrow and perhaps Grace's warbler, large trees 
provide elevated song posts and substrates for their open- 
cup nests. Thus, the loss of large trees not only curtails 
the sustained supply of large snags and nest cavities but 
may also reduce foraging substrates, song perches, and 
substrates for open-cup nests. 
Changes to the forest understory, mainly the loss of 
structural and floristic diversity, have also altered habi- 
tats of a number of species. Gambel oak is an important 
understory component in pine-oak forests (Rosenstock 
1996), and aspen is an important component of some early 
successional ponderosa pine forests. Unlike pines, large 
oaks and aspens often have natural or excavated cavities 
while still live. Characteristics of these cavities appear to 
be favored by some bird species over cavities in pine snags 
(Finch et al., this volume). Gambel oak provides acorn 
mast, and arthropods found on oaks add to the diversity 
of prey for insectivorous birds. We are observing loss of 
large Gambel oaks to fuelwood harvest and loss of aspen 
to pine succession in fire-excluded forests. Increased com- 
petition with pines for light as forest canopy cover in- 
creases may also explain declines of these deciduous trees. 
Further, heavy browsing by wildlife and livestock may 
be limiting regeneration of oak, aspen, and shrubs to re- 
place those lost by natural or human causes (USDI 1995). 
Grasses, forbs, and shrubs provide cover for ground- 
foraging and ground-nesting species. They also provide 
a variety of seeds, fruits, and nectar for granivorous (such 
as juncos, towhees, sparrows), frugivorous (such as 
thrushes), and nectivorous (such as hummingbirds) spe- 
cies. Since 1880, these herbaceous understories have been 
heavily impacted by livestock, elk, increased tree densi- 
ties, and altered fire regimes. Undoubtedly, these changes 
have affected the avifauna. Reductions in the amounts of 
seeds and fruits may be particularly important during the 
winter, when these foods are generally more available than 
arthropods. 
Studies should continue to emphasize habitat and popu- 
lation ecology but must provide greater consideration of 
geographic variation, seasonality, spatial scale, and popu- 
lation demographics. Past management activities have 
reduced the amount of mature/old-growth ponderosa 
pine:forest in the Southwest and the openness of stands. 
Older forests and open forests provide unique conditions 
used by various species (Siege1 1989, Finch et al, this vol- 
ume). Researchers have identified some general habitat 
correlates for birds in late-successional forests, but addi- 
tional research-especially experimental-that details the 
ultimate and proximate factors underlying avian selec- 
tion of different ponderosa pine habitats could help to 
identify key forest attributes that might be emphasized in 
future forest management. New research should examine 
bird-habitat relationships in different ponderosa pine 
types, successional stages, and patch sizes across a gradi- 
ent of spatial scales and management situations (commer- 
cial forests, wilderness areas, research natural areas, ex- 
perimental forests). Research should also identify key 
site-level characteristics. At larger landscape scales, for 
example, bird-habitat relationships should consider patch 
size and shape, distance between patches, number of 
patches, and landscape mosaic patterns (Rich and 
Mehlhop, this volume). 
Published information on bird-habitat relationships is 
limited both spatially and temporally. As noted by Rich 
and Mehlhop (this volume), knowledge of habitat relation- 
ships and population characteristics of ponderosa pine birds 
at the landscape level is virtually nonexistent for the South- 
west. Many earlier studies suffer from little or no replica- 
tion (number of sample plots within a similar condition 
or treatment), restricting the level of inference possible 
from the results. Also, most studies were relatively short- 
term (1-4 years) and were typically restricted to the breed- 
ing season. In addition, most breeding bird studies did 
not evaluate reproductive success or survival rates in re- 
lation to habitat elements. As a result, the full range of 
habitat use by resident species has not been sampled; habi- 
tat use by species that do not occupy Southwestern pon- 
derosa pine forests during the breeding season (for ex- 
ample, most wintering and many migrating birds) has 
rarely been studied; temporal variation in bird communi- 
ties is not well understood (Gaud et al. 1986; Hejl and 
Beedy 1986; Hall et al., this volume); and avian demo- 
graphic responses to habitat variation need further study. 
Thus, our knowledge of habitat associations of birds in 
ponderosa pine is a credible start but is far from what we 
require to describe desired conditions to land managers. 
Existing information on population trends and the 
population ecology of ponderosa pine birds provides good 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
147 

Chapter 8 
baseline information but leaves many questions unan- 
swered. Results from analyses of BBS and Christmas Bird 
Count (CBC) data, despite their weaknesses, can be used 
as a starting point to focus future monitoring and research 
efforts (which is indeed their intent). A logical start would 
be to increase the number of samples in ponderosa pine 
forests for both BBS and CBC and to allocate samples 
throughout the range of conditions found in these forests. 
Further, results from BBS or CBC data could be used as a 
basis for more intensive sampling efforts (see also Manley 
et al. 1993). For example, Miller's (1992) preliminary analy- 
sis of BBS data suggests that more species have declined 
than have increased in abundance over the past 30 years. 
Greater effort should be devoted to monitoring bird popu- 
lations exhibiting these perceived declines. This more in- 
tensive monitoring should not be restricted to measures 
of absolute or relative abundance, but should also include 
estimates of other population parameters such as survival, 
reproduction, or turnover rates. Likely, research will be 
needed to determine which population parameter is the 
most sensitive index of population status prior to initiat- 
ing intensive monitoring efforts. 
Effects of Land-Use Activities 
Numerous types of land and natural resource use have 
the potential of altering bird habitats, leading to spatial 
and temporal changes in bird populations (Rotenberry et 
al. 1995; Saab et al. 1995; Thompson et al. 1995). The pri- 
mary current land uses discussed in this volume include 
timber harvest, fire, fire suppression, grazing by wildlife 
and livestock, recreation, and urbanization. At least three 
major factors complicate a study addressing the effects of 
any of these factors. The first is that natural events such 
as climate, succession, and numerous stochastic distur- 
bances occur simultaneously with human impacts. Sepa- 
rating effects of natural events from human activities is 
extremely difficult. Second, where human activities oc- 
cur, more than one type of activity usually takes place. 
For example, many forests that have undergone timber 
harvest have also been subjected to fire suppression and 
livestock grazing. Thus, the real effects of land use are 
likely synergistic rather than the results of any one factor 
acting singly. Third, effects of activities can become addi- 
tive or even multiplicative over time. These cumulative 
effects, coupled with synergistic effects and effects of natu- 
ral events, create a difficult and complicated puzzle to 
solve. That has not prevented researchers from attempt- 
ing to address these questions in the past, nor should it 
dissuade researchers from doing so in the future. Limit- 
ing the number of variables under study can help to re- 
duce the complexity of a study, and developing coopera- 
tive research partnerships to conduct studies that address 
interactions among land uses may be the key to interpret- 
ing complex bird-habitat relationships. Regardless of how 
studies might be approached, understanding interactive 
cause-effect relationships of land use is critical for future 
management of Southwestern ponderosa pine forests and 
the conservation of the associated avifauna. 
Observational studies are basically correlative and may 
not elucidate cause-effect relationships. Although the stud- 
ies revlewed in this book have provided useful informa- 
tion, the interpretations that we have drawn from them 
are limited. The effects of various land uses, singly and in 
combination, are best studied using well-designed experi- 
ments. The need for experiments to understand the ef- 
fects of land management on specific ecosystem attributes 
(including birds) is not a new concept (see Eberhardt and 
Thomas 1991; James and McCulloch 1995; USDI 1995). 
Such studies are rarely conducted because costs and lo- 
gistical obstacles associated with implementing large-scale 
forest manipulations limit their application. 
We recognize that the design and implementation of 
experiments is a daunting challenge (Carpenter et al. 1995). 
Granted, we can develop educated guesses based on avail- 
able evidence as to how particular land uses might affect 
bird habitats, populations, and perhaps community dy- 
namics, but we can rarely assign levels of assurance that 
our guesses are correct. Given that such studies would 
need to be both well replicated and conducted at large 
spatial scales, success of implementing experiments re- 
quires commitment and collaboration by public partici- 
pants, resource-management agencies, and researchers. 
Treatments such as logging, fire, and grazing manipula- 
tions would need to be implemented by management 
agencies, following experimental designs developed in 
cooperation with researchers. Numerous opportunities 
exist to plan and design management treatments that al- 
low for the implementation of research experiments (Car- 
penter et al. 1995). Taking advantage of these opportuni- 
ties would resolve many key issues on forest passerine 
ecology. 
Literature Cited 
Balda , R. P. 1975. The relationship of secondary cavity 
nesters to snag densities in western coniferous forests. 
USDA Forest Service Southwestern Region, Wildlife 
Habitat Technical Bulletin 1, Albuquerque, New Mexico, 
USA. 
Brawn, J. D. 1985. Population biology, community struc- 
ture, and habitat selection of birds in ponderosa pine 
forest habitat. Ph.D. thesis, Northern Arizona Univer- 
sity, Flagstaff, Arizona, USA. 
148 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Summary 
Brawn, J. D., and R. P. Balda. 1983. Use of nest boxes in 
ponderosa pine forests. Pages 159-164 in J. W. Davis, G. 
A. Goodwin, and R. A. Ockenfiels, editors. Snag habi- 
tat management: proceedings of a symposium. USDA 
Forest Service General Technical Report RM-99, Fort 
Collins, Colorado, USA. 
Carpenter, S. R., S. W. Chisholm, C. J. Krebs, D. W. 
Schindler, and R. W. Wright. 1995. Ecosystem experi- 
ments. Science 269:324-327. 
Covington, W. W., and M. M. Moore. 1994. Southwestern 
ponderosa forest structure: changes since Euro-Ameri- 
can settlement. J. For. 92(1):3947. 
Covington, W. W., and P. K. Wagner, tech. coords. 1996. 
Conference on adaptive ecosystem restoration and man- 
agement: restoration of Cordilleran conifer landscapes 
of North America. USDA Forest Service General Tech- 
nical Report RM-278, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA. 
Cunningham, J. G., R. P. Balda, and W. S. Gaud. 1980. Se- 
lection and use of snags by secondary cavity nesters of 
ponderosa pine forest. USDA Forest Service Research 
Paper RM-222, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA.. 
Eberhardt, L. L., and J. M. Thomas. 1991. Designing envi- 
ronmental field studies. Ecological Monographs. 61: 
53-73. 
Ffolliott, P. F. 1983. Implications of snag policies on man- 
agement of Southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Pages 
28-32 in J. W. Davis, G. A. Goodwin, and R. A. 
Ockenfiels, editors. Snag habitat management: proceed- 
ings of a symposium. USDA Forest Service General 
Technical Report RM-99, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA. 
Gaud, W. S., R. P. Balda, and J. D. Brawn. 1986. The di- 
lemma of plots or years: a case for long-term studies. 
Pages 223-228 in J. Verner, M. L. Morrison, and C. J. 
Ralph, editors. Wildlife 2000: modeling habitat relation- 
ships of terrestrial vertebrates. University of Wisconsin 
Press, Madison, Wisconsin, USA. 
Green, R. H. 1979. Sampling design and statistical meth- 
ods for environmental biologists. John Wiley and Sons, 
New York, USA. 
Hejl, S. J. and E. C. Beedy. 1986. Weather-induced varia- 
tion in the abundance of birds. Pages 241-244 in J. 
Verner, M. L. Morrison, and C. J. Ralph, editors. Wild- 
life 2000: modeling habitat relationships of terrestrial 
vertebrates. University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, 
Wisconsin, USA. 
Hurlbert, S. H. 1984. Pseudoreplication and the design of 
ecological field experiments. Ecological. Monographs 
54:187-211. 
James, F. C., and C. E. McCulloch. 1995. The strengths of 
inferences about causes of trends in populations. Pages 
40-51. in T.E. Martin, and D.M. Finch, editors. Ecology 
and management of neotropical migratory birds. Ox- 
ford University Press, New York, USA 
Johnson, M. 1994a. Changes in Southwestern forests: stew- 
ardship implications. Journal of Forestry 92(12):16-19. 
Johnson, N. K. 1994b. Pioneering and natural expansion 
of breeding distributions in western North American 
birds. Studies in Avian Biology 15:2744. 
Manley, P. N., W. M. Block, F. R. Thompson, G. S. Butcher, 
C. Paige, L. H. Suring, D. S. Winn, D. Roth, C. J. Ralph, 
E. Morris, C. H. Flather, K. Byford. 1993. Guidelines for 
monitoring populations of neotropical migratory birds 
on National Forest Systems lands. USDA Forest Service, 
Washington, D.C., USA. 
Miller, R. 1992. Preliminary results from breeding bird 
survey data estimates of trends in bird populations in 
or near managed ponderosa pine in the Southwest. 
Unpublished report. Arizona Department of Game and 
Fish, Flagstaff, Arizona, USA. 
Miller, R. 1996. The need for diversity and acceptable risk. 
Pages 19-24 in W. Covington and P. K. Wagner, techni- 
cal coordinators. Conference on adaptive ecosystem 
restoration and management: restoration of Cordille- 
ran conifer landscapes of North America. USDA Forest 
Service General Technical Report RM-278. Fort Collins, 
Colorado, USA. 
Reynolds, R. T., W. M. Block, and D. A. Boyce Jr. 1996. 
Using ecological relationships of wildlife as templates 
for restoring Southwestern forests. Pages 34-42 in W. 
Covington and P. K. Wagner, technical coordinators. 
Conference on adaptive ecosystem restoration and man- 
agement: restoration of Cordilleran conifer landscapes 
of North America. USDA Forest Service General Tech- 
nical Report RM-278. Fort Collins, Colorado, USA. 
Richardson, F. 1942. Adaptive modifications for tree-trunk 
foraging in birds. University of California Publications 
in Zoology 46:317-368. 
Rosenstock, S. S. 1996. Habitat relationships of breeding 
birds in northern Arizona ponderosa pine and pine-oak 
forests. Arizona Game and Fish Department Research 
Branch, Technical Report 23, Phoenix, Arizona, USA. 
Rotenberry, J. T., R. J. Cooper, J. M. Wunderle, and K. G. 
Smith. 1995. When and how are populations limited? 
The roles of insect outbreaks, fire, and other natural 
perturbations. Pages 55-84 in T.E. Martin and D.M. 
Finch, editors. Ecology and management of neotropical 
migratory birds. Oxford University Press, New York, 
USA. 
Saab, V. A., C. E. Bock, T. D. Rich, and D. S. Dobkin. 1995. 
Livestock grazing effects in western North America. 
Pages 311-353 in T.E. Martin and D.M. Finch, editors. 
Ecology and management of neotropical migratory 
birds. Oxford University Press, New York, USA. 
Siegel, J. J. 1989. An evaluation of the minimum habitat 
quality standards for birds in old-growth ponderosa 
pine forests, northern Arizona. M.S. thesis, University 
of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, USA. 
Thompson, F. R., 111, J. R. Probst, and M. G. Raphael. 1995. 
Impacts of silviculture: overview and management rec- 
ommendations. Pages 201-219 in T.E. Martin and D.M. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 
149 

Chapter 8 
Finch, editors. Ecology and management of neotropical 
USDI Fish and Wildlife Service. 1995. Recovery plan for 
migratory birds. Oxford University Press, New York, 
the Mexican spotted owl. Vol. I. USDI Fish and Wildlife 
USA. 
Service, Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. 1997 

Appendix: Birds Referenced in This Book 
Common name 
Scientific name 
Acorn woodpecker 
American crow 
American dipper 
American goldfinch 
American kestrel 
American robin 
Ash-throated flycatcher 
Baird's sparrow 
Bald eagle 
Band-tailed pigeon 
Barn swallow 
Bell's vireo 
Berylline hummingbird 
Bewick's wren 
Black-billed magpie 
Black-capped chickadee 
Black-capped vireo 
Black-chinned hummingbird 
Black-headed grosbeak 
Black-throated gray warbler 
Black phoebe 
Blue grouse 
Blue-gray gnatcatcher 
Blue grosbeak 
Blue-throated hummingbird 
Brewer's blackbird 
Brewer's sparrow 
Broad-tailed hummingbird 
Brown creeper 
Brown-headed cowbird 
Buff-breasted flycatcher 
Bullock's orioles 
Bushtit 
California spotted owl 
Calliope hummingbird 
Canada jay 
Canyon wren 
Cation towhee 
Cassin's finch 
Cassin's kingbird 
Cedar waxwing 
Chipping sparrow. 
Clark's nutcracker 
Common crow 
Common nighthawk 
Common raven 
Common poorwill 
Cooper's hawk 
Melanerpes formicivorus 
Corvus brachyrhynchos 
Cinclus mexicanus 
Carduelis tristis 
Falco sparverius 
Turdus migratorius 
Myiarchus cinerascens 
Ammodramus bairdii 
Haliaeetus leucocephalus 
Columba fasciata 
Hirundo rustica 
Vireo bellii 
Amazilia beryllina 
Thryomanes bewickii 
Pica pica 
Parus atricapillus 
Vireo atricapillus 
Archilochus alexandri 
Pheucticus melanocephalus 
Dendroica nigrescens 
Sayornis nigricans 
Dendragapus obscurus 
Polioptila caerulea 
Guiraca caerulea 
Lampornis clemenciae 
Euphagus cyanocephalus 
Spizella breweri 
Selasphorus platycercus 
Certhia americana 
Molothrus atrer 
Empidonax fulvifrons 
lcterus bullockii 
Psaltriparus minimus 
Strix occidentalis occidentalis 
Stellula calliope 
Perisoreus canadensis 
Catherpes mexicanus 
Pipilo fuscus 
Carpodacus cassinii 
Tyrannus vociferans 
Bombycilla cedrorum 
Spizella passerina 
Nucifraga columbiana 
Corvus brachyrhynchos 
Chordeiles minor 
Corvus corax 
Phalaenoptilus nuttallii 
Accipiter cooperii 
cordilleran (western) flycatcher ~mpidonax difficilis 
Curve-billed thrasher 
Toxostoma cun~irostre 
Dark-eyed junco 
Junco hyemalis 
Common name 
Scientific name 
Downy woodpecker 
Dusky flycatcher 
Dusky-capped flycatcher 
Eastern bluebird 
Eastern kingbird 
Eastern meadowlark 
Elegant trogon 
European starling 
Evening grosbeak 
Flammulated owl 
Fox sparrow 
Golden-crowned kinglet 
Golden eagle 
Grace's warbler 
Gray flycatcher 
Great horned owl 
Greater peewee 
Greater roadrunner 
Green-tailed towhee 
Hairy woodpecker 
Hammond's flycatcher 
Hepatic tanager 
Hermit thrush 
House finch 
House sparrow 
House wren 
Hutton's vireo 
Killdeer 
Lark sparrow 
Lazuli bunting 
Lesser goldfinch 
Lesser nighthawk 
Lewis' woodpecker 
Lincoln's sparrow 
Loggerhead shrike 
Lucy's warbler 
Mallard 
MacGillivray's warbler 
Magnificent hummingbird 
Merriam's turkey 
Mexican chickadee 
Mexican parrot 
Mexican spotted owl 
Merlin 
Military macaw 
Montezuma quail 
Mountain bluebird 
Mountain chickadee 
Mourning dove 
Northern flicker 
Northern goshawk 
Picoides pubescens 
Empidonax oberholseri 
Myiarchus tuberculifer 
Sialia sialis 
Tyrannus tyrannus 
Sturnella magna 
Trogon elegans 
Sturnus vulgaris 
Coccothraustes vespertinus 
Otus flammeolus 
Passerella iliaca 
Regulus satrapa 
Aquila chrysaetos 
Dendroica graciae 
Empidonax wrightii 
Bubo virginianus 
Contopus pertinax 
Geococcyx californianus 
Pipilo chlorusrus 
Picoides villosus 
Empidonax hammondii 
Piranga flava 
Catharus guttatus 
Carpodacus mexicanus 
Passer domesticus 
Troglodytes aedon 
Vireo huttoni 
Charadrius vociferus 
Chondestes grammacus 
Passerina amoena 
Carduelis psaltria 
Chordeiles acutipennis 
Melanerpes lewis 
Melospiza lincolnii 
Lanius ludovicianus 
Vermivora luciae 
Anas platyrhynchos 
Oporornis tolmiei 
Eugenes fulgens 
Meleagris gallopavo merriami 
Parus sclateri 
Arnazona spp. 
Strix occidentalis lucida 
Falco columbarius 
Ara militaris 
Cyrtonyx montezumae 
Sialia currucoides 
Parus gambeli 
Zenaida macroura 
Colaptes auratus 
Accipiter gentilis 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-XXX. 1997 
- 
- - 
continued on next page 
151 

Appendix 
Common name 
Scientific name 
Northern mockingbird 
Northern pygmy owl 
Northern woodpecker 
Olive-sided flycatcher 
Olive warbler 
Orange-crowned warbler 
Painted redstart 
Peregrine falcon 
Pileated woodpecker 
Pine grosbeak 
Pine siskin 
Pinyon jay 
Plain titmouse 
Prairie chicken 
Purple martin 
Pygmy nuthatch 
Quetzal 
Red-breasted nuthatch 
Red crossbill 
Red-faced warbler 
Red-naped sapsucker 
Red-tailed hawk 
Red-shafted northern flicker 
Rivoli's hummingbird 
Rock dove 
Rock wren 
Rosy finch 
Rough-winged swallow 
Ruby-crowned kinglet 
Rufous hummingbird 
Sandhill crane 
Savannah sparrow 
Saw-whet owl 
Say's phoebe 
Scarlet macaw 
Scott's orioles 
Scrub jay 
Sharp-shinned hawk 
Solitary vireo 
Song sparrow 
Mimus polyglottos 
Glaucidium gnoma 
Picoides spp. 
Contopus borealis 
Peucedramus taeniatus 
Vermivora celata 
Myioborus pictus 
Falco peregrinus 
Dryocopus pileatus 
Pinicola enucleator 
Carduelis pinus 
Gymnorhinus cyanocephalus 
Parus inornatus 
Tympanuchus spp. 
Progne subis 
Sitta pyhmaea 
Pharomachrus spp. 
Sitta canadensis 
Loxia curvirostra 
Cardellina rubrifrons 
Sphyrapicus varius nuchalis 
Buteo jamaicensis 
Colaptes auratus 
Eugenes fulgens 
Columba livia 
Salpinctes obsoletus 
Leucosticte arctoa 
Stelgidopteryx serripennis 
Regulus calendula 
Selasphorus rufus 
Grus canadensis 
Passerculus sandwichensis 
Aegolius acadicus 
Sayornis saya 
Ara macao 
lcterus parisorum 
Aphelocoma coerulescens 
Accipiter striatus 
Vireo solitarius 
Melospiza melodia 
o U . S . GOVERWT PR1NTI:iC OFFICE : 1997- 575- 285165048 
152 
Common name 
Scientific name 
Spotted towhee 
Steller's jay 
Sulphur-bellied flycatcher 
Summer tanager 
Swainson's thrush 
Thick-billed parrot 
Three-toed woodpecker 
Townsend's solitaire 
Townsenb's warbler 
Tree swallow 
Turkey vulture 
Vaux's swift 
Veery 
Vesper sparrow 
Voilet-crowned hummingbird 
Violet-green swallow 
Virginia's warbler 
Warbling vireo 
Water pipit 
Western bluebird 
Western kingbird 
Western meadowlark 
Western screech owl 
Western tanager 
Western wood pewee 
Whip-poor-will 
White-breasted nuthatch 
White-crowned sparrow 
White-throated swift 
White-winged crossbill 
Whooping crane 
Wild turkey 
Williamson's sapsucker 
Willow flycatcher 
Wilson's warbler 
Winter wren 
Wright's flycatcher 
Yellow-bellied sapsucker 
Yellow-eyed junco 
Yellow-rumped warbler 
Pipilo maculatus 
Cyanocitta stelleri 
Myiodynastes luteiventris 
Piranga rubra 
Catharus ustulatus 
Rhynchopsitta pachyrhyncha 
Picoides tridactylus 
Myadestes townsendi 
Dendroica townsendi 
Tachycineta bicolor 
Cathartes aura 
Chaetura vauxi 
Catharus fuscescens 
Pooecetes gramineus 
Amazilia violiceps 
Tachycineta thalassina 
Vermivora virginiae 
Vireo gilvus 
Anthus spinoletta 
Sialia mexicana 
Tyrannus verticalis 
Sturnella neglecta 
Otus kennicotti 
Piranga ludoviciana 
Contopus sordidulus 
Caprimulgus vociferus 
Sitta carolinensis 
Zonotrichia leucophrys 
Aeronautes saxatalis 
Loxia leucoptera 
Grus americana 
Meleagris gallopavo 
Sphyrapicus thyroideus 
Empidonax traillii 
Wilsonia pusilla 
Troglodytes troglodytes 
Empidonax wrightii 
Sphyrapicus varius 
Junco phaeonotus 
Dendroica coronata 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-XXX. 1997. 

The United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in its programs on the 
basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs and marital or familial 
status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons withdisabilities who require alternative 
means for communication of program information (braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
the USDA Office of Communications at (202) 720-2791 (voice) or (800) 855-1234 (TDD). 
To file a complaint, write the Secretary of Agriculture, U S .  Department of Agriculture, Washington, 
D.C. 20250, or call (800) 245-6340 (voice) or (800) 855-1234 (TDD). USDA is an equal employment 
opportunity employer. 
Printed on 
recycled paper 

Rocky 
Mountains 
Southwest 
Great 
Plains 
U.S. Department of Agriculture 
Forest Service 
Rocky Mountain Forest and 
Range Experiment Station 
The Rocky Mountain Station is one of seven 
regional experiment stations, plus the Forest 
Products Laboratory and the Washington Office 
Staff, that make up the Forest Service research 
organization. 
RESEARCH FOCUS 
Research programs at the Rocky Mountain 
Station are coordinated with area universities and 
with other institutions. Many studies are 
conducted on a cooperative basis to accelerate 
solutions to problems involving range, water, 
wildlife and fish habitat, human and community 
development, timber, recreation, protection, and 
multiresource evaluation. 
RESEARCH LOCATIONS 
Research Work Units of the Rocky Mountain 
Station are operated in cooperation with 
universities in the following cities: 
Albuquerque, New Mexico 
Flagstaff, Arizona 
Fort Collins, Colorado' 
Laramie, Wyoming 
Lincoln, Nebraska 
Rapid City, South Dakota 
'Station Headquarters: 240 W. Prospect Rd., Fort Collins, CO 80526 
