Ecological Restoration 
Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to reversing declines in the condition of forested communities throughout the Intermoun-
tain West, particularly those affected by severe wildfires and insect outbreaks.  Our efforts focus on science-based research of ecological 
and socio-economic matters related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach, and education. 
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928/523-7182, FAX 928/523-0296, www.eri.nau.edu 
Fact Sheet: Meta-analysis of Treatment Effects on Fire Behavior   March 2012 
Meta-analysis Finds Restoration Thinning and Burning Treatments is Best Strategy to Restore 
Natural Fire Behavior in Western U.S. Forests  
Ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) and Jeffrey pine (P. jeffreyi), as dominant species or mixed with other 
conifer and broadleaf species, cover approximately 25 million acres in western North America. Although 
these forest types are adapted to a disturbance regime of 
frequent surface fires, extended fire exclusion and other 
factors have led to uncharacteristically dense stands and  
high fuel loadings that often result in large, high-severity 
crown fires.  
 
Twentieth-century conservationists, such as Aldo Leo-
pold, described changing ecosystem structure, function, 
and disturbance patterns. Early forest restoration efforts 
focused primarily on prescribed burning. Land managers 
and forest ecologists now recognize that prescribed burns 
on their own may not be an effective strategy because 
many forests are too dense. More recent experimental and 
observational studies have incorporated burn only, thin only, and thinning + burning as strategies for re-
storing these dense, pine-dominated forests. 
 
Systematic Review and Meta-analysis 
There has been a growing body of research about restoration treatments in western forests. The purpose of 
these experimental treatments is to study how to restore forest structure and disturbance, and reduce fire 
hazard. These experiments have been followed by observations of fire behavior in treated stands. To syn-
thesize this large body of information, we conducted a systematic review of the effects of forest thinning 
and burning treatments on forest structure and fire behavior attributes in western U.S. pine forests. Using a 
systematic review methodology, we found 54 studies with quantitative data suitable for meta-analysis.  

Results and Qualifications 
We found that surface fuels were significantly reduced relative to controls in burn-only treatments, signifi-
cantly increased in thin-only treatments, and changed little in thin + burn treatments. Forest structure variables 
(tree density, basal area, and canopy cover) were consistently significantly reduced compared to controls, and 
most so in combined treatments (thinning + burning). All treatments increased crowning and torching index 
values relative to controls (i.e., reduced susceptibility to crown fire), but no differences existed between treat-
ments. Similarly, changes in canopy base height and canopy bulk density were not consistently related to treat-
ment intensity, as measured by basal area reduction. Overall, treatments were successful in reducing the poten-
tial for passive and active crown fire, but additional studies about fire behavior effects are needed.  
 
There are a number of qualifications to the findings. First, because it is not feasible to subject treated areas to 
severe fire experimentally, inferences about potential fire behavior rely on imperfect modeling techniques. 
Second, research has not been done uniformly across the ranges of the pine forests, although we found no sig-
nificant differences in treatment effects between regions or forest types.  
 
Management Implications 
The meta-analysis showed that although the various treatments were not statistically distinguishable and there 
was not a linear relationship between treatment intensity and canopy fuels, all treatments had significant ef-
fects on the measured forest variables that contribute to low-severity fire behavior. Land managers who are 
trying to decide which treatment strategy to implement will note that this meta-analysis found:  
 
thinning + burning had the greatest effect on reducing tree density, basal area, and canopy cover 
 
thinning alone significantly increased fine and coarse surface fuels 
 
burning alone significantly reduced canopy fuels and both fine and coarse surface fuels, although 
the effects can be limited if environmental conditions do not allow for efficient and effective burn-
ing.  
 
Reference 
Fulé, P.Z., J.E. Crouse, J.P. Roccaforte, and E.L. Kalies. 2012. Do thinning and/or burning treatments in west-
ern USA ponderosa or Jeffrey pine-dominated forests help restore natural fire behavior?  Forest Ecol-
ogy and Management 269, 68-81. 
 
For more information about the results of this study,  
contact Joe Crouse, Ecological Restoration Institute, Joseph.Crouse@nau.edu. 
