 
 
Where there's smoke, there's a perception problem 
By DAILY SUN STAFF 
11/15/2002 
The public likes the idea of thinning dense stands of trees and burning undergrowth to 
prevent wildfires and promote healthy forest conditions.  
But that goodwill can vanish when loggers bearing roaring chainsaws appear and smoke 
from controlled burns creeps into neighborhoods.  
So besides fighting for funding, creating programs and battling wildfires, fire managers 
and fuel management officers need to add public relations to their list of chores, says a 
University of Arizona environmental psychologist.  
At a Flagstaff forest restoration and fuel management forum that drew 200 fire 
professionals from across the West, professor Terry Daniel advised officials Thursday to 
keep the public well-informed about the challenges of restoring overcrowded, unhealthy 
and fire-prone forests.  
"I think there's a reluctance to say how this is going to be achieved. It's much nicer to talk 
about biodiversity and pre-settlement conditions. But when you get down to it, there's a 
huge number of trees that have got to come down and go somewhere," Daniel said.  
The cost of thinning, the problems associated with burning and smoke, and the enormous 
job facing fire and fuel management officers need to be shared with the public, Daniel 
said.  
"The public is a bit confused and with good reason. The messages over the last two 
decades from governmental agencies, the professional community and the environmental 
groups have been mixed," Daniel said.  
After being bombarded for decades with Smokey Bear's fire-suppression message, now 
officials are talking about bringing fire back to the forests to save them. At the same time, 
the public is hearing from some environmental groups that thinning projects are thinly-
disguised commercial logging ventures, Daniel said.  
These mixed messages, coupled with televised pictures of burning forests, need to be 
addressed by fire managers and fuel management officials or restoration programs won't 
be successful or face public opposition, he added.  
Being upfront about the need for commercial loggers and timber sales to remove small-
diameter trees for restoration and fire prevention makes sense in the long run.  

"We talk about ecological restoration or we talk about fuel reduction for fire safety 
purposes and the next words that come out are 'board feet' or 'pre-commercial thin.' The 
public says, 'Wait, I thought we were talking about ecological restoration,'" Daniel said.  
The public needs to know how costly forest treatment programs can be. "It's expensive 
and it doesn't happen for free. And if we're not going to put tax dollars up to do it, 
where's the money coming from?" Daniel said.  
Officials working on restoration need to realize that in the end, public opinion will play a 
significant role deciding the scope of thinning and burning projects. Environmental 
groups will have their say and segments of the public will echo their concerns. The end 
result presents a tradeoff situation for officials, he said.  
"Our only real hope in this situation is to recognize that this is a multi-dimensional 
process and that all these things come together in various ways. It is extremely unlikely 
that we're going to have the best of everything. There is no way to have it all," Daniel 
said.  
Public concerns about logging may derail some restoration projects or reduce their scope 
and officials have to be prepared to deal with those setbacks, he said.  
Public officials lashing out against environmentalists for allegedly delaying or stopping 
restoration projects doesn't play well with the public Daniel told the audience.  
Last summer's disastrous Rodeo-Chediski fire was accompanied by blistering 
condemnations of environmentalists by Gov. Jane Hull and other Arizona politicians.  
"Both sides need to be very careful about painting the other side as wearing a black hat. 
Environmentalists would make a big mistake saying that agencies, scientists and planners 
are bad guys trying to do bad things. They are not," said Daniel.  
Down the road, if forest restoration takes hold and landscapes are thinned and the fire 
cycle resumes, fire officials will have a new public perception problem, said Taylor.  
"Paradoxically, what we're buying into is that there will be more fires, not fewer fires and 
very likely they will be bigger fires. Because if everything works right, when the fire 
starts we won't rush over and put it out. And when it's burning we won't move God and 
Earth to put a fireline around it and contain it. Because if all this fuel treatment works 
well we ought to let it go," he said.  
People will have to get used to frequent low-impact fires burning across forests and that 
will present a new set of public relation challenges, he added.  
Doc Smith of the Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University said 
Daniel's observations on the need for understanding the public's concerns and hopes for 
restoration are valid.  

"Certainly public perception and public acceptance are vital for everything we're doing. 
Terry's perspective needs to get out to the people that are doing these jobs ... I realize 
after hearing Terry that our Institute needs to make contact with him and those public 
information issues need to be included into the effort of forest restoration," said Smith,  
Brett Lacey, fire marshal for the Colorado Springs Fire Department, agreed. He said that 
thousands of Colorado Springs residents are helping with thinning projects on private 
property and supporting municipal restoration efforts. The success in Colorado Springs 
began with an outreach program that included a Web site, visits from the fire department 
and media stories, he said.  
The Ponderosa Fire Advisory Council presented the three-day forum at Little America. 
Presentations from experts examined community impact and current programs involving 
prescribed burns, tree thinning and other strategies to combat catastrophic fires.  
