 
 
Forest thinning gets green light 
By GARY GHIOTO 
Sun Staff Reporter 
 
12/17/1999 
A plan by the Grand Canyon Forests Partnership to "restore" 10,000 acres of national 
forest land northwest of Flagstaff by thinning, prescribed burning and meadow 
preservation received a green light yesterday from Forest Service Regional Forester 
Eleanor Towns.  
The Partnership, which involves Grand Canyon Trust, Northern Arizona University and 
the Forest Service, says the forest project, which will ultimately "treat" 100,000 acres, 
will improve forest health, reduce the risk of catastrophic wildfires around Flagstaff.  
Forest Guardians, an environmental group based in Santa Fe, N.M., appealed Coconino 
National Forest Supervisor James Golden's approval of the Fort Valley Project. The 
Guardians say the Forest Service has failed to analyze the long-term impact of the 
restoration project on the environment and charge it is based on faulty science.  
Commercial logging of 1,700 acres in the Fort Valley area would not reduce fire risk and 
would damage wildlife habitat and threatens cultural resources, said a series of appeals 
filed by Forest Guardians.  
But Towns rejected all of the environmentalists' appeal points and upheld Golden's 
decision to move ahead with project.  
"I am relieved that we can now move forward on this project that is so important to the 
community and the health of the forest that surrounds it," said Golden.  
But Sam Hitt, executive director of Forest Guardians, said his organization may file a 
lawsuit in U.S. District Court to block the Fort Valley Project.  
"We will certainly consider litigating this decision since it's so significant ... and they 
were so blatant in their failure to comply with environmental law," said Hitts in a 
telephone interview.  
"The Forest Service has not analyzed the cumulative impact. It's irresponsible to cut four 
out of five trees in the national forest surrounding Flagstaff without looking at the impact 
on wildlife, tourism and flooding," said Hitt.  

He added that Towns' decision upholding Golden "ignores that this is one of the largest 
logging operations in the West" that will certainly cause major environmental changes.  
Partnership officials, including representatives of several environmental groups, have 
criticized Forest Guardians for delaying the restoration project with appeals that they 
charge are not based on scientific data.  
Brad Ack of Grand Canyon Trust said Towns' decision clears the way for the Partnership 
to "develop restoration practices that are ecologically and socially acceptable." He invited 
Forest Guardians to work with the Partnership in research and demonstration projects 
aimed at restoring a healthy forest.  
Professor Wally Covington of Northern Arizona University said he is "excited" that the 
Fort Valley Project will begin soon.  
"We can proceed with new restoration treatments and research that will incorporate what 
we have learned and allow us to answer new questions," said Covington.  
Golden said thinning and logging could begin in the spring. But he said the project's 
ultimate success depends on finding markets for the smaller diameter trees that will be 
harvested during the operation.  
"That's our biggest obstacle right now. We keep hearing of possibilities, but nothing has 
really happened of any size," he said.  
So far, timber from limited thinning has yielded firewood and building materials for the 
Navajo and Hopi reservations. A Phoenix company is using some of the timber for fence 
posts.  
Gary Ghioto can be reached 556-2251, or by e-mail at gghioto@azdailysun.com.  
 
