Leave trees larger than 12 inches 
03/20/2005 
 
To the editor:  
Thursday's editorial, "Are Forest Thinning Critics in a Time Warp?" over-simplified the 
problems of protecting and restoring old growth forests on the North Kaibab Ranger District, and 
inaccurately portrayed conservationist's concerns regarding proposed Jacob-Ryan thinning 
project. Old growth ponderosa forests consist of a mosaic of habitats including meadows, open 
stands with trees far apart, and clumps of large trees closely space together. Old growth forests 
consist of an impressive diversity of animal and plant species as well.  
For example, seven species of birds use only diverse, mature forests. The handsome Kaibab 
squirrel, unique to the Kaibab Plateau (North Kaibab Ranger District), is utterly dependent on 
old growth ponderosa forest that includes significant patches of closed canopy forest. In fact, the 
entire ponderosa forest is designated as a National Natural Landmark for Kaibab squirrel and its 
habitat.  
The Kaibab squirrel plays an essential role in forest integrity and is also a key prey species for 
the threatened Northern goshawk. Both require adequate closed canopy, old growth forest for 
foraging and nesting.  
Logging has removed 95 percent of the old growth within the Southwest. The old growth left on 
the North Kaibab National Forest is especially important because it represents our best 
opportunity to restore old growth on a landscape scale. The Forest Service estimates that most of 
the trees in the project area are smaller than five inches in diameter, while a very small 
percentage is twelve inches or greater in diameter. A minuscule percentage of trees have 
diameters greater than 24 inches.  
Thinning the smaller trees makes sense, and most conservationists generally support their 
removal to reduce the threat of major fire and other risks to the remaining mature large trees. 
Because of their importance and scarcity, leaving the ancient giants greater than 12 inches in 
diameter is prudent, to say the least. It will not, as the Daily Sun stated, result in a "plantation-
style forest," but should provide some semblance of the diverse, ancient forest that once covered 
the Kaibab Plateau.  
Kim Crumbo  
Grand Canyon Wildlands Council  
Grand Canyon  
