Forest Service offers new thinning plan 
By GARY GHIOTO 
Sun Staff Reporter 
09/22/2000 
 
After months of appeals and legal challenges, the Forest Service has retooled its 
controversial plan to thin hundreds of acres of dense and wildfire prone stands of 
ponderosa pine forest northwest of Flagstaff in Fort Valley.  
The new plan includes a cap on cutting trees 16 inches in diameter or larger, prescribed 
burning to reduce accumulated forest fuels, the closing 19 miles of roads, building eight 
miles of new trails and the restoration of meadow and riparian habitats.  
The project, supported by the Grand Canyon Forests Partnership and the Ecological 
Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University, was proposed in April 1998 but 
then was stalled by environmentalists' administrative appeals in 1999 and by a lawsuit 
this year.  
The final plan, still subject to a 45-day appeal period that ends in early November, was in 
part a  
response to an out-of-court settlement in that lawsuit filed by the National Forest 
Protection Alliance, a Santa Fe, N.M.-based Forest Guardians, the Flagstaff Activists 
Network and the Forest Conservation Council.  
This morning, Roxanne George of the Flagstaff Activist Network said her group needs 
time to evaluate the latest Fort Valley plan before deciding on a new appeal.  
George said however that the new plan reflects many of the more "extreme" prescriptions 
concerning restoration and fire prevention that triggered previous appeals and a lawsuit.  
Brian Nowicki of Flagstaff-based Southwest Forest Alliance had not had a chance to 
assess the plan, but said it must address concerns about protecting threatened goshawk 
habitat and old growth or face appeal.  
Jim Golden, Coconino National Forest supervisor, said the project's varied approach not 
only will help reduce wildfire danger while restoring forest health, but also will provide 
what a service biologist called "a nice mosaic of different habitat conditions for wildlife."  
The plan includes thinning dense stands of Ponderosa pine, reducing not only the crowns 
through which flames might race but also getting rid of some of the brush and deadwood 
that could fuel a fire on the ground.  

Meanwhile, Golden took some pains to attempt to clarify what some have called the 
"Flagstaff plan."  
It's Golden's view that the Fort Valley Ecosystem Restoration Project, the formal name 
for the program, is the result of what might be called the "Flagstaff plan," a process of 
collaborative planning.  
The approach, he said, "focused on restoration of natural process with a strong foundation 
in science, cradled in adaptive management to facilitate change."  
But Nowicki and others say the Fort Valley plan basically reflects the "Flagstaff plan" 
prescription of thinning forests to reflect "pre-settlement" conditions. The concept was 
pioneered by NAU Prof. Wallace Covington and has been cited by Interior Secretary 
Bruce Babbitt as a viable solution to the problems of congested, unhealthy forests.  
While Covington's prescription seems to work well in forests containing old growth and 
mature trees, it is an "environmental disaster" when applied to landscapes dominated by 
young trees, said Nowicki.  
The Covington pre-settlement plan is the most extreme approach to restoration leading to 
the cutting of 80-90 percent of trees in some areas, Nowicki said.  
The impact of large-scale cutting in these areas, which reflect much of the timber 
conditions in the West, have not been properly studied, Nowicki said.  
As part of the project, some roads would be closed and some trails would be relocated to 
reduce disturbance of wildlife. Meadows and riparian habitats also would be restored, and 
-- instead of battling every blaze -- wildfire would be allowed to resume its natural role to 
a degree.  
The overall goal in addition to reducing the likelihood of a catastrophic wildfire is to 
restore the ecological integrity of the forest, Golden said.  
"This is just a small percentage of thinning that needs to be done around the city of 
Flagstaff," he added, saying the service will be taking a look at additional areas southwest 
of Flagstaff.  
"This is going to be a continual process in the next few years," Golden said. "Speaking 
ambitiously, we could complete the thinning around Flagstaff in the next 10 to 15 years, 
assuming we get adequate funding for it."  
Thinning of about 4,000 acres is expected to cost $1.2 million, or $300 an acre, Golden 
said. He said it appeared Congress was "on the verge" of appropriating funds.  

Sen. Jon Kyl, R-Ariz., this week said $9 million is earmarked for the NAU Ecological 
Restoration Institute in emergency funding for forest thinning research and projects such 
as Fort Valley.  
Given the delays, safety concerns make it important that the project get under way as 
soon as possible, especially in light of the extensive fires elsewhere in the West this 
summer, said Golden.  
Golden said that "in the short term, we're trying to improve the likelihood that we could 
control any forest fires that might threaten the city of Flagstaff.  
"In the longer term," he said, "it's a step toward restoring the national forest to more 
ecological sustainable conditions.  
"We have a much more dense forest now than would have occurred in nature," he added. 
"This is the result of intervention of people, and it can only by fixed by the intervention 
of people  
"The only conflict is not whether to take action, just what kind of action to take."  
The Associated Press contributed to this report. Gary Ghioto can be reached at 
gghioto@azdailysun.com or 556-2251.  
 
