Statewide Strategy for 
Restoring Arizona’s Forests
Sustainable
Forests,
Communities
& Economies
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

Landcover characterization in the Statewide Strategy
The 11 major land cover classes in Arizona, mapped on the facing page, are comprised of between one 
(e.g., Aspen, Ponderosa Pine) and 23 (e.g., Shrubland) of 77 vegetation subclasses. For each class, we used 
a geographic information system to identify the dominant subclasses (by total area) within each major land 
cover class: 
Aspen is dominated by Rocky Mountain aspen forest and woodlands; 
Barren is dominated by Colorado Plateau mixed bedrock canyon and tablelands; 
Grassland is dominated by semi-desert and inter-mountain grassland and steppe vegetation; 
Mixed-conifer is dominated by Rocky Mountain montane dry-mesic mixed conifer forest and  
 
 
woodland; 
Other is characterized by developed areas and agriculture; 
Pine-oak is dominated by Madrean encinal and pine-oak forest and woodland; 
Pinyon-juniper is dominated by Colorado Plateau and Madrean pinyon-juniper woodland; 
Ponderosa pine is dominated by Rocky Mountain ponderosa pine woodland; 
Riparian is dominated by North American warm desert riparian mesquite bosque, woodland,  
 
 
and shrubland; 
Shrubland is dominated by Sonoran paloverde-mixed cacti desert scrub and Sonoran-Mojave  
 
 
creosotebush-white bursage desert scrub; 
Water is characterized by open water features.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute
ii

Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute
i
Statewide Strategy for Restoring Arizona’s Forests: Arizona’s Forests

Statewide Strategy Subcommittee 
of the Governor’s Forest Health Oversight Council
Co-Chairs
Ethan Aumack
Thomas D. Sisk
Project Coordinator
Jean Palumbo
Committee Members
Jesse Abrams
Bob Broscheid
Glen Buettner
Steve Campbell
Gary Christopherson
Cathy Covington
Wally Covington
Dave Egan
Pete Fulé
Steve Gatewood
Haydee Hampton
Herb Hopper
Thomas Klabunde
McKinley-Ben Miller
Todd Schulke
Matt Skroch
Edward Smith
Diane Vosick
Victoria Yazzie
Stephen Yool
Governor’s Forest Health Advisory Council
Co-Chairs
Ethan Aumack
Wally Covington
Members
Bob Broscheid
Steve Campbell
Carl Edminster
Don Falk
Deb Hill
Tom Klabunde
Robert Lacapa
Scott Paulsen 
Molly Pitts 
Kirk Rowdabaugh
Matt Skroch
Ed Smith
Thomas Swetnam
Michael Taylor
Richard Van Demark
Beth Zimmerman
Governor’s Forest Health Oversight Council
Co-Chairs
Honorable Tom O’Halleran
Diane Vosick
Members
Alexious C. Becenti Sr.
Steve Campbell
Richard Collison
Rob Davis
Honorable Joe Donaldson
Don Foster
Heather Garbarino
Steve Gatewood
Mark C. Herrington 
Benjamin Hershey
Dallas Massey Sr.
Jack Metzger
Michael Neal 
Erica Rosenburg
Kirk Rowdabaugh
Todd Schulke 
Rob Smith
Mike Somerville
Darrell Willis 
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute
ii

Statewide Strategy for 
Restoring Arizona’s Forests
A project of 
the Governor’s Forest Health Advisory 
and Oversight Councils
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

This page left blank
iv
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

 Contents
Foreword/Acknowledgments 
vii 
 
Executive Summary 
viii 
 
Part One
1. The Vision 
   
1
2. Purpose of the Statewide Strategy 
3
3. Key Strategies and Recommendations 
5
Part Two
4. The State of Arizona’s Forests 
19
5. The Policy Context for Restoration 
23 
6. Economic Considerations for Restoring Forest Health 
29
7. A Collaborative Foundation for the Statewide Strategy 
35 
Part Three
8. Restoring Forests and Protecting Communities:  
39
    A Landscape Approach
9. Arizona’s Forested Landscapes 
41
 
Arizona Strip 
42 
 
Basin and Range 
51 
 
 
Central Highlands 
60 
 
 
Chuska Mountains 
72 
 
 
Kaibab Plateau 
81
 
Northeastern Woodlands 
92
 
Sky Islands 
101 
 
 
Western Mogollon Plateau 
110
 
White Mountains 
123 
10. Appendices    
136
 
Appendix 1: Recommendations and Action Items                                 137
 
Appendix 2: Outreach and Consultation  
 
 
 
     142
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

Foreword 
&
Acknowlegements
[To be added prior to publication]
vi
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

vii
       Executive Summary
Background
In 2003 Governor Janet Napolitano created the Forest Health Advisory Council and the Forest Health Oversight 
Council in response to the escalating number, frequency, and intensity of unnatural wildfires threatening Arizona’s 
forests and communities (Executive Order 2003-16). The Councils were directed to develop scientific information and 
policy recommendations to advise the Governor’s administration in matters of forest health, unnaturally severe fire 
and community protection. In addition, the membership was designed to be inclusive to maximize the opportunity for 
collaboration and defuse the controversy surrounding forest management. 
Initially, the Oversight Council policy recommendations were reactive—responding to year-to-year circumstances. 
However, members quickly realized that success would demand a proactive multi-year, integrated set of actions 
designed to maximize efficiency and effectiveness of treatment activities. In 2005, the Councils established a 
subcommittee to begin work on a 20-year strategy to restore forest health, protect communities from fire, and 
encourage appropriate, forest-based economic activity. The actions identified in this document are a product of 
that subcommittee’s work, and represent a starting point for on-the-ground implementation of a statewide strategy. 
Encouraging adoption and implementation of the actions specified here by the entities responsible for their execution 
is a critical next step. Fortunately, Arizonans have 
repeatedly demonstrated support for restoring 
forests. It is our hope that this document provides 
the road map and motivation to get us there.
Critical findings
Arizona’s forests are an invaluable asset in need 
of increased attention and public investment. The 
diverse array of native forests and woodlands, from 
the cottonwood bosques hugging our river courses 
to the subalpine firs cloaking out tallest peaks, form 
a stunning panorama across the state, providing 
recreational and aesthetic resources, surface and 
ground water, wildlife habitat, and many other 
benefits to every resident. These forests contribute 
to our quality of life, enhancing the unique 
character of our state that attracts a creative 
workforce and fuels our economic success. But an 
assessment of forest health reveals that Arizona’s 
forests are in need of attention and improved 
stewardship. The reality of climate change, 
drought, and the increasing threat of destructive 
wildfires and insect outbreaks to our forested 
watersheds require that we examine our approach 
to management and take bold action to restore 
the resilience and health of Arizona’s forests, and 
protect forest values for future generations.
Unhealthy conditions across many of Arizona’s 
forests developed gradually during the past century 
Fire Regime Condition characteristics of forests across the state illustrate the 
unhealthy condition of Arizona forests. Areas in red and yellow want to burn.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

viii
due to a combination of factors, 
including human land uses,fire 
suppression and climate change. 
Despite the scale of the forest 
health problem, solutions exist. 
Scientists, land managers, and 
restoration practitioners across 
the state have demonstrated 
practical ways of restoring forest 
integrity, through judicious use 
of thinning, and the appropriate 
application of fire as a restoration 
tool. Local communities have shown 
a willingness to collaboratively 
forge strategic solutions to local 
forest health problems. The fruits 
of their labor can be seen in the 
number of community wildfire 
protection plans crafted in recent 
years, as well as the ongoing work 
of collaborative organizations such 
as the Prescott Area Wildland Urban 
Interface Commission, the Greater 
Flagstaff Forests Partnership, the 
Pinaleño Partnership, and the Natural 
Resource Working Group of the White Mountains.
Beyond their inherent value, healthy forests are a vital piece of a healthy state economy. Forests are now the 
backbone for the tourist-based economies of much of rural Arizona—an economic driver that has far eclipsed the value 
of harvesting saw logs at a statewide level. In 2002, tourism in Arizona was estimated to contribute $30 billion to 
the economy in direct, indirect and induced expenditures, representing 20% of the economy and providing $1 billion 
in tax revenue. Moreover, the water Arizona’s forests supply and purify is more valuable today than ever before for 
Arizona’s burgeoning population. Forests also hold the potential for supporting development of a new generation of 
manufactured wood products and restoration-based work opportunities that will bring good jobs to rural Arizona. 
Finally, forests have received increased attention as a source of renewable biomass energy, a less-polluting energy 
source that can reduce dependence on foreign fossil fuels.
We cannot afford further delays in action. Partial solutions will not suffice. Although some uncertainty will always 
exist about how to proceed, we now know enough to move forward using the best available science. We must demand 
the human and financial resources from responsible authorities at a level sufficient to meet long-term restoration, 
community protection, and fire management goals. Recognizing that fires currently have the potential to burn at 
uncharacteristically large scales, we must coordinate forest and fire management activities across jurisdictional 
boundaries. We must allocate our financial and human resources strategically, maximizing the effectiveness of all 
dollars spent. Realizing the potential for wood and forest-based businesses to support on-the-ground work, we must 
support the development of appropriately-scaled industry.  Finally, we must continue to build public awareness of and 
support for this ambitious, forward-looking forest management strategy.  
We have decades of vitally important work yet to be done across the state.  Arizona is well-positioned to lead the 
nation in meeting what some consider an insurmountable challenge.  Today is not too soon to meet that challenge.
Vision
Our vision of Arizona’s forests is clear and deceptively simple: healthy, diverse stands, supporting abundant 
populations of our native plants and animals; thriving communities in attractive forested landscapes that pose little 
threat of destructive wildfire; and sustainable forest industries that strengthen local economies while conserving 
natural resources and aesthetic values. These characteristics are the components of a healthy, restored forest and their 
dependent communities.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

ix
This vision unites Arizonans, but there is an emerging consensus that we are on the wrong track, and that many forests 
across the state are unhealthy, reducing their value and raising the risk of destructive and dangerous wildfire and 
degraded streams and waterways. State, regional, and national agencies and organizations recognize the urgent need 
to improve the conditions of Southwestern forests, and are taking some action; but much more needs to be done. The 
next decade must be one of increased on-the-ground activity, including the thinning of dense stands, increased use 
of prescribed and natural fire to achieve ecological and public safety objectives, and appropriate utilization of forest 
products to fuel the sustainable economic activity that will help make forest restoration affordable. Across the state, 
local groups are developing innovative approaches to forest restoration and fire management.  
However, coordination between overarching policy and local, on-the-ground management has been inadequate. Despite 
broad agreement about the need for forest restoration, a practical strategy has not yet been clearly articulated 
in a policy-relevant form. Our Vision, therefore, extends beyond the restoration of forest health and includes a 
commitment to public involvement, coordinated government initiatives, and strategic planning to guide forest 
management in our rapidly changing state.
Recommendations and actions
The Strategy incorporates statewide stakeholder input that originates from the first Forest Health Summit convened 
by Governor Napolitano in March, 2003. A subcommittee of the Oversight and Advisory Forest Health Councils and 
including non-Council members was established to outline and write the strategy. In May, 2006 a workshop was held in 
Flagstaff to receive input from interested stakeholders. Various iterations of outlines, chapters and drafts were shared 
with the Councils during 2006. A final working draft of the Strategy was presented and approved for distribution to the 
public on April 12, 2007. In May, 2007 four public meetings were held in Phoenix, Flagstaff, Tucson and Pinetop, where 
(fill in) participants took the opportunity to discuss the Strategy, suggest changes and offer endorsements.  
The final document was approved by the Council on XXXX and conveyed to the Governor on XXXX and approved by the 
Governor on XXXXXX. 
The Statewide Strategy for Restoring Arizona Forests integrates knowledge and experience from science, community 
collaboration, and economics to identify the steps needed to increase the rate and effectiveness of forest restoration 
across the state. Because local ecological, social and economic conditions vary across the state, the Statewide Strategy 
presents local, landscape-specific recommendations in the Landscapes section of the document (pages x-x). All 
recommendations are explained and synthesized in the Key Strategies section (p. x-x).  
Five Key Strategies: A foundation for action
Five key strategies provide the framework for successfully restoring forests. These strategies evolved from 
discussions among experts, land managers and stakeholders who are actively working to improve forest health. To 
accomplish strategic and efficient restoration in 20 years the public and private sector must work together to: 
Increase the human and financial resources dedicated to restoring Arizona’s forests and protecting  
 
 
 
communities. 
Coordinate and implement action at the landscape-scale.
Increase the efficiency of restoration, fire management, and community protection  
 
 
 
 
 
activities. 
Encourage ecologically sustainable, forest-based economic activity.
Build public support for accomplishing restoration, community protection and fire  
 
 
 
 
 
management across the state. 
Sixteen overall recommendations have been identified as necessary for implementation of the key strategies described 
above. For the purposes of the Executive Summary, the recommendations and their associated action items are 
grouped according to the entity responsible for their implementation. Consequently, some of the recommendations 
that pertain to more than one entity appear several times below. Entities responsible for implementing the Strategy 
include Congress, federal land management agencies, the Arizona State Legislature, the Governor and her executive 
agencies, county and local government, citizens, and the Forest Health Advisory and Oversight Councils. 
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Executive Summary
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

x
Congress
The federal government and tribes own and manage the majority of forested land in Arizona. This makes 
participation by the federal land management agencies and tribes critically important to the success of any strategy. 
At the current level of funding and operation, the tribes and federal land management agencies will not be able to 
accomplish effective restoration in 20 years. The Congress is largely responsible for appropriating funds that pay for 
such forest management activities. In addition, Congress develops and executes the policies that motivate or hinder 
action. Therefore, many of the recommendations in the Strategy are directed at Congress.
Recommendation #1- Congress should increase funding to federal land management agencies and the state to 
furnish the capacity needed to collaboratively design, implement and monitor restoration treatments. (1.1.)
Actions:
Vegetation and fuel treatment funding should be increased to a minimum of $30 million/year for 3 years for  
 
 
the U.S. Forest Service; and $10 million/year for 3 years for Department of Interior agencies (Bureau of Land   
 
Management - BLM, National Park Service - NPS, Bureau of Indian Affairs - BIA, and the U.S. Fish  
 
 
 
and Wildlife Service – U.S. F&WS)  Funding should increase by 15% per year for 20 years. (1.1.1.)
Funding for CWPP implementation should be increased to $5 million per year, and the dollars should be   
 
 
allocated to local communities through the State Forester. (1.1.2.)
Program funding should be provided to federal land management agencies to ensure adequate human resources  
 
are available to facilitate treatment action. This includes capacity for all facets of developing and applying  
 
 
treatments including:  environmental review, contracting, community collaboration and implementation.                
 
(1.1.3.)
Funding should be provided to U.S. Forest Service research stations in cooperation with universities to convene   
 
land managers and stakeholders to identify practical monitoring approaches that require the  
 
 
 
 
minimum effort and funding needed to produce appropriate information for informing and adapting  
 
 
 
management at multiple scales. (1.1.4.)
Congress should maintain funding to complete the White Mountain Stewardship Contract. (1.1.5.)
Congress should fund recruitment and training programs for forest and wood-products workers in  
 
 
 
cooperation with forest and wood-products employers and educational institutions. (4.3.4.)
Recommendation #2- Congress should restore funding to enable communities, stakeholder groups, and the tribes 
to collaborate and be involved in land management activities including utilization and marketing of small-diameter 
wood and biomass.
Action:
Congress should revitalize the Economic Action Program or create a new source of funds dedicated to assisting   
 
local communities throughout the West in their efforts to support collaborative approaches to restoration and   
 
to develop utilization and marketing opportunities for small-diameter wood and biomass. (1.2.1.)
Recommendation #3- Congress should increase funding for developing and translating best available biophysical, 
ecological, and social science into forms needed by land managers and stakeholders.
Action:
Congress should fund universities, colleges, research stations and other organizations with applicable expertise   
 
for applied biophysical, social science and economic research that informs and improves forest health and the   
 
vitality of rural communities. (1.3.2.)
Federal Land Management Agencies
Land managed by the U.S. Forest Service dominates forested acreage in Arizona. However, other federal land 
management agencies--BLM, NPS, and BIA--manage or oversee land that has a significant effect on the forests and 
citizens of Arizona as well. Most of the following recommendations are directed at the U.S. Forest Service. However, all 
the federal agencies have a role to play. 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

Recommendation #1- Federal land management agencies should collaboratively develop and implement 
integrated, landscape-scale restoration, community protection, and fire management for forests across the state. 
(2.1.)
Actions:
The U.S. Forest Service should support the collaborative planning and implementation of integrated  
 
 
 
restoration, community protection, and fire management strategies across the state within the Forest   
 
 
Plan revision process. (2.1.1)
The U.S. Forest Service should develop, revise, and update annual Fire Management Plans using the best  
 
 
available science and in a transparent, collaborative fashion. (2.1.2)
National forest plans should provide clear performance measures that allow the agency and public to evaluate   
 
progress toward meeting restoration, community protection, and fire management objectives. (2.1.3)
Recommendation #2- All federal, state, tribal, and local governments should increase coordination of forest 
restoration, fire management, and community protection planning and implementation across jurisdictional 
boundaries. (2.3)
Action:
Federal land management agencies should provide treatment data to update the Arizona Fire Map. (2.3.3)
Recommendation #3- The federal land management agencies, counties and local governments should use 
Community Wildfire Protection Plans to inform and prioritize treatments in their jurisdiction. (2.4)
Action:
Federal agencies should place priority on implementing projects identified within Community Wildfire   
 
 
Protection Plans (CWPPs). (2.4.2)
Recommendation #4- State and federal land managers should design forest management practices to integrate 
wildlife habitat and biodiversity conservation protection with restoration, community protection, and fire 
management. (2.5)
Action:
The Arizona Game and Fish Department should work with the Arizona Forest Health Council, federal agencies   
 
and other stakeholders with applicable expertise to collaboratively develop a set of principles and strategies  
 
 
for integrating wildlife habitat and biodiversity conservation with community protection, restoration and fire   
 
management. This should include educating the public about these strategies. (2.5.1) 
Recommendation #5- Federal and state land management agencies should collaboratively and strategically place 
treatments in order to increase efficiency and maximize benefits. (3.1)
Actions:
Federal land management agencies should develop short-term (2-5 year) and longer-term (10-20 year)   
 
 
treatment plans based on priorities developed at the landscape scale. (3.1.1)
Federal land management agencies should complete and implement plans for using prescribed fire and Wildland  
 
Fire Use where and when appropriate. (3.1.3)
Federal land management agencies should initiate treatments in places where a collaborative process has  
 
 
preliminarily identified and prioritized landscape attributes at risk. (3.1.4)
A national forest in Arizona should take a landscape-scale approach that systematically evaluates existing  
 
 
ecological conditions and then identifies, applies and monitors the effectiveness of strategically placed   
 
 
treatments that in theory should modify extreme fire behavior and reduce the probability of large, unnaturally   
 
severe catastrophic fire. (3.1.5) 
State and federal authorities should work collaboratively with stakeholders to identify and develop restoration   
 
and fire management strategies for watersheds of critical importance across the state. (3.1.6)
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
xi
Executive Summary
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

xii
Recommendation #6- Land managers should work with stakeholders to clarify the amount, availability, and 
location of restoration-, community protection-, and fire management-generated wood and biomass across the 
region. (4.1)
Action:
The U.S. Forest Service and other federal land management agencies should fund and participate in a   
 
 
collaborative and objective evaluation of the amount and characteristics of wood and biomass available for  
 
 
utilization across Arizona. (4.1.1)
Recommendation #7- Federal, state, and local governments should identify and enhance opportunities for utilizing 
small-diameter wood and biomass generated from forest treatments. (4.2)
Actions:
The Forest Products Lab of the Forest Service, the U.S. Department of Energy, and the U.S. Department of  
 
 
Agriculture should conduct a study to identify utilization and marketing opportunities for products created  
 
 
from pinyon-juniper as well as ponderosa pine. (4.2.1)
The U.S. Forest Service should continue to use, and other federal land management agencies should initiate,   
 
best-value contracts and other tools that ensure continuous wood flow, where such contracts   
 
 
 
support collaborative and science-based forest management, and promote economic and social stability in rural  
 
communities. (4.3.1.)
Governor and Executive Branch Agencies
Restoring forest health and reducing the risk of catastrophic fire in Arizona was established as the first environmental 
priority of Governor Napolitano’s administration in 2003. Under her leadership, state agencies can carry out the 
strategies and actions identified in this document.
Recommendation #1- Arizona state agencies should develop land use policies and practices that support forest 
restoration, community protection, and fire management efforts. (2.2)
Actions:
The State Fire Marshall should adopt and enforce an Urban Wildland Interface Code to protect communities and  
 
property from wildfire. (2.2.2)
The Arizona State Lands Department should develop long-term forest restoration and fire management plans for  
 
state lands across the state. (2.2.8)
Recommendation #2- All federal, state, and local levels of government should increase coordination of forest 
restoration, fire management, and community protection planning and implementation across jurisdictional 
boundaries. (2.3)
Action:
The State Forester should work with the Arizona Interagency Wildland Fire Prevention Team or a similar  
 
 
organization to improve coordination between all agencies and tribes on treatment implementation as well as   
 
fire preparedness. (2.3.1)
Recommendation #3- State and federal land managers should design forest management practices to integrate 
wildlife habitat and biodiversity conservation protection with community protection, restoration, and fire 
management. (2.5)
Action:
The Arizona Game and Fish Department should work with the Arizona Forest Health Council, federal  
 
 
 
agencies and other stakeholders with applicable expertise to collaboratively develop a set of principles  
 
 
and strategies for integrating wildlife habitat and biodiversity conservation with community protection,  
 
 
restoration, and fire management. This should include educating the public about these strategies. (2.5.1.)
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

Recommendation #4- Federal and state land management agencies should collaboratively and strategically place 
treatments in order to increase efficiency and maximize benefits. (3.1)
Actions:
State land management agencies should develop restoration, fire management, and community protection  
 
 
performance standards that measure progress toward objectives. Measuring these performance standards can   
 
then lead to refinements of strategies, as necessary. (3.1.2)
State and federal authorities should work collaboratively with stakeholders to identify and develop restoration   
 
and fire management strategies for watersheds of critical importance across the state. (3.1.6)
The state should ensure that all state-identified communities at risk have completed a Community Wildfire  
 
 
Protection Plan or its equivalent. (3.1.7)
Recommendation #5- Federal, state, and local governments should identify and enhance opportunities for utilizing 
small-diameter wood and biomass generated from forest treatments. (4.2)
Actions:
Arizona state agencies should use treatment-generated material whenever possible. Specifically, the State of   
 
Arizona should actively apply Arizona Executive Order 2005-05, which calls for all new state-funded buildings to  
 
derive their energy from renewable sources, such as woody biomass. (4.2.2) 
 
 
 
 
State agencies should encourage the retrofitting of existing heating systems in public and private buildings to   
 
promote greater use of wood biomass. (4.2.3)
The Arizona Department of Transportation should use restoration treatment by-products generated in Arizona   
 
for guard rails and other transportation and highway maintenance applications. (4.2.5)
Recommendation #6- All levels of government should work together to support wood products industries capable 
of utilizing small-diameter wood and biomass. (4.3)
Action:
The Arizona Department of Commerce should fund a position designed to assist rural communities to recruit  
 
 
and support forest and wood-products enterprises. (4.3.3)
Arizona State Legislature
The Arizona State Legislature will play a critical role in achieving forest restoration during the next 20 years by 
providing the financial resources and authorities required to accomplish the actions outlined in this document. 
Recommendation #1- The Arizona State Legislature should provide funding for restoration treatments, community 
protection, and fire management on non-federal lands. (1.4)
Actions:
The state government should provide financial support to universities and other organizations with applicable   
 
expertise such that staff of these entities can provide scientific support to, and serve as neutral conveners  
 
 
within, collaborative processes, as necessary. (1.4.1)
The Arizona State Legislature should allocate $5 million per year to community protection activities identified   
 
in CWPPs. Activities to be supported would include completion of CWPPs and funding for community  
 
 
 
collaboration. (1.4.2)
The State of Arizona should provide adequate financial support to Arizona Fire Map. This tool provides the  
 
 
foundation for sharing treatment information across jurisdictional boundaries. (2.3.2)
Recommendation #2- The Arizona State Legislature should increase funding for developing and translating best 
available ecological, biophysical, and social science into forms needed by land managers and stakeholders. (1.3)
Action:
The Arizona State legislature should provide financial support to universities, state agencies, and other   
 
 
organizations with applicable expertise to conduct applied research, translate scientific information, and serve   
 
as neutral conveners within collaborative processes. (1.3.1)
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
xiii
Executive Summary

xiv
Recommendation #3- The Arizona State Legislature should develop land-use policies and practices that support 
forest restoration, community protection, and fire management efforts. (2.2)
Actions:
The Arizona State Legislature should delegate authority to counties to manage development in the Wildland  
 
 
Urban Interface, to enhance protection from wildfire, and to protect public safety. (2.2.5)
The Arizona State Legislature should develop incentives to encourage landowners to maintain defensible space.  
 
(2.2.6)
The Arizona State Legislature should work with local governments to revise planning requirements under  
 
 
Growing Smarter legislation to deal with fire risk at the landscape scale. (2.2.7)
Recommendation #4- Federal, state, and local governments should identify and enhance opportunities for utilizing 
small-diameter wood and biomass generated from forest treatments. (4.2)
Action:
The Arizona State Legislature should work with the Arizona Department of Commerce to identify incentive  
 
 
programs that encourage the use of restoration-generated materials by businesses across the state. (4.2.4)
Recommendation #5- All levels of government should work together to support wood products industries capable 
of utilizing small diameter wood and biomass. (4.3)
Actions:
The Arizona State Legislature should fund a position that is designed to help rural communities convene,  
 
 
recruit, and support forest and wood-products enterprises. This position will reside in either the State   
 
 
Forester’s Office or the Department of Commerce. (4.3.2)
The Arizona State Legislature should fund recruitment and training programs for forest and wood-products  
 
 
workers in cooperation with forest and wood-products employers and educational institutions. (4.3.4)
Recommendation #6- The Arizona State Legislature, working with the State Forester and local units of 
government, should educate the public about restoration, sustainable restoration-based businesses, fire 
management, and community protection needs and responsibilities. (5.1)
Action:
The Arizona State Legislature should fund the education coordinator position under the State Forester to  
 
 
coordinate and promote public education about forest restoration, sustainable restoration-based businesses,  
 
 
fire management, and community fire protection needs and responsibilities (5.1.2)
Counties and Local Government
Arizona has identified 159 Communities-At-Risk of fire through the Arizona Communities-at-Risk (CAR) process. 
In response to the Healthy Forest Restoration Act, 13 communities have prepared Community Wildfire Protection 
Plans (CWPPs) to guide treatment activity and attract federal funding for treatments. In addition to preparing 
CWPPs, the counties and local units of government have authority to adopt and enforce building codes intended to 
provide protection from fire. The counties and local units of government have an important and strategic role to 
play in motivating citizens to take action and guiding development to minimize the risk of wildfire and conflict with 
restoration-related activities.
Recommendation #1- Counties and local government should develop land use policies and practices that support 
forest restoration, community protection, and fire management efforts. (2.2)
Actions:
Counties and local governments should classify undeveloped lands based on relative fire hazard. (2.2.1)
Counties and local governments should adopt and enforce building and Wildland Urban Interface fire codes to   
 
minimize communities’ exposure to fire danger. (2.2.3)
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

Planners should work with developers to incorporate appropriate buffer zones, based on anticipated fire  
 
 
hazard, into the design of new developments to allow for maintaining conditions in adjacent forests  
 
 
 
where natural or prescribed fires may continue or be reintroduced. (2.2.4)
The counties and local governments should develop incentives to encourage landowners to maintain defensible   
 
space. (2.2.6)
Recommendation #2- Local governments should increase coordination of forest restoration, fire management, and 
community protection planning and implementation across jurisdictional boundaries. (2.3)
Action:
Counties and local units of government should provide treatment data to update the Arizona Fire Map. (2.3.3)
Recommendation #3- Counties and local governments should use Community Wildfire Protection Plans to inform 
and prioritize treatments in their jurisdictions. (2.4)
Actions:
Local governments in communities-at-risk should complete CWPPs. (2.4.1)
Local units of government should ensure that wood utilization opportunities and challenges are clearly   
 
 
identified in CWPPs. (4.1.2)
Recommendation #4- All levels of government should work together to support wood products industries capable 
of utilizing small-diameter wood and biomass. (4.3)
Action:
Local governments should develop and use policies, planning, and tax incentives to encourage businesses that   
 
will diversify the economy, are appropriately scaled to the amount of material available from the forest, and   
 
keep jobs and dollars in rural Arizona. (4.3.3)
Recommendation #5- Local governments should educate the public about restoration, sustainable restoration-
based businesses, fire management, and community protection needs and responsibilities. (5.1)
Action:
County and local governments should create and/or promote education programs to help residents of   
 
 
forest communities understand the risks inherent in living in fire-prone areas, and to educate developers and   
 
the community about steps that can be undertaken to reduce exposure to fire hazard and to improve   
 
 
forest health. Much has been done already under the FIREWISE, USA program. (5.1.1)
Citizens
Private landowners provide the first line of defense for protecting their property. Education and treatment cost-
share programs exist to assist homeowners to reduce fuels on their property and reduce the risk of their homes 
burning. Individual action will do much to make Arizona communities safe from fire. 
Recommendation #1- Citizens should take action to protect their communities and properties from fire. (5.2)
Action:
Citizens should seek assistance from their local fire district, fire department, homeowners association or visit   
 
http://www.firewise.org/usa/ to learn what they can do to protect their home and property. (5.2.1)
The Governor’s Forest Health Councils
Implementing the Statewide Strategy will require coordinated and concerted effort with annual monitoring to 
assess progress and adapt strategies to new conditions. The Forest Health Councils, which represent broad stakeholder 
interests and serve as a forum to collaboratively and constructively address problems, can provide the oversight and 
motivation required to make effective, timely progress. 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
xv
Executive Summary

Recommendation #1- The Governor’s Forest Health Council, working closely with the State Forester, the U.S. 
Forest Service and other federal agencies, should develop and administer on a yearly basis a “Forest Health 
Scorecard” based in part upon the Western Governor’s Association’s 10-Year Strategy Implementation Plan. (5.3)
Action:
In 2007 the Forest Health Councils should develop a scorecard based on the 20 Year Strategy to measure  
 
 
progress. (5.3.1)
Conclusion 
We must act now to strategically and efficiently restore our forests. In a spirit of collaborative engagement, informed 
analysis, and coordinated practical action, the Statewide Strategy for Restoring Arizona’s Forests provides a vision to 
guide forest management for the coming decades. 
•
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

Part One
1. A Vision for Arizona’s Forests
2. Purpose of the Statewide Strategy
3. Key Strategies and Recommendations

Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

1
1   
A Vision for Arizona’s Forests
A
rizona’s forests are an invaluable asset in need of increased attention and public investment. The diverse 
array of native forests and woodlands, from the cottonwood bosques hugging our river courses to the 
subalpine firs cloaking our tallest peaks, form a stunning panorama across the state, providing recreational 
and aesthetic resources, watershed values, wildlife habitat, and many other benefits to every resident. These forests 
contribute to our quality of life, enhance the unique character of our state, and help to attract a creative, diverse 
workforce that fuels our economic success. 
But an assessment of forest health reveals 
that Arizona’s forests are in need of attention 
and improved stewardship. In addition, 
Arizona’s population growth is among the 
fastest in the nation, with more people 
moving into forested areas where they 
face the risk of uncharacteristically severe 
wildfires.  Drought, warming temperatures, 
and dense forest conditions increase 
the threat of destructive wildfires and 
require that we examine our approach to 
management and take bold action to restore 
forest health and protect forest values for 
future generations.
Our vision for Arizona’s forests is clear and 
deceptively simple: healthy, diverse stands, 
supporting abundant populations of native 
plants and animals; thriving communities 
in attractive forested landscapes that pose 
little threat of destructive wildfire; and 
sustainable forest industries that strengthen 
local economies while conserving natural resources and aesthetic values. This vision unites Arizonans, but there is 
an emerging consensus that we are on the wrong track, and that many forests across the state are unhealthy and 
degraded, reducing their value and raising the risk of destructive and dangerous wildfire. 
State, regional, and national agencies and organizations recognize the urgent need to improve the conditions of 
Southwestern forests, and have provided helpful guidance; but much more needs to be done. The next decade must 
be one of increased on-the-ground action, including the thinning of dense stands, increased use of prescribed and 
natural fire to achieve ecological and public safety objectives, and appropriate utilization of forest products to fuel 
the sustainable economic activity that will help make forest restoration affordable. Across the state, local groups 
are developing innovative approaches to forest restoration and fire management. However, coordination between 
over-arching policy and local, on-the-ground management has been inadequate. Despite broad agreement about the 
need for forest restoration, a practical strategy has not yet been clearly articulated in a policy-relevant form. Our 
Vision, therefore, extends beyond the restoration of forest health and includes a commitment to public involvement, 
coordinated government initiatives, and strategic planning to guide forest management in our rapidly changing state.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

2
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

3
2
Purpose of the Statewide Strategy
T
he Statewide Strategy for Restoring Arizona’s Forests focuses attention on the current condition of our forests 
and the steps required to restore their health and vigor. It describes approaches for achieving long-term 
ecosystem restoration, fire risk reduction around communities, natural fire management in wildlands, and 
the development of appropriate restoration-related economic opportunities. Based on sound ecological and social 
science, the Statewide Strategy incorporates valuable insights and techniques from the successful and innovative 
efforts already underway in Arizona. The primary purpose of the Statewide Strategy is to foster the implementation 
of a comprehensive, systematic effort to restore the ecological integrity of Arizona’s forests and woodlands, while at 
the same time describing how rural communities can benefit from their aesthetic, ecological, and economic resources 
without compromising forest health and public safety. 
The restoration of forests and woodlands, and the transition of rural economies and lifestyles to promote sustainable 
and safe communities, will not happen overnight. The Statewide Strategy is a twenty-year vision that draws on the 
innovative spirit and practical experiences of Arizonans across our state. The large and diverse team assembled to 
develop the Strategy agreed that success required an integrated approach that would: 
Use the best available science from ecological, economic, social, and political disciplines.
Increase Arizona forests’ resilience to stresses, including drought, unnatural fire, climate change, and insect  
 
 
outbreaks; and help forests respond to the ebb and flow of natural ecological processes without constant and   
 
costly intervention.
Restore natural fire regimes, to the greatest extent possible, and prepare communities so that when fires do  
 
 
ignite, people respond in a manner that protects public safety and ecological values simultaneously.  
Encourage a diverse mix of community-supported wood utilization businesses, operating in a manner that can   
 
be sustained, ecologically and economically, over the long term.
The Statewide Strategy takes a science-based approach to the restoration challenge, while emphasizing that success 
depends on citizen leadership and participation in planning and implementation. It is important to honor local, 
collaborative approaches, while at the same time developing the capacity to address technical issues that require 
expert knowledge and the methods of science. In order to restore ecologically resilient forests and natural fire 
regimes, it will be necessary to employ strategic forest treatments—involving tree thinning, prescribed fire, and other 
measures—and to coordinate treatment strategies that span large areas and long time lines. These are controversial 
issues that spark intense debate and frequent disagreement. The Statewide Strategy strives to clarify the salient issues 
and focus our attention, so that important issues can be addressed openly and appropriate actions can be taken in a 
meaningful time frame. If Arizona is to reverse the decline in forest health and the upsurge of destructive wildfire, we 
must move confidently between strategic planning and on-the-ground actions, increasing effectiveness and efficiency 
as we move toward forest restoration goals. 
In order to encourage this transition from problem identification and planning to appropriate action, the Statewide 
Strategy is grounded in several fundamental concepts that combine scientific insight and democratic principles:
Forests occur in more-or-less independent landscapes, of which there are a relatively small number across  
 
 
the state. While all forests share some key qualities, each landscape has unique characteristics, and informed   
 
stewardship requires attention to local conditions, both ecological and social. Forest restoration and   
 
 
management efforts must be coordinated at the landscape level, rather than implemented through hundreds   
 
of small, unrelated projects.
Analysis, assessment, and decision-making should be transparent, should involve a diverse cross-section  
 
 
of Arizonans in all phases, and must be carried out in a democratic framework, where ideas, values,   
 
 
and policy responses are openly debated.
The incorporation of science into forest policy and management must focus on the use of science to inform  
 
 
public debate, rather then transferring power from stakeholders to experts; ultimately, the fate of Arizona’s   
 
forests depends on the long-term actions of landowners, communities, and public servants working together.
•
•
•
•
1.
2.
3.

4
While the Statewide Strategy takes a community- and landscape-based 
approach, it is clear that there is a unique and essential role to be played 
by government. With limited funding for restoration and fuels reduction 
treatments, the development of sustainable forest enterprises that achieve 
restoration goals while helping offset costs is a pressing need. The Statewide 
Strategy sets a clear vision for the encouragement of appropriately-scaled 
industry, the coordination of a long-term, sustainable supply of small-
diameter trees, and the development of new markets for products developed 
from small-diameter wood. But even with these accomplishments, greater 
federal investment will be needed. 
Success depends on many coordinated actions inspired by our common vision 
and purpose. Specific steps for rapid progress are presented in Chapter 3, 
Key Strategies and Recommendations, which build on the Guiding Principles 
of the Governor’s Forest Health Advisory Councils (2005), and related local, 
state, and regional efforts to articulate practical approaches to improved 
forest management. By calling on all citizens, and all levels of government, 
to work in a coordinated manner toward the pressing goal of forest 
restoration, this Statewide Strategy provides a roadmap to ensure that policy 
decisions and management actions affecting forested lands will be informed 
by the best available information and guided by the interests and needs of all 
Arizonans. 
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

3   
Key Strategies and Recommendations
5
A
rizona’s citizens have been working diligently for more than a decade to restore their forests, protect their 
communities, and manage fires appropriately across millions of acres of fire-prone forests and woodlands. 
In the process, stakeholders across the state have recognized the need to address several key strategic 
challenges as they continue working towards a future in which forest and woodland ecosystems exist within their 
natural range of variability, nearby human communities are adequately protected from high-intensity crown fire, and 
restoration-based economies are thriving. These strategic challenges center around five key requirements for progress:
Increased capacity for collaborative, science-based restoration, fire management, and community protection 
across Arizona’s forests.
Increased integration of restoration, fire management, and community protection planning and 
implementation at landscape scales.
Increased strategic efficiency of restoration, fire management, and community protection activities.
Increased support for ecologically sustainable forest-based economic activities.
Increased public awareness of the need and opportunities for, as well as progress towards achieving integrated 
restoration, fire management, and community protection goals.
Description of Strategic Challenges
1. Increased capacity for collaborative, science-based restoration, fire management, and community protection.
Many of Arizona’s citizens agree that forest restoration activities, and hazardous fuel reduction treatments intended 
to protect communities, should be proceeding at a faster pace and with greater effectiveness. Given the reality that 
a majority of Arizona’s forests are National Forest lands, it is reasonable to assume that much of the responsibility for 
funding and implementing restoration and community protection activities lies with the federal government. However, 
state and local authorities, collaborating with local homeowners, also share significant responsibility for ensuring that 
effective restoration and hazardous fuel reduction occurs on state and private land. They are also responsible for 
consulting and coordinating with federal authorities on public lands forest management.
Collaboration among the many jurisdictions and stakeholders interested in community protection and forest restoration 
is difficult and time consuming. Yet, it is essential to building understanding and support for treatments, reducing 
controversy and litigation, and implementing high-quality treatments on the ground. In Arizona, collaborative efforts 
have provided valuable services to federal land management agencies. For example, the White Mountains Stewardship 
Contract Multiparty Monitoring Board plays an essential role in the implementation of the nationally significant White 
Mountain Stewardship Contract, and collaboration between the Greater Flagstaff Forest Partnership and Coconino 
National Forest has attracted several national awards. Furthermore, Arizona communities have led the nation in the 
development of Community Wildfire Protection Plans - collaborative planning projects encouraged as a part of the 
Healthy Forest Restoration Act.  
Several factors hinder collaborative and science-based restoration, community protection, and fire management 
initiatives across the state. Understaffing and insufficient funding of on-the-ground treatments limit the pace at 
which forest management activities proceed at the federal level and, to a lesser but still significant degree, the state 
level. From an economic development standpoint, underdeveloped capacity to utilize byproducts of restoration and 
hazardous fuel treatments hinders progress (see Chapter 4 for additional description and recommendations). From 
a collaboration perspective, insufficient financial support for planning, combined with an inability to redirect funds 
to collaboratively defined priority areas, stifles support for, and the perceived benefits of, collaboration. If we are 
to make timely and effective progress in restoring forest ecosystems, protecting communities, and managing fires 
appropriately, these issues must be resolved.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Anticipating the effects of climate change on fire, insects, forest demography, and invasives species must be a central 
component of the response to maintain Arizona’s forests in healthy condition. Because climate change has already 
been set in motion, the central principle must be to focus on maintaining the resilience and adaptability of Arizona’s 
forests and woodlands. As regional climate moves outside of the recent historical range of variability, forest species 
and communities must be able to adapt in order to survive. To understand and manage these processes of resilience 
and adaptability, forest managers and scientists will need to develop new analytic and predictive tools. For example, 
geo-spatial modeling tools such as WALTER and ForestERA will be of increasing importance to predict where and when 
forest changes will occurin response to changes in climate, fire regimes, and other factors. In general, rapid climate 
change may shift the focus from a strict restoration strategy to one based more on adaptation to novel conditions and 
challenges.
Recommendations
Action Items
1.1. Congress should increase funding to federal 
land management agencies and the state to rebuild 
the capacity essential for collaboratively planning, 
implementing and monitoring restoration treatments.
1.1.1. Vegetation and  fuel treatment funding should be 
increased to a minimum of $30 million/year for 3 years 
for the Forest Service; and $10 million/year for 3 years 
for Department of Interior agencies (BLM, NPS, BIA, and 
F&WS).  Funding should increase by 15% per year for 20  
years. 
1.1.2. Funding for CWPP implementation should be 
increased to $5 million per year, and the dollars should 
be allocated to local communities through the State 
Forester.
1.1.3. Program funding should be provided to federal 
land management agencies to ensure adequate human 
resources are available to facilitate treatment action.  
This includes capacity for all facets of developing 
and applying treatments including:  environmental 
review, contracting, community collaboration and 
implementation.
1.1.4. Funding should be provided to the U.S. Forest 
Service research stations to cooperate with universities, 
land managers, and other stakeholders in identifying 
practical multi-scale monitoring approaches. 
1.1.5. Congress should maintain funding to complete 
the White Mountain Stewardship Contract on the Apache 
Sitgreaves National Forest.
1.2. Congress should restore funding to enable 
communities, stakeholder groups and tribes to 
collaborate in the utilization and marketing of small-
diameter wood and biomass.
1.2.1. Congress should revitalize the Economic Action 
Program or create a new source of funds dedicated to 
assisting local communities throughout the West in their 
efforts to develop utilization and marketing opportunities 
for small-diameter wood and biomass.
1.3. Congress and the Arizona State Legislature should 
increase funding for developing and translating best 
available ecological, biophysical and social science into 
forms needed by land managers and stakeholders.
1.3.1. The Arizona State Legislature should provide 
financial support to universities and state agencies to 
conduct applied research, translate scientific information 
and serve as neutral conveners within collaborative 
processes.
1.3.2. Congress should fund applied biophysical, 
ecological, social science and economic research in 
universities, colleges, research stations, and other 
institutes with applicable expertise that informs 
and improves forest health and the vitality of rural 
communities.
6

7
Key Strategies and Recommendations
Recommendations
Action Items
1.4. The Arizona State Legislature should provide funding 
for restoration treatments, community protection, and 
fire management on non-federal lands.
1.4.1. The state government should provide financial 
support to universities and other organizations with 
applicable expertise, such that the staff of these entities 
can provide scientific support to and serve as neutral 
conveners within collaborative processes, as needed.
1.4.2. The Arizona State Legislature should allocate 
$5 million per year to community protection activities 
identified in Community Wildfire Protection Plans 
(CWPPs). Activities to be supported would include 
completion of CWPPs and funding for community 
collaboration. 
2. Increased integration of restoration, fire management, and community protection planning and 
implementation at landscape scales.
Given the current economic challenges constraining forest restoration, and the ecological complexity of our 
extensive, diverse, and dynamic forests across the state, we will only be able to thin and burn a portion of these 
forests over the next 20 years. Fire (sometimes intense and potentially dangerous) will continue to burn across portions 
of Arizona’s forests.  As such, we must prepare and plan for fire so that it burns in a manner that helps to meet 
restoration and community protection goals.  We must also ensure that land-use policies support, rather than obstruct 
effective restoration, community protection, and fire management.
Planning for fire
Successful restoration, community protection, and fire management require the reintroduction and careful 
management of wildland fires. Fire is a keystone process in Arizona’s forests, and reestablishing natural fire regimes 
where appropriate is an important step for their restoration and management. At the same time, wildfires may 
threaten important values, such as communities, infrastructure, and habitat for imperiled species. Entire landscapes 
should be classified and assigned spatially explicit fire management goals and objectives, in order to develop an 
ecologically sound, socially viable, and maximally efficient landscape-scale strategy for restoration and community 
protection. Implementation activities should be prioritized, sequenced, and coordinated within and between zones. 
Given the critical ecological, social, and economic roles played by fire across entire landscapes, collaborative science-
based fire management planning should provide a starting point for all activities. Much as restoration provides a 
context for forest management across the state, fire management should also be considered a critical landscape-level 
factor guiding planning across the state.  
The framework for fire planning rests in Federal Land Management and Fire Management plans. Because Fire 
Management Plans are updated annually for each National Forest, and because Arizona’s National Forests are in the 
early phase of a periodic revision process, both planning venues are appropriate for addressing these issues in a timely 
manner.  
Wildland Fire Implementation Plans will be of particular importance for safely managing wildland fire and restoring 
natural fire regimes. These plans, in coordination with Fire Management Plans, establish site- and condition-specific 
decision criteria for determining management responses to fire ignitions. Given the importance of such decisions 
and their inherent link to broader fire management and restoration objectives, developing plans in a science-based, 
collaborative context, and in a manner that complements other strategic planning goals, will be central to successful 
restoration and community protection.
Fire is inevitable in many forest types, and in these ecosystems it will occur either as undesirable wildfire, or as a tool 
for achieving and sustaining desired conditions. Our choice is not whether or not fire will occur, but where and how it 
occurs, and how we respond. Planning restoration and long-term fire management in the same spatial and temporal 
contexts, and explicitly linking the corrective step of restoration with long-term fire management goals, will increase 
the likelihood that restoration will re-establish more natural fire regimes in ways that are both safe for communities 
and beneficial for ecosystems. Maximizing fire’s benefits while reducing its costs remains a fundamental challenge 
facing Arizona’s forests and communities, but the planning tools, collaboration and policy frameworks that will yield 
success are already in place. 

8
Pursuing land use policies that support integrated restoration, community protection, and fire 
management 
Because the character of some fire-adapted ecosystems and the fires they sustain has been altered during the past 
century, the inevitable effects of landscape-scale fires on widespread human development (current and future) is 
fundamentally challenging to society and to healthy ecosystems. Resolving or minimizing current and future conflicts 
between wildland fire and development will require new ways of thinking, new scientific and technical tools, and new 
ways of finding common ground and working together. 
The front line on forest health issues in Arizona occurs in the Wildland-Urban Interface (WUI), where developed human 
communities and infrastructure interface with the natural environment. Managing the ongoing and active growth of 
the WUI emerges as a challenging policy goal, an expression of an important public interest, and the beginning of a 
path to sustainability in Arizona’s forests. This does not mean that development should stop, but rather it must be 
done carefully, where it will not create new conflicts and hazards, so that wildfire risks and costs are minimized and 
forest sustainability is maximized. The State of Arizona should consider the social, environmental, and financial costs of 
continued uncontrolled development into fire-prone areas. 
This consideration is important for reducing risk to lives and communities, and for preserving healthy, productive 
forests into the future. It will allow for the restoration and maintenance of appropriate fire as a keystone ecological 
process - critical for maintaining the health of fire-adapted ecosystems.
Recommendations
Action Items
2.1. Federal land management agencies should collaboratively 
develop and implement integrated landscape-scale restoration, 
community protection and fire management for forests across 
the state. 
2.1.1. The U.S. Forest Service should support the collaborative 
planning and implementation of integrated restoration, 
community protection, and fire management strategies across 
the state within the Forest Plan revision process.  
2.1.2. The U.S. Forest Service should develop, revise, and/or 
update annual Fire Management Plans using the best available 
science and in a transparent and collaborative fashion.
2.1.3. National forest plans should provide clear performance 
measures that allow the agency and public to evaluate progress 
towards meeting restoration, community protection, and fire 
management objectives.
2.2. The Arizona State Legislature, county and local 
governments, tribal governments, and state agencies should 
develop land use policies and practices that support forest 
restoration, community protection, and fire management 
efforts.
2.2.1. Counties and local governments should classify 
undeveloped lands based on relative fire hazard. 
2.2.2. The State Fire Marshall should adopt and enforce an 
Wildland Urban Interface Code to protect communities and 
property from wildfire. 
2.2.3. Counties and local governments should adopt and enforce 
building and Wildland Urban Interface fire codes to minimize 
communities’ exposure to fire danger.
2.2.4. Planners should work with developers to incorporate 
appropriate buffer zones, based on anticipated fire hazard, 
into the design of new developments to allow for maintaining 
conditions in adjacent forests where natural or prescribed fires 
may continue or be reintroduced.
2.2.5. The Arizona State Legislature should delegate authority 
to counties to manage development in the Wildland Urban 
Interface to enhance protection from wildfire, and to protect 
public safety.
2.2.6. The Arizona State Legislature, counties and local 
governments should develop incentives to encourage 
landowners to maintain defensible space.
2.2.7. The Arizona State Legislature should work with local 
governments to revise planning requirements under Growing 
Smarter legislation to deal with fire risk at the landscape scale.
2.2.8. The Arizona State Lands Department should develop long-
term forest restoration and fire management plans for state 
lands.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

9
Recommendations
Action Items
2.3. All federal, state, tribal, and local governments should 
increase coordination of forest restoration, fire management, 
and community protection planning and implementation across 
jurisdictional boundaries.
2.3.1. The State Forester should work with the Arizona 
Interagency Wildland Fire Prevention Team or similar 
organization to improve coordination between all agencies 
and tribes on treatment implementation as well as fire 
preparedness.
2.3.2. The State of Arizona should provide adequate financial 
support to Arizona Fire Map. This tool provides the foundation 
for sharing treatment information across jurisdiction 
boundaries. 
2.3.3. Federal land management agencies, counties and local  
governments should provide treatment data to update the 
Arizona Fire Map.
2.3.4. The federal land management agencies should actively 
collaborate with the state, local governments and the tribes to 
revise Forest Plans.
2.4. The federal land management agencies, counties and local 
governments should use Community Wildfire Protection Plans to 
inform and prioritize treatments in their jurisdiction.
2.4.1. Local governments in communities at risk should 
complete Community Wildfire Protection Plans.
2.4.2. Federal agencies and national forest plans  should place a 
priority on implementing projects identified within CWPPs.
2.5. State and federal land managers should design forest 
management practices to integrate wildlife habitat and 
biodiversity conservation protection with community protection, 
restoration, and fire management.
2.5.1 The Arizona Game and Fish Department should work 
with the Arizona Forest Health Council, federal agencies, and 
other stakeholders with applicable expertise to collaboratively 
develop a set of principles and strategies for integrating 
wildlife habitat and biodiversity conservation with restoration, 
community protection, and fire management. This should 
include educating the public about these strategies.
3. Increased strategic efficiency of restoration, fire management, and community protection activities.
Arizona’s forest health challenges are great, and the costs to society of inappropriate or insufficient action are 
significant. The suppression of wildfires across the state cost $168 million in 2006, and will likely continue to rise in 
the face of increasingly large, unnaturally severe fires.  In the broadest sense, shifting from reactive modes of forest 
and fire management to pro-active restoration, fire management, and community protection is at once ecologically 
appropriate and fiscally responsible (see Key Strategy #1, above, for further description of overall capacity needs and 
recommendations). 
Beyond recognizing the need to shift from a reactive to proactive mode of forest and fire management, we must be 
as efficient as possible in allocating current funds and human resources.  Even under significantly increased budget 
scenarios, selective thinning and burning treatments will likely occur across only a limited portion of Arizona’s forests 
during the next twenty years, due to high cost and limited capacity. To meaningfully address restoration, fire, and 
community protection simultaneously, we must identify strategies for maximizing the effectiveness and efficiency 
of limited forest management resources.  Here we offer four promising management approaches worth serious 
consideration.
Strategically prioritize restoration, fire management, and community protection activities at the 
landscape-level.
Watersheds span tens of thousands of contiguous acres in forests across the state and their integrity is essential 
for healthy ecosystems and human communities. Important wildlife habitat areas and movement corridors occur at 
similarly broad scales. Human communities and the ever-expanding WUI zone surrounding them extend across hundreds 
of thousands of acres in forests across the state, and unnaturally severe fires are now occurring at similar scales, 
sometimes burning hundreds of thousands of acres in a single fire event.  
Even with a significant augmentation of resources and an increase in the number of projects aimed at reducing fire 
hazards, large and intense fires will almost certainly occur during the coming decades. We must prepare for these 
events by prioritizing and sequencing our forest and fire management efforts according to an integrated strategy that 
will maximize the value of every dollar spent. Such prioritization can and should occur at multiple levels--from the 
Key Strategies and Recommendations

10
community level to the regional level. It is especially critical, however, to prioritize and sequence our efforts at and 
above the scale at which fires are likely to burn. 
Arizona’s citizens have participated in and supported several landscape-scale prioritization efforts over the past 
decade.  Stakeholders with a variety of interests and perspectives have worked together to develop Community 
Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPPS), “Adaptive Landscape Assessments” (Figure X) in the Western Mogollon Plateau and 
White Mountains landscapes, and climate-linked adaptive management scenarios in the Sky Islands of southern Arizona.  
These collaborative, science-based landscape assessments have demonstrated that it is quite possible to engage 
informed and interested citizens in strategic planning that can chart a practical course for forest management over 
the coming decades. Land managers and stakeholders should support, expand, and value recommendations from these 
efforts whenever and wherever possible.
Strategically place treatments to reduce the threat of landscape-scale fire events 
As described above, collaborative, science-based landscape assessments can be invaluable tools for identifying 
high-priority areas requiring fuel reduction or restoration treatments. The actual treatment and maintenance of these 
areas, however, will require significant increases in funding and human resources. Because this expansion of effort will 
take time, we need to determine and pursue realistic objectives across remaining lands. One reasonable goal for these 
areas might be to break up landscape-scale fuel continuity, so that overall fire spread rate is slowed, fire effects are 
diminished, fire size is reduced, and containment capacity is increased.  
A number of potentially viable strategies have been proposed for breaking up fuel continuity across landscapes prone 
to uncharacteristic wildfire. For example, Dr. Mark Finney and colleagues at the U.S. Forest Service Fire Sciences Lab 
in Missoula, MT, suggest that thinning treatments can be designed to intercept and slow fires. By strategically locating 
many, relatively small treatments across the landscape, fire spread rates might be reduced, making it possible for 
natural precipitation events or modest suppression efforts to extinguish undesirable blazes (Figure 5.2). 
Alternative strategies for the strategic placement of forest treatments, such as developing containment boundaries 
along selected existing roads to create fuel breaks and allow firefighters greater access for initial attack and control 
activities, should be evaluated and implemented as appropriate - especially in areas upwind (and in the fire path) of 
communities and other high-priority features in fire-prone landscapes.
Employ prescribed fire and Wildland Fire Use as restoration and fire management tools
As mentioned above, restoration-based selective thinning plus burning treatments have been shown to be 
appropriate and needed in many of the state’s fire-adapted forests, but application of these techniques is likely to be 
constrained due to high treatment costs and concerns about potentially negative ecological “side-effects” of logging, 
such as soil erosion, spread of invasive species, and disturbance of wildlife species sensitive to logging operations. 
Recognizing this, the U.S. Forest Service has been attempting to restore fire to unthinned forests with lower-intensity 
prescribed burning during cooler, moister seasons. Additionally, fire managers have allowed some naturally-ignited 
wildland fires to burn when conditions permit. Although WFU fires are inherently risky during windy, warm conditions 
typical of the late spring and summer months, when fires typically burned prior to the disruption of natural fire regimes 
across the region, cautious application of this tool under appropriate conditions may allow forest managers to restore 
vastly larger areas than would otherwise be possible. 
The most effective and viable long-term strategy for restoring ponderosa pine forests will likely entail a careful 
and strategic sequencing of thinning and prescribed burning in areas of highest value and risk; strategically placed 
treatments to slow potential fires across remaining portions of the landscape; and careful application of prescribed 
burning and WFU fires. In combination, these treatments can effectively minimize the likelihood of very large fires, 
provide protection for communities and critically important wildlife habitats, and re-start fire-adapted forests on 
a restoration trajectory. As recommended in the “Integration” section, above, land managers should complete and 
implement Fire Management Plans as promptly as possible to ensure that prescribed burning and Wildland Fire Use 
are integrated with complementary treatment approaches, so that they can be used as management tools to achieve 
maximum effectiveness, efficiency, and safety.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

11
Employ adaptive management to continually refine management approaches and increase strategic 
efficiency  
While a great deal is known about the root causes of the decline in forest health – as well as the need for 
restoration, fire management, and community protection – uncertainty exists regarding the best strategies for 
managing fire at a landscape scale. To account for this uncertainty and to ensure that our management approaches are 
continually refined, we must employ an adaptive management process that includes monitoring and the adjustment 
of priorities and strategies, as deemed necessary by the scientific interpretation of monitoring data. As with the 
landscape assessment process described above, adaptive management can and should occur at multiple levels, from 
the project level to the regional level. Adaptive management is likely to be particularly valuable when applied at the 
scale at which fires are, and are likely to continue burning – across areas of tens to hundreds of thousands of acres.  
New tools for forest assessment and planning
Despite our general understanding of the forest 
health challenge and the need for action, guiding 
efficient and effective restoration projects is difficult. 
Much of what we know about forest ecology is derived 
from relatively small experiments and short-term 
observations, yet the answers to our most pressing 
questions require thinking at scales that encompass 
very large areas and long time lines. Furthermore, 
traditional scientific approaches often fail to address 
the social and economic issues that can control on-the-
ground implementation of well-intended plans.
During recent years, scientific and technological 
advances have enabled rapid advances in the tools 
available for uniting approaches from the natural 
and social sciences in landscape assessments, forest 
planning, and the monitoring of restoration efforts. 
Three examples from Arizona illustrate the power of 
these approaches. 
The Wildfire Alternatives (WALTER) project, initially 
focusing on lands in southern Arizona, helps guide 
fire management by using map-based information 
detailing forest conditions, combined with spatial data 
depicting temporal data on climatic conditions, to 
prioritize areas facing high fire risk. WALTER includes a 
stakeholder ranking tool that allows diverse participants 
to identify priorities in a rapid voting procedure that is 
electronically integrated with digital information in a 
Geographic Information System (GIS). Outputs can help 
forest managers track fire risk and identify high priorities 
for fire management activities, based on seasonal 
climate trends and high-value resources.
The Forest Ecosystem Restoration Analysis (ForestERA) 
Project uses similar GIS technology to integrate information on forest composition and structure, fire, wildlife habitat, 
and watershed conditions across landscapes comprising millions of acres. Applied across large areas of Arizona and New 
Mexico, ForestERA develops high resolution spatial data and the modeling tools needed to support stakeholder-driven 
workshops, where citizens work with forest managers, scientists, elected officials and other interest groups to identify 
priority areas for forest restoration, develop locally appropriate management scenarios, and compare the likely effects 
of different scenarios on issues of particular importance, such as fire threat, sensitive wildlife, and water supplies.
Key Strategies and Recommendations
▲Figure 5.2. Researchers at the Fire Sciences Lab, working with Forest 
Ecosystem Restoration Analysis staff at Northern Arizona, developed one 
potential configuration of selective thinning plus burning treatments that could 
be effective in slowing fire spread rate to the southwest of Flagstaff.  Black 
stippled areas in the map above represent historic burn areas, while orange 
areas represent potential treatment areas.  Using a fire simulation model, 
researchers found that treatments covering approximately 20% of the study 
area (as shown here) had the potential to significantly slow landscape-scale 
fires in the area.    
Work-
ing 

12
A third example is the Southwest Forest Assessment Project (SWFAP), a cost-share agreement between Region 3 of 
the U.S. Forest Service and The Nature Conservancy. The main goal of the project is to synthesize the best available 
science and develop tools to assist the Forest Service in revising management plans for the National Forests. SWFAP 
includes data bases on historic conditions, current forest conditions, biodiversity, and employs models of vegetative 
change designed to address improve dialogue with the public about the need for change and options for achieving 
desired forest conditions over large areas.  
No set of scientific assessment and planning tools can solve Arizona’s forest health challenges, but they can make it 
easier for Arizona’s diverse population to come together and work efficiently toward solutions that will work on the 
ground, and that have everyone’s support. Without an integrated, science-based approach that honors diverse values 
and perspectives, ecological restoration will be very difficult to achieve. Landscape assessment tools are an important 
part of the Statewide Strategy, delivering the “big picture” perspective that has been lacking in many previous 
approaches to forest management.
Recommendations
Action Items
3.1. Federal and state land management agencies should 
collaboratively and strategically place treatments in order to 
increase efficiency and maximize benefits. 
3.1.1. Federal land management agencies should develop short-
term (2-5 year) and longer-term (10-20 year) treatment plans 
based on priorities developed at the landscape scale. 
3.1.2. State land management agencies should develop 
restoration, fire management, and community protection 
performance standards that measure progress toward objectives 
and can lead to refinement of strategies as necessary.
3.1.3. Federal land management agencies should complete and 
implement plans for using prescribed fire and Wildland Fire Use 
where and when appropriate.  
3.1.4. Federal land management agencies should initiate 
treatments where a collaborative process has preliminarily 
identified and prioritized landscape attributes at risk. 
3.1.5.  A national forest in Arizona should take a landscape-
scale approach that systematically evaluates existing 
ecological conditions, then identifies, applies and monitors the 
effectiveness of strategically placed treatments that in theory 
should modify extreme fire behavior and reduce the probability 
of large, unnaturally severe wildfires. 
3.1.6. Federal and state authorities should work collaboratively 
with stakeholders to identify and develop restoration and fire 
management strategies for watersheds of critical importance 
across the state.
3.1.7. The state should ensure that all state-identified 
communities at risk have completed a Community Wildfire 
Protection Plan or its equivalent.
4. Support ecologically sustainable forest-based economic activities
Many community forestry advocates believe that a sustainable forest economy that uses the by-products of 
restoration treatments can create jobs and support local economies while assisting the complementary goals of 
community protection and forest restoration. They reason that thriving forest and wood-products enterprises will 
pay for harvested material (saw logs, small-diameter trees, and woody biomass) and that this will help offset some 
of the costs of restoration, allowing restoration to move forward, more rapidly, over larger areas. In addition, new, 
sustainable forest businesses will help Arizona realize economic benefit from forest restoration products, rather than 
paying for dead tree removal and disposal. 
Developing these forest and wood-product enterprises requires creative and cooperative efforts in order to derive 
profit from the marginal saw logs, small-diameter trees, and woody biomass harvested through restoration treatments. 
For example, more efficient ways of harvesting, transporting, and processing are needed in order to make these 
enterprises economically viable. Forest and wood-product enterprises need to develop value-added products based 
on emerging technologies, while cultivating new markets for these products. All of these efforts face barriers, such as 
access to capital, an antiquated forest industry infrastructure, an inadequate labor force, and underdeveloped markets 
for value-added wood products. 
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

13
The State of Arizona and the federal government have taken important initial steps to encourage a forest and wood 
product economic sector. The state has established tax incentives and raised renewable energy standards for utilities, 
while the federal government has made grants available for biomass and infrastructure improvements. Entities such as 
the Southwest Sustainable Forests Partnership, Northern Arizona Wood Products Association, Prescott Area Wildland 
Urban Interface Commission, and Greater Flagstaff Forests Partnership provide resources and grant opportunities to 
support emerging businesses. 
Significant challenges remain, but private citizens, non-governmental organizations, the business community, and 
government agencies—working together—have the power to establish thriving forest utilization businesses that advance 
local economies and help to accomplish forest restoration and community protection.
Recommendations
Action Items
4.1. Land managers should work with stakeholders to clarify the 
amount, availability, and location of restoration, community 
protection, and fire management-generated wood and biomass 
across the region.  
4.1.1. The U.S. Forest Service and other land management 
agencies should fund and participate in a collaborative and 
objective evaluation of the amount and characteristics of the 
wood and biomass available for utilization across Arizona. 
4.1.2. Local units of government should ensure that wood 
utilization opportunities and challenges are clearly identified in 
CWPPs.
4.2. Federal, state, and local units of government should 
identify and enhance opportunities for utilizing small-diameter 
wood and biomass generated from forest treatments.
4.2.1. The Forest Products Lab of the U.S. Forest Service, 
the U.S. Department of Energy, and the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture should conduct studies to identify utilization and 
marketing opportunities for products created from pinyon-
juniper as well as ponderosa pine.
4.2.2. Arizona state agencies should use treatment-generated 
material whenever and wherever possible. Specifically, the 
State of Arizona should actively apply Arizona Executive Order 
2005-05, which calls for all new state-funded buildings to derive 
their energy from renewable sources, such as woody biomass.
4.2.3. State agencies should encourage retrofitting of existing 
heating systems in public and private buildings to promote 
greater use of wood biomass.
4.2.4. The Arizona State Legislature should work with the 
Arizona Department of Commerce to identify incentive 
programs that encourage the use of restoration-generated 
materials by businesses across the state. 
4.2.5. The Arizona Department of Transportation should 
use restoration treatment by-products generated in Arizona 
for guard rails and other transportation  and other highway 
maintenance applications. 
Key Strategies and Recommendations
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

14
Recommendations
Action Items
4.3. All levels of government should work together to support 
wood products industries capable of utilizing small diameter 
wood and biomass.  
4.3.1. The Forest Service should continue to use, and other 
land management agencies should initiate, best-value contracts 
and other tools that ensure continuous wood flow, where 
such contracts support collaborative and science-based forest 
management, and promote economic and social stability in rural 
communities.  
4.3.2. The Arizona State Legislature should fund a position 
within The state legislature should fund a position that is 
designed to help rural communities convene, recruit, and 
support forest and wood-products enterprises. This position will 
reside in either the State Forester’s Office or the Department of 
Commerce. 
4.3.3. Local governments should develop and use policies, 
planning, and tax incentives to encourage businesses that will 
diversify the economy, are appropriately scaled to the amount 
of material available from the forest, and keep jobs and dollars 
in rural Arizona.
4.3.4. Congress and the Arizona State Legislature should 
fund recruitment and training programs for forest and wood-
products workers in cooperation with forest and wood-products 
employers and educational institutions.  
5. Increased public awareness of the need and opportunities for integrating restoration, fire management, and 
community protection goals
Although public support for restoration, fire management, and community protection remains high, transforming 
that support into action on a personal level requires that we continue to: 1) inform the general public about the 
need to treat hazardous fuels around homes; 2) build accountability at all levels of government by disseminating to 
the public information about progress made in addressing restoration, fire management, and community protection 
objectives; and 3) engage community members in collaborative discussions regarding forest management, both around 
communities and in wildlands.
The public must be well-informed and motivated to take action to reduce the risk of fire to private property 
and homes. Citizen involvement is a critical element of any comprehensive strategy to reduce the risk of fires to 
communities. Effective outreach employs a myriad of communication tools and multiple media approaches. Success 
requires full-time dedication to this effort, at the local, state, and federal levels.
Beyond the ever-present need to build awareness regarding forest health and restoration, it is important to provide a 
yearly accounting of progress - a “report card” of sorts. In the face of inevitable fires that will inevitably occur, such a 
report will reassure stakeholders and help the public understand the long-term nature of forest restoration efforts, and 
appreciate our continual progress towards meeting a clear set of objectives. The Western Governors’ Association has 
developed a series of metrics for measuring progress in implementation the organization’s “10-Year Strategy”. These 
metrics relate to collaborative, science-based initiatives for fire prevention, hazardous fuels reduction, ecological 
restoration, post-fire recovery of fire-adapted ecosystems, and community assistance; as such, they constitute a 
helpful starting point for developing a reporting process for Arizona’s Statewide Strategy.   
By continuing to build awareness about forest restoration, fire management, and community protection needs, and by 
measuring progress across the state, the Statewide Strategy will build citizen interest in collaborative planning at the 
local, state, and regional levels.  By actively engaging citizens, Arizona’s capacity for addressing long-term, crux forest 
management challenges will increase substantively over the coming decades.    
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

Key Strategies and Recommendations
15
Recommendations
Action Items
5.1. The Arizona State Legislature should fund public education, 
and work with the State Forester and local governments to 
educate the public about restoration, sustainable forest and 
wood products  businesses, fire management, and community 
protection needs and responsibilities.
5.1.1. County, local and tribal governments should create 
and/or promote education programs to help residents of forest 
communities understand the risks inherent in living in fire-prone 
areas, and to educate developers and the community about 
steps that can be undertaken to reduce exposure to fire hazard 
and to improve forest health. Much has been done already 
under the FIREWISE, USA program. 
5.1.2. The Arizona State Legislature should fund an education 
coordinator position under the State Forester to coordinate and 
promote public education about forest restoration, sustainable 
forest and wood products businesses, fire management, and 
community fire protection needs and responsibilities.
5.2 Citizens should take actions to protect their communities 
and properties from fire. 
5.2.1 Citizens should seek assistance from their local fire 
district, fire department, homeowners association or visit 
http://www.firewise.org/usa/ to learn what they can do to 
protect their home and property. 
5.3. The Governor’s Forest Health Council, working closely with 
the State Forester, the U.S. Forest Service and other federal 
agencies, should develop and administer an annual “Forest 
Health Scorecard” based in part upon the Western Governor’s 
Association’s 10-Year Strategy Implementation Plan.
5.3.1. In 2007 the Forest Health Councils should develop a 
scorecard based on the 20-Year Strategy to measure progress.
References
Laughlin, D.C. and P. Fulé. 2006. Meeting forest ecosystem objectives with wildland fire use. Fire Management   
 
 
Today, 66(4): 21-24.
Rehfeldt, G. E., N. L. Crookston, M. V. Warwell, and J. E. Evans. 2006. Empirical analysis of plant-climate  
 
 
 
relationships for the western United States. International Journal of Plant Science, 167(6): 1123-1150.
Sisk, T.D., M. Savage, D.A. Falk, C.D. Allen, E. Muldavin, and P. McCarthy. 2005. A landscape perspective for forest  
 
 
restoration. Journal of Forestry, 103(6):319-320.
Western Governors’ Association 10-Year Strategy Implementation Plan.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

16
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

17
Part Two
4. The State of Arizona’s Forests
5. The Policy Context
6. Economic Considerations
7. A Collaborative Framework
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

18
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

19
4
The State of Arizona’s Forests
“We came to a glorious forest of lofty pines, through which we have traveled ten miles.  The 
country was beautifully undulating...every foot being covered with the finest grass, and 
beautiful broad grassy vales extending in every direction.  The forest was perfectly open and 
unencumbered with brush wood, so that the traveling was excellent.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
–E.F. Beale expedition, 1858
A
rizona’s pine forests bear little resemblance to those described by Beale in 1858. A century of fire-
suppression, grazing and logging have eliminated the frequent surface fire regime that naturally thinned 
ponderosa pine forests. Now, many of these forests are choked with small trees that not only crowd out 
grasses and other understory plants, but supply the dense fuels that help fire spread into the crowns of the tallest 
trees. Climate data indicate that Arizona is in the midst of a pronounced drought, and most scientific analyses predict 
that dry conditions will continue for years to come, particularly if global climate change results in increased regional 
variability in rainfall and temperatures. The convergence of these factors leaves many of Arizona’s forests stressed and 
vulnerable to rapid ecological changes due to insect and disease outbreaks, inappropriate land uses, and increasingly 
widespread and destructive wildfire.
Despite these changes and their negative consequences, we have many opportunities for action that can address 
emerging problems and return our forests to healthier, more resilient conditions. Unlike many ecosystems across 
North America, Arizona’s forests are largely intact. While forest structure and, in particular, fire regimes are outside 
the natural range of variability, native species still predominate, sustaining the biological foundation necessary for 
successful restoration, and more than a century of scientific investigation has provided us with much of the knowledge 
necessary to guide improved management of forest ecosystems. Most importantly, Arizona citizens and policy makers 
are committed to action, guided by the knowledge that investments in forest restoration will help to protect our 
communities, foster appropriate new forest-based businesses, and revitalize the economy and quality of life in rural 
Arizona. 
Forest condition
Forestry professionals, scientists, land managers, and the public widely 
agree that most of Arizona’s pine and mixed-conifer forests reflect the 
combined effects of a century of logging, livestock grazing, and fire 
suppression. The density of trees is now substantially greater, the size of trees 
much smaller, and the forest canopies more continuous across much larger 
areas. Large, mature “old growth” trees are significantly underrepresented 
across the state, and the remaining large, old trees are dying at a far greater 
rate than they are being replaced. According to U.S. Forest Service analysis, 
only 5% of the original old growth ponderosa pine forest remains in the 
Southwest.
Related to this fundamental change in forest structure is the decline in the 
diversity and abundance of forest understory plants, including native grasses, 
wildflowers, and shrubs. Less well understood are changes in the abundance 
and distribution of many wildlife species that were associated with the more 
open forests noted by many nineteenth century pioneers. 
Arizona’s pine forests evolved over thousands of years with recurrent ground fire, ignited either by lightning or as 
part of indigenous land management practices. Fires typically spread through understory grasses and shrubs, seldom 
climbing into the forest canopy. Fire served many beneficial functions, including the thinning of dense thickets of tree 
seedlings and saplings that often establish following a string of wetter-than-average years. Fire also kept the forest 
understory productive by consuming fallen needles and other fuels that can blanket the forest floor, and by opening up 
the forest so that light and moisture can reach the diverse plant community below. Although people frequently focus 
on the trees, the understory plants are the key producers that support the complex food webs that sustain wildlife and 
forest biodiversity. 
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

Beginning in the 1860s, heavy livestock grazing reduced the extent of 
groundcover and fine fuels that enabled fires to spread. This activity, 
combined with fire suppression policies established in the early twentieth 
century, virtually eliminated natural fire regimes in Arizona’s forests. This 
combination of factors led to widespread establishment of young pines in 
dense stands, and the concomitant decline in understory plants and the 
food webs they previously supported. Wildlife habitat suffered in many 
places as a result. Tree vigor declined due to drought and competition 
for nutrients and water among densely packed trees, lowering their 
resistance to disease and insects. Recent events, such as the 2002-2003 
bark beetle eruption that killed mature trees over tens of thousands 
of acres, have exceeded previously recorded disturbances of this kind. 
Fire also played an important role in maintaining a shifting mosaic of 
forest types, such as the mix of conifer and aspen in alpine forests, and 
the mixture of pine-oak and pinyon-juniper at lower elevations. Our 
disappearing aspen forests and the spread of juniper across previously 
open grasslands are broad ecological changes that are likely linked to 
these twentieth century changes in land use and forest management.
An overwhelming majority of scientists now agree that we have entered a 
period of global climate change, and numerous studies predict dramatic 
changes in the distribution of plant and animal species as they respond 
to warming conditions. Most climate models suggest that the Southwest 
will experience higher temperatures and increased variability in 
precipitation, which will significantly affect fire regimes and forest health. Recent studies indicate that climate change 
effects on ecosystems in the western United States and Arizona may already have begun. For example, researchers 
have demonstrated that the recent increase in numbers of large forest fires in the western United States, including 
Arizona, is correlated with warming temperatures and earlier arrival of spring. Other studies suggest that the recent 
bark beetle-induced die-off of pinyon and ponderosa pine trees throughout the Southwest is probably more extensive 
and severe than previous die-offs as a consequence of unusually warm conditions during the current drought. While 
climate has always been variable over time, the extreme rapidity with which climate is changing now appears to 
be unprecedented during the last several thousand years. Rapid climate change creates cascading effects of tree 
mortality, increased catastrophic disturbance, and shifting zones of suitable habitat that could alter Arizona’s forest 
landscapes dramatically.
The social context
Most of Arizona’s forests are on public land managed by the federal government, or on private land managed by 
Arizona Indian tribes, with the remainder a complex mosaic of private property and lands administered by the state 
and other governmental entities. Forty-two percent of forest land in the state is administered by the USDA Forest 
Service (USFS), while 41% is private, including extensive Indian Trust lands. Seven percent is administered by the 
Bureau of Land Management (BLM), 6% is state owned, and the remaining 4% is comprised of other public lands.
Forest management in Arizona, and throughout the country, has often been marked by social and political conflict, 
including litigation and appeals, about issues such as timber harvesting, endangered species protection, and fire 
management. However, opinion polls reveal that the public is deeply concerned about declining forest health and 
strongly supports aggressive action to restore forest ecosystems. While efforts to improve forest health and the 
safety of nearby communities will continue to generate controversy at times, most Arizonans agree on the overall 
goals. Reflecting this widespread agreement, stakeholders in forested areas across the state are working together to 
simultaneously improve the ecological, social, and economic health of local forests and communities. Many of these 
collaborative groups have developed Community Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPPs). To date, 12 CWPPs have been 
completed, covering 73 communities currently deemed to be “at risk” of possible wildfire. Several additional CWPPs 
are being developed (Figure 2.1). The extent of CWPP development across the state indicates how effectively Arizonans 
have come together since our forest health crisis was first widely recognized. In addition, a number of standing 
collaborative forest health groups, such as the Natural Resource Working Group of the White Mountains, the Pinaleño 
20
Working 
Draft 

21
The State of Arizona’s Forests
Partnership in Graham County, the Greater Flagstaff Forests Partnership, and the Prescott Area Wildland-Urban 
Interface Commission have provided statewide leadership on broader issues related to forest health.
Ecological restoration
While Arizona’s forests vary tremendously by geographic 
region, elevation, and local condition, one characteristic 
is common to all forests across the state: present day 
conditions diverge significantly from those that predominated 
prior to the arrival of European Americans in Arizona. Current 
conditions are not conducive to simply reinstating the 
historical fire regimes that maintained forest health in the 
past. Reintroduction of natural fire into the landscape will 
be difficult at best, and is likely impossible in some areas. 
In many locations, forest thinning is a necessary first step 
toward ecological restoration, while in other areas prescribed 
fire and wildland fire use (allowing naturally ignited wildfires 
to burn for specific management purposes) can be used 
with appropriate caution, when and where conditions are 
favorable. These and other techniques, including the control 
of invasive plant species, reseeding of the forest understory, 
closing of unnecessary roads, and installation of erosion 
control structures, can be applied in a comprehensive 
approach to ecological restoration. 
Just as Arizona’s forests vary, so do public values in Arizona 
communities. Not only will the priorities and objectives 
for restoration-based forest management vary with forest 
type, they must also take into account public values. For 
example, rare, endangered, and endemic species are a major 
concern in the sky islands of southeastern Arizona, while 
concern about fuel loads and fire issues in the wildland-urban 
interface predominate in the central highlands. Restoration 
of ponderosa pine ecosystems is a primary concern across 
the Mogollon Plateau, while protection of old growth forests 
is a focus on the Kaibab Plateau. Because of variation in 
ecological, social, and economic factors, implementation of a Statewide Strategy requires different approaches in 
distinct landscapes.
Forest restoration and sustainable management require political will and the commitment of financial and human 
resources to bring about broad changes in the way we approach forest issues, including fire management, wildlife 
conservation, and the safety of forest communities. A strategic, cohesive solution to Arizona’s forest health problem 
must link three emerging themes in forest management:
Landscape assessment - Locally-driven, science-based landscape assessments can depict current conditions across 
meaningful management areas, reveal values shared among diverse stakeholders, and explore management 
alternatives. 
Strategic treatments - Not all forests need the same treatment, and not every acre needs to be treated. Forest 
restoration plans must be site-specific and tailored to local needs in a manner that maximizes their effectiveness. 
Increased efficiency - Economic utilization of small-diameter trees can offset the cost of restoration treatments. 
As forest restoration activity spreads over larger areas, economies of scale will increase the attractiveness of 
opportunities for new, sustainable industries in Arizona. Entrepreneurial innovation will play a major role in 
increasing the efficiency of forest restoration efforts across the state.
Locally-driven, science-based forest restoration can serve as the foundation for protecting communities, improving 
Cascabel
CWPP
Bisbee
CWPP
Arivaca / Sasabe
CWPP
Sonoita/Elgin
CWPP
PIMA
COCONINO
MOHAVE
APACHE
NAVAJO
GILA
YUMA
YAVAPAI
PINAL
MARICOPA
COCHISE
LA PAZ
GRAHAM
GREENLEE
SANTA
CRUZ
Sitgreaves
CWPP
Greater
Flagstaff
Area CWPP
Rim Country
CWPP
Yavapai
CWPP
Mt Lemmon
CWPP
Tusayan
CWPP
Northern Apache
Forest CWPP
Greater
Williams
Area CWPP
Greenlee County
CWPP
Graham County
CWPP
Palominas
CWPP
Blue Ridge
Area
Globe
Area
La Paz
County
Desert
Communities
CWPP
La Paz
County
River
Communities
CWPP
Hualapai
Mountain
Area
Central
Navajo County
CWPP
Kingman
Area
Littlefield
Beaver Dam
Area
Colorado
City
Area
Yuma
Area
Portal
Area
Arizona Community Wildfire Protection Planning
and Identified Communities At Risk
Map Created By: Arizona State Forestry - January 03, 2007
Data Sources: Basemap data from the Arizona Land Resource Information
System (ALRIS), Community At Risk data from the Arizona State Land
Department/Forestry Division, Community Wildfire Planning boundaries
from individual planning groups.
The Arizona State Land Department and the State Forester's Office
make no warranties, implied or expressed, with respect to information
shown on this map. Data is in development.
0
50
100
25
Miles
Scale:1:3,000,000
Identified Communities At Risk
- Lower Risk
- Moderate Risk
- Higher Risk
Incorporated Areas
Land Management
National Forest
National Park Service
Indian Reservation
Military Reservation
Wildlife Refuge
CWPP Planning
- Preliminary Efforts Reported
- Plans In Development
- Plans Completed
 ▲Figure 2.1. Arizona CWPPs completed and in progress.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

22
wildlife habitat, supporting rural economies, conserving watersheds, and replenishing lost biological diversity 
across the state. This does not mean that restoration must occur everywhere, immediately, but it does suggest 
that community protection and forest management must be embedded within broader landscape-scale restoration 
initiatives, and that restoration, community protection, and economic activity can and should support one another.
References
Arizona Cooperative Extension. 2006. Management of Forests and Woodlands. University of Arizona, College of   
 
 
Agriculture and Life Sciences.
Arizona Cooperative Extension. 2006. Insects, Diseases, and Abiotic Disorders in Southwest Forests and Woodlands.  
 
 
University of Arizona, College of Agriculture and Life Sciences.
Arizona Governor’s Forest Health Oversight Council. 2006. Report of the Arizona Forest Health Oversight Council: 2006   
 
Status Report and Recommendations. http://www.governor.state.az.us/fhc/
Breshears DD, Cobb NS, Rich PM, Price KP, Allen CD, Balice RG, Romme WH, Floyd ML, Belnap J, Anderson JJ, Myers OB,  
 
Meyer CW (2005) Regional vegetation die-off in response to global-change-type drought. Proceedings of the  
 
 
National Academy of Science 102: 15144-15148.
Covington, W.W. and M.M. Moore. 1994. Southwestern ponderosa forest structure: Changes since Euro-American  
 
 
settlement. Journal of Forestry 92(1).
Lowe, Kimberly and Jesse Abrams. 2005. Public perceptions of forest restoration in the southwest: A synthesis of  
 
 
selected surveys and literature. Ecological Restoration Institute, Issues in Forest Restoration, 19pp.
Noss, R.F., P. Beier, W.W Covington, R.E. Grumbine, D.B. Lindenmayer, J.W. Prather, F. Schmiegelow, T.D. Sisk, and D.J.   
 
Vosick. 2006. Recommendations for integrating restoration ecology and conservation biology in ponderosa pine   
 
forests of the southwestern United States. Restoration Ecology 14(1):4–10.
O’Brien, Renee A. 2002. Arizona’s Forest Resources, 1999. Resource Bulletin RMRS-RB-2. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of  
 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 116p. 
United States Department of Agriculture/Forest Service. 2006. The Effectiveness of Vegetation Management Practices   
 
for Mitigating the Impacts of Insects on Forest Ecosystems: A Science Synthesis. USDA/Forest Service, USDA/ 
 
 
Pacific Southwest Research Station, USDA/Southern Research Station. 
Westerling, A.H., H.G. Hidalgo, D.R. Cayan, and T.W. Swetnam. 2006. Warming and earlier spring increase western U.S.  
 
forest wildfire activity. Science 313:940-943.
Williams, J.W., S.T. Jackson., and J.E. Kutzbach. 2007. Projected distributions of novel and disappearing climates by  
 
 
2100 AD. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science (US) 104 (14):5738-5742.
 
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

23
5  
The Policy Context for Restoration
S
tate, regional, and federal policies influence restoration, community protection, and fire management 
in Arizona. These policies provide some of the guidance necessary to improve forest health and the 
socio-economic health of the human communities that depend on forests. These policies include federal 
executive-level policies, such as the Healthy Forests Initiative; Congressionally-approved laws such as the Healthy 
Forests Restoration Act and Tribal Forest Protection Act; and collaboratively-developed strategies such as the Western 
Governors’ Association’s 10-year Plan and Implementation Strategy. 
Many of the state and federal policies described below acknowledge the important role that ecological restoration 
plays in reversing declines in forest health and reducing unnaturally severe fires. They provide guidance for the 
collaborative development of forest treatment plans to protect structures, watersheds, and human lives from wildfire. 
They also highlight the need for developing wood products businesses whose activities might advance community 
protection, restoration, and fire management initiatives.    
Tribal and federal policies, programs, and authorities affirm tribal sovereignty and guide wildfire protection and forest 
restoration efforts on tribal lands. Arizona is home to 21 federally recognized tribal entities. Tribes are sovereign 
nations as recognized through the US Constitution, hundreds of treaties and agreements, and federal legislation and 
case law. The Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) primarily carries out the federal government’s trust responsibility to tribes. 
However, other federal agencies are required through executive orders and other federal legislation and authorities to 
work government-to-government with tribes.  
We recognize that some forest management policies are controversial, especially at the federal level, but it is not our 
intent to debate these controversies here. Instead, we examine these policies in order to interpret the latitude they 
may provide the State of Arizona for implementing the recommendations contained throughout this document. The 
following section provides a short overview of important state, regional, and federal policies, and a brief description of 
their role in guiding future forest management activities across the state.
Arizona 
Beginning with Governor Hull’s administration, citizen stakeholders have assembled in advisory groups to help 
identify and promote the state actions required to restore forests. In 2003 Governor Janet Napolitano created the 
Forest Health Advisory Council and the Forest Health Oversight Council to develop scientific guidelines and policy 
recommendations, respectively, for her administration. 
The first major action of the Arizona Forest Health Advisory Council was to develop a set of guiding principles that 
provide a framework for planning and implementing forest ecosystem restoration and community protection. The 
Guiding Principles (Table 5.1) represent a significant zone of agreement between stakeholders across the political 
spectrum and across the state, and they provide the foundation for recommendations presented in the Statewide 
Strategy.
Numerous policies at regional to national levels provide broad guidance for proceeding with forest restoration, 
community protection, and fire management in Arizona. The following section provides a short overview of these 
programs and a brief description of their role in guiding future forest management activities across the state.
Major Federal, Regional and State Policy Themes
Forest Restoration
The Arizona Forest Health Advisory Council’s “Guiding Principles” document focused forest management issues 
around the unifying objective of restoring forest ecosystems, just as forest restoration gained increased prominence 
through a host of forest policies developed during the past decade at regional and national levels. The Healthy Forests 
Restoration Act (HFRA) (see Table 5.2) describes the need to reduce the risk of high intensity crown fires to through 
forest fuels reduction and restoration treatments. Under this law, treatments are intended to contribute towards 
the restoration forest structure to approximate conditions that prevailed prior to aggressive fire suppression in the 
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

24
24
Table 5.1.                                        Arizona Forest Health Advisory Council’s 
Guiding Principles for Forest Ecosystem Restoration and Community Protection
Integration
1. The overall strategy for restoring forest ecosystem health and protecting communities must be dynamic, comprehensive and 
integrated.
Sustainable Communities and Economies
2. Sustainable economies are linked to sustainable ecosystems.
3. The immediate focus should be on protecting human communities at risk, critical infrastructure, along with key watersheds and 
habitats.
4. Close collaboration among all stakeholders is essential to a community-based approach to forest ecosystem restoration and 
community protection.
5. Decision-making about forest ecosystem restoration and community protection must occur with a serious commitment to 
rigorous adaptive management.
Ecological Integrity
6. Appropriate restoration methods are based on ecological need.
7. Effective forest ecosystem restoration should reestablish fully functioning ecosystems.
8. Forest ecosystem restoration and community protection treatments should protect and enhance water and soil resources.
9. Forest ecosystem restoration should protect and promote development of old-growth trees and large trees needed to restore 
ecosystem structure and function.
10. Landscape scale forest ecosystem restoration should maintain native plant and wildlife populations and habitat features.
11. Project work should be based upon landscape assessments of risks to and status of aquatic and terrestrial resources and of the 
potential for restoration to be successful.
Land Use and Planning
12. Forest ecosystem restoration must include evaluating and changing public land use practices that are scientifically 
demonstrated to contribute to forest health degradation.
13. Forest ecosystem problems and solutions exist in a context of land use.
14. Forest ecosystem restoration requires effective community protection to establish and maintain a fire-resistive condition for 
structures, improvements and vegetation.
Funding and Compliance
15. Forest ecosystem restoration and community protection requires a sustained investment of federal, tribal, state, local and 
private resources.
16. Forest ecosystem restoration and community protection actions should comply with all applicable environmental laws and 
regulations.
Practices
17. Forest ecosystem restoration and community protection programs should use the lowest impact techniques that will be 
effective and efficient.
18. All forest ecosystem restoration and community protection treatments should use locally adapted native plant materials to the 
greatest extent possible.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

25
The Policy Context for Restoration
Southwest. HFRA also includes language intended to protect old-growth forests and the retention of large, old trees. 
Administrative changes under the Healthy Forests Initiative (HFI) exempt some of the management actions needed to 
achieve this goal from environmental review and administrative appeal. The Western Governors Association’s (WGA) 
10-year Comprehensive Strategy and Implementation Plan articulates actions, assigns tasks, and describes measures 
needed to meet the regional goal of “restoration of fire-adapted ecosystems.” This Statewide Strategy, in turn, 
incorporates ecological restoration of Arizona’s forests as a guiding principle, and outlines strategies for implementing 
restoration actions at effective scales. 
Community protection of both public and non-public resources
The Arizona Forest Health Advisory Council’s “Guiding Principles” identify community protection as a principal 
objective of forest management. Community protection is also recognized within policy documents, including 
the WGA’s 10-year Implementation Strategy and many of the policies outlined in Table 4.1. Both HFRA and HFI 
provide incentives and guidance for forest treatments in the wildland urban interface (WUI), and both emphasize 
collaboratively-developed wildfire protection planning by local entities. In particular, HFRA provides guidance and 
incentives (in the form of prioritized funding and mandated consideration within NEPA analyses) for communities 
to collaboratively develop Community Wildfire Protection Plans. The Statewide Strategy recognizes the important 
work done by local communities and tribal entities, and suggests mechanisms for continuing that work as rapidly and 
effectively as possible.
For non-public tribal land resources, the Tribal Forests Protection Act (TFPA) encourages the USFS and BLM to enter into 
contracts with tribes, whose trust lands border or adjoin federal lands, to coordinate forest management activities and 
protect tribal resources from fire, insect outbreaks, or other threats. This act complements HFRA legislation in that it 
provides a mechanism for planning and implementing forest management treatments across jurisdictional boundaries, 
without infringing upon tribal self-determination and governance.
A variety of forest and fire policies influence disaster planning and fire and natural resource management. Cities, 
counties, and tribes are required by Federal and state law to prepare these plans. In many cases, these plans overlap 
in content and require a critical evaluation to ensure goals and objectives are aligned. Tribes are required to develop 
a variety of plans that deal with forest management (Forest Management Plans), fire protection, prevention, or 
suppression (Fire Management Plans and Wildland Fire Prevention Plans) and all-hazard mitigation (FEMA Disaster 
Mitigation Act). Tribes may also choose to develop an integrated resource management plan or community wildfire 
protection plan to ensure community protection and qualify for certain federal funding sources.
Fire management
Restoring natural or management-ignited fire is a key element of ecological restoration, and is recognized as such 
in the Statewide Strategy. The Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy, originally created in 1995 and updated in 
2001, recognizes the important natural ecological role of fire in fire-adapted forests. It calls for the use of wildland 
fire “to protect, maintain, and enhance resources and, as nearly as possible,” and suggests that fire “be allowed 
to function in its natural ecological role.” The Statewide Strategy provides guidance for the use of fire as part of a 
cohesive strategy to improve forest health throughout Arizona’s public forest lands (see Chapter 3: Key Strategies and 
Recommendations).
Business and workforce development
The Arizona Forest Health Advisory Council’s “Guiding Principles” recognize the importance of sustainable 
restoration-centered economies across the state.  The Arizona Forest Health Advisory and Oversight Councils’ “Guiding 
Principles for a New Economy Based on Forest Restoration” further encourage and support the development of 
businesses and workforce capacity to support forest restoration treatments. Policies such as HFRA and the WGA’s 10-
year Strategy and Implementation Plan (in addition to several policies outlined in Table 4.1) support the development 
of industries that can use the by-products of restoration and fuels reduction treatments. In Chapter 4, the Statewide 
Strategy identifies needs and opportunities for business and workforce development to support forest restoration and 
community protection, and it provides a strategy for operationalizing the guidance contained in many of the relevant 
policy documents.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

26
The Statewide Strategy for Restoring Arizona’s Forests is a cohesive response to the various policies, reports, and 
initiatives that strive to restore forests and build sustainable communities and economies.  The actions outlined in this 
document support the major directives identified in relevant policies, and they provide a framework for local decisions 
to guide on-the-ground projects. At the same time, the Strategy reveals gaps that must be addressed and the actions 
needed to plug those gaps. By advancing ideas for coordinated and cohesive action, the Strategy strives to ensure that 
the investments of time and resources into community protection planning, economic development, collaborative 
partnership building, and scientific research will pay dividends in the form of healthy, restored forests and thriving 
communities.
Policy Document
Summary
Relationship to Statewide 
Strategy
Arizona Forest Health 
Advisory Council’s 
Guiding Principles 
for Forest Ecosystem 
Restoration and 
Community Protection
Suggests a number of social, economic, and ecological 
parameters to guide forest restoration in the state of Arizona.
Serves as the basis for the 
Statewide Strategy’s approach to 
forest restoration and community 
protection
Arizona Forest Health 
Advisory and Oversight 
Councils’ Guiding 
Principles for a New 
Economy Based on Forest 
Restoration
Provides eleven principles to guide the development of 
businesses, jobs, and infrastructure based on forest restoration 
in Arizona.
Serves as the basis for the 
Statewide Strategy’s approach to 
restoration-based business and 
workforce development.
Western Governor’s 
Association 10-year 
Comprehensive Strategy 
and Implementation 
Plan, 2006 revision
Serves as the action plan for implementing the goals of the 
10-year comprehensive strategy and constitutes the primary 
vehicle for implementing the National Fire Plan. Goals 
include hazardous fuel reduction, restoration of fire-adapted 
ecosystems, and community support. The Plan is based on, and 
emphasizes, collaboration at all levels of policy development and 
implementation.
The Statewide Strategy serves as 
the state-specific action strategy 
for implementing key goals and 
actions of the WGA’s 10-year 
implementation plan.
Healthy Forests 
Restoration Act of 2003 
(HFRA)
Directs the Secretary of Agriculture, who oversees the Forest 
Service, and Secretary of Interior, who oversees the Bureau of 
Land Management, to plan and conduct hazardous fuel reduction 
projects on specified types of federal lands, including on 
certain lands that contain threatened and endangered species 
habitat. Directs the agencies to maintain or contribute toward 
the restoration of, the structure and composition of old-
growth stands according to the pre-fire suppression old-growth 
conditions characteristics of the forest type. Streamlines NEPA 
review, and limits appeals and judicial review.
The Statewide Strategy clarifies 
steps needed to restore forest 
ecosystems, protect communities, 
and manage fires across the 
state. It identifies key challenges, 
opportunities, and strategies 
inherent to the broad policy 
guidance offered by HFRA. 
Healthy Forests Initiative 
(HFI)
The HFI attempts to implement the core components of the 
National Fire Plan, and reduce procedural requirements for 
various activities by permitting some fuel reduction projects 
to be categorically excluded from full environmental analysis 
and documentation. It also broadens the categories of logging 
activities that are exempt from NEPA documentation and 
judicial appeal. Categorical exclusions (CE) under HFI are 
limited to 4,500 acres for prescribed fire and 1,000 acres for 
fuel treatments. CE projects must be identified through a 
collaborative framework and cannot be appealed
The Statewide Strategy supports 
the strategic identification of high 
priority projects across the state, 
and attempts to clarify a zone of 
agreement on crux issues that will 
expedite restoration, community 
protection, and fire management 
progress. 
Federal Wildland Fire 
Management Policy, 2001 
Update
Reviews and largely endorses the earlier 1995 policy; includes 
a set of guiding principles related to ecological restoration and 
public safety. Encourages use of wildland fire.
The Statewide Strategy provides 
steps to integrate wildland fire into 
approaches for restoring forest 
ecosystems.
Table 5.2.  A Summary of Major Federal, Regional, and State Forest Health Policies
26
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

27
Policy Document
Summary
Relationship to Statewide 
Strategy
National Forest 
Management Act of 1976 
(NFMA) and 2005 NFMA 
regulations
The intent of NFMA is to engage the American public in the 
creation and review of forest plans, to require the consideration 
of non-timber values in forest management, and to limit how the 
Forest Service administers timber sales. 2005 NFMA implementing 
regulations emphasize collaboration at several levels (public, 
inter-governmental, tribal), but exempted forest plans from the 
NEPA process. In April 2007, the United States District Court in 
Northern California ordered the Forest Service not to use the 
2005 Planning Rule in on-going forest planning processes. The 
Office of General Counsel is reviewing the decision.  
The Statewide Strategy is based 
on extensive collaborative efforts 
in Arizona, and recommendations 
contained within the Strategy 
should be integrated within Forest 
Plan revisions throughout Arizona.
Stewardship Contracting 
Authorities (Omnibus 
Appropriations Act of 
1999, reauthorized as 
semi-permanent in 2003)
Provides authority for the USFS and BLM to use stewardship 
contracts to reduce hazardous fuels. Stewardship contracts 
permit the trading of goods (commercially valuable timber) for 
stewardship services (other activities in the same area, such as 
thinning or watershed restoration).
This contracting tool allows the agencies to select contractors 
that will meet the employment and management needs of rural 
communities.
The Statewide Strategy supports 
the integration of forest restoration 
and sustainable economic 
development, and provides steps to 
achieve these interrelated goals.
National Indian Forest 
Resources Management 
Act (NIFRMA) of 1990, 
amended 1994
NIFRMA acknowledges Indian tribal self-determination in 
managing their forested lands and allows tribes to develop forest 
management plans for their reservations. NIFRMA reaffirmed 
many aspects of the existing Indian forestry program and 
established a new direction for cooperative agreements, tribal 
forestry programs, forestry education assistance, and other 
programs.
The Statewide Strategy respects 
tribal self-determination and 
provides resources that can be 
used by sovereign tribal entities.  
The Strategy was developed in 
consultation with representatives of 
tribal forestry programs.
Tribal Forests Protection 
Act of 2004 (TFPA)
Provides a contractual process that allows tribes to plan and 
implement forest management activities with federal agencies 
across jurisdictional boundaries. Requires the Secretary of 
Agriculture to submit a report to Congress about stewardship 
contracting on federal and tribal lands.
The Statewide Strategy recognizes 
the need to plan and work across all 
jurisdictional boundaries, including 
tribal boundaries. 
References
Arizona Forest Health Advisory Council. 2003. Guiding Principles for Forest Ecosystem Restoration and Community  
 
 
Protection.
Arizona Forest Health Advisory and Oversight Councils. Restoration Economy Subcommittee. 2004. Guiding Principles  
 
 
for a New Economy Based on Forest Restoration.
Congressional Research Service summary of Healthy Forest Restoration Act.
Evans, A and G. McKinley. 2007. An Evaluation of Hazardous Fuel Reduction Projects and the Healthy Forest Initiative.   
 
The Forest Guild. Santa Fe, New Mexico. http://forestguild.org/fuel_reduction_evaluation.html
2001 Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy.
Gorte, R. 2001. Stewardship Contracting for the National Forests. Congressional Research Service. #RS20985.  
 
 
 
Washington, D.C.
Healthy Forest Restoration Act of 2003. Public Law 108-148, 108th Congress (December 3, 2003)
National Forest Management Act of 1976.
National Indian Forest Resources Management Act of 1990. Title III of Public Law 101-630, USC Title 25, Chapter 33.
Omnibus Appropriations Act of 1999. Public Law 105-277, 105th Congress (October 21, 1998).
Tribal Forest Protection Act of 2004. Public Law 108-278, 108th Congress, 2nd Session (July 22, 2004).
Western Governors’ Association. 2002. A Collaborative Approach for Reducing Wildland Fire Risks to Communities and   
 
the Environment: 10-Year Comprehensive Strategy Implementation Plan.
The Policy Context for Restoration
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

28
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

Economic Considerations for Restoring Forest 
Health 
6   
29
F
orests have always contributed to Arizona’s economy and quality of life. When Arizona was a territory, forests 
were viewed as a source of natural resources to be extracted for economic development and expansion. 
The forest was the source of forage for cattle and sheep, trees for mine timbers and railroad ties, game for 
consumption, and water for irrigation and municipal uses. After World War II, forests sustained a timber industry that 
provided jobs to many rural Arizonans and fueled a half-century of rural development. When the most valuable timber 
had been harvested, and as tourism and watershed protection became more important to Arizona’s rapidly growing 
population, significant shifts in rural economies and the objectives of forest management occurred. However, the 
importance of forests to the Arizona economy has not changed. Forests remain the economic and aesthetic foundation 
of many rural communities that are increasingly dependent on amenities-based economic drivers that includes tourism, 
recreation, and a growing market for vacation homes. Larger communities benefit from quality-of-life factors that draw 
mobile professionals seeking aesthetic and health factors associated with healthy forests. While globalization, modern 
communications, and urbanism have reshaped Arizona’s economy, our diverse forests remain an essential component of 
the state’s economic success, and their restoration is likely to be one of the best possible investments in the future. 
Today, Arizonans demand more goods and services from our forests that ever—from amenities like hiking trails and 
hunting grounds, to harvestable resources, especially fresh water. Balancing these demands presents continuous 
management challenges. However, the science of ecology informs us that forests must be managed in a manner that 
sustains their natural composition, structure, and function if they are to continue providing us with the wealth of 
services people have come to expect from them. In other words, the management and uses of the forest should be 
“sustainable”; they should not diminish the health and productivity of the forest for future generations.
The cost of inaction
Restoring forest health will protect one of Arizona’s priceless assets. While ecological restoration is expensive (an 
estimated $350-$1,000/acre in the WUI) the cost of inaction is far greater. Many of today’s dense forests contain 
unhealthy accumulations of biomass that can fuel rapidly moving crown fires that – like the 2002 Rodeo-Chediski fire 
– can have destructive effects over large areas. Especially in times of drought and climate change, these fires threaten 
the economic and social well being of rural communities, and the loss of large forest tracts to unnatural fire affects all 
Arizonans. For example, the Rodeo Chediski Fire burned over 450,000 acres at an estimated cost the state of Arizona 
of over $400 million. While such cost accounting is difficult and subject to considerable uncertainty, it is clear that 
investment in ecological restoration, while expensive, is a sound long-term strategy that creates new jobs and develops 
critical skills in a rural workforce that is increasingly important in forested landscapes.
The challenges of wood utilization
Most forest restoration in Arizona is publicly subsidized. However, there are not enough federal and state dollars to 
pay for treatments on all the acres that need restoration. Competition for public dollars is fierce, and the myriad of 
other budget priorities reduce the appropriations available for forest management. Developing private, forest-based 
enterprises that can pay for wood and biomass harvested by treatments and, therefore, generate funding that will 
offset treatment costs is critically important to a successful restoration strategy. 
There are, however, many challenges to creating this new restoration-based economy. These include: 1) the loss of 
skilled labor and forest harvest infrastructure, 2) the fear that short-term economic incentives will undermine science-
based forest restoration and management, 3) fear of another era of boom-and-bust forest economies, and 4) the risk of 
investing in businesses that rely on a steady wood supply from federal land.
Forest-based private enterprise is in a period of transition. In the 1990s, Arizona lost most of the businesses, workforce, 
and infrastructure associated with the harvesting and processing of large saw logs. Today, many forested communities 
in the state have little or no capacity to efficiently or economically process the small-diameter material that is a by-
product of forest restoration. In addition, the cost of transportation precludes economically feasible restoration in 
areas far removed from processing facilities. 
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

30
Determining socially acceptable approaches to and levels of wood harvest has a history of controversy. The idea of 
reinvigorating wood-extraction businesses concerns environmental organizations and citizens who fear that industry, 
not science, will drive forest management decisions. The Statewide Strategy establishes science-based restoration of 
forest health as key to creating long term ecological and economic sustainability. Focusing action on the restoration of 
forests as a first priority, and encouraging business development based on restoration by-products, is one approach to 
addressing these concerns. 
Many Arizonans are also concerned about the long-term economic stability of new businesses and their relationship to 
rural communities. When forest operations shut down in the 1990s, many rural Arizona communities suffered serious 
social and economic dislocation as sawmills and forest-based industries closed. As a result, some civic leaders are wary 
of businesses that will boom and then bust, leaving communities once again in a state of social and economic turmoil. 
However, there are several measures that could be taken to alleviate these concerns. First, forest managers could 
manage the wood supply to encourage a mix of different-sized businesses that produce different products, thereby 
buffering communities from overdependence on a single enterprise. Such businesses can be ideal corporate citizens, 
especially when they can demonstrate through their business plans the ability and willingness to respond to different 
types and levels of wood supply. Second, businesses that are committed to operating in Arizona, long term, should be 
given preference over out-of-state and international companies that export the dollars earned in the state. Ultimately, 
the goal is to encourage a mix of locally focused businesses that will provide economic resiliency as the amount and 
type of harvested material changes over time.
An important role for sustainable forest-based enterprises
Many community forestry advocates believe 
that a sustainable forest economy that uses the 
by-products of restoration treatments can create 
jobs and support local economies while assisting 
the complementary goals of community protection 
and forest restoration. They reason that thriving 
forest and wood-products enterprises will pay 
for harvested material (saw logs, small-diameter 
trees, and woody biomass) and that this will help 
offset some of the costs of restoration, allowing 
restoration to move forward, more rapidly, over 
larger areas. In addition, new, sustainable forest 
businesses will help Arizona realize economic benefit 
from forest restoration products, rather than paying 
for dead tree removal and disposal. 
Developing these forest and wood-product 
enterprises requires creative and cooperative efforts in order to derive profit from the marginal saw logs, small-
diameter trees, and woody biomass harvested through restoration treatments. For example, more efficient ways of 
harvesting, transporting, and processing are needed in order to make these enterprises economically viable. Forest and 
wood-product enterprises need to develop value-added products based on emerging technologies, while cultivating new 
markets for these products. All of these efforts face barriers, such as access to capital, an antiquated forest industry 
infrastructure, an inadequate labor force, and underdeveloped markets for value-added wood products. 
The State of Arizona and the federal government have taken important initial steps to encourage a forest and wood 
product economic sector. The state has established tax incentives and raised renewable energy standards for utilities, 
while the federal government has made grants available for biomass and infrastructure improvements. Entities such 
as the Southwest Sustainable Forests Partnership, Northern Arizona Wood Products Association, Prescott Area Wildland 
Urban Interface Commission, and Greater Flagstaff Forests Partnership provide resources and grant opportunities to 
support emerging businesses. 
Significant challenges remain, but private citizens, non-governmental organizations, the business community, 
and government agencies--working together--have the power to establish thriving forest utilization businesses 
that advance local economies and help to accomplish forest restoration and community protection. For example, 
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

31
Economic Considerations for Restoring Forest Health 
Congress has enacted “stewardship end-result contracting” to provide a new tool to achieve forest management 
while simultaneously meeting local and rural community needs. Awarded on a best-value basis—not simply on lowest 
cost—the Forest Service or BLM can consider factors that reflect solid business experience and benefits to the local 
community. They are also a good tool for guaranteeing wood supply because they are long-term agreements. The 
largest stewardship contract in the country is currently being administered by the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest. 
According to Dr. Lay Gibson of the University of Arizona, in 2006 the White Mountain Stewardship Contract supported 
15 firms with total annual expenditures of almost $16 million. In addition, the forestry firms employ 245 full time 
equivalent employees (FTE) with an additional 85 FTE created through the multiplier process.
Strategies for developing and sustaining forest-based enterprises
The Statewide Strategy for Restoring Arizona’s forests articulates a balanced vision and identifies complementary 
actions for achieving long-term ecological restoration of our forests, fire risk reduction for communities, and 
sustainable restoration-based economic enterprises. The following strategies serve as a guide for developing 
sustainable forest and wood-product enterprises. 
1. Require that forest health priorities drive the utilization of restoration by-products
Forest health is the first priority of the Statewide Strategy. Planners and practitioners should recognize that  
 
 
community protection and sustained economic benefit can only be accomplished in the context of a  
 
 
 
well-managed, healthy forest ecosystem. 
Forest utilization enterprises must be based on the type, quality, and quantity of the material that is   
 
 
removed as a result of forest restoration treatments. Much of the material that will be made available from  
 
 
restoration treatments will come from under-utilized material, such as immature ponderosa pine and juniper,   
 
often referred to as small-diameter timber. The largest and traditionally least valuable category of  
 
 
 
material that forest restoration treatments produce is woody biomass. It includes slash and round wood  
 
 
that cannot be processed at a mill. Sustainable forest products businesses must have a plan for   
 
 
 
using woody biomass to generate energy, for manufacturing products, or for sale as minimally   
 
 
 
processed products.
Forest products businesses must be appropriately-sized, based upon the supply of woody material made  
 
 
available by forest treatments. It would be unwise to recruit businesses or industries that depend on an amount  
 
or type of forest material that cannot be sustained, over the long-term, without degrading the health of the  
 
 
forest. The ideal business will have the agility to adjust operations as the supply of wood varies by amount and   
 
type over time. 
2. Identify and evaluate the short-term and long-term supply of woody material available for 
restoration treatments and economic utilization. 
The U.S. Forest Service should conduct a regional supply analysis to determine availability of woody material   
 
and help guide coordination of restoration treatments.
The U.S. Forest Service should coordinate restoration treatments across the Southwestern Region and develop a  
 
wood supply management mechanism to ensure that a consistent supply of woody materials is available.
The U.S. Forest Service should develop and encourage new, creative contracting techniques that help to ensure  
 
a consistent wood supply, engage a larger number of bidders, and provide a longer term access to supply.
Community Wildfire Protection Plans, Tribal Forestry Plans, and other collaborative community based efforts  
 
 
should include language that addresses the use of restoration by-products. U.S. Forest Service managers and  
 
 
planners should consider these restoration and utilization plans when developing national forest management   
 
plans and related project-level plans.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

32
3. Identify, promote, and support businesses that use forest restoration by-products.
State, local, and federal governments should increase funding to provide assistance for the development  
 
 
of restoration-based forest enterprises, and they should develop financial incentives for the use of restoration   
 
products.
Federal, state, and local authorities should recruit new start-up businesses and encourage existing businesses   
 
to retool and use products from the emerging restoration-driven forest products industry. These incentives  
 
 
should be flexible enough to consider local circumstances and conditions.
Utilization experts should identify opportunities where existing businesses or agencies can use locally produced  
 
forest products. For example, landscaping businesses and nurseries could use mulch and compost produced  
 
 
from the woody biomass generated by local restoration projects.
State, local and federal governments should promote “green building” across all sectors, including business,  
 
 
structures that use materials more efficiently and result in reduced environmental impacts. Green  
 
 
 
buildings are often constructed with locally obtained recycled and natural building materials, and they use  
 
 
alternative energy sources. Properly processed and marketed wood by-products from restoration treatments  
 
 
could find a strong niche market if green building was supported by all levels of government.
Government and business should increase investment in research about pinyon-juniper ecosystems, the   
 
 
development of efficient harvesting and transportation of pinyon-juniper material, and the development and   
 
marketing of products made from pinyon and juniper. This is an important economic issue because pinyon- 
 
 
juniper woodlands comprise a large portion of Arizona’s forests (7.7 million acres or 42% of Arizona’s  
 
 
 
forest land, compared to 3 million acres or 17% for ponderosa pine), and are found in every landscape   
 
 
identified in the Statewide Strategy. 
4. Support the establishment of a diverse multi-scale, restoration-based forest economy that can 
sustain long-term forest restoration efforts.
Federal authorities should ensure that stewardship contracts include provisions for directing that a certain  
 
 
percentage of harvested material be reserved for smaller-scale local businesses.
All stakeholders in forest restoration efforts--including local, state, and federal governments, private   
 
 
businesses, and non-profit organizations--should support the formation of a consortium that would provide  
 
 
support for appropriately scaled existing and developing wood-products enterprises. This support would  
 
 
include:
-consulting services
-management and dissemination of important industry related information
-research and development of new techniques, methods, equipment, and products to advance   
 
  
-sustainable wood-products enterprises
-assistance in coordinating transportation of harvested material
-assistance in obtaining required permits
-assistance in identifying appropriate locations for new operations
-assistance in recruiting and coordinating businesses to develop a cluster of enterprises that can  
 
  
 capture economies of scale and co-location
-assistance and support for forest and wood-product enterprises that have the capacity - or potential   
  
-capacity to finance future restoration treatments. 
This organization should be results-oriented, with the goal of developing an environmentally and economically   
 
sustainable forest and wood products industry in Arizona. 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

33
Western Moulding Company, Inc.:  A Smallwood Success Story        
by James Tuvell
For Don Gonsalves, small diameter wood equals success. Don, a second generation 
moulding mill owner/operator, transformed a moribund mill, closed in 2000 after 
50 years of operation, into a profitable enterprise. He did it by diversifying and 
updating his products, processes and services in numerous ways.  
“The key,” says Don, “was, and is, innovation and attention to details.”  
He continually strives to create innovative new products and services and  
 
to add value to old ones. Don and his wife have developed new products,  
 
and added the equipment needed to produce them. 
His attention to detail helps Don to make the small, incremental  
 
 
improvements in the mill’s processes and equipment that give him and his  
 
bottom line an edge.  He uses thinner cuts, less handling, and  
 
 
experiments with different sizes and cuts to minimize waste and  
 
 
maximize useable material.
He stays on top of the latest industry advances through trade shows, trade  
 
journals and by participating in industry organizations; always looking for  
 
those incremental improvements.
He puts the grant money that he has receives into capital improvements, not operations.  “Not only will the machine  
 
I buy with the grant pay for itself but it will continue to produce operating revenue, wages for my employees, taxes for  
 
the government and net income for the business.”  
Don believes reviving the regional forest products industry depends on the proper scaling of the industry to the supply of material 
from the surrounding forests. 
 “The growth of the industry has to track the amount of material available.  We stand a better chance of creating a long-term 
sustainable forest products industry and a long-term sustainable healthy forest if we match the growth of the industry to the 
amount of material coming off the forests.  The goal for all of us is a healthy industry and a healthy forest.”
Don Gonsalves and Western Moulding are showing that both are achievable. 
•
•
•
•
State, local, and federal governments, along with the business sector, should support the development and  
 
 
employment of a diverse, stable, professional labor force to accomplish ecological restoration and maintain  
 
 
forest health.
Because less than 1% of Arizona’s total workforce is currently employed by forestry operations, it will be  
 
 
necessary to develop training programs, both on-the-job and within educational institutions. It will also  
 
 
be necessary to recruit trainees for such programs, as well as groom potential forest professionals and   
 
 
technicians, beginning at the high-school level.
Conclusion
The development of sustainable, restoration-based forest and wood-products enterprises that can pay for wood 
and biomass will help offset the costs associated with forest restoration. This is critically important to achieving the 
complementary goals of community protection and ecological restoration. The fact is that our forests need restoration 
now, yet state and federal agencies have been unable to undertake significant new initiatives through government 
channels alone. Public-private partnerships are needed, and the development of an appropriately scaled, sustainable 
forest industry in Arizona makes sense from both economic and ecological perspectives. 
•
•
Economic Considerations for Restoring Forest Health 
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

34
References 
Coconino County, Arizona. Single Audit Reporting Package. Year Ended June 30, 2003. co.coconino.az.us/uploadedFiles/  
 
Finance/FS03.pdf
Johnson, A.D. and A. Beyer. Arizona 2005 tourism facts: Statewide and regional tourism indicators, year-end summary.   
 
Phoenix: Arizona Office of Tourism. 
O’Brien, R.A. 2002. Arizona’s Forest Resources, 1999. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Resource   
 
Bulletin RMRS-RB-2.
Rowdabaugh, K. Annual Report, Fire Suppression Revolving Fund, FY 2006. Arizona State Land Department, Office of the  
 
State Forester.
Schmidt, K.M., J.P. Menakis, C.C. Hardy, W.J. Hann, and D.L. Bunnell. 2002. Development of coarse-scale spatial data   
 
for wildland fire and fuel management. General Technical Report, RMRS-GTR-87, U.S. Department of  
 
 
 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, CO.
Southwest Coordination Center. http://gacc.nifc.gov/swcc/predictive/intelligence/ytd_historical/ytd_historical.htm    
 
accessed 3/20/07.
Snider, G.B., D.B. Wood, and P.J. Daugherty. 2003. Analysis of Costs and Benefits of Restoration-Based Hazardous Fuel   
 
Reduction, Treatments vs. No Treatment. Northern Arizona University School of Forestry.
United States Census Bureau. 2000. Arizona: Profile of economic characteristics: 2000. http://factfinder.census.gov/ 
 
 
servlet/QTTable?_bm=n&_lang=en&qr_name=DEC_2000_SF3_U_DP3&ds_name=DEC_2000_SF3_U&geo_  
 
 
id=04000US04.
Utilization and Commerce Subcommittee, Arizona Forest Health Advisory and Oversight Councils. 2004. Guiding   
 
 
Principles for a New Economy Based on Forest Restoration.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

7   
35
A Collaborative Foundation for the 
Statewide Strategy
T
he Statewide Strategy for Restoring Arizona’s Forests is a collaborative vision. It draws its inspiration from the 
successful pioneering efforts of Arizona’s citizens, including community leaders, forest managers, scientists, 
and public servants across the state. By recognizing, studying, and learning from these many successes, the  
State of Arizona has committed to fostering a bolder, broader implementation of collaborative forest restoration work. 
Forest communities are embedded in larger landscapes that are linked by ecological processes, including fire, 
the movement of wildlife populations, and the flow of rivers and groundwater collected within watersheds. Thus, 
successful restoration efforts require the integration of many local efforts. Independent efforts by individual 
landowners or communities will ultimately be pointless if they are not part of a coherent and unified strategy to 
improve forest health across large areas. Neighboring land parcels should be restored and subsequently managed in an 
integrated, collaborative manner, so that the cumulative effects of many different projects will complement, rather 
than conflict with each other. Efforts to achieve this sort of cooperation through government mandates and regulation 
have had mixed results in the past. 
When community members, including local residents and others with a direct interest in the management of Arizona’s 
forests, come together to address common problems they often craft creative and practical solutions. The Forest 
Service’s stewardship contract for the White Mountains evolved through prolonged citizen involvement in federal 
planning efforts, and the implementation of this innovative strategy has united ecological restoration with economic 
development.  Similarly, where diverse citizens have come together in open processes to develop Community Wildfire 
Protection Plans, they are often better able to integrate fire and wildlife planning than committees of government 
officials.
Collaborative approaches to forest restoration and planning provide an additional benefit: they encourage the 
meaningful public discourse that is necessary for working through the deep divisions that have plagued forest 
management in recent decades. Taking appropriate action to safeguard communities, restore forests, and protect 
wildlife habitat is often stymied by disagreements–-real and perceived–-about which management actions are 
appropriate. Without the committed engagement of Arizona residents, it is difficult, if not impossible, to translate the 
shared but often vague objectives for improving forest health into publicly supported actions in specific places. Strong 
consensus, emerging from a mix of agreement and trust, is necessary to chart a new course for forest management that 
is characterized by restoration, sustainable use, and collaborative management. This important shift engages people of 
diverse backgrounds and interests from around the state, yet relies on scientific principles and adaptive approaches to 
management.
Inspired by successful collaborative efforts across the Southwest, the Statewide Strategy will strengthen and 
extend the growing network of creative initiatives to improve forest conditions, restore key ecological processes, 
protect wildlife and their habitats, and develop economically viable approaches for ongoing management, use, and 
conservation of Arizona’s forest resources. By building on local successes to implement the Statewide Strategy, the 
restoration of Arizona’s forests will proceed in a manner driven by on-the-ground collaborative efforts, and supported 
by integrated polices and appropriate levels of government support and involvement.
References
Cortner, H. J. and M. A. Moote. 1998. The politics of ecosystem management. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Sisk, T. D., J. W. Prather, H. M. Hampton, E. N. Aumack, Y. Xu, and B. G. Dickson. 2006. Participatory landscape 
analysis to guide restoration of ponderosa pine ecosystems in the American Southwest. Landscape and Urban Planning 
78(4):300-310. 
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

36
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

37
Part Three
8. A Landscape Approach
 
Arizona Strip
 
Basin and Range
 
Central Highlands
 
Chuska Mountains
 
Kaibab Plateau
 
Northeastern Woodlands
 
Sky Islands
 
Western Mogollon Plateau
 
White Mountains
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

38
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

A
rizona is a large and diverse state with extensive 
forests. Climate, topography, flora and fauna vary 
tremendously, from the widespread savannah 
woodlands dominated by juniper and pinyon, to subalpine 
spruce forests at the highest elevations. This great natural 
variation is not evenly or randomly distributed across the state. 
Many forces, including the influences of human settlement 
and timber harvests, have shaped Arizona’s forests into 
distinct landscapes, each with its own history and unique 
characteristics. For example, the extensive ponderosa pine 
forest occupying the relatively flat Western Mogollon Plateau 
was heavily logged during the first half of the twentieth 
century, and this, coupled with fire suppression and other 
forces, led to a dramatically different forest, characterized 
by a greater number of small trees, often occurring in dense 
stands that are more susceptible to crown fires than their 
widely spaced old-growth ancestors. The flat topography that 
had once allowed ground fires to burn slowly, and beneficially, 
across the forest floor now helps the spread of destructive 
crown fire across large areas, as it moves rapidly through 
interlocking tree canopies. Conversely, the pine and mixed-
conifer forests of the Southern Sky Islands--many also heavily 
logged in the past century--occupy generally steeper slopes, 
where they have always been subject to fires of different 
intensities, from cool ground fires creeping down steep slopes, 
to crown fires spreading in patchy patterns across the rugged, mountainous topography. Differences in the ecological 
conditions on the Mogollon Plateau and in the Sky Islands identify them as distinct landscapes that require different, 
locally grounded approaches to forest restoration and management.
The principles of landscape ecology, a rapidly developing discipline that studies large-scale patterns and processes 
in nature, indicate that there are a relatively small number of distinct forested landscapes in Arizona. The fates of 
these of these landscapes are largely independent, because 1) they are isolated from one another, and 2) because 
important processes, such as fire, drought, and urban expansion, operate at scales that affect different landscapes in 
very different ways. For example, periodic shifts in the jet stream may bring increased moisture to southern Arizona, 
while the northern forests are stressed by drought. Similarly, crown fires on the Mogollon Plateau in 2002 flared into 
the massive Rodeo-Chediski complex that restructured a half-million acres, while other forested landscapes suffered no 
negative effects during Arizona’s worst fire season in recent history. 
These examples demonstrate that there is a natural scale for planning and management of Arizona’s forests. This 
scale leads us to identify landscapes as those distinct areas that are linked together, internally, by key driving forces-
-fire, climate, and human activities--that determine forest conditions and influence their future development. In 
Arizona, rugged topography, variable climate, and differing fire regimes suggest that there are less than a dozen large 
landscapes, each differing from one another, each characterized by a unique set of environmental conditions and 
ecological processes, and each on an independent trajectory into the future. Adopting a landscape perspective is an 
important step toward addressing forest health responsibly, because it recognizes that conditions, challenges, and 
solutions almost certainly vary across our state, and that our actions should be governed by ecological reality, rather 
than abstract concepts that underlie outdated “one-size-fits-all” approaches to forest restoration and management.
Restoring Forests and Protecting Communities:
A Landscape Approach
8   
39
Work-
ing 

40
The Statewide Strategy embraces a landscape perspective that acknowledges the great variability of Arizona’s forests, 
while providing the integrated “big picture” view that can unite the interests of the state’s residents. Our map of the 
state distinguishes nine forested landscapes. These landscapes were identified, reviewed, and debated by committee; 
and as such, their number and boundaries are the products of compromise and represent a working definition that is 
subject to future review and revision. Boundaries drawn on maps are much less obvious in nature, and it is clear that 
there are other valid ways to map Arizona’s forested landscapes. Nevertheless, the map presented here provides a 
helpful way to break down a very complex issue into manageable parts. It allows clear presentation of the different 
conditions, problems, and potential solutions to Arizona’s forest heath challenge, a challenge that is addressed in 
subsequent sections on a landscape-by-landscape basis. By considering each landscape as an integral whole, we 
are then able to identify common themes across the state and develop policies that are scientifically grounded and 
locally effective, yet integrated into a strategy that can be effectively implemented at multiple scales, from the 
development of state- or forest-wide policy, to a community wildfire protection plan, to a series of on-the-ground 
forest management projects.  This is the strength of the landscape perspective.
References
Falk, D. A. et al. 2006. Forest health: Land-use planning for wildland fires and interface communities:   
 
 
 
Recommendations by the Landscape Context Subcommittee of the Arizona Forest Health Advisory Council.
Pickett, S. T. A. and P. S. White. 1985. Patch dynamics: A synthesis. Pages 371-384 in S. T. A. Pickett and P. S. White  
 
 
(eds.), The ecology of natural disturbance and patch dynamics. New York: Academic Press.
Sisk, T. D., M. Savage, D. A. Falk, C. D. Allen, E. Muldavin, and P. McCarthy. 2005. Landscape perspective for forest  
 
 
restoration. Journal of Forestry, 319-320.
Turner, M. G. 2004. Fire ecology in the Western US: Lessons from the 1988 Yellowstone fires. USDA Forest Service,  
 
 
Forest Products Laboratory, Madison, Wisconsin.]
Wiens, J., M. R. Moss, M. G. Turner, and D. Mladenoff. 2006. Foundation papers in landscape ecology. New York:  
 
 
Columbia University Press.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

41
Arizona Strip 
Basin and Range
Central Highlands
Chuska Mountains
Kaibab Plateau
Northeastern Woodlands
Sky Islands
Western Mogollon Rim
White Mountains
9
Arizona’s Forested Landscapes
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

42
Arizona Strip 
Sky Islands
Sky Islands
White Mountains
White Mountains
Central
Highlands
Central
Highlands
Northeastern Woodlands
Northeastern Woodlands
Western Mogollon Plateau
Western Mogollon Plateau
Arizona Strip
Arizona Strip
Kaibab
Plateau
Kaibab
Plateau
Chuska
Mountains
Chuska
Mountains
Basin
and
Range
Basin
and
Range
§¨¦
8
§¨¦
10
§¨¦
17
§¨¦
19
§¨¦
15
§¨¦
10
§¨¦
10
§¨¦
40
§¨¦
40
PAGE
PAGE
TUCSON
TUCSON
KINGMAN
KINGMAN
PHOENIX
PHOENIX
SHOW LOW
SHOW LOW
FLAGSTAFF
FLAGSTAFF
30
60
90
120
150
15
Miles
±
Traditionally, the entire portion of Arizona that lies north of the Colorado River is referred to as the Arizona Strip. 
However, for the purposes of Statewide Strategy, we differentiated the elevated Kaibab and Paria Plateaus as a 
separate forested landscape, reserving the remaining lands in the northwestern corner of the state for the Arizona 
Strip landscape. Ecologically, the Strip spans a transition from ponderosa pine forests and high desert shrublands to 
the Mohave Desert and western Great Basin. Culturally, the region is one of the most sparsely populated in Arizona, 
although it is affected by rapidly growing populations in nearby cities in Nevada and Utah.
Elevations across the Arizona Strip region range from about 1,400 feet near Lake Mead to just over 8,000 feet at the 
peaks of Mt. Trumbull and Mt. Bangs. Vegetation includes desert shrublands at lower elevations, extensive pinyon-
juniper woodlands, and ponderosa pine-Gambel oak forests on isolated “sky island” mountaintops. Water sources 
on the Arizona Strip include numerous springs, which are very important for wildlife and humans, but few perennial 
streams, except for the Virgin River in the far northwestern corner of the region and small tributaries of the Grand 
Canyon, including Kanab Creek, Parashant Canyon, and Grand Wash.
Politically, the region lies within Mohave and Coconino counties, but socially and economically the Arizona Strip has as 
much in common with southern Utah as it does with the southern portions of these Arizona counties. The northwestern 
region of the Arizona Strip has very few paved roads: a portion of Interstate 15 through the Virgin River Gorge, US 
highway 89A to Fredonia, and State Route 389. A network of unpaved roads, many impassible in wet weather, spans the 
vast acres of public and private lands in the area. A high-voltage utility line crosses the northern portion of the region.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

43
▲ Figure 9.1.1. Land Ownership status in the Arizona Strip landscape.
The Bureau of Land Management’s Arizona Strip Field Office manages more than two-thirds of the Arizona Strip 
region, including Grand Canyon/Parashant National Monument. One quarter of the region’s lands are owned and 
managed by Grand Canyon National Park (Figure 9.1.1). The Kaibab National Forest and scattered private and State 
Trust lands comprise the remainder. Several designated Wilderness Areas are located in the Arizona Strip, including the 
Paiute, Beaver Dam and Grand Wash Cliff wilderness areas in the west, and the Mt. Trumbull, Mt. Logan, Cottonwood, 
Paria Canyon/Vermilion Cliffs and Kanab Creek wilderness areas in the southeast. 
The ponderosa pine forests in the Arizona Strip region are limited to higher mountains primarily under federal 
ownership (BLM and NPS). Pinyon-juniper woodlands and desert shrublands are found under more mixed ownership, 
including BLM, State of Arizona, and private lands.
Land Ownership
Arizona Strip
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

44
Arizona Strip
Forests
▲ Figure 9.1.2. Vegetation characteristics of the Arizona Strip landscape.
The forests of the Arizona Strip region are comprised mostly 
of conifers interspersed with deciduous oaks, grasslands, and 
extensive shrub communities (Figure 9.1.2). Ponderosa pine-
Gambel oak forests cover roughly 34,000 acre. They occur 
mostly in forested highlands from 6,500 to 8,000 feet in the 
southern portion of the region (Mt. Trumbull, Mt. Logan, Mt. Emma, Mt. Dellenbaugh), as well as in a small portion of 
the Virgin Mountains. The forests were sporadically harvested from 1870 onward, leaving an unusually high component 
of large, old-growth trees in the Mt. Trumbull area. Gambel oak and New Mexican locust are important deciduous 
species. Gambel oak is particularly valuable for acorns and as snag habitat for cavity nesting birds. Understory plants 
include a diverse array of native shrubs, grasses, and forbs. 
Pinyon-juniper woodlands cover about 30% of the landscape at elevations ranging from 5,000 to 6,500 feet. These 
woodlands have become denser and, in some cases, have invaded former grasslands, as a result of livestock grazing 
and exclusion of fire. Pinyon-juniper woodlands are valuable for wildlife habitat, and also contain the majority of the 
region’s archeological sites.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

45
▲Figure 9.1.3. Fire Regime Condition characteristics of vegetation in the Arizona Strip landscape.
Annual precipitation averages just below 17 inches at Nixon Flat near 
Mt. Trumbull, but year-to-year variation is great, with six out of the past 
ten years well below average. A severe drought occurred in 2002, when 
precipitation was the third lowest total recorded during the past one 
hundred years.
The U.S. Forest Service has classified the vast majority of the landscape (74%) as Fire Regime Condition Class 3, 
meaning that there is a high risk of losing key ecosystem components to fire (Figure 9.1.3). At particularly high risk are 
Mohave Desert, pinyon-juniper, and ponderosa pine communities. The natural surface fire regime of the ponderosa pine 
forest was disrupted after 1870 when large herds of sheep and cattle were introduced. Currently, ponderosa forests 
are relatively dense and susceptible to stand-replacing fire. The natural fire regimes of pinyon-juniper woodlands are 
poorly understood, but a mix of surface and stand-replacing fires was probably typical. Current conditions in woodlands 
across the Arizona Strip are capable of supporting intense fire across greater areas than were the historic woodlands.
Current Conditions
Arizona Strip
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

46
Arizona Strip
We Are Kaibab Paiute!
We are members of one of the bands of Paiute people who have inhabited the lands 
to the north and west of the Grand Canyon for centuries. Long ago we were hunters and 
gatherers, living in small bands and moving according to the seasons in search of food. Our 
homeland has the most ecological zones of any area in North America. This made it easy 
for us to cultivate gardens near water sources, in addition to living off the wild plants and 
animals. We moved throughout the area and were able to have a fruitful life. 
Around 1863, Mormon settlers began to move into our homeland and establish ranches 
around our water sources. They did not understand our way of life and assumed ownership 
of our lands. We were no longer able to get water from small springs and wells for our 
farms. When the natural water flow was diverted, the plants we used for food died and the 
animals moved on. Our people began to starve and were forced to move to small camps near the Mormon settlements and take small 
jobs for food. This was a very big change for our people, and over the next 20 years we lost about 90 percent of our population. 
Our reservation was established May 28, 1909, on land that has many valuable minerals. We have struggled to get fair compensation 
for our mineral resources. We have approximately 250 tribal members. Our tribe has set goals to achieve sufficient economic growth 
to offer employment opportunities to any member of our tribe who wants to live and work on our reservation. We are governed by a 
tribal chairperson and a council of six representatives. We are dedicated to preserving the natural resources of our land along with 
our culture. 
Our songs are what keep us going.... Our songs help to remind us where we came from, who we are, and who we are related to -- 
Clifford Jake, Paiute elder, 1998 
Communities
Communities within the Arizona Strip district are small and 
include: Littlefield/Beaver Dam, Colorado City, Moccasin, Fredonia, 
and the Kaibab Paiute communities of Six Mile Village, Eagle 
Mountain, Red Cliffs, Juniper, and Kaibab. Total population of these 
communities is about 7,000. The economy is largely agricultural—
ranching and farming—and also includes mining, tourism, and government jobs.  
Due to the mild climate, tourists visit the Arizona Strip region year-round, but generally they are widely dispersed. 
Apart from the highly trafficked Virgin River corridor, the National Park Service’s Ranger Station at Tuweep is probably 
the single most-visited recreation site in the area. In general, apart from a few small towns and ranching operations, 
development and infrastructure is sparse. 
The Arizona Strip has a rich, but poorly documented history, beginning more 
than 12,000 years ago with prehistoric Native Americans called the Paleo-
Indians. Evidence of the once-extensive Anasazi and Southern Paiute cultures 
is found throughout the Strip. Spanish and Mexican forays into the area 
began in 1776 and were focused along the Old Spanish Trail during the 1820s 
and 1830s. Mining activities, timber cutting and settlement by farmers and 
ranchers began by the 1870s. While there is a significant concentration of 
archaeological and historical sites on the Arizona Strip, most are unknown 
because only about 1% of the Strip has ever been surveyed.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

47
Wildlife
Arizona Strip
A wide array of wildlife and plant diversity has evolved on the Arizona Strip, in 
large part due to the geological diversity of the lands. More than 200 plant species 
are native to the area. One hundred and fifteen bird and 49 mammal species live 
in the Arizona Strip region, including the endangered California condor (Gymnogyps 
californianus) and desert tortoise (Gopherus agassizii), mule deer (Odocoileus 
hemionus), wild turkeys (Meleagris gallopavo), desert bighorn sheep (Ovis canadensis), pronghorn (Antilocapra 
americana) and mountain lion (Puma concolor). 
The northern goshawk (Accipiter gentilis), identified by the Forest Service as a 
sensitive species in the Southwest, occurs in pine-oak forests. Goshawks make 
use of dense forest patches for nest sites, but hunt in more open and diverse 
forest stands, where they find prey that includes birds, squirrels, and other small 
mammals. Habitat for the Mexican spotted owl (Strix occidentalis lucida) also 
occurs in pine-oak forests, although owls do not presently reside in the forests on 
the Arizona Strip. The ponderosa pine-dependent Kaibab squirrel (Sciurus aberti 
kaibabensis), a subspecies of tassel-eared squirrel, was introduced to the sky 
islands on the Arizona Strip in the 1960s. The squirrel is valued as a attractive 
and recognizable forest resident, as prey for avian and mammalian predators, 
and for hunting. At lower elevations, the desert tortoise (Gopherus agassizii) 
is a threatened species. Pronghorn (Antilocapra americana) are also found 
throughout the open country of the Arizona strip, but their habitat is threatened by the loss of native grassland and the 
encroachment by pinyon-juniper woodlands.
Fire
Those implementing fire management on the 
Arizona Strip are faced with many challenges: (1) 
extensive areas of continuous forest and woodland 
vegetation are subject to uncharacteristically 
intense wildfire, (2) these wildfires can negatively 
affect watersheds, soils, and native species and 
habitats, and (3) invasive cheatgrass can establish 
near monocultures following severe fire, increasing 
fine fuels and permanently altering fire regimes, 
especially at low and middle elevations. Ignition 
risks include human activities, but also lightning, which is especially intense on the rim of Grand Canyon and nearby 
plateaus. The remote character of the Arizona Strip limits fire response, with fire crews needing to travel long 
distances over rough roads to reach fires.
Wildfires in recent years have impacted grass and shrublands, particularly those suffering from cheatgrass invasion. 
Ponderosa pine and pinyon-juniper forests are susceptible to stand replacing fire over large areas with particularly 
dense woody vegetation, however, in some areas conditions are suitable for the use of Wildland Fire Use, a practice 
which is being used increasingly in remote areas such as the Arizona Strip.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

48
Arizona Strip
Watersheds
The Arizona Strip falls within the Lake Mead Lower 
Colorado River watershed (Figure 9.1.4). Perennial water 
sources are few and far between in the remote 
landscape of the Arizona Strip. The Virgin River 
represents the only large perennial stream in the region, 
which is bordered on the east by perennial Kanab Creek, 
and on the south by the Colorado River in Grand Canyon. 
Watersheds in the northern portion of the region drain 
into the Virgin River, while southern watersheds drain 
into Grand Canyon. Springs are important water sources 
throughout the region, as are seasonal water sources, 
such as Death Valley Lake near Mt. Trumbull, which fill 
following periods of heavy precipitation. 
▲ Figure 9.1.4. Third-order watersheds (basins) in the Arizona Strip landscape.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

49
Arizona Strip
Collaborative Efforts
Collaboration has always been an important aspect of social life in 
the Arizona Strip. The isolation of communities and outlying ranches 
fostered a deep sense of community among early Anglo settlers, 
many of whom were Morman pioneers. Yet independence and self-
sufficiency are valuded traits in the Arizona Strip region because 
the population is sparse and widely distributed. While distances and 
settlement patterns make forest management difficult, the BLM, 
Arizona Game and Fish Department, and Northern Arizona University’s Ecological Restoration Institute have sustained a 
progressive experiment in forest restoration in the Mt. Tumbull area for more than a decade. The key element of this 
collaboration has been the integration of research with management. 
Researchers have studied the effects of tree thinning and prescribed 
fire on variables including forest structure, fire behavior, understory 
plant response, and habitat suitability for arthropods, lizards, rodents, 
songbirds, and other wildlife species, at both the stand and landscape 
scales. 
Since 1995, 2140 acres have been treated with tree-thinning and 
prescribed fire. Establishment of cheatgrass followed a recent severe 
drought, and its changing role in the plant community is providing 
opportunities to study the behavior of an invasive plant in a landscape 
undergoing ecological restoration. The importance of the Mt. Trumbull 
project led to its incorporation within the newly designated Grand 
Canyon-Parashant National Monument, where restoration is a featured 
aspect of land management.
Opportunities for economic utilization of restoration products 
are limited in this remote region, due to the long distances to 
markets and the predominance of low-value species such as 
sagebrush, pinyon, and juniper. Past utilization of forest and 
woodland species has been limited to fuel wood, juniper posts, 
Christmas trees and other vegetative products such as pinyon nuts 
and ponderosa pine cones. Seed companies collect native plant 
seed in shrub- and grasslands.
Economics
ERI researcher Mike Stoddard seeding the pinyon-juniper 
demonstration unit—photo by ERI.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

50
Future Restoration Needs
Arizona Strip
References
Arizona Strip Field Office-BLM Arizona. www.blm.gov/az/asfo/wildlife/pronghorn.htm accessed November 29, 2006
Arizona Strip Resource Management Plan Revision, Grand Canyon-Parashant National Monument Management Plan  
 
 
(jointly managed with the National Park Service), and Vermilion Cliffs National Monument Management Plan.  
 
 
Draft Resource Management Plan/Draft Environmental Impact Statement. November 2005. Accessed at   
 
 
http://www.blm.gov/az/LUP/strip/DEIS.htm
Beier, D. and J.E. Paul. 1997. Forest structure and prey abundance in foraging areas of northern goshawks. Ecological   
 
Applications 7:564-571
Hughes, L.E. 2004. Ponderosa pine undergrowth restoration on the Arizona Strip. Rangelands 26(1):23-27.
Rangeland ecosystems on the Arizona Strip. Accessed: http://www.blm.gov/az/asfo/range.htm
Contributions from Pete Fulé, Ecological Restoration Institute, and Ken Moore, Arizona BLM
While the Arizona Strip has been the setting for some of the most ambitious experiments in ecological restoration, 
numerous challenges face residents and land managers in continuing efforts to restore forest health on the Arizona 
Strip.  As in many locations funding and staff constraints make it difficult to implement restoration treatments in 
a timely manner, and the remoteness of the region make economic utilization of the woody biomass generated by 
restoration treatments unprofitable. While the use of fire as a restoration tool is possible in wildland areas, the region’s 
remoteness, combined with generally hot and dry conditions make it difficult for fire managers to identify appropriate 
opportunities for prescribed burns and Wildland Fire Use.
Invasion of restored areas by non-native herbaceous species, such as cheatgrass, poses another challeng to forest 
restoration efforts. In addition, livestock grazing can make it more difficult to accumulate fine fuels for prescribed fire 
and future maintenance burns. However, grazing is a historic part of the Strip, and ecological restoration efforts will 
need to build on collaborative efforts involving ranchers and other residents if they are to enjoy the broad support 
necessary for long-term success.   
Recommendations:
Long-term ecological research is needed to provide the necessary information for long-term ecosystem 
restoration and management.  Efforts initiated by the Ecological Resotoration Institute and Arizona Game and Fish 
Department, in conjunction with the BLM, should continue, and monitoring efforts should be ongoing.
An adaptive management is needed to guide management, given the high degree of scientific uncertainty and 
the prospect of climate change. Monitoring should focus on ecological, social, and economic indicators, with forest 
management decisions based on trends in monitoing data.
Cooperation among state and federal agencies, and universities, is essential. Ongoing efforts should continue, 
and expansion from the research focus to incorporate managmenet planning and implementation would be helpful. 
All forest restoration and managmenet efforts should be developed to complement, where possible, 
community and county priorities. Only with this type of integration will restoration treatments be able to meet the 
diverse needs of a wide range of people and ecological circumstances.  
1.
2.
3.
4.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

51
Landscape: Basin and Range
The Basin and Range landscape includes the Cerbat and Hualapai mountain ranges in Mohave County, Arizona. These 
ranges are located immediately north and south of Kingman, and rise sharply from the Detrital and Sacramento valleys 
to the west, and the Hualapai and Big Sandy River valleys to the east. 
Elevations range from approximately 3,000 feet above sea level in the valleys to over 8,400 feet at Hualapai Peak 
in the Hualapai Mountains. Native vegetation varies widely due to the large range in elevation. Lower elevations 
are dominated by Mohave and Sonoran Desert vegetative associations (about 3000 feet),transitioning to interior 
chaparral and pinyon-juniper woodlands at mid elevations (about 5,000 feet), and ponderosa pine/mixed-conifer 
forests at the highest elevations (about 7000 feet). Average annual precipitation ranges from less than 10 inches at 
the lower elevations to more than 20 inches at the highest elevations. Soils are primarily shallow, well drained granitic 
complexes. Water from the north and west sides of this area drains directly into the Colorado River, while the east side 
of the Hualapai Mountains drains into the Big Sandy River, then south to the Santa Maria River and eventually drains 
into the Colorado River at Lake Havasu. 
Sky Islands
Sky Islands
White Mountains
White Mountains
Central
Highlands
Central
Highlands
Northeastern Woodlands
Northeastern Woodlands
Western Mogollon Plateau
Western Mogollon Plateau
Arizona Strip
Arizona Strip
Kaibab
Plateau
Kaibab
Plateau
Chuska
Mountains
Chuska
Mountains
Basin
and
Range
Basin
and
Range
§¨¦
8
§¨¦
10
§¨¦
17
§¨¦
19
§¨¦
15
§¨¦
10
§¨¦
10
§¨¦
40
§¨¦
40
PAGE
PAGE
TUCSON
TUCSON
KINGMAN
KINGMAN
PHOENIX
PHOENIX
SHOW LOW
SHOW LOW
FLAGSTAFF
FLAGSTAFF
0
30
60
90
120
150
15
Miles
±
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

52
▲ Figure 9.2.1. Land Ownership status in the Basin and Range landscape.
Basin and Range
Land ownership status within the Basin and Range region, as across much of Arizona, is dominated by public lands, 
with the Bureau of Land Management administering 72% of the landscape. Arizona State Trust Land comprising 5%, and 
a little less than 1% is under Mohave County management. 22% of the area is privately owned (Figure 9.2.1.).
Large portions of the Hualapai and Cerbat Mountain ranges are under BLM management, although small private in-
holdings and some state and county lands occur throughout both ranges. The 40,000-acre Wabayuma Peak Wilderness 
and the 30,760-acre Mount Tipton Wilderness are also under BLM management, while the Hualapai Mountain Park 
covers about 2,226 acres of land managed by Mohave County in the north end of the Hualapai Mountains. The large 
number of private in-holdings and the mixed-ownership pattern within the Basin and Range landscape can complicate 
management of forested areas in the planning area, and rapid urban development and growth in Mohave County also 
presents challenges when planning restoration treatments. 
Land Ownership
§¨¦
40
£
¤
93
£
¤
66
£
¤
68
£
¤
93
KINGMAN
KINGMAN
0
50
Miles
±
72%
22%
5%
0.3%
Basin and Range Landscape
Ownership
BLM
PRIVATE
STATE TRUST LANDS
OTHER
Source: http://www.land.state.az.us/alris/
Percent in each Ownership category:
Total acreage: 715,161
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

53
Basin and Range
Forests
▲ Figure 9.2.2. Vegetation composition in the Basin and Range Landscape.
A highly diverse range of plant 
communities are found in the Cerbat 
and Hualapai Mountain ranges (Figure 
9.2.2.). Mixed-conifer forest occur 
in small stands on north-facing 
slopes above 7,500 feet, primarily near Hualapai, Hayden, and Aspen peaks within the Hualapai Mountain Park. 
Dominant species in this association are ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa), white fir (Abies concolor), and Douglas fir 
(Pseudotsuga menziesii). A few small stands of aspen (Populus tremuloides) occur between Hayden and Aspen peaks. 
Ponderosa pine is dominant over approximately 4000 acres, principally on north-facing slopes down to 6,500 feet in the 
Hualapai and in the Cerbat Mountains, near Mount Tipton. The Gambel oak (Quercus gambelii) is found in association 
with ponderosa pine at higher elevations, while interior chaparral, pinyon pine, and juniper co-occur at the lower 
limits of the pine zone, down to about 5,600 feet. 
Pinyon-juniper woodlands occur throughout the Basin and Range area at elevations between 4,600 and 6,500 feet, and 
are composed primarily of single-leaf pinyon (Pinus monophylla) and Utah juniper (Juniperous osteosperma). These 
forest types occur primarily in association with Arizona interior chaparral, although ponderosa pine may occur at higher 
elevations, and Mohave and Sonoran desert scrub species may be found in these stands at lower elevations. 
Arizona interior chaparral occurs primarily between elevations of 4,500 and 6,500 feet, although it occurs on the 
south-facing slopes of the highest peaks, and may be represented among desert scrub communities at lower elevations. 
Interior chaparral consists of several shrub species, but is typically dominated by shrub live oak (Quercus turbinella) 
and manzanita (Arctostaphylos spp.). It occurs in many areas as pure stands, but is often associated with scattered 
pinyon and juniper trees.
§¨¦
40
KINGMAN
KINGMAN
±
0
50
Miles
29%
26%
18%
13%
5.9%
3.8%
2.9%
0.8%
Basin and Range Landscape
Southwest ReGAP Landcover
Mogollon Chaparral
Sonoran Mid-Elevation Desert Scrub
Mojave Mid-Elevation Mixed Desert Scrub
Great Basin Pinyon-Juniper Woodland
S. Paloverde-Mixed Cacti Desert Scrub
S-M Creosotebush-W.B. Desert Scrub
Other
Rocky Mountain Ponderosa Pine Woodland
Source: http://earth.gis.usu.edu/swgap/
Percent in each Landcover category:
Total acreage: 715,161
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

54
Basin and Range
▲ Figure 9.2.3. Fire Regime Condition characteristics of Vegetation in the Basin and Range Landscape.
Fire exclusion during the past century, combined with recent 
drought has exacerbated insect and mistletoe infestations in the 
mixed conifer stands of the Basin and Range landscape. Past fire 
exclusion has caused overstocking in ponderosa pine stands, and 
created heavy dead and down fuel loading in some areas, increasing 
the probability of uncharacteristic wildfire (Figure 9.2.3.).
Pinyon-juniper woodlands in the Basin and Range landscape have not experienced the elevated mortality seen in many 
other Arizona pinyon-juniper woodlands. Nonetheless, drought and insects have caused significant tree mortality in 
some areas within the Basin and Range landscape in recent years, especially across drier, south-facing slopes. 
Most interior chaparral has also been affected by fire exclusion. This vegetation type evolved under a regime of 
infrequent, stand-replacing fires, but fire exclusion has led to heavy fuel accumulations that pose significant fire 
management challenges. Extensive areas in the Hualapai and Cerbat mountains have been treated with prescribed 
burning during the last 12 years, and have been successful in creating a mixed age class plant community that is more 
typical of the pre-suppression era.
Current Conditions
§¨¦
40
KINGMAN
KINGMAN
±
0
50
Miles
Source: http://www.landfire.gov/index.php
Percent in each FRC category:
Total acreage: 715,161
55%
23%
19%
2.2%
0.5%
0.1%
Basin and Range Landscape
Fire Regime Condition
Condition Class I
Condition Class II
Condition Class III
Bare Rock/Sand/Clay
Urban/Transportation/Mines/Quarries
Other
Wetlands/Alpine/Others
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

55
Basin and Range
Communities
Communities located within the forested areas in 
the Basin and Range area are largely limited to small 
unincorporated developments around the periphery of the 
city of Kingman. The developments of Pine Lake, Pinion 
Pines, Atherton Acres, Lazy Y-U, and Cedar Hills are located 
at the north end of the Hualapai Mountains. Dolan Springs 
and Chloride are located on the north and west side of the 
Cerbat Mountains, surrounded by Mohave Desert vegetation. 
The city of Kingman, also located in the Mohavean 
vegetation type, lies between the Hualapai and Cerbat 
mountain ranges, though rapid growth has spurred exurban 
development at the north end of the Hualapai Mountains and 
on the east side of the Cerbat range. Estimated population 
for the greater Kingman area in 2005 was 43,500 people.  
Kingman and Pine Lake are listed in the Federal Register 
as communities “at risk” (Table 9.2). Community values 
to be protected include public safety, aesthetics, 
and economic viability. A CWPP is currently under 
development for the communities on the north end of 
the Hualapai Mountains. A CWPP is also planned for the 
greater Kingman area. 
Critical infrastructure includes transmission lines, 
roadways, railroads, and water and gas lines, as well 
as several significant communication facilities are 
located on the highest peaks in the Hualapai and 
Cerbat mountains, A number of recreational sites in the 
Hualapai and Cerbat Mountains are popular with area 
residents, providing a cool respite from summer heat. 
While the Hualapai Indian Reservation is not located in 
the Basin and Range landscape, areas of the Hualapai 
and Cerbat mountains are important cultural resources 
for the tribe and should be considered when making 
decisions about forest restoration and management in 
the Basin and Range landscape. 
Table 9.2. Communities at risk in the Basin and Range Landscape Area
Wild Cow Springs Campground is situated in a grove of oak and large 
ponderosa pines within the Hualapai Mountains at an elevation of 6,200 
feet.
Community of Pine Lakes, Arizona
Community
County
WUI Risk Rating
CWPP
Kingman
Mohave
High
Planned
Pine Lake
Mohave
High
In development
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

56
Basin and Range
Wildlife
The Hualapai and Cerbat Mountain ranges rise abruptly from creosote bush flats on the 
Mohave Desert floor, very much like the Sky Islands in southern Arizona. This elevation gradient 
supports a broad diversity of plant and animal communities from several different western 
biomes. Wildlife species of particular interest include the endangered Hualapai Mexican 
vole (Microtus mexicanus hualpaiensis) and  peregrine falcon (Falco peregrinus), mule deer 
(Odocoileus hemionus), and the Rocky Mountain elk (Cervus canadensis).
The Hulapai Mexican vole is a federally-listed threatened and endangered species living in the higher elevations of the 
Hualapai Mountains, where it is associated with ponderosa pine forests. It lives exclusively on grasses and leafy plants 
that thrive in forest openings and moist sites. Mule deer prefer the shrubs that occur from the interior chaparral at 
lower elevations into the higher elevation pinyon pine and ponderosa pine stands. Elk on the other hand tend to prefer 
those areas where grasses grow. Currently there are an estimated 100 elk residing in the Hualapai Mountains.  
Other forest-dwelling mammals identified by the Arizona Game and Fish Department as in need of conservation 
measures include the spotted bat (Euderma maculatum), the greater western mastiff bat (Eumops perotis 
Californicus), the California leaf-nosed bat (Macrotus californicus), and the big free-tailed bat (Nyctinomops 
macrotis). As in the nearby Arizona Strip landscape, desert tortoises (both Sonoran and Mohave populations) are 
found in the lower elevation woodlands and chaparral zones of the Basin and Range landscape. The northern goshawk 
(Accipiter gentilis) and Mexican spotted owl (Strix occidentalis lucida) are found in the higher-elevation forests and 
woodlands, as are the Swainson’s thrush (Catharus ustulatus), olive-sided flycatcher (Contopus cooperi), sage thrasher 
(Oreoscoptes montanus), and red-naped sapsucker (Sphyrapicus nuchalis).
Fire
Fires in the Basin and Range country can be hard to control, 
due to limited access, rugged terrain, and heavy fuel loads. The 
effects of recent drought, including increased insect mortality, 
have contributed even more fuel to the readily combustible 
material in the area’s forests. About 70% of wildfires in this area 
are lightning caused, although human ignitions occur frequently. 
The largest and most intense fires have occurred primarily in 
interior chaparral vegetation, which is adapted to infrequent, 
stand-replacing fire. The Stove Fire burned roughly 11,000 acres 
in the south end of the Hualapais in 1995. In recent years, most 
fires in ponderosa pine and mixed conifer habitats have burned 
less than 10 acres, however, the 2002 Wild Cow and Lion Kill fires burned a combined 840 acres in ponderosa pine and 
chaparral, briefly threatening the communities of Pine Lake, Pinion Pines, Atherton Acres and Hualapai Mountain 
Large fires in these ranges have been few, primarily due to aggressive fire suppression efforts, the BLM’s pro-active 
prescribed fire program, and efforts to establish defensible space around structures and communities.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

57
Basin and Range
Watersheds
The Hualapai and Cerbat mountain ranges are primarily composed 
of metamorphic granite that has weathered over millennia to 
create deep “v” shaped valleys with very steep slopes. The overall 
alignment of the mountain ridges is north to south with sharply 
incised valleys running perpendicular from the ridge crest in an 
easterly or westerly direction. The alignment of these valleys 
creates a clear difference in vegetation present on the slopes. The 
south-facing slopes receive more direct sunlight and are warmer 
than the north facing slopes, which tend to be cooler and moister. The vegetation associated with the southerly slopes 
is generally interior chaparral with some pinyon pine mixed in at higher elevations. The northerly slopes support forests 
primarily of ponderosa pine. 
In general, soils in the Basin and Range landscape are thin, with granite bedrock very close to the surface. These thin 
soils have limited water-holding capacity, so precipitation is carried quickly down the steep slopes and collected in the 
flat valley bottoms, contributing to rapid water movement and powerful erosional events. Even average monsoon rains 
can generate flooding in the broad valleys to the east and west of the mountains. Maintaining the appropriate amount 
of vegetative cover on steep slopes is important for reducing the force of erosion. For the interior chaparral, a mosaic 
of young and old vegetation patches, distributed over the south-facing slopes is desirable, while mixed-age stands 
of ponderosa pine and pinyon-juniper woodland is appropriate for north-facing slopes and ridge tops at the highest 
elevation. 
Third order watershed basin in the Basin and Range landscape are depicted in Figure 9.2.4
▲ Figure 9.2.4. Third-order watersheds (basins) in the Basin and Range landscape.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

58
Collaborative Efforts
Collaborative educational efforts have been successful at improving the awareness of the risks associated with living 
in close proximity to fire-adapted forest and chaparral vegetation. Public education and fire prevention has been the 
focus of past collaborative efforts within the community of Kingman.
The Pine Lake Working Group was created in 2001 to address fire and fuels management issues in and around 
the community of Pine Lake. Working group members include the Pine Lake Fire Department, Hualapai Mountain 
Homeowners Association, Bureau of Land Management, and Mohave County. This group has developed and managed 
several projects to improve fire safety in the area, including construction of fuel breaks around the communities of 
Pine Lake, Pinion Pines, and Atherton Acres; maintenance of roads for fire escape routes; disposal sites for hazardous 
fuel removal; prescribed fire projects; thinning; and increased fire prevention and education efforts. In addition, grant 
monies have been used to improve defensible space around structures, reduce hazardous fuel accumulations, and 
upgrade fire department equipment at Pine Lake. 
A fuel break has been created around the community of Pinion pine, and a fuel break is currently being constructed 
around the Atherton acres development on BLM-administered lands. Pinion Pine Fire Department has been quite active 
in assisting property owners in creating and maintaining defensible space around homes in the area. 
Pine Lake Fire Department, Pinion Pine Fire Department, Mohave County Emergency Services, Arizona State Land 
Department, and the BLM maintain an emergency operations plan for fire response in the Hualapai Mountains. This 
plan outlines the processes and procedures for emergency response, warning and evacuation, incident command 
and communications, as well as and public information in the event of a wildfire. This plan is reviewed and updated 
annually. 
Basin and Range
Economic utilization of small diameter wood and biomass has been 
limited in this area. Extremely rugged terrain and restricted access 
limit the potential for significant biomass utilization. Local businesses 
that engage in this type of work are limited by the available supply 
of forest products in the area. In addition, much of the available 
ponderosa pine habitat occurs on county park lands, where 
recreational use and value is an important priority. 
Modest forest product utilization has occurred with thinning projects in the Pine Lake and Hualapai mountain park 
areas. Careful thinning of hazard trees and insect-killed ponderosa pine has been accomplished by one man with a 
team of draft horses, and a portable mill. Lumber produced by the mill has been purchased by local residents, ranchers 
and businesses. Wood that is not suitable for milling is offered for sale as firewood. Currently about 200 cords of wood 
are sold to campers and local residents.
Economics
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

59
Basin and Range
Future Restoration Needs
Implement prudent use of wildland fire use events in order to reflect the historic range of fire disturbances  
 
 
within the interior chaparral, ponderosa pine, mixed conifer and aspen vegetation types of the Basin  
 
 
 
and Range region.
Establish and maintain the appropriate landscape scale diversity of vegetative age classes, densities and  
 
 
forest structures, to create a healthy and resilient range of vegetation types for the  
 
 
 
 
 
long-term benefit of all plant and animal species within the region. 
Maintain the presence of aspen in the region, remove conifer ingrowth from the aspen stands at high  
 
 
 
elevations of the Hualapai Mountains.
References
http://www.fire.blm.gov/textdocuments/2_7_02.pdf. Snapshots: Successes of BLM Hazardous Fuel Projects, February 
7, 2002.
http://www.blm.gov/az/wildarea.htm
Phoenix/Kingman Zone Fire Management Plan 2004, accessed from http://www.blm.gov/az/env_docs/fmp/PKFMP_
04.pdf
http://www.azsf.az.gov/Risk/AZCommun.pdf
Interviews conducted with Wayne King, Arizona BLM, Kingman office, September 2006.
Contributions from McKinley-Ben Miller and Wade Reaves, Arizona BLM; and from the Arizona Game and Fish 
Department.
1.
2.
3.
Implementation and 
Management 
Since 1999, the BLM has conducted prescribed burning on over 
24,000 acres of interior chaparral habitat. The purpose was to 
reduce fuel loadings and the risk of large wildfires developing in 
the Hualapai and Cerbat mountains. The BLM’s Desired Future 
Conditions for the Basin and Range landscape is a historically similar mosaic of vegetation types and ages that are 
similar to historic conditions. These conditions are characterized by healthy, vigorous plant communities that are 
resilient to natural disturbances, fewer dense “dog-hair” thickets prone to uncharacteristic burns, fewer ladder fuels 
and downed woody debris, and a high percent of large trees. The objective is to maintain these conditions with a 
combination of prescribed fire and mechanical treatments. 
In August 2004, the BLM met with the Mohave County Board of Supervisors and recommended that the county develop a 
CWPP to address important issues such as wildfire response, hazard mitigation, community preparedness and structure 
protection, and seeking out new avenues of cooperative funding. The Board of Supervisors decided to develop two 
separate CWPPs--the Hualapai CWPP and the Kingman CWPP. They did this because they wanted to procure funding for 
the areas most at risk as soon as possible. The Hualapai CWPP, which includes the communities of Pine Lake, Pinion 
Pine, Cedar Hills, and the Lazy YU, will be developed first. The Kingman CWPP will follow.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

60
Landscape: Central Highlands 
The Central Highlands region is a transition zone that divides the state of Arizona into two major geologic provinces: 
the Colorado Plateau to the north and the Basin and Range to the south and west. The region is characterized by 
numerous mountain ranges separated by several basins including Chino Valley, and the Verde Valley. It is a region that 
offers a wide range of vegetation biomes and geologic landforms. 
Elevations range from about 4,400 feet above sea level in the valleys to about 7,800 feet  in the highest reaches of the 
Bradshaw Mountains. Native vegetation varies from high desert grassland in the basin areas to coniferous forest in the 
surrounding mountains. Ponderosa pine exists at the highest elevations, but most of the landscape is characterized by 
pinyon-juniper woodlands, chaparral, and Sonoran desert communities at successively lower elevations. Precipitation 
ranges from about 10 to 35 inches annually, contributing to perennial streams and springs.
Within the Central Highlands, the Prescott National Forest encompasses about 1.41 million acres, almost entirely within 
Yavapai County. Half of the forested areas lie west of Prescott, in the Juniper, Santa Maria, Sierra Prieta, and Bradshaw 
mountains. The other half lies east of Prescott in the Black Hills, on Mingus Mountain, and around the headwaters of 
the Verde River. Two halves are separated by the Chino and Lonesome valleys, and the Agua Fria River corridor.
The Big Boquillas Ranch, north of Seligman, covers roughly 730,000 acres, with more than half of the ranch held 
privately by the Navajo Nation and the remaining portions comprised of leased state trust land. Pinyon-juniper 
woodlands predominate, but there are areas of mixed conifer in the region of the Aubrey Cliffs, which run through the 
center of the ranch.
Occupying part of Coconino, Yavapai and Mohave counties, and hugging the Colorado River, the Hualapai Reservation’s 
topography varies from rolling grassland to forest. Elevations range from 1,500 feet at the Colorado River, to over 7,300 
feet at the highest point of the Aubrey Cliffs, located on the eastern portion of the reservation.
Sky Islands
Sky Islands
White Mountains
White Mountains
Central
Highlands
Central
Highlands
Northeastern Woodlands
Northeastern Woodlands
Western Mogollon Plateau
Western Mogollon Plateau
Arizona Strip
Arizona Strip
Kaibab
Plateau
Kaibab
Plateau
Chuska
Mountains
Chuska
Mountains
Basin
and
Range
Basin
and
Range
§¨¦
8
§¨¦
10
§¨¦
17
§¨¦
19
§¨¦
15
§¨¦
10
§¨¦
10
§¨¦
40
§¨¦
40
PAGE
PAGE
TUCSON
TUCSON
KINGMAN
KINGMAN
PHOENIX
PHOENIX
SHOW LOW
SHOW LOW
FLAGSTAFF
FLAGSTAFF
0
30
60
90
120
150
15
Miles
±
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

61
▲ Figure 9.3.1. Land Ownership status in the Central Highlands landscape.
Central Highlands
Land ownership status within the Central Highlands landscape is more diversified that across much of Arizona, 
with 39% under federal ownership, 31% managed by the U.S. Forest Service and 8% by the BLM.  State Trust Lands 
comprise 18%, and 12% is under tribal management, either Hualapai or Navajo.  The remaining lands (31% of the total) 
are privately held. Across much of the Central Highlands, the ownership pattern forms a checkerboard mosaic of 
management authorities (Figure 9.3.1.), making forest planning and management a challenge, particularly with respect 
to accomplishing restoration treatments on the ground.
Land Ownership
§¨¦
17
£
¤
89
Navajo
Navajo
§¨¦
40
§¨¦
40
£
¤
180
£
¤
93
£
¤
66
£
¤
93
£
¤
89
Hualapai
Hualapai
KINGMAN
KINGMAN
FLAGSTAFF
FLAGSTAFF
0
50
Miles
±
32%
31%
18%
12%
8%
0.03%
Central Highlands Landscape
Ownership
PRIVATE
FOREST SERVICE
STATE TRUST LANDS
AMERICAN INDIAN RESERVATION
BLM
OTHER
Source: http://www.land.state.az.us/alris/
Percent in each Ownership category:
Total acreage: 5,727,945
Big Boquillas Ranch (Navajo)
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

62
Central Highlands
Forests and
The broken topography or the Central Highlands landscape, with its many canyons, ridges, and rolling hills, creates 
an area of high biological diversity.  Dominant habitats consist of spruce-fir forests, ponderosa pine forest, pinyon-
juniper, chaparral, and semi-desert grassland.  
Ponderosa pine forests make up about five percent of the Central Highlands landscape and occur in the higher 
elevations--6,000 to 8,000 feet. They are found in the areas around Prescott, the Bradshaw Mountains, the 
Woodchute Mountain Wilderness, and the Juniper Mesa and Apache Creek Wilderness areas (Figure 9.3.2.).  
Ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) is the predominant tree species throughout. White fir (Abies concolor) and 
Douglas fir (Pseudotsuga menziesi) may be found in association at the higher elevations, while Gambel oak (Quercus 
gambelii), two-needle pinyon pine (Pinus californiarum var. fallax), juniper (Juniperus spp.), and chaparral 
species are intermixed to varying degrees. The Hualapai reservation has 50,000 acres of ponderosa pine forest, 
intermixed with gambel oak. It has been 20 years since any thinning was done in this forest.
Ponderosa pine stands are currently stocked at moderately high levels with an age class composition characterized 
as mostly immature with very little in the young and mature components.     
§¨¦
40
§¨¦
17
§¨¦
40
Hualapai
Hualapai
KINGMAN
KINGMAN
FLAGSTA
FLAGSTA
±
0
50
Miles
Central Highlands Landscape
Southwest ReGAP Landcover
Colorado Plateau Pinyon-Juniper Woodland
Madrean Pinyon-Juniper Woodland
Mogollon Chaparral
A-C P. Semi-Desert Grassland and Steppe
Other Shrub / Scrub
Other Grassland / Herbaceous
A-C Mesquite Upland Scrub
Rocky Mountain Ponderosa Pine Woodland
Other Evergreen Forests
Other
37%
14%
13%
8.3%
6.6%
6.0%
5.8%
4.6%
2.7%
2.6%
American Indian Reservation
Source: http://earth.gis.usu.edu/swgap/
Percent in each Landcover category:
Total acreage: 5,727,945
▲ Figure 9.3.2. Vegetation composition in the Central Highlands Landscape area.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

63
Central Highlands
▲ Figure 9.3.3.  Fire Regime Condition characteristics of Vegetation in the Central Highlands Landscape Area
Pinyon-juniper woodlands occur at elevations between 5,000 – 6,000 ft. Colorado pinyon (Pinus edulis) is found 
throughout, with singleleaf pinyon (Pinus monophylla) occurring on limited areas. Other tree species include: Utah 
juniper (Juniperus osteosperma), Rocky Mountain juniper (J. scopulorum), and one-seed juniper (J. monosperma), 
and are intermixed with pinyon pine. Annual and perennial grasses and grass-like plants, forbs, half-shrubs and shrubs 
comprise a highly variable understory. Pinyon-juniper woodlands are generally regarded as having little economic 
importance, except as fuelwood and for the edible piñon nuts. Between 2002 and 2003, 40-80% of the pinyon trees 
in Arizona died, due to drought and high temperatures. Numerous factors, most likely including prolonged livestock  
grazing, 50 years of fire suppression practices, and changes in climate have resulted in the encroachment of juniper 
into previously open areas, with the result that many woodlands are subject to increased likelihood of uncharacteristic 
wildfire (Figure 9.3.3.). 
Chaparral covers about 13% of the Central Highlands landscape. Predominant species include mountain mahogany 
(Cercocarpus montanus), manzanita (Arctostaphylos pungens), silk tassel (Garrya wrightii), scrub oak (Q. turbinella), 
emory oak (Q. emoryi), and Arizona white oak (Q.arizonica). These vegetation types are arranged as large, continuous 
stands of chaparral, or can be interspersed with ponderosa pine and in woodland areas. Fire suppression over the last 
century created stands of greater density and higher fuel loads in this fire-adapted plant community.  While stand-
replacing fires are characteristic of chaparral, persistent and long-term drought, high temperatures, low humidity, and 
high winds contribute to extreme fire conditions in this vegetation type.
Current Conditions
§¨¦
40
§¨¦
17
§¨¦
40
Hualapai
Hualapai
KINGMAN
KINGMAN
FLAGSTA
FLAGSTA
±
0
50
Miles
American Indian Reservation
Source: http://www.landfire.gov/index.php
Percent in each FRC category:
Total acreage: 5,727,945
59%
31%
8%
0.8%
0.3%
0.3%
Central Highlands Landscape
Fire Regime Condition
Condition Class I
Condition Class II
Condition Class III
Bare Rock/Sand/Clay
Urban/Transportation/Mines/Quarries
Agriculture
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

64
Central Highlands
Communities
Human communities within the forested areas of the Central Highlands landscape are concentrated in the tri-city 
area of Prescott, Prescott Valley and Chino Valley, where about 110,000 people live, but also include the smaller 
communities of Yarnell, Crown King, and Seligman. Critical infrastructure at risk includes specific roadways, railroads, 
overhead utility transmission lines, water and gas distribution systems, and telecommunications sites.
In summer, the population increases dramatically, when large numbers of campers, recreationists, and other tourists 
descend on the Prescott National Forest, and from 4,000 to 10,000 youths spend time in the area’s many camps.
The Yavapai Prescott Indian Tribe’s 160 members inhabit a 1,395-acre reservation adjacent to and north of Prescott. 
Further to the northwest, the 1,600-member Hualapai Tribe occupies a reservation of one million acres along 108 miles 
of the Colorado River, in and adjacent to Grand Canyon. Peach Springs, the tribal capital, is 50 miles east of Kingman 
on Historic Route 66. 
Within the Central Highlands landscape there are 12 communities listed as “at-risk” in the federal Register (Table 
1). The Yavapai Communities Wildfire Protection Plan is the only collaboratively developed plan in the area, and it 
encompasses eight of these communities. Four communities--Camp Verde, Cottonwood, Jerome, and Peach Springs--
are not included in any Community Wildfire Protection Plan (CWPP). Both the Yavapai Prescott and the Hualapai have 
developed fire plans for their communities.
Community 
Latitude/Longitude 
WUI Risk 
Rating 
County 
CWPP 
Camp Verde 
Cherry 
Cottonwood 
Crown King 
Groom Creek 
Jerome 
Mingus Mountain 
Mt Union/Mtn Pine Acre 
Peach Springs 
Prescott 
Walker 
Yavapai Prescott 
34.5636 / -111.8543 
34.5881 / -112.0418 
34.7392 / -112.0099 
34.2056 / -112.3385 
34.4756 / -112.4313 
34.7489 / -112.1138 
34.6987 / -112.1377 
34.4139 / -112.4125 
35.5292 / -113.4255 
34.5400 / -112.4685 
34.4558 / -112.3782 
34.5622 / -112.3956 
Moderate 
Moderate 
Moderate 
High
High
High
Moderate 
Moderate 
High
High
High
High
Yavapai
Yavapai
Yavapai
Yavapai
Yavapai
Yavapai
Yavapai
Yavapai
Mohave
Yavapai
Yavapai
Yavapai
N/A
Yavapai Communities 
N/A
Yavapai Communities 
Yavapai Communities 
N/A
Yavapai Communities 
Yavapai Communities 
N/A
Yavapai Communities 
Yavapai Communities 
Yavapai Communities 
Table 9.3. Communities at risk in the Central Highlands region
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

65
Central Highlands
Wildlife
◄ Figure 9.3.4. Designated critical habitat for Mexican 
Spotted Owl in the Central Highlands Landscape
Due to its varied topography, the Central Highlands landscape supports a 
number of different habitat types. Key wildlife species, including the tassel-
eared squirrel, Mexican spotted owl (Strix occidentalis lucida), Merriam’s 
turkey (Meleagris gallopavo), northern goshawk, (Accipiter gentilis) white-
tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus), Rocky Mountain elk (Cervus canadensis), 
black bear (Ursus americanus), pronghorn (Antilocapra americana), black-
footed ferret (Mustela nigripes), Gunnison’s prairie dog (Cynomys gunnisoni), 
and grassland birds such as the western burrowing owl (Athene cunicularia 
hypugea), ferruginous hawk (Buteo regalis), Swainson’s hawk (Buteo 
swainsoni), and rough-legged hawk (Buteo lagopus).
As in many landscapes across the state, ponderosa pine-dominated wildlife 
habitat in this landscape has become increasingly dense due to fire 
suppressions, livestock grazing, and large tree logging.  Drought over the 
last two decades appears to be contributing to a retreat of habitat types 
upslope due to dominant plants dying off in marginal locations at lower 
elevations.  Ponderosa pine and pinyon pine-dominated habitat types have 
experienced severe losses due to bark beetles.  Juniper and manzanita have 
also perished in more marginal sites.  Grassland habitat types have been 
invaded by shrubs and trees, depleting available moisture and nutrients. 
Year-long livestock grazing is still prevalent in this region and has eliminated 
most cool-season grasses (and fine fuels for naturally occurring fires).  Further, 
as juniper invasion has progressed, soils have dried out and eroded, forming 
gullies that further expose grasses to desiccation and diminish the numbers 
and diversity of plants and wildlife.  This 
conversion of habitat to monotypic stands 
of juniper trees affects a spectrum of 
grassland dependent wildlife species – from 
antelope to burrowing owls. 
 Mexican Spotted Owl
The Mexican spotted owl (Strix 
occidentalis lucida), a federally-listed 
threatened species, is considered a species 
of special concern by the Arizona Game and 
Fish Department (AZGFD), and a sensitive 
species by the U.S. Forest Service. They 
breed primarily in dense, old growth, 
mixed-conifer for ests located on steep 
slopes, and especially in deep, shady 
ravines. In Arizona, they occur primarily in 
ponderosa, mixed-conifer, pine-oak, and 
evergreen oak forests. Range size for single 
owls averages 1,600 acres and combined 
home ranges for  pairs of owls average 
2,000 acres. Critical habitat for Mexican 
Spotted Owl is shown in Figure 9.3.4.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

66
Central Highlands
Fire
Fuel hazards include combustible vegetation as well as combustible structures and related improvements. Areas 
of concern are continuous across Central Highlands forested landscape, except where previous events have reduced 
hazard, e.g. wildfire, prescribed burns, and vegetation modification through thinning and mowing. Figure 9.3.5. depicts 
the fire history in the Prescott Basin region of the Central Highlands.
The risk of ignition comes from a combination of human-caused and lightning starts. Concentrations of fire ignition 
points are often related to human activity around private property and roadways. The Prescott National Forest alone 
has averaged approximately 90 fires annually, with more than half of those initiated by lightning (Figure 9.3.6). Almost 
30,000 acres burned on the Prescott National Forest between the mid 1980’s and the mid 1990’s.
▲ Figure 9.3.5. History of fires greater than 10 acres in the       
   Central Highlands region.
▲ Figure 9.3.6. Fire ignition points in the Central Highlands                 
region.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

67
Central Highlands
Watersheds
Verde River Watershed
The Verde River and its tributary streams--the Verde 
River Watershed--is the principal river system in the 
Central Highlands. Surface water in the Verde Valley 
is used mostly for irrigation purposes. The Verde 
River Basin includes groundwater sources, covers 
approximately 5,450 square miles of north-central 
Arizona, and is divided into the Big Chino, Verde 
Valley and Verde Canyon subbasins (Figure 9.3.7). 
The northern part of the basin is in the Plateau 
Upland Province and the southern part is in the Central Highlands Province. Elevation ranges from more than 12,000 
feet in the San Francisco Mountains to about 1,600 feet in the south. The Mogollon Rim Escarpment forms a topographic 
relief of as much as 2,000 feet and trends northwest across the basin.
     In 1984, Congress declared most of the Verde River downstream from the headwaters area—from Camp Verde to 
Sycamore Creek—a Wild and Scenic River.
▲ Figure 9.3.7. Third-order watersheds (basins) in the Central Highlands landscape
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

68
Central Highlands
Collaborative Efforts
     In 1990, the Yavapai County Board of Supervisors and the City of Prescott convened to address the wildfire threat 
in the Prescott Basin and surrounding areas, and passed a joint resolution, forming the Prescott Area Wildland/Urban 
Interface Commission (PAWUIC). Key cooperating agencies involved in this unfunded, citizen-led commission were, and 
continue to be, the Prescott National Forest, the Arizona State Land Department, the Bureau of Land Management, the 
Central Yavapai Fire District, the City of Prescott Fire Department, and the Yavapai County Emergency Management 
Department. Each of the participating agencies signed on to a Memorandum of Understanding to establish a basis for 
cooperation and assistance. 
The Commission’s mission was to identify, develop, and implement wildland/urban interface defensible space, and 
fire safety awareness programs for the citizens of “at risk” communities in the Prescott area. It is the only such 
effort in the Central Highlands region (Figure 9.3.8). PAWUIC has several active committees -- the Interagency Fire 
and Emergency Management Group (IFEMG), the Healthy Forest Economic Development Team (HFEDT), and the 
Community Education/Wildfire Awareness. The IFEMG Chairman was given the responsibility for developing the Yavapai 
Communities Wildfire Protection Plan (YCWPP). A core team, consisting of the IFEMG Chair, PAWUIC Vice-Chair, private 
forester/PAWUIC member, and County Assessor representative, was formed to develop the Plan. 
The Interagency Fire and Emergency Management Group (IFEMG) defined the Wildland-Urban Interface (WUI), or 
plan area, based on Fire District borders, 
topography of the region, and fuel types. 
Wildland-urban interface was defined as the 
area where houses meet or intermingle with 
undeveloped wildland vegetation (Radeloff et 
al. 2005). The total Plan area covers 963,575 
acres (over 1505 sq miles) in Yavapai County, 
and includes a total of 13 fire organizations 
(Dept./District/Volunteer). At the BLM’s 
request, the YCWPP boundaries were expanded 
to include the communities of Crown King, 
Horsethief Basin and Yarnell. Funding for work 
accomplished in the expanded area is largely 
provided by BLM.
◄ Figure 9.3.8. Landscape covered by the Yavapai 
Communities Wildfire Protection Plan.
PAWUIC’s Education Committee hosts and participates in many community 
education and outreach programs.
Prescott Fire Department assists homeowners in clearing 
hazardous fuels from their properties
§¨¦
10
§¨¦
17
§¨¦
40
KINGMAN
KINGMAN
PHOENIX
PHOENIX
FLAGS
FLAGS
Yavapai CWPP
Greater Williams Area CWPP
Central Highlands
Central Highlands
±
Source: Forestry Division of the Arizona
State Land Department
Central Highlands Landscape
CWPP Planning
Plan Complete
Total acreage: 5,727,945
0
50
Miles
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

69
Central Highlands
The Prescott National Forest is currently seeking authority to 
enter into a 10-year stewardship contract agreement to assure 
a steady and predictable supply of harvestable biomass that 
could be used in a variety of industries (including a waste-to-
energy plant). Products of restoration treatments in the YCWPP 
area are currently converted into firewood (one cord per acre), 
which is being sold for $125. PAWUIC has been actively working 
to encourage the development of businesses to utilize forest 
restoration products. Working with local government and other 
organizations, the Healthy Forest Economic Development Team 
(HFEDT) seeks to implement the following recommendations:
Develop marketing and incentive programs to promote the  
development of appropriate local businesses and offset the  
 costs of forest treatments.
Stimulate public education efforts to highlight the 
restoration solution to existing forest health problems 
across the landscape.
Identify treatments that will lower the likelihood of broad-
scale factors causing tree mortality due to drought, insect  
outbreaks, and disease.
Fuel reduction and community protection have become the 
overarching focus of forest restoration. We must not lose 
sight of the fact that forest restoration is also a tool to  
accomplish forest health objectives.
CWPPs should include hierarchical silvicultural prescriptions 
for each vegetation type based on best available science 
and landowner objectives. They should also include total 
acres and timelines so that it will be known how much 
biomass is going to come off the land over time.
In wildland areas of the PNF, where aggressive prescribed  
burns have been the primary restoration management 
tool, we should incorporate mechanical means, selective 
harvesting, to achieve a more varying stand structure 
(different age classes and size distribution) and natural 
regeneration. Prescribed fire alone cannot achieve this. 
The timber market for the Hualpai Tribe has completely dried up. 
There are no longer any operating sawmills in the area, and so 
for the first time, they did not advertise a timber sale this year. 
Currently, in Ponderosa pine, they cannot harvest anything larger 
than 9 inches diameter at breast height. Those they sell as poles 
for fencing, etc. Pinyon-Juniper woodlands yield about 100 cords 
of firewood per acre. They are harvesting about 100 acres per 
year. Only Hualapai may cut firewood.
•
•
•
•
•
•
Economics
Prescott Woody Biomass Utilization Project.
In 2002, Kuhles Services of Prescott Arizona was 
awarded a $100,000 National Fire Plan-funded 
Economic Action Grant. These grants are aimed at 
developing and enhancing economic enterprises 
that address the use and marketing of small 
diameter trees and help reduce the risk of wildfire 
on both private, municipal, tribal and federal lands. 
The grant will be utilized to further Kuhles Services 
plans by acquiring equipment to develop value 
added products, according to Kuhles. Some of the 
products include screened mulch, soil stabilizers, 
erosion control materials, and bedding material 
for plants. The larger size material will be used to 
cover old mine spoils such as those at the Iron King 
mine in Humbolt. 
Forest and construction debris are separated and 
recycled .
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

70
Central Highlands
Smoke that accompanies prescribed burns often create unhealthy 
conditions for local residents, and are met with resistance and complaints
Implementation and 
Management 
▲Figure 9.3.9. Prescott National Forest approved vegetation treatments.
The Prescott National Forest (PNF) utilizes tree thinning 
and harvesting, mechanical brush clearing, and prescribed 
fire to improve ecosystem health and wildlife habitat, 
and to reduce the threat and adverse effects of wildland 
fire. The PNF considers prescribed burning to be one of 
the most effective, as well as  cost-effective, tools for 
achieving forest ecological restoration. In 2006, more than 
15,000 acres will be treated in the PNF’s Prescribed Fire 
Program. The PNF is the only agency conducting restoration 
treatments in the Central Highlands landscape, outside of 
the YCWPP.
     PAWUIC tracks the treatments that are conducted within 
the YCWPP boundaries. In 2005, nearly 8,900 acres were 
treated:
Prescott National Forest
Commercial thinning  
1,149 acres
Stand Improvement 
 
256 acres
Brush Crushing  
 
274 acres
Indian Fire Salvage 
 
372 acres
Prescribed Burns 
 
6,500 acres
Arizona Bureau of Land Management
Support to Mayer, Peeples Valley and Yarnell Fuels Crews
Arizona State Land Department
Hazard Tree Removal  
150 acres
Prescribed Burns 
 
65 acres
Yavapai Prescott Indian Tribe
Defensible Space Thinning 
8 acres
Arizona Public Service Company
Brush crushing  
 
100 acres
Tree removal  
 
5,000 trees
Line Protection 
 
1,500 miles
Fire Districts and Departments
Homes treated - 401; Acres treated - 638
Camps and Communities
Properties treated - 132; Acres treated - 190
In order to achieve PAWUICs goal of reducing the risk of a 
catastrophic fire within the YCWPP, 10,000 acres of forest 
would have to be treated each year. However, efforts in 
this region have not reached that level.
The Hualapai manage their Ponderosa pine forest for 
uneven-aged structure, by single tree selection. They used 
to get National Fire Plan funding for piling, conducting 
NEPA compliance for prescribed burns, and other activities, 
but the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) was unable to fulfill 
its obligation, and the funding has been lost.  As a result, 
the Hualapai have been unable to conduct prescribed 
burning treatments. Currently they are suppressing all 
wildfires.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

71
Central Highlands
Future Restoration Needs
Recommendations
Develop marketing and incentive programs to facilitate the development of appropriate local businesses to  
 
 
offset costs of forest treatments.
Stimulate public education efforts to highlight the restoration solution to existing forest health problems across  
 
the landscape.
Identify treatments that will lower likelihood of broad-scale factors causing tree mortality due to drought,  
 
 
insect outbreaks, and disease.
Fuel reduction and community protection have become the overarching focus of forest restoration. We must  
 
 
not lose sight of the fact that forest restoration is also a tool to accomplish forest health objectives.
CWPPs should include hierarchical silvicultural prescriptions for each vegetation type based on best available   
 
science and landowner objectives, and should include total acres and timelines so that it will be known  
 
 
how much biomass is going to come off the land over time.
In wildland areas of the PNF, where aggressive prescribed burns have been the primary restoration management  
 
tool, we should incorporate mechanical means, selective harvesting, to achieve a more varying stand structure   
 
(different age classes and size distribution) and natural regeneration. Prescribed fire alone cannot achieve this.
Develop better communication and interagency cooperation between Arizona Tribes and the BIA. 
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
References
Neary, D.G., G.J. Gottfried, and P.F. Ffolliott. 2003. Post-wildfire watershed flood responses. 2nd International Wildland   
 
Fire Ecology and Fire Management Congress.
http://ag.arizona.edu/oals/watershed/index.html
http://www.azwater.gov/dwr/Content/Find_by_Program/Rural_Programs/OutsideAMAs_PDFs_for_web/CentralHigh  
 
 
lands/default.pdf
http://www.fs.fed.us/forestmanagement/WoodyBiomassUtilization/  accessed 10/20/06. USDA Forest Service. 2005.   
 
A national strategy for improving woody biomass utilization through USDA Forest Service programs and   
 
 
activities. The Woody Biomass Utilization Team, Washington Office.
http://www.fs.fed.us/r3/prescott/
http://www.itcaonline.com/tribes_hualapai.html
http://www.regionalinfo-alert.org/PAWUIC.php
http://www.ypit.com/
Interviews conducted with Charlie Murphy, Forestry Department, Hualapai Tribe; Fritz Roanhorse, Department of 
Agriculture, Navajo Nation; Bob Shea, Environmental Protection Department, Yavapai Prescott Tribe; Ian Fox, Prescott 
National Forest; and Russ Shumate and Chad Upchurch, Arizona State Land Department.
Meetings and interviews conducted with PAWUIC members: Everett Warnock, President, Paul Benner, Ken Iversen, 
Richard VanDemark, Nick Angiolillo, Jeff Schalau, John Hunter, Carolyn Ladner, Gary Roysdon, Wayne Hultberg, Jeff 
Whitham, and Bruce Olson, BLM.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

72
Landscape: Chuska Mountains
The Chuska Mountains and Defiance Plateau comprise the wettest, most verdant terrain of the contemporary 
Navajo Nation. Two-thirds of the average annual surface water generated within the Navajo Reservation originates in 
this region’s ponderosa pine forests. Although the narrow Black Creek Valley separates the Chuskas from the Defiance 
Plateau, they are two halves of the same whole, a monocline (upwarp) in the Earth’s crust that geologists call the 
“Defiance Uplift.” Piggybacked upon the larger Colorado Plateau, the Defiance Uplift has been raised up and worn 
down repeatedly for hundreds of millions of years.
The harder volcanic and sedimentary rocks that cap the Chuskas have strongly resisted the same forces that have 
eroded the rocks surrounding them, creating the mountains that we see today. Most of the gently uplifted Defiance 
Plateau sits between 7,000 and 8,000 feet above sea level, while the more rugged Chuskas reach up to nearly 10,000 
feet. Much of the rain and snow that falls in the Chuskas’ montane forests drains westward into the spectacular depths 
of Canyon del Muerto and Canyon de Chelly, eventually emptying into the San Juan River via Chinle Wash.
The forests of the Chuskas and Defiance Plateau have been important to the indigenous peoples of the Colorado 
Plateau for thousands of years. Navajo agropastoralists began moving up into the Defiance Uplift’s open, grassy 
ponderosa pine forests sometime after 1700 A.D., migrating westward out of the tributary canyons of the San Juan 
River in present-day northwestern New Mexico. These semi-nomadic churro sheepherders and horticulturalists found 
that the Defiance Uplift’s savanna-like forests provided abundant water, forage, building materials, and other “goods 
of value” for Navajo people and their livestock, the main source of their subsistence. Since the first Navajos claimed 
these forests as their own, incorporating them into their language and oral traditions, the Chuskas and Defiance 
Plateau have been vitally important places within the Navajo cultural landscape. From a traditional Navajo view of this 
landscape, the Chuskas are the “Goods of Value Range,” or a “Mountain of Agriculture,” as Navajo headman Barboncito 
referred to them during treaty negotiations with the U.S. military in 1868. They are considered a sacred male deity 
whose head is Chuska Peak, whose throat is Narbona Pass, and whose legs are the Carrizo Mountains, at the northern 
terminus of the range. (adapted from Patrick Pynes essay “Chuska Mountains and Defiance Plateau, Navajo Nation.”)
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

73
▲ Figure 9.4.1. Land Ownership status in the Chuska Mountains landscape.
Land Ownership
Chuska Mountains
Canyon de Chelly National Monument
All of the Chuskas and all but the southern tip of the Defiance 
Plateau formed a majority of the original 1868 Navajo Treaty 
Reservation (Figure 9.4.1). The boundary dividing the territories 
of New Mexico and Arizona had been established five years 
before, bisecting the Chuskas’ main body. Today, the southern 
half of the Chuskas is located mainly in the New Mexico portion 
of the Navajo Nation, while the northern half is located in the 
Arizona portion. The smaller Tunicha and Lukachukai subranges 
extend outward from the Chuskas’ main spine. The Carrizos, 
Tunichas, and Lukachukais are all considered part of the Chuskas, 
a transliteration of the Navajo word choosh’gai, meaning “white-
colored spruce trees.” 
Canyon de Chelly National Monument is National Park Service 
land, and was established in 1931. One of the longest 
continuously inhabited landscapes of North America, Canyon 
de Chelly sustains a living community of Navajo people, who 
are connected to this landscape of great historical and spiritual 
significance.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

74
Chuska Mountains
Forests
▲ Figure 9.4.2. Vegetation composition in the Chuska Mountains landscape
The forests of the Navajo encompass about 596,725 acres of 
the Chuska Mountains and the Defiance Plateau, and include 
commercial timberland (Navajo Nation Forest Management 
Plan 2005), which are predominately ponderosa pine (Pinus 
ponderosa) with minor acreages of other commercial species, 
such as Douglas-fir (Pseudostuga menziesii) and Engelmann spruce 
(Picea engelmannii) (Figure 9.4.2). Atop the Chuska Mountains 
at an elevation of 9,780 feet is a spectacular upland ponderosa 
pine forest. Mixed conifer stands of blue spruce (Picea pungens), 
subalpine fir (Abies lasiocarpa), Douglas-fir (Pseudostuga menziesii 
var. glauca), and aspen (Populus tremuloides) are found on the 
north-facing slopes of the canyons and ridges. Along the flanks at 
lower elevations, Gambel oak (Quercus gambelii) accompanies the 
ponderosa pine, and this latitudinal belt gives way below (5,500-
7,000 feet) to pinyon pine (Pinus edulis)-juniper (Juniperus spp.) 
woodlands with a sage brush (Salvia spp.) community intermixed. 
The Statewide Strategy Chuska Landscape encompasses roughly 
250,000 acres of the commercial timber landscape of the Chuska 
Mountain and Defiance Plateau .
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

75
▲ Figure 9.4.3. Fire Regime Condition characteristics of Vegetation in the Chuska Mountains landscape.
The structure of the Chuska Mountain-Defiance Plateau 
ponderosa pine forest has undergone changes over the 
past several centuries, similar to other ponderosa pine 
forest of the Southwest. These changes in structure and 
the disruption of natural ecological processes on the 
landscape scale due to a history of intense livestock 
grazing and fire exclusion policies have contributed to 
increases in the extent and density of the forest. Increases 
in tree density tend to increase tree susceptibility to 
insects, diseases, and pathogens; increase the risk of 
catastrophic stand replacement fire events; and cause an 
overall decline in forest health.
With the building of the first modern sawmill on the 
Navajo Nation in 1958, timber harvesting quickly reduced the decadent old-growth stands of ponderosa pine. In 
general, stand structure analysis of ponderosa pine indicates significantly greater forest density, and a shift in structure 
from uneven to even-aged stands due to new recruitment coupled with the logging of old-growth pines.
Fire exclusion in forests adapted to low intensity, frequent fire regimes severely alters vegetation structure, fire 
hazard, and wildlife habitat over time. Figure 9.4.3 illustrates how much forests in the Chuska Mountains landscape 
have diverged from their natural range of variability.
Current Conditions
Chuska Mountains
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

76
Chuska Mountains
Communities
Navajos continue to use 
the Chuskas and Defiance 
Plateau for grazing livestock, 
gathering medicinal herbs 
and building materials, 
hunting, fishing, farming, 
and as a place for conducting sacred ceremonies. With increasing population pressures, permanent (as opposed to 
seasonal) homesites within the Navajo forest increased significantly, prompting the Navajo Tribal Government to issue a 
moratorium on new homesites within the forest during the mid-1990s. 
The major communities within the Chuska Mountains landscape include the Navajo Nation capital of Window Rock 
(population 3,059 – 2000 census), Fort Defiance (population 4,061), and St. Michaels (population 1, 295). Other Navajo 
communities are scattered throughout the landscape. Several of these communities are listed in the Federal Register of 
Communities at Risk, including: Tsaile and Oak Springs, which have a Wildland Urban Interface (WUI) risk rating of low; 
and Hunters Point and Pine Springs, which have a moderate WUI risk rating.
Portions of Canyon de Chelly National Monument exist within the Chuska Mountains landscape area. In addition to 
visitation by tourists, which was more than 881,000 in 2004, the Monument, which has been inhabited by indigenous 
peoples since about 300 A.D., continues to sustain a Navajo community.
The Mexican spotted owl (Strix occidentalis lucida) is listed 
as a threatened species by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, 
and by the Navajo Fish and Wildlife Department. This species 
is generally found in ponderosa pine forest and mixed conifer 
forests, and has also been associated with steep canyons. The 
Navajo Nation has designated critical habitat and developed a 
management plan for this species. Other significant avian species 
found in the Chuska Mountains and Defiance Plateau include the Northern goshawk (Accipiter gentilis), ferruginous 
hawk (Buteo regalis), northern saw-whet owl (Aegolius acadicus), mountain plover (Charadrius montanus), and 
Peregrine falcon (Falco peregrinus).
Mammalian species of concern include Pronghorn (Antilocapra americana americana) and the Chuska tassel-eared 
squirrel (Sciurus aberti chuscensis). Mountain lion (Felis concolor), and mule deer (Odocoileus hemionus) are also 
found within this landscape. The principal threat to wildlife species in this region is the alteration or destruction of 
habitat by humans or by natural forces such as drought and insect infestations.
Wildlife
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

77
Chuska Mountains
Fire
Because forest management treatments were halted in 1993, 
forests in the Chuska Mountains are dense with small trees. 
Competition for nutrients and water and a prolonged drought has 
weakened tree resistance to bark beetle infestations. The resulting 
mortality has significantly increased the amount of hazardous fuels 
in the forest. The Kinlichii Two Fire that started on June 6, 2006, 
burned 1,665 acres of pinyon-juniper woodlands, jumped Highway 264, and caused the evacuation of 66 people before 
it was controlled. Several people had to be treated for smoke inhalation, Highway 264 was shut down for a while, and 
the Navajo Nation declared a state of emergency. Fires like the Kinlichii Two Fire highlight the need for treatments to 
reduce the threat of fire to Navajo communities.
Watersheds
▲ Figure 9.4..4. Third order watersheds (basins) in the Chuska Mountains landscape.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

78
Chuska Mountains
Collaborative Efforts
The Navajo Nation Ten-year Forest Management Plan was developed under the direction of the Navajo Forestry 
Department by an interdisciplinary team consisting of natural resource specialists from the Navajo Nation and the 
Bureau of Indian Affairs. Public scoping to solicit issues and concerns of stakeholders was used to guide planning 
regarding forest management activities. Management themes developed from the initial scoping were presented in six 
public meetings. Stakeholders must be educated about the dangers associated with current forest conditions and the 
benefits of ecological restoration.
Economics
The Navajo Forest Products Industry (NFPI) 
was formed in 1958. In the years between 1962 
and 1992, NFPI cut and processed an average of 
40 million board feet of lumber each year from 
the Chuskas and Defiance Plateau’s forests. The 
NFPI was operating the largest lumber mill in the 
Southwest and in the process, created thousands 
of good-paying jobs and produced millions of dollars in tribal revenues. However, the rate of timber harvest was 
unsustainable, raising concerns about forest health in the Navajo Forestry Department, and criticism from some within 
the Navajo community about the effects of timber harvest on traditional subsistence and spiritual uses of the forest. In 
the end, timber sales were halted until a new forest management plan was completed, which closed the mill and put 
hundreds of tribal members out of work. 
Unemployment rates are high on the Navajo Nation. While natural resources are an important part of the Navajo 
economy, the current economic focus is on the industrial, retail, and tourism industries. Tourism is big player on the 
Navajo Nation, producing 48% of the nation’s income. The Navajo Nation Division of Economic Development (DED) has 
been somewhat successful in recruiting businesses to the area. Right now two wood-based businesses are operating on 
the Navajo Nation–-a cabinet company and a housing panel manufacturer, although neither uses local wood for their 
operations.
Currently the only wood-harvesting activity taking place on the Navajo Nation is through personal use permitting for 
forest products. The DED has been working on a project to build a 10-megawatt power plant that will run on biomass 
fuel on the former NFPI mill site. The fuel to power this plant will come from bark beetle-infected trees and small-
diameter wood, as well as from two invasive tree species—salt cedar and Russian olive. The project is anticipated to 
generate about 25 jobs. It will also encourage Navajo residents to clear the areas around their homes because the wood 
that is cleared from home sites will be purchased and stockpiled for use by the power plant.
The major challenge to implementation of the biomass power plant will be environmental opposition. Past over 
harvesting of the forests in the Chuska Mountains landscape resulted in opposition to harvesting by vocal residents. 
Harvesting of small-diameter wood looks the same as full-scale harvesting to these people, and opposition may 
still persist. Educating people about the benefits of ecological restoration--community protection and restoring the 
ecological health of the forests--will help to overcome existing opposition and allow restoration projects to move 
forward.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

79
Chuska Mountains
Implementation and Management 
All Indian forestlands in the United States have been classified into 
categories related to commercial timber productivity by the BIA. This 
classification is used as the basis for forest management planning and 
federal funding appropriations. (Commercial timberland is a forest 
classified by the BIA-BOFRP as being capable of producing 15 cubic feet of 
timber/acre/year.) The regulatory jurisdiction of the Forest Management 
Plan is defined by BIA, by the Code of Federal Regulations and by the 
National Indian Forest Resources Management Act (P.L. 101-630). These 
regulations define procedures for: timber harvesting, timber stand 
improvement (planting, thinning), forest protection (fire prevention and 
suppression, disease and insect control, enforcement against trespass, 
permitting for personal use (firewood, fence post, poles) and access for 
development for these activities. In addition to these actions, the NFD and 
BIA must ensure compliance with all applicable federal and Navajo Nation laws.
In 1991, the Resources Committee of the Navajo Nation Council directed the Navajo Forestry Department and an 
Interdisciplinary Team of natural resource specialists from the Navajo Nation and the BIA to develop forest management 
alternatives for the 596,725 acres of forest of the Defiance Plateau and Chuska Mountains. These alternatives were to 
be compared, and a preferred alternative would be incorporated into the Navajo Nation’s Ten-year Forest Management 
Plan.
In July 2001, the Resources Committee of the Navajo Nation 
Council selected Alternative 4 as the preferred alternative 
that will best protect the Navajo forest against damaging 
insects, disease, timber trespass, and wild fire. Alternative 
4 describes the desired future conditions of the forests as 
a mosaic of even-aged and uneven-aged stands, intermixed 
with areas of special management or no management. Special 
Management Areas (SMAs) were designated to create favorable 
wildlife habitat, and for the benefit of threatened and 
endangered species, water, soil, recreation and traditional/
cultural resources. This alternative designates 74,735 acres 
from accessible commercial forest areas as SMAs, and will 
implement Best Management Practices and monitoring 
programs.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

80
Chuska Mountains
Future Restoration Needs
References
Note: The Northeastern Woodlands landscape analysis was developed in cooperation with the Navajo Nation Forestry 
Department and the Hopi Tribe’s Department of Natural Resources; and is printed here with their permission.
Anon. 2006. Pine Springs Fire among six to burn through weekend on Navajo Nation. Indian Country Today. June 13.
Navajo Forestry Department. 2006. Navajo Nation Ten-Year Forest Management Plan.
Navajo Nation Kinlichii Two Fire now under control. 2006. Navajo Nation Press Release. Window Rock, AZ. June 6.
Navajo Natural Heritage Program. 2001. Navajo Endangered Species List. Navajo Fish and Wildlife Department. 4 pp.
Pynes, P. Chuska Mountains and Defiance Plateau, Navajo Nation. In “Land Use History of North America: Colorado  
 
 
Plateau. Retrieved from http://www.cpluhna.nau.edu/Places/chuska_mtns.htm, November 2006.
Resource Innovations, Confederated Salish and Kootenai tribes of the Flathead Nation, and the Intertribal  
 
 
 
Timber Council. 2006. Tribal Wildfire Resource Guide. 
Personal Interviews conducted December 18-19, 2006 with Navajo Forestry Department and the Bureau of Indian 
Affairs: Alexious C. Becenti Sr.- Forest Manager, Navajo Nation; Eddie Sam, Woodland Forester, Navajo Nation; Frankie 
Thompson, Program Manager/Forester, Navajo Nation; Theresa Nallick – GIS analyst, BIA-Fort Defiance Agency.
Phone Interview conducted January 18, 2007 with Allan Begay, Director of Navajo Nation Division of Economic 
Development
Phone Interview conducted January 18, 2007 with Allan Begay, Director of Navajo Nation Division of Economic   
 
Development
The Navajo Nation faces many challenges in implementing its forest management plan and fuel reduction 
treatments, and developing sustainable industries based on by products of forest restoration treatments. The Navajo 
Nation currently receives $169,000 from the federal government to treat 4.2 million acres of forests and woodlands on 
the entire Nation. This amounts to 3¢ an acre, which is wholly inadequate when the actual cost of forest restoration 
ranges from $300-$1,000 per acre. Furthermore, the U.S. Forest Service has little interest in participating in fuel 
reduction/restoration projects with the tribes because they can’t claim the acreages treated in their budgets.
Other challenges include: Lack of adequate training for Forestry Department personnel; limited accurate, up-to-date 
spatial data; and resistance and opposition from local groups and residents; and interagency cooperation with the BIA. 
Some recommendations to address these challenges are listed below:
Provide training for Navajo Forestry Department personnel for Pinyon-Juniper treatments, Wildland Urban  
 
 
Interface treatments, and the use of prescribed and wildland fire.
Obtain most recent accurate spatial data describing Navajo Nation forests and woodlands.
Design and implement forest treatments that minimize associated impacts on forests.
Educate Navajo Nation residents and environmental groups about the need for forest restoration.
Educate Navajo Nation residents about the need to reduce fuel loads around their homes.
Improve communication and cooperation with the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6. Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

Landscape: 
81
Landscape: Kaibab Plateau
Sky Islands
Sky Islands
White Mountains
White Mountains
Central
Highlands
Central
Highlands
Northeastern Woodlands
Northeastern Woodlands
Western Mogollon Plateau
Western Mogollon Plateau
Arizona Strip
Arizona Strip
Kaibab
Plateau
Kaibab
Plateau
Chuska
Mountains
Chuska
Mountains
Basin
and
Range
Basin
and
Range
§¨¦
8
§¨¦
10
§¨¦
17
§¨¦
19
§¨¦
15
§¨¦
10
§¨¦
10
§¨¦
40
§¨¦
40
PAGE
PAGE
TUCSON
TUCSON
KINGMAN
KINGMAN
PHOENIX
PHOENIX
SHOW LOW
SHOW LOW
FLAGSTAFF
FLAGSTAFF
0
30
60
90
120
150
15
Miles
±
The Kaibab Plateau landscape encompasses an area 1,350,608 acres in size, extending west to east from Kanab 
Creek to the confluence of the Paria and Colorado rivers, and north to south from the Arizona-Utah state line to the 
North Rim of the Grand Canyon. This landscape actually includes both the Kaibab Plateau and the lower elevation 
Paria Plateau to the east. Each is a sky island rising dramatically from lower elevations with grass and shrublands on all 
sides. The entire area is one of dramatic topographic and ecological contrast, with elevations ranging from 4,000 feet 
near Kanab Creek to more than 9,200 feet atop the Kaibab Plateau. It is one of the most remote landscapes within the 
state, with very little infrastructure development occurring within its boundaries.
The North Rim of the Grand Canyon of the Colorado River lies atop the broad upwarp of the Kaibab Plateau. The 
plateau supports a rich mix of plants and animals. Sufficiently high to capture occasional heavy winter snows and far 
enough south to garner significant summer monsoonal moisture, the Kaibab Plateau is surprisingly lush. Despite the 
cool temperatures and moisture, surface water is not common due to the porous nature of the Kaibab Limestone that 
caps much of the plateau.  
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

▲Figure 9. 5.1. Land Ownership status in the Kaibab Plateau landscape.
A majority of the Kaibab Plateau landscape is on federal land. (Figure 9.5.1). About 46% of the area is managed 
by the U.S. Forest Service, 28% by the Bureau of Land Management, and 23% by the National Park Service. State 
and private lands are scattered throughout, but comprise a very small portion (less than 1%) of the total area. The 
landscape also includes a portion of the Kaibab Paiute Reservation. Historically, the Kaibab Paiutes utilized all of the 
lands across the Kaibab Plateau and the Arizona Strip. Challenges presented by ownership status across the Kaibab 
Plateau landscape include coordination of restoration activities between the three federal agencies and developing a 
greater sensitivity to the cultural and subsistence values of the Kaibab Paiute Tribe.
Land Ownership
Kaibab Plateau
82
£
¤
89A
£
¤
89
U
V
389
U
V
67
U
V
Kaibab Paiute
Kaibab Paiute
Kaibab Plateau Landscape
OWNERSHIP
BLM
FOREST SERVICE
AMERICAN INDIAN RESERVATION
NPS
PRIVATE
STATE TRUST LANDS
0
50
Miles
±
46.2%
28.3%
22.7%
0.4%
2.0%
0.3%
0.0%
Source: http://www.land.state.az.us/alris/
Percent in each Ownership category:
Total acreage: 1,350,608
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

83
Arizona Strip
Forests
Kaibab Plateau
Forests
▲ Figure 9.5.2. Vegetation characteristics in the Kaibab Plateau landscape.
The crest of the Kaibab Plateau is heavily forested with spruce-fir, aspen, and 
mixed-conifer forests (Figure 9.5.2). Occasional subalpine grassland parks are 
scattered throughout the forests, generally above 8,500 feet. Stands of ponderosa 
pine and pinyon-juniper woodlands at lower elevations stretch from about 8,000 feet 
down to about 5,500 feet. The logging of large trees throughout much of the century 
has diminished the abundance of old growth trees, although the Kaibab Plateau is 
still widely regarded as holding some of the best remaining old growth ponderosa pine in the Southwest. Vegetation 
cover on the Paria Plateau, which ranges from 5,500 to 7,000 feet, consists principally of pinyon-juniper woodlands, 
interspersed with grasslands and sagebrush communities.
Kaibab Paiute
Kaibab Paiute
£
¤
89A
£
¤
89
Kaibab Plateau Landscape
Southwest ReGAP Landcover
Ponderosa Pine Woodland
Pinyon-Juniper Woodland
Other Evergreen Forests
Deciduous Forests
Shrub / Scrub
Grasslands / Herbaceous
Barren Lands
Altered or Disturbed Lands
0
50
Miles
±
35%
24%
21%
10%
5%
3%
1%
1%
Source: http://earth.gis.usu.edu/swgap/
Percent in each Landcover category:
Total acreage: 1,350,608
American Indian Reservation
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

84
Current Conditions
Arizona Strip
▲ Figure 9.5.3. Fire Regime Condition characteristics of vegetation in the Kaibab Plateau landscape.
As has been the case throughout forested landscapes across 
Arizona, frequent fire regimes across the Kaibab Plateau were 
disrupted in the late 19th century.  By 1920, land managers had almost completely excluded fires across higher 
elevations of the Plateau dominated by ponderosa pine and mixed conifer.  Fire exclusion across much of the Plateau 
has likely resulted in denser forest stands, more prone to high intensity crown fires. These unnatural conditions are 
reflected in the Fire Regime condition of the forests (Figure 9.5.3).
Current Conditions
Kaibab Platuea
Kaibab Paiute
Kaibab Paiute
£
¤
89A
£
¤
89
0
50
Miles
±
Source: http://www.landfire.gov/index.php
Percent in each FRC category:
Total acreage: 1,350,608
American Indian Reservation
5%
35%
59%
1%
Kaibab Plateau Landscape
Fire Regime Conditon
Class I
Class II
Class III
Other
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

85
Kaibab Plateau
Communities
Development is sparse across the Kaibab Plateau. Three 
areas of developed visitor facilities are listed as at-risk in 
the Federal Register: Jacob Lake (high risk), Kaibab Lodge 
(moderate risk), and the developed area on the North Rim of 
Grand Canyon National Park (high risk). The North Rim of the 
Grand Canyon attracts about 500,000 visitors per year, and dispersed camping occurs across the Kaibab National Forest. 
The cities of Page and Fredonia in Arizona, and Kanab in Utah, are the nearest incorporated communities.
Part of the Kaibab Paiute Reservation falls within the Kaibab Plateau 
landscape. While not included within the landscape at this time, two 
communities on the reservation are listed as “at-risk” in the Federal Register: 
Juniper Village (low risk) and Kaibab (moderate risk). Nomadic ancestors of 
the Kaibab Paiute tribe have lived on the Kaibab Plateau since around 1100 
A.D. Both the Kaibab Plateau and the Arizona Strip hold natural resources 
that possess important cultural value to the tribe, for food, water, medicines, 
and for ceremonial purposes
▲Jacob Lake Ranger Station was built in 1920 and             
    is on the National Register of Historic  Places.
▲Lookout Tower at Jacob Lake 
▲Campground at Jacob Lake 
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

86
Current Wildlife Habitat Characteristics
On the Kaibab Plateau, ponderosa pine forest wildlife habitat structure has become 
more homogeneous over time because of fire suppression, timber harvest strategies, 
and grazing pressure on the understory vegetation.  The Kaibab Plateau retains a 
higher proportion of old trees, a more balanced tree age and size structure and better 
understory conditions than most ponderosa forest in Arizona.  This forest is also one of 
only two designated National Game Preserves in the Forest Service.  
Wildfires have drastically altered wildlife habitat on the Plateau.  Wildfire burned 
54,000 acres of ponderosa and pinyon-juniper habitat on the west side of the Plateau 
in 1996 and an additional 60,000 acres of the ponderosa, mixed conifer, and pinyon 
– juniper habitat on the east side in 2006.  Some of the pinyon–juniper woodlands that have been burned are critical 
wildlife winter ranges. 
In the mixed conifer, wildlife habitat structure has also become more homogeneous largely due to fire protection.  
These habitats are very important for wildlife on the Plateau.
Selected Wildlife Species
Given its topographic and elevational diversity, the Kaibab Plateau provides habitat for a wide array of species.  The 
Kaibab Plateau is particularly known as providing habitat for the highest concentration of northern goshawks in the 
Southwest, Northern goshawks (Accipiter gentilis) are considered a Sensitive species by the Kaibab National Forest 
(KNF), as well as an indicator species for the late-seral,ponderosa pine habitat. Late-seral, mixed conifer habitat is 
also important to this species. The northern goshawk is also a Forest Service Sensitive species. Goshawks Goshawks are 
dependent on a continuous flow of habitat structural types over time to provide the necessary habitat characteristics 
for nesting and to support a wide variety of prey species, which include small mammals and medium-sized birds.
The Kaibab squirrel (Sciurus aberti kaibabensis) is a subspecies of the tassel-
eared squirrel, and is found only on the Kaibab Plateau. It is considered an 
indicator species for early seral, ponderosa pine habitat by the KNF. Kaibab 
squirrels forage, in part, on the forest floor and are associated with tree litter, 
roots, and mycorrhizal fungi, which is associated with Ponderosa pines. They 
also depend on mature trees to provide cones as a food source and arboreal 
travel routes as protection against predators.
 The Kaibab Plateau is also known for its world-famous mule deer (Odocoileus 
hemionus) herd, Merriam’s turkey (Meleagris gallopavo), and the California 
condor (Gymnogyps californianus), though it also provides critical habitat for 
numerous additional wide-ranging species, such as black bear, mountain lion 
(Puma concolor), and numerous forest-dependent song birds, as well as Species 
of Concern such as the dwarf shrew (Sorex nanus), peregrine falcon (Falco 
peregrinus), and Paradine Plain’s cactus (Pediocactus paradinei).  
Wildlife
Kaibab Plateau
▲Kaibab Squirrel 
▲Immature Northern Goshawk
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

Arizona Strip
Fire
87
Kaibab Plateau
Recent fires on the Kaibab Plateau highlight the need for and the 
complex challenges associated with returning natural fire through 
landscape-scale fire management and restoration. Fires across the 
plateau historically burned most intensely and least frequently across 
lower elevation pinyon-juniper woodlands, and least intensely and most 
frequently across intermediate elevation ponderosa pine forests. Higher 
elevation mixed conifer forests burned less frequently and more intensely 
than frequent fire-adapted ponderosa pine forests. Analysis of relatively 
recent fires across the Kaibab Plateau shows dramatically different post-fire 
responses in low, middle, and high elevation forests.  
At lower elevations, the effects of stand-replacing fire have been significant 
and largely negative. The Bridger Knoll Complex Fire, which burned about 
51,000 acres in 1996, affected a majority of the transition zone between 
ponderosa pine forests and pinyon-juniper woodlands on the west side of 
the plateau--a critical zone for Kaibab mule deer, as well as other wildlife 
species. Shrub regeneration in the area has been slow, and cheatgrass (Bromus tectorum) has invaded tens of thousands 
of acres within the burn perimeter. Several noxious weed species such as musk thistle (Carduus nutans), Scotch 
thistle (Onopordum acanthium), Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense), leafy spurge (Euphorbia esula), Russian knapweed 
(Acroption repens), and spotted knapweed (Centaurea maculosa) have invaded smaller site-specific areas.   
At middle elevations, fire impacts have been mixed, depending in large part on fire intensity. Within relatively low 
intensity burn areas, such as those caused by the Powell, Big, and Rose fires (2003), fire impacts have been generally 
positive, thinning smaller coniferous trees, and moving burned areas incrementally closer to their natural range of 
variability. Within higher intensity burn areas, such as those caused by the Outlet Fire (2000), fuels have been reduced 
more substantially, and coniferous trees have been largely replaced by more fire-resistant early successional species 
such as quaking aspen which are generally in decline throughout the Southwest.
At high elevations, fire intensities have generally been more severe. For example, within the Poplar Complex burn area 
(8500-8800 ft. elevation) of 2003, fire killed more trees, reduced canopy cover, and reduced forest floor fuel loading 
more than fires at lower elevations. Longer fire return intervals in higher elevation coniferous forests are considered 
the natural fire regime, and so high-severity fires are considered more natural at higher elevations than fires in lower-
elevation ponderosa pine forests.
The Warm Fire (2006) burned 60,000 acres and was one of the most intense and largest fires to have burned across 
the Kaibab Plateau in recorded history. It burned across a broad elevation zone, affecting pinyon-juniper woodlands, 
ponderosa pine, and mixed conifer forests. Long-term monitoring will help to clarify the costs and benefits of the Warm 
Fire, while analysis of historical fire impacts across the plateau should help guide post-fire response and future fire 
management strategies.  
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

Watersheds
The Kaibab Plateau spans both the Kanab and the Paria groundwater 
subbasins and encompasses portions of the Upper Colorado/Dirty Deveil 
and the Lower Colorado/Lake Mead basins (Figure 9.5.4). The Kaibab 
Plateau is uniformly dry except for small sinkhole lakes and localized 
springs and streams. Snowmelt and precipitation typically percolates into 
the Plateau and eventually exit at springs and seeps in the Grand Canyon. 
However, some sinkholes can capture runoff and hold it throughout the 
year. The Paria Plateau is similarly dry, with runoff percolating through 
Navajo Sandstone until it encounters the Chinle shale layer and is 
conveyed laterally to springs at the base of the Vermillion Cliffs. 
In part due to the dry nature of the Kaibab Plateau, the North Canyon watershed stands as one of the most valuable 
watersheds in the region, with challenging but pressing restoration and fire management needs. North Canyon Creek 
is a small perennial stream that flows approximately 1.2 miles from its emergence points in upper North Canyon 
Wilderness Area, Crystal Springs on the East Rim, and various unnamed springs along the canyon floor. It disappears 
after flowing into the lower Hermit Shale Formation. North Canyon provides abundant habitat for forest wildlife. The 
stream is an important habitat for Apache trout (Onchorhynchus apache), which was introduced there during the past 
century. This species is federally threatened and is regarded as an Arizona Species of Special Concern. It is endemic to 
Arizona, and is restricted to streams of Upper Salt, Blue, and Little Colorado drainages in the White Mountains. Forest 
conditions throughout the North Canyon watershed are generally conducive to high intensity crown fire, the effects of 
which could be significant and negative for North Canyon Creek.  
Arizona Strip
88
Kaibab Plateau
▲ Figure 9.5.4. Third order watersheds (basins) in the Kaibab Plateau landscape.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

Arizona Strip
Collaborative Efforts
Opportunities for economic utilization of restoration products are limited in this remote region, due to long 
distances to markets and domination of the region by low-value species such as sagebrush, pinyon, and juniper. Past 
utilization of forest and woodland species has consisted mostly of fuelwood, juniper posts, and Christmas tree sales.  
Other vegetative products such as pinyon nuts and ponderosa pine cones have been permitted.  Current economic 
utilization (within the past ten years) has included these same products with the addition of several small ponderosa 
pine timber sales for sawlogs and poles.  In shrub and grasslands there has been a demand for collection of seed by 
seed companies.
Economics
89
Kaibab Plateau
Over the past decade, the U.S. Forest Service has facilitated collaborative discussions regarding old growth 
ponderosa pine conservation across the Kaibab Plateau, and livestock management across the Kane Ranch, which 
includes large parts of the Kaibab Plateau. However, due to the remoteness and minimal Wildland urban interface of 
the region, larger-scale community-based collaborative forest management has not occurred across the Kaibab Plateau 
to the degree it has elsewhere in the state.  Given the concern recently generated by the Warm Fire, it is likely that 
local community members and stakeholders from across the region will participate in collaborative post-fire planning 
and long-term restoration and fire management planning discussions, especially if the recommendations from those 
discussions feed into land management planning across the Kaibab Plateau landscape. 
Future Restoration Needs
Despite its remoteness, the Kaibab Plateau landscape has been dramatically altered over the past century by 
livestock overgrazing, large-scale timber harvest, and aggressive fire suppression. Modern fire control efforts have 
reduced fire frequency, while creating conditions that favor high-intensity burns atypical in the paleoecological record. 
As discussions about forest restoration and fire management progressively shift from concerns about wildland-urban 
interface areas to the management of wildland areas, they highlight the immediate need to develop and test adaptive 
and integrated landscape-scale restoration and conservation strategies. Given its isolation, high conservation value, 
and measurable legacies associated with historic wildlife, forest, and fire, and non-native invasive species management 
initiatives, the Kaibab Plateau stands as a compelling showcase for testing emerging science-based approaches to 
restoration and fire management at extensive spatial scales.
The Warm Fire, which burned almost 60,000 acres in 2006, stands as a reminder that fire hazard reduction will and 
should be an important objective guiding forest management across the Plateau.  Such fire hazard reduction across 
the Plateau must, however, occur within an explicit and comprehensive restoration context that recognizes the 
essential ecological role played by mixed severity fire across the Plateau, and provides long-term strategic direction for 
maximizing the positive benefits of fire while mimizing associated risks.   In this vein, collaborative, cross-jurisdictional 
(especially Bureau of Land Management, U.S. Forest Service, and National Park Service) and science-based fire 
management planning is essential.  This fire management planning should provide long-term guidance directing 
treatment (thinning, prescribed burning, and Wildland Fire Use) priorities and strategies aimed at preparing the Kaibab 
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

Arizona Strip
90
Kaibab Plateau
Plateau landscape for the reintroduction of natural fire.  It should account for the potentially negative consequences of 
fire, especially those related to post-fire cheatgrass invasion and sensitive watershed degradation.  It should recognize 
and account for the effects of alternative fire management and restoration strategies on forest-dependent wildlife 
habitat characteristics.
Despite the Kaibab Plateau’s relative remoteness, restoration activities are likely to support and be supported 
by appropriately-scaled industry in northern Arizona and/or southern Utah.  The analysis of available supply 
characteristics within a restoration and long-term fire management context will provide local industry necessary 
certainty and  stability, and as such should be an integral part of any restoration and fire management planning 
process.   
Recommendations
Prioritize the North Kaibab landscape as one in which science-based collaborative “wildland” approaches to fire  
 
management and forest restoration can be tested and demonstrated at landscape scales.  Beyond its  
 
 
 
inherent value in restoring the Kaibab Plateau, the demonstration and testing of such approaches  
 
 
 
would complement community protection-based approaches to forest management currently being  
 
 
 
implemented in Wildland Urban Interface areas, and inform the development of integrated community   
 
 
protection / wildland restoration strategies across the state.   
Collaboratively develop a spatially and temporally explicit long-term restoration and fire management plan  
 
 
that supports the reintroduction of natural fire across the Plateau, and the restoration of the full range  
 
 
of natural variability in diverse and unique forest ecosystems, while protecting critical   
 
 
 
 
watersheds, wildlife habitat areas, and other critical landscape features.  Such a plan would consider,   
 
 
at a minimum, the following management needs and approaches:
Analysis of current landscape-scale forest, fire, watershed, wildlife habitat, recreation, and infrastructure 
characteristics across the Plateau.
Development of explicit strategies for simultaneously protecting critical landscape features from high 
intensity crown fire, and strategically modifying fire behavior at multiple scales, including the landscape scale.  
Landscape-scale fire behavior modification would likely involve strategically placed restoration treatments that 
might also serve as fuel breaks, and appropriately-scaled and sequenced application of prescribed burning and 
Wildland Fire Use strategies.
Development of coordinated cross-jurisdictional forest restoration and fire management plans.
Consideration of post-fire rehabilitation strategies and priorities within a landscape-scale restoration 
context.
Control of invasive non-native species within a landscape-scale post-fire rehabilitation and restoration 
context.  Such control will require identifying invasion characteristics and trends (especially that of cheatgrass) 
across the Plateau, including in surrounding lower-elevation invasive non-native species “source” areas within 
which invasion has already occurred, or is likely to occur. 
Identification of fire management and forest restoration strategies that protect and restore connectivity and 
habitat quality for wide-ranging species (ie, mule deer), and habitat quality for threatened, endangered, and 
sensitive species (ie, northern goshawk).  
Integration of forest and livestock management strategies, considering especially appropriate livestock 
management within the context of natural fire reintroduction and post-fire recovery.
Development of an access management plan that is consistent with long-term forest health restoration goals. 
Development of a long-term implementation and effectiveness monitoring plan. 
Analysis of long-term restoration by-products supply characteristics, and recommendations regarding 
initiation of appropriately-scaled industry designed to support restoration and fire management 
implementation. 
1.
2.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

Arizona Strip
91
Kaibab Plateau
91
References
White, M.A., and J.L. Vankat. 1993. Middle and high elevation coniferous forest communities of the North Rim region of  
 
Grand Canyon National Park, Arizona, USA. Vegetation, 109:161-174.
Wolf, J.J., and J.N. Mast. 1998. Fire history of mixed-conifer forests on the North Rim, Grand Canyon National Park,  
 
 
Arizona. Physical Geography, 19(1):1-14.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

92
Northeastern Woodlands
The region covered by the Northeastern Woodlands landscape covers nearly 6 million acres in northeastern Arizona. 
It is a land of broad mesas, arid valleys and deep canyons. Most of the area is over 5,000 feet in elevation. Extensive 
tablelands average 6,000 – 7,000 ft. in elevation, with high points just under 8,000 ft. Some of these tablelands include 
Kaibito Plateau, Grey Mesa, Rainbow Plateau, and Shonto Plateau in the north; Black Mesa, Hopi Buttes, and Balakai 
Mesa in the central region; and the Defiance Plateau in the southeastern region.
Precipitation and temperature in this landscape are largely a function of elevation. Precipitation at lower elevations is 
about 4 inches/yr, and about 20 inches/yr at the highest elevations. Most of the woodlands get 8-12 inches/yr, in the 
form of summer monsoonal rain and winter snow. Generally snow, when it occurs, is intermittent and melts quickly, so 
that many woodlands do not have a continuous cover of snow through the winter.
Northeastern woodlands have undergone significant changes in extent and in vegetation composition due to changes 
in land use. For example, woodlands have been cleared for agriculture, mining, and development. Grazing also has 
had a considerable effect on woodlands—altering the vegetation composition and reducing grasses that carried natural 
frequent fire. This, in turn has promoted the expansion of pinyon-juniper woodlands into grasslands.

93
The majority of the Northeastern Woodlands landscape is 
composed of Indian trust lands—roughly 4,394,000 acres of 
Navajo Nation lands and 878,000 acres on the Hopi Reservation. 
A checkerboard of private, State Trust, BLM and National 
Park lands comprises the extreme southeastern portion of the 
landscape and covers approximately 473,000 acres (Figure 
9.6.1.). Most of the Hopi Partitioned lands are included in 
the landscape as well as the North Oraibi, Hardrock, Upper 
Polacca, Toreva and Five Houses units of District Six of the Hopi 
Reservation. While a lengthy controversy over the boundaries 
of the Hopi and Navajo reservations hampered cooperation 
between the two tribes in the past, they now work together to 
improve conditions of the woodlands on both lands. 
Land Ownership
Northeastern Woodlands
▲Navajo Nation lands and the Hopi Reservation in Arizona
▲ Figure 9.6.1. Land Ownership status in the Northeastern Woodlandslandscape.

94
Northeastern Woodlands
Forests
▲ Figure 9.6.2. Vegetation composition characteristics in the Northeastern Woodlands landscape.
Pinyon-juniper woodlands are widespread on 
the Colorado Plateau between 5,000 and 7,000 ft. 
The dominant trees in the Northeastern Woodlands 
landscape are Colorado pinyon pine (Pinus edulis) and 
one or more species of juniper which can include Utah 
juniper (Juniperus osteosperma), one-seed juniper (J. 
monosperma) and Rocky Mountain juniper (J. scopulorum). 
Proportions of the trees vary, and pure stands of either 
pinyon pine or juniper can be found (Figure 9.6.2). Typically, as elevation increases, pinyon increases, juniper 
decreases, total tree density increases, and trees grow larger.
Gambel oak and mountain mahogany (Cercocarpus spp.) can be intermixed in woodland areas, generally at higher 
elevations. These provide forage when other forage is scarce. Mixed conifer and pine are found at the highest 
elevations
Riparian forests are found along washes and streams, and can include the following native species: Box elder (Acer 
negundo), cottonwood (Populus spp), willow (Salix spp) and quaking aspen (Populus tremuloides). Two invasive 
introduced species have become problematic in riparian and other areas—Tamarisk (Tamarix chinensis) and Russian 
olive (Elaeagnus angustifolia).

95
▲ Figure 9.6.3.  Fire Regime Condition of Vegetation in the Northeastern Woodlands landscape.
Areas of historic pinyon-juniper woodlands in the 
Northeastern Woodlands landscape have been removed 
to make way for agricultural uses, mining and residential 
areas. In other areas, drought and grazing have 
contributed to pinyon-juniper woodlands encroaching on 
grasslands and savannas.
Recent extended drought conditions have facilitated bark 
beetle and mistletoe damage throughout the region. By some estimates, more than 22% of trees have been affected in 
this way, creating unnaturally high fuel loads in pinyon-juniper woodlands.
Figure 9.6.3 illustrates that as much as 75% of woodlands in the Northeastern Woodlands landscape could be far 
removed from their natural range of variability.
Current Conditions
Northeastern Woodlands

96
Northeastern Woodlands
Communities
The Northeastern Woodlands is a sparsely populated landscape. The town 
of Kayenta, Arizona (population ~5,000) is the largest in the landscape. 
Numerous Navajo communities and Chapter Houses are scattered 
throughout the region.
The Hopi population in the Northeastern Woodlands landscape is concentrated in eleven villages situated atop three 
mesas that extend from the larger Black Mesa. Old Oraibi on Third Mesa is listed in the National Historic Register. First 
inhabited in 1050, it is one of the oldest continuously inhabited communities in North America. 
Five communities in the Northeastern Woodlands landscape are classified as communities at risk: 
Second Mesa - Moderate 
Third Mesa - Moderate 
Polacca - Low 
Jeddito - Moderate 
Keams Canyon - Moderate 
•
•
•
•
•
On the Hopi Reservation, the Wildlife and Ecosystems Management Program 
(WEMP) is responsible for protecting wildlife, including culturally sensitive 
species, and wildlife habitat. The program views the protection of wildlife, 
such as raptors, large and small game animals, migratory birds, reptiles and 
amphibians that have inhabited areas of the Hopi Reservation throughout its 
history. The Hopi have benefited from wildlife through hunting harvests and 
spiritual connections, and feel that wildlife play an important role in healthy 
ecosystems. One of the goals of woodland management for the Hopi is to protect 
threatened and endangered species. However, most of the Hopi woodlands are 
considered marginal to unsuitable habitat for most of the species listed by the 
USFWS.
On Navajo lands, big game species, especially mule deer (Odocoileus hemionus), 
provide subsistence food for many Navajo residents, and recreational hunting 
opportunities. Other important woodland game animals include elk (Cervus elaphus nelsoni), pronghorn (Antilocarpa 
americana), black-tailed jackrabbit (Lepus californicus), quail (Callipepla gambelkik) and Turkey (Meleagris gallopavo) 
Woodlands provide winter range for deer and elk populations, and cover from predators and extreme winter weather.
Evidence indicates that the Mexican spotted owl (Strix occidentalis lucida), a threatened species, lives in the mixed 
conifer forests of the Northeastern Woodlands landscape. Feathers of molting individuals and nests have been found in 
Pinyon-juniper woodlands that include narrow, shady, cool canyons in sandstone slickrock.
Wildlife

97
Northeastern Woodlands
Fire
With the post-settlement reduction in fire frequency, introduction  of grazing by 
livestock, and shifts in climate, the vegetation structure of pinyon-juniper woodlands 
began to shift. As trees, especially pinions, became dominant, shrubs and herbaceous 
vegetation declined. Dense tree canopies are now becoming susceptile to intense crown 
fires, which, in turn, can lead to dominance by exotic species.
A large number of fires have historically been caused by land clearing, the burning of weeds and trash, and the burning 
of fields prior to planting in the spring. While there are lightening strike caused fires, historically, the majority of fires 
reported in this zone were human-caused. 
Because of the obvious risk associated with the use of prescribed fire, planning and implementation will require a 
prescribed burn plan, review of the plan by the public, review by a competent fire management professional, review 
by the Water Resources Program (to assure that soil erosion is not accelerated), and approval by the Department of 
Natural Resources and BIA officials. The prescribed burn plan shall be consistent with the land useobjectives outlined in 
the Tribal plans such as the Hopi Integrated Resources Management Plan, the Hopi Wildand Fire Management Plan and 
others such as specific Range Unit Management Plans. A qualified burn specialist must carry out the prescription.
On the Navajo Nation, fire management is addressed under the Programmatic Wildland Fire Plan developed for the 
Navajo Nation by the BIA-Fore and Aviation Management Program.
Watersheds
The Northeastern Woodlands 
landscape is part of the Little Colorado 
Watershed Figure 9.6.4). Water is a 
precious resource in this area due to 
its scarcity. Hopi farmers depend on 
seasonal rains and diversions of water 
from the washes to successfully grow 
their corn and other crops. Black Mesa 
is a source of water for this region, and 
can be visualized as a broad, hand-
shaped mesa across whose “wrist” runs 
a pine-covered rim of generally 8,000 
foot elevation. Along its “fingers” 
extending to the southwest lie the 
Hopi villages and the headwaters of the Polacca, Wepo, Oraibi, and Blue Canyon drainages. Precipitation percolates 
into porous sandstones far back on the mesa, feeding the springs that give the Hopi villages a permanent supply of 
drinking water. Precipitation can also be delivered directly through the washes, but high volume flushes during extreme 
rain events can be destructive to farm fields and diversions. Land management in the highlands and washes can either 
improve or aggravate the effects from rain events.
Water flowing through the washes eventually flows into the Little Colorado River.
▲ Figure 9.6.4. Third order watersheds (basins) in the Northeastern Woodlands landscape.

98
Northeastern Woodlands
Collaborative Efforts
The National Indian Forest Resources Managment Act (Public Law 101-630 requires that American Indian Tribes 
develop a plan for forest development, maintenance, and enhancement. In keeping with this act, the BIA requires a 
forest management plan to assure wise-use and sustained yield of forest resources. Both the Navajo and Hopi Tribes 
worked with their respective BIA agencies to develop their Forest Management Plans.
Economics
Resources derived from Pinyon-Juniper woodlands by 
the Navajo Nation include:
Fuel for heating and cooking, both for personal   
 
use, as well as for barter or sale.
Posts and poles
Christmas trees for sale 
Pinyon nuts for personal consumption and sale   
 
and barter
Recreational and subsistence hunting
Tourism and other recreational uses
The Navajo Nation Division of Economic Development 
is currently working on building a 10-megawatt power 
plant that will run on biomass. At the present time, 
there are no plans for other uses of small diameter 
wood.
Resources derived from Pinyon-Juniper woodlands by the Hopi Tribe include:
Fuel for cooking and heating homes
Posts, poles, for fencing and building
Juniper for ceremonial uses
Pinyon nuts 
Gathering plants for medicinal or ceremonial purposes
Recreation 
The Hopi Tribe is interested in investigating opportunities to develop businesses that utilize small diameter wood, 
however, they are using most of the wood that is cleared from their lands. 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

99
Northeastern Woodlands
Implementation and Management 
The BIA plays a significant role in the management of Indian forests. All reservation timber-harvestplans must be 
approved by the agency, which is also responsible for monitoring the cuts. The BIA considers Indian lands exempt from 
such national environmental laws, such as the Endangered Species Act, because reservations are technically sovereign 
nations.
The Hopi Integreated Woodlands Management Plan was adopted by the Hopi Tribal Council in June 2006. The 
management goals reflected in this document are to protect cultural and traditional resources, wildlife habitat, 
watersheds, threatened and endangered species (as identified by the USFWS), and culturally sensitive species. 
Implementation steps include ecological assessments of specific range units, woodland areas, and special management 
areas, to determine current status of natural resources, and identify desired conditions and proposed actions. 
Implementation also includes monitoring of program impacts and effectiveness.
Currently, the Hopi Tribe is only harvesting dead and downed wood, including beetle-killed trees. The Tribe is also 
working to eradicate invasive Russian olive and tamarisk trees from riparian areas, and to plant native trees in their 
place.
Management of the Woodland area on the Navajo Nation is under the jurisdiction of the Navajo Forestry Department, 
with some local control by chapters. The goal of woodlands management is the integrated management and use of 
woodlands to encompass both the harvest and use of wood and tree products, as well as consideration of important 
habitats for wildlife, forage for grazing and the protection of woodland areas for ceremonies and other cultural uses, 
recreation and tourism.
Future Restoration Needs
Below are recommendations for accomplishing restoration goals in the Northeastern Woodlands landscape developed 
through conversations with the Navajo Department of Forestry and the Hopi Department of Natural Resources. 
Navajo:
Provide training for Navajo Forestry Department personnel Pinyon-uniper treatments, Wildland Urban   
 
 
Interface treatments, and the use of prescribed and wildland fire.
Obtain most recent accurate spatial data describing Navajo Nation forests and woodlands.
Design and implement forest treatments that minimize associated impacts on forests.
Educate Navajo Nation residents and environmental groups about the need for forest restoration.
Educate Navajo Nation residents about the need to reduce fuel loads around their homes.
Improve communication and cooperation with the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
Hopi: 
Participate in the Firewise Communities program
 
 
Do community assessment
 
 
Obtain training
 
 
Obtain public education materials
Obtain the equipment to become self-sustaining – e.g. mulchers, and splitters, which are currently being  
 
 
rented from Flagstaff.
BIA should expedite the development of site specific burn plans. Hopi have been unable to implement   
 
 
prescribed burn treatments.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
1.
2.
3.

100
Northeastern Woodlands
References
Note: The Northeastern Woodlands landscape analysis was developed in cooperation with the Navajo Nation Forestry 
Department and the Hopi Tribe’s Department of Natural Resources; and is printed here with their permission.
Land Use History of the Colorado Plateau: Black Mesa, Arizona. Accessed from http://www.cpluhna.nau.edu/  
 
Places/black_mesa.htm.
Loma’omvaya, M. 2006. Hopi Integrated Woodlands Management Plan for the Hopi Reservation
Miller, R. H. and R. J. Tausch. 2001. The role of fire in juniper and piñon woodlands: A descriptive analysis. Pp. 15-30  
 
in K. Galley and T. Wilson (eds.), Fire Conference 2000: The First National Congress on Fire, Ecology,  
 
 
Prevention And Management. Invasive Species Workshop: The Role of Fire in The Control And Spread Of Invasive  
 
Species. Tallahassee, FL: Tall Timbers Research Station.
Navajo Nation Forestry Department. 1999. Navajo Nation Woodland Inventory Analysis Report.
Personal Interviews conducted December 18-19, 2006 with Navajo Forestry Department: Alexious C. Becenti Sr., Forest 
Manager, Navajo Nation; Eddie Sam, Woodland Forester; and Frankie Thompson, Program Manager/Forester.
Personal Interviews conducted December 20, 2006 with Hopi Department of Natural Resources: Arnold Taylor, Director; 
Donna Anderson, Hopi Wildlife; Woody Shattuck, Wildland Fire Use manager.

101
Landscape: Sky Islands 
The Madrean Archipelago is a group of sky islands surrounded by a sea of desert grasslands. These sky-islands 
are located at the confluence of four major bioregions--the Southern Rocky Mountains, the Northern Sierra Madre 
Mountains, the Sonoran Desert, and the Chihuahuan Desert. Plant and animal inhabitants of many of the mountains 
in this area have been isolated from one another for at least eleven thousand years. Evolutionary processes during 
this period of isolation have created a region of great biological diversity, with high rates of endemism. This area also 
constitutes the historic ranges of the Chiricahua and Mescalero Apache tribes.
In Arizona, the Sky Island region of the Statewide Strategy is circumscribed by the Gila Mountains to the north, the 
Baboquivari Mountains to the west, and the Mexican border to the south. Major mountains within the region include 
the Chiricahua, Pinaleño, Catalina, Rincon, Tumacacori, Santa Rita, Whetstone, and Galiuro ranges. Geographically, the 
forested Sky Island ranges of southeastern Arizona span the North American continent’s two major mountain spines--
the Rocky Mountains and Colorado Plateau to the north, and the Sierra Madre Occidental to the south. In addition, the 
Sky Island region spans North America’s two largest desert biomes--the Sonoran to the west, and the Chihuahuan to the 
east. Due to latitudinal extent, as well as elevational range, plant and animal diversity derives from both temperate 
and tropical origins, contributing to the unusually high levels of biodiversity in this landscape.  
Madrean oak woodlands are the defining feature of the Sky Islands mountains and are the most prevalent vegetation 
type. The Sky Island region of the southeastern Arizona hosts the northern extension of Madrean-radiated oak woodland 
and savanna, which are dependent on wet summer, mild winter climate, associated with the subtropical Sierra Madre 
Occidental mountain range in western Mexico. This biotic community supports a relatively rich assortment of wildlife 
and plant species, generally absent in other forest types across Arizona. Because of its floristic and geographic 
connection to the Madrean continental spine to the south, bird, mammal, and reptile diversity is unparalleled in 
relation to other forest associations. Low-intensity, relatively frequent fire events are a natural component of this 
vegetation zone, and are fueled largely by a significant fine-fuel (grass) understory.  
Sky Islands
Sky Islands
White Mountains
White Mountains
Central
Highlands
Central
Highlands
Northeastern Woodlands
Northeastern Woodlands
Western Mogollon Plateau
Western Mogollon Plateau
Arizona Strip
Arizona Strip
Kaibab
Plateau
Kaibab
Plateau
Chuska
Mountains
Chuska
Mountains
Basin
and
Range
Basin
and
Range
§¨¦
8
§¨¦
10
§¨¦
17
§¨¦
19
§¨¦
15
§¨¦
10
§¨¦
10
§¨¦
40
§¨¦
40
PAGE
PAGE
TUCSON
TUCSON
KINGMAN
KINGMAN
PHOENIX
PHOENIX
SHOW LOW
SHOW LOW
FLAGSTAFF
FLAGSTAFF
0
30
60
90
120
150
15
Miles
±
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

102
▲ Figure 9.7.1. Land Ownership status in the Sky 
Islands.
Sky Islands
Land ownership patterns within the Sky Island region comprise a relatively complex mosaic of different jurisdictions 
and private landowners (Figure 9.7.1).  Separated by wide valleys (10-20 miles), the upper elevations are generally 
managed by the Coronado National Forest, which oversees 1.8 million acres of land within 13 distinct Ecological 
Management Areas.  Valleys within the region are managed largely by the Arizona State Land Department, Bureau of 
Land Management, and private land owners.  Ex-urban development with the region currently threatens landscape 
permeability between mountain ranges.  Fire events are invariably localized to individual mountain ranges today, 
although historically may have stretched across grassland valleys to adjacent ranges.  
Land Ownership
£
¤
191
Tohono O'odham
Tohono O'odham
San Carlos Apache
San Carlos Apache
Tohono O'odham
Tohono O'odham
Pascua Yaqui
Pascua Yaqui
§¨¦
17
§¨¦
19
§¨¦
10
§¨¦
8
§¨¦
10
£
¤
60
£
¤
70
£
¤
77
£
¤
191
£
¤
180
£
¤
60
£
¤
70
£
¤
191
TUCSON
TUCSON
PHOENIX
PHOENIX
SHOW LOW
SHOW LOW
0
50
Miles
±
Sky Islands Landscape
Ownership
STATE TRUST LANDS
FOREST SERVICE
PRIVATE
AMERICAN INDIAN RESERVATION
BLM
USFWS - WILDLIFE REFUGE
MILITARY
NPS
OTHER
27%
27%
25%
10%
9%
1%
1%
0.7%
0.1%
Source: http://www.land.state.az.us/alris/
Percent in each Ownership category:
Total acreage: 10,880,603
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

103
Forests
►Figure 9.7. 2. Vegetation  
characteristics in the Sky Islands 
At the highest elevations (8,000 – 10,000 feet), the sky islands are 
capped with cold, wet spruce-fir forests (Figure 9.7.2) that receive an 
average of 25-40 inches of precipitation annually. Engelmann spruce 
predominate, and can be interspersed with subalpine fir, blue spruce, 
Rocky Mountain maple, Bebb 
willow, Scouler willow, blueberry elder, or bitter cherry.
Below the spruce-fir level, a discontinuous belt of mixed conifer forests leads 
downward to the warmer, drier pine forests. Douglas fir, white fir, ponderosa 
pine, Mexican white pine and blue spruce can be found at this level.
Ponderosa pine forests make up the lowest elevation of coniferous forests (6,500 
– 8,000 feet), and typically receive 18-26 inches of precipitation annually. Aspen 
is the principal successional species in confer forests, forming dense stands of 
trees that shelter and promote the growth of young conifers. Fire suppression 
and intense browsing by deer and other herbivores threaten aspen populations, 
and have resulted in dense stands of conifers, which pose a risk of wildfire.
Below the conifer forests lie the pinyon-juniper woodlands or, depending on 
aspect and micro-climate, may be substituted by Madrean oak woodland.  
Grasses dominate the understory, which also includes shrubs, such as mountain 
mahogany(Cercocarpus spp.), Gambel oak, snakeweed (Gutierrezia arizonica), 
and threadleaf groundsel (Senecio longilobus). Pine-oak woodland forms a 
transitional zone between oak woodland and higher elevation montane conifer 
forests. 
Madrean encinal, or oak woodlands are found at elevations ranging from 
3,600 to 6,500 feet, and are bordered by semidesert grassland and plains at 
lower elevations. Emory oak 
(Quercus emoryi) is present 
throughout the oak woodlands 
range, with Mexican blue oak 
(Q. oblongifolia), Arizona white 
oak (Q. arizonica), and gray 
oak (Q. grisea) also occurring 
discontinuously. Understory is 
often composed of grasses and 
scrubland species.
Sky Islands
Mountains
High Point 
Elevation 
(ft)
Pinaleno
Mt. Graham
10,720
Santa Catalina
Mt. Lemmon
9,157
Rincon
Mica Mountain
8,666
Santa Rita
Mt. Wrightson
9,453
Chiricahua
Chiricahua Pk
9,796
Huachucas
Miller Peak
9,466
Dos Cabezas
Dos Cabezas
8,369
Baboquivari
Baboquivari Pk
7,730
Galiuro
Bassett Peak
7,650
Santa Teresa
Cottonwood Mtn
7,489
Dragoon
Mt. Glenn
7,519
Patagonia
Mt. Washington
7,221
Tucson
Wasson Peak
4,687
Atascosa
Atascosa Peak
6,440
Peloncillo
Owl Peak
6,625
Sierrita
Samaniego Pk
5,991
Table 1. Sky Island forested ecosystems of 
Arizona. Source: Warshall 1986
§¨¦
17
§¨¦
19
§¨¦
8
§¨¦
10
Tohono O'odham
Tohono O'odham
San Carlos Apache
San Carlos Apache
Tohono O'odham
Tohono O'odham
Pascua Yaqui
Pascua Yaqui
TUCSON
TUCSON
PHOENIX
PHOENIX
SHOW LOW
SHOW LOW
0
50
Miles
±
24%
18%
14%
11%
11%
8%
7% 6%
Sky Islands Landscape
Southwest ReGAP Landcover
A-C Mesquite Upland Scrub
A-C P. Semi-Desert Grassland and Steppe
Other Shrub / Scrub
C.C., Mixed Desert and Thorn Scrub
S. Paloverde-Mixed Cacti Desert Scrub
Other Evergreen Forests
Madrean Encinal
Other
American Indian Reservation
Source: http://earth.gis.usu.edu/swgap/
Total acreage: 10,880,603
Percent in each Landcover category:
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

104
▲Figure 9.7.3. Fire Regime Condition of Vegetation in the Sky Islands landscape
Current Conditions
Sky Islands
§¨¦
17
§¨¦
19
§¨¦
8
§¨¦
10
Tohono O'odham
Tohono O'odham
San Carlos Apache
San Carlos Apache
Tohono O'odham
Tohono O'odham
Pascua Yaqui
Pascua Yaqui
TUCSON
TUCSON
PHOENIX
PHOENIX
SHOW LOW
SHOW LOW
0
50
Miles
±
American Indian Reservation
Source: http://www.landfire.gov/index.php
Total acreage: 10,880,603
Percent in each FRC category:
64%
28%
4%
1.8%
0.8%
0.6%
0.6%
Sky Islands Landscape
Fire Regime Condition
Condition Class I
Condition Class II
Condition Class III
Bare Rock/Sand/Clay
Urban/Transportation/Mines/Quarries
Agriculture
Other
More than 30 mining centers operated in the Sky Islands landscape in the 1880s. 
Wood was extensively used in the mines for fuel and construction. To supply 
these mines with wood, significant saw timber logging occurred in the Chiricahua, 
Huachuca, Santa Rita, and Santa Catalina mountains. The management of the Sky 
Islands forests by U.S. Forest Service included fire exclusion, beginning around 1906, 
to encourage overstocking of the forests in order to maximize tree growth for fiber 
production. In addition, overgrazing by cattle and sheep eliminated grasses that 
carried natural, cool, ground fires. Fires could no longer run through the valleys and 
move through the mountains, resulting in unnaturally high fuel loads in nearly all 
forest types. Further more, the elimination of grasses has been instrumental in the 
spread and increased density of pinyon-juniper woodlands. As illustrated by the Fire 
Regime Condition characteristics in Figure 9.7.3, almost all of the forested areas in the Sky Islands landscape have 
significantly diverged from the natural range of variability.
Spruce-fir forests are normally insulated from fire by cool temperatures and soggy ground, but drought and insect 
attacks have created drier than normal conditions. Below the spruce-fir zone, in the mixed conifer zone, fire exclusion 
has created a forest that is overstocked with woody fuel. The downward migration of shorter spruce and fir has 
contributed to the fire threat by providing ladder fuels.
About 34,000 acres of the Coronado National Forest are in urban interface areas In the Tucson area alone, there are 60 
miles of interface. The mix of houses, fuels and brush fields adds significantly to the challenge of reintroducing natural 
wildland fire in forest restoration.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

105
Communities
The socioeconomic setting for the Sky 
Islands landscape is rural, with average 
incomes much lower than the national 
average. The population density in the 
region is typically less than five people per 
square mile, except for suburban or urban 
areas. In Arizona, seven counties are wholly or partially contained within the region. The only major urban area in the 
Sky Islands region is Tucson, Arizona. Other towns include Douglas, Benson and Sierra Vista in Cochise County; Safford in 
Graham County; and Nogales and Patgonia in Santa Cruz County. The community of San Carlos on the San Carlos Apache 
Reservation, is also within the landscape area, and listed on the Federal Register of communites at risk. 
The scientific community has several research sites in the Sky Islands landscape, including the world-renowned Large 
Binocular Telescope Observatory on Mt. Graham, which was threatened by the Nutall Fire Complex in the summer of 
2004.
Population in the Sky Islands region has been increasing steadily over the last few years. The mild climate and 
comparatively low cost of living draws large numbers of retirees from other parts of the country. The resulting sprawl 
has increased urban interface with wildlands and wildlife.Currently, five Community Wildfire Protection plans are in 
place in the Sky Islands landscape area (Figure 9.7.4): Graham County, Mt Lemmon, Cascabel, Palominas, and a small 
region of the Rim Country CWPP.
Sky Islands
Graham County CWPP
Palominas CWPP
§¨¦
17
§¨¦
19
§¨¦
10
§¨¦
10
Sonoita
Rim Country CWPP
Bisbee CWPP
Sasabe Arivaca CWPP
Cascabel CWPP
Sasabe Arivaca CWPP
MT Lemmon Wildland-Urban Interface Plan
Sky Islands
Sky Islands
TUCSON
TUCSON
PHOENIX
PHOENIX
SHOW LOW
SHOW LOW
±
Source: Forestry Division of the Arizona
State Land Department
Sky Islands Landscape
CWPP Planning
Plan Complete
In Development
Total acreage: 10,880,603
0
50
Miles
▲Figure 9.7. 4. Community Wildfire Protection Plans within the Sky Islands Landscape area.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

106
Wildlife
Sky Islands
The Sky Islands landscape is a biodiversity “hotspot,” and this 
is reflected in the wide array of wildlife species, many of them 
rare or sensitive, that are found within this landscape. Over 
240 butterfly species, and at least 468 bird species have been 
identified in southeastern Arizona in the last 50 years. The Sky 
Islands contain a large number of threatened and endangered 
species, many of them reliant on streams, springs, and other 
water sources in this mostly arid, hot environment. Several 
other species are restricted to unusual habitats such as spruce-
fir and moist mixed-conifer forests or moist talus slopes.
The madrean pine-oak woodlands in the higher elevations are home to species such as the white-bellied long-tailed 
vole (Microtus longicaudus leucophaeus), the violet-crowned hummingbird (Amazilia violiceps) and the threatened 
New Mexico ridge-nosed rattlesnake (Crotalus willardi obscurus). Very high elevation spruce-fir and moist mixed-
conifer forests in the Pinaleño Mountains contain the only population of the endangered Mount Graham red squirrel 
(Tamiasciurus hudsonicus grahamensis). Populations of this species have suffered in 
recent years from fire and insect infestations due to declining forest health in the 
Pinaleño range. Other rare and sensitive species found in Sky Islands forested habitats 
include the Mexican spotted owl (Strix occidentalis lucida), Chiricahua leopard frog 
(Rana chiricahuensis) and occasional sightings of jaguar (Panthera onca).
Several plant and wildlife species are restricted to a single, or a few isolated mountain 
ranges, such as the Pinaleño, Huachuca, and Patagonia mountains. For many forest-
dwelling species, each mountain range is indeed an isolated “island” surrounded by an 
inhospitable sea of treeless desert. Because migration is often difficult if not impossible, 
many wildlife populations are especially vulnerable to forest health declines in their 
local regions. 
Other significant species in the Sky Islands landscape include: black bear (Ursus 
americanus), wild turkey (Mealeagris gallopavo), buff-breasted flycatcher (Empidonax 
fulvifrons), and white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus).
Photo by G. Andrejko, courtesy of the AZ Game and Fish Department
Photo by Rick and Nora Bowers
Bowershoto.com
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

107
Fire
Sky Islands
Due to high levels of topographical complexity and gradient within 
each Sky Island, fire characteristics are variable across the region.  
Single fires will often cross multiple vegetation zones due to the 
relatively small distances between different associations.  Wooded 
canyons may carry fire below traditional burn areas of ponderosa 
pine, pine-oak, and oak woodland into chapparal or semi-desert 
grassland, and conversely, traditionally lower frequency burn areas such as mixed conifer and spruce-fir associations may 
burn more frequently with ignition sources in lower elevations being near.  
Unnaturally high fuel loads and drought have contributed to a series of major 
wildfies in the Sky Islands ranges since 1994:  
Rattlesnake fire - Chiricahuas, 1994, 27,500 acres burned
Bullock fire - Santa Catalinas, 2002, 30,000 acres
Aspen fire - Santa Catalinas, 2003, 87,000 acres and 333 structures burned
Nuttall fire - Pinalenos, 2004, 29,000 acres
Florida fire - Santa Ritas, 2005, 23,000 acres
•
•
•
•
•
▲Figure 5. Large Fire Probability in the Catalina Rincon Complex and Saguaro National Park East, near Tucson, Arizona. Source: WALTER
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

108
Watersheds
Annual precipitation in the high elevation mixed conifer forests (above 
9,500 feet) ranges from 30 to 45 inches and is normally in excess of potential 
evapotranspiration—the amount of water required by plants to grow normally. 
As a result of this excess precipitation, streams originating in this area are 
often perennial and contribute significantly to Sky Island watersheds. The 
Sky Island region contains the only watersheds apart from the Colorado River 
drainage system in Arizona.  West of Nogales, the upper reaches of the Rio 
Magdelena are represented by Sycamore Canyon, California Gulch, Warsaw 
Canyon, and other minor tributaries.  The Rio Magdelena flows south from 
Cibuta, Sonora westward directly into the Gulf of California.  In the extreme 
southeastern portion of the state, the Whitewater Draw and Hay Hollow 
watersheds flow south into the Rio San Bernardino, which together represent 
the northern reaches of the Rio Yaqui River, which flows south for several 
hundred miles to finally reach the Gulf of California near Obregon, Sonora.   
Sky Islands
Collaborative Efforts
A number of collaborative efforts have developed in the Sky Islands landscape that focus on reducing the risk 
of undesirable or uncharacteristic fire and forest restoration. The Pinaleno Partnership is a collection of agency, 
conservation, and local stakeholders working together on monitoring and restoration work throughout the mountain 
range.  Specifically, attention is currently devoted to monitoring effects of the Pinalenos Ecosystem Restoration Project 
– a series of thinning projects in the range’s higher elevations, and additional thinning near the cabins at Columbine.  
The Huachuca Area Fire Partners (HAFP), is an example of collaborative fire management planning in the Sky Islands 
landscape. The group culminated years of collaborative information gathering and processing with the release of the 
HAFP Fire Management Plan of 2005. The HAFP include National Audubon Society, Arizona State Land Department, 
Babocomari Ranch, Coronado National Memorial (National Park Service), Fort Huachuca (U.S. Army), San Pedro Riparian 
National Conservation Area (Bureau of Land Management), San Rafael Ranch, Arizona State Parks, USDA Forest Service, 
and The Nature Conservancy.  The group developed and implemented the Firescape concept, which works to restore 
fire-adapted ecosystems by:
Working at a landscape scale 
Applying current science to establish goals
Involving partner land managers 
Sharing resources in creative ways
Streamlining compliance and other paperwork to focus more on implementation 
The Fire Management Plan covers approximately 500,000 acres.
•
•
•
•
•
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

109
Sky Islands
Recommendations
Conduct educational outreach to stakeholders that will highlight the ecological and socio-economic benefits of   
 
ecological restoration.
Provide incentives/ assistance for restoration of privately-owned forests.
Integrate restoration planning with long term planning and zoning processes, which will require outreach and   
 
education to planning and zoning commissions.
Encourage Firewise landscaping and building in communities.
Encourage the restoration-based harvesting of firewood as opposed to importing firewood from Mexico that  
 
 
might be harvested at the expense of mesquite bosques.
Work to reintroduce natural fire regime in the remote Sky Islands mountains before that option is precluded by   
 
development - specifically in Galiuro wilderness and Galiuro/Winchester Mountain complex.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Future Restoration Needs
References 
Bart on, Andrew M. 2005. Madrean Pine-Oak Forest in Arizona: Altered Fire Regimes, Altered Communities. USDA Forest   
 
Service Proceedings RMRS-P-36.
Foreman, Dave, et al. 2000 Sky Islands Wildlands Network Conservation Plan. The Wildlands Project, Tucson, Arizona,   
 
220 pp.ADD MORE RESOURCES
Warshall, Peter. 1986. Southwestern Sky Island Ecosystems, University of Arizona.  Accessed from: http://biology.usgs.  
 
gov/s+t/frame/r119.htm.
Wheelwright, Jeff. 2006. Fire in the sky. Discover, 27:6.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

110
Landscape: Western Mogollon Plateau
The Western Mogollon landscape spans more than four million acres of north-central Arizona between the Grand 
Canyon and the White Mountains.  It encompasses the communities of Flagstaff, Williams, Blue Ridge, and Payson. Its 
most extensive feature, the Mogollon Plateau, is a northwest-southeast trending plateau capped by Tertiary volcanic 
formations and extensive forests and woodlands. The “Mogollon Rim” forms a steep scarp along the southwestern edge 
of the Mogollon Plateau, dividing two major geologic provinces: the Colorado Plateau to the north and the Basin and 
Range to the southwest. Near Flagstaff the San Francisco Peaks volcanic field forms the landscape’s most prominent 
feature with more than 600 volcanoes and Arizona’s highest point, Humphrey’s Peak (12,633 ft).  
Drainages to the southwest and northeast of the Mogollon Plateau form deep tributary canyons of the Verde and Little 
Colorado rivers, respectively.  Exposing Permian and Pennsylvanian formations, these canyons contain the landscape’s 
only natural perennial water. From peak to canyon bottom the Western Mogollon  landscape spans over 6000 vertical ft; 
most of the landscape sits above 6000 ft. Cooler and wetter than surrounding lowlands, precipitation occurs as summer 
thunderstorms and winter rain and snow.  Varying widely with sea surface temperature cycles, annual precipitation 
ranges from over 35” on portions of the San Francisco Peaks and Mogollon Plateau to less than 10” in the Little 
Colorado River valley. 
Sky Islands
Sky Islands
White Mountains
White Mountains
Central
Highlands
Central
Highlands
Northeastern Woodlands
Northeastern Woodlands
Western Mogollon Plateau
Western Mogollon Plateau
Arizona Strip
Arizona Strip
Kaibab
Plateau
Kaibab
Plateau
Chuska
Mountains
Chuska
Mountains
Basin
and
Range
Basin
and
Range
§¨¦
8
§¨¦
10
§¨¦
17
§¨¦
19
§¨¦
15
§¨¦
10
§¨¦
10
§¨¦
40
§¨¦
40
PAGE
PAGE
TUCSON
TUCSON
KINGMAN
KINGMAN
PHOENIX
PHOENIX
SHOW LOW
SHOW LOW
FLAGSTAFF
FLAGSTAFF
0
30
60
90
120
150
15
Miles
±
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

111
▲Figure 9.8.1. Land Ownership status in the Western Mogollon Plateau landscape.
Western Mogollon Plateau
Land ownership patterns consist of large tracts of National Forest land with embedded communities and dispersed 
private and state land  Land ownership allocations are as follows (Figure 9.8.1): 
71% United States Forest Service, 
13% private, 
8% State Trust,  
3% National Park Service, 
3% Tribal and 
less than 1% Bureau of Land management and other.  
Because each ownership has a unique suite of applicable laws and policies, jurisdictional differences can cause 
problems for fire and wildlife management, smoke management, access and treatment funding and implementation.  
These challenges, unless overcome, may impede forest restoration, community protection, and wildlife conservation. 
Collaborative interjurisdictional planning and implementation can help to identify and resolve such problems, bridge 
interagency barriers, and bolster public involvement and support. Contiguous National Forest ownership in many parts 
of the Western Mogollon  landscape, especially in areas distant from communities, provides an excellent opportunity 
for collabroative fire management and restoration planning.  
•
•
•
•
•
•
Land Ownership
Hopi
Hopi
§¨¦
40
§¨¦
17
§¨¦
40
£
¤
180
£
¤
89
£
¤
60
£
¤
160
£
¤
89
£
¤
66
Navajo
Navajo
Havasupai
Havasupai
SHOW LOW
SHOW LOW
FLAGSTAFF
FLAGSTAFF
Western Mogollon Landscape
OWNERSHIP
FOREST SERVICE
PRIVATE
STATE TRUST LANDS
NPS
AMERICAN INDIAN RESERVATION
BLM
OTHER
±
71.2%
13.3%
8.1%
3.3% 2.8%
0.4%
0.8%
0
50
Miles
Source: http://www.land.state.az.us/alris/
Percent in each Ownership category:
Total acreage: 4,694,243
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

112
Western Mogollon Plateau
Forests
With its variable climate and topography the Western Mogollon Plateau is among the state’s most ecologically 
diverse forested landscapes (Figure 9.8.2).  At the highest elevations, spruce-fir forests (9,500 feet to tree-line) are 
co-dominated by Engelmann spruce (Picea engelmannii) and subalpine fir (Abies lasiocarpa). Under natural conditions 
spruce-fir forests are constantly changing mosaics of stands in varying stages of recovery from natural disturbances.
Mixed conifer forests (8,000 - 10,000 ft) are closed canopy, multi-layered forests which vary from site to site. Douglas 
fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii) and ponderosa pine dominate lower, drier sites while white fir (Abies concolor), blue spruce 
(Picea pungens) and Southwestern white pine (Pinus strobiformis) are found elsewhere.
Aspen forests (8,000 - 10,000 ft) grow interspersed with mountain meadows, mixed conifer and spruce-fir forests.  As-
pen can form stable stands for long periods, or can occur as a temporary “seral” forest that gives way to conifers after 
several decades.  
Ponderosa pine forests (6,000 - 8,000 ft) span the entire Mogollon Plateau, comprising about 33% of the the Western 
Mogollon Landscape. Dominated by ponderosa pine trees (Pinus ponderosa var. Arizonica), these forests’ natural condi-
tions are characterized by clumps of large trees, often abundant and diverse grass and forb communities. Interspersed 
with mixed conifer forests at upper elevations and pinyon juniper woodlands at lower areas, ponderosa pine forests are 
frequently dotted with grasslands and meadows.  Gambel’s oak (Quercus gambellii) is often found within ponderosa 
pine forests and provides valuable wildlife habitat. 
Pinyon-juniper woodlands (4,000 - 6,000 ft) occur throughout the Western Mogollon landscape. Mixing with ponderosa 
pine forests at upper elevations and desert scrub, grasslands and shrublands at lower elevations, these woodlands 
may include Colorado pinyon pine (Pinus edulis), Utah juniper (Juniperus utahensis), one-seed juniper (Juniperus 
monosperma),  Rocky 
Mountain juniper (Ju-
niperus scopulorum) 
and alligator juniper 
(Juniperus deppeana). 
The woodlands’ dynam-
ics are tied to climate, 
with tree mortality 
during droughts and 
recruitment during wet 
periods.     
▲Figure 9.8.2. Vegetation characteristics across the Western Mogollon Plateau Landscape.
Hopi
Hopi
§¨¦
17
§¨¦
40
§¨¦
40
Navajo
Navajo
Havasupai
Havasupai
SHOW LOW
SHOW LOW
FLAGSTAFF
FLAGSTAFF
Western Mogollon Landscape
Southwest ReGAP Landcover
Ponderosa Pine Woodland
Pinyon-Juniper Woodland
Other Evergreen Forests
Deciduous Forests
Shrub / Scrub
Grasslands / Herbaceous
Barren Lands
Altered or Disturbed Lands
Developed
Water
±
33.2%
32.4%
15.2%
10.0%
1.6%
3.8%
0.5%
2.6%
0.4%
0.3%
Source: http://earth.gis.usu.edu/swgap/
American Indian Reservation
Total acreage: 4,694,243
Percent in each Landcover category:
0
50
Miles
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

113
Western Mogollon Plateau
▲Figure 9.8.3.  Fire Regime Condition characteristics of Vegetation in the Western Mogollon Plateau landscape.
The Western Mogollon landscape has undergone significant environmental change over the past 120 years due to both 
human and natural forces. These include domestic livestock grazing, fire suppression industrial logging, development, 
predator extermination, and climate variability.  Resulting changes include extirpation of wildlife species, increased 
abundance of exotic species, and encroachment of urban areas into wildlands.  
Past management has most affected ponderosa pine forests. By removing grasses that limited tree seedlings  and 
carried frequent fires, livestock grazing and fire suppression helped to increase tree densities, and ladder and surface 
fuels. This has increased the threat of uncharacteristic crown fire--threatening human and ecological communities 
alike.  Industrial logging has contributed to declines in old growth conditions and associated biodiversity. Natural 
resource values at risk include forest and woodland communities, watershed function, soil productivity, stream erosion 
and flooding, aquatic systems, air pollution from wildfire, and wildlife and endangered species habitat. 
The past decade’s drought caused die-off in pinyon-juniper, ponderosa, aspen and mixed conifer forests, contributing 
to increased fuel loads in the forests. The build out of communities into forests has compounded these problems, more 
and more putting human values at risk. At the same time, significant efforts are underway in the Western Mogollon 
Plateau landscape to implement ecological restoration projects, especially in the ponderosa pine forests.  Adaptive 
management is used to refine approaches to ecosystem restoration.  Limitations are primarily the result of insufficient 
resources to treat the extensive public lands in the area, and the lack of utilization opportunities for the forest 
products produced and harvested during treatment activities.
Figures 9.8.3 depicts Western Mogollon landscape forest conditions as related to fire and the extent of their departure 
from natural variability. Class III represents conditions that are highly departed from natural variability, as is the 
case for 65% of the Western Mogollon Plateau. Much of the mixed conifer and ponderosa pine forests in this region 
fall in either Fire 
Regime Condition 
Class II or III, with 
increased surface and 
ladder fuels on sites 
formerly dominated 
by large resilient 
trees. Forests that 
naturally experience 
infrequent, severe 
fires, like spruce-fir 
forests or some pinyon-
juniper woodlands 
are generally not in 
need of ecological 
restoration, at least 
from a fire standpoint, 
and would be 
considered as Class 
I, within the range of 
natural variability. 
Current Conditions
Hopi
Hopi
§¨¦
17
§¨¦
40
§¨¦
40
Navajo
Navajo
Havasupai
Havasupai
SHOW LOW
SHOW LOW
FLAGSTAFF
FLAGSTAFF
±
Source: http://www.landfire.gov/index.php
American Indian Reservation
Total acreage: 4,694,243
Percent in each FRC category:
0
50
Miles
8%
26%
65%
1%
Western Mogollon Landscape
Fire Regime Conditon
Class I
Class II
Class III
Other
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

114
Western Mogollon Plateau
Communities
The Greater Flagstaff area is the hub of 
activity for the Western Mogollon Plateau 
region, with Flagstaff the largest urban area 
within the landscape (population 65,000).  Other 
communities include Williams, Parks/Bellemont, 
Winslow, Sedona, Munds Park, Happy Jack and the Blue Ridge developments, Payson, Pine/Strawberry and Forest 
Lakes.  The edge of the Navajo Nation abuts the northeast edge of the landscape, but there are no major communities 
in this area. However, on the Hualapai Reservation, which is included in the northwest edge of the Western Mogollon 
landscape, the community of Supai has been assigned a high risk rating (Arizona State Land Department).  
Four Community Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPPs) have been developed within the Western Mogollon Plateau region 
(Figure 9.8.4.), covering 43 communities, including the Greater Flagstaff area, Williams, Tusayan, and Rim Country 
(Payson). The Sitgreaves (Heber/Overgaard area) CWPP spans the Western Mogollon Plateau and the White Mountain 
regions. Each of these plans identifies community values at risk and suggests strategies and actions necessary for living 
safely within fire-adapted landscapes. However, 20 communities and recreation sites designated as at-risk, including 
four in the Grand Canyon South Rim area, are not included in any CWPP, although the communities in the Blue Ridge 
area are reported to have begun developing a CWPP. The Central Navajo County CWPP, which spans the Western 
Mogollogn Plateau and White Mountains landscape is currently being developed. Increased community fire preparedness 
will decrease risks associated with unwanted fires while making it safer and easier for managers to use beneficial fires 
in surrounding forests.
▲Figure 9.8.4.  Community Wildfire Protection Plans in the Western Mogollon Plateau landscape.
§¨¦
40
§¨¦
17
§¨¦
40
Sitgreaves CWPP
Greater Flagstaff Area CWPP
Central Navajo County CWPP
Rim Country CWPP
Greater Williams Area CWPP
Tusayan CWPP
Western Mogollon Plateau
Western Mogollon Plateau
SHOW LOW
SHOW LOW
FLAGSTAFF
FLAGSTAFF
±
Source: Forestry Division of the Arizona
State Land Department
Western Mogollon Plateau Landscape
CWPP Planning
Plan Complete
In Development
Total acreage: 4,694,243
0
50
Miles
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

115
Western Mogollon Plateau
Wildlife
Current Wildlife Habitat Characteristics 
In southwestern ponderosa pine forests, wildlife habitat structure 
has become more homogeneous over time because of fire suppression, 
timber harvest strategies, and grazing pressure on the understory 
vegetation.  These pressures have caused a reduction in large old trees, 
an increase in pole size trees, reduced age and size class diversity, more even spacing of trees, and a simplification of 
the understory. 
In the pinyon – juniper woodlands, wildlife habitats have undergone a reduction in both structural diversity and 
vegetation species diversity as a result of a reduction in wildfire and grazing.  These factors have often resulted in 
woodlands that are largely not very productive for wildlife.  In the mixed conifer wildlife habitat structure has also 
become more homogeneous due to fire protection and the lack of aspen regeneration. 
The lowered diversity in structure and vegetation composition has had a major impact on wildlife habitat in these 
vegetation communities.  The relative lack of habitat features such as snags, hollow trees, downed logs, and shrub/oak 
understories reduces the overall density and diversity of wildlife using the forest.
Selected Wildlife Species
Given its topographic diversity and resulting vegetation diversity, the Western Mogollon Plateau landscape provides 
habitat for a wide array of forest-dependent species.  The Mexican spotted owl (Strix occidentalis lucida) a federally-
listed threatened species, is considered a species of special concern by the Arizona Game and Fish Department 
(AZGFD), and a sensitive species by the U.S. Forest Service. They breed primarily in dense, old growth, mixed-conifer 
for ests located on steep slopes, and especially in deep, shady ravines. In Arizona, they occur primarily in ponderosa, 
mixed-conifer, pine-oak, and evergreen oak forests. 
The northern goshawk (Accipiter gentilis) is listed as a management indicator species by the United States Forest 
Service, and is considered highly sensitive to management.  Avian communities have been well-studied in the area, and 
several species including the pygmy nuthatch (Sitta pygmaea) and hairy woodpecker (Picoides villosus) are considered 
management indicator species by the Forest Service. 
Tassel-eared squirrels (Sciurus aberti) are a specialist in ponderosa pine, being dependant on pine seeds, terminal 
buds, and mycorrhizal truffles as food sources. They play a key role in dispersing spores 
from mycorrhizal fungi symbionts of ponderosa pine, are an important prey species for the 
goshawk, and are considered a management indicator species in National Forests.  
Pronghorn (Antilocapra americana) habitat exists throughout the area, especially in montane 
grasslands.   Pronghorn are considered sensitive to management in Arizona and are listed as 
a management indicator species by the Forest 
Service. The mule deer (Odocoileus hemionus) is 
an indicator species of early-seral stages of aspen 
and pinyon-juniper woodlands.  Early-seral stages 
of ponderosa pine, mixed-conifer, and chaparral habitats are also important 
for this species.  Mule deer typically summer at higher elevations in aspen 
and ponderosa pine forests, and winter in pinyon-juniper woodlands found 
at lower elevations.  They are browsers and prefer herbaceous, green 
shoots and fruits of shrubs and trees, but also feed on and grasses.  
Additional species with significant habitat across the Western Mogollon 
Plateau that have been identified as important within the context of 
forest management include Merriam’s wild turkeys (Meleagris gallopavo 
merriami),  black bear (Ursus americanus), and American elk (Cervus elaphus). 
Photo courtexy of AZGFD
Photo courtexy of AZGFD
Photo courtexy of AZGFD
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

116
Western Mogollon Plateau
Fire
Fire is a keystone ecosystem process, 
meaning it regulates a wide range of 
other ecological factors, including 
structure, composition, pattern, soil 
development and retention, insect 
and other animal populations, nutrient 
cycling, hydrology, and carbon storage. 
The natural variability of fires differs 
across ecosystems. In high severity 
fire forests, like spruce-fir forests, 
infrequent, high-severity crown fires are typical. Climatic variation, through its effects on the moisture content of live 
fuels and larger dead fuels, is the principal influence on fire frequency and severity. In mixed-severity fire forests, like 
mixed-conifer forests, the historical fire regime includes both low-severity surface fires and high-severity crown fires. 
Both fuels and climate influence the frequency, severity, and size of fires in these forests. In low-severity fire forests, 
like ponderosa pine forests, frequent, low-severity surface fires characterized the historical fire regime, which was 
regulated by the variation in fine fuels over space and time. Periodic fire is also important for restarting aspen forests 
which may be dominated by mixed conifer forests in the absence of fire. 
Droughts are prolonged periods of below normal precipitation.  They last from a few years to a several decades.  
Prolonged drought results in less water for plants, animals, and people.  Fire activity increases during droughts as 
forest vegetation dries and dry, hot, and windy weather helps fires spread.   Drought can change the makeup and 
structure of forests and shift boundaries between them.  These changes may last for decades and affect populations of 
wildlife that depend on certain types of vegetation.  Droughts also affect the availability of natural resources, including 
snow pack, spring and stream flows, lake and reservoir levels, and growth and availability of timber and forage.  
Figure 9.8.5. describes 
predicted fire behavior under 
90th percentile fire weather 
conditions.  Under these 
conditions, most (63%) of 
the landscape is predicted to 
experience passive crown fire 
behavior, while crown fire is 
predicted across 26% of the 
landscape and ground fire 
across  11%.
▲Figure 9.8.5. Predicted Fire Behavior in the Western Mogollon Plateau 
landscape.
Hopi
Hopi
§¨¦
17
§¨¦
40
§¨¦
40
Navajo
Navajo
Havasupai
Havasupai
SHOW LOW
SHOW LOW
FLAGSTAFF
FLAGSTAFF
±
Source: http://forestera.nau.edu/
American Indian Reservation
Total acreage: 4,694,243
Percent in each Crown Fire Behavior
category:
0
50
Miles
11%
63%
26%
Western Mogollon Landscape
Crown Fire Behavior
Ground Fire Only
Passive Crown Fire
Active Crown Fire
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

117
Western Mogollon Plateau
Watersheds
The Western Mogollon landsacpe contains the boundary separating two major Arizona watersheds (Figure 6):  The 
Verde River watershed to the south and the Little Colorado River watershed to the north. Volcanic soils and fractured 
base rock allows the sparse rainfall and snowmelt (averaging from 10–25 inches annually) to percolate through to deep 
aquifers, which also feeds occasional surface springs and springs along slopes with exposed geologic strata.  
These highlands are the headwaters for numerous water courses that feed the Verde River to the south and Little 
Colorado to the north. Some streams in the area discharge to closed basins and percolate into the substrate. Little 
Colorado tributaries are mostly gently sloping washes and ravines with intermittent flow, while those feeding the 
Verde typically follow steeper gradients through deep canyons.  Sycamore, Oak, Beaver, Clear and Fossil Creeks are 
examples of the latter.  Several communities get drinking water from surface water features (Lake Mary and Blue Ridge 
Reservoir) where the watersheds are subject to potentially negative impacts from wildfire.
▲ Figure 9.8.6. Third-order watersheds (basins) in the Western Mogollon Plateau.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

118
Western Mogollon Plateau
Collaborative Efforts
Several collaborative efforts exist in the Western Mogollon landscape.  
Some of these were formed expressly for the purpose of developing 
CWPPs. The greater Williams area Community Wildfire Protection Plan 
(CWPP) is a collaborative effort between the City of Williams, Coconino 
County, Parks-Bellemont Fire District, Sherwood Forest Estates Fire 
District, Kaibab National Forest, Arizona State Land Department, and concerned citizens. The collaborative process for 
developing the Tusayan Community Wildfire Protection Plan began May 5, 2004 at a Tusayan/Grand Canyon Chamber 
of Commerce Board meeting in Tusayan. Five committee members, representing various interested parties, were 
appointed that day. Other State and Federal representatives were then invited to participate. Federal, state, county, 
local and Tribal governments, public utilities, local private businesses, and individual citizens joined together to 
develop the Rim Country Community Wildfire Protection Plan.
In the Flagstaff area, The Grand Canyon Forests Partnership was created after the 1996 wildfire season, when the 
Hochderffer, Horseshoe and Bridger-Knoll fires burned more than 75,000 acres in the Coconino and Kaibab National 
forests near Flagstaff and the Grand Canyon. These devastating wildfires revealed the need to return the forests 
surrounding Flagstaff to a more natural tree-density level. Later renamed the Greater Flagstaff Forest Partnership 
(GFFP), the organization has a 25-member Partnership Advisory Board, which reaches decisions through consensus. 
The partners include the Coconino County Farm Bureau and Cattle Growers Association, Coconino Natural Resource 
Conservation District, Cocopai Resource Conservation and Development District, Ecological Restoration Institute, 
Flagstaff Chamber of Commerce, Flagstaff Native Plant and Seed, Grand Canyon Trust, Greater Flagstaff Economic 
Council, Highlands Fire Department, Indigenous Community Enterprises, Northern Arizona Conservation Corps, Northern 
Arizona University, Perkins Timber Harvesting, Ponderosa Fire Advisory Council, Practical Mycology, The Nature 
Conservancy, Society of American Foresters-Northern Arizona Chapter, Southwest Environmental Consultants, The 
Arboretum at Flagstaff, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and city, county and state officials.
GFFP has three primary goals:
Restore natural ecosystem functions in ponderosa pine forests surrounding Flagstaff;
Manage forest fuels to reduce the risk of catastrophic wildfire; and
Research and test key ecological, economic and social dimensions of restoration efforts.
•
•
•
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

119
Western Mogollon Plateau
Planning and implementing forest restoration and community 
protection efforts is expensive.  A factor limiting these efforts is 
public funding.  Opportunities for maximizing the benefits of limited 
public funding exist both in planning treatment types and sequencing, 
and private sector utilization of small trees and biomass.  Strategic 
planning of treatment types and sequencing can reduce per-acre costs by positioning relatively costly mechanical 
treatments in a way that facilitates wildland fire use, comparatively less expensive, across broader landscapes. While 
wildland fire use can cost as little as $10 per acre, mechanical treatments can exceed $1000. The goal is to increase 
acres treated, while decreasing unit costs.
Where mechanical treatments are warranted, there is an opportunity to reduce treatment costs by increasing the 
value of small trees thinned. However, capacity to utilize small diameter trees is limited. While the Western Mogollon 
Plateau region supported a thriving timber business for decades, the last local pulp mill closed in the mid-nineties. 
Although logging contractors continue to treat forests and remove material, end uses for restoration products are 
limited, to fire wood, mulch, occasional poles and cants for dimension lumber, etc.  The largest consumer of material 
removed from the forest is a pallet manufacturer and mulch producer in Phoenix, who recently built an additional 
processing plant in Ash Fork.  Attempts to locate biomass energy plants in the region have been unsuccessful to date. 
Potential large users that have looked at the area have not moved forward with investment in operations due to 
limited guaranteed supply of wood from public lands.  
The Greater Flagstaff Economic Council works to recruit small diameter timber users. Prospects are usually concerned 
about their ability to procure a predictable, long-term supply of small diameter wood. Most in the region agree that 
Economics
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

120
Western Mogollon Plateau
Implementation and 
Management 
The Western Mogollon Plateau is a microcosm of issues facing many of the forested areas of the state.  These issues 
include degraded forests, communities at risk of wildfire, limited small diamter utilization opportunities, established 
collaborative processes, and lack of a cohesive landscape-scale strategy for comprehensive fire management and 
restoration.  Despite these challenges, collaborators are moving forward with the most critical actions and continue 
their efforts to reach lofty goals.
Tens of thousands of acres of community protection and restoration treatments 
are planned, or being implemented in the Western Mogollon landscape (Table 
1).  Many of these treatments, including home ignitablity efforts and treatments 
occuring on non-federal lands, are tiered to Community Wildfire Protection 
Plans.  While continued implementation of CWPPs is a critical priority, 
integrating these into a broader landscape strategy is necessary to develop an 
ecologically sound, socially viable, and maximally efficient landscape-scale 
strategy for managing fire, restoring forests, and protecting communities.
Successful restoration will require that the entire landscape be zoned and 
assigned spatially explicit fire management and restoration objectives. 
Implementation activities can and should be prioritized, sequenced, and 
coordinated within and between zones. Given the critical ecological, social, 
and economic role played by fire across the entire landscape, collaborative and 
science-based fire management planning should provide an adequate starting 
point for zoning, delineation of management objectives, and sequencing of 
implementation activities. As such, fire management should be considered a 
critical landscape context for ecological restoration.  
With ongoing fire management planning, forest plan revisions underway, and 
a seemingly insurmountable challenge before us, the need to coordinated, 
strategic landscape-scale planning and implementation has never seemed 
greater. As is reflected in recommendations herein, successful restoration will 
require a comprehensive approach that considers communities, ecosystems and 
landscapes together.  
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

121
Western Mogollon Plateau
Future Restoration Needs
From a restoration standpoint, current conditions in the Western Mogollon landscape warrant as a highest priority 
community protection treatments in and around at-risk communities and restoration treatments in degraded ponderosa 
pine forests.  In these areas the costs of inaction are greatest.  Facilitating treatments will require significant public 
and private resources, viable, appropriately scaled utilization capacity for small trees and biomass, and a coherent and 
broadly supported restoration strategy that, building upon CWPPs, spatially defines fire management and restoration 
objectives, treatment strategies and sequencing across the entire landscape.  
Recommendations
Collaboratively define and map fire management and restoration objectives, treatment strategies and   
 
 
treatment sequencing strategies to inform Fire Management and Forest Plan Revisions for the Western Mogollon  
 
landscape.
Prioritize treatments to maximize efficiency and return on investment – CWPP’s, USFS, community  
 
 
 
collaborative plans, FIREMAP.
Rapidly complete work in the wildland/urban interface zone to protect  communities and infrastructure and  
 
 
allow greater flexibility in treatments for wildland ecosystems – CWPP’s.
Increase public education about the need for and benefits of large-scale treatment, prescribed fire, and  
 
 
wildland fire use. 
Enhance the use of prescribed and natural fire as a treatment tool and  addressing the impacts of associated  
 
 
smoke.
Build appropriately scaled economic capacity to accelerate treatment  implementation and produce higher  
 
 
value-added benefits from large volume of material removed during mechanical thinning.
Coordinte supply across multiple forests to assure efficient utilization and limiting transportation costs.
Assure stakeholder involvement in the collaborative processes addressing these issues.
Expand planning horizons to address longer-term and restoration-based  sustainable supply.
Expand monitoring and research activities to assess potential and real impacts  of various projects and   
 
 
programs.
Implement more structured application of adaptive management to assure lessons learned are applied to future  
 
management programs and actions.
Enhance integration of forest restoration and fuel reduction treatments on public land and requisite Firewise   
 
and defensible space actions on private land.
Develop appropriate statutes, ordinances and codes to allow governmental entities to address the causes and   
 
results of wildland/urban interface conflicts.
Increase funding across the board (federal, state, local  and private) to achieve  targeted treatment priorities   
 
and longer-term goals.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

Western Mogollon Plateau
122
References
Allen, C.D., Savage, M., Falk, D.A., Suckling, K.F., Swetnam, T.W., Schulke, T., Stacey, P.B., Morgan, P., Hoffman,  
 
 
M., and J.T. Klingel. 2002. Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems: a broad   
 
 
perspective. Ecological Applications 12(5): 1488-1433.
Belsky A.J. and D.M. Blumenthal. 1997. Effects of livestock grazing on stand dynamics and soils in upland forests of the   
 
Interior West. Conservation Biology 11(2) 316-327.
Breshears, D. D., N. S. Cobb, P. M. Rich, K. P. Price, C. D. Allen, R. G. Balice, W. H. Romme, J. H. Kastens, M. L. Floyd,   
 
J. Belnap, J. J. Anderson, O. B. Myers, and C. W. Meyer. 2005. Regional vegetation die-off in response   
 
 
to global-change type drought. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA: 102:115144 -15148 
Covington WW and Moore MM. 1994. Southwestern ponderosa pine forest structure and resource conditions: changes  
 
 
since Euro-American settlement. J Forest. 92: 39–47.
Dodd et al 1998
Falk, D. A.  2006.  Process-centered restoration in a fire-adapted ponderosa pine forest.  Journal for Nature  
 
 
 
Conservation, 14:140—151.
Fulé, P.Z., J.E. Crouse, T.A. Heinlein, M.M. Moore, W.W. Covington, and G. Verkamp. 2003. Mixed-Severity Fire Regime   
 
in a High-Elevation Forest: Grand Canyon, Arizona. Landscape Ecology 18:465-486.
Moir, W. H., B. Geils, M.A. Benoit, and D. Scurlock. 1997. Ecology of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests.  
 
 
 
Pages 3-27 in Block, William M. and D.M. Finch, tech. ed. Songbird ecology in southwestern ponderosa pine  
 
 
forests: a literature review. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Dept. of Agriculture,   
 
 
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 152 p. 
Rebertus, A. J., Veblan, T. T., Roovers, L. M., and Mast, J. N. 1992.  Structure and dynamics of old-growth Engelmann   
 
spruce-subalpine fir in Colorado. Old-growth forests in the Southwest and Rocky Mountain regions, proceedings   
 
of a workshop, M. R. Kaufmann, W. H. Moir, and R. L. Bassett, eds., United States Department of Agriculture  
 
 
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, General Technical Report RM-213, Portal,   
 
Arizona.
Romme, W.H., L. Floyd-Hanna, D.D. Hanna, and E. Bartlett. 2001. Aspen’s Ecological Role in the West.  Pp. 243-259  
 
 
in W.D Shepperd, D. Binkley, D.L. Bartos, T.J. Stohlgren, and L.G. Eskew, compilers. Sustaining Aspen   
 
 
in Western Landscapes: Symposium Proceedings; 13-15 June 2000; Grand Junction, CO. Proceedings RMRS-P-18.  
 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. Fort Collins, CO.
Schoennagel, T., T.T. Vevblen, and W.H. Romme. 2004. The interaction of fire, fuels and climate across rocky mountain   
 
forests. Bioscience. 54:7.
Management Indicator Species Status Report for the Coconino National Forest, July 1, 2002.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

Landscape: 
123
Landscape: White Mountains
The White Mountains landscape encompasses an area 7.3 million acres in size, and includes the Apache-Sitgreaves 
National Forests, White Mountain Apache Tribal Lands in the Fort Apache Reservation, portions of the San Carlos Apache 
Reservation, and scattered BLM, State, and private lands. Ranging from desert grassland at 3,000 feet to the summit 
of Mt. Baldy at over 11,400 feet, this landscape is large and diverse. It contains both rural hubs such as Show Low, and 
large remote regions like the Blue Range Primitive Area. Occasional heavy winter snows and summer monsoon rains give 
rise to numerous perennial streams and lakes in the high country, a notable feature in a state where surface water is 
not common. Because of the cool temperatures and abundant precipitation, much of the region is thickly forested with 
spruce-fir, aspen, mixed conifer, and ponderosa pine forest types. Subalpine grassland parks are scattered throughout 
forests above approximately 9,000 feet, some of them quite large. Pinyon-juniper woodlands and semi-arid grasslands 
are found throughout much of the lower elevations. The White Mountains landscape is ecologically, culturally, and 
economically diverse.
Sky Islands
Sky Islands
White Mountains
White Mountains
Central
Highlands
Central
Highlands
Northeastern Woodlands
Northeastern Woodlands
Western Mogollon Plateau
Western Mogollon Plateau
Arizona Strip
Arizona Strip
Kaibab
Plateau
Kaibab
Plateau
Chuska
Mountains
Chuska
Mountains
Basin
and
Range
Basin
and
Range
§¨¦
8
§¨¦
10
§¨¦
17
§¨¦
19
§¨¦
15
§¨¦
10
§¨¦
10
§¨¦
40
§¨¦
40
PAGE
PAGE
TUCSON
TUCSON
KINGMAN
KINGMAN
PHOENIX
PHOENIX
SHOW LOW
SHOW LOW
FLAGSTAFF
FLAGSTAFF
0
30
60
90
120
150
15
Miles
±
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

▲ Figure 9.9.1. Land Ownership status in the White Mountains landscape. 
In much the same manner as other forested landscapes throughout the state, the White Mountains landscape spans 
several large land ownership and management units (Figure 9.9.1).  The White Mountain Apache reservation is wholly 
contained within this landscape, as is about half of the San Carlos Apache Reservation. Together, these reservations 
occupy 2.85 million acres of the White Mountains landscape. Tribal lands are bordered to the north, east, and west 
by national forest lands, which are in turn bordered to the north by a checkerboard of state and private lands, and to 
the south by private and Bureau of Land Management lands.  Private lands, primarily found in or near the Sitgreaves 
portion of the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests, are embedded within a public lands matrix, and account for 
approximately 12% of the landscape.
Land Ownership
White Mountains
124
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

125
Arizona Strip
Forests
White Mountains
Forests
▲Figure 9.9.2. Vegetation characteristics in the White Mountain Landscape.
The forests of the White Mountains region are diverse, due to the great elevational 
and topographic diversity in the region (Figure 9.9.2). Along and above the Mogollon 
Rim, forests include a vast portion of Arizona’s famous ponderosa pine belt, primarily 
found within the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests. These forests are largely 
overstocked, stressed, and susceptible to landscape-scale stand-replacement fire, as 
was demonstrated in the Rodeo-Chediski burn of 2002. The higher terrain contains 
mixed conifer, aspen, and spruce-fir forests, particularly in the vicinity of Mount 
Baldy and the Alpine Ranger District of the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests. Ponderosa pine forests continue below 
the rim until pinyon-juniper becomes more predominant with decreasing elevational and moisture gradients. Due to 
the diverse topography in White Mountain Apache Tribal lands and within the Clifton district of the Apache-Sitgreaves 
National Forests chaparral, pinyon-juniper, ponderosa pine, and dry mixed-conifer forests are found in close proximity 
to one another. Mountainous terrain in San Carlos Apache Tribal lands contains ponderosa pine, pinyon-juniper, and 
pine-oak woodland forests, along with chaparral. Pinyon-juniper and semi-arid grassland ecosystems are found in the 
lowest elevations, such as the gently rolling terrain north of the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests and portions of the 
Gila River drainage near the New Mexico border and within the San Carlos Apache Reservation.
§¨¦
17
§¨¦
10
§¨¦
8
§¨¦
19
§¨¦
10
TUCSON
TUCSON
PHOENIX
PHOENIX
SHOW LOW
SHOW LOW
San Carlos Apache
San Carlos Apache
White Mountain Apache
White Mountain Apache
White Mountains Landscape
Southwest ReGAP Landcover
Pinyon-Juniper Woodland
Ponderosa Pine Woodland
Grasslands / Herbaceous
Other Shrub / Scrub
A-C Mesquite Upland Scrub
M. Pine-Oak Forest and Woodland
Other Evergreen Forests
Other
±
29%
21%
18%
11%
8%
6% 4% 3%
Source: http://earth.gis.usu.edu/swgap/
Percent in each Landcover category:
Total acreage: 7,299,811
American Indian Reservation
0
50
25
Miles
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

126
Current Conditions
Arizona Strip
▲Figure 9.9.3. Fire Regime Condition characteristics of vegetation in the White Mountains landscape.
Forest conditions in the White Mountains landscape are like those throughout Arizona: most forests are unhealthy 
due to past land use practices, alterations of natural processes, and recent natural phenomena such as drought and 
insect outbreaks. Ponderosa pine and mixed-conifer forests are both denser and more homogenous compared to their 
natural historic conditions. This makes the trees more stressed and the forests more susceptible to uncharacteristic 
stand-replacing wildfire. Abundance and diversity of understory plant species in these forest types are also diminished, 
leading to degraded suitability for many wildlife species. Pinyon-juniper systems also contain greater tree densities 
and less understory than occur under natural conditions, and many grassland ecosystems are degraded. Many of the 
region’s communities are at risk of damage from wildland fire, as the 2002 Rodeo-Chediski fire illustrated. Forty-three 
percent (3.14 million acres) of the landscape is classified as Fire Regime condition class III (Figure 9.9.3), largely in the 
ponderosa pine, mixed-conifer, and pinyon-juniper forests types, with another 3.34 million acres (46%) in condition 
class II.
A number of programs and initiatives have developed to address forest health issues in the White Mountains. These 
include the White Mountain Stewardship Project, the nation’s largest (and first 10-year) stewardship contract, which 
is working to treat approximately 150,000 acres in the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests, much of it in the Wildland-
Urban Interface. The Clifton ranger district (the southernmost district of the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests) has 
implemented landscape-scale management and restoration programs in recent years which include a large component 
of prescribed fire and wildland fire use, combined with mechanical treatments and other activities. The White 
Mountain Apache Tribe has used prescribed fire and an active timber management program to deal with forest fuels and 
unhealthy stand conditions, 
with the possibility of 
using wildland fire in the 
future. Current Tribal forest 
management programs 
include a hazardous 
fuel reduction program 
and a wildland-urban 
interface program tasked 
with creating defensible 
space around all human 
habitations. However, 
funding for these programs, 
and creating markets for 
the small-diameter wood 
removed as part of them, 
are ongoing challenges to 
full implementation.
Current Conditions
White Mountains
§¨¦
17
§¨¦
10
§¨¦
8
§¨¦
19
§¨¦
10
TUCSON
TUCSON
PHOENIX
PHOENIX
SHOW LOW
SHOW LOW
San Carlos Apache
San Carlos Apache
White Mountain Apache
White Mountain Apache
±
Source: http://www.landfire.gov/index.php
Percent in each FRC category:
Total acreage: 7,299,811
American Indian Reservation
0
50
Miles
46%
43%
0.4%
9.4%
0.4% 0.3%
0.2%
Sky Islands Landscape
Fire Regime Condition
Condition Class I
Condition Class II
Condition Class III
Bare Rock/Sand/Clay
Urban/Transportation/Mines/Quarries
Agriculture
Other
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

127
White Mountains
Communities
The White Mountains landscape contains a number of human 
communities, many of which have strong cultural and economic ties to 
surrounding forests. The northern portion of the landscape contains some 
of the region’s largest communities: Show Low, Snowflake, Taylor, Pinetop-
Lakeside, Springerville, and Eagar, as well as smaller communities such as 
Pinedale, Clay Springs, Heber, Overgaard, Greer, Alpine, Nutrioso and others. 
Many of these communities were greatly affected by the 2002 Rodeo-Chediski Fire. Both the Fort Apache and San 
Carlos Reservations contain several communities within or near forests of the White Mountains Landscape, including 
Whiteriver, Fort Apache, McNary, Bylas, and San Carlos. The mining communities 
of Clifton and Morenci are found in the southeast portion of this landscape. Many 
of the aforementioned communities currently rely or relied historically on wood 
products from surrounding forests; several communities currently rely on forests for 
tourism and amenity income.
A large number of the communities in the White Mountains landscape are considered 
to be at risk of wildland fire. Many of these communities have participated in the 
development of CWPPs (Figure 9.9.4), and some have begun work implementing 
their plans. Other at-risk communities have yet to develop wildfire protection plans, 
and some have limited capacity to respond to wildfire emergencies. The White 
Mountains landscape in general, and the Sitgreaves Forest region in particular, is 
currently experiencing rapid residential and vacation/resort development, nearly all 
of it taking place in close proximity to fire-prone forests. Indeed, it is the forested 
environment itself which is a major draw for tourists, retirees, second-home 
owners, residents of Arizona’s urban centers, and others. At the same time, even 
some of the most desirable destination communities contain areas of rural poverty. 
Preparing for and responding to wildland fire emergencies is likely to be a particularly great challenge for those living 
on limited incomes.
▲Figure 9.9.4. Community Wildfire Protection Plans in the White Mountain Landscape
▲Sunrise Ski Resort on White Mountain 
Apache Reservation 
Graham County CWPP
§¨¦
17
§¨¦
10
§¨¦
10
Sitgreaves CWPP
Greenlee County CWPP
Central Navajo County CWPP
Northern Apache Forest CWPP
Rim Country CWPP
White Mountains
White Mountains
TUCSON
TUCSON
SHOW LOW
SHOW LOW
PHOENIX
PHOENIX
±
Source: Forestry Division of the Arizona
State Land Department
White Mountains Landscape
CWPP Planning
Plan Complete
In Development
Total acreage: 7,299,811
0
50
Miles
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

128
Wildlife issues in the White Mountains landscape are closely related to the 
degradation of habitat in all forest types, particularly ponderosa pine, mixed 
conifer, and pinyon-juniper systems. Tassel-eared (Abert’s) squirrel, mule deer, 
forest songbirds, and Merriam’s turkey are species of particular importance. 
Mexican spotted owls and northern goshawks are found in denser forest habitats 
across all ownerships, particularly on White Mountain Apache Tribal lands and on 
the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests. In addition, the bald eagle, southwest willow flycatcher, Chiricahua leopard 
frog, Apache trout, Gila trout, Little Colorado Spinedace, Loach Minnow, spikedace, razorback sucker, and Gila chub 
are all listed as threatened or endangered under the Endangered Species Act. Most of these sensitive species rely in 
part or entirely on the region’s surface water and associated riparian zones, which make up a small portion of the total 
area in the White Mountains landscape but account for a large proportion of its biological diversity.
The Mexican wolf, a subspecies of the Gray wolf, is a wildlife species of concern 
in the White Mountains landscape. Largely exterminated from the United States 
and Mexico by 1970, the Mexican Wolf was listed as endangered under the 
Endangered Species Act in 1976. In 1998  Mexican 11 captive-reared Mexican 
wolves were released to the wild in the Blue Range Wolf Recovery Area. A 
Memorandum of Understanding has been established to oversee the recovery 
process in Arizona and New Mexico. Participating cooperators include the Arizona 
Game and Fish Department, New Mexico Department of Game and Fish, U.S. 
Department of Agriculture- Forest Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture- 
Wildlife Services, White Mountain Apache Tribe, New Mexico Department of 
Agriculture, and Greenlee County. 
A major challenge of wildlife management in the White Mountains landscape 
is protecting and enhancing wildlife habitat while improving forest health and 
reducing catastrophic fire risk. Past forest management has resulted in a deficit 
of large, old trees and led to current overstocked, homogenous forest conditions 
across much of the landscape. Fire risk reduction treatments, particularly in the 
wildland-urban interface, can conflict with wildlife habitat needs, particularly 
when those treatments produce even tree spacing and relatively even-aged or 
even-sized distributions. Other wildlife issues include herbivore impacts on aspen regeneration and on fine fuels, and 
conflicts between introduced game species (such as rainbow trout) and the native species (such as Apache trout) that 
they compete with.
Wildlife
White Mountains
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

Arizona Strip
Fire
129
White Mountains
The White Mountains landscape contains tremendous vegetation 
diversity due in large part to its broad elevational range (xxx 
to xxx feet).  Discrete fire regimes vary significantly across 
these vegetation types, and are further complicated in areas of 
intermixing and ecological transitions. Due to the unnaturally 
dense and high fuel load conditions found in many of the region’s 
ponderosa pine, mixed conifer, and even some pinyon-juniper 
forests, the potential for unnaturally severe fire is high. Fire 
Regime Conditions reflect the unnatural conditions of Forests in the White Mountain landscape (Figure 9.9.5). The 
Rodeo-Chediski fire burned across nearly a half million acres of White Mountain Apache Tribal lands and the adjacent 
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest in 2002, displaying some of the most extreme fire behavior ever recorded in 
ponderosa pine forests. The fire resulted in the loss of 426 structures, many of them residential, and the evacuation of 
thousands of White Mountains area residents. The Rodeo-Chediski, along with other major fires in the White Mountains 
in recent years, illustrate the potential result of continued declines in forest health in the region. Although both the 
Rodeo and Chediski components of the infamous burn were human-caused, the White Mountains region receives locally 
heavy lightning activity. The combination of high ignition potential, overstocked forest conditions, and extensive 
wildland-urban interface development makes the White Mountains landscape a region of high concern for community 
protection.
Both the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests and the White Mountain Apache Tribe have prescribed fire programs, 
though the White Mountain Apache prescribed fire program has been curtailed in recent years, and wildland fire use has 
been used successfully in more remote regions of the Clifton district in the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest. Wildland 
fire use may also 
be a future option 
available on White 
Mountain Apache 
Tribal lands.
§¨¦
17
§¨¦
10
§¨¦
8
§¨¦
19
§¨¦
10
TUCSON
TUCSON
PHOENIX
PHOENIX
SHOW LOW
SHOW LOW
San Carlos Apache
San Carlos Apache
White Mountain Apache
White Mountain Apache
±
Source: http://forestera.nau.edu/
Percent in each Crown Fire Behavior
category:
Total acreage: 7,299,811
American Indian Reservation
0
50
Miles
53%
32%
15%
White Mountains Landscape
Crown Fire Behavior
Surface Fire Only
Passive Crown Fire
Active Crown Fire
▲Figure 9.9.5. Fire Regime Condition characteristics of vegetation in the White Mountains landscape.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

Watersheds
The White Mountains landscape is the source area for three 
major watersheds (Figure 9.9.6)  On the north the Little 
Colorado River has its head waters on Mt. Baldy, draining 
northward through many of the White Mountains’ more 
populated areas. Major tributaries originating in this portion 
of the White Mountains are Nutrioso Creek, Carnero Creek, and Silver Creek. Show Low Creek, and the Cottonwood/
Mortenson Wash Complex are critical components of the Silver Creek drainage.  The San Francisco River originates in 
the eastern and southern portion of the White Mountains landscape, flowing east into New Mexico, then south and west 
back into Arizona wh.ere it meets the Blue River and becomes a major tributary of the Gila River.  The Black River 
originates along the eastern slopes of Mt. Baldy, on White Mountain Apache Tribal lands and Apache-Sitgreaves National 
Forest. Along its southern reaches it marks the boundary between the White Mountains and the Sky Island landscape to 
the south. Reservation Creek, Pacheta Creek, and Bonita Creek drain the entire southern area of the White Mountains 
feeding the Black River.  On the north Paradise, Trout and Diamond Creeks are major contributors to the North Fork 
White River.  The White River confluences with the Black River twenty miles from White River marking the beginning 
of the Salt River.  Further to the west Carrizo and Cibeque Creeks feed into the Salt River representing the rest of the 
watershed system associated with the White Mountains area. 
Surface water is one of the most important elements of the White Mountains landscape, and is relied upon by wildlife 
and human populations for a variety of uses. Massive watershed sedimentation following landscape-scale crown fire is a 
real threat in this region. 
Arizona Strip
130
White Mountains
▲Figure 9.9.6. Third order watersheds (basins) in the White Mountain landscape.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

Arizona Strip
Collaborative Efforts
131
White Mountains
Local collaboration has been a defining characteristic 
of the White Mountains landscape. Community Wildfire 
Protection Plans have been developed for Greenlee County, 
Graham County, the “Rim Country” area northwest of the Fort 
Apache Reservation, communities of the northern portion 
of the Apache National Forest, and communities of the Sitgreaves National Forest. The Sitgreaves CWPP received 
a 2005 National Fire Plan award for Excellence in Collaboration, in part due to its cross-boundary collaboration 
between private lands, National Forest System lands, and Tribal lands within the Fort Apache Reservation. A CWPP is 
currently under development for central Navajo County north of the Sitgreaves National Forest. In addition, a number 
of longer-term collaborative efforts exist in the area, including the Natural Resources Working Group of the White 
Mountains, Upper Eagle Creek Watershed Association, Upper Little Colorado River Watershed Partnership, Show Low 
Creek Watershed Enhancement Partnership, and Little Colorado River Watershed Coordinating Council. The Southwest 
Sustainable Forests Partnership has been instrumental in 
encouraging and helping to develop local wood products 
businesses capable of utilizing small-diameter timber.
Local collaboration within the Natural Resources Working 
Group has been a key component in the planning and 
implementation of the White Mountain Stewardship 
Project. The contract includes funding for monitoring 
of the project’s effects, and the coordination of this 
monitoring is being led by the multiparty monitoring 
board, a collaborative body composed of various 
scientists and stakeholders from the region. In 2005, 
local stakeholders participated in the White Mountains 
Landscape Assessment project, a collaborative, science-
based approach to restoration planning at the landscape 
scale, based on GIS layers and tools developed within 
Northern Arizona University.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

Economic dependence on the natural resources 
base in the White Mountains landscape is complex and 
multifaceted. On one side there are community economic 
structures dependent on the extraction, processing and 
sale of products from the national and tribal forests. On 
the opposite side there are communities whose economic 
structure is based on the forests’ amenity values, and forest access for a multitude of recreational activities is of 
primary importance. Additionally, there are communities which represent a combination of both economic utilizations. 
Communities on the east (Apache County), south (Greenlee County) and in parts of both Apache Reservations are 
primarily extraction and processing while communities in the western and northern area (Navajo County) are largely 
amenity based with significant numbers of second homes and retirement dwellings.
The White Mountains area was one of the few regions in Arizona that did not completely lose its forest products 
infrastructure during the 1980s and early 1990s. This was due entirely to the White Mountain Apache Tribe which 
maintained an active forest products extraction and processing effort throughout. While economic capacity is still a 
major barrier to effective forest stewardship and restoration, having the basis for a credible economic prospect was 
essential to developing the current level of activity enjoyed throughout the area. Wood products created by local 
businesses include lumber, posts and poles, molding, pellet heating fuel, bioenergy, mulch, animal bedding, and other 
applications. The recent growth in wood products businesses can be attributed to both the persistence of a wood 
products economy through the lean years of the 1990’s and to the 
level of supply predictability that accompanied the announcement 
of the White Mountain Stewardship Project.
Increased utilization opportunities and marketing efforts have 
acted to reduce somewhat the cost per acre of restoration 
treatments implemented under the White Mountain Stewardship 
Project, but these treatments still operate at a net loss. Even 
with the relatively large number and variety of wood products 
businesses in the White Mountains, there is still a need for greater 
utilization capacity to deal with the by products of restoration 
treatments. Opportunities for locating wood products businesses 
have become more limited in recent years as some communities 
have wholly embraced amenity-based economies where milling 
and processing infrastructure is either unwelcome or is excluded 
due to land and real estate prices. 
Economics
Arizona Strip
132
White Mountains
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

Arizona Strip
Implementation and 
Management 
133
White Mountains
Implementation of the White Mountain Stewardship Project has 
been steady, though at times constrained by weather-related factors 
such as drought or excessive precipitation. To date, close to 16,000 
acres have been mechanically treated under the contract. Stewardship 
contract implementation has been aided by the expansion of utilization opportunities in the local area, but the need 
exists for continued funding of the contract as well as expanded economic utilization opportunities to offset treatment 
costs.
Implementation of Community Wildfire Protection Plans within the White Mountains Landscape has benefited from state 
and federal community protection grants, but treatment needs far exceed available funding. Some locales have hired 
CWPP coordinators to oversee implementation. As of yet, the federal dollars which were supposed to be prioritized 
to communities with CWPPs have not materialized, leaving many communities with viable plans but little means of 
implementing them. Forest management activities on White Mountain Apache and San Carlos Apache Tribal lands are 
continuing, but a lack of funding is slowing hazardous fuel reduction work, including defensible space creation in the 
wildland-urban interface.
Like all other Region 3 Forests, the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests are currently revising the Forest Plan guiding 
the management of these federal lands over the next ten year period. This presents a unique opportunity to address 
some of the most pressing issues related to declining forest health and the threat of unnaturally severe wildfire. 
White Mountain Apache Tribe
The WMAT landscape is managed for recreation, fuel wood, cultural preservation, wildlife, aesthetics, livestock, 
and the economics gained by the removal of merchantable timber.  Two plans exist to provide for long-term resource 
objectives and to ensure the development, maintenance, and enhancement of ecosystems on White Mountain Apache 
Tribal land: the Forest Management Plan (2005 
to 2014) and the Fire Management Plan (2005 to 
2009). Input was gathered from Tribal members, 
the BIA and WMAT staff during the development 
of this plan. Federal, Tribal and State laws 
are followed in regards to protecting Cultural 
Heritage Resources when implementing both the 
Forest and Fire Management Plans.  
Management of fuels on the WMAT forests is 
conducted throughout logging, thinning, and 
Hazard Fuel Reduction (HFR) projects.  There 
have been several wildlife habitat and range 
improvement burns conducted on the WMAT 
landscape.  Another fuel reduction program 
implemented on the WMAT reservation is the 
Wildland Fire Use (WFU) program, which may be 
implemented on the WMAT lands from about mid-
July to April, as long as certain criteria are met.
WUI plans include direct treatment of 
approximately a one mile radius around each 
urban interface on the WMAT reservation.  
Implementing WUI treatments occurs in 
conjunction with active timber sales to help 
White Mountains Stewardship Contract
Conceived in 2004 this contract opened the door for large forest 
restoration on the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests with the removal 
of excess biomass for utilization by local industry.  The contract involves 
a local coalition of forest related industries organized as Future Forests 
LLC in Pinetop, Arizona.   This contract is for the removal of excess 
small diameter biomass from a minimum of 5,000 acres annually up to 
a maximum of 25,000 acres.  To date, after two years of the contract, 
16,000 acres have been treated.  The major factor contributing to the 
lower levels of treatment are the costs and the lack of processing and 
marketing opportunities for the product.  Currently the USFS subsidizes 
the project at the level of $400+ per acre. 
The initial focus of the contract has been interface and priority watershed 
restoration related wildland treatments.  Future priorities will be in the 
wildland and focus on wildlife guidelines as an additional consideration 
and model to meet the desired, ecosystem, social, economic, watershed, 
and wildland fire mitigation outcomes.
Within the area an additional 75 jobs have been created by the contract 
in the first two years.  These are in processing, transportation, marketing, 
and extraction.  Additionally, forest restoration under the contract also 
supports and enhances the intrinsic, or amenity, values of properties and 
businesses in communities such as Pinetop-Lakeside, Show Low, Forest 
Lakes, and Heber-Overgaard.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

Future Restoration Needs
Arizona Strip
134
Some of the major restoration needs in the White Mountains landscape include:
Protecting communities efficiently and strategically. A combination of high hazardous fuel loads and extensive   
 
wildland-urban interface development creates a high-risk situation.
Integrating community and Tribal lands protection with wildland restoration strategies. Much of the recent  
 
 
attention and activity has been in the wildland-urban interface, but as the Rodeo-Chediski fire illustrated,  
 
 
wildland areas and remote watersheds remain at high risk due to degraded forest ecological health.
Development of utilization opportunities. While the White Mountains landscape stands out for its number and   
 
variety of wood products businesses, local capacity is still not sufficient to meet restoration needs. Potential  
 
 
cost savings on restoration treatments will not be realized without expanded markets for low-value restoration   
 
by-products.
Increased funding for implementation. A number of restoration and community protection plans have been  
 
 
developed at local, tribal, and forest levels. Funding in the form of grants and cost-share assistance is needed   
 
to successfully implement these plans. Low-income rural populations are in particular need of wildfire   
 
 
protection assistance.
Support for long-term, large-scale restoration plans. The White Mountain Stewardship Contract is the first of its  
 
kind in the nation, and has the potential to serve as a demonstration of the ways restoration, community  
 
 
protection, and economic development can complement each other. This stewardship contract and others like   
 
it need ongoing federal financial and political support.
Monitoring of restoration and community protection activities. The Multiparty Monitoring Board for the White   
 
Mountain Stewardship Project has taken the lead on monitoring important indicators within the project area.   
 
Further monitoring is needed for other activities outside the project area, including on some of  
 
 
 
the more remote regions of the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest and on non-federal lands.
Support for collaborative enterprises. Communities in the White Mountains landscape have shown that locally-  
 
driven, grassroots collaboration is a viable model for comprehensive forest and watershed management across   
 
jurisdictions. As these collaborative enterprises continue to work effectively, their guidance must be supported   
 
by relevant state, federal, and local land and resource managers.
A focus on watershed protection. The White Mountains landscape contains more surface water than any other   
 
region of the state. Active forest restoration is needed to lower the risk of irrevocable watershed damage  
 
 
following a wildfire event.
Some more specific recommendations include:
Federal government should ensure the White Mountain Stewardship Project is fully funded and supported.
Local entities should develop requirements regarding building materials, defensible space, and other   
 
 
FireWise activities to be met before new development is approved.
Funding is needed to help accelerate wildland-urban interface fire protection. Primary needs include cost- 
 
 
share funding and grants for fuel reduction and funding to support outreach and educational efforts.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
1.
2.
3.
White Mountains
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

135
White Mountains
References
Abrams, J. 2005. Report on a needs assessment for collaborative landscape planning in the White Mountains of Arizona.  
 
Ecological Restoration Institute. Flagstaff, AZ.
Arizona Department of Environmental Quality. Table of Arizona Watershed Partnerships. http://www.azdeq.gov/ 
 
 
environ/water/watershed/download/partner.pdf
Arizona Game and Fish Department. List of Special Status Species. http://www.gf.state.az.us/w_c/edits/documents/  
 
county_taxon_scientificName_001.pdf
Arizona Identified Communities At-Risk. http://www.azsf.az.gov/
Livingston, J. 2006. Small-diameter success stories II. Gen. Tech. Rep. FPL-GTR-168. U.S. Department of Agriculture,  
 
 
Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. Madison, WI.
National Interagency Fire Center. Historically Significant Wildfires. http://www.nifc.gov/stats/historicalstats.html
Statement of Robert H. Davis, President, Forest Energy Corporation, Member, Future Forest LLC, to the Joint Oversight   
 
Hearing Subcommittee on Forests and Forest Health, Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources.   
 
 
House Resources Committee. 2006. http://www.sustainablenorthwest.org/pdf/policy/testimony/ 
 
 
 
rdavis02082006.pdf
Meeting with the Natural Resources Working Group, August 8, 
Contirbutions from Stephen J. Campbell, University of Arizona Cooperative Extension – Navajo County and Cathy 
Covington, White Mountain Apache Tribe
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

136
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute
Appendices
Appendix 1: Recommendations and Action Items
Appendix 2: Outreach and Consultation

137
Appendix 1: Strategies, Recommendations and Action Items
STRATEGY #1:  Increase the human and financial resources available for forest restoration and community protection 
in Arizona. 
Recommendations
Action Items
1.1. Congress should increase funding to federal land 
management agencies and the state to furnish the capacity 
essential for collaboratively planning, implementing and 
monitoring restoration treatments.
1.1.1. Vegetation and fuel treatment funding should be 
increased to a minimum of $30 million/year for 3 years for the 
Forest Service; and $10 million/year for 3 years for Department 
of Interior agencies (BLM, NPS, BIA, and F&WS).  Funding should 
increase by 15% per year for 20 years. 
1.1.2. Funding for CWPP implementation should be increased to 
$5 million per year, and the dollars should be allocated to local 
communities through the State Forester. (1.1.2.)
1.1.3. Program funding should be provided to federal land 
management agencies to ensure adequate human resources are 
available to facilitate treatment action. This includes capacity 
for all facets of developing and applying treatments including:  
environmental review, contracting, community collaboration 
and implementation.
1.1.4. Funding should be provided to the USFS research stations 
to cooperate with universities, land managers, and other 
stakeholders in identifying practical multi-scale monitoring 
approaches. 
1.1.5. Congress should maintain funding to complete the White 
Mountain Stewardship Contract on the Apache Sitgreaves 
National Forest.
1.1.6. Expand the Collaborative Forest Restoration Program 
developed for New Mexico to include Arizona. CFRP provides $5 
million in cost-share grants to stakeholders and communities for 
hazardous fuel reduction and restoration projects.
1.2. Congress should restore funding to enable communities, 
stakeholder groups and tribes to collaborate in utilization and 
marketing of small-diameter wood and biomass.
1.2.1. Congress should revitalize the Economic Action Program 
or create a new source of funds dedicated to assisting local 
communities throughout the West in their efforts to develop 
utilization and marketing opportunities for small-diameter wood 
and biomass.
1.3. Congress and the Arizona State Legislature should increase 
funding for developing and translating best available biological, 
biophysical, and social science into forms needed by land 
managers and stakeholders.
1.3.1. The Arizona State Legislature should provide financial 
support to universities, state agencies and other organizations 
with applicable expertise to conduct applied research, translate 
scientific information and serve as neutral conveners within 
collaborative processes.
1.3.2 Congress should fund applied biophysical, social science, 
ecological, and economic research in universities, colleges, 
research stations, and other organizations with applicable 
expertise, that informs and improves forest health and the 
vitality of rural communities. 
1.4. The Arizona State Legislature should provide funding 
for restoration treatments, community protection, and fire 
management on non-federal lands.
1.4.1. The state government should provide financial support to 
universities and other organizations with applicable expertise, 
such that the staff of these entities can provide scientific 
support to, and serve as neutral conveners within collaborative 
processes, as needed. 
1.4.2. The Arizona State Legislature should allocate $5 million 
per year to community protection activities identified in 
Community Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPPs). Activities to be 
supported would include completion of CWPPs and funding for 
community collaboration.
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

138
STRATEGY #2: Coordinate and implement action at the landscape scale.
Recommendations
Action Items
2.1. Federal land management agencies should collaboratively 
develop and implement integrated landscape-scale restoration, 
community protection and fire management for forests across 
the state. 
2.1.1. The Forest Service should support collaborative planning 
and implementation of integrated restoration, community 
protection, and fire management strategies across the state 
within the Forest Plan revision process.  
2.1.2. The Forest Service should develop, revise, and/or update 
Annual Forest Fire Management Plans using the best available 
science and in a transparent and collaborative fashion. 
2.1.3. National forest plans should provide clear performance 
measures that allow the agency and public to evaluate progress 
toward meeting restoration, community protection, and fire 
management objectives. 
2.2. The Arizona State Legislature, county and local 
governments and state agencies should develop land-use 
policies and practices that support forest restoration, 
community protection, and fire management efforts.
2.2.1. Counties and local governments should classify 
undeveloped lands based on relative fire hazard. 
2.2.2. The State Fire Marshall should adopt and enforce an 
Urban Wildland Interface Code to protect communities and 
property from wildfire. 
2.2.3. Counties and local governments should adopt and enforce 
building and Wildland Urban Interface fire codes to minimize 
communities’ exposure to fire danger.
2.2.4. Planners should work with developers to incorporate 
appropriate buffer zones, based on anticipated fire hazard, 
into the design of new developments to allow for maintaining 
conditions in adjacent forests where natural or prescribed fires 
may continue or be reintroduced.
2.2.5. The Arizona State Legislature should delegate authority 
to counties to manage development in the Wildland Urban 
Interface to enhance protection from wildfire, and to protect 
public safety.
2.2.6. The Arizona State Legislature, counties and local 
governments should develop incentives to encourage 
landowners to maintain defensible space.
2.2.7. The Arizona State Legislature should work with local 
governments to revise planning requirements under Growing 
Smarter legislation to deal with fire risk at the landscape scale.
2.2.8. The Arizona State Land Department should develop long-
term forest restoration and fire management plans for state 
lands.
2.3. All federal, state,tribal, and local governments should 
increase coordination of forest restoration, fire management, 
and community protection planning and implementation across 
jurisdictional boundaries.
2.3.1. The State Forester should work with the Arizona 
Interagency Wildland Fire Prevention Team or a similar 
organization to improve coordination between all agencies 
and tribes on treatment implementation as well as fire 
preparedness.
2.3.2. The State of Arizona should provide adequate financial 
support to Arizona Fire Map. This tool provides the foundation 
for sharing treatment information across jurisdiction 
boundaries. 
2.3.3. Federal land management agencies, counties and local 
governments should provide treatment data to update the 
Arizona Fire Map.
2.3.4. The federal land management agencies should actively 
collaborate with the state, local governments and the tribes to 
revise Forest Plans.
2.4. The federal land management agencies, counties and local 
governments should use Community Wildfire Protection Plans to 
inform and prioritize treatments in their jurisdiction. 
2.4.1. Local governments in communities at risk should 
complete Community Wildfire Protection Plans.
2.4.2. Federal agencies should place priority on implementing 
projects identified within CWPPs.
Strategies, Recommendations and Action Items
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

139
2.5. State and federal land managers should design forest 
management practices to integrate wildlife habitat and 
biodiversity conservation protection with restoration, 
community protection, and fire management.
2.5.1. The Arizona Game and Fish Department should work 
with the Arizona Forest Health Council, federal agencies and 
other stakeholders with applicable expertise to develop a set 
of principles and strategies for integrating wildlife habitat 
and biodiversity conservation with restoration, community 
protection, and fire management. This should include educating 
the public about these strategies.
STRATEGY #3: Strategically increase efficiency of restoration, fire management, and community protection activities.
Recommendations
Action Items
3.1. Federal and state land management agencies should 
collaboratively and strategically place treatments in order to 
increase efficiency and maximize benefits. 
3.1.1. Federal land management agencies should develop short-
term (2-5 year) and longer-term (10-20 year) treatment plans 
based on priorities developed at the landscape scale.
3.1.2. State land management agencies should develop 
restoration, fire management, and community protection 
performance standards that measure progress toward objectives 
and can lead to refinement of strategies as necessary.
3.1.3. Federal land management agencies should complete and 
implement plans for using prescribed fire and Wildland Fire Use 
where and when appropriate.  
3.1.4. Federal land management agencies should initiate 
treatments where a collaborative process has preliminarily 
identified and prioritized landscape attributes at risk. 
3.1.5. A national forest in Arizona should take a landscape-
scale approach that systematially evaluates existing ecological 
conditions and then identifies, applies, and monitors the 
effectiveness of strategically placed treatments that in theory 
should modify extreme fire behavior and reduce the probability 
of large, unnaturally severe wildfire.
3.1.6. State and federal authorities should work collaboratively 
with stakeholders to identify and develop restoration and fire 
management strategies for watersheds of critical importance 
across the state. 
3.1.7. The state should ensure that all state-identified 
communities at risk have completed a Community Wildfire 
Protection Plan, or equivalent plan (e.g. Grand Canyon North 
Rim.
STRATEGY #4: Support ecologically sustainable forest-based economic activities.
Recommendations
Action Items
4.1. Land managers should work with stakeholders to clarify the 
amount, availability, and location of restoration, community 
protection, and fire management-generated wood and biomass 
across the region.  
4.1.1. The Forest Service and other land management agencies 
should fund and participate in a collaborative and objective 
evaluation of the amount and characteristics of the wood and 
biomass available for utilization across Arizona. 
4.1.2. Local governments should ensure that wood utilization 
opportunities and challenges are clearly identified in CWPPs. 
4.2. Federal, state, and local governments should identify and 
enhance opportunities for utilizing small-diameter wood and 
biomass generated from forest treatments.
4.2.1. The Forest Products Lab of the US Forest Service, 
the U.S. Department of Energy, and the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture should conduct studies to identify utilization and 
marketing opportunities for products created from pinyon-
juniper as well as ponderosa pine.
4.2.2. Arizona state agencies should use treatment-generated 
material whenever possible. Specifically, the State of Arizona 
should actively apply Arizona Executive Order 2005-05, which 
calls for all new state-funded buildings to derive their energy 
from renewable sources, such as woody biomass.
Strategies, Recommendations and Action Items
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute

140
4.2.3. State agencies should encourage retrofitting of existing 
heating systems in public and private buildings to promote 
greater use of wood biomass.
4.2.4. The Arizona State Legislature should work with the 
Arizona Department of Commerce to identify incentive 
programs that encourage the use of restoration-generated 
materials by businesses across the state. 
4.2.5. The Arizona Department of Transportation should use 
restoration treatment by-products generated in Arizona for 
guard rails and other transportation or highway maintenance 
applications.
4.3. All levels of government should work together to support 
wood products industries capable of utilizing small diameter 
wood and biomass.
4.3.1. The Forest Service should continue to use, and other 
land management agencies should initiate, best-value contracts 
and other tools that ensure continuous wood flow, where 
such contracts support collaborative and science-based forest 
management, and promote economic and social stability in rural 
communities.  
4.3.2. The Arizona State Legislature should fund a position that 
is designed to assist rural communities to convene, recruit, and 
support forest and wood-products enterprises. This poosition 
would reside either in within the State Forester’s office or the 
Dept. of Commerce
4.3.3. Local governments should develop and use policies, 
planning, and tax incentives to encourage businesses that will 
diversify the economy, are appropriately scaled to the amount 
of material available from the forest, and keep jobs and dollars 
in rural Arizona.
4.3.4. Congress and the Arizona State Legislature should 
fund recruitment and training programs for forest and wood-
products workers in cooperation with forest and wood-products 
employers and educational organizations.  
STRATEGY #5:  Build public support for accomplishing necessary restoration, community protection, and fire 
management work across the state.
Recommendations
Action Items
5.1.  The Arizona State Legislature should fund public 
education, and work with the State Forester and local 
governments to educate the public about restoration, 
sustainable forest and wood products businesses, fire 
management, and community protection needs and 
responsibilities.
5.1.1. County, local and tribal governments should create 
and/or promote education programs to help residents of forest 
communities understand the risks inherent in living in fire-prone 
areas, and to educate developers and the community about 
steps that can be undertaken to reduce exposure to fire hazard 
and to improve forest health. Much has been done already 
under the FIREWISE, USA program. 
5.1.2. The Arizona State Legislature should fund an education 
coordinator position under the State Forester to coordinate 
and promote public education about restoration, sustainable 
restoration-based businesses, fire management, and community 
protection needs and responsibilities. 
5.2. Citizens should take actions to protect their properties and 
communities from fire. 
5.2.1 Citizens should seek assistance from their local fire 
district, fire department, homeowners association or visit 
http://www.firewise.org/usa/ to learn what they can do to 
protect their home and property. 
5.3. The Governor’s Forest Health Council, working closely 
with the State Forester, the U.S. Forest Service and other 
federal agencies, should develop and administer annual “Forest 
Health Scorecard” based in part upon the Western Governor’s 
Association’s 10-Year Strategy Implementation Plan.
5.3.1. In 2007, the Forest Health Councils should develop a 
scorecard based on the 20- Year Strategy to measure progress.
Strategies, Recommendations and Action Items
Working Draft 
Do Not Distribute
