242
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-15-VOL-5. 2000
In: Cole, David N.; McCool, Stephen F.; Borrie, William T.; O’Loughlin,
Jennifer, comps. 2000. Wilderness science in a time of change conference—
Volume 5: Wilderness ecosystems, threats, and management; 1999 May 23–
27; Missoula, MT. Proceedings RMRS-P-15-VOL-5. Ogden, UT: U.S. Depart-
ment of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station.
Peter Z. Fulé is Assistant Research Professor, Thomas A. Heinlein is
Research Specialist, W. Wallace Covington is Regents’ Professor, and Marga-
ret M. Moore is Professor, School of Forestry, Northern Arizona Universiy,
Flagstaff, AZ 86011 U.S.A.
Abstract—Ponderosa pine forests in which frequent fire regimes
continue up to the present would be invaluable points of reference
for assessing natural ecological attributes. A few remote forests on
the North Rim of Grand Canyon National Park come close to this
ideal: never-harvested, distant from human communities and fire
suppression resources, and with several low-intensity fires in the
past century—a highly unusual recent fire regime in the Southwest.
Recent fires appear to have played a crucial role in preventing the
increases in forest density that characterize most southwestern
pine forests. The study sites are not unaffected by the ecological
changes associated with settlement, but they do present an impor-
tant reference resource for study and management of ponderosa
pine ecosystems.
Ponderosa pine forests in which historically frequent fire
regimes continue up to the present would be invaluable
points of reference for assessing natural attributes of eco-
logical structure and function. Grand Canyon National Park
contains one of the largest old-growth forests in the South-
west, where tree harvesting has not occurred and grazing
has been eliminated for over 60 years. Although most fire
disturbance regimes in the park have been disrupted since
European settlement, a few remote sites may retain near-
natural conditions. The majority of the forested area lies on
the North Rim, part of the Kaibab Plateau, which supports
ponderosa pine, mixed conifer and spruce-fir forests at
elevations ranging from 7,500 to 9,165 feet on well-drained
limestone soils.
The North Rim is remote from modern human communi-
ties, but Altshul and Fairley (1989) document the long
human history of the region. The lower elevations of the
rim were densely populated by Native Americans prior to
1250-1300 A.D. Six tribes—the Paiute, Hopi, Havasupai,
Hualapai, Navajo, and Zuni—have ancestral and current
connections to the canyon and rim habitat. An expedition
led by the Spaniards Dominguez and Escalante in 1776
marked the first European presence on the Arizona Strip,
the land north of the Colorado River that includes the
Continuing Fire Regimes in Remote Forests
of Grand Canyon National Park
Peter Z. Fulé
Thomas A. Heinlein
W. Wallace Covington
Margaret M. Moore
Kaibab Plateau. It took another 78 years before the first
European settlement was begun by Mormon explorers and
pioneers in 1854. Fighting with Utes and Navajos kept
settlers out of the Arizona Strip until 1869. With the
establishment of peace, there was a rapid expansion of
livestock grazing, logging and mining activity.
Frequent fire regimes were disrupted in forested high-
lands of the Arizona Strip as early as 1870 in the Mt
Trumbull area (Fulé and others, unpublished data). As
elsewhere in the Southwest, early livestock grazing was
excessive (Altshul and Fairley 1989) and removed fine
herbaceous fuels, stopping fire spread. The establishment
of the Grand Canyon Forest Reserve in 1893 and creation
of Grand Canyon National Park (GCNP) in 1919 brought
organized fire detection and suppression crews. On the
North Rim, Wolf and Mast (1998) found complete fire
exclusion by about 1920 in ponderosa pine and mixed
conifer forests. Even in the high-elevation spruce-fir for-
ests, with historically longer fire-return intervals and more
severe fires, protracted fire exclusion has led to the devel-
opment of increasingly dense, homogeneous stands (White
and Vankat 1993). Park management policy has changed
in recent decades to favor restoration of natural ecological
processes, including fire (GCNP 1992), but the presently
dense forests and heavy fuel loads hinder effective re-
introduction of fire on much of the North Rim. Fuel prob-
lems are not only an ecological concern: the difficulty of fire
management on the North Rim has been cited by Pyne
(1989) as a major factor impeding the Park’s plan for
wilderness designation of the area (Morehouse 1996).
Among the challenges faced by managers are: 1) lack of
knowledge about natural ecological conditions as a point of
reference for restorative management (Moore and others
1999), 2) uncertainty about the appropriate mix of pre-
scribed fire and tree thinning for treating accumulated
fuels (Nichols and others 1994), and 3) a host of off-site
issues including air quality, developing management pro-
cedures suitable for wilderness areas and working in a
highly charged political environment.
Our study focuses on the first of these questions: charac-
terizing fire regimes on several sites that may be among the
least impacted by recent fire exclusion in the Southwest.
The northwestern points and plateaus of the North Rim
have the most frequent lightning ignitions in the Park
(GCNP fire records). As part of a broader study on fire and
forest structure in the Park, we selected three representa-
tive sites: Powell Plateau, a mesa separated from the
Kaibab Plateau “mainland,” Fire Point, the westernmost
extension of the rim, and Rainbow Plateau, a peninsula to

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-15-VOL-5. 2000
243
the southeast (fig. 1). The forests are dominated by old
trees, with lush understory vegetation and substantial
evidence of recent fires. The sites are not without recent
human impact: these areas were grazed prior to construc-
tion of the North Rim boundary fence in 1938 (Schroeder,
personal commnication) and fire suppression was practiced
here through much of the 20th century (Pyne 1989). How-
ever, we anticipated that the limited water for livestock and
difficult access for firefighters might have minimized dis-
ruption of the fire regime. Our goals were to quantify the fire
regime, describe any post-settlement changes and assess
management implications.
Methods _______________________
The study sites totaled nearly 1,700 acres. The Powell
Plateau site covered 780 acres, ranging from 7,400 to 7,660
feet in elevation. The Fire Point site was 333 acres, 7,570 to
7,770 feet in elevation. The Rainbow Plateau site was 550
acres, 7,550 to 7,658 feet in elevation. Soils have not been
mapped in detail for these sites, but North Rim soils in
general are predominantly of the Soldier series, derived
from Kaibab limestone. Average annual precipitation on the
North Rim is 23 inches, with an average annual snowfall of
129 inches. Temperatures are cooler than on the South Rim,
ranging from an average July maximum of 79° F to an
average January minimum of 30° F (GCNP1992; White
and Vankat 1993). Vegetation includes ponderosa pine
(Pinus ponderosa), Gambel oak (Quercus gambelli), and
New Mexican locust (Robinia neomexicana) trees, with an
understory of forbs and perennial grasses (Bennett 1974).
Fire-scarred tree sampling was done in June-July, 1998.
Partial cross-sections were cut from scarred “catfaces” on
trees, logs, and stumps of conifers that appeared to repre-
sent the oldest and/or most extensive fire records. Samples
were mapped when collected and were well-distributed
throughout the study areas. In the lab, samples were
mounted, surfaced with progressively finer sandpaper and
crossdated (Stokes and Smiley 1968) using characteristic
patterns of narrow marker years: 1722, 29, 35, 48, 52, 72, 82
(false ring), 1810, 13, 20, 22, 45, 47, 73, 79, 96, 99, 1902, 04,
51, 63, 77, 96. All dates were independently confirmed by
another dendrochronologist. The season of fire occurrence
(Baisan and Swetnam 1990) was estimated from the relative
position of each fire lesion within the annual ring.
Fire history data were analyzed with the FHX2 software
(Grissino-Mayer 1995). Analysis at each site began with the
first year with an adequate sample depth (Grissino-Mayer
and others 1994). Fire return intervals were analyzed statis-
tically in different categories related to the size and/or
intensity of past fires. The fire data were filtered to look at
progressively greater proportional scarring as a proxy for
Figure 1—Study sites on the North Rim of Grand Canyon National Park.

244
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-15-VOL-5. 2000
fire size (Swetnam and Baisan 1996). First, all fire years, even
those represented by a single scar, were considered. Then, we
included only those fire years in which 10% or more, and 25%
or more, of the recording samples were scarred. The statisti-
cal analysis of fire return intervals includes several measures
of central tendency: the mean fire interval (MFI, average
number of years between fires), the median and the Weibull
median probability interval (WMPI).
The relationship between climatic fluctuations and fire
occurrence was compared by superposed epoch analysis
(SEA), using software developed by Grissino-Mayer (1995).
A locally developed, ponderosa pine tree-ring chronology
served as a proxy for climate. The SEA superimposes fire
years and summarizes the climate variable (tree-ring width)
for fire years, as well as preceding and succeeding years. The
output of the SEA was a comprehensive comparison of the
climate, as represented by tree-ring width, for five years
before fire years, the fire years themselves, and two years
after fire years. The degree to which the climate variable in
each analysis year differed from the average climate was
assessed with 90%, 95%, and 99% confidence intervals,
developed using bootstrapping methods, with 1,000 simula-
tions based on random windows with the actual fire events
(Grissino-Mayer 1995).
Accuracy of the fire scar record could be tested because a
relatively high number of fires occurred on the study sites in
the 20th century, due both to the isolation of the sites and to
recent fire management policies. Across western North
America, we usually find sites with good records but no fires
(USA—Swetnam and Baisan 1996) or many fires but limited
records (Mexico—Fulé and Covington 1997, 1999). The Grand
Canyon sites in the present study have both recent fires and
written historical data: fire records maintained at GCNP
since 1924 provide an unusual opportunity for a quantita-
tive test of the utility of fire scars in reconstructing the
temporal and spatial pattern of past fires.
The fire record data were used with caution. The database
was patchy in the early years. Many recorded fire sizes and
geographic locations were considered approximate, and some
evident errors were observed, such as coordinates that
placed fires well outside the Park’s boundaries. Nonethe-
less, the database was a valuable independent source of fire
history information. After completing the fire scar analysis
without reference to the database, we selected records of
fires occurring in and around (within 1 km) the study sites
for comparison with the fire scar data.
Results and Discussion __________
Fire Regimes
Composite fire history graphs for all fires on all three sites
show that fires were frequent through 1879 and fires contin-
ued to occur sporadically up through the present (fig. 2).
Prior to 1879, the Weibull Median Probability Interval
Figure 2—Fire history results are summarized in these graphs, with each horizontal line representing the composite of all sampled trees
on a site and the short vertical lines noting the year of fire occurrence. Fire regimes are compared in two categories: all fires, including even
those which scarred only a single sample tree (top graph); and fires scarring 25% or more of the sample trees (bottom graph).

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-15-VOL-5. 2000
245
(WMPI) at Powell Plateau was less than three years, rising
to about 3.9 years on Rainbow Plateau (table 1). Considering
only the 25%-scarred fires, the WMPI values were about two
to three times higher, suggesting that small fires were more
common than larger ones. The fire return intervals fall
within the range of values reported at other southwestern
sites (Swetnam and Baisan 1996), close to the high fre-
quency end of the distribution. These sites might have been
expected to have relatively infrequent fires, as did isolated
smaller mesas in Zion National Park, Utah (Madany and
West 1982), because the study sites are isolated high-eleva-
tion landmasses at the western edge of the canyon rim. The
prevailing southwestern winds tend to carry fire out of the
sites, while the likelihood of importing fire from lower-
elevation lands to the west seems low, due to the reduced
chance of low-elevation lightning strikes and discontinuous
fuels (although there is a chaparral belt extending for about
1,000 feet below the rim). The fact that high fire frequencies
were observed suggests that lightning densities are high on
the study sites. Ignitions by Native Americans may have
played a role as well (Schroeder, personal communication).
The many synchronous fire dates in fig. 2 suggest that
presettlement fires spread between the study sites in many
years, or that sites were ignited separately in the same
years.
Fires occurred primarily in dry years following wet years
(fig. 3), assuming that tree-ring widths in the local chronol-
ogy adequately reflect moisture varability. Similar patterns
were observed across the Southwest by Swetnam and
Betancourt (1990), who suggested that increased herba-
ceous production in moist years led to high fuel loading and
continuity in subsequent years.
Clearly, fewer fires burned after 1879, especially using the
25%-scarred criterion that filters out the presumably smaller
fires that scarred fewer samples (fig. 2). The question is, how
much disruption of the fire regime results in ecologically
significant changes? Each site has had either two or three
large fires since settlement. These post-settlement fires
contrast with fire exclusion in the majority of forests in the
Southwest (Swetnam and Baisan 1996). Fires were excluded
in most of the only other large unharvested southwestern
ponderosa pine forest, New Mexico’s Gila/Aldo Leopold Wil-
derness Areas (Swetnam and Dieterich 1985), although
some portions of the Wildernesses have had repeated 20th
century fires (Rollins and others, in press).
The timing of postsettlement fires may also be important.
Regeneration flushes in the early 20th century, especially
1919, were important in forming dense forests in northern
Arizona (Savage and others 1996; Mast and others 1999).
Large fires on Powell Plateau in 1892 and 1924, Fire Point in
1923 and Rainbow Plateau in 1900 may have been instrumen-
tal in thinning seedlings. The other post-settlement fires were
all post-1980, reflecting the change in park policy toward
prescribed natural fire. In light of the fire regime data, we will
evaluate forest structural information from the same study
sites to assess changes from reference conditions.
Comparison to Fire Records
Fire scars were highly accurate in identifying historic
fires: every fire on the study sites recorded since 1924 and
larger than 20 acres was identified from fire scars. The
largest fire from written records missed in the fire-scar
reconstruction was a 20-acre prescribed natural fire on the
Rainbow Plateau in 1987. Many smaller fires, suppressed at
one acre or less in size, did not show up in the fire scar record.
The proportion of scarred trees was generally related to fire
size. The greatest discrepancy between fire size and scarring
proportion occurred with the 1931 Fire Point fire, which
burned 160 acres but was recorded only on a single scarred
sample. In the case of this fire event, reliance on the 25%-
scarred criterion would underestimate fire size.
Mapped fire perimeters from the Emerald prescribed
natural fire in 1993 matched well with fire scar data (fig. 4).
The fire was recorded on only half of the 12 fire-scarred
samples collected from within its boundary, but the six
samples were well-distributed. Taking these six samples
and applying a reasonable spatial buffer of 1,000 feet around
them would fairly closely approximate the geographic bound-
ary and size of the Emerald fire.
The close correspondence between the fire scar data and
the Park’s fire records builds confidence in the interpreta-
tion of presettlement fire regime characteristics. While fire
scar methods do have limitations (Johnson and Gutsell
1994), our results suggest that the rationale described by
Swetnam and Baisan (1996) for proper use of fire scar data,
Table 1—Fire return intervals at the study sites, in two categories: (1) all fire years,
including even those represented by a single scarred sample, and (2)
fire years in which 25% or more of the recording trees were scarred.
Weibull Median
Mean fire
Probability
Site
interval (MFI)
Minimum
Maximum
Interval (WMPI)
Powell – All
3.24
1
9
2.97
Powell – 25%
9.45
3
24
8.56
Fire Pt. – All
3.65
1
11
3.42
Fire Pt. – 25%
6.35
2
11
6.25
Rainbow – All
4.00
1
11
3.86
Rainbow – 25%
7.81
3
18
7.53

246
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-15-VOL-5. 2000
Figure 3—Relationship between local climate (tree-ring width index) and fire occurrence determined by superposed epoch
analysis (SEA). The average climate value is scaled to one. Bootstrapping procedures were used to assess the statistical
significance of climate departures above the mean (“wet years”) and below the mean (“dry years”) in the fire years (year 0), the
five years preceding fires (-5 through –1), and the two year after fires (1-2). The three lines above and below the x-axis in each
graph represent confidence intervals of 90%, 95%, and 99%.
filtering data according to the proportion of scarred samples,
is sound.
Management Implications
Presettlement fire regime data serve as a point of
reference for ecosystem management, particularly in Park
Service wildlands managed primarily for their natural
qualities. One logical course of action would be to permit
natural ignitions to burn without impediment, using the
reference fire regime data as a standard against which to
judge the effectiveness of fire restoration.
But if a natural fire policy were to be fully adopted, the
Park would have to accept the occurrence of large fires
spreading over thousands of acres, dropping below the rim
and burning during the summer fire season. The biggest
fires, reaching well into the higher elevations of the Kaibab
Plateau, would most likely occur during the driest years.
When these fires encountered the dense mixed conifer for-
ests above 8,000 feet elevation, intense fire behavior and
severe fire effects would occur, in contrast to the effects of the
frequent surface fires that prevailed prior to settlement
(Wolf and Mast 1998). In the past decade, the two driest
years in northern Arizona have been 1989 and 1996. The
1989 Muav wildfire, ignited by lightning, was perceived as
a threat of such magnitude that the use of bulldozers was
authorized in the Park to construct fireline. The 1996 fire
season was the worst on record in the Southwest, with the
50,000 acre Bridger Complex fire burning just north of the
Park boundary. Neither in 1989 nor in 1996 would park
managers have been able to authorize natural fires to burn,
even though it is in precisely such years that large presettle-
ment fires occurred.
Current management policy is directed toward beneficial
use of wildland fire for resource benefits, primarily applied
in ponderosa pine forests, where burning is less risky. In
1998, for example, a small lightning-ignited fire was inten-
tionally expanded with aerial ignition over the Rainbow
Plateau. When fire use involves management ignitions,
park managers are faced with different questions. The fire
behavior may be less hazardous, but the fire timing and
spread will be controlled more by management than by fuel
and weather patterns. Fire use is unlikely to be permitted
during dry fire seasons, so fire timing and size would prob-
ably remain outside the range of natural variability. Fire use
may also pose conflicts with the Park’s wilderness proposal,
because fire managers rely on helicopters, vehicles, and
other equipment to carry out burns.
Smoke remains a significant management challenge at
Grand Canyon because of the Class I airshed designation,
the importance of scenic vistas for park visitors, and the
active role taken by the Park in opposing other off-site
pollution sources, such as power plants.
Despite the difficulties in restoring fire to the Park, there
is no alternative: fuels will burn eventually. The question is
how best to intervene. An ecological restoration experiment
that tests thinning of small trees, as well as prescribed
burning (Covington and others 1997; Heinlein and others, in
press), may offer management alternatives for some areas of
the Park.
The resilience of forest ecosystems will be key to the eventual
restoration of natural processes. Although presettlement fire

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-15-VOL-5. 2000
247
frequency was much higher than the post-1879 fire occurrence,
and post-settlement fire-free intervals have been substantially
greater than the presettlement maximums, the study sites on
the northwestern points and plateaus may still be the best
existing representatives of natural ponderosa pine forest land-
scapes in the Southwest. If a few widely spaced fires can have
ecological effects reasonably similar to those of the natural fire
regime, managers may be able to manipulate modern fire
regimes to accommodate constraints without significant dam-
age to ecosystems.
Acknowledgments ______________
We thank the Grand Canyon National Park staff assisting
with this research, especially R. Winfree, K. Kerr, D. Oltrogge,
D. Spotskey, M. Schroeder, J. Schroeder, K. Crumbo, N.
Bryan, J. Balsam, R.V. Ward, A. Horn-Wilson and D.
Bertolette. Northern Arizona University’s Ecological Resto-
ration Program students and staff, especially J.P. Roccaforte,
supported data collection and sample preparation. This
work was funded by a grant from the U.S. Department of the
Interior.
References_____________________
Altschul, J.H., and H.C. Fairley. 1989. Man, models, and manage-
ment: An overview of the archaeology of the Arizona Strip and the
management of its cultural resources. USDA Forest Service and
USDI Bureau of Land Management Report contract # 53-8371-6-
0054), submitted by Dames & Moore, Inc.
Baisan, C.H., and T.W. Swetnam. 1990. Fire history on a desert
mountain range: Rincon Mountain Wilderness, Arizona, USA.
Canadian Journal of Forest Research 20:1559-1569.
Bennett, P.S. 1974. The fire ecology of the ponderosa pine ecosystem
of the North Rim forests, Grand Canyon National Park. Report on
file at Grand Canyon National Park, AZ.
Covington, W.W., M.M. Moore, P.Z. Fulé, and H.B. Smith. 1997.
Grand Canyon Forest Ecosystem Restoration. Proposal for Adap-
tive Ecosystem Research and Management to the U.S.D.I. Inte-
rior Fire Coordinating Committee.
Fulé, P.Z., Assistant Research Professor, Northern Arizona Univer-
sity, and others: unpublished fire history data from Mt. Trumbull
area, AZ.
Fulé, P.Z., and W.W. Covington. 1999. Fire regime changes in La
Michilía Biosphere Reserve, Durango, Mexico. Conservation Bi-
ology 13(3):640-652.
Fulé, P.Z., and W.W. Covington. 1997. Fire regimes and forest
structure in the Sierra Madre Occidental, Durango, Mexico. Acta
Botanica Mexicana 41:43-79.
Grand Canyon National Park. 1992. Fire management plan. On file
at Grand Canyon National Park, AZ.
Grissino-Mayer, H.D. 1995. Tree-ring reconstructions of climate
and fire history at El Malpais National Monument, New Mexico.
Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Arizona, Tucson.
Grissino-Mayer, H.D., C.H. Baisan, and T.W. Swetnam. 1994. Fire
history and age structure analyses in the mixed conifer and
spruce-fir forests of Mount Graham. Final Report, Mount Gra-
ham Red Squirrel Study Committee, US Fish and Wildlife Ser-
vice, Phoenix, AZ.
Heinlein, T.A., W.W. Covington, P.Z. Fulé, and M.M. Moore. In
press. Restoration of fire-adapted forest ecosystems at Grand
Canyon National Park. In: Cole, David N.; McCool, Stephen F.
2000. Proceedings: Wilderness Science in a Time of Change. Proc.
RMRS-P-000. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, For-
est Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station.
Johnson, E.A., and S.L. Gutsell. 1994. Fire frequency models,
methods, and interpretations. Advances in Ecological Research
25:239-287.
Madany, M.H., and N.E. West. 1983. Livestock grazing—fire re-
gime interactions within montane forests of Zion National Park,
Utah. Ecology 64(4):661-667.
Mast, J.N., P.Z. Fulé, M.M. Moore, W.W. Covington, and A. Waltz.
1999. Restoration of presettlement age structure of an Arizona
ponderosa pine forest. Ecological Applications 9(1):228-239.
Moore, M.M., W.W. Covington, and P.Z. Fulé. In press. Evolution-
ary environment, reference conditions, and ecological restora-
tion: a southwestern ponderosa pine perspective. Ecological
Applications.
Morehouse, B.J. 1996. A Place Called Grand Canyon: Contested
Geographies. The University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Nichols, T., B. Callenberger and G. Kleindienst. 1994. Report of the
task force review of the hazard fuel situation on the North Rim of
the Grand Canyon. Report on file at Division of Resource Manage-
ment, Grand Canyon National Park.
Pyne, S.J. 1989. Fire on the Rim. Weidenfeld & Nicolson, New York.
Rollins, M., T. Swetnam, and P. Morgan. In press. Twentieth-
century fire patterns in the Selway-Bitterroot Wilderness, Idaho/
Montana, and the Gila/Aldo Leopold Winderness Areas, New
Figure 4—Map of the Emerald prescribed natural fire, which
burned from 8/10/93 to 8/24/93, reaching a size of approximately
342 acres. Fire perimeters are shown at approximately 2-day
intervals. The stars indicate the locations of six fire-scarred samples
that recorded the fire; another six samples within the fire perimeter
did not scar in this burn.

248
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-15-VOL-5. 2000
Mexico. In: Cole, David N.; McCool, Stephen F. 2000. Proceed-
ings: Wilderness Science in a Time of Change. Proc. RMRS-P-000.
Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service,
Rocky Mountain Research Station.
Savage, M, P.M. Brown, and J. Feddema. 1996. The role of climate
in a pine forest regeneration pulse in the southwestern United
States. Ecoscience 3(3):310-318.
Schroeder, M. Archeologist, Grand Canyon National Park. Personal
communication, 1999.
Stokes, M.A., and T.L. Smiley. 1968. An introduction to tree-ring
dating. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Swetnam, T.W., and C.H. Baisan. 1996. Historical fire regime
patterns in the southwestern United States since AD 1700. Pages
11-32 in Allen, C.D. (ed.), Proceedings of the 2nd La Mesa Fire
Symposium. USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RM-
GTR-286, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Sta-
tion, Fort Collins, CO.
Swetnam, T.W., and J.L. Betancourt. 1990. Fire—Southern Oscil-
lation relations in the southwestern United States. Science
249:1017-1020.
Swetnam, T.W., and J.H. Dieterich. 1985. Fire history of ponderosa
pine forests in the Gila Wilderness, New Mexico. Pages 390-397 in
Lotan, J.E., B.M. Kilgore, W.C. Fischer, and R.W. Mutch (tech.
coords.), Proceedings—Symposium and Workshop on Wilderness
Fire. USDA Forest Service General Technical Report INT-182,
Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Ogden, UT.
Wolf, J.J., and J.N. Mast. 1998. Fire history of mixed-conifer forests
on the North Rim, Grand Canyon National Park, Arizona. Physi-
cal Geography 19(1):1-14.
White, M.A., and J.L. Vankat. 1993. Middle and high elevation
coniferous forest communities of the North Rim region of Grand
Canyon National Park, Arizona, USA. Vegetatio 109:161-174.
