12
Ecological Restoration Institute
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
www.eri.nau.edu
Working Papers in Southwestern 
Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
Restoring Forest Roads
June  2005 

Working Papers in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native species, structural
characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological Restoration International
defines restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an
ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability. . . . Restoration attempts to return
an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration International 2004).
In the southwestern United States, most ponderosa pine forests have been degraded during the last
150 years; many areas are now dominated by dense thickets of small trees and have lost their once
diverse understory. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing
fires and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers on
reintroducing frequent, low-intensity surface fires—often after first thinning dense stands—and
reestablishing productive understory plant communities. The Ecological Restoration Institute at
Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, implementing, and monitoring ecological
restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. By allowing natural processes such as fire to
resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem
services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
Every restoration project needs to be site specific, but the detailed experience of field practitioners
may help guide practitioners elsewhere. The Working Papers series presents findings and
management recommendations from research and observations by the ERI and its partner
organizations.
This publication would not have been possible without significant funding from the USDA Forest
Service. The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and
should not be interpreted as representing the opinions or policies of the U.S. Government.
Mention of trade names or commercial products does not constitute their endorsement by the
U.S. Government.
1: Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons and Adaptive Management Practices
2: Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3: Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
4: Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits
5: Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
6: Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
7: Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
8: Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
9: Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
10: The Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Restoration Model
11: Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration

Restoring Forest Roads
Introduction
Restoring unused and abandoned forest roads is an important step in the rehabilitation
of natural ecosystem processes. The Forest Service estimates that there are over 435,000
miles of road within the national forest system, 52,000 miles of which are unclassified
and not maintained for vehicle use (USDA Forest Service 2004). Temporary forest roads
can facilitate ecosystem restoration by providing access for equipment and by serving as
firebreaks. But they have the potential to cause an array of ecological problems (Havlick
2002; Forman et al. 2003). Many agency land management plans call for closing and
rehabilitating unneeded roads. This publication presents both an overview of the
ecological problems forest roads can cause and a guide to traditional and novel methods
that can be used in their restoration.
How Is Ecosystem Functioning Affected by Forest Roads?
Many factors contribute to the overall influence roads have on an ecosystem. Length of
operation, frequency of use, type of vehicles used, presence of plant and animal species,
general health of the landscape, and location are important predictors of ecosystem
impacts. Not all ecosystems are affected by roads in the exactly the same way; the
following patterns of disturbance, however, are consistently observed.
Soils
The compaction of forest road soils is known to reduce aeration, porosity, infiltration
rates, water movement, and biological activity in soils. Research indicates that soil bulk
density, organic matter, moisture, and litter depths are much lower on roads than on
nearby forest lands. Macropores, which provide soil drainage and infiltration, have been
shown to significantly decrease in size as a result of road construction and use. Reduced
infiltration and increased compaction promote soil erosion, especially during the
seasonal southwestern monsoon rains (Elseroad 2001).
Plants
Physical disturbances caused by road construction and vehicle use create ideal conditions for colonization by
invasive exotic plant species. The use of roads by vehicles, machinery, or humans often aids the spread of exotic
plant seeds. Once established, they can have long-term impacts on surrounding ecosystems and can be difficult to
remove. Read more about exotic plants in Working Paper 8: Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration
Treatments.
Wildlife
Roads are known to cause habitat fragmentation. Many create ecological “edges” with different plant species, light
levels, and hiding cover, all of which may alter animal survival, reproductive success, and movement patterns. The
introduction of exotic plants can disrupt the availability of native vegetation used by wildlife for food and shelter
(Trombulak and Frissell 1999).
Hydrology
Forest roads often develop a water-repellent soil layer caused by lack of vegetative cover and changes in soil
composition. This can substantially influence how runoff is processed. Erosion, the formation of water channels
beside the road, and increased sediment loads in nearby streams are common results of this process (Baker 2003).
Restoring Roads
Though there may be myriad local reasons to remove and restore roads, the essential goals of such projects are:
•
Reduce soil erosion
•
Reestablish vegetation
•
Promote hillside stability
•
Protect plant and wildlife species
•
Restore aquatic and terrestrial habitats
•
Preserve and enhance natural drainage patterns
•
Restrict access to remote or sensitive forest sites
All of these factors contribute to the larger goal of forest restoration—that is, the reestablishment of natural and
self-sustaining ecosystem functions.
Major Considerations
in Road Restoration
1. Have the appropriate
NEPA guidelines been
met (Coghlan and Sowa
1998)?
2. Has the road been
adequately barricaded to
discourage vehicle use?
3. How will the
colonization of exotic
plants be minimized?
How will they be
removed if they do
colonize?
4. What strategies will be
used to monitor the site
after the project is
complete?
1
a

Standard Road Removal Methods
Several strategies have proven successful in restoring roads to a more natural and sustainable condition (Table 1).
Traditional methods such as road ripping, reshaping, and revegetation are commonly used in all forest types. The
ecosystem response to these activities is varied and depends on the initial condition of the road and the process by
which the method was implemented. A successful road restoration project will likely need to incorporate most, if
not all, of the following strategies.
Barricades
This method is commonly used for road decommissioning. It involves blocking the road from vehicle use.
Barricades must be appropriate for their setting in order to be effective. When implemented alone, barricades are
not considered to constitute road restoration; however, barricading is an important first step in the restoration
process if used in conjunction with other methods such as those listed below.
Reshaping
Physical reshaping of the roadbed may be necessary to prevent erosion on steep slopes, or if one management goal
is to bring the landscape back to the pre-road contour. It is an expensive procedure that must be linked with other
strategies to achieve full restoration.
Ripping
The main purpose of ripping a road is to loosen the soil. Soils compacted by mechanized equipment may remain
compacted for decades without rehabilitation. Soil productivity and physical characteristics are crucial to an
ecosystem’s overall functioning (Selmants et al. 2003). Ripping a road reduces soil density while increasing soil
porosity, infiltration, moisture, and seedbed potential (Luce 1997). Adding organic amendments to the soil after
ripping may expedite the recovery of hydrological and vegetative processes. Bringing in mulch or topsoil adds
organic matter. Mulch and soil should come from nearby locations, as native soils often contain plant fragments
and seeds specific to that location, along with the propagules of mycorrhizal fungi (Bagley 1998; Elseroad 2001;
Korb et al. 2004). The best soil to add is that removed when a temporary road is built; it can be collected and
replaced after the road has been ripped. Some research indicates that the positive effects of road ripping, when
performed in isolation, are not long-lived. Although ripping loosens the soil, it does little to improve soil structure.
Without seeding the newly ripped soil, the soil’s crust can become hardened and block the infiltration of water
(Elseroad 2001).
Revegetation
After ripping, some plants may sprout from the soil seed bank or when seeds enter the road area from elsewhere,
but seeding can speed up the process of reestablishing herbaceous cover, reducing erosion, and stabilizing the soil. A
weed-free mix of native seeds is most appropriate for restoration. Only on severely disturbed sites at grave risk of
erosion should managers consider nonnative annual species for soil stabilization; if possible, they should be sterile
varieties (Robichaud et al. 2000). Immediate seeding after ripping makes it more difficult for exotic species to
colonize a newly disturbed road (Switalski et al. 2004). Some research indicates that adding topsoil and then mulch,
in conjunction with seeding, can help protect seeds, reduce erosion, contain moisture, increase organic matter, and
regulate soil temperature (Elseroad et al. 2003). Materials commonly used as mulch at road restoration sites include
straw and wood chips (Bagley 1998).
Novel Restoration Approaches
The symbiotic relationship between plants and mycorrhizal fungi—which generally live in soils—has been proven
to enhance plant diversity and productivity (Amaranthus 1999; Hartnett and Wilson 1999). Populations of these
fungi can promote the recovery of the herbaceous understory, and appear to be increased by some forest restoration
activities (Korb et al. 2001, 2003). The growth of mycorrhizal fungi can be enhanced in several ways, most easily
and effectively by applying soil from the site to a road under restoration.
Some researchers and practitioners have used artificial inoculation of fungi to encourage the growth of native
plants, bind soil particles together, and recycle nutrients, while inhibiting the growth of exotic species (Marler et al.
1999). Two methods have been tried. The first involves mixing a fungus-laden powder with plant seeds before they
are distributed in the soil (Amaranthus and Steinfeld 2003). The second way to inoculate the soil is to place dowels
of wood covered with fungi throughout the soil and/or mulch at a restoration site (unpublished data, J. Trudeau,
Ecological Restoration Institute). Check the resources in the references section for more information.
Restoring Forest Roads
a
2

Restoring Forest Roads a
3
Table 1. Advantages and Disadvantages of Road Restoration Methods
Monitoring
An important component of any restoration project is monitoring the ecosystem response after on-the-ground
restoration activities are complete. All restoration projects ought to begin with a set of clearly defined and
measurable goals. The purpose of monitoring is to see if the ecosystem responds to the restoration efforts as
expected. Monitoring the landscape at specific time intervals for several years can provide valuable feedback and
help predict what the final outcome of future restoration projects may be.
There are several strategies for monitoring the ecological effects of a restoration project (see
www.eri.nau.edu/implementation/). One valuable and easy tool for monitoring the ecosystem response to forest
road restoration is taking photographs of the site to document change over time. This is usually started by selecting
a handful of permanent photo points. Photographs are then taken at each of the points at set time intervals over the
course of one to five years. The photos are usually stored in a binder so the progress of the landscape can be easily
witnessed.
To maximize the benefits of this monitoring technique, select photo points that will provide the most useful
information. For example, choose sites that will readily show whether erosion is taking place, and how herbaceous
cover changes over time (Bagley 1998).
References
Amaranthus, M. 1999. Mycorrhizal management: A look beneath the surface at plant establishment and growth.
www.fungi.com/mycogrow/amaranthus.html.
Amaranthus, M., and D. Steinfeld. 2003. A symbiotic relationship. Erosion Control (September/October).
www.forester.net/ecm_0309_symbiotic.html.
Bagley, S. 1998. The ripper’s guide to wildland road removal. Wildland Center for Preventing Roads.
www.wildlandscpr.org/WCPRpdfs/roadremovalguide.pdf.
METHOD
Barricades
Ripping
Revegetation
Reshaping
Introduction of
mycorrhizal fungi
ADVANTAGES
•
Inexpensive and easy
•
Loosens soil
•
Increases soil infiltration
•
Reduces erosion
•
Prepares soil for revegetation
•
Equipment readily available
•
Reduces erosion
•
Minimizes colonization of exotic plants
•
Roots reduce soil bulk density
•
Decaying plant material enhances quality
and quantity of soil organic matter
•
Reduces the risk of landslides
•
Can bring the landscape back to pre-road
appearance and functionality
•
Forms a beneficial relationship with
plants; promotes vegetation growth
•
Supports biodiversity
•
Binds soil particles and recycles nutrients
DISADVANTAGES
•
Do not promote natural ecosystem
function
•
Road can still be traveled by ATVs and by
foot
•
Successes observed during short-term
evaluation often disappear over time
•
Must plan to seed with native plants
immediately following ripping to
minimize the invasion of exotics
•
Seeds will likely not take root unless the
soil has been disturbed before planting
•
Road must be well blocked to successfully
eliminate all vehicle traffic
•
Expensive and often logistically infeasible
•
Does little to promote ecosystem function
unless other methods of restoration are
also implemented
•
Little research has been done in
southwestern forests, though preliminary
results are promising
•
Fungi may be eaten by wildlife or
consumed by native molds
Sources: Elseroad 2001; Hunt and Wall 2002; Korb et al. 2003; Switalski et al. 2004.

Restoring Forest Roads
a
4
Baker, M. B. 2003. Hydrology. Pp. 161-174 in Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests, ed. P.
Friederici. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Coghlan, G., and R. Sowa. 1998. National Forest road system and use. Washington, D.C.: USDA Forest Service.
www.fs.fed.us/eng/road_mgt/roadsummary.pdf.
Elseroad, A. 2001. Forest roads in northern Arizona: Recovery after closure and revegetation techniques. Master’s
thesis, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff.
Elseroad, A. C., P. Z. Fulé, and W. W. Covington. 2003. Forest road revegetation: Effects of seeding and soil
amendments. Ecological Restoration 21(3):180-185.
Forman, R. T. T., D. Sperling, J. A. Bissonette, A. P. Clevenger, C. D. Cutshall, V. H. Dale, L. Fahrig, R. France, C. R.
Goldman, K. Heanue, J. A. Jones, F. J. Swanson, T. Turrentine, and T. C. Winter. 2003. Road ecology: Science and
solutions. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Hartnett, D., and G. W. T. Wilson. 1999. Mycorrhizae influence plant community structure and diversity in tallgrass
prairie. Ecology 80(4):1187-99.
Havlick, D. G. 2002. No place distant: Roads and motorized recreation on America’s public lands. Washington, D.C.:
Island Press.
Hunt, H. W., and D. H. Wall. 2002. Modeling the effects of loss of soil biodiversity on ecosystem function.
Global Change Biology 1(8):35-51.
Korb, J. E., N. C. Johnson, and W. W. Covington. 2001. Effect of restoration thinning on mycorrhizal fungal
propagules in a northern Arizona ponderosa pine forest: Preliminary results. Pp. 74-79 in Ponderosa pine
ecosystems restoration and conservation: Steps toward stewardship, comp. G. K. Vance et al. Proceedings RMRS-
22. Ogden, Utah: USDA Forest Service.
Korb, J. E., N. C. Johnson, and W. W. Covington. 2003. Arbuscular mycorrhizal propagule densities respond rapidly
to ponderosa pine restoration treatments. Journal of Applied Ecology 40:101-110.
Korb, J. E., N. C. Johnson, and W. W. Covington. 2004. Slash pile burning effects on soil biotic and chemical
properties and plant establishment: Recommendations for amelioration. Restoration Ecology 12(1):52-62.
Luce, C. H. 1997. Effectiveness of road ripping in restoring infiltration capacity of forest roads. Restoration Ecology
5(3):265-270.
Marler, M. J., C. A. Zabinski, and R. M. Callaway. 1999. Mycorrhizae indirectly enhance competitive effects on an
invasive forb on a native bunchgrass. Ecology 80(4):1180-87.
Robichaud, P. R., J. L. Beyers, and D. G. Neary. 2000. Evaluating the effectiveness of postfire rehabilitation treatments.
General technical report RMRS-63. Fort Collins, Colo.: USDA Forest Service.
Selmants, P. C., A. Elseroad, and S. C. Hart. 2003. Soils and nutrients. Pp. 144-160 in Ecological restoration of
southwestern ponderosa pine forests, ed. P. Friederici. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Society for Ecological Restoration International. 2004. The SER International primer on ecological restoration.
www.ser.org/pdf/primer3.pdf.
Switalski, T. A., J. A. Bissonette, T. H. Deluca, C. H. Luce, and M. A. Madej. 2004. Benefits and impacts of road
removal. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 2(1):21-28.
Trombulak, S., and C. Frissell. 1999. Review of ecological effects of roads on terrestrial and aquatic communities.
Conservation Biology 14(1):18-30.
USDA Forest Service. 2004. National Forest system fact sheet. www.fs.fed.us/eng/road_mgt/factsheet.shtml.

For More Information
For more information about forest restoration, contact the ERI at 928-523-7182 or www.eri.nau.edu.
Written by Kimberly Lowe
Reviewed by Jesse Abrams, John Bedell, Adrien C. Elseroad, Julie E. Korb, Judith D. Springer,
Joseph Trudeau, and Diane Vosick
Cover photograph by Joseph Trudeau
Series Editor Peter Friederici
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution   
NAU Printing Services/G57276/2500/06-05

Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
2ERI35AE
