Communications between Forest Managers
and Property Owners in Pine Flats, Arizona:
A Case Study of Community Interactions in a 
High Fire Hazard Area
ERI— Issues in Forest Restoration

A l l  m a t e r i a l  c o p y r i g h t  ©  2 0 0 6  E R I ,  N A U
The Ecological Restoration Institute
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, 
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. 
These forests have been signiﬁcantly altered over the last century, with decreased ecological and 
recreational values, near-elimination of natural low-intensity ﬁre regimes, and greatly increased 
risk of large-scale ﬁres. The ERI is working with public agencies and other partners to restore 
these forests to a more ecologically healthy condition and trajectory—in the process helping 
to signiﬁcantly reduce the threat of catastrophic wildﬁre and its effects on human, animal, and 
plant communities.
Cover photo: Typical scene in the Flat Pines neighborhood in Oak Creek Canyon showing the 
mixture of homes and heavy forest fuels.
Ecological Restoration Institute
Northern Arizona University
Box 15017, Flagstaff AZ 86011-5017
928-523-7182 • www.eri.nau.edu
Publication date: December 2006
Author: Aleta Rudeen
Editor: Jesse Abrams
Reviewers: Mark Brehl, Stephen Campbell, 
Dave Egan, Dr. Marty Lee, Raquel Romero
Cover Photo: Aleta Rudeen
Series Editor: Dave Egan
Please contact ERI for reproduction policies: 928-523-5697

Table of Contents
Introduction
1
Methods
2
Results
3
Fire Risk
4
Fuel Reduction
5
Firewise Program
6
Firewise Misconceptions: Defensible Space, Fuel Reduction 
 
7
Firewise: Government Involvement
8
Forest Health and Drought
9
Forest Service, National Forest and Responsibility
10
Forest Service Plans
11
Personal Contact
12
Conclusions
13
Recommendations for Forest Managers
14
Recommendations for Property Owners
16
Endnotes  
17
Appendix 1. Survey Instrument Administered to Residents of Pine Flats
18
Appendix 2. Interview Questions for Forest Managers and Pine Flats Residents
20


1
Introduction
The wildland-urban interface presents a number of challenges for forest managers, particularly 
in the context of fire-prone ecosystems. Forest restoration and fire protection needs can conflict 
with the very reasons people have for moving to forested settings. Homeowners often believe 
that public agencies, rather than the homeowners themselves, should bear the responsibility for 
fire protection.1 However, effective communication and education can increase homeowners’ 
acceptability of fuel treatments and encourage them to take personal action.2 Conversely, poor 
communication can lead to feelings of mistrust, frustration, and homeowner reluctance to take 
personal action.
This case study of the Pine Flats subdivision in Oak Creek Canyon, Arizona analyzes 
communications between forest managers and property owners in an area of high fire hazard. 
Pine Flats is similar to many seasonal neighborhoods in the western United States: homeowners 
use their properties for leisure and relaxation, and amenities such as privacy, proximity to the 
forest, aesthetics, and exclusivity are highly valued. This study highlights the challenges of 
communicating fire and forest health information in such a context, and offers recommendations 
for both forest managers and homeowners. 
Pine Flats has long been recognized as a neighborhood with a particularly high threat of 
devastating wildfire. Residents of the subdivision were apparently not taking the necessary 
actions to reduce fire hazard, prompting this study which considers whether there were possible 
miscommunications about fire hazard occurring between property owners and forest managers. 
Before conducting this research, several hypotheses were created based on preliminary 
knowledge: 1) Property owners were unfamiliar with forest and fire issues but would be 
willing to take action if they had a better understanding of fire hazard and forest health; 2) 
Communication styles and strategies used by forest managers were not compatible with those 
of homeowners; and 3) While forest experts are the best informed in terms of forest and fire 
knowledge, they may lack the skills needed to effectively communicate that knowledge to a lay 
audience.
The research presented here indicates that there is general willingness on the part of forest 
managers and property owners to improve and expand communication. There are extensive 
miscommunications about forest management and hazard mitigation. Pine Flats is an excellent 
example of a community in the wildland-urban interface, and this study illustrates how 
communications between groups have at times succeeded and other times failed. While the case 
study is site-specific to Pine Flats, the lessons learned there can be applied to other communities 
in similar situations.

2
Methods
The Pine Flats neighborhood, located north of Sedona, Arizona in the scenic Oak Creek Canyon, 
is situated in a ponderosa pine forest at an elevation of 5,500 feet (see map). There are 60 
property owners, the majority (86%) being seasonal residents who spend their time in Pine Flats 
during the summer months. The subdivision is heavily forested and includes about 50 structures, 
many of which are close to one another. Pine Flats is surrounded by the Coconino National 
Forest and, given the current forest conditions, steep terrain and prevailing winds, is considered 
to be in a high fire hazard zone. 
The study design included a mail-in survey to property owners (see Appendix 1); interviews with 
property owners, forest managers, and forest ecologists (see Appendix 2); and site visits to Pine 
Flats with forest management experts. The research was all conducted during a time when the 
community’s Firewise application  was being processed, and in the midst of an extraordinarily 
dry winter. Research was concluded prior to the 2006 summer fire season, which saw the 
evacuation of Oak Creek Canyon due to a nearby forest fire. 
Surveys and interview requests were sent to the primary addresses of all 60 property owners 
during the winter of 2005-06. Thirty surveys (50%) were returned, and many residents agreed to 
be interviewed, indicating significant interest in this topic. Survey results were analyzed using 
SPSS statistical software. The survey instrument and summary results are given in Appendix 1.
Ten property owners were formally interviewed, either by phone or in person. These interviews 
lasted from 20 minutes to more than an hour and were audio recorded and later transcribed. Of 
these ten interviewees, nine owned homes and one owned property with no structures. Because 
of this difference, that property owner tends to be an outlier in the interview results. In addition 
to the ten formal interviews, there were four informal interviews. These were unplanned and 
occurred by phone or in person while walking through the Pine Flats neighborhood. These 
informative conversations were added to the overall research analysis, for a total interview 
group of 14 people (23.3% of Pine Flats property owners). A flexible interview design allowed 
residents to address issues that were most important to them. As a result, some questions were 
not asked of all interviewees (see Appendix 2 for a list of interview questions). Most residents 
believed that survey findings were indicative of their community as a whole, possibly with 
a few exceptions. However, some opinions may be missing due to the voluntary interview 
methodology.
In addition to interviews with Pine Flats residents, the research included interviews with three 
of the key forest managers involved with the Pine Flats subdivision and Oak Creek Canyon. 
Two interviewees represented the USDA Forest Service and the third represented Sedona Fire 
Department. All had been in direct contact with the Pine Flats property owners.
For the third portion of this research, several trips were taken to Pine Flats with two forest 
ecologists from the Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI) at Northern Arizona University. 
They provided assessments of the fire danger and forest health both inside Pine Flats and on the 
national forest lands surrounding the subdivision. This third portion of the research incorporated 
expert opinions on these matters from an outsider’s perspective. 

3
Results
The surveys and interviews detected a wide range of issues for Pine Flats residents. This 
synthesis will describe some of the key concerns. These include the risk fire poses to Pine Flats, 
fuel reduction activities, the Firewise community program and miscommunications about that 
program, perceptions of forest health, responsibilities of homeowners and the Forest Service, and 
views about the national forest that surrounds Pine Flats. These were the key issues that affected 
property owner action and enthusiasm, and all are greatly affected by communications between 
forest managers and homeowners. Confusion about these issues occurs among many people 
involved. The results given on the following pages highlight areas in need of clarification and 
improvement.
Map of Pine Flats subdivision and vicinity, in north-central Arizona

4
Fire Risk
Pine Flats residents are aware of the high fire risk in their subdivision and Oak Creek Canyon. 
One survey question asked respondents to rate the likelihood of fire in Pine Flats from 1 (not 
likely) to 10 (very likely). The mean response was 7.7, showing a very high overall level of 
concern. Only two returned surveys chose a number less than five, and seven surveys said that 
fire risk was a 10. Respondents from the Sedona Fire Department and Forest Service as well 
as the forest ecologists from ERI all agree that Pine Flats residents have good reason to be 
concerned with fire threat, both due to forest conditions and to problems with firefighter access to 
the subdivision. One forest ecologist noted, “The one-way road [which is the only entrance into 
Pine Flats], especially as it crosses the creek, is a serious, serious problem for fire suppression 
in the subdivision.” Pine Flats is also at a disadvantage due to its distance from the nearest fire 
station along a winding, two-lane road. One forest manager said, “There’s a lot of reasons they 
should be worried about response time.” The layout of Pine Flats, as well as the zigzag nature of 
Highway 89A, present possible challenges for homeowner evacuation as well.
Interviews indicated that the Pine Flats Property Owners’ Association initiated formal meetings 
with the Forest Service in recent years. Forest managers were invited to talk about ways of 
reducing fire hazard in the neighborhood. Several residents noted that the Forest Service has 
cancelled these meetings twice, due to fire-related responsibilities. Residents understand these 
responsibilities, but still desire information and guidance on fire issues from forest managers.

5
Fuel Reduction
The majority of Pine Flats residents reduce some level of fuels on their property, but there is 
confusion concerning the means and degree to which fuels should be reduced. 
Thirteen of the 14 Pine Flats property owners interviewed said they regularly reduced fuels 
on their property. The level of activity varied widely, however, and included activities such 
as raking pine needles off lawns, removal of dead trees and debris from rooftops and gutters, 
the relocation of wood piles, and thinning live trees on property boundaries. Nine out of 14 
interviewees said they were willing to remove live trees; six had already done so, and two said 
they would if a forest manager suggested specific trees. One property owner said they would 
only reduce fuels if the rest of Pine Flats did it first. This person was also the only respondent 
that did not have an actual structure on their property. The person made the argument that “I 
could go up there and spend thousands of dollars…to clear my lot and if a fire broke out in 
that thing, that subdivision, the entire thing would burn. And I don’t know why I should have 
expended that money.” This outlook on fuels reduction was not necessarily unique. Several other 
homeowners expressed sympathy for this attitude, but articulated that they were willing to take 
necessary steps to reduce the fire hazard regardless of a neighbor’s inaction.
It is important to note that most Pine Flats residents are retirement age and live there seasonally. 
Some spend little time in Pine Flats and do not want to spend their visits cleaning up their yards 
or removing trees. A few more active residents said that some seasonal residents are difficult to 
get in touch with about fire issues. Most residents interviewed said they attend the annual Fourth 
of July meeting where they speak with forest managers and talk about proposed options for 
their subdivision. They said it is difficult to include those who do not come to those meetings in 
decisions.
One forest manager and the two forest ecologists from ERI agreed that it would likely take 
every person to be compliant with fuel reductions in order to provide homes with maximum fire 
protection. It was recognized that because of house and property proximity, if one house caught 
fire, neighboring houses would likely catch fire. Regardless, most residents were supportive 
of fuel reduction, though for some this was limited to debris removal rather than the more 
substantial task of forest density reduction. 
 
One of the interviewed forest managers gave Pine Flats residents credit for improving fuel 
reduction efforts in recent years. Though some fuels had been reduced in Pine Flats, the 
community as a whole would require a great deal more thinning in order to significantly reduce 
fire hazard, according to ERI’s forest ecologists. Several homeowners felt there was a shortage of 
available workers to perform fuel reduction operations and said they would like to have someone 
to hire for this purpose. It appears that greater access to resources, including both labor and 
information, would greatly improve the quantity and quality of Pine Flats fuel reduction efforts.

6
Firewise Program
Pine Flats residents have become more aware of fire issues in recent years. However, much 
confusion still exists among property owners about fire hazards and remedies, and many are 
confused about the Firewise Community Program. 
The National Firewise Communities Program (www.firewise.org) is a multi-agency effort 
designed to involve homeowners, community leaders, planners, developers, and others in the 
effort to protect people, property, and natural resources from the risk of wildland fire. The 
Firewise Communities approach emphasizes community responsibility for planning in the design 
of a safe community as well as effective emergency response, and individual responsibility for 
safer home construction and design, landscaping, and maintenance. 
Firewise Communities is part of the National Wildland/Urban Interface Fire Program, which 
is directed and sponsored by the Wildland/Urban Interface Working Team (WUIWT) of the 
National Wildfire Coordinating Group, a consortium of wildland fire organizations and federal 
agencies responsible for wildland fire management in the United States. In Arizona, the effort 
is led by Arizona Firewise Communities in affiliation with the national Firewise Communities 
programs. Among the state collaborators are the Arizona Fire Districts Association and the Forest 
Service. 
The Sedona Fire Department representative, who is currently processing Pine Flats’ Firewise 
application, describes Firewise as an awareness program that recognizes communities for their 
effort to reduce fire hazard. For Pine Flats to become “Firewise,” a majority of homeowners in 
Pine Flats would have to show an active attempt each year at making their homes more fire safe. 
Activities include, but are not limited to, debris removal, limbing larger trees to reduce ladder 
fuels, and tree removal. Not every home within the subdivision would need to be compliant in 
order for Pine Flats to be deemed a Firewise community.
While Pine Flats property owners were generally supportive of fuels reduction, their feelings 
about becoming a Firewise community were more variable. Nine of the 14 interviewees were in 
favor of becoming Firewise. Three interviewees did not want Pine Flats to become a Firewise 
community, but the reasons they gave were based on a misunderstanding of the realities of the 
Firewise community design. Two people were undecided, including one who had never heard 
of the Firewise Program. Some of these perceptions and misunderstandings are discussed in the 
following section. 

7
Firewise Misconceptions: Defensible Space, Fuel Reduction
Pine Flats residents have misconceptions about what implications the Firewise Program would 
have in their community and the effect this would have on their properties.
The most common misconception about the Firewise Program pertained to defensible space. 
Much of the Firewise literature that Pine Flats residents have seen suggests creating a 30-foot 
fuel reduction buffer around each home. Most lots in Pine Flats are 50 feet by 100 feet, with 
only 20 feet or less between neighboring homes. Many respondents argued that they “lived there 
for the trees” and did not want to “clear-cut” their property. Many residents felt that not only 
was a 30-foot defensible zone impossible due to the proximity of homes, but they mistakenly 
understood it to mean that they would have to literally remove every tree and shrub within that 
zone. According to forest managers, creating defensible space would not require all trees be cut, 
but in order to fully manage for fire threat and forest health, homeowners would have to reduce 
both the vertical and horizontal continuity of forest fuels.
The goal of creating a fire-safe community often conflicts with the reasons residents have 
for owning property in Pine Flats. Some homeowners argued that they live in Pine Flats for 
the aesthetic value of the forest and in some cases would rather enjoy it while they have it 
than remove live trees. Others said that while they would prefer to keep all the trees in the 
subdivision, “[We would] rather have it thin than not have a house at all.” 
 
Firewise activities in Pine Flats could include actions such as cutting some live trees, limbing 
some trees to reduce ladder fuels, and regularly removing pine needles and debris as well as 
changes to building materials and removal of flammable material around homes. If a homeowner 
is particularly fond of a tree that is close to their house, they would not necessarily have to cut 
it, but would consider that tree as a part of the structure and create defensible space around it. 
Forest Service and Fire Department officials said that the Firewise framework would not require 
residents to remove old-growth trees as some had thought, but rather remove some of the trees 
surrounding them as well as their ladder fuels. This would actually have positive effects for 
the health of some older trees that might otherwise be compromised. One forest ecologist from 
ERI as well as one of the interviewed forest managers said that some Pine Flats residents were 
putting their old-growth trees in danger because of crowded forest conditions.
Several homeowners said they had been opposed to the Firewise Program until they spoke 
with the Fire Department representative in person and better understood exactly what Firewise 
treatments would look like on their property or that of their neighbors. They often said that it 
was this contact and site-specific explanation that persuaded them to want to become Firewise 
and to remove some trees on their property. As one resident with a relatively large lot said after 
thinning on his property, “What’s interesting is you take a lot of trees out and you’d be surprised 
how little you miss them.”  Six people had already removed trees around their homes based on 
suggestions from the Fire Department or the Forest Service and two more said they would be 
willing to take out live trees if it was recommended by a forest manager. In general, residents 
lacked the knowledge of the specific actions needed. Nobody wanted to remove a tree unless 
someone with credibility recommended specific action for their land.

8
Firewise: Government Involvement
Pine Flats residents held a range of opinions on the proper role for government in areas of high 
fire hazard.
One survey question asked property owners what level of involvement government should have 
with private property use in areas of high fire hazard. The results showed a majority (56.7%) felt 
government should act as an information source that actively contacts property owners about 
fire issues. Another 13.3% said they wanted government to act as an information source, but one 
that property owners would take the initiative to contact with questions. The most surprising 
results, however, were that none of the survey respondents chose the option of no government 
involvement and an unexpected 23.3% said that government should have as much authority as 
necessary in order to reduce the risk of fire.
One resident remarked that he was not in favor of the Firewise Program because “to me they 
have you by the bootstraps.”  Other residents wanted to see more government control. Some 
felt that it was frustrating to reduce fuels on their own property if their neighbors did not, and 
thought it would be good to see mandatory fuels cleanup. One interviewee said, “I want the Fire 
Department to hand out tickets. That will get people’s attention. And I don’t mean invitations to 
a meeting. I mean citations for a violation.”  The residents who were the most concerned about 
fire were often the most adamant about government being very strict to get others to comply.

9
Forest Health and Drought
Most residents could only attribute the poor condition of the forests in Oak Creek Canyon to 
drought conditions, rather than to changes in forest structure from fire exclusion. 
Ponderosa pine forests in the Southwest are ecologically unhealthy due to past forest practices 
including logging, overgrazing and fire exclusion, and, as a result, are more prone to catastrophic 
forest fire than they were before European settlement.3 Drought exacerbates existing unhealthy 
conditions of the forest and leads to heightened fire hazard. It also causes already stressed trees to 
be more prone to bark beetle attacks which in turn leave more dead fuels in the forest to further 
increase the fire hazard. 
 
The survey sent to Pine Flats property owners asked them to evaluate the condition of the forest, 
given the following options: “healthy,” “excessive fuels on the ground,” “bark beetle kill,” “too 
many trees,” and “other.”  The term “healthy” is a charged word that did not necessarily mean 
the same thing to Pine Flats residents as it did to researchers, as was later realized. Nevertheless, 
only 16.7% of respondents said that the forest was healthy. Of the 14 property owners 
interviewed, only four had a concept of general forest health issues, though these understandings 
were often limited or incomplete. Eight of the 14 interviewees thought that the threat of fire to 
Pine Flats stemmed only from the current drought conditions. Several believed that fire was not 
a significant threat during years of higher precipitation. Most interviewees expressed concern 
about increased tree mortality due to bark beetle attacks.
All three forest managers were asked if they communicated fire hazard to Pine Flats property 
owners in terms of general ecosystem degradation, attributed fire hazard to the current drought 
or used a combination of the two factors in their communications. Two forest managers said they 
focused on drought when speaking with homeowners, while one said that he used both issues to 
explain fire hazard.
One question worth considering when designing a communication strategy is whether having 
greater ecological literacy would further encourage residents of the Wildland Urban Interface 
to reduce fuels and thin trees. While interview results were inconclusive in terms of direct 
correlation between knowledge of forest health issues and willingness to reduce fuels, the 
majority of residents did not understand forest health as a benefit of fuels reductions. One 
interviewed manager said, “Education is a powerful tool. And I think a lot of people don’t realize 
that the condition of the forest is because of us excluding fire.”  While he usually communicated 
issues of drought only, he thought that homeowners would benefit, and be more willing to reduce 
fuels, if they had a better understanding of forest health issues.
Aesthetic and visual reactions to the forest may also play an important role in people’s 
preferences. One forest manager said that homeowners may have an “unrealistic idea of what 
a forest should look like.”  Forest ecologists from the ERI agreed that pre-European settlement 
forest conditions did not include such dense conditions as occur in the Pine Flats subdivision 
and outside of the subdivision in the national forest. They said restoring forests to more natural 
conditions would greatly reduce the wildfire hazard in and around Pine Flats.

10
Forest Service, National Forest and Responsibility
The central frustration articulated by Pine Flats property owners during their interviews was a 
frustration with the Forest Service for the condition of the national forest that surrounds their 
subdivision. 
Many residents felt that the “real” fire hazard was in the national forest that surrounds them. 
They thought that a fire would likely catch or spread in the national forest before it would in Pine 
Flats. Most people felt that individual managers were personable, but the Forest Service as an 
institution was a frustrating bureaucracy that “failed to follow through on anything.”
Property owners felt that the Forest Service should prioritize forest management around homes, 
but that so far the Forest Service had failed to do their part to reduce fire hazard. All of the 13 
homeowners interviewed expressed deep frustration with both the condition of the national forest 
as well as the inability of the Forest Service to visibly follow through with any management 
plans. While the two forest ecologists from ERI said that structures, such as houses, would likely 
carry a fire faster than the fuels in the national forest, both agreed that the forests surrounding 
the subdivision were in very poor condition and needed to be managed for both forest health 
and reduced fire hazard. Forest managers agreed that the national forest was in poor condition. 
However, there were some comments that Pine Flats residents needed to take responsibility for 
their own choice to build or buy a house in the middle of the forest, not the other way around. 
Many interviewees expressed strong frustrations with the agency’s lack of action, and some 
of this ill will apparently affects perceptions of the Firewise Program. Firewise is not a Forest 
Service program, but it has been promoted to Pine Flats residents by some forest managers. One 
person tied his initial negativity toward the Firewise Program with his frustration with the Forest 
Service, stating that “I’m not anti-government, but…when you wonder why people don’t want to 
jump in and participate with the government [it is] because we see the government do such sorry 
jobs of things.”  Another interviewee commented that “The Forest Service has done nothing, 
and…since a couple of floods, and since a couple of beetle attacks, I mean you can hardly walk 
through some of the woods that surround our place.”  All Pine Flats interviewees wanted to see 
the surrounding national forest “cleaned up” and felt that this was by far the most important 
action to prevent fires in the subdivision.
There was a general agreement within Pine Flats that the Forest Service should be doing their 
part if they were suggesting to Pine Flats residents to reduce fuels on their private property. One 
resident commented, “We had a forest guy in there, he gets us all gung-ho and gets us to clean 
everything up…but they can’t seem to do anything on their own [land].”
 

11
Forest Service Plans
The Forest Service does have a plan for a fuels reduction in Oak Creek Canyon, but the plan, as 
well as its limitations, have been ineffectively communicated to Pine Flats residents.  
The project proposal as described in the environmental assessment is to thin national forest land 
within 200 feet of all private property in Oak Creek Canyon on slopes less than 40%. A large 
portion of national forest land within 200 feet of the Pine Flats subdivision consists of slopes 
greater than 40%, which means the project may not accomplish the level of fuels reduction that 
Pine Flats residents are expecting from the Forest Service. The Forest Service sent letters to all 
property owners in the fall of 2005 explaining the proposal, and invited residents to an open 
house. However, only one resident mentioned the existence of this plan during the interviews.
Two respondents were later asked why interviewees failed to mention the Forest Service 
proposal. They gave different, but insightful, answers to this question. One interviewee had 
experience with the Forest Service in the past. He said that he got the letter and understood it, 
but thought the writing was too technical for most other people in the subdivision to understand. 
He used as an example the term, “prescribed burn,” which he believed most people would not 
understand. The other interviewee recalled the letter and commented that they thought the reason 
“no one mentioned it, [is] because they [the Forest Service] have forever said they were going to 
do things and never followed through….So no one believes them.”
 
Of the 13 homeowners who expressed frustration with the Forest Service for the conditions 
in the national forest, four volunteered during the interview to go in and clean up some of the 
fuels on the national forest themselves on their own initiative. One woman who volunteered 
suggested, “If they are so tight with money and it is so hard to get things done, let us offer to 
help them.” All four would-be volunteers said their offers to reduce the fuels themselves had 
been turned down by the Forest Service. One person said he had been turned down when he 
applied for a permit to get firewood. Many people recognized this as a concern since they are 
not allowed to “clean up” the national forest, and yet it is right outside their homes. One resident 
said, “The Forest Service has a forest. I can understand if we’re not high on their priority. But, 
we ought to be able to do, you know, take care of ourselves. And it wouldn’t hurt if we went in 
there and cleaned up the Forest.”  Some people said they use neighborhood hoses to water all the 
trees around the boundary with national forest land on a regular basis because it is all they can 
think of to do.
 

12
Personal Contact
All 14 interview respondents from Pine Flats said they would like to see more in-person contact 
from forest managers. 
One interviewee said that the prospect of having more information and getting more site-specific 
advice was the only reason he finally agreed to the Firewise community proposal. Another 
explained that she wanted more one-on-one time with forest specialists, stating “I think they 
should talk to the individual people rather than hold a meeting, so people can ask their own 
concerns.” Others wanted forest managers to address their concerns through a combination of 
annual Property Owners’ Association meetings and one-on-one contact. Because of the seasonal 
resident status of the majority of Pine Flats homeowners, it is essential that forest managers are 
available to meet with homeowners when they are likely to be there (during the summer and 
often on weekends). This is difficult because this is also fire season when personnel from the 
Forest Service and Fire Department are likely to have other places they need to be. 
Forest managers have communicated fire hazard to property owners through three different 
modes: literature, such as pamphlets and letters; formal meetings; and one-on-one talks with 
some residents. Pamphlets and letters were rarely referred to during interviews as significant 
sources of information. Residents recognize and appreciate the value of formal meetings, but all 
interviewees desired more individual recommendations from forest managers and continued one-
on-one contact. The residents that had already received site-specific recommendations on their 
property felt that the rest of Pine Flats would greatly benefit from the same.

13
Conclusions
Pine Flats property owners are acutely concerned about the threat that fire poses to their 
subdivision. Many residents have shown enthusiasm toward fuels reduction and are interested 
in receiving information about how to be more Firewise in their community. For the most 
part, residents said they would welcome more contact from forest managers in dealing with 
their property. While residents are interested in taking action to reduce the threat of fire, they 
also expressed some apprehension about removing numerous trees from their property. This 
investigation found that many wildland-urban interface residents were willing to take small 
steps to reduce fire hazard on their own property (e.g., removal of pine needles and debris), 
but felt that the larger risk was in the national forest surrounding them, and, therefore, more 
responsibility falls on public agencies. Some residents wanted site-specific, expert information 
on how to reduce fire hazard on their property before moving forward with fuel reduction.
The slow pace of fuel reduction in Pine Flats does not appear to be a result of inadequate 
understanding of fire hazard. It is more likely a combination of personal preferences for dense 
forest conditions, limited understanding of the local ecology, lack of understanding of what 
remedial actions to take, a perceived lack of available skilled workers to perform fuel reduction 
activities, and mistrust of government agencies and programs. Several of these factors can be 
addressed through improved communication between forest managers and property owners.
These findings highlight the important role of effective communication between forest managers 
and wildland-urban interface residents. In particular, the following issues should be the focus of 
communications between managers and residents:
Hazards of forest fire and property damage resulting from current forest conditions. 
Residents should understand how both the short-term (e.g., seasonal weather patterns) and 
longer-term (e.g., changes in forest structure) contribute to fire hazard.
Specific steps homeowners can take to protect their own property and to minimize the 
possibility that a residential fire will spread into the neighboring forest.
Steps being taken by forest managers to restore more natural forest conditions and change 
fuel arrangements to decrease fire behavior. This should include a realistic appraisal of 
possible complicating factors including funding, seasonal windows of opportunity, terrain 
limitations, and compliance with environmental or procedural laws.
Concerns or limitations homeowners have about reducing fire hazard on their property.
The context of communication is just as important as the content, as was discovered in this study. 
In the case of Pine Flats, communication has apparently been effective for some residents, but 
for others the timing, mode, or content of communication has been inadequate. According to 
residents in this study, communication with forest managers is greatly desired, but it must be 
done in a way that is accessible, understandable, and useful to residents.
•
•
•
•

14
Recommendations for Forest Managers
 
The following recommendations are based on a combination of opinions expressed by Pine 
Flats residents and information from forest managers and ecologists. These recommendations 
are intended to address shortcomings in manager-homeowner communications in Pine Flats, but 
many may be applicable to similar wildland-urban interface situations across the country.
General recommendations
Modes of communication should use concepts and terminology that members of the public 
can understand.
Further research is needed to determine whether an increased emphasis on educating 
residents about forest health would increase their willingness to conduct fuels reductions. 
It is likely that property owners would be more willing to reduce fuels on their property if 
they believed that doing so would positively benefit overall ecosystem health.
Fuel reductions, Firewise
Firewise community recommendations should be customized and site-specific. Pine Flats 
residents had a tendency to take information given to them either verbally or through 
literature verbatim. Literature describing concepts, such as defensible space, should fit 
the specifics of a community to avoid confusion and the rejection of programs because of 
misinformation.
Since many Pine Flats property owners are older as well as seasonal residents they 
need a list of recommended and qualified contractors to do fuel reduction work. Several 
respondents supported the idea of the Property Owners’ Association hiring, on a regular 
basis, a worker or group of workers to work specifically for Pine Flats. Such workers 
would be advised by forest managers as to what fuels should be reduced with the consent 
of property owners.
In-person contact
One-on-one contact with forest managers was reported as useful in clarifying fire and 
forest issues. All interviewees who had already had the chance to speak in person with 
forest managers spoke highly of that interaction, and those who had not yet had that 
opportunity wished to do so. Most property owners felt that while they understood 
suggestions for fuels management in general, they were not confident enough to undertake 
actions on their own property. The majority of residents said that they would greatly benefit 
from site-specific explanations and suggestions and hoped that would be provided.
•
•
•
•
•

15
One-on-one contact with forest managers is essential to motivate landowners to take 
precautions against forest fire. The suggestion received a high level of enthusiasm from 
residents. Contact should be made during times when seasonal residents are at their homes.
Forest Service
Property owners need to see a definite timeline for proposed work. Any delays or inaction in 
the national forest gives the impression that the Forest Service will not follow through on its 
proposals, leading to distrust of the Forest Service as an institution. This distrust can cause 
negativity about the Firewise program. 
Interviewees were universally either unaware or dismissive of the current plan for the 
national forest surrounding private property in Oak Creek Canyon, indicating a need for 
better communication between the agency and adjacent property owners.
The Forest Service should make a greater effort to meet with residents at scheduled 
times, and to send a replacement representative if agency staff are unable to meet their 
commitments.
Fire education and action should go hand in hand. Currently, property owners have been 
receiving information from forest managers about the high fire hazard of their area and at 
the same time nothing is happening on the adjacent national forest to reduce that hazard. 
This creates a higher level of fear and frustration in a group that cannot actively manage 
locations outside their private property.
Forest managers should review outreach materials to ensure that they are both site-specific and 
understandable for a lay audience. Plans for fuel-reduction projects on the national forest should 
include a definite timeline to avoid property owner frustration. Meetings and open houses for 
these plans should be scheduled for times that a majority of the desired audience can attend, 
such as during the summer and over weekends in the case of Pine Flats. Outreach should focus 
on more direct interaction with property owners. Site-specific demonstrations of suggested 
mitigation activities would be beneficial for gaining property owner acceptance and trust.
•
•
•
•

16
Recommendations for Property Owners
Pine Flats property owners could improve their communications between each other and their 
availability to meet with forest managers during their mostly seasonal residency. Property 
owners should also take responsibility for choosing to live in a fire-adapted ecosystem and 
take the initiative to learn more about those areas and about the complexities of federal forest 
management.
Property owners should take the initiative to educate themselves about forest health and 
fire hazard. While residents had a good understanding of drought conditions in Pine Flats, 
their knowledge of the ecosystem as a whole was fairly limited. Because of their choice 
to purchase property in a fire-adapted ecosystem, they should make an attempt to better 
understand how to live in that ecosystem to both promote forest health and reduce fire 
hazard.
Property owners should also develop a greater understanding of the constraints and 
opportunities of federal forest management. Important constraints include staffing, funding 
for treatments, regulatory compliance, terrain limitations, seasonal limitations, and the 
need to attend to other high-priority projects. At the same time, several recent policies 
have created new opportunities for partnerships between communities and land managers, 
especially in the context of fire and fuels planning.
Regardless of neighbors’ inaction, property owners should make Firewise efforts on their 
own land. While it is true that a fire could spread between houses in Pine Flats in spite 
of Firewise activities, fuels reductions still have the potential to reduce fire hazard. Pine 
Flats residents have a responsibility to manage their land for fire safety regardless of their 
neighbors’ (including Forest Service) actions.
Property owners could make a greater effort to be available for meetings with forest 
managers. It may be difficult for residents to be around during necessary intervals for 
communications with forest managers, but property owners should try to make themselves 
available during times that managers are able to meet with them.
•
•
•
•

17
Endnotes
1. Gardner, P.D., H.J. Cortner, and K. Widaman. 1987. The risk perceptions and policy response 
toward wildland fire hazards by urban home-owners. Landscape and Urban Planning 14:163-
172. Cortner, H.J., P.D. Gardner, and J.G. Taylor. 1990. Fire hazards at the urban-wildland 
interface: What the public expects. Environmental Management 14(1):57-62. Blanchard, B. 
and R.L. Ryan. 2004. Community perceptions of wildland fire risk and fire hazard reduction 
strategies at the wildland-urban interface in the northeastern United States. Pp. 285-294 in J. 
Murdy (ed.), Proceedings of the 2003 Northeastern Recreation Research Symposium. Gen. 
Tech. Rep. NE-317. Newtown Square, PA: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Northeastern Research Station.
2. Jacobsen, S.K., M.C. Monroe, and S. Marynowski. 2001. Fire at the wildland interface: 
the influence of experience and mass media on public knowledge, attitudes, and behavioral 
intentions. Wildlife Society Bulletin 29(3):929-937. Loomis, J.B., L.S. Bair, and A. Gonzalez-
Caban. 2001. Prescribed fire and public support: Knowledge gained, attitudes changed in 
Florida. Journal of Forestry 99(11):18-22. Monroe, M.C., L. Pennisi, S. McCaffrey, and D. 
Mileti. 2006. Social science to improve fuels management: A synthesis of research relevant to 
communicating with homeowners about fuels management. Gen. Tech. Rep. NC-267. St.Paul, 
MN: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, North Central Research Station.
3. Covington, W.W. 2003. The evolutionary and historical context. Pp. 26-47 in P. Friederici 
(ed.), Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Washington, D.C.: Island 
Press.

18
Appendix 1. Survey Instrument Administered to Residents of Pine Flats
Note that percentages do not necessarily add up to 100% either because respondents were 
asked to choose one or more answers or because respondents chose multiple answers despite 
instructions to choose only one.
1) 
What, in your opinion, is the condition of the forests surrounding your home? 
   
(Circle one or more):  
 
 
 
 
 
n=30
 
 
Healthy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16.7%
Lots of bark beetle kill 
 
 
 
 
 
53.3%
Trees are too close together  
 
 
 
 
56.7%
Excess pine needles and other dead debris on the ground 
 
66.7%
Other ____________________ 
 
 
 
 
10.0%
2) 
What is your primary source of information about the risk/likelihood of fire in the  
 
Pine Flats area?  (Choose one): 
 
 
 
 
n=30
Personal familiarity with the issues 
 
 
 
 
53.3%
TV/radio/newspaper  
 
 
 
 
 
6.7%
Forest Service 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43.3%
City officials  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.3%
Neighbors and friends 
 
 
 
 
 
23.3%
 Other ____________________ 
 
 
 
 
6.7%
3) 
How would you rate the risk of a forest fire in or near Pine Flats?  (Circle a number)  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            n=30
 
 
               0.0   3.3    3.3    0.0   6.7   10.0  10.0  30.0  13.3  23.3%
Not very likely฀--1-----2-----3-----4-----5-----6-----7-----8-----9-----10--฀Very probable
(forest fires are not 
 
 
 
 
 
          (forest fires are a
likely to occur here) 
 
 
 
 
                      very likely possibility) 
4) 
Who do you believe is responsible for procedures to reduce the danger of forest fires   
 
in forested residential areas such as Pine Flats?  (Choose one): 
n=30
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Forest Service  
 
 
 
 
 
 
30.0%
Homeowners  
 
 
 
 
 
 
30.0%
City Fire Department  
 
 
 
 
 
0.0%
Other ____________________ 
 
 
 
 
0.0%
[Forest Service and Homeowners]  
 
 
 
 
26.7%
[Forest Service, Homeowners, and Fire Department] 
 
 
6.7%
[Forest Service, Homeowners, and other]  
 
 
 
3.3%
[Homeowners and Fire Department] 
 
 
 
 
3.3%
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
f)
a)
b)
c)
d)

19
5) 
How much involvement should the government have in homeowner’s private  
 
 
property use in areas of forest fire danger?  (Choose one): 
 
n=30
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
None at all  
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.0%
As an information resource that property owners can 
 
contact if they have questions  
 
 
 
 
13.3%
As an information resource that actively contacts propert  
 
owners regarding fire protection issues 
 
 
 
56.7%
As much as is necessary in order to protect people and 
 
forests from forest fire risks  
 
 
 
 
23.3%
6) 
What do you feel would be the best approach for homeowners to reduce any 
 
 danger of forest fire in Pine Flats?  (Circle one or more): 
 
n=29
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
There is no need to change anything  
 
 
 
0.0%
Cutting down some trees 
 
 
 
 
 
30.0%
Removing some of the debris around houses that 
 
could catch fire 
 
 
 
 
 
 
80.0%
Other _____________________ 
 
 
 
 
26.7%
7) 
How informed do you think you are about forest health issues? 
 
(Circle a number): 
 
 
 
 
 
 
n=30
 
          13.3   13.3   20.0   20.0    10.0    0.0    10.0    13.3    0.0    0.0%
        Very aware฀--1------2------3------4------5------6------7------8------9------10--฀Not really
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
  aware
The following three demographic questions will help the credibility of my research by defining a 
population:
8) 
How long have you lived in Pine Flats? 
 
 
 
n=30
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0-3 years 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  0.0%
4-10 years 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26.7%
11-20 years  
 
 
 
 
 
 
33.3%
21+ years 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40.0%
9) 
Do you live in Pine Flats as a:  
 
 
 
 
n=29
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Seasonal resident 
 
 
 
 
 
 
86.2%
Year-round resident  
 
 
 
 
 
13.8%
10) 
Up to what level of education have you completed? 
 
 
n=30
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Less than high school 
 
 
 
 
 
  0.0%
High School  
 
 
 
 
 
 
16.7%
Bachelor’s degree 
 
 
 
 
 
 
53.3%
Master’s degree 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20.0%
PhD  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  0.0%
Other _____________________ 
 
 
 
 
10.0%
a)
b)
c)
d)
a)
b)
c)
d)
a)
b)
c)
d)
a)
b)
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
f)

20
Appendix 2. Interview Questions for Forest Managers and Pine Flats Residents
Note that the interview methodology used a flexible, semi-structured approach as a means of 
eliciting specific information from the varied interviewees. Therefore, the following questions 
are not an exhaustive list of all questions asked of all interviewees. Likewise, some of the 
following questions may not have been asked of all interviewees.
Interview Questions – Forest Managers
Could you describe your job and how it relates to Pine Flats and Oak Creek Canyon?
What constitutes the largest fire threat to Pine Flats?
How do you communicate forest health issues to residents? 
How do you communicate fire risk issues to residents?
When you talk to residents about fire risk, how do you frame the issue? Do you emphasize 
forest health or drought?
What would the Firewise community program entail for Pine Flats?
In order to be Firewise, would Pine Flats residents have to clear 30 feet of defensible space 
around their homes?
If Pine Flats becomes Firewise is there some sort form of enforcement to make sure 
everyone remains compliant?
Is there reason for Pine Flats residents to be concerned about fire department response 
time?
Has your agency/department actively tried to get Pine Flats residents to thin their 
properties or do fuel reductions?
How do you go about contacting residents?
Have any Pine Flats residents contacted you with concerns about surrounding national 
forest land?
How would Pine Flats residents contact your agency/department?
What kind of risk does the campground pose to Pine Flats in terms of fire danger?
Have you seen a significant change over time in Pine Flats residents’ willingness to accept 
fuel reductions?
Have you seen a significant change over time in Pine Flats residents’ willingness to 
become a Firewise community?
Is your agency/department willing to give one-on-one advice to homeowners on what 
actions to take to reduce fire danger on their property?
Is it accurate to say that Pine Flats homeowners have been resistant to taking action to 
reduce fire danger in their subdivision?
Is there any other information that you think is relevant?
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Interview Questions – Pine Flats Residents
How much time do you generally spend at Pine Flats?
How long have you owned your property (in Pine Flats)?
What is your age (or age range)?
What is your occupation?
Do you feel fire poses a large threat to Oak Creek Canyon?
What is chiefly responsible for the fire threat in the area?
What does the term fuel reduction mean to you? Does it include removal of live and dead 
material or just dead material?
Who approached your community about becoming Firewise?
What can you tell me about Pine Flats becoming a Firewise community?
Why is or was there resistance to the Firewise program?
Do you often talk with your Pine Flats neighbors about fire issues?
Have you done any tree-thinning or other fuel reduction on your property?
Has anyone else in Pine Flats done any thinning or fuel reduction?
Describe the condition of the forest surrounding Pine Flats.
Do you think people in Pine Flats are well-educated on forest health issues?
Is forest thinning a forest health issue or mainly a fire risk issue? 
Do you think people are receptive to learning about forest health issues?
Are there generational differences in views of forest health and homeowner 
responsibility?
Do you feel that survey results are representative of most of Pine Flats?
Would it be beneficial for a forest manager to visit every house to discuss fire issues on 
that property?
Are you happy with the communication you’ve had with forest managers?
What form of outreach would work well in Pine Flats?
Do you have any suggestions for forest managers?
Have you been in contact with anyone from the government concerning fire issues? Who 
(what department or agency)?
What is your experience dealing with fire risk in Pine Flats?
Do you have concerns about the surrounding national forest lands?
Has the Forest Service contacted you about plans for neighboring national forest land?
What can you tell me about the risk posed by the campground?
Is it more important for the Forest Service to manage surrounding forests or for home 
owners to manage forests on their properties?
What level of fuels reduction would you be comfortable with on your property?
Is there any other information that you think is relevant?
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
21

22

23
ERI White Papers: Issues in Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by 
reestablishing native species, structural characteristics, and ecological processes. The 
Society for Ecological Restoration International deﬁnes ecological restoration as “an 
intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem with respect 
to its health, integrity and sustainability….Restoration attempts to return an ecosystem to 
its historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration International Science & Policy 
Working Group 2004).
In the southwestern United States, most ponderosa pine forests have been degraded 
during the last 150 years. Many ponderosa pine areas are now dominated by dense thickets 
of small trees, and lack their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests 
in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing ﬁres and increased 
insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers on reintroducing 
frequent, low-intensity surface ﬁres—often after thinning dense stands—and reestablishing 
productive understory plant communities. 
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer 
in researching, implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests. By allowing natural processes, such as ﬁre, to resume self-
sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem services, 
wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The ERI White Papers series provides overviews and policy recommendations derived 
from research and observations by the ERI and its partner organizations. While the ERI 
staff recognizes that every forest restoration is site speciﬁc, we feel that the information 
provided in the ERI White Papers may help decisionmakers elsewhere.
This publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest 
Service. The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors 
and should not be interpreted as representing the opinions or policies of the United States 
Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products does not constitute their 
endorsement by the United States Government or ERI.
ERI White Papers: Issues in Forest Restoration 
1. Forestlands Health and Carbon Sequestration: Strengthening the Case for
Western Forest Restoration
2. Smoke from Prescribed Burning: Issues on Public Forestlands of the Western
United States
3. Public Perceptions of Forest Restoration in the Southwest: A Synthesis of Selected
Literature and Surveys
4. Integrating Ecological Restoration and Conservation Biology: A Case Study from 
Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests

