Lessons of the Pumpkin: Prof: Without thinning, fires will 
destroy forest 
By GARY GHIOTO 
Sun Staff Reporter 
 
06/17/2000 
 
The 15,000-acre Pumpkin Fire may have been ignited by lightning three weeks ago, but it 
was actually caused nearly a century ago, said Professor W. Wallace Covington Friday as 
he scanned a blackened stretch of forest burned to charcoal some 15 miles northwest of 
Flagstaff.  
"The crown fire you saw today was man-caused," he said, adding, "We let the forest get 
too dense and we have to solve that problem ... we owe it to future generations and we 
owe it to nature to solve problems that we have caused."  
Generations of grazing and fire suppression have eliminated the natural cycle of burning 
that removed forest debris. Logging provided plenty of space for new trees to grow in 
dense thickets. Now, an acre that held maybe 20 to 80 trees in 1880 may have as many as 
900 to 8,000 trees, said Covington.  
"If you wanted to destroy ponderosa pine ecosystems, you couldn't do it better than we've 
done it," said Covington.  
By failing to implement a comprehensive policy of thinning overcrowded stands and 
controlled burns to remove forest debris, the stage is set all over the West for disastrous 
wildfires, such as the Pumpkin Fire, he said.  
"The future is getting bleaker. When I came here in '75, this kind of scenario of a 14,000-
acre fire ... was pretty much unthinkable," said Covington.  
"By all the predictions, the ecological simulation models and the landscape models we're 
looking at these days, we know that these crown fires are going to get larger and larger 
and more severe," he added.  
While touring heavily damaged tracts of forest Friday with reporters, Covington's boots 
were covered with the dust and ash from the fire that blasted through dense ponderosa 
pine fueled by decades of accumulated pine needles, sticks and debris.  
The lesson of this wildfire, which destroyed a precious old-growth wilderness on 
Kendrick Mountain and has cost more than $6 million to contain, is a harsh one indeed, 
said Covington.  

The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University says it has developed 
"science-based" treatment plans that can bring back a healthy forest ecosystem and 
reduce the risk of catastrophic fires, such as the recent Los Alamos fire, which destroyed 
hundreds of homes.  
Recently U.S. Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt said it was time for the nation to adopt 
what he called the "Flagstaff Plan" developed by the Institute.  
But attempts to conduct thinning and prescribed burns on 100,000 acres in the Flagstaff 
area have been stalled by some environmental groups who argue the prescription 
proposed by Covington is too drastic and won't solve the problem.  
Covington blasted opponents of ecological restoration and claimed their real agenda is to 
block all logging on federal lands, a claim firmly denied by groups such as the Forest 
Alliance and Forest Guardians.  
He suggested that critics of ecological restoration should come to the Pumpkin Fire and 
take a look around.  
DIFFERENCE IN DAMAGE  
Covington and Forest Service officials showed a large tract of land inside the fire zone 
that had been thinned to a tree-density level that was typical before pioneers arrived in 
the area. The thinning was also accompanied by controlled burns several years ago.  
The contrast between the fire damage on the "treated" plots and the nearby dense forest is 
dramatic.  
The trees on the test plot were scorched around their trunks, but most retained branches 
filled with green needles. The intensity of the fire from the dense forest that was 
completely destroyed caused some of the test plot trees to brown, but they will recover, 
said Covington.  
"This was just as dense at the stands you saw today," he said of the treated parcel, "We 
can go out in stands like this, thin them, burn them and they will not burn up," he said.  
Thinning and prescribed burns have helped old growth trees that are being killed by 
competition for water and nutrients from hundreds of sickly pines crowded together. 
Studies show treated parcels are beneficial to wildlife, insects, wild flowers and 
endangered species, he added.  
"What's happening today was predicted in the 1940s and we can predict what's going to 
happen 40 and 50 years hence. What's going to happen to the forest, with the densities 
they have, is that they are going to be burning up on a scale of 40,000 to 50,000 acres."  

Covington is working with Grand Canyon Trust and other supporters of forest restoration 
to secure funding from Congress and the Clinton administration for projects in Flagstaff.  
Meanwhile, in response to a lawsuit filed by the Forest Alliance, Flagstaff Activist 
Network, Forest Guardians and other groups, the first phase of the Fort Valley restoration 
effort on 1,700 acres has been stopped.  
The Forest Service is preparing another decision on the Fort Valley project in an out-of-
court settlement reached by the environmental groups and the government.  
There is no firm timetable for the release of the new decision, which again could be 
appealed or challenged in court by opponents.  
Gary Ghioto can be reached at gghioto@azdailysun.com or 556-2251.  
 
