32
Ecological Restoration Institute 
Working Paper No. 32
An Evaluation of Fire Regime 
Reconstruction Methods
November 2014
SOUTHWEST 
FIRE     SCIENCE 
CONSORTIUM

Intermountain West Frequent-Fire Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing 
native species, structural characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological
Restoration International defines ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that 
initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity 
and sustainability….Restoration attempts to return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” 
(Society for Ecological Restoration International Science and Policy Working Group 2004).
Most frequent-fire forests throughout the Intermountain West have been degraded during 
the last 150 years. Many of these forests are now dominated by unnaturally dense thickets 
of small trees, and lack their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests 
in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing fires and increased 
insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers on reintroducing frequent, 
low-severity surface fires—often after thinning dense stands—and reestablishing productive 
understory plant communities.
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in 
researching, implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of frequent-fire forests of 
the Intermountain West. By allowing natural processes, such as low-severity fire, to resume 
self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem 
services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The Southwest Fire Science Consortium (SWFSC) is a way for managers, scientists, and 
policy makers to interact and share science. SWFSC’s goal is to see the best available science 
used to make management decisions and scientists working on the questions managers 
need answered. The SWFSC tries to bring together localized efforts to develop scientific 
information and to disseminate that to practitioners on the ground through an inclusive and 
open process.
This publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest 
Service and the Southwest Fire Science Consortium. The views and conclusions contained 
in this document are those of the author(s) and should not be interpreted as representing the 
opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of trade names or commercial 
products does not constitute their endorsement by the United States Government or the ERI.
Author: Larissa Yocom Kent
Reviewers: Dan Binkley, Dave Egan, Robert Fahey, Will Flatley, Peter Fulé, David Huffman, Andrea Thode, 
Barb Satink Wolfson, Amy Waltz 
Series Editor: Tayloe Dubay
Cover Photo: Historical photos like this one, which shows evidence of a large severe fire in spruce and aspen 
forests on the San Francisco Peaks near Flagstaff, AZ, taken in 1910, can provide rich historical information, 
but they are typically “snapshot” images, meaning that changes over time are not documented. A combination 
of methods used together is the strongest approach to reconstructing historical fire regimes. Photo courtesy of 
USDA Forest Service, fs.usda.gov
Please use the following citation when referring to this Working Paper:
Kent, L.Y. 2014. An Evaluation of Fire Regime Reconstruction Methods. ERI Working Paper No. 32. 
Ecological Restoration Institute and Southwest Fire Science Consortium, Northern Arizona University: 
Flagstaff, AZ. 15 p. 

Table of Contents
Introduction........................................................................................................... 1
Identifying the Best Available Historical Data.......................................................... 1
Historical Documents and Photos..................................................................... 2
Dendrochronology: Fire-scar Data.................................................................... 3
Dendrochronology: Tree Age, Death and Growth Data....................................... 5
Forest Structure Data........................................................................................ 6
Plant Traits....................................................................................................... 9
Charcoal........................................................................................................ 10
Integration of Multiple Lines of Evidence............................................................... 10
Conclusion........................................................................................................... 13
References.......................................................................................................... 14

1
Ecological Restoration Institute
AN EVALUATION OF FIRE REGIME RECONSTRUCTION METHODS
Introduction
Reconstruction of Fire Regimes
Fire is a fundamental disturbance process in ecology 
and has been a powerful agent of change in terrestrial 
ecosystems for millions of years. Understanding the 
role of ﬁre on a landscape is critical for managing ﬁre 
and forests for biodiversity, ecosystem function, and 
resilience to changes in climate. To better understand 
the role ﬁre can play in forests today, researchers and 
managers have found it useful to reconstruct attributes 
of historical ﬁre regimes before the onset of ﬁre 
exclusion. Fire exclusion in the southwestern United 
States ofen occurred in the late 1800s, when activities 
such as grazing of domestic animals, logging, and ﬁre 
suppression began on a widespread scale. 
Information about past ﬁre regimes can be a helpful 
reference to guide and inform land managers about 
current and future ﬁre regime characteristics, patterns, 
and forest structure characteristics. Management 
activities that beneﬁt from understanding past ﬁre 
regimes include prescribed ﬁre, managed wildﬁres for 
resource beneﬁt, and mechanical treatments to reduce 
ﬁre risk. Six ﬁre regime attributes are ofen considered: 
• 
Frequency: how ofen ﬁres occur in a given 
area or region (see Box 1 for more detailed fre-
quency terminology)
• 
Seasonality: time of year
• 
Severity: ecological eﬀects of ﬁre
• 
Type: surface or crown ﬁre 
• 
Size: area burned
• 
Spatial complexity: pattern of severity within 
ﬁre perimeter 
Fire intensity, which is a measure of the heat of a 
ﬁre, is a seventh ﬁre regime attribute that cannot be 
reconstructed directly but is inferred from ﬁre severity. 
Fire severity refers to the ecological eﬀects of ﬁre and 
is ofen quantiﬁed by overstory tree mortality. Each 
ﬁre regime attribute can be characterized by an average 
condition (for example, an average ﬁre frequency of 8 
years) as well as a measure of variation (for example, a 
range in ﬁre frequency of 2 to 20 years).
Tis working paper discusses several methods for 
reconstructing historical ﬁre regimes: 
• 
Historical documents and photos
• 
Dendrochronology: ﬁre-scar data
• 
Dendrochronology: tree age, death and growth 
data
• 
Forest structure data
• 
Plant traits
• 
Charcoal
Each of these methods will be discussed in terms of 
advantages, disadvantages, inherent uncertainties, and 
assumptions as well as temporal and spatial precision. 
Te potential value and limitations for reconstructing 
historical forest structure and composition with each 
method are also brieﬂy covered.
Identifying the Best Available Historical Data
Scientiﬁc work can be evaluated for quality based 
on a few key characteristics. Conﬁdence in scientiﬁc 
work can be based on the type, amount, quality, 
and consistency of evidence, as well as the degree of 
agreement of the evidence (Mastrandrea et al. 2010). 
“Generally, evidence is most robust when there are 
multiple, consistent independent lines of high-quality 
evidence” (Mastrandrea et al. 2010).
Two kinds of evidence will be discussed in this 
working paper: direct and indirect evidence. Direct 
evidence is a measurement of the actual subject of 
interest. For example, temperature can be measured 
with a thermometer; therefore a thermometer reading 
is direct evidence of temperature. Indirect evidence 
requires an assumption; it is not a measurement of 
the actual subject of interest but it is a measure of 
something related. For example, frost-killed tomatoes 
are indirect evidence of temperature; if the tomatoes 
have frost damage, we have evidence (we can infer) that 
temperatures were below freezing. 
Assumptions should be considered and a best 
estimate of the level of conﬁdence should be developed 
for any assumption. It is particularly important to 
evaluate assumptions if the overall results of a study rest 
heavily on those assumptions. Uncertainty levels, both 
for assumptions and for the results, can be quantitatively 
or qualitatively assigned (Mastrandrea et al. 2010). 
Box 1. How often do fires occur? 
Fire frequency definitions (from Agee 1993).
Fire frequency: a general term referring to the 
recurrence of ﬁre in a given area over time
Fire event (ﬁre occurrence, ﬁre incidence): a 
single ﬁre or series of ﬁres within an area at a 
particular time
Fire interval (ﬁre-free interval or ﬁre-return 
interval): the number of years between two 
successive ﬁre events in a given area
Mean ﬁre interval (mean ﬁre-return interval): 
arithmetic average of all ﬁre intervals in a given 
area over a given time period
Fire rotation (natural ﬁre rotation): the length 
of time necessary for an area equal in size to the 
study area to burn

2
Ecological Restoration Institute
AN EVALUATION OF FIRE REGIME RECONSTRUCTION METHODS
Historical Documents and Photos
Historical photos and documents, including timber 
company records, personal diaries, and expedition 
notes, can be valuable for understanding historical ﬁre 
regimes because they provide written or visual evidence 
of conditions as people experienced them before the 
eﬀects of ﬁre exclusion changed forests throughout much 
of the Southwest. An example is an excerpt written by Lt. 
Edward Beale in 1857 during an expedition in northern 
Arizona: “... A vast forest of gigantic pines, intersected 
frequently with open glades, sprinkled all over with 
mountains, meadows, and wide savannahs, and covered 
with the richest grasses, was traversed by our party for 
many days” (Bell 1870). Example photos are shown in 
Figure 1. Although historical documents and photos 
can provide rich historical information about a place, 
they are typically “snapshot” descriptions or images, 
meaning that changes over time are not documented. 
One exception is when repeat photography is available 
(Webb et al. 2010).
Fire frequency, unless it is directly described in a 
historical document, must be inferred from descriptions 
or images of forest structure or ﬁre severity. Old, large, 
widely-spaced trees, with or without ﬁre-scar catfaces, 
likely experienced low-severity, high-frequency ﬁre. 
Even-aged, densely spaced trees or places that were 
Figure 1. Top: Photo showing evidence of large severe fire in spruce 
and aspen forests, San Francisco Peaks, near Flagstaff, AZ, 1910. Bot-
tom: Photo showing grasslands and scattered juniper trees, Reserve 
Valley, Apache National Forest, 1923. Source of photos: fs.usda.gov.
Box 2. For more information about 
concepts and applications of historical 
ecology, generally and in the Southwest, 
see the following sources:
Balee, W. 1998. Advances in historical ecology. 
Columbia University Press, New York.
Crumley, C. 1994. Historical ecology: Cultural 
knowledge and changing landscapes. School 
of American Research Press, Santa Fe, NM.
Egan, D. and E. Howell. 2001. Te historical 
ecology handbook: A restorationist’s guide 
to reference ecosystems. Island Press, 
Washington, DC.
Friederici, P. 2004. Establishing reference 
conditions for southwestern ponderosa 
pine forests. Ecological Restoration Institute 
Working Paper 7. Ecological Restoration 
Institute, Flagstaﬀ, AZ.
Kaufmann, M.R., L.S. Huckaby, C.M. Ragan, and 
J. Popp. 1998. Forest reference conditions for 
ecosystem management in the Sacramento 
Mountains, New Mexico. USDA Forest 
Service, RMRS-GTR-19. USDA Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, 
CO.
Larson, A.J., and D. Churchill. 2012. Tree spatial 
patterns in ﬁre-frequent forests of western 
North America, including mechanisms 
of pattern formation and implications for 
designing fuel reduction and restoration 
treatments. Forest Ecology and Management 
267: 74–92.
Moore, M.M., W.W. Covington, and P.Z. Fulé. 
1999. Reference conditions and ecological 
restoration: A southwestern ponderosa pine 
perspective. Ecological Applications 9: 1266-
1277.
Rackam, O. 1980. Ancient woodland: Its history, 
vegetation and uses in England. Edward 
Arnold, London, England.
Sheil, J. 1980. Historical ecology: Te 
documentary evidence. Institute of 
Terrestrial Ecology, Cambridge, England.
Smith, H.Y. and S.F. Arno. 1999. Eighty-eight 
years of change in a managed ponderosa 
pine forest. USDA Forest Service, RMRS-
GTR-23. USDA Rocky Mountain Research 
Station, Ogden, UT.
Swetnam, T.W., C.D. Allen, and J.L. Betancourt. 
1999. Applied historical ecology: Using 
the past to manage the future. Ecological 
Applications 9: 1189-1206.

3
Ecological Restoration Institute
AN EVALUATION OF FIRE REGIME RECONSTRUCTION METHODS
photographed afer high-severity ﬁre, such as in the 
top photo in Figure 1, likely experienced infrequent 
but more high-severity ﬁre. Any inferences about ﬁre 
frequency from historical documents and photos are 
likely to have moderate to high degrees of uncertainty.
Most historical documents and photos are unlikely 
to provide information about historical ﬁre seasonality, 
unless the season is directly mentioned in the text. 
Ofen ﬁre type or severity is referred to in a historical 
document, and ﬁre type and severity can also be seen 
in some historical photos. Fire type and severity can 
also sometimes be inferred from forest structure seen or 
described in historical documents and photos. Fire size 
is usually not possible to reconstruct with this method. 
Photos may not show the extent of a ﬁre, or low-severity 
ﬁre evidence may not be visible at a distance. Writers 
rarely explored forested areas thoroughly enough to be 
able to report ﬁre sizes. A classic exception was  
F.E. Clements, who, in 1910, wrote a fairly thorough 
description of recent ﬁres in lodgepole pine in Colorado 
(Clements 1910). It is also unlikely and rare that 
spatial complexity of historical ﬁre regimes can be 
reconstructed from historical documents and photos.
Length of Reconstruction, Temporal Precision and 
Spatial Resolution
Historical documents and photos in the Southwest are 
available from the time when Europeans began exploring 
and living in the region. Except for documents associated 
with Spanish colonization, typically the earliest records are 
from the late 1800s and early 1900s. Temporal precision 
of ﬁre evidence from historical documents and photos 
varies widely, from precise dates of ﬁres published in 
newspapers (Bahre 1991) to descriptions of forests which 
contain a mention of a ﬁre sometime in the past. For 
example, charred bark, which may be described in written 
documents or captured in photos, can last for many years 
on live trees. In terms of spatial resolution, photos ofen 
give a broad, landscape-scale view of a particular place, but 
detail is diﬃcult to see on landscape-scale photos. Written 
documents vary in their spatial resolution, from travelers 
describing a speciﬁc place or route to a general description 
of a region. 
Forest Structure and Composition
Written documents as well as photos can provide 
information about forest density and species. Good 
information can be found in surveys of early national 
forests (Leiberg et al. 1904, Lang and Stewart 1910, Woolsey 
1911). However, many other historical documents and 
photos are limited to the places settlers and explorers 
happened to visit and document, they usually are not 
quantitative in nature, and qualitative descriptions of forests 
in historical documents can be interpreted in diﬀerent ways. 
In addition, the authors of reports may have had biases or 
poor skill level in identifying species or characterizing forest 
density (Edmonds 2001). 
Historical photos and documents may be most useful as 
supporting lines of evidence when combined with other 
methods of ﬁre regime reconstruction.
Dendrochronology: Fire-scar Data
Fire scars are injuries formed in tree boles by exposure 
to heat from wildﬁre (Fig. 2). Te injuries are formed 
when a ﬁre kills a portion of a tree’s cambium. Following 
the formation of a ﬁre scar, the uninjured portion of a 
tree’s cambium continues to grow and can begin to grow 
over the injury. Fire scars can be used to date exact years 
of ﬁres and sometimes the seasons of past ﬁres as well. 
Fire-scarred sections of live trees, stumps, snags or logs 
are sampled in the ﬁeld and analyzed in the laboratory to 
determine precise years of historical ﬁres.
Historical ﬁre frequency can be easily calculated 
using ﬁre scars (see Box 1). In a general sense, this is 
done by determining the speciﬁc years that ﬁres scarred 
trees and then averaging the intervals between the scars. 
See Swetnam and Baisan (1996) for a good description of 
ﬁre-scar data compilation and statistical description.
Critiques of ﬁre-scar methods (Johnson and Gutsell 
1994, Baker and Ehle 2001) have focused on the way 
ﬁre frequency statistics are calculated from ﬁre-scar 
Figure 2. Top: multiple fire scars seen in a “catface” on a living tree. 
Bottom: sample showing multiple fire scars recorded in the wood of a 
tree, datable to the year and sometimes the season of a fire.

4
Ecological Restoration Institute
AN EVALUATION OF FIRE REGIME RECONSTRUCTION METHODS
dates. Mean ﬁre interval calculations can be strongly 
inﬂuenced by the area sampled (Falk et al. 2007) as well 
as how many samples are collected. Te more area that 
is searched or the more samples collected, the more ﬁre 
dates will likely be found, as more small ﬁre dates are 
picked up. Terefore it is important to understand the 
area and sample basis for reported mean ﬁre interval 
statistics, especially when comparing statistics among 
studies or designing ﬁre and forest management 
practices. Partially to address these issues, most recent 
ﬁre-scar-based ﬁre history studies report “ﬁltered” 
mean ﬁre intervals, which are intervals between more 
widely represented (widespread) ﬁre dates. For example, 
researchers ofen report ﬁre intervals between ﬁre scars 
represented on at least 10% or 25% of recording samples 
(Swetnam and Baisan 1996; Fig. 3). Tis technique 
usually eliminates ﬁre-scar dates that appear on only 
one or a few trees, and ﬁltered ﬁre interval statistics 
are relatively immune to changes in area or sample size 
(Van Horne and Fulé 2006). Another issue is whether 
the interval between the pith date of a tree and the date 
of the ﬁrst ﬁre scar should be included as a ﬁre-free 
interval when calculating mean ﬁre interval, with some 
arguing that small trees do not survive ﬁre well and 
therefore must not have encountered ﬁre until the ﬁrst 
scar was formed (Baker and Ehle 2001). However, most 
trees are not scarred by surface ﬁres; the lack of a scar 
on a tree cannot be used to indicate lack of surface ﬁre 
around the tree. Tis issue aﬀects the determination 
of ﬁre frequency, since including the interval between 
the pith date and the ﬁrst scar would tend to lengthen 
the mean ﬁre interval calculated in most cases. Most 
researchers do not include the interval between pith 
dates and ﬁrst scars in their calculations.
Another critique of ﬁre-scar-based methods for 
reconstructing ﬁre history is that researchers tend to 
collect samples in areas where ﬁre-scarred trees are 
abundant. If researchers focus on areas with high numbers 
of ﬁre-scarred trees, they might be bypassing areas that 
historically experienced high-intensity stand-replacing 
ﬁres, which today would have few or no ﬁre scars. 
Finally, researchers typically collect samples from 
trees that have the largest number of ﬁre scars. It has 
been argued that this “targeted” method of sampling 
is biased; it may result in a focus on trees or areas that 
burned more frequently than the average in the region. 
However, tests of this question in southwestern forests 
have shown that targeted sampling is the most eﬃcient 
way to arrive at the same answer that random sampling 
would provide, with many fewer samples collected (Van 
Horne and Fulé 2006, Farris et al. 2013). 
Using the position of a ﬁre scar within an annual 
growth ring allows dendrochronologists to determine 
the approximate season that a ﬁre occurred. Scars in 
the early part of an annual ring are formed early in 
the growing season and scars in the later part of an 
annual ring are formed late in the growing season. 
More speciﬁc timing of ﬁre scar formation can be 
reconstructed if the timing of annual growth is known 
for a given species, region, and elevation. Seasonality 
ofen is determined for the majority but not all ﬁre scars 
in a given study.
Fire scars can be used to reconstruct type and 
severity of ﬁre. Tey are most ofen used to reconstruct 
low-severity surface ﬁre regimes because the presence of 
a ﬁre scar is an indication of low-severity ﬁre at the scale 
of a tree; a ﬁre injured but did not kill the tree. Where 
several trees are scarred by low-severity ﬁre in the same 
year, it is inferred that a ﬁre was a low-severity ﬁre 
throughout the area, including in the spaces between 
the ﬁre-scarred trees. Fire scars can also be used to 
supplement evidence of stand-replacing ﬁres in crown 
ﬁre regimes. For example, in Rocky Mountain National 
Park, ﬁre scars were sampled around the edges of even-
aged stands (the result of past stand-replacing ﬁres) to 
verify the dates of those stand-replacing ﬁres (Sibold et 
al. 2006). 
Fire scars are “point-speciﬁc” evidence that a ﬁre 
in the past occurred exactly where the tree is located 
(Swetnam and Baisan 1996). Fire scars usually cannot 
be used to reconstruct with certainty the size of ﬁres 
that burned in the past, because “absence of evidence 
is not evidence of absence”; ﬁres do not scar every tree 
within a ﬁre perimeter, and some ﬁres may burn few or 
no trees (Swetnam and Baisan 1996). In addition, ﬁre-
scar evidence of past ﬁres can rot away or burn up in 
Figure 3. Example of “filtering” to eliminate fire scars represented on 
one or few samples. Shown are fire charts from six different sites. 
Horizontal lines represent sites and vertical dashes represent fires. 
Top: all fires in each site and in all sites combined. Middle: years when 
a minimum of two samples were scarred in each site. Bottom: years 
when a minimum of 25% of recording samples and a minimum of two 
samples were scarred. Filtered fire interval statistics are relatively im-
mune to changes in area or sample size. From Yocom and Fulé 2012. 

5
Ecological Restoration Institute
AN EVALUATION OF FIRE REGIME RECONSTRUCTION METHODS
subsequent ﬁres. However, there are methods that can 
be used to estimate past ﬁre perimeters based on ﬁre-
scarred trees (Hessl et al. 2007). A study by Farris et al. 
(2010) compared National Park records with ﬁre scar 
records and showed that ﬁre scars allowed very accurate 
reconstruction of spatial patterns of ﬁre (Fig. 4).
Te ﬁre-scar method alone is not eﬀective for 
reconstructing spatial complexity of past ﬁres. Because 
ﬁres do not scar every tree, it cannot be known if a ﬁre 
burned everywhere within a ﬁre perimeter. Also, patches 
of high-severity ﬁre within a low-severity ﬁre may not be 
identiﬁed using only ﬁre scars.
Length of Reconstruction, Temporal Precision and 
Spatial Resolution
Te ﬁre-scar method can be used to reconstruct the 
ﬁre history of a site as far back in time as the oldest 
preserved wood in the site. In western North America, 
this typically means a ﬁre history can be reconstructed 
for several hundred years (Grissino-Mayer 1995, Fulé 
et al. 2003, Brown et al. 2008a). In very long-lived trees, 
ﬁre history from tree rings can be reconstructed for a 
much longer time period. Te ﬁrst ﬁre recorded in giant 
sequoias in a 1993 study was in 1125 BCE and most 
records in the study went back to ~500 AD (Swetnam 
1993). Exact years of historical ﬁres are known with high 
precision and accuracy using the ﬁre-scar method. In 
terms of spatial resolution, the ﬁre-scar method has been 
used at widely varying spatial scales, from <2.5 acres to 
many thousands of acres. 
Forest Structure and Composition
Te ﬁre-scar method cannot be used to reconstruct 
forest structure and composition, although identifying 
the species from which ﬁre-scarred samples are taken is 
a common practice. Terefore the presence of particular 
species is known as far back in time as the tree samples 
extend.
For further reading on the ﬁre-scar method of 
reconstructing ﬁre history, see Johnson and Gutsell 
(1994), Swetnam and Baisan (1996), Minnich et al. 
(2000), Baker and Ehle (2001), Fulé et al. (2003) and Van 
Horne and Fulé (2006).
Dendrochronology: Tree Age, Death and Growth Data
Tree-ring data besides ﬁre scars can also be used 
to obtain information about historical ﬁre regimes 
(Kipfmueller and Swetnam 2001). In particular, 
researchers use dendrochronology to look for even-
aged stands of trees that presumably initiated afer 
a stand-replacing ﬁre. Other tree-ring approaches 
for determining past ﬁre regime attributes include 
examining growth releases and determining the death 
dates of ﬁre-killed trees (Johnson and Gutsell 1994). 
Caution must be used to diﬀerentiate ﬁre-initiated 
stand establishment, tree death, or growth release from 
Figure 4. Spatial patterns of fire frequency from 1937 to 2000 calculated from (A) National Park Service Fire Atlas maps 
and (B) fire-scar data interpolated with Thiessen polygons. (C) The proportion of the study area occupied by each fire 
frequency class in the two maps (panels A and B). From Farris et al. (2010).

6
Ecological Restoration Institute
AN EVALUATION OF FIRE REGIME RECONSTRUCTION METHODS
establishment, death, or growth release afer other 
high-severity disturbances (see Veblen et al. 1994), 
but they are useful in conjunction with other methods 
to reconstruct historical ﬁre regime attributes. One 
example of using multiple lines of tree-ring evidence 
to reconstruct ﬁre history in the Southwest is a study 
of mixed conifer forests in northern New Mexico and 
southern Colorado (Margolis et al. 2007). Tis study 
used inner-ring dates, outer-ring dates, tree-ring width 
changes and ﬁre scars to show that stand-replacing ﬁres 
coincided with strong droughts in the region.
Using tree age data, ﬁre frequency of high-severity 
ﬁre can be calculated using a statistical method very 
diﬀerent from the method for calculating mean ﬁre 
interval from ﬁre scars. Instead, ﬁre rotation can be 
estimated. Fire rotation is the time it would take for an 
area equivalent to the entire study area to burn. Some 
areas may burn more than once and other areas not at 
all (see Box 1 and Fig. 5). Tere are assumptions that go 
into calculating ﬁre rotation. In the example in Figure 5 
from Agee (1993), it is assumed that the ﬁrst ﬁre event 
(top right box) burned 100% of the area. However, as 
little as about 20% may have burned; subsequent high-
intensity ﬁres wipe away the original evidence. If only 
20% burned in the ﬁrst event, the natural ﬁre rotation 
(NFR) would change from 162 years to 286 years.
Seasonality of historical ﬁres cannot be 
reconstructed using tree age, growth release, or death 
data. In terms of ﬁre type and severity, tree age, 
growth releases, and death dates are most useful in 
reconstructing high-severity ﬁres. Tree death dates, 
even-aged germination dates, and tree growth releases 
all indicate some amount of high-severity historical ﬁre. 
When tree age can be associated with discrete stands of 
trees, it is possible to reconstruct, with relatively high 
conﬁdence, the size of past ﬁres (e.g., Romme 1982, 
Margolis et al. 2011). With an intensive sampling design, 
it is also possible to reconstruct spatial complexity using 
a combination of tree ages and ﬁre scars. For example, 
Brown et al. (2008b) used a combination of ﬁre-scar data 
and tree age data in the Black Hills of South Dakota to 
conclude that the historical ﬁre regime was dominated 
by low-severity surface ﬁre but had patches of high-
severity ﬁre at the scale of <250 acres.
Length of Reconstruction, Temporal Precision and 
Spatial Resolution
One drawback to this method is that many times only 
the most recent high-severity ﬁre can be reconstructed; 
ofen older evidence is lost in subsequent ﬁres. 
Reconstructions using tree age data range in length 
from one ﬁre date to several ﬁres over hundreds of 
years. Precise dates of ﬁres are diﬃcult to obtain with 
tree age data alone, but precise dates can be obtained 
by collecting ﬁre-scar samples from the perimeter of 
a historical high-severity ﬁre (Sibold et al. 2006). Te 
spatial resolution of ﬁre regime reconstructions using 
dendrochronology data is limited only by the sampling 
design and the presence of trees with datable rings. 
Forest Structure and Composition
Historical forest structure and composition are 
ofen reconstructed using tree-ring information. For 
example, Mast et al. (1999) reconstructed historical 
forest composition, age structure, and regeneration 
patterns in an unharvested ponderosa pine forest in 
northern Arizona. Te researchers found a multimodal 
presettlement age distribution with the oldest tree having 
a center date of 1333 AD.
Forest Structure Data
Early forest structure data, including data from General 
Land Oﬃce (GLO) surveys and data derived from 
early aerial photographs, have been used in some 
cases to infer disturbance history of the forests. Tese 
methods are diﬀerent than tree-age data obtained 
with dendrochronological methods because they use 
information like size of trees, tree density, and species 
composition at the time of sampling to infer disturbance 
history of forests instead of post-ﬁre tree ages, death 
dates, or growth releases.
Figure 5. Example of a natural fire rotation (NFR) calculation. From 
Agee 1993. Tree age classes are shown in the top left box, resulting 
from 4 fire events. Fires occurred 300, 250, 100, and 50 years ago (other 
four boxes). The proportion of area burned in each fire was: 1.0, 0.3, 
0.35, and 0.2. The total proportion of area burned is 1.85, over a time 
period of 300 years. The natural fire rotation is therefore 300/1.85, or 
162 years.

7
Ecological Restoration Institute
AN EVALUATION OF FIRE REGIME RECONSTRUCTION METHODS
Established by the federal government in the early 
1800s, the General Land Oﬃce sent surveyors across 
much of the United States to map the country. Surveyors 
were required to note “bearing” trees at every mile mark 
(section corner) and half-mile mark (quarter section 
corner). Species, diameters, bearings, and distances from 
the corner were recorded for two or more bearing trees 
at each corner. In addition, surveyors wrote descriptions 
of vegetation, soil, and disturbances encountered 
along the lines between section corners (Whitney and 
Decant 2001). Te GLO Survey data (also called Public 
Land Survey (PLS) data) have been used extensively 
to reconstruct historical forest structure, species 
composition, and forest type (Whitney and Decant 
2001). Survey data including tree density, tree sizes, and 
species composition, have also been used less commonly 
to infer disturbance history. Examples include studies by 
Baker (2012) and Williams and Baker (2012a, 2013).
Another method for obtaining information 
about past forest structure is to use early aerial 
photographs. For example, Hessburg et al. (2007) 
used aerial photographs from the 1930s and 1940s in 
eastern Washington to estimate canopy cover, species 
composition, size classes of trees, number of canopy 
layers, and other variables. Tese variables were then 
used to infer disturbance history of the forest.
Deriving disturbance history from forest structure 
information has not been done uniformly across studies. 
Tis is likely because of diﬀerences in data types and 
characteristics, forest types, and relationships between 
ﬁre and forest structure in particular areas. Tis makes 
comparisons among studies diﬃcult. However, there 
are assumptions involved with each set of methods. 
Tree example papers will be presented to illustrate 
assumptions as well as methods used to infer various 
ﬁre regime attributes from forest structure data (Taylor 
and Skinner 1998, Hessburg et al. 2007, and Williams 
and Baker 2012a). Tese three papers were chosen 
because they use tree size, tree species, and/or tree 
density to infer historical ﬁre history. Other studies 
that have used survey data have also used surveyor 
notes about disturbances encountered (e.g., Schulte 
and Mladenoﬀ 2005, Williams and Baker 2012b) and 
they are not included as examples. In the ﬁrst example 
paper, Taylor and Skinner (1998) used a combination 
of dendrochronology techniques and stand structure 
methods to infer historical ﬁre history in the Klamath 
National Forest in northern California. Te second 
example paper, by Hessburg et al. (2007), is described 
above. Te third example paper, by Williams and Baker 
(2012a), classiﬁed forests in four areas of the western 
United States into ﬁre severity categories based on 
reconstructed stand structure from the GLO data. 
Although the details of the methods in these three 
papers vary, some assumptions are consistent across 
the studies and include: 1) forest structure (size class 
structure) is related to the disturbance history of the 
forest, 2) the disturbance that led to the documented 
forest structure was ﬁre rather than another disturbance 
type such as wind or an insect outbreak, 3) ﬁre exclusion 
and succession had little eﬀect on the forest structure 
documented in photographs or surveys, and 4) some 
measure of tree size is related to tree age. 
Because each example study used diﬀerent 
methodology to infer historical ﬁre regime information, the 
methods used in each study are summarized in Table 1.
Severity of historical ﬁres was estimated in diﬀerent 
ways by the three studies in Table 1. Hessburg et al. 
(2007) assumed that lower overstory canopy cover 
(<30%) indicated higher ﬁre severity in the past. 
Williams and Baker (2012a) assumed that a lower 
percentage of large trees and a higher percentage 
of small trees (<20% large trees, >50% small trees, 
measured by bole size) indicated higher ﬁre severity in 
the past. Taylor and Skinner (1998) assumed that fewer 
taller trees (<10 stems per 2.5 acres) indicated higher ﬁre 
severity in the past.
Te assumption that tree size and tree age are reliably 
correlated has been questioned (Fulé et al. 2014), given 
that “the relationship between age and size is frequently 
not very strong” (Spies 1998, p. 37), especially in shade-
tolerant species. Tree size may be limited by site quality, 
overcrowding, or climate, which would cause trees to 
remain the same size for decades. Another critique is that 
even if age and size are reliably correlated, there are other 
reasons trees could regenerate in cohorts, including bark 
beetles, wind, climate-induced mortality, climate-induced 
establishment, or ﬁre exclusion (Fulé et al. 2014). “In some 
cases, diﬀerent disturbance histories can produce similar 
size distributions of trees” (Spies 1998, p. 37). Post-wildﬁre 
regeneration is ofen inconsistent or delayed in dry western 
forests, with post-ﬁre regeneration being non-existent, 
delayed, or dense and immediate (Savage and Mast 2005, 
Roccaforte et al. 2012). 
For more on using forest structure to infer 
disturbance history, see Fulé et al. (2014), Williams and 
Baker (2014), and the three papers described in Table 1.
Length of Reconstruction, Temporal Precision and 
Spatial Resolution
Te GLO surveys were conducted at around the time 
European settlers were arriving and altering land use and 
vegetation at a landscape scale (late 1800s in the Southwest). 
Aerial photos were taken over some areas in the 1930s and 
later. In many places, widespread changes had probably not 
yet occurred at the time of the surveys, and aerial photos 
also may predate heavy human inﬂuence on forests. Te 
surveys and aerial photos, like historical documents and 
photos, are “snapshots”; changes through time are not 
captured. In terms of temporal precision, it is not possible 
to derive speciﬁc ﬁre dates from forest structure data. 
A strength of using GLO survey data to reconstruct ﬁre 
regimes is that the data cover large landscapes across large 
portions of the country.

8
Ecological Restoration Institute
AN EVALUATION OF FIRE REGIME RECONSTRUCTION METHODS
Fire regime attribute
Hessburg et al. (2007)
Williams and Baker (2012a)
Taylor and Skinner (1998)
Frequency
Not reconstructed
Using GLO survey data, “we 
estimated ﬁre rotation… as 
the number of years a ﬁre 
was detectable divided by the 
percentage of the landscape 
burned by high-severity ﬁre.” 
“We estimated the time a ﬁre was 
detectable as the time it took for 
a tree to grow to the cut-oﬀ size 
for a ‘large’ tree.” For example, “in 
northern Arizona, an average 40-
cm tree is about 120 years old.” 120 
years is therefore “the maximum 
length of time a ﬁre could be 
recognized using this structure-
based approach.”
Used data from ﬁre-scarred trees 
(dendrochronology methods)
Seasonality
Not reconstructed
Not reconstructed
Used data from ﬁre-scarred trees 
(dendrochronology methods)
Severity
Using aerial photos from the 
1930s and 1940s: “overstory 
canopy percentage classes (= 
overstory canopy remaining 
classes, ≥80%, 30.1–79.9%, 
≤30%)” [were] used to deﬁne 
low, mixed and high severity 
ﬁres.” In some patches, “the 
ﬁre tolerance of the cover type 
was also used to predict the 
most likely ﬁre severity.
Cover type was used where 
overstory canopy percentage 
exceeded 80%, and where it 
was impossible to discern from 
structural attributes alone 
whether severity was high 
(stand replacing ﬁre from a 
long time ago) or low (surface 
ﬁre maintained).”
Using GLO survey data and forest 
structure data reconstructed from 
survey data: “low-severity ﬁre 
was assigned if: (1) mean tree 
density was < 178 trees ha-1, (2) 
the percentage of large trees was > 
29.2%, and (3) the percentage of 
small trees was < 46.9%. … High 
severity was deﬁned as having a 
percentage of small trees > 50% 
and a percentage of large trees < 
20%. … Remaining areas … were 
classiﬁed as mixed severity.”
At plot level: tree age obtained using 
dendrochronology. Ten “we calculated 
a measure of ﬁre severity as the average 
number of 60-year periods in which 
trees regenerated. Presumably, plots 
with trees in fewer 60-year age-classes 
characterize stands that have burned 
more severely than those with more age-
classes.”
At stand level, using aerial photographs 
from 1944 to 1975: “Severity patches 
were mapped using the relative density 
of short even-aged stems and taller, 
older trees that survived successive ﬁres. 
High-severity patches had <10 tall stems 
ha-1, moderate-severity patches had 
10-20 tall stems ha-1, and low-severity 
patches had >20 tall stems ha-1.”
Type 
Not speciﬁcally reconstructed, 
although ofen “low-severity” 
implies surface ﬁre and “high-
severity implies crown ﬁre
Not speciﬁcally reconstructed, 
although ofen “low-severity” 
implies surface ﬁre and “high-
severity implies crown ﬁre
Not speciﬁcally reconstructed, although 
ofen “low-severity” implies surface ﬁre 
and “high-severity implies crown ﬁre
Size
Not reconstructed
Not reconstructed
Used data from ﬁre-scarred trees 
(dendrochronology methods)
Spatial complexity 
Not reconstructed
Not reconstructed
Not reconstructed
Table 1. Summary of methods used by three different studies to infer various fire regime attributes 

9
Ecological Restoration Institute
AN EVALUATION OF FIRE REGIME RECONSTRUCTION METHODS
Forest Structure and Composition
Structure and composition of historical forests has 
ofen been reconstructed using GLO data (e.g., Radeloﬀ 
et al. 1999, Leahy and Pregitzer 2003, Whipple et al. 
2010). Critiques of forest reconstructions using GLO 
data include the possibility of error and ambiguity in 
tree identiﬁcation, survey contract fraud, surveyor 
bias in selection of bearing trees (small and large 
trees were ofen avoided), the “snapshot” nature of 
the survey records, and the underestimation of small 
features on township maps (Bourdo 1956, Schulte and 
Mladenoﬀ 2001, Whitney and Decant 2001). However, 
Williams and Baker (2010) quantiﬁed measurement 
error and selection bias at 384 survey corners in the 
western United States and concluded that surveyor bias 
and measurement errors were fairly low. Schulte and 
Mladenoﬀ (2001) concluded that survey data are most 
appropriately used over a broad spatial scale and at 
coarse spatial resolution, and with complementary data 
from other historical sources. For example, Batek et al. 
(1999) used survey data to reconstruct vegetation in the 
Missouri Ozarks and ﬁre-scarred trees to reconstruct 
ﬁre regimes, which resulted in data that could be 
compared. Tey concluded that ﬁre played a large role in 
inﬂuencing vegetation patterns in that region.
Using GLO data to reconstruct forest density can 
also be done, but caution should be used because, 
depending on the methods, it may overestimate tree 
density. Hagmann et al. (2013) compared tree density 
reconstructed using GLO data with tree density recorded 
in historical timber inventories on the former Klamath 
Indian Reservation in Oregon. Tey found that a GLO-
based reconstruction (Baker 2012) resulted in tree 
densities nearly 2.5 times higher than tree densities 
recorded in the timber inventories. Te authors ruled 
out diﬀerences in diameter limits, timing of the two 
datasets, and disturbance events between the time of 
the GLO surveys and the timber inventories as potential 
reasons for the diﬀerences in tree density between the 
GLO-based methods and the timber inventories, and 
concluded that tree density was overestimated using 
GLO data and methods (Hagmann et al. 2013). Te 
results of this study in Oregon have not been replicated 
in other parts of the western United States.
Plant Traits
Plant traits that give plants increased fitness in 
particular fire regimes can be used to infer that, over 
long time periods, those species survived and even 
thrived in those fire regimes. An example that is often 
cited is the thick bark of ponderosa pine and some 
other conifers. Thick bark gives trees a competitive 
advantage over thin-barked tree species in a low-
intensity surface fire regime because they can live 
through multiple fires with little to no disruption, 
while trees with thin bark often die. It is inferred that 
frequent surface fires were part of the “evolutionary 
environment” for ponderosa pines and many other 
conifers with thick bark (Covington 2003). He et al. 
(2012) found that the development of thick bark in 
pines coincided 126 million years ago with a rise in 
low-intensity surface fire. On the other hand, many 
other tree species with thick bark are not associated 
with low-intensity surface fire (Paine et al. 2010). 
Te plant trait method must be used with caution 
because it is diﬃcult to ascertain that plant traits 
that currently give plants advantages in particular 
ﬁre regimes were selected for by ﬁre or if they were 
selected by some other agent. For example, the ability 
to resprout is ofen cited as a stand-replacing ﬁre 
adaptation, but there are other disturbances afer which 
it is advantageous for plants to be able to resprout. Tose 
disturbances include ﬂooding, windstorms, drought, 
landslides, and herbivory (Bond and Midgley 2001). 
Terefore, it is possible that resprouting species have not 
experienced stand-replacing ﬁre over an evolutionary 
time period. However, it has also been argued that no 
matter what the original conditions particular traits 
evolved in, plant traits that increase ﬁtness in particular 
ﬁre regimes today are important and can be used by 
managers to predict plant dynamics under alternative 
ﬁre regime scenarios (Keeley et al. 2011).
Historical ﬁre frequency can be estimated using 
the ﬁre frequency in which plants can persist today. For 
example, increased ﬁre frequency due to an invasion of 
cheatgrass across western North America has resulted in 
vastly diﬀerent species composition in many areas. It was 
estimated that before the invasion of cheatgrass on the 
Snake River Plains in Idaho, ﬁre return intervals were 
several decades long, but with much more frequent ﬁre 
(<5 years) it was not possible for native plants to persist 
on the landscape (Whisenant 1990). Terefore, we can 
infer that ﬁre frequency was historically on the order of 
decades rather than years where those native plants lived 
over an evolutionary time scale.
Historical ﬁre seasonality can also be inferred from 
how plants respond to ﬁre in diﬀerent seasons today. 
For example, in California chaparral, historically ﬁres 
burned in late summer or fall when soil moisture was 
low. Spring prescribed burns, when soil moisture is 
higher, impair the germination of certain native species 
(Le Fer and Parker 2005). It can be inferred that ﬁres 
burned in late summer or fall over an evolutionary time 
span, in at least some locations, for those species to have 
persisted on the landscape. 
Fire type and severity can also be inferred from plant 
traits. Some plants depend on high-severity crown ﬁre to 
persist. For example, serotinous lodgepole pines have a 
competitive advantage afer high-severity ﬁres. We can infer 
that, over an evolutionary time frame, serotinous lodgepole 
pines experienced some high-severity ﬁres. However, many 
lodgepole pine trees also produce non-serotinous cones, 
which would be consistent with conditions that did not 
include only high-severity ﬁres. Size and spatial complexity 

10
Ecological Restoration Institute
AN EVALUATION OF FIRE REGIME RECONSTRUCTION METHODS
of ﬁres in historical ﬁre regimes cannot be inferred using 
plant traits.
Inferences from plant traits come with a low degree 
of certainty because evolution may not have occurred in 
response to a homogeneous landscape and ﬁre regime.
Length of Reconstruction, Temporal Precision and 
Spatial Resolution
Plant traits are used to infer ﬁre regimes over thousands 
to millions of years, rather than at the scale of human 
history. Plant traits cannot be used speciﬁcally to infer 
ﬁre regimes at the time of ﬁre exclusion in the late 
1800s, although the vegetation communities present 
at that time were shaped in part by the existing ﬁre 
regimes. Using plant traits gives us zero temporal 
precision; no particular ﬁre dates can be known by 
understanding plant traits. Plant traits can be used to 
understand historical ﬁre attributes at the scale of species 
distributions. Individual ﬁres, including size or location, 
cannot be reconstructed. 
Forest Structure and Composition
Speciﬁc historical forest structure and composition 
cannot be determined by knowing plant traits, although 
generalizations can be made. Species that can resprout 
and species that have serotinous seeds are likely to form 
even-aged stands, for example.
Charcoal
Charcoal particles formed during wildﬁres are found 
in lakes, bogs, wetlands, and in soil. Tey are extracted 
for research purposes with sediment cores in wet areas 
(Whitlock and Larsen 2001) and with soil cores from the 
soil proﬁle within forest stands (Carcaillet et al. 2002, 
Fesenmyer and Christensen 2010). Charcoal particles 
are dated in the laboratory using radiocarbon dating to 
estimate individual ﬁre dates. Charcoal can be found 
at the site of a past ﬁre or deposited by overland ﬂow 
(Gardner and Whitlock 2001). 
Fire frequency can be reconstructed with 
charcoal, but not with the precision of ﬁre-scar 
records. Seasonality, ﬁre type, and severity cannot be 
reconstructed using charcoal records. Determining 
the size of ﬁres using charcoal evidence depends on 
whether sediment charcoal or soil charcoal is used. 
With sediment charcoal, a peak in charcoal can mean 
a ﬁre at the edge of a lake or a ﬁre several kilometers 
away, depending on wind and other factors (Gardner 
and Whitlock 2001). However, soil charcoal can be used 
to reconstruct ﬁre history at or very near the site that 
the soil charcoal is found (Fesenmyer and Christensen 
2010). Finally, spatial complexity of historical ﬁre 
regimes cannot be reconstructed using charcoal records.
Length of Reconstruction, Temporal Precision and 
Spatial Resolution
One strength of the charcoal sediment technique is that 
it allows the reconstruction of ﬁre history for much 
longer than the ﬁre-scar method. For example, ﬁre 
history, vegetation, and paleoclimate were reconstructed 
for the last 13,500 years on the Kaibab Plateau in 
northern Arizona (Weng and Jackson 1999), with results 
indicating dynamic climate, vegetation, and ﬁre regimes 
over millennia. In terms of temporal precision, historical 
ﬁres cannot be dated to a precise year using the charcoal 
method. Tis method is most useful in areas where the 
historical ﬁre return interval was on the order of decades 
rather than years, since with very frequent ﬁres a nearly 
steady stream of charcoal is deposited, and individual 
events cannot be identiﬁed. 
Forest Structure and Composition
Another strength of charcoal studies is that the length of 
the reconstructions allows the comparison of ﬁre with 
long-term climate and vegetation changes reconstructed 
from pollen records (Anderson et al. 2008). Usually 
charcoal alone is not used to reconstruct forest structure 
and composition, although wood structure in soil 
charcoal can be assessed to learn more about forest 
composition.
Integration of Multiple Lines of Evidence
A combination of methods used together is the 
strongest approach to reconstructing historical ﬁre 
regimes (example studies that use two or more lines of 
evidence include Kaye and Swetnam 1999, Whitlock 
et al. 2004, and Margolis et al. 2011). Multiple lines of 
evidence that point in the same direction give managers 
a stronger basis for inferences about characteristics of 
a historical ﬁre regime. Researchers in the Southwest 
are extraordinarily fortunate to have several of these 
methods available for reconstructing historical ﬁre 
regimes. Tis is not the case in many other parts of the 
world. For example, ﬁre scars do not form in all tree 
species, wood may be highly susceptible to rot, historical 
written and photographic evidence may not be available, 
an area may not be suitable for charcoal sampling, and 
land surveys may not have been carried out.

11
Ecological Restoration Institute
AN EVALUATION OF FIRE REGIME RECONSTRUCTION METHODS
Historical 
documents and 
photos
Fire scars
Tree age, death & 
growth data
Forest structure 
data
Plant traits
Charcoal
Advantages
Contemporary to 
time when forests 
were not altered 
by a century 
or more of ﬁre 
exclusion
Precise to year 
(and sometimes 
season) of ﬁre; 
most utility in 
reconstructing 
surface ﬁre 
regimes; point-
speciﬁc direct 
evidence of past 
ﬁres
Most utility in 
reconstructing 
high-severity ﬁre 
regimes
Can be broad 
scale across large 
regions; evidence 
from time before 
forests were 
altered by a 
century or more 
of ﬁre exclusion
Plant traits (and 
lack of traits) 
indicate success 
or lack of success 
in a particular 
ﬁre regime; trait 
success implies 
fairly long-term 
relationships 
between plant 
traits and ﬁre 
regimes
Long 
reconstructions; 
most utility in 
reconstructing 
mixed-severity or 
high-severity ﬁre 
regimes; can be used 
to compare with 
long-term pollen 
records of vegetation 
and climate
Disadvantages
Limited to 
availability of 
old photos & 
documents;
not available 
everywhere;
recorders could 
have been biased 
or poorly skilled
Time period 
limited by oldest 
wood; not all ﬁres 
scar trees; limited 
to forest types 
where trees form 
scars; sampling 
scheme can result 
in biases; MFI 
interpretation 
inﬂuenced by 
sample size and 
area sampled
Ofen can only 
reconstruct last 
stand-replacing 
ﬁre; older 
evidence is lost in 
subsequent ﬁres; 
dating of ﬁres not 
precise because 
regeneration may 
not be immediate 
afer disturbance; 
small-scale 
ﬁres diﬃcult to 
reconstruct
Regeneration 
uncertain afer 
ﬁre; “snapshot” of 
forest structure 
available from 
the time the 
surveys were 
completed or 
photos taken; in 
surveys, sampling 
intensity low 
(small number of 
trees per square 
mile);
Fire regimes can 
change (and have 
changed) over 
millennia; traits 
can’t be pinned to 
an evolutionary 
“reason”- could 
have evolved for 
other reasons
Not precise to year 
of ﬁre; less utility 
for low-severity ﬁre 
regimes; cannot 
reconstruct exact 
spatial pattern of 
ﬁre in the watershed 
(not point-speciﬁc) 
or area burned
Amount of 
uncertainty
Uncertainty 
about how 
applicable photo 
or description 
is to larger area; 
sometimes 
uncertainty about 
exact location
No uncertainty 
at point scale: a 
ﬁre scar indicates 
ﬁre happened at 
that point, but 
some uncertainty 
about ﬁre extent 
between point 
samples.
Uncertain 
disturbance 
event unless 
accompanied 
by ﬁre scars; 
uncertain dating 
of ﬁres unless 
accompanied by 
ﬁre scars
Uncertainty 
about size/age 
relationships; 
uncertain 
disturbance 
event unless 
accompanied by 
other evidence
Uncertainty 
about whether 
traits evolved as 
an adaptation 
speciﬁcally to ﬁre, 
even if useful now 
for ﬁre
Uncertainty about 
speciﬁc years of ﬁres
Direct or indirect 
evidence of 
historical ﬁres?
Direct (e.g., 
photo of burned 
area) or indirect 
(e.g., description 
of open, park-like 
forest)
Direct (ﬁre scars 
are evidence of 
ﬁre) and indirect 
(infer ﬁre spread 
between scarred 
trees)
Indirect (even-
aged cohort of 
trees or growth 
release) or direct 
(dates of ﬁre-
killed trees)
Indirect 
(particular forest 
structures are the 
result of historical 
disturbances)
Indirect
Direct (charcoal 
fragments are 
evidence of ﬁre)
Assumptions
Photos and 
written 
descriptions are 
representative of 
the larger area.
Multiple ﬁre-
scarred trees in 
a study site in 
the same year 
are the result of a 
spreading surface 
ﬁre and not 
individual ﬁres at 
each tree
Stand initiated 
by ﬁre and not 
some other stand-
replacing event
Tree density, 
tree size, and/
or forest species 
composition can 
be translated 
into evidence of 
historical ﬁre and 
attributes such as 
ﬁre severity 
Traits adaptive 
in particular ﬁre 
regimes represent 
long-term 
conditions for 
plant species
Charcoal is the 
result of forest ﬁre in 
the study area
Length of 
reconstruction
Limited to 
time when 
settlers were 
writing about 
explorations and 
settlements; in 
SW, usually late 
1800s
Several hundred 
years common 
in SW, longest 
reconstructions 
using ﬁre scars 
are thousands of 
years long
Can be several 
hundred years, 
but ofen limited 
to most recent 
stand-replacing 
ﬁre (older 
evidence is lost)
Limited to point 
in time that 
surveys were 
conducted or 
aerial photos 
were taken
Evolutionary time 
scale; not possible 
to pinpoint ﬁre 
regime at any 
particular time
Many thousands of 
years

12
Ecological Restoration Institute
AN EVALUATION OF FIRE REGIME RECONSTRUCTION METHODS
Table 3. Fire regime attributes that can be reconstructed by each of six different fire regime reconstruction methods, and an indication of whether the attributes are 
based on direct or indirect evidence. Boxes that are blank indicate that an attribute is usually not able to be reconstructed using that method.
Historical documents 
and photos
Fire scars
Tree age, death & 
growth data
Forest structure 
data
Plant traits
Charcoal
Frequency
Direct
Indirect
Indirect
Indirect
Direct
Seasonality
Direct
Indirect
Severity
Direct or indirect
Direct
Direct or indirect
Indirect
Indirect
Fire type
Direct or indirect
Direct
Direct or indirect
Indirect
Indirect
Size
Direct
Indirect
Indirect
Spatial complexity
Direct
Table 2. Summary of advantages and disadvantages, uncertainty, direct/indirect data, assumptions, length of reconstruction possible, spatial and temporal resolution, 
and whether forest structure and composition can be reconstructed using each of six different reconstruction methods.
Spatial resolution
Depends on 
source; usually 
descriptions of 
routes or small 
regions, photos 
of stands to 
landscapes
<1 to 1000s of 
hectares
Usually landscape 
scale; small ﬁres 
diﬃcult to detect
Large spatial scale 
(many thousands 
of hectares); small 
ﬁres diﬃcult to 
detect
Scale of species 
distribution
Scale of watershed, 
usually; cannot 
reconstruct speciﬁc 
ﬁre perimeters or 
sizes
Temporal precision
Documents and 
photos are ofen 
dated precisely, 
but dates of 
ﬁres may not 
be recorded 
precisely if they 
are not directly 
witnessed
Precise to year 
of ﬁre and 
sometimes to 
season
Cannot precisely 
date ﬁres with 
tree germination 
dates unless 
accompanied 
by ﬁre-scar 
information; can 
precisely date ﬁres 
with ﬁre-killed 
tree death dates
No temporal 
precision; 
not possible 
to determine 
individual ﬁre 
years
No temporal 
precision; 
not possible 
to determine 
individual ﬁre 
years
Not precise to 
year; carbon dating 
estimates are given 
conﬁdence limits
Forest structure 
and composition 
reconstruction?
Can glean some 
information from 
documents and 
photos
Not possible to 
reconstruct with 
ﬁre-scar data 
alone
Useful tool for 
reconstructing 
forest structure 
and composition
Useful tool for 
reconstructing 
forest structure 
and composition
Not possible
Not possible with 
charcoal alone, but 
ofen accompanied 
by pollen studies, 
which can be used 
to understand forest 
composition over 
long time scales
Historical 
documents and 
photos
Fire scars
Tree age, death & 
growth data
Forest structure 
data
Plant traits
Charcoal

13
Ecological Restoration Institute
AN EVALUATION OF FIRE REGIME RECONSTRUCTION METHODS
Conclusion
All the methods discussed in this working paper have 
strengths and weaknesses, and are most appropriate for 
reconstructing particular ﬁre regimes and ﬁre regime 
attributes (Table 2) as well as for particular research or 
resource goals. While historical documents and photos 
are usually qualitative in nature, they serve as eﬀective 
communication tools to teach or introduce ﬁre history to 
diverse audiences. Te ﬁre-scar method provides strong 
evidence about low-severity historical ﬁre frequency, 
seasonality, severity, and type. Other dendrochronology 
methods such as using tree ages, tree death dates, and 
growth releases, are most appropriate for reconstructing 
high-severity ﬁre regimes, and can provide evidence of 
historical ﬁre severity, type, and size. Forest structure 
data is most useful for reconstructing dominant 
species composition and tree density, and is valuable 
because it covers large landscapes. Plant traits can 
provide information about ﬁre regimes that plants were 
subjected to over an evolutionary time scale. Fire regime 
attributes that can be inferred from plant traits include 
ﬁre frequency, seasonality, severity, and type. Finally, 
information about charcoal from soil cores is most 
useful for reconstructing high-severity ﬁre and can be 
used to gain information about historical ﬁre frequency 
over thousands of years.
Historical ﬁre regimes are useful to inform 
current ﬁre and forest management practices. Results 
of studies using these methods can contribute to 
prescribed ﬁre programs that may need to measure 
tradeoﬀs of ecological beneﬁt with other resources, 
including threatened and endangered species or human 
community health. However, it is not advisable to 
attempt to replicate exactly the historical ﬁre regime in 
a modern context. Many management variables must 
be considered, including agency mission and policy, 
wildlife, smoke, WUI, costs, and climate change. Due 
to these variables, it is important to think about desired 
future conditions, which may be very diﬀerent from 
historical conditions. As always, it is important to 
incorporate local data, knowledge, and monitoring in 
any forest restoration plan.

14
Ecological Restoration Institute
AN EVALUATION OF FIRE REGIME RECONSTRUCTION METHODS
References
Agee, J.K. 1993. Fire Ecology of Paciﬁc Northwest Forests. Island Press, 
Washington, D.C.
Anderson, R.S.,  R.B. Jass, J.L. Toney, C.D. Allen, L.M. Cisneros-Dozal, 
M. Hess, J. Heikoop, J. Fessenden. 2008. Development of the mixed 
conifer forest in northern New Mexico and its relationship to 
Holocene environmental change. Quaternary Research 69: 263-275.
Bahre, C.J. 1991. A Legacy of Change: Historic Human Impact on 
Vegetation of the Arizona Borderlands. University of Arizona 
Press, Tucson, AZ.
Baker, W.L. 2012. Implications of spatially extensive historical data 
from surveys for restoring dry forests of Oregon’s eastern Cascades. 
Ecosphere 3(3): 23.
Baker, W.L. and D. Ehle. 2001. Uncertainty in surface-ﬁre history: 
the case of ponderosa pine forests in the western United States. 
Canadian Journal of Forest Research 31: 1205-1226.
Batek, M.J., A.J. Rebertus, W.A. Schroeder, T.L. Haithcoat, E. Compas, 
and R.P. Guyette. 1999. Reconstruction of early nineteenth-century 
vegetation and ﬁre regimes in the Missouri Ozarks. Journal of 
Biogeography 26: 397-412.
Bell, W.A. 1870. New tracks in North America. 2nd Ed., 2 Vols. 
London: Chapman & Hall.
Bourdo, E.A. 1956. A review of the General Land Oﬃce Survey and of 
its use in quantitative studies of former forests. Ecology 37: 754-
768.
Bond, W.J., and J.J. Midgley. 2001. Ecology of sprouting in woody 
plants: the persistence niche. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 
16(1): 45-51.
Brown, P.M., E.K. Heyerdahl, S.G. Kitchen, and M.H. Weber. 
2008a. Climate eﬀects on historical ﬁres (1630-1900) in Utah. 
International Journal of Wildland Fire 17: 28-39.
Brown, P.M., C.L. Wienk, and A.J. Symstad. 2008b. Fire and forest 
history at Mount Rushmore. Ecological Applications 18(8): 1984-
1999.
Carcaillet, C., H. Almquist, H. Asnong, R.H.W. Bradshaw, J.S. Carrion, 
M.-J. Gaillard, K. Gajewski, J.N. Haas, S.G. Haberle, P. Hadorn, S.D. 
Müller, P.J.H. Richard, I. Richoz, M. Rösch, M.F. Sánchez Goñi, 
H. von Stedingk, A.C. Stevenson, B. Talon, C. Tardy, W. Tinner, 
E. Tryterud, L. Wick, and K.J. Willis. 2002. Holocene biomass 
burning and global dynamics of the carbon cycle. Chemosphere 49: 
845-863.
Clements, F.E. 1910. Te life history of lodgepole burn forests. USDA 
Forest Service Bulletin 79, Washington, DC. 56 pp.
Covington, W.W. 2003. Te evolutionary and historical context. In: 
Ecological Restoration of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests (P. 
Friederici, ed.), pp. 26-47. Island Press, Washington, DC.
Edmonds, M. 2001. Te pleasures and pitfalls of written records. In: 
Te Historical Ecology Handbook: A Restorationist’s Guide to 
Reference Ecosystems (D. Egan and E.A. Howell, eds.), pp.73-99. 
Island Press, Washington, D.C.
Falk, D.A., C. Miller, D. McKenzie, and A.E. Black. 2007. Cross-scale 
analysis of ﬁre regimes. Ecosystems 10: 809-823.
Farris, C.A., C.H. Baisan, D.A. Falk, S.R. Yool, and T.W. Swetnam. 
2010. Spatial and temporal corroboration of a ﬁre-scar-based ﬁre 
history in a frequently burned ponderosa pine forest. Ecological 
Applications 20: 1598-1614.
Farris, C.A., C.H. Baisan, D.A. Falk, M.L. Van Horne, P.Z. Fulé, and 
T.W. Swetnam. 2013. A comparison of targeted and systematic 
ﬁre-scar sampling for estimating historical ﬁre frequency in south-
western ponderosa pine forests. International Journal of Wildland 
Fire 22: 1021-1033.
Fesenmyer, K.A. and N.L. Christensen, Jr. 2010. Reconstructing Holo-
cene ﬁre history in a southern Appalachian forest using soil char-
coal. Ecology, 91: 662-670.
Fulé, P.Z., T.A. Heinlein, W.W. Covington, and M.M. Moore. 2003. 
Assessing ﬁre regimes on Grand Canyon landscapes with ﬁre-scar 
and ﬁre-record data. International Journal of Wildland Fire 12: 
129-145.
Fulé, P.Z., T.A. Heinlein, W.W. Covington, and M.M. Moore. 2003. 
Assessing ﬁre regimes on Grand Canyon landscapes with ﬁre-scar 
and ﬁre-record data. International Journal of Wildland Fire 12: 
129-145.
Fulé, P.Z., T.W. Swetnam, P.M. Brown, D.A. Falk, D.L. Peterson, C.D. 
Allen, G.H. Aplet, M.A. Battaglia, D. Binkley, C. Farris, R.E. 
Keane, E.Q. Margolis, H. Grissino-Mayer, C. Miller, C. Hull Sieg, 
C. Skinner, S.L. Stephens, and A. Taylor. 2014. Unsupported 
inferences of high severity ﬁre in historical western United States 
dry forests: Response to Williams and Baker. Global Ecology and 
Biogeography 23: 825-830.
Gardner, J.J., and C. Whitlock. 2001. Charcoal accumulation following 
a recent ﬁre in the Cascade Range, northwestern USA, and its 
relevance for ﬁre-history studies. Te Holocene 11: 541-549.
Grissino-Mayer, H.D. 1995. Tree-ring reconstructions of climate and 
ﬁre history at El Malpais National Monument, New Mexico. PhD 
dissertation, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ.
Hagmann, R.K., J.F. Franklin, and K.N. Johnson. 2013. Historical 
structure and composition of ponderosa pine and mixed-conifer 
forests in south-central Oregon. Forest Ecology and Management 
304: 492-504.
He, T., J.G. Pausas, C.M. Belcher, D.W. Schwilk, and B.B. Lamont. 2012. 
Fire-adapted traits of Pinus arose in the ﬁery Cretaceous. New 
Phytologist 194: 751-759.
Hessburg, P.F., R.B. Salter, and K.M. James. 2007. Re-examining ﬁre 
severity relations in pre-management era mixed conifer forests: 
inferences from landscape patterns of forest structure. Landscape 
Ecology 22: 5-24.
Hessl, A., J. Miller, J. Kernan, D. Keenum, and D. McKenzie. 2007. 
Mapping paleo-ﬁre boundaries from binary point data: comparing 
interpolation methods. Te Professional Geographer 59: 87-104.
Johnson, E.A. and S.L. Gutsell. 1994. Fire frequency models, methods 
and interpretations. Advances in Ecological Research 25: 239-287.
Kaye, M.W. and T.W. Swetnam. 1999. An assessment of ﬁre, climate, 
and Apache history in the Sacramento Mountains, New Mexico. 
Physical Geography 20: 305-330.
Keeley, J.E., J.G. Pausas, P.W. Rundel, W.J. Bond, R.A. Bradstock. 2011. 
Fire as an evolutionary pressure shaping plant traits. Trends in 
Plant Science 16(8): 406-411.
Kipfmueller, K.F. and T.W. Swetnam. 2001. Using dendrochronology 
to reconstruct the history of forest and woodland ecosystems. In: 
Te Historical Ecology Handbook: A Restorationist’s Guide to 
Reference Ecosystems (D. Egan and E.A. Howell, eds.), pp.199-228. 
Island Press, Washington, D.C.
Lang D.M., and S.S. Stewart. 1910. Reconnaissance of the Kaibab 
National Forest. On ﬁle at North Kaibab Ranger District, Kaibab 
National Forest, Fredonia, Arizona.
Le Fer, D., and V.T. Parker. 2005. Te eﬀect of seasonality of burn on 
seed germination in chaparral: the role of soil moisture. Madroño 
52(3): 166-174.
Leahy, M.J. and K.S. Pregitzer. 2003. A comparison of presettlement 
and present-day forests in northeastern lower Michigan. American 
Midland Naturalist 149: 71–89.
Leiberg, J.B., T.F. Rixon, and A. Dodwell. 1904. Forest conditions in the 
San Francisco Mountains Forest Reserve, Arizona. US Geological 
Survey Professional Paper No. 22. US Government Printing Oﬃce, 
Washington, DC.
Margolis, E.Q., T.W. Swetnam, and C.D. Allen. 2007. A stand-replacing 
ﬁre history in upper montane forests of the southern Rocky 
Mountains. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 37: 2227-2241.
___. 2011. Historical stand-replacing ﬁre in upper montane forests 
of the Madrean Sky Islands and Mogollon Plateau, southwestern 
USA. Fire Ecology 7: 88-107.
Mast, J.N., P.Z. Fulé, M.M. Moore, W.W. Covington, and A.E.M. Waltz. 
1999. Restoration of presettlement age structure of an Arizona 
ponderosa pine forest. Ecological Applications 9(1): 228-239.

15
Ecological Restoration Institute
AN EVALUATION OF FIRE REGIME RECONSTRUCTION METHODS
Mastrandrea, M.D., C.B. Field, T.F. Stocker, O. Edenhofer, K.L. Ebi, 
D.J. Frame, H. Held, E. Kriegler, K.J. Mach, P.R. Matschoss, G.-K. 
Plattner, G.W. Yohe, and F.W. Zwiers. 2010. Guidance Note for 
Lead Authors of the IPCC Fifh Assessment Report on Consistent 
Treatment of Uncertainties. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC). Available at http://www.ipcc.ch.
Minnich, R.A., M.G. Barbour, J.H. Burk, and J. Sosa-Ramírez. 2000. 
Californian mixed-conifer forests under unmanaged ﬁre regimes 
in the Sierra San Pedro Mártir, Baja California, Mexico. Journal of 
Biogeography 27: 105-129.
Paine, C.E.T., C. Stahl, E.A. Courtois, S. Patiño, C. Sarmiento, and 
C. Baraloto. 2010. Functional explanations for variation in bark 
thickness in tropical rain forest trees. Functional Ecology 24: 1202-
1210.
Radeloﬀ, V.C., D.J. Mladenoﬀ, H.S. Hong, and M.S. Boyce. 1999. 
Forest landscape change in northwestern Wisconsin pine barrens 
from pre-European settlement to present. Canadian Journal of 
Forest Research 29: 1649-1659.
Roccaforte, J.P., P.Z. Fulé, W.W. Chancellor, and D.C. Laughlin. 2012. 
Woody debris and tree regeneration dynamics following severe 
wildﬁres in Arizona ponderosa pine forests. Canadian Journal of 
Forest Research 42: 593-604.
Romme, W.H. 1982. Fire and landscape diversity in subalpine forests 
of Yellowstone National Park. Ecological Monographs 52: 199-221.
Savage, M. and J.N. Mast. 2005. How resilient are southwestern pon-
derosa pine forests afer crown ﬁres? Canadian Journal of Forest 
Research 35: 967-977.
Schulte, L.A., and D.J. Mladenoﬀ. 2001. Te original US Public Land 
Survey records: their use and limitations in reconstructing pre-
settlement vegetation. Journal of Forestry 99: 5-10.
Schulte, L.A., and D.J. Mladenoﬀ. 2005. Severe wind and ﬁre regimes 
in northern forests: historical variability at the regional scale. Ecol-
ogy 86: 431-445.
Sibold, J.S., T.T. Veblen, and M.E. González. 2006. Spatial and 
temporal variation in historic ﬁre regimes in subalpine forests 
across the Colorado Front Range in Rocky Mountain National 
Park, Colorado, USA. Journal of Biogeography 33: 631–647.
Spies, T.A. 1998. Forest structure: a key to the ecosystem. Northwest 
Science 72: 34–39.
Swetnam, T.W. 1993. Fire history and climate change in giant sequoia 
groves. Science 262: 885-889.
Swetnam, T., and C. Baisan. 1996. Historical ﬁre regime patterns in 
the southwestern United States since AD 1700. In: Fire Eﬀects 
in Southwestern Forest: Proceedings of the 2nd La Mesa Fire 
Symposium (CD Allen, ed.), pp. 11-32. USDA Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Research Station, General Technical Report RM-
GTR-286.
Taylor, A.H. and C.N. Skinner 1998. Fire history and landscape 
dynamics in a late-successional reserve, Klamath Mountains, 
California, USA. Forest Ecology and Management 111: 285-301.
Van Horne, M.L., and P.Z. Fulé. 2006. Comparing methods of 
reconstructing ﬁre history using ﬁre scars in a southwestern 
United States ponderosa pine forest. Canadian Journal of Forest 
Research 36: 855-867.
Veblen, T.T., K.S. Hadley, E.M. Nel, T. Kitzberger, M. Reid, and R. Villalba. 
1994. Disturbance regime and disturbance interactions in a Rocky 
Mountain subalpine forest. Journal of Ecology 82: 125-135.
Webb, R.H., D.E. Boyer, and R.M. Turner (eds.) 2010. Repeat 
Photography: Methods and Applications in the Natural Sciences. 
Island Press, Washington, DC. 337 pp.
Weng, C., and S.T. Jackson. 1999. Late Glacial and Holocene 
vegetation history and paleoclimate of the Kaibab Plateau, 
Arizona. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 153: 
179-201.
Whipple, A.A., R.M. Grossinger, and F.W. Davis. 2010. Shifing 
baselines in a California oak savanna: nineteenth century data to 
inform restoration scenarios. Restoration Ecology 19: 88-101.
Whisenant SG. 1990. Changing Fire Frequencies on Idaho’s Snake 
River Plains: Ecological and Management Implications. 
Logan (UT): US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Center. General Technical Report INT-
276.
Whitlock, C. and C. Larsen. 2001. Charcoal as a ﬁre proxy. In Tracking 
environmental change using lake sediments, pp. 75-97. Springer 
Netherlands.
Whitlock, C., C.N. Skinner, P.J. Bartlein, T. Minckley, and J.A. Mohr. 
2004. Comparison of charcoal and tree-ring records of recent ﬁres 
in the eastern Klamath Mountains, California, USA.
Whitney, G.G., and J.P. DeCant. 2001. Government Land Oﬃce 
surveys and other early land surveys. In: Te Historical Ecology 
Handbook: A Restorationist’s Guide to Reference Ecosystems 
(D. Egan and E.A. Howell, eds.), pp.147-172. Island Press, 
Washington, D.C.
Williams, M.A. and W.L. Baker. 2010. Bias and error in using survey 
records for ponderosa pine landscape restoration. Journal of 
Biogeography 37: 707-721.
____. 2012a. Spatially extensive reconstructions show variable-
severity ﬁre and heterogeneous structure in historical western 
United States dry forests. Global Ecology and Biogeography 21: 
1042-1052.
____. 2012b. Comparison of the higher-severity ﬁre regime in 
historical (A.D. 1800s) and modern (A.D. 1984–2009) montane 
forests across 624,156 ha of the Colorado Front Range. Ecosystems 
15: 832-847.
____. 2013. Variability of historical forest structure and ﬁre across 
ponderosa pine landscapes of the Coconino Plateau and south 
rim of Grand Canyon National Park, Arizona, USA. Landscape 
Ecology 28: 297-310.
____. 2014. High-severity ﬁre corroborated in historical dry forests of 
the western United States: response to Fulé et al. Global Ecology 
and Biogeography 23: 831-835.
Woolsey, T.S. 1911. Western yellow pine in Arizona and New Mexico. 
US Department of Agriculture Bulletin 101. US Department of 
Agriculture, Washington, DC.
Yocom, L.L. and P.Z. Fulé. 2012. Human and climate inﬂuences on 
frequent ﬁre in a high-elevation tropical forest. Journal of Applied 
Ecology 49: 1356-1364.

For more information about forest restoration, contact the ERI at (928) 523-7182  or nau.edu/eri.
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution   
This report was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.
 NAU Printing Services/77531/300/06-14
 
Working Papers in Intermountain West Frequent-Fire Forest Restoration
1: 
Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons  and Adaptive Management Practices
2: 
Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3: 
Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
4: 
Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits
5: 
Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
6: 
Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
7: 
Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
8: 
Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
9: 
Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
10: The Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Restoration Model
11: Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration
12: Restoring Forest Roads
13: Treating Slash after Restoration Thinning
14: Integrating Forest Restoration Treatments with Mexican Spotted Owl Habitat Needs
15: Effects of Forest Thinning Treatments on Fire Behavior
16: Snags and Forest Restoration  
17: Bat Habitat and Forest Restoration Treatments
18: Prescribed and Wildland Use Fires in the Southwest: Do Timing and Frequency Matter? 
19: Understory Seeding in Southwestern Forests Following Wildfire and Ecological Restoration Treatments
20: Controlling Cheatgrass in Ponderosa Pine and Pinyon-Juniper Restoration Areas 
21: Managing Coarse Woody Debris in Frequent-fire Southwestern Forests
22: Restoring Spatial Pattern to Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
23: Guidelines for Managing Small Mammals in Restored Ponderosa Pine Forests of Northern Arizona
24: Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Burning 
25: Strategies for Enhancing and Restoring Rare Plants and Their Habitats in the Face of Climate Change and Habitat Destruction 
in the Intermountain West
26: Wildlife Habitat Values and Forest Structure in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine: Implications for Restoration
27: Fuel Treatment Longevity
28: Southwestern Mixed-Conifer Forests: Evaluating Reference Conditions to Guide Ecological Restoration Treatments
29:  Post-Wildfire Restoration of Structure, Composition, and Function in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine and Warm/Dry Mixed-
Conifer Forests
30: Impact of Forest Restoration Treatments on Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Tree Resistance to Bark Beetles
31: Climate Change Impacts on Bark Beetle Outbreaks and the Impact of Outbreaks on Subsequent Fires

Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
nau.edu/eri
G1002207
