Multiple Party Monitoring in New Mexico  
by Ann Moote, Ecological 
Restoration Institute 
M 
ny community for­
estry advocates have 
heard of th e Col ­
laborative Forest Restoration 
Program (CFRP), a pilot For­
est Service program that fun­
nels $5 million per year to com­
munity groups in New Mexico. 
Funds available under CFRP 
go to diverse, multi-partner 
project s th at promote forest 
restoration and improve th e 
use of small diameter trees re­
moved from restoration sites. 
Several advocates are clamor­
ing to have this law expanded 
to provide similar funds for 
community forestry in other 
states. 
What some may not know 
is that the Community For­
estry Restoration Act , the leg­
islation that creat ed CFRP, 
also requires each grant recipi ­
ent to conduct a "multiparty 
assessment." As written in the 
law, this assessm ent mu st 
"identifyboth the existing eco­
logical conditio n of the pro­
posed project area and the de­
sired future condition" and "re­
port,upon project completion, 
on the positive or negative impact and ef­
fectiveness of the project, including im­
provements in local management skills 
and on the ground results." 
In 2001, th e fir st year that CFRP 
grants were offered, no one associated 
with the program knew quite what Con­
gress intended by this "multiparty assess­
ment" requirem ent. The Technical Advi­
sory Committee that reviews CFRP grant 
proposals interpreted th e first part to 
mean ecological monitoring, but no one 
knew quite what indicators the projects 
should measure or what the multiparty 
piece meant . 
"The proposals coming in clearly 
showed that theconununities didn't know 
what it meant to monitor," says Melissa 
Monitors review data during a break. 
that's going to be very critical as 
we move to monitoring is design­
ing a system that isn't a research 
study but that has enough form 
that it has credibility." 
Defining Monitoring 
for CFRP 
In response to these con ­
cerns, CFRP program director 
Walter Dunn and other funders 
organized a group of researchers 
and foresters to better define the 
multi-party monitoring require­
ment.Their work was eventually 
translated into a series of hand ­
books on multiparty monitoring 
that are now provided to all 
CFRP grantees (see sidebar) . 
Grant recipients are also encour ­
aged to attend one of th e CFRP' s 
trainings in multiparty monitor­
ing offered several times a year in 
different parts of New Mexico. 
The handbooks explain that 
monitoring involves repeatedly 
measuring the same thing over 
time to see if project activities 
have caused expected or unex­
pected changesin the social,eco­
nomic, or biophysical environ­
Savage, a forest ecologist who served on 
the advisory committee."Theyhadn't bud ­
geted for monitoring, the y didn 't under­
stand the value of monitoring, and they 
didn't know how to proceed with it." 
CFRP grant recipients were at 
best lukewarm wh en told that they had 
to monitor their projects. "While inter­
ested local people should be involved in 
monitoring if possible, much of the re­
quired monitoring forprogram substanria­
tion and 'in stituticnal' level learning 
should be done centrally, such as by the 
state." said CFRP grantee Gordon W est. 
Bob Moore, another Technical Advi­
sory Committee member and coordinator 
of the Catron County Citizens Group in 
western New Mexico, noted, "The piece 
ment.The specificindicators and 
level of rigor grantees use will 
depend on the type of informa­
tion and reliability they need. 
The basic con cept behind 
multiparty monitoring is mutual learning. 
Through this process, participants can 
gain greater understanding of ecological, 
economic, and social well-being, and th e 
interconnections between all three 
through learning others' perspectives. Be­
cause it involves a diverse group of stake­
holders tracking the effects of a project 
over time, multiparty monitoring can also 
allow a project to moveforward in the face 
of conflict or cont roversy. 
Choosing Goals and Indicators 
Grantees are encouraged to use their 
project goals as the first step in develop-
See NEW MEXICO on page 7 
Communities and Forests· Fall 2004 3 

/ 
A policy paper on the impacts on rural 
communities of the Competitive Sourc­
ing Initiative is available through 
Wallowa Resources and Sustainable 
Northwest. For more details visit 
www.wallowaresources.org and choose 
the publications tab to view the docu­
ment. 
"Urban and Community Forestry: 
Working Together to Facilitate 
Change" is a recently published 216 page 
book available for free through Commit­
tee board member Dr. Zhu Ning of South­
ern University's Urban Forestry program. 
Call 225 ~771 ~22 6 2 , ext. 267 or e-mail 
zhu_ning@suagcenter.net. 
MARK YOUR CALENDARS 
Community Forests: Possibilities,  
experiences, and lessons learned  
June 16-19, :2005,  
Missoula, Montana  
Community -ow ned forests may be the 
answer for communities confronting un ­
anticipated and unwanted large scale land 
use changes. Organized by the Communi­
ties Committee, the conference focuses on 
private forest land conversion and practi­
tioner tools for acquiring and managing 
community-owned forests. Registration 
will begin in January, 2005, and commu­
nity forest practitioners who wish to ap ­
ply for scholarships must apply no later 
than March 31,2005. For information visit 
www.communitiescommittee.org or call 
or e-mail Carol Daly at 406 -892 ~8155 or 
cdalyl@centurytel.net. 
1<JJOUt'C8J  
2005 Wildland Fire Confer ence 
February 16-18, 2005, 
Albuquerque, New Mexico 
Wildland Fire 2005, "Partnering to Pro­
tect Our Communities," will bring to ­
get her fire service leaders at the local, state 
and federal levels to address this critical 
problem facing fire departments around 
the w orld- the wildland-urban interface 
The International Association of Fire 
Chiefs has partnered with the USDA For­
est Service and the U.S. Department of the 
Interior to provide you the opportunity to 
network with more than 1,000 of your 
pe er s - fire chiefs, compan y officers, 
firefighters, land use planners, military 
personnel and local,state and federal gov ~ 
ernrnent representatives. For information, 
see http://www.iafc.org/confere nces/ 
wildland/index.asp or contact the Inter­
national Fire Chiefs Association at 703­
273 ~ 0911. 
NEW MEXICO frampage 2 
ing monitoring goals. "If you don't know 
what you're monitoring, if you don't have 
a goal, there's no purpose in doing moni­
toring," says j an-Willem Jansens, a pro~ 
gram director at Earth Works Institu te 
who helped develop the CFRP monitor­
ing guidelines. 
Since most CFRP projects involve 
thinning the forest to reduce the threat of 
large, high-intensity wildfires, there are 
significant commonalities among the vari­
ous projects. Many communities choose 
indicators such as the size and density of 
trees, canopy closure, and surface fuels. 
Those who are trying to diversify the local 
economy may measure such indicators as 
the number of value-added forest products 
industries in the community. 
Other communities have developed 
more sp ecialized goals. For example, Las 
Hurnan as, a group that represents vil­
lages and land grants along the eastern 
edge of the Manzano Mountains in cen­
tral New Mexico, is mapping the distri­
but ion of medicinal plants across their 
. project sit e t o measure the effects of 
roads on areas where community mem­
bers gather medicinal plants. A project 
on the Picuris Pueblo in northern New 
Mexico is monitoring the restoration ef­
feets of adding native fungi spores to 
slash left from small-diameter thinning 
projects. 
Capitalizing on an Opportunity 
Jor Youth 
Several communities train local youth 
to do the monitoring as a way to intro­
duce them to biological and social science 
and to connect them to their local envi­
ronrnent. The youth set up photo points, 
plots, and transects to monitor changes 
in vegetation and conduct surveys to 
monitor social impacts of the restoration 
projects. "Monitoring is great science 
training for students," says grantee 
George Ramirez,executive directorof Las 
Humanas. "It's also a way to connect 
them to the land and make them want to 
st ay in the community." 
"W e feel that it is very, very strong to 
have those youth out there with their di­
ameter tapes and increment borers,gain­
ing an understanding of the spatial rela­
tionships in the forest" says Bob Moore, 
coordinator of the Catron County Citi­
zens Group in w es tern New Mexico. 
Youth involvement in monitoring forest 
health helps build community support for 
the restoration work as well. Moore adds, 
"Over time, these skills ar e nurtured, 
these folks go back and talk to their Iarni­
lies and say they had a great time doing 
this, and it builds on itself.n 
CFRP MUI~party monitoring handbooks are available online at: 
WWw.fs.fed.us/r3/spf/cfrp1rnonitoringftndex.shtinl 
Handbook 1- What isMultiparty Monitoring? 
Handbook 2- Developing aM41tiparty Monitonng Plan 
Handbook 3- Creative BUdgeting for Monitoring Projects 
Handbook 4- Monitoring Ecological Effects 
~~n d b o o k 5- Momtoring Social and Economic Effects ofFares! Restoration 
Handbook 6.,.... Analyzing Monitoring Data 
Communities and Forests- Fall 2004 7 
