November 1999
1179
HISTORICAL VARIABILITY
1179
Ecological Applications, 9(4), 1999, pp. 1179–1188
q 1999 by the Ecological Society of America
OVERVIEW OF THE USE OF NATURAL VARIABILITY CONCEPTS IN
MANAGING ECOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
PETER B. LANDRES,1,4 PENELOPE MORGAN,2 AND FREDERICK J. SWANSON3
1USDA Forest Service, Aldo Leopold Wilderness Research Institute, P.O. Box 8089, Missoula, Montana 59807 USA
2College of Forestry, Wildlife, and Range Sciences, University of Idaho, Moscow, Idaho 83844 USA
3USDA Forest Service, Paciﬁc Northwest Research Station, 3200 Jefferson Way, Corvallis, Oregon 97331 USA
Abstract.
Natural resource managers have used natural variability concepts since the
early 1960s and are increasingly relying on these concepts to maintain biological diversity,
to restore ecosystems that have been severely altered, and as benchmarks for assessing
anthropogenic change. Management use of natural variability relies on two concepts: that
past conditions and processes provide context and guidance for managing ecological systems
today, and that disturbance-driven spatial and temporal variability is a vital attribute of
nearly all ecological systems. We review the use of these concepts for managing ecological
systems and landscapes.
We conclude that natural variability concepts provide a framework for improved un-
derstanding of ecological systems and the changes occurring in these systems, as well as
for evaluating the consequences of proposed management actions. Understanding the history
of ecological systems (their past composition and structure, their spatial and temporal
variability, and the principal processes that inﬂuenced them) helps managers set goals that
are more likely to maintain and protect ecological systems and meet the social values
desired for an area. Until we signiﬁcantly improve our understanding of ecological systems,
this knowledge of past ecosystem functioning is also one of the best means for predicting
impacts to ecological systems today.
These concepts can also be misused. No a priori time period or spatial extent should
be used in deﬁning natural variability. Speciﬁc goals, site-speciﬁc ﬁeld data, inferences
derived from data collected elsewhere, simulation models, and explicitly stated value judg-
ment all must drive selection of the relevant time period and spatial extent used in deﬁning
natural variability. Natural variability concepts offer an opportunity and a challenge for
ecologists to provide relevant information and to collaborate with managers to improve the
management of ecological systems.
Key words:
disturbance; ecosystem management; historical range of variability; landscape man-
agement; management of ecological systems; natural variability; restoration; variation, spatial and
temporal scales.
INTRODUCTION
Natural resource managers increasingly rely on the
‘‘range of natural variation,’’ or simply ‘‘natural vari-
ability,’’ to develop plans that guide management with-
in the range of ecological and evolutionary conditions
appropriate for an area. Developed through a collab-
orative effort of applied scientists and managers, the
use of natural variability relies on two intertwined con-
cepts: (1) that past conditions and processes provide
context and guidance for managing ecological systems
today, and (2) that disturbance-driven spatial and tem-
poral variability is a vital attribute of nearly all eco-
logical systems.
Management use of natural variability concepts be-
Manuscript received 18 May 1998; accepted 2 February
1999. For reprints of this Invited Feature, see footnote 1,
p. 1177.
4 E-mail: plandres/rmrspmissoula@fs.fed.us
gan out of a search for a legally defensible strategy for
maintaining biological diversity and sustaining the vi-
ability of threatened and endangered species. Initially,
‘‘vignettes’’ of naturalness (Leopold et al. 1963) were
used by national park managers to establish broad man-
agement goals to protect wildlife and other natural re-
sources. These concepts are now being used in situa-
tions where sustaining ecological integrity is the pri-
mary goal, where a structural stage such as old-growth
forest has been signiﬁcantly altered, or where key pro-
cesses such as ﬁre and ﬂooding have been excluded.
Recently, these concepts were proposed for establish-
ing
benchmarks
for evaluating whether observed
changes in protected areas such as wilderness are
caused by human actions (Morgan et al. 1994, Landres
et al. 1998). Despite the large role that natural vari-
ability concepts have played, and will likely continue
to play, in setting management direction, research ecol-

1180
INVITED FEATURE
Ecological Applications
Vol. 9, No. 4
ogists have largely been silent on the use and limita-
tions of these concepts.
The purpose of this paper is to review, from an eco-
logical perspective, the applications and limitations of
natural variability concepts to managing ecological
systems and landscapes. We examine key premises be-
hind the use of these concepts, evaluate commonly used
terms and statistical descriptors of natural variability,
discuss barriers and challenges to the use of these con-
cepts, examine management application of these con-
cepts, and discuss key research issues and questions.
We conclude that natural variability concepts provide
a framework for understanding the ecological context
of an area and in evaluating ecosystem change. There-
fore, they are useful in managing ecological systems.
However, these concepts can be easily misused and
misapplied. Natural variability concepts offer both a
challenge and an opportunity for ecologists to become
meaningfully involved with managers in deﬁning eco-
logically appropriate goals and practices for an area.
BACKGROUND AND PREMISES
Natural spatial and temporal variation has long pro-
vided ecologists insight into understanding ecological
processes and the implications of ecological change
(e.g., Cowles 1899, Shelford 1913). Today, historical
ecologists use paleoreconstructions of climate, vege-
tation, and disturbances to understand past conditions
and illustrate the importance of natural variability and
disturbance processes on many different ecosystem
types (e.g., Baker 1992, Swetnam 1993, Tausch et al.
1995, Foster et al. 1996). Natural spatial and temporal
variation is a cornerstone of the contemporary non-
equilibrium paradigm of ecology (e.g., Wu and Loucks
1995) and its metaphor, the ‘‘ﬂux of nature’’ (Pickett
and Ostfeld 1995). Further, understanding local eco-
logical communities requires understanding at broad
spatial and long temporal scales, the ‘‘regional–histor-
ical viewpoint’’ (Ricklefs 1987).
This use of natural variability concepts draws upon
many ﬁelds of knowledge. Geography, watershed sci-
ence, and landscape ecology contribute concepts for
understanding temporal and spatial patterns and pro-
cesses. Disturbance ecology contributes understanding
about the temporal and spatial dynamics of ecological
systems and the myriad ecological responses to dis-
turbance. Wildlife, plant, and stream ecology provide
understanding of ecological responses to environmen-
tal change. Each of these ﬁelds strongly contributed to
the development of landscape-scale planning and man-
agement, as well as to the following premises on which
the use of natural variability concepts is based:
1) Contemporary anthropogenic change may dimin-
ish the viability of many species adapted to past or
historical conditions and processes (Swanson et al.
1994).
2) Approximating historical conditions provides a
coarse-ﬁlter management strategy that is likely to sus-
tain the viability of diverse species, even those for
which we know little about (Hunter et al. 1989, Swan-
son et al. 1994). Similarly, because of limited under-
standing about ecosystems, approximating past con-
ditions offers one of the best means for predicting and
reducing impacts to present-day ecosystems (Kauf-
mann et al. 1994).
3) Managing within the constraints of site variability
and history is easier, requires fewer external subsidies,
and is more cost effective than trying to achieve man-
agement goals that are outside the bounds of the system
(Allen and Hoeskstra 1992).
4) Natural variability is a useful reference for eval-
uating the inﬂuence of anthropogenic change in eco-
logical systems, including lakes (Smol 1992, Anderson
1995), commodity production lands (Morgan et al.
1994), and protected areas such as wilderness (Haila
1995).
5) Analysis of an ecological system at different sites
and over long time frames provides the context that
hierarchy theory suggests is important in understanding
the driving variables, constraints, and behavior of a
system at local and shorter time scales (Allen and
Hoekstra 1992). Such analysis yields essential under-
standing about the dynamic ecological processes that
drive both spatial and temporal variation in ecological
systems, as well as the inﬂuence of this variation on
evolution and biological diversity (Landres 1992, Pick-
ett and Ostfeld 1995).
6) Similar to the classic driving variables of mois-
ture and temperature, disturbances such as ﬁre and in-
sect outbreaks have a strong and lasting inﬂuence on
species, communities, and ecosystems (White 1979,
Sousa 1985), and have been called a ‘‘key structuring
process’’ at midscales, i.e., the scale of forest stands
(Holling 1992).
7) Spatial heterogeneity per se is an important com-
ponent of ecological systems. Reducing spatial vari-
ability typically results in declining biological diversity
(Petraitis et al. 1989), increased vulnerability to insects,
pathogens, or other disturbances (Lehmkuhl et al.
1994), and decreased resiliency to subsequent distur-
bances (White and Harrod 1997).
DEFINING NATURAL VARIABILITY
We deﬁne natural variability as the ecological con-
ditions, and the spatial and temporal variation in these
conditions, that are relatively unaffected by people,
within a period of time and geographical area appro-
priate to an expressed goal. One of the major aims of
characterizing natural variability is to understand how
driving processes vary from one site to another, how
these processes inﬂuenced ecological systems in the
past, and how these processes might inﬂuence ecolog-
ical systems today and in the future. Several phrases
have been used by ecologists and managers to describe

November 1999
1181
HISTORICAL VARIABILITY
these past conditions and processes, as well as how
they change spatially and temporally. These include
‘‘range of natural variability,’’ ‘‘natural range of vari-
ability,’’ ‘‘historical range of variability,’’ and ‘‘ref-
erence variability.’’ However, we suggest that the
phrase ‘‘natural variability’’ most clearly and simply
conveys this idea.
A lack of precision and clarity in the terms ‘‘natu-
ral,’’ ‘‘range,’’ and ‘‘historical’’ has generated consid-
erable debate over the appropriate time period and spa-
tial extent used in deﬁning and evaluating ‘‘natural
variation’’ (e.g., Morgan et al. 1994). Much of this
debate has centered on whether impacts of native
Americans are considered natural or not, and on deﬁn-
ing a point in time when ecological systems were rel-
atively unaffected by people, usually considered the
time before Euro–American settlement (e.g., Schrader-
Frechette and McCoy 1995, Hunter 1996). Joining this
debate and attacking what he calls the ‘‘myth of the
humanized landscape,’’ Vale (1998) asserts that for
many areas, especially the western United States, the
inﬂuence of native people is overstated, and that ‘‘hon-
est assessments to determine where, how, and to what
degree the pre-European landscape was a product of
people and their activities needs to be undertaken,
unencumbered by commitment to a preconceived no-
tion of the ubiquity of human agency.’’ Landres et al.
(1998) review this debate, suggesting that the use of
these concepts will always depend on the ecological
and social context of the area and the issue. We em-
phasize that clearly deﬁned goals, objectives, assump-
tions, value judgements, and spatial and temporal
bounds must always be explicit parts of the deﬁnition
and use of natural variability concepts.
DESCRIBING NATURAL VARIABILITY
In a recent set of papers on ecological variability,
Kareiva and Bergelson (1997) pointed out problems of
imprecisely using the common terms ‘‘variation’’ and
‘‘variability.’’ Managers need descriptions of natural
conditions and how these conditions vary spatially and
temporally. These descriptions need to be precise and
relevant to setting management goals and making de-
cisions based on those goals.
A crucial part of describing natural variability is se-
lecting the time period and geographical extent used
to characterize system dynamics. There is no single,
widely applicable optimal period, and relevance is lost
if too long a time period is used, because conditions
such as climate and species composition may have
changed drastically. Displaying major sources of rel-
evant information along spatial and temporal scale (see
Fig. 1 in Swetnam et al. 1999) allows managers to
identify what types of information are most applicable
to meet stated goals. Other considerations in selecting
spatial and temporal extent include the presence of ex-
otic species, known climate changes, human inﬂuences,
and record length and quality. Morgan et al. (1994)
suggested that natural variability be assessed over rel-
atively consistent climatic, edaphic, topographic, and
biogeographic conditions. For the Interior Columbia
Basin Ecosystem Management Project, for example,
Hann et al. (1997) used the last 2000 yr as the appro-
priate temporal depth, based on studies showing the
vegetation in this area was in relative equilibrium with
the macroclimate and native Americans during that
time (Schoonmaker and Foster 1991).
Choosing the appropriate geographic extent is par-
ticularly critical where management issues extend be-
yond the scale of the planning area, as is commonly
the case. A regional scope is often needed to inform
planning efforts that address local ecological and social
issues. Many bioregional assessments and conservation
strategies do this, providing context for local analysis
and planning (see Knight and Landres [1998] for sev-
eral examples). Wide-ranging, legally-protected spe-
cies, for example, must be evaluated at the scale of
their range, even if this extends beyond the local plan-
ning area (Cissel et al. 1994). DellaSala et al. (1995)
assert that a regional extent is necessary in applying
natural variability concepts to setting forest health
goals.
Quantifying natural variability
Quantifying natural variability requires information
on the conditions of interest and their variation over
set periods of time and space. Common metrics used
to describe these conditions and their variation include
mean, median, percentile, range, standard deviation,
coefﬁcient of variation, skewness, frequency, spatial
arrangement, and size and shape distributions. Differ-
ent attributes of interest require different descriptors.
Fire, for example, might require descriptors of fre-
quency, severity, size, and spatial arrangement across
the landscape. In contrast, an endangered plant might
require descriptors of the number of individuals, as-
pects of population viability, and metapopulation struc-
ture. The overall form of a distribution (e.g., negative
exponential) is also useful for describing attributes
such as patch size distribution of a forest type, or the
frequency and intensity of disturbances such as ﬁre.
Range is often used to describe natural variability
and to evaluate when current conditions are beyond the
bounds of natural conditions. When used alone, we
suggest that the range is not appropriate for this pur-
pose, because rare, extreme events deﬁne these bounds
and spatial and temporal limits usually are not deﬁned
in sufﬁciently explicit terms.
Two additional types of descriptors may be useful
in quantifying variability. Spike descriptors quantify
short-term, extreme, or high magnitude changes caused
by discrete disturbance events and the relatively short-
term ecological responses to these events. Spike de-
scriptors include the rate of change, severity, season-

1182
INVITED FEATURE
Ecological Applications
Vol. 9, No. 4
FIG. 1.
Diagrammatic comparison of cur-
rent conditions (CC, denoted as XX in the
graphical representation), desired future con-
ditions (DFC, – – –) or the social objectives for
public lands jointly decided by managers and
stakeholders, and the ecological conditions de-
ﬁned by natural variability (NV,
), illus-
trating the range of differences among these.
The width of the bars represent the spatial or
temporal variation in conditions. DFCs are por-
trayed as narrower than (or as a subset of ) NV.
Only extreme cases are shown here; partial
overlap among NV, DFC, and CC will likely be
more common. A ‘‘greater than or equal to’’
sign ($) denotes that a condition is within the
bounds of the preceding condition (e.g., in the
top row, current conditions are within the
bounds of desired future conditions, and these
are within the bounds of natural variability).
ality, and size and severity frequency distributions. Mo-
ritz (1997) described the ‘‘extremal ﬁre regime’’ as the
time series of the largest ﬁre per year, to test for spatial
and temporal differences due to ﬁre suppression and
the effect of climate forcing on the ﬁre regime in south-
ern California. Trend descriptors, for example time se-
ries analysis, quantify the low magnitude and rate
changes that occur over longer time frames through
succession or chronic disturbances, such as habitat
fragmentation or acid deposition.
In addition, probabilistic descriptors of spikes and
trends may be especially useful in detecting trends and
estimating the probability that a particular type, direc-
tion, and magnitude of change from historical condi-
tions will occur. The probability that current conditions
are similar to past conditions could be derived from
data-driven statistical models. Some models yield em-
pirical relationships and probabilities associated with
change along environmental gradients or gradients of
human impact. Another type of analysis could assess
the probability that a given current or future condition
is consistent with past system behavior. For example,
frequency analysis, a standard hydrology technique for
estimating probabilities of future events such as ﬂoods
from historical data, was used by Erman and Jones
(1996) to assess change in ﬁre frequencies over time,
across seven national forests in the Sierra Nevada.
MANAGEMENT APPLICATIONS
Historical information has been used to guide man-
agement decisions in many different systems. For ex-
ample, it has been used to understand the impacts of
altered ﬂow regimes on the ecology and geomorphol-
ogy of the Colorado River (Poff et al. 1997); to assess
the impacts of altered ﬁre regimes on the structure and
composition of forest ecosystems (Skinner and Chang
1996); to assess the effectiveness of prescribed natural
ﬁre programs in wilderness (Brown et al. 1994); to
understand the impacts of altered freshwater ﬂows on
the Everglades in southern Florida (Harwell 1997); to
assess the current spatial patterns of boreal (Gauthier
et al. 1996), midwestern (Baker 1992), and western
(Ripple 1994, Camp et al. 1997) old-growth forests; to
monitor the condition of eastern temperate deciduous
forests (Keddy and Drummond 1996); and to under-
stand the processes that inﬂuenced the structure of old-
growth forests in the Midwestern (Mladenoff and Pas-
tor 1993), southwestern (Fule´ et al. 1997), and north-
western (Lesica 1996, Lertzman et al. 1997) United
States.
Current agency implementation of ecosystem man-
agement also relies heavily on the ‘‘historical range of
variability’’ (Kaufmann et al. 1994) or ‘‘reference vari-
ability’’ (Manley et al. 1995) in deﬁning target con-
ditions for the full array of managed lands, from timber
harvest areas to wilderness. In developing a vegetation
management strategy for the Six Rivers National Forest
in northwestern California, for example, the planning
team relied on natural disturbance processes and rates,
rather than silvicultural prescriptions, ‘‘. . . to provide
a near-natural range and distribution of habitat types
throughout the forest’’ (Wright et al. 1995).
Natural variability is a useful tool for understanding
and evaluating change (Morgan et al. 1994). Hypoth-
eses about the drivers and mechanisms of ecosystem
change can be developed and tested with spatial and
temporal data (Swetnam et al. 1999). This understand-
ing is helpful for predicting how ecosystems will
change, even in response to novel structures and pro-
cesses, and nonnative species. Until we fully know how
ecosystems function, the past is one of the best means
for understanding and predicting impacts to ecological
conditions.
Natural variability is also useful as a reference for
setting general management goals. Comparing current
conditions, desired future conditions (an expression of
ecosystem conditions preferred by stakeholders and
managers), and natural variability clariﬁes management
direction (Fig. 1). Maintaining situations where current
and desired conditions are within natural variability, or

November 1999
1183
HISTORICAL VARIABILITY
restoring current conditions to that state, are just two
of the many possible situations managers face. Desired
future conditions may or may not be equivalent to ei-
ther natural variability or current conditions. When
they are not (Fig. 1; rows 3, 4, and 5), desired con-
ditions may need to be reevaluated. The actions needed
to move current conditions to desired conditions, and
the external subsidies required to maintain those de-
sired conditions, need to be evaluated for their eco-
logical and socioeconomic acceptability. For example,
the restoration of ﬁre to old-growth forests may be
desired in the long-term, but in the short-term ﬁre may
reduce the amount of habitat that is critical to endan-
gered species. Similarly, restoring intense crown ﬁre
to forests that historically experienced such ﬁre may
pose unacceptable social costs today. This analysis of
trade-offs is relevant to all lands, because we choose
to sustain artiﬁcial conditions to a lessor or greater
degree everywhere.
Using these concepts in the process of ecosystem
assessment, and in the setting of speciﬁc landscape
management goals, requires several steps. First, site
interpretation derived from the history of several in-
dividual sites, using techniques such as dendrochro-
nology and stand analysis, allows understanding the
speciﬁc forces inﬂuencing current conditions. Second,
the landscape history is compiled based on the indi-
vidual site histories. Third, the landscape-scale distur-
bance regime is interpreted from the site-speciﬁc un-
derstanding of factors controlling disturbance process-
es, a general understanding of disturbance mechanisms,
and simulation models that may be used to extend these
inferences to areas where site-speciﬁc data are lacking.
And fourth, the landscape management plan is devel-
oped based on an understanding of the landscape-scale
disturbance regime, current landscape conditions, and
the desired future conditions (or social objectives) for
the landscape. Cissel et al. (1999) apply this process
in old-growth forests of the Paciﬁc Northwest. Value
judgements will always be part of this process. When
made explicit, the merits and impacts of these judge-
ments can be openly discussed.
Under certain social and biophysical conditions, al-
ternative approaches to managing ecosystems may be
more useful. Where single or small numbers of species
are pivotal issues, an emphasis on reserves may be most
appropriate biologically and legally. If historical re-
lationships between ecosystem components and their
functions cannot be determined or restored, the natural
variability approach has little utility. When the size,
intensity, or effect of a disturbance (e.g., ﬁre) is so
great as to be socially or politically unacceptable, other
approaches to landscape management will be needed.
Where past management activities have pushed eco-
systems into undesired conditions, measures such as
strict reserve systems or intensive restoration may be
needed before less intensive management under a nat-
ural variability-based system is appropriate (Wallin et
al. 1996). In such cases, the transition in management
from a restoration focus to a natural variability-based
maintenance approach may not be appropriate for many
decades.
Several conclusions may be drawn from the exam-
ples discussed here. Natural variability concepts com-
pel a regional and historical perspective that provides
a deeper understanding of the processes and mecha-
nisms that drive ecological systems. This deeper un-
derstanding can then be used to evaluate causes of eco-
logical change and predict the consequences of current
management actions. These concepts are often used in
setting goals that ‘‘. . . guide the direction but not the
detail of what a desired condition might be . . .’’ (Millar
1996; emphasis in original). These general directions
may in turn signiﬁcantly help managers understand the
potential consequences of proposed goals and actions.
BARRIERS AND CHALLENGES
Signiﬁcant concerns remain about the use of natural
variability concepts: the relevance of these concepts to
environments that are different today from what they
were; the amount and quality of information and un-
derstanding about natural variability may be insufﬁ-
cient; and the difﬁculty of managing dynamic ecolog-
ical systems, especially at scales large enough to be
meaningful.
Is natural variability relevant?
In a world that is constantly changing and increas-
ingly altered by people, primary criticisms against the
use of natural variability include the following: (1) Na-
tive and contemporary people have so altered natural
systems that there are no pristine natural areas left on
our planet, making information derived from the past
difﬁcult to interpret or irrelevant. (2) Each point in time
and space is unique, and dominant climate patterns are
continually changing, therefore a description of past
patterns and processes is largely irrelevant today or in
the future. (3) Management goals based on natural vari-
ability seek to recreate past environments and then
maintain those environments in a static condition.
There is no question that ecological systems are con-
stantly changing, and that people have extirpated and
altered the distribution of many species, introduced ex-
otic species, released pollutants, eroded soils, altered
ﬂuvial processes, restructured landscapes, and altered
the frequency, type, and intensity of disturbances. Hu-
mans can also change ecosystem patterns and processes
at rates that limit the abilities of species to adapt or
disperse to suitable habitat. Although native people
burned and otherwise altered ﬂoral and faunal com-
positions, they did not occupy all areas or all ecosys-
tems, nor impose broad-scale and intense impacts in
all the areas they did occupy (Swetnam and Baisan
1996, Delcourt and Delcourt 1997). Historical analyses

1184
INVITED FEATURE
Ecological Applications
Vol. 9, No. 4
demonstrate that contemporary aspects of ecological
systems, including species composition, distribution
patterns of vegetation and animals, and rates of nutrient
turnover, are often contingent on past conditions and
processes (see review by Swetnam et al. [1999] in this
Feature). In this context, the legacy of past management
actions may have signiﬁcantly altered the natural state
of an ecosystem, thereby altering the actions that may
be necessary to restore that system (Frissell and Bayles
1996). In general, understanding past conditions, and
the natural processes that inﬂuenced those conditions,
yields insight into why and how current conditions de-
veloped, and what changes might be expected in the
future.
One of the primary objectives in using natural vari-
ability concepts is to better understand ecological
change, as well as the past and current impacts of peo-
ple. Furthermore, the use of these concepts is not nec-
essarily an attempt to simply mimic or recreate the
processes that occurred on a site long ago, or to return
managed landscapes to a single and unchanging past
condition. Rather, it is an attempt to improve under-
standing about the ecological context of an area and
the landscape-scale effects of disturbance. This under-
standing may then be used to make existing and future
conditions more relevant and variable, and thereby eco-
logically sustainable (Covington et al. 1994, Wallin et
al. 1996, Lertzman et al. 1997). It has also been sug-
gested that natural variability is irrelevant, because our
current understanding of ecosystems is sufﬁcient to al-
low the achievement of any desired goal. However, it
is only with great hubris that we ignore or claim to
understand the ecological interactions and processes
that have operated for thousands of years and that have
shaped the ecological systems of today.
Is there sufﬁcient understanding about natural
variability?
For many areas, sufﬁcient data exist for a general
understanding of the recent history of disturbances,
such as ﬁre and insect outbreaks. For a few areas (such
as the Long-Term Ecological Research program sites)
there is substantial knowledge of structures and pro-
cesses. Site-speciﬁc data, however, are lacking for most
areas, and there is insufﬁcient temporal depth for many
of the areas that have been studied, requiring inference
and extrapolation such as space-for-time substitutions
(e.g., Pickett 1989). The effect of these inferences on
our understanding of past conditions and variation is
poorly known (Clark 1990), especially in topographi-
cally complex landscapes and when extrapolating the
effects of disturbances across a landscape. Further-
more, the spatial arrangement of patches and severity
of disturbances are not usually identiﬁed with conﬁ-
dence from historical data, resulting in a general lack
of information about the spatial variation of past con-
ditions.
Compounding this lack of understanding, estimates
derived from paleoreconstructions become more un-
certain further back in time for several reasons includ-
ing the following: fewer data are available further back
in time; the probability of rare events increases with
longer time frames; and rare events may skew the data
record, because they are often intense and their impacts
may be retained longer. Furthermore, for earlier times,
there is only limited information about disturbance pro-
cesses, as well as the interactions of these processes
with dominant driving variables such as climate. To-
gether, these sources of uncertainty make analysis of
long-term trends difﬁcult. This lack of data is especial-
ly problematic when statistical power is needed to de-
tect trends that have important consequences, such as
change in the amount of forest needed for an endan-
gered species.
Swetnam et al. (1999) discuss the variety of data
used for understanding past ecological structures and
processes, and the spatial and temporal resolution of
these data. Similarly, White and Walker (1997) discuss
the beneﬁts and limitations in selecting and using dif-
ferent types of reference information in restoration
ecology. Both papers conclude that information, from
multiple sites and times that are both similar and dif-
ferent from the target area, provides necessary spatial
and temporal context and understanding. Likewise, in
applying natural variability concepts, multiple sources
of information are needed, ranging from site-speciﬁc
data and simulation models, to expert opinions and
judgements. These disparate types of information allow
for the forming and testing of hypotheses about how
natural variability concepts can best be applied to man-
aging ecological systems.
The current theoretical understanding of natural vari-
ability, especially related to disturbances, is also poorly
developed, hampering application of these concepts.
While the factors promoting spatial variability (e.g.,
patterns of topography, soil, precipitation, and distur-
bances) are generally well known for individual sites,
the causes and effects of historical contingency and
spatial and temporal variation at the landscape scale
are poorly understood. Likewise, interactions among
disturbances at different spatial and temporal scales are
not well understood. This lack of understanding is il-
lustrated by the contentious and long-standing debate
over natural variability, disturbance regimes, and struc-
tural- vs. process-based management of giant sequoia
(Sequoiadendron giganteum) forests in California (Ste-
phenson 1996, 1999).
How are natural variability concepts used in
managing dynamic systems?
Three issues are paramount as barriers to managing
dynamic systems. First, our understanding of spatial
and temporal dynamics in ecological systems will never
be complete. Determining the appropriate spatial extent

November 1999
1185
HISTORICAL VARIABILITY
and temporal depth for analysis of natural variability
is difﬁcult. Goals of the analysis, speciﬁc ecological
attributes of concern (such as a species, or a disturbance
process such as ﬁre), speciﬁc decisions that need to be
made, information currently available, costs of gath-
ering new information, time constraints, and political
inﬂuence, for example, all affect the spatial and tem-
poral scale of analysis. Second, management plans
based on disturbance processes will always be some-
what uncertain, because large and infrequent distur-
bances have signiﬁcant long-term consequences for
ecosystems (Turner et al. 1997). In the Black Hills of
South Dakota and Wyoming, for example, infrequent
catastrophic ﬁres maintained large patches of old-
growth ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) in a non-
equilibrium state (Shinneman and Baker 1997). And
third, even in those cases where there is sufﬁcient eco-
logical understanding of how to manage the processes
that drive dynamic systems, there may be insufﬁcient
social or political will to maintain or restore these pro-
cesses.
In general, management systems are not geared for
managing moving targets or coping with the uncer-
tainty and surprise that are inherent and fundamental
aspects of ecological systems (Ludwig et al. 1993, Hai-
la 1995, Christensen 1988, 1997). Most large land and
water resource management organizations approach the
world in a deterministic manner. Ecosystems, on the
other hand, are variable in time and space, and relations
among vegetation patterns, topography, and distur-
bance regimes may not be sharply deﬁned. This com-
plexity may be a critical aspect of long-term ecosystem
dynamics and function. In parts of the Paciﬁc North-
west, for example, substantial components of old-
growth ecosystems may have persisted on the land-
scape over millennia as a result of the highly variable
frequency, severity, and spatial patterning of wildﬁres
(Agee 1993). This is challenging for land managers,
because historical variability does not provide a simple,
clear blueprint that can be easily followed. Further-
more, extreme disturbance events, which may have
strongly structured ecosystems in the past, may be so-
cially unacceptable today. Recognizing this, and that
managers have no practical control over extreme
events, Manley et al. (1995) recommend that a subset
of the full range of natural variability, or ‘‘management
variability,’’ is a more practical goal in applying natural
variability concepts. Even in situations where a deci-
sion is made to not allow certain disturbance events,
natural variability concepts are still useful in improving
understanding about ecological conditions and the po-
tential consequences of management actions.
Managing for natural variability allows greater lat-
itude, and requires greater ﬂexibility, than traditional
stand-level management prescriptions. However, this
latitude and ﬂexibility can also be misused and mis-
applied in setting management goals and targets that
push a landscape outside the range of historical con-
ditions. Some forest managers, for example, have used
past ﬁre and windstorm disturbances to justify timber
harvest targets, but timber harvesting and ecological
disturbances may have profoundly different long-term
ecological consequences (DellaSala et al. 1995). Great-
er latitude and ﬂexibility also require greater com-
munication with stakeholders and greater public trust;
for many agencies in many areas, this communication
and trust is currently lacking.
KEY RESEARCH ISSUES AND QUESTIONS
Research is needed to improve the basic understand-
ing and management application of natural variability,
especially at broader spatial and longer time scales.
Both site-speciﬁc and general cross-cutting research
can be focused on three issues: describing past con-
ditions and disturbance regimes, understanding the
landscape-scale effects of disturbance regimes, and un-
derstanding the cumulative effects of management ac-
tions.
Describing past conditions and disturbance regimes
More information is needed on past conditions and
disturbance regimes, as well as better quantitative de-
scriptions of how these vary over large areas of com-
plex terrain and over long periods of time. Our current
understanding of landscape-scale variation and the pro-
cesses driving this variation is meager, and ‘‘. . . ﬁne-
scale knowledge of autecology cannot simply be ag-
gregated to represent [ecosystem] behavior at scales
beyond the scale of a patch or gap’’ (Holling 1992).
Indeed, combining broad spatial and deep temporal
analyses is likely to be one of the more important and
exciting challenges for landscape ecologists. Such
analyses allow insight into whether there are ecological
patterns that can be discerned only at certain spatial
and temporal scales, whether extrapolating information
on natural variability across spatial and temporal scales
is reliable, and whether extrapolations are more robust
for certain system attributes under certain conditions.
Understanding landscape-scale effects of disturbance
regimes
Better understanding is needed on the effects of mul-
tiple disturbance events on vegetation and wildlife over
large areas and long time ﬂames. Disturbances have
effects that may last hundreds of years, allowing ample
time for multiple disturbances and cumulative effects
across a landscape. Currently, little information exists
on the short- and long-term interactions among mul-
tiple disturbances (e.g., overlapping patterns of ﬁre and
insect outbreaks) in spatial pattern, frequency, inten-
sity, or the effects of multiple disturbances on land-
scape-scale patterns of distribution and abundance of
vegetation and wildlife. Furthermore, analyses that sac-
riﬁce local-scale detail, but answer crucial broader-

1186
INVITED FEATURE
Ecological Applications
Vol. 9, No. 4
scale questions, are needed to understand landscape-
level controls on disturbance frequency, intensity, and
spatial pattern (e.g., see McKelvey and Busse 1996).
Cumulative effects of management
Just as current system attributes are contingent on
historical inﬂuences, future system attributes will be
contingent on current conditions and planned manage-
ment actions inﬂuencing the composition, structure,
and disturbance regimes of ecosystems. For example,
the combined long-term effects of altering spatial pat-
terns of forest vegetation, excluding ﬁre from ﬁre-de-
pendent ecosystems, and introducing exotic species,
will certainly be great. Research built upon a basic
understanding of disturbance interactions and effects
over large areas and long times is needed to predict
probable vegetation and wildlife outcomes from dif-
ferent
management
strategies.
Practically,
logical
frameworks are needed for determining the appropriate
spatial and temporal scales that are relevant to a par-
ticular management goal, as well as for understanding
the implications when inappropriate spatial and tem-
poral scales are used. For example, modeling could
help address to what degree multiple small and man-
ageable disturbance events could be used to accomplish
the important effects of a single large, and unmana-
geable, disturbance, as is often discussed for the res-
toration of ﬁre regimes (e.g., Christensen 1995).
CONCLUSIONS
Our world is highly modiﬁed from the past, and cre-
ating static reproductions of past ecosystems is neither
possible nor the desire of most managers. Understand-
ing past ecological systems, their composition and
structure, how they changed from one place to another
and over time, and the principal interactions and pro-
cesses that inﬂuenced them, helps managers set goals
that respond to the ecological context and social values
of an area. The use of natural variability concepts com-
pels recognition of processes that cause spatial and
temporal variation, such as disturbances, and illustrates
their important role in sustaining ecological systems
and the species that depend on them. The use of these
concepts also compels acknowledging the important
role of regional and historical perspectives in setting
management goals, even for local actions. Recognizing
these processes and perspectives further reinforces the
uncertain and surprise-ﬁlled ecological realities in
managing ecosystems. Conversely, managing for goals
informed by natural variability likely reduces uncer-
tainty and surprise, because these goals would be set
within the ecological constraints of an area.
Using natural variability concepts in developing
management plans requires speciﬁc, clearly deﬁned
management goals, as well as information about the
speciﬁc landscape. In addition, no a priori time period
or spatial extent can be used in deﬁning natural vari-
ability. Speciﬁc goals and explicitly stated values must
always drive selection of the relevant time period and
spatial extent. Understanding a landscape’s past and
present spatial and temporal variation usually requires
a combination of site-speciﬁc ﬁeld data, inferences de-
rived from data collected elsewhere, simulation mod-
els, and expert judgement. When used judiciously and
collectively, this information provides valuable insight
that is useful for developing the general direction of
management plans and goals. Research can help deﬁne
the set of ecological conditions and social goals that
require a natural variability approach for effective and
successful management.
Variability is a key attribute of natural systems, as
well as a practical and realistic foundation for land-
scape-scale management. Sustaining ecosystems, via-
ble species populations, and the amenities and com-
modities our society desires from natural ecological
systems will require a long-term, landscape-scale ap-
proach to management that balances the needs, capa-
bilities, and impacts among different areas within that
landscape. Management goals and actions cannot be
applied uniformly across a landscape without causing
a loss of species and ecosystem functions.
Finally, natural variability provides a foundation for
improving discussion among managers, scientists, and
the public about the desirability and feasibility of dif-
ferent values and goals for an area, the resulting im-
pacts and tradeoffs that occur from these different man-
agement goals, and how to improve the management
of dynamic ecosystems. Applying natural variability
concepts to management is a new and developing ﬁeld,
where there is much to learn and improve upon. Active
collaboration between researchers and managers will
profoundly improve the management of ecological sys-
tems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
In developing this paper we have greatly enjoyed and ben-
eﬁted from our discussions with Greg Aplet, Steve Bunting,
John Cissel, Wendel Hann, Lee Harry, Paul Hessburg, Merrill
Kaufmann, Pat Manley, Madeline Mazurski, Kevin Mc-
Kelvey, Connie Millar, Dave Parsons, Nate Stephenson, Tom
Swetnam, Peter White, the attendees at the Georgetown Lake
Workshop, and the managers who are leading this important
and difﬁcult task of managing ecological systems.
LITERATURE CITED
Agee, J. K 1993. Fire ecology of Paciﬁc Northwest forests.
Island Press, Washington, D.C., USA.
Allen, T. F. H., and T. W. Hoekstra. 1992. Toward a uniﬁed
ecology. Columbia University Press, New York, New York,
USA.
Anderson, N. J. 1995. Using the past to predict the future:
lake sediments and the modelling of limnological distur-
bance. Ecological Modelling 78:149–172.
Baker, W. L. 1992. Effects of settlement and ﬁre suppression
on landscape structure. Ecology 73:1879–1887.
Brown, J. K., S. F. Arno, S. W. Barrett, and J. P. Menakis.
1994. Comparing the prescribed natural ﬁre program with
presettlement ﬁres in the Selway-Bitterroot Wilderness. In-
ternational Journal of Wildland Fire 4:157–168.

November 1999
1187
HISTORICAL VARIABILITY
Camp, A., C. Oliver, P. Hessburg, and R. Everett. 1997. Pre-
dicting late-successional ﬁre refugia pre-dating European
settlement in the Wenatchee Mountains. Forest Ecology and
Management 95:63–77.
Christensen, N. L. 1988. Succession and natural disturbance:
paradigms, problems, and preservation of natural ecosys-
tems. Pages 62–86 in J. K. Agee and D. R. Johnson, editors.
Ecosystem management for parks and wilderness. Univer-
sity of Washington Press, Seattle, Washington, USA.
. 1995. Fire and wilderness. International Journal of
Wilderness 1:30–34.
. 1997. Managing for heterogeneity and complexity
on dynamic landscapes. Pages 167–186 in S. T. A. Pickett,
R. S. Ostfeld, M. Shachak, and G. E. Likens, editors. The
ecological basis of conservation: heterogeneity, ecosys-
tems, and biodiversity. Chapman and Hall, New York, New
York, USA.
Cissel, J. H., F. J. Swanson, W. A. McKee, and A. L. Burditt.
1994. Using the past to plan the future in the Paciﬁc North-
west. Journal of Forestry 92:30–31, 46.
Cissel, J. H., F. J. Swanson, and P. J. Weisberg. 1999. Land-
scape management using historical ﬁre regimes: Blue River,
Oregon. Ecological Applications 9:1217–1231.
Clark, J. S. 1990. Fire and climate change during the last
750 yr in northwestern Minnesota. Ecological Monographs
60:135–159.
Covington, W. W., R. L. Everett, R. Steele, L. L. Irwin, T.
A. Daer, and A. N. D. Auclair. 1994. Historical and an-
ticipated changes in forest ecosystems of the inland west
of the United States. Pages 13–63 in R. N. Sampson and
D. L. Adams, editors. Assessing forest ecosystem health
in the inland west. Haworth Press, Binghamton, New York,
USA.
Cowles, H. C. 1899. The ecological relations of the vege-
tation on the sand dunes of Lake Michigan. Botanical Ga-
zette 27:95–117, 167–202, 281–308, 361–391.
Delcourt, H. R., and P. A. Delcourt. 1997. Pre-Columbian
native American use of ﬁre on southern Appalachian land-
scapes. Conservation Biology 11:1010–1014.
DellaSala, D. A., D. M. Olson, S. E. Barth, S. L. Crane, and
S. A. Primm. 1995. Forest health: moving beyond rhetoric
to restore healthy landscapes in the inland Northwest. Wild-
life Society Bulletin 23:346–356.
Erman, D. C., and R. Jones. 1996. Fire frequency analysis
of Sierra forests. Pages 1139–1153 in Status of the Sierra
Nevada, Volume II: Assessments and scientiﬁc basis for
management options. Sierra Nevada Ecosystem Project, Fi-
nal Report to Congress. Wildland Resources Center Report
No. 37, Centers for Water and Wildland Resources, Uni-
versity of California, Davis, California, USA.
Foster, D. R., D. A. Orwig, and J. S. McLachlan. 1996.
Ecological and conservation insights from reconstructive
studies of temperate old-growth forests. Trends in Ecology
and Evolution 11:419–425.
Frissell, C. A., and D. Bayles. 1996. Ecosystem management
and the conservation of aquatic biodiversity and ecological
integrity. Water Resources Bulletin 32:229–240.
Fule´, P. Z., W. W. Covington, and M. M. Moore. 1997. De-
termining reference conditions for ecosystem management
of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Ecological Appli-
cations 7:895–908.
Gauthier, S., A. Leduc, and Y. Bergeron. 1996. Forest dy-
namics modelling under natural ﬁre cycles: a tool to deﬁne
natural mosaic diversity for forest management. Environ-
mental Monitoring and Assessment 39:417–434.
Haila, Y. 1995. Natural dynamics as a model for manage-
ment: is the analogue practicable? Pages 9–26 in A.-L.
Sippola, P. Alaraudanjoki, B. Forbes, and V. Hallikainen,
editors. Northern wilderness areas: ecology, sustainability,
values. Arctic Centre Publications 7, Arctic Center, Uni-
versity of Lapland, Ravaniemi, Finland.
Hann, W. J., J. L. Jones, M. G. Karl, P. F. Hessburg, R. E.
Keane, D. G. Long, J. P. Menakis, C. H. McNicoll, S. G.
Leonard, R. A. Gravenmier, and B. G. Smith. 1997. Land-
scape dynamics of the Basin. Pages 363–1055 in T. M.
Quigley and S. J. Arbelbide, technical editors. An assess-
ment of ecosystem components in the Interior Columbia
Basin and portions of the Klamath and Great Basins, vol-
ume II. U.S. Forest Service General Technical Report
PNW-GTR-405, Paciﬁc Northwest Research Station, Port-
land, Oregon, USA.
Harwell, M. A. 1997. Ecosystem management of south Flor-
ida. BioScience 47:499–512.
Holling, C. S. 1992. Cross-scale morphology, geometry, and
dynamics of ecosystems. Ecological Monographs 62:447–
502.
Hunter, M. L. 1996. Benchmarks for managing ecosystems:
are human activities natural? Conservation Biology 10:
695–697.
Hunter, M. L., G. L. Jacobson, and T. Webb. 1989. Paleo-
ecology and the coarse-ﬁlter approach to maintaining bi-
ological diversity. Conservation Biology 2:375–385.
Kareiva, P, and J. Bergelson. 1997. The nuances of vari-
ability: beyond mean square error and platitudes about ﬂuc-
tuating environments. Ecology 78:1299–1230.
Kaufmann, M. R., R. T. Graham, D. A. Boyce, W. H. Moir,
L. Perry, R. T. Reynolds, R. L. Bassett, P. Mehlhop, C. B.
Edminster, W. M. Block, and P. S. Corn. 1994. An eco-
logical basis for ecosystem management. U.S. Forest Ser-
vice General Technical Report RM-GTR-246, Rocky
Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA.
Keddy, P. A., and C. G. Drummond. 1996. Ecological prop-
erties for the evaluation, management, and restoration of
temperate deciduous forest ecosystems. Ecological Appli-
cations 6:748–762.
Knight, R. L., and P. B. Landres, editors. 1998. Stewardship
across boundaries. Island Press, Washington, D.C., USA.
Landres, P. B. 1992. Temporal scale perspectives in man-
aging biological diversity. Transactions of the North Amer-
ican Wildlife and Natural Resources Conference 57:292–
307.
Landres, P. B., P. S. White, G. Aplet, and A. Zimmermann.
1998. Naturalness and natural variability: deﬁnitions, con-
cepts, and strategies for wilderness management. Pages 41–
50 in D. L. Kulhavy and M. H. Legg, editors. Wilderness
and natural areas in eastern America: research, manage-
ment, and planning. Center for Applied Studies, College
of Forestry, Stephen F. Austin University, Nacogdoches,
Texas, USA.
Lehmkuhl, J. F., P. F. Hessburg, R. L. Everett, M. H. Huff,
and R. D. Ottmar. 1994. Historical and current forest land-
scapes of eastern Oregon and Washington. Part I: Vege-
tation pattern and insect and disease hazards. U.S. Forest
Service General Technical Report PNW-GTR-328. Paciﬁc
Northwest Research Station, Portland, Oregon, USA.
Leopold, A. S., S. A. Cain, C. M. Cottom, I. N. Gabrielson,
and T. L. Kimball. 1963. The wildlife management in the
national parks. Transactions of the North American Wild-
life and Natural Resources Conference 28:28–45.
Lertzman, K., T. Spies, and F. Swanson. 1997. From eco-
system dynamics to ecosystem management. Pages 361–
382 in P. K. Schoonmaker, B. von Hagen, and E. C. Wolf,
editors. The rain forests of home: proﬁle of a North Amer-
ican bioregion. Island Press, Washington, D.C., USA.
Lesica, P. 1996. Using ﬁre history models to estimate pro-
portions of old growth forest in northwestern Montana,
USA. Biological Conservation 77:33–39.
Ludwig, D., R. Hilborn, and C. Walters. 1993. Uncertainty,

1188
INVITED FEATURE
Ecological Applications
Vol. 9, No. 4
resource exploitation, and conservation: lessons from his-
tory. Science 260:17.
Manley, P. N., et al. 1995. Sustaining ecosystems: a con-
ceptual framework. USDA Forest Service, Paciﬁc South-
west Region and Station. R5-EM-TP-001. Berkeley, Cal-
ifornia, USA.
McKelvey, K. S., and K. K. Busse. 1996. Twentieth-century
ﬁre patterns on Forest Service lands. Pages 1119–1138 in
Status of the Sierra Nevada, Volume II: Assessments and sci-
entiﬁc basis for management options. Sierra Nevada Ecosys-
tem Project, Final Report to Congress. Wildland Resources
Center Report No. 37, Centers for Water and Wildland Re-
sources, University of California, Davis, California, USA.
Millar, C. I. 1996. The Mammoth–June Ecosystem Manage-
ment Project, Inyo National Forest. Pages 1273–1304 in Status
of the Sierra Nevada, Volume II: Assessments and scientiﬁc
basis for management options. Sierra Nevada Ecosystem Pro-
ject, Final Report to Congress. Wildland Resources Center
Report No. 37, Centers for Water and Wildland Resources,
University of California, Davis, California, USA.
Mladenoff, D. J., and J. Pastor. 1993. Sustainable forest
ecosystems in the northern hardwood and conifer region:
concepts and management. Pages 145–180 in G. H. Aplet,
J. T. Olsen, N. Johnson, and V. A. Sample, editors. Deﬁning
sustainable forestry. Island Press, Washington, D.C., USA.
Morgan, P., G. H. Aplet, J. B. Hauﬂer, H. C. Humphries, M.
M. Moore, and W. D. Wilson. 1994. Historical range of
variability: a useful tool for evaluating ecosystem change.
Journal of Sustainable Forestry 2:87–111.
Moritz, M. A. 1997. Analyzing extreme disturbance events:
ﬁre in Los Padres National Forest. Ecological Applications
7:1252–1262.
Petraitis, P. S., R. E. Latham, and R. A. Niesenbaum. 1989.
The maintenance of species diversity by disturbance. Quar-
terly Review of Biology 64:393–418.
Pickett, S. T. A. 1989. Space-for-time substitution as an al-
ternative to long-term studies. Pages 110–135 in G. E. Lik-
ens, editor. Long-term studies in ecology: approaches and
alternatives. Springer-Verlag, New York, New York, USA.
Pickett, S. T. A., and R. S. Ostfeld. 1995. The shifting par-
adigm in ecology. Pages 261–278 in R. L. Knight and S.
F. Bates, editors. A new century for natural resources man-
agement. Island Press, Washington, D.C., USA.
Poff, N. L., J. D. Allan, M. B. Bain, J. R. Karr, K. L. Pres-
tegaard, B. D. Richter, R. E. Sparks, and J. C. Stromberg.
1997. The natural ﬂow regime. BioScience 47:769–784.
Ricklefs, R. E. 1987. Community diversity: relative roles of
local and regional processes. Science 235:167–171.
Ripple, W. J. 1994. Historic spatial patterns of old forests
in western Oregon. Journal of Forestry 92:45–49.
Schoonmaker, P. K., and D. R. Foster. 1991. Some impli-
cations of paleoecology for contemporary ecology. The Bo-
tanical Review 57:204–245.
Schrader-Frechette, K., and E. D. McCoy. 1995. Natural
landscapes, natural communities and natural ecosystems.
Forest and Conservation History 39:138–142.
Shelford, V. E. 1913. Animal communities in temperate
America. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois,
USA.
Shinneman, D. J., and W. L. Baker. 1997. Nonequilibrium
dynamics between catastrophic disturbances and old-
growth forests in ponderosa pine landscapes of the Black
Hills. Conservation Biology 11:1276–1288.
Skinner, C. N., and C. Chang. 1996. Fire regimes, past and
present. Pages 1041–1070 in Status of the Sierra Nevada,
Volume II: Assessments and scientiﬁc basis for manage-
ment options. Sierra Nevada Ecosystem Project, Final Re-
port to Congress. Wildland Resources Center Report No.
37, Centers for Water and Wildland Resources, University
of California, Davis, California, USA.
Smol, J. P. 1992. Paleolimnology: an important tool for ef-
fective ecosystem management. Journal of Aquatic Eco-
system Health 1:49–58.
Sousa, W. P. 1985. The role of disturbance in natural com-
munities. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 15:
353–391.
Stephenson, N. 1966. Ecology and management of giant se-
quoia management groves. Pages 1431–1467 in Status of
the Sierra Nevada, Volume II: Assessments and scientiﬁc
basis for management options. Sierra Nevada Ecosystem
Project, Final Report to Congress. Wildland Resources
Center Report No. 37, Centers for Water and Wildland Re-
sources, University of California, Davis, California, USA.
Stephenson, N. L. 1999. Reference conditions for giant se-
quoia forest restoration: structure, process, and precision.
Ecological Applications 9:1253–1265.
Swanson, F. J., J. A. Jones, D. O. Wallin, and J. H. Cissel.
1994.
Natural variability—implications for ecosystem
management. Pages 80–94 in M. E. Jensen and P. S. Bour-
geron, technical coordinators. Ecosystem management:
principles and applications, volume II. Eastside forest eco-
system health assessment. U.S. Forest Service, General
Technical Report PNW-GTR-318, Paciﬁc Northwest Re-
search Station, Portland, Oregon, USA.
Swetnam, T. W. 1993. Fire history and climate change in
giant sequoia groves. Science 262:885–889.
Swetnam, T. W., and C. H. Baisan. 1996. Historical ﬁre re-
gime patterns in the southwestern United States since AD
1700. Pages 11–32 in C. D. Allen, technical editor. Fire
effects in southwestern forests. U.S. Forest Service General
Technical Report RM-GTR-286, Rocky Mountain Forest
and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, Colorado,
USA.
Swetnam, T. W., C. D. Allen, and J. L. Betancourt. 1999.
Applied historical ecology: using the past to manage for
the future. Ecological Applications 9:1189–1206.
Tausch, R. J., C. L. Nowak, and R. S. Nowak. 1995. Climate
change and plant species responses over the Quaternary:
implications for ecosystem management. Pages 14–19 in
R. W. Tinus, technical coordinator. Interior west global
change workshop. U.S. Forest Service General Technical
Report RM-GTR-262, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA.
Turner, M. G., V. H. Dale, and E. H. Everham. 1997. Fires,
hurricanes, and volcanoes: comparing large disturbances.
BioScience 47:758–768.
Vale, T. R. 1998. The myth of the humanized landscape: an
example from Yosemite National Park. Natural Areas Jour-
nal 18:231–236.
Wallin, D. O., F. J. Swanson, B. Marks, J. H. Cissel, and J.
Kertis. 1996. Comparison of managed and pre-settlement
landscape dynamics in forests of the Paciﬁc Northwest,
USA. Forest Ecology and Management 85:291–309.
White, P. S. 1979. Pattern, process, and natural disturbance
in vegetation. Botanical Review 45:229–297.
White, P. S., and J. Harrod. 1997. Disturbance and diversity
in a landscape context. Pages 128–159 in J. A. Bissonette,
editor. Wildlife and landscape ecology: effects of pattern
and scale. Springer-Verlag, New York, New York, USA.
White, P. S., and J. L. Walker. 1997. Approximating nature’s
variation: selecting and using reference information in res-
toration ecology. Restoration Ecology 5:338–349.
Wright, K. A., L. M. Chapman, and T. M. Jimerson. 1995.
Using historic range of vegetation variability to develop
desired conditions and model forest plan alternatives. Pages
258–266 in J. E. Thompson, compiler. Analysis in support
of ecosystem management; Analysis Workshop III. U.S.
Forest Service, Ecosystem Management Analysis Center,
Washington, D.C., USA.
Wu, J. G., and O. L. Loucks. 1995. From balance of nature
to hierarchical patch dynamics: a paradigm shift in ecology.
Quarterly Review of Biology 70:439–466.
