Fact Sheet: Forest Restoration Treatments and Fire Behavior 
 
Changing fire behavior is not the only reason to restore fire-adapted western forests: restoration 
treatments in these forests are intended to restore overall ecological health. Yet lowering the 
severity of wildfires is one of the most important of contemporary management goals in these 
forests. How do treatments affect fire behavior? 
 
Thinned Ponderosa Pine Forests Exhibit Less Severe Fire Behavior. Numerous observations 
of actual wildland fires, as well as computer modeling studies, have shown that fires burn less 
intensely in ponderosa pine forests with a lower density of trees.1 Breaking up contiguous fuels 
in tree canopies is especially important in reducing fire intensity. Fuels can be both horizontally 
and vertically contiguous, and it is important to break them up in both directions in order to 
prevent the spread of crown fires. 
 
These real-life prescribed burns set in treated and untreated ponderosa pine stands on the Kaibab 
National Forest in Arizona show how tree density affects fire behavior.  
 
 
 
 
 
Burn Only. An unthinned forest burns 
at a high level of intensity during a 
prescribed fire. Vertical “fuel ladders” 
readily allow flames to climb from the 
ground into tree crowns, while closely 
ranked trees allow fire to spread from 
crown to crown without much wind. 
 
 
 
 
Minimal Thinning. Thinning 
around large trees may spare them 
from fire, yet flames can still 
spread fairly readily into most tree 
crowns.
Ecological Restoration Institute/Northern Arizona University 
1

   
Full Restoration. Fire generally 
remains on the ground; it would take 
a very strong wind to carry it 
through these more dispersed tree 
crowns.
 
Fire is Never Entirely Predictable. A particular thinning treatment cannot guarantee a 
particular type of fire behavior. Southwestern forests are variable, and so are the conditions of 
wind, dryness, and topography under which fire burns. During the 2003 Hayman Fire, extremely 
strong winds at times pushed fire directly through thinned areas that significantly reduced fire 
behavior when winds were lighter.2 Yet lower tree densities generally lower fire severity and 
provide firefighters with suppression opportunities if needed. 
 
Treatments Can Themselves Increase Fire Danger. Slash left onsite after thinning can 
increase fire danger. It may need to be pile-burned or otherwise removed so that it does not 
contribute to fuel loads.3 
 
Prescribed Fire is an Important Element in Fuel Reduction. Prescribed fire after thinning can 
reduce wildfire severity for up to ten years and, when repeated, can maintain an open forest 
structure in the long term at low cost.4 
Ecological Restoration Institute/Northern Arizona University 
2
 
Treating for the Long Term is Most Cost Effective. 
Treatments that focus solely on fuels reduction and not 
holistic restoration don’t last – as trees and other 
plants grow back, fire danger grows again and more 
thinning becomes necessary. Holistic restoration 
treatments incorporate low-intensity fire, overall 
ecological health, and long-term planning. 
                                                
 
Treatments Work. During the 2003 Rodeo-Chediski 
Fire (left), a crown fire dropped to the ground when it 
reached an area (beyond the road in the right center) 
that had been thinned to reduce ground, ladder, and crown fuels. 
 
 
 
1 These studies are summarized in Working Paper 15: Effects of Forest Thinning Treatments on Fire Behavior. 
 
2 Finney, M. A., R. Bartlette, L. Bradshaw, K. Close, B. M. Collins, P. Gleason, W. M. Hao, P. Langowski, J. McGinely, C. W. 
McHugh, E. Martinson, P. N. Omi, W. Shepperd, and K. Zeller. 2003. Fire behavior, fuel treatments, and fire suppression on the 
Hayman Fire. Pp. 33-180 in Hayman Fire case study, ed. R. T. Graham. General technical report RMRS-114. Ogden, Utah: 
USDA Forest Service. www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs/rmrs_gtr114.html. 
 
3 Methods for treating slash are detailed in Working Paper 13: Treating Slash after Restoration Thinning. 

Ecological Restoration Institute/Northern Arizona University 
3
                                                                                                                                                             
 
4 Finney, M. A., C. W. McHugh, and I. C. Grenfell. 2005. Stand- and landscape-level effects of prescribed burning on two 
Arizona wildfires. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 35(7):1714-1722. 
 
 
