 
 
Campaign stand-in knows Joe Lieberman well 
By SETH MULLER 
Sun Staff Reporter 
11/19/2003 
Rebecca Lieberman, daughter of 
presidential candidate and U.S. Sen. Joe 
Lieberman, visited Flagstaff for the first 
time Tuesday to campaign on the behalf of 
her father.  
 
Greg Bryan/Arizona Daily Sun Rebecca Lieberman, 
representing her father Senator Joe Lieberman, awaits 
questions during the Northern Arizona Young 
Democrats presidential candidate forum at the duBois 
Center ballroom Tuesday. Seated next to Lieberman 
are Kevin Spidel, representative for Dennis Kucinich, 
and Hank Lacey, representative for Wesley Clark. To 
order this photo, go to http://photos.azdailysun.com  
 
And between now and the state's primary 
on Feb. 3, she said that it will not be her 
last.  
Rebecca Lieberman, 34, served as one of 
six candidate representatives at the 
Northern Arizona Young Democrats 
presidential campaign forum hosted at 
NAU's duBois ballroom -- an event that 
drew more than 200 people. She flew from 
her home in New York to attend.  
In an interview before the forum, Lieberman said that she plans to make a number of trips 
to Arizona, and specifically northern Arizona, as her father focuses his campaign on the 
state for its Feb. 3 primary.  
Arizona joins Oklahoma and South Carolina in that distinction, and Joe Lieberman is 
looking to those three states to give him a surge in the race. His daughter will focus her 
efforts in Arizona and Oklahoma as the primaries near.  
At the forum, Rebecca Lieberman joined state-level representatives for Gen. Wesley 
Clark, Sen. John Kerry, Gov. Howard Dean, U.S. Rep. Dennis Kucinich and Sen. John 
Edwards in addressing questions about regional and state issues like forest health, tribal 
sovereignty, immigration and higher education.  
Rebecca Lieberman toured an experimental forest site with members of NAU Ecological 
Restoration Institute during the day Tuesday, and she said that the science should drive 
the policies of forest restoration and "not the timber industry."  

She also used the question on forest health as a chance to knock the Bush 
Administration's Healthy Forests initiative as she explained the components of addressing 
forest health.  
"One part of it is clearing out Bush, and we really need to clear out Bush," said 
Lieberman, who referred to Bush's environmental policy as "Leave No Tree Behind."  
On the topic of tribal sovereignty, Rebecca Lieberman said her father has a strong interest 
in helping Native Americans and working to improve their situation.  
"My dad is committed to reversing the history of broken promises," she said, noting that 
Lieberman is the only candidate to meet with Arizona's intertribal council. Also, 
Lieberman visited the Navajo Nation earlier this year to meet with tribal officials.  
Kevin Spidel, representative for Dennis Kucininch, took the opportunity of the tribal 
sovereignty question to announce to the crowd that Kucinich would spend his 
Thanksgiving on the Navajo Nation with tribal President Joe Shirley, as part of a healing 
ceremony.  
Kucinich's anticipated visit is another sign that Democrats are looking to Arizona as they 
ramp up their campaigns. Dean paid a visit to Flagstaff this summer, and Lieberman's 
state representatives anticipate a visit to northern Arizona by their candidate in the 
coming weeks.  
Rebecca Lieberman has become well-acquainted with campaigning. She hit the trail for 
her father when he was the vice presidential candidate with Al Gore. This time around, 
she left Vote For America -- a non-profit group she founded in 2001 to raise voter turnout 
-- to help with her father's race.  
Reporter Seth Muller can be reached at 913-8607 or by e-mailing him at 
smuller@azdailysun.com  
 
