Presettlement Regeneration Patterns in a Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Stand
Alan S. White
Ecology, Vol. 66, No. 2. (Apr., 1985), pp. 589-594.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0012-9658%28198504%2966%3A2%3C589%3APRPIAS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-4
Ecology is currently published by Ecological Society of America.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/esa.html.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
The JSTOR Archive is a trusted digital repository providing for long-term preservation and access to leading academic
journals and scholarly literature from around the world. The Archive is supported by libraries, scholarly societies, publishers,
and foundations. It is an initiative of JSTOR, a not-for-profit organization with a mission to help the scholarly community take
advantage of advances in technology. For more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
http://www.jstor.org
Fri Mar 14 17:56:39 2008

Ecology, 66(2), 1985, pp. 589-594 
0 1985 by the Ecological Society of America 
PRESETTLEMENT REGENERATION PATTERNS IN A  
SOUTHWESTERN PONDEROSA PINE STAND1  
ALAN S. WHITE  
School of Forestry, Northern Arizona CTniversity, Flagstaft; Arizona 8601 1 USA  
Abstract. Tree stems 2 106 yr old (i.e., established before significant European influence in this 
area) in a 7.3-ha old-growth ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) forest in northern Arizona were aged 
and mapped. Age structure analysis showed that successful establishment of ponderosa pine was 
infrequent. The periods without successful establishment could be quite long, as suggested by four 
consecutive decades in which only two surviving trees were established. 
The stems were strongly aggregated, as measured with nearest neighbor analysis, and groups were 
visually distinct in the field. Most of the stems occurred in groups of three or more, with group size 
ranging from 3 to 44 stems and area occupied by a group ranging from 0.02 to 0.29 ha. Ages of stems 
within groups were variable, the most homogeneous group having a range of 33 yr and the least having 
a range of 268 yr. 
The data are not consistent with the commonly held view that southwestern ponderosa pine occurs 
in even-aged groups and that each group became established following the demise of the group 
previously occupying the site. Instead, it seems more likely that seedlings became established when 
one or two trees within the group died, the additional fuel surrounding the dead trees causing an 
intensely burned spot in the otherwise low-intensity fires that were frequent in the area. The hot spot 
would create a potential seedbed for pine by eliminating, at least temporarily, the competing grasses 
on that small area. This decreased competition, in conjunction with adequate seed production and 
favorable moisture conditions in the spring and early summer, may well have been critical for pon- 
derosa pine establishment. The relative infrequency of all these events occuning in the necessary 
sequence could explain the erratic age structure data from this area. 
Key words: age structure; Arizona; fire; old-growth stands; ponderosa pzne; Pinus ponderosa; re-
generation; spatial distribution. 
casionally, how were appropriate site conditions gen- 
Natural establishment ofponderosa pine (Pinuspon-
erated, especially if an abundant understory of grasses 
derosa Laws.) seedlings in the Southwest is rarely suc- 
existed? Cooper (1 960, 196 1) hypothesized that suit- 
cessful (Pearson 1923, Heidmann et al. 1982). This is 
able seedbeds were created when a group of old, large 
apparently because the factors necessary for successful 
pines died simultaneously and produced enough fuel 
establishment are relatively rare themselves and sel- 
to create hot spots in the otherwise low-intensity fires 
dom occur in the necessary sequence. Problems in nat- 
that frequently swept through these forests. He used 
ural regeneration include erratic seed production (Lar- 
this reasoning to explain the mosaic of even-aged 
son and Schubert 1970), annual seedling-killing drought 
patches of ponderosa pine he observed in the White 
conditions in May and June (Pearson 1950, Schubert 
Mountains of eastern Arizona. The pine seedlings that 
1974), competition for moisture by perennial bunch- 
became established on such areas would not experience 
grasses (Larson and Schubert 1969), and various site- 
the intense moisture competition that pine seedlings 
related factors, such as frost heaving (Heidmann 1976). 
in grass-covered areas would, and consequently would 
Despite these problems, seedling establishment and 
have a greater chance for survival. 
development to maturity must have occurred frequent- 
The purpose of the present study was to analyze the 
ly enough to allow perpetuation of ponderosa pine for- 
age structure and stem spatial distribution in an old- 
ests. Historical accounts indicate that the pine forests 
growth ponderosa pine stand in northern Arizona and 
were widespread in the Southwest at the time of early 
make inferences from that analysis concerning the pre- 
exploration and settlement (Cooper 1960). These for- 
settlement regeneration patterns that gave rise to the 
ests were typically characterized as open and park-like 
old-growth stands we see today. If Cooper's (1960, 
with an understory rich in grasses (Cooper 1960). Al- 
196 1) hypothesis were valid for this area, old pine trees 
though it is difficult to attach quantitative values to 
of relatively similar ages could be expected to occur 
such a description, the description implies that these 
together in small patches. 
forests were probably not as dense as today's forests; 
STUDYAREA 
nonetheless, some reproduction had to occur for these 
stands to exist. Given that adequate seed production 
The 7.3-ha study site was located in the Gus Pear- 
and favorable moisture conditions had to occur oc- 
son Natural Area (GPNA) about 15 km northwest of 
Flagstaff, Arizona. The area was chosen because it is 
Manuscript received 29 July 1983; revised 20 February 
relatively undisturbed, is typical of many sites in the 
1984; accepted 2 1 February 1984. 
ponderosa pine zone in northern Arizona, and has long- 
I 

590 
ALAN S. WHITE 
Ecology, Vol. 66, No. 2 
term records of tree mortality. The study area is at 
2255 m elevation with a yearly average of 57.4 cm of 
precipitation (Avery et al. 1976), which typically falls 
as snow in the winter months and as rain in July and 
August (Schubert 1974). The average growing season 
is 94 d (Avery et al. 1976). The soils are montmoril- 
lonite clay loams of the Brolliar series which developed 
from late Tertiary lava flows (Avery et al. 1976). 
The vegetation is dominated by ponderosa pine in 
the overstory and perennial bunchgrasses in the under- 
story. The pattern of overstory vegetation is a mosaic 
with scattered clumps of old-growth trees separated by 
dense thickets of sapling-and pole-sized trees which 
originated primarily in 19 19. These dense thickets are 
common in northern Arizona and apparently devel- 
oped due to an unusual set of circumstances. A large 
seed crop was produced in 19 18, followed by very fa- 
vorable moisture conditions in 19 13 and subsequent 
years (Pearson 1923). Survival of these seedlings was 
probably much greater than in presettlement days due 
to many years of heavy grazing, which reduced com- 
petition from grasses, and due to fire suppression ef- 
forts, which reduced the thinning effect of frequent 
fires. (See Madany and West [I9831 for a discussion of 
the relative importance of these two factors.) This dense 
reproduction is not present, however, beneath the can- 
opy of the old-growth trees, possibly because of the 
large litter buildup that occurs under these old trees in 
the absence of frequent fires. 
The tree population of interest was defined by age. 
Only trees r 106 yr old (a center date of 1875 or earlier) 
were used because they had become established prior 
to any substantial influence by the early settlers, who 
amved in the Flagstaff area in the late 1870's and 
1880's (Cline 1976). Identification of this population 
required an indirect approach because it was not pos- 
sible to age all the trees in the study area. First, all trees 
237 cm dbh were chosen for initial study on the as- 
sumption that the majority of trees r 106 yr old would 
have reached that size. Second, any trees <37 cm dbh 
that showed signs of the bark becoming yellow were 
also chosen for initial study. This second criterion was 
based on the common observation in the Southwest 
that ponderosa pine bark changes color from black to 
yellow as the tree ages (Pearson 1950). 
All trees meeting one of the above criteria were cored 
at "30 cm above ground level. The cores were then 
sent to the University of Arizona Laboratory of Tree- 
Ring Research for aging using correlation techniques. 
Use of these techniques avoids the inaccuracies of di- 
rect ring counts due to false rings and locally absent 
rings (Stokes and Smiley 1968). From the age data, all 
trees r 106 yr old were chosen for further analysis. 
Although some trees r 106 yr old were undoubtedly 
missed by the sampling criteria, the age data supported 
the assumption that the vast majority of trees r 106 
yr old in the study area were included in the survey. 
Approximately 73% of the trees 237 cm dbh and 49% 
of the trees <37 cm dbh with yellow bark were r 106 
yr old; of 24 randomly chosen trees between 25 and 
37 cm dbh without yellow bark, none was r 106 yr 
old. The very large trees that were too big to core or 
that had rotten cores were also included in the study 
on the assumption that they met the age criteria. 
Next, this population of trees originating prior to 
European settlement was mapped. Each group of three 
or more trees was mapped by starting with one tree 
and measuring the distance and direction from it to an 
adjacent member of the group. The process was re- 
peated until all members of the group had been mapped. 
By actually constructing the map to scale as the mea- 
surements were made, an immediate check on the ac- 
curacy of the map was possible. The actual distance 
between the first tree mapped and the last tree mapped 
was compared to the distance determined from the 
map. If the difference was r 1.2 m actual distance, the 
whole group was mapped again to reduce the error. 
The result was an accurate map of each group of trees. 
Each group was related to an existing grid system in 
the area by measuring the distance and direction from 
one member of the group to a marked comer in the 
grid system. By putting all these groups onto a com- 
posite map using the grid system as frame of reference, 
the actual position of each tree was accurately por- 
trayed in relation to all other trees r 106 yr old in the 
study area. The composite map was completed by add- 
ing the positions of trees occuring singly or in pairs by 
measuring distances and directions from these trees to 
grid system comers or to already-mapped trees. 
The area occupied by each group of three or more 
trees was defined roughly by the area of influence of 
the group. This was easy to discern in most cases, be- 
cause the dense thickets resulting from the prolific 19 19 
seed year had boundaries corresponding very closely 
to the canopy drip line of the larger, older trees. This 
drip line perimeter was mapped in the same way as 
were the trees in each group, i.e., by measuring dis- 
tances and directions between points along the perim- 
eter. The same degree of accuracy was required as with 
the individual tree mapping. The area of each group 
was determined from the map by tracing the perimeter 
of the mapped group with a compensating polarimeter. 
This was done three times for each group and the area 
was determined from the average of the three readings. 
In no case did the three readings differ by more than 
3.5 units (equivalent on the ground to "0.001 ha). 
The spatial distribution of stems in the entire study 
area, and of stems within each group of three or more 
individuals, was determined using the nearest neighbor 
method of Clark and Evans (1 954). This method com- 
pares the actual average distance from trees to their 
nearest neighbor to the expected average distance if the 
individuals were distributed randomly; this ratio will 
be referred to hereafter simply as R. A random distri- 

PRESETTLEMENT PONDEROSA PINE REGENERATION 
AGE-CLASS MIDPOINT ( y  r ) 
FIG.1 
Percent of total number (236) of aged trees 2 106 yr old occumng in 10-yr age-classes on entire study area. Number 
above each bar is the actual number of trees in that age-class. 
bution would yield R = 1, whereas an aggregated dis- 
available for 236 of these 268 trees; of the other 32 
tribution would yield R < 1 and a regular distribution 
trees, 27 had rotten cores and 5 were too big (>10 1.6 
would yield R > 1. This method has proven quite re- 
cm diameter at 30 cm above the ground) for our in- 
liable in determining spatial distributions (e.g., see 
crement borers to reach the pith. These 32 trees were 
Goodall and West 1979). The major objection to use 
included in the analysis because a count of the available 
of this technique has been in situations where density 
rings or their large size left no doubt that they were at 
had to be estimated from the distances themselves (Pie- 
least 106 yr old. 
IOU 1969). This was not a problem in my study because 
Age structure by 10-yr age-classes is depicted in Fig. 
actual density was known and did not have to be es- 
1. Almost half the trees (49.2%) were between 14 1 and 
timated. 
170 yr old with a considerable drop on either side of 
this peak. A noticeable gap occurred between 19 1 and 
230 yr; only two trees had ages in this range. Trees 
were quite evenly distributed between 230 and 4 10 yr. 
The original population sampled included 373 trees, 
That 60% of the years had no trees established in them 
of which 268 trees were r 106 yr old. Actual ages were 
illustrates the sporadic nature of the age data. 
TABLE1. Characteristics of the 16 spatially distinct groups of three or more trees recognized in the field 
Group 
Number of 
Group 
Density* 
Age 
Range of 
number 
trees 
area (ha) 
(stems/ha) 
(2 i SD) 
ages 
R‘t 
* Density equals number of trees in a group divided by the area occupied by that group (calculations were done before area 
was rounded). 
t Nearest neighbor ratio of Clark and Evans (1954); see Methods for explanation. 
$ These groups occurred adjacent to the boundaries of the study area. Consequently, number of trees and group area may 
be greater than indicated. 
5 Number in parentheses refers to number of trees in each group for which age was available. 
Significantly (P< .05) different from 1.00 using test described by Clark and Evans (1954). 

592 
ALAN S. WHITE 
Ecology, Vol. 66, No. 2 
The distribution of stems r 106 yr old over the entire 
area was strongly aggregated, as indicated by an R of 
0.58. As mentioned in the Study Area Description, 
these groups were easily recognized in the field. Ap- 
proximately 88% of the trees r 106 yr old occurred in 
groups of three or more trees, with the groups occu- 
pying 22% of the 7.3-ha study area. A minimum group 
size of three was chosen because these were the smallest 
groups to exhibit characteristics oflarger groups, name- 
ly the lack of 19 19 regeneration under the canopy and 
a relatively well-developed understory of grasses and 
forbs. The remaining 78% of the area was densely 
stocked with sapling- and pole-sized stems and the 32 
older trees not occumng in groups. 
The 16 recognized groups differed in several respects 
(Table 1). Number of trees in a group ranged from 3 
to 44 and area occupied varied between 0.02 and 0.29 
ha, resulting in densities between 62 and 285 stems/ha. 
Average age within a group ranged from 14 1 to 382 yr 
and the range of ages within a group varied between 
33 and 268 yr. The wide range of ages in each group 
was typically due to several different 10-yr age-classes 
being represented. For example, groups containing at 
least 10 aged trees had a minimum of 3, and as many 
as 12, 10-yr age-classes represented. 
Spatial distribution within a group varied greatly 
(Table I), the R values indicating aggregated, random, 
and regular patterns. However, only one of the values 
(for Group 4) was significantly different from 1 (using 
the test described by Clark and Evans [1954]). Whether 
this indicated a truly random distribution of stems 
within each group or was a reflection of the small num- 
ber of stems within each group could not be deter- 
mined. The maps of each group were also inspected to 
determine if trees of similar ages occurred together 
within the group, regardless of the distribution pattern. 
No evidence was found that indicated that these groups 
were composed of smaller groups with more homo- 
geneous age structures. 
The 32 trees not occumng in groups of three or more 
trees were found throughout the study area. These trees 
ranged in age from 106 to 406 yr, virtually the same 
range as was found for the trees occumng in groups 
(Table 1). 
DISCUSSION
AND CONCLUSIONS 
The age structure data (Fig. 1) illustrate the great 
variation in successful establishment of ponderosa pine 
over time. Part of the variation is likely due to erratic 
seed production in presettlement years similar to the 
erratic seed production reported for this century (Lar- 
son and Schubert 1970). 
Moisture could also have been limiting. To examine 
this hypothesis, the dendroclimatological record for the 
Flagstaff area (Drew 1972) was used to compare the 
best represented ages (141-170 yr) and the least rep- 
resented ages (19 1-230 yr). Age at the 30 cm level was 
assumed to be between 1 and 10 yr. Thus, the "good 
years" were 180 1-1 840 and the "bad years" were 174 1- 
1790. No clear correlations were found. The good pe- 
riod was characterized by three decades of below-nor- 
ma1 precipitation, followed by one decade of above- 
normal precipitation. In contrast, the bad period had 
two decades of above-normal precipitation followed 
by three decades of below-normal precipitation. The 
lack of correlation may be because dendroclimatology 
is based on relating radial growth of mature trees to 
several precipitation periods during and immediately 
prior to the year of growth (Fritts et al. 1964). Precip- 
itation during the critical period (May and June) for 
most young pine seedlings in the Southwest, however, 
may not correlate well with the precipitation periods 
that are well correlated with radial growth of mature 
trees. 
Another possible explanation for the erratic age data 
is lack of good regeneration sites. That only 22% of the 
study area was occupied by old-growth trees supports 
the idea that only limited "safe sites" (sensu Harper 
1977) were available for regeneration prior to Euro- 
pean settlement. This was reinforced by the lack of 
evidence that earlier groups occupied much of the area 
between current groups (A. S. White, personal ohser- 
vation). Indeed, although numerous snags, stumps, and 
downed trees existed throughout the study area, the 
majority of such material seemed to occur around ex- 
isting groups or around isolated trees (A. S. White, 
personal observation). 
As described in many historical accounts (Cooper 
1960), the area between groups in presettlement times 
was most likely occupied by grasses, which present a 
formidable bamer to successful pine seedling estab- 
lishment. Cooper (1961) hypothesized that following 
the demise of existing groups, a relatively high-inten- 
sity surface fire created a suitable seedbed for pine 
seedlings to become established, given adequate seed 
production and moisture conditions. This resulted in 
the mosaic of even-aged groups of ponderosa pine in 
the White Mountains of Arizona. 
In contrast to the pattern observed by Cooper in the 
White Mountains, my within-group age data indicate 
a wide range of ages within a group. A possible expla- 
nation is that rather than the whole group dying si- 
multaneously, one or two trees within the group died 
and contributed enough additional fuel to a portion of 
the area to result in a high-intensity fire in that small 
area. The area thus created would typically be quite 
small and only capable of supporting one or two mature 
trees. 
Several additional questions can be posed concern- 
ing mortality. In particular, are certain ages of trees 
not represented because seedlings established in that 
period of time were eliminated by some mortality agent 
before the seedlings reached maturity? Probably the 
best information available in this region on mortality 
agents in presettlement times concerns fire. Dieterich 
(1980) documented the fire history of Chimney Spring, 

593 
April 1985 
PRESETTLEMENT PONDEROSA PINE REGENERATION 
only 6 km from the study area. His published fire fre- 
quency data indicate that during the previously noted 
good establishment years (1801-1840) the fire fre- 
quency was one fire every 2.2 yr. whereas during the 
bad establishment years (1 74 1-1 790) the frequency was 
one fire every 4.2 yr. Although at first glance this might 
seem to be an anomaly, perhaps the more frequent fires 
were less damaging to newly established seedlings be- 
cause of less fuel buildup between fires. The difference 
in fuel buildup between fires at different frequencies 
could be great if old-growth groups were breaking down 
one or two trees at a time, rather than simultaneously, 
because the remaining live trees could be adding fuel 
to the small areas where seedlings were becoming es- 
tablished. 
Establishment of ponderosa pine during presettle- 
ment times in the GPNA probably occurred as follows. 
First, adequate seed production was necessary; this 
eliminates years where virtually no seed was produced, 
but no data are available to suggest what the minimum 
number of seeds might have been in presettlement 
times. Second, the seeds had to germinate in an area 
where there was a reasonable chance of success. This 
required areas without significant grass competition. 
Most likely the grasses would have been eliminated 
only in small areas within existing clumps of mature 
trees where one or two individuals died and created a 
patch of heavy fuels that would bum intensely. Third, 
the years immediately following germination had to 
have sufficient precipitation in spring and early sum- 
mer so that the young seedlings would not die from 
drought. Fourth, the seedlings had to avoid mortality 
during their early years. The greatest threat was prob- 
ably from fire if fuel loads within the young patch of 
seedlings became too great, but certainly other factors, 
such as frost heaving (Heidmann 1976), also played a 
role. There is little evidence, direct or indirect, that 
suggests widespread mortality of ponderosa pine after 
the early, sensitive years. These four factors could have 
maintained the old-growth pattern observed in the 
GPNA today. Since the 32 trees that currently exist 
singly or in pairs were apparently once part of larger 
groups, the same four factors apply to them. 
The data from this study may have some implica- 
tions for wilderness and natural area management and 
timber management. For example, adequacy of natural 
regeneration in ponderosa pine natural areas may have 
to be judged over many decades. In timber manage- 
ment, a shelterwood cut may mimic natural conditions 
better than a clearcut, the success depending in part on 
whether or not fire is used as a site preparation tool. 
Regardless of whether the proposed regeneration 
pattern of ponderosa pine in presettlement times proves 
to be true, the age structure of small, individual groups 
at the GPNA is contrary to the commonly held view 
that these groups are even aged (Schubert 1974). The 
range of ages within many of the examined groups is 
simply too great for even a very liberal interpretation 
of the term even aged. One possible reason why the 
data in this study do not concur with Cooper's (1960, 
196 1) findings in the White Mountains is that the two 
areas represent quite different sets of environmental 
conditions. For example, precipitation patterns are dif- 
ferent. Summer rains tend to start earlier in the White 
Mountains than in the Flagstaff area (Schubert 1974). 
The influence of environmental conditions on regen- 
eration patterns could help explain why ponderosa pine 
does not have the same types of age structures and 
stem distribution patterns throughout its range. The 
concept of the southwestern ponderosa pine forest as 
a mosaic of groups (Schubert 1974) is upheld by the 
study of stem spatial distribution, but the age data 
indicate that groups in at least one area are not even 
aged. 
This paper benefited greatly from my discussions with sev- 
eral colleagues, especially W. Wallace Covington. Financial 
support was provided by the Organized Research Fund and 
the School of Forestry of Northern Arizona University. Per- 
mission to use the area and access to records of the area were 
provided by the Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experi- 
ment Station, Flagstaff, Arizona. Age determinations were 
made by the Laboratory of Tree-Ring Research, University 
of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, through the cooperation of Mar- 
vin Stokes. I am also grateful to the many students who put 
in long hours in the field making many tedious measurements. 
Helpful reviews of the manuscript were provided by W. Wal- 
lace Covington, Charles W. Cooper, Robert K. Peet. and an 
anonymous reviewer. 
Avery, Charles C., Frederic R. Larson, and Gilbert H. Schu- 
bert. 1976. Fifty-year records of virgin stand development 
in southwestern ponderosa pine. United States Forest Ser- 
vice General Technical Report RM-22. 
Clark, Philip J., and Francis C. Evans. 1954. Distance to 
nearest neighbor as a measure of spatial relationships in 
populations. Ecology 35:445-453. 
Cline, Platt. 1976. They came to the mountain: the story of 
Flagstaffs beginnings. Northern Arizona University with 
Northland Press, Flagstaff, Arizona, USA. 
Cooper, Charles F. 1960. Changes in vegetation, structure, 
and growth of southwestern pine forests since white settle- 
ment. Ecological Monographs 30: 129-164. 
-. 
196 1. Pattern in ponderosa pine forests. Ecology 42: 
493-499. 
Dieterich, John H. 1980. Chimney Spring forest fire history. 
United States Forest Service Research Paper RM-220. 
Drew, Linda G., editor. 1972. Tree-ring chronologies of 
western America. 11. Arizona, New Mexico, Texas. Chro- 
nology Series I, Laboratory of Tree-Ring Research, Uni- 
versity of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona. USA. 
Fritts, Harold C., David G. Smith, and Richard L. Holmes. 
1964. Tree-ring evidence for climatic changes in western 
North America: from 1500 A.D. to 1940 A.D. 1964 Annual 
Report to the United States Weather Bureau. Department 
of Commerce, Washington, D.C., USA. 
Goodall, David W., and Neil E. West. 1979. A comparison 
of techniques for assessing dispersion patterns. vegetatio 
40:15-27. 
Harper, John L. 1977. Population biology of plants. Aca- 
demic Press, New York, New York, USA. 
Heidmann, L. J. 1976. Frost heaving of tree seedlings: a 

594 
ALAN S. WHITE 
Ecology, Vol. 66, No. 2 
literature review of causes and possible control. United 
States Forest Service General Technical Report RM-21. 
Heidmann, L. J., Thomas N. Johnsen, Jr., Quinten W. Cole, 
and George Cullum. 1982. Establishing natural regener- 
ation of ponderosa pine in central Arizona. Journal of For- 
estry 80:77-79. 
Larson, M. M., and Gilbert H. Schubert. 1969. Root com- 
petition between ponderosa pine seedlings and grass. United 
States Forest Service Research Paper RM-54. 
Larson, M. M., and Gilbert H. Schubert. 1970. Cone crops 
of ponderosa pine in central Arizona. including the influ- 
ence of Abert squirrels. United States Forest Service Re- 
search Paper RM-58. 
Madany, Michael H., and Neil E. West. 1983. Livestock 
grazing-fire regime interactions within montane forests of 
Zion National Park, Utah. Ecology 64:661-667. 
Pearson, G.A. 1923. Natural reproduction ofwestern yellow 
pine in the Southwest. Department Bulletin Number 1105, 
United States Department of Agriculture, Washington. D.C., 
USA. 
-. 
1950. Management of ponderosa pine in the South- 
west. United States Forest Service Agricultural Monograph 
Number 6. 
Pielou, E. C. 1969. An introduction to mathematical ecol- 
ogy. Wiley-Interscience, New York, New York, USA. 
Schubert, Gilbert H. 1974. Silvicultureofsouthwestern pon-
derosa pine: the status of our knowledge. United States 
Forest Service Research Paper RM-123. 
Stokes, Marvin A,, and Terah L. Smiley. 1968. An intro- 
duction to tree-ring dating. University of Chicago Press, 
Chicago, Illinois, USA. 
