Copyright © 2007 by the author(s). Published here under license by the Resilience Alliance.
Egan, D. 2007. Conserving and restoring old growth in frequent-fire forests: cycles of disruption and
recovery. Ecology and Society 12(2): 23. [online] URL: http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art23/
Guest Editorial, part of a Special Feature on The Conservation and Restoration of Old Growth in
Frequent-fire Forests of the American West
Conserving and Restoring Old Growth in Frequent-fire Forests: Cycles of
Disruption and Recovery
Dave Egan
ABSTRACT. I provide a synthesis of the papers in the Special Issue, The Conservation and Restoration
of Old Growth in Frequent-fire Forests of the American West. These papers—the product of an Old Growth
Writing Workshop, held at Northern Arizona University in Flagstaff, Arizona on 18–19 April 2006—
represent the ideas of 25 workshop participants who argue for a new attitude toward managing old growth
in the frequent-fire forests of the American West. Unlike the lush, old-growth rainforests of the Pacific
Northwest, the dry, frequent-fire forests of the western United States evolved with surface fires that disturbed
the system with such regularity that young trees were almost always killed. When saplings did survive,
they grew beyond the harm of frequent surface fires and, ultimately, attained the characteristics that define
old growth in these systems. This system worked well, producing old-growth trees in abundance, until the
onset of Euro-American settlement in the mid- to late-19th century. The arrival of these settlers put in motion
an interplay of unprecedented social, political, economic, and ecological forces (e.g., removal of Native
Americans and their fire-based land management systems, overgrazing of the understory, aggressive
logging, establishment of federal land management agencies, implementation of a federal fire suppression
policy). These activities have culminated in 1) overly dense forested ecosystems that are now on the verge
of collapse because of catastrophic fires (i.e., crown fire at the landscape level; the Rodeo-Chediski Fire)
and insect outbreaks, 2) the emergence of conservation-minded environmental legislation and policy, and
3) greater levels of interaction between citizens, federal agencies, and fire-prone landscapes. Recognizing
the tenuous ecological situation of these forests, restoration ecologists, foresters, and others have developed
ways to return historic ecological processes and lower tree densities to these forests. However, their efforts
are not without challenges, including working with communities and citizens, serving as a bridge between
entrenched bureaucracies (i.e., federal agencies and environmental groups), balancing both ecological and
economic interests, and producing new applied technologies and science-based policy to advance
conservation and restoration efforts aimed at preserving and developing old growth within a healthy forest
environment.
Key Words: adaptive cycle, definitions of old growth, forest management, forest policy, old-growth forests,
social–ecological system
INTRODUCTION
In April 2006, 25 people participated in a 2-day
workshop at Northern Arizona University in
Flagstaff, Arizona. The purpose of the meeting was
to discuss and debate the history and future of old
growth in frequent-fire forests of the American
West. The results of their interactions are the eight
papers in this special issue of Ecology & Society:
The Conservation and Restoration of Old Growth
in Frequent-fire Forests of the American West. In
these papers, the authors examine the ecological,
social, and political histories that have shaped these
forest ecosystems; predict how these systems will
react to future conditions; and suggest means of
restoring these systems so as to preserve and
develop their old-growth features. Collectively,
they make a case for taking a new look at managing
for old growth—one that recognizes the regional
and climatic differences in forest ecosystems and
the effects those variations have on disturbance
processes, such as surface fire, and, consequently,

Ecology and Society 12(2): 23
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art23/
on forest structure and composition; one that
understands that, in many dry western forests,
catastrophic crown fire, not logging, is now the
greatest threat to old growth; one that appreciates
the need for a tempered, but active, hands-on
management approach; and one that recognizes that
we may have the technical means to make a
difference in the forests, but we must do a better job
of educating and social marketing to change
peoples’ behaviors.
In order to provide a synthesis of the papers in this
special issue, I will use the adaptive cycle model of
Holling and Gunderson (2002) as a guide to examine
the following points:
1. Defining old growth.
 
2. Social practices and policy changes.
 
3. Technical challenges.
DEFINING OLD GROWTH
The authors of these papers tread lightly when it
comes to defining old growth, and for good reason.
Although simple impressions of old-growth forests
as large trees in an undisturbed forest may exist in
the public’s mind, the truth of the matter is that
answering the question, “What is an old-growth
forest?” is much more complex. One thing that all
the authors agree on is that, in these frequent-fire
forests, old growth does not mean trees or stands or
patches or landscapes that were without natural
disturbances.
In their paper, Merrill Kaufmann and his colleagues
provide definitions of old growth from several
sources, including international ones, but ultimately
conclude that the differences within the different
frequent-fire forests of the western United States
“attest to the complexity of describing or defining
old growth in frequent-fire forests of the western
United States.” Nevertheless, they do provide a list
of essential structural features of old growth in
frequent-fire forests in Table 1 of their paper. Dan
Binkley and his colleagues provide a pictorial
version of old-growth features in Figure 1 of their
paper, and Carl Fiedler and his co-authors provide
a list of minimum stand structural requirements for
old-growth ponderosa pine. It seems fair to say that
these authors, although recognizing that any
definition of old growth will have to be flexible
because we are working with complex ecosystems,
suggest that old growth in frequent-fire forested
systems has the following characteristics:
 
G 
Old, but not always large trees.
 
G 
Modest amounts of large, woody debris
(either standing snags or downed logs).
 
G 
Low tree density and grassy openings.
 
G 
Slightly interlocking canopies.
 
G 
Clumpy to random tree distribution.
 
G 
High levels of understory biomass and
diversity.
 
G 
Slow nutrient cycling.
 
G 
Low levels of tree regeneration.
 
G 
Patchiness at the landscape level.
 
 Seen through the lens of an adaptive cycle, these
forests in their pre-European settlement state might
be defined as having a high level of connectedness
among the controlling variables, which were trees
at the slowest level; understory biomass and surface
fire, along with small-scale insect outbreaks, at the
intermediate level; and, in more moist systems,
stand-replacing fire and extensive insect outbreaks
at the fast level. These systems also had relatively
low levels of potential because frequent fire
consumed much of the system biomass, leaving and
encouraging what biomass that did accumulate to
do so in the slowest variable—older, larger trees.
Finally, the resilience of these systems tended to be
high because the regularity of low-severity surface
fires and the evolutionary physiological adaptations
of the trees to fire (e.g., thick bark, elevated
branches) combined to leave the ecosystem’s legacy
material (remember connection) intact and
operational, forestalling any collapse of the system.
As many of the authors note (especially Scott Abella
and his colleagues), today’s frequent-fire forests are
dramatically different systems. Instead of being
resilient, healthy, and dynamic, today’s systems are
rigid and homogeneous (Duncan 2003), with levels
of high potential (e.g., too much resource (biomass)

Ecology and Society 12(2): 23
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art23/
accumulated in small-diameter trees), which makes
them especially vulnerable to disturbances, even the
low-severity fires that once were an integral process
within the system. Crown fires and extensive insect
outbreaks, which can now happen relatively easily
in these overstocked systems (e.g., the Rodeo-
Chediski Fire and the numerous other wildfires that
now occur annually throughout the western United
States), overwhelm the legacy/remember connection
of the adaptive cycle, destroy old growth, and make
conservation and restoration of old growth more
difficult and more unlikely.
SOCIAL PRACTICES AND POLICY
CHANGES
As the papers by Sandra Murphy and her colleagues,
Victoria Yazzie, and Diane Vosick and her co-
authors point out, the frequent-fire ecosystems of
the American West, and the limited old growth they
contain, exist in social–ecological systems (SES;
Walker et al. 2002). As such, these SES each have
a history of decisions at various levels (national vs.
local, institutional vs. personal) that have affected
them from the very moment that humans first came
to populate these ecosystems. Both Murphy and her
co-authors and Yazzie focus on this history—the
former with a largely Euro-American perspective,
whereas Yazzie’s outlook is decidedly Native
American. Both of these histories point out the
social practices that helped make and sustain
(Native American land management practices), and
then undermine (logging, overgrazing, fire
suppression) the well-being of old growth in the
frequent-fire forests of the American West. They
also describe the adaptive measures that were taken
at different points in time to “correct” problems in
the systems (e.g., utilitarianism, Progressive Era
reliance on experts, judicial decisions about Indian
property rights, environmentalism, Land Ethic,
New Forestry). Each of these papers could have
outlined as management eras that illustrate adaptive
cycles, much as Lance Gunderson and his
colleagues did in their discussion of Florida’s
Everglades (Gunderson et al. 2002, Fig. 12-1), or as
an historical narrative (Cronon 1992) or an
historical ecology (Crumley and Marquardt 1987).
Vosick and her colleagues describe and analyze old-
growth protection policies and legislation in the
United States since the 1960s, and provide
alternative goals and objectives to today’s public
perceptions of old growth, federal land management
policies, and a culture of bureaucracy. Their
analysis suggests that the current system is
floundering in a rigidity trap (Holling et al. 2002),
i.e., within a system that has high potential, high
connectedness, and high resilience. In this situation,
federal policymakers, federal agency bureaucrats
and other personnel, and litigious environmental
groups are locked into a system that focuses on
single-species protection and expends excessive
energies preparing or defending appeals and
lawsuits. In such an arrangement of fear and
mistrust, there is little room for innovation or
constructive dialogue, and little chance for passing
new legislation to correct problems unless it is
spurred by a crisis situation that resets the adaptive
cycle (e.g., the Healthy Forest Restoration Act of
2003). These authors suggest that “a necessary
approach to build confidence in management
decisions will be to bring stakeholders into
management discussions through collaboration.”
Instances where a collaborative approach has been
implemented (e.g., the White Mountains Stewardship
Contract, and various smaller collaboration projects
in New Mexico) have resulted in moving past the
rigidity of the typical federal agency/environmentalist
interaction, allowing citizens on all sides to interact
to solve common problems (Abrams and Burns, in
press; Moote et al., in press). This type of social
marketing (i.e., asking a group of people to change
their behavior in return for something they value;
Social Marketing Institute 2007) may be the way to
move people beyond awareness of their social–
ecological problems and give them a format for
taking voluntary actions that produce both
individual and community benefits.
Vosick and her counterparts also emphasize the
need to move restoration efforts beyond the
wildland–urban interface into outlying regions,
including designated wilderness and backcountry
areas. Such a shift will require a change in emphasis
and strategy, and will undoubtedly raise questions
about active work in areas that are otherwise
passively managed.
TECHNICAL CHALLENGES
As Vosick and her colleagues point out, the timber
industry either no longer exists or is a state of
transition in many areas where frequent-fire forests
occur in the American West. Adaptation, new
technologies, and entrepreneurial innovation are
now needed to move beyond a reliance on large, old

Ecology and Society 12(2): 23
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art23/
trees as a source of income and profit. When using
timber from public lands, today’s wood products
industry must increasingly rely on the byproducts
of restoration efforts, namely small-diameter trees
along with some larger-diameter thinnings. The use
of smaller-diameter material means marketing and
producing 
products, 
such 
as 
pellets 
for
woodburning stoves, other biomass-based energy
products, oriented-strand board and mulches, that
were not part of the industry a decade ago. In the
forests, as Fielder and his colleagues describe, new
techniques for harvesting and felling in and around
old growth are required in order to ensure that not
only will old growth be preserved, but that
remaining trees can develop into old growth.
The variables that may promote these transitions,
both in the forest and the factory, occur at many
different scales and speeds (e.g., international,
national, and regional wood products markets;
agency and private training of foresters and loggers;
diameter cap regulations; government support and
subsidies; local and regional collaboration; rising
costs of energy), and make it difficult to predict
whether a sustainable course of action will emerge.
It may be that we have the technical means to make
a difference in the forests, but that we must do a
better job of educating and social marketing to
change peoples’ behaviors—a slower, more
voluntary approach. It may be that some crisis (e.
g., energy needs) will be needed to move the system
into another state—a faster, but more difficult
scenario. Or it may be that some combination of
both will be the future.
CONCLUSION
The future of frequent-fire forests in the American
West remains uncertain, but the papers presented in
this special issue collectively suggest an alternative
path toward making them more ecologically
sustainable. We know that, globally, more and more
fire-dependent ecosystems are degraded or very
degraded, with fire behaving much differently than
it did in the past (Shlisky et al. 2007). This study of
frequent-fire forests in the western United States
may then serve as an example of what happens when
we allow the resilience of such ecosystems to
disintegrate, and what it will take within an SES to
help put them, and the human communities that
interact with them, back on course.
Responses to this article can be read online at:
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art23/responses/
LITERATURE CITED
Abrams, J., and S. Burns. In press. Case study of
community 
stewardship 
success: 
the White
Mountain 
Stewardship 
Contract. 
Ecological
Restoration Institute White Paper. Ecological
Restoration Institute, Flagstaff, Arizona, USA.
Cronon, W. 1992. Nature’s metropolis: Chicago
and the Great West. W. W. Norton and Co., New
York, New York, USA.
Crumley, C. L., and W. H. Marquardt, editors. 
1987. Regional dynamics: Burgundian landscapes
in historical perspective. Academic Press, San
Diego, California, USA.
Duncan, S. 2003. The trouble with connectedness:
disturbance and ecosystem crashes. Science
Findings 54. U.S. Forest Service, Pacific Northwest
Research Station, Portland, Oregon, USA.
Gunderson, L. H., C. S. Holling, and G. D.
Peterson. 2002. Pages 315–332 in L. H. Gunderson
and C. S. Holling, editors. Panarchy: understanding
transformations in human and natural systems. 
Island Press, Washington, D.C., USA.
Holling, C. S., and L. H. Gunderson. 2002.
Resilience and adaptive cycles. Pages 25–62 in L.
H. Gunderson and C. S. Holling, editors. Panarchy:
understanding transformations in human and
natural systems. Island Press, Washington, D.C.,
USA.
Holling, C. S., L. H. Gunderson, and G. D.
Peterson. 2002. Sustainability and panarchies.
Pages 63–102 in L. H. Gunderson and C. S. Holling,
editors. Panarchy: understanding transformations
in human and natural systems. Island Press,
Washington, D.C., USA.
Moote, A., J. Abrams, E. Krasilovsky, M.
Schumann, M. Savage, and T. Derr. In press.
Navigating the motives and mandates of multiparty
monitoring. Ecological Restoration Institute White
Paper. Ecological Restoration Institute, Flagstaff,
Arizona, USA.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 23
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art23/
Shlisky, A., J. Waugh, P. Gonzalez, M. Gonzalez,
M. Manta, H. Santosa, E. Alvarado, A. A.
Nuruddin, D. A. Rodríguez-Trejo, R. Swaty, D.
Schmidt, M. Kaufmann, R. Myers, A. Alenar, F.
Kearns, D. Johnson, J. Smith, D. Zollner, and W.
Fulks. 2007. Fire, ecosystems and people: threats
and strategies for global biodiversity conservation. 
The Nature Conservancy Global Fire Initiative,
Tallahassee, Forida, USA. [online] URL: http://ww
w.nature.org/initiatives/fire/science/.
Social 
Marketing 
Institute. 
2007. 
Social
marketing. Social Marketing Institute, Washington,
D.C., USA. [online] URL: http://www.social-mark
eting.org/sm.html.
Walker, B., S. Carpenter, J. Anderies, N. Abel, G.
S. Cumming, M. Janssen, L. Lebel, J. Norberg,
G. D. Peterson, and R. Pritchard. 2002. Resilience
management in social–ecological systems: a
working hypothesis for a participatory approach.
Conservation Ecology 6(1):14. [online] URL: http:
//www.consecol.org/vol6/iss1/art14/.
