 
 
Earth Day celebration a part of Forest Festival 
By DAILY SUN STAFF 
04/23/2003 
Earth Day fun at Wheeler Park, talks about 
the environment at the Orpheum Theater, a 
walk in the gardens at The Arboretum at 
Flagstaff and field trips into the forest are 
all part of the 2003 Forest Festival, 
beginning Saturday and ending Wednesday, 
April 30.  
This annual event rolls Earth Day, Arbor 
Day and the Forest Festival into one big 
celebration of nature and caring for our 
planet. Topics will include major issues 
facing our the Flagstaff-area community 
such as water conservation, bark beetles, 
the drought, wildfire and forest health.  
"This year's Earth Day celebration is an 
attempt to provide relevant timely and viable information for all greater Flagstaff citizens 
about the specific forest and drought conditions we face together. We are reaching out 
beyond the regular events to involve more residents in their immediate environmental 
crisis," said Al White, Flagstaff City Councilmember.  
 
Ryann Drozdowski/Arizona Daily Sun David Grandon 
points out the essential elements of how to render 
biodiesel to use in modern cars. David Grandon and 
Kurt Brooks talked to students and locals in the Wilson-
Allen-Tinsley quad on the NAU campus Tuesday for 
Earth Day to inform them about the positives of using 
biodiesel made from conola to run cars such as this 
300 TD Mercades.  
Programs outlining the free activities over the five-day celebration of the forests are 
available at the Flagstaff Visitor Center.  
A full calendar of events is also available at The Arboretum at Flagstaff Web site, 
www.thearb.org. Click on the Forest Festival logo for a complete listing.  
Forest Festival activities will include Earth Day in Wheeler Park, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m., 
Saturday, with music, food, recycled art, exhibits and children's activities.  
Talks with topics such as the bark beetle epidemic, the drought's impact on trees and 
wildfire preparedness will take place in the Orpheum Theater on Saturday also.  
Other activities will include field trips to the Centennial Forest and restoration projects, 
community clean-up efforts, a brown bag lunch lecture featuring locally grown foods, 
and the Southwest Fire Initiative Conference sponsored by the Ecological Restoration 
Institute at Northern Arizona University .  

Among the experts giving talks on forest health, wildfires and ecological issues are Mark 
Finney, of the Forest Service's Fire Sciences Laboratory, Doc Smith, Ecological 
Restoration Institute at NAU, Tom DeGomez, University of Arizona Cooperative 
Extension Office, and Tom Kolb, NAU School of Forestry.  
The conference keynote presentation will feature Mark Finney, of the Forest Service's 
Fire Sciences Laboratory, and his computer program that highlights at-risk forest areas. 
Finney's talk, 9 a.m. in the du Bois Center Ballroom at NAU, Tuesday, April 29, will be 
free and open to the public.  
Fire consultant Jim Paxon, the voice from the Rodeo-Chediski Fire, will be talking about 
"Living With Fire" and identifying how individuals and mountain communities can 
reduce the risk of crown fires.  
Paxon's talk is free and open to the public Tuesday, April 29, at 7 p.m. in the du Bois 
Center Ballroom.  
Major sponsors of the Festival are NAU's Ecological Restoration Institute, the School of 
Forestry, the Centennial Forest and city of Flagstaff.  
The Arboretum at Flagstaff will be offering the Water-Wise Landscaping Workshop, 9 
a.m. to 4 p.m. Saturday, April 26, addressing the creation and maintenance of beautiful 
landscapes that can survive northern Arizona's semi-arid climate, drought conditions and 
water restrictions.  
Participants may register for the whole day at $45 or half a day at $25. The morning 
session will cover landscape design and irrigation; the afternoon will cover plant 
selection and care. Lunch will be provided for all participants.  
The deadline to register for the Water-Wise Landscaping Workshop is Wednesday, April 
24. For more information, call 774-1442, ext. 110  
 
