 
 
United front first requires agreement 
By Taylor McKinnon& Michele James 
Special to the Daily Sun 
04/08/2004 
Grand Canyon Trust welcomes public debate on important environmental issues because 
we feel it is the best way to ensure the average citizen has the knowledge needed to make 
informed decisions.  
Grand Canyon Trust is deeply committed to the Greater Flagstaff Forests Partnership' s 
(GFFP) collaborative process. It is a partnership we established and into which we have 
and will continue to invest significant organizational time and energy. We believe 
collaboration is critical to identifying common ground within which projects can move 
forward without the delays associated with controversy, appeals and litigation, and 
without alienating stakeholders. Grand Canyon Trust did everything in our power to 
ensure that the Woody Ridge Project would be a success. That included nearly two years 
and hundreds of hours of collaborative work within the GFFP.  
During the environmental analysis, the Forest Service agreed to analyze a Woody Ridge 
project alternative that included a 16-inch diameter limit. This was significant because 
removal of "large" trees (those over 16 inches) is a socially and scientifically contentious 
issue that has created controversy in nearly every GFFP project to date. While the Trust 
did not advocate a 16-inch diameter cap on the entire Woody project, we believe the 
burden of proof rests with the Forest Service to demonstrate the need to remove large 
trees.  
The Forest Service's comparison of the diameter cap alternative with their preferred 
alternative showed that project objectives could be met across 82 percent of the project 
with the diameter cap in place. In other words, the Forest Service's own environmental 
analysis demonstrated no need to log trees larger that 16 inches across 82 percent of the 
project.  
Based on the Forest Service analysis, the Trust urged the Forest Service to place a cap on 
the 82 percent of the project where their environmental assessment indicated project 
objectives could be met.  
We believe such a decision would have reduced the likelihood of controversy and project 
delays, would have sent a strong message that restoration actions will be based on 
ecological needs, and would have conserved large trees that are regionally rare and 
valuable for wildlife habitat.  

The GFFP Partnership Advisory Board and Board of Directors asked the Forest Service 
to consider the same recommendation in their final decision.  
Despite our urging, the Forest Service's final decision will remove large trees in the 
portions of the project where their own analysis showed no need to do so.  
Also problematic for us is the fact that the project lacks a comprehensive monitoring 
program, and does not ensure that adequate mitigation measures will be used to prevent 
heat girdling of old trees during prescribed burning. Grand Canyon Trust can't support 
what we can't defend.  
Absent meaningful resolution, the large tree issue promises to plague forest restoration 
projects for years to come. The notion that "science" alone can resolve this debate is 
naive. Science provides information that people consider along with their own individual 
values as well as society's values. That fact is evidenced by a wide range of scientific 
opinions on the need to log or conserve large trees during forest restoration. Some 
scientists have the opinion that restoration efforts should not be overly concerned about 
removing large trees while others present more cautious opinions.  
The same holds true for the goals of restoration thinning. While a few scientists 
recommend tree densities similar to the 1870s, other scientists believe single points in 
time may be unrepresentative, and that thinning should instead focus on safely restoring 
fires to the forest. In the final analysis, science-informed social agreement, not just 
science or scientists, is needed to move forward together with collaborative action.  
There is now 90 percent agreement among the stakeholders on how to proceed with forest 
thinning in Arizona. In American democracy, 90 percent agreement is extraordinary. It 
would be a clear mandate in a congressional vote or presidential election. We wonder 
why, amidst agreement on almost everything except logging large trees, it is still being 
proposed? Why not move forward together within an area of agreement? Proponents of 
controversial actions must share responsibility for the consequences of delayed projects.  
The Grand Canyon Trust worked hard to reach agreement on the Woody Ridge project. 
Although we disagree with the Forest Service's decision, we will not actively oppose it. 
We will continue to work collaboratively with GFFP and all stakeholders to find 
solutions to shared problems. Grand Canyon Trust is committed to a future in which 
communities exist safely within a network of wildland forests where fire resumes its 
sustaining ecological role.  
Taylor McKinnon and Michele James are with the Grand Canyon Trust in Flagstaff.  
