The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Tamm Review: Are Fuel Treatments Effective at Achieving Ecological  
and Social Objectives? A Systematic Review 
By Elizabeth L. Kalies and Larissa L. Yocom Kent 
Introduction 
Over the past 30 years there has been an increase in the size and frequency of stand-replacing wildfires 
in historically frequent-fire dry forests in the western U.S. The high fuel loads have resulted from man-
agement activities that include fire suppression, logging, and grazing, combined with more severe 
drought conditions and increasing temperatures. Fuel reduction treatments designed to reduce fire haz-
ard and improve overall ecosystem function have been increasing over the last decade. However, until 
recently, much of what we knew about treatment effectiveness was based on modeling and predictive 
studies. Now, there are many examples of wildfires burning through both treated and untreated areas, 
and the effectiveness of treatments versus no action can be evaluated empirically. We completed a sys-
tematic review of relevant literature to address whether fuel treatments are effective at achieving eco-
logical (restoring ecosystem structure, composition, and function) and social (saving human lives and 
property) objectives. 
 
Methods 
A systematic search of the litera-
ture using Web of Science and 
Google Scholar was conducted to 
identify studies that examined post-
wildfire responses in both treated 
and untreated sites (Figure 1). The 
main objective was to evaluate the 
current state of knowledge about 
whether treatments are more effec-
tive than no action, and whether 
certain treatments are more effec-
tive than others. We examined fuel 
treatments (thin, burn, thin plus 
burn) in western U.S. coniferous 
forests dominated by: 1) ponderosa 
pine or Jeffrey pine 2) pines mixed 
with oak, and 3) dry mixed-conifer 
forests dominated by ponderosa or 
Jeffrey pine. Studies included in 
our review reported ecosystem or 
human response variables, such as  
March 2017 
Figure 1. The systematic review identified studies that examined treated and 
untreated sites after both were burned by wildfire.  

 
fire behavior and overstory structure, soil, understory vegetation, carbon storage, wildlife, entomolo-
gy/forest health, human values (property saved, human life, and safety). Our goal was to address the 
question: What evidence is there that fuel treatments are effective at achieving ecological and social 
objectives? 
 
Results/Discussion 
Fifty-six papers from eight western states were identified for inclusion in the review. Seventy percent 
of the papers included results on the post-wildfire effects on various aspects of fire behavior as well 
as the direct effects of fire on various attributes of forest structure. The consensus of the review is that 
fuel treatments can have a direct positive effect on fire behavior, fire severity, crown torch and 
scorch, canopy consumption, char height and bole scorch, overstory mortality/survivorship, live basal 
area, tree density, canopy cover and closure, live tree cover, and regeneration. These results are most 
consistent for thin plus burn treatments. Carbon is removed during treatments, but is also lost in wild-
fires. Results for carbon loss and storage in treated versus untreated stands were thus mixed across the 
studies. Results on understory responses were mixed, with some studies finding higher plant cover in 
treated sites, others finding higher plant cover in untreated sites, and some finding no effect of treat-
ments. 
Management Implications 
Despite millions of dollars spent annually on fuel treatments, and despite a general consensus among 
managers that fuel treatments are effective, there is little data on fuel treatment effectiveness in North 
America, especially as it relates to outcomes other than overstory and fire behavior. What studies ex-
ist, however, suggest that thinning and burning treatments are likely to be more effective at meeting 
objectives because they remove both canopy and surface fuels. Studies show there are limitations to 
the effectiveness of fuel treatments; extreme weather conditions can overwhelm reductions in hazard-
ous fuels, and other variables likely cofound results of treatment-control studies (e.g., soil type, forest 
type, time since treatment, etc.). Fuel treatment effectiveness diminishes over time, and so a fuel 
treatment plan must include a long-term strategy rather than a one-time effort. As treatments are im-
plemented and wildfires burn, managers and researchers need to rigorously monitor and study treat-
ment effectiveness to fill the many data gaps in our knowledge. 
 
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
Kalies, E.L. and L.L. Yocom Kent. 2016. Are fuel treatments effective at achieving ecological and social 
objectives? A systematic review. Forest Ecology and Management, (375): 84-95. 
Contact: Elizabeth L. Kalies, Liz.Kalies@nau.edu 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
