 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
Collaboration for Environmental Evidence 
 
 
 
 
Systematic Review No. 75 
 
 
WORKING TITLE:  
 
Have wet meadow restoration projects in the Southwestern U.S. been 
effective in restoring hydrology, geomorphology, soils, and plant 
species composition to conditions comparable to wet meadows with 
minimal human-induced disturbance? 
 
 
 
Review Protocol 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lead Reviewer: 
James A. Allen 
 
 
Postal Address: 
School of Forestry 
 
Northern Arizona University 
 
P.O. Box 15018 
 
Flagstaff, AZ 86011 
 
 
U.S.A. 
 
E-mail Address: 
James.Allen@nau.edu 
Telephone: 
00+1+928-523-5894 
Fax: 
00+1+928-523-1080 
 
 

 
 
2 
Cover Sheet 
 
Title 
Working title: Have wet meadow restoration projects 
in the Southwestern U.S. been effective in restoring 
hydrology, geomorphology, soils, and plant species 
composition to conditions comparable to wet meadows 
with minimal human-induced disturbance? 
Systematic review  
No.75 
Reviewer(s) 
James Allen, Karissa Ramstead, and Abe Springer 
Date draft protocol 
published on website 
10th July 2009 
Date final protocol 
published on website 
14th December 2009 
Date of most recent 
amendment 
- 
Date of most recent 
SUBSTANTIVE 
amendment 
- 
Details of most recent 
changes 
- 
Contact address 
School of Forestry 
Northern Arizona University 
P.O. Box 15018 
Flagstaff, AZ 86011 
U.S.A. 
 
James.Allen@nau.edu 
Sources of support 
Northern Arizona University’s Ecological Restoration 
Institute and School of Forestry 
Conflicts of interest 
- 
 

 
 
3 
1. 
BACKGROUND 
High elevation streamside or spring-fed meadows occur in numerous locations 
throughout the American Southwest.  They are often referred to as riparian 
meadows, montane (or high-elevation) riparian meadows, sedge meadows, or 
simply as “wet meadows,” which is the term we will use for this review.  In 
the same high-elevation regions of the Southwest, wet meadows can 
occasionally be found in isolated depressions, such as along the fringes of 
ponds and lakes with no outlets. 
Where wet  meadows have not been excessively altered, sedges (Carex spp.), 
rushes (Juncus spp.), and spikerush (Eleocharis spp.) are common species 
(Patton and Judd 1970, Hendrickson and Minckley 1984, Muldavin et al. 
2000). Willow (Salix) and alder (Alnus) species often occur in or adjacent to 
these meadows (Long 2000, 2002, Maschinski 2001, Medina and Steed 2002).  
High-elevation wet meadows frequently occur along a gradient that includes 
aquatic vegetation at the lower end and mesic meadows, dry meadows, and 
ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) or mixed conifer forest at the upper end.   
These vegetation gradients are closely associated with differences in flooding, 
depth to water table, and soil characteristics (Judd 1972, Castelli et al. 2000, 
Dwire et al. 2006). 
The extent of wet meadows in the American Southwest is unknown, but it is 
clear that they are relatively rare.  Less than 1% of the landscape in the region 
is characterized as wetland (Dahl 1990), and wet meadows are just one of 
several wetland types that occur.  The only estimate of the extent of wet 
meadows in the region that has been located to date is by Patton and Judd 
(1970), who reported that approximately 17,700 ha of wet meadows occur on 
national forests in Arizona and New Mexico; they also noted that many more 
wet meadows occur in areas adjacent to the national forests, such as on the 
Fort Apache Indian Reservation in eastern Arizona.   
While relatively rare, wet meadows are believed to be of disproportionate 
value because of their use by wildlife and the range of other ecosystem 
services they provide.  Elk and other ungulates, for example, have been shown 
to make extensive use of wet meadows as foraging sites (Patton and Judd 
1972, Dodd et al. 2007).  The high population of voles in some wet meadows 
is an important food source for Mexican spotted owls, a threatened species, 
where their home ranges encompass wet meadows (D. Fleishman, US Forest 
Service, personal communication).  It is also likely that wet meadows perform 
many of the same ecosystem functions associated with other wetland types, 
such as water quality improvement, reduction of flood peaks, and carbon 
sequestration.  In addition to their ecological values, wet meadows are known 
to be of significant cultural importance to some Native American tribes (Long 
2002). 
Despite their apparent value, wet meadows are one of the most heavily altered 
types of ecosystems in the American Southwest.  Among other things, they 
have been used extensively for grazing livestock, have become the site of 
many small dams and stock tanks, have had roads built through them, and 

 
 
4 
have experienced other types of hydrologic alterations, most notably the 
lowering of their water tables due to stream downcutting, surface water 
diversions, or groundwater withdrawal (Neary and Medina 1996, Gage and 
Cooper 2008).  It is also possible that the extirpation of beaver in the 
Southwest led to profound changes in wet meadow environments by reducing 
flooding and potentially facilitating some of the stream downcutting that 
occurred in so many riparian areas (Parker et al. 1985, Weber 2005).  
 
Because of their relative rarity and the important hydrologic and ecological 
functions they are believed to perform, there is currently a significant degree 
of interest in the restoration of wet meadows.  Several restoration projects 
have been recently completed or are underway in the region (Long 2000, 
Medina and Long 2002, 2004, Anderson et al. 2003, Steed and DeWald 2003, 
Long et al. 2004, Mullen et al. 2006, Natural Channel Design, Inc. 2007), 
sometimes at considerable expense and with minimal monitoring.  Before 
many new projects are initiated, it is important to review what has been done 
to date, as well as related hydrological and ecological research that has been 
published and that may help inform future restoration efforts. 
 
2. 
OBJECTIVE OF THE REVIEW 
 
2.1 
Primary question 
Have wet meadow restoration projects in the Southwestern U.S. been effective 
in restoring hydrology, geomorphology, soils, and plant species composition 
to conditions comparable to wet meadows with minimal human-induced 
disturbance? 
 
2.2 
Secondary question (if sufficient data are available) 
Have wetland-dependent wildlife species increased in diversity and/or 
abundance following wet meadow restoration? 
 
3. 
METHODS 
 
3.1 
Search strategy 
 Electronic databases available through Northern Arizona University’s 
Cline Library will be a primary source, including at a minimum: 
o Academic Search Premier 
o Biological Sciences 
o BioOne 
o Environmental Science and Pollution Management 
o Forest Science Database (Ovid) 
o JSTOR  
o Plant Science 
o ProQuest: Dissertations and Theses Full Text 
o Science Direct 
o Wilson OmniFile 
 Additional sources of information will include at a minimum: 
o ISI Web of Science 
o Google Scholar and at least one non-academic search engine 

 
 
5 
o Government and university websites and libraries (e.g., USDA 
Forest Service’s TreeSearch, Ecological Restoration Institute 
and School of Forestry electronic libraries, state game and fish 
agency websites and libraries) 
o Unpublished reports (e.g., project monitoring reports) will be 
sought directly from individuals and organizations responsible 
for restoration projects. 
 
Search terms will include wet meadow or riparian meadow or 
montane meadow in combination with the following: restoration, 
hydrology, sedimentation, diversity, grazing, erosion, channel, 
wildlife, Carex, and Juncus. 
 
3.2 
Study inclusion criteria  
 Relevant subject(s): 
Herbaceous and mixed herbaceous/scrub-shrub dominated riparian 
ecosystems that are clearly wetlands (e.g., dominated by obligate 
or facultative wetland species in genera such as Carex, Juncus, 
Salix, and Alnus); meadows adjacent to these wetlands that are 
more typically characterized as mesic and that are often have a 
diverse flora characterized by facultative or facultative wetland 
species, including a greater number of grass and forb species than 
typically found in “true” wet meadows. 
 Types of intervention: (Note: these categories overlap 
somewhat) 
Hydrologic restoration techniques (e.g., check dams, artificial riffle 
formations) 
Geomorphological and/or soil restoration techniques (e.g., channel 
relocation, site recontouring, topsoil placement or removal) 
Vegetation restoration techniques (e.g., seeding, planting, 
herbivore exclusion) 
Modifications of adjacent areas (e.g., thinning or prescribed 
burning of adjacent forests to increase water yields, reductions in 
groundwater withdrawals) 
 Types of comparator: 
Replicated randomized experiments with controls (expected to be 
rare or nonexistent) 
Projects that use reference ecosystems as comparators 
Before-after control-impact (BACI) studies 
 Types of outcome: 
Hydrologic outcomes such as changes in water table levels and 
flooding depth, duration and/or timing. 
Geomorphological and soil outcomes such as channel stability, 
presence/movement of nick points, and development of 
redoximorphic soil properties. 
Vegetation outcomes such as species composition, percent cover 
and biomass, survival of planted material, and presence or absence 
of invasive species. 
 
 

 
 
6 
 Types of study: 
Primary, experimental, and peer-reviewed studies will be 
considered the most reliable, but it is expected that much of the 
available information will be from observational studies, 
unpublished theses and dissertations, monitoring reports, and other 
types of grey literature.  
 
 
3.3 
Potential effect modifiers and reasons for heterogeneity: 
 
The American Southwest is a vast region and considerable 
heterogeneity exists due to differences in elevation, topography, soils, 
natural disturbances, and land use history.  There has also been 
considerable variation in the type and intensity of restoration 
treatments.  All of these factors have the potential to modify the effects 
of restoration on hydrologic, geomorphologic, soil, and vegetation 
response variables. 
 
3.4 
Study quality assessment 
 
Studies will be evaluated based on the types of methods used.  While 
considerable caution will be exercised with strictly observational 
studies, unpublished reports, and work that does not involve 
randomized experiments and rigorous peer review, it is recognized that 
some work of these types may still be of high quality.  A key factor 
that will be used to determine whether studies will be included in this 
review will therefore be where they fit in  Pullin’s and Knight’s (2003) 
hierarchy of quality of evidence.  Evidence in Categories I through II-3 
(see Table 1) will be included.  Evidence that falls into Categories III 
and IV will be treated with a high degree of caution, but may still be 
used if all authors agree and if appropriate qualifiers (e.g., an 
explanation of why a particular set of evidence falls into Category IV 
and why we still think it is appropriate to mention) are included.  
Typically, if any Category IV evidence is reported it will be more for 
the purpose of indicating areas of potentially valuable future research 
than for drawing definitive conclusions about treatment effects.  To 
assist in this process, all studies considered for inclusion in this review 
that include treatment effects will be placed into one of the categories 
in Table 1 and agreed upon by the authors.  Also, all authors will be 
familiar with the guidelines for assessing quality of evidence outlined 
in Pullin and Stewart (2006) and will use those guidelines as 
appropriate (e.g., possibly contacting authors of some papers to request 
additional data). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
7 
Table 1. Hierarchy of quality of evidence, as modified by Pullin and Knight 
(2003). 
 
Category
Quality of Evidence 
I 
Strong evidence obtained from at least one properly 
designed; randomized controlled trial of appropriate size. 
II-1 
Evidence from well designed controlled trials without 
randomization. 
II-2 
Evidence from a comparison of differences between sites 
with and without (controls) a desired species or community.
II-3 
Evidence obtained from multiple time series or from 
dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments. 
III 
Opinions of respected authorities based on qualitative field 
evidence, descriptive studies or reports of expert 
committees. 
IV 
Evidence inadequate owing to problems of methodology 
(e.g. sample size, length or comprehensiveness of 
monitoring) or conflicts of evidence. 
 
 
3.5 
Data extraction strategy 
 
Two primary reviewers will conduct the initial database and library 
searches and identify publications of potential value based primarily on 
an assessment of titles and abstracts.  All potentially useful 
publications will be reviewed by all reviewers.  Material determined to 
be of use will then be stored in a location accessible to the whole 
review team and summarized in a master spreadsheet by one of the 
primary reviewers (Karissa Ramstead).   
 
If a sufficient amount of quantitative data on the effects of specific 
restoration treatments can be extracted, a meta-analysis will be 
conducted, possibly employing MetaWin Version 2.0© software.  
However, the amount of good quality data on effect sizes is believed to 
be quite limited, which in turn may limit the use of formal meta-
analysis methods.  We will be looking for papers that describe 
quantitative effects on vegetation (species diversity, cover, biomass), 
hydrology (esp. water table changes) and soil characteristics (organic 
matter content, redoximorphic characteristics, redox potential, bulk 
density).  Some of the other variables listed above in the “Types of 
Outcomes” subsection may also be considered as possible effects to be 
considered in a meta-analysis. 
 
3.6 
Data synthesis and presentation 
  
All publications will be read by the reviewers and results will be 
discussed by all, but one reviewer (James Allen) will take the primary 
responsibility for synthesizing and presenting the results.  The results 
of this review will be organized around the components listed in the 
primary question, which involve the responses of hydrology, 
geomorphology, soils, and vegetation to restoration treatments. 
 

 
 
8 
4.  
POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST AND SOURCES OF SUPPORT 
 
This review is funded by the Northern Arizona University Ecological 
Restoration Institute, with additional support from the NAU School of 
Forestry.  Although there is no known conflict of interest, independent reviews 
will be sought both through the CEE and directly from scientists not affiliated 
with the Ecological Restoration Institute or the School of Forestry. 
 
5. 
REFERENCES 
 
Anderson, D., A. Springer, J. Kennedy, W. Odem, L. DeWald, and D. 
Fleishman. 2003. Verde River Headwaters Restoration Demonstration 
Project. Final Report, Arizona Water Protection Fund, Grant No. 98-
059. 
 
Castelli, R.M., J.C. Chambers, and R.J. Tausch. 2000. Soil-plant relations 
along a soil-water gradient in Great Basin riparian meadows. Wetlands 
20(2): 251-266. 
 
Dahl, T.E. 1990. Wetland losses in the United States, 1780s to 1980s. U.S. 
Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service, Washington, 
D.C. 21 pp. 
 
Dodd, N. L., J. W. Gagnon, S. Boe, and R. E. Schweinsburg. 2007. 
Assessment of elk highway permeability by using global positioning 
system telemetry. Journal of Wildlife Management 71:1107-1117. 
 
Dwire, K.A., J.B. Kauffman, and J.E. Baham. 2006. Plant species distribution 
in relation to water-table depth and soil redox potential in montane 
riparian meadows. Wetlands 26(1): 131-146. 
 
Gage, E. and D.J. Cooper. 2008. Historic range of variation assessment for 
wetland and riparian ecosystems, US Forest Service Region 2.  USDA 
Forest Service, Region 2, Golden, CO. 
 
Judd, B.I. 1972. Vegetation zones around a small pond in the White 
Mountains of Arizona. Great Basin Naturalist 32(2): 91-96. 
 
Hendrickson, D. A. and W. L. Minckley. 1984. Ciénegas – vanishing climax 
communities of the American Southwest. Desert Plants 6:131-175. 
 
Long, J. W. 2000. Restoration of Gooseberry Creek. p. 356-358 In P. F. 
Ffolliot, M. B. Baker Jr., C. B. Edminster, B. Carleton, M. C. Dillon, 
and K. C. Mora (tech. eds.), Proceedings of land stewardship in the 21st 
Century: The contributions of watershed management. U.S.D.A. Forest 
Service Proceedings RMRS-P-13, Rocky Mountain Research Station, 
Fort Collins, CO, USA. 
 

 
 
9 
Long, J. W. 2002. Evaluating recovery of riparian wetlands on the White 
Mountain Apache Reservation. Ph.D. dissertation, Northern Arizona 
University, Flagstaff, AZ, USA. 
 
Long, J.W., B.M. Burnette, and A.L. Medina. 2004. Restoring wetlands after 
the Rodeo-Chediski wildfire. In Seaton, R. and F. Anderson, Fran 
(eds.), Proceedings of the 16th International Conference, Society for 
Ecological Restoration, August 24-26, 2004, Victoria, Canada. 5 pp. 
 
Machinski, J. 2001. Impacts of ungulate herbivores on a rare willow at the 
southern edge of its range. Biological Conservation 101:119-130. 
 
Medina, A.L. and J.W. Long. 2004. Placing riffle formations to restore stream 
functions in a wet meadow. Ecological Restoration 22(2): 120-124. 
 
Medina, A. L. and J. E. Steed. 2002. West Fork Allotment riparian monitoring 
study 1993-1999. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research 
Station, Final Project Report Volume I.  
 
Muldavin, E., P. Durkin, M. Bradley, M. Stuever, and P. Mehlhop. 2000. 
Handbook of wetland vegetation communities of New Mexico, 
Volume I: Classification and community descriptions. New Mexico 
Natural Heritage Program, Biology Department, University of New 
Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA. 
 
Mullen, R.M., A.E. Springer, and T.E. Kolb. 2006. Complex effects of 
prescribed fire on restoring the soil water content in a high-elevation 
riparian meadow, Arizona. Restoration Ecology 14(2): 242-250. 
 
Natural Channel Design, Inc. 2007. AWPF Grant Projects Evaluation Phase II: 
Case Studies. Final Report to the Arizona Watershed Protection Fund, 
Phoenix, AZ. 
 
Neary, D.G. and A.L. Medina. 1996. Geomorphic response of a montane 
riparian habitat to interaction of ungulates, vegetation, and hydrology. 
Pages 143-147 in Shaw, D.W. and D.M. Finch (tech. coords.), Desired 
future conditions for southwestern riparian ecosystems: bringing 
interests and concerns together.  USDA Forest Service General 
Technical Report RM-GTR-272. Rocky Mountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station, Fort Collins, CO. 
 
Parker, M, F.J. Wood, Jr., B.H. Smith, and R.G. Elder. 1985. Erosional 
downcutting in lower order riparian ecosystems: Have historical 
changes been caused by removal of beaver? Pages 35-38 in Johnson, 
R.R., C.D. Ziebell, D.R. Patton, P.F. Ffolliott, and R.H. Hamre (tech. 
coords.), Riparian ecosystems and their management: Reconciling 
conflicting uses. USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RM-
120. Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort 
Collins, CO. 
 

 
 
10 
Patton, D.R. and B.I. Judd. 1970. The role of wet meadows as wildlife habitat 
in the Southwest. Journal of Range Management 23(4): 272-275. 
 
Pullin, A.S. and T.M. Knight. 2003. Support for decision making in 
conservation practice: An evidence-based approach. Journal for Nature 
Conservation 11: 83-90. 
 
Pullin, A.S. and G.B. Stewart. 2006. Guidelines for systematic review in 
conservation and environmental management. Conservation Biology, 
20(6): 1647-1656. 
 
Steed, J.E. and L.E. DeWald. 2003. Transplanting sedges (Carex spp.) in 
Southwestern riparian meadows. Restoration Ecology 11(2): 247-256. 
Weber, D.J. 2005. The Taos trappers: The fur trade in the far Southwest, 1540-
1846. University of Oklahoma Press,  228 pp. 
