News	  Release	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Contact:	  bonnie.stevens@nau.edu	  
Tuesday,	  June	  7,	  2011	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  928-­‐380-­‐4349 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  928-­‐523-­‐6228 
	  	   
Millions of Excess Trees Fuel Catastrophic Wildfires 
  
(Flagstaff, Ariz.) Arizona wildlands are on fire and forest ecologist Dr. Wally Covington says 
millions of small diameter trees that have grown in during the last century have lined up like sticks 
of firewood ready to fuel unnaturally intense, destructive wildfires. 
	   
“Decades of scientific research reveal the frequent-fire ecosystems of the West are suffocating 
under too many trees. Where we once had 10 to 25 trees per acre, we now have hundreds,” says 
Covington, Regents’ Professor of Forest Ecology and Executive Director of the Ecological 
Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University.  
  
The Pumpkin Fire that burned nearly 15,000 acres northwest of Flagstaff in 2000 had as many as 
7,000 to 8,000 trees packed in on some of those acres.  
  
“As a result of this unnatural forest structure, the forest cannot self-regulate, ecological processes 
are out of balance, and the heavy fuel load from too many trees is setting the stage for 
catastrophic wildfire.” 
  
Covington says we now have extensive overly dense forests across vast landscapes in 
ponderosa pine, mixed conifer, and pinyon-juniper ecosystems. In the ponderosa pine forests, 
where fire once burned naturally along the forest floor every two to ten years – killing excess tree 
seedlings, recycling nutrients and cleaning up the dead and dying debris – it is now burning 
through the treetops.    
  
“We’ve crossed a series of thresholds. Starting in the 1940s, we started seeing small crown fires. 
In the ‘60s, we saw bigger crown fires on a scale of a few thousand acres. By the ‘90s, we started 
seeing tens of thousands of acres in crown fires. Now, in this century, what we’re set up for are 
crown fires on a scale of hundreds of thousands of acres. This is clearly not sustainable.” 
	   
The 2002 Rodeo-Chediski Fire, Arizona’s largest wildfire on record, burned nearly half a million 
acres in the White Mountains.  
  
“If we have disturbances such as wildfires, massive bark beetle infestations and disease 
outbreaks that are on the scale of hundreds of thousands of acres, then we have to restore 
landscapes on the scale of hundreds of thousands of acres. That’s exactly where we’re headed 
with the Four Forest Restoration Initiative and eight other landscape-scale restoration efforts 
across the West.” 
  
The 4FRI is the nation’s largest forest ecological restoration project, spanning some 2.4 million 
acres across the Mogollon Rim.   
  
“A lot of people focus on the immediate impacts of these large unnatural fires that we’ve been 
having and that’s devastating. It’s devastating immediately to wildlife habitat and human habitat. 
Homes are threatened, homes for wildlife, as well as homes for people. But there’s a secondary 
impact that people are often unaware of. As these watersheds degrade, as the roots break down, 
as the vegetation disappears that used to hold the watershed intact, we start having major flood 
events, as we’ve seen in the aftermath of the Schultz Fire. In these flood events, it’s not only 
water that’s being delivered, but massive amounts of sediment that are swept down to the houses 
below. So it impacts humans below the burnt over area, but it also impacts that whole riparian 
system.” 

  
Covington says some 180 million acres of ponderosa pine across the West are at risk, more than 
300 million acres with the addition of degraded mixed conifer forests. “Especially with drought and 
climate change, there is an urgent need to restore forests to their most resilient condition. That 
requires protecting the old growth trees and thinning most of the small diameter trees.” 
  
He says the abundance of small trees creates the opportunity for jobs and developing a 
restoration economy. “Without wood utilization, the cost of restoration can be as much as $1,000 
per acre. Businesses that can use the excess wood to make products such as oriented strand 
board, other engineered forest products and energy from biomass will be critical to restoring 
forest health. NAU has set the goal of using biomass to supply its electrical needs achieving 
carbon neutrality by the year 2020.” For more information, please see 
http://www4.nau.edu/insidenau/bumps/2010/6_23_10/climate.html.     
  
Changes to the forest since pioneers arrived in the late 1800s resulted from heavy grazing that 
removed grasses from the forest floor, an overabundance of ponderosa pine seedlings that 
became established in 1919 and the exclusion of natural fire as wildfires were extinguished as 
fast as possible.    
  
“Fire is to the forest what wolves are to deer. If we remove an essential component of the 
ecosystem, there is going to be an upset in the balance. Like the deer population explosion that 
caused deer to far outstrip the carrying capacity of the land after wolves were eliminated, in the 
absence of frequent, low intensity fires, the forest has become overloaded with small, sickly trees 
that are competing with old growth pines and making our forests vulnerable to crown fire.” 
  
Covington says collaborative efforts such as the 4FRI that aim to accelerate large forest 
restoration efforts will make the difference between forests that have become liabilities and 
forests that are assets. 
  
“Our success in restoring forest health during the next two decades will determine whether we 
can leave landscape legacies for future generations.” 
  
Ecological Restoration Institute research plots near Alpine have been burned in the Wallow Fire. 
   
### 
  
Video clips of Wally Covington are available HERE 
or http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2_t6uovjoWw	   
  
Interview topics (6 minutes total): 
  
Resiliency of Ponderosa Pine Trees after Ecological Restoration Treatment 
  
Restoring Large Landscapes across the West 
  
Forest Research and Urgent Need to Restore Forests across Millions of Acres  
  
Leaving a Landscape Legacy through Ecological Restoration  
	  
