Ecological and social implications of employing diameter caps at a collaborative forest
restoration project near Flagstaff, Arizona, USA
Dave Egan a,⁎, Michael Stoddard b, Alicia Formanack c
a Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ, USA
b Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ86011, USA
c Scottsdale, AZ85254, USA
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 7 February 2014
Received in revised form 13 November 2014
Accepted 30 November 2014
Available online xxxx
Keywords:
Ecological restoration
Forest policy
Forest restoration
Collaboration
Diameter cap
Fort Valley Experimental Forest
The issue of implementing diameter caps as a means of preserving old-growth trees on forest restoration projects
continues to permeate collaborative land management discussions and treatment decisions on public lands in the
Southwest and, indeed, throughout the western United States. We examine the ecological and social results of the
collaborative Fort Valley Ecosystem Restoration Project on U.S. Forest Service lands near Flagstaff, Arizona. Since
this experiment had areas treated with and without a diameter cap, we sought to determine: 1) the ecological
consequences of implementing a 16-inch diameter cap, 2) whether the fears and concerns of the environmental
groups who proposed the diameter cap were, in fact, warranted, and 3) how the local collaborative responded to
implementing the diameter cap. The ecological data revealed that a site's management history played a major
role in how a diameter cap would affect the restoration of stand structure in terms of tree density and tree
size. The data suggest that, if implemented, diameter caps are best applied in a manner that takes into account
both site conditions and stand management history. In general, we found the concerns about the loss of old-
growth trees due to thinning treatments were not realized at Fort Valley. Finally, stakeholder surveys indicate
that while the discussion of diameter caps caused tension within the collaborative group, the overall goal of forest
restoration was not compromised.
© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
In 1931, the U.S. Forest Service (USFS) created the Fort Valley Exper-
imental Forest (FVEF) from Forest Service lands surrounding and adja-
cent to the historic Fort Valley Experimental Forest Station, northwest
of Flagstaff, Arizona. This action initially protected some 2420 acres of
forest research study area from logging, homesteading, fuelwood
cutting, and hunting (Olberding, 2000) with more acreage added in
the following decades. Almost 70 years later, Unit 1 of the FVEF became
the site of one of the ﬁrst collaborative forest restoration efforts in the
western United States and received national recognition from former
Vice President Al Gore as a National Reinvention Laboratory. Most
importantly, this community-wide effort marked a signiﬁcant change
in how American society would begin to manage its national forests
and their vast resources through ecological restoration rather than
commodity extraction.
This Flagstaff-based collaboration emerged when a small, diverse set
of constituencies began meeting in 1996 with the idea of identifying
approaches to forest management that could reduce the hazard of
stand-replacing wildﬁre and restore forest vitality and resiliency. In
1998, an alliance of more than 20 local government, academic, environ-
mental, and business organizations established a collaborative effort
with the Forest Service in response to unprecedented, stand-replacing
ﬁres in southwestern ponderosa pine forests, in particular the Horse-
shoe and Hochderffer wildﬁres that scorched tens of thousands of for-
ested acres near Flagstaff. Initially known as the Grand Canyon Forest
Partnership (GCFP) and later (2002) as the Greater Flagstaff Forest Part-
nership (GFFP), the collaborative's main goals are:
1. Restore the natural ecosystem functions and structure—within the
range of natural variability—of the ponderosa pine forests in
Flagstaff's urban/wildland interface (i.e., Flagstaff and the Kachina
Peaks Wilderness Area).
2. Manage forest fuels within the urban/wildland interface to reduce
the risk of catastrophic ﬁre.
3. Research, test, develop, and demonstrate key ecological, economic,
and social dimensions of restoration efforts.
The collaborative has been successful both in terms of staying active
as an organization and moving forward to meet their goals through pro-
ject design and implementation, public education and involvement, uti-
lization and economic development, monitoring and research, and
Forest Policy and Economics xxx (2015) xxx–xxx
⁎ Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 928 863 4668.
E-mail addresses: dave.egan@nau.edu (D. Egan), Michael.stoddard@nau.edu
(M. Stoddard), Amf258@nau.edu (A. Formanack).
FORPOL-01218; No of Pages 7
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.forpol.2014.11.013
1389-9341/© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Forest Policy and Economics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/forpol
Please cite this article as: Egan, D., et al., Ecological and social implications of employing diameter caps at a collaborative forest restoration project
near Flagstaff, Arizona, USA, Forest Policy and Economics (2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.forpol.2014.11.013

management and administration (Gatewood, 2010). The real-life per-
formance of the collaborative has also been instructive and invaluable
in terms of understanding the various aspects of leadership, decision-
making, trust, and partnership within a collaborative forest restoration
setting.
However, the GCFP/GFFP's initial project, known as the Fort Valley
Ecosystem Restoration Project (or the Fort Valley Wildland-Urban Inter-
face), sparked a controversial public debate between restoration propo-
nents and several environmental groups about the validity and
appropriateness of restoration efforts and proposed restoration treat-
ments (Velush and Tolan, 1999; Hoffman et al., 2000; Ghioto, 2001;
Friederici, 2003). It featured many of the fears about clearcutting and
commodity-driven logging raised by environmental groups during
previous national debates about forestry on public lands as well as the
threat of litigation to prevent or delay management efforts (Shapiro,
1995; Keele et al., 2006). This viewpoint was in contrast to the hopeful,
science-based rationale of the then newly emerging practice of ecolog-
ical forest restoration (Friederici, 2003).
This clash of perspectives was somewhat predictable and, perhaps,
unavoidable. Within the context of previous USFS forest management
decisions, the new idea of restoring forests on public lands was
perceived by the environmental community not only as a “cover-up”
for business-as-usual logging (Ghioto, 2000b), but a threat to their pres-
ervationist core values and preference for “hands-off” land manage-
ment (Baldwin et al., 1993). Thus, their insistence on size-restricted
tree thinning prescriptions, known as diameter caps, was seen by
them as a reasonable compromise and recognition that Southwestern
forests in their present condition were extremely vulnerable to the
vagaries of wildﬁre. The GCFP/GFFP restoration community, on the
other hand, was eager to move forward quickly to ﬁnd a solution to
the devastating ecological and social effects of wildﬁres while simulta-
neously restoring the forest's ecological structure and functions.
Moreover, they felt that many of the environmental groups were “out-
siders” (i.e., not members of the collaborative) trying to score another
legal victory in their ongoing confrontations with the USFS over the
management of national forests.
Since the issue of diameter caps permeates land management
discussions and treatment decisions in the Southwest and, indeed,
throughout the West, we sought to understand 1) the ecological conse-
quences of the 16-inch diameter cap proposed by some environmental
groups and 2) whether the fears and concerns of these groups about the
loss of large trees were, in fact, warranted in the case of the GCFP/GFFP
project at Fort Valley.
2. The ecological and sociological implications of a 16-inch diameter
cap: a case study of the Fort Valley Ecosystem Restoration Project
and the GCFP/GFFP
The idea of implementing a diameter cap (i.e., a limit on the size of
tree that can be removed or thinned) often arises at some point during
the collaborative forest restoration process. In the southwestern United
States, this typically means not cutting ponderosa pine trees 16 inches
or greater in diameter at breast height (dbh) in order to protect “old-
growth” trees. There are, however, different views about the metrics
that deﬁne “old growth” trees in the American Southwest (Kaufmann
et al., 2007). Disagreement about “old growth” seems to arise when
size (diameter at breast height), which in and of itself does not neces-
sarily indicate a tree is old, is the only metric. Such a divergence in
perspectives about “old growth” and “large” trees occurred during the
implementation of the Fort Valley Ecosystem Restoration Project.
Proponents of diameter caps believe that they are ecologically and
socially necessary to protect large trees from being harvested during
restoration thinning operations (Center for Biological Diversity, 2001,
see also 4FRI 2011 for an overview of the diameter cap concept and its
implementation) and to provide habitat for forest species that prefer
closed canopies, such as Abert's squirrel and northern goshawk, as a
part of their habitat matrix.
Opponents typically view diameter caps as arbitrary and, at times,
restrictive in terms of reaching forest restoration goals, including emu-
lating natural or historic forest structural and functional patterns
(Abella et al., 2006; Triepke et al., 2011). Diameter caps are also seen
as problematic when used at a landscape-scale because forest stands
differ in their history and site conditions. Thus, a diameter cap that
may be justiﬁable scientiﬁcally in one stand does not necessarily trans-
late well throughout a landscape (Noss et al., 2006). Instances where
science-based, forest restoration proponents do not support a diameter
cap include projects: 1) that aim to restore historically open stands,
2) where the goal is to support understory diversity and microorganism
productivity, and 3) where reducing current tree density to presettle-
ment levels is needed to reduce crown-ﬁre potential (Abella et al.,
2006).
In
addition,
opponents
sometimes
point
to
research
(e.g., Larson and Mirth, 2001) that indicates diameter caps make the
economics of thinning trees difﬁcult for small-scale logging operators.
Indeed, some members of the Flagstaff collaborative felt that an increase
from a 16-inch to 18-inch diameter cap would signiﬁcantly improve the
economic value of a thinning operation at Fort Valley (Coughlan, 2003).
From a social perspective, employing diameter caps as part of the
restoration prescription may be viewed as a political tool meant to
placate potential appellants and litigants from either inside or outside
of the collaborative (Friederici, 2003; Abrams and Burns, 2007). By
implementing a diameter cap, some suggest that the collaborative effort
can avoid litigation that might halt or delay a forest restoration project.
It must also be acknowledged, however, that the threat of litigation,
often from entities outside the collaborative (Wynsma, 2013), may
create factions within the collaborative group (i.e., it raises issues of
trust), and, therefore, may change the dynamics of how stakeholders
interact.
2.1. Fort Valley as a study site
Fort Valley is located about nine miles northwest of Flagstaff on the
southern base of the San Francisco Peaks at an elevation of 7400–7600
feet. This area has a gentle topography with a cool, sub-humid climate.
Half of the mean annual precipitation—22.4 inches—is comprised of
snowfall while the other half comes from summer monsoonal rains.
These rains follow the late spring/early summer drought typical for
this region (Covington et al., 1997). Until the restoration treatments at
Fort Valley, ﬁre had been excluded since 1876. Before that time, it is
estimated that low-severity surface ﬁres occurred at a frequency of
every two to ten years (Covington et al., 1997). Fort Valley has long
been an area for USFS research, including pioneering work by noted
researchers G.A. Pearson, T.S. Woolsey, C.K. Cooperrider, G.H. Schubert,
and many others (Olberding, 2000).
The Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI), led by forest ecologist and
Northern Arizona University professor, W. Wallace Covington,
established successful, small-scale forest restoration experiments in
the G.A. Pearson Natural Area of the FVEF during the early 1990s. This
pioneering work provided much of the scientiﬁc foundation, including
the experimental design, for the larger, collaborative effort envisioned
for the Fort Valley Project (Moore et al., 2008). Over the years, the ERI
continued to monitor the effects of the Fort Valley Project, amassing
data about various aspects of the work including: the effects of diameter
caps, the response of exotic and native understory plant species, the
effects on wildlife, and the human response to working in collaborative
efforts and confronting differing values and perspectives.
2.2. The Fort Valley Ecosystem Restoration Project
Restoring forest structure (i.e., number of trees per acre, size of trees,
amount of canopy, understory cover) is a central goal in the ecological
restoration of ponderosa pine forests because of the role forest structure
2
D. Egan et al. / Forest Policy and Economics xxx (2015) xxx–xxx
Please cite this article as: Egan, D., et al., Ecological and social implications of employing diameter caps at a collaborative forest restoration project
near Flagstaff, Arizona, USA, Forest Policy and Economics (2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.forpol.2014.11.013

plays in regulating above and belowground competition, nutrient
cycling, animal nesting and foraging areas, and forest responses to dis-
turbances, such as wildﬁre (Fulé et al., 1997). Key structural variables,
such as tree density (trees per acre) and basal area (a measure of tree
size), are practical metrics used by forest ecologists to quantify forest
stand structure. These measures form the basis for management deci-
sions about how much intervention is needed to meet restoration or
other management goals (Moore et al., 1999). In some cases, employing
diameter caps may make it more difﬁcult to accomplish some manage-
ment goals or require managers to modify their goals.
The Fort Valley Ecosystem Restoration Project is an ideal case to
study the effects of a diameter cap because the project had two different
approaches to the diameter cap issue. The Phase I restoration treat-
ments, which were carried out following ERI prescriptions, did not
include a diameter cap (Covington et al., 1998). However, because
there was a negative reaction to those prescriptions from some environ-
mental groups (e.g., see Hoffman et al., 2000), a diameter cap was incor-
porated into more expansive Phase II part of the project (Ghioto, 2000a)
in order to avoid possible litigation and move the project ahead. A
review of the Environmental Assessment (EA) for the project indicates
that saving old-growth trees was one of the signiﬁcant issues of concern
raised by EA respondents (USFS, 2000).
2.3. Fort Valley Experimental Design
There are three different ponderosa pine stands that comprise the
Phase 1 experimental design in the Fort Valley Ecosystem Restoration
Project (Fig. 1). Experimental Block 1 (EB 1) is a predominately yellow
pine area with more than ﬁve yellow pine per acre; Experimental
Block 2 (EB 2) is an area of yellow pine and blackjack pine with less
than two yellow pine per acre; and Experimental Block 3 (EB 3), a black-
jack pine area, contains little to no yellow pine (Larson and Mirth, 2001)
and is located in “a key wildlife corridor and portions of a goshawk post
ﬂedgling area” (United States Fish and Wildlife Service, 1999). Yellow
ponderosa pines are generally larger in size, older than 150 years, and
have a distinctive yellow, plated bark. Blackjack ponderosa pines tend
to be younger, smaller trees with a black, furrowed bark (Larson and
Mirth, 2001). The yellow pine areas (EB1) and the blackjack/yellow
pine areas (EB 2) were located within the FVEF and had not been logged.
As a result of this protection and a lack of prescribed ﬁre, these two
areas, while having numerous old-growth ponderosa pine, also
contained large numbers of small-diameter pines. The blackjack areas
(EB 3) were in the Coconino National Forest and had been logged
once for larger trees and later thinned from below, which removed
most of the smaller-diameter ponderosa pines (Covington et al., 2001;
Larson and Mirth, 2001).
For the sake of replication, each EB contained three treated units and
a control unit (12 total units; see Fig. 1). Each unit was approximately 40
acres and contained 20, 0.1-acre circular sampling plots (240 total
plots). The blocks were thinned in 1998–1999 and prescribed burned
in 2000 or 2001 (see http://www.gffp.org/fort_valley/frameset.htm for
more details).
The experiment implemented three different ecological restoration
treatment prescriptions that were designed to produce low, medium,
and high tree density stands after thinning treatments. These levels
reﬂect the different numbers of post-settlement trees selected to re-
place dead pre-settlement trees (as determined by pre-settlement
tree evidence, such as stumps, down logs, snags, and/or stump holes;
Friederici, 2003). The low-retention (i.e., full restoration) treatment
produces the least dense stand and is designated “full restoration”
because it comes closest to replicating the tree density found in this
area prior to Euro-American settlement as determined by pre-
settlement evidences. It replaces 1 pre-settlement tree with 1.5 post-
settlement trees, if those trees are greater than 16″ dbh, and with 3
post-settlement trees, if the replacements are smaller than 16″ dbh.
The medium level of retention (i.e., modiﬁed restoration) leaves 2
existing trees greater than 16″ dbh for each evidence of a pre-
settlement tree or 4 post-settlement trees for every evidence if the
Fig. 1. Map of the various units in Phase 1 of the Fort Valley Restoration Project. Units 1, 2, and 4 (EB 3) contained blackjack pine only. Units 5, 6, and 7 (EB 2) contained a mix of blackjack
and yellow pine. Units 10, 11, 12 (EB 1) contained yellow pine only (Larson and Mirth, 2001). Light thinning = high retention/minimal restoration, moderate thinning = medium
retention/modiﬁed restoration, and heavy thinning = low retention/full restoration.
3
D. Egan et al. / Forest Policy and Economics xxx (2015) xxx–xxx
Please cite this article as: Egan, D., et al., Ecological and social implications of employing diameter caps at a collaborative forest restoration project
near Flagstaff, Arizona, USA, Forest Policy and Economics (2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.forpol.2014.11.013

existing trees are less than 16″ dbh. The high level of retention
(i.e., minimal restoration) produces the densest stand of the three
levels. It calls for leaving 3 post-settlement trees for every pre-
settlement evidence if the existing trees are greater than 16″ dbh and
6 post-settlement trees for every evidence if the existing trees are less
than 16″ dbh. Replacement/retained trees are chosen from trees
existing within 60 feet of the pre-settlement tree evidence (Friederici
and Sanchez-Meador, 2005) in order to emulate the natural clumpy,
groupy structure that naturally occurred in the forest prior to
anthropogenic-induced changes.
3. Analysis of the ecological and social effects of a diameter cap at the
Fort Valley Ecosystem Restoration Project
In order to understand the ecological implications of a 16-inch diam-
eter cap, we set out to assess the difference in tree density and stand
basal area between capped and non-capped treatments at the Fort
Valley Ecosystem Restoration Project. We hypothesized that there
would be little difference in tree density or basal area within different
thinning intensities due to the implementation of the diameter cap.
Formanack also conducted and analyzed semi-structured interviews
with eight people involved in the process (ﬁve stakeholders in the
GCFP/GFFP collaborative, two Coconino National Forest employees,
and one representative of a local environmental organization) in order
to identify their beliefs and obtain their recollections of how the collab-
orative dealt with the diameter cap issue.
3.1. Ecological data analysis
In 2006, ERI ecologists collected overstory data to assess treatment
effects on forest density and tree size following Phase I of the Ft. Valley
Ecosystem Restoration Project. Trees per acre and basal area or BA
(i.e., the cross-sectional area of all stems of a tree species or all tree
stems in a stand measured at breast height, and expressed in terms of
per unit of area) were determined for pre- (1998) and post- (2006)
restoration treatments. A 16-inch diameter cap was then superimposed
on the 2006 data set to provide values for tree density and basal area per
acre for a capped restoration scenario. Those trees that were 16-inch
dbh or greater and thinned during Phase 1 were added back and their
observed growth increases were added to calculate basal area per acre
for the capped restoration scenarios. The capped and non-capped data
sets were then compared within each experimental block and treat-
ment using a 1-tailed, paired t-test with the p-value set at 0.05 (Table 1).
3.2. Ecological data analysis results
The comparisons between capped and non-capped showed signiﬁ-
cant differences in four out of the nine treated units, especially in EB 3
(Table 1). All treated units in EB 3, an area that had been previously
logged, indicated signiﬁcantly higher tree density and basal area when
a diameter cap was superimposed than did a cap-free prescription.
The EB 2 moderate retention unit also showed signiﬁcant differences
between a capped and non-capped prescription. The EB 3 had an in-
crease of 5 trees/acre and a 10 ft2/acre increase in BA across all treat-
ment units following a capped-constrained prescription. Meanwhile,
EB 1 had increases of 1 tree/acre (1 ft2/acre BA), and EB2 had increase
of 3 trees/acre (5 ft2/acre BA).
Interestingly, 60% of the large, but post-European settlement, trees
(≥16 inches) cut following Phase I of the Ft. Valley Ecosystem Restora-
tion Project were in EB 3, whereas 9% and 31% were cut in EB 1 and EB 2,
respectively. These results appear to be due to the variation in the pre-
treatment tree densities in the three EBs. Pretreatment tree densities
were signiﬁcantly greater in EB 1 and EB 2 (both in the experimental
forest and never subject to logging) than in EB 3 (Coconino National
Forest and subject to past logging) (Figs. 2–4). On average, treatment
units inside the experimental forest had twice as many trees than
units found outside the experimental forest (EB 3) due to the cessation
of ﬁre. The majority of trees in EB 1 and EB 2 were small in diameter
(in the 0 to 4-inch size class) and when their diameter distribution is
plotted on a graph, they produce a reverse J-shaped curve (Figs. 2–3).
Meanwhile, the same type of data from EB 3 creates a bell-shaped
curve that reaches its highest abundance of trees per acre at the
12-inch size class (Fig. 4). Across all thin-and-burn treatment units,
two of the 111 (1.8%) presettlement trees (i.e., those established before
1877) were cut as part of the treatment. Both of trees were in EB3.
Differences between treatment intensity (i.e., low-, medium-, high-
retention) in a capped and non-capped scenarios were indistinguish-
able in terms of in terms of tree density and basal area.
3.3. Discussion of ecological effects
The hypothesis that there would be little difference between capped
and non-capped restoration was not supported by the results, especially
those from EB 3. At Fort Valley, the data revealed that it was not the
intensity of the treatment that dictated a signiﬁcant difference between
capped and non-capped restoration treatments, but rather the site
history and the resulting tree size, which, in this case, was the difference
between protected areas (EB1 and EB2) and those that were logged
(EB3). This issue of available tree size plays a key role in terms of the
number of existing trees that are marked to save as replacement trees.
For example, if there are only few small trees and a 16-inch diameter
cap (and relatively more trees per acre in that size class), as was the
case in EB 3, then the result will be an area with higher tree densities
and greater basal area than is desirable in terms of obtaining protection
from crown ﬁres, increasing the growth of a grassy understory, and,
ultimately, producing a number of large, but not necessarily older, trees.
Treatment intensity showed no signiﬁcant difference between
capped and non-capped scenarios when all three experimental blocks
are examined together. It was only when individual units were analyzed
that signiﬁcant differences can be seen. Trees that fell within the 8.1–
16.0 inch range dominated EB 3 (Covington et al., 2001), while trees
that were less than 4 inches in diameter dominated EB 1 and EB 2.
Table 1
Mean (SE) of both tree density and stand basal area following restoration treatment with and without a 16 inch-diameter cap. For each EB block and treatment, bold text and different
lowercase letters indicate signiﬁcantly different means at P b 0.05.
Control
Low retention
Moderate retention
High retention
EB block
Cap
No cap
Cap
No cap
Cap
No cap
Cap
No cap
Tree per acre
EB1
651.0 (98.4)
651.0 (98.4)
73.5 (8.8)
73.5 (8.8)
79.0 (10.0)
77.5 (10.2)
73.0 (5.6)
72.5 (5.8)
EB2
406.5 (59.2)
406.5 (59.2)
70.5 (10.2)
69.5 (10.3)
81.0 (7.0)a
75.0 (7.5)b
140.5 (19.7)
140.0 (19.7)
EB3
269.5 (13.9)
269.5 (13.9)
41.0 (6.6)a
38.0 (6.7)b
59.5 (8.5)a
54.0 (9.0)b
92.0 (11.8)a
86.5 (11.9)b
BA (ft2/acre)
EB1
152.5 (10.9)
152.5 (10.9)
91.1 (7.4)
91.1 (7.4)
106.9 (9.4)
113.7 (8.5)
102.1 (9.8)
101.2 (10.1)
EB2
173.6 (14.5)
173.6 (14.5)
79.4 (9.5)
77.0 (9.5)
100.3 (8.2)a
88.8 (7.8)b
100.5 (7.2)
99.4 (7.3)
EB3
178.2 (8.6)
178.2 (8.6)
50.0 (7.5)a
43.9 (7.2)b
62.6 (7.7)a
50.6 (7.1)b
108.0 (9.4)a
96.4 (10.7)b
4
D. Egan et al. / Forest Policy and Economics xxx (2015) xxx–xxx
Please cite this article as: Egan, D., et al., Ecological and social implications of employing diameter caps at a collaborative forest restoration project
near Flagstaff, Arizona, USA, Forest Policy and Economics (2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.forpol.2014.11.013

This difference is related to the difference in historical context of these
blocks—EB 3 had been logged for large trees and later had thinned
from below (Larson and Mirth, 2001), whereas EB 1 and EB 2 have
been protected from logging and burning. Because of the differing distri-
bution in size classes before treatment, EB 3 has a higher probability of
tree removal within the 16-inch range. There are also signiﬁcantly
fewer trees per acre in EB 3, which leaves fewer trees to choose from
when marking and thinning take place. In the case of Fort Valley, it
appears that site history played a major role in how a diameter cap
would affect the restoration of stand structure in terms of tree density
and tree size.
3.4. Effects of a diameter cap on the GCFP/GFFP collaborative process
We used criteria sampling (Henry, 1990) to select participants to
interview about their thoughts regarding diameter caps and how
employing a diameter cap affected the collaborative process. Her inter-
viewees included members of the collaborative from the ERI, Grand
Canyon Trust, NAU College of Engineering, NAU School of Forestry,
and the Flagstaff Fire Department. She also interviewed USFS liaisons
to the collaborative and an individual from the Southwest Forest
Alliance. She developed and used a semi-structured guide for the inter-
views to obtain relevant and comparable information.
We conducted semi-structured interviews (either face-to-face or
telephone) with eight individuals during a one-month period. The
interviews were digitally recorded and transcribed. All data was
imported into QSR Nvivo 9 software, organized into principal themes
with graduated levels of detail (Miles and Huberman, 1994), and
analyzed for trends. Snowball sampling was applied (Goodman, 1961)
to thoroughly capture all perspectives within the partnership.
There were three themes to the questions: 1) What motivates peo-
ple/groups to implement a diameter cap? 2) What type of “atmosphere”
did discussions of implementing a diameter cap create within and
outside the collaborative? 3) How did interviewees think a diameter
cap would affect the outcome of restoration treatments at Fort Valley?
3.5. Interview results
The interviews revealed that there was general agreement that old-
growth trees were valuable components of the Southwest forest ecosys-
tem. Sixty-two percent of interviewees agreed that the implementation
of a diameter cap helped avoid litigation (Fig. 5), while 75% believed
that the idea of implementing a diameter cap created factions within
the collaborative (Fig. 6). Also, 71% of the interviewees thought that,
due to the stand structure present at Fort Valley, there would be little
structural difference between the capped and non-capped areas (Fig. 7).
3.6. Discussion of effects on the collaborative process
Plans for Phase 2 of the Fort Valley Restoration Project were
appealed by environmental groups three times during 1999 and 2000.
The U.S. Forest Service denied each of these appeals, which were
based on a variety of ecological, social, and legal concerns. While these
appeals were rendered as insigniﬁcant by the agency, according to the
members interviewed they had a deep effect on the collaborative
process and, ultimately, pushed the collaborative to accept the imple-
mentation of a diameter cap in order to move the project forward with-
out delays. Indeed, a majority of the collaborative's stakeholders were in
Figs. 2–4. Diameter distribution of trees per acre before and after restoration treatments
(not inﬂuenced by a diameter cap). Diameter size classes are in 4-inch increments. Tress
per acre are post-treatment.
Fig. 5. A majority of the respondents agreed that implementation of a 16-inch diameter
cap helped avoid litigation.
5
D. Egan et al. / Forest Policy and Economics xxx (2015) xxx–xxx
Please cite this article as: Egan, D., et al., Ecological and social implications of employing diameter caps at a collaborative forest restoration project
near Flagstaff, Arizona, USA, Forest Policy and Economics (2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.forpol.2014.11.013

general agreement that the implementation of a diameter cap was
important to increase the likelihood that restoration treatments would
not be halted by litigation.
While a diameter cap did help the collaborative avoid litigation,
according to those interviewed, it also created and/or reinforced
factions within the group by causing stakeholders to become engaged
in an issue that was ultimately deﬁned by someone winning and some-
one losing a debate. That said, the success of the GCFP/GFFP and the Fort
Valley project overall is due to in many ways to the stakeholders' ability
to see that controversy was normal and that continuing to work togeth-
er through various problems would ultimately result in successfully
implementing treatments on the ground. Thus, members were able to
keep the eyes on the greater mission of achieving the collaborative's
stated goals of 1) restoring the natural ecosystem functions and struc-
ture of ponderosa pine forests in Flagstaff's urban/wildland interface,
2) managing forest fuels to reduce the risk of catastrophic ﬁre, and
3) researching and demonstrating the key ecological, economic, and
social dimensions of restoration efforts.
4. Conclusion
The results of this study indicate that at Fort Valley:
• A 16-inch diameter cap was not necessary to protect old-growth trees
in ponderosa pine stands where there were sufﬁcient numbers of
small-diameter growing in a matrix of old-growth, like the conditions
found in EB 1 and EB 2. In both of these EBs, although especially in EB
1, the tree density per acre and the BA were roughly similar regardless
of whether a diameter cap was in place or not.
• In formerly logged ponderosa pine stands with large, but not neces-
sarily old, trees, like those found in EB 3, the 16-inch diameter cap
only served to increase both the tree density and basal area by limiting
the number of trees available for thinning.
• In all EBs, both capped and non-capped scenarios signiﬁcantly
reduced the tree density and basal area from what was recorded in
the control units.
• Differences between treatment intensity (i.e., low-, medium-, high-
retention) in a capped and non-capped scenarios were indistinguish-
able in terms of forest density and tree size in all EBs.
These ﬁrst two results reﬂect similar ﬁndings by other researchers
(e.g., Abella et al., 2006; Triepke et al., 2011). Moreover, the outcome
of this study strongly suggests that even if a decision is made for
socio-political reasons to implement diameter caps, this approach
should not be used as a “one-size-ﬁts-all” solution, but should be
applied in a manner that takes into account both site conditions and
stand management history. Finally, while decisions to implement
diameter caps are ultimately derived from the values and attitudes of
stakeholders, these results indicate that the fears and concerns of
environmental groups and other concerned citizens were not realized
at Fort Valley in terms of how the forest responded.
The Four Forests Restoration Initiative (4FRI) now underway in
Arizona, has taken a different and more nuanced approach to large
tree retention. The stakeholder group produced a “Large Tree Retention
Strategy” that urges protecting trees greater than 16 inches while
allowing the removal of larger diameter trees in situations where their
removal is deemed necessary and acceptable to a review committee
(Four Forests Restoration Initiative, 4FRI, 2012) to achieve ecological
goals and reduce the risk of unnatural ﬁre. And while Region 3 of the
Forest Service ultimately rejected this stakeholder proposal, it remains
a viable concept because it has the potential to provide environmental
groups with assurances that restoration treatments will primarily
focus on small trees while giving the agency the ﬂexibility it needs to
achieve outcomes that are both practical and ecologically sound. As
was the case with the Fort Valley Restoration Project, the success of
any forestry-related collaboration is partially due to addressing existing
fears and concerns, and, ultimately, ﬁnding a workable balance between
social and ecological perspectives.
Acknowledgments
This paper was adapted and revised from an earlier, unpublished
report for the ERI written by Alicia Formanack. We would also like to
acknowledge Dr. Wally Covington and Diane Vosick of the ERI for
their advice and help with this article. Two anonymous reviewers also
provided useful comments during the preparation of the manuscript
for this journal. This research was funded by a grant (Award # 10-DG-
11031600-050) from the USDA Forest Service. Northern Arizona Uni-
versity is an equal opportunity employer.
References
Abella, S.R., Fule, P.Z., Covington, W.W., 2006. Diameter caps for thinning southwestern
ponderosa pine forests: viewpoints, effects, and tradeoffs. J. For. 104, 407–414.
Abrams, J., Burns, S., 2007. Case Study of a Community Stewardship Success: The White
Mountain Stewardship Contract. Ecological Restoration Institute- Issues in Forest
Restoration, Flagstaff, AZ.
Baldwin Jr., A.D., De Luce, J., Pletsch, C. (Eds.), 1993. Beyond Preservation: Restoring and
Inventing Landscapes. University of Minnesota Press, St. Paul.
Center for Biological Diversity, 2001. Grand Canyon Forest Partnership abandons cap on
logging large trees. https://www.biologicaldiversity.org/news/press_releases/
LOGGINGCAP.HTML.
Coughlan, M.R., 2003. Large diameter trees and the political culture of “restoration:” a
case study with the Grand Canyon Forest Partnership, Flagstaff, Arizona. Ariz.
Anthropol. 15, 48–71.
Covington, W.W., Fulé, P.Z., Moore, M.M., Hart, S.C., Kolb, T.E., Mast, J.N., Sackett, S.S.,
Wagner, M.R., 1997. Restoration of ecosystem health in southwestern ponderosa
pine forests. J. For. 95 (4), 23–29.
Fig. 7. Seventy-one percent of the respondents agreed that a 16-inch diameter cap would
not affect the restoration of stand structure at Fort Valley.
Fig. 6. Three-quarters of the respondents agreed that implementation of a diameter cap
created or revealed factions within the collaborative group.
6
D. Egan et al. / Forest Policy and Economics xxx (2015) xxx–xxx
Please cite this article as: Egan, D., et al., Ecological and social implications of employing diameter caps at a collaborative forest restoration project
near Flagstaff, Arizona, USA, Forest Policy and Economics (2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.forpol.2014.11.013

Covington, W.W., Smith, H.B., Moore, M.M., Fulé, P.Z., 1998. Comments on Fort Valley
Urban/Wildland Restoration Issues. Ecological Restoration Program, School of Forestry,
Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ (www.for.nau.edu/forestry/ecorest/1998).
Covington, W.W., Smith, H.R., Fulé, P.Z., Moore, M.M., 2001. Report on the Experimental
Forest Treatments in the Flagstaff Wildland/Urban Interface. Ecological Restoration
Program, School of Forestry, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ (Submitted
to the USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station).
Four Forests Restoration Initiative (4FRI), 2012. Old Growth Protection and Large Tree
Retention Strategy. http://www.4fri.org/pdfs/documents/collaboration/old_growth_
protection-revised080812.pdf.
Friederici, P., 2003. The Flagstaff Model. In: Friederici, P. (Ed.), Ecological Restoration of
Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests. Island Press, Washington, D.C., pp. 1–25.
Friederici, P., Sanchez-Meador, A., 2005. Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to
Presettlement Conditions. Ecological Restoration Institute Working Paper 9. Ecological
Restoration Institute, Flagstaff, AZ.
Fulé, P.Z., Moore, M.M., Covington, W.W., 1997. Determining reference conditions for
ecosystem management in southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Ecol. Appl. 7 (3),
895–908.
Gatewood, S., 2010. Forest Restoration and Community Wildﬁre Protection: Ten Years of
Lessons Learned From the Greater Flagstaff Forest Partnership. Greater Flagstaff
Forest Partnership, Flagstaff, AZ.
Ghioto, G., 2000a. Forest Service Offers New Thinning Plan. Arizona Daily Sun (September
22).
Ghioto, G., 2000b. Appeal Denied. Arizona Daily Sun (December 22).
Ghioto, G., 2001. Activists Insist on Limited Thinning. Arizona Daily Sun (April 25).
Goodman, L.A., 1961. Snowball sampling. Annual of Mathematical Statistics 32, 148–170.
Henry, G.T., Sampling, Practical, 1990. SAGE Publications; Newbury Park. CA: v. 21.
Hoffman, M., Schulke, T., Crumbo, K., 2000. Why the Flagstaff Restoration Model Should
not be Applied to Public Forest Lands. Southwest Forest Alliance, Flagstaff, AZ.
Kaufmann, M.R., Binkley, D., Fulé, P.Z., Johnson, M., Stephens, S.L., Swetnam, T.W., 2007.
Deﬁning old growth for ﬁre-adapted forests of the western United States. Ecol. Soc.
12 (2), 15 (http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art15/).
Keele, D.M., Malmsheimer, R.W., Floyd, D.W., Perez, J.E., 2006. Forest Service land man-
agement litigation, 1989–2002. J. For. 104, 196–202.
Larson, D., Mirth, R., 2001. Projected economic impacts of a 16-inch tree cutting cap for
ponderosa pine forests within the Greater Flagstaff Urban-Wildlands. USDA Forest
Service Proceedings RMRS-P-22.
Miles, M.B., Huberman, A.M., 1994. Qualitative Data Analysis: An Expanded Sourcebook.
SAGE Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Moore, M.M., Covington, W.W., Fulé, P.Z., 1999. Evolutionary environment, reference
conditions, and ecological restoration: a southwestern ponderosa pine perspective.
Ecol. Appl. 9 (4), 1266–1277.
Moore, M.M., W.W. Covington, P.Z. Fule, S.C. Hart, T.E. Kolb, S.S. Sackett, and M.R. Wagner.
2008. Ecological restoration experiments (1992-2007) at the G.A. Pearson Natural
Area, Fort Valley Experimental Forest. Pages 290-304 in S.D. Olberding and M.M.
Moore (tech. cooords.), Proceedings of Fort Valley Experimental Forest—A century
of research 1908-2008. Conference Proceedings; August 7-9, 2008; Flagstaff, AZ.
Proc. RMRS-P-53CD. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service,
Rocky Mountain Research Station.
Noss, R.F., Beier, P., Covington, W.W., Grumbine, R.E., Lindenmayer, D.B., Prather, J.W.,
Schmiegelow, F., Sisk, T.D., Vosick, D.J., 2006. Recommendations for integrating
restoration ecology and conservation biology in ponderosa pine forests of the south-
western United States. Restor. Ecol. 14, 4–10.
Olberding, S.D., 2000. Fort Valley: The Beginnings of Forest Research. Forest History
Today, pp. 9–15 (Spring).
Shapiro, M., 1995. The United States. In: Tate, C., Vallinder, T. (Eds.), The Global Expansion
of Judicial Power. New York University Press, New York, pp. 43–66.
Triepke, F.J., Higgins, B.J., Weisz, R.N., Youtz, J.A., Nicolet, T., 2011. Diameter Caps and
Forest Restoration: Evaluation of a 16-inch Cut Limit on Achieving Desired
Conditions. USDA Forest Service Forestry Report FR-R3-16-3. U.S. Forest Service,
Southwestern Region, Regional Ofﬁce, Albuquerque, NM.
United States Fish and Wildlife Service, 1999. Biological Opinion Summary, Fort Valley
10 K. Response from US Fish and Wildlife Service to Fort Valley 10K proposal. http://
www.fws.gov/southwest/es/Arizona/Documents/Biol_Opin/99145_Ft_Valley_10K.
pdf.
United States Forest Service, 2000. Environmental Assessment for Fort Valley Ecosystem
Restoration Project. Coconino National Forest. http://www.fs.fed.us/r3/coconino/
nepa/ft_valley_01.html.
Velush, L., Tolan, M., 1999. Appeal delays Fort Valley Road Fire Reduction Project. Arizona
Daily Sun (June 18).
Wynsma, B., 2013. U.S. Forest Service collaboration process: solution or sham? Evergreen
Magazine (March 19. Online: http://evergreenmagazine.com/web/U_S_Forest_
Service_Collaboration_Process_Solution_or_Sham_-v3.html).
7
D. Egan et al. / Forest Policy and Economics xxx (2015) xxx–xxx
Please cite this article as: Egan, D., et al., Ecological and social implications of employing diameter caps at a collaborative forest restoration project
near Flagstaff, Arizona, USA, Forest Policy and Economics (2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.forpol.2014.11.013
