 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Long-term Herbivore Exclusion for Recovery of Buckbrush Populations 
During Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests in Northern Arizona  
By David W. Huffman, Director of Research and Development  
Introduction 
Open conditions created by restoration activities in 
ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa Laws.) forests of 
the American Southwest can lead to increases in 
understory plant productivity but also attract large 
ungulate herbivores. New plant growth stimulated 
by tree thinning and prescribed fire can provide 
greater forage quantity and quality for herbivores, 
but grazing pressure on the recovering understory 
may be high. Some management options during the 
period when understories are recovering include 
excluding herbivores from the site or protecting 
individual plants for a number of years following 
restoration treatments. Short-term protection of 
grazed species may provide opportunity for their 
escape through development of mass or structural 
defenses such as spines or thorns. For example, 
Huffman and Moore (2003) showed that two years 
after forest treatments buckbrush (Ceanothus 
fendleri Gray) plants protected from mule deer and Rocky Mountain elk had greater stem number, longer 
stems, and greater current-year biomass than unprotected plants. In contrast, branches of unprotected plants 
were heavily browsed and just 8 percent of these plants produced flowers. Herbivory pressure also may be 
lessened with increasing plant community diversity and as more forage options become available to herbi-
vores. However, it is unclear how long protection of grazed plants is needed. Chancellor et al. (2008) 
showed that buckbrush plants exposed to herbivores after seven years of protection had similar stem lengths 
and stem numbers as plants that continued to be protected. Leaf area and leaf biomass, however, were sig-
nificantly less on the recently exposed plants than on protected plants.   
 
In this study, we wanted to determine if long-term protection from herbivores was required to restore buck-
brush abundance and potential reproduction after forest restoration treatments that were comprised of tree 
thinning and prescribed fire Buckbrush is a shrub common in ponderosa pine forests of the southwestern 
U.S. It is important for soil nutrient budgets, understory structure, and habitat for wildlife. We re-measured 
buckbrush plots (10.8 ft2 (1 m2) in size) in the following groups: 1) unprotected (never protected from herbi-
vores); 2) short-term protection (exclosures installed in 1999, removed in 2006); and 3) long-term protection 
(exclosures installed in 1999 and maintained throughout the 12-year study period). 
 
 Fact Sheet: Long-term Herbivore Exclusion for Recovery of Buckbrush Populations During  
Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests in Northern Arizona  
October 2015 
Large herbivores such as mule deer (Odocoileus hemionus) and 
Rocky Mountain elk (Cervus elaphus nelsoni) are attracted to 
open conditions and new plant growth in areas receiving forest 
thinning and burning treatments. Photo by Brady Smith, USDA 
Forest Service, Coconino National Forest 

 
Results 
 Survival of buckbrush was significantly lower on un-
protected plots compared with plots given short-term 
protection and those with long-term herbivore protec-
tion (Fig. 1)   
 Plots with long-term protection had higher stem densi-
ties (> 50 stems per plot) than either short-term protec-
tion or unprotected plots. Most unprotected plots (90 
percent) had less than 10 aerial stems per plot.  
 Plots with long-term protection showed greater flower-
ing rates (> 50% of aerial stems flowering) than both 
short-term protection and unprotected groups.  
 We found a strong, positive relationship between prob-
ability of flowering and plant height, regardless of pro-
tection. 
Conclusions 
 Short-term protection following forest restoration treat-
ments marginally improved survival of buckbrush in a 
northern Arizona ponderosa pine ecosystem. 
 Herbivory pressure remained high over 12 years fol-
lowing restoration treatments and detrimentally affect-
ed potential reproduction of plants not receiving long-
term protection. 
 Managers may need to consider controlling large her-
bivores or their access to restoration sites for a number 
of years after implementation of tree thinning and pre-
scribed fire. 
 Long-term monitoring of populations of preferred browse species such as buckbrush may provide ef-
fective indicators of restoration success. 
Literature Cited 
Chancellor, W.W., D.W. Huffman, and M.M. Moore. 2008. Characteristics of buckbrush shrubs exposed to herbivores 
after seven years of protection. Pp. 171-175 in Olberding, S.D., M.M. Moore (tech coords.). Fort Valley Ex-
perimental Forest — a century of research 1908-2008. USDA Forest Service Proceedings, RMRS-P-53CD.  
Huffman, D.W., and M.M. Moore. 2003. Ungulate herbivory on buckbrush in an Arizona ponderosa pine forest. Jour-
nal of Range Management, 56:358-363. 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Contact 
Dave Huffman, David.Huffman@nau.edu  
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
 
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
 
Huffman, D.W., J.D. Springer, and W.W. Chancellor. 2015. Long-term herbivore exclusion for recovery of buckbrush 
(Ceanothus fendleri) populations during restoration of ponderosa pine forests in northern Arizona. Ecological 
Restoration, 33:274-281. (http://library.eri.nau.edu/gsdl/collect/erilibra/index/assoc/D2015023.dir/doc.pdf) 
Figure 1. Buckbrush plants receiving long-term 
(12 years) protection (top) from large herbivores had 
higher survival, greater stem densities, and higher 
rates of flowering than plants not receiving protection 
after restoration treatments (bottom). 
