Ecological restoration and ﬁne-scale forest structure regulation
in southwestern ponderosa pine forests
Matthew C. Tuten a,⇑, Andrew Sánchez Meador b,c, Peter Z. Fulé c
a Ouray Ranger District, Grand Mesa, Uncompahgre and Gunnison National Forest, 2505 South Townsend, Montrose, CO, United States
b Northern Arizona University, Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, United States
c Northern Arizona University, School of Forestry, Box 15018, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, United States
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 10 November 2014
Received in revised form 13 March 2015
Accepted 14 March 2015
Keywords:
Spatial heterogeneity
Spatial patterns
Within-stand
Silviculture
Ponderosa pine
Ecological restoration
a b s t r a c t
Fine-scale forest patterns are an important component of forest ecosystem complexity and spatial pat-
tern objectives are an increasingly common component of contemporary silviculture prescriptions in
dry ﬁre-adapted forests of North America. Despite their importance, questions remain regarding the
assessment of silvicultural treatments designed to meet spatial objectives. We initiated a replicated
silvicultural assessment of two forest management approaches commonly applied in dense ponderosa
pine forests of the Southwest United States: historical evidence-based ecological restoration guidelines
(ERG) and northern goshawk (Accipiter gentilis) foraging area management recommendations (GMR).
We compared stand-level characteristics, global tree location point patterns and tree group-level attri-
butes resulting from the marking of these approaches to current forest conditions and patterns of histori-
cal forest remnants in six, 2.02 ha stem mapped plots. We also assessed group-level Vegetative Structural
Stage (VSS; a classiﬁcation of ﬁne-scale forest structural development used to regulate ﬁne-scale spatial
patterns in these forests). ERG and GMR-based treatments signiﬁcantly reduced densities and basal area
from the current condition, but did not signiﬁcantly differ in density from historical forest remnant esti-
mates. GMR-based treatments retained greater stand level basal area than ERG-based treatments, pri-
marily in large, 28–48 cm tree diameter classes. GMR-based treatments approximated global tree
location point patterns of forest remnants better than ERG-based treatments, primarily due to a 5–6 m
minimum spacing of residual trees, but also likely due to speciﬁc aspects of ERG-based marking tech-
niques. Despite this difference, both treatments resulted in group-level characteristics similar to those
exhibited by historical forest remnants. Both treatments signiﬁcantly altered group-level VSS area and
reduced variation of tree diameters within classiﬁed VSS groups.
Our study provides insight how tree marking techniques using historical forest remnants may have
important effects on resulting ﬁne-scale forest structure patterns. We also demonstrate how the use of
global point or group-level pattern assessment methods can affect the evaluation of ﬁne-scale spatial pat-
tern objectives. Our analysis of VSS group characteristics highlights implementation and assessment
issues associated with group-level spatial pattern identiﬁcation, classiﬁcation and regulation. We con-
clude that group-level classiﬁcation and regulation is not necessary for maintaining ﬁne-scale spatial pat-
terns in complex ponderosa pine ecosystems subject to frequent ﬁre disturbances and changing future
climate conditions and societal demands. Both ERG and GMR-based approaches applied in this study
may have utility in maintaining ﬁne-scale spatial heterogeneity and promoting resiliency in Southwest
ponderosa pine forests.
Published by Elsevier B.V.
1. Introduction
1.1. Fine-scale forest structure management
Forest
spatial
pattern
heterogeneity
at
multiple-scales
is
increasingly recognized as an important component of forest struc-
tural complexity (Churchill et al., 2013; Puettmann et al., 2008).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2015.03.032
0378-1127/Published by Elsevier B.V.
⇑Corresponding author.
E-mail address: matthew.tuten@gmail.com (M.C. Tuten).
Forest Ecology and Management 348 (2015) 57–67
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Forest Ecology and Management
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/foreco

Variation in tree spatial patterns at scales ﬁner than those associ-
ated with forest stands (typically 10–100 ha) is a result of complex
interacting biotic and abiotic ecological processes (Franklin and
Van Pelt, 2004). Spatial heterogeneity not only inﬂuences future
tree growth and development, but is also important for the devel-
opment of understory plant communities (Grifﬁs et al., 2001;
Fahey and Puetmann, 2008), ﬁre behavior and effects (Fulé et al.,
2001; Heyerdahl et al., 2001; Agee and Skinner, 2005) and wildlife
habitat suitability (Reynolds et al., 1992; Turner et al., 1997; Dodd
et al., 2006). There is increasing recognition that the maintenance
of ﬁne-scale spatial heterogeneity in dry forests increases the
capacity of these ecosystems to adapt to a changing future climate
and persist and recover from disturbances over time and (Franklin
et al., 2007; Churchill et al., 2013).
Management for within-stand spatial heterogeneity, particu-
larly associated with natural disturbance regimes, is an increas-
ingly
common
objective
of
contemporary
silviculture
prescriptions, especially in dry ﬁre-adapted forests of North
America (North et al., 2009; O’hara and Nagel, 2013; Reynolds
et al., 2013). Management for speciﬁc spatial structures occurring
under natural disturbance regimes is a common objective of
Ecological Restoration and Ecological Forestry practices (Franklin
et al., 2007) and is considered essential for the management of for-
ests as complex and adaptive ecosystems (Puettmann et al., 2008).
Silvicultural treatments based upon reference conditions are
increasingly accepted as capable of increasing forest resilience to
disturbance and changing climate (Keane et al., 2009; Spies et al.,
2010).
Additionally, forest spatial structure and development require-
ments form the basis of management guidelines for many threat-
ened, endangered or sensitive bird and mammal species and
have been incorporated into public forest management regulations
(Hoffman et al., 1993; USDA Forest Service 2008, 2012, O’hara and
Nagel, 2013). Guidelines have proposed to create characteristics
and patterns associated with speciﬁc forest development stages
to promote associated nesting, denning, foraging or hiding habi-
tats, depending on the speciﬁc organism and landscape (for exam-
ple Abert’s squirrel (Sciurus aberti) nesting, Canada lynx (Lynx
canadensis) denning, or northern goshawk (Accipiter gentilis) fora-
ging). The suitability of contemporary forest structure and the suc-
cess or failure of silvicultural treatments intended to enhance or
develop spatial patterns relies on the ability of managers to classify
and quantify forest spatial patterns and attributes. Since managers
are often legally mandated to manage for ﬁne-scale threatened,
endangered or sensitive species habitat characteristics, the ability
to evaluate spatial patterns consistently and quantitatively is of
great importance to land management in many jurisdictions.
1.2. Importance to southwestern ponderosa pine forests
A legacy of past land management activities such as logging,
grazing and ﬁre suppression in many forests in North America that
were historically subject to frequent surface ﬁres has been the
development of dense, contiguous forested landscapes, highly sus-
ceptible to expensive and destructive stand replacing wildﬁres
(Dombeck et al., 2004). Many studies have shown contemporary
forests to have relatively homogeneous spatial patterns compared
with forests existing at the time of Euro-American settlement circa
1880 (Cooper, 1960; White, 1985; Sánchez Meador et al., 2009;
Larson
and
Churchill,
2012).
Within
southwestern
National
Forests there is broad agreement that forest management activities
are necessary across large areas of ponderosa pine forest to restore
forest densities and spatial patterns similar to those common in
the region prior to Euro-American settlement of the region in the
late 19th centuries. (Moore et al., 1999; Allen et al., 2002).
Ecological
Restoration
Guidelines
(ERG)
and
Goshawk
Management Recommendations (GMR) are two forest manage-
ment approaches that have been proposed to accomplish this goal
(Reynolds et al., 1992; Covington et al., 1997).
Ecological restoration efforts within ponderosa pine forests
have often relied on silvicultural treatments designed to reduce
tree densities and woody fuel accumulations in order to allow rein-
troduction of ecologically beneﬁcial surface ﬁres. Restoration of a
surface ﬁre regime is anticipated to maintain ecological function
and regulate structure in these forests over time (Moore et al.,
1999; Allen et al., 2002).
Management for forest structural patterns within the historical
range of ecosystem variability is a stated goal of ERGs (Moore
et al., 1999). These guidelines draw upon White’s (1985) observa-
tion in Northern Arizona ponderosa pine forests indicating trees in
groups (i.e., two or more trees with interlocking crowns were
uneven-aged, ranging in age from 33 to 268 years. ERG-based
methods, therefore, often attempt to manage for uneven-aged or
multi-aged tree groups (Moore et al., 1999). The ERG-based mark-
ing approach uses the location and density of historical forest rem-
nants (old trees, stumps, snags, and stump holes predating
settlement of the region by Europeans in the 1870–1880s) as
reference for the desired spatial pattern and density of the
restored forest. Using this method, treatments typically retain all
trees older than approximately 135 years, so-called ‘‘presettle-
ment’’ trees, as well as 1–3 younger ‘‘replacement’’ trees within
a predetermined search distance of each dead presettlement forest
remnant (Covington et al., 1999) (Fig. 1). The resulting forest
structure is intended to approximate the ﬁne-scale forest structure
patterns existing in the stand prior to the disruption of the natural
frequent-surface ﬁre regimes around the time of Euro-American
settlement.
Fig. 1. ERG Historical Evidence-based Marking. (A) Using this approach, all pre
Euro-American settlement (1870–1880) era live trees (A-dotted circles) and
presettlement forest remnants (A-dashed circles) are identiﬁed. (B) All presettle-
ment era trees are retained and each remnant is replaced with the closest (two in
this example) post-settlement era trees within a predetermined search distance
(represented by black arrows in B) and the remaining post-settlement trees are
thinned.
58
M.C. Tuten et al. / Forest Ecology and Management 348 (2015) 57–67

The GMR-based approach focuses speciﬁcally on developing
and sustaining plant and animal habitats that form the foundation
of the food web for the northern goshawk (A. gentilis) (Reynolds
et al., 1992, 2006; Long and Smith, 2000). It has been selected by
the U.S. Forest Service to guide forest management National
Forests of the Southwest in areas where northern goshawk nests
have been documented (Youtz, 2006). A fundamental premise of
the GMRs is that northern goshawk and its prey populations are
limited by available food and suitable habitat (Reynolds et al.,
1992). The goal of the GMRs is to create a range of forest habitats
within a 2356 hectare (ha) post-ﬂedgling family area and foraging
area surrounding goshawk nests, suitable for goshawk nesting as
well as habitat for a broad range of plants and animals comprising
the goshawk food web (Reynolds et al., 1992, 2006).
In contrast to White’s (1985) ﬁnding of uneven-aged tree
groups, the GMR-based approach draws upon work by Cooper
(1960) in central Arizona who reported that presettlement pon-
derosa pine forests were multi-aged at coarse scales, but were
comprised of somewhat homogenously sized, even-aged groups
of trees with interlocking crowns at ﬁner scales. The Vegetative
Structural Stage (VSS) forest structure classiﬁcation was adapted
for use in the Southwest to serve as a conceptual framework for
management of such even-aged groups (Reynolds et al., 1992).
This classiﬁcation system, originally developed for use in eastern
Oregon, but widely employed in the National Forests (Thomas,
1979), classiﬁes forest structure into 0.04–0.4 ha tree groups of
six structural classes ranging from seedlings (VSS1, 0–2.5 cm
DBH), saplings and poles (VSS2, 2.5–12.7 cm DBH), mature small
to mid-sized and aged trees (VSS3 and 4; 12.8–30.2 cm DBH and
30.3–45.7 cm DBH respectively), to old, large diameter trees (VSS
5
and
6;
45.8–61.0 cm
and
60.0 + cm
DBH
respectively)
(Reynolds et al., 1992, 2006). The long-term management goal of
the GMR-based approach is to regulate forest structure at ﬁne-
scales by balancing the area of forest groups classiﬁed by VSS
through the use of repeated management entries. Additionally,
the GMRs require certain criteria such as within-group canopy
cover, maximum opening sizes, snags and downed woody debris
density and reserve trees (Reynolds et al., 1992). Lastly, presettle-
ment forest remnants (old trees, logs, stumps, snags) are often used
as guides for site-speciﬁc tree densities and spatial patterns (Youtz,
2006; Youtz et al., 2008). While not mentioned in the original
GMRs (Reynolds et al., 1992), the use of forest remnants is a recent
effort intended to bring GMR desired future conditions closer to
local presettlement forest densities and spatial patterns (Youtz,
2006; Youtz et al., 2008).
Speciﬁc forest spatial patterns are an explicit objective of both
ERG and GMR guidelines. Despite the importance of ﬁne-scale for-
est structures to silvicultural objectives, spatial forest structure
changes resulting from either ERG or GMR-based treatments have
not been formally quantiﬁed. We designed a study to observe for-
est spatial patterns and non-spatial structure resulting from appli-
cation of ERG and GMR-based treatments in ponderosa pine forests
in order to determine:
 How closely each approach approximates the densities and tree
location point patterns and group-level characteristics exhib-
ited by historical forest remnants.
 The differences in forest spatial patterns and non-spatial struc-
ture resulting from each approach.
 Changes in group-level Vegetative Structural Stage (VSS) char-
acteristics and distributions resulting from each approach.
2. Methods
2.1. Study site
The study area is an approximately 2000 ha area ranging in ele-
vation from 2260 to 2350 meters (m), located on the western edge
of the Kaibab Plateau in the Kaibab National Forest, Arizona, USA
(1123000W, 363000N). Soils across the area are derived from por-
ous, Permian-age Kaibab limestone rock layer (USDA, 1991).
Annual precipitation is bimodal, split between winter snowfall
and
late
summer
thunderstorms,
averaging
52 cm
annually
between 1981 and 2010 (PRISM Climate Group, Oregon State
University; http://prism.nacse.org). Pure ponderosa pine stands
cover the majority of the study area, with scattered groups of
Gambel oak (Quercus gambelii Nutt.) and aspen (Populus tremu-
loides Michx.) also present. Since the latter two species were rela-
tively rare throughout the study area, only ponderosa pine forest
structure information is presented.
Presettlement mean ﬁre return intervals ranged from 6 to
12 years in a research site with the same vegetation type approxi-
mately 25 km south of the study area (Fulé et al., 2003). Reduction
of grassy fuels by livestock beginning in 1880 and large deer herds
Fig. 2. Historical Forest Remnant and VSS Classiﬁed Stem Maps for Plot 4. PRE = Historical Forest Structure Remnants, CUR = Current conditions, ERG = Ecological Restoration
Guidelines, GMR = Goshawk Management Recommendations. All groups shown above are deﬁned by the intersection of 80th percentile crown radius (2.6 m) buffers at each
remnant or tree location. Only CUR, ERG and GMR groups have been classiﬁed by VSS.
M.C. Tuten et al. / Forest Ecology and Management 348 (2015) 57–67
59

during the 1920’s (Rasmussen, 1941; Merkle, 1962), as well as
active ﬁre suppression efforts beginning in the 1920s, nearly elimi-
nated surface ﬁres during the 20th century (Fulé et al., 2003). Fire
exclusion is largely responsible for the current high densities of
trees (White and Vankat, 1993; Fulé et al., 2002, 2003).
2.2. Plot selection
We stratiﬁed the study areas using the following criteria:
(1) Elevations of 2210–2360 m. Locally, forests within this eleva-
tion band are predominantly of the ponderosa pine type.
(2) Less than 15% slope. This minimized variation in forest struc-
ture patterns due to the inﬂuence of aspect on forest species
composition and spatial pattern.
(3) Previously harvested forests. Unharvested or very lightly har-
vested forests were excluded from the study due to their
relative rarity across the Kaibab Plateau and southwestern
ponderosa pine forests.
We randomly located six, two-ha sites within the stratiﬁed area.
A two-ha plot size allows assessment of ﬁne-scale tree spatial pat-
terns, features ranging in extent from approximately 0.02–0.3 ha
(Cooper, 1960; White, 1985; Sánchez Meador et al., 2009, 2011).
Since ﬁeld resources were limited, this plot size and number was
chosen as a compromise between measuring very few, large area
plots (i.e. low replication, but capturing broader-scale spatial pat-
terns) and many small area plots (i.e. high replication, but unable
to capture all but the very ﬁnest-scale spatial patterns).
2.3. Plot marking and mapping
In
2007,
Richard
Reynolds,
lead
author
of
Management
Recommendations for the Northern Goshawk in the Southwestern
United States (Reynolds et al., 1992), and crew members used col-
ored ﬂagging to mark trees to be retained under a GMR-based fora-
ging area prescription. This marking approach attempted to create
a plot-level mosaic of unforested openings and groups of trees with
high canopy cover (>40%). During marking activities, markers
relied on old trees, down logs and stumps as a guide to the desired
size (area, number of trees), density and spacing of tree groups.
Due to the relatively small size of the stem-mapped plots, GMR-
based tree markings were not marked and subsequently adjusted
to meet the proportional area targets published within the guide-
lines. This marking effort should be considered as representative
of a ﬁrst management entry to move these stands closer toward
a future desired VSS distribution.
Following tree marking, we used a reference grid of survey
tapes to map locations of all live trees taller than 2.54 cm DBH
(corresponding to all trees VSS 2 and larger) and all presettlement
forest remnants (i.e. cut-stumps, snags, downed logs and stump-
holes) within each plot. For each mapped tree and historical forest
remnant we recorded species, diameter at breast height (or a
coarse estimate of diameter at stump height, when necessary),
condition (living or snag/log classes), bark color, and presence or
absence of ﬂagging (indicating retention in the GMR-based pre-
scription). After mapping we removed all ﬂagging from each
marked tree.
Later the same year, staff from the Ecological Restoration
Institute used an ERG-based prescription to mark trees within
the same plots following an established ecological restoration
marking protocol (Covington et al., 1999). Marking personnel
attempted to retain all trees with old characteristics (i.e. platy yel-
low bark, ﬂat topped growth forms and large diameters). In addi-
tion to these trees, markers retained an additional 1.5 ‘‘post-
settlement’’ replacement trees for each presettlement forest
remnant as described by Covington et al. (1999) and Moore et al.
(1999). Markers attempted to use the closest proximity post-set-
tlement replacement trees for each historical forest remnant,
resulting in an unregulated selection of post-settlement leave tree
diameters. The ﬁeld staff used a minimum 5–6 m spacing of post-
settlement trees in order to encourage residual tree growth, a sig-
niﬁcant modiﬁcation to the existing ERG marking guidelines.
To
minimize
potential
measurement
bias,
no
personnel
involved with marking activities were involved with tree mapping
activities. Although no trees were cut in eithercase, locations and
attributes of ﬂagged ‘‘leave trees’’ resulting from the marking of
each prescription have been considered synonymous with thinning
treatment results for the purposes of this silvicultural evaluation.
2.4. Historical forest remnant deﬁnition
All living trees of any size with yellow platy bark and other old-
age characteristics (large diameter branches, dead tops, mature
growth
form)
were
considered
historical
forest
remnants.
Informal ﬁeld increment boring tests indicated trees with diame-
ters at breast height greater than 44.4 cm diameter typically ger-
minated prior to the approximate settlement date of 1880 and
were therefore present at the time of Euro-American settlement
of the area (D. Lund personal communication). We identiﬁed dead
historical forest evidences, such as snags, stumps and downed logs
by several morphological characteristics including diameter, the
presence of yellow platy bark and level of decomposition. We com-
bined location and attribute information for all live presettlement
trees with that of dead presettlement forest remnants for preset-
tlement forest density and spatial pattern analyses.
The same morphological historical forest remnant identiﬁcation
approach was used by marking crews of both ERG and GMR treat-
ments to quickly assess presettlement forest structure. The results
of historical forest remnant analysis in this study (PRE) should be
considered a coarse estimate of presettlement forest structure pat-
terns that might be made by marking crews. It serves as a repre-
sentation of the site-speciﬁc spatial patterns that implementers
of both ERG and GMR could realistically attempt to emulate
through silvicultural treatments. It should not be considered a
reconstruction of historical forest patterns at a speciﬁc point in
the past, reported elsewhere in forestry literature (Moore et al.,
2004; Sánchez Meador et al., 2011).
2.5. Canopy cover
To assess canopy cover a predicted a crown radius for each
mapped and measured tree using the following regression of tree
diameter and crown radius developed by Sánchez Meador et al.
(2011):
R ¼ 0:1387ðDÞ0:7901
where R = Crown radius in meters and D = Diameter at breast height
in centimeters.
We modeled canopies for all mapped trees using a vector GIS
approach by buffering tree locations using crown radii estimated
with this method. An estimate of percent canopy cover was made
by comparing the total estimated canopy area within each plot to
the total plot area (2.02 ha) (Fig. 2).
2.6. Global tree point patterns
We assessed global tree point patterns within each stand to
determine if they were uniform, random or aggregated at different
scales using the Ripley’s K(d) function (Ripley, 1976, 1977, 1981)
with a square root, variance stabilizing transformation of K(d) to
L(d)  d (Besag, 1977). Signiﬁcant aggregation or uniformity was
60
M.C. Tuten et al. / Forest Ecology and Management 348 (2015) 57–67

tested by comparing observed L(d)  d values to a distribution of
values from 999 simulated random point patterns (Upton and
Fingleton, 1985; Dale, 1999). Goodness-of-ﬁt (GoF) tests were per-
formed to assess the overall ﬁt of the observed functions with the
null model (see Loosmore and Ford, 2006 for details) at both a the
global (plot extent) and ﬁne scale (0–6 m, Sánchez Meador et al.,
2011; Larson and Churchill, 2012). Results for each of the six K(d)
functions calculated were then combined into a pooled K(d) func-
tion, following the procedure proposed by Diggle (2003). In brief,
the treatments implemented were intended to be identical for all
six plots (ERG and GMR treatments), therefore we treated the six
plots as replicates and tested our hypothesis on the pooled data
(Diggle, 2003; Illian et al., 2008). For pooled analyses, we used
Baddeley’s ratio regression weighted average estimator (Baddeley
et al., 1993; Illian et al., 2008), which performs well with K(d)
(Pawlas, 2011) and has been applied with success in previous stud-
ies (Sánchez Meador and Moore, 2010; Larson et al., 2012). All spa-
tial analyses were completed using scripts written in R version
3.0.1 (R Core Team, 2014) using the spatstat package (Baddeley
and Turner, 2005).
2.7. Group characteristics
To assess tree group characteristics we identiﬁed groups of
trees comprised of two or more trees. While the selection of speci-
ﬁc group delineation criteria can be a somewhat arbitrary process,
we used an approach rooted in the literature (White, 1985; Lang,
1994; Sánchez Meador et al., 2011) and in contemporary forestry
practice in the Southwest (Reynolds et al., 1992; Youtz et al.,
2008). To deﬁne groups we used a distance-based group member-
ship criterion similar to Sánchez Meador et al. (2011), but used the
80th percentile crown radius (Refer to 2.5 Canopy Cover) for all
trees in the study resulting in a radius of 2.6 m. We chose the
80th percentile crown radius because this value approximates
the potential area of inﬂuence for a typical tree over the course
of its growth and development. A strict crown radius membership
criterion would result in many isolated (i.e. one tree group) small
trees, despite these trees often being aggregated very close to other
small trees that would, with future growth, form a group with
other adjacent trees. Further, the area currently occupied by small
trees would be disproportionately low due to their current small
crown radius, resulting in an inherently small representation of
the growing space occupancy associated with these trees over
time. By using an 80th percentile crown radius delineation criteria,
we also attempt to standardize group area estimates, thereby
facilitating the comparison of large and small tree group areas.
We developed and used a custom vector classiﬁcation model to
summarize the attributes of the individual trees comprising each
group using geographic information systems (ArcMap v10.1).
Group VSS classiﬁcation was determined by using the VSS class
of the trees contributing the majority of the basal area to the group,
an approach mandated by the GMRs (Reynolds et al., 1992; Youtz
et al., 2008) (Fig. 2).
2.8. Statistical comparisons
Whenever possible, stand and group level attribute means
(n = 6) resulting from each treatment (PRE, CUR, ERG, GMR) were
assessed for signiﬁcant differences using the Prism 6 Graphpad sta-
tistical software package (2014). Assumptions of normality were
assessed using the Shapiro–Wilk test (alpha = 0.05). If assumptions
of normality were not rejected, as was the situation for all stand
level metrics, Tukey’s Multiple Comparison Test was used to com-
pare all possible combinations of attribute means (Tukey, 1949). If
assumptions of normality were not met, as was the situation for all
group-level and VSS attribute comparisons, the non-parametric
Dunn’s Multiple Comparison Test was used to compare all possible
combinations of attribute means (Dunn, 1964). A familywise alpha
level of 0.05 was used for both parametric and non-parametric
multiple comparison tests.
3. Results
3.1. Plot-level metrics
Tree densities resulting from ERG- or GMR-based treatments
were not signiﬁcantly different from historical forest remnant
(PRE) densities, but PRE, ERG and GMR average densities were sig-
niﬁcantly different from current (CUR) forest densities (Table 1).
GMR-based treatments resulted in a signiﬁcantly higher average
basal area versus ERG-based treatment (21.8 m2 ha1 versus
18.6 m2 ha1). Both of these treatments differed signiﬁcantly from
the current forest basal area average (29.2 m2/ha1). Average stand
canopy cover, as determined by simulated tree canopy area as a per-
centage of the total plot area, did not signiﬁcantly differ between
ERG and GMR-based treatments (23.7% and 25.5% respectively),
but did differ signiﬁcantly from current forest conditions (35.6%)
(Table 1).
Mean diameter distributions (n = 6) featuring 4 cm diameter
classes and associated mean skewedness and kurtosis values are
shown in Fig. 3. Treatments greatly reduced small diameter trees
and retained the vast majority of trees over 48 cm DBH. ERG-based
treatments resulted in a more uniform average distribution of trees
across all size classes when compared to GMR-based treatments,
with greater absolute densities of trees in the smallest size classes
(0–28 cm DBH). GMR-based treatments retained absolutely more
middle size trees (28–48 cm DBH), than ERG-based treatments.
3.2. Point pattern analysis
Living, presettlement era trees and non-living presettlement
forest remnants were signiﬁcantly aggregated on average at lag
distances from 0 to 30 m, with the greatest aggregation intensity
occurring at distances around 6 m (Fig. 4). Beyond this distance,
global tree location patterns were no longer signiﬁcantly different
from a random pattern. The historical forest remnant aggregation
pattern contrasts with contemporary forest conditions where sig-
niﬁcant (p = 0.001) and intense aggregation was observed at all dis-
tances from 0 to 70 m (Fig. 4).
Both treatments signiﬁcantly exhibited tree spatial pattern dif-
ferent from random across a range of scales when compared to con-
temporary forest conditions. While the ERG-based treatments
resulted in a signiﬁcant (p = 0.017) uniform tree spacing (i.e. evenly
spaced trees) at small lag distances (0–6 m) and aggregation at dis-
tances from 17 to 24 m (p = 0.015).GMR-based treatments resulted
in signiﬁcant tree aggregation from 0 to 54 m (p < 0.001). Patterns
became indistinguishable from a random pattern beyond this dis-
tance (p = 0.09). The greatest aggregation intensity was observed
at ﬁne scales less than 15 m (p 6 0.001), with a peak at an average
distance of 4 m. The intensity of this aggregated pattern was
approximately seven times more pronounced than the greatest
intensity of point patterns resulting from ERG-based treatments
(Fig. 4).
3.3. Group-level patterns
ERG-based treatments resulted in signiﬁcantly more mean sin-
gle, isolated trees (43.9 trees/ha1) and signiﬁcantly fewer large
(>10 trees/group) groups (0.1 groups/ha1) per acre than current
forest conditions (21.2 trees and 7.4 groups/ha1 respectively),
but did not differ signiﬁcantly from the results of GMR-based
M.C. Tuten et al. / Forest Ecology and Management 348 (2015) 57–67
61

treatments (29.1 trees and 1.6 groups/ha1) or historical forest
remnants (36.7 trees and 0.9 groups/ha1) (Table 2). Mean maxi-
mum group size resulting from ERG-based treatments was 8.5
trees, signiﬁcantly less than the mean current maximum group size
208.7, but not signiﬁcantly different from mean maximum GMR
and PRE group sizes (19.9 and 16.3 trees respectively). The overall
mean frequency distribution of different group sizes for both treat-
ments and current and historical forest structure estimates are
shown in Fig. 5. Mean group area per acre resulting from ERG
and GMR-based treatments (25.0 and 28.4 m2/ha1 respectively)
was signiﬁcantly smaller than the current mean group area per
acre (74.7 m2/ha1), but not signiﬁcantly different from the mean
historical forest remnant group area (28.2 m2/ha1) (Table 2).
VSS 3 and 4 groups were the most abundant by area on average
prior to treatment and were reduced the greatest degree by both
treatments (Fig. 6, top). Treatments did not result in signiﬁcant
average reductions of the smallest and largest two VSS classes
compared to the current forest condition. ERG treatments did
result in a signiﬁcant reduction of VSS 4 group area and GMR-
based treatments resulted in a signiﬁcant reduction of VSS 3 group
area when compared to current forest conditions.
The average range of tree diameters within groups varied from
less than 5 cm DBH within VSS 2 to over 40 cm DBH within VSS 6
groups prior to treatment. Both ERG and GMR-based treatments
resulted in a signiﬁcantly lower mean range of tree diameters
within all groups (8.3 cm) versus the current mean range of diame-
ters within groups (15.6 cm) (Table 2). This reduction was not sig-
niﬁcant in VSS 2 and 3 classiﬁed groups. ERG and GMR treatments
both signiﬁcantly reduced the mean range of diameter within VSS
4 groups from current forest group diameter range, but only GMR
treatments signiﬁcantly reduced the mean range of diameters
within VSS 5 and 6 groups. Group average tree diameter range
tended to increase with increasing VSS classiﬁcation regardless of
treatment type (Fig. 6, bottom).
Fig. 3 shows the average VSS group classiﬁcation distribution of
trees in each diameter class. The current condition forest group
structure shows the lowest VSS group classiﬁcations are restricted
to a smaller range of diameter classes, but larger VSS group classi-
ﬁcations tend to contain a broad range of tree diameters. Both ERG
and GMR-based treatments reduced the range of VSS classes
associated with the smallest diameter trees, indicating that follow-
ing treatments smaller diameter trees are more likely to be con-
tained in lower VSS class groups than before treatment.
4. Discussion
4.1. Patterns of historical forest remnants
Average presettlement forest remnant densities of stands
assessed in this study were similar to results of studies of nearby
Table 1
Average non-spatial stand-level forest structure metrics associated with treatments (n = 6). All combinations of means for each attribute tested with Tukey’s Multiple Comparison
Test. Familywise alpha = 0.05. P values for all signiﬁcant comparisons shown.
CUR
ERG
GMR
PRE
Adjusted P values
Mean
SE
Mean
SE
Mean
SE
Mean
SE
Trees per hectare
443.4A
71.7
127.2B
10.3
143.6B
9.0
141.6B
12.3
CUR-PRE p < 0.0240, CUR-ERG p < 0.0170, CUR-GMR p < 0.0319
Basal area per hectare
29.2A
1.8
18.6B
1.1
21.8C
0.7
–
–
CUR-ERG p < 0.0054, CUR-GMR p < 0.0134, GMR-ERG p < 0.0094
Canopy cover
35.6A
2.7
23.7B
1.3
25.5B
1.3
–
–
CUR-ERG p < 0.0090, CUR-GMR p < 0.0169
Fig. 3. Mean (n = 6) tree density distribution by vegetative structural stage classes. CUR = Current conditions, ERG = Ecological Restoration Guidelines and GMR = Goshawk
Management Recommendations. Shading indicates the average VSS group membership for trees in each diameter class. Error bars equal one standard error of the mean.
62
M.C. Tuten et al. / Forest Ecology and Management 348 (2015) 57–67

areas reported in the literature. Fulé et al. (2002) used den-
drochronological methods to reconstruct presettlement ponderosa
pine densities in three areas at slightly higher elevations on the
North Rim of Grand Canyon within Grand Canyon National Park.
Densities reported in these three sites averaged 152.7 pines ha1,
11 trees ha1 or 8% higher than the mean of 141.6 trees ha1
observed in this study.
Spatial pattern analysis of historical forest remnants indicates a
high degree of aggregation at ﬁne-scales (<10 m lag distances) simi-
lar to other presettlement ponderosa pine forest spatial patterns
observed in surface-ﬁre adapted forests of the Southwest and west-
ern US. Sánchez Meador et al. (2011) reported statistically signiﬁ-
cant aggregation patterns at lag distances less than 40 m, with a
peak in aggregation at lag distances of 6–8 m for presettlement for-
est structures on six plots near Flagstaff, Arizona. Other studies of
presettlement forest spatial patterns in surface ﬁre-adapted forests
of the western U.S. report aggregated patterns at scales up to 20 m
(Harrod et al., 1999; Larson et al., 2012; Lydersen et al., 2013;
Youngblood et al., 2004). At coarser scales (>20 m lag distances),
there was a fairly consistent transition from aggregated to random
Fig. 4. Results of the univariate L(d)  d analysis combined across plots (n = 6) sampled for: PRE = Historical Forest Structure Remnants, CUR = Current Forest Conditions,
ERG = Ecological Restoration Guidelines and GMR = Goshawk Management Recommendations. Black lines show the difference between values observed for the L(d)  d
function and the null model (complete spatial randomness), while dashed lines represent an approximate 95% conﬁdence envelope of the L(d)  d function minus the
expectation of the null model (calculated under 999 simulations). Goodness-of-ﬁt (GoF) results and statistical signiﬁcance (p) are also shown for the plot extent, with n being
the number of plots considered for each analysis.
Table 2
Average group-level metrics by treatment type (CUR = Current conditions, ERG = Ecological Restoration Guidelines, GMR = Goshawk Management Recommendations and
PRE = Historical Forest Remnants). All combinations of means for each attribute tested with Non-Parametric Dunn’s Multiple Comparison Test. Familywise alpha = 0.05. P values
for all signiﬁcant comparisons shown.
CUR
ERG
GMR
PRE
P values
Mean
SE
Mean
SE
Mean
SE
Mean
SE
Single tree frequency/ha1
21.2A
2.9
43.9B
3.3
29.1AB
0.2
36.7AB
2.9
CUR-ERG p < 0.0152
All tree groupsa frequency/ha1
31.4A
3.0
28.6A
2.4
29.0A
2.7
27.3A
2.2
Large tree groupsb (>10 trees) frequency/ha1
7.4A
0.6
0.1B
0.1
1.6AB
0.4
0.9AB
0.4
CUR-ERG p < 0.0009
Maximum group size (trees)
208.7A
97.5
8.5B
1.2
19.7AB
4.2
16.3AB
1.8
CUR-ERG p < 0.0002
Group area (m2/ha1)
74.7A
15.3
25.0B
0.9
28.4B
1.5
28.2AB
1.8
CUR-ERG p < 0.0105, CUR-GMR p < 0.0437
DBH range (cm)
15.6A
1.1
8.3B
0.5
8.3B
0.4
–
–
CUR-ERG p < 0.0281, CUR-GMR p < 0.0281
a Includes all groups of two or more trees with interlocking crowns; See 2.7 Group Characteristics.
b Includes groups of trees comprised of 10 or more trees with interlocking crowns.
Fig. 5. Group size (i.e. trees per group) frequency distributions for each treatment
and condition. CUR = Current conditions, ERG = Ecological Restoration Guidelines;
GMR = Goshawk
Management
Recommendations
and
PRE = Historical
Forest
Evidences. Error bars equal one standard error of the mean.
M.C. Tuten et al. / Forest Ecology and Management 348 (2015) 57–67
63

spatial patterns. This trend also is supported by other studies in
western and southwestern North American ponderosa pine forests
(Harrod et al., 1999; Youngblood et al., 2004; Binkley et al., 2008;
Sánchez Meador et al., 2009, 2011). Group-level estimates of histori-
cal forest structure in surface ﬁre-adapted forests have also been
described in several recent studies (Sánchez Meador et al., 2011;
Churchill et al., 2013; Lydersen et al., 2013). While the locations
and assessment methods differ in each of these studies, each reports
that single trees, smaller group sizes and fewer large groups were
common in historical forests as compared to contemporary forests.
Thus, the assumptions underlying the spatial pattern objectives of
both ERG and GMR-based approaches appear to be supported by glo-
bal and group-level historical forest structure spatial patterns in
these stands.
4.2. Treatment effects on forest structure and pattern
The observed silvicultural treatments demonstrate trade-offs
associated with forest management objectives. Both treatments
moved tree densities closer to levels evidenced by historical forest
remnants. Despite signiﬁcant differences in basal area between
treatments, absolute differences were not large, with only a 17%
average difference in basal area between ERG and GMR-based
treatments. The differences in basal area may be primarily attribu-
table to signiﬁcantly different tree densities in the 28–48 cm
diameter classes (Fig. 3). Density differences in these size classes
may be related to the objectives of GMRs. Trees in large diameter
classes are preferred habitat for the tassel-eared squirrel (S. aberti)
and other closed-canopy dependent goshawk prey species and
management for this habitat component is an objective of the
GMRs (Patton, 1984; Reynolds et al., 1992). Since the GMR-based
approach did not intend to regulate VSS group area during this
exercise, continued implementation of the GMRs over time would
likely result in reduction of these 28–48 cm diameter trees in a
future management entry.
The ERG-based approach is inherently less focused on the cre-
ation of speciﬁc habitat groups than the GMR-based one, its intent
being to create mixed-aged (more accurately, mixed-sized) groups
of trees. In this study, as marked, the ERG-based approach will
result in the short-term removal of more 28–48 cm diameter trees
at the expense of close canopy-dependent prey habitat groups. This
difference is important in two ways. First, harvests of trees in these
size classes could produce valuable forest products and, depending
on market conditions, would likely contain products that could be
used to offset the cost of treatment. Since the area of trees in these
size classes would eventually need to be reduced with the GMR-
based approach, the GMR-based approach retains the product
value of these trees for future harvest. Second, the ERG-based
approach retains a marginally greater degree of the contemporary
diameter distribution variability, speciﬁcally in the smaller diame-
ter classes. These smaller diameter trees could potentially be
associated with greater resistance to insect related mortality which
typically affects larger diameter trees (Covington et al., 1997), and
provided that height to diameter ratios are considered in their
selection, should provide a degree of stand-level resistance to
windthrow (Wonn and O’hara, 2001).
4.3. Silvicultural treatment outcomes: assessment methods, precision
and trade-offs
Although both ERG and GMR-based treatments restored preset-
tlement forest remnant densities, global spatial patterns resulting
from the GMR-based treatments were much closer to historical
forest remnant patterns at ﬁne scales (<6 m) than global spatial
patterns resulting from the ERG-based approach. The ERG-based
approach used a minimum tree spacing of approximately 5–6 m,
a modiﬁcation to strict application of ecological restoration guide-
lines (Covington et al., 1999). This modiﬁcation prohibited the
approximation of the signiﬁcantly aggregated ﬁne-scale historical
forest remnant spatial patterns observed on all six plots. Despite
this limitation, this minimum tree spacing increased the available
growing space around the retained trees, thus allowing for poten-
tially greater growth and resistance to drought following treat-
ment (Ronco and Edminster, 1985). These results illustrate the
inherent compromises required when managers are faced with
competing forest structure objectives.
Despite these clear differences, the group-level differences
between these treatments and historical forest remnant patterns
are much less pronounced. Both treatments signiﬁcantly reduced
group size from the contemporary forest condition and moved the
group characteristics and the distribution of tree group sizes closer
to patterns exhibited by the historical forest remnants (Table 2,
Fig. 5). This contrast illustrates the importance of the speciﬁc evalua-
tion methods and the level of precision required for the assessment
of spatial pattern objectives. Global point pattern assessment could
be considered a more precise measure of ﬁne-scale spatial patterns
than a group-based assessment method and may be considered a
better evaluation approach if very-ﬁne scale (i.e. less than approxi-
mately 3 m) spatial patterns objectives are of primary management
concern. It is not entirely evident if this level of precision is required
to assess treatment outcomes. If a somewhat less-precise group-
level assessment method is used to assess silvicultural treatment
outcomes, both treatments appeared to succeed somewhat equally
in replicating historical spatial patterns.
The inability of the modiﬁed ERG-based approach to replicate
the ﬁnest-scale historical remnant spatial patterns should not be
Fig. 6. Mean (n = 6) Vegetation Structural Stage group area (top) and mean range of
tree diameters within VSS groups associated with vegetation treatments (bottom).
CUR = Current
conditions,
ERG = Ecological
Restoration
Guidelines
and
GMR = Goshawk Management Recommendations. All combinations of means for
each
VSS
class
tested
with
Dunn’s
Multiple
Comparison
Test.
Familywise
alpha = 0.05. P values for all signiﬁcant comparisons shown. Error bars equal one
standard error of the mean.
64
M.C. Tuten et al. / Forest Ecology and Management 348 (2015) 57–67

interpreted as a distinct failure of this approach, but should instead
be understood as the result of its attempt to meet multiple silvicul-
tural objectives. The desire to meet multiple objectives through the
application of silviculture treatments is a concept at the core of the
practice of Ecological Forestry (Franklin et al., 2007) and is
regarded as an essential requirement for the management of com-
plex adaptive systems (Puettmann et al., 2008). In a future of
uncertain climatic conditions, disturbance regimes and societal
demands on forests, tactics similar to those employed by the modi-
ﬁed ERG-based approach that balance historical reference targets,
habitat functions and ecological processes objectives may be
required to meet silvicultural demands (Puettmann, 2011).
4.4. Tree marking methodology effects on spatial patterns
Fine-scale aggregation patterns are intrinsically related to the
methodologies used to mark each prescription. Patterns resulting
from the GMR-based approach are related to the group-level objec-
tives of the GMRs and the historical forest remnant assessment and
marking techniques used by marking personnel. The GMR-based
approach has a stated objective of creating 0.04–0.4 ha groups of
trees (Reynolds et al., 1992). GMR-marking personnel were
undoubtedly inﬂuenced by this requirement in selecting patterns
of tree groups for retention (R. Reynolds, personal communication).
While
not
speciﬁcally
addressed
in
the
original
Goshawk
Management Recommendations (Reynolds et al., 1992), inclusion
of site speciﬁc reference information has been promoted as a
means to implement GMR-based treatments (Youtz, 2006; Youtz
et al., 2008). In this study, whenever GMR marking personnel
encountered an aggregated group of dead historical forest rem-
nants (most commonly large stumps), a group of a similar density
and spatial pattern was selected from the surrounding post-settle-
ment forest structure as a replacement and the proximity to the
remnant group was not a stated concern (R. Reynolds, personal com-
munication). This group-centric and more outcome-based approach
appeared to succeed in recreating presettlement forest remnant
patterns and closed-canopy wildlife habitat conditions better than
the modiﬁed ERG-based treatments. Similar approaches relying on
group-level attributes such as group size, density and distributions
have been reported by others as more intuitive to tree marking
personnel (Larson and Churchill, 2012; Knapp et al., 2012).
While the minimum-spacing associated with the modiﬁed-ERG
based treatments clearly had an important inﬂuence on very ﬁne
scale spatial patterns, it does not entirely explain differences
between tree aggregation resulting from the ERG and GMR-based
treatments at broader scales (Fig. 4). A complimentary explanation
can be found in the details of the ERG-based approach. A distance,
or search radius, typically exists between presettlement forest rem-
nants and post-settlement replacement trees (Fig. 1). In this study,
an approximately 18 m search radius was used. Using an ERG-based
approach, the closest suitable trees are used to replace historical evi-
dences. If suitable replacement trees cannot be found nearby, then
trees up to 18 m away can be used. In a hypothetical extreme exam-
ple, a group of 3 forest remnants 1 m apart could be replaced by 4–5
trees up to 37 m (i.e. two times the search radius plus the 1 m dis-
tance between remnants) apart, essentially ‘‘diluting’’ ﬁne-scale for-
est remnant spatial patterns. This aspect of the ERG-based
prescription could be partly responsible for the low intensity of
point pattern aggregation and the high numbers of single and small
tree groups observed relative to historical forest remnants.
4.5. Obstacles to the classiﬁcation, management and regulation of
ﬁne-scale heterogeneity in complex ecosystems
The GMR-based management approach represents a long-term
attempt to regulate a landscape mosaic of VSS classiﬁed tree groups.
Assessment of group-level area is sensitive to the method used to
identify groups (Sánchez Meador et al., 2011). The 80th percentile
crown radius delineation criterion used in this study, while consis-
tent with the accepted deﬁnition of groups of trees with interlock-
ing crowns, is not a standardized delineation criterion and other
different criteria could be used to deﬁne groups. The delineation cri-
terion used in this study corresponds to approximately half the
minimum spacing used in the modiﬁed ERG approach, a coinci-
dence that undoubtedly colored the results of our group-level
analyses. Without a standardized criterion, different assessments
of VSS area could produce in conﬂicting results. The delineation cri-
terion also affects the classiﬁcation of VSS groups, being directly
associated with the number of trees per group. In this study, a rela-
tively conservative 2.6 m delineation criteria resulted in many large
groups of trees (Table 1) with a mean diameter range of over 30 cm
(approximately 2 VSS classes) prior to treatment (Fig. 6). The ability
of practitioners to reliably delineate and classify VSS tree groups in
the ﬁeld undoubtedly increases with increasing group size and the
range of trees comprising a group.
Over the long-term, to successfully regulate group VSS area,
practitioners must ﬁrst be able to consistently delineate and clas-
sify many often complex structured tree groups as done in this
study. Through additional management entries these mixed-
diameter groups must be assigned a VSS classiﬁcation and reduced
or increased relative to the area occupied by groups of 5 other VSS
classes across a 2356, ha Northern Goshawk foraging area. The
interaction of forest structure and pattern and group delineation
and classiﬁcation criteria make the VSS heterogeneity regulation
system a highly complex, multi-step endeavor even with the
advantage of stem mapped tree data and geographic information
systems.
Since
most
commonly
employed
forest
inventory
approaches and data management and analysis tools are not
designed for spatially-explicit, group-level information (Churchill
et al., 2013), it is reasonable to expect that this effort will be under-
taken informally with a variety of methods, further complicating
interpretation of treatment results.
The GMR-based silvicultural approach attempts to manage and
regulate the development of forest group structure by area over
time. This approach contrasts with unregulated structural develop-
ment goals typically associated with most Ecological Restoration-
based approaches (Allen et al., 2002). In this study, the GMR
attempt to regulate forest groups is seen in the signiﬁcantly lower
average range of diameters within groups of VSS classes 4–6 as
compared to the current forest condition. This effort represents
an attempt to homogenize ﬁne-scale group structure and charac-
teristics, thus incorporating a level of predictability and order into
stand structural development. Predictability of forest growth,
development and yield has historically been seen as essential to
traditional
agriculturally-oriented
silvicultural
practice
(Puett
mann et al., 2008). This study demonstrates that group-level VSS
classiﬁcation, management and regulation is a complex, if not
problematic, undertaking. Further, area regulation of VSS classiﬁed
groups will eventually require the removal of overabundant large
diameter VSS groups, which are important to the spatial patterns
outcomes observed in this study. Management and regulation of
VSS group area will also be subject to the constraints of patterns
associated with tree regeneration, which may or may not resemble
the desired GMR group-level patterns. Perhaps most importantly,
it is unclear how changes in future climate conditions and distur-
bance regimes will affect group-level spatial patterns and the abil-
ity to regulate group area. Despite the initial success of the GMR-
based approach in promoting speciﬁc spatial patterns, the desire
to regulate and predict group-scale spatial patterns over time is
an untested management strategy more closely related to tradi-
tional intensive silvicultural approaches than the management of
complex and adaptive forest ecosystems.
M.C. Tuten et al. / Forest Ecology and Management 348 (2015) 57–67
65

5. Conclusions
In forests of the Southwest United States, and across dry forests
of North America, the current landscape condition is one of rela-
tively high densities, canopy continuity and ﬂammability similar
to the contemporary forest conditions described in this study.
Both the modiﬁed ERG and GMR-based silvicultural treatments
compared in this study move forest structure away from this
undesirable condition and toward the group-level patterns exhib-
ited by historical forest structure remnants. The group-centric
GMR-based marking approach was decidedly more successful in
recreating the precise historical remnant global point patterns than
the marking approach employed to mark the modiﬁed ERG-based
treatment. Each treatment reduced tree density and basal area,
and while not speciﬁcally assessed, when combined with prudent
surface fuel treatments, would also likely reduce the probability
of crown ﬁre initiation and spread within evaluated stands since
both treatments reduced absolute crown bulk density, crown
continuity and raised average crown base heights through the cut-
ting of small diameter trees (Peterson et al., 2005; Kennedy and
Johnson, 2014). The result of such treatments would likely prepare
these stands for an expected future climate in the Southwest fea-
turing high year to year precipitation variability and more frequent
and possibly intensive ﬁre disturbances (Seager et al., 2007). In
fact, each of these stands is very likely to experience at least one
ﬁre over the next 50 years (in fact, one stand has already burned,
albeit with light surface ﬁre, in a wildﬁre in 2010).
Since it is likely that these stands will experience a changing
future climate and associated disturbances (e.g. drought, wildﬁre),
attempts at high-precision classiﬁcation and regulation of group-
level forest patterns using VSS may not be an efﬁcient strategy
for managing for within-stand heterogeneity in these forests. An
approach featuring a broader envelope of well-deﬁned group-level
forest structure pattern objectives, but with a reduced forest struc-
ture regulation focus, may be a more fruitful strategy for managing
complex and adaptable ponderosa pine ecosystems. The need for
such an approach has never been greater, as continued mixed to
high-severity wildﬁres continue to reduce potential management
options and goshawk habitat suitability across ponderosa pine
dominated landscapes (Ray et al., 2014). Such an approach would
likely result in a socially and ecologically acceptable outcome
and avoidance of potential undesirable conditions associated with
future wildﬁre disturbances.
Acknowledgements
We thank two anonymous reviewers and the Associate Editor
for
comments
that
have
greatly
improved
this
manuscript.
Funding for this research was made possible through a grant from
the USDA Forest Service and was generously provided by the
Ecological
Restoration
Institute
(ERI)
at
Northern
Arizona
University, Flagstaff, AZ. Special thanks to Tim Short and staff of
the Kaibab National Forest, Richard Reynolds, Allison Cofer, John
Zeifried, Dennis Lund, Charlie Denton, Dave Brewer and student
research assistants from the ERI who made the stem-mapped data-
set used in this study possible. ERI and Northern Arizona
University are equal opportunity providers.
References
Agee, J.K., Skinner, C.N., 2005. Basic principles of fuel reduction treatments. For.
Ecol. Manage. 211 (2005), 83–96.
Allen, C.D., Savage, M., Falk, D.A., Suckling, K.F., Swetnam, T.W., Schulke, T., Stacey,
P.B., Morgan, P., Hoffman, M., Klingel, J.T., 2002. Ecological restoration of
Southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems: a broad perspective. Ecol. Appl. 12
(5), 1418–1433.
Baddeley, A., Moyeed, R.A., Howard, C.V., Boyde, A., 1993. Analysis of a three-
dimensional point pattern with replication. J. Roy. Stat. Soc.: Ser. C (Appl. Stat.)
42 (4), 641–668.
Baddeley, A., Turner, R., 2005. Spatstat: an R package for analyzing spatial point
patterns. J. Stat. Softw. 12 (6), 1–42.
Besag, L., 1977. Contributions to the discussion of Dr. Ripley’s paper. J. Roy. Stat.
Soc., Ser. B 39, 193–195.
Binkley, D., Romme, W., Cheng, T., 2008. Historical Forest Structure on the
Uncompahgre Plateau: Informing Restoration Prescriptions for Mountainside
Stewardship. Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, Colorado State University, Ft
Collins, Colorado.
Cooper, C.F., 1960. Changes in vegetation, structure and growth of southwestern
pine forests since white settlement. Ecol. Monogr. 30, 129–164.
Covington, W.W., Fulé, P.Z., Moore, M.M., Hart, T.E., Kolb, J.N., SackettMast, S.S.,
Mast, , Wagner, M.R., 1997. Restoration of ecosystem health in southwestern
ponderosa pine forests. J. Forest. 95 (4), 23–29.
Covington, W.W., Fulé, P.Z., Moore, M.M., Smith, H.B., Waltz, A.E.M., Heinlein, T.A.,
1999. Ecological Restoration Marking Guidelines for Ponderosa Pine Restoration
Areas. Northern Arizona University.
Churchill, D.J., Larson, A.J., Dahlgreen, M.C., Franklin, J.F., Hessburg, P.F., Lutz, J.A.,
2013. Restoring forest resilience: from reference spatial patterns to silvicultural
prescriptions and monitoring. For. Ecol. Manage. 291, 442–457.
Dale, M.R.T., 1999. Spatial Pattern Analysis in Plant Ecology. Cambridge University
Press, New York, New York.
Diggle, P.J., 2003. Statistical Analysis of Spatial Point Patterns, second ed. Oxford
University Press, New York, NY.
Dodd, N.L., Schweinsburg, R.E., Boe, S., 2006. Landscape-scale forest habitat
relationship to tassel-eared squirrel populations: implications for ponderosa
pine forest restoration. Restor. Ecol. 14, 537–547.
Dombeck, M.P., Williams, J.E., Wood, C.A., 2004. Wildﬁre policy and public lands:
integrating scientiﬁc understanding with social concerns across landscapes.
Conserv. Biol. 18, 883–889.
Dunn, O.J., 1964. Multiple comparisons using rank sums. Technometrics 6 (3), 241–
252.
Fahey, R.T., Puetmann, K.J., 2008. Patterns in spatial extent of gap inﬂuence on
understory plant communities. For. Ecol. Manage. 255 (97), 2801–2810.
Franklin, J.F., Van Pelt, R., 2004. Spatial aspects of structural complexity in old
growth forests. J. Forest. 102, 22–28.
Franklin, J. F., Mitchell, R.J., Palik, B., 2007. Natural disturbance and stand
development principles for ecological forestry. USDA Forest Service, Northern
Research Station, General Technical Report 19.
Fulé, P.Z., Waltz, A.E.M., Covington, W.W., Heinlein, T.A., 2001. Measuring forest
restoration effectiveness in hazardous fuels reduction. J. Forest. 99 (11), 24–29.
Fulé, P.Z., Covington, W.W., Moore, M.M., Heinlein, T.A., Waltz, A.E.M., 2002. Natural
variability in forests of Grand Canyon, USA. J. Biogeogr. 29, 31–47.
Fulé, P.Z., Heinlein, T.A., Covington, W.W., Moore, M.M., 2003. Assessing ﬁre regimes
on Grand Canyon landscapes with ﬁre scar and ﬁre record data. Int. J. Wildland
Fire 12 (2), 129–145.
Grifﬁs, K.L., Crawford, J.A., Wagner, M.R., Moir, W.H., 2001. Understory response to
management treatments in Northern Arizona ponderosa pine forests. For. Ecol.
Manage. 146 (1–3), 239–245.
Harrod, R.J., McRae, B.H., Hartl, W.E., 1999. Presettlement stand reconstruction in
ponderosa pine forests to guide silvicultural prescriptions. For. Ecol. Manage.
114 (2–3), 433–446.
Heyerdahl, E.K., Brubaker, L.B., Agee, J.K., 2001. Spatial controls of presettlement ﬁre
regimes: a multiscale example from the Interior West, USA. Ecology 82 (3),
660–678.
Hoffman, R.W., Shaw, H.G., Rumble, M.A., Wakeling, B.F., Mollohan, C.M., Schemnitz,
S.D., Engle-Wilson, R., Hengel, D.A., 1993. Management guidelines for Merriam’s
wild turkeys. Report No. 18. Colorado Division of Wildlife, Denver, CO, and
USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station,
Fort Collins, CO, 24 pp.
Illian, J., Penttinen, A., Stoyan, H., Stoyan, D., 2008. Statistical Analysis and Modeling
of Spatial Point Patterns. John Wiley and Sons, Chichester, West Sussex, UK.
Keane, R.E., Hessburg, P.F., Landres, P.B., Swanson, F.J., 2009. The use of historical
range and variability (HRV) in landscape management. For. Ecol. Manage. 258
(7), 1025–1037.
Kennedy, M.C., Johnson, M.C., 2014. Fuel treatment prescriptions alter spatial
patterns of ﬁre severity around the wildland–urban interface during the
Wallow Fire, Arizona, USA. For. Ecol. Manage. 318, 122–132.
Knapp, E., North, M., Benech, M., Estes, B., 2012. The variable-density thinning study
at stanislaus-tuolumne experimental forest. In: North, M., (Ed.), Managing
Sierra Nevada forests. USDA Forest Service, Paciﬁc Southwest Research Station,
General Technical Report 237.
Lang, P., 1994. Spatial analyses of northern goshawk ponderosa pine nest site
habitat in east-central Arizona (M.S. Thesis). Northern Arizona University,
Flagstaff, Arizona, 92 p.
Larson, A.J., Churchill, D., 2012. Tree spatial patterns in ﬁre-frequent forests of
western North America, including mechanisms of pattern formation and
implications for designing fuel reduction and restoration treatments. For.
Ecol. Manage. 267, 74–92.
Larson, A.J., Keyes, C.R., Stover, K.C., 2012. Effects of restoration thinning on spatial
heterogeneity in mixed-conifer forest. Can. J. For. Res. 42, 1505–1517.
Long, J.N., Smith, F.W., 2000. Restructuring the forest: goshawks and the restoration
of Southwestern ponderosa pine. J. Forest. 98 (8), 25–30.
66
M.C. Tuten et al. / Forest Ecology and Management 348 (2015) 57–67

Loosmore, N.B., Ford, E.D., 2006. Statistical inference using the G or K point pattern
spatial statistics. Ecology 87, 1925–1931.
Lydersen, J.M., North, M.P., Knapp, E.E., Collins, B.M., 2013. Quantifying spatial
patterns of tree groups and gaps in mixed-conifer forests: reference conditions
and long-term changes following ﬁre suppression and logging. For. Ecol.
Manage. 304, 340–382.
Merkle, J., 1962. Plant communities of the Grand Canyon area, Arizona. Ecology 43
(4), 698–711.
Moore, M.M., Covington, W.W., Fulé, P.Z., 1999. Reference conditions and ecological
restoration: a southwestern ponderosa pine perspective. Ecol. Appl. 9, 1266–
1277.
Moore, M.M., Huffman, D.W., Fulé, P.Z., Covington, W.W., Crouse, J.E., 2004.
Comparison of historical and contemporary forest structure and composition
on permanent plots in southwestern ponderosa pine forests. For. Sci. 50, 162–
176.
North, M., Stine, P., O’Hara, K., Zielinski, W., Stephens, S., 2009. An ecosystem
management strategy for Sierran mixed-conifer forests. USDA Forest Service,
Paciﬁc Southwest Research Station, General Technical Report 220.
O’Hara, K.L., Nagel, L.M., 2013. The stand: revisiting a central concept in forestry. J.
Forest. 111 (5), 335–340.
Patton, D.R., 1984. A model to evaluate Abert squirrel habitat in uneven-aged
ponderosa pine. Wildl. Soc. Bull. 12, 408–414.
Pawlas, Z., 2011. Estimation of summary characteristics from replicated spatial
point processes. Kybernetika 47, 880–892.
Peterson, D.L., Johnson, M.C., Agee, J.K., Jain, T.B., McKenzie, D., Reinhardt, E.D., 2005.
Forest structure and ﬁre hazard in dry forests of the western United States.
General
Technical
Report
PNW-GTR-628.
USDA
Forest
Service,
Paciﬁc
Northwest Research Station, Portland, OR.
Puettmann, K.J., Coates, K.D., Messier, C.C., 2008. A Critique of Silviculture:
Managing for Complexity. Island Press.
Puettmann, K.J., 2011. Silvicultural challenges and options in the context of global
change: ‘‘Simple’’ ﬁxes and opportunities for new management approaches. J.
Forest. 109 (6), 321–331.
R Core Team, 2014. R: a language and environment for statistical computing. R
Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. ISBN 3-900051-07-0,
<http://www.R-project.org/>.
Rasmussen, D.I., 1941. Biotic communities of Kaibab plateau, Arizona. Ecol. Monogr.
11, 229–275.
Ray, C.T., Dickson, B.G., Sisk, T.D., Sesnie, S.E., 2014. Spatial application of a
predictive wildlife occurrence model to assess alternative forest management
scenarios in northern Arizona. For. Ecol. Manage. 322, 117–126.
Reynolds, R. T., Sánchez Meador, A. J., Youtz, J. A., Nicolet, T., Matonis, M. S., Jackson,
P. L., DeLorenzo, D. G., and Graves, A. D. 2013. Restoring composition and
structure in southwestern frequent-ﬁre forests: a science-based framework for
improving ecosystem resiliency. United States Forest Service, Rocky Mountain
Research Station, Fort Collins, Colorado, United States.
Reynolds, R.T., Graham, R., Reiser, M.H., Bassett, R.L., Kennedy, P. L., Boyce, D.,
Goodwin, G., Smith, R., Fisher, E.L., 1992. Management recommendations for the
northern goshawk in the Southwestern United States. General Technical Report
RM-217. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment
Station, Fort Collins, CO.
Reynolds, R.T., Graham, R.T., Boyce, D.A., 2006. An ecosystem-based conservation
strategy for the northern goshawk. Stud. Avian Biol. 31, 299–311.
Ripley, B.D., 1976. The second-order analysis of stationary point processes. J. Appl.
Probab. 13, 255–266.
Ripley, B.D., 1977. Modelling spatial patterns. J. Roy. Stat. Soc. B 39, 172–212.
Ripley, B.D., 1981. Spatial Statistics. Wiley Press, New York, NY, US.
Ronco, F., Edminster, C.B., 1985. Growth of ponderosa pine thinned to different
stocking levels in northern Arizona. Rocky Mountain Forest and Range
Experiment Station, USDA Forest Service, RM-469:10.
Sánchez Meador, A.J., Moore, M.M., Bakker, J.D., Parysow, P.F., 2009. 108 years of
change in spatial pattern following selective harvest of a ponderosa pine stand
in northern Arizona, USA. J. Veg. Sci. 20 (1), 79–90.
Sánchez Meador, A.J., Moore, M.M., 2010. Lessons from long-term studies of harvest
methods in southwestern ponderosa pine-Gambel oak forests on the Fort Valley
Experimental Forest, Arizona, USA. For. Ecol. Manage. 260 (2), 193–206.
Sánchez Meador, A.J., Parysow, P.F., Moore, M.M., 2011. A new method for
delineating
tree
patches
and
assessing
spatial
reference
conditions
of
ponderosa pine forests in northern Arizona. Restor. Ecol. 19 (4), 490–499.
Seager, R., Ting, M., Held, I., Kushnir, Y., Lu, J., Vecchi, G., Huang, H., Harnik, N.,
Leetmaa, A., Lau, N., Li, C., Velez, J., Naik, N., 2007. Model projections of an
imminent transition to a more arid climate in southwestern North America.
Science 316 (5828), 1181–1184.
Spies, T.A., Giesen, T.W., Swanson, F.J., Franklin, J.F., Lach, D., Johnson, K.N., 2010.
Climate
change
adaptation
strategies
for
federal
forests
of
the
Paciﬁc
Northwest,
USA:
ecological,
policy,
and
socio-economic
perspectives.
Landscape Ecol. 25 (8), 1185–1199.
Thomas, J.W., 1979. In: Wildlife Habitats in Managed Forests the Blue Mountains of
Oregon and Washington. Agriculture Handbook, vol. 553. USDA Forest Service.
Tukey, J., 1949. Comparing individual means in the analysis of variance. Biometrics
5 (2), 99–114.
Turner,
M.G.,
Pearson,
S.M.,
Romme,
W.H.,
Wallace, L.H.,
1997. Landscape
heterogeneity and ungulate dynamics: what spatial scales are important? In:
Bissonette, J.A. (Ed.), Wildlife and Landscape Ecology: Effects of Pattern and
Scale. Annual Meeting of the Wildlife Society, Portland, Oregon, pp. 331–338.
Upton, G., Fingleton, B., 1985. Spatial Data Analysis by Example: Point Pattern and
Quantitative Data. Wiley and Sons, NY, US.
U.S.
Department
of
Agriculture
Forest
Service
Southwestern
Region,
1991.
Terrestrial Ecosystem Survey of the Kaibab National Forest.
White, A.S., 1985. Presettlement regeneration patterns in a southwestern ponderosa
pine stand. Ecology 66, 589–594.
White, M.A., Vankat, J.L., 1993. Middle and high elevation coniferous forest
communities of the North Rim Region of Grand Canyon National Park,
Arizona, USA. Vegetatio 109, 161–174.
Wonn, H.T., O’Hara, K.L., 2001. Height: diameter ratios and stability relationships for
four northern Rocky Mountain tree species. Western J. Appl. Forest. 16 (2), 87–
94.
Youtz, J., 2006. Implementation strategies for forest vegetation management.
Presentation.
2006
Northern
Goshawk
Workshop,
USDA
Forest
Service
Southwestern Region. Albuquerque, NM, 31 October 31–November 1, 2006.
Youtz, J.A., Graham, R.T., Reynolds, R.T., Simon, J., 2008. Implementing northern
goshawk habitat management in Southwestern forests: a template for restoring
ﬁre-adapted
forest
ecosystems.
In:
Integrated
Restoration
of
Forested
Ecosystems to Achieve Multiresource Beneﬁts: Proceedings of the 2007
National
Silviculture
Workshop.
Gen.
Tech.
Rep.
PNW-GTR-73,
U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Paciﬁc Northwest Research Station,
Portland, OR, pp. 173–191.
Youngblood, A., Max, T., Coe, K., 2004. Stand structure in eastside old-growth
ponderosa pine forests of Oregon and Northern California. For. Ecol. Manage.
199 (2–3), 199–217.
M.C. Tuten et al. / Forest Ecology and Management 348 (2015) 57–67
67
