ERI–Issues in Forest Restoration
The History of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative: 1980s–2010

The Ecological Restoration Institute 
 
Te Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, 
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of dry, frequent-ﬁre forests in the Intermountain 
West. Tese forests have been signiﬁcantly altered during the last century, with decreased ecological and 
recreational values, near-elimination of natural low-intensity ﬁre regimes, and greatly increased risk of 
large-scale ﬁres. Te ERI is working with public agencies and other partners to restore these forests to 
a more ecologically healthy condition and trajectory—in the process helping to signiﬁcantly reduce the 
threat of catastrophic wildﬁre and its eﬀects on human, animal, and plant communities.
Cover photo: 
View from the Rim Visitors Center on the Black Mesa Ranger District of the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest 
looking onto the Tonto National Forest portion of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative, which is an ambitious ef-
fort to collaboratively restore resiliency and function to 2.4 million acres across four national forests in northern 
Arizona. Photo courtesy of the USDA Forest Service, Flickr.com
Northern Arizona University
Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
928-523-7182
nau.edu/eri
Northern Arizona University 
School of Forestry
P.O. Box 15018
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5018
Publication date: July 2014
Authors: Dave Egan, Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University; Erik Nielsen, School of 
Earth Sciences and Environmental Sustainability, Northern Arizona University
Reviewers: Wally Covington, Executive Director, Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona Uni-
versity; Rob Davis, Owner and President, Forest Energy Corporation; Tayloe Dubay, Knowledge Special-
ist, Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University; Lucy Murﬁtt, Senate Energy and Natural 
Resources Committee; Molly Pitts, Executive Director, Northern Arizona Wood Products Association, Arizona 
Forest Health Council Co-Chair; Henry Provencio, Biologist, U.S. Forest Service, former 4FRI team leader; 
Nora Rasure, Regional Forester, Intermountain Region (Region 4), U.S. Forest Service; Tom Sisk, Director, Lab 
of Landscape Ecology and Conservation Biology, Northern Arizona University; Diane Vosick, Director of Policy 
and Partnerships, Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University
Series Editor: Tayloe Dubay
All material copyright © 2014 ERI, NAU
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Afﬁrmative Action Institution   
This report was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.

1
Table of Contents
Introduction .................................................................................................................................... 2
The Formative Years: Emerging Concepts, Relevant Events and Efforts (1980s–2005) .......... 2
 
Emerging Concepts and Practices ......................................................................................... 2 
Signiﬁcant Ecological Events ................................................................................................. 4
Scientiﬁc Recognition of a Crisis ........................................................................................... 6
Mobilization of Public/Private Efforts .................................................................................... 7
Key Policy and Management Events ................................................................................... 10
The Pivotal Years: The Forest Health Councils and Collective Action, 2006–2007 ................. 12
Governor’s Forest Health Advisory Council and the Governor’s Forest Health  
Oversight Council (2006–2007)............................................................................................. 12
The Statewide Strategy to Restore Arizona’s Forests ........................................................ 13
Analysis of Small-diameter Wood Supply in Northern Arizona ....................................... 14
The Pivotal Years: Accelerated Restoration, Pilot Study, New Alliances,  
CFLRP, 2008–early 2009 ............................................................................................................... 15
The Governor’s Forest Health Council (2008–2009) ........................................................... 16
U.S. Forest Service and the Forest Health Council: Accelerated Restoration and  
the Pilot Project (2008–2009) ................................................................................................ 16
The Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program Legislation (2007–2009) ...... 17
The Emerging Alliance between AZFRP, Northern Arizona County Representatives,  
and the Environmental Community .................................................................................... 18
Emergence of 4FRI: April 2009–August 2010 ............................................................................. 19
The Path Forward .................................................................................................................. 20
The 4FRI Stakeholder Group Charter................................................................................... 20
The CFLRP Proposal .............................................................................................................. 20
Conclusion ..................................................................................................................................... 22 
Acknowledgments ....................................................................................................................... 22
References ..................................................................................................................................... 23

2
Introduction 
In this paper, we (Dave Egan and Erik Nielsen) present our account of how a divergent group of people, with a 
variety of values, interests and resources, recognized a social and ecological problem, and came together to find 
a collective answer. This is the story of the landscape-scale forest restoration effort known as the Four Forest 
Restoration Initiative (4FRI) and the ideas, groups of people, and series of related events as well as collaborative 
projects from which it eventually emerged. It is a record of the progress these people made from the mid-1990s 
until 2010. This is the latest chapter in the long and dynamic story of people as members of the ponderosa pine 
ecosystem in Arizona. As such, it provides a glimpse into the multi-dimensional interplay between humans and the 
environment in the American Southwest today. 
Our information is based on earlier work by Windy Greer Selig and Nielsen designed to record the history of 4FRI. 
That work included identifying a timeline, compiling stakeholder comments about the importance of different 
events and documents as well as conducting stakeholder interviews. We used their study along with documentary 
evidence, both published and unpublished, and more recent interviews of other 4FRI stakeholders to produce this 
history of 4FRI. 
The Formative Years:  
Emerging Concepts, Relevant Events and Efforts (1980s-2005) 
Various phenomena served as the foundation for the 4FRI, in particular: 1) emerging concepts and practices, 2) 
significant ecological events, 3) scientific recognition of a crisis, 4) mobilization of public/private efforts, and 5) key 
policy and management events.
Emerging Concepts and Practices
•	
Ecological restoration
	
The idea and practice of ecological restoration emerged as a recognized and new land management option 
in the late 1980s and early 1990s. The Society for Ecological Restoration (SER) was organized in 1987–88 
and three prominent members of SER during its early years—Don Falk (first SER executive director), 
Steve Gatewood (second SER executive director), and Wally Covington (chair, SER science and policy 
committee)—each played key roles in activities to restore forest ecosystems in Arizona. During this period 
and well into the 2000s, ecological restoration derived much of its scientifically based working procedures 
from the idea of understanding reference conditions and maintaining or restoring an ecosystem’s natural/
historic range of variability (Covington and Moore 1994, Landres et al. 1999, Moore et al. 1999, Swetnam 
et al. 1999, Egan and Howell 2001, SER 2004). The U.S. Forest Service (USFS) formally recognized the 
idea of ecological restoration in 2000 and continued to work throughout that decade to better understand 
restoration’s role in terms of agency policy and practice (U.S. Forest Service 2006).  
•	
Collaboration
	
In the United States, the interest in collaboration as a means of addressing land management issues began 
to take hold in the mid-1990s. Collaboration was seen as a way to shift to “win-win, let’s find our common 
ground” solutions among stakeholders who typically solved their differences about land management through 
the court system in a winner-loser format. This call for collaborative action came from community forestry 
groups, who were interested in working from the “bottom up” as well as from academics and government 
leaders who came to understand the need to move away from litigation-only solutions to federal forest 
management (Tilt 2005). 

3
	
In terms of federal agencies, collaboration became officially endorsed by President George W. Bush, first 
in the Healthy Forests Restoration Act of 2003 and again in 2004 in Executive Order 13352, which “... 
directs agencies to implement environmental and natural resource laws to promote collaborative activity 
among Federal, State, local, and Tribal governments, private for-profit and nonprofit institutions, other 
non-governmental entities and individuals.” In 2005, a memorandum from the Office of Management and 
Budget and the President’s Council on Environmental Quality further directed federal agencies to build 
institutional capacity for collaborative problem solving. 
•	
Community forestry
	
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, various economic and social factors caused the level of commercial 
logging on public lands to dramatically decline. By the mid-1990s, advocates of a new approach, called 
community forestry, began to organize in order to overcome the gridlock and sporadic violence produced 
during these “timber wars” (Bosworth and Brown 2007). The goals of community forestry groups were 
broad and included policies and practices designed such that “people in forest-dependent communities 
participate directly in decisions about forest land use and management that affect them, and that they 
have access to the resources (knowledge, credit, social networks of power brokers and policy makers, etc.) 
necessary to facilitate this participation” (Wilmsen and Isom 2003; see also DellaSala et al. 2003). They 
also embraced the ideas of bioregionalism (Berg 1978, Sale 1985) and small-is-beautiful (Schumacher 1973) 
because these concepts supported maintaining local control of land and promoting small, local business. 
	
The Greater Flagstaff Forest Partnership, the White Mountains Natural Resources Working Group, the 
Collaborative Forest Restoration Program in New Mexico, and, ultimately, the 4FRI each represents 
various types of efforts in collaborative community forestry. 
•	
Landscape-scale approaches: ecosystem management, landscape ecology, conservation biology 
o	
Ecosystem management
Ecosystem management as a land management concept came into its own in the late 1980s and 
early 1990s. Grumbine (1994) describes several principles of ecosystem management that are 
pertinent to envisioning and developing a landscape-scale project as: 1) multiple levels of analysis, 
2) monitoring, 3) adaptive management, 4) interagency cooperation, 5) humans as part of the 
ecosystem, and 6) importance of human values. 
Ecosystem management also entered the lexicon of the USFS in the early 1990s at the end of 
the George H.W. Bush’s presidency (Steen 2000). The concept was heartily supported by the 
U.S. Forest Service chiefs during the President Clinton Administration. By 2000, the agency 
viewed the onset of large-scale wildfires and insect outbreaks in the West as ecosystem-oriented, 
landscape-scale problems (Laverty and Williams 2000).
o	
Landscape ecology and GIS
The field of landscape ecology emerged in the mid-1980s as its leaders, especially Richard 
T.T. Forman, developed the conceptual framework and tools to look at landscapes, landscape 
patterns, and potential landscape-level management solutions in a wholly new way (Risser et al. 
1983, Forman and Godron 1986, Franklin and Forman 1987, Forman 1995). Combined with 
the emerging technologies of computers and Geographic Information Systems (GIS) software, 
landscape ecology provided the means to address landscape- and ecosystem-scale issues with 
increasing levels of sophistication and versatility. ForestERA’s landscape assessment work in 
northern Arizona and elsewhere stands as an example of the kind of results these concepts and 
technological innovations can produce. 

4
Northern Arizona is home to the largest contiguous ponderosa pine forest in North America. The Four Forest 
Restoration Initiative, known as 4FRI, was formed as a collaborative effort to restore forest ecosystems on portions 
of four Arizona National Forests, which include the Apache-Sitgreaves, Coconino, Kaibab, and Tonto. Photo by Brady 
Smith, courtesy of Coconino National Forest, USDA Forest Service/Flickr.com
o 
Conservation biology
Conservation biology, the scientiﬁc study of species that are deemed threatened, rare or in danger of 
extinction, emerged during the 1980s as a powerful, interdisciplinary set of ideas for natural resource 
management and policymaking. In the Southwest, this interest in conserving rare and threatened 
species (see Noss and Cooperrider 1984) manifested itself in extensive studies of, and debates about, 
conservation needs and protection for species such as the Mexican spotted owl, northern goshawk, 
and old-growth trees.
• 
Environmental ideas about forest management
Empowered by the public participation potential of the National Environmental Policy Act (1969/1970) 
and the mandate to protect endangered species in the Endangered Species Act (1973), forest-oriented 
environmental action became a powerful national presence by the mid-1980s and early 1990s. Eﬀorts 
to expose forest clearcutting to public scrutiny were extremely successful in raising awareness about 
that practice and casting suspicion on corporate logging operations and federal forest management. Te 
organizations involved used appeals and litigation to question and halt various projects on public lands 
where issues of concern to them arose (e.g., endangered species protection, encroachment into roadless areas, 
old-growth logging). Wilderness area protection and expansion were often key agenda items. However, by 
the late 1990s, some environmental groups began working actively on the issues of community forestry and 
forest restoration (Southwest Forest Alliance 1996).
Signiﬁcant Ecological Events
Beginning in the early 1990s, the incidence of large (>10,000 acres) wildﬁres began to increase in the ponderosa 
pine-dominated, frequent-ﬁre forests of northern Arizona. Tese ﬁres often resulted in damage not only to wildlands 
but in some cases to homes that were built, with little planning or foresight, in heavily wooded areas of the wildland-
urban interface (WUI) (Falk 2008). 
• 
1990: Dude Fire near Payson, Arizona; 24,000 acres burned, 60 homes destroyed, six ﬁreﬁghters killed.
• 
1996: Horseshoe Fire, northwest of Flagstaﬀ, Arizona: 8,650 acres burned.

5
• 
1996: Hochderﬀer Fire, northwest of Flagstaﬀ, Arizona; 16,400 acres burned; this and the Horseshoe Fire 
were largest wildﬁres ever on the Coconino National Forest. 
• 
1999: Rainbow Fire, north of Whiteriver, Arizona; 4,500 acres burned, 17 structures destroyed.
• 
2000: Pumpkin Fire, northwest of Flagstaﬀ; 15,779 acres burned, one structure destroyed.
• 
2002: Rodeo-Chediski Fire, White Mountains of east-central Arizona; 468,638 acres burned, 13,500 
homes threatened with 465 homes, six commercial properties, and 20 outbuildings destroyed; estimated 
cost of $122.5 million for property loss, suppression costs estimated at $46.5 million with emergency 
stabilization costs of nearly $139 million (Western Forestry Leadership Coalition 2009); U.S. Senator Jon 
Kyl (AZ) blamed “radical environmentalists” for not allowing U.S. Forest Service to thin the forests (Kyl 
2002), Sierra Club responded it is just trying to protect “large ﬁre resistant old growth trees” (Sierra Club 
2002); both ﬁres were set by humans; media coverage was extensive both in Arizona and nationally; the 
event helped to advance the passage of the Healthy Forests Restoration Act.
• 
2002: Outlet Fire, North Rim of the Grand Canyon National Park in northern Arizona; 14,000 acres 
burned.
The Rodeo-Chediski Fire of 2002 burned nearly 500,000 acres in east-central Arizona and was a key ecological event 
that helped spur the passage of the Healthy Forests Restoration Act. Photo courtesy of Apache-Sitgreaves National 
Forest, USDA Forest Service

6
Large wildfires continue to occur in northern Arizona and throughout the American West due to overstocked forest 
conditions, steady accumulation of fuels, extended periods of drought, human carelessness, lightning strikes, and 
other factors. The Wallow Fire, which burned 538,049 acres of forest and grassland in east-central Arizona in 2011, 
is the latest and largest fire of this type in the Southwest. In addition to burned acres, it destroyed 72 structures 
worth an estimated $109 million, injured 16 people, forced the evacuation of nearly 6,000 residents from their 
homes, and cost taxpayers about $80 million in suppression costs alone. The 2010 Schultz Fire in the San Francisco 
Peaks is another more recent example (see Combrink et al. 2013). 
Extensive outbreaks of pine bark beetle populations, typically in physiologically weak or damaged forested stands, 
are also more commonplace now in northern Arizona. For example, aerial surveys conducted in the fall of 2002 
indicated about 60,000 acres of bark beetle-damage forests are located in the Coconino National Forest and 7,000 
acres in the Kaibab National Forest (DeGomez 2003).
Scientific Recognition of a Crisis
Beginning in the mid-1970s and with increasing effort ever since, the forest research community has improved 
the scientific knowledge about frequent-fire forest types in the Southwest, and their importance and relation to 
fire, insects, wildlife, and humans. Scientists from various universities and state and federal agencies have observed, 
studied, and documented a significant decline in the health and resilience of the southwestern ponderosa pine 
ecosystem (Vance et al. 2001, Marlette 2004). Not only did these researchers provide a scientific basis to help others 
recognize and understand the crisis conditions within Arizona’s forests, several of them, with Wally Covington of 
Northern Arizona University as the most visible proponent (Malakoff 2002), began to experiment with ways of 
solving the forest health problem, albeit at a relatively small scale. By 1992, Covington and other researchers began 
small-scale experimental work at the G.A. Pearson Natural Area within the Fort Valley Experiment Forest, 12 miles 
northwest of Flagstaff (Mast et al. 1999). The theoretical and experimental field work of Covington and many others 
provided a strong scientific basis for moving ahead to increasingly larger scale projects. In addition, Covington was 
influential in educating government officials and policymakers from both Washington, D.C. and Arizona about the 
need for science-based forest restoration.
Social science studies and experiments were also evident and active at the time. The 2003 workshop, “Barriers 
to Collective Forestry” (Moote and Becker 2003) is a case in point as are the small-scale, small-diameter wood 
utilization ideas of Brett KenCairn, an early member of the Grand Canyon Forest Partnership (Taylor 2003); the 
ideas presented in the Proceedings of the 2003 workshop, “Humans, Fire, and Forests” (Cortner et al. 2003); and the 
work of ERI social scientists, Ann Moote and Jesse Abrams, with collaborative forestry groups in Arizona and New 
Mexico.
A truly innovative collaboration between landscape ecologists and social scientists took place when ForestERA and 
the ERI teamed up to produce the Western Mogollon Plateau Adaptive Landscape Assessment (2003-2004) and 
the White Mountains Landscape Assessment (2005). Both of these assessments used a collaborative, science-based 
approach to help stakeholders identify critical features for protection from severe wildfires and other risk factors. 
They also provided a forum for stakeholders to visually explore, through the use of GIS-produced maps, a range of 
restoration scenarios designed to decrease the potential for wildfires and insect outbreaks. These efforts were the 
precursors to the collaborative work ForestERA and others produced for the Wood Supply Analysis in 2008.

7
Mobilization of Public/Private Eﬀorts
A number of issues—decline/loss of timber industry and infrastructure in the early 1990s, concern for endangered 
species, community-level anxiety about the next “mega-ﬁre,” a shifting economic base in rural communities, conﬂicts 
about forest management and uses, and others--prompted the creation of numerous public and private organizations 
during this formative stage. Many of these organizations and their representatives, most of whom operated at a 
relatively small scale, became active in the process that led to the formation of 4FRI. 
1985: Grand Canyon Trust is established by then Arizona Governor, Bruce Babbitt, as a national trust for projects 
in the Grand Canyon National Park, although its scope was almost immediately changed to include activities and 
projects throughout the Colorado Plateau.
1989: Center for Biological Diversity, initially known as the Greater Gila Biodiversity Project, is started by Kieran 
Suckling, Peter Galvin, Todd Schulke, and Robin Silver to “…secure a future for all species, great and small, 
hovering on the brink of extinction” (CBD mission statement).
1995: Covington and his research group, Arizona Game and Fish Department, and the Grand Canyon-Parashant 
National Monument begin the Mt. Trumbull Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration Project on Mt. Trumbull in 
northwest Arizona (Moore et al. 2003).
A dense, dog-hair thicket of Ponderosa pine stands in contrast to a more open, restored 
forest in the G.A. Pearson Natural Area within the Fort Valley Experimental Forest. Evidence 
gathered here in the 1990s by forest ecologists, including Wally Covington of the Ecological 
Restoration Institute, bolstered the need for science-based forest restoration. Photo 
courtesy of ERI

8
Forest restoration work is conducted on the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest under the White Mountain 
Stewardship Contract. The WMSC was the largest 10-year stewardship contract in the nation and served as a testing 
ground for the use of stewardship contracting. Photo courtesy of ERI
1996: Covington becomes the director of the Ecological Restoration Program in the School of Forestry at Northern 
Arizona University. Tis program would evolve into the ERI in 2000.
1996: Upon accepting a faculty position at Northern Arizona University, Tom Sisk establishes the Laboratory for 
Landscape Ecology and Conservation Biology at NAU. Te goal of the lab was to conduct research in conservation 
science, while addressing landscape-scale, ecosystem management issues.
1996–1997: Grand Canyon Forests Partnership (GCFP) organizes in response to the 1996 wildﬁres near Flagstaﬀ 
with the goals of managing forest fuels in the WUI near Flagstaﬀ and restoring the natural functions and processes 
of local ponderosa pine forests. Lead organizations included the Grand Canyon Trust, Northern Arizona University, 
the Flagstaﬀ Fire Department, and the USFS/Coconino National Forest. 
1997: White Mountains Natural Resource Working Group (NRWG) forms and collaborates with the USFS to set 
up three thinning prescriptions at the 7,000-acre Blue Ridge Demonstration Project, including a typical USFS fuels 
treatment, an ERI pre-settlement prescription, and a prescription designed by several environmental organizations. 
Tis group, which was founded by Lewis Tenney, was extremely inﬂuential in the development and implementation 
of the White Mountain Stewardship Contract (Abrams and Burns 2007). 
1998: Northern Arizona Wood Products Association, a non-proﬁt trade group, starts to provide support for local 
economic development, especially the use of small-diameter trees and logs. Molly Pitts was the executive director  
of the association from 2004 through 2012.

9
1998: The Grand Canyon Forests Foundation, the non-profit wing of the GCFP, and the USFS sign a cooperative 
agreement to “work cooperatively to demonstrate new forest management approaches that improve and restore 
ecosystem health of ponderosa pine forest ecosystems in the Flagstaff urban-wildland interface area” (GCFF-USFS 
Cooperative Agreement 1998).
1999–2001: The GCFP, the ERI, and others begin the 1,700-acre Fort Valley Urban/Wildland Restoration Project 
near Flagstaff on an experimental area of the Coconino National Forest. Several environmental organizations (Sierra 
Club, Southwest Forest Alliance, Center for Biological Diversity, Flagstaff Activist Network; see Southwest Forest 
Alliance 2000) strongly critiqued and litigated this project. Based on the so-called “Flagstaff Model” of restorative 
forest thinning and social engagement (Friederici 2003), this project raised issues (e.g., diameter caps, thinning vs. 
burning, canopy cover) that would remain part of the discussion about implementing forest restoration in Arizona.
2000: The ERI approaches Sisk with the idea of conducting landscape-scale assessments of the Mogollon Rim 
forests (Covington 2014, Sisk 2014). This collaboration grew into the Forest Ecosystem Restoration Analysis 
Project (ForestERA), a multidisciplinary, participatory effort to assess the ecological and social implications of 
different restoration treatments at landscape and regional scales, including areas beyond the wildland-urban 
interface.
2002–2006: The GCFP changes its name to the Greater Flagstaff Forests Partnership (GFFP) in 
2002; signs a Cooperative Agreement and Memorandum of Understanding with the USFS to work collaboratively 
to reduce the fire threat on about 180,000 acres in the greater Flagstaff area; Gatewood becomes its executive 
director in 2003. In addition to restoration activities, the GFFP undertakes public outreach about local forestry 
issues. It also commissions two wood supply studies (Mater Engineering 2002, 2004) and hears proposals for local 
wood products industries, including one about creating an oriented-strand board plant from Arizona Lumber 
Products, a company that had been recently purchased by Don Walters, a Flagstaff businessman and building 
contractor (Gatewood 2014). 
2003: Ecological Restoration of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests, edited by Peter Friederici, is published by Island 
Press. This book, along with other influential articles (Allen et al. 2002, Covington 2003, Sisk et al. 2005), made it 
clear that collaborative, science-based forest restoration efforts were underway in the southwestern United States.
2003–2004: The Western Mogollon Plateau Adaptive Landscape Assessment (Sisk et al. 2004) is undertaken by 
ForestERA, the ERI, and numerous northern Arizona stakeholders. The assessment area included portions of the 
Coconino, South Kaibab, Tonto, and Apache-Sitgreaves national forests. Because it was the first such workshop, the 
organizers sought to help participants understand the techniques of landscape-scale assessments and planning as 
well as the principles and goals of landscape-scale forest restoration. Ultimately, the diverse group of stakeholders 
was able to identify common values and threats, and prioritize landscape features in need of protection from 
wildfires by using this visual, collaborative means of analysis.
2004: The NRWG completes their Community Wildfire Protection Plan (CWPP) for At-Risk Communities of 
the Sitgreaves National Forest in Apache, Coconino, and Navajo Counties (Logan Simpson Design Ltd. 2004). By 
2007, 12 CWPPs were completed in Arizona, addressing the wildfire protection needs of 73 communities.
2005: White Mountains Landscape Assessment is completed by ForestERA, the ERI, and 43 regional stakeholders. 
Like the similar landscape assessment in the western Mogollon Rim, this project provided a forum where 
stakeholder values, concerns, and ideas could be translated into spatially explicit prioritization and management 
action scenarios based on the best available science (Abrams 2005, Abrams et al. 2005).

10
10
2005: Covington and Vosick (ERI) begin talks with John Pasquantino of the Oﬃce of Management and Budget 
(OMB) as well as U.S. Forest Service personnel (e.g., Doug Crandall) and Arizona U.S. Senator Kyl and his staﬀ 
in Washington, D.C. about a landscape-scale “pilot project” that would involve a number of the national forests in 
northern Arizona and would be supported by collaborative eﬀort (Covington 2014). Te OMB was interested in 
this idea because they were concerned about ever-increasing wildﬁre suppression costs and whether hazardous fuel 
reduction treatments had the potential to reverse that budgetary trend. Tey believed that such a landscape-scale 
project could provide answers to that question (Murﬁtt 2014).
Key Policy and Management Events
Tere were a number of policy actions at the federal level, regionally, and in Arizona that were vital to resolving 
the crisis in the frequent-ﬁre forests of the West. Nationally, the USFS was in transition during this period, 
trying to ﬁnd its place with several new and demanding constituent groups, particularly recreational visitors and 
environmental organizations. At the same time, the agency was beginning to experience a dramatic increase in 
wildﬁre suppression costs—an ever-increasing expense that strained the budget for other management activities, 
including forest restoration. Its leadership was trying to address issues on a variety of fronts from litigation over 
endangered species to seemingly constant challenges to, and rewrites of, its planning rules. Te Southwestern Region 
of the USFS (R3) spent signiﬁcant time studying northern goshawk populations and developing guidelines for 
silvicultural treatments that addressed the habitat needs of that species (Reynolds et al. 1992) as well as recovery 
plans for the Mexican spotted owl. In addition, the USFS was being pushed to accept a new role as a collaborator in 
a more diverse discussion about wildﬁres and forest management of public lands.
1998: Congress authorizes 28 stewardship contracts as a demonstration project in the Department of Interior and 
Related Agencies Appropriations Act of 1999. 
1999: Te General Accounting Oﬃce produces a report, Western National Forests: A Cohesive Strategy is Needed to 
Address Catastrophic Wildﬁre Treats (GAO 1999).
September 2000: Secretary of the Interior, Bruce Babbitt, and Secretary of Agriculture, Dan Glickman, present 
President Clinton with a report titled, Managing Impacts of Wildﬁres on Communities and the Environment (USDI 
and USDA 2000).
October 2000: Te U.S. Forest Service responds to the 1999 GAO report with the publication of Protecting People 
and Sustaining Resources in Fire-adapted Ecosystems: A Cohesive Strategy (Laverty and Williams 2000).
2001: Arizona Governor Jane Dee Hull issues Executive Order 2001-16 creating the Governor’s Forest Health/
Fire Plan Advisory Committee in response to “the catastrophic wildﬁre season of 2000 and concerns for future 
catastrophic wildﬁres.” Te committee is designed to have members from academia, ﬁre departments, environmental 
groups, tribes, logging industry, and county government, among others.
2001: Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy Update endorses the earlier 1995 policy, but now includes a set of 
guiding principles related to ecological restoration and increasing public safety from wildﬁres.
2001: U.S. Forest Service Collaborative Forest Restoration Program (CFRP) begins in New Mexico. Te program 
proves highly successful in implementing collaborative, relatively small-scale forest restoration and small-diameter 
tree utilization projects across that state. It is inﬂuential as a model for similar work in Arizona and other states, and 
for the federal legislation that authorized the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program in 2009. 

11
11
2002: Te Western Governors Association (WGA) releases A Collaborative Approach for Reducing Wildland Fire 
Risks to Communities and the Environment—a key policy statement and strategy about western forests that has 
the endorsement of the Secretaries of Agriculture and the Interior, the National Association of State Foresters, 
the National Association of Counties, and the Intertribal Timber Council. Te WGA set as its goals: 1) improve 
ﬁre prevention and suppression, 2) reduce hazardous fuels, 3) restore ﬁre-adapted ecosystems, and 4) promote 
community assistance (Western Governors Association 2002; revised 2006).
2002: President G.W. Bush announces the Healthy Forests Initiative (HFI), which recognized the need for federal 
action to limit the number of large wildﬁres. Te HFI also called for legislative and other legal measures that 
would help expedite the review of fuel hazard reduction and forest restoration plans. However, such attempts at 
streamlining the review process were quite controversial, especially the use of collaborative-approved categorical 
exclusions that could not be appealed. While adopted by the USFS in 2004, the use of such categorical exclusions 
was later overturned in the courts (see Sierra Club v. Bosworth, 2007).
2002–2004: In July 2002, Harv Forsgren becomes the regional forester for R3. With his direction, the Regional 
Leadership Team, in January 2004, agreed that restoring the ecological functionality of ﬁre-adapted ecosystems was 
the central priority for R3. Te team also committed the Region to reducing the threat of catastrophic wildﬁre to 
communities and lowering treatment costs by fostering private sector involvement to create the infrastructure to 
utilize excess biomass. Te team agreed to focus and realign its resources to accelerate vegetation treatments across 
the Region to accomplish these goals (USDA Forest Service 2005).
2003: Nora Rasure (Supervisor, Coconino NF) and Mike Williams (Supervisor, Kaibab NF) begin discussions 
about how to move forest restoration forward in northern Arizona given the new R3 central priority, concern about 
increasing frequency and size of wildﬁres, the implications of the revised Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy 
Update, and the scientiﬁc and collaborative work of local groups like the ERI, GFFP, and NRWG (Rasure 2014, 
Williams 2014). 
2003: Arizona Governor Janet Napolitano replaces the previous Governor’s Forest Advisory Committee with 
the Governor’s Forest Health Advisory Council and the Governor’s Forest Health Oversight Council (Executive 
Order 2003-16). Membership includes participants from academia, local governments, environmental groups, ﬁre 
departments, state agencies, and federal agencies.
2003: Congress expands the application of stewardship contracting in the Consolidated Appropriations Resolution 
of 2003 by amending the 1998 authorizing legislation. Te amendments allow federal agencies to award an 
unspeciﬁed number of multi-year stewardship contracts through a period ending in September 2013. 
2003: Prompted by President G.W. Bush’s Healthy Forests Initiative and other calls for federal action, Congress 
passes the Healthy Forests Restoration Act of 2003 to address the issue of large wildﬁres and improve the rate 
of forest restoration activities. While politically controversial, the legislation was eﬀective in motivating federal 
agencies to collaborate with communities to develop hazardous fuel reduction projects (i.e., Community Wildﬁre 
Protection Plans) and place priority on WUI treatment areas identiﬁed by communities. 
September 2003: Arizona Governor’s Forest Health Advisory Council adopts Guiding Principles for Forest 
Ecosystem Restoration and Community Protection. Te Guiding Principles address the following topics: 
integration, sustainable communities and economies, ecological integrity, land use and planning, funding and 
compliance, and practices. Te Integration Principle calls for: “… a statewide forest health evaluation to identify 
high-priority communities, critical infrastructure, habitats, and watersheds at risk. Tis evaluation can also provide 
the framework for monitoring individual projects and cumulative eﬀects.” Tis principle paves the way for future 
work on the Statewide Strategy.

12
12
2004: USFS R3 awards the White Mountain Stewardship Contract (WMSC) on the Apache-Sitgreaves National 
Forests to Future Forests LLC, operated by Rob Davis and Dwayne Walker and his brothers. Te contract allows for 
the treatment of 5,000 to 15,000 acres per year, up to 150,000 acres in ten years. Tis project is the ﬁrst and largest 
10-year stewardship contract in the nation, and it is hoped that its implementation will provide lessons for larger-
scale forest restoration projects. It also serves as a testing ground for the use of stewardship contracting and some 
of its tools, such as trading “goods for services,” “best value contracting,” and “tree designation without marking” 
as well as multi-party monitoring. Te WMSC met many concerns of local leaders and stakeholders: 1) guarantee 
of a baseline level of activity suﬃcient for a wood products business to make the necessary capital investments; 2) 
awarding of the contract to a local wood business; 3) prescribed work within the WUI as a means of protecting local 
communities from wildﬁres; and 4) a 16-inch diameter cap to assure environmental organizations that larger trees 
would only be cut under special circumstances. With the diameter cap 
and local collaborative support in place, the USFS could proceed with 
fewer concerns about litigation and work stoppages (Abrams 2011; see 
also Sitko and Hurteau 2010). 
2004: Te Governor’s Forest Oversight Council presents Governor 
Napolitano with 31 recommendations for needed directives, initiatives, 
and funding to help address forest health issues in the state (Governor’s 
Arizona Forest Oversight Council 2004, Muller 2004). Tis document 
contains the beginnings of ideas and actions later expressed more fully in 
the Statewide Strategy.
2004: Te Restoration Economy Subcommittee of the Arizona Forest 
Health and Advisory Councils develops the Guiding Principles for a 
New Economy Based on Forest Restoration.
2005: Arizona Congressman Rick Renzi introduces Community Forest 
Restoration Expansion Act of 2005 (H.R. 3590) to expand the CFRP to 
Arizona; measure dies in subcommittee.
2005: Te Arizona Governor’s Forest Health Advisory Council and the 
Governor’s Forest Health Oversight Council select a subcommittee, led 
by Aumack and Sisk, to frame a 20-year forest strategy for Arizona. 
The Pivotal Years: The Forest Health Councils and  
Collective Action, 2006-2007
From 2006 through 2007, many of the groups, organizations, and individuals who had been working separately 
on the forestry problem in Arizona began to come together to take collective action. In this section, we review the 
various forums, products, and activities that took place during this period, focusing especially on the work of the 
Governor’s Forest Health Advisory Council and the Governor’s Forest Health Oversight Council, and developments 
of the Statewide Strategy and the Wood Supply Study.
Governor’s Forest Health Advisory Council and the Governor’s Forest Health  
Oversight Council (2006-2007)
During the Napolitano Administration (2003–2009), members of the Governor’s Forest Health Advisory Council 
and the Governor’s Forest Health Oversight Council were extremely focused and productive. By all accounts, the 
participants seemed to thrive in the knowledge that they were working as advisors to Governor Napolitano and 
that their goal to restore Arizona’s forests had her attention and support. As Sisk recalls, “Te atmosphere was 
charged with energy. It was a very productive, and rarely contentious, environment” (Sisk 2014). Schulke remembers 
Arizona Governor Janet Napolitano visits 
a restoration project near Flagstaff in 2004. 
Her support for forest restoration efforts 
across the state energized members of the 
Forest Health Advisory Council and the 
Forest Health Oversight Council and fueled 
a productive time in the events that led to 
the formation of 4FRI. Photo courtesy of 
the state of Arizona

13
it as being “the ﬁrst time for comprehensive thinking” (Schulke 2014). 
Tese councils provided a relatively long-term, government-supported 
structure for people from diﬀerent parts of the state (e.g., White 
Mountains, Flagstaﬀ, Phoenix, Tucson) and from diﬀerent perspectives 
(e.g., academia, business, NGOs, environmental organizations, state 
agencies, local ﬁre departments). Tey served as a forum for people to 
work with and get know one another, to build friendships and alliances, 
and to create constructive, hopeful solutions. Te USFS was represented 
at meetings during this time and the local and regional USFS leadership 
knew about the activities of the councils. 
2006: Work begins in earnest on the Statewide Strategy for Restoring 
Arizona’s Forests, including holding a May workshop in Flagstaﬀ to 
receive comments from stakeholders. 
April 2007: Te subcommittee completes the ﬁnal working draft of the 
Statewide Strategy.
May 2007: Six public meetings are held throughout the state to obtain 
citizen comments about the ﬁnal working draft of the Statewide Strategy.
June 2007: Te two councils approved the ﬁnal document, the Statewide 
Strategy for Restoring Arizona’s Forests: Sustainable Forests, Communities 
& Economies (hereafter, the Statewide Strategy; Aumack et al. 2007), on 
June 14. Tey conveyed it to Governor Napolitano on June 21.
Te Statewide Strategy to Restore Arizona’s Forests
Te Statewide Strategy was a groundbreaking, pro-active document. 
It outlined ﬁve key strategies and made 16 recommendations as to 
how those strategies might be carried out by various federal and state governmental organizations, agencies, and 
committees. In these strategies and recommendations, the councils and the governor sought to increase federal 
funding and state support for restoration/hazardous fuel reduction treatments throughout Arizona. Federal land 
management agencies were called on to begin planning and working at the landscape level. Te Statewide Strategy 
also outlined a number of ideas for developing and sustaining forest-based business enterprises that could process 
the type, quality, and quantity of wood removed during thinning operations. Te authors of the Economics section 
also recognized that those same businesses would have to help oﬀset the costs of restoration activities. Finally, the 
Statewide Strategy provided detailed descriptions of the forested areas within nine bioregions in Arizona—Arizona 
Strip, Basin and Range, Central Highlands, Chuska Mountains, Kaibab Plateau, Northeastern Woodlands, Sky 
Islands, Western Mogollon Rim, and White Mountains. Tese descriptive chapters used ForestERA-based maps as 
well as text and ﬁgures to provide information about the people, wildlife, economic base, collaborative eﬀorts, future 
restoration needs, and other features of these areas.
Te publication of the Statewide Strategy marked a high point in the work of the two councils. It was the councils’ 
ﬁrst large product and demonstrated the hopes of those involved, their commitment to the process, and their 
breadth of knowledge and experience with the issue. Te Statewide Strategy, for the ﬁrst time, put together the over-
arching concept of landscape-scale, community-supported, industry-funded, accelerated forest restoration. It would 
serve as a foundational document for all future discussions about forest management in Arizona and was often 
referred to in discussions with state and federal agencies leading up to the creation of the 4FRI.
Its publication was followed by strong support by Governor Napolitano and signiﬁcant media coverage throughout 
the state. Shortly thereafter, the governor dissolved the two councils and created a single group, the Arizona 
Governor’s Forest Health Council (FHC), which she charged with developing ways to implement the Statewide 
Strategy (Executive Order 2007-17).
The Statewide Strategy for Restoring 
Arizona’s Forests was presented 
to Governor Napolitano on June 
21, 2007. It outlined strategies and 
recommendations to increase federal 
funding and state support for restoration 
and hazardous fuel reduction treatments 
and is regarded as a pivotal document 
for the development of large-scale 
restoration efforts like 4FRI.

14
Analysis of Small-diameter Wood Supply in Northern Arizona
While not a direct product of the two councils, the Analysis of Small-
diameter Wood Supply in Northern Arizona (hereafter, the Wood 
Supply Study; Hampton et al. 2008, Hampton et al. 2011) has its 
origins in informal meetings among several members of the councils. 
Te need for such a study is clearly described in the Statewide 
Strategy (Recommendation 6—“Land managers should work with 
stakeholders to clarify the amount, availability, and location of wood 
and biomass generated through restoration, community protection 
and ﬁre management across the region.” Action: “Te U.S. Forest 
Service and other federal land management agencies should fund and 
participate in a collaborative and objective evaluation of the amount 
and characteristics of wood and biomass available for utilization across 
Arizona.” On p. 31, “Te U.S. Forest Service should conduct a regional 
supply analysis to determine availability of woody material and help 
guide coordination of restoration treatments.”).
Late 2006: Council members, Aumack, Steve Campbell (AZ state 
representative and NRWG member), Gatewood, Schulke, and Vosick 
meet informally to discuss the need for an accurate analysis of the 
wood available in Arizona forests from restoration treatments (Aumack 
2014, Schulke 2014). Several members of this group then urged 
ForestERA to put together a proposal to R3 to carry out this task 
(Hampton et al. 2008). Davis and Schulke meet with Elaine Zieroth 
(Supervisor, Apache-Sitgreaves NF) to discuss the idea; Zieroth meets 
with Forsgren to promote the study (Davis, pers. comm.).
January 2007: Pascal Berlioux, who had been hired in 2006 by Don Walters as President and CEO of the newly 
incorporated Arizona Restoration Forest Products (AZRFP), makes a presentation to the Governor’s Forest 
Health Oversight Council. Berlioux tells the council that AZRFP supports the timely undertaking of  
a collaborative, science-based analysis of the wood supply in Arizona.
Early 2007: Aumack and Schulke meet with Forsgren to discuss the need for such an analysis (Aumack 2014). 
By April, Forsgren verbally agrees that R3 will fund ForestERA to undertake the study (Wood Supply Steering 
Committee Meeting Minutes, April 9, 2007). He also sets a number of goals and a deadline for the project. 
In a letter to Haydee Hampton (lead ForestERA staﬀ member on the project), he outlined his thoughts about 
the importance of the study: “Te utility of the study is threefold. First, it will provide us [USFS R3] a better 
understanding of the zone of agreement across the broad spectrum of stakeholders of the range of available 
biomass resulting as a byproduct of various restoration treatment scenarios. Secondly, it will provide an additional 
dimension to build our discussions at the local level as to the scale and scope of restoration treatments. Tirdly, it 
will assist both us and potential private investors in assessing the appropriate scale of infrastructure development 
to utilize the biomass produced as a byproduct of restoration projects” (Forsgren to Hampton, July 19, 2007).
May 2007: A 20-member stakeholder group, including a steering committee of Davis, Gatewood, Schulke, Vosick 
and Zieroth, begins work on the Wood Supply Study. Sessions are led by ForestERA staﬀ and facilitated by 
Rosemary Romero. Te group met seven times during 2007, beginning in June and ending in late November.
February 2008: Te Analysis of Small-diameter Wood Supply in Northern Arizona (Hampton et al. 2008) was 
completed and distributed.
Using up-to-date, remote sensing-based forest structure data, the Wood Supply Study group analyzed potential 
treatment scenarios for a 2.4-million-acre analysis area across the Mogollon Plateau in order to create a science-
based estimate of wood volume in three tree diameter classes (<5”, 5–16”, and >16” diameter at breast height). 
The results from the Analysis of Small-
diameter Wood Supply in Northern 
Arizona helped frame an economic and 
ecological picture of implementing 
treatments at the landscape scale in 
northern Arizona, across an area nearly 
identical to 4FRI.

15
The group reached consensus (i.e., 100% agreement) about treatments across two-thirds of the analysis area. 
Specifically, the group unanimously agreed that 26% of the analysis area should not be considered a source 
for wood supply from mechanical restoration treatments due to steep topography, endangered species habitat, 
streamside management zones, and other factors. They also agreed by consensus that 41% of the study area was 
appropriate for mechanical thinning. In addition, the group reached a high level of agreement, but not consensus, 
that an additional 33% of the analysis area might be available as a source of wood using mechanical restoration 
treatments (Hampton et al. 2008).
Within less than a year of the publication of the Statewide Strategy, the stakeholders produced a second 
document that would prove essential in terms of setting the stage for 4FRI.The Wood Supply Study was the 
result of the experience gained in the earlier landscape assessment/stakeholder processes by ForestERA and 
many others within the study group. Equally important, it was the first collaborative project of this scale that 
worked closely with the R3 Office. The results of the consensus-approved scenarios showed that even when 
hundreds of thousands of acres were taken “off the table,” there was still more than 1 million acres with enough 
trees and biomass to support a wood products industry and allow it to find investors for needed infrastructure 
improvements. It helped all parties put a realistic economic and ecological frame on the issue of implementing 
restorative treatments at the landscape scale in northern Arizona, across an area that turned out to be nearly 
identical to the area of 4FRI. Moreover, despite some hard feelings about the way consensus was reached, the 
group did find a zone of agreement or “social license” that Forsgren felt R3 needed to proceed with its plans for 
accelerated restoration of fire-adapted ponderosa pine forests in the area. 
During roughly the same period the stakeholders were developing the Wood Supply Study, Forsgren organized 
a USFS regional task group to study the feasibility of developing one or more long-term stewardship contracts 
within the region. By December 2007, the group produced a draft Multi-Forest Stewardship Contract 
Feasibility Assessment in which they concluded the most effective way to accomplish landscape-scale 
treatments would be through the creation of multi-forest planning, preparation, and contract administration 
teams dedicated to the project.
The positive results of the Wood Supply Study raised hopes that the USFS would be able to quickly implement 
its first on-the-ground, landscape-scale restoration treatment in the area. This was especially the case because, 
realistically or not, Forsgren “promised” such a level of action within 90 days of the completion of the study 
(Aumack 2014, Gatewood 2014, Pitts 2014, Sisk 2014, Schulke 2014; also see letter from Forsgren to Gatewood, 
July 2007, which suggests a Request for Proposal by December 2007/January 2008). However, while some 
stakeholders thought the Wood Supply Study results would provide an immediate springboard for decisive action 
and on-the-ground implementation, events and actions proved otherwise. 
In late 2007, Forsgren left his job as R3 Regional Forester. His deputy, Gilbert Zepada, was named acting Deputy 
Regional Forester, and Corbin Newman was eventually assigned to replace him. Although concerted efforts 
continued forward, there was an emotional letdown and an immediate sense of uncertainty, especially from those 
representing industry, environmental organizations, and local communities (Aumack 2014, Pitts 2014, Sisk 2014). 
Davis made this observation: “I really don’t know exactly why, but there was something that occurred between 
the supply study being finished, a few discussions with the Forest Service about what they were going to do, and 
then all of a sudden the 4FRI took off. I don’t know who and why that really happened, but there is something 
significant during that period. At one time I thought it was all just going to go away” (Davis 2012).
The Pivotal Years: Accelerated Restoration, Pilot Study, New 
Alliances, CFLRP, 2008-early 2009
During 2008 and the early months of 2009 numerous activities took place to promote and accelerate the 
implementation of forest restoration in Arizona, in particular: 1) continued work by the new Forest Health 
Council to implement the Statewide Strategy and use the findings and social license of the Wood Supply Study; 
2) increased engagement by R3 and the four national forest supervisors in northern Arizona with the Forest 

16
Health Council; 3) efforts in the U.S. Congress that would result in the creation of the Collaborative Forest 
Landscape Restoration Program (CFLRP); and 4) the development of a new alliance between the AZFRP 
and environmental groups, highlighted by their April 2009 Memorandum of Understanding. 
The Governor’s Forest Health Council (2008-2009)
The Governor’s Forest Health Council (FHC) was now focused on implementing the Statewide Strategy. To 
that end, the FHC discussed and implemented various activities, including: 
• Securing support and funding from government officials and NGOs at all levels for 
implementation of the Statewide Strategy using the information and social license obtained 
during the Wood Supply Study, and to maintain a high level of political pressure/concern on 
the U.S. Forest Service for landscape-level treatments on national forests in Arizona. 
To help accomplish this goal, Berlioux and Aumack made presentations to all seven northern 
Arizona counties, the Northern Arizona Council of Government, the Eastern Arizona 
County Organization, and the County Supervisors Association of Arizona from December 
2008 to February 2009. They secured resolutions of support from these groups for industry-
supported, landscape-scale, accelerated restoration in northern Arizona as outlined in the 
Statewide Strategy. Copies of the county-signed resolutions were sent to R3 (Aumack 2014, 
Berlioux 2014).
• Assisting the USFS in conceptualizing and implementing their plans for accelerated 
restoration and/or other restoration-related activities. 
There were two documents produced by the FHC at this time—Fire on the Landscape: Planning for 
Communities, Fire, and Forest Health (Falk et al. 2008) and The Guiding Principles for Forest Restoration and 
Community Protection: Wildlife Habitat, developed by Steve Rosenstock from the Arizona Game and Fish 
Department and other stakeholders (i.e., Schulke and Gatewood).
There was also a change in FHC leadership with Pitts replacing Vosick as the co-chair with Aumack. 
U.S. Forest Service and the Forest Health Council: Accelerated Restoration and  
the Pilot Project (2008–2009)
Corbin Newman turned out to be a strong, although more cautiously pragmatic, supporter of accelerated 
restoration in the Southwest (Covington 2014, Rasure 2014, Williams 2014). Very shortly after arriving in 
Albuquerque, he attended a FHC meeting to discuss the Statewide Strategy and the Wood Supply Study, the 
Forest Plan revisions process, R3 staffing changes, and to quell rumors that the White Mountain Stewardship 
Contract would be cancelled (Minutes of the FHC, March 13, 2008). He met with the FHC again in June 
2008 and indicated that R3 was now looking closely at how to accelerate restoration at the landscape scale, 
but that it wouldn’t happen as soon as some people hoped because of the scope of the treatment (35,000-
100,000 acres as opposed to the then typical project size of 5,000-10,000 acres) and the amount of work 
involved. He proposed that R3 and representatives of the FHC work together to study this issue (Minutes of 
the FHC, June 12, 2008). 
The FHC agreed and they formed the Southwestern Region Restoration Task Force, which met four times 
during August and September 2008. This group was co-chaired by Williams (Kaibab NF) and Don Bright 
(R3 Director, Forest Management), and included FHC representation from Berlioux, Gatewood, Scott 
Higginson (Renergy Holding, Inc.), and Schulke. In October 2008, they produced a draft report titled, 

17
Alternative Approaches to Accelerating Forest Restoration in Northern Arizona (Southwestern Region Restoration 
Task Force 2008). Tis study looked at ﬁve contracting and implementation alternatives and what each would 
mean in terms of both the eﬃciencies of planning operations and shifting costs away from the U.S. Forest Service 
(Berlioux 2014, Gatewood 2014). While the draft report did not aﬃrm any one of the alternatives, it did conclude 
that doing business-as-usual (i.e., relatively small projects, carried out by individual forests, working within the 
compartmentalized organizational structure) would not work for large-scale forest treatments given the present 
budget and political climate. 
Shortly after the release of the Wood Supply Study, Rasure (Coconino NF) and Williams (Kaibab NF) expanded 
their conversations about accelerated restoration to include Gene Blakenbaker (Supervisor, Tonto NF) and Chris 
Knopp (Supervisor, Apache-Sitgreaves NF) (Rasure 2014). Newman encouraged these meetings because he wanted 
the four supervisors to discuss realistic ways to move ahead using the ideas developed in the Statewide Strategy 
and the data from the Wood Supply Study (Rasure 2014, Williams 2014). At times, these meetings included 
personnel from R3, including directors and regional foresters (Rasure 2014). Tey signaled a move away from each 
forest working on its own individual projects and toward a four forest restoration strategy (Rasure 2014). During 
this same period, the Kaibab NF also launched the Kaibab Forest Health Focus project. It produced a series of 
recommendations for high-priority areas on all three districts of the Kaibab National Forest, and provided guidance 
about restoration treatments and other appropriate management actions (ForestERA 2009).
During 2008 and the ﬁrst quarter of 2009, the four forest supervisors, R3 personnel, and various invited stakeholders 
(e.g., Aumack, Berlioux, Covington, Schulke, Ed Smith (Te Nature Conservancy), U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service 
representatives; Rasure 2014, Williams 2014) discussed the topics of accelerated restoration as well as a “pilot project” 
that the ERI had moved forward following numerous conversations with the OMB and other oﬃcials in Washington, 
D.C. (Covington 2014, Murﬁtt 2014). Parallel discussions took place at FHC meetings under the headings of the 
Implementation Plan (accelerated restoration based on the Wood Supply Study and the Southwestern Region 
Restoration Task Force report) and the Northern Arizona Pilot Project (Minutes of the FHC, 2008-2009). 
While these discussions and meetings were important to the continuing progress toward forest restoration on public 
lands in Arizona, they were ultimately overshadowed by the passage of the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration 
Program (CFLRP) legislation and the subsequent eﬀort to establish the 4FRI as a CFLRP project. Te Northern Arizona 
Pilot Project never took place, although the work by the FHC Landscape Working Group toward that goal helped shape 
the Four Forest Strategy by identifying project objectives as well as the scale of the project and the best locations (FHC 
letter to Newman, November 23, 2008). Te FHC was able to garner local political support through its resolution for 
accelerated forest restoration. Enough support, in fact, to prompt Newman to send a letter to the FHC that among other 
things stated, “Te four forest supervisors have recently agreed to take the following actions..: 1) Develop a four-forest 
strategy for evaluating large landscapes and identifying priorities for treatments taking full advantage of the wood supply 
study. 2) Work expeditiously to identify planning, contracting, and collaboration mechanisms that support an acceleration 
of restoration consistent with the wood supply study consensus agreement. 3) Identify and implement a streamlined 
environmental analysis methodology that meets National Environmental Policy Act and all other pertinent legal 
requirements. 4) Organize and aggressively complete restoration across a 750,000-acre landscape within the wood supply 
study area by the end of the next decade. 5) Implement thinning and fuels reduction projects using long-term stewardship 
contracts, agreements and other tools that provide for reasonable assurance of long-term wood supply” (Newman to 
Aumack and Pitts, March 9, 2009).
March 9, 2009: A stakeholder meeting is held to develop points of agreement (a precursor to the Path Forward) 
about implementation of accelerated restoration across northern Arizona; these talking points were sent to R3. At 
this meeting, the eﬀort went from being called the Four Forest Restoration Strategy to the Four Forest Initiative. 
Te Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program Legislation (2007-2009)
Te U.S. Congress established the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program (CFLRP) when it passed 
Title IV of the Omnibus Public Land Management Act of 2009 on March 30, 2009. Tis federal law brought the 
needed focus and funding to collaborative forest restoration eﬀorts, not only in Arizona, but throughout the western 

18
United States. It provided the “mechanism” (Covington 2014) and the “way” (Williams 2014) for the USFS and 
its collaborative partners to proceed with landscape-scale restoration on the four forests in northern Arizona.
Eﬀorts to move this idea through Congress began in 2007 and came from several NGOs, in particular Te Nature 
Conservancy, with support from American Forests, the Forest Guild, Sustainable Northwest, the Watershed 
Research and Training Center, and Conservation Northwest. United States Senator Jeﬀ Bingaman (NM) was the 
major proponent of the legislation in the Senate, with Scott Miller of the senator’s staﬀ as the chief author of the 
legislation; Senator Diane Feinstein (CA) and Senator Peter Domenici (NM) and their staﬀs were also consulted 
and involved. Congressman Raul Grijalva (AZ) and his staﬀ played an active role in the House of Representatives. 
Both R3 and FHC stakeholders knew about the proposed legislation when it was ﬁrst introduced in 2008 with 
some groups, like the GFFP, writing letters of support.
Te Emerging Alliance between AZFRP, Northern Arizona County 
Representatives, and the Environmental Community
When Berlioux ﬁrst became active within the stakeholder group, he was by his own admission “pretty naïve” about 
what had gone on beforehand and, being used to the “matter-of-fact, get it done or get out the way” business 
world, was unsure how to act in the collaborative environment of stakeholder-driven discussions (Berlioux 2014). 
However, he had enough business acumen to see that he had to ﬁnd allies and build support, for the AZFRP to 
succeed. To that end, Berlioux took several initial steps to make himself and AZFRP a legitimate, large-scale, 
wood products industry stakeholder.
December 2006 to July 2007: Berlioux made presentations to various groups about the AZFRP proposal for 
construction of an oriented strand board production facility in Winslow and associated biomass electricity-
generating facilities along the Mogollon Rim. He secured resolutions and letters of support for the AZFRP 
proposal from all seven counties of northern Arizona (Navajo, Apache, Gila, Greenlee, Graham, Yavapai, 
Coconino), the Northern Arizona Council of Government, the Eastern Arizona County Organization, and 
numerous communities and organizations (e.g., Flagstaﬀ Mayor, City of Winslow, Society of American Foresters).
October 2007: Te AZFRP released the Impact Analysis of Arizona Forest Restoration Products’ Oriented Strand 
Board Facility report (Hjerpe and Gunderson 2007), which concluded that the AZFRP business proposal would 
support 600 jobs and inject $170 million annually in the northern Arizona economy.
Berlioux also became active as a public participant at the Forest Health Council, and was a contributing member 
of the Wood Supply Study Working Group and other stakeholder groups. During his participation as part of the 
Southwestern Region Restoration Task Force, Berlioux showed his business plan data to R3 staﬀ and believes he 
convinced them and Forsgren that “industry-supported restoration” was a viable alternative (Berlioux 2014).
Trough these eﬀorts, Berlioux began to gain favor with leaders from the environmental community and the local 
government community, both of whom earlier had serious doubts about him and the type of business he had in 
mind (Berlioux 2014, Schulke 2014, Pitts 2014, Tenney 2012, Stephenson 2012). In particular, local government 
representatives came to see the AZFRP as a legitimate solution to help boost their rural economies during the 
economic downturn of the late 2000s as well as to safeguard their communities from wildﬁres (Tenney 2012, 
Stephenson 2012).
April, 2009: Signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between Arizona Forest Restoration Products, Inc., 
the Center for Biological Diversity and the Grand Canyon Trust, to Work Cooperatively to Restore Degraded 
Ponderosa Pine Ecosystems in Northern Arizona. Signatures: Pascal Berlioux (AZFRP), Taylor McKinnon 
(CBD), and Ethan Aumack (GCT).
In early 2008, after the Wood Supply Study was released and as the hoped-for pace of accelerated restoration 
slowed and the process of more studies and discussions resumed, some stakeholders had a “fear of non-action” 
and a sense that only “forceful politics” was going to make R3 move forward with any urgency (Aumack 2014, 
McKinnon 2012, Schulke 2014). Te idea for the MOU developed in response to those thoughts. After working 

19
with Berlioux during the Wood Supply Study, Schulke began to think that the AZFRP had the “appropriate” 
business philosophy and scope (i.e., industry-supported restoration using only small-diameter trees, working 
at a landscape scale) to garner the support of environmental groups (Schulke 2014). In addition, he recognized 
that Berlioux had developed a significant level of support from local community leaders in northern Arizona. 
Sometime that spring, Berlioux met with Schulke and showed him all the details of the AZFRP business plan 
and answered his questions about it (Berlioux 2014). A level of trust emerged from that discussion that convinced 
both parties they could and should show support for one another in a public way in order to push the USFS 
and the process forward (Berlioux 2014, Schulke 2014). However, because the MOU was a “huge political risk” 
for the CBD, it took “a long time” to negotiate the final draft (Schulke 2014). The connection between Berlioux 
and Aumack was likewise strengthened during this period, especially as they began working together obtaining 
endorsements from the counties and NGOs for the FHC resolution supporting accelerated forest restoration 
in Arizona. They both considered that resolution an important means of providing the “forceful politics” needed 
given the situation; the MOU was another step (Berlioux 2014). 
The public reaction to the MOU was memorable. The three parties expected their statement to be very 
well received, but a number of other stakeholders, as well as some in the R3 leadership, were decidedly 
upset by it (Aumack 2014, Berlioux 2014, McKinnon 2012, Schulke 2014, Sisk 2014). The reasons for this 
negative reaction were numerous but revolved around the lack of consultation with the rest of the then-
forming 4FRI stakeholder group and wording in the MOU which gave the impression that the contractor 
(AZFRP) could make implementation decisions independent of the USFS and the collaborative group (e.g., 
excluding thinning any trees greater than 16 inches in diameter at breast height). However, various local 
and Washington-based officials in the USFS, along with some stakeholders, did value having an agreement 
between industry and environmental interests that suggested a way forward without litigation or other 
interferences. As Aumack points out, “The intent of the MOU, from my perspective, was that it would take 
off the table the traditional rational for not moving forward with landscape-scale restoration, thereby forcing 
everybody, meaningfully, to agree. And it had that effect, and it had some very negative consequences to go 
along with it in terms of being politically forceful” (Aumack 2012). 
Emergence of 4FRI: April 2009–August 2010
With the passage of Title IV of the Omnibus Public Land Management Act of 2009, the way became clear for 
landscape-scale, community-supported, industry-funded, accelerated forest restoration in northern Arizona. Now 
there was federal legislation available to financially and structurally support the kind of forest and community 
restoration efforts that people and organizations in Arizona had worked so long and hard to achieve.
During its first year of operation, 4FRI began to organize both in terms of the collaborative stakeholders and the 
USFS. The 4FRI Collaborative Stakeholder Group (4FRISG) established a steering committee, various working 
groups (Landscape Strategy, Science and Monitoring, Communications, Industry Engagement, and CFLRP Proposal), 
developed a charter (4FRISG 2010c), and several other important foundational documents. Additionally many 
members of the stakeholder group made multiple trips to visit key politicians and agency personnel in Washington, 
D.C. to advocate for the 4FRI concept and funding to support its implementation. For their part, the four forests 
(Apache-Sitgreaves, Coconino, Kaibab, Tonto) assigned a project team leader (Henry Provencio) and several other staff 
members (e.g., Mike Chaveas, Courtney Schultz, Linda Wadleigh). They also hired meeting facilitators, and began 
discussions among their staff and the stakeholder group about how to proceed.
Two items were of immediate concern: 1) developing The Path Forward (4FRISG 2010a) as a foundational 
document to guide implementation of the 4FRI Project and 2) preparing the proposal for acceptance into the 
CLFRP. While these were not the only activities that the stakeholder group undertook, these two became the 
highest priority because the project had not yet been authorized for funding and, in order to receive authorization, 
the group needed to demonstrate that there was an agreed-upon social license to implement the project.

20
Te Path Forward
May 2009: R3 hosts a stakeholder meeting in Flagstaﬀ on May 1 to discuss the “Four Forest Restoration 
Initiative”—the ﬁrst oﬃcial use of the name in a public forum. A topic of discussion is R3’s uneasiness with 
the proposed limits (i.e., “sideboards”) for landscape-scale restoration that were expressed in the so-called 
“Points of Agreement” document. Tis document came out of discussions between R3 and stakeholders 
during the development of the draft 2008 accelerated restoration report by the Southwestern Region 
Restoration Task Force. 
May 2009: A group of 12 stakeholders is formed on May 11 to begin work on a document that would 
come to be known as Te Path Forward. Tese stakeholders include: Aumack (GCT), Berlioux (AZFRP), 
Covington (ERI), Bruce Greco (ERI), Shaula Hedwall (USFWS), McKinnon (CBD), Pitts (NAWPA), 
Sarah Reif (AZGF), Rosenstock (AZGF), Schulke (CBD), Ed Smith (TNC), and Larry Stephenson 
(EACO).
Te development of Te Path Forward took longer than expected and 
revisited many of the issues that had divided the stakeholders for years 
(i.e., old-growth trees/large-tree retention/diameter caps) as well as 
reviving a growing concern, also experienced during the Wood Supply 
Study, that having both majority and unanimous consensus decisions 
was the proper means for making decisions in this situation. In order 
to break through these contentious issues, the stakeholders adopted a 
consensus decision matrix that allowed members to express agreement 
while simultaneously articulating their reservations. After many 
months of work and several drafts, the 4FRISG ﬁnally adopted Te 
Path Forward in March, 2010. Many stakeholders used the matrix to 
document their reservations, but ultimately supported the document 
and explicitly agreed to not undercut the agreement in the future. 
Whatever its weaknesses, the document provided a serviceable zone of 
agreement for the theoretical and practical work ahead and included a 
vision, principles, key strategies, and sideboards for implementation. 
Te 4FRI Stakeholder Group Charter
Adoption of Te Path Forward set the stage for another foundational document, the 4FRI Stakeholder Group 
Charter, which was signed by 40 signatories from 28 organizations in June, 2010. Te charter laid out the 
4FRI vision and mission as well as key actions needed to achieve these goals. Te organizational structure 
outlined in the charter included a steering committee, working groups, and a rotating chair. It also included 
a matrix of decision rules and deliberation for guiding agreements or disagreements, role of facilitation, 
collaborative and communication norms, annual self-evaluation, and guidelines for membership and 
participation to enable participation from among the wide range of interests. Te charter’s mission also helped 
shape the goals of the Memorandum of Understanding between the stakeholders and the USFS.
Te CFLRP Proposal
Te CFLRP legislation includes an extensive review process that requires interested stakeholder groups and 
their partners in the USFS to submit a detailed account of the need for a collaborative landscape-scale forest 
restoration projects and supporting evidence as to why they believe the project will be successful. 
April 2009: Te USFS releases a Request for Information (RFI) for a Four Forest Restoration Initiative 
(4FRI) Project. 
On August 13, 2010, the Secretary of 
Agriculture selected the 4FRI Project as one 
of the ﬁrst CFLRP projects in the country.

21
February–March 2010: Minutes from 4FRI meetings indicate that the proposal, the writing of which was led by 
USFS 4FRI Assistant Team Leader, Courtney Schultz, was completed in draft form in March 2010. Titled, Te 4 
Forest Restoration Initiative: Promoting Ecological Restoration, Wildﬁre Risk Reduction, and Sustainable Wood Products 
Industries: A proposal for funding under the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program (4FRISG 2010b), it 
was submitted to R3 for its review by the end of that month, and sent to USFS Washington Oﬃce by the May 14 
deadline for ﬁnal proposals. Te Washington Oﬃce reviewed all proposals and sent their decision by August, 2010.
August 2010: On August 13, 2010, the Secretary of Agriculture announced the selection of ten CFLRP projects 
in nine states. Te 4FRI Project was named as one of the ﬁrst CFLRP projects in the country and was awarded $2 
million through the CFLRA grant, plus an additional $1 million from the USFS “Chief’s Reserve.” 
After receiving CFLRP authorization, the 4FRISG and the USFS continued working on various issues, in particular 
ﬁnalizing a Memorandum of Understanding, which was signed by all four forest supervisors and 20 stakeholders 
representing industry, environmental, county, and academic interests on February 23, 2011. Tis MOU outlined the 
following goals: 
“1) accelerate landscape-scale restoration across the Mogollon Rim to support resilient, diverse stands, that 
sustain populations of native plants and animals; 
2) restore forests so they pose less threat of destructive wildﬁre to forest communities; 
3) create sustainable forest industries that strengthen local economies while conserving natural resources and 
aesthetic values; and 
4) engage the public at large through increased public outreach, education, and support for this initiative.” 
Working collaboratively at the landscape scale to restore ponderosa pine forest ecosystems in Arizona had ﬁnally 
become a reality. However, much work remained after signing the MOU, including awarding the largest stewardship 
contract in USFS history, a massive NEPA planning process, followed by several stages of implementation, 
monitoring, and adaptive management. 
Top: The 4FRI Stakeholder Group along with all four forest supervisors met on February 23, 2011 to sign a Memorandum 
of Understanding. Bottom (left to right): Coconino National Forest Supervisor Earl Stewart; Navajo County Supervisor 
David Tenney; and Coconino County Supervisor Mandy Metzger. Photos courtesy of ERI

22
Conclusion
The 4FRI emerged and evolved from a number of ideas and a series of purposeful actions with the common goal of 
achieving landscape-scale forest restoration in the ponderosa pine ecosystems of northern Arizona. Extraordinary 
in its vision and scope, 4FRI developed from a dynamic confluence of ecological and socio-political changes, policy 
openings, stakeholder and government learning experiences with smaller-scale projects (e.g., White Mountain 
Stewardship Contract), and consistent pressure from both outside and inside the USFS for a significant change and 
adaptation. A review of 4FRI’s history also strongly suggests that groups who are able to make collective decisions 
possess real power through the use of the collaborative process. However, this means having the resolve to keep the 
larger goal in mind at all times, and overcoming the emotional turmoil often created by individualistic or potentially 
divisive actions. 
Whether 4FRI will achieve its various goals remains a work-in-progress. However the project unfolds, the history of 
4FRI exemplifies the willingness of diverse interests to face a significant problem and work toward an ecologically 
and socially acceptable solution. 
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge the important work of Windy Greer Selig in researching and preparing 
significant amounts of the material used in this paper. We would also like to thank the various people who were 
interviewed, some several times, during the preparation of this document. Likewise, many sincere thanks to everyone 
who reviewed this document. Finally, our hats off to all the various people—citizens, agency personnel, scientists, 
government officials, business people, and others—who involved themselves in the process of finding a socially 
acceptable solution to the management of the ponderosa pine ecosystem in Arizona. 
A visual timeline of events documenting the history of 4FRI from the 1980s to 2010 is available online at  
http://prezi.com/iwdz-m7horl8/the-history-of-4fri/.

23
References
Abrams, J. 2011. The policy context of the White Mountain Stewardship Contract. Pages 163-176 in D. Egan, E.E. 
Hjerpe, and J. Abrams, eds, Human dimensions of ecological restoration: Integrating science, nature, and culture. 
Washington, DC: Island Press.
___. 2005. Report on a needs assessment for collaborative landscape planning in the White Mountains of Arizona. Flagstaff, 
AZ: Ecological Restoration Institute.
Abrams, J., H. Hampton, J. Prather, B. Dickson, J. Rundall, Y. Xu, J. Anderson, and T. Sisk. 2005. Report on the White 
Mountains Landscape Assessment: A collaborative, science-based approach to forest restoration in eastern Arizona. Flagstaff, 
AZ: Ecological Restoration Institute and Forest Ecosystem Restoration Analysis Project, Northern Arizona 
University.
Abrams, J. and S. Burns. 2007. Case study of community stewardship success: The White Mountain Stewardship Contract. 
ERI-Issues in Forest Restoration. Flagstaff, AZ: Ecological Restoration Institute.
Allen, C.D., M. Savage, D.A. Falk, K.F. Suckling, T.W. Swetnam, T. Schulke, P.B. Stacey, P. Morgan, M. Hoffman, 
and J.T. Klingel. Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems: A broad perspective. Ecological 
Applications 12(5):1418-1433. 
Arizona Governor’s Forest Health Oversight Council. 2004. The report of the Arizona Governor’s Forest Health 
Oversight Council. Phoenix, AZ: Arizona Governor’s Forest Health Oversight Council.
Aumack, E. 2014. Interview with D. Egan, Feb. 25.
___. 2012. Interview with W. Greer Selig.
Aumack, E., T. Sisk, and J. Palumbo, eds. 2007. Statewide strategy for restoring Arizona’s forest: Sustainable forests, 
communities, and economies. State of Arizona, Governor’s Forest Health Councils. Phoenix: Arizona Public Service.
Berg, P., ed. 1978. Reinhabiting a separate country: A bioregional anthology of northern California. San Francisco: Planet 
Drum.
Berlioux, P. 2014. Interview with D. Egan, March 5.
Bosworth, D. and H. Brown. 2007. After the Timber Wars: Collaborative community-based stewardship. Journal of 
Forestry 105(5):271–273.
Combrink, T., C. Cothran, W. Fox, J. Peterson, and G. Snider. 2013. A full cost accounting of the 2010 Schultz Fire. 
ERI—Issues in Forest Restoration Series. Flagstaff, AZ: Ecological Restoration Institute.
Cortner, H.J., D.R. Field, P. Jakes, and J.D. Buthman, eds. 2003. Humans, fires, and forests: Social science applied to 
fire management, A workshop summary. Flagstaff, AZ: Ecological Restoration Institute.
Covington, W.W. 2014. Interview with D. Egan, Feb. 25. 
___. 2003. Restoring ecosystem health in the frequent-fire forests of the American West. Ecological Restoration 
21(1):7-11.
Covington, W.W. and M.M. Moore. 1994. Southwestern ponderosa forest structure changes since Euro-American 
settlement. Journal of Forestry 92(1):39-47.

24
Davis, R. 2012. Interview with W. Greer Selig.
DeGomez, T. 2003. Arizona Bark Beetle Outbreak – Fall 2003 Update. Flagstaﬀ: University of Arizona Cooperative 
Extension.
DellaSala, D.A., A. Martin, R. Spivak, T. Schulke, B. Byrd, M. Criley, C. van Daalen, J. Kreilick, R. Brown, and G. 
Aplet. 2003. A citizen’s call for ecological forest restoration: Forest restoration principles and criteria. Ecological 
Restoration 21(1):14-23.
Egan, D. and E.A. Howell, eds. Te historical ecology handbook: A restorationist’s guide to reference ecosystems. 
Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Falk, D., C. Cox, D. Hill, T. McKinnon, E. Rosenberg, K. Siderits, and T. Swetnam. 2008. Fire on the landscape: 
Planning for communities, ﬁre, and forest health. Report of the Arizona Forest Health Council to the Oﬃce of the 
Governor. Tucson, AZ.
ForestERA. 2009. Te Kaibab Forest Health Focus. Flagstaﬀ, AZ: ForestERA, Northern Arizona University.
Gatewood, S. 2014. Interview with D. Egan, Feb. 24.
Forman, R.T.T. 1995. Land mosaics: Te ecology of landscapes and regions. Cambridge, England and New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Forman, R.T.T. and M. Godron. 1986. Landscape ecology. New York: John Wiley. 
Franklin, J.F. and R.T.T. Forman. 1987. Creating landscape patterns by forest cutting: ecological consequences and 
principles. Landscape Ecology 1:5-18.
Friederici, P. 2003. Te “Flagstaﬀ Model.” Pages 7-25 in P. Friederici, ed., Ecological restoration of southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests. Washington, DC: Island Press.
Four Forest Restoration Initiative Stakeholder Group. 2010a. Path Forward. Available on the web at http://www.
fs.usda.gov/Internet/FSE_DOCUMENTS/stelprdb5180874.pdf.
Four Forest Restoration Initiative Stakeholder Group. 2010b. Te 4 Forest Restoration Initiative: Promoting 
Ecological Restoration, Wildﬁre Risk Reduction, and Sustainable Wood Products Industries. A proposal for funding 
under the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program. Flagstaﬀ, AZ: Ecological Restoration Institute and 
US Forest Service.
Four Forest Restoration Initiative Stakeholder Group. 2010c. Four Forest Restoration Initiative Stakeholder Group 
Charter. Available on the web at http://www.fs.usda.gov/Internet/FSE_DOCUMENTS/stelprdb5180873.pdf.
General Accounting Oﬃce. 1999. Western National Forests: A cohesive strategy is needed to address catastrophic 
wildﬁre threats. General Accounting Oﬃce Report GAO/RCED—99-65. Washington, DC: General Accounting 
Oﬃce.
Grumbine, E. 1994. What is ecosystem management? Conservation Biology 8(1):27-38.
Hampton, H.M., S.E. Sesnie, B.G. Dickson, J.M. Rundall, T.D Sisk, G.B. Snider, and J.D. Bailey. 2008. Analysis 
of Small-Diameter Wood Supply in Northern Arizona. Forest Ecosystem Restoration Analysis Project, Center for 
Environmental Sciences and Education, Northern Arizona University.

25
Hampton, H.M., S.E. Sesnie, J.D. Bailey, and G.B. Snider. 2011. Estimating regional wood supply based on 
stakeholder consensus for Forest Restoration in northern Arizona. Journal of Forestry. 109(1), 15-26
Hjerpe, E. and R.J. Gunderson. 2007. Impact analysis of Arizona Forest Restoration Products’ oriented strand board 
facility. Flagstaﬀ, AZ: Northern Arizona University, Te W.A. Franke College of Business, Te Center for Business 
Outreach.
Kyl, J. 2002. Environmental activists place forests at risk. Arizona Republic, B9. June 26.
Landres, P.B., P. Morgan, and F.J. Swanson. 1999. Overview of the use of natural variability concepts in managing 
ecological systems. Ecological Applications 9(4):1179-1188.
Laverty, L. and J. Williams. 2000. Protecting people and sustaining resources in ﬁre-adapted ecosystems: A cohesive 
strategy. Te Forest Service Management Response to the General Accounting Oﬃce Report GAO/RCED—99-
65. Washington, DC: U.S. Forest Service.
Logan Simpson Design Ltd. 2004. Community Wildﬁre Protection Plan for at-risk communities of the Sitgreaves 
National Forest in Apache, Coconino, and Navajo counties. Tempe, AZ: Logan Simpson Design Ltd.
Malakoﬀ, D. 2002. Arizona forest ecologist puts stamp on forest restoration debate. Science 297:2194-2196.
Marlette, J. 2004. Greater Flagstaﬀ Forest Partnership: A research reference guide, second edition. Flagstaﬀ, AZ: Greater 
Flagstaﬀ Forest Partnership.
Mast, J.N., P.Z. Fule, M.M. Moore, W.W. Covington, and A.E.M. Waltz. 1999. Restoration of a presettlement age 
structure of an Arizona ponderosa pine forest. Ecological Applications 9(1):228-239.
Mater Engineering. 2004. A CROP pilot project design and implementation project for the Greater Flagstaﬀ Forest 
Partnership. Corvallis, OR: Mater Engineering.
___. 2002. Restoration resource and investment potential ﬁnal report. Corvallis, OR: Mater Engineering.
McKinnon, T. 2012. Interview with W. Greer Selig.
Moore, K., B. Davis, and T. Duck. 2003. Mt. Trumbull Ponderosa Pine Restoration Project. Pp. 117-132 in USDA 
Forest Service Proceedings, RMRS-P-29. 
Moore, M.M., W.W. Covington, and P.Z. Fule. 1999. Reference conditions and ecological restoration: A 
southwestern ponderosa pine perspective. Ecological Applications 9(4):1266-1277.
Moote, A. and D. Becker. 2003. Exploring the barriers to collective forestry: Report from a workshop held at Hart Prairie, 
Flagstaﬀ, AZ, September 17-19, 2003. Flagstaﬀ, AZ: ERI Papers in Restoration Policy. http://library.eri.nau.edu/
gsdl/collect/erilibra/index/assoc/HASH724e.dir/doc.pdf.
Muller, S. 2004. Governor takes get-tough approach to ﬁre. Arizona Daily Sun, February 10.
Murﬁtt, L. 2014. Interview with D. Egan, March 4.
Noss, R.F. and A.Y. Cooperrider. 1984. Saving nature’s legacy: Protecting and restoring biodiversity. Washington, DC: 
Island Press.
Pitts, M. 2014. Interview with D. Egan, Feb. 21.
Rasure, N. 2014. Interview with D. Egan, Feb. 25.

26
Reynolds, R.T., R.T. Graham, and M.H. Reiser. 1992. Management recommendations for the northern goshawk in 
the southwestern United States. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-217. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station.
Risser, P.G., J.R. Karr, and R.T.T. Forman. 1983. Landscape ecology: Directions and approaches. Illinois Natural 
History Survey, Special Publication Number 2.Champaign: Illinois Natural History Survey.
Sale, K. 1985. Dwellers in the land: Te bioregional vision. New York: Random House.
Schulke, T. 2014. Interview with E. Nielsen, April 12.
Schumacher, E.F. 1973. Small is beautiful: Economics as if people mattered. London: Blonde & Briggs Ltd.
Sierra Club, Arizona Chapter. 2002. Mistaken and misinformed on Arizona ﬁres. News release, June 24. http://arizona.
sierraclub.org/pr_and_alerts/pr_and_alerts_2002/alert_06-22-02.asp.
Sisk, T.D. 2014. Interview with D. Egan, March 15.
Sisk, T.D., H.M. Hampton, J. Prather, E.N. Aumack, Y. Xu, M.R. Loeser, T. Munoz-Erickson, B. Dickson, and 
J. Palumbo. 2004. Western Mogollon Plateau Adaptive Landscape Assessment Report. Flagstaﬀ: Northern Arizona 
University, Center for Environmental Sciences and Education. http://www.forestera.nau.edu/docs/Products/
WMPALA/WMPALA_FinalReport_Vol2.pdf.
Sisk, T.D., M. Savage, D.A. Falk, C.D. Allen, E. Muldavin, and P. McCarthy. 2005. A landscape perspective for 
forest restoration. Journal of Forestry September:319-320.
Sitko, S. and S. Hurteau. 2010. Evaluating the impacts of forest treatments: Te ﬁrst ﬁve years of the White Mountain 
Stewardship Project. Phoenix, AZ: Te Nature Conservancy. 
Stephenson, L. 2012. Interview with W. Greer Selig.
Society for Ecological Restoration (SER) Science and Policy Working Group. 2004. SER primer on ecological 
restoration. Tucson, AZ: Society for Ecological Restoration
Southwest Forest Alliance. 1996. Forests forever! A plan to restore ecological and economic integrity to the Southwest’s 
national forests and forest dependent communities. Flagstaﬀ, AZ: Southwest Forest Alliance. 
___. 2000. Why the Flagstaﬀ Restoration Model should not be applied to public forest lands. Flagstaﬀ, AZ: Southwest 
Forest Alliance.
Southwestern Region Restoration Task Force. 2008. Alternative approaches to accelerating forest restoration in 
northern Arizona. Unpublished internal document. Albuquerque, NM: US Forest Service Region 3.
Steen, H.K. 2000. Traditional forestry hits the wall: Excerpt of an interview with F. Dale Robertson (August 12-14, 
1999). Forest History Today Spring:2-8.
Sturtevant, V., M.A. Moote, P. Jakes, and A.S. Cheng. 2005. Social science to improve fuels management: A 
synthesis of research on collaboration. Gen. Tech. Rep. NC-257. St. Paul, MN: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, North Central Research Station.
Swetnam, T.W., C.D. Allen, and J.L. Betancourt. 1999. Applied historical ecology: Using the past to manage the 
future. Ecological Applications 9(4):1189-1206.
Taylor, D. 2003. Tinking small diameter: An interview with Brett KenCairn. Ecological Restoration 21(1):29-33.

27
Tenney, D. 2012. Interview with W. Greer Selig.
Tilt, W. 2005. Lessons from community-based collaboration in the West. Te Quivira Coalition Newsletter 7(2):1, 
22-30.
U.S. Department of the Interior (USDI) and U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). 2000. Managing the impact 
of wildﬁres on communities and the environment: A report to the President in response to the wildﬁres of 2000. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior and U.S. Department of Agriculture. 
U.S. Forest Service, Restoration Framework Team. 2006. Ecosystem restoration: A framework for restoring and 
maintaining the nation’s forests and grasslands. Washington, DC: USDS Forest Service. http://www.fs.fed.us/
restoration/documents/RestFramework_ﬁnal_010606.pdf.
U.S. Forest Service. 2005. Regional Strategic Action Plan. Albuquerque, NM: U.S. Forest Service, Southwestern 
Region.
Vance, R.K., C.B. Edminster, W.W. Covington, and J.A. Blake, compilers. 2001. Ponderosa pine ecosystems 
restoration and conservation: Steps toward stewardship. Proceedings of a conference held April 25–27, 2000 in 
Flagstaﬀ, AZ. Proceedings RMRS-P-22. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station.
Western Forestry Leadership Coalition. 2009. True costs of wildﬁres in the western United States. Lakewood, CO: 
Western Forestry Leadership Coalition.
Western Governors’ Association. 2002. A collaborative approach for reducing wildland ﬁre risks to communities 
and the environment: 10-year comprehensive strategy implementation plan. Denver, CO: Western Governors’ 
Association.
Williams, M. 2014. Interview with D. Egan, March 28.
Wilmsen, C. and J.E. Isom. 2003. Community forestry and community well-being in the United States. A paper 
presented to the XII World Forestry 2003, “Forests, Source of Life,” Quebec City, Canada. http://www.fao.org/
docrep/ARTICLE/WFC/XII/0558-C1.HTM.


Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native species, structural characteristics, 
and ecological processes. Te Society for Ecological Restoration International deﬁnes ecological restoration as “an intentional activity 
that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability… Restoration attempts to 
return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration International 2004).
Troughout the dry forests of the western United States, most ponderosa pine forests have been degraded during the last 150 years. 
Many ponderosa pine areas are now dominated by dense thickets of small trees, and lack their 
once diverse understory of grasses, 
sedges, and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing ﬁres and increased insect and disease 
epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers on reintroducing frequent, low-intensity surface ﬁres—often after thinning dense 
stands—and reestablishing productive understory plant communities.
Te Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, implementing, and monitoring 
ecological restoration of dry, frequent-ﬁre forests in the Intermountain West. By allowing natural processes, such as ﬁre, to resume 
self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational 
opportunities.
Te ERI Issues in Forest Restoration series provides overviews and policy recommendations derived from research and observations 
by the ERI and its partner organizations. While the ERI staﬀ recognizes that every forest restoration is site speciﬁc, we feel that the 
information provided in the series may help decisionmakers elsewhere.
Tis publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Service. Te views and conclusions contained 
in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the opinions or policies of the United States 
Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products does not constitute their endorsement by the United States Government 
or the ERI.
ERI—Issues in Forest Restoration
1. 
Forestlands Health and Carbon Sequestration: Strengthening the Case for Western Forest Restoration
2. 
Smoke from Prescribed Burning: Issues on Public Forestlands of the Western United States
3. 
Public Perceptions of Forest Restoration in the Southwest: A Synthesis of Selected Literature and Surveys
4. 
Integrating Ecological Restoration and Conservation Biology: A Case Study from Southwestern Ponderosa  
Pine Forests
5. 
Communications between Forest Managers and Property Owners in Pine Flat, Arizona: A Case Study of  
Community Interactions in a High Fire Hazard Area
6.  
Wilderness Management and the Restoration of Fire: An Analysis of Laws and Regulations in  
Northern Arizona
7.  
Navigating the Motives and Mandates of Multiparty Monitoring
8.  
Forest Service Contracting: A Basic Guide for Restoration Practitioners
9.  
Case Study of Community Stewardship Success: The White Mountain Stewardship Contract
10.  What to Expect from Collaboration in Natural Resource Management: A Research Synthesis for  
Practitioners
11.  Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI) Biophysical Monitoring Workshop Report
12.  Carbon Credits for Restored Western Forests?
13.  Ecological Restoration as Economic Stimulus: A Regional Analysis
14.  Exploring the Potential of Obtaining Carbon Credits for Restoration Activities on Navajo Tribal Forest Lands
15.  Integrating Domestic and Wild Ungulate Grazing into Forest Restoration Plans at the Landscape Level 
16.  Workforce Needs of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative Project: An Analysis
17.  A Full Cost Accounting of the 2010 Schultz Fire
18.  Forest Restoration Treatments: Their Effect on Wildland Fire Suppression Costs

Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
G1002446
Return Service 
Requested
Non-Proﬁt Org
U.S. Postage 
PAID
Northern Arizona 
University
