Wildland Fire Behavior & Forest Structure
Environmental Consequences
Economics
Social Concerns
RMRS-GTR-173
September 2006
Wildlife and Invertebrate 
Response to Fuel Reduction 
Treatments in Dry Coniferous 
Forests of the Western 
United States: A Synthesis
Wildlife and Invertebrate 
Response to Fuel Reduction 
Treatments in Dry Coniferous 
Forests of the Western 
United States: A Synthesis

The Authors _________________________________________
David S. Pilliod was a post-doctoral Ecologist with the USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station at the Aldo Leopold Wilderness Research Institute in Missoula, MT.  He is 
currently an Assistant Professor in the Department of Biological Sciences, College of Science 
and Mathematics at California Polytechnic State University in San Luis Obispo, CA.  
Evelyn L. Bull is a Research Wildlife Biologist, Jane L. Hayes is a Research Biological 
Scientist, and Barbara C. Wales is a Wildlife Biologist with the USDA Forest Service, Pacific 
Northwest Research Station in La Grande, OR.
Pilliod, David S.; Bull, Evelyn L.; Hayes, Jane L.; Wales, Barbara C. 2006. Wildlife and invertebrate 
response to fuel reduction treatments in dry coniferous forests of the Western United States: a 
synthesis. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 34 p.
Abstract ____________________________________________
 This paper synthesizes available information on the effects of hazardous fuel reduction treatments on 
terrestrial wildlife and invertebrates in dry coniferous forest types in the West. We focused on thinning 
and/or prescribed fire studies in ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) and dry-type Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga 
menziesii), lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta), and mixed coniferous forests. Overall, there are tremendous 
gaps in information needed to evaluate the effects of fuel reduction on the majority of species found in our 
focal area. Differences among studies in location, fuel treatment type and size, and pre- and post-treat-
ment habitat conditions resulted in variability in species responses. In other words, a species may respond 
positively to fuel reduction in one situation and negatively in another. Despite these issues, a few patterns 
did emerge from this synthesis. In general, fire-dependent species, species preferring open habitats, and 
species that are associated with early successional vegetation or that consume seeds and fruit appear 
to benefit from fuel reduction activities. In contrast, species that prefer closed-canopy forests or dense 
understory, and species that are closely associated with those habitat elements that may be removed or 
consumed by fuel reductions, will likely be negatively affected by fuel reductions. Some habitat loss may 
persist for only a few months or a few years, such as understory vegetation and litter that recover quickly. 
The loss of large-diameter snags and down wood, which are important habitat elements for many wildlife 
and invertebrate species, may take decades to recover and thus represent some of the most important 
habitat elements to conserve during fuel reduction treatments. Management activities that consider the 
retention of habitat structures (such as snags, down wood, and refugia of untreated stands) may increase 
habitat heterogeneity and may benefit the greatest number of species in the long run.
Key words:  dry coniferous forests, fuel reduction, habitat, invertebrates, prescribed fire, thinning, Western 
United States, wildlife
Cover inset photo: Black-backed woodpecker. Photo by Evelyn Bull.
You may order additional copies of this publication by sending your 
mailing information in label form through one of the following media. 
Please specify the publication title and number.
 
Telephone 
(970) 498-1392
 
FAX 
(970) 498-1122
 
E-mail 
rschneider@fs.fed.us
 
Web site 
http://www.fs.fed.us/rm
 
Mailing Address 
Publications Distribution 
 
 
Rocky Mountain Research Station
 
 
240 West Prospect Road
 
 
Fort Collins, CO 80526

Foreword_ ______________________
 This document is part of the Fuels Planning: Science 
Synthesis and Integration Project, a pilot project initiated 
by the USDA Forest Service to respond to the need for 
tools and information useful for planning site-specific 
fuel (vegetation) treatment projects. The information 
addresses fuel and forest conditions of the dry inland 
forests of the Western United States: those dominated 
by ponderosa pine, Douglas-fir, dry grand fir/white fir, 
and dry lodgepole pine potential vegetation types. 
Information was developed primarily for application at 
the stand level and is intended to be useful within this 
forest type regardless of ownership. Portions of the 
information also will be directly applicable to the pinyon 
pine/juniper potential vegetation types. Many of the 
concepts and tools developed by the project may be 
useful for planning fuel projects in other forests types. 
In particular, many of the social science findings would 
have direct applicability to fuel planning activities for 
forests throughout the United States. As is the case 
in the use of all models and information developed for 
specific purposes, our tools should be used with a full 
understanding of their limitations and applicability.
 The science team, although organized functionally, 
worked hard at integrating the approaches, analyses, 
and tools. It is the collective effort of the team members 
that provides the depth and understanding of the work. 
Wildlife_and_Invertebrate_Response_to_Fuel_Reduction_
Treatments_in_Dry_Coniferous_Forests_of_the_Western_
United_States:_A_Synthesis
The science team leadership included the following 
USDA Forest Service personnel:
 
• Deputy Science Team Leader Sarah McCaffrey,  
North Central Research Station
 
• Forest structure and fire behavior: Dave Peterson 
and Morris Johnson, Pacific Northwest Research 
Station
 
• Environmental consequences: Elaine Kennedy 
Sutherland and Anne Black, Rocky Mountain  
Research Station
 
• Economic uses of materials: Jamie Barbour and  
Roger Fight, Pacific Northwest Research 
Station
 
• Public attitudes and beliefs: Pamela Jakes and  
Susan Barro, North Central Research Station
 
• Technology transfer: John Szymoniak, Pacific 
Southwest Research Station
 This project would not have been possible were it not  
for the vision and financial support of USDA Forest  
Service, Washington Office Fire and Aviation 
Management individuals, Janet Anderson, and Leslie 
Sekavec.
Russell T. Graham, Science Team Leader  
USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
 Research Station

Acknowledgments______________________________
 Part or all of the manuscript was reviewed by Rick Brown, James LaBonte, 
Kim Mellen, Victoria Saab, Lia Spiegel, Elaine Kennedy Sutherland, Christina Vojta, 
and an anonymous reviewer. Wildlife sketches were done by Susan Lindstedt.

Contents____________________________________
 
Page
Introduction ......................................................................................................1
  Fuel Reduction Planning ..............................................................................2
  Thinning .......................................................................................................3
  Prescribed Fire .............................................................................................4
Wildlife and Invertebrate Responses to Fuel Reduction..................................5
  Life History Considerations ..........................................................................5
  General Patterns ..........................................................................................5
  Direct Mortality .............................................................................................5
  Habitat Alterations ........................................................................................5
Species Implications—Mammals.....................................................................8
  Forest Carnivores .........................................................................................8
  Ungulates .....................................................................................................9
  Small Mammals ..........................................................................................10
  Bats ............................................................................................................12
Species Implications—Birds ..........................................................................13
  General ......................................................................................................13
  Raptors .......................................................................................................15
  Cavity-Nesting Birds ...................................................................................16
Species Implications—Reptiles .....................................................................18
Species Implications—Amphibians ...............................................................20
Species Implications—Invertebrates .............................................................22
  General ......................................................................................................22
  Detritivores .................................................................................................22
  Predators ....................................................................................................23
  Forest Herbivores and Pollinators ..............................................................23
  Bark and Wood Boring Insects ...................................................................24
Summary .......................................................................................................24
English Equivalents .......................................................................................25
References  ...................................................................................................25

1
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
Introduction_____________________
 The National Fire Plan (USDA and USDI 2001) and the 
Healthy Forest Restoration Act (HFRA 2003) mandate federal 
land managers to restore forest habitats and to reduce risk 
of wildfire on federal lands, particularly along the wildland-
urban interface. Restoration may include reducing fuels and 
may allow fire back into fire-dependent systems. To reduce 
the intensity and spread of fire, federal land managers are 
reducing hazardous fuels primarily by using thinning (selec-
tive cutting) or prescribed fire or a combination of the two 
(Graham and others 2004; USDA 2003). Hazardous fuels are 
generally considered to be standing and down dead wood, 
tall shrubs, and small trees–forest biomass that has accu-
mulated as a result of many factors, including prior land use 
(for example, cattle grazing, which removed fine fuels that 
once carried frequent understory fires) and successful fire 
exclusion programs (Covington and Moore 1994; Peterson 
and others 2005).
 Part of the planning process for fuel reduction projects 
is an environmental assessment of potential impacts under 
the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA 1969) and 
the National Forest Management Act (NFMA 1976). Sus-
taining viable populations of terrestrial fauna is generally 
accomplished by maintaining habitat. Because populations 
are associated with the structure and composition of living 
and dead vegetation, there is little doubt that fuel reduction 
projects will affect habitats in some way.
 Fire regimes in dry coniferous forests of the West have 
been characterized as historically having low-intensity fires 
at frequent intervals over small to moderate spatial scales 
(Agee 1993). These forests were often described as park-like 
by early explorers and settlers. Lightning-ignited fires car-
ried on the surface killed small trees and top-killed shrubs, 
Wildlife_and_Invertebrate_Response_
to_Fuel_Reduction_Treatments_in_Dry_
Coniferous_Forests_of_the_Western_
United_States:_A_Synthesis
David_S._Pilliod_
Evelyn_L._Bull_
Jane_L._Hayes_
Barbara_C._Wales
but did not kill large fire-tolerant trees like ponderosa pine 
(Pinus ponderosa) and Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii) 
(DeBano and others 1998). Dry lodgepole pine (Pinus con-
torta) and other more moist higher elevation forests likely 
burned over larger spatial scales, at higher intensity, and 
less frequently than ponderosa pine forests (Agee 1993). 
Current forest structural characteristics resulted from fire 
exclusion, timber harvesting, and domestic livestock graz-
ing (Covington and Moore 1994; Peterson and others 2005). 
Conditions today are different from those developed under 
natural disturbance regimes; present conditions include large 
patches with high stand densities, complex stand structure, 
more fire-intolerant species, and greater fuel accumulations 
(Graham and others 2004; Peterson and others 2005). Hence, 
fuel reduction treatments should gradually result in favorable 
conditions for species that thrive in low-intensity, moderate- 
to high-frequency disturbances and less complex structure 
(DeBano and others 1998). It is probable that those species 
that use a mosaic of disturbed and undisturbed forest stands 
for reproduction, foraging, and cover may benefit from fuel 
treatments whereas other species that are associated with large 
patches of high density trees and more complex structure may 
lose habitat through fuel treatments.
 The goal of this paper is to provide information to help fuel 
planners, fire managers, and NEPA specialists evaluate the 
potential effects of thinning and prescribed fire on terrestrial 
vertebrate and invertebrate species and their habitats in the 
dry coniferous forests of the Western United States. The 
forest types that we consider are predominantly ponderosa 
pine and Douglas-fir, and the drier sites containing lodgepole 
pine, grand fir (Abies grandis), incense-cedar (Calocedrus 
decurrens), western larch (Larix occidentalis), and sugar pine 
(Pinus lambertiana) (Hann and others 1997), and occurring 
in Washington, Oregon, Idaho, Montana, California, Nevada, 

2
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
Utah, Wyoming, South Dakota, Colorado, New Mexico, and 
Arizona (fig. 1). This document is not an exhaustive review; 
rather, we present studies representative of the available lit-
erature on fuel reduction effects. We include some wildland 
fire or commercial logging studies. Where data are limited 
for our subject, we also present and discuss research results 
from other areas or for other forest types, but these data may 
or may not apply to dry coniferous forests in the West.
Fuel_Reduction_Planning
 Determination of a fuel reduction strategy depends on many 
factors, including defining the desired future conditions of the 
posttreatment stand characteristics, while recognizing social 
values and commitments and considering existing and future 
ecological conditions (Peterson and others 2005; Wissmar 
and Beschta 1998). Under the Data Quality Act (OMB 2001), 
fuel planners are required to use the best available data to 
set objectives for fuel reduction projects, evaluate potential 
consequences, and determine alternatives. However, the 
amount and kind of background information available for 
most treatments and access to that information is often a 
limitation to this process. New tools are being developed 
to assist managers in evaluating the social, economic, and 
ecological consequences of different fuel treatments (see Web 
site: http://forest.moscowfsl.wsu.edu/fuels/).
 The spatial and temporal scale of individual treatments and 
treatment regimes in a stand or on a landscape are critical to 
understanding the potential influences of fuel reduction ef-
fects on wildlife. In most circumstances, maintaining habitat 
heterogeneity conserves biodiversity (August 1983; Lassau 
and Hochuli 2004; Lassau and others 2005). Therefore, fuel 
specialists may want to work directly with biologists to plan 
treatments such that, over years and decades, a mosaic of forest 
structures and conditions which mimic natural disturbance 
patterns are created, which might be more likely to support 
greater species diversity than large, homogeneous stands 
given the same treatment (Allen and others 2002; Morris 
1975; Mutch 1970; Nitschke 2005; Potter and Kessell 1980). 
Treating fuels in habitat patches adjacent to untreated patches 
that are occupied by a given species may increase the rate of 
colonization and recovery as compared to restoring areas at 
random (Huxel and Hastings 1999). Large-scale prescribed 
fires and thinning are still experimental tools in ecological 
restoration (box 1), and unanticipated effects on biodiversity, 
wildlife and invertebrate populations, and ecosystem func-
tion may yet be discovered (Allen and others 2002; Carey 
and Schumann 2003).
 On which species should managers focus? Most fuel plans 
will focus effects assessments on species listed by the U.S. 
Fish and Wildlife Service or individual states as threatened, 
endangered, or of conservation concern and species ranked 
under the Natural Heritage Program system (Biodiversity 
Network element ranking system, Master 1991). If there 
is convincing evidence that a listed or proposed species or 
its critical habitat could be adversely affected by a project, 
What is ecological restoration?
 “Ecological restoration is an intentional activity that 
initiates or accelerates ecosystem recovery with respect to its 
health (functional processes), integrity (species composition 
and community structure), and sustainability (resistance to 
disturbance and resilience). Restoration attempts to return 
an ecosystem to its historic trajectory, i.e., to a state that 
resembles a known prior state or to another state that could 
be expected to develop naturally within the bounds of the 
historic trajectory (also called ‘natural range of variability’). 
The restored ecosystem may not necessarily recover its former 
state, since contemporary constraints and conditions can cause 
it to develop along an altered trajectory.”
 —Adapted from Clewell and others (2005). Ecological 
Restoration Society International: Guidelines for developing 
and managing ecological restoration projects, 2nd edition.
a biological assessment is usually completed to provide 
 supporting documentation during formal consultation with 
resource agencies. If a listed species is not likely to be ad-
versely affected by a project, a biological evaluation can be 
used as a basis of information during informal consultation. 
Consultation culminates a biological opinion that determines 
whether an action is likely to jeopardize a listed species. New 
federal policies, such as the 2005 NFMA National Forest 
Planning Regulations and the 2003 HFRA, enable manag-
ers to avoid lengthy assessments if management actions are 
considered to not adversely affect federally listed species. 
National Forests are “to provide a framework to contribute 
to sustaining native ecological systems by providing ecologi-
cal conditions to support diversity of native plant and animal 
species in the plan area” (USDA 2005).
 A problem with many assessments of potential treatment 
effects on fauna is that information on how animals respond 
to fuel reduction is generally lacking. Furthermore, some of 
the available information on treatment effects on species is 
ambiguous owing to the difficulty in setting up valid field 
experiments and the natural variability that exists in animal 
populations. Variability among sites and past management 
history also influence effects of treatments. Unfortunately, 
many of the studies of prescribed fire have been plagued by 
methodological problems and thus have given few insights 
into the effects on wildlife (Finch and others 1997; Mantgem 
and others 2001; Russell and others 1999). When information 
is unavailable or ambiguous, it can be difficult to know how 
to proceed with a planned treatment. The Wildlife Habitat 
Response Model, which uses species-habitat relationships to 
predict effects of fuel reduction on wildlife habitats, is a tool 
that may aid in this evaluation process (Pilliod and others, 
in press).

3
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
Thinning
 The objective of thinning in fuel reduction treatments is 
usually to prevent or slow the spread of crown fire by reduc-
ing surface and ladder fuels, raising crown base height, and 
breaking canopy continuity (Graham and others 2004; Pollet 
and Omi 2002). There is considerable variation in thinning 
techniques, including the number and size of trees removed, 
amount and sizes of snags and down wood retained, size and 
distribution of unthinned patches within the stand, thinning 
technique (mechanical or hand), and treatment of slash (lop 
and scatter, pile and burn, chip, or broadcast burn) (Peterson 
and others 2005). The general definition of thinning in this 
synthesis is a reduction in the density of understory trees 
through the removal of selected trees and shrubs. We rarely 
refer to the specific thinning prescription in discussing 
thinning effects. For the most part, this paper does not ad-
dress precommercial thinning in the more traditional sense 
of a silvicultural treatment done to reduce stand density of 
young even-aged trees to improve growth of residual trees 
for later harvest.
 Thinning may be more appropriate than prescribed fire 
where understory trees are so large or dense that attempts 
to kill them with fire would run a high risk of also killing 
overstory trees (Brown 2000). One advantage of thinning 
over fire is that a chainsaw or harvester can provide more 
control over which trees are actually killed. In addition, down 
wood and standing dead trees (hereafter snags), which are 
important wildlife habitat, can more assuredly be retained 
with thinning than with fire. However, to accomplish fuel 
treatment objectives, it is likely there will be some reduction 
in snags and down wood in most operations.
Figure_1—Forest cover types of the western United States. National Atlas of the United States, March 5, 2003, 
http://nationalatlas.gov

4
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
Figure_2—An example of a prescribed fire that resulted in the 
retention of down wood providing cover for small mammals and 
foraging substrates for black bears and pileated woodpeckers 
(top). An example of a prescribed fire that resulted in a loss of 
all down wood (bottom). Photos by Evelyn Bull.
Prescribed_Fire
 The objective of prescribed fire in fuel reduction treatments 
is to reduce surface and ladder fuels by eliminating live and 
dead understory vegetation, including down wood (Graham 
and others 2004). In this synthesis, reference to prescribed 
fire is either broadcast burning of activity fuels (slash) after 
thinning or understory burning without thinning. Variation 
in the severity of the burn influences residual stand charac-
teristics, including the spatial distribution and availability 
of litter, down wood, snags, and vegetation (Jain and others 
2004) (fig. 2). In most cases, prescribed fire results in increased 
structural complexity and habitat heterogeneity. However, 
multiple entries with prescribed fire (repeated burning), which 
is often the only way to reduce fuels effectively without thin-
ning, may reduce the structural complexity of forests over 
time. Large prescribed fires (greater than 1000 ha) could also 
potentially homogenize the landscape for some species and 
decrease overall wildlife habitat (Brown and others 2004).
 The season when prescribed fires are conducted has impor-
tant consequences for wildlife and invertebrates (King and 
others 1998). Whereas spring burns may remove grasses and 
shrubs that provide critical forage and cover for small mam-
mals, birds, ungulates, and invertebrates, late summer and fall 
burns remove senescent plant biomass and usually stimulate 
growth of grass and shrubs the following spring (Mushinsky 
and Gibson 1991; Potter and Kessell 1980). Some spring burns 
are conducted prior to green-up and many grasses, forbs, and 
some shrubs will sprout or resprout within a few weeks of a 
spring fire. Fall fires tend to burn hotter and consume more 
of the down wood and snags. Stands generally have a range 
of tree sizes, and it is the smaller diameter trees that will most 
likely be killed by prescribed fire. These dead trees may provide 
temporary foraging habitat for some species, such as bark and 
wood-boring beetles and woodpeckers that feed on them, but 
these trees are usually too small for nest cavities. Mortality 
of live trees tends to be less with spring burns than with fall 
burns owing to higher moisture content in spring. Consump-
tion of large logs by fire is regulated by fuel moisture, which 
is often higher in spring and may minimize the loss of these 
important habitat elements compared to fall burns.

5
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
Wildlife_and_Invertebrate_Responses_
to_Fuel_Reduction_ _______________
Life_History_Considerations
 The potential effects of fuel reduction on a species should 
be considered within the context of species distribution and 
abundance, migratory and dispersal characteristics, habitat 
associations, and potential responses to changes in habitat. If 
a species is broadly distributed regionally, then local effects 
in a project area may be relatively inconsequential to popula-
tion viability depending on a species’ ability to recolonize 
from surrounding areas. However, a species with a limited 
distribution warrants special consideration. For example, an 
entire population of a rare species may be contained within 
a stand being treated and protection for specific habitat 
components or creation of refugia may be needed. The habi-
tat needs of a species include characteristics important for 
breeding, producing and rearing of young, feeding, refuge 
from predators, and protection from adverse environmental 
conditions. The habitat requirements of some species may 
be contained within the project area, but other species may 
use the project area for only part of the year or part of their 
life cycle. A species’ response to habitat changes from fuel 
reduction depends on what habitat elements are needed for 
its survival and reproduction, and how these habitat elements 
are affected by fuel reduction (George and Zack 2001).
General_Patterns
 Our knowledge of the effects of different fuel reduction 
techniques on most wildlife and invertebrate species is lim-
ited. Some useful information can be applied from wildfire 
research and much of this information has been summarized 
(Fisher and Wilkinson 2005; Kramp and others 1983; Lyon 
and others 1978; Pilliod and others 2003; Saab and Powell 
2005; Smith 2000). Two ongoing broad-scale research studies 
will provide information on wildlife and invertebrate effects 
of fuel reduction in the future. The Fire and Fire Surrogate 
(FFS) project is a long-term study designed to understand the 
effects of alternative methods for fuel reduction and forest 
restoration at 13 study sites across the United States (www.
fs.fed.us/ffs/). The Birds and Burns Network is investigating 
the ecological consequences of fire management on wildlife 
populations, with an emphasis on cavity-nesting birds, in 
ponderosa pine forests in eight states across the interior West 
(www.rmrs.nau.edu/lab/4251/birdsnburns/).
Direct_Mortality
 Overall, direct mortality of wildlife owing to crushing 
from heavy equipment, incineration, or asphyxiation dur-
ing fuel reduction is considered to be low (Folk and Bales 
1982), but this is mostly based on anecdotal information. It 
is believed that most species are able to find refuge micro-
sites (for example, inside burrows or under surface objects) 
or move away from approaching equipment, heat, or smoke 
(Komarek 1969). However, spring-season prescribed fire and 
thinning during the breeding season may result in mortality 
of ground- and shrub-nesting bird nestlings and species living 
within litter such as small mammals, reptiles, amphibians, 
and invertebrates. Although fires are more likely to kill slow-
moving animals (for example, tortoises) that are unable to 
find refugia quickly (Esque and others 2003; Folk and Bales 
1982), or animals that are physiologically compromised 
(Means and Campbell 1981), even mobile species like birds 
and large mammals are occasionally killed in fires (Horton 
1929). Mortality may be particularly high for many inverte-
brates (Komarek 1969). Therefore, it should be recognized 
that a planned burn will likely kill some individuals and 
that mortality can be significant for some populations. For 
example, after a roadside burn in Florida, 42 percent (24 of 
57) of eastern glass lizards (Ophisaurus ventralis) found in 
a 3-m transect were dead (Babbitt and Babbitt 1951), and 
in Australia, 29 percent of marked lizards were killed in a 
late-season burn (Griffiths and Christian 1996).
Habitat_Alterations
 In general, if an animal is not killed during a fuel treatment, 
it will undoubtedly respond to changes in environmental 
and habitat conditions. Animal responses to environmental 
change often vary and depend upon characteristics of both 
the animal and the disturbance (or in this case treatment). 
Therefore, it is difficult to generalize about the potential 
effects of fuel reduction on individual species, much less 
groups of species (for example, small mammals or invertebrate 
predators). However, it is relatively safe to assume that the 
wildlife and invertebrate species most likely to be negatively 
affected by fuel reduction treatments are those depending on 
the structural features of the fuels being removed (table 1). 
Wildlife and invertebrate species that depend on down wood, 
snags, dwarf mistletoe (Arceuthobium spp.) brooms, dense 
forests with abundant saplings and small poles, and closed 
canopy-forests for survival and reproduction are likely to 
be detrimentally affected by fuel treatments that alter these 
habitat elements. In contrast, species that are associated 
with fairly open canopies and open forest floor may benefit 
from fuel treatments. Another consideration is that species 
responses may vary over time. For example, a small mammal 
species that needs high shrub cover to avoid predators may do 
poorly for the first few years posttreatment, but then exceed 
pretreatment population levels when shrubs recover and food 
resources are high from increased light, herbaceous growth, 
and seed production. In addition, an altered vertical structure 
and decreased tree density may be confounded by second-
ary effects such as changes in rates of predation, parasitism 
or interspecific competition which further complicates our 
abilities to predict overall restoration effects on species dis-
tribution and abundance (Chambers and Germaine 2003).
 Some wildlife species respond more to vegetation struc-
ture than to composition (George and Zack 2001), and the 
immediate effect of fuel reduction will be a change in the 
structure of vegetation. For example, the removal of shrubs 

6
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
Table_1—Structural features of wildlife and invertebrate habitats altered by fuel reduction treatments.
_
Treatment
Habitat_Element_
Thinning_
Prescribed_Fire
Trees 
• Decreased density, but number and sizes of 
trees removed depends on method
 
• Generally small trees removed (ladder fuels) 
and some reduction in canopy continuity
 
• Increased canopy base height
 
• Reduced living trees with decay
 
• Reduced trees with dwarf mistletoe brooms
Shrubs 
• Removal of large shrubs (ladder fuels)
 
• Trampling of small shrubs
 
• Regrowth within 1-10 years
Forbs and Grasses 
• Minimal disturbance, except where trampling, 
skidding, or pile burning
 
• Regrowth within 1-2 growing seasons
 
• Potential for invasive plants
Litter and Duff 
• Generally minimal disturbance
 
• Possible increase with mastication
Soil 
• Possible ground compaction
Snags 
• Number and sizes removed depends on treat-
ment
 
• Removal of larger snags could take decades 
to recover
Down Wood 
• Amount and size classes removed depends on 
treatment
 
• Small-diameter could increase with lop-and-
scatter
 
• Removal of large-diameter down wood could 
take decades to recover
 
• Mortality of small diameter trees
 
• Decreased density, but highly variable due 
to variability in fuels
 
• Increased canopy base height
 
• Reduced canopy bulk density
 
• Reduced hardwoods and aspens
 
• Reduced living trees with decay
 
• Reduced trees with dwarf mistletoe brooms
 
• Small mortaility in patches, but mostly loss 
of above-ground biomass
 
• Regrowth within 1-10 years
 
• Minimal mortality, mostly loss of above-
ground biomass
 
• Regrowth within 1-2 growing seasons
 
• Potential for invasive plants
 
• Possible elimination in places, but highly 
variable
 
• Charring may alter nutrient content, water 
holding capacity, and other properties
 
• Variable heating to soils
 
• Possible erosion on steeper slopes
 
• Variable, but generally larger snags are not 
consumed
 
• Many small-diameter snags created, most of 
which are too small for most wildlife to use
 
• Charring of snags may alter wildlife and 
invertebrate use
 
• Loss of larger snags could take decades to 
recover
 
• Reduced amount, but variable due to fire in-
tensity, size and decay state of down wood, 
and moisture content
 
• Charring of down wood may alter wildlife 
and invertebrate use
 
• Loss of large-diameter down wood could 
take decades to recover

7
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
and small trees increases the height to the crown base and 
eliminates one or more levels of vegetation structure. Over 
longer timescales, repeated thinning or prescribed fire or 
both can change the vegetation composition, particularly 
of shrub and forb species. This change is usually the result 
of increased light reaching the forest floor and thus altering 
growing conditions for understory species (Hayes and others 
1997). Understory vegetation can also be inhibited by non-
native plants that colonize recently disturbed areas such as 
might occur after fuel treatments (Brown and Smith 2000; 
Parks and others 2005). Grazing by both domestic and wild 
ungulates can also influence understory plant responses to 
fuel treatments (Dwire and others 2006; Huffman and Moore 
2003, 2004). Protecting understory vegetation from overgraz-
ing by domestic animals (for example, cows and sheep) may 
be important for the first one to two years posttreatment to 
allow full recovery of herbaceous biodiversity and biomass 
(Allen and others 2002; Belsky and Blumenthal 1997).
 Implementation of any thinning or prescribed burning 
is likely to result in loss of snags, future snags, and down 
wood that are important stand attributes of healthy forests 
and critical components of wildlife and invertebrate habitat 
(fig. 3). The retention and protection of snags during treatments 
could minimize the effects of fuel reduction treatments on 
cavity-dependent wildlife, and retaining some down wood 
in treated stands could minimize negative effects on species 
that depend heavily on this habitat structure. Loss of large-
diameter snags and down wood can take years to decades 
to recover, as indicated by wildland fire research (Passovoy 
and Fule 2006). The Healthy Forest Restoration Act (2003) 
directs “to maximize the retention of large trees,” although 
it is unclear if this includes both live and dead trees.
Figure_ 3—Snag previously used as a nest/roost for pileated woodpeckers inadvertently burned during 
prescribed fire. Photo by Evelyn Bull.

8
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
Species_Implications—_
Mammals_ ______________________
Forest_Carnivores
 Forest carnivores are generally rare on the landscape, and 
there are substantial gaps in data on the response of these 
species to fire and tree harvest (Fisher and Wilkinson 2005). 
Because most forest carnivores have relatively large activ-
ity areas, few species will be affected by fuel reduction at 
the project or stand level, but could be affected by loss of 
denning habitat and changes in prey populations due to the 
cumulative effects of past management, past disturbances, 
and broad scale implementation of fuel reduction projects. 
The primary forest carnivores that occur in the dry coniferous 
forests in the West are the mountain lion (Felis concolor), 
bobcat (Lynx rufus), wolf (Canis lupus), coyote (Canis la-
trans), black bear (Ursus americanus), grizzly bear (Ursus 
arctos horriblis), fisher (Martes pennanti), and American 
marten (Martes americana). Wolverine (Gulo luscus) and 
lynx (Lynx canadensis) may occasionally wander through 
dry forest types but generally inhabit cooler coniferous 
forests at higher elevations. Although American marten are 
primarily associated with older forests of Engelmann spruce 
(Picea engelmannii) and subalpine fir (Abies lasiocarpa), in 
northeastern Oregon they occasionally occur in drier stands 
of grand fir and lodgepole pine where they are associated 
with high densities of down wood and snags (Bull and others 
2005c). In this synthesis, we report in detail on black bears 
because they are common inhabitants of dry forests across 
our focal area and their diet and habitat use may be influenced 
by fuel reduction.
 Black bears use areas with abundant down wood and dense 
thickets of shrubs and smaller trees adjacent to or within 
mature forests (Bull and others 2001a). By volume, around 
25 percent of black bear diet can consist of insects (mainly 
ants [Camponotus spp., Lasius sp., Tapinoma sp., Aphaeno-
gaster sp., Formica spp.] and yellowjackets [Vespula spp., 
Dolichovespula sp.]) obtained primarily from down logs 
(Bull and others 2001b). A decrease in down wood would 
result in fewer ants and yellowjacket nests available to black 
bears. Black bears are also known to strip the bark from 
smaller trees and feed on sapwood. In a western larch (Larix 
occidentalis), lodgepole pine, and Engelmann spruce forest 
in northwestern Montana, black bear feeding on sapwood 
was at least five times higher in thinned stands where bears 
mostly selected larch trees 10 to 20 cm diameter at breast 
height (dbh) compared with adjacent unthinned stands (Mason 
and Adams 1989). It is unclear why bears were attracted to 
the thinned stand, but health and condition of residual trees 
may have attracted the bears. Treated stands may also provide 
dependable food sources for bears, such as when fruit, mast, 
grass, and herbaceous plant production increases after pre-
scribed fire (Hamilton 1981; Johnson and Landers 1978).
 Fuel reduction may decrease the amount of escape cover, 
which may be the most critical component of black bear habitat 
(Hamilton 1981). Sites used by black bears for traveling and 
resting typically have high stem density and dense canopy 
closure, presumably for security (Bull and others 2001a). A 
radio-telemetry study of 14 black bears in the ponderosa pine 
and mixed conifer forests on the Mogollon Rim in north-
central Arizona found that horizontal cover was important 
for feeding and particularly bedding sites, and that only 12 
percent of bedding sites were in areas that had been selec-
tively logged or thinned in the previous 20 years (Mollohan 
and others 1989). Bears use large-diameter hollow logs for 
denning (Bull and others 2000) that may be consumed in 
prescribed fires (fig. 4) or by thinning operations.
Figure_4—Thinning and prescribed fire will likely 
increase the amount of grasses and berries used 
by black bears for foraging but may decrease the 
amount of hiding cover, den sites in hollow logs, 
and down wood used for foraging on ants and 
wasps. Photo courtesy of Oregon Department of 
Fish and Wildlife.

9
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
Ungulates
 North American ungulates, including deer (Odocoileus 
spp.), elk (Cervus canadensis), moose (Alces alces), moun-
tain goats (Oreamnos americanus), and bighorn sheep (Ovis 
canadensis), are generally associated with a mosaic of open 
areas used for foraging and forested areas used for cover. 
Some ungulates use dense thickets of shrubs and trees as 
thermal cover and as cover to hide from predators, for day-
beds, and for fawning. All species are associated with areas 
of abundant forage, such as grasses, forbs, and shrubs. The 
proximity of these two habitats is important. In Douglas-fir 
and mixed conifer forests in western Montana, elk generally 
remain within 200 m of foraging areas during summer (Edge 
and others 1987). Thinning alone or combined with prescribed 
fire will likely increase forage quantity and quality for elk 
and other ungulates (Demarais and Krausman 2000; Huff-
man and Moore 2004; McConnell and Smith 1970; Reynolds 
1962) (fig. 5). However, retaining patches (at least 0.04 ha) 
of dense cover (greater than 40 percent closure of midstory 
canopies) is beneficial for providing security and escape cover 
for mule deer (O. hemionus) (Chambers and Germaine 2003). 
In northern Arizona, fuel reduction resulted in reduced use of 
day-beds by mule deer for 3 years posttreatment (Germaine 
and others 2004). Treatments occurring on the wintering 
grounds of ungulates will likely be more beneficial, as winter 
forage is usually more limiting (Hobbs and Spowart 1984).
 For centuries, Native Americans and land managers have 
used prescribed fire to improve habitat for ungulates, and it 
is generally agreed that prescribed fire improves the quality 
of browse vegetation (Bentz and Woodard 1988; Easterly 
and Jenkins 1991; Riggs and others 1996). In an aspen stand 
in Idaho, a prescribed fire greatly improved the amount and 
nutritional quality of forage for elk within one to two years 
after prescribed fire (Canon and others 1987). This finding is 
consistent with deer and elk responses to recovering vegeta-
tion after wildfire. For example, one year after a wildfire in 
Idaho, mule deer (Odocoileus hemionus) preferred the burned 
Douglas-fir/ninebark and burned ponderosa pine/bluebunch 
wheatgrass habitat types compared to unburned areas (Keay 
and Peek 1980). Although Keay and Peek (1980) found that 
white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus) preferred unburned 
forests because of their preference for dense cover, white-tailed 
deer in a ponderosa pine forest in the Black Hills of South 
Dakota selected recently burned winter range (DePerno and 
others 2002), and this preference for burned habitats has been 
reported in other forest types as well (Main and Richardson 
2002). White-tailed deer may be more likely to use treated 
stands if patches of dense cover are retained.
Figure_5—Fuel reductions usually increase the amount of forage for ungulates. Photo by Frank Vanni.

10
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
Small_Mammals
 Cover and food resources are both essential to small mam-
mal populations. Shrubs, down wood, and snags provide 
important cover from predators and thus the loss of these 
habitat elements may have negative consequences for some 
small mammal species (Chambers 2002). However, other 
species prefer open habitat conditions and may benefit from 
the food resources provided by early and mid-seral fruit-
 producing shrubs and the plentiful grasses and forbs that may 
establish after fuel reduction. Fisher and Wilkinson (2005) 
presented an extensive review of the effects of disturbance 
on mammals in boreal forests. They reported that small 
mammals recolonize disturbed areas soon after disturbance, 
although diversity and species dominance differ as succes-
sion progresses. Generalist species are typically dominant 
in the early successional stages, while specialist species are 
dominant in the later successional stages. When a decline in 
abundance of a particular species does occur, it is typically 
owing to a reduction in moisture and thermal cover, which 
can be a result of changes in coarse woody debris and in the 
herb and shrub layers (Fisher and Wilkinson 2005). A study 
in British Columbia reported that fuel reduction in young 
lodgepole pine forests increased the richness and diversity 
of small mammals, probably as a result of increased habitat 
heterogeneity (Sullivan and others 2001).
 Small mammal species vary in their habitat preferences 
and thus in their responses to different types of treatments. A 
study in north-central Idaho found that southern red-backed 
voles (Clethrionomys gapperi) were most abundant in more 
closed-canopy mesic sites, whereas North American deer 
mice (Peromyscus maniculatus) and yellow-pine chipmunks 
(Tamias amoenus) predominated in open canopy xeric sites 
(Koehler and Hornocker 1977). Both chipmunks and deer mice 
will likely increase in numbers after thinning in Douglas-fir 
and ponderosa pine forests (Goodwin and Hungerford 1979; 
Medin and Booth 1989; Woolf 2003) (fig. 6). Conversely, 
red-backed voles have been shown to decline after stands 
are clearcut but appear to continue to use selectively cut 
stands, at least in moist forest types (Campbell and Clark 
1980; Steventon and others 1998). In a lodgepole pine and 
mixed conifer forest in northeastern Oregon, a commercial 
thinning designed as a fuels reduction treatment resulted in 
an increase in chipmunks and a decrease in red-backed voles, 
red squirrels (Tamiasciurus hudsonicus), and snowshoe hares 
(Lepus americanus) one year after thinning (Bull and Blumton 
1999) (fig. 7). Hares continued to use very small patch-cut 
stands (10-m-wide circular cuts interspersed in unthinned 
stands and comprising 30 to 40 percent of a stand), but 
avoided stands thinned to a 4.2-m spacing (Bull and others 
2005b). Retaining unthinned patches of trees within stands 
may help maintain hare populations in fuel treatment areas 
until understory vegetation recovers (Ausband and Baty 2005; 
Shick 2003; Sullivan and Sullivan 1988).
 Some species of small mammals prefer high canopy closure 
and thus may be adversely affected by thinning treatments. 
For example, the Abert squirrel (Sciurus aberti) in ponderosa 
pine forests in north-central Arizona selects areas with high 
overstory canopy (Dodd and others 2003). Thinning will likely 
have a drying effect on high-canopy, high-density stands of 
grand fir (Lillybridge and others 1995), potentially having 
a negative effect on northern flying squirrel (Glaucomys 
sabrinus) populations (Lehmkuhl and others 2006). North-
ern flying squirrel abundance in dry Douglas-fir-ponderosa 
pine-western larch forests in northeastern Oregon decreased 
one to two years after a thinning treatment (Bull and others 
Figure_ 6—Chipmunks typically flourish after disturbance events like 
thinning and fire. Photo by Evelyn Bull.

11
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
2004), possibly as a result of habitat changes and decreases 
in truffles, the primary food of northern flying squirrels and 
other small mammals (Lehmkuhl and others 2004). Lehm-
kuhl and others (2006) concluded that thinned and burned 
stands would likely be poor bushy-tailed woodrat (Neotoma 
cinerea occidentalis) habitat in dry forests of eastern Wash-
ington due to their association with abundant large snags, 
mistletoe brooms and soft log cover. In dry mixed conifer 
forests in the Sierra Nevada of California, truffle frequency, 
biomass, and species richness, and consequently consumption 
by lodgepole chipmunks (Neotamias speciosus), were lower 
in heavily thinned and thinned and prescribed burned plots 
compared with burn-only plots or unburned controls (Meyer 
and others 2005).
 Relatively few studies have examined small mammal re-
sponses to prescribed fire, but inferences can be made from 
some wildland fire effects research. Short-term negative 
effects of fire have been observed for shrews (Sorex spp.) 
(Black and Hooven 1974), voles (Microtus spp.) (Dimock 
1974), red-backed voles (Spildie and others, n.d.), rabbits 
(Lepus spp.), snowshoe hares (Keith and Surrendi 1971), 
red squirrels, and northern flying squirrels (Ream 1981). In 
contrast, deer mice (Dimock 1974, Spildie and others, n.d.), 
chipmunks, pocket gophers (Thomomys spp.), and ground 
squirrels (Spermophilus spp.) are favored by disturbances 
and are less affected by prescribed fires (Ream 1981). This 
response was demonstrated in ponderosa pine stands in 
South Dakota where deer mice increased the first year after 
a prescribed fire but decreased or remained the same the 
second year (Bock and Bock 1983). Deer mice, voles, and 
chipmunks also increased in spruce, lodgepole pine, and 
subalpine fir forests in British Columbia after clearcutting 
followed by prescribed fire (Sullivan and others 2001). All 
mammals, except the yellow-pine chipmunk, declined in 
stands of subalpine fir after prescribed fire in Washington 
(Hanson 1978). Studies from other regions and forest types 
show similar patterns of species-level differences in response 
to fire (Ahlgren 1966; Ford and others 1999; Kirkland and 
others 1996; Masters and others 1998).
Figure_ 7—Red-backed voles may decrease after thinning and fire. 
Photo by Evelyn Bull.

12
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
Bats
 Bats are found in stands with appropriate roosting habitat 
(tall, large-diameter trees and snags) and abundant prey re-
sources (flying insects). Little information is available on the 
direct effects of fuel reduction on bats overall, although some 
inferences can be made based on the known habitats used by 
bats. Long-legged myotis (Myotis volans), silver-haired bats 
(Lasionycteris noctivagans), and several other bat species 
roost under the bark of tall, large-diameter trees or in cavi-
ties of large snags (Betts 1998; Ormsbee and McComb 1998; 
Rabe and others 1998; Vonhof and Barclay 1996). In South 
Dakota, silver-haired bats roosted primarily under loose bark, 
in tree crevices, and in woodpecker cavities in ponderosa 
pine snags averaging about 39 cm dbh (fig. 8) (Mattson and 
others 1996). These stands contained an average of 21 snags 
per hectare (Mattson and others 1996).
 If large-diameter snags and trees are protected during fuel 
reduction, it is likely that thinning or prescribed fire may 
have minimal or even positive effects on bat populations 
depending on the starting conditions and management history 
of the site (Boyles and Aubrey 2006; Patriquin and Barclay 
2003; Schmidt 2003). However, the loss of these habitat 
features may be detrimental to forest bat species (Chambers 
and others 2002). In the Oregon Coast Range, bat activity in 
Douglas-fir stands was highest in old-growth stands, lowest in 
unthinned stands of second growth (50 to 100 years old), and 
intermediate in second growth stands with thinning (Humes 
and others 1999). Old-growth stands of Douglas-fir-western 
hemlock, ponderosa pine-sugar pine, and true firs were also 
preferred by hoary (Lasiurus cinereus) and silver-haired bats 
compared to younger stands in other parts of Oregon (Per-
kins and Cross 1988). Bat activity was higher in old growth 
stands of Douglas-fir than in mature and young stands in 
the southern Washington Cascades and in the Oregon Coast 
Range (Thomas 1988). The preference for old growth may be 
a function of the high density of large-diameter snags used 
as roosts; the open space between trees, which allows bats 
to gain flight when leaving the roost; or other factors. It is 
not known if stands with fuel reductions will function in the 
same capacitythroughout the interior dry coniferous forests 
of the West.
Figure_8—Silver-haired bats roost under loose bark and 
in cavities in large trees and snags, habitats that could 
increase or decrease depending on fuel reduction treatment. 
©Merlin Tuttle, Bat Conservation International Inc.

13
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
Species_Implications—Birds_ ______
General
 Several factors influence the richness and diversity of bird 
species in a stand including the structure and composition of 
living and dead vegetation (Easton and Martin 2002; Steventon 
and others 1998; Taylor and Barmore 1980). In western dry 
coniferous forests, bird community composition depends on 
the heterogeneity of habitats available, proximity to water, fire 
history, and silvicultural legacy (Brawn and Balda 1988; Finch 
and others 1997; Hejl and others 2002). Like other wildlife, 
the species that are most likely to be affected by fuel reduc-
tions are those species whose nesting and foraging habitats 
are associated with the fuels being removed or created, and 
species that either prefer or avoid disturbed areas (fig. 9). 
Birds are often grouped based on foraging or nesting location 
or characteristics. Because of their great mobility as adults, 
population-level responses of birds are strongly influenced by 
their distribution and abundance in the surrounding landscape, 
although the existing conditions prior to treatment will also 
influence responses.
 Patterns of bird responses to fire throughout North America 
have been recently summarized from published literature 
(Saab and Powell 2005), including chapters that synthesize 
information on dry coniferous forests (Bock and Block 2005; 
Saab and others 2005). The great majority of studies reported 
fire effects in terms of population change in relative abundance, 
during the breeding season, and within five years after fire. 
Bird responses were classified for 203 North American bird 
species as either positive, negative, inconclusive (that is, not 
enough data to determine the response), or mixed (that is, 
data suggest both a positive and negative response). Species 
were categorized by nest type (open vs. closed [cavity]), nest 
layer (canopy, shrub, ground or near ground), and foraging 
guild. Although this type of summary is necessarily coarse 
resolution (for example, does not distinguish between fire 
severity or time since fire), it still offers valuable insights and 
a basis for hypotheses. Some patterns in short-term responses 
to fire were apparent: (1) aerial, ground, and bark insectivores 
clearly favored burned habitats, whereas foliage gleaners 
preferred unburned habitats; (2) species with closed nests 
responded more favorably to burned habitats than species 
with open-cup nests; and (3) those nesting in the ground and 
canopy layers generally favored burned habitats compared 
to shrub nesters.
 The reported effects of fuel reduction on birds are not always 
consistent among studies or species. For example, some stud-
ies observe an increase in bird abundance shortly after fuel 
reduction whereas others report large decreases or no change 
at all (Huff and others 2005; Moreira and others 2003). Short-
term responses may differ from long-term responses (Hannon 
and Drapeau 2005); breeding bird response may differ from 
wintering bird response (Bock and Block 2005); and effects 
observed at the stand scale may differ from those at the land-
scape or regional scale (Kotliar and others 2002; Saab and 
others 2002). However, some general effects are fairly pre-
dictable. First, thinning or prescribed fires conducted during 
the nesting season are more likely to result in high mortality 
of nestlings, especially for species nesting on the ground and 
in shrubs and small trees (Smith 2000). If conducted prior to 
the nesting season, prescribed fires are likely to reduce nesting 
habitat for ground- and shrub-nesting species (Artman and 
others 2001). Shrubs and ground cover lost during treatment 
will likely recover within a few years.
Figure_9—Yellow warblers will likely benefit from fuel reductions if tall 
shrubs increase with time. Photo by Don Bradshaw.

14
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
 Bird responses to prescribed fire are dependent on the 
species and other factors. Some bird species prefer early 
successional and open habitats, and these species are likely 
to increase in abundance after fuel reduction (DeGraaf and 
others 1991; Hagar and others 1996; Michael and Thornburgh 
1971; Provencher and others 2002; Simon and others 2000; 
Wilson and others 1995). In ponderosa pine stands in South 
Dakota, the total number of breeding birds per transect was 
found to be higher in burned areas compared to controls only 
in the first summer after a fire (Bock and Bock 1983). In con-
trast, some birds may be less abundant after prescribed fire 
 (Anderson and Crompton 2002; Gaines and others, in press). 
For example, foliage gleaners prefer unburned forests and often 
decrease in abundance with increasing burn severity (Kotliar 
and others 2002). Burning operations that remove large trees 
and snags will likely affect species nesting in tree canopies 
and cavities of snags or live tree boles (fig. 10). Recruitment 
of large snags for cavity nesters may take decades or longer, 
depending on existing stand conditions.
 Prescribed fire can also alter bird foraging habitats and the 
primary components of bird diets, such as insect populations 
and fruit production of plants (Dickson 1981). Any fuel-reduc-
ing activity that removes a bird’s preferred foraging habitat 
will likely result in adverse affects, at least in the first few 
years after treatment. For example, tree gleaners declined 
after thinning in an Idaho ponderosa pine-Douglas-fir forest 
(Medin and Booth 1989). A potential increase in food supply 
(seeds and insects) following fire might provide better for-
aging for these birds because there is greater access owing 
to the removal of grass layers. This increase in food supply 
influences mostly granivorous species and some omnivorous 
and carnivorous species that feed on the ground (Artman and 
others 2001). Burn edges can also be important for some birds 
by providing a heterogeneous mix of burned and unburned 
trees, possibly providing opportunistic foraging while main-
taining cover from predators. Hence, the juxtaposition of live 
and dead trees may be important for some species such as the 
olive-sided flycatcher (Altman and Sallabanks 2000; Kotliar 
and others 2002).
Figure_10—Great gray owls may benefit from the more open forest 
structure resulting from fuel reductions, but the loss of nest sites in 
large-diameter snags and mistletoe brooms would be detrimental. 
Photo by Evelyn Bull.

15
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
Raptors
 The more open understory created by fuel reduction may be 
advantageous to some species of hawks, owls, and eagles that 
prey on small mammals and birds in open forests and small 
clearings (fig. 10). Prey species that have less cover are more 
easily captured, and some prey species prefer open forests 
(for example, deer mice). However, some raptor species and 
some small mammal and avian prey prefer closed canopy 
forests and thus may avoid stands that have been treated 
to reduce fuels. The removal of trees with dwarf mistletoe 
brooms during thinning treatments will likely be detrimental 
to wildlife species that nest in mistletoe brooms including the 
great gray owl (Strix nebulosa), long-eared owl (Asio otus), 
great horned owl (Bubo viginianus), northern spotted owl 
(Strix occidentalis), northern goshawk (Accipiter gentilis), 
Cooper’s hawk (Accipiter cooperii), and red-tailed hawk 
(Buteo jamaicensis) (Bull and others 1997).
 Northern goshawks prefer closed canopy forests of large-
 diameter trees with relatively open understories (Reich and 
others 2004). Management recommendations for sustain-
ing habitat for the northern goshawk and their prey include 
prescribed fire, thinning from below to achieve nonuniform 
spacing of trees larger than 46 cm dbh, not to exceed 30 to 50 
percent canopy opening, and various slash treatments (Reyn-
olds and others 1992; Squires and Reynolds 1997). A single 
moderate-level thinning in even-aged 30- to 35-year-old stands 
is recommended in moist forests on the Olympic Peninsula to 
achieve high crown base heights (>25 m) and low shrub cover 
(<20 percent) to improve habitat for northern goshawks (Finn 
and others 2002). In the Southwest, Beier and Maschinski 
(2003) recommend no restoration activities in the nest area 
(a 73-ha area around each nest), except for possibly thinning 
from below to reduce the risk of stand-replacing fire.
 Both Mexican spotted owls (Strix occidentalis lucida) and 
northern spotted owls (Strix occcidentalis caurina) are listed 
under the federal Endangered Species Act and are found in 
dry forest environments. Management objectives for both 
species are conservatory with little active management in 
defined areas. By reducing the risk that stand-replacement 
fire will sweep into these defined areas, restoration treat-
ments outside of these areas should benefit spotted owls 
over the long-term (Beier and Maschinski 2003). In Arizona 
and New Mexico ponderosa pine and mixed conifer forests, 
relatively light fires, including most prescribed fires, had no 
clear short-term effect on Mexican spotted owl presence or 
reproduction (Jennes 2000). Variable-density thinning may 
hold promise for acceleration of the development of northern 
spotted owl habitat and dense prey populations (Carey 2001, 
2003; Carey and others 1999a, b; Carey and Wilson 2001; 
Muir and others 2002) especially when appropriate attention 
is paid to decadence (snags, cavity trees, and coarse woody 
debris) (Bunnell and others 1999; Carey 2002; Carey and 
others 1999a, b) though these results may be best suited in 
mixed conifer stands with mixed-severity fire regimes rather 
than the drier pine, low-intensity fire regimes (Lehmkuhl and 
others 2006). Although vegetation manipulation to reduce 
wildfire hazard may create less than optimum habitat for 
the northern spotted owl, this should be weighed against the 
hazard for stand replacement fires and the complete loss of 
habitat over large areas (Everett and others 1997).

16
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
Cavity-Nesting_Birds
 If fuel treatments involve removing or eliminating snags, 
then a net loss of nesting habitat for primary and secondary 
cavity-nesting birds might be expected for many years (Scott 
and Oldemeyer 1983). Prescribed fire, depending on the 
intensity, will likely increase the number of small-diameter 
snags, but these snags are generally less suitable habitat for 
cavity-nesting birds. Primary cavity nesters excavate nest 
cavities in large trees and large snags. The value of and 
preference for large-diameter snags for nesting has been well 
documented for the pileated woodpecker (Dryocopus pilea-
tus), hairy woodpecker (Picoides villosus), northern flicker 
(Colaptes auratus), and Williamson’s sapsucker (Sphyrapi-
cus thyroideus) in dry forests in northeastern Oregon (Bull 
1986), woodpeckers in ponderosa pine forests in central 
Oregon (Bate 1995; Dixon 1995), pileated woodpeckers in 
Montana (McClelland and others 1979), and cavity nesters 
in ponderosa pine forests after wildfires in southwestern 
Idaho (Saab and Dudley 1998; Saab and others 2002) and 
northern Arizona (Chambers and Mast 2005). Additionally, 
previously excavated cavities provide nesting, roosting, and 
shelter habitat for secondary cavity-nesting birds and some 
mammals (Bull and others 1997; Hay and Guntert 1983; Saab 
and others 2004).
 The majority of research studies report that thinning or 
thinning and burning fuel treatments result in a decrease 
in populations of cavity nesters owing to loss of dead trees 
used for nesting and roosting. Preliminary results of a study 
in southeastern British Columbia indicate that thinning 
treatments in dry Douglas-fir and ponderosa pine forests 
resulted in a decline in snag densities, cavity-nesting bird 
densities, and species richness of cavity nesters in the first 
two breeding seasons following thinning (Machmer 2002). 
In northeastern Oregon, 65 percent of pileated woodpecker 
foraging occurs in down wood and snags (Bull 1987) (fig. 11). 
Pileated woodpecker foraging was highest in untreated stands 
of ponderosa pine-Douglas-fir-grand fir, lowest in stands that 
had been thinned and burned one to three years previously, 
and intermediate in thinned stands (Bull and others 2005a). 
The prescribed fire in this study also eliminated more than 
10 pileated woodpecker nest and roost trees (past and current) 
in one 18-ha stand averaging more than 80 cm dbh. However, 
other factors may be influencing cavity-nesting bird responses 
to fire, some of which may be beneficial depending on burn 
severity. For example, in stand-replacement fires in ponderosa 
pine forests in Idaho, nest success of six cavity-nesting birds 
(2-5 years postfire) was generally higher than nest success 
reported in the literature from studies conducted in unburned 
forests (Saab and others 2005).
 Prescribed fire results in variable snag creation and loss 
across a stand. Finch and others (1997) reviewed studies that 
evaluated the effects of prescribed fire on snags and down 
wood in southwestern ponderosa pine forests and found that 
snag loss was greatest in the large size classes and in the decay 
classes (those with decayed heartwood) that contained nest 
cavities. Snag loss typically ranged from 20 to 48 percent and 
Figure_11—The loss of down wood and snags in 
fuel reductions would be detrimental to pileated 
woodpeckers. Photo by Evelyn Bull.
loss of down wood (logs) from 42 to 74 percent depending 
on the burn intensity and dead wood characteristics (in other 
words, decay state and moisture) and size classes (reviewed 
in Finch and others 1997; Randall-Parker and Miller 2002). 
A net 45-percent decrease in snags followed a prescribed fire 
in a southwestern pine-oak forest dominated by ponderosa 
pine (Horton and Mannan 1988). Proportional snag loss in 
this study was greatest in the size (>50 cm dbh) and decay 
classes that contained the most nest cavities.
 Some studies also report a short-term benefit in creating snags 
used for foraging due to an increase in bark beetles caused by 
the treatment. Horton and Mannan (1988) found there was a 
20-fold increase in new snags <15 cm dbh; 64 percent of these 
newly created snags were used by woodpeckers for foraging 
within one year of being created. If prescribed fires are con-
ducted over large areas, there may be a short-term benefit to 
woodpeckers in the Picoides genus which forage on recently 
burned trees (Rudolph and others 2002) (fig. 12). Fires that 
do not consume large snags may improve ponderosa pine 
habitat for breeding Lewis’s woodpeckers (Melanerpes lewis) 
due to a decrease in canopy cover which is preferred habitat 
for this species (Saab and Vierling 2001). Fuel reductions 
may be beneficial for white-headed woodpeckers (Picoides 
albolarvatus) because this species is attracted to open areas 
in older mature forests with low shrub cover in ponderosa 
pine stands in central Oregon (Frenzel 2004); the open areas 
may be created by silvicultural treatments, although nesting 
success was depressed at these sites.

17
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
Figure_ 12—Black-backed woodpeckers 
move into burned areas to forage on bark and 
woodboring beetles that invade the scorched 
trees. Photo by Evelyn Bull.
 Maintaining a minimum number of snags per hectare in a 
ponderosa pine or Douglas-fir stand may be insufficient given 
the ephemeral nature of snags (in other words, continually 
changing in height, decay state, and presence of sapwood 
decay organisms) (Parks and others 1999; Zack and others 
2002). Wildfire research in dry forests in Idaho suggests that 
cavity excavation increases with time since fire, but that most 
cavities are only used once by seven of the eight woodpecker 
species that were considered (Saab and others 2004); thus a 
continual supply of snags is needed to maintain new nesting 
sites over time.
 The response of secondary cavity nesters to fuel reduction 
in ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir forests will likely follow 
a pattern similar to primary cavity nesters, including some 
positive, negative, and neutral responses (Medin and Booth 
1989). Clutch size and number of nestlings of the western 
bluebird (Sialia mexicana), a secondary cavity nester, did 
not differ between control stands and stands thinned and 
burned in ponderosa pine forests in Arizona (Germaine and 
Germaine 2002). Bluebirds had a higher probability of suc-
cessfully fledging young in treated stands but with greater 
risk of parasitic infestations (Germaine and Germaine 2002). 
After prescribed fire in ponderosa pine forests in southeastern 
Arizona, northern flickers and violet-green swallows (Tachy-
cineta thalassina) decreased in abundance and mountain 
chickadees (Parus gambeli) increased in abundance when 
compared to numbers in adjacent unburned control stands 
over the same periods (Horton and Mannan 1988).

18
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
Species_Implications—Reptiles
 In general, reptile diversity is lower in forested habitats 
compared to desert, grassland, and chaparral (Pough and 
others 2004). Few lizard and snake species occupy closed-
canopy coniferous forests in the Western United States except 
for possibly the rubber boa (Charina bottae) (fig. 13). Other 
species inhabit specific patches within forests, such as wet-
lands, meadows, and rock outcroppings that provide shelter, 
microclimates, and prey (Heatwole 1977; Lillywhite 1977). 
These species will primarily include the western fence lizard 
(Sceloperus occidentalis), eastern fence lizard, (Sceloporus 
undulatus), sagebrush lizard (Sceloporus graciosus), ornate 
tree lizard (Urosaurus ornatus), western skink (Eumeces 
skiltonianus), northern alligator lizard (Elgaria coerulea), 
garter snakes (Thamnophis spp.), mountain king snake 
(Lampropeltis zonata), racer (Coluber constrictor), gopher 
snake (Pituophis catenifer), and western rattlesnake (Crotalus 
viridis).
 Very little is known about the effects of thinning on reptiles, 
and we found no studies specific to the dry coniferous forests. 
In general, species responses to fuel reduction depend upon 
habitat preferences and how those habitats are altered by the 
treatment (Russell and others 1999). Although a few species 
prefer forest floor cover, others will likely benefit from the 
reduction in shrubs, ground vegetation, and litter cover and 
depth (Germaine and Germaine 2002; Knox and others 2001; 
Mushinsky 1985; Singh and others 2002).
 Prescribed fire does not appear to adversely affect most 
reptiles, and general patterns suggest that some species 
prefer postfire environments (Brisson and others 2003; Litt 
and others 2001; Moseley and others 2003; Russell and oth-
ers 1999; Singh and others 2002). In central Arizona, lizard 
species richness was greater in burned ponderosa pine forests 
compared to adjacent unburned areas for three years after 
catastrophic wildfire (Cunningham and others 2002). Total 
lizard abundance in burned ponderosa pine forests was four 
to nine times that of unburned forests, but it varied year to 
year and was strongly influenced by eastern fence lizard 
captures, which represented 78 percent of all lizard captures 
in forested plots. The high numbers of lizards captured in 
burned areas have generally been attributed to increases in 
habitat quality for species that prefer open habitat, prefer 
large woody debris, and benefit from postfire food resources 
such as insects (Lillywhite 1977; Lillywhite and North 1974). 
Short-term loss of vegetation cover does not appear to limit 
lizard habitat use (Cunningham and others 2002). Many lizard 
species prefer snags and down wood over live trees (James 
and M’Closkey 2003) and use charred branches for perching 
(Lillywhite and North 1974; Lillywhite and others 1977). Fuel 
reduction treatments that leave these habitat elements on site 
may improve habitat for species. Other studies (from outside 
our focal area) suggest that immediate population declines 
are occasionally associated with prescribed fire (Patterson 
1984; Setser and Cavitt 2003; Singh and others 2002; Trainor 
and Woinarski 1994), but these are usually short-term effects. 
Maintaining unburned areas close to burned areas may help 
facilitate snake and lizard recolonization or use of burned 
areas (Brisson and others 2003; Setser and Cavitt 2003).
Figure_13—Rubber boas are a species that may be detrimentally affected 
by fuel reductions owing to the loss of down logs that they use for cover and 
foraging. Photo by Evelyn Bull.

19
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006

20
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
Species_Implications—Amphibians
 A few amphibians are strictly aquatic, but most use upland 
habitats at various times during the year, and a few species 
are strictly terrestrial. Upland habitat use by forest amphib-
ians largely depends on the availability of moist duff and 
litter and rotting down wood. Unlike reptiles, amphibians’ 
response to reducing canopy cover will likely be less favorable 
because of the warmer and drier conditions created in the 
understory vegetation, down wood, litter, and soil (Heatwole 
1962; McGraw 1997; Meyer and others 2001; Pough and oth-
ers 1987). Most terrestrial salamanders require moist soils 
or decomposing wood to maintain water balance, and dry 
conditions usually result in suppressed populations (Bury and 
Corn 1988; deMaynadier and Hunter 1995). Anurans (frogs 
and toads) may be less affected by changes in environmental 
conditions associated with fuel reduction because of their 
tendency to travel at night and during rain events, their greater 
vagility than salamanders, and their close association with 
wetlands (Constible and others 2001; Pilliod and others 2003). 
Still, species that frequently occupy terrestrial habitats such 
as many salamanders, boreal toads (fig. 14), and tree frogs 
may be killed during fuel treatments or find posttreatment 
conditions unsuitable (Pilliod and others 2003).
 We know of only one study that has quantified the effect of 
thinning on amphibians in dry coniferous forests. In a lodgepole 
pine forest in western Montana, 70 percent fewer long-toed 
salamanders (Ambystoma macrodactylum) were captured in 
selectively harvested stands compared to unharvested stands 
(Naughton and others 2000). However, the authors also reported 
no differences in understory vegetation, woody debris, or litter 
between harvested and unharvested plots and thus the effects of 
these treatments are contrary to most fuel reduction treatments. 
Still, the authors suggest that differences in salamander num-
bers were attributed to the reduction in overstory canopy and 
subsequent increases in mean ambient temperatures (Naughton 
and others 2000). The importance of overstory canopy has 
been demonstrated for other amphibian species in the central 
Oregon Coast Range (Martin and McComb 2003).
 The effects of prescribed fire on amphibians is highly 
variable and strongly influenced by the location of fires in 
proximity to breeding habitats (generally wetlands), season 
of fire, and amphibian species (see reviews by Bury 2004; 
Bury and others 2002; deMaynadier and Hunter 1995; Pilliod 
and others 2003; Russell and others 1999). To date, few stud-
ies have been published on the effects of prescribed fire on 
amphibian populations in dry coniferous forests of the West 
(see table 1 in Pilliod and others 2003). Comparing amphibian 
populations before and after logging and burning of activity 
fuels in western Oregon, Cole and others (1997) found that 
capture rates of terrestrial Ensatina (Ensatina eschscholtzii) 
and giant salamander (Dicamptodon tenebrosus) decreased 
in treatment stands relative to untreated controls. In contrast, 
Vreeland and Tietje (2002) found similar abundances of 
slender salamanders (Batrachoseps attenuatus) in California 
oak woodlands before and after prescribed fire.
Figure_14—Boreal toads readily occupy burned habitats, foraging on ants 
and ground beetles and finding shelter under logs and rocks and in rodent 
burrows. Photo by David Pilliod.

21
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
 There is concern that fuel treatments may contribute fine 
sediment to streams because of increased surface runoff 
(Elliott and others 1999; Robichaud 2000; Robichaud and 
Waldrop 1994). Sedimentation causes reduced survivorship 
of eggs and tadpoles of some stream-breeding amphibians 
that lay their eggs and rear tadpoles under rocks or within 
interstitial spaces in the substratum (Corn and Bury 1989; 
Gamradt and Kats 1997; Gillespie 2002).
 Some amphibians may benefit from fuel treatments. For 
example, boreal toads (Bufo boreas) appear to be attracted 
to recently disturbed areas and may benefit from fuel reduc-
tion projects (fig. 14). Toads colonized and bred in dozens 
of shallow ponds in burned lodgepole pine forests in Glacier 
National Park but not in adjacent unburned areas (Corn and 
Hossack, n.d.). Although the environmental factors attract-
ing the toads to the ponds in the burned forests are unclear, 
another study found toads in greater abundances in burned 
forests (Kirkland and others 1996). In northeastern Oregon, 
diet samples from boreal toads in burned subalpine fir and 
lodgepole pine forests contained higher numbers of prey 
items (82 percent ants) than samples obtained from toads 
in unburned forests (Bull, in press). In the mid-Atlantic and 
southeastern United States, substantial research has been 
conducted on the effects of prescribed fire in fire-prone 
ecosystems and found that fire is important for maintaining 
habitats for several amphibians (Means and Campbell 1981; 
Means and others 2004; Mushinsky 1985). However, our 
understanding of how best to manage the fire-return inter-
val in forests with thinning and prescribed fire needs more 
attention (Means and others 2004; Pilliod and others 2003; 
Semlitsch 2000; Schurbon and Fauth 2004). Although many 
species appear minimally affected by fuel treatments (Ford 
and others 1999; Kirkland and others 1996; Litt and others 
2001), some amphibian populations may experience short-
term negative effects (McLeod and Gates 1998; Schurbon 
and Fauth 2003).

22
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
Species_Implications—Invertebrates
General
 The effects of fuel treatments on terrestrial invertebrates in 
western dry coniferous forests are likely to be as diverse as the 
group itself. The group includes the highly diverse arthropods 
(insects, spiders, mites, scorpions, centipedes, millipedes, iso-
pods), annelids (segmented worms), and mollusks (snails and 
slugs). Invertebrates compose over half of the animal diversity 
across broad landscapes, including forested lands (Niwa and 
others 2001b). This number is even higher if undescribed spe-
cies are included. For example, in the Columbia River basin, 
less than 20 percent of an estimated 24,290 species have been 
described (Niwa and others 2001b). Invertebrates occupy all 
forested habitats and have diverse functional roles including 
detritovores, predators, herbivores, and pollinators. Many 
invertebrates are specifically associated with shrubs, snags, 
litter, and duff, habitat elements targeted in fuel treatments.
 Most invertebrates occupy distinctly different habitats 
during their life cycle. For example, some species live below 
ground as immatures and above ground as adults or feed on 
vegetation as immatures and then on flower nectar as adults. 
Because forest invertebrates are short lived and either have 
short dispersal ranges or are sedentary in one or more of 
their life stages, fuel treatments have the potential to affect 
local populations through direct mortality depending on the 
season, type, and size of treatment. The scale of invertebrate 
habitats and population sizes can vary by orders of magnitude 
compared with vertebrates. Although some invertebrate spe-
cies are noted for their explosive population numbers, many 
invertebrate species are scarce and recognized as threatened, 
endangered, or of conservation concern (for example, LaBonte 
and others 2001). One of the inherent problems in planning 
fuel reduction treatments, however, is the lack of information 
available about this highly diverse group.
 Relatively few studies have evaluated the effects of fuel re-
duction treatments on invertebrates in dry coniferous forests. 
These studies focused variously on communities of certain 
strata (for example, forest litter or soil) or certain taxa (for 
example, spiders, ground beetles, butterflies, bark beetles). In 
this synthesis, we organize available information to the extent 
possible around functional groups (detritivores, predators, for-
est herbivores, and pollinators) described in Niwa and others 
(2001b). For the ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest, Short 
and Negron (2003) examine pertinent literature and predict 
arthropod responses across a similar array of functional 
groups to forest restoration activities including mechanical 
thinning, prescribed burning, and thinning with burning. In 
most experimental studies, numerical and in some cases func-
tional responses to treatments have been measured by using 
census or survey techniques expressed in terms of abundance 
and diversity (species assemblages, richness, evenness). An 
increasing number of studies are examining mechanisms and 
consequences of disturbance including fuel reduction treat-
ments on invertebrate communities and habitat dynamics. A 
number of studies have focused on bark or wood boring insects, 
because of their well-known relation with site disturbance and 
host stress, and the large-scale disturbance and disruption of 
management objectives that outbreaks can cause (see syntheses 
by Filip and others 1996; Gast and others 1991; Hayes and 
Daterman 2001). We treat this group separately.
 The threat to forest health posed by outbreaks of native 
species, particularly insects like some species of bark beetles 
and defoliators, is somewhat unique to invertebrates. Sil-
vicultural practices (such as precommercial thinning) that 
improve growing conditions of desired tree species and stand 
health have long been considered one means of reducing the 
risk and impact of these disturbance agents (Gast and others 
1991). However, the direct use of fuel reduction treatments 
to achieve the combined goal of fuel and insect management 
has not been widely applied or extensively studied, with one 
exception being slash (thinning residue) treatments that are 
aimed at reducing surface fuel and the build-up of popula-
tions of some bark and woodboring insects (for example, Six 
and others 2002; Zabowski and others 2000). The success of 
fuel reduction treatments as insect population control tactics, 
through habitat alteration or direct mortality, requires an 
understanding of potential life history or behavioral vulner-
abilities of the species, population dynamics, and season of 
treatment application, particularly in the cases of prescribed 
fire (for example, McCullough and others 1998; Miller 1979). 
For example, microclimate changes in thinned stands have 
been found to affect mountain pine beetle (Dendroctonus 
ponderosae) behavior and colonization of ponderosa and 
lodgepole pine (reviewed in Amman and Logan 1998). Fuel 
reduction treatments may also have important implications 
for the management of nonnative invasive invertebrate spe-
cies, and some specific examples with variable results have 
been reported in other ecosystems (for example, Callaham 
and others 2003; Sanders 2004; Zettler and others 2003).
 Our lack of knowledge about the diverse invertebrate com-
munities of dry coniferous forests is a significant limitation 
in understanding and predicting the response of this group, 
native and nonnative, to fuel reduction treatments. Across 
invertebrate groups and for diverse ecosystems, the provision 
of refugia (leaving untreated areas from which populations 
can recolonize) is widely recommended to minimize the ef-
fects of direct mortality and accelerate recovery (for example, 
Hohenlohe and Duncan 2003; Panzer 2003). Based on studies 
in boreal forests, but seemingly generally applicable, Niemela 
(1999) concluded that recovery will be influenced by treat-
ment size, by retention of critical habitat components such 
as coarse woody debris, and by size, amount and distance 
between these refugia.
Detritivores
 Invertebrates of the forest soil and floor are instrumental in 
decomposition and nutrient cycling and include detritivores 
(such as earthworms, land snails and slugs, and arthropods 
including millipedes, isopods, mites, and springtails) and 
those species actively involved in the decomposition of dead 
vegetation including down wood and snags (such as termites, 

23
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
beetles, and ants). Although Niwa and others (2001a, b) and 
Short and Negron (2003) review the potential effects of man-
agement activities, including thinning and prescribed fire, on 
invertebrates of the soil, litter, and down wood in western dry 
coniferous forests, few studies have specifically examined 
the effects of fuel reduction treatments on detritivores and 
decomposers in these forests. As has been shown elsewhere 
(Battigelli and others 2004; Gunnarsson and others 2004), 
Niwa and others (2001a, b) and Short and Negron (2003) 
hypothesized that thinning is likely to have a substantial 
negative effect, at least in the short-term, on invertebrates 
of the soils and organic layers through soil compaction and 
disruption or loss of organic layers. Compaction will depend 
on soil type and thinning mechanism. Soil organisms may 
be more buffered from the effects of treatments than those in 
the litter layers. For example, long-term effects of thinning 
(16-41 years posttreatment) on densities of microinvertebrates 
(including oribatid, mesotigmid, and prostigmatid mites) 
were found in the litter of late-successional white fir (Abies 
concolor) and Douglas-fir forests in the Cascade Mountains 
of southwestern Oregon, but no differences were found in mite 
or Collembola densities in the upper 5 cm of soil between 
thinned and unthinned stands (Peck and Niwa 2004).
 Prescribed fire effects on the inhabitants of forest soil, litter, 
and down wood may differ dramatically by species, but are 
likely to depend on fire intensity (Niwa and others 2001a, b). 
In ponderosa pine stands in Blacks Mountain Experimental 
Forest in northeastern California, preliminary results show 
that low-intensity prescribed fire had little effect on the species 
richness, diversity, and evenness of oribatid mites whereas 
moderate-intensity prescribed fires substantially affected 
mite community structure (Oliver 2000). Tenebrionid beetles, 
which are forest floor scavengers, were found at higher richness 
and diversity in ponderosa pine stands of northern Arizona 
seven to eight years after wildfire and 13 to 14 years after 
fuel reduction treatments (thinning alone and thinning with 
prescribed burning) compared to untreated stands (Chen et al. 
2006). Studies in other ecosystems have shown fuel reduction 
treatments can negatively affect invertebrates of the soil and 
litter directly through mortality and loss of food and cover, and 
many have prolonged recovery periods (for example, Hanula 
and Wade 2003; Springett 1976). Information on effects of 
changes in soil and litter invertebrates on ecosystem functions 
(for example, nutrient cycling) is needed.
Predators
 Predatory invertebrates can be found throughout forest 
habitats, but frequently studied predators are those of the 
forest floor, especially spiders and carabid beetles. These 
invertebrates are likely to recoverfrom fuel reduction treat-
ments more quickly than those in the soil, particularly those 
with greater mobility and dispersal ranges. They may also 
respond positively to greater habitat heterogeneity created 
by treatments. Two studies, one on response to thinning (>16 
years posttreatment) and the other on prescribed fire (<1 to 15 
years posttreatment), focused on spiders and carabid beetles 
in late-successional white fir and Douglas-fir forests in the 
Cascade (Peck and Niwa 2004) and Klamath Mountains of 
Oregon (Niwa and Peck 2002). Although no difference was 
found in overall abundance or species richness of carabid 
beetles between thinned and unthinned stands, some indi-
vidual species were more or less abundant in thinned stands. 
Abundance and species richness of spiders were significantly 
higher in thinned stands. Generally, hunting spiders were 
more numerous in thinned stands, whereas sheet web-building 
spiders were more numerous in unthinned stands (see also 
McIver and others 1992).
 In their study of short- to long-term effects of prescribed 
fire, Niwa and Peck (2002) found no differences in species 
richness or diversity for carabids or spiders. However, four 
of five common species of carabids were more abundant in 
unburned sites. Four of seven common spider species were 
more abundant in unburned sites, and three were more abun-
dant in burned sites. As was found with thinning treatments, 
hunting spiders were more abundant in treated sites, and 
web-builders were more abundant in untreated sites. Only a 
weak relationship was found between abundance and time 
since burn. Patterns were likely influenced by differences in 
fire intensities among years (Niwa and Peck 2002).
 Site management history and size of treatment area were fac-
tors considered important in moderating changes in diversity 
and abundance of leaf litter arthropods in mixed-conifer stands 
in the Sierra Nevada Mountains of California one year fol-
lowing fire and fire surrogate treatments (prescribed burning, 
overstory thinning with understory mastication, and combined 
thinning and burning) (Apigian and others 2006). Apigian and 
others (2006) found species richness of ground beetles was 
slightly higher in burned compartments. However, changes 
in abundance due to treatments were taxon-specific among 
common groups of beetles, ants, and spiders and showed no 
particular pattern. In a longer-term study of ground beetles 
in ponderosa pine stands of northern Arizona, the species 
assemblage did not vary between thinned (4-10 years post-
treatment) and untreated stands, was richer in thinned stands 
that were subsequently (3-4 years) treated with prescribed 
fire, and was highest in stands two years following wildfire 
(Villa-Castillo and Wagner 2002). These authors attribute the 
high diversity in burned stands to temporary colonization by 
open-area species, pyrophilous species, and the beginning 
of recolonization from refugia. In another study conducted 
in ponderosa pine stands in northern Arizona, Chen et al. 
(2006) found consistently higher richness and diversity of 
carabids more than seven years following wildfire and more 
than 13 years following fuel treatments. They conclude that 
carabids may provide a useful indicator of ponderosa pine 
stand conditions following fuel treatments or wildfire.
Forest_Herbivores_and_Pollinators
 Depending on the timing of fuel reduction treatments, 
invertebrate herbivores and pollinators such as moths and 
butterflies that feed on and live in live vegetation during 
some life stage can be immediately affected through direct 

24
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
mortality or loss of food or cover. In the long-term, these 
invertebrates may benefit from changes in structural diver-
sity caused by fuel reduction treatments that increase the 
amount of light reaching foliage and the forest floor. Two 
years after a thinning that removed 50 percent of the basal 
area in young ponderosa pine in central Oregon, abundance 
of pandora moths (Coloradia pandora) (which feed as larvae 
on pine foliage) was not affected (Ross 1995). However, adult 
emergence and egg hatch occurred seven to 10 days earlier 
in thinned stands, presumably as a result of increased solar 
radiation and temperature (Ross 1995). In ponderosa pine/
oak forest type in northern Arizona, Waltz and Covington 
(2004) found that adult butterfly abundance and species 
richness were greater with a combination of thinning and 
prescribed fire than were those of paired control sites. They 
found these elevated responses up to two years posttreatment 
corresponded with significantly greater light intensity in the 
treated site, although larval host and nectar plant richness 
did not change. Similar results were reported by Huntzinger 
(2003) after prescribed fire (1 to >15 years) in two forest types 
(late-successional reserve Douglas-fir and hardwoods in the 
Siskiyou Mountains of Oregon and mid- to late-seral pines 
and firs in western Sierra Nevadas of California). Huntzinger 
(2003) found adult butterfly species richness and diversity 
were significantly greater in burned sites (including upland 
forest sites, riparian sites, and fuel breaks) than in control 
sites. As found by Waltz and Covington (2004), penetration 
of sunlight (total area and density of sunlit patches) was 
found to be a significant factor in butterfly species richness 
(Huntzinger 2003). Additionally, Huntzinger (2003) called 
attention to the potential for nonnative plant species invasion 
following prescribed fire and other disturbances that could 
have secondary negative impacts through loss of host plants 
(but see Forrester and others 2005).
Bark_and_Wood_Boring_Insects
 Species benefiting from stress or weakened defenses of living 
hosts, such as root and bark beetles and wood borers, are likely 
to respond positively in the short-term to site disturbance created 
by thinning and prescribed fire, although timing of treatment 
affects the response. Machmer (2002) found a substantial 
increase in abundance of some bark beetles and wood borers 
(families in the Coleoptera and Hymenoptera) after prescribed 
fire only (170 percent increase), partial harvest and prescribed 
fire (54 percent increase), and partial harvest only (45 percent 
increase) compared to untreated controls (up to one year post-
treatment) in interior Douglas-fir and ponderosa pine stands in 
British Columbia. They also reported an increase in diversity 
of beetles within the flat-headed wood borers (Buprestidae), 
round-headed wood borers (Cerambycidae), and bark beetles 
(Curculionidae: Scolytinae). Apigian and others (2006) also 
found bark and woodboring beetles (including scolytids: 
Hylurgops spp., Hylastes spp., and Xyleborus spp.) increased 
in the year following thinning and prescribed fire, which is 
common (for example, Hanula and others 2002; Sullivan and 
others 2003; Witcosky 1986).
 Several studies examining effects of prescribed fire on 
bark and wood boring beetles found comparable results. 
Low-intensity late-season prescribed fire in Jeffrey pine 
stands in the Sierra Nevadas resulted in a greater number of 
trees attacked by bark beetles (Scolytinae: Dendroctonus and 
Ips spp.) compared to untreated stands (Bradley and Tueller 
2001). Crown and bole scorch were significant predictors of 
beetle presence in fire-injured trees. In an experiment where 
lodgepole pine boles were burned prior to mountain pine beetle 
flight in Banff and Kootenay National Parks, Elkin and Reid 
(2004) found that emerging beetles did not preferentially at-
tack fire-injured trees. However, attack success was higher in 
injured trees when beetle population levels were low; at high 
population levels, injured and uninjured trees were equally 
likely to be successfully attacked.
 Three studies examined short- and long-term effects of fuel 
reduction treatments on bark and wood boring beetles in pon-
derosa pine in northern Arizona. McHugh and others (2003) 
followed tree mortality and beetle attacks for three years after 
a spring and summer wildfire and a fall prescribed fire. They 
found wood boring beetle colonization and bark beetle attacks 
were highest in the first year postfire (wildland or prescribed). 
Trees attacked by bark beetles had more crown injury than 
unattacked trees; attack percentage was highest in the spring 
burn and lowest in the fall burn. Wallin and others (2003) found 
a positive relationship between crown scorch and attempted 
bark beetle colonization in a study examining responses of 
host trees and bark beetle populations after treatment (winter/
spring prescribed fire with thinning). Over a three-year period, 
Sanchez-Martinez and Wagner (2002) found low population 
levels of endemic bark beetles regardless of treatment history 
(that is, no evidence of an outbreak); these treatments included 
untreated, thinned (4-11 years prior), thinned followed by 
prescribed fire within three to four years, or stand replacement 
by wildfire (two years prior). These results are counter to the 
hypothesis that dense stands should be more susceptible to 
beetle infestation (Sanchez-Martinez and Wagner 2002).
Summary_ ______________________
 This synthesis provides a current state of knowledge and 
elucidates the many data gaps that exist on the effects of fuel 
reduction on fauna in dry coniferous forest types in the West. 
Effects of fuel reduction on wildlife and invertebrate species 
differ according to a number of factors that may differ with 
each thinning or prescribed fire treatment, including current 
condition and management history, existing and surrounding 
habitats, landscape setting, and treatment attributes (type, size, 
season, frequency). This confounds our ability to generalize 
about responses to fuel treatments and limits predictions 
to those species that are well-studied and have responded 
consistently to various fuel reduction treatments. In general, 
species preferring open habitats and species associated with 
early successional vegetation will likely benefit from fuel 
reduction treatments whereas those species that prefer closed 
canopy forests or dense understory will likely be negatively 

25
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
affected by fuel reductions. Species that are closely associated 
with those habitat elements that will be removed or consumed 
by fuel reductions (such as down wood, large-diameter snags, 
small diameter trees, and shrubs) will experience habitat loss, 
at least in the short term.
 Wildlife and invertebrate populations have evolved with 
fire as a natural disturbance in dry forests of the West, and 
thus hazardous fuel reductions that simulate historical fire 
regimes may ultimately benefit some native fauna. Managing 
fuels to recreate natural disturbance patterns (Bunnell 1995; 
Allen and others 2002) and to reduce the risk of catastrophic 
fires can be done in a conservative, incremental manner us-
ing mechanical thinning and fire over a long time period for 
restoration of ecosystems (Allen and others 2002). This con-
cept may allow managers to move away from single-species 
management and toward ecosystem management. Nonetheless, 
long-term monitoring of invertebrate and wildlife populations 
will ultimately determine whether frequent, repeated thinning 
and prescribed fire is having beneficial or adverse effects on 
species of interest.
 There is a great need for long-term observational and 
preferably experimental studies on the effects of a range of 
fuel reduction treatments at multiple spatial scales (stand or 
larger). Ideally, replicated before-after-control-impact stud-
ies, such as those underway with the Fire and Fire Surrogate 
Program and Bird and Burns Network, will provide much 
needed information. However, until more complete informa-
tion on many species becomes available, the consideration 
of management activities that allow the retention of critical 
habitat elements is warranted, particularly those that are slow 
to recover such as large-diameter down wood and snags.
English_Equivalents_ _____________
 When you know: 
Multiply by: 
To find:
 Centimeters (cm) 
0.39 
Inches
 Meters (m) 
3.28 
Feet
 Kilometers (km) 
0.62 
Miles
 Hectares (ha) 
2.47 
Acres
References______________________
Agee, J.K. 1993. Fire ecology of the Pacific Northwest. Wash-
ington, DC: Island Press. 493 p.
Ahlgren, C.E. 1966. Small mammals and reforestation following 
prescribed burning. Journal of Forestry. 64: 614-618.
Allen, C.D.; Savage, M.; Falk, D.A.; Suchling, K.F.; Swetnam, 
T.W.; Schulke, T.; Stacey, P.B.; Morgan, P.; Hoffman, M.; 
Klingel, J.T. 2002. Ecological restoration of southwestern 
ponderosa pine ecosystems: a broad perspective. Ecological 
Applications. 12: 1418-1433.
Altman, B.; Sallabanks, R. 2000. Olive-sided flycatcher (Con-
topus cooperi). In: Poole, A.; Gill, F., eds. The birds of 
North America No. 502. Philadelphia, PA: The Academy 
of Natural Sciences; Washington, DC: American Ornitholo-
gists’ Union. 28 p.
Amman, G.D.; Logan, J.A. 1998. Silvicultural control of 
mountain pine beetle: prescriptions and the influence of 
microclimate. American Entomologist. 44: 166-178.
Anderson, S.H.; Crompton, B.J. 2002. The effects of shelter-
wood logging on bird community composition in the Black 
Hills, Wyoming. Forest Science. 48: 365-372.
Apigian, K.O.; Dahlsten, D.L.; Stephens, S.L. 2006. Fire and 
fire surrogate treatment effects on leaf litter arthropods 
in a western Sierra Nevada mixed-conifer forest. Forest 
Ecology and Management. 221: 110-122.
Artman, V.L.; Sutherland, E.K.; Downhower, J.F. 2001. 
Prescribed burning to restore mixed-oak communities 
in southern Ohio: effects on breeding bird populations. 
Conservation Biology. 15: 1423-1434.
August, P.V. 1983. The role of habitat complexity and het-
erogeneity in structuring tropical mammal communities. 
Ecology. 64: 1495-1507.
Ausband, D.E.; Baty, G.R. 2005. Effects of precommercial 
thinning on snowshoe hare habitat use during winter in 
low-elevation montane forests. Canadian Journal of Forest 
Research. 35: 1-5.
Babbitt, L.H.; Babbitt, C.H. 1951. A herpetological study 
of burned-over areas in Dade County, Florida. Copeia. 
1951: 79.
Bate, L.J. 1995. Monitoring woodpecker abundance and habi-
tat in the central Oregon Cascades. Moscow, ID: University 
of Idaho. 116 p. Thesis.
Battigelli, J.P.; Spence, J.R.; Langor, D.W.; Berch, S.M. 
2004. Short-term impact of forest soil compaction and 
organic matter removal on soil mesofauna density and 
oribatid mite diversity. Canadian Journal of Forest Re-
search. 34: 1136-1149.
Beier, P.; Maschinski, J. 2003. Threatened, endangered, and 
sensitive species. In: Friederici, P., ed. Ecological restoration 
of Southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Washington, DC: 
Island Press: 306-327.
Belsky, A.J.; Blumenthal, D.M. 1997. Effects of livestock 
grazing on stand dynamics and soils in upland forests of the 
interior West. Conservation Biology. 11: 315-327.
Bentz, J.A.; Woodard, P.M. 1988. Vegetation characteristics 
and bighorn sheep use on burned and unburned areas in 
Alberta. Wildlife Society Bulletin. 16: 186-193.
Betts, B.J. 1998. Roost use by maturity colonies of silver-
haired bats in northeastern Oregon. Journal of Mammal-
ogy. 79: 643-650.
Black, H.C.; Hooven, E.F. 1974. Response of small mam-
mal communities to habitat changes in western Oregon. 
In: Black, H.C., ed. Wildlife and forest management in 
the Pacific Northwest; proceedings of a symposium; 1973 
September 11-12. Corvallis, OR: Oregon State University: 
177-186.
Bock, C.E.; Block, W.M. 2005. Fire and birds in the southwest-
ern United States. Studies in Avian Ecology. 30: 14-32.
Bock, C.E.; Bock, J.H. 1983. Responses of birds and deer 
mice to prescribed burning in ponderosa pine. Journal of 
Wildlife Management. 47: 836-840.

26
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
Boyles, J.G.; Aubrey, D.P. 2006. Managing forests with pre-
scribed fire: implications for a cavity-dwelling bat species. 
Forest Ecology and Management. 222: 108-115.
Bradley, T.; Tueller, P. 2001. Effects of fire on bark beetle 
presence on Jeffery pine in the Lake Tahoe Basin. Forest 
Ecology and Management. 142: 205-214.
Brawn, J.D.; Balda, R.P. 1988. The influence of silvicultural 
activity on ponderosa pine forest bird communities in the 
southwestern United States. Bird Conservation. 3: 3-21.
Brisson, J.A.; Strasburg, J.L.; Templeton, A.R. 2003. Impact 
of fire management on the ecology of collared lizard (Cro-
taphytus collaris) populations living in the Ozark Plateau. 
Animal Conservation. 6: 247-254.
Brown, R. 2000. Thinning, fire and forest restoration: a science-
based approach for national forests in the Interior Northwest. 
Washington, DC: Defenders of Wildlife. 39 p.
Brown, R.; Agee, J.K.; Franklin, J.F. 2004. Forest restoration 
and fire: principles in the context of place. Conservation 
Biology. 18: 903-912.
Brown, J.K.; Smith, J.K., eds. 2000. Wildland fire in ecosys-
tems: effects of fire on flora. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-
42, Vol. 2. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, For-
est Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 257 p.
Bull, E.L. 1986. Resource partitioning among woodpeckers 
in northeast Oregon. Moscow: University of Idaho. 109 p. 
Dissertation.
Bull, E.L. 1987. Ecology of the pileated woodpecker in northeast-
ern Oregon. Journal of Wildlife Management. 51: 472-481.
Bull, E.L.; Akenson, J.J.; Henjum, M.G. 2000. Characteristics 
of black bear dens in trees and logs in northeastern Oregon. 
Northwest Science. 81: 148-153.
Bull, E.L. In press. Sexual differences in the ecology and habi-
tat selection of western toads (Bufo boreas) in northeastern 
Oregon. Herpetological Conservation and Biology.
Bull, E.L.; Blumton, A.K. 1999. Effect of fuels reduction 
on American Marten and their prey. Res. Note PNW-RN-
539. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. 10 p.
Bull, E.L.; Clark, A.A.; Shepherd, J.F. 2005a. Short-term 
effects of fuel reduction on pileated woodpeckers in 
northeastern Oregon—a pilot study. Res. Pap. PNW-RP-
564. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. 17 p.
Bull, E.L.; Heater, T.W.; Clark, A.A.; Shepherd, J.F.; Blum-
ton, A.K. 2005b. Influence of precommercial thinning on 
snowshoe hares. Res. Pap. PNW-RP-562. Portland, OR: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific 
Northwest Research Station. 16 p.
Bull, E.L.; Heater, T.W.; Shepherd, J.F. 2005c. Habitat se-
lection by the American marten in northeastern Oregon. 
Northwest Science. 79: 37-43.
Bull, E.L.; Heater, T.W.; Wertz, T. L. 2001a. Black bear 
habitat use in northeastern Oregon. Western Black Bear 
Workshop. 7: 82-91.
Bull, E.L.; Heater, T.W.; Youngblood, A. 2004. Arboreal 
squirrel response to silvicultural treatments for dwarf 
mistletoe control in northeastern Oregon. Western Journal 
of Applied Forestry. 19: 133-141.
Bull, E.L.; Parks, C.G.; Torgersen, T.R. 1997. Trees and logs 
important to wildlife in the interior Columbia River basin. 
Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-GTR-391. Portland, OR: U.S. De-
partment of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest 
Research Station. 56 p.
Bull, E.L.; Torgersen, T.R.; Wertz, T.L. 2001b. The impor-
tance of vegetation, insects, and neonate ungulates in black 
bear diet in Northeastern Oregon. Northwest Science. 75: 
244-253.
Bunnell, F.L.1995. Forest-dwelling vertebrate faunas and 
natural fire regimes in British Columbia: patterns and 
implications for conservation. Conservation Biology. 9: 
636-644.
Bunnell, F.L.; Kremsater, L.L.; Wind, E. 1999. Managing 
to sustain vertebrate richness in forests of the Pacific 
Northwest: relationships within stands. Environmental 
Review. 97: 97-146.
Bury, R.B. 2004. Wildfire, fuel reduction, and herpetofauna 
across diverse landscape mosaics in northwestern forests. 
Conservation Biology. 18: 968-975.
Bury, R.B.; Corn, P.S. 1988. Responses of aquatic and 
streamside amphibians to timber harvest: a review. In: 
Raedeke, K.J., ed. Streamside management: riparian, 
wildlife and forestry interactions. Institute of Forest 
Research. 59: 165-181.
Bury, R.B.; Major, D.J.; Pilliod, D.S. 2002. Responses of 
amphibians to fire disturbance in Pacific Northwest forests: 
a review. In: Ford, W.M.; Russell, K.R.; Moorman, C.E., 
eds. The role of fire in nongame wildlife management and 
community restoration: traditional uses and new directions. 
Gen. Tech. Rep. NE-GTR-288. Newtown, Square, PA: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Northeastern 
Research Station: 34-42.
Callaham, M.A., Jr.; Blair, J.M.; Todd, T.C.; Kitchen, D.J.; 
Whiles, M.R. 2003. Macroinvertebrates in North American 
tallgrass prairie soils: effects of fire, mowing, and fertiliza-
tion on density and biomass. Soil Biology and Biochemistry. 
35: 1079-1093.
Campbell, T.M., III; Clark, T.W. 1980. Short-term effects of 
logging on red-backed voles and deermice. Great Basin 
Naturalist. 40: 183-189.
Canon, S.K.; Urness, P.J.; DeByle, N.V. 1987. Habitat selec-
tion, foraging behavior, and dietary nutrition of elk in 
burned aspen forest. Journal of Range Management. 40: 
433-438.
Carey, A.B. 2001. Experimental manipulation of spatial 
heterogeneity in Douglas-fir forest: effects on squirrels. 
Forest Ecology and Management. 152: 13-30.
Carey, A.B. 2002. Response of northern flying squirrels 
to supplementary dens. Wildlife Society Bulletin. 30: 
547-556.

27
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
Carey, A.B. 2003. Restoration of landscape function: reserves 
or active management? Forestry. 76: 221-230
Carey, A.B.; Lippke, B.R.; Sessions, J. 1999a. Intentional 
systems management: managing forests for biodiversity. 
Journal Sustainable Forestry. 9:83-125.
Carey, A.B.; Maguire, C.C.; Biswell, B.L.; Wilson, T.M. 1999b. 
Distribution and abundance of Neotoma in Western Oregon 
and Washington. Northwest Science. 73: 65-79.
Carey, A.B.; Wilson, S.M. 2001. Induced spatial heterogeneity 
in forest canopies: responses of small mammals. Journal 
Wildlife Management. 65: 1014-102.
Carey, H.; Schumann, M. 2003. Modifying wildfire behav-
ior–the effectiveness of fuel treatments. Southwest Region 
Working Paper 2. Santa Fe, NM: National Community 
Forestry Center. 26 p.
Chambers, C.L. 2002. Forest management and the dead 
wood resource in ponderosa pine forests: effects on small 
mammals. In: Laudenslayer Jr., W.F., and others, technical 
coordinators. Proceedings of the symposium on the ecology 
and management of dead wood in western forests. Gen. 
Tech. Rep. PSW-GTR-181. Albany, CA: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Research 
Station: 679-693.
Chambers, C.L.; Alm, V.; Sider, M.S.; Rabe, M.J. 2002. 
Use of artificial roosts by forest-dwelling bats in northern 
Arizona. Wildlife Society Bulletin. 30: 1085-1091.
Chambers, C.L.; Germaine, S.S. 2003. Vertebrates. In: 
Friederici, P., ed. Ecological restoration of Southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests. Washington, DC: Island Press: 
268-285.
Chambers, C.L.; Mast, J.N. 2005. Ponderosa pine snag dy-
namics and cavity excavation following wildfire in northern 
Arizona. Forest Ecology and Management. 216: 227-240.
Chen, Z.; Grady, K.; Stephens, S.; Villa-Castillo, J.; Wagner, 
M.R. 2006. Fuel reduction treatment and wildfire influence 
on carabid and tenebrionid community assemblages in the 
ponderosa pine forest of northern Arizona, USA. Forest 
Ecology and Management. 225: 168-177.
Clewell, A.; Rieger, J.; Munro, J. 2005. Society for Ecologi-
cal Restoration International: Guidelines for developing 
and managing ecological restoration projects, 2nd edition. 
Tuscon, AZ: Society for Ecological Restoration Interna-
tional. 16 p.
Cole, E.C.; McComb, W.C.; Newton, M.; Chambers, C.L.; 
Leeming, J.P. 1997. Response of amphibians to clearcutting, 
burning, and glyphosate application in the Oregon Coast 
Range. Journal of Wildlife Management. 61: 656-664.
Constible, J.M.; Gregory, P.T.; Anholt, B.R. 2001. Patterns 
of distribution, relative abundance, and microhabitat use 
of anurans in a boreal landscape influenced by fire and 
timber harvest. Ecoscience. 8: 462-470.
Corn, P.S.; Bury, R.B. 1989. Logging in western Oregon: 
responses of headwater habitats and stream amphibians. 
Forest Ecology and Management. 29: 119.
Corn, P.S.; Hossack, B.R. [n.d.]. Unpublished data on file at 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Aldo Leopold Wilderness 
Institute, Missoula, MT.
Covington, W.W.; Moore, M.M. 1994. Southwestern ponderosa 
forest structure: Changes since Euro-American settlement. 
Journal of Forestry. 92:39-47.
Cunningham, S.C.; Babb, R.D.; Jones, T.R.; Taubert B.D.; 
Vega, R. 2002. Reaction of lizard populations to a cata-
strophic wildfire in a central Arizona mountain range. 
Biological Conservation. 107: 193–201.
DeBano, L.F.; Neary, D.G.; Ffolliott, P.F. 1998. Fire’s effects 
on ecosystems. New York: John Wiley and Sons. 333 p.
DeGraaf, R.M.; Healy, W.M.; Brooks, R.T. 1991. Effects 
of thinning and deer browsing on breeding birds in New 
England oak woodlands. Forest Ecology and Management. 
41: 179-191.
Demarais, S.; Krausman, P.R. 2000. Ecology and manage-
ment of large mammals in North America. Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 778 p.
deMaynadier; P.G.; Hunter, M.L., Jr. 1995. The relationship 
between forest management and amphibian ecology: a 
review of the North American literature. Environmental 
Review. 3: 230-261.
DePerno, C.S.; Jenks, J.A.; Griffin, S.L.; Rice, L.A.; Higgins, 
K.F. 2002. White-tailed deer habitats in the central Black 
Hills. Journal of Range Management. 55: 242-252.
Dickson, J.G. 1981. Effects of forest burning on songbirds. 
In: Wood, G.W., ed. Prescribed fire and wildlife in southern 
forests. Georgetown, SC: Clemson University, The Belle 
W. Baruch Forest Science Institute: 67-72.
Dimock, E.J., II. 1974. Animal populations and damage. In: 
Cramer, O.P., ed. Environmental effects of forest residues 
management in the Pacific Northwest. Gen. Tech. Rep. GTR-
PNW-24. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station: 1-28.
Dixon, R.D. 1995. Ecology of white-headed woodpeckers 
in the central Oregon Cascades. Moscow: University of 
Idaho. 148 p. Thesis.
Dodd, N.L.; States, J.S.; Rosenstock, S.S. 2003. Tassel-
eared squirrel population, habitat condition, and dietary 
relationships in north-central Arizona. Journal of Wildlife 
Management. 67: 622-633.
Dwire, K.A.; Ryan, S.E.; Shirley, L.J.; Lytjen, D.; Otting, 
N.; Dixon, M.K. 2006. Influence of herbivory on regrowth 
of riparian shrubs following a wildland fire. Journal of 
the American Water Resources Association (JAWRA). 
42: 201-212.
Easterly, T.G.; Jenkins, K.J. 1991. Forage production and use 
on bighorn sheep winter range following spring burning in 
grassland and ponderosa pine habitats. Prairie Naturalist. 
23: 193-200.
Easton, W.E.; Martin, K. 2002. Effects of thinning and 
herbicide treatments on nest-site selection by songbirds in 
young managed forests. Auk. 119: 685-694.

28
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
Edge, D.W.; Marcum, C.L.; Oslon-Edge, S.L. 1987. 
Summer habitat selection by elk in western Montana: 
a multivariate approach. Journal of Wildlife Manage-
ment. 51: 844-851.
Elkin, C.M.; Reid, M.L. 2004. Attack and reproductive suc-
cess of mountain pine beetles (Coleoptera: Scolytidae) in 
fire-damaged lodgepole pine. Environmental Entomology. 
33: 1070-1080.
Elliot, W.J.; Page-Dumroese, D.; Robichaud, P.R. 1999. The 
effects of forest management on erosion and soil produc-
tivity. In: Lal, R., ed. Soil quality and soil erosion. Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press: 195-208.
Esque, T.C.; Schwalbe, C.R.; DeFalco, L.A.; Duncan, R.B.; 
Hughes, T.J. 2003. Effects of wild fire on small desert 
vertebrates, especially desert tortoise (Gopherus agassizii). 
The Southwestern Naturalist. 48: 103-111.
Everett, R.; Schellhaus, D.; Spurbeck, D.; Ohlson, P.; 
Kechum, D.; Anderson, T. 1997. Structure of northern 
spotted owl nest stands and their historical conditions on 
the eastern slope of the Pacific Northwest Cascades, USA. 
Forest Ecology and Management. 94: 1-14.
Filip, G.M.; Torgersen, T.R.; Parks, C.G.; Mason, R.R.; 
Wickman, B. 1996. Insects and disease factors in the Blue 
Mountains. In: Jaindl, R.G.; Quigley, T.M., eds. Search 
for a solution: sustaining the land, people, and economy of 
the Blue Mountains. Washington, DC: American Forests: 
169-202.
Finch, D.M.; Ganey, J.L.; Yong, W.; Kimball, R.T.; Sal-
labanks, R. 1997. Effects and interactions of fire, logging, 
and grazing. In: Block, W.M.; Finch, D.M., eds. Song-
bird ecology in Southwestern ponderosa pine forests: a 
literature review. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-292. Fort 
Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station: 103-136.
Finn, S.P.; Verland, D.E.; Marzluff, J.M. 2002. Does northern 
goshawk breeding occupancy vary with nest-stand charac-
teristics on the Olympic Peninsula, Washington? Journal 
of Raptor Research. 36: 265-279.
Fisher, J.T.; Wilkinson, L. 2005. The response of mammals 
to forest fire and timber harvest in the North American 
boreal forest. Mammal Review. 35: 51-81.
Folk, R.H., III; Bales, C.W. 1982. An evaluation of wildlife 
mortality resulting from aerial ignition prescribed burning. 
Proceedings Annual Conference Southeastern Association 
Fish and Wildlife Agencies. 36: 643-646.
Ford, W.M.; Menzel, M.A.; McGill, D.W.; Laerm, J.; McCay, 
T.S. 1999. Effects of a community restoration fire on small 
mammals and herpetofauna in the southern Appalachians. 
Forest Ecology and Management. 114: 233-243.
Forrester, J.A.; Leopold, D.J.; Hafner, S.D. 2005. Maintaining 
critical habitat in a heavily managed landscape: effects of 
power line corridor management on Karner blue butterfly 
(Lycaeides Melissa samuelis) habitat. Restoration Ecology. 
13: 488-498.
Frenzel, R.W. 2004. Nest-site occupancy, nesting success, 
and turnover-rates of white-headed woodpeckers in the 
Oregon Cascade Mountains in 2004. Unpublished paper on 
file with: Richard W. Frenzel, 12330 S.E. Reedway Street, 
Portland, OR 97236.
Gaines, W.L.; Lehmkuhl, J.F.; Lyons, A.L.; Harrod, R.J. [In 
press]. Short-term response of land birds to ponderosa pine 
restoration. Restoration Ecology.
Gamradt, S.C.; Kats, L.B. 1997. Impact of chaparral wild-
fire-induced sedimentation on oviposition of stream-
breeding California newts (Taricha torosa). Oecologica. 
110: 546-549.
Gast, W.R., Jr.; Scott, D.W.; Schmitt, C.; Clemens, D.; Howes, 
S.; Johnson, C.G., Jr.; Mason, R.; Mohr, F.; Clapp, R.A., Jr. 
1991. Blue Mountains forest health report: new perspec-
tives in forest health. U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Malheur, Umatilla, and Wallowa-Whitman 
National Forests. [Unconventional pagination].
George, T.L.; Zack, S. 2001. Spatial and temporal consider-
ation in restoring habitat for wildlife. Restoration Ecology. 
9: 272-279.
Germaine, H.L.; Germaine, S.S. 2002. Forest restoration 
treatment effects on the nesting success of western bluebirds 
(Sailia mexicana). Restoration Ecology. 110: 362-367.
Germaine, S.S.; Germaine, H.L. 2002. Lizard distributions 
and reproductive success in a ponderosa pine forest. Journal 
of Herpetology. 37: 645-652.
Germaine, S.S.; Germaine, H.L.; Boe, S.R. 2004. Charac-
teristics of mule deer day-bed and forage sites in current 
condition and restoration-treated ponderosa pine forest. 
Wildlife Society Bulletin. 32: 554-564.
Gillespie, G.R. 2002. Impacts of sediment loads, tadpole 
density, and food type on the growth and development of tad-
poles of the spotted tree frog Litoria spenceri: an in-stream 
experiment. Biological Conservation. 106: 141-150.
Goodwin, J.G., Jr.; Hungerford, C.R. 1979. Rodent population 
densities and food habits in Arizona ponderosa pine forests. 
Res. Pap. RM-214. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and 
Range Experimental Station. 12 p.
Graham, R.T.; McCaffrey, S.; Jain, T.B. 2004. Science basis 
for changing forest structure to modify wildfire behavior 
and severity. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. Fort Col-
lins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Research Station. 43 p.
Griffiths, A.D.; Christian, K.A. 1996. The effect of fire on 
the frillneck lizard (Chlamydosaurus kingii) in northern 
Australia. Australian Journal of Ecology. 21: 386-398.
Gunnarsson, B.; Nitterus, K.; Wirdenas, P. 2004. Effects 
of logging residue removal on ground-active beetles in 
temperate forests. Forest Ecology and Management. 201: 
229-239.
Hagar, J.C.; McComb, W.C.; Emmingham, W.H. 1996. Bird 
communities in commercially thinned and unthinned 
Douglas-fir stands of western Oregon. Wildlife Society 
Bulletin. 24: 353-366.

29
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
Hamilton, R.J. 1981. Effects of prescribed fire on black bear 
populations in southern forests. In: Wood, G.W., ed. Pre-
scribed fire and wildlife in southern forests. Georgetown, 
SC: Clemson University, The Belle W. Baruch Forest Sci-
ence Institute: 129-134.
Hann, W.J.; Jones, J.L.; Karl, M.G.; Hessburg, P.F.; Keane, 
R.E.; Long, D.G.; Menakis, J.P.; McNicoll, C.H.; Leonard, 
S.G.; Gravenmier, R.A.; Smith, B.G. 1997. Landscape 
dynamics of the basin. In: Quigley, T.M.; Arbelbide, S.J., 
tech. eds. An assessment of ecosystem components in the 
interior Columbia Basin and portions of the Klamath and 
Great Basins. Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-GTR-405. Portland, 
OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific 
Northwest Research Station: 337-1055.
Hannon, S.J.; Drapeau, P. 2005. Bird responses to burning 
and logging in the boreal forest of Canada. Studies in Avian 
Biology. 30: 97-115.
Hanson, E.E. 1978. The impact of prescribed burn in a tem-
perate subalpine forest upon the breeding bird and small 
mammal populations. Ellensburg, WA: Central Washington 
University. 56 p. Thesis.
Hanula, J.L.; Meeker, J.R.; Miller, D.R.; Barnard, E.L. 2002. 
Association of wildfire with tree health and numbers of pine 
bark beetles, reproduction weevils and their associates in 
Florida. Forest Ecology and Management. 170: 233-247.
Hanula, J.L.; Wade, D.D. 2003. Influence of long-term dor-
mant-season burning and fire exclusion on ground-dwelling 
arthropod populations in longleaf pine flatwood ecosystems. 
Forest Ecology and Management. 175: 163-184.
Hay, D.B.; Guntert, M. 1983. Seasonal selection of tree cavities 
by pygmy nuthatches based on cavity characteristics. In: 
Snag habitat management: proceedings of the symposium. 
Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-99. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. De-
partment of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station: 19-23.
Hayes, J.L.; Daterman, G.E. 2001. Bark beetles (Scolytidae) 
in eastern Oregon and Washington. Northwest Science. 
75: 21-30.
Hayes, J.P.; Chan, S.S.; Emmingham, W.H.; Tappeiner, J.C.; 
Kellogg, L.D.; Bailey, J.D. 1997. Wildlife response to 
thinning young forests in the Pacific Northwest. Journal 
of Forestry. 95: 28-33.
Healthy Forest Restoration Act of 2003; 16 U.S.C. 6501 et 
seq. Public Law 108-148.
Heatwole, H. 1962. Relation of substrate moisture to absorption 
and loss of water by the salamander Plethodon cinereus. 
Ecology. 42: 814-819.
Heatwole, H. 1977. Habitat selection in reptiles. In: Gans, C.; 
Tinkle, D.W., eds. Biology of the reptilia. Vol. 7. Ecology 
and behaviour. New York: Academic Press: 137-155.
Hejl, S.J.; Mack, D.E.; Young, J.S.; Bednarz, J.C.; Hutto, R.L. 
2002. Birds and changing landscape patterns in conifer 
forests of the north-central Rocky Mountains. Studies in 
Avian Biology. 25: 113-129.
Hobbs, N.T.; Spowart, R.A. 1984. Effects of prescribed fire on 
nutrition of mountain sheep and mule deer during winter and 
spring. Journal of Wildlife Management. 48: 551-560.
Hohenlohe, P.A.; Duncan, N. 2003. How do terrestrial mol-
lusk populations survive fire? Northwest Naturalist. 84: 
102. Abstract.
Horton, J. 1929. Birds and animals killed by forest fires. The 
Murrelet. 6: 22.
Horton, S.P.; Mannan, W.R. 1988. Effects of prescribed fire 
on snags and cavity-nesting birds in southeastern Arizona 
pine forests. Wildlife Society Bulletin. 16: 37-44.
Huff, M.H.; Seavy, N.E.; Alexander, J.D.; Ralph, C.J. 2005. 
Fire and Birds of the Maritime Pacific Northwest. Studies 
in Avian Biology. 30: 46-62.
Huffman, D.W.; Moore, M.M. 2003. Ungulate herbivory on 
buckbrush in an Arizona ponderosa pine forest. Journal of 
Range Management. 56: 358-363.
Huffman, D.W.; Moore, M.M. 2004. Responses of Fendler 
ceanothus to overstory thinning, prescribed fire, and drought 
in an Arizona ponderosa pine forest. Forest Ecology and 
Management. 198: 105-115.
Humes, M.L.; Hayes, J.P.; Collopy, M.W. 1999. Bat activity 
in thinned, unthinned, and old-growth forests in western 
Oregon. Journal of Wildlife Management. 63: 553-561.
Huntzinger, M. 2003. Effects of fire management practices 
on butterfly diversity in forested Western United States. 
Biological Conservation. 113: 1-12.
Huxel, G.R.; Hastings, A. 1999. Habitat loss, fragmentation, 
and restoration. Restoration Ecology. 7: 309-315.
Jain, T.B.; Pilliod, D.S.; Graham, R.T. 2004. Tongue-tied. 
Wildfire Magazine. July/August: 22-26.
James, S.E.; M’Closkey, R.T. 2003. Lizard microhabitat and fire 
fuel management. Biological Conservation. 114: 293-297.
Jennes, J.S. 2000. The effects of fire on Mexican spotted 
owls in Arizona and New Mexico. Flagstaff, AZ: Northern 
Arizona University. 129 p. Thesis.
Johnson, A.S.; Landers, J.L. 1978. Fruit production in slash 
pine plantations in Georgia. Journal of Wildlife Manage-
ment. 42: 606-613.
Keay, J.A.; Peek, J.M. 1980. Relationship between fires and 
winter habitat of deer in Idaho. Journal of Wildlife Man-
agement. 44: 372-380.
Keith, L.B.; Surrendi, P.C. 1971. Effects of fire on a snow-
shoe hare population. Journal of Wildlife Management. 
35: 16-26.
King, T.G.; Howell, M.A.; Chapman, B.R.; Miller, K.V.; Schorr, 
R.A. 1998. Comparisons of wintering bird communities in 
mature pine stands managed by prescribed burning. Wilson 
Bulletin. 110: 570-574.
Kirkland, G.L., Jr.; Snoddy, H.W.; Amsler, T.L. 1996. Impact 
of fire on small mammals and amphibians in a central Ap-
palachian deciduous forest. American Midland Naturalist. 
135: 253-260.

30
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
Knox, S.C.; Chambers, C.; Germaine, S.S. 2001. Habitat as-
sociations of the sagebrush lizard (Sceloporus graciosus): 
potential responses of an ectotherm to ponderosa pine 
forest restoration treatments. In: Vance, R.K.; Edminster, 
C.B.; Carleton, B; Covington, W.W.; Blake, J., comps. 
Ponderosa pine ecosystems restoration and conservation: 
steps toward stewardship. Proc. RMRS-P-22. Ogden, UT: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station: 95-98.
Koehler, G.M.; Hornocker, M.G. 1977. Fire effects on marten 
habitat in the Selway-Bitterroot wilderness. Journal of 
Wildlife Management. 41: 500-505.
Komarek, E.E. 1969. Fire and animal behavior. In: Proceed-
ings, annual Tall Timbers fire ecology conference; 1969 
April 10-11. Tallahassee, FL: Tall Timbers Research Sta-
tion. 9: 160-207.
Kotliar, N.B.; Hejl, S.J.; Hutto, R.L.; Saab, V.A.; Melcher, 
C.P.; McFadzen, M.E. 2002. Effects of fire and post-fire 
salvage logging on avian communities in conifer-dominated 
forests of the Western United States. Studies in Avian 
Biology. 25: 49-64.
Kramp, B.A.; Patton, D.R.; Brady, W.W. 1983. The effects of 
fire on wildlife habitat and species. Wildlife Unit Technical 
Report. Albuquerque, NM: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Southwestern Region. 29 p.
LaBonte, J.R.; Scott, D.W.; McIver, J.; Hayes, J.L. 2001. 
Threatened, endangered, and sensitive insects in eastern 
Oregon and Washington forests and adjacent lands. North-
west Science. 75: 185-198.
Lassau, S.A.; Hochuli, D.F. 2004. Effects of habitat complex-
ity on ant assemblages. Ecography. 27: 157-164.
Lassau, S.A.; Hochuli, D.F.; Cassis, G.; Reid, C.A.M. 2005. 
Effects of habitat complexity on forest beetle diversity: 
do functional groups respond consistently? Diversity and 
Distribution. 11: 73-82.
Lehmkuhl, J.F.; Gould, L.E.; Cazares, E.; Hosford, D.R. 
2004. Truffle abundance and mycophagy by northern fly-
ing squirrels in eastern Washington forests. Forest Ecology 
and Management. 200: 49-65.
Lehmkuhl, J.F.; Kistler, K.D.; Begley, J.S. 2006. Bushy-tailed 
woodrat abundance in dry forests of eastern Washington. 
Journal of Mammalogy. 87(2): 371-379.
Lehmkuhl, J.F.; Kistler, K.D.; Begley, J.S.; Boulanger, J. 
2006. Demography of northern flying squirrels informs 
ecosystem management of Western interior forests. Eco-
logical Applications. 16: 584-600.
Lillybridge, R.; Kovalchik, B.; Williams, C.; Smith, B.G. 
1995. Field guide for forested plant associations of the 
Wenatchee National Forest. Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-GTR-
359. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. 335 p.
Lillywhite, H.B. 1977. Animal responses to fire and fuel 
management in chaparral. In: Mooney, H.A.; Conrad, 
E.C., eds. Proceedings of the symposium on environ-
mental consequences of fire and fuel management in 
Mediterranean ecosystems. Gen. Tech. Rep. WO-GTR-3. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service: 368-272.
Lillywhite, H.B.; Friedman, G.; Ford, N. 1977. Color matching 
and perch selection by lizards in recently burned chaparral. 
Copeia. 1977(1): 115-121.
Lillywhite, H.B.; North, F. 1974. Perching behavior of Sce-
loperus occidentalis in recently burned chaparral. Copeia. 
1974: 256-257.
Litt, A.R.; Provencher, L.; Tanner, G.W.; Franz, R. 2001. 
Herpetofaunal responses to restoration treatments of 
longleaf pine sandhills in Florida. Restoration Ecology. 
9: 462-474.
Lyon, L.J.; Crawford, H.S.; Czuhai, E.; Fredriksen, R.L.; 
Harlow, F.; Metz, L.J.; Pearson, H.A. 1978. Effects of fire 
on fauna: a state-of-knowledge review. Gen. Tech. Rep. 
WO-GTR-6. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agri-
culture, Forest Service. 22 p.
Machmer, M. 2002. Effects of ecosystem restoration treat-
ments on cavity-nesting birds, their habitat, and their in-
sectivorous prey in fire-maintained forests of southeastern 
British Columbia. In: Proceedings of the symposium of the 
ecology and management of dead wood in Western forests. 
Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-GTR-181. Albany, CA: U.S. Depart-
ment of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Southwest 
Research Station: 121-133.
Main, M.B.; Richardson, L.W. 2002. Response of wildlife to 
prescribed fire in southwest Florida pine flatwoods. Wildlife 
Society Bulletin. 30: 213-221.
Mantgem, P.V.; Schwartz, M.; Keifer, M. 2001. Monitoring 
fire effects for managed burns and wildfires: coming to 
terms with pseudoreplication. Natural Areas Journal. 21: 
266-273.
Martin, K.A.; McComb, B.C. 2003. Amphibian habitat as-
sociations at patch and landscape scales in western Oregon. 
Journal of Wildlife Management. 67: 672-683.
Mason, A.C.; Adams, D.L. 1989. Black bear damage to thinned 
timber stands in northwest Montana. Western Journal of 
Applied Forestry. 4: 10-13.
Master, L.L. 1991. Assessing threats and setting priorities for 
conservation. Conservation Biology. 5: 559-563.
Masters, R.E.; Lochmiller, R.L.; McMurry, S.T.; Bukenhofer, 
G.A. 1998. Small mammal response to pine-grassland res-
toration for red-cockaded woodpeckers. Wildlife Society 
Bulletin. 26: 148-158.
Mattson, T.A.; Buskirk, S.W.; Stanton, N.L. 1996. Roost 
sites of the silver-haired bat (Lasionycteris noctivagans) 
in Black Hills of South Dakota. Great Basin Naturalist. 
56: 247-253.
McClelland, B.R.; Frissell, S.S.; Fischer, W.C.; Halvorson, 
C.H. 1979. Habitat management for hole-nesting birds in 
forest of western larch and Douglas-fir. Journal of Forestry. 
77: 480-483.
McConnell, B.R.; Smith, J.G. 1970. Response of under-
story vegetation to ponderosa pine thinning in eastern 
 Washington. Journal of Range Management. 23: 208-212.

31
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
McCullough, D.G.; Werner, R.A.; Neumann, D. 1998. Fire and 
insects in northern and boreal forest ecosystems of North 
America. Annual Review of Entomology. 43: 107-127.
McGraw, R.L. 1997. Timber harvest effects on breeding and 
larval success of long-toed salamanders (Ambystoma mac-
rodactylum). Missoula: University of Montana. Thesis.
McHugh, C.W.; Kolb, T.E.; Wilson, J.L. 2003. Bark beetle 
attacks on ponderosa pine following fire in northern Ari-
zona. Environmental Entomology. 32: 510-522.
McIver, J.D. ; Parsons, G.L.; Moldenke, A.R. 1992. Litter 
spider succession after clear-cutting in a western coniferous 
forest. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 22: 984-992.
McLeod, R.F.; Gates, J.E. 1998. Response of herpetofaunal 
communities to forest cutting and burning at Chesapeake 
Farms, Maryland. American Midland Naturalist. 139: 
164–177.
Means, D.B.; Campbell, H.W. 1981. Effects of prescribed 
burning on amphibians and reptiles. In: Wood, G.D., ed. 
Prescribed fire and wildlife in southern forests. George-
town, SC: Clemson University, The Belle W. Baruch Forest 
Science Institute: 89-96.
Means, D.B.; Dodd, C.K.; Johnson, S.A.; Palis, J.G. 2004. 
Amphibians and fire in longleaf pine ecosystems: response to 
Schurbon and Fauth. Conservation Biology. 18: 1149-1153.
Medin, D.E.; Booth, G.D. 1989. Responses of birds and small 
mammals to single-tree selection logging in Idaho. Res. Pap. 
INT-RP-408. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station. 11 p.
Meyer, C.L.; Sisk, T.D.; Covington, W.W. 2001. Microclimatic 
changes induced by ecological restoration of ponderosa 
pine forests in northern Arizona. Restoration Ecology. 9: 
443-452.
Meyer, M.D.; North, M.P.; Kelt, D.A. 2005. Short-term 
effects of fire and forest thinning on truffle abundance 
and consumption by Neotamias speciosus in the Sierra 
Nevada of California. Canadian Journal Forest Research. 
35: 1061-1070.
Michael, E.D.; Thornburgh, P.I. 1971. Immediate effects of 
hardwood removal and prescribed burning on bird popula-
tions. The Southwestern Naturalist. 15: 359-379.
Miller, W.E. 1979. Fire as an insect management tool. Bulletin 
of Entomological Society of America. 25: 137-140.
Mollohan, C.; Brady, W.W.; LeCount, A.L. 1989. Habitat use 
of an Arizona ponderosa pine-mixed conifer forest by female 
black bears. Western Journal of Applied Forestry. 4: 6-9.
Moreira, F.; Delgado, A.; Ferreira, S.; Borralho, R.; Oliveira, 
N.; Ináco, M.; Silva, J.S.; Rego, F. 2003. Effects of pre-
scribed fire on vegetation structure and breeding birds in 
young Pinus pinaster stands of northern Portugal. Forest 
Ecology and Management. 184: 225-237.
Morris, M.G. 1975. Preliminary observations on the effects 
of burning on the Hemiptera (Homoptera and Aucheno-
rhyncha) of limestone grassland. Biological Conservation. 
7: 312-319.
Moseley, K.R.; Castleberry, S.B.; Schweitzer, S.H. 2003. 
Effects of prescribed fire on herpetofauna in bottomland 
hardwood forests. Southeastern Naturalist. 2: 475-486.
Muir, P.S.; Mattingly, R.L.; Tappeiner, J.C., Il; [and others]. 
2002. Managing for biodiversity in young Douglas-fir forests 
of western Oregon. Biological Science Report USGS/BRD/
BSR—2002-0006. Corvallis, OR: U.S. Geological Survey, 
Forest and Rangeland Ecosystem Science Center. 76 p.
Mushinsky, H.R. 1985. Fire and the Florida sandhill herpe-
tofaunal community: with special attention to responses of 
Cnemidophorus sexlineatus. Herpetologica. 41: 333-342.
Mushinsky, H.R.; Gibson, D.J. 1991. The influence of fire 
periodicity on habitat structure. In: Bell, S.S.; McCoy, E.D.; 
Mushinsky, H.R., eds. Habitat complexity: the physical 
arrangement of objects in space. New York: Chapman & 
Hall: 237-259.
Mutch, R.W. 1970. Wildland fires and ecosystems — a hy-
pothesis. Ecology. 51: 1046-1051.
National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 [NEPA]; 42 
U.S.C. 651 et seq.
National Forest Management Act of 1976 [NFMA]; Act of 
October 22, 1976; 16 U.S.C. 1600.
Naughton, G.P.; Henderson, C.B.; Foresman, K.R.; McGraw, 
R.L., II. 2000. Long-toed salamanders in harvested and 
intact Douglas-fir forests of western Montana. Ecological 
Applications. 10: 1681-1689.
Niemela, J. 1999. Management in relation to disturbance in 
the boreal forest. Forest Ecology and Management. 155: 
127-134.
Nitschke, C.R. 2005. Does forest harvesting emulate fire dis-
turbance? A comparison of effects on selected attributes in 
coniferous-dominated headwater systems. Forest Ecology 
and Management. 214: 305-319.
Niwa, C.G.; Peck, R.W. 2002. Influence of prescribed fire 
on carabid beetle (Carabidae) and spiders (Araneae) as-
semblages in forest litter in southwestern Oregon. Envi-
ronmental Entomology. 31: 785-796.
Niwa, C.G.; Peck, R.W.; Torgersen, R.T. 2001a. Soil, litter, and 
coarse woody debris habitats for arthropods in eastern Oregon 
and Washington. Northwest Science. 75: 141-148.
Niwa, C.G.; Sandquist, R.E.; Crawford, R.; Frest, T.J.; 
 Griswold, T.; Hammond, P.; Ingham, E.; James, S.; Jo-
hannes, E.J.; Johnson, J.; Kemp, W.P.; LaBonte, J.; Lat-
tin, J.D.; McIver, J.; McMillin, J.; Moldenke, A.; Moser, 
J.; Ross, D.; Schowalter, T.; Tepedino, V.; Wagner, M.R. 
2001b. Invertebrates of the Columbia River basin assess-
ment area. Gen. Tech, Rep. PNW-GTR-512. Portland, OR: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific 
Northwest Research Station. 74 p.
Office of Management and Budget [OMB]. 2001. Data Quality 
Act. P.L.106-554, Sect. 515.
Oliver, W.W. 2000. Ecological research at the Blacks Moun-
tain Experimental Forest in northeastern California. Gen. 
Tech. Rep. PSW-GTR-179. Albany, CA: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Research 
Station. 66 p.
Ormsbee, P.C.; McComb, W.C. 1998. Selection of day roosts 
by female long-legged myotis in the central Oregon Cascade 
Range. Journal of Wildlife Management. 62: 596-603.

32
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
Panzer, R. 2003. Importance of in situ survival, recoloniza-
tion, and habitat gaps in postfire recovery of fire-sensitive 
prairie species. Natural Areas Journal. 23: 14-21.
Parks, C.G.; Conklin, D.A.; Bednar, L.; Maffei, H. 1999. 
Woodpecker use and fall rates of snags created by kill-
ing ponderosa pine infected with dwarf mistletoe. Res. 
Pap. PNW-RP-515. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research 
Station. 11 p.
Parks, C.G.; Radosevich, S.R.; Anzinger, D.; Maxwell, B.; Rew, 
L.; Dwire, K.A.; Endress, B.A. 2005. Natural and land-use 
history of the Northwest mountain ecoregions (USA) in 
relation to patterns of plant invasions. Perspectives in Plant 
Ecology, Evolution and Systematics. 7: 137-158.
Passovoy, M.D.; Fule, P.Z. 2006. Snag and woody debris 
dynamics following severe wildfires in northern Arizona 
ponderosa pine forests. Forest Ecology and Management. 
223: 237-246.
Patriquin, K.J.; Barclay, R.M.R. 2003. Foraging by bats in 
cleared, thinned and unharvested boreal forest. Journal 
of Applied Ecology. 40: 646-657.
Patterson, G.B. 1984. The effect of burning-off tussock 
grassland on the population density of common skinks. 
New Zealand Journal of Zoology. 11: 189-194.
Peck, R.W.; Niwa, C.G. 2004. Longer-term effects of selec-
tive thinning on carabid beetle and spiders in the Cascade 
Mountains of southern Oregon. Northwest Science. 78: 
267-277.
Perkins, J.M.; Cross, S.P. 1988. Differential use of some 
coniferous forest habitats by hoary and silver-haired bats 
in Oregon. Murrelet. 69: 21-24.
Peterson, D.L.; Johnson, M.C.; Agee, J.K.; Jain, T.B.; McK-
enzie, D.; Reinhardt, E.D. 2005. Forest structure and fire 
hazard in dry forests of the western United States. Gen. 
Tech. Rep. PNW-GTR-628. Portland, OR: U.S. Depart-
ment of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest 
Research Station. 29 p.
Pilliod, D.S.; Bury, R.B.; Hyde, E.J.; Pearl, C.A.; Corn, 
P.S. 2003. Fire and amphibians in North America. Forest 
Ecology and Management. 178: 163-181.
Pilliod, D.S.; Shick, K.; Velasquez, M.E. [In press]. The 
wildlife habitat response model: Estimating terrestrial 
wildlife habitat responses to fuel treatments. In: Suther-
land, E.K.; Black, A.E., eds. Estimating environmental 
consequences of fuels treatments: User’s Guide. Gen. Tech. 
Rep. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station.
Pollet, J.; Omi, P.N. 2002. Effect of thinning and prescribed 
burning on crown fire severity in ponderosa pine forests. 
International Journal of Wildland Fire. 11: 1-10.
Potter, M.W.; Kessell, S.R. 1980. Predicting mosaics and 
wildlife diversity resulting from fire disturbance to a forest 
ecosystem. Environmental Management. 4: 247-254.
Pough, F.H.; Andrews, R.M.; Cadle, J.E.; Crump, M.L.; 
Savitsky, A.H.; Wells, K.D. 2004. Herpetology, 3rd ed. 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall. 726 p.
Pough, F.H.; Smith, E.M.; Rhodes, D.H.; Collazo, A. 1987. 
The abundance of salamanders in forest stands with dif-
ferent histories of disturbance. Forest Ecology and Man-
agement. 20: 1-9.
Provencher, L.; Cobris, N.M.; Brennan, L.A.; Gordon, D.R.; 
Hardesty, J.F. 2002. Breeding bird response to midstory 
hardwood reduction in Florida sandhill longleaf pine forests. 
Journal of Wildlife Management. 66: 641-661.
Rabe, M.J.; Morrell, T.E.; Green, H.; deVos, J.C., Jr.; Miller, 
C.R. 1998. Characteristics of ponderosa pine snag roosts 
used by reproductive bats in northern Arizona. Journal of 
Wildlife Management. 62: 612-621.
Randall-Parker, T.; Miller, R. 2002. Effects of prescribed fire 
on ponderosa pine key wildlife habitat components: pre-
liminary results and a method for monitoring. Gen. Tech. 
Rep. PSW-GTR-181. Berkeley, CA: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Research 
Station: 823-834.
Ream, C.H. 1981. The effects of fire and other disturbances 
on small mammals and their predators: an annotated bibli-
ography. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-GTR-106. Ogden, UT: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain 
Forest and Range Experiment Station. 55 p.
Reich, R.M.; Joy, S.M.; Reynolds, R.T. 2004. Predicting the 
location of northern goshawk nests: modeling the spatial 
dependency between nest locations and forest structure. 
Ecological Modeling. 176: 109-133.
Reynolds, H.G. 1962. Effect of logging on understory veg-
etation and deer use in ponderosa pine forest of Arizona. 
Research Notes 80. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest 
and Range Experiment Station. 7 p.
Reynolds, R.T.; Graham, R.T.; Reiser, M.H. 1992. Manage-
ment recommendations for the northern goshawk in the 
Southwestern United States. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-
217. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Ex-
periment Station. 90 p.
Riggs, R.A.; Bunting, S.C.; Daniels, S.E. 1996. Prescribed 
fire. In: Krausman, P.R., ed. Rangeland wildlife. Denver, 
CO: The Society for Range Management: 295-319.
Robichaud, P.R. 2000. Fire effects on infiltration rates after 
prescribed fire in Northern Rocky Mountain forests, USA. 
Journal of Hydrology. 231-232: 220-229.
Robichaud, P.R.; Waldrop, T.A. 1994. A comparison of surface 
runoff and sediment yields from low- and high-severity site 
preparation burns. Water Resources Bulletin. 30: 27-34.
Ross, D. 1995. Short-term impacts of thinning ponderosa pine 
on pandora moth densities, pupal weights, and phenology. 
Western Journal of Applied Forestry. 10: 91-94.
Rudolph, D.C.; Conner, R.N.; Schaefer, R.R. 2002. Red-cock-
aded woodpecker foraging behavior in relation to midstory 
vegetation. Wilson Bulletin. 114: 235-242.
Russell, K.R.; Van Lear, D.H.; Guynn, D.C., Jr. 1999. Pre-
scribed fire effects on herpetofauna: review and management 
implications. Wildlife Society Bulletin. 27: 374-384.

33
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
Saab, V.A.; Dudley, J. 1998. Responses of cavity-nesting 
birds to stand-replacement fire and salvage logging in 
ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir forests of southwestern Idaho. 
Res. Pap. RMRS-RP-11. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research 
Station. 17 p.
Saab, V.A.; Brannon, R.; Dudley, J.; Donohoo, L.; Vander-
szanden, D.; Johnson, V.; Lachowski, H. 2002. Selection 
of fire-created snags at two spatial scales by cavity-nesting 
birds. In: Shea, P.J.; Laudenslayer, W.F., Jr.; Valentine, B.; 
Weatherspoon, C.P.; Lisle, T.E., eds. Proceedings of the 
symposium on the ecology and management of dead wood 
in western forests; 1999 November 2-4; Reno, NV. Gen. 
Tech. Rep. PSW-GTR-181. Albany, CA: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Research 
Station: 835-848.
Saab, V.A.; Dudley, J.; Thompson, W.L. 2004. Factors in-
fluencing occupancy of nest cavities in recently burned 
forests. The Condor. 106: 20-36.
Saab, V.A.; Powell, H.D.W. 2005. Fire and avian ecology in 
North America: process influencing pattern. Studies in 
Avian Biology. 30: 1-30.
Saab, V.A.; Powell, H.D.W.; Kotliar, N.B.; Newlon, K.R. 
2005. Variation in fire regimes of the Rocky Mountains: 
implications for avian communities and fire management. 
Studies in Avian Biology. 30: 76-96.
Saab, V.A.; Vierling, K.T. 2001. Reproductive success of 
Lewis’s woodpecker in burned pine and cottonwood ripar-
ian forests. The Condor. 103: 491-501.
Sanchez-Martinez, G.; Wagner, M.R. 2002. Bark beetle 
community structure under four ponderosa pine forest 
stand conditions in northern Arizona. Forest Ecology and 
Management. 170: 145-160.
Sanders, N. 2004. Immediate effects of fire on the invasive 
Argentine ant, Linepthema humile. The Southwestern 
Naturalist. 49: 246-250.
Schmidt, C.A. 2003. Conservation assessment for the silver-
haired bat in the Black Hills National Forest South Dakota 
and Wyoming. Custer, SD: U.S. Department of Agricul-
ture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Region, Black Hills 
National Forest. 22 p.
Schurbon, J.M.; Fauth, J.E. 2003. Effects of prescribed burn-
ing on amphibian diversity in a southeastern U.S. National 
Forest. Conservation Biology. 17: 1338-1349.
Schurbon, J.M.; Fauth, J.E. 2004. Fire as friend and foe of am-
phibians: a reply. Conservation Biology. 18: 1156-1159.
Scott, V.E.; Oldemeyer, J.L. 1983. Cavity-nesting bird require-
ments and response to snag cutting in ponderosa pine. In: 
Davis, J.W.; Goodwin, G.A.; Ockenfels, R.A., tech. coords. 
Snag habitat management: proceedings of the symposium. 
Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-99. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. De-
partment of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Forest and Range Experiment Station: 19-23.
Semlitsch, R.D. 2000. Principles for management of aquatic-
breeding amphibians. Journal of Wildlife Management. 
64: 615-631.
Setser, K.; Cavitt, J.F. 2003. Effects of burning on snakes 
in Kansas, USA, tallgrass prairie. Natural Areas Journal. 
23: 315-319.
Shick, K. 2003. The influence of stand-level vegetation and 
landscape composition on the abundance of snowshoe hares 
(Lepus americanus) in managed forest stands in western 
Montana. Missoula: University of Montana. 102 p. Thesis.
Sort, K.C.; Negron, J.F. 2003. Arthropod responses: a func-
tional approach. In: Friederici, P., ed. Ecological restoration 
of Southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Washington, DC: 
Island Press: 286-305.
Simon, N.P.P.; Schwab, F.E.; Diamond, A.W. 2000. Patterns 
of breeding bird abundance in relation to logging in western 
Labrador. Journal of Forest Research. 30: 257-263
Singh, S.; Smyth, A.K.; Blomberg, S.P. 2002. Effect of a 
control burn on lizards and their structural environment in 
a eucalypt open-forest. Wildlife Research. 23: 447-454.
Six, D.L.; Vander Meer, M.; DeLuca, T.H.; Kolb, P. 2002. Pine 
engraver (Ips pini) colonization of logging residues created 
using alternative slash management systems in western Mon-
tana. Western Journal of Applied Forestry. 17: 96-100.
Smith, J.K., ed. 2000. Wildland fire in ecosystems: effects 
of fire on fauna. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-42 Vol. I. 
Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 83 p.
Spildie, D.R.; Stanton, N.L.; Buskirk, S.W. [n.d.] Post-fire 
succession of small mammals in montane forests of the 
greater Yellowstone area, Wyoming. Unpublished paper 
on file at: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Research Station, Aldo Leopold Wilder-
ness Research Institute, Missoula, MT. 41 p.
Springett, J.A. 1976. The effect of prescribed burning on the 
soil fauna and on litter decomposition in Western Australian 
forests. Australian Journal of Ecology. 1: 77-82.
Squires, J.R.; Reynolds, R.T. 1997. Northern goshawk (Ac-
cipiter gentiles). In: Poole, A.; Gill, F., eds. The Birds of 
North America No. 298. Philadelphia, PA: The Academy 
of Natural Sciences; Washington, DC: American Orni-
thologists’ Union.
Steventon, J.D.; MacKenzie, K.L.; Mahon, T.E. 1998. Re-
sponse of small mammals and birds to partial cutting and 
clearcutting in northwest British Columbia. The Forestry 
Chronicle. 74: 703-713.
Sullivan, B.T.; Fettig, C.J.; Otrosina, W.J.; Dalusky, M.J.; 
Berisford, C.W. 2003. Association between severity of 
prescribed burns and subsequent activity of conifer-feed-
ing beeltes in stands of longleaf pine. Forest Ecology and 
Management. 185: 327-340.
Sullivan, T.P.; Sullivan, D.S. 1988. Influence of stand thin-
ning on snowshoe hare population dynamics and feeding 
damage in lodgepole pine forest. Journal of Applied Ecol-
ogy. 25: 791-805.
Sullivan, T.P.; Sullivan, D.S.; Lindgren, P.M.F. 2001. Stand 
structure and small mammals in young lodgepole pine 
forest: 10-year results after thinning. Ecological Applica-
tions. 11: 1151-1173.

34
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. 2006
Taylor, D.L.; Barmore, W.J. 1980. Post-fire succession of 
avifauna in coniferous forests of Yellowstone and Grand 
Teton National Parks, Wyoming. In: Management of West-
ern forests and grasslands for nongame birds: workshop 
proceedings. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-GTR-86. Ogden, UT: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain 
Research Station: 130-145.
Thomas, D.W. 1988. The distribution of bats in different ages 
of Douglas-fir forests. Journal of Wildlife Management. 
52: 619-626.
Trainor, C.R.; Woinarski, J.C.Z. 1994. Responses of lizards to 
three experimental fires in the Savanna Forests of Kakadu 
National Park. Wildlife Research. 21: 131-148.
U.S. Department of Agriculture; U.S. Department of the 
Interior; Western Governors Association. 2001. A col-
laborative approach for reducing wildland fire risks to 
communities and the environment: 10-year comprehensive 
strategy. 21 p.
U.S. Department of Agriculture. 2003. A strategic assessment 
of forest biomass and fuel reduction treatments in western 
states. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service. 18 p.
U.S. Department of Agriculture. 2005. National Forest Man-
agement Act, Planning Rule.
Villa-Castillo, J.; Wagner, M.R. 2002. Ground beetle (Cole-
optera: Carabidae) species assemblages as an indicator of 
forest condition in northern Arizona ponderosa pine forests. 
Environmental Entomology. 31: 242-252.
Vonhof, M.J.; Barclay, R.M.R. 1996. Roost-site selection and 
roosting ecology of forest-dwelling bats in southern British 
Columbia. Canadian Journal of Zoology. 74: 1797-1805.
Vreeland, J.K.; Tietje, W.D. 2002. Numerical response of 
small vertebrates to prescribed fire in California oak 
woodland. In: Ford, W.M.; Russell, K.R.; Moorman, C.E., 
eds. The role of fire in nongame wildlife management and 
community restoration: traditional uses and new directions. 
Gen. Tech. Rep. NE-GTR-288. Newtown Square, PA: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Northeastern 
Research Station: 100-110.
Wallin, K.F.; Kolb, T.E.; Skov, K.R.; Wagner, M.R. 2003. 
Effects of crown scorch on ponderosa pine resistance to 
bark beetles in northern Arizona. Environmental Entomol-
ogy. 32: 652-661.
Waltz, A.E.M.; Covington, W.W. 2004. Ecological restoration 
treatments increase butterfly richness and abundance: mech-
anisms of response. Restoration Ecology. 12: 85-96.
Wilson, C.W.; Masters, R.E.; Bukenhofer, G.A. 1995. Breeding 
bird response to pine-grassland community restoration for 
red-cockaded woodpeckers. Journal of Wildlife Manage-
ment. 59: 56-67.
Wissmar, R.C.; Beschta, R.L. 1998. Restoration and man-
agement of riparian ecosystems: a catchment perspective. 
Freshwater Biology. 40: 571-585.
Witcosky, J.J. 1986. The influence of time of precommerical 
thinning on the colonization of Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga 
menziesii) by three species of root-colonizing insects. 
Canadian Journal Forest Research. 16: 745-749.
Woolf, J. 2003. The effects of thinning and prescribed fire 
on birds, small mammals, and avian species composition. 
Missoula: University of Montana. 93 p. Thesis.
Zabowski, D.; Java, B.; Scherer, G.; Everett, R.L.; Ottmar, 
R. 2000. Timber harvesting residue treatment: Part 1. 
Response of conifer seedlings, soils, and microclimate. 
Forest Ecology and Management. 126: 25-34.
Zack, S.; George, T.L.; Laudenslayer, W.F., Jr. 2002. Are 
there snags in the system? Comparing cavity use among 
nesting birds in “snag-rich” and “snag-poor” eastside pine 
forests. Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-GTR-181. Berkeley, CA: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific 
Southwest Research Station: 179-191.
Zettler, J.A.; Taylor, M.D.; Allen, C.R.; Spira, T.P. 2003. 
Consequences of forest clear-cuts for native and non-
 indigenous ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). Annals of the 
Entomological Society of America. 97: 513-518.

 The Rocky Mountain Research Station develops scientific informa-
tion and technology to improve management, protection, and use of 
the forests and rangelands. Research is designed to meet the needs 
of National Forest managers, Federal and State agencies, public and 
private organizations, academic institutions, industry, and individuals. 
 Studies accelerate solutions to problems involving ecosystems, 
range, forests, water, recreation, fire, resource inventory, land reclama-
tion, community sustainability, forest engineering technology, multiple 
use economics, wildlife and fish habitat, and forest insects and diseases. 
Studies are conducted cooperatively, and applications may be found 
worldwide.
Research Locations
Flagstaff, Arizona 
Reno, Nevada 
Fort Collins, Colorado* 
Albuquerque, New Mexico 
Boise, Idaho 
Rapid City, South Dakota
Moscow, Idaho 
Logan, Utah 
 
Bozeman, Montana 
Ogden, Utah 
 
 
Missoula, Montana 
Provo, Utah  
 
*Station Headquarters, Natural Resources Research Center,
2150 Centre Avenue, Building A, Fort Collins, CO 80526 
RMRS
ROCKY  MOUNTAIN RESEARCH STATION
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its 
programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, 
and where applicable, sex, marital status, familial status, parental status, religion, 
sexual orientation, genetic information, political beliefs, reprisal, or because all 
or part of an individual’s income is derived from any public assistance program. 
(Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who 
require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, 
large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA’s TARGET Center at (202) 
720-2600 (voice and TDD).
 
To file a complaint of discrimination, write to USDA, Director, Office of Civil 
Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, DC 20250-9410, or call 
(800) 795-3272 (voice) or (202) 720-6382 (TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.

Sponsors:
United States Department of Agriculture
Forest Service
North Central Research Station
Pacific Northwest Research Station
Pacific Southwest Research Station
Rocky Mountain Research Station
