9
Ecological Restoration Institute
Northern Arizona University
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
www.eri.nau.edu
Working Papers in Southwestern 
Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
Restoration of Ponderosa 
Pine Forests to 
Presettlement Conditions
February 2005 

Working Papers in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native species, structural
characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological Restoration International
defines restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an
ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability. . . . Restoration attempts to return
an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration International 2004).
In the southwestern United States, most ponderosa pine forests have been degraded during the last
150 years; many areas are now dominated by dense thickets of small trees and have lost their once
diverse understory. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing
fires and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers on
reintroducing frequent, low-intensity surface fires—often after first thinning dense stands—and
reestablishing productive understory plant communities. The Ecological Restoration Institute at
Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, implementing, and monitoring ecological
restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. By allowing natural processes such as fire to
resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem
services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
Every restoration project needs to be site specific, but the detailed experience of field practitioners
may help guide practitioners elsewhere. The Working Papers series presents findings and
management recommendations from research and observations by the ERI and its partner
organizations.
This publication would not have been possible without significant funding from the USDA Forest
Service. The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and
should not be interpreted as representing the opinions or policies of the U.S. Government.
Mention of trade names or commercial products does not constitute their endorsement by the
U.S. Government.
1: Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons and Adaptive Management Practices
2: Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3: Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
4: Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits
5: Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
6: Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
7: Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
8: Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments

Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions a
Treatment Type
Emulation of the forest structure prevalent before the landscape-level
disturbances that followed Euro-American settlement.
Treatment Objectives
To emulate the forest structure characteristic of the period immediately
preceding Euro-American settlement in order to return forest conditions to
their natural range of variability. This greatly reduces risks of stand-replacing
fire, allows frequent ground fire to be safely reintroduced in order to regulate
forest structure, and promotes the growth of understory plants that fuel such
fires and support wildlife.
Steps
Overstory Trees:
•
All living trees that existed at the time of local Euro-American
settlement are identified and left standing. Depending on the location,
area, and resources available, this may be assessed through increment
boring, size, or the presence of yellow bark.
•
All indicators of trees standing at the time of settlement that are no
longer present as living trees—including snags, downed logs, stumps,
and stump holes—are identified. Read more about this in Working
Paper 7: Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa
Pine Forests.
•
Younger trees to replace the trees that have fallen, burned, or decayed
since settlement are selected. “Extra” trees are left standing—that is,
each missing tree is replaced with more than one—to compensate for
possible mortality after treatment, and because most of the
replacements are much smaller than the large trees that were removed
or have died. In tests these trees have been chosen according to several
different replacement rates, depending on local conditions, social
considerations, wildlife needs, wildfire hazards, and other factors:
•
1.5/3 (full restoration). If the replacement trees are over 16 inches in diameter, 1.5 trees
are left standing for each presettlement indicator. If they are smaller, 3 trees are left
standing for each indicator.
•
2/4 (modified restoration). If the replacement trees are over 16 inches in diameter, 2
trees are left standing for each presettlement indicator. If they are smaller, 4 trees are left
standing for each indicator.
•
3/6 (minimal restoration). If the replacement trees are over 16 inches in diameter, 3
trees are left standing for each presettlement indicator. If they are smaller, 6 trees are left
standing for each indicator.
•
Replacement trees are chosen from within 60 feet of indicators, though a smaller distance (15
or 30 feet) can result in a more desirable clumping pattern among the remaining trees. Where
possible, replacements should include the largest and healthiest postsettlement trees, and/or
clumped trees, especially those with interlocking canopies.
Treatment Options
This Working Paper is one
of a series that describes
the planning and
implementation of
restoration treatments in
southwestern ponderosa
pine forests. It presents the
best scientifically based
knowledge currently
available about treatment
types and effects. But this
Working Paper is not a
prescription. Restoration
decisions need to be made
with close attention to
local conditions—there is
no “one size fits all”
approach, and specific
prescriptions must be
determined according to
project objectives. Use this
publication as an aid in
making informed decisions
about how to restore more
natural conditions, and
greater health, to the
southwestern ponderosa
pine forests.
1

•
Trees that are neither of presettlement age or designated replacements are removed using
either manual or mechanical means. Choice of equipment can have a great impact on
ecological impacts such as soil compaction, which can be minimized through careful planning.
Read more about this in Working Paper 5: Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration.
In most cases deciduous trees such as Gambel oak and aspen are left standing while shade-
tolerant conifers such as white fir and Douglas-fir are removed, but this may vary depending
upon local conditions and project objectives.
Fire:
•
Prescribed burns are conducted after thinning.
•
Slash can be treated by gathering it into piles for burning prior to broadcast burning.
•
It is also possible to scatter slash throughout a treatment area and leave it to settle before
burning; some practitioners have tried compacting it with a small tractor before burning to
reduce flame heights (Jerman et al. 2004).
•
Ground fires should recur on the site in years to come, at intervals that reflect the site’s “range
of natural variability”—often from 2 to 12 years in many parts of the Southwest (Swetnam
and Baisan 1996; Landres et al. 1999).
•
Raking thick duff about a foot away from the trunks of remaining large trees—especially large
trees—before fire may be necessary in order to prevent excessive bark scorch or root mortality
(see Working Paper 3: Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire). Particular caution is needed on
lava soils, which may make trees especially susceptible to fire damage (Fulé et al. 2002).
Understory Vegetation:
•
Treatment of understory vegetation varies. In some cases it may make sense to reseed treated
areas with native plants after burning. Seeding can increase species richness, but also poses the
risk of introducing invasive species and nonnative genotypes (Springer and Laughlin 2004).
Whether it is necessary depends on such variables as the existing understory, distance from
seed sources, and contents of the soil seed bank.
•
In many places control of invasive plants may be necessary, and in all cases it is prudent to
minimize their spread. Read how to do this in Working Paper 8: Controlling Invasive Species as
Part of Restoration Treatments.
Where It’s Been Done
This treatment and variations on it have been implemented at a variety of locations, including:
•
Gus Pearson Natural Area, near Flagstaff
•
Fort Valley, near Flagstaff
•
Mount Trumbull area, in the Grand Canyon–Parashant National Monument
•
Other national forest sites in Arizona
•
San Juan National Forest, Colorado
•
Lincoln and Cibola national forests, New Mexico
Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
a
2

Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions a
Results
Overstory Trees:
Depending on initial conditions and the replacement rate chosen, this treatment has the potential to
remove a high percentage of a site’s younger trees. At Mount Trumbull, tree density was reduced by
an average of 77 percent under a 1.5/3 replacement rate prescription, and basal area by an average of
48 percent (Waltz et al. 2003). This still left a diverse forest, as postreatment basal area varied from
about 66 to more than 115 ft2/acre. In many cases this treatment results in a large number of forest
openings of various sizes.
Tree health is enhanced by this treatment, as remaining pines in areas with a 1.5/3 prescription have
shown increased resin flow, canopy growth, and water and nutrient uptake (Feeney et al. 1998; Stone
et al. 1999; Kolb et al. 2001; Wallin et al. 2004). Windthrow and wind breakage of remaining pines
may increase slightly in treated areas, but only a few trees have died from these causes in the areas
monitored (Kolb et al. 2001).
Understory Vegetation:
In general, the productivity of the understory increases after dramatic tree thinning (Abella and
Covington 2004; Huffman and Moore 2004; Moore and Deiter 1992). This response has been
measured at several restoration sites, including the Gus Pearson Natural Area and Fort Valley area
(Korb and Springer 2003). In Fort Valley, this treatment resulted in higher species richness, diversity,
and cover on treated than untreated sites, though the degree to which understory vegetation
responds to increased levels of light, water, and nutrients is significantly affected by year-to-year
variability in climate (Korb et al. 2003). Because of the high degree of annual variability, it is
important to conduct long-term monitoring that can accurately assess treatment impacts over time
(Korb et al. 2003).
The response of specific understory plants to this level of thinning and prescribed burning is also
dependent on the seed bank present in the soil. At Mount Trumbull, application of a native seed mix
increased the richness and cover of native plants, especially grasses (Springer and Laughlin 2004).
Seeding, though, has the potential to introduce invasive species and new, nonlocal genotypes of
native species, and needs to be done carefully, with seed that is certified weed-free.
Exotic and invasive species also often increase in number and cover due to the disturbance caused by
thinning and prescribed fire (Abella and Covington 2004; Sieg et al. 2003). Controlling them should
be a top priority in the design and implementation of this treatment.
Fire:
The degree of thinning associated with this treatment can substantially reduce overall fuel loads,
separate tree crowns, and increase the average base height of crowns. This results in a large decrease
in crown fire potential. At Fort Valley a computer model predicted that under dry conditions a 28-
mile-per-hour wind would result in a crown fire in an untreated stand, but 55-mile-per-hour winds
would be needed to fuel a crown fire in stands treated with a 1.5/3 prescription (Fulé et al. 2001).
Crown fire potential is reduced less in stands with more replacement trees; a 40-mile-per-hour wind
would be required to sustain a crown fire in a stand treated with a 3/6 prescription (Fulé et al. 2001).
What degree of fire risk is acceptable in different areas may in part determine which replacement rate
is most appropriate.
3

Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
a
Logging slash represents a significant fire hazard in treated areas. The burning of slash piles can harm
soil health and potentially promote the spread of invasive species (Korb and Springer 2003), but
these effects can be ameliorated with seed or soil amendments (Korb et al. 2004). When it is scattered
and consumed during a broadcast burn, slash can increase prescribed fire intensity to hazardous
levels, resulting in substantial tree mortality due to crown scorch (Jerman et al. 2004). The intensity
of future broadcast burns after the initial prescribed burn should be lower, as less woody fuel will be
available.
Soils and Hydrology:
Thinning followed by prescribed burning frees water and nutrients for use by remaining trees and
understory plants. Thinning in a 1.5/3 treatment area at Gus Pearson Natural Area increased summer
soil temperatures (Kaye and Hart 1998b). Subsequent prescribed burning removed organic matter
from the forest floor and released nitrogen and phosphorus that could be used for plant growth
(Kaye and Hart 1998a). Water outflow has been slightly higher in treated than in control areas (Kaye
et al. 1999).
Wildlife:
Wildlife responses to this treatment vary depending on species, tree replacement rate, treatment area
size, the condition of forest stands around the treatment area, time since treatment, and many other
factors (Chambers and Germaine 2003). Relatively little monitoring of wildlife responses to
restoration thinning has been done, but among the most apparent of responses seen in areas
monitored so far is a marked increase in butterfly use of thinned and burned areas in 1.5/3 treatment
areas at Mount Trumbull, probably because of increased light levels (Waltz and Covington 2004;
Meyer et al. 2001). Other studies have found an increase in fledging success among western tanagers,
plumbeous vireos, and western bluebirds in treated areas at Mount Trumbull, though the bluebird
fledglings also had a higher rate of parasitism by nest parasites (Battin 2003; Germaine and
Germaine 2002). Mule deer tended to use a combination of thinned and unthinned areas (Chambers
and Germaine 2003). Wild turkey roosting behavior was not noticeably affected by treatments, and
turkeys did use thinned areas for foraging (Martin et al. in press).
Social Issues:
Aesthetically, these treatments can represent a profound alteration of the forest landscape. The
dramatic reduction in tree density may result in significant social concerns about thinning, but site
appearance improves within a few years as stumps decay, charred wood disintegrates, and understory
vegetation recovers. In the Fort Valley area social considerations were among those that led to the
development of the 2/4 and 3/6 replacement rates.
Costs
Restoration costs vary widely, but researchers at the ERI estimate as a very rough guideline that it
costs anywhere from $250 to $1,000 per acre to conduct the thinning work for a 1.5/3 restoration
treatment. Prescriptions leaving more replacement trees may require additional thinning in a few
more years. Prescribed burning of slash piles, and subsequent broadcast burning, also presents costs.
In Fort Valley, slash pile and broadcast burning cost an average of $250 per acre. At Mount Trumbull,
treatment costs have totaled about $700 per acre, not including the cost of native seed for understory
regeneration at $80 to $150 per acre. Whether treatment costs can be offset in whole or in part by the
value of wood removed varies with local conditions.
4

Pretreatment
Figure 1b shows pretreatment
(1992) forest structure.
Posttreatment
Figure 1c shows posttreatment
forest structure; the area in the
upper left corner is an untreated
control. Actual tree locations are
shown.
Reconstructed 1876 
Forest Structure
Figure 1a shows 1876 (pre-
disturbance) forest structure, as
reconstructed through dating of
trees living in 1992 and analysis of
nonliving woody material.   
Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions a
Discussion
This treatment strives to use the self-sustaining
conditions present before Euro-American
settlement as a template for future conditions. It
aims to create a forest structure that allows
ecological processes, especially low-severity fire, to
shape the ecosystem into the future. As a result,
stand-replacing fire and severe bark beetle outbreaks
should be rare in treated stands in the future. It is
important to emphasize the key role that fire must
play in future maintenance: without regular fires,
thinned stands are likely to once again become
dense with small trees.
The degree of thinning chosen has a number of
important consequences. A lighter degree of
thinning, such as that represented by the 2/4 or 3/6
replacement rates, may be more socially acceptable
in some places. Managers may also choose to retain
more trees in some areas in order to provide habitat
for wildlife species that might find 1.5/3 stands too
open—or to provide options for future timber
harvests. However, retaining more trees provides less
protection against crown fires than using the 1.5/3
replacement rate. In addition, retaining more trees
may necessitate a future entry to thin more trees,
with associated impacts on soils and the potential
for spreading invasive species.
The degree of thinning, and the selection of specific
trees for retention, also affects how “clumpy” the
resulting stand will be. Choosing replacement trees
from a radius of 60 feet around presettlement
evidence indicators generally allows for the
retention of larger trees, but because the
replacement trees can be more widely spread the
resulting stand often consists of rather evenly
spaced trees rather than clumps. Choosing
replacements closer to presettlement evidence signs
can create a stand with a mosaic of small clumps
and openings that is believed to be characteristic of
presettlement forest stands in many areas (White
1985).
Current conditions play an important role in
making decisions about thinning intensity: a
thinned stand with some remnant old “yellow”
pines will look unlike one that lacks large, old trees,
and may play a different ecological role. As always,
local conditions and objectives should dictate
replacement rates and thinning methods.
Figure 1. Simulation depicting results of this thinning
treatment, with a 1.5/3 replacement rate, as implemented
at the Gus Pearson Natural Area.
5

PARAMETER
CONTROL
1.5/3
2/4
3/6
Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
a
Tree vigor and health
Often declining due to
heavy competition for
water, light, and
nutrients
Improved for at least
seven years after initial
thinning (Kolb et al.
2001; Wallin et al.
2004); some danger of
mortality during
intense prescribed fire
(Jerman et al. 2004)
Likely to improve due
to reduced
competition; some
danger of mortality
during intense
prescribed fire
(Jerman et al. 2004)
Likely to improve due
to reduced
competition; some
danger of mortality
during intense
prescribed fire
(Jerman et al. 2004)
Table 1. Difference in selected ecological parameters between control areas and areas thinned to
three different tree densities.
Herbaceous
vegetation
Often low in richness
and cover, due to tree
density and heavy
deposits of fallen
needles
Both native and
nonnative species
increase in richness
and cover (Abella and
Covington 2004;
Huffman and Moore
2004; Moore and
Deiter 1992)
Response intermediate
between 1.5/3 and
control treatments
(Abella and Covington
2004)
Response similar to
2/4 thinning (Abella
and Covington 2004)
Fuel loading
Heavy crown fuels and
“ladder fuels”; little
herbaceous growth,
but heavy loading of
pine needles
Very light loading of
crown fuels; vigorous
herbaceous regrowth
should promote
surface fires (Fulé et
al. 2001; Waltz et al.
2003)
Light loading of crown
fuels; vigorous
herbaceous regrowth
should promote
surface fires (Fulé et
al. 2001)
Intermediate loading
of crown fuels; some
herbaceous regrowth
should promote
surface fires (Fulé et
al. 2001)
Fire behavior
Can be extreme; high
susceptibility to crown
fire (Fulé et al. 2001)
Very low likelihood of
crown fire (Fulé et al.
2001)
Moderate likelihood of
crown fire (Fulé et al.
2001)
Likelihood of crown
fire intermediate
between 2/4 treatment
and control (Fulé et al.
2001)
Hydrology
Stand-replacing
wildfire can cause
severe erosion and
downstream
sedimentation (Baker
2003)
Water outflow slightly
higher than in control
areas (Kaye et al. 1999)
Not measured
Not measured
Wildlife
Depends upon
individual species
needs and patch
dynamics (Chambers
and Germaine 2003)
Increase in butterfly
use and in fledging
rates of some
passerine birds (Waltz
and Covington 2004;
Battin 2003; Germaine
and Germaine 2002)
Not measured, but
results likely mixed
depending upon
species and patch
dynamics (Chambers
and Germaine 2003)
Not measured, but
results likely mixed
depending upon
species and patch
dynamics (Chambers
and Germaine 2003) 
6

Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions a
7
References
Abella, S. R., and W. W. Covington. 2004. Monitoring an Arizona ponderosa pine restoration:
Sampling efficiency and multivariate analysis of understory vegetation. Restoration Ecology
12:359-367.
Baker, M. B., Jr. 2003. Hydrology. Pp. 161-174 in Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine
forests, ed. P. Friederici. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Battin, J. 2003. Habitats and the animals that love them: Avian habitat selection in a post-restoration
landscape. Ph.D. dissertation, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff.
Chambers, C. L., and S. S. Germaine. 2003. Vertebrates. Pp. 268-285 in Ecological restoration of
southwestern ponderosa pine forests, ed. P. Friederici. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Feeney, S. R., T. E. Kolb, W. W. Covington, and M. R. Wagner. 1998. Influence of thinning and
burning restoration treatments on presettlement ponderosa pines at the Gus Pearson Natural
Area. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 28:1295-1306.
Fulé, P. Z., C. McHugh, T. A. Heinlein, and W. W. Covington. 2001. Potential fire behavior is reduced
following forest restoration treatments. Pp. 28-35 in Ponderosa pine ecosystems restoration and
conservation: Steps toward stewardship, ed. R. K. Vance et al. Proceedings RMRS-22. Ogden, Utah:
USDA Forest Service.
Fulé, P. Z., G. Verkamp, A. E. M. Waltz, and W. W. Covington. 2002. Burning under old-growth
ponderosa pines on lava soils. Fire Management Today 62(3):47-49.
Germaine, H. L., and S. S. Germaine. 2002. Forest restoration treatment effects on the nesting success
of western bluebirds (Sialia mexicana). Restoration Ecology 10:362-367.
Huffman, D. W., and M. M. Moore. 2004. Responses of Fendler ceanothus to overstory thinning,
prescribed fire, and drought in an Arizona ponderosa pine forest. Forest Ecology and Management
198:105-115.
Jerman, J. L., P. J. Gould, and P. Z. Fulé. 2004. Slash compression treatment reduced tree mortality
from prescribed fire in southwestern ponderosa pine. Western Journal of Applied Forestry
19(3):149-153.
Kaye, J. P., and S. C. Hart. 1998a. Ecological restoration alters nitrogen transformations in a
ponderosa pine-bunchgrass ecosystem. Ecological Applications 8:1052-1060.
Kaye, J. P., and S. C. Hart. 1998b. Restoration and canopy-type effects on soil respiration in a
ponderosa pine-bunchgrass ecosystem. Soil Science Society of America Journal 62:1062-1072.
Kaye, J. P., S. C. Hart, R. C. Cobb, and J. E. Stone. 1999. Water and nutrient outflow following the
ecological restoration of a ponderosa pine-bunchgrass ecosystem. Restoration Ecology 7:252-261.
Kolb, T. E., P. Z. Fulé, M. R. Wagner, and W. W. Covington. 2001. Six-year changes in mortality and
crown condition of old-growth ponderosa pines in ecological restoration treatments at the G. A.
Pearson Natural Area. Pp. 61-66 in Ponderosa pine ecosystems restoration and conservation: Steps
toward stewardship, ed. R. K. Vance et al. Proceedings RMRS-22. Ogden, Utah: USDA Forest
Service.

Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
a
8
Korb, J. E., W. W. Covington, and P. Z. Fulé. 2003. Sampling techniques influence understory plant
trajectories after restoration: An example from ponderosa pine restoration. Restoration Ecology
11:504-515.
Korb, J. E., N. C. Johnson, and W. W. Covington. 2004. Slash pile burning effects on soil biotic and
chemical properties and plant establishment: Recommendations for amelioration. Restoration
Ecology 12:52-62.
Korb, J. E., and J. D. Springer. 2003. Understory vegetation. Pp. 233-250 in Ecological restoration of
southwestern ponderosa pine forests, ed. P. Friederici. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Landres, P. B., P. Morgan, and F. J. Swanson. 1999. Overview of the use of natural variability concepts
in managing ecological systems. Ecological Applications 9:1179-1188.
Martin, S. L., T. C. Theimer, and P. Z. Fulé. In press. Ponderosa pine restoration does not affect
turkey roost site use in northern Arizona. Wildlife Society Bulletin.
Meyer, C. L., T. D. Sisk, and W. W. Covington. 2001. Microclimatic changes induced by ecological
restoration of ponderosa pine forests in northern Arizona. Restoration Ecology 9:443-452.
Moore, M. M., and J. A. Deiter. 1992. Stand density index as a predictor of forage production in
northern Arizona pine forests. Journal of Range Management 45:267-271.
Sieg, C. H., B. G. Phillips, and L. P. Moser. 2003. Exotic invasive plants. Pp. 251-267 in Ecological
restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests, ed. P. Friederici. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Society for Ecological Restoration International. 2004. The SER International primer on ecological
restoration. http://www.ser.org/pdf/primer3.pdf.
Springer, J. D., and D. C. Laughlin. 2004. Seeding with natives increases species richness in a dry
ponderosa pine forest (Arizona). Ecological Restoration 22(3):220-221.
Stone, J. E., T. E. Kolb, and W. W. Covington. 1999. Effects of restoration thinning on presettlement
Pinus ponderosa in northern Arizona. Restoration Ecology 7:172-182.
Swetnam, T. W., and C. H. Baisan. 1996. Historical fire regime patterns in the southwestern United
States since AD 1700. Pp. 11-32 in Fire effects in southwestern forests: Proceedings of the second La
Mesa Fire Symposium, ed. C. D. Allen. General technical report RM-286. Fort Collins, Colo.:
USDA Forest Service.
Wallin, K. F., T. E. Kolb, K. R. Skov, and M. R. Wagner. 2004. Seven-year results of thinning and
burning restoration treatments on old ponderosa pines at the Gus Pearson Natural Area.
Restoration Ecology 12:239-247.
Waltz, A. E. M., and W. W. Covington. 2004. Ecological restoration treatments increase butterfly
richness and abundance: Mechanisms of response. Restoration Ecology 12:85-96.
Waltz, A. E. M., P. Z. Fulé, W. W. Covington, and M. M. Moore. 2003. Diversity in ponderosa pine
forest structure following ecological restoration treatments. Forest Science 49: 885-900.
White, A. S. 1985. Presettlement regeneration patterns in a southwestern ponderosa pine stand.
Ecology 66:589–594.

For More Information
For more information about forest restoration, contact the ERI at 928-523-7182 or www.eri.nau.edu.
Written by Peter Friederici
Illustrations by Andrew Sanchez-Meador
Reviewed by John Bedell, Chuck Bullington, W. Wallace Covington, Charlie Denton, Peter Z. Fulé, Robin
Long, Kimberly Lowe, Dennis Lund, Ann Moote, Doc Smith, and Diane Vosick
Series Editor Peter Friederici
Cover: Gus Pearson Natural Area, Coconino National Forest, Arizona.
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution   
NAU Printing Services/G56420/5M/02-05

Ecological Restoration Institute
Northern Arizona University
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
www.eri.nau.edu
2ERI 35AE
NON-PROFIT ORG.
U.S. POSTAGE
PAID
NORTHERN
ARIZONA
UNIVERSITY
