67 
 
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION      20:1         MARCH 2002 
 
 
Notes & Abstracts  
Source: Ecological Restoration, Volume 20, Number 1, 1 March 2002 , pp. 47-80(34) 
Publisher: University of Wisconsin Press 
Technique for Estimating Plant Biomass Reduces Destruction, Cost, and Sampling Time 
(Arizona) 
 
Julie E. Korb and Judith D. Springer, Ecological Restoration Institute, College of Ecosystem Science and 
Management, Northern Arizona University, P.O. Box 15018, Flagstaff, Arizona 86011,928/523-0997, 
(Fax) 928/523-0296, jek2@spruce.for.nau.edu 
 
In the summer of 1998, a cooperative working group of researchers and interested community members 
implemented a large-scale ponderosa pine ( Pinus ponderosa) forest restoration project near Flagstaff, 
Arizona. The primary goals of this project are to reduce the risk of large, high-mortality crown fires and to 
restore the structure and function of the system within the range of natural variability. Because enhancing 
the herbaceous understory is a major component to accomplishing these goals, the group decided that it 
needed a method for quantifying plant biomass that was not destructive, expensive, or time-consuming. 
To achieve this, we combined two sampling techniques: the photo guide technique and the comparative 
yield technique (Freidel and Bastin 1988). The photo guide technique entails the creation of several photo 
keys of different biomass levels derived from destructive biomass sampling for different vegetation types. 
For our photo guide, we identified three vegetation types according to the vegetation present in the 
restoration treatments: 1) graminoid-dominated, 2) forb-dominated, and 3) mixed graminoid/ 
forb-dominated. For each vegetation type, we placed ten 1-m
2 (0.5 m x 2.0 m) quadrants, and then 
photographed and clipped ten different levels of biomass ranging from 8.8 lbs/acre (10 kg/ha) to 1,446 
lbs/acre (1,640 kg/ha). After eliminating plots with similar levels of biomass, we were left with seven plots 
in each type to use in our photo guide as examples of different levels of plant biomass, increasing from 
low to high. In each plot, we identified all species, visually estimated their aerial cover, and measured 
their average height. We then tabulated this information so that the biomass of individual species could 
be estimated within the plots and the species could be distinguished in the photographs. We 
determined actual plant biomass for individual species in the plots by drying the clipped samples for 24 
hours in an oven at 158û F (70û C) and weighing the plants to within 0.01 gram. It took one person about 
50 hours to create the photo guide at a cost of $40 for film, processing, and miscellaneous items. We 
then tested the guide’s compatibility with the comparative yield technique, which involves estimating plant 
biomass weight from reference standards.  The cooperative working group established three replicate 
blocks of four different treatments of approximately 40 acres (16.2 ha) each. The treatments consisted of 
three levels of thinning ( low, medium, high) and burning, and one control (no thinning or burning). We 
established twenty 50-m transects on a systematic grid within each treatment unit. We then established 
four 1-m2 plots at 10 m, 20 m, 30 m, and 40m on alternate sides of each transect.  Using our photo guide, 
we estimated forb and graminoid biomass separately for each plot.  We used three steps to estimate 
overall biomass. First, we classified the plot into one of the three vegetation types. Second, we classified 
the plot into one of the seven biomass levels within the vegetation type chosen in step one, and estimated 
the weight of each individual species based upon its aerial cover and height, as compared to the cover, 
height, and corresponding weight values of actual plant species in the photo guide series. When a 
species was not found in the photo guide series, we estimated biomass values according to a species 
that had a similar vegetation structure. Third, we grouped individual species into graminoid and forb 
functional groups and summed the biomass values for the individual species to obtain a total value for 
each functional group. We double-sampled eight randomly selected transects in each unit and clipped the 
plots located at 20 m along the transect, separating the biomass into forb and graminoid classes.  Using 
linear regression analysis, we determined the relationship between actual and estimated plant biomass, 
transforming data when necessary to meet the variance assumptions for regression analysis. We found a 
high correlation between actual and estimated biomass for both forbs (r2 = 0.87, p = <0.0001; y = 0.19433 
+ 0.88694x) and graminoids (r2 = 0.89, p= <0.0001; y = 0.1942 + 0.82869x).  On average, estimating 
biomass plots was three times faster than clipping biomass plots.  We believe that the decrease in the 

67 
 
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION      20:1         MARCH 2002 
 
 
relative cost of biomass sampling and the reduction in destructive sampling will, in many cases, outweigh 
the minimal loss of accuracy for our plant biomass estimates. We endorse this sampling technique for 
restoration studies where quantifying plant biomass is desired, but money and time are limited. In 
addition, we recommend using species that are common in the study area and representative of common 
vegetative structural forms in order to increase the accuracy of the biomass estimates. We also 
recommend limiting the number of researchers estimating biomass to reduce variation between 
estimators. Finally, all estimators should practice double-sampling before using the photo guide in 
the field and throughout the duration of the experiment. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We thank Mike Stoddard, Adrien Elseroad, Cara Gildar, Brian Gideon, Todd Bucknell, Lauren Labate, Mark Daniels, 
and Michael Tweiten for assistance in the field. We also acknowledge the support of Pete Fulé, Gina Vance, and 
Wally Covington. USDA Research Joint Venture Agreement RMRS-99156-RJVA provided funding for this research. 
REFERENCE 
Freidel, M. H. and G. N. Bastin. 1988. Photographic standards for estimating comparative yield in arid rangelands. 
Australian Rangeland Journal 10:34-38. 
