USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
335
Ancient Piñon-Juniper Forests of Mesa Verde
and the West: A Cautionary Note for Forest
Restoration Programs
William H. Romme1, Lisa Floyd-Hanna2, David D. Hanna2
Abstract—Fuel reduction and fire mitigation activities may be linked to restoration
of overall forest health, but the two goals do not always coincide. We illustrate the
importance of understanding both historic and contemporary fire regimes by evalu-
ating the piñon-juniper forests of Mesa Verde National Park in southwestern Colorado.
These dense forests are characterized by infrequent, severe fires occurring at inter-
vals of many centuries. Stand structure, composition, and fire behavior have not
been substantially altered by 20th century fire suppression, in contrast to other piñon-
juniper systems. We hypothesize that three qualitatively different disturbance regimes
characterize piñon-juniper ecosystems throughout the West.
Introduction
A
major effort is under way to reduce the fire hazard in western forests
by thinning tree canopies, removing shrubs and coarse woody debris,
and conducting low-intensity prescribed burning. Often, these fuel reduction
or fire mitigation activities are linked to restoration of overall forest health
(e.g., Covington et al. 1997). This combination of pragmatic objectives (re-
ducing fire hazard at the wildland-urban interface) and ecological objectives
(restoring ecological integrity and resilience) is quite sensible in forests that
were formerly characterized by frequent, low-intensity fires, and where twen-
tieth century activities like logging, grazing, and fire suppression have
dramatically changed forest structure and function — e.g., in many western
ponderosa pine forests (Hardy and Arno 1996, Covington et al. 1997).
Indeed, the authors of this paper are currently involved in just such a program
of thinning and burning degraded ponderosa pine forests in southwestern
Colorado, both to achieve the pragmatic objectives of reducing fire hazard
and providing material for the local logging industry, and to achieve the eco-
logical objectives of stimulating the suppressed herbaceous stratum and
providing habitat for cavity nesting birds and species that prefer open forest
conditions (Lynch et al. 2000).
We are concerned, however, that the distinction between fire hazard miti-
gation and ecological restoration may become blurred, with sometimes
unfortunate consequences for ecological integrity and resilience. In particu-
lar, because of pressures to meet treatment targets under the National Fire
Plan (targets that may be defined primarily in terms of acreage treated per
year), managers may be tempted to apply thinning and burning in forest sys-
tems where such treatments are unnecessary or even inappropriate from an
ecological standpoint (Cole and Landres 1996). To illustrate this concern, we
present a case study of the piñon-juniper forests of Mesa Verde National Park
in southwestern Colorado.
1Department of Forest Sciences, Colorado
State University, Fort Collins, CO.
 2Prescott College, Prescott, AZ.

336
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
Piñon-juniper vegetation covers a vast area in western North America, and
exhibits a wide range of stand structures and dynamics (Wangler and Minnich
1996, Miller et al. 1999). Recent research in the Great Basin has demon-
strated clearly that piñon and juniper are increasing in density throughout
much of this region. Many areas that were formerly dominated by shrubs are
now being taken over by piñon and juniper, a trend that began in the late
1800s and is continuing. The causes of piñon and juniper expansion include
livestock grazing, fire exclusion, and climatic changes (Miller and Wigand 1994,
Miller and Tausch 2001). Some piñon-juniper and juniper savannas in New
Mexico and Arizona also appear to have developed denser tree canopies in the
twentieth century, or the trees have invaded grassland areas (Jameson 1962,
Dwyer and Pieper 1967). Some former grasslands in Bandelier National Monu-
ment in northern New Mexico are now largely dominated by juniper and
piñon trees <150 years old (C. Allen, personal communication). Because of
these well-documented examples of piñon-juniper expansion that were clearly
caused by fire exclusion and other human activities, many managers through-
out the West have tended to view the entire piñon-juniper vegetation type as
being degraded and in need of intensive restoration – usually by means of
chaining, roller-chopping, hydro-mulching, and/or burning.
What is often missing in plans for restoration of piñon-juniper vegetation is
recognition of the fact that throughout the West there are also ancient piñon-
juniper stands with trees >400 years old (examples below). These stands were
already well developed even before the late 1800s, and should not be re-
garded as abnormal consequences of grazing, fire exclusion, and climate change.
Unfortunately, thinning and burning programs that would be appropriate and
effective in piñon-juniper stands that have developed abnormal tree density
during the last century, are being proposed or implemented in old-growth
piñon-juniper stands that probably need no restoration. The result of such a
well intentioned but misguided restoration effort is likely to be degradation of
a relatively rare vegetation type (i.e., old-growth piñon-juniper forest) that
contributes much to the biological diversity of western North America. As the
pace of fuel reduction and restoration programs accelerates under the
National Fire Plan, we have an urgent need to provide criteria for distinguishing
between piñon-juniper stands that need treatment and those that do not. We
believe that the situation we describe for piñon-juniper also applies to several other
important forest types where mitigation and restoration plans may be under way.
This paper has two objectives. First, we describe the fire history, stand struc-
ture, and natural fire regime in old-growth piñon-juniper forests of Mesa Verde
National Park (MVNP), as a case study to demonstrate that some piñon-juni-
per vegetation has not changed substantially in the last century, and therefore
is not in need of broad-scale thinning or burning to achieve ecological objec-
tives. Second, we develop a set of general hypotheses for predicting where in
western North America we are most likely to find piñon-juniper vegetation
that has undergone abnormal successional changes in the last century as a
result of grazing, fire exclusion, and climate change, and where we are likely
to find old-growth piñon-juniper stands that have not been degraded and do
not require treatment to restore ecological integrity.
Fire History in Piñon-Juniper Forests of
Mesa Verde National Park
Mesa Verde is a large, prominent cuesta in southwestern Colorado com-
posed of uplifted and deeply eroded Cretaceous sedimentary rocks (Griffits
Romme, Floyd-Hanna, and Hanna
Ancient Piñon-Juniper Forests of Mesa Verde and the West: A Cautionary Note for Forest Restoration Programs

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
337
1990). Mesa Verde National Park (MVNP) occupies the northeastern portion
of the cuesta. The remainder of the cuesta is mostly in the Ute Mountain
reservation and is environmentally similar to the park. The two most extensive
vegetation types are piñon-juniper forests (Pinus edulis and Juniperus
osteosperma), found mostly on the southern end of the cuesta at slightly lower
elevations, and Petran chaparral or oak-serviceberry shrubland (Quercus
gambellii and Amelanchier utahensis), found mostly on the northern end of
the cuesta at higher elevations. Floyd et al. (2000) mapped the major fires
since the 1840s in the shrubland portion of MVNP, based on post-fire co-
horts of re-sprouting oak, and determined that the average fire return interval
is about 100 years. A graph of cumulative time-since-fire indicates little differ-
ence between late-nineteenth century and late-twentieth century area burned
per decade. Thus, the fire exclusion policy in effect since the Park’s establish-
ment in 1906 probably has prevented many fires that would have remained
small if not suppressed, but had little impact on the large fires that ignited
under conditions of extreme drought and high wind. These latter kinds of
fires, uncontrollable even with modern fire suppression technology, are infre-
quent but account for most of the area burned in a century — a situation
similar to many boreal forests (Johnson 1992), subalpine forests (Romme
1982), and chaparral vegetation (Minnich and Chou 1997, Moritz 1997).
Floyd et al. (2000) presented preliminary data on fire history in the piñon-
juniper forests of MVNP. We summarize those data here and augment them
with additional, unpublished information to provide a fuller picture of the fire
regime in the piñon-juniper forests. We structure our analysis around four
questions: (1) Are low-severity surface fires an important component of the
natural fire regime? (2) How frequent were fires of any kind before 1900?
(3) Have piñon and juniper invaded other vegetation types since 1900?
(4) Has tree density increased since 1900 in piñon-juniper stands?
Are low-severity surface fires an important component of
the natural fire regime?
The large fires of the twentieth century in MVNP have all been stand-
replacing crown fires, in both piñon-juniper and shrubland vegetation.
Low-severity surface fires have occurred only at the margins of the crown fires
as those fires were dying out. But were low-severity surface fires more com-
mon prior to Park establishment in 1906? We think not. Low-severity fires
often scar susceptible trees, and indeed, the resulting fire scars are the basis of
reconstructions of fire history in ponderosa pine and other forests character-
ized by frequent, low-severity fires. Despite explicitly searching for fire scars
throughout MVNP during our 10 years of field work, we have not found any
– aside from two trees having single basal scars that could be from fire but
probably are from other causes. Piñon and juniper do not form the best scars
for dendrochronological dating purposes, but they can be scarred by low-
intensity fires (Tausch and West 1988). Moreover, numerous small patches of
ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) and Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii) exist
within and adjacent to the piñon-juniper forests, but these excellent recorders
of low-severity fire also lack fire scars in MVNP. Given the paucity of fire scars,
we conclude that low-severity surface fires simply were never extensive in piñon-
juniper forests of MVNP.
However, we find ample evidence that stand-replacing crown fires occurred
in the piñon-juniper forests even before 1900. Figure 1 is a photograph taken
in 1934 (from MVNP archives) of an area that burned at some unknown time
prior to Park establishment in 1906. The standing snags and the sharp border
Ancient Piñon-Juniper Forests of Mesa Verde and the West: A Cautionary Note for Forest Restoration Programs
Romme, Floyd-Hanna, and Hanna

338
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
of the unburned forest indicate clearly that this was a stand-replacing crown
fire. From our fire history map (Floyd et al. 2000) and the general location of
the photograph, we suspect that the fire occurred in the 1880s – some 50
years before the photo. Indeed, the scene looks much like areas today that
were burned in the middle part of the twentieth century.
We also find patches of charred juniper snags within the piñon-juniper for-
ests of MVNP. We took increment cores from piñon trees growing beneath or
adjacent to the charred snags in one such patch on Chapin Mesa, known lo-
cally as “the glades.” The living trees that we sampled were so close to the
snags that they could not possibly have survived the fire that created the snags.
Some of the sampled piñons were >200 years old, indicating that the fire
occurred in the 1700s or earlier (Floyd et al. 2000). This finding also indicates
that evidence of past fires (in the form of charred snags) can persist for a very
long time in this semi-arid environment.
How frequent were fires before 1900?
By measuring the extent of piñon-juniper forest burned during the twenti-
eth century, and considering that twentieth century fire suppression probably
did not have much effect on the few large fires that accounted for most of this
burned area, we determined that the mean fire interval in piñon-juniper for-
ests of MVNP is approximately 400 years (Floyd et al. 2000). In a landscape
Figure 1—Photograph taken in 1934 in the western portion of Mesa Verde National Park, near an area that burned in that year
on Wetherill Mesa. The photo is not of the 1934 burn, but shows an area that was burned at an unknown time prior to Park
establishment in 1906. Fire history reconstructions (Floyd et al. 2000) suggest that the area in this photo probably burned in the
1880s. Note the edge of dense, unburned piñon-juniper forest in the background.
Romme, Foyd-Hanna, and Hanna
Ancient Piñon-Juniper Forests of Mesa Verde and the West: A Cautionary Note for Forest Restoration Programs

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
339
characterized by such long fire intervals, we would expect to find numerous
stands that had remained unburned for even longer periods. Indeed, much of
the piñon-juniper forest in MVNP contains no evidence of past fire whatso-
ever – no fire scarred trees, no charred snags, no charred logs. Tree ages (see
below) also indicate that many of the stands are very old. Based on a conver-
gence of several lines of evidence (paucity of fire-scars and charred wood, very
old trees, and historic photographs – see below), we believe that much of the
piñon-juniper forest in MVNP has not been subjected to any major distur-
bance since the ancestral Puebloan people (who built the famous cliff dwellings)
abandoned the area 700 years ago.
Have piñon and juniper invaded other vegetation types
since 1900?
Young piñon and juniper appear to be slowly increasing in some of the
Park’s shrublands. The stands so affected are developing after fires that oc-
curred in the mid to late 1800s (Floyd et al. 2000). Given the naturally long
intervals between fires in Mesa Verde’s shrublands (mean of ca 100 years),
this trend probably represents the natural course of post-fire succession rather
than a true “invasion” by trees (Erdman 1970).
We also see young piñon and juniper establishing in some stands of big
sagebrush (Artemisia tridentata) growing on small patches of deeper soils
within the piñon-juniper forests. This may represent actual “invasion,” since
the trees are mostly young (<100 years old). However, it does not appear to
be an anomaly caused by twentieth-century fire exclusion, because these areas
apparently burned rarely even before 1900 (above). The extent of the area so
affected within MVNP is very small.
Has tree density increased in piñon-juniper stands since
1900?
The piñon-juniper forests of MVNP are very dense in many places. Piñon
generally has more stems per hectare, but juniper has greater basal area (un-
published data). Small and presumably young piñon are especially noticeable
and give a visual impression of an ongoing increase in stand density.
However, old photographs from MVNP indicate that the piñon-juniper
forests have been very dense since at least the early part of the twentieth cen-
tury. Figures 2 and 3, taken in 1929 and 1934, respectively (from MVNP
archives) show dense stands — much like what we see today. The stand de-
picted in figure 3 (from 1934) gives the impression of a two-tiered structure,
with a sparse canopy of older trees and a thick understory of younger trees.
However, without information on mortality rates in the understory, it is diffi-
cult to interpret long-term stand dynamics. We need detailed age structure
data to confidently interpret trends in stand structure. We currently have age
structure data derived from age-dbh regressions in one stand that appears
representative of the old forests at the southern end of MVNP (Floyd et al.
2000), and we are in the process of directly determining age structure via ring
counts in several additional stands. A plot of log(stems/ha) vs log(tree age) in
this one stand is approximately linear for both piñon and juniper (figure 4) —
a pattern associated with stable, old-growth forests that are not undergoing
any major successional trends (Leak 1975). The largest piñon in figure 4 are
>400 years old and the largest juniper are >600 years old.
We need additional detailed age distribution data to resolve the question of
increasing stand density in piñon-juniper forests of MVNP during the last
Ancient Piñon-Juniper Forests of Mesa Verde and the West: A Cautionary Note for Forest Restoration Programs
Romme, Floyd-Hanna, and Hanna

340
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
Figure 2—Photograph taken in 1929 of cliff dwellings in the southern portion of Mesa Verde National Park. Note the dense
piñon-juniper forest on the rim above the ruins, a forest that does not look much different from the dense forests of today.
century. The abundance of small and young trees in the forests today does
suggest that density has increased somewhat in the last 100 years. However,
the old photos indicate that the magnitude of increase has not been great.
And even if the forests have become more dense, the mechanism probably is
related to climatic changes, direct effects of increasing atmospheric CO2, or
other causes (Miller and Wigand 1994)—but not to fire exclusion. Given that
these forests rarely burned before 1900 (as argued above), post-1900 fire
exclusion cannot be the primary reason for increasing tree density after 1900.
Reasons for the Distinctive Fire Regime in
Mesa Verde
The evidence just presented indicates that the natural fire regime in Mesa
Verde’s piñon-juniper forests is characterized by occasional tiny fires (often a
single lightning-ignited tree) but few fires of any significant extent. Most igni-
tions fail to spread, and much of the forest has not burned for at least 700
years. Large fires do occur periodically, however, under extreme weather con-
ditions, and these rare fires are severe and stand-replacing. This fire regime
probably has been altered only slightly by twentieth century fire suppression
or other activities.
Romme, Floyd-Hanna, and Hanna
Ancient Piñon-Juniper Forests of Mesa Verde and the West: A Cautionary Note for Forest Restoration Programs

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
341
Why do piñon-juniper forests of MVNP have such infrequent large fires?
The reason is not a lack of fire starts: lightning ignites numerous fires every
summer in the Park’s piñon-juniper zone (Omi and Emrick 1980). However,
the vast majority of these fires burn no more than an individual tree or snag
before going out – with or without the intervention of a fire suppression crew.
Even though the piñon-juniper forests in MVNP support enormous fuel loads
of both dead and live material (Omi and Emrick 1980), the fuels are very
patchily distributed. Patches of heavy fuels (a few square meters in extent) are
separated by comparably sized patches of rock, bare ground, or sparse cover
of herbs that do not carry fire readily. Because of the lack of horizontal fuel
continuity, fire can spread from fuel patch to fuel patch only under conditions
of strong winds and extremely low fuel moisture. In these circumstances, fire
spreads through the crowns of live trees, generating extremely high energy
release and displaying great rates of spread (personal observations). The nec-
essary weather conditions for such fire behavior occur in only a few years of
each decade, and coincide with local ignition only once every decade or two.
Once such a fire is started, however, it may cover a large area, going out only
when the wind dies down, rain falls, or the fire reaches an extensive area of
non-flammable terrain. The deep canyons of MVNP, bordered by tall cliffs
with poorly vegetated shale slopes at their bases, probably are significant
Figure 3—Photograph taken in 1934 in the western portion of Mesa Verde National Park, near an area that burned in that year on
Wetherill Mesa. The photo was taken to show the kind of forest that burned in that year. Note the high density of the stand in
1934, similar to the dense stands in this area today.
Ancient Piñon-Juniper Forests of Mesa Verde and the West: A Cautionary Note for Forest Restoration Programs
Romme, Floyd-Hanna, and Hanna

342
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
natural barriers to fire spread (figure 5). As one park ranger put it, “Fire in
MVNP tends to burn either one tree or one mesa” (S. Budd-Jack, personal
communication).
Heavy livestock grazing in the late 1800s and early 1900s altered fire re-
gimes in many western forests by removing the grass and other fine fuels that
formerly carried frequent, low-intensity fires (e.g., Miller and Wigand 1994,
Covington et al. 1997). Heavy grazing also occurred in MVNP from around
1900 through the early 1930s (superintendents’ annual reports and photos in
MVNP archives). The reports are quite vague as to specific locations where
cattle were grazed. However, we think that nearly all of the heavy livestock
grazing occurred in the meadows and shrublands at the north end of the Park
—not in the piñon-juniper forests at the south end. The homesteads, wind-
mills, and stock tanks were all located in the northern area, and all of the old
photos that we have located showing heavily grazed lands in MVNP depict
meadows and adjacent shrublands. Heavy grazing in the piñon-juniper forests
would have been problematic in any event because of lack of water on the dry
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
log (age)
Colorado Piñon
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
log (age)
Utah Juniper
Figure 4—A plot of log(stems/ha) vs.
log (tree age) for a stand of dense
piñon-juniper forest at the southern
end of Mesa Verde National Park.
The linear relationship for Juniperus
osteosperma (a) and for Pinus edulis
(b) indicates that both tree species
have an approximately stationary
age structure of the kind that is
associated with stable, old-growth
forests (Leak 1975).
Romme, Floyd-Hanna, and Hanna
Ancient Piñon-Juniper Forests of Mesa Verde and the West: A Cautionary Note for Forest Restoration Programs

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
343
mesa-tops and lack of forage. The heavily grazed meadows and shrublands
have regained their grass cover in the 65 years since grazing was terminated in
MVNP, but the old piñon-juniper forests still have only a sparse cover of Poa
fendleriana and a few other native bunchgrasses. We doubt that grass cover
was ever very great in the dry, shallow soils at the south end of Mesa Verde.
Even if there was somewhat more grass prior to 1900, it apparently did not
carry surface fires, because we find almost no fire scars (above).
Implications for Fire Management in
Mesa Verde National Park
MVNP contains one of the greatest concentrations of prehistoric cultural
sites and artifacts in North America. The Park was established in 1906 to
protect these archaeological treasures, and protection of cultural resources
remains the central mission of MVNP. Many of the most outstanding cultural
resources are located in the piñon-juniper forests at the southern end of the
Park and are vulnerable to damage or destruction by fire (Romme et al. 1993).
Recognizing this dangerous situation, MVNP has implemented a fire mitiga-
tion program that emphasizes mechanical thinning of dense forests in the
immediate vicinity of sensitive cultural resources.
Figure 5—Photo taken in the southern portion of Mesa Verde National Park in the 1930s. Note the dense piñon-juniper forests on
the mesa tops, which resemble the dense stands of today, and the cliffs and sparsely vegetated slopes that probably tend to prevent
fire spread from one mesa to another.
Ancient Piñon-Juniper Forests of Mesa Verde and the West: A Cautionary Note for Forest Restoration Programs
Romme, Floyd-Hanna, and Hanna

344
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
We laud the proactive steps being taken by Park managers to protect the
Park’s special cultural resources and to provide for the safety of visitors and
staff. However, we believe it is important to stress that fuel reduction in MVNP
is strictly a program of fire mitigation—it is not ecological restoration. To
remove >50 % of stand density and basal area from forests that have not been
subjected to any major disturbance for 700 years is to create a stand structure
that probably never existed previously—at least not within the last several cen-
turies.
Because of the distinctive fire history of piñon-juniper forests in MVNP,
especially the paucity of past fire occurrences in this system, we recommend
against thinning and burning in areas remote from sensitive cultural sites. Not
only would such a program create stand structures and disturbance regimes
far outside the historical range of variability, but the treatments themselves
would create at least two new problems for managers to deal with. First, where
piñon-juniper forests in MVNP have burned or been cleared in the last cen-
tury, they have not yet begun to recover their tree component. We have sampled
all of the large burns of the twentieth century (1934, 1959, 1972, 1989, and
1996), and have found almost no re-establishment of piñon or juniper even in
the oldest burns (unpublished data). The trees are thought to re-establish
only after shrubs have recovered adequately to provide sheltered micro-sites
for tree seedlings (Floyd 1982, Miller and Rose 1995, Wangler and Minnich
1996, Chambers 2001). However, we find no trees even in 50-year-old burns
in MVNP, where the shrubs are well established, suggesting that additional
mechanisms are involved in this area. We are initiating studies to elucidate the
reasons for this poor regeneration of trees after fire, but at present we do not
fully understand why piñon and juniper are so slow to re-establish after fire.
Considering that these are some of the oldest forests in the southwest, and
that they support a variety of old-growth fauna and flora (e.g., black-throated
gray warbler and Pedicularis centranthera), their conservation value should
be considered before subjecting them to what may be essentially irreversible
changes.
Our second big concern about extensive thinning and burning of Mesa
Verde’s piñon-juniper forests is related to what we may get in place of young
trees. Forests that burned in the 1930s through 1950s were replaced by
shrublands, through what appear to be normal successional processes. Indeed,
a major reason for the extensive shrublands at the northern end of MVNP is
the extensive fires that have occurred periodically during the last two centu-
ries and possibly earlier (Erdman 1970, Floyd et al. 2000). However, the
piñon-juniper forests that have burned in the past two decades are being re-
placed by invasive non-native species, including muskthistle (Carduus nutans),
Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense), wild lettuce (Lactuca serriola), and the an-
nual mustard Alyssum minor. Various post-fire mitigation actions (aerial seeding
of native grasses, mechanical removal, herbicides, and bio-control) have been
effective in reducing the density of weeds after fire, but none of these tech-
niques has prevented the weeds from becoming major components of the
post-fire plant community (unpublished data). The burned areas also appear
vulnerable to invasion by cheatgrass (Bromus tectorum), which readily carries
surface fire. Cheatgrass invasion has caused drastic alteration of fire regimes in
much of the northern Great Basin (Miller and Tausch 2001). Cheatgrass ex-
pansion in Mesa Verde may be limited by the area’s cooler temperatures and
higher summer precipitation, compared with the northern Great Basin
(R. Tausch, personal communication). However, cheatgrass already dominates
some overgrazed rangelands at lower elevations near Mesa Verde, and it is
present, though not abundant, in the burned forests of MVNP. If it should
Romme, Floyd-Hanna, and Hanna
Ancient Piñon-Juniper Forests of Mesa Verde and the West: A Cautionary Note for Forest Restoration Programs

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
345
increase in the park, it could carry ever more frequent fires into the Park’s
ancient forests.
Thus, even though mechanical thinning is a very appropriate technique for
localized, small-scale protection of sensitive cultural resources, even in this
context it will require careful monitoring and weed control. And a more am-
bitious program of extensive thinning and burning of piñon-juniper forests in
MVNP could create an ecological disaster: weeds and more frequent fires could
potentially destroy nearly all of the ancient forests within a few decades. Such
a loss would be especially tragic if it resulted from well-intentioned but mis-
guided efforts to “restore” the piñon-juniper ecosystem.
Implications for Piñon-Juniper Vegetation
Throughout the West
The piñon-juniper “type” covers a vast area in western North America, but
has received surprisingly little research attention given its ecological, economic,
and aesthetic importance. In particular, the natural range of variability in dis-
turbance regimes and post-disturbance recovery processes is poorly understood.
We urgently need a more comprehensive understanding of piñon-juniper
dynamics so that we can direct our restoration and fire hazard mitigation ef-
forts towards those stands and landscapes where such efforts are most
appropriate. As a first step, we suggest that it is useful to distinguish among
three fundamentally different kinds of piñon-juniper stand structures and fire
regimes, and to identify the environmental conditions with which each kind is
associated (table 1). We regard table 1 as a set of hypotheses, and hope that this
compilation will stimulate research to critically test these suggested relation-
ships across the full geographic range of piñon-juniper vegetation in western
North America.
The first type in table 1 is what we call piñon-juniper grass savanna. Veg-
etation of this kind has been described in northern Mexico (Segura and Snook
1992), Arizona (Jameson 1962, Dwyer and Pieper 1967), and New Mexico
(Dick-Peddie 1993:87-93 (cited in Scurlock 1998: 206), C. Allen personal
communication), in places where soils are fine-textured, topography is gentle,
and summer moisture is relatively abundant. The well-developed grass com-
ponent formerly carried frequent low-intensity fires that killed or thinned
encroaching trees and maintained an open woodland structure. Many of these
stands have been altered profoundly in the last century by grazing and fire
exclusion, which led to loss of the grass component, abnormal tree densities,
and abnormally severe fire behavior when the stands burn today. In such stands,
fire hazard mitigation via mechanical thinning and prescribed burning can be
linked to a broader goal of ecological restoration, and aggressive treatment of
this kind is an urgent need in many places.
The second type in table 1 is what we call piñon-juniper shrub woodland.
This kind of vegetation has been described in northern and central portions of
the Great Basin (Koniak 1985, Tausch and West 1988, Miller et al. 1995,
Miller and Tausch 2001) and probably also occurs in many portions of the
Colorado Plateau, where precipitation occurs mostly in winter, on deep soils
that support an abundant shrub layer (e.g., sagebrush). Shrublands generally
support more intense fires than grasslands, and fires in this vegetation type
probably always have tended to be stand-replacing. Prior to Euro-American
settlement in the mid-1800s, trees would become established during the fire-
free intervals that lasted from several years to a few decades, but nearly all of
Ancient Piñon-Juniper Forests of Mesa Verde and the West: A Cautionary Note for Forest Restoration Programs
Romme, Floyd-Hanna, and Hanna

346
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
Table 1—Structure and disturbance dynamics, distribution patterns, and current status of three contrasting types of piñon-
juniper communities in western North America: a synthesis and set of hypotheses for further research. HRV = historic range
of variability.
Piñon-Juniper Grass Savanna
Piñon-Juniper Shrub Woodland
Piñon-Juniper Forest
Pre-1900 fire
frequent, low-severity, surface
moderately frequent, high-severity,
very infrequent, very high-
regime
fires … carried by grasses
crown fires … carried by shrubs &
severity, crown fires … carried
trees
by tree crowns
Pre-1900
sparse trees, few shrubs,
sparse to moderately dense trees,
dense trees, sparse to moderately
stand structure
dense grass and other
sparse to very dense shrubs,
dense shrubs, sparse herbs
herbs
moderately dense to sparse herbs
… all depending on time since
last fire
Pre-1900 stand
low tree density and high
seral trend from herb to shrub to tree stable/stationary tree age
dynamics
herbaceous biomass
dominance, interrupted periodically
structure and little change in
maintained in part by recurrent
by fire which returns a stand to early
shrub or herbaceous layers
fire
seral herb dominance
during the long intervals without
fire … very slow recovery after
fire
Post-1900
reduced fire frequency, great
reduced fire frequency, small
little change in fire frequency or
changes in
increase in fire severity
increase in fire severity
fire severity
disturbance
regime
Post-1900
increasing tree density,
increasing tree density, decreasing
little change in tree density or in
changes in
decreasing herbaceous biomass
shrubs and herbs
shrubs and herbs
structure
Overall current
outside HRV for disturbance
outside HRV for disturbance regime,
still within HRV for disturbance
status
regime, structure, & composition
structure, & composition
regime, structure, & composition
Implications for
urgent need for active restoration urgent need for active restoration
no need for restoration … protect
restoration
instead
Current stand
very old trees (> 300 years)
very old trees (> 300 years) absent
very old trees (> 300 years)
age structure
present, but not numerous
or rare … young trees (< 150 years)
numerous … stands with all-
… young trees (< 150 years)
dominate stands
aged structure, including old &
dominate stands
young trees
Distribution:
deep, fine-textured soils
deep, fine-textured soils
shallow, rocky, or coarse-textured
soil character-
soils
istics
Distribution:
summer peak in precipitation
winter peak in precipitation
variable
precipitation
regime
Distribution:
gentle plains and broad valley
gentle plains and broad valley
rugged slopes, canyons, and
topographic
bottoms, with few barriers to
bottoms, with few barriers to fire
mesa tops, with many barriers to
characteristics
fire spread
spread
fire spread
Distribution:
grasslands, ponderosa pine, or
grasslands, big sagebrush, or other
desert scrub, “slickrock,” or other
adjacent
other types that burn frequently
types that burn frequently
types with sparse herbaceous
vegetation types
vegetation that rarely burn
Geographic
most common in northern Mexico, most common in the northern and
scattered throughout the
distribution
southern New Mexico & Arizona,
central Great Basin, and the
Colorado Plateau, Great Basin,
northern NM, and possibly SE
Colorado Plateau
central Oregon, southern Rocky
Colorado
Mountains, and southern
California mountains
Examples
Jameson 1962, Dwyer and
Tausch et al. 1981, Koniak 1985,
Tausch et al. 1981, Tress and
Pieper 1967, Segura and Snook
Tausch and West 1988, Miller et
Klopatek 1987, Kruse and Perry
1992, Dick-Peddie 1993, C. Allen
al. 1995, Miller and Tausch 2001
1995, Wangler and Minnich
personal communication
1996, Miller et al. 1999, Tausch
and Nowak 1999, Floyd et al.
2000, Waichler et al. 2001
Romme, Floyd-Hanna, and Hanna
Ancient Piñon-Juniper Forests of Mesa Verde and the West: A Cautionary Note for Forest Restoration Programs

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
347
the trees would be killed by the next fire. Fire exclusion during the last cen-
tury has allowed this normal successional process to proceed to the point of
tree dominance across large areas where trees were formerly sparse. Fuel loads
have become very high and continuous, and some recent fires probably have
been larger and more severe than would have occurred before the late 1800s
(Miller and Tausch 2001). As with the piñon-juniper-grass savanna, fire haz-
ard mitigation via mechanical thinning and prescribed burning (some of it
designed to be stand-replacing) can be linked to a broader goal of ecological
restoration in the piñon-juniper shrub woodland, and aggressive treatment of
this kind is an urgent need in many places.
The third type in table 1 is what we call piñon-juniper forest. This kind of
vegetation has been described in scattered locations throughout the Colorado
Plateau (Tress and Klopatek 1987, Floyd et al. 2000), the Great Basin (Tausch
et al. 1981, Miller et al. 1999, Tausch and Nowak 1999), central Oregon
(Waichler et al. 2001), the mountains of southern California (Wangler and
Minnich 1996, Minnich and Everett 2001), and in central Arizona (Kruse
and Perry 1995). Rather than being associated with a particular soil type and
climatic regime, piñon-juniper forest appears to be restricted to an unusual
combination of soils and topographic conditions that protect the stands from
frequent fires. Soils are too shallow or too coarse-textured to support a con-
tinuous cover of grass or shrubs, such that fires tend to spread through a stand
only under conditions of extreme drought and wind. The topography is rug-
ged and broken, with cliffs, bare slopes, or other natural barriers that tend to
prevent fires from spreading into a stand except under conditions of extreme
drought and wind. Thus, this kind of vegetation may escape fire for many
centuries and develop striking old-growth characteristics, including a dense,
multi-storied canopy with ancient living and dead trees. The old forests of
Mesa Verde have these characteristics, and Waichler et al. (2001) describe
western juniper forests in central Oregon that contain living trees >1000 years
old and dead trees nearly 2000 years old. When fire does occur in old piñon-
juniper forest stands, however, it tends to be very severe and stand-replacing.
In dramatic contrast to the other two kinds of piñon-juniper vegetation (piñon-
juniper grass savanna and piñon-juniper shrub woodland), most of the
piñon-juniper forest type probably has not been substantially altered by fire
exclusion in the last century, and probably is not outside its historic range of
variability in stand structure, fire frequency, and fire behavior. Thus, these
forests generally should not be subjected to extensive mechanical thinning or
prescribed burning, although fuel reduction may be appropriate in localized
areas to protect human lives, property, or other sensitive resources. Such
localized fire mitigation treatments should be called just that – they should
not be called “restoration” and they should acknowledge that relatively rare
and ecologically significant old-growth characteristics are being sacrificed to
protect other resources and values.
The piñon-juniper grass savanna (table 1) differs qualitatively from the other
two piñon-juniper types, in that its pre-1900 fire regime was characterized by
frequent, low-severity fires, whereas the piñon-juniper shrub woodland and
the piñon-juniper forest were dominated by infrequent, high-severity fires.
The piñon-juniper shrub woodland had shorter pre-1900 fire intervals than
the piñon-juniper forest (mean fire intervals perhaps <100 vs >100 years,
respectively), but both types probably followed similar successional trajecto-
ries after fire. However, the piñon-juniper forest type is distinct from the other
two types today, in that its natural fire regime and stand dynamics have been
disrupted to a far lesser extent by human activities of the past century.
Ancient Piñon-Juniper Forests of Mesa Verde and the West: A Cautionary Note for Forest Restoration Programs
Romme, Floyd-Hanna, and Hanna

348
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
We emphasize that all of the hypotheses in table 1 need further critical
testing. We also point out that, although this paper has focused on piñon-
juniper vegetation, its conceptual framework probably is broadly applicable to
several other vegetation types. Despite the well-supported need for urgent
restoration in many areas (e.g., Covington et al. 1997), we believe that there
also are many ecosystems throughout the West in which Twentieth century
alterations of community structure and function have been minimal. Systems
that probably still remain within their historic range of variability include high-
elevation spruce-fir and lodgepole pine forests, which are naturally characterized
by infrequent but sometimes large, intense fires (Romme 1982, Veblen this
volume). Richard Minnich (personal communication) also suggests that the
fire regimes of numerous semi-desert and woodland vegetation types (includ-
ing blackbrush scrub, Joshua tree woodland, and closed-cone conifer
woodlands) have been altered very little in the past century – at least in places
where non-native species invasions have not shortened fire intervals substan-
tially. Even some ponderosa pine forests in northern Colorado and the Black
Hills may have been altered less by twentieth century fire exclusion than is
commonly believed (e.g., Shinneman and Baker 1997). These examples help
to underscore the primary message that we hope to convey in this paper: that
restoration treatments must be based on a good understanding of local stand
history and historic range of variability. Above all, we must avoid the tempta-
tion to apply “one-size-fits-all” prescriptions for management.
Acknowledgments
Our research in Mesa Verde has been supported by the National Park Ser-
vice and by Prescott College. We thank the park staff, particularly Steve
Budd-Jack, Howard Dimont, Marilyn Colyer, Allan Loy, and Linda Towle,
for facilitating our research over the last 10 years. We also thank Albert Spen-
cer, Marilyn Colyer, Craig Allen, and Brian Jacobs for insightful discussions
and observations of Mesa Verde’s ecology. We are grateful to Robin Tausch,
Rick Miller, Richard Minnich, William Baker, R. M. King, Dave Swift, and
Dan Manier for their critical reviews that helped to improve an earlier draft of
the manuscript.
Literature Cited
Chambers, J.C. 2001. Pinus monophylla establishment in an expanding pinyon-juniper
woodland: environmental conditions, facilitation, and interacting factors. Journal
of Vegetation Science. 12: 27-40.
Cole, D.N., and Landres, P.B. 1996. Threats to wilderness ecosystems: impacts and
research needs. Ecological Applications. 6: 168-184.
Covington, W.W.; Fule, P.Z.; Moore, M.M.; Hart, S.C.; Kolb, T.E.; Mast, J.N.; Sackett,
S.S.;Wagner, M.R. 1997. Restoring ecosystem health in ponderosa pine forests of
the southwest. Journal of Forestry. 95: 23-29.
Dick-Peddie, W.A. 1993. New Mexico vegetation: past, present, and future.
Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press. 244 p.
Dwyer, D.D.; Pieper, R.D. 1967. Fire effects on blue grama – pinyon – juniper
rangeland in New Mexico. Journal of Range Management. 20: 359-362.
Romme, Floyd-Hanna, and Hanna
Ancient Piñon-Juniper Forests of Mesa Verde and the West: A Cautionary Note for Forest Restoration Programs

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
349
Erdman, J.A. 1970. Piñon juniper succession after natural fires on residual soils of
Mesa Verde, Colorado. Provo, UT: Brigham Young University. Biological Series
Vol. XI (2). 58 p.
Floyd, M.E. 1982. Interaction of piñon pine and Quercus gambelii in succession near
Dolores, Colorado. Southwestern Naturalist. 27: 143-147.
Floyd, M.L.; Romme, W.H.; Hanna, D.D. 2000. Fire history and vegetation pattern in
Mesa Verde National Park, Colorado, USA. Ecological Applications. 10: 1666-1680.
Griffits, M.O. 1990. Guide to the geology of Mesa Verde National Park. Mesa Verde
Museum Association, Lorraine Press, Utah.
Hardy, C.C.; Arno, S.F. 1996. The use of fire in forest restoration. Gen. Tech. Rep.
INT-GTR-341. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service,
Intermountain Research Station. 86 p.
Jameson, D.A. 1962. Effects of burning on a galleta – black grama range invaded by
juniper. Ecology. 43: 760-763.
Johnson, E.A. 1992. Fire and vegetation dynamics: Studies from the North American
boreal forest. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 129 p.
Koniak, S. 1985. Succession in pinyon-juniper woodlands following wildfire in the
Great Basin. Great Basin Naturalist. 45: 556-566.
Kruse, W.H.; Perry, H.M. 1995. Ecosystem management research in an “old-growth”
piñon-juniper woodland. In: Shaw, D.W.; Aldon, E.F.; LoSapio, C., tech. coords.
Desired future conditions for piñon-juniper ecosystems; 1994 August 8-12;
Flagstaff, AZ. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-258. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station:
219-224.
Leak, W.B. 1975. Age distribution in virgin red spruce and northern hardwoods.
Ecology. 56: 1451-1454.
Lynch, D.L.; Romme, W.H.; Floyd, M.L. 2000. Forest restoration in southwestern
ponderosa pine. Journal of Forestry. 98: 17-24.
Miller, R.F.; Wigand, P.E. 1994. Holocene changes in semiarid piñon-juniper
woodlands. BioScience. 44: 465-474.
Miller, R.F.; Rose, J.A. 1995. Historic expansion of Juniperus occidentalis (western
juniper) in southeastern Oregon. Great Basin Naturalist. 55: 37-45.
Miller, R.; Rose, J.; Svejcar, T.; Bates, J.; Paintner, K. 1995. Western juniper woodlands:
100 years of plant succession. In: Shaw, D.W.; Aldon, E.F.; LoSapio, C., tech.
coords. Desired future conditions for piñon-juniper ecosystems; 1994 August
8-12; Flagstaff, AZ. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-258. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment
Station: 5-8.
Miller, R.; Tausch, R.; Waichler, W. 1999. Old-growth juniper and pinyon woodlands.
In: Monsen, S.B.; Stevens, R., comps. Proceedings: ecology and management of
pinyon-juniper communities within the Interior West; 1997 September 15-18;
Provo, UT. Proc. RMRS-P-9. Ogden, UT: U. S. Department of Agriculture, Forest
Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station: 375-384.
Miller, R.F.; Tausch, R.J. 2001. The role of fire in juniper and pinyon woodlands: a
descriptive analysis. In: Galley, K.E.M.; Wilson, T.P., eds. Proceedings of the invasive
species workshop: the role of fire in the control and spread of invasive species. Fire
conference 2000. Miscellaneous Publication Number 11. Tallahassee, FL: Tall
Timbers Research Station: 15-30.
Minnich, R.A.; Chou, Y.H. 1997. Wildland fire patch dynamics in the chaparral of
southern California and northern Baja California. International Journal of Wildland
Fire. 7: 221-248.
Minnich, R.A.; Everett, R.G. 2001. Conifer tree distributions in southern California.
Madroño. 48: 177-197.
Ancient Piñon-Juniper Forests of Mesa Verde and the West: A Cautionary Note for Forest Restoration Programs
Romme, Floyd-Hanna, and Hanna

350
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
Moritz, M.A. 1997. Analyzing extreme disturbance events: fire in Los Padres National
Forest. Ecological Applications. 7: 1252-1262.
Omi, P.; Emrick, L. 1980. Fire and resource management in Mesa Verde National Park.
Contract CS-1200-9-B015. Unpublished report, on file at Mesa Verde National Park.
Romme, W.H. 1982. Fire and landscape diversity in subalpine forests of Yellow-stone
National Park. Ecological Monographs. 52: 199-221.
Romme, W.H.; Floyd Hanna, L.; Conner, M. 1993. Effects of fire on cultural resources
at Mesa Verde National Park. Park Science. 13(3): 28
Scurlock, D. 1998. From the Rio to the Sierra: an environmental history of the Middle
Rio Grande Basin. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-5. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 440 p.
Segura, G.; SnookL.C. 1992. Stand dynamics and regeneration patterns of a piñon
pine forest in east central Mexico. Forest Ecology and Management. 47: 175-194.
Shinneman, D.J.; Baker, W.L. 1997. Nonequilibrium dynamics between catastrophic
disturbances and old-growth forests in ponderosa pine landscapes of the Black
Hills. Conservation Biology. 11: 1276-1288.
Tausch, R.J.; West, N.E.; Nabi, A.A. 1981. Tree age and dominance patterns in Great
Basin pinyon-juniper woodlands. Journal of Range Management. 34: 259-264.
Tausch, R.J.; West, N.E. 1988. Differential establishment of pinyon and juniper
following fire. The American Midland Naturalist. 119: 174-184.
Tausch, R.J.; Nowak, R.S. 1999. Fifty years of ecotone change between shrub and
tree dominance in the Jack Springs Pinyon Research Natural Area. In: McArthur,
E.D.; Ostler, W.K.; Wambolt, C.L., comps. Proceedings: shrub ecotones; 1998
August 12-18; Ephraim, UT. Proc. RMRS-P-11. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station: 1-7.
Tress, J.A.; Klopatek, J.M. 1987. Successional changes in community structure of
pinyon-juniper woodlands of north-central Arizona. In: Everett, R.L. comp.
Proceedings: pinyon-juniper conference; 1986 January 13-16; Reno, NV. Gen.
Tech. Rep. INT-215. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service,
Intermountain Research Station: 80-85.
Veblen, T.T. An introduction to key issues in fire regime research for fuels management
and ecological restoration. This volume.
Waichler, W.S.; Miller, R.F.; Doescher, P.S. 2001. Community characteristics of old-
growth western juniper woodlands. Journal of Range Management. 54: 518-527.
Wangler, M.J.; Minnich, R.A. 1996. Fire and succession in piñon-juniper woodlands
of the San Bernardino Mountains, California. Madroño. 43: 493-514.
Romme, Floyd-Hanna, and Hanna
Ancient Piñon-Juniper Forests of Mesa Verde and the West: A Cautionary Note for Forest Restoration Programs
