 
 
Prescott gets defensive about wildfire 
By MICHELLE ROBERTS RUSHLO 
Associated Press Writer 
05/31/2004 
PRESCOTT -- The gentle winds whooshing through the pine trees here have long acted 
as a siren's song for the state's desert dwellers, drawing increasing numbers of residents to 
this central Arizona town.  
But the dry winds and nearby trees create more than just a pleasant climate; they bring 
wildfire danger to Prescott's doorstep.  
Prescott, a town of 34,000, is hardly alone this fire season. The Agriculture and Interior 
departments identified 11,376 communities across the United States in 2001 that were 
highly susceptible to damage from a wildfire on federal land.  
Since that time, many communities have gotten more aggressive about reducing 
underbrush and other fire hazards near homes, said fire and forest officials. But they also 
agree the job isn't done.  
"Have we made significant progress? Yes. But there's a lot of work to do," said Prescott 
Fire Chief Darrell Willis.  
Dick Bahr, the National Park Service official who helped compile the 2001 communities-
at-risk report, said the same is true in many Western states.  
"The issue is giving the process time to work and having some stability in the funding to 
keep these community projects going forward," he said, noting that few significant 
projects can be completed in a single year.  
For generations, public and private landowners quickly suppressed wildfires in forested 
communities, allowing the buildup of small trees and brush in forested areas. They also 
allowed or even planted vegetation close to their homes with little thought to the risk.  
Individual homes and whole communities have been built near crowded forests in the 
West, but wildfires have leveled thousands of homes in the last several years, reminding 
some communities that areas left without thinning or other fire prevention measures are 
ripe for destruction.  
"People think ... 'It's not going to happen to me.' That's just not true," said Michael 
Brown, the director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency.  

His agency recently released a book on fire mitigation for what fire officials call the 
wildland-urban interface -- where development meets forested country.  
The book offers case studies on what communities have done to protect themselves.  
A home's ability to survive can be affected by how close the landscaping is, the kind of 
materials used to build it, and whether firewood is piled against the house, officials say.  
"I just see so much devastation that could be avoided," said Brown.  
In Prescott, city officials passed a code limiting the amount and types of vegetation 
permitted within 30 feet of a new home. The move came after a 1,300-acre wildfire 
burned within three miles of downtown in 2002, destroying five homes and forcing the 
evacuation of 1,500 people.  
The city also requires new homes to be built of noncombustible material.  
In Flagstaff, which does not have a mandatory defensible space law, fire officials can 
only recommend that home and business owners do appropriate clearing.  
Coconino County lacks the legislative authority to enact such a code for the 
unincorporated areas after an enabling bill failed this spring in the Legislature.  
Willis, who has been the fire chief in Prescott for 10 years, said residents have become 
receptive to creating a space between their home and vegetation.  
"There are some resistant people, but they're the minority," he said.  
George and Mary Hickok, who were evacuated during the 2002 fire, said they have done 
a lot of clearing around their home.  
"We cut all the brush out and that sort of thing. We need to get out there raking now," 
said George Hickok, 82, as he and Mary, 80, walked their dog around the city's 
picturesque courthouse square.  
Not all communities are as far along though.  
Education efforts in Castle Rock, Colo., which served as the staging area for firefighters 
combatting the 138,000-acre Hayman fire in 2002, are just now getting under way, said 
Paul Russell, an investigator for the Castle Rock Fire Department and new head of the 
wildland mitigation project there.  
"Right now, we're a ways out. We're doing a lot of educating," he said. "The challenge is 
that nobody thinks there's a problem."  

Wallace Covington, a professor of forest ecology at Northern Arizona University, said 
awareness of the risk is growing, and federal and local officials seem to understand that 
work needs to be done.  
"I'm actually pretty optimistic. I just wish we would have started in the '70s. But we're 
moving along," he said.  
The larger communities seem to be making the most progress, he said. Different agencies 
are working together and individuals are doing work around their homes in many 
communities.  
Some of the smaller communities are less organized and less prepared, he said. And 
major wildfires are likely to keep coming given an ongoing drought in the West.  
"Clearly, there's going to be some major catastrophes to come," Covington said.  
------  
On the Net:  
FEMA: http://www.fema.gov  
Reports on communities at risk: http://www.fireplan.gov/content/reports  
