Historical Fire Regimes in Ponderosa Pine Forests of 
the Colorado Front Range, and Recommendations for 
Ecological Restoration and Fuels Management 
Merrill R. Kaufmann, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, CO 
Thomas T. Veblen, University of Colorado at Boulder, Boulder, CO 
William H. Romme, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 
May 18, 2006 
INTRODUCTION 
At the request of The Nature Conservancy and the Front Range Fuels 
Treatment Partnership, the authors of this article are developing brief summaries 
of the current state of our scientific understanding of historical fire regimes in the 
forested landscapes of Colorado's Front Range. The area of interest extends 
from EI Paso and Teller Counties, near Pikes Peak, to Larimer County and the 
Colorado-Wyoming border. This article focuses on forests in which ponderosa 
pine is a dominant or co-dominant species. A subsequent article will deal with 
forests of lodgepole pine, spruce, and fir. M. Kaufmann and T. Veblen have 
conducted extensive studies of ponderosa pine forest ecology in the southern 
Front Range (mainly the Cheesman Reservoir area) and the northern Front 
Range (mainly in and around Boulder County), respectively. This research has 
led to substantial agreement about the historical role of fire in shaping these 
forests, and we emphasize these points of agreement in this article, in the 
section entitled "Things We Know with Relatively High Confidence." 
Some 
disagreements and uncertainties also have arisen, and we identify these as 
topics of high priority for future research, under the section entitled "Things We 
Think We Know -- BUT with Relatively Low Confidence." We close with a brief 
summary of the implications of the science for current efforts directed at fire 
hazard mitigation and ecological restoration in ponderosa pine forests of the 
Front Range. 
Ponderosa pine is a dominant or co-dominant forest species over a large 
portion of the eastern slope of the Colorado Front Range, where it grows in a 
wide variety of ecological settings. We have identified five major vegetation 
zones, extending from the plains grasslands at the foot of the mountains to the 
upper timberline, to provide a context for our interpretations (see Figure 1 and 
Table 1). The Plains Grassland Zone is predominantly non-forested, but small 
patches of ponderosa pine woodland with a grass or shrub understory are found. 
Pinon -juniper woodland also occurs south of about the Castle Rock area and in 
a small portion of Larimer County. The Lower Ecotone Zone represents the 
transition from predominantly non-forest to predominantly forest vegetation in the 
foothills. The elevation of this zone (and of all the other zones) varies from the 
southern to the northern portions of the Front Range, as shown in Table 1. 
Citation: Kaufmann, Merrill R., Thomas T. Veblen, and William H. Romme. 2006. Historical fire regimes in 
ponderosa pine forests of the Colorado Front Range, and recommendations for ecological restoration and 
fuels management. Front Range Fuels Treatment Partnership Roundtable, findings of the Ecology 
Workgroup. www.frftp.org/roundtable/pipo.pdf. 

Environmental gradient of vegetation - northern Front Range 
12,000 -,--------------------, 
ALPINE 
3500 
11,000 
(SpruceIFlr forest) 
6_ .. -
· 
.. ·-_ .. •
SUBALPINE ..._­_. .•-...-.. . 
~ 
3" 
C" 
~ 
10,000 
(lodgepole Pine forest) 
"0 :; 
~ 
3000 -
-
9000 
E
=­C
­ C
0 
0
;; 
;;
2500
eu 
8000 
eu
> 
>
Q)
~ 
W 
jjj 
7000 
Mesic 
Xeric 
Steep North 
North·East 
South-West 
Exposed 
Slopes (>60%) 
Slopes 
Slopes 
Ridges 
2000 
6000 
5000 -l.------------------..L.J·- 1500 
Figure 1. Major vegetation zones in the Colorado Front Range. See Table 1 for 
additional description of each zone. 
Generally a given zone occurs at lower elevations in the north than in the south, 
though there are several exceptions to this general pattern. The Lower Montane 
Zone contains a variety of forests and woodlands, with complex mixtures of tree 
species, understory species, local environmental conditions, and histories of 
natural and human disturbances. Ponderosa pine is the usual dominant tree in 
this zone, with Douglas-fir also present or co-dominant in many locations. The 
Upper Montane Zone represents a transition from montane to subalpine forests. 
Ponderosa pine is a component of this zone, and forms nearly pure stands in 
places. However, several other tree species also are common and may be co­
dominant in places, including Douglas-fir, lodgepole pine, limber pine, aspen, and 
(in the south) white fir. Engelmann spruce, blue spruce, and subalpine fir are 
sometimes minor components of stands in the higher parts of the Upper Montane 
Zone. Vegetation patterns in this portion of the mountains are quite complex, 
and the controlling factors of topographic position, soils, and disturbance history 
are not fully understood. Above the Upper Montane Zone is the Subalpine Zone, 
dominated by lodgepole pine, Engelmann spruce, and subalpine fir. Because 
ponderosa pine is not a component, we do not deal with the subalpine zone in 
this article, but it will be the subject of a subsequent article. It is important to 
recognize the variety of plant associations and abiotic environments in which 
2  

ponderosa pine occurs in Colorado's Front Range, because these different 
environments were characterized by important differences in their historical fire 
regimes. 
Consequently, the opportunities and constraints for community 
protection and ecological restoration also differ among these environments. 
A "fire regime" is a summary of fire occurrence, behavior, and effects 
within a specified area, including specific parameters such as fire frequency, 
extent, seasonality, behavior (e.g., surface vs. crown fire), intensity (defined as 
heat release), and severity (defined as impacts on organisms and the abiotic 
environment). We focus in this report on fire frequency and severity during the 
historical reference period from about A.D. 1600 to 1900. This is a time for which 
we have relatively abundant data on fire and forest structure prior to many of the 
impacts of EuroAmerican settlement, and it therefore serves as a useful 
benchmark for evaluating the magnitude and significance of changes that have 
occurred during the last century. 
The Concept of Fire Severity: Historical fires burned in a complex 
fashion, in response to variation in weather conditions, fuels, and topography. 
Within any individual fire, except perhaps the tiniest fires that failed to spread 
because of moist weather conditions or lack of fuel, there could be a continuum 
of fire behavior and fire effects from almost no change in forest structure to 
complete mortality of the canopy and understory. Moreover, a fire at a given site 
may burn severely one year, and then burn with very low severity the next time 
the area burns. Thus, in all of the vegetation zones of the Colorado Front Range, 
the historical fire regime would best be characterized as mixed severity or 
variable severity. Unfortunately, the term mixed severity has been used with a 
variety of meanings, some of which actually may be contradictory. Therefore, we 
wish to carefully define how we will use the term "fire severity" throughout this 
article. Our definition includes both the relative proportions of canopy trees killed 
by a fire and the consequences of this mortality for future development of stand 
structure, notably the opportunity (or lack thereof) for a new cohort of ponderosa 
pine trees to become established after the fire. 
The continuum of potential fire effects is illustrated in Figure 2 for a small 
patch (an acre or so) of ponderosa pine forest having a sufficiently closed canopy 
that regeneration of this shade-intolerant species is impeded. At one end of the 
spectrum (point A in Figure 2), fire intensity is so slight that it produces 
essentially no change in stand conditions: perhaps a thin upper layer of litter is 
blackened, but the forest floor and surface fuels are only slightly altered and 
there is little or no mortality of canopy trees. Because the stand is not opened up 
by the fire to any significant degree, and mineral soil exposure remains limited, 
there is little opportunity for a new cohort of young trees of the relatively shade­
intolerant ponderosa pine to become established as a consequence of the fire. 
(Of course, in initially dense stands, new trees could become established for 
other reasons, such as canopy mortality caused by wind, insects, or disease; or, 
in open stands with sufficient light, moister climatic conditions could trigger an 
episode of tree recruitment.) Near the middle of the spectrum (point B in Figure 
2), the fire consumes a variable portion of the forest floor and kills a variable 
3  

----d~------------.F_--­
A 
B 
c 
Least Severe .... 
Most Severe 
Essentially no change 
Moderate canopy mortality; 
High canopy mortality 
in stand conditions; 
allows recruitment of dense 
and loss of seed source; 
still a closed canopy 
new cohort if climate 
creates forest opening 
is suitable 
Figure 2. Continuum of potential fire severity and fire effects on forest structure in a small patch 
(an acre or so) of ponderosa pine forest having a relatively closed canopy before the fire. 
number of the dominant canopy trees - enough to create opportunities for a new 
cohort of trees to germinate and become established in the resulting canopy 
gaps, and to increase understory productivity. (Of course, no new trees would 
become established unless there was a seed source nearby and climatic 
conditions were favorable for tree seedlings, but nevertheless the fire created an 
opportunity for new trees if other factors were favorable.) Toward the other end 
of the spectrum of fire effects (point C in Figure 2), the fire kills so much of the 
canopy (maybe all of it) that it essentially eliminates the seed source. Even 
though the resulting open site conditions are favorable for new tree 
establishment, reforestation may be very slow as seed gradually disperses into 
the area from outside the severely burned patch. Here the size of opening 
created by fire, including consumption of any potential seed bank in the canopy 
or litter, becomes important in predicting subsequent vegetation development. 
In our detailed descriptions of the historical variable severity fire regimes 
in ponderosa pine forests of the Colorado Front Range (below), we will be 
concerned especially with the proportions of the total burned area that were 
affected by various levels of fire severity as depicted by points A, B, and C in 
Figure 2. In other words, a given fire event that covered tens to thousands of 
acres would be characterized as predominantly low-severity if most of the 
patches were burned as indicated by the left end of the continuum near point A in 
the figure, while only a few patches were represented by points B or C. 
Alternatively, a given fire would be predominantly high-severity if most patches 
had fire effects resembling those of point B or C in the figure, recognizing that 
even here at least a few patches would likely be more similar to point A. If all 
three points in the figure were well represented by individual patches within the 
overall fire perimeter, then we would refer to these as truly mixed severity or 
variable severity fires. 
Fires during the historical reference period exhibited complex behavior 
and complex effects in the Colorado Front Range. Because of this complexity, 
we cannot simply extrapolate results from the well known studies of fire in 
southwestern ponderosa pine forests (e.g., the "southwestern model" developed 
in northern Arizona) to the Front Range - even though ponderosa pine is the 
4  

dominant tree in both areas. Instead, we need to understand how fire operated 
in different environments and different geographical regions of the Front Range. 
Things We Know with Relatively High Confidence 
(1) 
Factors in addition to fire and fire suppression have had major 
inUuences on historical and modern ponderosa pine landscapes. 
Although our emphasis in this article is on fire and potential ecological 
effects of fire suppression, it is important to stress that several other 
environmental factors (soils, topographic position, climate) and disturbance 
agents (insects, disease, drought, logging, grazing, tree planting) may have an 
equal or greater influence on forest stand structure and dynamics. For example, 
open stands with low tree density potentially may be maintained by periodic low­
severity fires -- but such stands also may result simply from locally poor growing 
conditions, e.g., on shallow soils or on hot south-facing slopes at low elevations. 
Other disturbances also may cause substantial tree mortality, e.g., mountain pine 
beetles and severe drought. Ponderosa pine recruitment is driven not just by 
opening of the canopy and creation of bare mineral soil (as occurs with severe 
fire or logging), but also is dependent on the episodic availability of seed in 
conjunction with moist climatic conditions over periods of several years or 
decades. Fire frequency and severity also are controlled in large part by climatic 
variation, with more extensive and severe fire activity during dry years and less 
fire activity during wet years. Yet, the growth of herbaceous fuels during wet 
years is an important precursor to large fire years occurring one to several years 
later in the drier, low-elevation environments of the ponderosa pine zone. The 
climate of the Colorado Front Range appears to be influenced in part by very 
broad-scale atmospheric processes, such that local climate is statistically 
correlated with indices of atmospheric and oceanic conditions in the tropical 
Pacific (EI Nino - Southern Oscillation), the northern Pacific (Pacific Decadal 
Oscillation), and the northern Atlantic (Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation). 
Climatologists are just beginning to fully understand the ways in which variability 
in these broad-scale atmospheric processes affect the climate of Colorado (and 
consequently fire occurrence) at time scales of a few years to centuries. 
It is also important to recognize the effects of fire and land-use practices 
other than 20th century fire suppression on current forest conditions in the Front 
Range. 
For example, widespread burning and logging in the late 1800s is 
responsible for many of the young, even-aged stands that we see today. 
Similarly, livestock grazing in the late 1800s and early 1900s appears to have 
facilitated increases in tree density in some former grasslands. 
And finally, 
evidence exists that tree planting was emphasized in some areas during the 20th 
century when assuring sustainable timber production was a national goal. Some 
transplanting occurred even where historical forest densities may have been low 
or zero. 
5 

(2) Historical fires burned in a complex fashion, in response to variation in 
weather conditions, fuels, and topography. 
We stress the complexity of historical fire behavior along topographic, 
moisture, and elevation gradients within relatively small areas (a few thousand 
acres) in the Front Range. This complexity of historical fire behavior was also 
influenced by broad-scale vegetation differences across the Front Range. For 
example, at low elevations south of the Denver area, Gambel oak shrublands 
adjacent to or mixed with ponderosa pine stands could have supported high 
severity shrubland fires, but oak is absent from the northern Front Range. 
Likewise, substantial topographic variation among different sectors of the Front 
Range may have significantly influenced historical fire regimes. For instance, 
rolling hills are quite extensive in the southern Front Range and in central and 
northern Larimer County, but in Boulder County the elevational gradient is 
steeper and the extent of rolling topography is substantially less than in these 
other areas. Likewise, the deep, and in places broad, canyon of the Poudre 
River creates a topographic setting that differs from much of the remainder of the 
Front Range. 
(3) The idea that a historical fire regime of primarily low-severity fires 
maintained savannas and open woodlands applies only to portions of the 
lowest elevations of the Colorado Front Range, and generally does not 
apply to most of the middle and higher elevations. 
Fire history and historical stand structures have been documented, based 
on extensive tree-ring evidence and historical photographs, in a study area 
centered on Boulder County but overlapping with adjacent counties. 
This 
research indicates that at low elevations near the Plains grasslands (primarily in 
the Lower Ecotone Zone, Figure 1), ponderosa pine stands in the 19th century 
were mostly open and were affected primarily by low- to moderate-severity fires 
(i.e., most of the burned area was affected by fires depicted between points A 
and B in Figure 2). These low to moderate severity fires burned with sufficient 
frequency to prevent the survival of most juvenile trees, and therefore tended to 
maintain open stands of mature trees. Although this is somewhat analogous to 
findings for dry ponderosa pine woodlands in Arizona, New Mexico, and some 
other parts of the West, the situation in the Colorado Front Range differed in two 
critical respects from these other areas. First, fire-scar evidence indicates that 
actual fire frequencies in this low-elevation ponderosa pine zone were 
substantially less than those reported for Arizona and New Mexico. Whereas a 
150-250 acre tract of ponderosa pine forest near Flagstaff may have experienced 
fire every 3-10 years, a comparably sized area in Boulder County experienced 
fire only every 10-30 years. 
Secondly, patches of shrubland (especially 
mountain-mahogany and Garnbel oak) in the Lower Ecotone Zone could have 
fueled locally severe fires that killed all of the trees growing within the shrubland 
patch, as has been observed in recent fires. The key similarity between the 
lowest elevation ponderosa pine zone of the Colorado Front Range and the 
6  

ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest, is that during the 20th century both 
areas have experienced substantial increases in tree density. This increase in 
tree density appears to have been facilitated in part by exclusion of low-severity 
fires that formerly killed juvenile trees. However, other factors such as grazing, 
soil disturbance associated with logging and trail or road construction, and 
climatic variation probably also contributed to increased seedling establishment, 
even though long fire-free intervals during the fire exclusion period were essential 
to the survival of seedlings. 
In this Lower Ecotone and in some of the lower portions of the adjacent 
Lower Montane Zone in and around Boulder County (Figure 1, Table 1) where 
historical fires were predominantly low-severity, fires generally killed tree 
seedlings but only rarely killed mature trees due to the lack of contiguous woody 
fuels. Nevertheless, at fine spatial scales, fuel accumulations from dead trees or 
small patches of live woody fuels would have resulted in some variability in fire 
severity. Patches of dense shrubs also would have provided fuels for locally 
severe fires, as described above. Thus, although there clearly was fine-scale 
spatial heterogeneity in fire severity, the predominant fire severity in this zone 
was low-severity that only rarely killed mature trees. These 'fires did kill some 
tree seedlings and saplings, but once a tree reached moderate size, it usually 
could survive most fires, and lived until it died from other causes, e.g., drought or 
insects. Thus, stands tended to have open canopies (less than 20% canopy 
cover), and, where soils and moisture conditions permitted, a well-developed 
herbaceous layer. Even here, however,fires occasionally were of moderate 
severity, killing a single tree or small clusters of canopy trees. 
Just how extensive is this region in the Boulder County area where 
predominantly low-severity fires maintained an open, low-density forest structure, 
and where exactly in the Front Range should we expect to find this kind of 
historical fire regime? The precise geographical area in which this fire regime 
was important historically has been estimated from tree-ring data on fire history 
and fire effects (e.g., percentage of trees that survived a given fire) in a study 
area of 60,875 hectares (150,360 acres) in the ARNF in and around Boulder 
County. The analysis was applied to all cover types where ponderosa pine is a 
dominant or co-dominant, i.e., it encompassed portions of the Plains Grasslands, 
Lower Ecotone, Lower Montane and Upper Montane Zones (Figure 1, Table 1) in 
the northern Front Range. 
Ponderosa pine was mapped as dominant in 
approximately 75% of this area. Results of the analysis showed that, within this 
broad expanse of ponderosa pine forest, less than 20% of the area was 
characterized historically by mainly low-severity fires. In a separate analysis, 
using Boulder County as the base area and including both non-federal and 
federal lands, the same result was obtained: c. 20% for the area of predominantly 
low-severity fires. In the other 80+ % of the study area, evidence of moderate 
and high-severity fires also was prominent in the tree-ring record. The area of 
predominantly low-severity historical fires corresponds to those sites where, 
according to fire-scar evidence, fires burned at intervals of 10 to 30 years in 
sample areas of 150 to 250 acres, prior to fire exclusion. This zone in which pre­
settlement forest structure was shaped primarily by low-severity fires (as well as 
7  

soils and climate) is mainly at elevations below about 6900 to 7200 feet, although 
topographic factors also influence the elevational distribution of this fire regime 
type, and mixed severity fires undoubtedly occurred in some locations in this 
lower elevation zone. 
The study described above for Boulder County is the only study in the 
Front Range that systematically relates fire regime type to environmental factors 
across the full elevation range of ponderosa pine. Thus, it is difficult to estimate 
the area of the low-severity fire regime in other parts of the Front Range. 
However, we can infer that this zone of predominantly low-severity fires is found 
mostly on gentle terrain where the mountains meet the plains and in the lower 
foothills, mainly in the Plains Grasslands and Lower Ecotone Zones but also in 
the lower half of the Lower Montane Zone (Figure 1, Table 1). We stress that 
aspect, slope steepness, and proximity to grassland also influenced the location 
of this zone of low-severity fires, and that elevation alone cannot be used as a 
strict guide to its location. Although many of these low-elevation areas show 
increases in tree density during the fire suppression period, fire suppression is 
not the only reason for increased tree density; these are also areas where 
grazing and soil disturbances associated with roads and other construction have 
been widespread and may have triggered tree recruitment. We also note that 
tree densities have not increased in all of the low-elevation landscapes of the 
Front Range (though more research is needed to understand why tree density 
has increased in some areas but not others). 
(4) In most of the Lower Montane Zone of the Colorado Front Range, the 
historical fire regime was a mixed or variable severity fire regime in which 
low-, moderate-, and high-severity fires all played an ecologically 
significant role. 
With increasing elevation in the Lower Montane Zone, the model of 
primarily low-severity fire clearly does not apply, except perhaps in limited 
situations as described below. For example, in Boulder County this low-severity 
fire regime has not been documented at elevations above c. 6900 to 7200 feet. 
Instead, fires at higher elevations in the Lower Montane Zone (Figure 1, Table 1) 
were typically of variable severity, i.e., any individual fire could exhibit patches of 
fire behavior and effects spanning the entire continuum shown in Figure 2. 
Consequently, the effects of historical fires on stand structure were also very 
complex. In some places and at some times, fires simply maintained a relatively 
open forest structure (i.e., fire severity was between points A and B in Figure 2); 
in other places and at other times the fires killed most, or all, of the canopy (i.e., 
between points Band C in Figure 2). Thus, patches of high-severity fire killing a 
large proportion of canopy trees were important components (though not the only 
components) of the historical fire regime of middle and upper elevation 
ponderosa pine forests. 
In addition, dense stands of relatively even-aged 
ponderosa pine cohorts were a natural consequence of the moderate to high 
severity fires in this zone, though low-density stands with trees of all ages 
8  

(including centuries-old individuals) also were common or even dominant in 
places, especially in the lower half of the Lower Montane Zone. 
Although we are confident about this broad description of historical fire 
behavior and effects in ponderosa pine forests of the Lower Montane Zone in the 
Colorado Front Range, there are uncertainties about some of the details of the 
historical fire regime, notably the spatial extent of patches of different fire 
severity. 
In particular, we have an incomplete understanding of the spatial 
patterns of historical fires, e.g., the size and shape of patches of higher-severity 
fire vs. patches of lower-severity fire. 
The high degree of variability in fire 
severity over space and over time in this zone makes it difficult to determine 
meaningful averages for sizes of patches of different fire severity. Indeed, we 
expect that the idea of average patch sizes and severities actually is not 
particularly useful in this area. 
A broad range of sizes and severities was 
probably common, especially over time scales of centuries that included wetter 
and drier climate phases. Nevertheless, it is clear that the southwestern model of 
frequent, low-severity fires that maintained savanna-like stands does notapply to 
the Lower Montane Zone of the Colorado Front Range. On the contrary, this 
extensive region of ponderosa pine forests and woodlands was shaped by a 
complex fire history that included high severity as well as low severity fires, and 
this heterogeneous fire history (coupled with heterogeneous environmental 
conditions) resulted in a mosaic of naturally dense as well as open stands. 
Things We Think We Know --
BUT with Relatively Low 
Confidence 
(5) The model of predominantly low-severity fires may apply to limited 
areas of more gentle topography in the upper part of the Lower Montane 
Zone and the Upper Montane Zone. 
In localized areas of gentle, rolling topography, or near grasslands in the 
upper part of the Lower Montane and in the Upper Montane Zone, there may 
have been a greater incidence of low-severity fires than in surrounding areas of 
more rugged relief and greater forest cover. Examples might be the grasslands 
near Cardinal and Camp Frances in Boulder County, areas in Rocky Mountain 
National Park, and some of the country north of the Poudre River Canyon. 
Today, some grassland patches in the Lower and Upper Montane Zones appear 
to show encroachment by young ponderosa pine trees (although many other 
montane grasslands do not exhibit any tree encroachment). 
It could be 
hypothesized that grassy areas burned relatively frequently during the historical 
period, because their fuels were continuous and dried quickly, and fires ignited in 
the grassy places could have carried into surrounding forests, thus maintaining 
lower stand densities than were typical of forests remote from the grasslands. 
This interpretation makes intuitive sense, but we have relatively low confidence in 
it because we do not find as many fire-scarred trees adjacent to the grassy areas 
as we would expect if it is correct. We also note that many montane grasslands 
9  

have been maintained by local site conditions inimical to tree establishment, 
rather than by fire. Furthermore, grass productivity in our region generally is 
much less than in parts of northern Arizona, so fire or herbaceous competition 
may not be as effective here in reducing tree density. In any case, we do not 
know whether these hypothesized areas -
of gentle topography at higher 
elevations that may have been affected by primarily lower-severity fires - were 
relatively extensive or very limited. 
And we stress that even if there were 
relatively extensive areas in the Lower Montane Zone where low-severity fires 
dominated the historic fire regime, those fires occurred far less frequently and 
with far more variable severity than in southwestern ponderosa pine forests such 
as those in northern Arizona. 
(6) In ponderosa pine dominated forests of the Lower and Upper Montane 
Zones, stand structures in many areas strongly reflect the effects of pre­
fire-exclusion fires that were of sufficient severity to kill large numbers of 
mature ponderosa pine. 
In the Upper Montane Zone and at higher elevations of the Lower 
Montane Zone, for example at 8400-9100 feet in Boulder County, tree age data 
from many stands dominated by ponderosa pine, often in combination with 
Douglas-fir, show that present stand structures were largely determined by pre­
20th century fires -- fires that killed high percentages of the tree population and 
triggered subsequent regeneration. 
Although forests in this region are still 
properly described as having a variable severity fire regime, it is the higher 
severity component of the fire regime that has largely shaped current stand 
structures by creating even-aged post-fire cohorts in many of these higher­
elevation locations. Fire-scar a.nd tree age data indicate that low-severity fire 
events comprised a far lower proportion of total fire events at higher elevations 
than at lower elevations, and similarly, that high-severity fire events were 
especially prominent in fire histories from higher elevation ponderosa pine 
forests. 
This pattern is very clear in Boulder County and nearby areas. 
However, we place this interpretation in the Low Confidence section of the article 
because of preliminary results from a study in progress in Larimer County by 
Laurie Huckaby and others. Preliminary results of that study suggest that low to 
moderate severity fires had a greater influence in Larimer County than in Boulder 
County on stand structure of Upper Montane mixed conifer forests . Therefore, 
we are unsure how widely we can apply the general principle that higher-severity 
fires became progressively more important with increasing elevation. 
At least in the Boulder County region, under the historical fire regime, 
forest structures in the Upper Montane Zone appear to have been shaped largely 
by fires that were relatively infrequent (i.e., fire intervals of many decades or even 
a century or more) but severe (between points Band C in Figure 2). Some low 
severity fires also occurred in these stands, but tree population age structures 
indicate that it was primarily the severe fires that caused tree mortality and 
created opportunities for new establishment of the shade-intolerant ponderosa 
pine. These are environments where moist conditions probably prevented 
10  

widespread fires except under conditions of extreme drought, and also provided 
for large quantities of spatially contiguous woody fuels. Thus, once ignited under 
extremely dry conditions, fires could be intense and burn over large areas. Age 
structures in these forests indicate that severe fires generally did not result in 
complete tree mortality over large areas, but did kill substantial numbers of 
canopy trees, and that high percentages of existing trees established soon after 
a documented severe fire. It is important to recognize that, although such sites 
have a relatively low probability of fire occurring in any given year, when fire does 
occur it has a high probability of being severe. When we reach the Subalpine 
Zone (Figure 1, Table 1), infrequent but extensive, severe fires are the primary 
shapers of forest structure, as will be discussed in a subsequent article. 
Implications 
for 
Fire 
Hazard 
Mitigation 
and 
Ecological 
Restoration 
(7) The two goals of community fire protection and restoring historical 
ecological conditions can sometimes, but not always, be attained in the 
same locations. 
Although fuels reduction through thinning is sometimes consistent with 
ecological restoration, this is not the case everywhere in ponderosa pine forests. 
In the Colorado Front Range, relatively frequent low- and moderate-severity 
historical fires maintained low-density woodlands, transient openings, and 
relatively sparse fuel loads in some parts of the ponderosa pine zone. In these 
areas, by reducing woodland densities and creating openings we can reduce the 
probability of severe, large-scale crown fires and also create stand structures that 
more closely resemble historical conditions. 
Unfortunately, it is not currently possible to state precisely where such fire­
maintained low-density stands were located. In fact, individual forest stands may 
have fluctuated over long time scales between relatively low and relatively high 
densities, in response to fires of variable severity and climatic fluctuations. What 
we can say is that the relative proportion of the landscape that was in a fire­
maintained low-density condition was generally greatest at the lowest elevations 
and least at the highest elevations. This elevational gradient was complicated by 
local topographic effects: at any given elevation, xeric sites were more likely to 
support low-density stands and low-severity fires than were mesic sites. 
Because of this background variability, none of the vegetation zones (Figure 1, 
Table 1) can be categorized as having any uniform historical landscape structure 
or type of fire behavior. 
Nevertheless, we can provide somewhat more precise descriptions as 
follows. Most, or nearly all, of the ponderosa pine stands in the Plains Grassland 
and Lower Ecotone Zones apparently were characterized by low-density 
conditions most of the time. Low-density conditions probably also characterized 
11  

most of the lower portion of the Lower Montane Zone (e.g., below about 6900­
7200 feet in Boulder County). 
However, fire-maintained low-density stands 
covered progressively smaller proportions of the landscape with increasing 
elevation or increasingly mesic site conditions in this zone. Toward the upper 
end of the Lower Montane Zone, and into the lower reaches of the Upper 
Montane Zone, low-density stands were always a component of the landscape, 
but high-density stands (and high-severity fires) became increasingly prevalent in 
these higher-elevation sections of the ponderosa pine zone. Unfortunately, we 
lack the data necessary to estimate more precisely the relative proportions of 
high-density and low-density stands at any particular elevation in the Montane 
Zone, and so we stress the elevational gradient in relative proportions of stands 
of different structure. Indeed, these proportions probably varied over time and in 
relation to topography. 
Stand densities were typically greater towards higher elevations than near 
the Plains grassland ecotone. Notably, over most of the Upper Montane zone 
and upper portion of the Lower Montane zone fires often were of sufficient 
severity to kill large numbers of canopy trees and were often (though not always) 
followed by development of dense post-fire cohorts (Le., fire severity was 
between points Band C in Figure 2). This is a critically important aspect of the 
historical fire regimes of the Colorado Front Range, an aspect that cannot be 
overemphasized. This landscape probably was never characterized by large 
(thousands of acres), homogeneous stands with low tree densities. Likewise, we 
do not believe that ponderosa pine was characterized by vast areas (10s of 
thousands of acres) of homogeneously dense stands analogous to lodgepole 
pine stands in the subalpine zone. On the contrary, variation in forest structure 
was important across the entire area, as were changes in landscape structure 
over decades and centuries. For these reasons, creating large landscapes with 
uniformly low tree densities probably would be unprecedented in the ecological 
history of this area. 
The upshot of all of this is that, in the Colorado Front Range, the two goals 
of fire hazard reduction and ecological restoration converge most clearly in the 
lower-elevation portions of the ponderosa pine zone, even though "Iower­
elevation" cannot be precisely defined. We recognize, of course, that managers 
in the Front Range do not envision creating a uniformly low tree density across 
the entire region of ponderosa pine. Nor are we suggesting that the objective of 
restoration should necessarily carry more weight than other desirable ecological 
outcomes or fire hazard mitigation. Indeed, fuels reduction through thinning or 
creation of small openings and prescribed burning may be consistent with 
objectives other than restoration, such as protection of vulnerable structures from 
wildfire, enhancement of wildlife habitat, or preservation of threatened and 
endangered species. Rather, we are stressing that reduction in stand density 
does not always mimic the effects of historical fires and should not be uncritically 
equated with ecological restoration. 
12 

(8) In the Lower and Upper Montane Zones of the Colorado Front Range, 
where historical fire regimes and stand structures were highly variable, fuel 
treatments and restoration efforts should reflect that variability. 
In most of the ponderosa pine forests of the Front Range, it may be 
appropriate for managers to implement a variety of fuel reduction treatments to 
protect structures and other vulnerable resources while also emulating natural 
ecological processes. Although there is much uncertainty about the extent of 
past fires of different severities, the historical landscape appears to have been 
characterized by a high complexity of stand structures. This implies that fuels 
treatments leading to a structurally complex landscape will not result in patterns 
fundamentally outside the historical range of variation. With prescribed burning 
(whether manager-ignited or wildland fire use), a wide range of fire severity 
should be tolerated, including at least some patches of relatively high severity fire 
(between points Band C in Figure 2). 
(9) High tree density in itself is not a sufficient criterion for concluding that 
fire suppression has created an unnaturally dense stand. 
Although many of today's dense ponderosa pine stands are an unnatural 
result of fire suppression and other human activities, this is not the case with all 
dense ponderosa pine stands in the Colorado Front Range. 
Some stands 
(particularly those in the Upper Montane Zone) are dense because of more 
mesic conditions. Many Lower Montane stands are now dense because of a 
sequence of anthropogenic effects, beginning with logging and grazing in the late 
1800s and early 1900s that created conditions suitable for abundant regeneration 
of ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir, and finally by 20th century fire suppression 
that eliminated the key natural process for reducing tree density. It also must be 
recognized that many ponderosa pine stands in the Front Range are dense today 
because they are developing after severe fires that occurred prior to the period of 
fire suppression, Le., fires in the 19th century or earlier. Thus, where ecological 
restoration is the primary management goal, or where emulation of natural 
landscape structure and ecological processes is an important secondary 
component of management that focuses primarily on wildfire hazard mitigation, 
not all of the dense stands should be thinned. 
To the extent feasible and 
consistent with primary management goals, at least some dense stands of 
ponderosa pine or ponderosa pine and Douqlas-fir should be retained as 
important natural components of the historical forest landscape. Higher density 
stands probably were most prevalent at higher elevations and on mesic north­
facing slopes. 
(10) We cannot prevent all high-severity fires in Front Range ponderosa 
pine forests, and the likely effectiveness of mitigation will vary with 
elevation, and with other factors inclUding extent of treatment, topography, 
weather, and climate. 
13 

With appropriate fuels treatments, it is feasible to substantially reduce the 
likelihood of high-severity fire, especially in the lower portions of Front Range 
ponderosa pine forests (e.g., in most of the Lower Ecotone and adjacent parts of 
the Lower Montane Zone). 
This is also where the greatest residential 
development is occurring, and thus the benefits of fuels reduction generally will 
be greatest in these lower-elevation areas. However, preventing high-severity 
fire in the highest-elevation portions of the ponderosa pine forest (e.g., in the 
Upper Montane Zone and adjacent parts of the Lower Montane Zone) will be 
more difficult. This is partly because these areas are generally more productive, 
i.e., relatively large quantities of biomass develop relatively quickly. It is also 
because the ecologically most important fires, i.e., the fires that have the greatest 
influence on stand structure, both here and in the adjacent subalpine zone, tend 
to occur primarily under conditions of extreme fire weather. 
Under those 
conditions, variation in fuels characteristics has less influence on fire behavior 
than when fire weather is less extreme. Effective reduction in fire risk at these 
higher elevations could potentially require more forest removal (and prevention of 
regeneration) than is either economically feasible or socially acceptable. Thus, 
we should not lead the public to believe that we can effectively or cheaply 
prevent all high-severity fires, either by fuels treatments or by suppression 
efforts. Nevertheless, even at the higher elevations, we can manage fuels and 
fires in such a way that, through Firewise and other practices, we substantially 
reduce the risk of damage to vulnerable structures from high severity fire - while 
acknowledging that the risk will never fall to zero. 
(11) Although fuel reduction treatments can be effective in the short run, 
fuels management must be an on-going effort, or hazardous conditions will 
simply re-develop within one to several decades. 
There is abundant evidence that logging (e.g., removal ot larger trees or 
thinning of smaller ones) and associated soil disturbances may enhance 
establishment of new ponderosa pine seedlings. 
Thus, depending on initial 
stand structure, thinning could potentially result in a new stand structure in which 
surface fires are actually more likely to become crown fires. For example, in 
dense stands lacking an understory of young trees, seedling recruitment 
following thinning may produce a multi-story stand with dense ladder fuels. We 
do not fully understand how the kinds of thinning, logging, and prescribed burning 
now being conducted in the Front Range will affect subsequent tree recruitment, 
nor do we know how soon re-treatment may be needed to maintain a lower risk 
of high-severity fire. Nevertheless, management agencies should plan for on­
going fuels treatments over the long term. Private land owners also must playa 
crucial role in reducing fire risk by treating their own lands to maintain stand 
structures conducive to fire control or to low-severity fire behavior. 
14  

Concluding Remark: 
Ponderosa pine forests in the Colorado Front Range are as complex as 
anywhere else in the geographic distribution of the species. A great deal of 
knowledge about these ecosystems has been developed over the past two 
decades, much of it illustrating unique features not typically described elsewhere. 
Nonetheless, many details are not yet fully understood, and many of these 
details have important implications for getting the ecology right for the Front 
Range, for prioritizing where treatments are needed, and for clarifying more 
precisely what the treatments should be. Therefore, research must continue, to 
provide these details. 
Even without all the answers, however, a sufficient 
knowledge base is available to proceed with caution to restore more sustainable 
ecological conditions in some portions of the ponderosa pine ecosystem, and to 
protect human communities and values at risk. 
We stress that fire hazard 
reduction and ecological restoration are not always congruent, and that specific 
objectives therefore need to be clearly articulated for every treatment. We also 
stress that adaptive management is all about learning from research and from 
project experiences, including both our mistakes and our successes. 
It is 
imperative that the research and land management communities continue their 
pattern of frequent interaction and feedback. 
Maintaining this pattern of 
cooperation will assure the best ecological gains and the greatest community 
protection with the fewest mistakes and disasters. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Mike Babler of the Nature Conservancy was instrumental in bringing 
together the authors to develop this article. Chris Pague also contributed to our 
discussions, and Jeannie Patton served as our recorder. Our efforts also were 
supported by the U.S. Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station, the 
University of Colorado at Boulder, and the Colorado Forest Restoration Institute 
at Colorado State University. Critical reviews of a preliminary manuscript were 
provided by Dan Binkley, Peter Brown, Laurie Huckaby, Tania Schoennagel, 
Rosemary Sherriff, and Bob Sturtevant. 
SOME SOURCES OF ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 
Brown, P. M., M. R. Kaufmann, and W. D. Shepperd. 
1999. Long-term, 
landscape patterns of past fire events in a montane ponderosa pine forest of 
central Colorado. Landscape Ecology 14:513-532. 
Ehle, D. S., and W. L. Baker. 
2003. Disturbance and stand dynamics in 
ponderosa pine forests in Rocky Mountain National Park, USA. 
Ecological 
Monographs 73:543-566. 
15 

Fornwalt , P. J., M. R. Kaufmann , J. M Stoker, and L. S. Huckaby. 2002. Using 
the Forest Vegetation Simulator to reconstruct historical stand conditions in the 
Colorado Front Range. Crookston, N. L., and Havis, R. N. compilers. Second 
Forest Vegetation Simulator Conference; February 12-14, 2002, Fort Collins, CO. 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research 
Station Proc. RMRS-P-25, pp. 108-115. 
Huckaby , L. S., M. R. Kaufmann, J. M. Stoker, and P. J. Fornwalt. 
2001. 
Landscape patterns of montane forest age structure relative to fire history at 
Cheesman Lake in the Colorado Front Range. 
In Vance, R. K., W. W. 
Covington, and C. B. Edminster (tech. coords.), Ponderosa pine ecosystems 
restoration and conservation: steps toward stewardship. 
U.S. Department of 
Agriculture Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station Proc. RMRS-P-22: 
19-27. 
Kaufmann, M. R., C. M. Regan, and P. M. Brown. 
2000. 
Heterogeneity in 
ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir forests: age and size structure in unlogged and 
logged landscapes of central Colorado. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 
30: 98-711. 
Kaufmann, M. R., P. J. Fornwalt, L. S. Huckaby, and J. M. Stoker. 
2001. 
Cheesman Lake - a historical ponderosa pine landscape guiding restoration in 
the South Platte watershed of the Colorado Front Range. In Vance, R. K., W. W. 
Covington, and C. B. Edminster (tech. coords.) , Ponderosa pine ecosystems 
restoration and conservation: steps toward stewardship. 
U.S. Department of 
Agriculture Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station Proc. RMRS-P-22: 
9-18. 
Kaufmann, M.R., L.S. Huckaby, P.J. Fornwalt, J.M. Stoker, and W.H. Romme. 
2003. Using tree recruitment patterns and fire history to guide restoration of an 
unlogged ponderosa pine / Douglas-fir landscape in the southern Rocky 
Mountains after a century of "fire suppression. Forestry 76:231-241 . 
Lewis, P., M. R. Kaufmann , D. Leatherman , and L. S. Huckaby. 2005. Report 
on the Health of Colorado's Forests 2004 -- Special Issue on Ponderosa Pine 
Forests. Colorado State Forest Service, Colorado State University. 36 pp. 
Mast, J. N., 1. 1. Veblen, and Y. B Linhart. 
1998. Disturbance and climatic 
influences on age structure of ponderosa pine at the pine/grassland ecotone, 
Colorado Front Range. Journal of Biogeography 25:743-755. 
Schoennagel, T., 1. 1. Veblen, and W. H. Romme. 2004. The interaction of fire, 
fuels, and climate across Rocky Mountain forests. BioScience 54:661-676. 
Veblen, T.T. and D.C. Lorenz. 1986. Anthropogenic disturbance and recovery 
patterns in montane forests, Colorado Front Range. Physical Geography 7:1-24. 
16  

Veblen , T.T. and D.C. Lorenz. 1991. The Colorado Front Range: a century of 
ecological change. University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City, Utah. 
Veblen, T. T., T. Kitzberger, and J. Donnegan. 
2000. 
Climatic and human 
influences on fire regimes in ponderosa pine forests in the Colorado Front 
Range. Ecological Applications 10(4):1178-1195. 
Veblen, T. T. 2003. Key issues in fire regime research for fuels management 
and ecological restoration. 
Pages 259-275, in: ami, P. N., and L. A. Joyce 
(technical editors), Fire, fuel treatments, and ecological restoration. Conference 
Proceedings; 2002 16-18 April, Fort Collins, CO. USDA Forest Service 
Proceedings RMRS-P-29. [http://www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs/rmrs-p029.pdf] 
Veblen, T.T. 2003. Historic range of variability of mountain forest ecosystems: 
concepts and applications. Forest Chronicle 79:223-226. 
Veblen, T.T. and J.A. Donnegan 2004. Historical range of variability assessment 
for forest vegetation of the national forests of the Colorado Front Range. Final 
report, USDA Forest Service. 182 p. 
http://www.colorado.edu/geography/biogeography/publications.html 
17  

Table 1. Forest area (acres) in major life zones in Colorado Front Range counties, reclassified from ReGAP data1. 
Major forest types listed in the table and key (below) account for at least 5% of the total forested area per life 
zone summed across all counties. 
Front 
Southern 
Range 
Counties 
Douglas EIPaso 
Life Zone 
Subalpine / Alpine 
Elevations 
>9500 
Forested 
103 
14,712 
Area 
Park 
380,657 
Teller 
69,078 
Central 
Boulder 
>9000 
66,568 
Clear 
Creek 
123,302 
Gilpin 
49,857 
Jefferson 
19,945 
Northern 
Larimer 
358,325 
Total 
Forested 
Area 
1,082,546 
Major 
Forest 
Tvpes" 
SF 
LP 
A 
Upper Montane 
Elevations 
8500-9500 
Forested 
25,889 
61,308 
Area 
197,440 
143,927 
8000-9000 
74,630 
34,616 
27,962 
85,053 
7500-9000 
336,167 
986,991 
PP 
Me 
LP 
Lower Montane 
Elevations 
6500-8500 
Forested 
139,620 
96,250 
Area 
57,825 
63,388 
6000-8000 
88,871 
7,919 
2,182 
166,652 
5500-7500 
140,834 
763,542 
PP 
PPOF 
Lower Ecotone 
Elevations 
5500-6500 
Forested 
13,014 
18,960 
Area 
° 
° 
5500-6000 
3,599 ° 
° 
1,976 
5000-5500 
499 
38,049 
PP 
PJ 
Plains Grassland 
Elevations 
<5500 
Forested 
31 
Area 
50 
° 
° 
95 
° 
° 
27 
<5000 
2 
205 
PP 
PJ 
Total 
Forested 
Area 
178,657 
191,280 
635,922 
276,393 
233,763 
165,837 
80,001 
273,653 
835,828 
2,871,334 
18  

1 See elsewhere (http://leopold.nmsu.edu/fwscoop/swregap/default.htm) for a more thorough analysis of ReGAP data for 
the Colorado Front Range. ReGAP data for several forest types were grouped following general terminology used to 
describe Front Range forests (key below). Mesic and Dry-Mesic Mixed Conifer (ReGAP codes S032 and S034) in the 
Lower Montane Zone is almost entirely restricted to ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir. In contrast, the same types in the Upper 
Montane Zone tend to have a greater component of Douglas-fir, and one or more additional species (most commonly 
lodgepole pine, limber pine, aspen, Engelmann spruce, subalpine fir) are nearly always present. Note that acreages have 
not been corrected for several large fires since 2000 (most notably Bobcat Gulch, Hi Meadows , Schoonover, Hayman, 
and Big Elk). 
Forest Type Groupings 
ReGAP Code ReGAP Description 
SF Subalpine spruce/fir 
S028 
Rocky Mountain Subalpine Dry-Mesic Spruce-Fir Forest and Woodland 
S030 
Rocky Mountain Subalpine Mesic Spruce-Fir Forest and Woodland 
A Aspen 
S023 
Rocky Mountain Aspen Forest and Woodland 
LP Lodgepole Pine 
S031 
Rocky Mountain Lodgepole Pine Forest 
MC Mixed Conifer 
S032 
Rocky Mountain Montane Dry-Mesic Mixed Conifer Forest and Woodland 
S034 
Rocky Mountain Montane Mesic Mixed Conifer Forest and Woodland 
PPDF Ponderosa Pinel 
S032 
Rocky Mountain Montane Dry-Mesic Mixed Conifer Forest and Woodland 
Douglas-Fir 
S034 
Rocky Mountain Montane Mesic Mixed Conifer Forest and Woodland 
PP Ponderosa Pine 
S036 
Rocky Mountain Ponderosa Pine Woodland 
PJ Pinon/Juniper 
S038 
Southern Rocky Mountain Pinon-Juniper Woodland 
2 Listed in decreasing order of area in each life zone. 
19  

