157 
Calochortiana December 2012 Number 1 
     Astragalus is believed to be the largest genus of 
flowering plants in the world, with over 2500 species 
worldwide and over 400 species in North America 
alone, primarily in arid regions of the western U.S. The 
highest diversity in North America is centered in the 
Great Basin and on the Colorado Plateau (Barneby 
1989, Sanderson 1991). Astragalus species are often 
found in marginal habitats or on specialized soil types, 
and their geographic ranges are strongly skewed to-
wards narrow endemism (Barneby 1964, 1989; Sander-
son 1991). Along with a limited dispersal ability pos-
sessed by many members of the genus, there is wide-
spread local differentiation and geographic speciation, 
particularly in the areas of the western U.S. where it 
achieves the highest levels of diversity (Sanderson 
1991, Lesica et al. 2006). However, due to restricted 
ranges and habitats, some Astragalus species may ex-
hibit low genetic variability and reduced fitness from 
inbreeding depression (Karron et al. 1988, Allphin et al. 
2005, Breinholt et al. 2009). Neoendemism is common 
in the intermountain regions of North America where 
there are large numbers of both widespread, recently 
evolved species, as well as narrowly endemic species, 
which are often associated with extreme edaphic condi-
tions and reduced competition from dominant species  
 
Ecology  of  Rusby’s  Milkvetch  (Astragalus rusbyi),  
a Rare Endemic of Northern Arizona Ponderosa Pine Forests 
 
Judith D. Springer, Michael T. Stoddard, and Daniel C. Laughlin,  
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 
 
Debra L. Crisp and Barbara G. Phillips, 
Coconino National Forest, Flagstaff, AZ 
 
Abstract.    Rusby’s  milkvetch  (Astragalus rusbyi Greene) is endemic to basaltic soils northwest and west of Flagstaff, 
Arizona. Recent interest in this species is due in part to its addition to the U.S. Forest Service Region 3 sensitive spe-
cies list in 1999 and its occurrence in ecological restoration projects and proposed fuels reduction projects that in-
volve tree thinning and prescribed burning. Some of its habitat has been subjected to large wildfires over the last few 
decades, and other areas have undergone ecological restoration treatments, while much of its range in ponderosa pine 
forest is slated to undergo such treatments in the near future. In a ponderosa pine restoration study area northwest of 
Flagstaff, A. rusbyi was an indicator species of remnant grass patches and increased following tree thinning and pre-
scribed burning. However, in an area less than 3 km away, there appeared to be no relationship to restoration treat-
ments, trees per ha, pine basal area, or canopy cover, but A. rusbyi did appear to be sensitive to an extreme drought 
event in 2002 and may have remained dormant in that year, a pattern that has been observed in other rare Astragalus 
species. A. rusbyi has a foliar nitrogen content of 4.4% and a foliar C:N mass ratio of 11. It is classified as a competi-
tive ruderal species, meaning it is able to compete well with other understory species, but is not very tolerant of 
stresses, such as deep shade. We currently do not have a thorough understanding of the ecology of this species, or the 
effects of ecological restoration or fuels reduction treatments. In this paper we will discuss ecology of other members 
of the genus Astragalus and explore the relationships of A. rusbyi to moisture, vegetation treatments and overstory 
mortality. 
(Lesica et al. 2006). Lesica and his co-authors suggest 
that restricted ranges and high local abundances of 
neoendemic species may be due more to patterns and 
processes of speciation than to ecological tolerance. The 
small ranges exhibited by many Astragalus species in 
the western U.S. may be due to recent speciation and an 
insufficient amount of time for these species to have 
increased their ranges significantly (Lesica et al. 2006). 
Reticulate evolution may not be widespread in the As-
tragalus genus, for many members of the genus appear 
to exhibit allopatry (geographic isolation) along with 
high levels of local endemism and little hybridization 
(Sanderson 1991).  
     The type specimen of A. rusbyi was collected by 
Henry Hurd Rusby on July 2, 1883 on Mt. Humphreys, 
near Flagstaff Arizona (Welsh 2007) and was first de-
scribed by Edward Lee Greene in 1884 (Greene 1884). 
A. rusbyi is a slender perennial averaging 15-40 cm in 
height. It also has a fairly deep taproot (D.C. Laughlin, 
personal communication, 2008). It grows primarily in 
meadows in ponderosa pine forests and in aspen groves 
(Barneby 1964, Welsh 2007), but it also may be found 
in moderately dense ponderosa pine forests. Populations 
are mainly concentrated on basaltic soils in two areas in 
northern Arizona: around the San Francisco Peaks  

158 
Utah Native Plant Society 
(primarily on the southern and western sides of the 
Peaks) and also the vicinity of Kendrick Mountain 
(Figure 1). Collections from areas to the south, includ-
ing Oak Creek Canyon and Yavapai County are of un-
certain validity. It is ranked G3 (vulnerable) by Nature-
Serve (2009) and is on the U.S. Forest Service sensitive 
species list for Region 3 (Southwestern Region). 
     A. rusbyi has been placed in the section Strigulosi, 
which contains approximately 35 species found mainly 
in the Mexican highlands north to Arizona and New 
Mexico and generally associated with oak and pine for-
ests (Barneby 1964, Spellenberg 1974). Section Strigu-
losi is thought by some authors to be the most primitive 
group of Astragalus species in North America. The ma-
jority of the evidence, including research on chromo-
some numbers and more recent molecular phylogenetic 
data, currently points to an Old World origin for Astra-
galus, presumably in the steppes and mountains of 
southwestern and south-central Asia and the Himalayan 
Plateau (Spellenberg 1976, Wojciechowski 2005). 
     Astragalus rusbyi has a chromosome number of 11 
(2n=22) (Spellenberg 1974). Morphologically, it ap-
pears to be most closely related to two other members of 
section Strigulosi, A. egglestonii and A. longissimus, 
with which it shares technical features (Barneby 1964).  
Like most members of Strigulosi, A. rusbyi flowers 
from mid-summer onward into the fall, varying in abun-
dance in response to the amount and timing of summer 
rains.  Astragalus rusbyi is differentiated from these 
species of Astragalus by minor differences in characters 
of its pendulous, stipitate, bilocular, trigonously com-
pressed pods (Barneby 1964). However, the ranges of 
these three species do not overlap and they maintain 
geographic isolation from one another with no observed 
intermediate populations.  
ECOLOGY OF ENDEMIC WESTERN SPECIES 
     Astragalus is a very large genus with little ecological 
information available for the vast majority of species. 
However, many uncommon and rare species share char-
acteristics with each other that may directly affect moni-
toring and conservation planning for A. rusbyi. For ex-
ample, some species exhibit prolonged vegetative dor-
mancy, such as A. scaphoides (Bitterroot milkvetch) and 
A. sinuatus (Whited’s  milkvetch)  of  the  sagebrush  
steppe of the Pacific Northwest, or dormancy during dry 
years, as demonstrated by A. schmolliae (Schmoll’s  
milkvetch) of Mesa Verde National Park, in southwest-
ern Colorado (Anderson 2004, Gamon 1995, Lesica and 
Steele 1994). A. scaphoides plants may utilize pro-
longed vegetative dormancy as a bet-hedging strategy in 
an effort to conserve resources while avoiding the risk 
inherent in funneling resources into aboveground 
growth (Gremer et al. 2012). Lesica (1995) found that 
A. scaphoides plants may remain dormant belowground 
for as long as five years before reappearing. Dormancy 
may be inferred in other species, such as A. ripleyi, due 
to an increased number of visible plants in years of 
above average precipitation (Ladyman 2003). Barneby 
(1964) notes that A. rusbyi, like most members of sec-
tion Strigulosi varies  in  “vigor  and  abundance  in  propor-­
tion  to  amount  and  timing  of  summer  rains,”  but  pro-­
longed vegetative dormancy has not been established.  
     Many Astragalus species exhibit large underground 
storage organs (A. scaphoides), a vigorous creeping root 
system (A. cicer – chickpea milkvetch), or long taproots 
(A. ampullarioides – Shivwits milkvetch) (Jennifer Gre-
mer, unpublished data; Mark Miller, personal observa-
tion; Horvath 2002). These extensive rooting systems 
exhibited in the genus may be linked to observed pat-
terns of vegetative dormancy. A. ripleyi (Ripley’s  milk- 
Figure 1. Known range of Astragalus rusbyi in northern Arizona based on herbarium collections and research studies 
(figure compiled by J.E. Crouse and D. L. Crisp). 

159 
Calochortiana December 2012 Number 1 
(Anderson 2004). Grass seeding post-fire also has the 
potential to cause negative impacts on this species. 
Drought is deleterious, but it is likely tolerant of fire 
because of a deep taproot. However, monitoring indi-
cates that while fire may confer short-term benefits, it 
may also have long-term detrimental impacts (Anderson 
2004). 
 
OBSERVATIONS FROM FIELD STUDIES 
      A. rusbyi has a very small range in northern Arizona, 
with the bulk of its population limited to a band ap-
proximately 18 x 7 km (11 x 4.5 mi) in size to the west 
and north of the San Francisco Peaks and a few scat-
tered populations to the west (Figure 1). Some of its 
habitat has been subjected to large wildfires over the last 
few decades; other areas have undergone ecological res-
toration treatments (tree thinning and prescribed burn-
ing); and much of its range in ponderosa pine forest is 
slated to undergo such treatments in the near future. In-
creasing tree densities of ponderosa pine, and a cessa-
tion of frequent fires in ponderosa pine forests since 
Euro-American settlement of this area of the Southwest 
have been well documented (Covington and Moore 
1994, Fulé et al. 1997). 
     We currently do not have a thorough understanding 
of the basic ecology of this species. Additionally, we 
have insufficient knowledge of the effects of increased 
tree densities, tree thinning, or fire on the population 
dynamics. However, some limited information is avail-
able from large landscape scale studies within its range. 
Fisher and Fulé (2004) installed 121 20x50 m perma-
nent monitoring plots on the south side of the San Fran-
cisco Peaks (specifically Agassiz Peak). Plots were es-
tablished in five forest types: ponderosa pine, mixed 
conifer, aspen, spruce/fir and bristlecone pine. Over-
story measurements and plant community data were 
collected between 2000 and 2003. A. rusbyi was found 
to be an indicator species for ponderosa pine forest, with 
an indicator value of 36.5 (p<0.01). Six of the 14 pon-
derosa pine indicator species were nitrogen fixers, and 
one other species was an Astragalus (A. humistratus). A 
large part of the study area was burned in the high-
intensity Leroux Fire of 2001 (26 plots) and these plots 
were measured a year after the fire in May 2002. Ten 
plots contained A. rusbyi prior to the fire, but it was in-
ventoried on only two plots following the fire, which 
was an 80% decrease. However, 2002 was an extremely 
dry year with precipitation at levels 77% below normal 
in the vicinity of the Fort Valley area (Laughlin et al. 
2008), so the absence of this species in the monitoring 
plots could have been due to drought, vegetative dor-
mancy, the detrimental impacts of high-intensity fire, or 
a combination of other factors.  
     In a research area near Flagstaff, AZ which was de-
signed to study the effects of ecological restoration  
vetch), a species of ponderosa pine forests in north-
central New Mexico and south-central Colorado, repro-
duces by seed, but plants tend to allocate resources to-
ward survival of individual plants, and it is believed to 
build up root stock reserves when aboveground parts are 
consumed (Ladyman 2003). Direct evidence supports an 
ability to lie dormant for two years, but monitoring has 
not yet been used to establish if it can remain dormant 
for a longer period.  
     Although a number of Astragalus species contain 
toxins (such as miserotoxin or swainsonine) or accumu-
late selenium, thus making them poisonous to livestock, 
there are also many species that are highly desirable to 
herbivores. Lesica (1995) found fecundity losses in A. 
scaphoides due to livestock and insect herbivory rang-
ing from 14-90% at two sites. Observations have con-
firmed that inflorescences are consumed by ants and 
moth larvae. Loss of seeds to weevil predation ranged 
from 0-33%. Sugars such as those found in flower nec-
tar may increase palatability. Lesica also found very low 
recruitment, accounting for less than 17% of population 
growth. However, despite heavy losses in reproductive 
output and low recruitment, populations can continue to 
persist and increase in size. He suspects that persistence 
of many populations of long-lived plants may be more 
reliant on growth and survival of established plants than 
on recruitment from seed. Herbivory by cattle and game 
has also been observed in A. terminalis (railhead milk-
vetch), and seed predation in A. ripleyi may be the cause 
of significant seed loss (Heidel and Vanderhorst 1996, 
Ladyman 2003). Apparently, like A. scaphoides, this 
species has low recruitment rates and allocates a signifi-
cant amount of resources toward maintenance of the 
root system. A. ripleyi is also consumed by a number of 
arthropods (aphids, treehoppers, carpenter ants), rodents 
and large mammals, including cattle, elk, deer, sheep 
and goats. A ninety percent reduction in fruit production 
due to herbivory was observed in A. ampullarioides 
(Shivwits milkvetch), which the authors suggest could 
have a significant impact on reproductive output (Miller 
et al. 2007). The toxicity of A. rusbyi is unknown. 
     The effects of disturbances, such as tree thinning or 
burning, on Astragalus species vary widely. A. ripleyi is 
thought  to  be  a  “fire  evader”  rather  than  a  stress  tolera-­
tor (Ladyman 2003). Following fire, plants have been 
observed in areas where they have not been detected 
before, presumably emerging from dormant root sys-
tems underground. However, the stress-tolerator cate-
gory may be appropriate, for a pattern of rapid coloniza-
tion following fire and drought has also been observed 
in this species (Ladyman 2003).  
     Thinning activities in pinyon-juniper woodlands at 
Mesa Verde National Park appeared to cause an increase 
in Poa fendleriana (muttongrass) that could result in 
undesirable competition impacts on A. schmolliae  

160 
Utah Native Plant Society 
lected on all plant species, and data collection was not 
targeted specifically toward A. rusbyi.  Pre-treatment 
data were collected in 1998, and the study sites were 
thinned in 1999 and burned in 2000/2001. Although 
there was no significant effect on plant density from the 
ecological restoration treatments (p=0.242), there was a 
sharp decline in 2002, a year of extreme drought (Figure 
3). However, populations in some of the units appeared 
to return to pre-2002 levels within four years. Determin-
ing why there are differences in responses to ecological 
restoration treatments between these two sites would be 
purely speculative. The G.A. Pearson Natural Area is 
fenced to exclude both domestic and wild ungulates, so 
vegetation would have been spared the effects of graz-
ing. This area also received fairly labor-intensive fuel 
treatments prior to burning, including removal of slash 
by hand and addition of herbaceous vegetation from a 
nearby prairie prior to burning.  
     Surveys conducted in 2008 within an area of A. rus-
byi habitat to the northwest of the San Francisco Peaks 
that is slated for fuels reduction treatments revealed 
high levels of mortality of overstory trees, especially 
quaking aspen (Populus tremuloides) (D. L. Crisp, per-
sonal observations, 2008). Numerous populations of A. 
rusbyi, varying in size from a few to several hundred 
plants, were also noted in areas that exhibited heavy tree 
mortality.   
Figure 2. Frequency of Astragalus rusbyi by treatment over time at G.A. Pearson Natural Area near Flagstaff, AZ. 
treatments (G.A. Pearson Natural Area), Laughlin and 
others (2008) found A. rusbyi to be an indicator species 
of both thinned treatments and treatments that involved 
thinning plus burning (mean indicator value of 25.0; 
p<0.001) (Figure 2). Thus it exhibited a positive re-
sponse to either type of treatment, whether thinning 
alone or a combination of thinning and burning. A. rus-
byi (along with two other legumes) was also found to be 
an indicator species of remnant grass patches (small 
open areas consisting of native grasses and forbs) with a 
mean indicator value of 26.8 (p=0.013). It would appear 
from this study that ecological restoration treatments, 
whether they involve thinning plus prescribed burning, 
or prescribed burning alone, have neutral to positive 
effects on A. rusbyi.   
     However, in another restoration study area less than 
3 km away, no significant effects, either positive or 
negative, were observed with thinning and prescribed 
burning treatments and there was no correlation found 
between the presence of A. rusbyi and trees per ha, pine 
basal area, or canopy cover. In this study, there was no 
“thinning  only”  component,  but  rather,  treatments  were  
designed to examine the effects of various levels of tree 
thinning, and these treatments were all combined with 
prescribed burning, with the exception of the controls. 
There is a total of 240 plots divided up into three blocks, 
each with a control, and 3 units with different thinning 
levels. Presence/absence and frequency data were col- 

161 
Calochortiana December 2012 Number 1 
in the very near future. Many Astragalus species are 
long-lived, recruit slowly by seed, and maintain long-
lived seeds in the soil seed bank. Whether A. rusbyi util-
izes a similar strategy is unknown but could be deter-
mined from additional research. We currently do not 
have a thorough understanding of the population dy-
namics of this species over time. Rigorous long-term 
demographic monitoring would be valuable in determin-
ing population baselines and is essential for understand-
ing the ecology and conservation and habitat needs of 
this species. Such monitoring can also reveal patterns 
that might be caused by precipitation fluctuations.  From 
the information available, it appears to have a large tap-
root, which should give some resistance to the impacts 
of drought and fire, but high-intensity fire or burning at 
peak  growth times could be detrimental. It has shown 
positive to no effects from tree thinning and prescribed 
burning operations in ecological restoration research 
studies, but additional research that specifically targets 
this species would be useful before we can draw firm 
conclusions.  
Figure 3. Proportion of permanent monitoring plots through time containing Astragalus rusbyi at an ecological resto-
ration study area near Flagstaff, AZ. Treatments were randomly assigned within each block and included (a) no thin-
ning, no burning (control), (b) 1.5-3 tree replacement (high-intensity thinning), (c) 2-4 tree replacement (medium-
intensity thinning), and (d) 3-6 tree replacement (low-intensity thinning). All treatment units were thinned in 1999 
and subsequently treated with prescribed fire in spring 2000 (Block 3) and spring 2001 (Blocks 1 and 2).  
     D.C. Laughlin (personal communication, 2009) col-
lected trait data on 137 ponderosa pine understory spe-
cies, including A. rusbyi, and found that, on average, it 
has a higher specific leaf area (24 mm2/mg) and higher 
nitrogen and phosphorous concentrations in its foliar 
tissue (4.4% and 0.18%, respectively) (Figure 4). Be-
cause of the high nitrogen content, it has a relatively 
high net photosynthetic rate.  On average, it also has a 
lower leaf dry matter content (0.19 mg/mg) and foliar 
C:N mass ratio (10.7). Combined with its high photo-
synthetic rate and comparatively tall stature (with an 
average height of 31 cm), it is able to compete well with 
other understory species, but is not very tolerant of 
stresses such as deep shade. The combined trait data 
place it in the category of a competitive ruderal species 
(Hodgson et al. 1999).  
 
CONCLUSIONS 
     As previously mentioned, little is known of the ecol-
ogy of this locally abundant but narrowly endemic spe-
cies, and much of its known range is slated to undergo 
various thinning and prescribed burning activities  

162 
Utah Native Plant Society 
REFERENCES 
     Allphin, L., N. Brian and T. Matheson. 2005. Repro-
ductive success and genetic divergence among varieties 
of the rare and endangered Astragalus cremnophylax 
(Fabaceae) from Arizona, USA. Conservation Genetics. 
6: 803-821. 
     Anderson, D.G. 2004. Populations Status Survey of 
Schmoll’s  Milkvetch  (Astragalus schmolliae C.L. Por-
ter). Prepared for National Park Service Mesa Verde 
National Park. Colorado Natural Heritage Program. Fort 
Collins, CO. 81 pp. 
     Barneby, R.C. 1964. Atlas of North American Astra-
galus. Memoirs of The New York Botanical Garden. 
13:1–1188. 
 
Figure 4. Astragalus rusbyi is  located  at  the  positive  end  of  the  ‘leaf  economic  spectrum’  because  of  its  high  specific  
leaf area and tissue nitrogen concentration.  This scatterplot illustrates the results of a principal components analysis 
of 133 plant species and 10 functional traits (adapted from Laughlin 2009) that occur in southwestern USA ponderosa 
pine forests. Species symbols are coded by plant functional types. A few species names are highlighted: ARPU = 
Aristida purpurea, BLTR = Blepharoneuron tricholepis, CAGE = Carex geophila, HECO = Hesperostipa comata, 
IRMI = Iris missouriensis, LUAR = Lupinus argenteus, MUMO = Muhlenbergia montana, OXLA = Oxytropis lam-
bertii, PIPO = Pinus ponderosa, QUGA = Quercus gambelii. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
     We would like to thank Wally Covington, Margaret 
Moore, Pete Fulé, Marta Fisher, Julie Korb, Mark 
Daniels, Jon Bakker, and Cheryl Casey and the staff and 
students of the Northern Arizona University Ecological 
Restoration Institute and School of Forestry who as-
sisted with data collection. We would also like to thank 
Martin Wojciechowski and Jill Craig for their reviews 
of the paper and the U.S. Forest Service for providing 
funding to carry out the majority of the research de-
scribed in this paper.  

163 
Calochortiana December 2012 Number 1 
     Barneby, R.C. 1989.  Fabales.  Intermountain Flora, 
vol. 3, part B.  A. Cronquist et al. (editors).  The New 
York Botanical Garden, New York. 
     Breinholt, J.W., R.Van Buren, O.R. Kopp, and C.L. 
Stephen. 2009. Population genetic structure of an endan-
gered Utah endemic, Astragalus ampullarioides (Fab-
aceae). American Journal of Botany. 96(3):661-667. 
     Covington, W.W. and M.M. Moore. 1994. South-
western ponderosa pine forest structure: changes since 
Euro-American settlement. Journal of Forestry. 92: 39-
47. 
     Fisher, M.A. and P.Z. Fulé. 2004. Changes in forest 
vegetation and arbuscular mycorrhizae along a steep  
elevation gradient in Arizona. Forest Ecology and Man-
agement. 200: 293–311. 
     Fulé, P.Z, W. W. Covington and M.M. Moore. 1997. 
Determining reference conditions for ecosystem man-
agement of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Eco-
logical Applications.7: 895-908. 
     Gamon, J.G. 1995. Report on the status of Astragalus 
sinuatus Piper. Olympia, WA: Washington Natural 
Heritage Program, Washington Department of Natural 
Resources. 
     Greene, H.L. 1884. New plants of the Pacific Coast. 
Bulletin of the California Academy of Sciences. 1(1 – 
Feb. 1884): 8. 
     Gremer, J.R., E.E. Crone, and P. Lesica.  2012.  Are 
dormant plants hedging their bets?  Demographic conse-
quences of prolonged dormancy in variable environ-
ments.  The American Naturalist 179(3):315-327. 
     Heidel, B.L. and J. Vanderhorst. 1996. Sensitive 
plant surveys in Beaverhead and Madison counties, MT. 
Unpublished report to the Bureau of Land Management. 
Montana Natural Heritage Program, Helena. 85 pp. plus 
appendices.  
     Hodgson, J.G., P.J. Wilson, R. Hunt, J.P. Grime, and 
K. Thompson. 1999. Allocating C-S-R plant functional 
types: a soft approach to a hard problem. Oikos. 85:282-
294. 
     Horvath, J. 2002. Factsheet Astragalus cicer (Cicer 
milkvetch). University of Saskatchewan, Rangeland 
Ecosystems and Plants, PL EC 434.3. 
     Karron, J.D., Y.B. Linhart, C.A. Chaulk, and C.A. 
Robertson. 1988. Genetic structure of populations of 
geographically restricted and widespread species of As-
tragalus (Fabaceae). American Journal of Botany. 75
(8): 1114-1119. 
 
     Ladyman, J.A.R. 2003. Astragalus ripleyi Barneby 
(Ripley’s  milkvetch):  A  technical  conservation  assess-­
ment. Prepared for the USDA Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Region, Species Conservation Project. 48 pp. 
     Laughlin, D.C., J.D. Bakker, M.L. Daniels, M.M. 
Moore, C.A. Casey, J.D. Springer. 2008. Restoring plant       
species diversity and community composition in a pon-
derosa pine-bunchgrass ecosystem. Plant Ecology. 
197:139-151.  
     Lesica, P. 1995. Demography of Astragalus sca-
phoides and effects of herbivory on population growth. 
Great Basin Naturalist. 55(2): 142-150. 
     Lesica, P. and B.M. Steele. 1994. Prolonged dor-
mancy in vascular plants and implications for monitor-
ing studies. Natural Areas Journal. 14(3): 209-212. 
     Lesica, P., R. Yurkewycz, and E.E. Crone. 2006. 
Rare plants are common where you find them. Ameri-
can Journal of Botany. 93(3): 454-459. 
     Miller, M.E., R.K. Mann and J.D. Yount. 2007. Eco-
logical Investigations of the Federally Endangered 
Shivwits Milk-Vetch (Astragalus ampullarioides) – 
2006 Annual Report. U.S. Department of the Interior, 
U.S. Geological Survey, in cooperation with the Na-
tional Park Service, Zion National Park. Open-File Re-
port 2007-1050. 34 pp. 
     NatureServe. 2009. NatureServe Explorer: An online 
encyclopedia of life [web application]. Version 7.1. 
NatureServe, Arlington, Virginia. Available http://
www.natureserve.org/explorer. (Accessed: May 27, 
2009 ).  
     Sanderson, M.J. 1991. Phylogenetic Relationships 
within North American Astragalus L. (Fabaceae). Sys-
tematic Botany. 16(3): 414-430. 
     Spellenberg, R. 1974. Chromosome number as an 
indication of relationships of Astragalus, section Strigu-
losi (Leguminosae), with descriptive notes on A. altus. 
The Southwestern Naturalist. 18(4): 393-396.  
     Spellenberg, R. 1976. Chromosome numbers and 
their cytotaxonomic significance for North American 
Astragalus (Fabaceae). Taxon. 25(4): 463-476. 
     Welsh, S.L. 2007. North American Species of As-
tragalus Linnaeus (Leguminosae): A Taxonomic Revi-
sion. Brigham Young University, Provo, UT. 932 pp. 
     Wojciechowski, M.F. 2005. Astragalus (Fabaceae): 
A molecular phylogenetic perspective. Brittonia. 57(4): 
382-396. 
 
 
