 
 
Officials: Burns dictated by science, art, luck 
By ANABELLE GARAY 
Associated Press Writer 
05/07/2004 
GRAND CANYON NATIONAL PARK -- The blaze that shrouded the Grand Canyon in 
hazy smoke and briefly closed portions of the popular South Rim Wednesday was started 
by firefighters seeking to prevent more destructive wildfires. But a sudden wind shift put 
firefighters on the defensive.  
"You do your level best, but you're still dealing with Mother Nature," said Sam Whitted, 
a firefighter who was on the crew that set the initial blaze.  
Prescribed fires are a frequent tool in the effort to reduce fire danger, but the prevention 
effort carries its own risks.  
The burns can only be done when it is dry enough to ensure that pine needles, low-lying 
brush and other forest litter will burn, said Peter Fulé, associate director of the Ecological 
Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University. Fire managers also need enough 
wind to ventilate the area so smoke doesn't become too heavy, he said.  
But weather that is too windy and dry can create opportunities for runaway fires.  
"Fire managers wrestle with those decisions," Fulé said. "They have to make some 
difficult and public decisions."  
The overwhelming number of prescribed burns do what they are supposed to do -- clear 
low-level grasses and trees that stoke wildfires and can blacken tracts of forests. Treated 
areas burn with less intensity, sparing large trees.  
But occasionally, prescribed burns grow out of control, as the one on the South Rim of 
the Canyon did Wednesday.  
The planned 1,665-acre blaze spewed embers across planned containment lines, 
scorching an additional 235 acres.  
Officials initially reported that 285 additional acres were burned, but reduced their 
estimate after using satellite mapping to survey the area Thursday, said Dan Oltrogge, an 
incident commander for the fire.  
The fire was 80 percent contained late Thursday. Crews hoped to have the fire fully 
contained by Saturday evening, Oltrogge said.  

The fire came within a half-mile of park employee housing and Mather Point, a popular 
canyon overlook.  
On Thursday, Ralene and Andrew Adler, of Great Neck, N.Y., were at Mather Point, 
which had been closed part of the day Wednesday.  
The Adlers said they had never heard of prescribed burns until Wednesday, when they 
talked to rangers after smelling smoke and seeing soot-covered firefighters.  
At first, they were disappointed that the fire could hamper their first trip to the canyon. 
But by Thursday, they chalked it up to part of their vacation story.  
"To me, it was so fascinating. That's part of the experience," Ralene Adler said.  
Across federal lands, authorities did prescribed burns on 1.79 million acres in 2002, 
according to the National Interagency Fire Center.  
Roy Johnson, NIFC's manager for planning and resources, said less than 1 percent of 
those fires escaped the planned area.  
He noted that authorities must develop an exhaustive plan for burns, including everything 
from how to manage the smoke to contingency plans.  
Still, the process is not foolproof, as the sudden wind shift on Wednesday demonstrated.  
"It's a combination of science and art -- and luck," Johnson said.  
Whitted, who was acting as a spokesman for the team fighting the Grand Canyon fire, 
said fire managers felt they had to treat the area burned on Wednesday before the hot 
summer months, especially because it is in an important visitor hub.  
"Sometimes, you have to take calculated risks," he said.  
------  
Associated Press Writer Michelle Rushlo in Phoenix contributed to this report.  
------  
On the Net:  
National Interagency Fire Center: http://www.nifc.gov  
NAU's Ecological Research Institute: http://www.eri.nau.edu/  
Grand Canyon National Park: http://www.nps.gov/grca  

 
