United States
Department
of Agriculture
Forest Service
Rocky Mountain
Research Station
General Technical
Report RMRS-GTR-105
July 2003
Coarse Woody Debris:
Managing Benefits and
Fire Hazard in the
Recovering Forest
James K. Brown
Elizabeth D. Reinhardt
Kylie A. Kramer

Abstract _____________________________________
Brown, James K.; Reinhardt, Elizabeth D.; Kramer, Kylie A. 2003. Coarse woody debris:
managing benefits and fire hazard in the recovering forest. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-
GTR-105. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain
Research Station. 16 p.
Management of coarse woody debris following fire requires consideration of its positive and
negative values. The ecological benefits of coarse woody debris and fire hazard consider-
ations are summarized. This paper presents recommendations for desired ranges of coarse
woody debris. Example simulations illustrate changes in debris over time and with varying
management.
Keywords: fuel, salvage, snags, reburn, Fire and Fuels Extension to the Forest Vegetation
Simulator
The Authors
James K. Brown received his B.S. degree from the
University of Minnesota in 1960, his M.S. degree from
Yale in 1961, and his Ph.D. degree from the University of
Michigan in 1968, all in forestry. From 1961 to 1965, he
was a Research Forester with the Lake States Forest
Experiment Station. In 1965 he transferred to the Inter-
mountain Fire Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, MT, where
he continued research on the physical properties, inven-
tory, and prediction of fuels. From 1979 until his retire-
ment in 1995, he was leader of a Prescribed Fire and Fire
Effects Research Work Unit.
Elizabeth Reinhardt is a Research Forester in the
Prescribed Fire and Fire Effects Research Work Unit at
the Fire Sciences Laboratory in Missoula, MT. She has
degrees in English (A.B., Harvard University, 1978) and
forestry (M.S., 1982 and Ph.D., 1991, University of Montana).
Her research has included studies of fuel consumption,
tree mortality, and prescription development.
Kylie A. Kramer worked in fire suppression for 7 years,
then worked at the Fire Sciences Laboratory in Missoula,
MT. Her work there included  tree climbing, canopy fuel
analysis, leaf area index analysis, and FFE-FVS fuel
modeling. She has a chemistry degree from the Univer-
sity of Puget Sound and is currently investigating biode-
gradable polymers at the University of Montana.
Acknowledgments
Thanks to Stu Lovejoy and the Bitterroot National
Forest staff for suggesting the need for this paper and for
providing data for the example simulations.
You may order additional copies of this publication by sending
your mailing information in label form through one of the following
media. Please specify the publication title and Research Paper
number.
Fort Collins Service Center
Telephone
(970) 498-1392
FAX
(970) 498-1396
E-mail
rschneider/rmrs@fs.fed.us
Web site
http://www.fs.fed.us/rm
Mailing Address
Publications Distribution
Rocky Mountain Research Station
240 W. Prospect Road
Fort Collins, CO 80526-2098

1
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-105. 2003
The Management Concern ________
Large fires in the Inland West during the past
decade and efforts to conduct salvage logging have
intensified public debate on what is the proper harvest
of dead trees. Harvesting fire-killed trees as soon as
possible following fire is often called salvage. The
objectives of salvage can be to provide economic value,
improve forest health by thinning, and reduce fire
hazard by removing fuel (Gorte 1996; SAF 1995). In
this report, harvesting and salvage refer to cutting of
trees for their product value and for reducing fire
hazard. Positive values of salvage harvest are gener-
ally perceived as economic benefits from jobs and
forest products, site rehabilitation, fuel hazard reduc-
tion, and lessening the buildup of insect pests. Nega-
tive values include lost recreational opportunities,
damaged soils through erosion and reduced nutrient
processes, reduced wildlife habitat, and spread of
weeds (McIver and Starr 2001). A quandary faced by
managers is deciding where and how to manage fire-
killed trees in the new developing forest. Their deci-
sions about taking action come down to two questions:
Where on the landscape should cutting and fuel treat-
ment be undertaken, and how much of what sized
material should be removed?
An important goal in dealing with these concerns is
to manage toward quantities of accumulated downed
woody material such that the risk of damage from a
reburn is acceptable and benefits derived from coarse
woody debris (CWD) can be realized. Considerable
uncertainty exists over the effects of a possible reburn
on soil productivity and vegetation succession. Al-
though repeated fires have occurred as long as vegeta-
tion covered the landscape (Pyne 1982), the term
“reburn” has specific meaning. Reburn results when
falldown of the old burned forest contributes signifi-
cantly to the fire behavior and fire effects of the next
fire.
The purposes of this report are (1) to identify a range
of CWD quantities that provides for positive values
and avoids excessive fire hazard, and (2) to illustrate
how simulation of the effects of various management
alternatives on CWD over long periods can assist in
planning. We examined the knowledge of the ecology
of CWD, its contribution to potential fire behavior,
historical stand structures and large fuel accumula-
tions, and potential reburn severity as a basis for
identifying optimum quantities of CWD. The fires of
2000 on the Bitterroot National Forest served as a case
study to illustrate the way in which simulation model-
ing can be used in conjunction with these general
concepts to aid in planning.  Example simulations use
data from the Bitterroot Forest.  The general discus-
sion of coarse woody debris is meant to be broadly
applicable and not limited to a particular forest.
A note on terminology: low soil heating severity or
burn severity as reported in the Bitterroot Post Fire
Assessment (Bitterroot National Forest 2000) and as
used in this paper is typical of understory and mixed
fire regime types. Moderate severity is typical of mixed
and stand-replacement fire regime types, and high
severity is typical of the stand-replacement fire re-
gime type. Fire regime type refers to historical effects
of fire (Brown 2000).
• Understory fire regime—fires are generally non-
lethal to the overstory (approximately 80 percent
or more of the dominant vegetation survives).
• Stand-replacement fire regime—fires are lethal
to most aboveground dominant vegetation (ap-
proximately 80 percent or more of the dominant
vegetation is killed).
• Mixed severity fire regime—fire severity varies
between understory and stand-replacement
regimes.
Ecology of Coarse Woody
Debris _________________________
Coarse woody debris is typically defined as dead
standing and downed pieces larger than 3 inches in
diameter (Harmon and others 1986), which corre-
sponds to the size class that defines large woody fuel.
Some ecologists include woody material larger than
1 inch in diameter as CWD. Coarse woody debris is an
important component in the structure and functioning
of ecosystems. A dead tree, from the time it dies until
Coarse Woody Debris: Managing
Benefits and Fire Hazard in the
Recovering Forest
James K. Brown
Elizabeth D. Reinhardt
Kylie A. Kramer

2
USDA Forest Service Gen Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-105. 2003
it is fully decomposed, contributes to many ecological
processes as a standing snag and fallen woody mate-
rial lying on and in the soil. Fire, insects, pathogens,
and weather are responsible for the decomposition of
dead organic matter and the recycling of nutrients
(Olson 1963; Stoszek 1988). Fire directly recycles the
carbon of living and dead vegetation. The relative
importance of fire and biological decomposition de-
pends on site and climate (Harvey 1994). In cold or dry
environments, biological decay is limited, which al-
lows accumulation of plant debris. Fire plays a major
role in recycling organic matter in these environ-
ments. Without fire in these ecosystems, nutrients
are tied up in dead woody material for a long period.
Fire, insects, and diseases perform similar roles in
that they both create and consume CWD and smaller
dead woody material.
Importance to Wildlife
Coarse woody debris plays many roles in the forest.
Animal life processes, site productivity, site protec-
tion, and fire are probably the ones that managers
most often deliberate. Coarse woody debris contrib-
utes to biodiversity by being part of the life cycle of soil
mites, insects, reptiles, amphibians, mammals, and
birds (Brown 2000). Invertebrates such as bark beetles,
wood borers, carpenter ants, and wasps utilize CWD
for food and protection. Mammals, reptiles, and am-
phibians mostly utilize downed logs for purposes such
as feeding, reproduction, and shelter (Harmon and
others 1986). As more downed CWD accumulates in
the forest, activity of small mammals such as voles
increases (Ucitel 1999). A 15 to 20 percent coverage of
downed CWD was recommended by Carey and Johnson
(1995) for favoring small animal communities. A 15
percent coverage of CWD is equivalent to 32 tons per
acre of 6-inch diameter pieces or 64 tons per acre of 12-
inch pieces, assuming wood densities typical of ponde-
rosa pine and lodgepole pine.
Woody debris incorporated in streams creates habi-
tat diversity that improves rearing habitat for anadro-
mous fish (Everest and Harr 1982) and provides sur-
vival cover. Woody debris also provides a source of
nutrients for aquatic life that increases abundance of
macroinvertebrates (Smock and others 1989). How-
ever, excessive accumulations can block fish passage,
cover important spawning sites, and damage aquatic
habitat during postfire flood events (Gresswell 1999).
Desirable quantities of CWD to leave following sal-
vage logging for recruitment into streams to benefit
aquatic life are only generally known. However, the
origin of CWD that eventually becomes incorporated
in streams is known. In small streams in Washington
and Oregon, McDade and others (1990) found that 70
percent of debris pieces were rooted within 60 ft of the
streambank, and 50 percent came within a 30-ft wide
strip on each side of the stream. In Alaska, Murphy
and Koski (1989) observed that 95 percent of the
CWD came from within 60 ft of the stream. They also
observed that the larger the stream, the larger the
CWD needed to form a stable accumulation. These
studies suggest that leaving an uncut strip 60 to 100
ft from each streambank would maintain CWD in
aquatic habitat.
A range of desirable snag densities depending on
bird species has been suggested for forests in the
Northern Rocky Mountains. About 25 percent of the
bird species in the Northern Rocky Mountains are
cavity nesters (Bull and others 1997). Cavity nesting
birds and bats mostly utilize standing snags especially
those of large diameters (Fischer and McClelland
1983). Smaller snags can be important for foraging.
Salvage logging can enhance habitat for some species
but diminish it for others, resulting in a shift in
diversity but not in richness (McIver and Starr 2001).
For Pileated Woodpeckers (Dryocopus pileatus), Bull
and Holthausen (1993) showed that viable popula-
tions were maintained with an average of four snags
per acre (10-inch and greater diameter at breast height,
d.b.h.). Following high intensity wildfire Saab and
Dudley (1998) found that the Lewis’ Woodpecker
(Melanerpes lewis) and Kestrel (Falco sparverius) pre-
ferred salvage logged areas that retained about 25
snags per acre (more than 9-inch d.b.h.). The Black-
backed Woodpecker (Picoides arcticus) and Northern
Flicker (Colaptes auratus) preferred the unlogged ar-
eas having about 50 snags per acre (more than 9-inch
d.b.h.). Bull (1994) suggested leaving 40 standing or
fallen snags per acre (preferably more than 15-inch
d.b.h.) to retain as much wildlife as possible in stands
to be salvage logged following fire. The CWD loadings
represented by these snag densities range from about
1 to 25 tons per acre depending on diameter of trees
(table 1, 2).
Although an abundant literature shows the impor-
tance of standing and downed CWD to wildlife, few
studies have quantified amounts needed to maintain
specific populations much less whole faunal communi-
ties. One difficulty in interpreting and applying re-
search results is that many studies deal with popula-
tions on specific sites and report conditions that
enhance or maximize populations on those sites. Main-
tenance of metapopulations and a diversity of spe-
cies, however, requires a landscape perspective and a
strategy that provides a diversity of habitat struc-
tures (Hutto 1995; Lyon and others 2000; Tobalske
and others 1991).
Importance to Soils
Maintaining soil productivity over the long term
generally requires presence of soil organic material
and fire effects characteristic of the natural fire re-
gime. Most fires characteristic of the historic fire
regime or moderate severity prescribed fires are likely

3
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-105. 2003
Table 1—Loading of standing dead ponderosa pine coarse woody debris (tons per acre) by number
of snags per acre and d.b.h. (inches). Loadings computed from table 2.
d.b.h.
Number
6
8
10
12
14
16
20
24
4
0.2
0.4
0.8
1.3
2.0
2.9
5.3
8.6
6
.3
.6
1.2
2.0
3.1
4.4
8.0
12
8
.4
.9
1.6
2.7
4.1
5.9
11
17
10
.5
1.1
2.0
3.3
5.1
7.4
13
22
15
.7
1.6
2.9
5.0
7.7
11
20
32
20
1.0
2.1
3.9
6.6
10
15
27
43
25
1.2
2.7
4.9
8.3
13
18
33
54
30
1.4
3.2
5.9
10
15
22
40
64
40
1.9
4.3
7.8
13
20
29
53
86
50
2.4
5.4
9.8
17
26
37
67
100
4.8
11
20
33
51
74
200
9.6
21
39
66
102
300
14
32
58
100
400
19
43
78
500
24
54
98
to enhance soil development and fertility over the long
term by periodic release of nutrients. However, ex-
tremely severe fires or large severely burned areas
within fires, brought on by either rare natural events
or humans, are likely to be highly detrimental to forest
soils (Harvey and others1989).
Nitrogen is the most limiting nutrient in forest
ecosystems. Its quantity and form in the soil is almost
totally dependent on microbial action by way of two
distinct processes, symbiotic and nonsymbiotic N fixa-
tion. Except where N-fixing plants such as alder (Alnus
spp.) and ceanothus (Ceanothus spp.) are in good
supply, most N acquisition in forests comes from
nonsymbiotic fixation that depends on organic matter
for energy (Harvey and others 1989). Another group of
microorganisms that depend on soil organic matter
and is important to a conifer’s ability to acquire
nutrients such as N is the ectomycorrhizal fungi
associated with roots. Using ectomycorrhizae as a
bioindicator of healthy, productive forest soils, Gra-
ham and others (1994) developed conservative recom-
mendations for leaving CWD after timber harvesting
to ensure enough organic matter was left to maintain
long-term forest productivity. For Montana habitat
types (Pfister and others 1977) they recommended 5
to 9 tons per acre (Douglas-fir/ninebark), 12 to 24
tons per acre (Douglas-fir/pinegrass), 7 to 14 tons per
acre (grand fir/bear grass), 8 to 18 tons per acre
(subalpine fir/bluehuckleberry, subalpine fir/grouse
Table 2—Total tree bole weight (tons) of wood and bark of
individual trees based on whole tree volume
equationsa, wood density, and bark-to-wood ratios
for ponderosa pine (PP), Douglas-fir (DF), and
lodgepole pine (LP)b. Data based on trees from
stands of a variety of site indexes and densities.
d.b.h.
PP
DF
LP
4
0.017
0.021
0.026
5
.029
.037
.051
6
.048
.060
.081
7
.074
.088
.118
8
.107
.123
.162
9
.147
.166
.215
10
.196
.218
.275
11
.258
.274
.343
12
.332
.341
.420
13
.416
.416
.504
14
.511
.501
.597
15
.617
.595
.698
16
.736
.699
.807
18
1.009
.938
1.051
20
1.334
1.220
1.328
22
1.714
1.546
24
2.151
1.921
26
2.648
2.344
28
3.208
2.819
30
3.832
3.346
a Equations for 4-inch d.b.h. from Faurot (1977) and for 5- to 30-inch d.b.h. from
Brown and Johnston (1976) and Stage (1973).
b Wood density and bark ratios from Brown and others (1977).

4
USDA Forest Service Gen Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-105. 2003
whortleberry), and 12 to 24 tons per acre (subalpine
fir/bear grass, subalpine fir/twinflower). For ponde-
rosa pine/fescue and Gambel oak (Quercus gambelii)
habitat types in Arizona, they recommended 5 to 13
tons per acre. These recommendations were based on
studies in undisturbed mature stands where ectomyco-
rrhizae populations were used to determine optimum
amounts of organic material. The upper limit of the
recommended ranges or higher seems appropriate for
stands recovering from high severity wildfire where
much of the partially decomposed CWD and other
forest floor organic matter was consumed.
The role of CWD in site protection can be significant
or minor depending on site conditions. On steep slopes,
CWD helps protect soils from erosion due to surface
runoff. It disrupts flow near the ground, creates shade
for seedlings, and reduces trampling by livestock,
wildlife, and people.
Fire Hazard_____________________
Fire hazard generally refers to the difficulty of
controlling potential wildfire.  It is commonly deter-
mined by fire behavior characteristics such as rate-of-
spread, intensity, torching, crowning, spotting, and
fire persistence, and by resistance-to-control. In this
paper we also consider fire severity to be an element of
fire hazard. Fire severity refers to the effects of fire on
the ecosystem. It depends on fuel consumption and
heat flux into all living components. Downward heat
transfer into the soil is an important determinant of
fire severity (Ryan and Noste 1985). Fire intensity,
largely a measure of upward heat transfer, is not a
reliable indicator of fire severity because it can corre-
late poorly with downward heat transfer. Small and
large downed woody fuels contribute differently to the
various elements of fire hazard.
Fire Behavior
The influence of small woody fuels (3 inches and less
in diameter) on spread rate and intensity of surface
fires and associated torching and crowning is substan-
tial and can be estimated using widely accepted fire
behavior models (Andrews 1986; Finney 1998;
Rothermel 1983; Scott and Reinhardt 2001). Large
woody fuels have little influence on spread and inten-
sity of the initiating surface fire in current fire behav-
ior models; however, they can contribute to develop-
ment of large fires and high fire severity. Fire
persistence, resistance-to-control, and burnout time
(which affects soil heating) are significantly influ-
enced by loading, size, and decay state of large woody
fuel. However, methods for estimating and interpret-
ing these fire characteristics are not well established.
Accumulations of large dead woody fuel, especially
containing larger diameter decayed pieces, can hold
smoldering fire on a site for extended periods. When
high winds occur, the sustained burning of persistent
fire can be fanned into fast moving, dangerous fires
(Chandler and others 1983). Historically, this was
probably an important factor in development of large
fires. The probability of a reburn is higher, to an
unknown extent, in heavy accumulations of CWD be-
cause of the high fire persistence that characterizes
decayed CWD. However, the probability of wildfire
due to high fire persistence can be mitigated by effec-
tive fire detection and suppression actions.
Torching, crowning, and spotting, which contribute
to large fire growth, are greater where large woody
fuels have accumulated under a forest canopy and can
contribute to surface fire heat release. Duration of
flaming and energy release during flaming can be
computed using a burnout model (Albini 1976) to
indicate the potential for extreme fire behavior such as
crowning and long-distance spotting. Compared to
surface fuels with little CWD, Rothermel (1991) showed
that 30 tons per acre of 6-inch sound pieces increases
energy release of surface fuels in the flaming front and
the associated crown fire, but not substantially. How-
ever, if the large woody fuel is decayed and broken up,
its contribution is considerably greater, similar to fire
in heavy slash. The contribution of large woody fuel to
surface fire intensity is likely underestimated in fire
behavior models that treat large woody pieces as
smooth cylinders. An assumption of a smooth surface
disregards the finely textured nature of bark-covered
and weathered pieces.
Resistance-to-Control
Resistance-to-control is generally viewed as an esti-
mate of the suppression force required for controlling
a unit of fire perimeter. Ratings may be subjective as
applied in the Photo Guide for Appraising Downed
Woody Fuels in Montana Forests (Fischer 1981). For
example, “high” resistance-to-control means “slow work
for dozers, very difficult for hand crews; hand line
holding will be difficult.” Large woody fuel loadings in
the Photo Guide ranged widely depending on size of
downed pieces and undergrowth. Loading for a me-
dium rating ranged from 14 to 50 tons per acre.
The USDA Forest Service Pacific Southwest Region
(1976) developed a resistance-to-control rating scheme
based on difficulty of hand line construction and an
inventory of downed woody fuel loadings by size classes.
High and extreme resistance-to-control ratings were
reached for the following loadings (tons per acre):
0- to 3-inch diameter
3- to 10-inch diameter
High
Extreme
5
25
40
10
15
25
15
5
15

5
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-105. 2003
The above ratings were based on the assumption
that few downed pieces greater than a 10-inch diam-
eter were present. In computing the ratings, the num-
ber of large pieces (greater than 10 inch) by length
class is more important than their loading in deter-
mining resistance-to-control. If the number of pieces
greater than a 10-inch diameter exceeded 10 to 20 per
acre, depending on length, less 3- to 10-inch diameter
material would be required to reach the high and
extreme resistance-to-control ratings.
Soil Heating
Soil heating is a complicated process that depends
on burnout time of duff and woody material, removal
of the insulating duff layer, and soil properties
(Hungerford and others 1991). Under severe burning
conditions, soil organic matter can be removed or
destructively altered, nutrients volatilized, water-ab-
sorbing capacity decreased, and living plant parts and
microorganisms killed. Loss of soil organic matter that
is necessary for sustaining the biological activity of
soils (DeBano and others 1998) is probably the most
serious long-term concern.
Estimates of soil heating can be obtained using
FOFEM (Reinhardt and others 1997). The model pre-
dicts a time-temperature profile at specified depths;
depths at which critical temperatures occur can also
be predicted. But to date little experience exists in
interpreting the predicted soil temperature profiles
across a large landscape. In addition to considering
temperature, three other aspects of soil heating need
to be evaluated: depth of undesirable heating, dura-
tion of heating (for example, 1 minute) that allows
heat effects to unfold, and proportion of area that is
impacted by undesirable soil temperatures. This last
element is necessary because the model predicts a
time-temperature profile based on an estimated unit
average heat flux that expresses heating uniformly
across a given area. In reality, however, excessive soil
heating is concentrated beneath large woody fuel
pieces particularly in the vicinity of piece intersec-
tions. For any predicted temperature it can be as-
sumed that the temperature is considerably higher
where the soil is overlaid with CWD, and elsewhere it
is less than predicted.
To explore the effect of CWD on soil temperatures we
exercised the soil heating model in FOFEM for a range
of fuel loadings (fig.1a). We assumed absence of a duff
layer, typical of a young forest developing after stand-
replacement fire. One possible criterion for evaluating
undesirable soil heating is the temperature at which
organic matter is destructively distilled. This occurs at
200 to 300 ∞C (Hungerford and others 1991). Figure 1a
indicates that high fuel loads (40 tons per acre) are
necessary to cause soil to be excessively heated (at least
275 ∞C) from the surface to 2 cm depths. Figure 1b can
be used to help with interpretation of soil heating
Figure 1—(a) Simulated soil heating. Curves show maximum temperatures reached at several
soil depths for a range of woody fuel loadings.  In these simulations, it was assumed the soils and
fuels were dry, and that there was no duff to insulate the soil. (b) Percent of area covered by woody
fuel for a range of piece diameters and woody fuel loadings, assuming the fuel is evenly spread.
Actual area coverage would be reduced because of piece overlap, but area impacted by heating
might be greater due to heating of soils adjacent to but not immediately below woody fuel.
a
Maximum temperature, degrees C
Woody fuel loading, tons/acre
b
Area covered by coarse woody debris, percent
Tons/acre

6
USDA Forest Service Gen Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-105. 2003
results.  It shows, for several piece sizes, the coverage
of CWD over a range of fuel loads.  Even at high fuel
loads, a small portion of an area is covered with woody
fuel. In areas that have no coverage, minimal soil
heating can be expected.
A practical consideration for minimizing severe soil
heating is to concentrate salvage activities in thickets
of dead trees. If the thickets fall down naturally the
CWD becomes concentrated. Burnout of large woody
fuels is enhanced where the material is concentrated
because of the interaction between adjacent burning
pieces. Thus, salvage can be used to reduce and scatter
the potential fuel concentrations.
Historical Conditions ____________
Stand Structure
On dry sites occupied by ponderosa pine and mixed
ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir, a structural mosaic
probably existed due to variation in tree establish-
ment, fire caused mortality, and other factors (Arno
and others 1995). Research plots on the Bitterroot and
Lolo National Forests showed that ponderosa pine
existed in all-aged and even-aged stands that experi-
enced similar fire histories. Although age-class struc-
tures varied substantially, most stands probably ap-
peared open or parklike (Arno and others 1997). Long
periods (50 to 100 years) without new pine establish-
ment occurred presumably because the site was too
stocked to allow recruitment of shade-intolerant spe-
cies, or most of the regeneration was killed by fire.
After 1900, when occurrence of frequent, low inten-
sity fires was significantly reduced in Western forests,
understories changed with an increase in basal area
and number of trees per acre. A shade-tolerant tree
understory of Douglas-fir developed. We computed the
increase in standing bolewood and crowns for trees up
to an 8-inch diameter that accrued from 1900 to 1991
on the four Bitterroot National Forest study plots
(Arno and others 1995). The increase in bolewood
weight ranged from 1 to 11 tons per acre and crown
weight from 0.5 to 6 tons per acre.
In restoring the dry site forest communities, a range
of alternatives is possible because of the wide range in
stand structures that probably existed historically.
However, control of shade-tolerant species such as
Douglas-fir will probably be necessary either using
mechanical means or prescribed fire repeated periodi-
cally. Where prescribed fire is applied, probably after
young pine can tolerate low intensity fire, woody fuels
including CWD will be partially reduced.
Large Woody Fuel
Quantities of downed woody fuel, hence CWD, that
fall within the presettlement era historical range of
variability for the understory and mixed fire regime
types can be inferred from existing inventory data and
knowledge of fire history and fuel consumption. An
indication of large downed woody fuel loadings that
existed historically in the ponderosa pine, Douglas-fir,
and lodgepole pine cover types is the summary of data
gathered by forest inventory (stage I) and stand exams
(stage II) during the 1970s (Brown and See 1981). The
forest inventory was based on randomly located plots
and is representative of forestwide conditions exclud-
ing classified wilderness. Stand exams were located
where silvicultural activities were anticipated, such
as timber sales that were often targeted for high risk
stands. Thus, quantities of downed woody material
might tend to be greater than found in the forest
inventory over the whole forest as suggested in table 3.
Results of inventories are summarized for the Bitter-
root and Lolo National Forests, which have similar
forests and fire histories (table 3). Considerable vari-
ability in quantities of downed woody material prob-
ably existed with many stands having little downed
woody material and a few stands having excessive
accumulations.
It seems reasonable to speculate that on average the
quantities in table 3 would be less if understory fire
had been allowed to occur at presettlement frequen-
cies. This is supported by Habeck’s (1976) study in the
White Cap drainage of the Selway-Bitterroot Wilder-
ness. In ponderosa pine stands having less than 0.5
Table 3—Average quantities of large woody fuel (tons per acre) by ponderosa pine
(PP), Douglas-fir (DF), and lodgepole pine (LP) cover types on the
Bitterroot and Lolo National Forests inventoried by the forest survey and
stand exam programs (Brown and See 1981). Number of plots is shown
in parentheses.
Bitterroot
Lolo
Program
PP
DF
LP
PP
DF
LP
Forest survey
5.3
9.2
12.2
4.8
11.5
13.3
(218)
(1,056)
(203)
(120)
(1,000)
(768)
Stand exam
11.3
21.1
25.9
10.4
11.9
15.8
(1,685)
(7,158)
(1,152)
(665)
(4,233)
(1,591)

7
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-105. 2003
inch (1 cm) of duff (averaged 2.4 tons per acre), large
woody fuels averaged less than 1 ton per acre. The
shallow duff indicated a fire history characteristic of
the understory fire regime. In stands having more
than a 0.5 inch of duff (averaged 11 tons per acre),
indicating a long period without fire, large woody fuels
averaged 23 tons per acre.
Snag densities on pre-European landscapes were
estimated by Harrod and others (1998) as 6 to 14 snags
per acre for dry forests east of the Cascades. This
converts to approximately 4.5 to 7.0 tons per acre
based on the wood density of ponderosa pine. He
assumed stand structure to be open and parklike
(basal area of 60 and 80 sq ft per acre) for forests of
ponderosa pine, Douglas-fir, and dry associations of
grand fir (Abies grandis). Lower densities favored
larger tree diameters, which ranged from 7 to 35
inches. Snags were recruited with a life of up to 45
years under a regime of frequent, low intensity surface
fires that created an uneven-aged structure with
small even-aged groups. In a study of snag abun-
dance in western Montana based on forest inventory
data, Harris (1999) reported an average of 2.5, 9, and
12 snags per acre in uncut stands of the ponderosa
pine, Douglas-fir, and lodgepole pine cover types. This
is equivalent to about 2.2 to 6.0 tons per acre of snags.
The spatial distribution of snags was highly variable,
with many plots having none and some plots having
many. The estimated snag densities from both studies
over their modeled life span (Harrod and others 1998)
seem to relate in a plausible way to the accumulated
downed large woody fuels in table 3.
Optimum Coarse Woody
Debris _________________________
The amount of CWD that provides desirable biologi-
cal benefits, without creating an unacceptable fire
hazard or potential for high fire severity reburn, is an
optimum quantity that can be useful for guiding man-
agement actions. To arrive at this optimum, various
sources of information about the roles of CWD in the
forest and its historical dynamics should be consid-
ered. Most sources of technical knowledge about the
benefits of CWD and fire characteristics deal with
individual species or restricted segments of the ecosys-
tem. We integrated the various sources of information
to identify an optimum range of CWD that provides an
acceptable risk of fire hazard while providing benefits
to soil and wildlife (fig. 2). The optimum quantity for
soil and fire considerations refers to downed CWD. For
wildlife the optimum quantity involves both standing
and downed CWD.
Although quantitative information is limited, we
stress it here because it provides a good basis on which
to plan. To summarize the positive values from earlier
discussion, for maintaining soil productivity the upper
limit of the following ranges is recommended: 5 to 10 tons
per acre for warm, dry ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir
types, 10 to 20 tons per acre for cool Douglas-fir types,
and 8 to 24 tons per acre for cool lodgepole pine and
lower subalpine fir types. Interestingly, these quanti-
ties coincide with the average amounts of large woody
fuel inventoried by forest survey and stand exams
(table 3) that may represent the high end of
presettlement conditions because occurrence of fire
Figure 2—Optimum ranges of coarse woody debris for providing acceptable risks of fire hazard and
fire severity while providing desirable quantities for soil productivity, soil protection, and wildlife
needs for (a) warm dry forest types and (b) cool and lower subalpine forest types.  Dotted lines show
a range that seems to best meet most resource needs: 5 to 20 tons per acre for the warm dry types
and 10 to 30 tons per acre for other types.
b
Coarse woody debris, tons/acre
a
Coarse woody debris, tons/acre

8
USDA Forest Service Gen Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-105. 2003
and associated fuel consumption had already been
reduced compared to the historical fire regime. Al-
though fire both creates and consumes fuel (Brown
1985), fuel depletion would tend to be greater than fuel
accretion in high frequency fire regime types such as
the warm, dry ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir types.
For cavity-nesting birds, up to 25 tons per acre may
be desirable depending on species (see tables 1 or 2 for
converting tons per acre to number of snags per acre).
For small mammals, more than 30 tons per acre is
best. Needs of riparian systems for CWD can be met by
leaving all or most of the trees in a 60- to 100-ft wide
strip on each side of streams. A wide range in CWD is
indicated for wildlife (fig. 2) because desirable quanti-
ties vary greatly by species. However, insufficient
knowledge exists to define the upper limit of CWD
beneficial to wildlife. To encourage a diversity of wild-
life species, a worthy objective may be to manage for a
wide range of CWD across the landscape. There is
considerable latitude within the optimum range for
managing CWD to achieve benefits and avoid exces-
sive wildfire threats.
To summarize the negative values, fire hazard in-
cluding resistance-to-control and fire behavior reach
high ratings when large fuels exceed about 25 to 30
tons per acre in combination with small woody fuels of
5 tons per acre or less. Excessive soil heating is likely
at approximately 40 tons per acre and higher. Thus,
generally high to extreme fire hazard potential exists
when downed CWD exceeds 30 to 40 tons per acre.
Consideration of these positive and negative aspects
indicates that the optimum quantity of CWD is about
5 to 20 tons per acre for warm dry ponderosa pine and
Douglas-fir types and 10 to 30 tons per acre for cool
Douglas-fir and lodgepole pine types and lower subal-
pine fir types. The recommended optimum ranges of
CWD quantities (fig. 2) should be modified by consid-
eration of other factors such as quantity of small
woody fuel, diameter of CWD, landscape level needs,
and ecosystem restoration objectives. The CWD opti-
mum quantities for acceptable fire hazard are appro-
priate when accompanied by small dead fuel loadings
of about 5 tons per acre or less. Acceptable CWD quanti-
ties are less at higher small fuel loadings (greater than
8 to 10 tons per acre). Acceptable CWD for fire hazard
(fig.2) is slightly less for the warm, dry sites because
they occur in a more flammable fire environment
where generally less soil organic materials are neces-
sary for maintaining soil productivity.
Higher loadings of CWD are acceptable where larger
piece sizes predominate, for example in accumulated
falldown of old growth trees. Larger piece sizes also
are desirable because, faced with decomposition and
fire, they persist longer to benefit wildlife and soil
productivity. Unfortunately, the relationship between
quantity and size of CWD and the various measures of
fire hazard is largely undefined. Thus, it is a matter of
judgment to consider that the larger the diameter of
downed CWD the greater the loading that could be
allowed without undesirable fire effects. A graph of
CWD surface area by piece diameter and vertical
projection of piece areas by piece diameter (fig. 3) can
provide some guidance for adjusting the optimum
range. The curves flatten at about a 5-inch diameter
for the vertical projection and at an 8-inch diameter for
surface area. This suggests that where CWD com-
prises predominately 3- to 6-inch material, the opti-
mum quantity is less, perhaps by 5 tons per acre or
more, than for larger sized material. With this in
mind, it seems reasonable to assume that high fire
hazard ratings apply when 25 to 30 tons per acre of
CWD largely comprises 3- to 6-inch material. If quan-
tities of CWD, comprising mostly smaller diameter
pieces (3 to 6 inches), were at the upper end of the
optimum range, adverse soil heating might occur at
low fuel moisture contents, especially if substantial
quantities of small woody fuels were also present (8 to
10 tons per acre or more).
Severity of Reburn ______________
A question often asked by managers is if a reburn
occurs, what fire effects can be expected? The interest
is primarily in recovery of vegetation and possible
impairment to soil productivity. The purpose of this
section is to suggest in general terms how burn sever-
ity and postfire succession might be affected by recur-
rence of fire at varying periods following the previous
fire. The probability of a reburn occurrence, which is
small for a particular site but high over a large area
such as a Ranger District, is not dealt with here.
Figure 3—Surface area and vertical
projection per ton of woody material as they
vary by size class.
Square feet/ton
Piece diameter

9
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-105. 2003
Vegetative succession following forest fire including
reburns depends on a number of interacting factors
including fire severity, prefire vegetation, species ad-
aptations to fire, environmental conditions, and chance
(Brown 2000; Lyon and Stickney 1976; Miller 2000;
Morgan and Neuenschwander 1988). Although suc-
cession depends on many variables, the following
principles can provide a general description of plant
community development after a reburn.
1. The course of succession is set by the prefire
composition of species that survive fire onsite by pro-
tected sprouting plant parts and seeds (Stickney 1990).
In Northern Rocky Mountain wildfires, which are
mostly of moderate to high severity, there is a ten-
dency to get back most of the species that were present
before fire (Lyon and Stickney 1976).
2. Many herb and shrub species have sprouting
parts such as rhizomes, bulbs, and root crowns that
are buried in mineral soil to varying depths.
3. The more severe the fire the higher the mortality
and the less the survivor component in both species
and number of plants (Stickney 1990). Only deeply
buried sprouting parts survive. Resilient species such
as pinegrass (Calamagrostis rubescens) and Douglas
spirea (Spiraea betulifolia) usually retain surviving
plant components. Further additions must come from
offsite plants. Offsite colonizers that have light, easily
wind-disseminated seeds are favored. Thus, both de-
sired native plant and weed species fitting this cat-
egory are favored.
4. The pattern of burn severity within a fire relates
to the pattern of fuel consumption (Miller 2000). Dura-
tion of fire over uninsulated soil largely determines
severity.
5. A future influence of unknown consequences on
postfire succession is global warming, which may
affect fire severity and plant establishment, growth,
and mortality (Ryan 2000).
With these principles in mind, some general state-
ments about the effects of a reburn during high to
extreme burning conditions with low fuel moistures
can be made:
0 to 10 Years After First Fire—High severity fire
is unlikely because duff and downed woody fuels that
support prolonged burning would be absent. Large
woody fuels would still be accumulating through
falldown, and they would not have decayed enough to
support smoldering combustion, which can extend the
period of downward heating. If salvage operations
leave concentrations of small woody fuels, high severity
burning could occur where the fuels are concentrated.
This situation would be aggravated where stand-
replacement fire did not consume foliage, thus allow-
ing a layer of scorched needles to accumulate as
surface fuel. Surviving onsite herbs and shrubs should
dominate the recovering vegetation. Newly estab-
lished trees that regenerate by producing seeds could
be lost. Even seedlings of species having sprouting
capability could die if their root systems are not well
established.
10 to 30 Years After First Fire—Downed CWD
would exhibit some decay and support a longer period
of burning. A duff layer, however, would not be well
established and would be unable to contribute to soil
heating. Thus, high burn severity would primarily
occur where large woody material was lying on or near
the soil surface. High severity fire could be substantial
where a large proportion of the soil surface was di-
rectly overlain by large woody material, which could
accumulate from falldown of a large amount of tree
basal area. A limited amount of conifer regeneration
might be possible from young cone-bearing trees es-
tablished onsite after the previous fire. Onsite herbs
and shrubs would dominate the recovery vegetation
except where burnout of large woody pieces caused
deep soil heating, which would occur particularly in
the near vicinity of overlapping pieces.
30 to 60 Years After First Fire—Large woody
pieces would probably exhibit considerable decay, and
a forest floor of litter and duff would be established to
a variable extent depending on the density of over-
story conifers. Burnout of large woody pieces and duff
is assisted by the interaction of these two components
(Brown and others 1991). Higher severity burning
than would typically occur during earlier periods is
possible depending on extent of soil coverage by large
woody pieces. If a conifer overstory exists, crowning
coupled with burnout of duff could amplify the burn
severity. Offsite colonizers would be an important
component of the recovery in the more severely burned
locations. Prescribed fire during this period could
greatly reduce the severity of a reburn wildfire. How-
ever, a reburn involving optimum quantities of CWD
should not lead to unusually severe fire effects. His-
torically, fires probably often occurred in the under-
story and mixed fire regime types when large downed
woody fuels were in the optimum range.
To predict succession more specifically following a
reburn, managers would need an inventory of plant
species onsite and offsite and an inventory of fuels.
Planning Retention of Coarse
Woody Debris __________________
The environmental effects of postfire salvage and
fuel treatment activities may be due to the activity of
removing trees or due to the altered stand structure
(McIver and Starr 2001). Deciding whether to remove
fire-killed or damaged trees and how much CWD
should be retained on various sites could be viewed as
passing through a series of decision gates or address-
ing questions that evaluate the environmental effects.
For example, consider the following questions:

10
USDA Forest Service Gen Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-105. 2003
1. Where will salvage activities cause unacceptable
soil compaction, erosion, and sedimentation? Roads
have the greatest potential for exacerbating erosion.
Also consider the need for site rehabilitation and that
a reburn in heavy accumulations of CWD could en-
courage erosion.
2. Where will expected falldown of fire-killed trees
together with existing downed woody fuels exceed the
optimum CWD? Consider mortality to surviving trees
that may die during the next 5 to 10 years due to fire
injury, insects, and windfall.
3. Where should landscape scale considerations in-
fluence retention of CWD? For example, salvage may
be desirable in the wildland-urban interface zone and
elsewhere to break up large blocks of high fuel load-
ings and create areas having low to moderate fire
behavior potential and resistance-to-control. Salvage
may be undesirable where large diameter snags needed
by wildlife are in short supply in adjoining areas.
The Bitterroot National Forest: An
Example _______________________
Following the wildfires of 2000 on the Bitterroot
National Forest, managers were particularly concerned
with:
1. Potential for large, severe fires in the future that
are of high risk to firefighters and public safety
2. Creating a fire-defensible wildland-urban inter-
face
3. Recovery of the dry site forest types to fit with the
historical fire regime
4. Effects of a possible reburn on soil productivity
and vegetation succession
5. Providing wildlife values and forest products
6. Avoiding soil erosion and sedimentation and inva-
sion of weeds
Of primary concern were three ecosystems identi-
fied as vegetation response units (VRU) in the Bitter-
root Fires 2000 Assessment of Post-fire Conditions
with Recovery Recommendations (Bitterroot National
Forest 2000):
1. VRU 2—warm, dry ponderosa pine (Pinus ponde-
rosa) and Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii var.
glauca) habitat types
2. VRU 3—cool, dry, and moist Douglas-fir habitat
types
3. VRU 4—cool lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta) and
lower subalpine fir (Abies lasiocarpa) habitat types.
Approximately 126,000 acres in VRU 2 and VRU 3
were burned with 60 percent of VRU 2 and 49 percent
of VRU 3 experiencing moderate to high soil heating
severity (Bitterroot National Forest 2000). Under-
story and mixed fire regime types characterize VRU 2
and VRU 3. Management direction for these vegetation
response units was to keep wildfire hazard in the
wildland-urban interface at acceptable levels by re-
ducing fuels and to return the vegetation and fuels to
conditions falling within the historical range of vari-
ability (Brown 2000) for these fire regime types. Ap-
proximately 86,000 acres burned in VRU 4, with 51
percent of the area experiencing moderate and high
soil heating severity, which fits with the mixed and
stand-replacement fire regime types that character-
ize VRU 4. In all, 356,000 acres were burned on the
Bitterroot National Forest and adjacent State and
private lands.
Modeling Predictions
Management of CWD should consider how much of
it is desired onsite in the future. This requires predic-
tions of falldown of fire-killed trees, continued tree
mortality and falldown, and loss of dead woody mate-
rial through deterioration and decay. The time inter-
val chosen for predicting CWD should be long enough
for a new immature or mature forest to develop. Keep
in mind that the further in time the projection, the
more uncertainty exists about the predicted values.
Reasonable predictions of CWD can probably be pro-
vided over a period of 50 to 100 years.
To project future trends of CWD we used The Fire
and Fuels Extension (FFE) (Beukema and others
2000) to the Forest Vegetation Simulator (FVS) (Stage
1973) to simulate the effects of alternative manage-
ment strategies on future quantities of CWD and
small woody fuels. The FVS simulates tree growth,
tree mortality and regeneration, and the impacts of a
wide range of silvicultural treatments. The FFE simu-
lates additions to fuel pools from stand dynamics and
management activities, and the removal of fuels
through decay, mechanical treatments, and prescribed
or wildfires. Various types of fuels are represented,
including canopy fuels and surface fuels by diameter
classes. Fire behavior of the propagating fire front and
fire effects, such as fuel consumption, tree mortality,
and smoke production, are modeled. Model outputs
include fuel characteristics, stand structure, snag den-
sity, and potential fire behavior that provide a basis
for comparing proposed stand and fuel treatments.
We selected three stands representing different veg-
etation types on the Bitterroot National Forest to
illustrate how FVS and FFE could be used to simulate
the effects of no treatment, salvage, and fuel treat-
ment on CWD. The selected stands were considered
typical of forest conditions occurring commonly on the
Bitterroot National Forest (table 4). The VRU 2 stand
contained a few old growth ponderosa pine and Dou-
glas-fir trees with a dense understory of Douglas-fir, a
condition that has developed extensively in the ab-
sence of repeated low intensity fire. The VRU 3 stand
is a pure Douglas-fir stand with trees mostly ranging

11
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-105. 2003
from 4 to 20 inches d.b.h. The VRU 4 stand consisted
of a dominant lodgepole pine overstory with a dense
understory of small subalpine fir and Englemann
spruce (Picea engelmannii). The salvage treatment
called for removing merchantable quality dead trees
greater than 12 inches d.b.h. Approximately the same
proportion of trees in each size class was removed.
Fuel treatment called for removing dead trees 6 inches
and less in d.b.h. by slashing, piling, and burning.
Figure 4a shows an untreated stand typical of VRU 2
following high severity fire, while figure 4b shows a
similar stand following partial salvage and surface
fuel treatment. Figure 4c shows a VRU 2 stand follow-
ing low severity fire, partial salvage, and surface fuel
treatment.
For the simulation of high fire severity (100 percent
tree mortality) in VRU 2, untreated CWD accumu-
lated well beyond the optimum range for the next 100
years (fig. 5). The large quantity of CWD together
with 8 to 10 tons per acre of small woody fuel (fig. 6)
presented a high fire hazard over many years. Salvage
of 50 percent or more of the merchantable dead trees
accompanied by treatment of fuel left an acceptable
quantity of CWD (fig. 7). The number of snags greater
than 12 inches d.b.h. per acre (snags per acre, SPA)
initially ranged from 4 for the 100 percent salvage
treatment to 17 for 50 percent salvage (table 5). After
20 years SPA falls to 0.8 for 100 percent salvage and
1.5 for 50 percent salvage. Many years elapse in high
fire severity burns before newly grown large diameter
snags can replace the fallen snags, so leaving an ample
density of snags following fire can help maintain a
minimal snag resource during the 20 to 40 year postfire
period when many snags have already fallen. Leaving
a high density of snags would require constraints on
harvesting.
Living stand structure and CWD varied considerably
between simulations of low and high fire severity (fig.
5). Under low severity fire (80 percent tree mortality),
Table 4—Number of trees per acre by d.b.h. class (inches) for
the representative vegetation response unit stands
used in the FFE simulation of postfire recovery.
VRU2
VRU 3
VRU 4
d.b.h.
DF
PP
DF
LP
ES
AF
0–1
409
112
191
464
5345
1–4
436
0
27
246
4–8
142
153
130
16
8–12
56
141
108
13
12–16
18
50
12
2
16–20
10
1
13
20–24
1
2
24–28
2
28–32
3
32+
2
a
Figure 4—(a) Untreated stand following high
severity fire, Bitterroot National Forest, 2002.
(b) Treated stand following high severity fire,
Bitterroot National Forest, 2002. Note the
reduced density of standing dead trees and the
presence of coarse woody debris on the forest
floor. (c) Treated stand following low severity
fire, Bitterroot National Forest, 2002. Note
the standing live and dead trees, as well as
the residual coarse woody debris.
b
c

12
USDA Forest Service Gen Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-105. 2003
Figure 5—Simulated quantities of standing and surface coarse woody debris and live 3+
inch biomass for vegetation response unit 2 with no salvage and no fuel treatments under
(a) low (80 percent tree mortality) and (b) high (100 percent tree mortality) fire severity
conditions.  Shaded bands indicate desired ranges.
untreated CWD peaked at 24 tons per acre but re-
mained slightly higher than the 20-tons per acre upper
limit of optimum for next the 100 or more years due to
contributions from growth and mortality of the surviv-
ing forest. Fuel treatment without salvage removed
about 4 tons per acre of CWD and 2 tons per acre of
small woody fuel. This kept CWD within the optimum
range and lowered fire hazard.
For the VRU 3 stand, assuming high fire severity,
untreated CWD peaked at 53 tons per acre and re-
mained greater than the 30-tons per acre upper limit
of optimum for the next 100 years (fig. 8). Salvage
accompanied by fuel treatment lowered CWD into the
optimum range (fig. 9). The simulations for salvage of
all dead merchantable trees without fuel treatment
and 50 percent salvage accompanied by fuel treatment
produced nearly the same amount of CWD over the
Figure 6—Simulated quantities of surface small woody fuel (0- to 3-inch diameter) for
vegetation response unit 2 for combinations of 100 percent salvage, 50 percent salvage and
no salvage with treated and untreated fuels under (a) low (80 percent tree mortality) and
(b) high (100 percent tree mortality) fire severity conditions.
a
a
Tons/acre
Year
b
Tons/acre
Year
b

13
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-105. 2003
Figure 7—Simulated quantities of surface
coarse woody debris for vegetation
response unit 2 for high severity-100
percent salvage-treat fuels, high severity-
50 percent salvage-treat fuels and low
severity-no salvage-treat fuels.
Table 5—Number of dead snags per acre in vegetation response
unit 2 simulated by FFE for varying treatments and
periods following fire.
Years following fire
          Treatments
3
20
40
60
80
All snags (>0 inch d.b.h.)
80% M, no S, no Ta
482
26
32
39
39
100% M, no S, no T
532
14
11
18
26
100% M, 50% S, yes T
154
3.9 28
34
45
100% M, 100% S, yes T
140
3.1 28
34
45
Snags >12 inch d.b.h.
80% M, no S, no T
22
8.2
3.2
3.0
3.4
100% M, no S, no T
34
11
1.7
.1
.7
100% M, 50% S, yes T
17
1.5
.3
.2
2.3
100% M, 100% S, yes T
3.7
.8
.1
.2
2.3
a M is mortality, S is salvage of dead merchantable trees, T is slash, pile, and
burn trees < 6 inches d.b.h.
simulation period. The CWD exceeded the 30-tons per
acre upper limit of optimum for 18 years, making these
treatments marginally acceptable. Regardless of the
level of salvage prescribed, fuel treatment was neces-
sary to keep CWD within the optimum range. Imme-
diately after fire, SPA were 33 for 50 percent salvage
and 7 for complete salvage. Most snags fell within
about 20 years. After that the difference in SPA be-
tween salvage treatments was slight. However, for
Year
Tons/acre
Figure 8—Simulated quantities of standing
and surface coarse woody debris and live
3+ inch biomass for vegetation response
unit 3 with no salvage and no fuel treatments
under high (100 percent tree mortality) fire
severity conditions. The shaded band
indicates desired ranges.
about 20 years in this simulation, the level of salvage
affected snag density significantly. Depending on spe-
cies and d.b.h., the time snags remain standing gener-
ally ranges from 15 to 40 or more years. In planning for
retention of a given amount of CWD, treatment of fuel
that reduces small-sized CWD (trees up to 6 inches
d.b.h.) makes it possible to retain more large-diameter
dead snags.
For the VRU 4 lodgepole pine stand, the salvage
prescription had little effect on CWD (fig. 10) because
few merchantable trees were present. Without sal-
vage or fuel treatment, the CWD exceeded the opti-
mum range by 1 to 5 tons per acre for about 20 years
then fell within the optimum range. This simulation
suggests that fuel treatment and salvage would be
unnecessary unless landscape considerations such as
maintaining low fire hazard in the wildland interface
zone or in a strategically placed fuel break are important.
In stand-replacement fires, the CWD from the fire-
killed trees is all that exists for a long time, until the new
forest undergoes mortality and falldown. Some allowance
for decay should be considered in the planning. For
example, if 20 tons per acre was considered desirable
in the 40 to 60 year old immature forest, 25 tons per
acre or possibly more should be retained from the fire-
killed trees. In low severity fire where an overstory
survived, recruitment of CWD will probably occur
regularly over time as trees continue to die from
various causes such as insects, blowdown, and fire
injury. Meeting a target of 20 tons per acre in 40 years

14
USDA Forest Service Gen Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-105. 2003
Year
a
Figure 9—Simulated quantities of (a) small woody fuel and (b) coarse woody debris for
vegetation response unit 3 for 100 percent salvage-no fuel treatment, 100 percent salvage-treat
fuel and 50 percent salvage-treat fuel under high (100 percent tree mortality) fire severity
conditions. The shaded band indicates desired ranges.
Year
a
Year
b
Figure 10—Simulated quantities of (a) small woody fuel and (b) coarse woody debris for
vegetation response unit 4 for no salvage-no fuel treatment, 100 percent salvage-treat fuel and
100 percent salvage-no fuel treatment under high (100 percent tree mortality) fire severity
conditions. The shaded band indicates desired ranges.
may only require 15 tons per acre from falldown of the
trees directly killed by fire.
In VRU 2 where applying prescribed fire in the future
might be necessary to maintain desired conditions,
leaving excessive CWD, especially in the 3- to 6-inch
diameter class, could hamper prescribed fire efforts.
But also consider that prescribed fire will reduce the
CWD loadings. On sites where most of the CWD
loading comprises large pieces (greater than 12 inches),
which would offer less of a hindrance to prescribed
burning, consider retaining CWD loadings at the high
end of the optimum range.
Conclusion_____________________
Management of CWD following fire requires consid-
eration of its positive and negative values. The lower
b
Year

15
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-105. 2003
limit of the optimum range is determined by the
ecological benefits of CWD, including wildlife habitat
and site productivity, and the upper limit by excessive
fire hazard. A wide range of CWD is acceptable de-
pending on many individual site and landscape con-
siderations including severity of burn, desired future
stand conditions, restoration objectives, and desired
structural diversity.
Because CWD amounts at a given site can be ex-
pected to change over time with or without manage-
ment, simulation modeling can help with planning
and designing treatments.  Predicted quantities of
CWD over time vary considerably with fire severity
and postfire treatment, but they also depend on prefire
stand structure. Site-specific analysis can strengthen
decisionmaking by allowing managers to tailor
postfire treatments to best achieve desired CWD
quantities over time. Simulating snag recruitment,
falldown, and subsequent decay allows decisions on
fuel treatment (salvage harvest and/or surface fuel
treatment) to be made in the context of expected future
conditions as well as current conditions.
References _____________________
Albini, Frank A. 1976. Estimating wildfire behavior and effects.
Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-30. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agricul-
ture, Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experi-
ment Station. 92 p.
Andrews, Patricia L. 1986. BEHAVE: Fire behavior prediction and
fuel modeling system—BURN Subsystem, Part I. Gen. Tech. Rep.
INT-194. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest
Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station.
130 p.
Arno, Stephen F.; Scott, Joe H.; Hartwell, Michael G. 1995. Age-
class structure of old growth ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir stands
and its relationship to fire history. Res. Pap. INT-481. Ogden, UT:
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain
Research Station. 25 p.
Arno, Stephen F.; Smith, Helen Y.; Krebs, Michael A. 1997. Old
growth ponderosa pine and western larch stand structures:
influences of pre-1900 fires and fire exclusion. Res. Pap. INT-495.
Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service,
Intermountain Research Station. 20 p.
Beukema, S. J.; Reinhardt, E. D.; Kurz, W. A.; Crookston, N. L.
2000. An overview of the Fire and Fuels Extension to the Forest
Vegetation Simulator. In: Neuenschwander, L. F.; Ryan, K. C.,
tech. eds. Proceedings, the joint fire science conference and
workshop—cossing the millennium: integrating spatial technolo-
gies and ecological principles for a new age in fire management.
Volume II; 1999 June 15–17; Boise, ID. University of Idaho and
the International Association of Wildland Fire: 80–85.
Bitterroot National Forest. 2000. Bitterroot fires 2000: an assess-
ment of post-fire conditions with recovery recommendations.
Hamilton, MT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service,
Bitterroot National Forest. 108 p.
Brown, James K. 1985. The “unnatural fuel buildup” issue. In:
Lotan, James E.; Kilgore, Bruce M.; Fischer, William C.; Mutch,
Robert W. , tech. coords. Proceedings—symposium and workshop
on wilderness fire; 1983 November 15–18; Missoula, MT. Gen.
Tech. Rep. INT-182. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment
Station: 127–128.
Brown, James K. 2000. Chapter 9: Ecological principles, shifting fire
regimes and management considerations. In: Brown, James K.;
Smith, Jane Kapler, eds. Wildland fire in ecosystems: effects of
fire on flora. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-42-vol. 2. Ogden, UT:
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain
Research Station: 185–203
Brown, James K.; Johnston, Cameron M. 1976. Debris prediction
system. Office report on file at: U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences
Laboratory, Missoula, MT. 27 p.
Brown, James K.; Reinhardt, Elizabeth D.; Fischer, William C.
1991. Predicting duff and woody fuel consumption in northern
Idaho prescribed fires. Forest Science. 37(6): 1550–1566.
Brown, James K.; See, Thomas E. 1981. Downed woody fuel and
biomass in the Northern Rocky Mountains. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-
117. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service,
Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 48 p.
Brown, James K.; Snell, J. A. Kendall; Bunnell, David L. 1977.
Handbook for predicting slash weight of western conifers. Gen.
Tech. Rep. INT-37. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment
Station. 35 p.
Bull, Evelyn L. 1994. Conserving wildlife habitat. In: Everett,
Richard L. , comp. Restoration of stressed sites and processes.
Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-GTR-330. Portland, OR: U.S. Department
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Sta-
tion: 37–38.
Bull, Evelyn L.; Holthausen, Richard S. 1993. Habitat use and
management of pileated woodpeckers in northeastern Oregon.
Journal of Wildlife Management. 57(2): 335–345.
Bull, Evelyn L.; Parks, Catherine G.; Torgersen, Torolf R. 1997.
Trees and logs important to wildlife in the Interior Columbia
River Basin. Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-GTR-391. Portland, OR: U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest
Research Station. 55 p.
Carey, A. B.; Johnson, M. L. 1995. Small mammals in managed
naturally young and old growth forests. Ecological Applications.
5: 336–352.
Chandler, Craig; Cheney, Phillip; Thomas, Philip; Trabaund, Louis;
Williams, Dave. 1983. Fire in forestry. Vol. I. Forest fire behav-
ior and effects. New York: John Wiley and Sons. 450 p.
DeBano, Leonard F.; Neary, Daniel G.; Ffolliott, Peter F. 1998. Fire’s
effects on ecosystems. New York: John Wiley and Sons. 333 p.
Everest, Fred H.; Harr, Dennis R. 1982. Influence of forest and
rangeland management on anadromous fish habitat in western
North America silvicultural treatments. Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-
134. Portland, OR: Pacific Northwest Forest and Range Experi-
ment Station. 19 p.
Faurot, James L. 1977. Estimating merchantable volume and stem
residue in four timber species: ponderosa pine, lodgepole pine,
western larch, Douglas-fir. Res. Pap. INT-196. Ogden, UT: U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain For-
est and Range Experiment Station. 55 p.
Finney, Mark A. 1998. FARSITE: Fire Area Simulator—model
development and evaluation. Res. Pap. RMRS-RP-4. Ogden, UT:
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain
Research Station. 47 p.
Fischer, William C. 1981. Photo guide for appraising downed woody
fuels in Montana forests. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-96. Ogden, UT:
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain
Research Station. 53 p.
Fischer, William C.; McClelland, Riley. 1983. A cavity nesting bird
bibliography—including related titles on forest snags, fire, in-
sects, disease, and decay. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-140. Ogden, UT:
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain
Forest and Range Experiment Station. 79 p.
Gorte, Ross W. 1996. Salvage timber sales and forest health. Report
for Congress. 4 p. Available from: Committee for the National
Institute for the Environment, 1725 K Street, NW, Suite 212,
Washington, DC 20006; 95-364 ENR.
Graham, Russell T.; Harvey, Alan E.; Jurgensen, Martin F.; Jain,
Theresa B.; Tonn, Jonalea R.; Paige-Dumroese, Deborah S. 1994.
Managing coarse woody debris in forests of the Rocky Mountains.
Res. Pap. INT-RP-477. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agricul-
ture, Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experi-
ment Station. 12 p.

16
USDA Forest Service Gen Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-105. 2003
Gresswell, Robert E. 1999. Fire and aquatic ecosystems in forested
biomes of North America. Transactions of the American Fisheries
Society. 128: 193–221.
Habeck, James R. 1976. Forests, fuels, and fire in the Selway-
Bitterroot Wilderness, Idaho. In: Tall Timbers fire ecology confer-
ence proceedings 14; Fire and land management symposium;
1974 October 8–10; Missoula, MT. Tallahassee, FL: Tall Timber
Research Station: 559–572.
Harmon, M. E.; Franklin, J. F.; Swanson, F. J.; Sollins, P.; Gregory,
S. V.; Lattin, J. D.; Anderson, N. H.; Cline, S. P.; Aumen, N. G.;
Sedell, J. R.; Lienkaemper, G. W.; Cromack, K. , Jr.; Cummins, K. W.
1986. Ecology of coarse woody debris in temperate ecosystems.
Advances in Ecological Research. 15: 133–302.
Harris, Richard B. 1999. Abundance and characteristics of snags in
western Montana forests. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-31. Ogden,
UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Moun-
tain Research Station. 19 p.
Harrod, Richy J.; Gaines, William L.; Hartl, William E.; Camp, Ann.
1998. Estimating historical snag density in dry forests east of the
Cascades Range. Gen. Tech. Pep. PNW-GTR-428. Portland OR:
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific North-
west Research Station. 16 p.
Harvey, A. E. 1994. Integrated roles for insects, diseases and
decomposers in fire dominated forests of the Inland Western
United States: past, present and future forest health. Journal of
Sustainable Forestry. 2: 211–220.
Harvey, Alan E.; Jurgensen, Martin F.; Graham, Russell T. 1989.
Fire-soil interactions governing site productivity in the Inland
Northwest. In: Baumgartner, David M.; Breuer, David W.; Zamora,
Benhamin A.; [and others], comps. Prescribed fire in the Inter-
mountain Region: forest site preparation and range improve-
ment; symposium proceedings; 1986 March 3–5; Spokane, WA.
Pullman, WA: Washington State University, Conferences and
Institutes: 9–18.
Hungerford, Roger D.; Harrington, Michael G.; Frandsen, William
H.; Ryan, Kevin C.; Niehoff, Gerald J. 1991. In: Proceedings—
management and productivity of western montane soils. Gen.
Tech. Rep. INT-280. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment
Station: 32–50.
Hutto, Richard L. 1995. Composition of bird communities following
stand-replacement fires in Northern Rocky Mountain conifer
forests. Conservation Biology. 9(5): 1041–1058.
Lyon, L. Jack; Huff, Mark H.; Smith, Jane Kapler. 2000. Chapter 6:
Fire effects on fauna at landscape scales. In: Smith, Jane Kapler, ed.
Wildland fire in ecosystems: effects of fire on fauna. Gen. Tech. Rep.
RMRS-GTR-42-vol. 1. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station: 43–49.
Lyon, L. Jack; Stickney, Peter, F. 1976. Early vegetal succession
following large Northern Rocky Mountain wildfires. In: Tall
Timbers fire ecology conference proceedings 14; Fire and land
management symposium; 1974 October 8–10; Missoula, MT.
Tallahassee, FL: Tall Timber Research Station: 355–375.
McDade, M. H.; Swanson, F. S.; McKee, W. A.; Franklin, J. F.; Van
Sickle, J. 1990. Sources distances for coarse woody debris enter-
ing small streams in western Oregon and Washington. Canadian
Journal of Forest Research. 20: 326–330.
McIver, James D.; Starr, Lynn. 2001. A literature review on the
environmental effects of postfire logging. Western Journal of
Applied Forestry. 16(4): 159–168.
Miller, Melanie. 2000. Chapter 2: Fire autecology. In: Brown,
James K.; Smith, Jane Kapler, eds. Wildland fire in ecosystems:
effects of fire on flora. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-42-vol. 2.
Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service,
Rocky Mountain Research Station: 9–34.
Morgan, Penelope; Neuenschwander, Leon F. 1988. Shrub response
to high and low severity burns following clearcutting in northern
Idaho. Western Journal of Applied Forestry. 3(1): 5–9.
Murphy, Micheal L.; Koski, K. V. 1989. Input and depletion of
woody debris in Alaska streams and implications for stream-
side management. North American Journal of Fish Manage-
ment. 9: 427–436.
Olson, J. S. 1963. Energy storage and balance of producers and
decomposers in ecological systems. Ecology. 44: 322–331.
Pfister, R. D.; Kovalchik, B. L.; Arno, S. F.; Presby, R. C. 1977. Forest
habitat types of Montana. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-34. Ogden, UT:
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain
Forest and Range Experiment Station. 174 p.
Pyne, Stephen J. 1982. Fire in America: a cultural history of
wildland and rural fire. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press. 654 p.
Reinhardt, Elizabeth D.; Keane, Robert E.; Brown, James K. 1997.
First Order Fire Effects Model: FOFEM 4. 0, user’s guide. Gen.
Tech. Rep. INT-GTR-344. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agri-
culture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station. 65 p.
Rothermel, Richard C. 1983. How to predict the spread and inten-
sity of forest and range fires. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-143. Ogden,
UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermoun-
tain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 161 p.
Rothermel, Richard C. 1991. Predicting behavior and size of crown
fires in the Northern Rocky Mountains. Res. Pap. INT-438.
Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service,
Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 46 p.
Ryan, Kevin C. 2000. Chapter 8: Global change and wildland fire. In:
Brown, James K.; Smith, Jane Kapler, eds. Wildland fire in
ecosystems: effects of fire on flora. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-
42-vol. 2. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest
Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station: 175–184.
Ryan, Kevin C.; Noste, Nonan V. 1985. Evaluating prescribed fires.
In: Lotan, James E.; Kilgore, Bruce M.; Fischer, William C.;
Mutch, Robert W. , tech. coords. Proceedings—the symposium
and workshop on wilderness fire; 1983 November 15–18; Missoula,
MT. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-182. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range
Experiment Station: 230–238.
Saab, Victoria A.; Dudley, Jonathan G. 1998. Responses of cavity-
nesting birds to stand-replacement fire and salvage logging in
ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir forests of southwestern Idaho. Res.
Pap. RMRS-11. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 17 p.
Scott, Joe H.; Reinhardt, Elizabeth D. 2001. Assessing crown fire
potential by linking models of surface and crown fire behavior.
Res. Pap. RMRS-RP-29. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station.
59 p.
Smock, Lenard A.; Metzler, Glenn M.; Gladden, James E. 1989. Role
of debris dams in the structure and functioning of low-gradient
headwater streams. Ecology. 70(3): 764–775.
Society of American Foresters. 1995. Below cost timber sales on the
National Forests: the role of salvage and sanitation harvesting in
the restoration and maintenance of healthy forests [position
statement]. Bethesda, MD: Society of American Foresters. 3 p.
Stage, Albert R. 1973. Prognosis model for stand development. Res.
Pap. INT-137. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, For-
est Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Sta-
tion. 32 p.
Stickney, Peter F. 1990. Early development of vegetation following
holocaustic fire in Northern Rocky Mountain forests. Northwest
Science. 64(5): 243–246.
Stoszek, K. J. 1988. Forests under stress and insect outbreaks.
Northwest Environmental  Journal. 4: 247–261.
Tobalske, Bret W.; Shearer, Raymond C.; Hutto, Richard L. 1991.
Bird populations in logged and unlogged western larch/Douglas-
fir forest in northwestern Montana. Res. Pap. INT-442. Ogden,
UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermoun-
tain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 12 p.
Ucitel, Dalit. 1999. Vole use of coarse woody debris and its impli-
cations for habitat and fuel management. Missoula, MT: Uni-
versity of Montana. Thesis.
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Region Five. 1976.
Resistance to control calculation matrix. USDA Forest Service
Manual, Region Five Supplement 5151. 14-2.

Federal Recycling Program 
  Printed on Recycled Paper
The use of trade or firm names in this publication is for reader information and does not
imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of Agriculture of any product or service

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its
programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion,
age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, or marital or family status. (Not
all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require
alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print,
audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA’s TARGET Center at (202)-720-2600 (voice
and TDD).
To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights,
Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC
20250-9410 or call (202)-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity
provider and employer.
The Rocky Mountain Research Station develops scientific informa-
tion and technology to improve management, protection, and use of
the forests and rangelands. Research is designed to meet the needs
of National Forest managers, Federal and State agencies, public and
private organizations, academic institutions, industry, and individuals.
Studies accelerate solutions to problems involving ecosystems,
range, forests, water, recreation, fire, resource inventory, land recla-
mation, community sustainability, forest engineering technology,
multiple use economics, wildlife and fish habitat, and forest insects
and diseases. Studies are conducted cooperatively, and applications
may be found worldwide.
Research Locations
Flagstaff, Arizona
Reno, Nevada
Fort Collins, Colorado*
Albuquerque, New Mexico
Boise, Idaho
Rapid City, South Dakota
Moscow, Idaho
Logan, Utah
Bozeman, Montana
Ogden, Utah
Missoula, Montana
Provo, Utah
Lincoln, Nebraska
Laramie, Wyoming
*Station Headquarters, 240 West Prospect Road, Fort Collins, CO 80526
ROCKY  MOUNTAIN  RESEARCH  STATION
RMRS
