  
 
JESSE ABRAMS· 
Ecological Restoration Institute 
Northern Arizona University P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, 
Arizona 86011, USA 
ERIN KELLY 
BRUCE SHINDLER 
Department of Forest Resources 
Oregon State University 280 Peavy Hall, Corvallis, Oregon 
97331, USA 
JAMES WILTON 
Institute for Tourism and Recreation Research 
College of Forestry and Conservation, University of Montana 
32 Campus Drive #1234, Missoula, Montana 59812, USA 
ABSTRACT / Among both forest practitioners and the gen­
eral public, "forest health" has become an issue of con­
tention. Whereas the debate over which treatments will best 
achieve healthy forests has been framed largely by the 
popular media and politicians as a struggle between industry 
001: 10.1007/s00267-004-7256-8 
Value Orientation and Forest Management: 
The Forest Health Debate 
and environmentalists, the views of the general public remain 
unexplored. Survey results from Oregon and Washington 
residents were used to assess the relationships between 
respondents' self-described environmental or economic pri­
orities and the following two variables: (1) acceptability of 
forest management practices and (2) perceived threats to 
forest health. Findings indicate that active management was 
generally accepted by a majority of respondents regardless 
of their environmental or economic orientation. Disagreement 
emerged, however, when the appropriateness of specific 
management practices within specific forest conditions was 
examined. Additionally, strong evidence was found for a 
relationship between self-described environmental or eco­
nomic orientation and perceived threats to forest health. 
Those with an environmentally oriented viewpoint tended to 
perceive human-caused factors as the largest threats, 
whereas those with an economic orientation saw naturally 
occurring processes as the greatest threats. These findings 
suggest that the issue of contention is not active manage­
ment per se. Rather, the major divisions in the forest health 
debate are defined by specific contexts and circumstances, 
as well as the management practices used. 
Recent national debates over forest health have 
illuminated a range of viewpoints regarding desirable 
forest practices and conditions. Two major end points 
of this ideological continuum have been clearly delin­
eated by interest groups representing environmental­
ism on the one hand and resource extraction interests 
on the other. Whereas the national debate has been 
framed largely by these interest groups, the forest 
health perspectives of the general public have been less 
visible. It is not clear to what degree public perspectives 
have been adequately represented by the groups at 
these polarized end points. There is clearly a range of 
natural resource value systems among members of the 
public (Brown and Harris 1992), with nuances that may 
not be reflected in the arenas of interest group plu-
KEY WORDS:  Forest health; Values; Social acceptability: Public 
opinion; Active management; Value orientations 
Published online August 29, 2005. 
•Author to whom correspondence should be addressed; email: 
jesse.abrams@nau.edu 
Environmental Management Vol. 36, No.4, pp. 495-505 
ralism (Baker and Kusel 2003). The interests and de­
mands of the public will ultimately affect how forest 
health policies are implemented and accepted. Thus, 
there exists a compelling need to understand citizens' 
expectations and desires regarding forest health poli­
cies (Shindler and others 2002a), and to explore fac­
tors that may help explain public perceptions. 
High-profile wildfire seasons throughout the 1990s 
and 2000s have brought the issue offorest health to the 
public's attention. In the autumn of 2002, the Bush 
administration introduced the Healthy Forests Initia­
tive as a means of addressing forest health on public 
lands. Elements of the President's plan were passed by 
Congress as the Healthy Forests Restoration Act of 
2003 (H.R. 1904). The purpose of the Act is to reduce 
fuel loads on public forestlands considered to be at 
high risk for "catastrophic" wildfires. Treatments to 
reduce these fuel loads involve "active management" 
of forests, including mechanical thinning, prescribed 
fires, and other interventions designed to manipulate 
forest structure to achieve management objectives. 
Both the Presidential Initiative and the Congressional 
© 2005 Springer Science-Business Media, Inc. 

496 
Value Orientation and Forest Health 
  
  
legislation have sparked public debate over the very 
definition of a healthy forest, and how healthy forest 
conditions can (or cannot) be met through manage­
ment. 
The forest health controversy appears to be a 
microcosm of the larger debate over the purposes and 
management of federal forestlands, and ultimately the 
role of humans in the forest. Much of the politics and 
rhetoric surrounding the forest health concept have 
involved normative judgments about human manipu­
lation of federal forestlands. This has encompassed 
such topics as the land management role of the federal 
government, the fate of rural forest-dependent com­
munities, and commercial logging on public lands 
(Shindler and others 2002a). 
Because of the importance of including public val­
ues in land use decision making (Bliss 2000; Kennedy 
and Thomas 1995; Shindler and others 2002b), there is 
a need to examine public opinions about forest health. 
In this study, we focus on the Pacific Northwest of the 
United States, specifically Oregon and Washington 
(Figure 1). This region has been a major battleground 
for federal forest policy conflicts, most recently over 
forest health issues. Shindler and others (2002a) have 
examined differences in the Pacific Northwest between 
rural and urban residents' perspectives on forest health 
conditions and management practices. In this article, 
we draw on the same study to examine differing forest 
health and management viewpoints and their rela­
tionship to respondents' self-described economic or 
environmental orientations. There is reason to believe 
that differences within this range of natural resource 
values translate into different perspectives regarding 
forest health conditions and the appropriateness of 
management practices. Public concerns about forest 
health may not be as simple as being "for" 
or 
"against" a specific practice. Rather, more thoughtful 
deliberation by land management professionals that 
reflects the nuances and range of public opinion is 
probably warranted. 
Background and Framework 
Previous research has established strong evidence of 
links between value orientations, defined as "patterns 
of basic beliefs relative to a particular topic," 
and 
forest management preferences (Vaske and Donnelly 
1999). In the context of forest management issues, the 
most important value orientations can be arranged 
along a continuum from biocentric to anthropocentric 
perspectives (Vaske and Donnelly 1999). The biocen­
tric perspective considers the natural world to be 
inherently valuable, besides any material benefits it 
might provide to humans. It extends ethical consider­
ations to nonhuman entities and life forms. The 
anthropocentric perspective, on the other hand, mea­
sures the value of the natural world in terms of its 
ability to provide tangible benefits, including economic 
gains, to humans. From this viewpoint, human wants 
and needs, including economic interests, are primary 
considerations, and take precedence over most envi­
ronmental concerns (List 1996; Steel and others 1994; 
Vaske and Donnelly 1999). 
There is reason to believe that value orientations 
may influence not only forest health management 
preferences, but also forest health perceptions (Jen­
kins 1997; Kolb and others 1994). Differing under­
standings offorest health may relate to notions of what 
are and what are not appropriate human-nature 
interactions. The value orientations of individuals have 
been found to vary according to a number of demo­
graphic variables such as gender, age, size of a 
respondent's community, and levels of education and 
income. More environmental or biocentric orienta­
tions have been found to correspond with people who 
are younger (Jones and Dunlap 1992; Lowe and Pinhey 
1982; Steel and others 1994), those who come from 
larger towns (Shindler and others 2002a), and those 
who have higher income and education levels (Vaske 
and others 2001). In addition, women have been found 
to have more biocentric views of nature than men 
(Fortmann and Kusel 1990). Logically, economic ori­
entations have been found to correspond with the 
following demographic factors: higher age, residence 
in smaller towns, and lower income and education 
levels. 
Previous research has explored the relationships 
between broadly defined belief systems and percep­
tions regarding forest management issues (Brown and 
Harris 1992; Shindler and others 1993; Tarrant and 
Cordell 2002). Tindall (2003) pointed to differences 
between 
individuals 
with 
ecologically 
oriented 
perspectives and those with economically oriented 
perspectives regarding the visual acceptability of clear­
cutting and other management practices, 
with 
economically oriented individuals showing more sup­
port for clear-cutting. Steel and others (1994) found 
that respondents with a biocentric perspective were 
more likely to support policies that minimized human 
intervention in the landscape, such as banning clear­
cutting, establishing more wilderness areas, and pro­
tecting 
old-growth 
forests. 
The 
anthropocentric 
respondents in this study favored economic uses of 
federal land, including logging in wilderness areas, 
emphasizing timber production and setting aside 
environmental laws that conflict with resource-based 
  

J. Abrams and others 
497 
  
 
employment. Brown and Reed (2000) found that 
respondents with an "economic" perspective showed 
more support for human uses of the forest such as 
commercial logging, mining, drilling, and motorized 
recreation, whereas those who believed the natural 
world has "intrinsic" value had negative attitudes to­
ward commercial mining and logging and positive 
attitudes toward wilderness designation. 
Because identification of a forest as "healthy" or 
"unhealthy" involves a normative evaluation of forest 
conditions, we would expect value orientations such as 
"biocentrism" 
and "anthropocentrism" 
to affect 
forest· health perceptions and management prefer­
ences. An individual's evaluation of a forest's health 
involves more than just the forest itself. It entails the 
projection of that person's values, beliefs, and under­
standings onto the landscape (Greider and Garkovich 
1994). 
Research on perceptions of forest health has poin­
ted to a discrepancy in understandings of the concept. 
Kolb and others (1994) described two primary under­
standings of forest health: (1) a "utilitarian" 
view, 
similar to anthropocentrism, in which the health of a 
forest is measured by its ability to provide material 
benefits to humans or meet specified management 
Figure 1. Surveyrespondents reside in Oregon 
and Washington, in the United States of America. 
objectives, and (2) an "ecosystem view," which uses 
information on historic ecologic patterns and pro­
cesses as a template for measuring forest health. Jen­
kins (1997) expanded on this conceptual divide as a 
means for interpreting social and political responses to 
the "forest health crisis" of the mid-1990s, concluding 
that "the real crisis in our forest is that we cannot agree 
on what constitutes a healthy forest" (p. 14). As evi­
dence, Shindler and others (2002a) found differences 
between urban and rural residents of the Pacific 
Northwest in their opinion concerning the health of 
Northwest forests and, to some degree, their selection 
of appropriate forest health indicators. 
Environmentalist perspectives, which can be de­
scribed as biocentric (Brown and Harris 1992), often 
are believed to include a "nature knows best" philos­
ophy (Hull and others 2001), suggesting a preference 
for a "passive management" approach to achieving 
forest health. This has often led to a characterization of 
environmentalists as advocating a "hands-off', man­
agement approach to federal forests, and this charac­
terization has been a common element in policy 
debates surrounding forest health. For example, in 
1992, U.S. Oregon Senator Bob Packwood opined 
during a subcommittee hearing on forest health: 

498 
Value Orientation and Forest Health 
 
(12%) 
(12~/0) 
(13~/0) 
(39~/0) 
(14%) 
(5~") 
(4~/0) 
1------------2-----------3---------4------------5-----------6----------7 
I 
I
I 
Higben priorit}'slJouid 
Botb @'1l"il'OlIlDent..d:u1ll 
Higbestpriolit}· slumld 
be gh'l!'n to maint:linillg 
('("ommic fuctol'Sshould 
be~"ftl. III ('("ommic 
ltatm·aJ. emirolU1I!'Ilt..d 
be gn."ftl. equ..d priority. 
tomiderntioll.~@'I-'l!'n if 
colUlitiom e,,'l!'nif tlU!'1't' 
tlle'1't' arelleg;lm't' m"irou­
:u't' ueg;lm'l!'('("onomic 
mel\t.'l1 comequences. 
COl\o;equellCes. 
Figure 2. The Environmental-Economic Priority Scale (EEP) as presented to respondents in the survey. The percentage of 
respondents in each category is indicated in parentheses. 
Many in the environmental community believe 
ronmental and economic priorities espoused by citi­
people are incapable of good work where nature is 
zens 
of the 
Pacific 
Northwest 
for 
a 
better 
concerned. They also believe the natural world is very 
understanding of their views on forest health. 
fragile and that hands-off is the best policy. [But] this 
could not be farther from the truth.... We cannot 
Methods
walk away and leave these forests. We are going to have  
to do something to restore their health (Subcommittee 
A forest management survey was distributed to 949  
on Public Lands, National Parks and Forests of the 
rural and urban households in Oregon and Washing­ 
Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources 
ton in 2001-2002. Questionnaires from 482 respon­ 
1992 p. 80). 
dents were completed and returned, for a 51%  
More recently, Arizona Representative Jeff Flake 
response rate. Researchers used a stratified random 
complained of "so-called environmentalists who want 
sampling technique, with rural households oversam­
nothing more than to stop all forest thinning" (Little 
pled to ensure that this important demographic was 
2003 p. 45). 
included in adequate numbers. This survey was devel­
At the same time, timber industry advocates, who 
oped on the basis of pilot studies involving focus 
tend to be more anthropocentric or utilitarian (Brown 
groups in 14 communities and research objectives 
and Harris 1992), have been portrayed as focused on 
provided by the Region 6 Ecosystem Health team of 
the economic value of trees, often to the exclusion of 
the U.S. Forest Service (Shindler and others 2002a). 
all other forest uses. Bernard Zaleha, of the Idaho 
This study used a Likert scale to assess environ­
Sporting Congress, argued: "Private corporations, and 
mental or economic priorities (Figure 2). Respondents 
their servant, the Forest Service, are not in the business 
self-selected along a 7-point scale ranging from 1 
of protecting forests, but of logging, period" (Task 
(highest preference for natural conditions) to 7 
Force on Salvage Timber and Forest Health of the 
(highest preference for economic considerations). We 
House Committee on Resources 1995 p. 11). 
refer to this scale as the Environmental-Economic 
Much of the recent controversy surrounding forest 
Priority (EEP) scale. We used this continuum approach 
health-and the Healthy Forests Restoration Act-has 
with the intention of capturing a more accurate 
been portrayed as a battle between environmentalists, 
reflection of public opinion than is commonly attained 
who desire a passive management approach to forest 
using dichotomous environmental or economic ori­
health, and timber industry advocates, who simply want 
entation measures. 
to increase the amount of commercial logging on 
The EEP scale provides a simple, intuitive means of 
federal lands. This characterization may overlook the 
measuring an individual's preferences regarding com­
views of the general public, and it is the public that 
mon trade-offs between economic and environmental 
ultimately owns federal forest lands (Stankey 1995). 
benefits. The EEP scale has been used in 19 studies 
For example, Shindler and others (1993) found that 
since 1991 (Shindler and others 1993, Smith and oth­
more than 40% of randomly sampled Oregonians and 
ers 1997) as a means of representing public attitudes 
citizens nationwide favored a balance between natural 
toward environmental and economic concerns. Scores 
conditions and economic considerations. A thorough 
across settings (seven states and a national survey) are 
examination of the forest health issue must necessarily 
sufficiently consistent to suggest that the EEP scale is a 
include the perspectives of the general public and their 
reliable survey instrument. 
opinions regarding specific elements of managing for 
Two indices were developed to test respondents' 
forest health. This investigation uses data on the envi-
perceived threats to forest health. An index is a single 
 

J. Abrams and others 
499 
 
Table 1. Demographics of the environmental--eco­
• Hypothesis 2: Respondents with different EEP scores 
nomic priority scale" 
(different economic or environmental orientations) 
Pearson's R 
Gender (M = 0, F = 1) 
-0.097b 
Age 
0.155< 
Size of town 
-0.235< 
(from rural to city of >500,000) 
Education level (from some high 
-O.ISO< 
school to graduate/professional degree) 
Income 
-0.09Sb 
EEP, environmental or economic priorities 
a Scale for the dependent variable (EEP scale) ranges from 1 (envi­
ronmentally-oriented) to 7 (economically oriented). 
b significant at P < 0.05 
c significant at P < 0.01 
variable created from a composite of separate, logically 
related variables (Babbie 2001). Each of the indices in 
our study includes elements that fit logically together 
in a forest health paradigm. The NATURE-THREAT 
index measures agreement with the notion that natu­
rally occurring forest disturbances coupled with a lack 
of human intervention are the greatest threats to 
healthy forest conditions. This index includes potential 
forest health threats such as insect outbreaks, wildfires, 
and overcrowded stands. The HUMAN-THREAT index 
measures agreement with the idea that human inter­
ventions in natural systems and processes are them­
selves the greatest threats to forest health, and thus 
includes factors such as overharvesting, forest frag­
mentation, and fire suppression. 
We tested respondents' EEP scores against their 
opinions regarding 
•  the acceptability of active management generally 
•  the appropriateness of particular management prac­
tices 
•  perceived threats to forest health. 
We investigated the notion that the value orienta­
tions of people, as represented by their EEP scores, 
relate to their assessment of forest health conditions 
and management practices. Anthropocentric and bio­
centric perspectives correspond to the end points of 
our continuum, with low EEP scores reflecting bio­
centric perspectives and high EEP scores indicating 
anthropocentric perspectives. Specifically, we explored 
the following hypotheses: 
•  Hypothesis 1: Respondents with lower EEP scores (a 
more environmental orientation) will show less 
support for active management generally than those 
with higher EEP scores. 
will report different levels of acceptability regarding 
specific management practices to achieve forest 
health. 
•  Hypothesis 3: Respondents with different EEP scores 
will have different perceptions of threats to forest 
health. Specifically, those with lower EEP scores 
(environmentally oriented individuals) will perceive 
human factors as larger threats, whereas those with 
higher EEP scores (economically oriented individu­
als) will perceive naturally occurring processes as 
larger threats. 
Results 
Demographics and the EEP Scale 
The distribution of respondents across the EEP scale 
showed a relatively bell-shaped pattern (Figure 2). The 
largest single group indicated having equal priorities 
for economic and environmental concerns. Overall, 
more respondents identified with an environmental 
orientation (37%) than with an economic orientation 
(23%) on the EEP scale. These patterns are consistent 
with results found both nationwide and in the state of 
Oregon in previous studies (Shindler and others 1993; 
Wright and Shindler 2000). The EEP scale, when used 
as a dependent variable and tested against demo­
graphic information (Table 1), yielded the following 
findings. Respondents' EEP scores correlated signifi­
cantly, but not strongly, with factors such as gender, 
age, educational attainment, and income, and corre­
lated somewhat more strongly with the size of the town 
where the respondent resides. In our sample, women 
tended to be slightly more environmentally oriented 
than men. Higher EEP scores (more economically ori­
ented) correlated positively with older respondents, 
people from smaller towns, and those with lower levels 
of education and income. Lower EEP scores (more 
environmentally oriented) correlated positively with: 
younger respondents, people from larger towns, and 
those with higher levels of education and income. 
EEP as an Independent Variable 
For the remainder of our analyses, we use respon­
dents' EEP scores as the independent variable to 
investigate how well economic or environmental ori­
entations correlate with various opinions surrounding 
the forest health concept. 
Acceptability of Management in General. Respondents 
were asked for their level of agreement on a 5-point 
scale of options ranging from "strongly agree" 
to 
"strongly disagree" 
with the following statement: 

500 
Value Orientation and ForestHealth 
 
Table 2. Overall acceptance levels and correlation 
between the environmental--economic priority (EEP) 
scorea and approval of various forest management 
activities" under two forest conditions: overstocked 
and healthy 
Management practice 
Trees thinned 
selectively 
Prescribed fire 
used to control forest fuels 
All forest fires extinguished 
Clear-cut logging used 
Nature left to take its course 
Forest Condition 
% Acceptance (correlation) 
Overstocked 
Healthy 
88 (O.lW) 
50 (0.279
C 
) 
39 (0.176
C 
) 
27 (0.210
C 
) 
24 (0.178
C 
) 
29 (0.186
C 
) 
12 (0.251
C
) 
7 (0.249
C
) 
8 (-0.170
C 
) 
37 (-0.264
C 
) 
Note. Positive correlation scores represent higher levels of support 
from economically oriented respondents; negative scores represent 
higher levels of support from environmentally oriented respondents. 
a The EEP score ranges from 1 (environrnentallj-oriented) to 7 
(economically oriented). 
b Respondents were asked to indicate what practices from a supplied 
list were acceptable under different forest conditions. 
C Significant at P < 0.01 
"sustaining healthy forests requires long-term active 
management." A test of correlation between respon­
dents' EEP scores and their response to this question 
showed no significant difference (Pearson's R = .039,
 
one-tailed, P = .211), showing a lack of support for 
hypothesis 1. Respondents across the EEP scale showed 
high levels of support for active management. At least 
82% of the respondents in each of the seven categories 
answered that they agreed or strongly agreed with the 
statement. This finding contradicts the view that peo­
ple with environmental orientations accept only a 
passive management approach to forest health. 
Acceptability 
of 
Particular 
Management 
Prac­
tices. Respondents used a 5-point scale to rate whether 
particular practices were acceptable or unacceptable 
for purposes of achieving or maintaining forest health 
under two different forest conditions: overstocked and 
healthy (Table 2). An overstocked forest was defined in 
the sUlVey as "one with dense stands of trees where tree 
growth and other vegetation is inhibited. May be sub­
ject to disease and insect infestation as well as wild­
fire." 
A healthy forest was defined as "one with 
sufficient numbers of green trees and plants, native 
wildlife habitat, stable soil, little disease or insect 
damage, and opportunities for recreation." 
For both conditions, selective thinning received the 
most support among respondents, with 88% support­
ing the practice in an overstocked forest, and 50% 
expressing support for thinning of healthy forests. Very 
few respondents supported the practice of clear-cutting 
 
as a management option for either overstocked or 
healthy forests. The practice of extinguishing all fires 
and using prescribed fire were supported by 24% to 
39% of the respondents, depending on the condition 
(overstocked or healthy), Whereas 8% supported let­
ting an overstocked forest "take its course," 
37% 
agreed with this approach for a healthy forest. 
For all management practices for both forest con­
ditions, levels of acceptance correlated significantly 
with EEP scores (Table 2), although degrees of corre­
lation varied. The strongest correlations emerged be­
tween the EEP score and acceptance of selective 
thinning for a healthy forest, letting a healthy forest 
"take its own course," and clear-cut logging under 
either healthy or overstocked conditions. In other 
cases, correlations were statistically significant, but not 
particularly strong. 
Acceptance levels for all active management ap­
proaches (clear-cutting, selective thinning, extinguish­
ing all fires, and the use of prescribed fire) were 
correlated with higher EEP scores (more economically 
oriented). Acceptance of "letting nature take its 
course" was correlated with lower EEP scores (more 
environmentally oriented). Our findings support 
hypothesis 2. We have illustrated these patterns 
graphically in Figure 3 by reporting scores for each 
activity across the EEP spectrum. Note that the graphs 
in Figure 3 are not sufficient for statistical comparisons 
(recall that group 4 contains nearly 10 times more 
respondents than group 7). Rather, they are provided 
here for visual reference. 
In the context of a healthy forest, there was con­
siderable disagreement over both selective thinning 
and letting nature take its course, with relatively large 
correlation coefficients indicating strong relationships 
with the EEP score (Table 2). The practice of thinning 
was supported much more strongly by economically 
oriented respondents, whereas letting nature take its 
course showed greater support among environmentally 
oriented respondents. 
On the other hand, support for clear-cut logging 
was low among all respondents for both overstocked 
and healthy forest conditions. Economically oriented 
respondents were more supportive of the practice for 
both conditions, but Figure 3 shows that support was 
consistently low among all the EEP groups. There was a 
lack of general agreement on the use of prescribed fire 
and the practice of extinguishing all fires, and support 
for these practices showed relatively lower correlations 
with the EEP score. 
Although a majority of respondents in all seven EEP 
categories agreed that maintaining healthy forests re­
quires long-term active management, there clearly was 

 
-_.__...._............  
100
100 
80
C 80 
CD 
10
-
~ 
10 
~ 
«l 
~ 
40 
20 
* 20 
In
o 
, 
, 
2
3
4 
$
1
7 
Clearcut L' 
1 
100j 
13
80 
1 : 
... e; 
CD
10-1 
10 
... 
~ 
«l 
40
40'" 
* 20-1 
20 
Use Prescribed Fire 
2 
O 
I _I I 
_, I 
WI I ., I 
_, 
r 
" 
I 
(economically oriented). 
disagreement regarding the specific types of manage­
ment that are appropriate under different forest con­
ditions. 
Perceived Threats to Forest Health. Respondents were 
asked to indicate perceived threats to forest health 
from a provided list (Shindler and others 2002a). Se­
lected items were subsequently grouped on the basis of 
two general approaches to viewing factors threatening 
forest health (Table 3). The HUMAN-THREAT index 
measures threats arising from human intervention and 
activity. The NATURE-THREAT index consists of nat­
urally occurring threats or those that result from a lack 
of human intervention. We found strong relationships 
between both indices and respondents' scores on the 
EEP scale (Table 3). Specifically, respondents with 
lower EEP scores (environmentally oriented) were 
more likely to perceive human activities as threats to 
forest health. Conversely, the EEP score correlated 
positively with the NATURE-THREAT index. Eco­
nomically oriented respondents were more likely to 
view natural disturbances and a lack of human inter­
vention as threats to forest health. These findings 
support hypothesis 3. 
According to respondents' ratings overall, it is clear 
that some factors are widely viewed as threats. Insect 
and disease outbreaks (90%), overharvesting (82%), 
overcrowded stands of trees (73%), impacts from 
I
.,
I 
WI
I I 
O 
I -, I
., I ., I
., I
., I ., I
., I I 
i
I 
i 
r 
i i i .  
o I 
-r -, -, I
~ 
.... I
_,
I
WI
I I 
.r, __ .nl 
I 
I 
I
I 
234517 
123451 
Figure 3. Percentage of respondents (y-axis) agreeing with particular management practices for two forest conditions 
("overstocked" and "healthy" ). Respondents are 'grouped (x-axis) on a continuum from 1 (environmentally oriented) to 7 
517 
Let Nature Take Its Course 
O 
I -, I -, I 
_, I 
_, I 
_I I 
I I 
I I I 
{ 
• 
~ 
F 
• 
J. Abrams and others 
501 
Extinauish All Fires 
100 
80 
80 
~ 
20 
234 
5 
1 
7 
Forest Condition: 
_ 
Overstocked 
D 
Healthy 
motorized recreation (72%), and wildfires (70%) were 
the factors most commonly cited as threats. These 
represent both the HUMAN-THREAT and NATURE­
THREAT approaches. Large numbers of respondents, 
regardless of orientation, viewed both human-eaused 
and naturally occurring factors as threats to healthy 
forests. 
Discussion 
A number of interesting patterns emerged from this 
investigation. Although respondents across the EEP 
spectrum showed high levels of support for active 
management generally, specific questions revealed 
sharp differences in the kinds of management consid­
ered appropriate under different conditions. Further­
more, respondents across the EEP spectrum disagreed 
on what kinds of threats to forest health (naturally 
occurring or human-eaused) were the most pressing. 
Our results demonstrate that the residents of Ore­
gon and Washington can make distinctions between 
different forest health conditions and management 
practices, and that their evaluations of these are related 
to value orientations, as measured by the EEP scale. A 
central finding of this study is that a divide between 
anthropocentric and biocentric forest health concep­
tions exists and can be useful for explaining many of 

502 
Value Orientation and Forest Health 
Table 3. 
Indices created to assess perceived threats 
to healthy forest conditions" and percentage of 
respondents answering "agree" or "strongly agree" 
that the factor is a threat to forest health 
Factors constituting the HUMAN-THREAT index 
Overharvesting 
82% 
Impacts from 
72% 
motorized recreation 
Road-building in forests 
54% 
Fire suppression 
48% 
Too much forest 
43% 
fragmentation 
Cronbach's alpha 
.72 
N 
229 
Correlation with 
-0.523" 
EEP scaleb 
Factors constituting 
the NATURE-THREAT index 
Insect/disease outbreaks 
90% 
Overcrowded stands of trees 
73% 
Wildfires 
70% 
Too little harvesting 
52% 
Too many areas being 
48% 
set aside and "locked up" 
from management 
Cronbach's alpha 
.69 
N 
300 
Correlation with EEP scaleb 
0.564< 
EEP, environmental or economic priorities 
"Respondents were asked indicate 1 (strongly disagree) to 4 (strongly 
agree) that the stated factor was a threat to forest health. Respondents 
who answered "no opinion" were excluded from this analysis. 
b The EEP scale ranges from 1 (environmentally oriented) to 7 (eco­
nomically oriented). 
<Significant at P $ 0.01 
our results. At the same time, large numbers of 
respondents fall somewhere in the middle along the 
EEP continuum, and cannot be said to espouse strictly 
anthropocentric or biocentric perspectives. 
Although there appears to be a consensus among 
respondents that active management is a necessary 
element in the maintenance of healthy forests, this 
agreement breaks down when respondents are asked to 
evaluate specific forest conditions and practices. Our 
results underscore the notion presented by previous 
researchers (Jenkins 1997; Kolb and others 1994; 
Shindler and others 2002a) that, at least among the 
general public, "forest health" 
is not a singular, 
coherent concept, but rather includes multiple, con­
trasting social perspectives. 
Much of the disagreement over appropriate prac­
tices may be explained by the contrasting management 
objectives of individuals with anthropocentric and 
biocentric outlooks. Brown and Reed (2000), Steel and 
others (1994), and Tindall (2003) reported that 
anthropocentric individuals see resource extraction as 
an appropriate and desirable use for forests, so it fol­
lows that their views of forest health include a place for 
management activities that produce useable and sal­
able goods. Under this view, factors such as wildfires, 
insects, and disease are considered to be forest health 
threats because they harm or devalue harvestable tim­
ber. As Kolb and others (1994) have pointed out, the 
utilitarian view measures forest health primarily by 
assessing the health of individual trees. 
Biocentric individuals, who often value forests more 
as natural ecosystems than as sources for human com­
modities, tend to assess forest health in terms of nat­
ural ecosystem functioning, often at larger spatial and 
temporal scales. Human activities that interfere with 
natural processes (e.g., fire suppression) or alter nat­
ural conditions (e.g., fragmentation or overharvesting) 
are considered as threats to overall forest health. Fur­
thermore, naturally occurring disturbance factors (e.g., 
disease and insects) are not necessarily indicative of 
poor forest health. Kolb and others (1994, p. 14) have 
pointed out that a "dead tree is not healthy, but [un­
der an ecosystem perspective] it may be part of a 
healthy stand." 
Individuals who indicated a preference for balanc­
ing economic and environmental priorities perceived a 
variety of forest health threats (both naturally occur­
ring and human-eaused), and appeared to favor man­
agement 
intervention 
in 
some, 
but 
not 
all, 
circumstances. Their assessments of forest health tend 
to fall midway between the biocentric and anthropo­
centric perspectives. Individuals near the "middle" of 
the biocentric-anthropocentric continuum may rep­
resent a silent majority, and a need exists for further 
examination of their forest health perceptions. 
It would be oversimplification to suggest that the 
entire forest health debate falls on either side of the 
environmental--economic divide. The widespread sup­
port for thinning of overstocked stands, the broad 
agreement on a number of forest health threats, and 
the rejection of both clear-eutting and letting an 
overstocked forest "take its own course" suggests the 
beginnings of a region of accord among those with 
differing value orientations. Specifically, there appears 
to be agreement that forest health will not be achieved 
through industrial style timber production, nor will it 
result from a lack of response to disease and insect 
infestations or overstocked conditions. By and large, 
people in the Northwest expect managers to apply ac­
tive management to forests in poor health, but they do 
not believe traditional commercial forest management 
approaches are appropriate when the desired outcome 
is a healthy forest. These "sidebars" may be useful as a 

J. Abrams and others 
503 
 
 
beginning for building a broader societal vision of how 
to manage for healthy forests. 
Levels of support for specific management practices 
are clearly contextual. Treatments widely judged to be 
appropriate for an overstocked stand (e.g., selective 
thinning) were not necessarily appropriate for a heal­
thy stand. This suggests that respondents make dis­
tinctions between the restoration of degraded forests 
to a healthy condition and the maintenance of forests 
that are already healthy. There appears to be much 
greater agreement regarding appropriate actions for 
managing to restore an unhealthy forest (thinning is 
strongly supported; passive management is strongly 
rejected) than for managing a healthy forest. 
Vast disagreements regarding appropriate manage­
ment practices for a currently "healthy" forest point 
again to the notion that contrasting management 
objectives (e.g. managing for economic outputs vs 
managing for "naturalness") lead to 'contrasting 
assessments of appropriate practices (Brown and Reed 
2000). Specifically, anthropocentric individuals may 
not perceive a forest as "healthy" unless it provides 
some economic returns (such as would occur through 
thinning), whereas biocentric individuals may see such 
commercial activity as degrading a healthy stand that 
should essentially be "left alone." This disagreement 
over how to manage healthy forests indicates an area of 
contention that land managers and polieymakers will 
have to address with the public. 
The relationship between an economic or environ­
mental orientation and attitudes toward the role of fire 
is likewise complex. Whereas most respondents be­
lieved that wildfires are a threat to forest health, a 
division emerged over whether fire suppression is an 
appropriate response, or whether suppression itself 
constitutes a greater threat. Environmentally oriented 
respondents pointed to past and current fire suppres­
sion as a cause of poor forest health, and likely saw a 
place for "catastrophic change in vegetation composi­
tion" (Kolb and others 1994, p. 13) in a healthy forest. 
The greater support for fire suppression by economi­
cally oriented respondents fits well into a "utilitarian" 
view of forest health, wherein humans are expected to 
prevent natural forces from causing tree mortality and 
the loss of economic potential. The support for pre­
scribed fire by economically oriented individuals indi­
cates a positive attitude toward fire so long as it is 
controlled (rather than wild) and applied to meet 
management objectives. Prescribed fire, then, is seen as 
a management tool rather than a "natural" part of a 
forest ecosystem. It should be emphasized, however, 
that acceptability of prescribed fire and fire suppres­
sion were not strongly correlated with EEP scores. 
There are likely other more important factors that 
influence public opinions on this important subject 
(Brunson and Shindler 2004; Loomis and others 2001; 
Winter and others 2004). 
Conclusions 
The findings of this study underscore the notion 
that the term "forest health" 
has important social 
dimensions, and that beliefs and opinions regarding 
forest health management must be made explicit. 
Members of the public possess a wide variety of views 
about what forest health threats are the most pressing 
and what actions are appropriate for achieving forest 
health. These views may differ widely from the forest 
health perceptions of land managers. Unless these 
various understandings are specifically explored, we 
can expect continued miscommunication as people 
use the same term, "forest health," in reference to 
vastly different goals and expectations. 
Portraying the forest health debate as a simple 
choice between active and passive management fails to 
address important elements of public opinion. Rather, 
major divisions appear to include differing perceptions 
of forest health threats and the appropriateness of 
specific practices within specific contexts. The findings 
point to the need for more clarity regarding the com­
ponents of a healthy forest and how specific practices 
contribute to maintaining these conditions, as opposed 
to the question of whether or not management should 
occur at all. Because it appears that forest health per­
ceptions are related to management objectives, there is 
also a need for greater clarity regarding expectations 
for individual forests (Shindler and others 2002a). 
Whether a stand is managed primarily for timber, 
wildlife, recreation, or fire protection (all of which 
could be components of a "healthy forest") will 
undoubtedly affect people's views of appropriate 
treatments. 
Justifying a management action solely on the basis 
that it promotes "forest health" does little to address 
the complexities of public understandings of the term. 
Land managers will need to engage the public about 
the meaning and specific uses of "forest health." For 
example, discussion about the current condition of the 
forestland in question (e.g., overstocked, fire-prone, 
"healthy" ), the presumed threats to forest health and 
sustainability, and the benefits and risks of using pro­
posed management practices is essential to reaching 
agreement about appropriate actions. In particular, 
managers will need to clarify the context within which 
forest health determinations are made. Distinguishing 
between management actions intended to restore de­
 

504 
Value Orientation and Forest Health 
 
 
graded stands and management aimed at achieving 
other forest health objectives will help temper the de­
bate. 
Because more accord exists regarding the man­
agement of "unhealthy" 
than "healthy" 
forests, 
managers dealing with a divided contentious public 
may find it easier to concentrate on restoration 
activities where agreement on problems already ex­
ists. Projects that focus on reducing fuel loads at the 
wildland-urban interface or thinning diseased and 
insect-infected stands are more likely to meet with 
approval (Shindler and Toman 2003). The trust built 
by working together on relatively uncontroversial 
projects can provide a starting point for addressing 
more contentious forest management issues. Manag­
ers should also be aware that forest health manage­
ment which addresses some forest health threats 
(e.g., insects or disease) but not others (e.g., high 
forest road densities) is not likely to be widely sup­
ported. Citizens take a broad, ecosystemic view of 
forest health which recognizes the damage that can 
stem from both natural and human sources. 
Too often, the nuances of public opinions are 
oversimplified, misrepresenting the complexity of the 
forest health issue. Managing for healthy forests will be 
an increasing concern among all stakeholders. There­
fore, participants in the debate will need to address the 
lack of universal agreement about the concept and 
come to a common understanding of desired forest 
conditions and how to achieve them. 
Literature Cited 
Babbie, E. 2001. The practice of social research. 
9th 
ed.Wadsworth Publishing, Belmont, California. 
Baker, M., and J. Kusel. 2003. Community forestry in the 
United States: Learning from the past, crafting the future. 
Island Press, Washington, D.C. 
Bliss,J. C. 2000. Public perceptions of clear-cutting. Journal of 
Forestry 98(12):4-9. 
Brown, G., and C. Harris. 1992. The USDA Forest Service: 
Toward the new resource management paradigm? Society 
and Natural Resources5:231-245. 
Brown, G., and P. Reed. 2000. Validation of forest values 
typology for use in National Forest planning. ForestScience 
46(2):1-8. 
Brunson, M., and B. Shindler. 2004. Geographic varia­
tion in social acceptability of wildland fuels manage­
ment in the western states. Society and Natural Resources 
17:661-678. 
Fortmann, L., and J. Kusel. 1990. New voices, old beliefs: 
Forest environmentalism among new and long-standing 
residents. Rural Sociology 55:214-232. 
Greider, T., and L. Garkovich. 1994. Landscapes: The social 
construction of nature and the environment. Rural Sociology 
59(1):1-24. 
Hull, B., D. Robertson, and A. Kendra. 2001. Public under­
standings of nature: A case study of local knowledge about 
"natural" forest conditions. Society and Natural Resources 
14(4):325-340. 
Jenkins, A. F. 1997. Forest health: A crisis of human propor­
tions. Journal of Forestry 95(9):11-14. 
Jones, R E., and R E. Dunlap. 1992. Social bases of envi­
ronmental concern: Have they changed over time? Rural 
Sociology 57:28-47. 
Kennedy, J., and J. W. Thomas. 1995. Managing natural re­
sources as social value. Pages 311-321 in R.L. Knight, S.F. 
Bates (eds.), A new century for natural resources manage­
ment. Island Press, Washington, D.C. 
Kolb, T. E., M. R Wagner, and W. W. Covington. 1994. 
Concepts of forest health: Utilitarian and ecosystem per­
spectives. Journal ofForestry 92(7):10-15. 
List, P. 1996. Leopoldian forestry and the ethical acceptability 
of forest practices. Pages 25-36 in M. W. Brunson, L. E. 
Kruger, C. B. Tyler, S. A. Schroeder (eds.), Defining social 
acceptability in ecosystem management: A workshop pro­
ceedings, June 23-25, 1992, Kelso, WA. Gen. Tech. Rep. 
PNW-GTR-369. U.S.. Dept. of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Pacific Northwest Research Station, Portland, Oregon. 
Little,J. B. 2003. Un-Common ground: A controversy over the 
U.S. Forest Service's appeals process is eroding carefully 
wrought partnerships. American Forests 109(2):45-51. 
Loomis, J. B., L. S. Bair, and A. Gonzalez-Caban. 2001. Pre­
scribed fire and public suppon: Knowledge gained, atti­
tudes changed in F1orida. Journal ofForestry 99 (11): 18-22. 
Lowe, G. D., and T. K. Pinhey. 1982. Rural-urban differences 
in suppon for environmental protection. Rural Sociology 
47:114-128. 
Shindler, B., M. Brunson, and G. Stankey. 2002b. Social 
acceptability of forest conditions and management prac­
tices: A problem analysis. Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-GTR-537. 
USDA Forest Service, Portland, Oregon. 
Shindler, B., P. List, and B. S. Steel. 1993. Managing federal 
forests: Public attitudes in Oregon and nationwide. Journal 
of Forestry 91 (7):36-42. 
Shindler, B., and E. Toman. 2003. Fuel reduction strategies in 
forest communities: A longitudinal analysis of public sup­
port. Journal of Forestry 101(6) :8-14. 
Shindler, B., J. Wilton, and A. Wright. 2002a. A social assess­
ment of ecosystem health: Public perspectives on Pacific 
Northwest forests. Department of Forest Resources, Ore­
gon State University, Corvallis, Oregon. 
Smith, C., J. Gilden, J. Cone, and B. Steel. 1997. Oregon 
coastal salmon restoration: Views of coastal residents. 
Oregon Sea Grant, Corvallis, oregon, ORESU-S-97-D01. 
Stankey, G. H. 1995. Values, uses, and institutions of natural 
resources: Key concepts and a framework for study of 
international changes. A report prepared for the USDA 
Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. Con­
sortium for the Social Values of Natural Resources, Seattle, 
Washington. 
 

J. Abrams and others 
505 
Steel, B. S., P. List, and B. Shindler. 1994. Conflicting values 
about federal forests: A comparison of national and Ore­
gon publics. Societyand Natural Resources 7:137-153. 
Subcommittee on Public Lands, National Parks and Forests 
of the Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Re­
sources. 1992. Forest ecosystem health and recovery act 
(S. 1156): Hearing before the 102nd Congress, second 
session. Senate Hearing 102-980 (Testimony of Senator 
Robert Packwood). 
Tarrant, M. A., and H. K. Cordell. 2002. Amenity values of 
public and private forests: Examining the value-attitude 
relationship. Environmental Management 30(5):692-703. 
Task Force on Salvage Timber and Forest Health of the 
House Committee on Resources. 1995. Salvage timber and 
forest health: Pan 1. Hearing before the 104th Congress, 
first session. Serial Number 104-44 (Testimony of Bernard 
Zaleha, Idaho Sporting Congress). . 
 
Tindall, D. B. 2003. Social values and the contingent nature 
of public opinion, attitudes, and preferences about forests. 
The Forestry Chronicle79(3):692-705. 
Vaske, J., and M. P. Donnelly. 1999. A value-attitude-behav­
ior model predicting wildland preservation voting inten­
tions. Society and Natural Resources12:523-537. 
Vaske, JJ., M. P. Donnelly, D. R Williams, and S. Jonker. 
2001. Demographic influences on environmental value 
orientations and normative beliefs about national forest 
management. Society and Natural Resources14:761-776. 
Winter, G., and C. A. S. Vogt, and S. McCaffrey. 2004. 
Examining social trust in fuels management strategies. 
Journal ofForestry 102(6):8-15. 
Wright, A., and B. Shindler. 2000. Watershed management in 
the central cascades: A study of citizen knowledge and 
information sources in the South Santiam Basin. Oregon 
State University Research Report, Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
