ERI–Issues in Forest Restoration 
Case Study of a Community Stewardship Success: 
The White Mountain Stewardship Contract 
Ecological Restoration Institute
 

Ecological Restoration Institute
 
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, 
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. These forests 
have been significantly altered over the last century, with decreased ecological and recreational values, near-
elimination of natural low-intensity fire regimes, and greatly increased risk of large-scale fires. The ERI is 
working with public agencies and other partners to restore these forests to a more ecologically healthy 
condition and trajectory––in the process helping to significantly reduce the threat of catastrophic wildfire and 
its effects on human, animal, and plant communities. 
Cover photo: A thinned ponderosa pine forest in a White Mountain Stewardship Contract treatment site west 
of Eagar, Arizona on the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest, Springerville District. 
PO Box 15017 
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017 
928-523-7182 
www.eri.nau.edu 
Publication date: August 2007 
Authors: Jesse Abrams and Sam Burns 
Editor: Dave Egan 
Reviewers: Ann Moote, Kathy Lynn, Robert Taylor, Dave Egan 
Cover Photo: Jean Palumbo 
Series Editor: Dave Egan 
Please contact ERI for reproduction policies, 928-523-5697 
All material copyright © 2007 ERI, NAU 
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution 
NAU Printing Services/G63633/500/08-07 

Table of Contents 
Executive Summary. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2  
What is Stewardship Contracting?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3  
The White Mountains of Arizona . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3  
The Importance of Community Capacity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4  
Rebuilding Markets and Workforce to Support Restoration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6  
A New Approach to Agency-Community Relations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8  
Situating Stewardship Within a Larger Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9  
Current and Future Challenges. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11  
Lessons Learned . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13  
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16  
Endnotes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16  
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17  
Box 1. The White Mountain Stewardship Contract: Basic Facts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18  
Box 2. Stewardship Contracting Authorities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18  
Box 3. Chronology of Key Events in the White Mountains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19  
Box 4. Capacity-building Community Forums in the White Mountains . . . . . . . . . . 19  
Appendix 1. Methodology Used for This Case Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20  
1 

Executive Summary 
Stewardship contracting is a recent innovation in federal land management designed to address land stewardship needs 
through collaboration with local communities. The White Mountain Stewardship Contract (WMSC), which is focused on 
restoring ponderosa pine forests in Wildland-Urban Interface (WUI) areas of the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests 
(ASNF) in east-central Arizona, is the nation’s largest stewardship contract to date, and the first to commit to the maximum 
duration of ten years. After two-and-a-half years of implementation, the WMSC is credited with helping to restore forest 
health, protect vulnerable communities, and revitalize local wood products businesses, and has received strong support from 
a broad spectrum of local stakeholders. These accomplishments are particularly impressive given the fact that less than a 
decade ago the White Mountains region was mired in a “shut down” of forest activities, characterized by social division over 
forest management issues, local mill closures, and an inability to implement most forest management efforts. This case study 
examines how community members, business owners, and agency employees were able to transition from community gridlock 
to broad-based support for the most ambitious forest stewardship plan in the National Forest System. In particular, three 
factors emerged as the most important in facilitating this transition: 
•  Community capacity: Community leaders and relevant stakeholders played very active roles in the wake of the 
shut down to identify management approaches that were broadly supportable by all major stakeholders. These 
conversations led to the creation of inclusive collaborative forums that over time were able to build the social 
capacity necessary to move forward with active forest stewardship. The Natural Resources Working Group, in 
particular, has acted as the voice of community consensus on forest management issues, and has worked to craft a 
“zone of agreement” within which forest management activities could take place without provoking opposition. 
•  Utilization capacity: Other inclusive community forums were created specifically to support the re-tooling of the 
local wood products infrastructure to increase its capacity to process small-diameter material. Through a 
combination of business development assistance, technical assistance, grants and loans, these community–led 
forums supported the development of an integrated network of small- to medium-sized wood products businesses 
distributed throughout the White Mountains region. This allowed local businesses to successfully compete for the 
harvesting and processing of stewardship contract removals and provided local value-added markets for restoration 
by-products. 
•  Agency capacity: Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests staff has been instrumental in supporting the community 
transition to stewardship. This is due in large part to the initiative and foresight of key individuals within the agency 
who worked to define the approach to stewardship through close collaboration with the community, and by 
preparing administratively for restoration activities prior to the start of the stewardship contract. The agency has 
worked to maintain a responsive, accountable relationship to the community through the all-volunteer stewardship 
contract Multiparty Monitoring Board and through ongoing engagement with the Natural Resources Working 
Group. 
While the situation in the White Mountains is clearly unique, lessons related to capacity-building and the development of 
constructive relationships between communities, businesses, and land management agencies may serve other locales well. 
Prominent among these lessons are the recognition of new and indispensable roles the community plays in preparing for 
stewardship, the need to build capacity prior to the initiation of stewardship activities, the need to structure work within a 
socially defined zone of agreement that can be expected to change with time, and the need for a collaborative community 
framework able to address new challenges and opportunities as they arise. 
The WMSC, which officially began on August 10, 2004, is a plan to treat 150,000 acres of degraded federal forests over ten 
years using new stewardship end-results contracting authorities (see Box 1). Supported by quotes of various people involved 
in the process, this report details how the White Mountains community was able to transition from stalemate to stewardship 
through several years of intensive community-level collaboration and capacity building, ultimately setting the stage for an 
ambitious stewardship contract that is now seen as a model for “scaling up” restoration and stewardship of public forests. 
2 

What is Stewardship Contracting? 
Stewardship end-results contracting, better known as stewardship contracting, is an approach to public land management that 
focuses on the ecological, social, and economic end results of management operations.1 This is in contrast to traditional 
approaches to land management, usually accomplished through timber sale contracts, that focus on the value of commodities 
removed from the forest, or procurement contracts (also known as service contracts), which tend to focus on a single, 
identified need. Stewardship contracts are a means of integrating several objectives into a single plan. For example, the “goods 
for services” authority allows a single contractor to remove both merchantable and non-merchantable trees during a single 
operation, with the value of commercially valuable trees removed used as an offset against the costs of treating the smaller, 
non-merchantable trees. “Best value” and “multiyear contract” authorities support local economic development by considering 
local employment as an explicit forest management objective and providing long-term predictability of work in order to spur 
local investments (see Box 2 for a description of stewardship contracting authorities). Stewardship contracting, unlike 
traditional approaches to public land management, includes a focus on strong agency-community collaboration in designing, 
implementing, and monitoring management activities. This new approach is based on a vision of using the knowledge, skills, 
and resources of local communities to guide and support long-term integrated stewardship of publicly-administered lands. 
The White Mountains of Arizona 
The White Mountains region of eastern Arizona, roughly the area covered by the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest 
(ASNF) and adjacent Fort Apache Reservation (White Mountain Apache Tribe), is a largely rural part of the state 
characterized by small towns and heavily wooded subdivisions separated by expanses of federal or Tribal forests. Ponderosa 
pine is the dominant forest type, and like ponderosa forests throughout much of the Southwest, these fire-adapted ecosystems 
suffer from the effects of a century or more of fire exclusion, logging, and historically unregulated grazing.2 Current forest 
conditions are typified by overstocked stands containing 10 to 20 times the historic tree density, decreased tree vigor, a 
depauperate understory, and a susceptibility to uncharacteristic crown fire. This last point was made evident in 2002, when 
the Rodeo-Chediski fire burned intensely across nearly a half-million acres of tribal, federal, and private land, destroying 465 
homes and forcing the evacuation of over 30,000 people.3 
Many White Mountains communities within or near the ASNF trace their roots back to the area’s earliest Euro-American 
settlers: Mormon families sent by Brigham Young to settle the Little Colorado River Valley, non-Mormon Anglo cavalrymen 
and homesteaders, and early English- and Spanish-speaking shepherds and ranchers. Descendents of many of these original 
families still call the White Mountains home, although increasingly large proportions of these communities are made up of 
seasonal residents, retirees, and second-home owners. While much of the contemporary White Mountains economy is 
derived from tourism, real estate, and other amenity values,4 it was timber cutting and grazing that sustained the people and 
their communities for most of the last hundred years. Prior to the 1990s, the White Mountains economy relied heavily on 
its timber processing facilities, including sawmills, moulding operations, and large paper and containerboard plants. These 
facilities were highly dependent upon harvests of sawtimber and pulpwood from the ASNF for their continued operation. 
Timber harvesting also occurred at an accelerated pace on White Mountain Apache Tribal lands, supplying wood to mills in 
reservation communities, such as McNary and Whiteriver. From 1959 to 1989, the pulp and paper mill near Snowflake (now 
owned by Abitibi Consolidated Corporation) enjoyed a guaranteed pulpwood supply through the Colorado Plateau 
Pulpwood Contract, and, as recently as the 1990s, this local pulpwood market helped provide an economic driver for the 
harvest of smaller-diameter material on the ASNF.5 
The timber economy underwent dramatic changes beginning in the 1990s, when a combination of decreased availability of 
local timber and national and international competition began to take a toll on existing mills.6 After the listing of the 
Mexican spotted owl as a threatened species in 1993, local and regional environmental groups became more active in 
challenging timber operations on the ASNF. Environmental organizations, wildlife agencies, and others were concerned 
about the effects of the Forest Service timber program on old-growth and late-successional forests and associated wildlife 
species. In 1995, Judge Carl Muencke ordered an injunction on all timber harvesting activities in spotted owl habitat until 
the U.S. Forest Service (USFS) met its consultation obligations under the Endangered Species Act. During the next several 
years, White Mountains communities grew increasingly divided over forest management issues as mills shut down and local 
3 

harvesters, haulers, and processors went out of work. Spotted owls were hung in effigy outside local businesses and elected 
officials at town and county levels worked to try to revise the Endangered Species Act to lessen its effect on their 
communities. Meanwhile, environmental organizations continued to be successful in slowing or stopping commercial timber 
harvesting activities. White Mountains residents refer to this as a time when the forests were “shut down” due to 
administrative appeals, decisions by the courts, and the disappearance of viable markets for wood products. See Box 3 for a 
chronology of recent key events in the White Mountains. 
Given this as a backdrop, it may seem unlikely that within a decade White Mountains residents and stakeholders would come 
together so successfully in support of a long-term, large-scale contract focused on mechanical treatment of the region’s 
overstocked forests, and that White Mountains communities would see investments in new and expanded wood processing 
infrastructure. The story of the White Mountains’ transition from gridlock to stewardship provides a number of valuable 
lessons for land managers, place-based organizations, and others faced with social and economic obstacles to achieving 
sustainable community-based forest stewardship. Throughout the pages that follow, the focus is on how the WMSC was able 
to occur where and how it did, and what lessons can be taken from the first two-and-a-half years of implementation. 
The Importance of Community Capacity 
Central to forest stewardship efforts in White Mountain communities was the building of community capacity, defined by 
Kusel as “the collective ability of residents in a community to respond…to external and internal stresses; to create and take 
advantage of opportunities; and to meet the needs of residents, diversely defined.”7 One of the most important tasks for the 
community in the wake of the shut-down was finding a way to reconcile the conflicting interests of the various individuals, 
agencies, organizations, and businesses that had a stake in the management of local forests. Through a combination of 
collaborative forums (see Box 4), mutual learning through shared experiences and the leadership of key individuals, the 
community built up a level of social capacity over a number of years that allowed it to move forward with the ambitious plan 
contained in the stewardship contract. 
The Natural Resources Working Group 
Among the most important entities working to build community capacity in the White Mountains is the Natural Resources 
Working Group8 (NRWG), which started in the mid-1990s as a series of discussions between various elected officials, 
agency leaders, and environmental representatives. It has since grown into a multi-stakeholder collaborative forum that 
helped foster a cohesive community vision among disparate interests. The NRWG was (and continues to be) based on the 
concepts of inclusiveness, respectful interactions between members, and a focus on working within existing laws and 
regulations rather than on trying to change them. 
…we started with the idea of, okay, number one…there are rules out there. There has to be a commitment 
to follow the rules. We are a nation that believes in the rule of law, so let’s quit trying to change the law. 
Follow the law, and see what we can get done. Out of that developed the idea of how can a community 
thrive complementarily with the Endangered Species Act, and that grew into NEPAs, EIS, the whole 
process, EAs. How can the community use that to their advantage versus always looking at it as an 
impediment to progress? That was where we began the Natural Resources Working Group process. 
(Community member) 
The community capacity that was painstakingly built over several years through venues like the NRWG was perhaps the 
most important factor in the success of the stewardship contract concept, according to those most closely involved in contract 
creation, implementation, and monitoring. The collaboration that occurred in this forum allowed the community to recognize 
areas of common concern, build constructive working relationships, and experiment with new land management approaches 
on the ground. The NRWG has changed somewhat in composition over the years as individuals have come and gone, but 
throughout it has worked to keep the major stakeholder interests engaged, and has had a strong emphasis on the inclusion 
of community leaders including elected officials, heads of local agency units, and non-governmental organization 
representatives empowered to make decisions for their respective entities. 
4 

The Blue Ridge Demonstration Project 
Another aspect of the NRWG that was critical in setting the stage for the stewardship contract was the group’s emphasis on 
building both social trust and broader scientific and economic understanding through on-the-ground work. To this end, one 
of the NRWG’s first significant projects was a demonstration of various approaches to restoration and fuel reduction in a 
Wildland-Urban Interface (WUI) area known as Blue Ridge. The development of a demonstration site on Blue Ridge, as 
well as design and layout of treatment alternatives, was conducted in close collaboration between ASNF staff and the various 
stakeholders of the NRWG. Particular attention was paid to engaging the environmental activist community by 
implementing one treatment alternative based on guidelines developed by a consortium of regional environmental groups. 
The agency also signaled a willingness to compromise with environmental groups by instituting a 16-inch diameter cap on 
treatments within the Blue Ridge demonstration. 
…it was just a vehicle to get the whole process started, and it was ready to roll. [The district ranger] was 
cooperative, we certainly were behind it…nobody was opposed to it that I know of, for any reason at all. 
It had a 16-inch cap, so that wasn’t an issue…everybody supported it is all I can say. 
Interviewer: And was that pretty rare? Was that one of the first projects that the community could be brought 
together on? 
Oh, absolutely! Are you kidding? … I think you have to bite off just a little bit at a time, I mean that’s 
sort of what Blue Ridge was…it was not a significant area, it was all even-aged, there were no big trees 
to argue about, just all of those factors. (Environmental group representative) 
While some individuals both within and outside the agency were personally opposed to including diameter caps in 
silvicultural treatments, the group decided to start within the narrow zone of agreement that existed in hopes that with time, 
through monitoring and continued dialogue, the zone of agreement would expand. The demonstration also illustrated for 
many NRWG members the connections between utilization capacity and the ability to get restoration work done. Because 
of diminished local markets for small-diameter material, two initial offerings on the Blue Ridge projects received no bids. 
Treatments were implemented only after the project was scaled back and outside funds were obtained to conduct the thinning 
activities. 
Building and Maintaining the Zone of Agreement 
Continued public support for the contract is due in large part to the fact that it met most stakeholders’ major interests. From 
the perspective of local businesses, it provided a guaranteed level of supply and sufficient predictability to spur investments 
in infrastructure. Environmental and wildlife interests were satisfied by focusing on the WUI, limiting most harvests to trees 
under 16 inches in diameter, and including a strong monitoring component. A consortium of local government entities that 
had bid on the contract with plans to bring in a large, corporate wood processor were understandably disappointed by the 
decision to choose a local business venture as the contractor, but other government representatives were pleased to see 
progress toward protecting communities and stimulating the local economy. Underlying the response to the contract 
announcement was a deep sense of concern for community well-being. 
We had a lot of discussions with the County and some of the local politicians…that regardless of how 
this thing came out, regardless of how it was awarded, there are some real important things that had to 
be sustained and one was that local involvement...We have to be supportive to whoever the successful 
bidder is to and make sure it works. (Community member) 
Another way in which the contract reflected community values and priorities was by focusing on areas identified and 
prioritized through Community Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPPs). Community leaders, working with a local consultant 
(Logan Simpson Design), developed the Sitgreaves CWPP in May 2004 and the Apache CWPP in August 2004. From the 
perspective of the communities, the stewardship contract’s focus on these areas was an indication that the ASNF took 
community values seriously. From the ASNF’s perspective, the CWPPs helped provide strategic direction for the sequencing 
and prioritization of treatments. 
5 

The Importance of Individuals 
In addition to the formal and informal avenues of communication and collaboration, the stewardship contract process was 
consistently supported by the contributions of individual members of the White Mountains community. In this sense, the 
community’s capacity to support a large-scale, long-term stewardship contract was a function not only of having the right 
organizations (e.g., NRWG), but having the right people. 
I think we were blessed with really, the right people at the right time…I guess a fear, if I have any, is will 
enough good people like this, and a good mix of people be around the full [ten years], because you know 
[the Forest Supervisor] is retiring at the end of the year. So if we got the wrong person in there, it literally 
would be all over, overnight. That’s a key position––hers. But you know the wrong person in any of 
several of these positions could really doom the experiment. (Business representative) 
Despite the proliferation of formalized place-based and interest-based organizations working on forest issues in the White 
Mountains, one of the most active and effective entities has been an informal collection of individuals known as the STP, 
meaning the “same ten people.” This title has been bestowed on the most engaged agency and non-agency stakeholders for 
their consistent efforts in support of the stewardship contract and other community initiatives. Community “champions” such 
as these played critical roles in building community and political support, coordinating utilization capacity with anticipated 
stewardship work, and building the kinds of constructive relationships that made the stewardship contract possible. 
Rebuilding Markets and Workforce to Support Restoration 
In addition to playing a vital role in building the social license to move forward with stewardship activities, community 
organizations took the lead in preparing for long-term stewardship by building or rebuilding an economic support system. 
This required transitioning from a focus on milling larger trees and pulping small-diameter material to a focus on finding 
value-added applications for mostly smaller trees (only 15% of the material harvested as part of the WMSC is sawtimber, the 
rest is roundwood-size or smaller). 
Adapting Existing Local Knowledge and Commitment 
During a period of years beginning in about 1997, a series of activities coalesced into a revitalized economic infrastructure 
that made it possible to engage with forest restoration and stewardship work on a large scale. These activities included the 
support of local entrepreneurship through Regional Economic Assistance Program funding; the creation of the Four Corners 
Sustainable Forests Partnership, a 5.5-million dollar, five-year effort in four states; the return of Walker Brothers Contracting, 
one of the region’s most experienced harvesting companies that had moved  its primary operations to New Mexico when local 
work disappeared; and increased coordination, marketing and business support, grant and loan opportunities, and access to 
processing equipment coordinated through community organizations such as the Arizona Sustainable Forests Partnership 
(ASFP) and the Northern Arizona Wood Products Association (NAWPA). See Box 4 for more information on these 
community organizations. 
Making Infrastructure Investments that Reduce Treatment Costs 
This expansion in utilization capacity continued as the WMSC came on line. Forest Energy, the heating pellet manufacturer, 
increased its capacity by 50%. One of the community’s long-standing saw mills continued to adapt to small-diameter 
materials. Initiatives were begun to develop biomass power generation options. The demonstrated successes of these more 
efficient harvesting techniques and value-added utilization options drew the interest of the USFS Forest Products 
Laboratory, which led to a series of grants. These technical assistance projects have led to even higher-value products. 
6 

These infrastructure investments have been made strategically, through community business forums like NAWPA and the 
ASFP, with the ultimate goal of fostering an integrated array of utilization options distributed throughout the White 
Mountains. 
…we need consumption in the Alpine-Springerville-Eagar area, we need consumption in the Show Low 
area, we need consumption over in the Heber area. We’re talking to a small sawmill about coming in on 
the west side. We’re talking to larger sawmills. Part of this resource evaluation is trying to say, well, can 
we put a 50-million-board-foot sawmill in some place that could use the big stuff, and still not steal wood 
from [another mill owner]…It’s a juggling act. It’s not necessarily run the way you would normally run 
a business. The intent is to make the stewardship contract successful. (Business representative) 
This is an example of the active role community-based organizations have played and continue to play in preparing for, and 
helping to ensure, the success of the stewardship contract. The approach has been not to simply increase the number of wood 
processors in the White Mountains, but to support business ventures in a strategic manner that maximizes the contribution 
of each wood processor to overall regional capacity. These capacity improvements have accomplished a number of important 
results: 
•  Stretching across 100 miles throughout the White Mountains, wood products businesses are coalesced into a 
collaborative fiber utilization and distribution network; 
•  Business infrastructure investments were made during a ten-year period (1997-2007) that have been estimated by 
one business representative to be 5-6 million dollars; 
•  Gradually over a decade, cost and revenue efficiencies were made, which in turn lowered the cost of forest 
restoration and thinning operations, and upon which a more affordable long-term stewardship contract could be 
anchored; and   
•  The ten-year WMSC made possible a predictable supply of wood fiber, which in turn made additional investments 
in harvesting, product development, and expanding markets much more feasible. 
Continuing to Improve the Forest Restoration Business Model 
As the WMSC has been implemented during the past two-and-a-half years, it has become increasingly clear how important 
the previous ten years of step-by-step economic development has been. At the same time, many wood products business 
leaders and supporters are fully cognizant of the vagaries of being shut out of the woods due to weather or wildfires, of 
depressed wood products markets due to international market forces, of limited biomass utilization options that constrain the 
potential value of wood chips, and imbalances in federal and state tax polices that undervalue biomass-generated thermal 
energy. Major challenges at present include a lack of higher-value markets that would raise raw material values, for example, 
from $20 to $30 or more per ton. This could come in the form of increased markets for existing products (e.g., commercial-
grade heating pellets) or the entry of a new wood user capable of paying more for raw material. 
Additionally, business leaders believe that a collaborative business environment needs to be sustained, through which new 
entrepreneurs enter the regional wood production marketplace in northern Arizona in a cooperative rather than solitary or 
overtly independent manner. The consistent economic and local voices for working together, building primarily from a 
grassroots community perspective, continue to strongly believe this has been the basis of their success thus far. While they 
remain open to large-scale utilization activities that would enable the region to expand up to the 15,000-acre-per-year level, 
they are strongly committed to a coherent sustainable forest restoration model that continues to drive down the costs of forest 
stewardship and strengthens long-standing, family-owned businesses. 
This is about forest health. When you have communities that identify with the forest, then they need 
something like a stewardship contract in order to bring the holistic approach to fixing that problem... 
Nobody’s going to get wealthy off of this, but a lot of people will sleep better at night. A few firefighters’ 
lives might be saved. Certainly properties will be saved, and certainly those creatures in the forest that 
7 

we’re all concerned about could be saved as well…. This is about forest health. I think the community, by 
having a visible contract, material being moved, processed–the threat to their communities posed has 
been reduced marginally, significantly, measurably, over the years. I think a lot of people are paying 
attention to that. (Business representative) 
A New Approach to Agency-Community Relations 
The Agency is Part of the Community 
Even while White Mountains communities continued to make sustained investments in building community capacity 
(through collaborative forums, demonstrations, and monitoring) and expanding utilization capacity (through business 
assistance, grants, loans, and networking opportunities), it was clear that achieving a vision of long-term stewardship would 
take the commitment of the public land managers themselves. Agency cultures, policies, and procedures can often act as 
stumbling blocks to collaborative resource management,9 but the White Mountains region was blessed with a number of 
ASNF staff committed to building constructive relationships with the community. 
Significantly, a number of ASNF staff perceived the agency’s role as being a participant in community decision-making 
processes, rather than as an independent decision-making entity insulated from community concerns. Both agency and non-
agency community members saw the stewardship contract as a community effort rather than merely an agreement between 
the ASNF and a contractor. 
I think it’s all about relationships. It’s not about the Forest Service offering a contract. It’s all about the 
community banding together to decide this is what they want and then everybody taking a role and 
making it work. (Agency representative) 
This level of agency-community engagement was clearly important to the development of the contract, but just as important 
are the ongoing relationships between the ASNF and collaborative groups (such as the NRWG and the multiparty 
monitoring board) and individual stakeholders, including contractors, local government, and environmental advocates. This 
requires agency staff to be highly attentive to community developments, place-based and interest-based community forums, 
and emerging social and political issues. It also requires the agency to be both responsive and adaptive as new issues and needs 
arise. These investments of time and energy have paid off in terms of community support and the ability to initiate and 
sustain long-term forest stewardship. 
Beginning with writing the initial contract, and continuing through site selection, prescription design and implementation, 
ASNF staff has shown a willingness to adapt to the needs of local stakeholders. Perhaps this is best illustrated by the 
constructive relationship between the ASNF and the contractor, Future Forests. 
The relationship between the contractor and the Forest Service throughout the entire analysis, 
preparation, and implementation is very important…Any time we have questions while we're going 
through NEPA--Could White Mountain stewardship do this? Is your equipment set up to do this or is 
this something that we better plan on it being done by some other contract, some other grant funds?--
we'll get them out in the field and ask them: What kind of equipment would you use in this particular 
location? Can you get material off the slope with what you've got, or is that something that we just better 
defer? When it comes to the actual implementation, a lot depends on the market that he has available at 
the time. If he's got a very active market for chips down to some of his mulchers, for instance, he may 
want to have a larger size landing to treat that so he can store some of that on site for a later 
haul…Somebody who takes the approach that it's going to be done the “Forest Service’s way,” can lead 
to significant additional costs to the contractor, which is putting us on a path that's in the wrong direction 
than we want to be. (Agency representative) 
8 

While this kind of adaptive relationship might be cause for concern in some settings, the social capacity that has been built 
in the community creates space for the contract to undergo minor adjustments. Even environmental advocates, who normally 
play a “watchdog” function, express comfort with allowing implementation to proceed without constant oversight. Said one 
environmental representative, “To a large degree we’re operating on faith, and on trust of the people involved.” For many 
community members (environmental representatives in particular), the monitoring and accountability functions of the 
multiparty monitoring board are of great importance. The board provides an accountability mechanism by tracking any 
changes that were made at the close-out of each task order. It is also responsible for independently investigating the 
ecological, economic, and social effects of the contract. The Forest Supervisor personally attends nearly every board meeting, 
and she has dedicated a small, but significant, percentage of the stewardship budget to funding monitoring activities 
recommended by the all-volunteer board. 
While land management agencies are often characterized as being risk-averse,10 key ASNF staff were willing to take risks 
by committing to a long-term, large-acreage contract. Many stewardship contracts had been implemented previously under 
pilot authorities, but these were largely short-term and relatively small acreages. Being the first forest to use the maximum 
contract length (ten years) and to apply stewardship contracting to a large area meant having to work through turf battles 
within the Forest Service bureaucracy and devoting a large portion of the forest’s base budget to stewardship activities. 
However, the strong community collaboration in support of a stewardship vision and the many years of work building 
stewardship capacity gave the ASNF confidence that the project would be a success. 
Navigating NEPA 
The high level of social capacity built by White Mountains stakeholders, and the fact that the stewardship contract is focused 
on operating within the social “zone of agreement” has also allowed the ASNF to complete NEPA requirements on tens of 
thousands of acres (as of May 2007 about 188,000 acres associated with the stewardship contract have been analyzed and 
more than 54,000 treatable acres were considered NEPA-ready). The NEPA process is often cited as a major institutional 
barrier to implementing land management,11 yet in the case of the ASNF, this potential obstacle was avoided by taking an 
approach that focused on areas of broadest agreement. As one agency representative characterized it, “We're not going to 
spend a lot of time and effort arguing about 5 or 10% of the areas or trees out there, let's focus on getting the 90% or 95% 
that needs to be done, done.” 
The ASNF staff made the completion of NEPA requirements for restoration and fuel reduction projects a top priority, even 
during the late 1990s and early 2000s when little actual treatment was occurring on the forest. 
Even though by the early 1990s the big timber programs had shut down, which meant the thinning 
programs had shut down, which meant a lot of the brush disposal work shut down, and a lot of the road 
stuff went down, [the forest supervisor at the time] continued to emphasize that we needed to put 
projects on the shelf because one of these days, and we didn’t have a concept of stewardship at the time, 
we just knew that one of these days, if the money was going to break available, we’d be able to get some 
work done. (Community representative) 
Situating Stewardship Within a Larger Context 
The capacity for long-term forest stewardship is in many ways a reflection of community capacity, utilization capacity, and 
the capacity of the forest management agency itself. At the same time, other more contextual factors can be important 
contributors to the stewardship process. In the case of the WMSC, these included the close proximity of White Mountain 
Apache Tribal lands, the recent history of large and destructive fires, and the changing policy context that is slowly evolving 
to support stewardship activities. 
The Role of the White Mountain Apache Tribe 
While the White Mountain Apache Tribe has been involved in stewardship contract deliberations only peripherally, it has, 
nevertheless, played an important role in contributing to the contract’s success. First, the Tribe continued forest management 
on Tribal lands, including experimenting with thinning prescriptions, during the “shut down” on national forest land. This 
9 

provided an economic buffer to local wood products businesses that helped some of them survive the lean years. It also helped 
local contractors build up their skill set in the years prior to the stewardship contract. Second, because Tribal lands border 
several White Mountains communities, and some of the major highways linking these communities traverse Tribal land, the 
non-Tribal public was able to see the effects of fuel reduction activities before they started to be applied on the ASNF. 
According to one community member, “I think it helps being right next [to] the Apaches, because the people here are used 
to burning and logging and it’s not like something foreign.” Previous thinning and prescribed fire treatments on Tribal land 
also illustrated the effects of fuel treatments on fire behavior during the Rodeo-Chediski Fire, with treated areas showing 
reduced fire intensity and lower tree mortality rates.12 These documented effects served as validation of the concepts 
contained in the WMSC plan to many in the White Mountains. 
The Rodeo-Chediski and Other Large Fires 
The Rodeo-Chediski and other large fires that have affected the White Mountains in recent years were important 
contributing factors to the stewardship contract, in the sense that they may have motivated the community into action and 
helped to build support from the Washington, D.C. office of the Forest Service. Some community members felt that the 
Rodeo-Chediski Fire, in particular, may have changed the political calculus of some of the region’s more litigious 
environmental groups, making them less inclined to object to fuel reduction treatments in the WUI. One environmental 
representative emphasized that it was the specifics of the stewardship contract, rather than political considerations related to 
the fire, that formed the basis of support: 
I won’t say we were completely insensitive to the whole fire thing, but it really didn’t drive the decision 
[to support the stewardship contract]. Once it kind of came together the way it did, we really wanted it 
to work. I can understand why people would have that perspective…But no, it was definitely much more 
positive from our standpoint. (Environmental group representative) 
There was broad agreement among stakeholders in the White Mountains that wildfires by themselves would not have led 
the community to adopt the stewardship contract concept, but rather that they added momentum to efforts that were already 
taking place. 
We were already on the path of knowing that something needed to be done. Obviously, Rodeo-Chediski 
had an impact as well, but if the collaborative efforts hadn’t been in place I don’t think Rodeo-Chediski 
by itself would have gotten us where we needed to be. (Agency representative) 
Experience with these fires may have also helped to spur action on Community Wildfire Protection Plans, which ultimately 
provided support and direction to treatments conducted under the stewardship contract. 
The Policy Context 
Another factor that contributed to the contract’s success was the changing policy context for federal forest management. 
While the stewardship contract could not have existed in its current form without the semi-permanent authorization granted 
by Congress in 2003, other recently enacted federal policies played important roles as well. The Healthy Forests Restoration 
Act of 2003 (HFRA) authorized locally led CWPPs—the very community-based plan that formed the basis for WUI 
treatments under the stewardship contract. The HFRA also expedited the NEPA processes for fuel reduction treatments in 
WUI areas, and these processes were used widely and successfully to plan stewardship contract treatments. Some smaller 
treatment areas on the ASNF were planned using categorical exclusions created through administrative actions under the 
Healthy Forests Initiative (HFI). Policies such as these gave the ASNF and the community the ability to implement 
treatments quickly once agreements had been made. While HFRA and HFI have been the subjects of a great deal of 
controversy at a national level since their introduction onto the political stage, they appear to have been used in the White 
Mountains without generating significant discord. Other recent policy changes designed to support place-based collaboration 
among various agency and non-agency entities have also contributed to increased capacity in the White Mountains. For 
example, the Economic Assistance Program supported the Four Corners Sustainable Forest Partnership and provided grant 
funds and technical assistance from the Forest Service Southwestern Region for the re-tooling of wood processing equipment 
to handle small-diameter materials, small business planning, marketing through the NAWPA, and new product 
development, such as modular log cabin packages. 
10 

Current and Future Challenges 
The ASNF, contractors, and other members of the White Mountains community had to contend with a number of obstacles 
in both the development and implementation stages of the stewardship contract. Some of these challenges were related to 
the WMSC’s status as the first large-scale, ten-year stewardship contract, while others are more systemic, ongoing challenges. 
In addition, issues related to treatment prescriptions and the role of large industry in the contract may arise as issues of 
contention in the coming years. 
Navigating the Forest Service Bureaucracy 
I think there were, and continue to be, large personalities who are creating very strong forces against 
stewardship contracting in the Forest Service. You have to get past the dinosaurs and their unwillingness 
to change. (Business representative) 
Some of the most significant challenges faced in the development of the WMSC occurred before the contract was officially 
announced, and were found primarily within the USFS bureaucracy. Challenges arose from various levels of the agency with 
turf battles between the agency’s timber management and procurement divisions being particularly acute. Some in the agency 
opposed the concept of stewardship contracting either because they felt traditional contracts were better tools or due to legal 
and policy concerns. It took the persistence of stewardship contract supporters at the forest, regional, and national office levels 
during what one agency representative described as “seven months of fighting” to break impasses associated with contracting 
language (including guarantees of acreage) and the responsibility for contract administration. According to many within the 
ASNF, commitment and buy-in to the stewardship concept by agency staff at district, forest, and higher levels is needed for 
successful implementation. 
Funding, Markets, and the Pace of Treatments 
A dynamic relationship exists between the level of funding available to the ASNF, the existing markets for small-diameter 
material, and the rate at which acres can be treated under the WMSC. Future Forests is paid for the tonnage of sub-
merchantable timber (the smallest, least-valuable material) they remove, and in turn they pay for the larger material for which 
local markets exist (generally 12- to 16-inch-diameter ponderosa pine). Under the WMSC, sub-merchantable removal 
expenses have consistently been higher than the value of merchantable timber removed. Using “goods for services” authority, 
the difference between the two is the cost to the ASNF to treat a parcel of ground, which has averaged around $550 an acre 
during the first few years of implementation. The ASNF is given a limited budget each year for all forest operations, including 
implementing the stewardship contract, and is sometimes able to direct additional funding to the contract through 
agreements with other national forest units. 
Because of the success of ASNF districts completing NEPA analyses, the primary constraints on treating acres are levels of 
available funding and the pace of the contractor in implementing treatments. If local markets expand (e.g., if a greater 
premium can be paid for merchantable material or if previously sub-merchantable material gains value), per-acre costs will 
decline, and the ASNF can treat a greater area for the same amount of money. The expansion of markets, in turn, is affected 
by local factors (such as private investments and grants) as well as non-local factors, such as state and federal policies and 
incentives. In effect, the pace of treatments is dependent on a combination of the funding available to the ASNF and existing 
markets for small-diameter material, although treatments can also be limited by weather and forest conditions (e.g., extreme 
fire danger, excessive snow, or muddy conditions). 
Besides seasonal concerns about weather-related forest closures (which can be significant), there are some concerns about the 
pace of treatments and the possibility of declining ASNF implementation funds over time. Issues such as these bring up 
questions of whether the government should continue to pay for stewardship activities or whether local wood products 
businesses should be expected to compete in a global marketplace when their supply consists of low-value restoration 
byproducts. While community organizations continue to work toward expanding local markets for small-diameter material, 
there is a recognition that implementation in the near future will continue to depend on the availability of federal dollars. 
11 

In a similar vein, the capacity of the regional wood products industry in the past was significantly strengthened by a variety 
of Forest Service Economic Assistance Program (EAP) grants funded through the Arizona Sustainable Forests Partnership 
and the Four Corners Sustainable Forests Partnership. Because the EAP is no longer functioning, this gap could well affect 
future business development in the White Mountains and other communities seeking to replicate this scale of stewardship 
contracting. 
The Cluster Effect vs. the Big-box 
In grappling with the issue of expanding local markets in an attempt to make restoration and fuel reduction treatments 
economically sustainable, there is some disagreement within the community about the role of large-volume wood users in the 
White Mountains. Many of the local capacity building organizations, such as the Arizona and Southwest Sustainable Forests 
Partnerships and NAWPA, have focused on building an integrated “cluster” of small- to medium-sized wood users 
distributed throughout the White Mountains, with each business filling a particular niche in terms of location and type of 
wood used. Likewise, the WMSC was awarded to a joint venture of local businesses working in close concert with other local 
users. 
However, the continued expense of forest treatments and concerns about the pace of implementation has led some to 
advocate for the inclusion of a larger wood user (some refer to this as a “big box” plant) that would be able to pay a higher 
premium for small-diameter material. Said one community member “I think they’re going to need some type of bigger user, 
like an OSB or a paper plant…There’s just so many acres to do.” Some in the community feel that with a big box user, the 
ASNF will no longer have to pay for treatments, and the capacity building that has tended to focus on the smaller users will 
no longer be necessary. Others in the community believe the cluster approach will ultimately drive prices down if given 
enough time: 
If we do this small cluster like everybody likes--a long, scary thing--it’ll take five to seven years to rebuild 
it to where it’ll pay for itself. It’s just economics. We’d just come out of the worst market they’ve seen in 
30 years in the wood industry. So we’re doing well, given the atmosphere we’re in. (Business 
representative) 
Expanding the Range of Prescriptions 
Another challenge confronting the community is whether--and how--to evolve the kinds of treatment prescriptions being 
implemented as part of the contract. Most work to date has involved fairly simple prescriptions focusing on thinning from 
below in the smallest size classes as a means of breaking up fuel continuity. Some refer to the outcome of these treatments as 
“the jailbar effect,” because the resulting stand often contains evenly-spaced, similar-sized trees. While most stakeholders see 
fuel reduction in the WUI as the top priority in these treatments, there are additional concerns about the need to meet other 
objectives such as maintaining or enhancing wildlife habitat, re-creating historic openings, and creating a more heterogeneous 
landscape. To this end, the ASNF has engaged members of the NRWG and the multiparty monitoring board in creating a 
collaborative interdisciplinary team, composed of both agency and non-agency stakeholders, to explore ways of implementing 
more integrated restoration and fuel reduction treatments, largely based on guidelines originally created to provide for 
northern goshawk habitat. While this approach is largely supported within the NRWG and multiparty monitoring board, it 
is causing some concern, particularly among those who see it as a way for the USFS to avoid including diameter caps in future 
prescriptions. Issues of this sort are likely to pose future challenges as the White Mountains community attempts to move 
away from simple fuel reduction prescriptions to more integrated restoration treatments. 
12 

Lessons Learned 
While the new provisions inherent in stewardship contracting (goods for services, end-results, flexibility, etc,) have been 
acknowledged quite widely as important additional tools that can facilitate forest restoration objectives, the WMSC, because 
of its large landscape scope and ten-year time frame, offers an unusually rich situation from which to reflect on some of the 
more far-reaching lessons learned. By and large, the stewardship contract authority has previously been used on a 
demonstration scale to address forest health needs on projects of 500 to 5,000 acres. The magnitude and duration of this 
stewardship contract offers a unique opportunity to look much further ahead to the next generation of larger, more complex 
forest restoration work. As one community member said shortly after the WMSC was announced, “This is a whole different 
ball game.” 
One way to frame the lessons learned from this “whole new ball game” is to start with a perspective expressed by a business 
person involved with the WMSC: 
We've had a lot of people visit us from other areas, wanting a stewardship contract, and what we've 
decided is most of them don't understand that a stewardship contract itself is not going to solve their 
problem. If they haven't put the time and effort into rebuilding their infrastructure, the collaboration, a 
stewardship contract isn't the magic answer. There had been a lot of work done prior to the stewardship 
contract ever coming here, Four Corners [Sustainable Forests Partnership], and we've seen that. Even 
with the stewardship contract, a guaranteed amount of wood, things are still slow. So when we've got 
people who come and say, “Well if we have a stewardship contract, things are going to be great.” Well, 
yes and no. It's going to take some time. (Business representative) 
In examining both the years leading up to the WMSC and several years of implementation, the importance of capacity 
building, community-based collaboration, expanded Forest Service organizational capacity and leadership, and economic 
infrastructure re-development have been emphasized. Each of these areas offers a series of take-home messages or key 
discoveries that clearly demonstrate that the wider community, business organizations, economic development and 
environmental entities, local governments, and land management agencies must build a state of preparedness or readiness in 
order to have a reasonable chance at success. 
Lesson 1. The White Mountain Stewardship Contract represents a new approach to land management in which the 
community plays a variety of important roles. 
Perhaps the most important lesson to emerge from this study of the WMSC is that it represents a different approach to public 
land management than is found under the traditional model. The traditional expectation is that land management is carried 
out under the narrow terms of a legal contract between the agency and a contractor who either pays to harvest valuable forest 
products or is paid to perform a needed service. While the WMSC does contain a legal agreement between the agency and 
contractor, it is in many respects a social contract to which all major stakeholders are signatories. What is novel is not only 
that these stakeholders play active roles (above and beyond the nominal role non-agency players are allowed in the NEPA 
process), but that to a great extent the contract would not be possible without them. In particular, building a cohesive social 
vision through ongoing collaboration and rebuilding the kind of economic infrastructure needed to perform restorative forest 
work were two functions the agency could not have executed in isolation. By adopting a more engaged and adaptive position 
within the community, the agency was able to capitalize on the potential created by these sustained community efforts. 
Building from a broadly inclusive collaborative base also provides some level of security that stewardship activities will be 
sustainable in the sense that they will be less vulnerable to being thwarted by outside entities. 
The WMSC is certainly not the first example of innovative, agency-community institutional arrangements, nor is it the first 
multi-year stewardship contract. Because of its long time frame and large spatial scale, however, it illustrates the necessary 
ingredients for land stewardship beyond a demonstration scale. 
13 

A key lesson for land managers in other parts of the country is that embarking on stewardship activities on a large scale and long time 
frame will require some kind of partnership between the agency, private business, and the community. The roles of the agency in 
preparing administratively for stewardship, and of private business in providing an economic outlet for restoration by-products, are 
well understood. Perhaps less obvious is the vital role played by the community in working with the agency, businesses, and key 
stakeholders in providing collaborative forums to build the social license for stewardship, and in supporting the transition from an 
extractive to a stewardship-based economic infrastructure. 
Lesson 2. Community capacity, wood utilization capacity, and agency organizational capacity had to be built in order to 
prepare for large-scale forest restoration work. 
The WMSC represents one approach for making the transition from a resource-extractive paradigm for public land 
management to a stewardship-based paradigm. The transition did not occur overnight, however, nor did it occur without 
sustained effort by the community. The success of the contract is in many ways the result of years of community investments 
in capacity-building in three key areas: 
•  Community capacity: The White Mountains community was able to move from a state of social, political, and 
managerial gridlock to establishing broad-based commitment to a large, long-term contract largely through the 
building of trust and working relationships among historically polarized stakeholders. This required inclusive 
forums (such as the NRWG) that appeared to progress very slowly at times but were eventually able to foster 
agreement on initial, demonstration-scale projects. As the community learned from these projects and continued 
to build constructive relationships, the community’s capacity to take on larger, more ambitious projects increased. 
•  Utilization capacity: Wood products businesses, non-governmental business support organizations, and the USFS 
invested a great deal of time and resources building utilization capacity in the White Mountains in advance of the 
initiation of the stewardship contract. One of the more significant parts of this period of getting ready was re-
tooling and revitalizing existing components of the forest-based economy. While the White Mountains region 
benefited from the existence of some remnants of the past wood products industry, it took the combined support 
of business owners, the ASNF, and organizations like the Four Corners/Southwest Sustainable Forests Partnership, 
the ASFP, and NAWPA to rebuild and restructure these “remnants” into an integrated array of businesses capable 
of supporting restoration and fuel reduction practices on federal lands. 
•  Agency capacity: As the manager of nearly all non-tribal forests in the White Mountains, the role of the ASNF 
in the success of the stewardship contract is obviously paramount. Largely due to the personal skills, the willingness 
to innovate and the collective foresight of individuals within the ASNF, the agency was able to move beyond the 
usual fits and starts in management to creating a sustained program of work that was supported by all major 
stakeholders. This momentum has been sustained through ongoing engagement with the local community, a 
willingness on the part of the agency to adapt to emerging needs and changes, and establishing mechanisms for 
accountability, largely through the multiparty monitoring board. 
Stewardship capacity may ultimately represent the sum total of other capacities–community, utilization, and agency capacity in the case 
of the White Mountains–and these will often need to be built or re-built over time. Investments in community-based collaborative 
processes and community based infrastructure development may be needed before the ground is prepared for long-term, large-scale 
stewardship. Collaborative and business support organizations in the White Mountains provide models of successful community-based 
forums for building capacity, just as the ASNF provides a model of how a land management agency can successfully engage the local 
community to leverage existing momentum. 
14 

Lesson 3. The White Mountain Stewardship Contract, and the work leading up to it, have focused on the “zone of agreement” 
created and maintained by relevant stakeholders. 
Achieving a workable “zone of agreement” in the White Mountains in preparation for developing a large-scale stewardship 
contract has been noted as a key ingredient for sustaining commitment and trust generated among active stewardship contract 
stakeholders. The zone of agreement was quite small at times, but it has clearly expanded with time through the relationships 
built in collaborative forums and the mutual learning that arose from shared experiences working at smaller scales. While 
there is often pressure in forest management to push the boundaries of social acceptance (or to discount the importance of 
social acceptance altogether), the approach taken in the White Mountains was to build agreement through collaborative 
forums and focus work on areas of broadest agreement, with the expectation that ongoing learning would help to increase 
the level of agreement as time passed. As one agency representative described this approach, “Let's continue with the 
education and do what society allows us to do right now.” It should be noted that the zone of agreement relates to all aspects 
of the contract. The community was clearly concerned about issues regarding the types and placements of forest treatments. 
Just as important, however, were questions of who would be awarded the contract, how jobs would be created and sustained, 
and how non-agency stakeholders would continue to be involved in monitoring and influencing contract outcomes. 
The various informal and formal social structures from personal relationships, to meetings of several partnerships and 
associations, to implementation of the Community Wildfire Protection Plans, to collaborative agency-community 
interdisciplinary teams, are all aiding an evolving zone of agreement. As the stewardship contract continues to evolve, for 
example through changing restoration prescriptions, this zone of agreement will be challenged from time to time. While there 
is no guarantee of particular outcomes, the community does have existing collaborative forums (e.g., NRWG and the multi-
party monitoring board) and existing social capacity to provide a framework for dealing with these challenges. 
Although it might be in a sense obvious that this zone needs to be maintained, more attention needs to be paid to this 
outcome with longer-term and larger-scale stewardship contracts. As implementation begins, economic, ecological, and 
social conditions and issues evolve, sometimes in predictable ways and sometimes in unforeseen directions. Because the 
WMSC ultimately depends on a number of outside players for its success (e.g., wood products businesses, local government 
officials, community leaders, environmental organizations, regulatory agencies), maintaining the zone of agreement helps to 
ensure the process won’t get derailed by local interests or outside forces. 
Achieving stewardship capacity will often be difficult, if not impossible, without the support of all major stakeholders. If proposed 
actions do not take place within the zone of agreement as defined by these stakeholders, a variety of forms of resistance can be expected, 
some of which may ultimately doom prospects for long-term stewardship. Even if projects start out with broad support, unforeseen 
challenges may arise later. This highlights the necessity of community forums for dealing with challenges constructively. 
Lesson 4. The White Mountain Stewardship Contract is a part of a larger community vision of achieving social, economic, 
and ecological sustainability. 
In achieving a stewardship contract of the scale of the WMSC, a reasonable response might be to simply declare a huge 
victory. By its nature, the WMSC provides a long-term supply of wood fiber; businesses can expand to address the higher 
biomass volumes; the Forest Service is doing fairly well in coming up with annual funds to offer task orders as rapidly as the 
contractor, Future Forests, can implement them; and the community and local governments remain highly supportive of the 
economic and ecological benefits being derived. However, this stewardship contract is neither a “beginning” (in the sense that 
previous work was necessary to prepare for it) nor an “end”-it is the next step in a long-term process of realizing a community 
vision of integrated economic, social, and environmental sustainability. 
Even with all the successes that the White Mountains community has experienced, it is still only in the initial stages of 
achieving their vision. Economically, there remains the challenge of expanding local markets to the point that restoration and 
fuel reduction treatments can pay for themselves through utilization of small-diameter by-products. While this challenge 
continues to be addressed through grants, technical assistance, and business development at the local level, it is at least 
partially a function of distinctly non-local forces as national and international competition along with state- and federal-level 
15 

energy, tax, and forest policies continue to affect the viability of locally produced sawtimber, heating pellets, and other 
products. More work needs to be done to level the playing field so that local products have a chance at competing in a national 
and international marketplace where incentives and disincentives are unequally distributed. 
The social component of sustainability, while clearly strong in the White Mountains region is, nevertheless, vulnerable to 
changes at local and higher levels. Challenges at the local level include continuing to build trust and common understanding 
to the point that consistent treatments can begin across the hundreds of thousands of acres of degraded forests outside the 
WUI. There is also the possibility of non-local factors influencing the social agreements that have been forged. Examples 
could include legal challenges to forest management by outside organizations or directives from higher political or 
managerial levels to change the approach to land management that has so far characterized the contract. 
Ecologically, the WMSC is continuing to undergo changes. Shifting from relatively simple fuel reduction prescriptions to 
more complex, integrated restoration prescriptions will have implications for both wood utilization and social acceptability. 
While the multiparty monitoring board is taking an active role in evaluating the effect of these treatments on a number of 
key variables, there is a sense that it may not be until the end of the contract––or later––before the effects of these treatments 
become clear. 
A lesson learned from the White Mountains is that even given strong local leadership, rural communities––and the public lands to 
which they are proximate––are inevitably situated within larger political, social, and ecological contexts over which they may have 
little influence. However, the WMSC provides one model of how local stewardship can flourish even in the face of outside challenges, 
given sufficient investment and dedication by the agency and community. 
Acknowledgments 
The authors would like to thank the many White Mountains residents and community members who took time to share 
their thoughts, experiences, and observations with us. Special thanks to the White Mountain Stewardship Contract 
Multiparty Monitoring Board and the staff of the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests for providing feedback on preliminary 
findings and drafts. Thanks to James Motichek, Austin Lyons, and Justy Leppert for help with interview transcriptions. 
Endnotes 
1Moseley 2002, General Accounting Office 2004, Daly et al. 2006 
2Cooper 1960, Covington et al. 1994, Johnson 1994, Covington 2003 
3Wilmes et al. 2002, Lenart 2006 
4Arizona Department of Commerce 2007 
5Barnett and Hawkins 2002 
6Baeza 1995, Stone 1995, Lenart 2006 
7Kusel 1996, p. 369 
8See Lenart (2006) for a more thorough discussion of the Natural Resources Working Group. 
9Carr et al. 1998, Moseley 2002, Moote and Becker 2003, McDermott et al. 2005 
10Carr et al. 1998, Moseley 2002, McDermott et al. 2005 
11Moote and Becker 2003, McDermott et al. 2005 
12Strom and Fulé 2007 
16 

References 
Arizona Department of Commerce. 2007. Community 
Profile Index. Available online at 
http://www.azcommerce.com/SiteSel/Profiles/Community 
+Profile+Index.htm. 
Baeza, J. 1995. Elk timber sale still on hold for court 
decision. The White Mountain Independent – Navajo County 
Edition. 41(36):1A-2A. Friday May 5, 1995. 
Barnett, L.O. and R.H. Hawkins. 2002. Reconnaissance 
watershed analysis on the upper and middle Verde 
watershed. Watershed Resources Program, School of 
Renewable Natural Resources, University of Arizona, 
Tuscon, AZ. Available online at http://www.azwater.gov/ 
dwr/Content/Find_by_Program/Rural_Programs/content/ 
map/documents/ReconnaissanceVerdeWS_Analysis.pdf. 
Carr, D.S., S.W. Selin, and M.A. Schuett. 1998. Managing 
public forests: Understanding the role of collaborative 
planning. Environmental Management 22(5):767-776. 
Cooper, C.F. 1960. Changes in vegetation, structure, and 
growth of southwestern pine forest since white settlement. 
Ecological Monographs 30:129-164. 
Covington, W.W. 2003. The evolutionary and historical 
context. Pp. 26-47 in P. Friederici (ed.), Ecological 
restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. 
Washington, D.C.: Island Press. 
Covington, W.W., R.L. Everett, R. Steele, L.L. Irwin, 
T.A. Daer, and A.N.D. Auclair. 1994. Historical and 
anticipated changes in forest ecosystems of the Inland 
West of the United States. Pp. 13-63 in R.N. Sampson, 
D.L. Adams, and M.J. Enzer, (eds.), Assessing forest 
ecosystem health in the Inland West. New York, NY: Food 
Products Press. 
Daly, C., C. Moseley, A. Moote, and M. Enzer. 2006. 
Forest Service contracting: A basic guide for restoration 
practitioners. Flagstaff, AZ: Ecological Restoration 
Institute, Ecosystem Workforce Program, Sustainable 
Northwest, and Flathead Economic Policy Center. 
General Accounting Office. 2004. Federal land 
management: Additional guidance on community 
involvement could enhance effectiveness of stewardship 
contracting. GAO-04-652. Washington, D.C. 
Johnson, M. 1994. Changes in southwestern forests: 
Stewardship implications. Journal of Forestry 92(12):16-19. 
Kusel, J. 1996. Well-being in forest-dependent 
communities, part 1: A new approach. Pp. 361-373 in 
Sierra Nevada Ecosystem Project: Final report to 
Congress, Vol. II, Assessments and scientific basis for 
management options. Davis, CA: University of California, 
Centers for Water and Wildland Resources. 
Lenart, M. 2006. Collaborative stewardship to prevent 
wildfires. Environment 48(7):9-21. 
McDermott, M.H., M.A. Moote, and C. Danks. 2005. 
How community-based collaboratives overcome external 
institutional barriers to achieving their environmental goals. 
Paper presented at the Fifth National Community-based 
Collaboratives Research Consortium, November 17-19, 
2005, Sedona, AZ. 
Moote, A. and D. Becker. 2003. Exploring barriers to 
collaborative forestry: Report from a workshop held at Hart 
Prairie, Flagstaff, Arizona, September 17-19, 2003. 
Flagstaff, AZ: Ecological Restoration Institute. 
Moseley, C. 2002. A survey of innovative contracting for 
quality jobs and ecosystem management. U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Pacific Northwest Research Station. 
General Technical Report PNW-GTR-552. Portland, 
OR. 
Stone, C. 1995. Logging injunction affects Stone 
Container. The White Mountain Independent – Navajo 
County Edition. 41(72):1A-2A. Friday September 1, 1995. 
Strom, B. and P.Z. Fulé. 2007. Pre-wildfire fuel treatments 
affect long-term ponderosa pine forest dynamics. 
International Journal of Wildland Fire 16:128-138. 
Wilmes, L., D. Martinez, L. Wadleigh, C. Denton, and D. 
Geisler. 2002. Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests Rodeo-
Chediski Fire effects summary report. Springerville, AZ: 
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests. 
17 

Box 1.  
The White Mountain Stewardship  
Contract: Basic Facts?  
Started: August 10, 2004. 
Stewardship contracting authorities used: Goods for 
services, best value, designation by description, multi-year 
contracting. 
Location: Can be applied to any national forest in Region 
3 (the Southwest Region of the U.S. Forest Service). To 
date, all activities have occurred on the Apache-Sitgreaves 
National Forests, largely in Wildland-Urban Interface 
(WUI) areas. 
Contractor: Future Forests, LLC, formed by Walker 
Brothers, Inc., a local logging contractor, and Forest 
Energy Corporation, a local heating pellet manufacturer. 
Duration: Ten years. All task orders must be released by 
the end of the ten year period, but Future Forests has 
three years to complete task orders, so implementation 
may not be completed until 2017. 
Size: The ten-year goal is to treat 150,000 acres, but the 
sum total could range from 50,000 to 250,000 acres. 
Guaranteed acreage: The contract guarantees that a 
minimum of 5,000 acres will be released through task 
orders annually. 
Payment method: Value of commercial removals (trees 12 
inch diameter and greater) is offset against cost of non-
commercial removals (under 12 inch diameter). Costs 
calculated by tons of non-commercial material removed. 
Per-acre costs have ranged from $300 to $800, averaging 
around $550. 
Treatment type: Treatments to date have focused on 
reducing tree density and modifying potential fire 
behavior in the WUI. Treatments are largely mechanical, 
using feller-bunchers, stroke delimbers, and rubber-tired 
skidders. Fifteen percent of the material removed is 
commercial sawtimber (12 inch diameter or greater), 40% 
is roundwood (9 to 12 inches), and 45% is less than 9 
inches. 
Local products manufactured from treatment byproducts: 
Commercial and residential heating pellets, biomass 
energy production, mulch, wood shavings, posts, poles, 
dimensional lumber. 
Box 2.  
Stewardship Contracting Authorities  
With passage of semi-permanent stewardship contracting 
authority in 2003 (16 U.S.C. 2104 Note), the U.S. Forest 
Service and Bureau of Land Management received a number of 
new, innovative options for land management. The following is 
a brief description of new authorities that can be used, together 
or separately, in stewardship contracts. 
Goods for services: Allows the administering agency (U.S. 
Forest Service or Bureau of Land Management) to apply the 
value of forest products removed as an offset against the cost of 
services rendered. Traditionally, timber sale (commercial) and 
service (non-commercial) contracts were administered 
separately. 
Best value contracting: All stewardship contracts are required 
to be awarded on the basis of the best value to the government 
rather than lowest price. Considerations in determining best 
value can include “the contractor’s past performance, work 
quality, existing public or private agreements or contracts, on-
time delivery, experience, technical approach, and benefits to 
the local community.” (FSH 2409.19, Ch. 63.1). 
Designation without marking: This authority allows for the 
cutting of both merchantable and non-merchantable trees as 
part of stewardship activities, without requiring trees slated for 
removal to be marked. “Designation by description” describes 
trees to be removed by species, size class, and other factors (e.g. 
the removal of all ponderosa pine under nine inches). 
“Designation by prescription” uses silvicultural criteria to 
describe the desired stand condition following treatment (for 
example, thinning to a 60 basal area factor, or clustering leave 
trees in even-aged clumps of 2 to 10 trees per clump). 
Multi-year contracts: Multi-year stewardship contracts may 
extend up to ten years in length and do not require a contract 
renewal option after the first year. Previously, service contracts 
were limited to five years in length. 
Retention of receipts: Allows the administering agency to 
retain any receipts from the sale of timber or other forest 
products and apply these funds to service work on the same 
stewardship contract or transfer them to another stewardship 
contract. These funds can also be applied to project-level or 
programmatic multiparty monitoring processes or to certain 
U.S. Forest Service trust fund accounts (e.g. Knutson-
Vanderberg, salvage sale funds and others). 
Less than full and open competition: This authority can be 
used to provide opportunities to local contractors, when doing 
so would provide the best value to the government. Use of less 
than full and open contracting by the U.S. Forest Service must 
be justified on a case-by-case basis through reporting to the 
Regional Forester. 
Non-Department of Agriculture administered contracts: The 
Chief of the U.S. Forest Service and Regional Foresters have 
the authority to delegate administration of stewardship contract 
timber harvesting activities to qualified individuals outside the 
Department of Agriculture. 
Source: U.S. Forest Service Handbook 2409.19, Chapter 60; 
Red Lodge Clearinghouse, available online 
http://www.redlodgeclearinghouse.org/legislation/stewardship2. 
html#semipermanent   
18 

Box 3. 
Chronology of Key Events in the White 
Mountains 
1959-1989: Thirty-year guaranteed Colorado Plateau 
Pulpwood Contract is continued until 1999 through three-
year contract extensions. 
1993: Mexican spotted owl listed as threatened under the 
Endangered Species Act. 
1995: Court-ordered injunction on all harvesting activities in 
Mexican spotted owl habitat until the U.S. Forest Service 
complies with Endangered Species Act obligations. 
1995-1998: Several White Mountains area mills, including a 
Stone Industries sawmill in Eagar and Precision Pine 
sawmills in Eager and Heber, go out of business. 
1997: Members of the Natural Resources Working Group 
sign MOU agreeing to work together to develop options for 
forest restoration, initially focused on the Blue Ridge 
Demonstration. 
1999: Stone Industries Pulp Mill in Snowflake stops receiving 
local wood and converts to 100% recycled materials. 
1999: The Four Concerns Sustainable Forests Partnership 
begins to make US Forest Service Economic Assistance 
Program grant funds available. 
2001-2004: Treatments are implemented on the Blue Ridge 
Demonstration Project by Walker Brothers Contracting, 
which has also been working on White Mountain Apache 
Tribal lands. 
2002: The Rodeo-Chediski Wildfire burns 467,000 acres in 
east-central Arizona on the Apache-Sitgreaves National 
Forests and White Mountain Apache Tribal Lands. 
2003: The Kinishba Wildfire burns 22,600 acres mostly in the 
White River drainage on White Mountain Apache Tribal 
lands. 
2003: Congress grants semi-permanent authority to the U.S. 
Forest Service and BLM to engage in an unlimited number of 
stewardship end-result contracts. The maximum allowed 
length for stewardship contracts is extended to ten years. 
2003: The Arizona Sustainable Forests partnership forms the 
Northern Arizona Wood Products Association. 
2004: The White Mountain Stewardship Contract is awarded 
to Future Forests, LLC and officially begins on August 10. 
The Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests Supervisor also 
announces the creation of the White Mountain Stewardship 
Contract Multiparty Monitoring Board. 
2007: About 17,000 acres of stewardship contract work is 
completed by the Future Forests by mid-year. Thirty-one 
thousand acres have been released through task orders and 
more than 54,000 treatable acres have been cleared through 
the NEPA process. 
Box 4. 
Capacity-building Community Forums in 
the White Mountains 
The Natural Resources Working Group formed in the 
mid-1990s as a collaborative forum focused on forest, 
watershed, and wildlife issues. It has served as the primary 
collaborative community organization behind the White 
Mountain Stewardship Contract, and has had consistent 
support and engagement from key stakeholders, including 
local government (cities and counties), Apache-Sitgreaves 
National Forests leadership, environmental organizations, 
wood products businesses, state wildlife and lands agencies, 
fire districts, elected officials, and other community 
organizations. It operates on a volunteer basis with support 
from Navajo County and leadership through the University 
of Arizona Cooperative Extension. 
The Blue Ridge Demonstration Project began as the 
17,000-acre Blue Ridge–Morgan Ecosystem Management 
Area on the Lakeside Ranger District of the Apache-
Sitgreaves National Forests. It served as a demonstration of 
forest restoration activities through the implementation of 
three different treatment approaches across 7,000 acres and 
was developed collaboratively between the Natural Resources 
Working Group and the Apache-Sitgreaves National 
Forests. 
The Southwest Sustainable Forests Partnership grew out 
of the earlier Four Corners Sustainable Forests 
Partnership. Hosted by the Little Colorado River Plateau 
Resource Conservation and Development Area, the focus of 
the partnership is to build linkages between healthy forests 
and healthy communities. This is accomplished through 
technical assistance in marketing, product development, 
workforce training, and other key aspects of the new small-
diameter forestry economy. 
The Arizona Sustainable Forests Partnership serves as the 
Arizona component of the Southwest Sustainable Forests 
Partnership. It helps to increase utilization capacity by 
meeting key needs of local wood products businesses, such as 
assisting with re-tooling of infrastructure, providing 
technical assistance, and building linkages between various 
independent businesses in Arizona. 
The Northern Arizona Wood Products Association was 
created as a trade organization for the variety of Northern 
Arizona businesses focused on utilization of small-diameter 
wood. NAWPA focuses on building utilization capacity 
through technical assistance, outreach, networking, and 
marketing. 
The White Mountain Stewardship Contract Multiparty 
Monitoring Board was formed by the Apache-Sitgreaves 
National Forests as a citizen advisory board focused on 
monitoring the ecological, economic, and social effects of the 
stewardship contract. The board acts both to provide outside 
review of stewardship contract activities and to serve as a 
forum for ongoing agency-community dialogue. 
The Eastern Arizona Counties Resource Advisory 
Committee is a formal collaborative body charged with 
distributing federal funds associated with the Secure Rural 
Schools and Community Self-Determination Act of 2000. 
These funds benefit the community by supporting projects 
such as Community Wildfire Protection Plans, land and 
watershed restoration activities, and projects associated with 
the White Mountain Stewardship Contract. 
19 

Appendix 1. Methodology Used for This Case Study 
This study was conducted largely through the use of qualitative research methods, including a series of 20 semi-structured 
interviews with 21 key stakeholders involved in the development, implementation, or monitoring of the stewardship contract 
(one interview included two individuals) and a group discussion with the multiparty monitoring board tasked with tracking 
the impacts and results of the contract. Nineteen interviews and the monitoring board discussion were recorded (one 
interview was not recorded due to technical problems), and the recordings transcribed and analyzed. One interview was 
conducted by telephone and the rest were in person, mostly on-site in the White Mountains. Interviewees included five 
individuals whose primary role in the community is as a current or former officer with the ASNF, four whose primary role 
is as an advocate for environmental conservation, six whose primary role is as a supporter or manager of wood products 
businesses, and six who play a variety of roles in the community, and are referred to simply as community members. It should 
be noted that nearly all stakeholders, regardless of their primary role, play a variety of roles in the community. For example, 
several of the community members formerly worked for the USFS and even some environmental representatives assist with 
wood products business development. For the sake of clarity, interviewees are referred to by the primary role they currently 
play in the community. Other published and unpublished information about the stewardship contract and related issues was 
used as needed to fill information gaps and to verify factual information provided by interviewees. This secondary information 
came from a variety of sources including monitoring board reports, documents prepared by ASNF staff, and organizational 
documents, such as charters and memoranda of understanding. 
20 

Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native species, 
structural characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological Restoration International 
defines ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem 
with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability...Restoration attempts to return an ecosystem to its 
historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration International Science & Policy Working Group 2004). 
In the southwestern United States, most ponderosa pine forests have been degraded during the last 150 years. 
Many ponderosa pine areas are now dominated by dense thickets of small trees, and lack their once diverse 
understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, stand-
replacing fires and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers on reintroducing 
frequent, low-intensity surface fires––often after thinning dense stands––and reestablishing productive 
understory plant communities. 
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, 
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. By allowing 
natural processes, such as fire, to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that 
provide ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities. 
The ERI White Papers series provides overviews and policy recommendations derived from research and 
observations by the ERI and its partner organizations. While the ERI staff recognizes that every forest 
restoration is site specific, we feel that the information provided in the ERI White Papers may help 
decisionmakers elsewhere. 
This publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Service. The views and 
conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing 
the opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products 
does not constitute their endorsement by the United States Government or ERI. 
ERI White Papers: Issues in Forest Restoration 
1. Forestlands Health and Carbon Sequestration: Strengthening the Case for Western Forest Restoration 
2. Smoke from Prescribed Burning: Issues on Public Forestlands of the Western United States 
3. Public Perceptions of Forest Restoration in the Southwest: A Synthesis of Selected Literature and Surveys 
4. Integrating Ecological Restoration and Conservation Biology: A Case Study from Southwestern Ponderosa 
Pine Forests 
5. Communications Between Forest Managers and Property Owners in Pine Flat, Arizona: A Case Study of 
Community Interactions in a High Fire Hazard Area 
6. Wilderness Management and the Restoration of Fire: An Analysis of Laws and Regulations in Northern 
Arizona 
7. Navigating the Motives and Mandates of Multiparty Monitoring  

