Testimony of Dr. W. Wallace Covington, Regents' Professor  
and Director of the Ecological Restoration Institute  
Northern Arizona University  
http://www.for.nau/ecorest/
  
Before the Committee on Resources  
Subcommittee on Forests and Forest Health  
U.S. House of Representatives  
 
Oversight Hearing on Preventing Wildfires through Proper Management of the 
National Forests  
August 14, 2000  
Madam Chairman Chenoweth-Hage, and members of the Committee, thank you for this 
opportunity to testify on a subject of personal importance to me and of critical importance 
to the health of our nation's forests and the people and communities that live within them.  
My name is Wally Covington. I am Regents' Professor of Forest Ecology at Northern 
Arizona University and Director of the Ecological Restoration Institute. I have been a 
professor at NAU since 1975.  
I have a Ph.D. in forest ecosystem analysis from Yale University where I worked with 
Professors F. Herbert Bormann and Daniel B. Botkin on the Hubbard Brook Watershed 
Ecosystem Study. There I conducted an ecosystem analysis of changes in species 
composition, organic matter and nutrient budgets, and net primary production on a time 
series of northern hardwood stands ranging from 1-yr old after clearcutting to an old-
growth stand that had never been cut. I also have an M.S. in ecology from the University 
of New Mexico where I worked with Professor James Gosz. There I directed field crews 
in establishing the Tesuque Watershed Ecosystem Study using the Santa Fe Watershed as 
a control area.  
Over the past 25 years I have taught graduate and undergraduate courses in research 
methods, ecological restoration, ecosystem management, fire ecology and management, 
forest management, range management, wildlife management, watershed management, 
recreation management, park and wildland management, and forest operations research. I 
have been working in long-term research on fire ecology and management in ponderosa 
pine and related ecosystems since I moved to Northern Arizona University in 1975. In 
addition to my publications on forest restoration, I have co-authored scientific papers on a 
broad variety of topics in forest ecology and resource management including research on 
fire effects, prescribed burning, thinning, operations research, silviculture, range 
management, wildlife effects, multiresource management, forest health, and natural 
resource conservation. I am senior author of the Ecosystem Restoration and Management: 
Scientific Principles and Concepts chapter of the interagency publication entitled The 

 
2
Ecological Stewardship Reference. I am a member of numerous professional societies 
including the Ecological Society of America, the International Society for Ecosystem 
Health, the Society for Conservation Biology, the Natural Areas Association, the Soil and 
Water Conservation Society, the Society for Range Management, and the Society of 
American Foresters. I am also a member of the Society for Ecological Restoration and 
am outgoing chair of its Science and Policy Working Group. In addition to publishing in 
the scientific literature I have been actively involved in outreach efforts to natural 
resource professionals, community leaders, and the general public on issues related to 
forest ecosystem management.  
Although the general principles that I will discuss apply to the vast majority of the West's 
dryer forest types, I will focus my testimony on ponderosa pine forests. As the GAO has 
pointed out over 90 percent of the severe crown fire damage nationally is in this forest 
type.  
It is an unfortunate set of circumstances that have led to this hearing. Scientists have 
predicted the current forest crisis for the last 75 years (Leopold 1924, Weaver 1943). In 
1994 I was senior author on a review paper (Attachment One) in which I stated that we 
could anticipate exponential increases in the severity and extent of catastrophic fire. It is 
not a prediction I ever wanted to come true. In that same paper, I also suggested that we 
have a narrow window of opportunity to take preventative actions to restore forest health 
and minimize the losses of civilian and firefighter lives as well as the mounting damage 
to our nation's natural resources.  
We have been extremely lucky that no lives have been lost so far this season. In some 
respects we were lucky that the Cerro Grande Fire occurred in the fireshed for Los 
Alamos, a town that had perhaps the best evacuation plan in the nation. The forest is full 
of communities that have poor escape routes and little capability for evacuation in the 
event of a fast moving fire. It is not likely that our luck will continue. The Viveash Fire 
traveled 9 miles and burned 20,000 acres in a 24-hour period. Given such a rate of spread 
in heavy forest fuels there is no way that we will be able to evacuate vulnerable mountain 
communities in time to prevent the loss of lives. Clearly, if we do not do something 
quickly we can expect civilian and firefighter fatalities that are today unimaginable. I 
commend the Committee and Congress for taking a problem-solving approach to the 
current and future fire situation.  
I am an optimist who believes with thoughtful action, adequate resources and public and 
private leadership we can begin to solve this crisis. There are three points I intend to 
make in my testimony that will contribute to the solution.  
1. We have a solid body of scientific information to begin applying ecologically 
based forest restoration treatments to protect people, communities, and the forests 
surrounding them. As we proceed we should continue to build on that knowledge 
through continued research, monitoring and adaptive management.  

 
3
2. The solution to catastrophic wildfire must include more than the wildland/urban 
interface. It is unclear how large a barrier would have been needed to protect Los 
Alamos under the extreme conditions and power of the Cerro Grande Fire. In 
addition, there are economic, social and aesthetic reasons that these communities 
exist in the forest. Communities are inextricably linked in many ways to the 
forests that surround them. People live in forested areas because they love 
forested habitats. They don't want to live in a fire-scarred landscape.  
3. There are emerging models of communities working to reduce the threat of fire 
while restoring the forest for its full suite of values. Their success depends on 
meaningful community collaboration, human and financial resources and 
adequate scientific support to make well informed management decisions. 
Congress, federal agencies, universities, and non-governmental organizations 
must support these communities to help them achieve success.  
We have a solid body of scientific information to begin the process of forest 
restoration that will protect people, communities and the forest.  
There is much wailing and gnashing of teeth by activists, members of the lay public, and 
even some within the academic community about the scientific basis of forest restoration. 
Some of the arguments are founded on differences of opinion about desirable ecological 
conditions for western forestlands. Others stem from differences of opinion about 
whether public lands should be used for consumptive resource use, especially by wood 
products or grazing interests, or for individual uses and/or non-consumptive uses. At 
times individuals use what might best be described as pseudoscientific arguments to try 
to advance a particular cause.  
By pseudoscience, I mean a set of theories, assumptions, and methods erroneously 
advanced as science. Pseudoscience stands in contrast to science, which is based on 
attempts to objectively discover the truth about a natural system. The scientific method 
has been developed as a systematic way to discover truth, or more specifically to avoid 
being fooled by biases about how we imagine that things might be. A.D. Bradshaw 
(1993) of the University of Liverpool in England has presented a particularly cogent 
discussion of the need for objectivity in ecological restoration work. Otherwise, he fears 
that arguments over restoration objectives and approaches will tend to degenerate into 
decisions and actions based on intuition and impressions instead of the best knowledge 
available. He goes on to state that, "With this goes the belief that good restoration is 
intuitive, stemming from feelings rather than logical understanding, and that because of 
this it is only learned by experience... Certainly nobody should ever decry the importance 
of intuition...Yet applied to the exclusion of other principles, these beliefs will destroy the 
efficiency and effectiveness of restoration ecology..."  
Restoration ecology, he posits, must be based on six cardinal points:  
1. Awareness of other work.  

 
4
2. Preparedness to carry out proper experiments to test ideas.  
3. Preparedness to monitor fundamental parameters in a restoration scheme.  
4. Further tests and experiments suggested by these monitoring observations.  
5. The restoration of functioning ecosystems in which a whole variety of species 
is involved.  
6. Published results.  
There is abundant scientific research that began in the 1890's and continues today that 
provides a sound scientific framework for implementing the science and practice of 
restoration. We have solid information about presettlement forest conditions, changes in 
fire regimes over the last century, deterioration of overall ecosystem health, and 
ecological responses to thinning and prescribed burning-the key elements of any attempt 
to restore ecosystem health in ponderosa pine and related ecosystems. We know that 
current overcrowded stands of trees do not sustain the diversity of wildlife and plants that 
existed a century ago. We know this by examining the data of early naturalists and 
scientists. We also know this to be true from primary research. Scientists that have 
compared biological diversity of overstocked stands-stands that have had decades of fire 
exclusion--with open, park-like stands that have not had severe fire regime disruption, 
have found greater plant diversity, greater insect diversity, and greater bird diversity. 
Similar studies have also found greater old-growth tree vigor and resistance to insect 
attack in open, park-like stands-stands similar to those present before settlement. We also 
know that stopping ecologically based forest restoration that includes thinning, is not 
saving the forest as some would like you to believe, but only contributing to its demise 
and causing severe losses to the wealth of species that depend on it.  
Research across the Intermountain West has shown that restoration treatments 
substantially reduce fire hazard by thinning trees to decrease tree canopy density, break 
up interconnected canopy fuels, raise the crown base height, and then reduce accumulated 
forest floor fuels and debris with prescribed fire. Fire alone is usually inadequate. 
Without thinning, fire can lead to increased mortality, especially among old growth trees.  
Restoration thinning enhances the productivity (growth) of trees, allowing young trees to 
develop old-growth characteristics such as large size and full crowns. Perhaps most 
importantly, restoration has been shown to increase rapidly the productivity of native 
understory grasses and herbs, the species that make up 90-99% of the plant biological 
diversity in western fire-adapted forests. The resources provided by abundant understory 
vegetation-seeds, flowers, fruits, and cover-translate into key wildlife habitat 
components. For example, the number of butterfly species and individuals increased 
within two years in Arizona sites that had received ecological restoration treatments.  
A variety of restoration options are being investigated at research sites across the West, 
applying treatments developed locally by scientists, managers, environmental activists, 

 
5
resource users, and members of the public. It is important to continue and expand the 
research effort, but at the same time it is imperative that we accept the responsibility to 
apply the extensive knowledge we already have, before more forests are lost. Restoration 
faces many challenges, because ecosystems have been highly fragmented and degraded 
by decades of overuse. It is not necessarily simple nor is success always guaranteed. But 
the preponderance of research clearly indicates that restoration management approaches 
stand in striking contrast to the destructive effects of unnaturally intense fires. Clearly the 
risks of inaction far outweigh the risks of scientifically based restoration treatments.  
The actions that others and I believe should be taken to restore the ecological integrity of 
ponderosa pine forests and therefore reduce the threat of crown fire are well known. I do 
not advocate a "one-size fits all approach" but rather crafting management approaches 
based on the location under analysis, its presettlement condition, and its relationship to 
the broader ecosystem and the communities that live within it. In this sense, ecological 
restoration should not be viewed as a strict recipe or a rigid set of prescriptions. Rather, 
ecological restoration should be viewed a broad intellectual framework for restoring and 
enhancing not only ecosystem health, but also sustainable human uses of the land.  
At the Ecological Restoration Institute we have developed some general principles for 
restoration of ponderosa pine ecosystems http://www.for.nau/ecorest/. In general, 
treatment design should:  
* Strive to emulate, insofar as is practical, natural ecosystem patterns and 
processes. In ecological restoration we refer to these natural conditions as 
"reference conditions". In most cases for ponderosa pine forests this includes 
fewer trees per acre; retaining older trees and removing the excess trees thus 
opening up the forest canopy to promote increased numbers and species of plants 
and grasses.  
* Seek to incorporate human needs with ecosystem conservation goals. For 
example, in many circumstances it may be desirable to deviate from strict-sense 
restoration prescriptions to accommodate specific uses by humans, endangered 
species, or other ecosystem management objectives.  
* Recognize that ecologically based restoration treatments not only provide fuel 
breaks to stop crown fires from spreading across the landscape, but also enhance 
resource values and minimize the risk of environmental degradation.  
* Be based on comprehensive economic analysis. Initially the cost of pre-
suppression treatments and restoration appears large, however, when compared to 
the cost of fire suppression, property loss, environmental services lost (such as 
water), potential loss of lives and other factors it is relatively small. As others 
have said, we can either pay now, or pay much more later.  
* Recognize that initial costs will be higher than maintenance costs. For example, 
in a degraded forest the cost of restoration can be as high as $700/acre. Following 

 
6
treatment, prescribed, low-intensity fire can be used as the primary tool at a much 
lower cost, as little as $40/acre for large areas.  
* Recognize that agency staff capacity and operational funds are limited and must 
be increased to meet the challenge. In the near term, fire suppression costs will 
continue to mount and implementing pre-suppression treatments will require 
resources as well.  
* Consider the potential for the creation of new restoration based jobs and 
industries. Many new jobs will be created throughout the nation as a consequence 
of implementing ecological restoration. Furthermore, in many situations the 
woody material could be removed and used to produce wood products to provide 
jobs and offset some of the costs of the restoration.  
This is not to suggest that we do not need more research or that we should not continue to 
learn from current treatments so that we can improve future treatments. One of the most 
important contributions the scientific community could make to improve land 
management is to develop monitoring protocols that are simply applied, affordable, 
understandable to land managers and that can be quickly synthesized to inform adaptive 
management.  
This need for continued research and monitoring is particularly acute for processes that 
operate at the landscape scale. For example, with regard to endangered and threatened 
species as well as many other species occupying the forest, we need more information on 
wide-ranging animals that we cannot gather until there are more and larger restoration 
treatments in place. Ironically some critics of forest restoration argue that before we can 
implement landscape scale restoration treatments we must know the effects of treatments 
on this scale-a Catch-22 argument.  
The solution to catastrophic wildfire must include more than the wildland/urban 
interface.  
The Cerro Grande fire has focused policy attention on the need to create defensible 
perimeters around communities in the wildland/urban interface. Without a doubt we need 
to take action to secure communities. However, my fear is that by defining the 
"urban/wildland interface" as some sort of narrow ring around a town to protect property, 
we will miss the whole reason for the existence of forest communities. A town is not just 
the place where people have homes. Communities are in the forest because they are 
emotionally, economically, and socially linked and dependent on the forest. When we 
consider the areas that need immediate treatment we should consider the human 
community "impact area"--the entire area that if impacted by a catastrophic fire, will 
undermine the health and livelihood of a community.  
The Forest Service Cohesive Strategy includes one aspect of this greater impact area I've 
mentioned by identifying watersheds as important areas of focus. An excellent example is 
the Santa Fe Watershed, a 17,000-acre area that provides 40% of the water supply for the 

 
7
city. In June, my colleague Tom Swetnam and I attended a meeting in Santa Fe to 
provide science-based recommendations for treating the watershed. The conditions in the 
Santa Fe watershed are remarkably similar to the conditions that existed around Los 
Alamos prior to the fire. The fact that the City of Santa Fe, the Forest Service, the Santa 
Fe Watershed Association (including the Sierra Club, the Audubon Society, and the 
Nature Conservancy), and citizens are actively designing pre-suppression treatments is 
commendable. I am hopeful that meaningful restoration actions can be taken in the Santa 
Fe Watershed and surrounding areas before a tragedy similar to Los Alamos hits Santa 
Fe.  
A second example of an important impact area beyond the town site itself is the San 
Francisco Peaks north of Flagstaff, Arizona. Recreation and tourism contributes 
significantly to the Flagstaff economy. A wildfire at the Snowbowl ski area or along one 
of the many popular trails on the peaks could have a significant impact on many small 
businesses dependent on recreation dollars. Although it is critical that we design 
treatments to protect the property of Flagstaff residents, it will be fruitless in the long run 
if their economic livelihood and quality of life disappears.  
Another reason that attention cannot be narrowly focused on a ring around the city is 
because it will fail to address one of the most contentious issues of our time, the 
protection of endangered species. Wildfire in the Southwest contributes to the loss of 
essential habitat for many of these vulnerable species because they are not adapted to 
stand replacing fires. According to a recent draft plan by the Coconino National Forest, 
over the last ten years the nesting habitats of seven northern goshawks and six Mexican 
spotted owls have been eliminated or severely altered by stand replacement fires in the 
vicinity of the San Francisco Peaks.  
There are numerous factors that contribute to the decline of species in this country but the 
biggest threats, according to experts like E.O. Wilson, a Harvard conservation ecologist, 
are habitat destruction and degradation. Degradation of habitat occurs for many reasons 
but one of the most severe factors is the elimination of important ecological processes, 
such as the periodic, low-intensity burns that characterize the fire dependent ponderosa 
pine forest. By not restoring the forest we contribute to the decline of habitat and the 
collision between society and nature.  
From a conservation biology perspective (conservation biology deals with the biology of 
rare and declining species), one of the most critical needs for species conservation is the 
ecological restoration of the core areas of greater ecosystems. Core areas are large areas 
that are managed as source areas for native plants and animals to disperse across the 
larger landscape. Core areas are typically, but not always, wilderness areas, National Park 
backcountry, and similar undeveloped areas. In the ponderosa pine type, these core areas 
are often even more overcrowded by unnaturally dense stands of trees than is the rest of 
the landscape. As such, our parks, wilderness areas, and other reserve areas are at a much 
greater risk of catastrophic crown fire than is the rest of the landscape. Furthermore, 
because of the importance of these areas as strongholds of biological diversity, their loss 
to crown fire is a much more critical blow to biological diversity than are fires in other 

 
8
areas. If we are serious about restoring ecosystem health we must confront the difficult 
problem of how to restore these critical core areas and do so immediately. At the very 
least we should seek to protect them with a defensible perimeter using restoration based 
fuel breaks much as we are trying to do with urban areas.  
There are emerging models of communities working to reduce the threat of fire 
while restoring the forest for its full suite of values  
Designing restoration and fuel reduction strategies that protect towns is not easy because 
of the social, economic and philosophical ties people have to forests. In addition, even 
with broad support for treatments there are some people and organizations who will 
choose not to participate, yet will litigate if the approaches don't match their ideology. 
The towns working to implement fire risk reduction and the ecological restoration of 
forests are developing important models for accomplishing protection. In addition, their 
experiences are an important source of information that should be used by decision-
makers, agency officials and others for adapting their own ways of operating to support 
community-based decisions.  
For the past three years the Grand Canyon Forests Partnership has worked to develop and 
implement strategies to prevent catastrophic fire and restore the ecological integrity of 
ponderosa pine forests around Flagstaff. Over fifteen public and private organizations 
participate in the Partnership. Members include Northern Arizona University, the 
Coconino National Forest, the City of Flagstaff fire department, the Chamber of 
Commerce, the Grand Canyon Trust and many others. The group was formed in response 
to the volatile fire season of 1996. During that season fires were a constant threat within 
the city limits and two wildfires in the Coconino National Forest demonstrated the 
vulnerability of the San Francisco Peaks to fire. In fact, it was the decision to re-deploy 
fire fighters from the Hochderffer fire in the Coconino National Forest to a fire within the 
Flagstaff City limits that resulted in the Hochderffer fire growing to approximately 
16,000 acres.  
The goal of the Partnership is to analyze 100,000 acres of forest surrounding Flagstaff 
and within that area to treat approximately 30,000 strategically located acres to achieve 
fire protection for the town and the San Francisco Peaks. Although there are aggressive 
fuel reduction treatments underway on city property and on private property in the city, 
the Partnership recognizes the social and economic importance of applying ecologically 
based restoration to the forest surrounding Flagstaff. The Ecological Restoration Institute 
at Northern Arizona University in collaboration with the Rocky Mountain Research 
Station and others is developing the science-based treatments, research and monitoring 
that are essential for developing effective approaches. Developing the science behind 
each treatment is a critical part of achieving community consensus and responding to 
criticism. Other important activities include developing economically viable approaches 
to restoration by promoting and developing the use of small diameter trees (where 
feasible), community outreach and education, and exploration of restoration based 
employment options.  

 
9
What Congress Can Do  
There are several constructive steps Congress and the federal agencies can take to 
improve our current situation.  
1. Treatments to reduce fire threat and restore the ecological integrity of forests 
should become the single biggest priority of forest management policy and the 
land management agencies working in the Intermountain West. As you will recall 
the 1999 GAO report pointed out that the Forest Service has estimated that 39 
million acres of Forest Service lands are at high risk to catastrophic wildfire in 
that region alone.  
2. Congress should provide adequate resources to the agencies to maximize 
treatments. Senator Domenici's amendment to the Fiscal Year 2001 Interior 
Appropriations Bill in the Senate provides $240 million in pre-suppression money 
to treat forests to prevent fire. This legislation represents pro-active thinking but 
the resources to accomplish the job are still insufficient. Compare this 
appropriation to the estimated one billion dollars needed to compensate victims 
and repair the landscape after the Cerro Grande Fire. A simple extrapolation of 
recent rates of increase in crown fire damage suggests that within the next decade 
acres burned could easily double whereas costs for fire suppression and 
compensation could approach four billion dollars annually.  
3. Wherever possible, Congress and the land management agencies should 
support the positive collaboration of forest communities to design ecologically 
based restoration treatments. This includes: producing high quality, timely 
environmental review documents; elevating the production of the review 
documents to a top priority; assisting communities to develop economically viable 
opportunities for restoration products; and assisting to develop new employment 
opportunities in restoration.  
4. Support the development of science-based restoration treatments.  
To move forests from their current degraded conditions to healthy, diverse, and 
productive ecosystems requires knowledge. Our lack of understanding of how naturally 
functioning ponderosa pine forests function and the ecological and social implications of 
changed forest conditions has led to the current situation we now face with regard to 
catastrophic fire, endangered species and the social and economic upset of forest 
communities.  
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is generating 
significant knowledge about pine forest restoration and working to get that information 
into the hands of communities and land managers that can apply it on the ground. With 
each treatment we learn more and can incorporate that knowledge into the next set of 
treatments.  

 
10
Senator Jon Kyl, with the support of Secretary of Interior Bruce Babbitt, has recognized 
the need for good science and has actively supported the work of the Ecological 
Restoration Institute at NAU. His support for science-based solutions has allowed us to 
design effective restoration treatments that are the underpinning of the development of 
socially acceptable approaches to forest restoration underway in Flagstaff and other forest 
communities. This year we are again hoping for federal funding to assist in our efforts. 
This money is a crucial contribution to solving forest problems now and into the future.  
Thank you very much for asking me to appear before the Subcommittee.  
# # #  
 
