8
Ecological Restoration Institute
Northern Arizona University
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
www.eri.nau.edu
Working Papers in Southwestern 
Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
Controlling Invasive 
Species as Part of 
Restoration Treatments
May 2004 

Working Papers in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching,
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests.
These forests have been significantly altered through more than a century of fire suppression,
livestock grazing, logging, and other ecosystem changes. As a result, ecological and recreational
values of these forests have decreased, while the threat of large-scale fires has increased
dramatically. The ERI is helping to restore these forests in collaboration with numerous public
agencies. By allowing natural processes such as fire to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to
reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational
opportunities.
Every restoration project needs to be site specific, but the detailed experience of field practitioners
may help guide practitioners elsewhere. The Working Papers series presents findings and
management recommendations from research and observations by the ERI and its partner
organizations.
This publication would not have been possible without significant staff contributions and funding
from the Bureau of Land Management. The views and conclusions contained in this document are
those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the opinions or policies of the
U.S. Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products does not constitute their
endorsement by the U.S. Government.
1: Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons and Adaptive Management Practices
2: Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3: Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
4: Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits
5: Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
6: Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
7: Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests

Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments a
Introduction
Thinning, prescribed fire, and other treatments can restore ecological integrity in southwestern
ponderosa pine forests that are at risk of unnaturally severe crown fires and bark beetle outbreaks.
Such treatments can promote the survival and recruitment of native plant and animal species, but
they also represent a significant disturbance that can allow invasive plants to spread. Invasive plants
are a serious threat to the biological integrity of lands in western North America and elsewhere.
Mitigating their impact must be a high priority during the planning and implementation of
restoration treatments. This publication presents an overview of methods to prevent and control
their spread.
Why Are Invasive, Exotic Plants Harmful? 
Invasive plants, many of them imported from other regions, can cause significant ecological and
economic problems (Olson 1999). Invasive plants are generally considered those vigorous, persistent,
prolific, and widespread enough to cause serious economic and environmental impacts (Vitousek et
al. 1996; Novak and Mack 2001). The spread of these species can cause harmful ecological effects at a
number of levels:
• At the soil level, they can cause changes in soil organic matter, microbial activity, salinity, and
nitrogen availability.
• At the plant community level, invasives tend to be early successional species that reproduce
rapidly and absorb nutrients rapidly. As a result, they can spread rapidly and outcompete much
native vegetation. In some cases invasive species change basic ecological processes such as fire
regimes.
• At the animal level, native animal species often cannot use nonnative plants for food or shelter.
In ecosystems dominated by invasive species native soil organisms, plants, and animals often do
not, and cannot, function viably in the long term.
Invasive Plants and Forest Restoration
Most invasive exotic plant species prefer disturbed areas for colonization (Sheley et al. 1999). For this
reason, restoration sites are a highly suitable place for invasive plant migration and proliferation.
Severe soil disturbances, including those caused by restoration thinning and by prescribed fire, may
provide an ideal colonization site for these opportunistic species (Sieg et al. 2003) and result in
profound changes in understory vegetation.
Leaving forests untreated, though, is not an effective means of dealing with invasive species. Severe
wildfires, such as those that have occurred in many overly dense southwestern ponderosa pine
forests, can promote the spread of many invasive exotic species (Crawford et al. 2001). When
carefully planned and implemented, restoration treatments that prevent severe fires can help prevent
their spread.
Species of Concern
Learning to identify invasive plant species is a primary step in minimizing their threat at a
restoration site. Seig et al. (2003) provide a comprehensive list of invasive exotic species found within
southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems. In addition, numerous books and Web sites are also
available with pictures and tools for identification—see the inside back cover for links. Diffuse
knapweed (Centaurea diffusa), cheatgrass (Bromus tectorum), and Dalmatian toadflax (Linaria
dalmatica) are three of the troublesome invasive exotics commonly found in southwestern forests
(illustration).
1

Preventing the Spread of Invasive Plants During
Restoration Treatments
It may be impossible to avoid the colonization of invasive, exotic plant
species at a restoration site. However, by paying attention to the
following precautions, their distribution and abundance can be
minimized.
Research the land-use history of the restoration site. Concentrations of
invasive seeds may be present within the seed bank at sites where
disturbances such as construction, road building, seeding, livestock
grazing, and logging occurred in the past. Present-day disturbance in
these locations could encourage their emergence from the soil seed bank
(Korb et al. in review).
Take a plant inventory before work begins. The planning process for
restoration thinning or prescribed burning should include an inventory
of existing plant species located on and near the restoration site. Where
possible, areas heavily infested with invasives should not undergo
restoration treatments until the infestations have been controlled (Sieg
et al. 2003).
Prioritize. Where invasive exotics are present on part of a site, thin and
burn areas without infestations first, and control existing populations of
invasives—otherwise invasives will spread into areas that are currently
weed-free. Ensure that heavily trafficked sites, such as roads, staging
areas, and log landings, have no invasives present.
Control invasives before work begins on the ground. If invasives are
present in only small numbers in or around the restoration site, it may
be feasible and is certainly advisable to eradicate them before any
restoration work begins. A little bit of control before any soil disturbance
occurs can avert the need to do a lot of control later on.
Don’t transfer seeds to the restoration site. The seeds of many invasive
species are easily carried by vehicles, field workers, and animals. Avoid
their spread by washing the undercarriage of field vehicles; avoiding
carrying mud on vehicles; and having field workers wear gaiters when
walking through areas infested with invasive species. Use certified weed-
free hay for horses.
Minimize soil disturbance during restoration logging. Do so by
limiting the extent of the area traveled by vehicles and by not working
when soils are too wet. Read more about this in Working Paper 5:
Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration.
Leave some slash broadcast on the ground. By holding moisture in the
soil and collecting seeds, broadcast slash can create a favorable
microclimate for native grasses and other understory plants. Leaves,
needles, and wood also provide nutrients to the soil as they decompose.
Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
a
2
Diffuse knapweed
(Centaurea diffusa)
cheatgrass 
(Bromus tectorum)
Dalmatian toadflax
(Linaria dalmatica)

Minimize severity of slash pile fires. It is best to burn slash piles with low-
intensity, short-duration fires. High-intensity burning of slash piles can occur
when piles are very large or conditions are dry; it can cause the loss of seeds
and microscopic plants and animals within the soil, reducing the chances that
native plants will naturally colonize the site (Korb and Springer 2003).
Excessive soil heating can also lead to a loss in nutrients.
Don’t rely on fire to control invasive exotics. Burning may control or even
eradicate a few nonnative plants, but most invasive species commonly found in
the Southwest cannot be eliminated with fire. For example, cheatgrass densities
may be minimized by burning, but fire will stimulate the remaining plants to
produce more seeds than normal (Mosley et al. 1999).
Promote the growth of native species. Many invasive exotic species do well in
areas of high disturbance. Restoration sites with a thriving native vegetative
community will offer only limited colonization opportunities for invasives.
Seeding with fast-growing native species such as squirreltail (Elymus elymoides)
or penstemon species may slow the spread of invasive exotics.
Use weed-free seed when reseeding after treatment. Native plant seed that is
certified weed-free is often more expensive than noncertified seed, but the extra
expense is well worth it.
Monitor. The prevention of colonization by invasive exotic plants does not end
when on-the-ground restoration activities are complete. Monitoring after
treatment is vital and should be done annually. Include intermediate targets,
rather than only end targets, in order to ensure that restoration objectives are
being met along the way (Fulé 2003). For ideas on monitoring methods, see
Fulé 2003.
Removing Invasive Species After Treatment
Regardless of the best efforts at prevention, some nonnative species likely will
appear following restoration treatments. Some are more a problem than others.
For example, common mullein (Verbascum thapsus) has invaded many
restoration sites in the Flagstaff area shortly after treatment. It tends to be
replaced during the course of successional changes within a few years (Sieg et
al. 2003), although viable seeds may remain plentiful in the soil seed bank. Other more aggressive
species may persist and spread unless managed.
Remove small infestations immediately. It is much easier to remove invasive plant infestations when
they are small. A few hours spent dealing with weeds soon after thinning or burning, and before
plants reach the reproductive stage, can avert larger infestations later.
Pull weeds. Some species can be controlled through manual and mechanical means such as pulling,
mulching, or even burning. Be aware that these techniques can expand the problem for some species
that produce additional stems when cut or pulled. See Web sites on inside back cover or consult local
experts for specific techniques. Any plants that have already produced seeds should be double-bagged
and either incinerated or sent to a properly managed landfill to prevent further spread.
Consider using herbicides if necessary. Herbicides are not appropriate for all situations, but they
can be highly effective in controlling some invasive exotics, particularly if other control methods
have failed. A variety of ecological, regulatory, and social concerns must be weighed and considered
before utilizing herbicides; proper training is also essential.
Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments a
3
Specific Questions to
Ask During
Restoration Planning
1. What plants, native and
nonnative, currently
exist at and near the
restoration site?
2. How invasive are the
nonnative species?
Which are the highest
priorities?
3. What means are readily
available for control of
invasive exotic plants,
both before and after
restoration treatments?
4. How will the
introduction of invasive
exotics be avoided
during on-the-ground
restoration activities?
5. How, and for how long,
will the restoration site
be monitored after
treatment to ensure that
invasive exotics have not
colonized?

Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
a
4
Focus on specific species. Methods for removing invasive exotic plants vary depending on site
conditions and on which species are present. What works in controlling one species may not work
against another.
Get help. Local county extension offices and the Forest Service can often provide accurate and up-to-
date information regarding effective eradication strategies for a given species. The Web sites listed on
the inside back cover also provide resources.
Take advantage of volunteer energy. Volunteer groups can furnish labor for weed monitoring and
control efforts. Existing groups such as Boy and Girl Scout troops, Audubon societies, high school or
college clubs, service societies, and others can get a great deal of work done during volunteer weed-
pulling outings.
References
Crawford, J. A., C.-H. A. Wahren, S. Kyle, and W. H. Moir. 2001. Responses of exotic species to fires in
Pinus ponderosa forests in northern Arizona. Journal of Vegetation Science 12:261–268.
Fulé, P. Z. 2003. Monitoring. Pp. 402–416 in Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine
forests, ed. P. Friederici. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Korb, J. E., and J. D. Springer. 2003. Understory vegetation. Pp. 233–250 in Ecological restoration of
southwestern ponderosa pine forests, ed. P. Friederici. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Korb, J. E., J. D. Springer, S. R. Powers, and M. M. Moore. In review. Soil seed banks in southwestern
ponderosa pine forests: Clues to site history and vegetation restoration potential.
Mosley, J. C., S. C. Bunting, and M. E. Manoukian. 1999. Cheatgrass. Pp. 175–188 in Biology and
management of noxious rangeland weeds, ed. R. L. Sheley and J. K. Petroff. Corvallis: Oregon State
University Press.
Novak, S. J., and R. N. Mack. 2001. Tracing plant introduction and spread: Genetic evidence from
Bromus tectorum (cheatgrass). BioScience 51:114–122.
Olson, B. E. 1999. Impacts of noxious weeds on ecological and economic systems. Pp. 4–18 in
Biology and management of noxious rangeland weeds, ed. R. L. Sheley and J. K. Petroff. Corvallis:
Oregon State University Press.
Sheley, R. L., S. Kedzie-Webb, and B. D. Maxwell. 1999. Integrated weed management on rangelands.
Pp. 57–68 in Biology and management of noxious rangeland weeds, ed. R. L. Sheley and J. K. Petroff.
Corvallis: Oregon State University Press.
Sieg, C. H., B. G. Phillips, and L. P. Moser. 2003. Exotic invasive plants. Pp. 251–267 in Ecological
restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests, ed. P. Friederici. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Vitousek, P. M., C. M. D’Antonio, L. L. Loop, and R. Westbrooks. 1996. Biological invasions as global
environmental change. American Scientist 84:468–478.

For More Information
For more information about forest restoration, contact the ERI at 928-523-7182 or  www.eri.nau.edu.
Written by Kimberly Harding
Reviewed by Mark Daniels, Peter Z. Fulé, Laura P. Moser, John M. Randall, Carolyn Hull Sieg, and Judith D.
Springer
Series Editor Peter Friederici
Cover: Cheatgrass is one of the troublesome invasive species in southwestern ponderosa pine forest
restoration projects. Photo courtesy of Ken Henke and Bureau of Land Management Wyoming Office.
Cheatgrass drawing courtesy of USDA PLANTS Database
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution   
NAU Creative Communications/A54127/1M/05-04
Additional Resources
In addition to the references above, the following books and Web sites can provide more
information about invasive species and their control.
Sheley, R. L., and J. K. Petroff, eds. 1999. Biology and management of noxious rangeland weeds.
Corvallis: Oregon State University Press.
Whitson, T. D., ed. 1996. Weeds of the West. Laramie: University of Wyoming and Western Society of
Weed Science.
plants.usda.gov
www.invasivespecies.gov 
www.weedcenter.org
www.ams.usda.gov/lsg/seed/seed_pub.htm 
www.usgs.nau.edu/SWEPIC/
ag.arizona.edu/agnic/az/weeds/home.html

Ecological Restoration Institute
Northern Arizona University
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
www.eri.nau.edu
2ERI 35AE
NON-PROFIT ORG.
U.S. POSTAGE
PAID
NORTHERN
ARIZONA
UNIVERSITY
