Proceedings: International Conference on Transfer of Forest Science 
Knowledge and Technology 
 
Cynthia Miner, Ruth Jacobs, Dennis Dykstra, and Becky Bittner, Editors Troutdale, 
OR, USA, May 10-13, 2005 
Sponsored by: 
USDA Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station U.S. Geological 
Survey 
 
Oregon State University 
 
University of Washington 
 
IUFRO Working Party 6.06.01-Technology Transfer 
 
IUFRO Research Group 5.12-Sustainable Utilization of Forest Products U.S. Department of 
Agriculture 
 
Forest Service 
 
Pacific Northwest Research Station 
Portland, Oregon 
General Technical Report PNW-GTR-726 
August 2007 
 
 
 
 
 
i 

Proceedings: International Conference on Transfer of Forest Science Knowledge and Technology 
Challenges and Opportunities in Forest Restoration Outreach: The 
Example of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests 
Peter Friederici1 
Abstract 
The majority of forest managers, informed policymakers, and educated members of the public agree that restoration of 
dry, fire-adapted forests of western North America is a critical ecological and social need. A large body of scientific 
research documents how forests that were once open and parklike have grown dense with small trees, resulting in 
significant increases in fire hazards and declines in ecological values. 
It has been difficult, though, to convert even detailed scientific understanding into effective results on the ground. 
Reasons include numerous economic and social hurdles, but also difficulties in translating research results into tactics 
applicable in the field. Ecologists often require many years before they are willing to identify causal relationships 
between specific restoration treatments and identifiable ecological results. Managers often demand immediate answers 
to ecological questions so that they can make pressing real-time decisions. Policymakers and the public are often 
unwilling to wait for peer-reviewed scientific results and want to know quickly whether economic, political, and social 
investments in restoration work are warranted. 
This paper uses the example of the Ecological Restoration Institute's (ERI) outreach program to assess the 
difficulties and opportunities inherent in translating science into action. The ERI maintains a broad effort aimed at 
publicizing timely yet scientifically rigorous information about the restoration of Southwestern ponderosa pine (Pinus 
ponderosa Dougl. ex Laws.) forests. Through an ever-evolving combination of print and electronic publications, public 
outreach activities, and land manager workshops, we attempt to keep varied audiences abreast of the latest 
developments in the science and application of restoration work. This paper outlines a broad restoration outreach 
strategy and discusses challenges encountered as those working to improve the health of public-lands forests continue 
to expand the audience for their work. 
 
Keywords: Forest restoration, ponderosa pine, Southwestern United States, outreach. 
 
Introduction: The Complexities of Restoration 
Ecological restoration is a fast-growing approach to the management of forests and many other ecosystem types in 
North America, and throughout the world (Arno and Fiedler 2005, Jordan 2003). Restoration, according to the Society 
for Ecological Restoration International (SERI), is "an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an 
ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability. . . . Restoration attempts to return an ecosystem to 
its historic trajectory" (SERI 2004). Restoration can simultaneously return ecosystems to greater ecological health, 
make a positive contribution to the human economy, and enable people to actively participate in the management of 
natural areas near their homes. Yet, it is also a complex and often contentious endeavor (Jordan 2003). 
Restoration is complex for several reasons: the scientific information on which it is based is always incomplete; 
 
' Assistant professor of journalism, School of Communication, Box 5619, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011; e-mail: 
peter.friederici@nau.edu. 
 
73 

GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-726 
and restoration is largely an effort to guide future management through knowledge of past conditions. Although researchers 
have many tools for plumbing the ecological past, our understanding of that past is always partial and often biased by 
preconceptions (Egan and Howell 2001, Landres et al. 1999). Even our understanding of how ecosystems work in the present 
moment is always incomplete. Managers seldom know as much as they would like to know about interactions among plants, 
animals, climate, geology, human activities, and other factors that affect ecological circumstances and, hence, their 
management decisions. 
Restoration also is not a matter solely for scientists and for professional land managers. Rather, it engages broad segments 
of the public who are interested in conservation, recreation, resource-based industries, even the safety of their homes and 
neighborhoods (Cortner 2003). That breadth of interest can bring wide support to restoration projects but also instill a great 
deal of controversy when forest managers propose such actions as mechanical thinning or prescribed burning (Allen et al. 
2002, Cortner 2003, Friederici 2003). The social landscape in which restoration takes place is often as complex as the 
ecological landscape. Restoration touches on questions of policy, economics, decisionmaking processes, and ultimately on the 
deep-seated values that people perceive in forests and other landscapes (Jordan 2003, Oelschlaeger 2003). For these reasons, 
restoration advocates cannot work in isolation; rather, they have a critical need to focus on outreach to the varied audiences 
and many people who are interested in the topic. 
Case Study: Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests 
In no landscape ought it to be easier to engage residents in the process of restoration than in the dry, fire-adapted forests of 
western North America, and especially in the ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa Dougl. ex Laws) forests of the Southwest 
(Arizona, New Mexico, and southern Colorado and Utah). Many lines of historical evidence have shown that these forests were 
once subject to frequent low-severity fires that maintained an open forest structure and a diverse understory of grasses, forbs, 
and shrubs (Allen et al. 2002, Covington and Moore 1994, Swetnam and Baisan 1996). With the advent of intensive livestock 
grazing, logging, and fire suppression in the late 19`h and early 20`h centuries, the regular cycle of frequent fires was broken. 
Fires vanished from many parts of the forest landscape for decades. 
As a result, many of these forests grew dense with thickets of small trees. Today these stands and their associated large 
trees are at risk of severe stand-replacing crown fire that threatens human communities and the ecological integrity of the 
forest. They also are subject to severe bark beetle (Dendroctonus ponderosae) attacks. Other ecological values are at risk, too. 
Overly dense stands lose much of their herbaceous understory and, with it, the wildlife species that rely on it (Covington 2003). 
When dense ponderosa pine forests burn, stands are often replaced across hundreds or thousands of acres, causing erosion, 
loss of soils and wildlife habitats, and possibly long-term changes of vegetation type (Savage and Mast 2005). 
Restoring these forests is, on the one hand, quite simple. They are still forests. Unlike the tallgrass prairies of the Midwest, 
to cite one example, most of them have not undergone a type conversion. Although some nonnative, invasive plants are a 
problem, most of these forests are still dominated by native species. Development connected with the region's quickly growing 
population is a concern, but vast acreages of dry forest will remain in public ownership and will likely continue as open space 
in the long term. Most Americans recognize their value for lumber production, for livestock grazing, for healthy watersheds, for 
recreation, for aesthetics, and perhaps, above all, for local economies that are increasingly based on natural amenities. 
In addition, scientific understanding of the past structure of these forests is remarkably robust. These forests were settled  
 
 
74 

Proceedings: International Conference on Transfer of Forest Science Knowledge and Technology 
relatively late in the history of the United States. Good records-written and photographic-exist of their condition prior to 
alterations by novel land-use practices in the 19th century. In addition, the region's dry climate has preserved a great deal of 
physical evidence-such as stumps, fallen logs, living trees, and soil phytoliths-that documents historical forest conditions 
(Covington 2003, Fule et al. 1997). 
The management techniques required to return contemporary forests to conditions similar to those of the past are also 
relatively well understood. More, of course, always remains to be learned, but the effects of the two most commonly 
implemented restoration treatments prescribed fire and mechanical thinning-have been heavily studied for years. Perhaps 
most important, restoration of these forests is quite consonant with human needs and desires. Unhealthy dry forests are 
prone to enormous and dangerous crown fires that are detrimental to both ecological and human values. Healthy ponderosa 
pine forests burn frequently, but they burn at a low level of intensity that typically does not threaten human lives or property 
or such ecological values as the healthy functioning of watersheds. In addition, research on aesthetic preferences has shown 
that people tend to like the open-structured, spacious appearance of ponderosa pine forests resembling those that preceded 
the Euro-American settlement of the West (Daniel and Boster 1976, Ulrich 1993).  This fortuitous coincidence means that 
managers of ponderosa pine forests can shape the landscape into what most people want to see even as they improve its 
ecological health. Managers of western landscapes with very different fire regimes, such as lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta 
Dougl. ex Loud) forests or California chaparral, are not so fortunate. In such places, where severe, standreplacing fires are 
naturally evolved, managers may need to make difficult choices between ecological integrity and public safety. 
Despite the widely agreed-upon need for restoration, and despite the identification of enormous acreages of dry forest in 
need of restoration in the interior West (GAO 1999), the pace of work done has been slow. Why is this? Some of the most 
significant reasons for that failure are matters of policy and economics. Studies have shown that investing relatively small 
amounts of money in restoration can avert the spending of much larger amounts of money on fire suppression (Romme et al. 
2003, Snider et al. 2003). But the federal government, which manages most of these forests, has generally been loath to invest 
federal funding in the precautionary restoration of forests before they burn, and indeed has at times taken money from fuels 
reduction projects that might contribute toward restoration and used them for fire suppression (GAO 2004). 
As a result, restoration work has generally been completed only when some grant funding is available (as, e.g., through 
New Mexico's Collaborative Forest Restoration Program) or when private contractors are able to remove enough products of 
value from the forest (especially larger trees that can be turned into lumber) to compensate for the time they spend in removing 
the large numbers of small-diameter trees that make up the primary fire threat but are generally unmerchantable. The logging 
of larger trees almost inevitably stirs public controversy. In many places, as in Arizona, infrastructure is insufficient in the 
form of logging companies and mills to accomplish restoration work at even a slow pace. 
But the slow progress of restoration can also be ascribed in part to shortcomings in education. The term "restoration" has 
entered the language of forest management and is often used to describe any activity that reduces wildfire danger or improves 
forest health-even if it does not truly restore natural conditions. As a result, managers often fail to take steps-such as seeding 
native grasses or conducting regular maintenance burns-that contribute to holistic restoration and can lower fire danger in the 
long term. Many homeowners who live adjacent to public forest tracts, assuming that the responsibility for avoiding fire lies 
entirely with public land managers, neglect simple steps that can contribute to the reduction of fire danger on their own 
property. 
 
 
75 

GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-726 
Policymakers who must try to balance manifold demands for attention and limited resources are seldom sufficiently informed 
about forest issues to make wellinformed decisions. And members of the general public may be concerned, or simply confused, 
about the value of such restoration techniques as thinning and prescribed burning, both of which do carry negative side 
effects. 
It is for these reasons that the ERI at Northern Arizona University (NAU) has implemented a broad outreach 
program. 
 
Different Audiences, Different Learning Styles 
A great variety of groups are engaged in forest restoration in the Southwest. In many places, restoration projects have been 
conducted as exercises in broad-based collaboration that involve not only traditional land managers but such stakeholder 
groups as environmentalists, industry groups, community groups, fire departments, and others (Friederici 2003, Kusel and 
Adler 2003, Moote 2003). In addition, restoration can be a wide-ranging, holistic, and interdisciplinary endeavor that engages 
the skills and imaginations of many people and organizations (Light 2000). Restoration advocates who seek to influence the 
debate about such projects must recognize that members of these disparate groups are accustomed to learning in different 
ways because of their background, educational training, and professional culture (app. 1). It is to match those different 
learning styles that the ERI has generated a variety of publications and educational outreach events. 
Academic Community 
Members of the academic community are more likely than members of other groups to educate themselves through reading-in 
particular, they constitute the only audience likely to spend much time reading primary research results presented in 
professional journals. The ERI has maintained a robust research program that has resulted in numerous publications in the 
pages of professional journals, conference proceedings, and books. It has also organized professional conferences for the 
dissemination of new research results. In addition, ERI faculty educate the next generation of forest researchers by teaching 
undergraduate and graduate classes in restoration through the NAU School of Forestry. 
Land Managers 
Typically strapped for time, land managers are unlikely to closely read professional journals, but they do have an interest in 
research results. The ERI synthesizes those results into short, easy-to-read publications called working papers (app. 2). Each 
one summarizes lessons learned by researchers and practitioners working on restoration projects. Each includes readily usable 
tips for improving project planning and implementation. In addition, the ERI conducts workshops and classes, both in the 
classroom and in the field, that give practitioners a firsthand look at forest restoration concepts, strategies, and techniques. 
Policymakers 
Policymakers have even less time to devote to researching issues than land managers do. They require very short summaries of 
issues requiring their attention. The ERI has prepared a series of fact sheets, generally one page long, on such issues as fire 
behavior and variable ecological responses to different thinning treatments. The impact of such materials has been greatly 
enhanced through personal contacts with decisionmakers. Such venues as field trips offer an excellent opportunity to convert 
forest restoration from an abstract issue discussed in black and white text to a visible management strategy that affects how 
real forest stands look and interact with their surroundings. 
 
 
 
76 

Proceedings: International Conference on Transfer of Forest Science Knowledge and Technology 
Community Groups 
Throughout the West, many community groups and other stakeholders who are not professional land managers are engaged in 
restoration efforts. Their involvement may range from providing input into desired future conditions to active participation in 
the work of thinning, prescribed burning, seeding, or monitoring. Their level of education in forest ecology may be high or low. 
The ERI reaches such audiences through such publications as its working papers and a detailed series of handbooks about 
monitoring strategies and methodologies. In addition, it maintains a large Web site that provides a wide range of information, 
at varied levels of detail, about restoration ideas and methods. The ERI staff members also actively participate in the meetings 
of a number of collaborative community-based restoration efforts in Arizona and New Mexico. 
General Public 
Most restoration efforts take place on public land, and many are set in or near wildland-urban interface areas where many 
people live. Public involvement is crucial to the success of most restoration efforts, yet public understanding of the rationales 
for and effects of restoration work is often lacking. The ERI attempts to reach the public through the publication of brochures 
aimed at such groups as homeowners who live in forest settings. In addition, it has participated in numerous festivals, Earth 
Day and Firewise events, school science presentations, and other special events. Outreach to newspapers, radio, TV, and other 
local, regional, and national media is also important in reaching both the general public and decisionmakers. 
Note that tailoring a message is a matter of adjusting form rather than content. Successful targeting of different 
audiences is not a matter of telling different stories, but rather of telling the same story in different ways. Summarizing what is 
known about historical fire regime patterns, for example, requires an entirely different vocabulary in an academic journal 
article and in a newspaper article. Awareness of those differences before setting out to write can save a great deal of time in 
rewriting-or trying to rectify miscommunications later. 
 
An Example of Restoration Outreach 
Since the mid-1990s, the USDI Bureau of Land Management (BLM) has been conducting large-scale experimental restoration 
treatments near Mount Trumbull in far northern Arizona. Scientists from the ERI, Arizona Game and Fish Department, and 
other institutions have monitored the effects of those treatments on understory plant species, wildlife, fire behavior, and other 
variables. Those studies have provided great insight into the theory and practice of forest restoration and can inform future 
work if they are sufficiently publicized. How can this best be done? 
The ERI has produced a variety of outreach materials intended to bring these results to the audiences listed above. We 
have done so by producing a hierarchy of publications that reflect the expectations of different readers. The first level of 
publications, arguably the most important, consists of peer-reviewed articles that present primary field research to a scientific 
audience (summarized in Waltz et al. 2003). These articles appear in journals such as Restoration Ecology, Forest Ecology and 
Management, and others. Such articles have wide currency in the academic community, yet those periodicals are generally not 
accessible to the general public and policymakers, and often not to land managers. 
To reach land managers and members of other groups particularly interested in forest management-such as environmental 
organizations and regional community groups focused on ecology and economics-the ERI has produced several working papers 
that summarize lessons learned during the course of restoration research at Mount Trumbull. In some cases, those lessons  
 
 
77 

GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-726 
 
 
 
 
have been based on experimental studies; in others, they have been based on anecdotal observations made about operational 
successes and failures. For example, measurement of the effects of a prescribed fire that killed an unexpected number of old 
trees resulted in recommendations to be careful about burning on volcanic cinders, which were published both in a journal 
read by fire professionals and in a working paper distributed to practitioners in the region in both print and electronic formats 
(Fule et al. 2002, Minard 2002). Full citations of the primary literature are provided in the working papers so that readers can 
look up the original, peer-reviewed research. 
Other publications address readers who would not read even a working paper. The ERI has prepared a number of one- or 
two-page fact sheets that summarize research results for time-strapped policymakers. These, too, include citations that 
enable readers to understand where the data mentioned come from. 
In addition, the ERI has published a brochure for the general public that the BLM has distributed at its field office and at 
the restoration site. It provides a general overview of the work being done and explains what viewers may see as they tour the 
site. 
All these publications represent efforts to bring relevant research to audiences in appropriate forms. It is important to note, 
too, that this hierarchy of publications is not confined to print only. Much of the same material is available on our Web site, 
from downloadable copies of original journal articles to short, illustrated descriptions of research sites and projects that might 
appeal to the general public. The same hierarchy of outreach styles applies in presentations as well: a presentation of research 
results to an academic audience at a professional conference will differ in style from a presentation to a community group or a 
group of regional decisionmakers such as state legislators or county supervisors-even if much of the content is the same. 
 
The Challenges of Using Science in Policy 
Moving between one audience and another, though, presents significant challenges. Some of the thorniest challenges in 
educating varied audiences about a complex land management practice such as restoration stem from the different 
expectations to be found among those audiences. Ecologists, for example, are notoriously cognizant of the complexities of 
the systems they study (Noss et al. 1997). They are acutely aware that it can take years of study to construct even 
simplified models of ecological processes; that forest dynamics may be very different at different sites; that the effects of 
interannual variability in climate (which can be severe in the Southwestern States) can easily mask the effects of 
restoration treatments or any other forest management practices; that whatever variables are under study are inevitably 
affected by another set that is not being monitored. They may be reluctant to draw inferences about other sites from their 
study of one locale; they may point out that the complexities of ecological interactions make it difficult or impossible to 
draw precise cause-and-effect conclusions from even years of study. 
Yet those conclusions are exactly what land managers, policymakers, and the general public are after. All these groups 
are under pressure of various sorts to show results on the ground, especially when the issue at play is as attention-getting 
and volatile as fire behavior in public forests. Under pressure from their own constituents, both land managers and 
policymakers are apt to ask scientists for precise and prescriptive advice about what to do in the forests. Such advice is 
precisely what most ecologists are most reluctant to give. 
Presenting research results in a timely fashion, and in a format easily accessible to land managers and policymakers, is 
also often made difficult by the proprietary interest researchers have in their results, which are, after all, the result of a good 
deal of hard work. Academic researchers, in particular, are under consistent pressure to publish their results in respected, 
peer-reviewed professional journals. Publication of results in such formats as working papers or general-interest publications 
is often either frowned upon or entirely neglected when it comes time to review academic records for the approval of 
 
 
 
78 

Proceedings: International Conference on Transfer of Forest Science Knowledge and Technology 
tenure or changes in job status. Most academic institutions are simply not structured to provide quick summaries of current 
research results to the land managers and other practitioners who have the greatest immediate need for them. Yet publication 
in peer-reviewed journals can take a long time, and even after publication, results may filter only slowly-or not at all-into 
formats accessible to those outside the academic community. 
It is in large part because ecology is a complex science and drawing precise conclusions from it about management 
practices is so fraught with difficulty that debates about an endless array of management issues have come to be dominated by 
competing scientific claims (Cortner 2003). The scientific basis for practicing restoration in Southwestern ponderosa pine 
forests is excellent, but advocates can often buttress widely competing ideas with findings that seem to support one particular 
management practice or another. For example, it has been well established that Southwestern ponderosa pine forests burned 
often before the onset of livestock grazing and widespread fire exclusion (Allen et al. 2002, Covington and Moore 1994, 
Swetnam and Baisan 1996), yet reputable researchers have questioned the generally accepted methodologies that have helped 
lead to those conclusions (Baker and Ehle 2001). 
Ecologists, like many other scientists, are also often reluctant to enter debates about land management because they are 
understandably worried about being misquoted or having their work taken out of context. Scientific results are almost 
invariably skewed or oversimplified when they enter public discourse. Newspaper and television accounts are rife with 
hyperbolic rhetoric; it is common to hear about enormous acreages "destroyed" by fire when in fact almost all fires bum in a 
mosaic of different severity levels, and when highintensity fires are in fact crucial to the health of certain forest types (Smith 
1992). Politicians and advocates of all positions are apt to oversimplify debates about any land management issue. 
In light of this, it is incumbent on those charged with educating any audience about such questions to be both accurate 
and precise. When discussing forest fire, for example, it is critical to point out that different forest types have very different fire 
regimes. When discussing historical reference conditions, it is vital to delimit the discussion to the appropriate geographic area 
or ecosystem type. When deciding what sort of terminology is appropriate, it is important to be very judicious in the use of 
such politically loaded phrases as "old-growth tree" or "catastrophic fire." In general, it is vital to carefully "translate" precise 
scientific terminology into language that other audiences can readily understand. Some simplification is generally necessary in 
order to discuss ecology in a way that is meaningful to land managers or the general public, but too much simplification is a 
disservice. Finding the right degree of simplification requires finesse and good judgment. 
 
Conclusion 
It is certainly possible to provide good information in a way that makes a difference. Our goal, as interpreters of science, should 
be to disseminate information so that those who make decisions-which in a democracy should include everyone from high 
officials in Washington, D.C., to professional land managers to lay members of the public-have the best possible background 
for making their own decisions. The results of those decisions may not always be what we ourselves would have chosen, but if 
they are based at least in part on good science, they will likely be far better than if they are based on no science at all. 
If ecological restoration is a matter of returning an ecosystem to a healthier trajectory, then we might think of science 
education as the practice of slowly placing public decisionmaking on a trajectory that over time gives more weight to good 
science. It's an evolving practice, never completed, but one that is crucial to the future health of our lands. 
 
79 

GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-726 
Literature Cited 
Allen, C.D.; Savage, M.; Falk, D.A.; Suckling, K.F. ; Swetnam, T.W.; Schulke, T.; Stacey, P.B.; Morgan, P.; Hoffman, 
M.; Klingel, J.T. 2002. Ecological restoration of Southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems: a broad perspective. 
Ecological Applications. 12(5): 1418-1433. 
Arno, S.F.; Fiedler, C.E. 2005. Mimicking nature's fire: restoring fire-prone forests in the West. Washington, DC: Island 
Press. 242 p. 
Baker, W.L.; Ehle, D. 2001. Uncertainty in surface-fire history: the case of ponderosa pine forests in the Western United 
States. Canadian Journal of Forest Research. 31: 1205-1226. 
Cortner, H.J. 2003. The governance environment: linking science, citizens, and politics. In: Friederici, P., ed. Ecological 
restoration of Southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Washington, DC: Island Press: 70-80. 
Covington, W.W. 2003. The evolutionary and historical context. In: Friederici, P., ed. Ecological restoration of 
Southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Washington, DC: Island Press: 26-47. 
Covington, W.W.; Moore, M.M. 1994. Southwestern ponderosa pine forest structure: changes since Euro-American 
settlement. Journal of Forestry. 92(1): 39-47. 
Daniel, T .C.; Boster, R.S. 1976. Measuring landscape esthetics: the scenic beauty estimation method. Res. Pap. 
RM-167. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station. 66 p. 
Egan, D.; Howell, E.A. 2001. The historical ecology handbook: a restorationist's guide to reference ecosystems. 
Washington, DC: Island Press. 457 p.Friederici, P. 2003. The "Flagstaff Model." In: Friederici, P, ed. Ecological 
restoration of Southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Washington, DC: 'Island Press: 7-25. 
Fule, P.Z.; Covington, W.W.; Moore, M.M. 1997. Determining reference conditions for ecosystem management of 
Southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Ecological Applications. 7: 895-908. 
Fule, P.Z.; Verkamp, G.; Waltz, A.E.M.; Covington, W.W. 2002. Burning under old-growth ponderosa pine on lava 
soils. Fire Management Today. 62(3): 47-49. 
U.S. General Accounting Office [GAO]. 1999. Western national forests: a cohesive strategy is needed to address 
catastrophic wildfire threats. GAO/RCED99-65. Washington, DC. 60 p. 
U.S. General Accounting Office [GAO]. 2004. Wildfire suppression: funding transfers cause project cancellations and 
delays, strained relationships, and management disruptions. GAO-04-612. Washington, DC. 62 p. 
Jordan, W.M., III. 2003. The sunflower forest: ecological restoration and the new communion with nature. Berkeley, CA: 
University of California Press. 256 p. 
Kusel, J.; Adler, E., eds. 2003. Forest communities, community forests. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. 301 p. 
Landres, P .B.; Morgan, P;  Swanson, F .J. 1999. Overview of the use of natural variability concepts in managing 
ecological systems. Ecological Applications. 9(4): 1179-1188. 
Light, A. 2000. Restoration, the value of participation, and the risks of professionalization. In: Gobster, P.H.; Hull, R.B., 
eds. Restoring nature: perspectives from the social sciences and humanities. Washington, DC: Island Press: 163-181. 
 
 
 
80 

Proceedings: International Conference on Transfer of Forest Science Knowledge and Technology 
Minard, A. 2002. Protecting old trees from prescribed fire. Working Papers in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forest 
Restoration 3. Flagstaff, AZ: Ecological Restoration Institute. 4 p. 
Moote, A. 2003. Community-based forest restoration. In: Friederici, P., ed. Ecological restoration of Southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests. Washington, DC: Island Press: 335-352. 
Noss, R.F.; O'Connell, M.A.; Murphy, D.D. 1997. The science of conservation planning. Washington, DC: Island Press. 
246 p. 
Oelschlaeger, M. 2003. Ecological restoration as thinking like a forest. In: Friederici, P., ed. Ecological restoration of 
Southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Washington, DC: Island Press: 81-91. 
Romme, W.H.; Preston, M.; Lynch, D.L.; Kemp, P ; Floyd, M.L.; Hanna, D.H.; Burns, S. 2003. The Ponderosa Pine 
Forest Partnership: ecology, economics, and community involvement in forest restoration. In: Friederici, P., ed. 
Ecological restoration of Southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Washington, DC: Island Press: 99-125. 
Savage, M.; Mast, J.N. 2005. How resilient are southwestern ponderosa pine forests after intense crown fires? 
Canadian Journal of Forest Research. 35(4): 967-977. 
Smith, C. 1992. Media and apocalypse: news coverage of the Yellowstone forest fires, Exxon Valdez oil spill, and Loma 
Prieta earthquake. Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing Group. 213 p. 
Snider, G.B.; Wood, D.B.; Daugherty, P.J. 2003. Analysis of costs and benefits of restoration-based hazardous fuel 
reduction treatments vs. no treatment: progress report no. 1. 16 p. Unpublished report. On file with: Dave Egan. 
Ecological Restoration Institute, Flagstaff, AZ 86011. 
Society for Ecological Restoration International [SERI]. 2004. The SER international primer on ecological 
restoration. Tucson, AZ. 15 p. 
Swetnam, T.W.; Baisan, C.H. 1996. Historical fire regime patterns in the Southwestern United States since AD 1700. In 
Allen, C.D., ed. Fire effects in Southwestern forests: proceedings of the second La Mesa fire symposium. Gen. Tech. 
Rep. RM-GTR-286. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and 
Range Experiment Station: 11-32. 
Ulrich, R.S. 1993. Biophilia, biophobia, and natural landscapes. In: Kellert, S.R.; Wilson, E.O., eds. The biophilia 
hypothesis. Washington, DC: Island Press: 73-137. 
Waltz, A.E.M.; Fule, P.Z.; Covington, W.W.; Moore, M.M. 2003. Diversity in ponderosa pine forest structure following 
ecological restoration treatments. Forest Science. 49(6): 885-890. 
 
 
 
 
81 
