Evidence-based Restoration 
Systematic Review 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to reversing declines in the condition of forested communities throughout the Intermoun-
tain West, particularly those affected by severe wildfires and insect outbreaks.  Our efforts focus on science-based research of ecological 
and socio-economic matters related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach, and education. 
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928/523-7182, FAX 928/523-0296, www.eri.nau.edu 
Effectiveness of Post-wildfire Seeding in Western U.S.  Forests           March 2011  
Background 
Broadcast seeding is one of the most widely used emergency treatments after a wildfire in forested ecosystems 
of the western United States. It is intended to reduce soil erosion, increase vegetative ground cover, and mini-
mize establishment and spread of non-native plant species. However, seeding treatments can have negative ef-
fects, including competing with recovering native plant communities and inadvertently introducing invasive 
species.  
 
Primary question: Does seeding after severe forest fires mitigate negative impacts on soils and plant commu-
nities? 
Secondary questions: Does seeding after severe forest fires reduce soil erosion? Is seeding effective at reduc-
ing non-native plant invasion into burned areas? Does post-wildfire seeding affect native plant community re-
covery?  
 
Methods 
This systematic review was conducted following the Centre for Evidence-Based Conservation guidelines at: 
http://www.environmentalevidence.org/Authors.htm. 
 
Results 
In our review, we found 94 relevant studies. The majority of studies (64%) evaluating soil erosion in seeded 
plots and unseeded controls showed that seeding did not reduce erosion relative to unseeded controls. Compar-
ing cover measure-
ments between seed-
ed and unseeded plots 
from 20 studies con-
taining a total of 29 
study sites, we found 
that even when seed-
ing significantly in-
creased vegetative 
cover, seeded sites 
rarely supported suf-
ficient plant cover to 
stabilize soils in the 
first and second year 
post-fire (Table 1). 
 
Table 1 – Number of 
sites, by ecoregion, in 
published studies re-
porting measures of 
seeding “success” dur-
ing the first two years 
following a wildfire. 

Of the 11 papers providing direct evidence regarding the role of seeding in reducing non-native species abundance, 
an almost equal number found seeding treatments to be effective (six studies) or ineffective (five studies). Howev-
er, the majority of effective and ineffective treatments (83% and 80%, respectively) used non-native species caus-
ing negative impacts on native communities. A majority of studies reported that seeding suppressed recovery of 
native plants (62%, 16 studies). Data on long-term impacts of this reduction are limited, however. Cover data from 
15 studies containing 57 different study sites showed decreased seeded cover relative to control plot cover with in-
creasing time since fire. Cover data from all 57 sites indicates that total plant cover in seeded sites and controls was 
nearly identical by years 4 and 5 post-wildfire (Figure 1).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Average seeded cover (seeded species only), unseeded cover (seeded plots), total cover (seeded + 
unseeded species), and total control cover (unseeded) versus time since fire (data from 57 sites contained in 
15 studies assessing post-wildfire seeding treatment performance in forested ecosystems in the western U.S.). 
 
Management and Research Recommendations 
These findings suggest that post-fire seeding is not reliably effective in protecting soil in the short term and can 
have negative consequences for native plant recovery. Seeding with annual, non-native species can be effective in 
curtailing invasive non-natives, but is often associated with slower native plant recovery. Land managers should 
weigh the costs and benefits of seeding treatments, and consider using alternative rehabilitation methods shown to 
be more effective (e.g., mulching). Early detection of new, undesirable species invasions through monitoring post-
fire environments in combination with rapid response methods to quickly contain, deny reproduction and eliminate 
these invasions, may allow better control of non-native species establishment than is typically obtained through 
seeding. Plant community recovery may be improved with the use of locally adapted, genetically appropriate plant 
materials, although more research regarding the effects and effectiveness of these species is critical.  
 
The effectiveness and long-term effects of post-fire seeding deserve further study, particularly well-designed re-
search experiments and rigorous quantitative monitoring to evaluate seeding success. Studies assessing the use of 
native species to counter non-native species invasions in burned areas are almost non-existent. Taking a closer look 
at the use of native species to reduce non-natives would be valuable. Further quantitative research on the effects of 
mulching after wildfire is also essential. Given on-going debates about seeding, additional research that studies the 
long-term effects of seeding with both native and non-native species on natural vegetation recovery and the genetic 
integrity of native populations is essential.  
 
Reference and Links 
The full systematic review and all references can be accessed at:  
http://www.eri.nau.edu/en/evidence-based-restoration-projects  
