Evidence-based Conservation 
Systematic Review 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928/523-7182, FAX 928/523-0296, www.nau.edu/ERI 
Fact Sheet: Restoration Treatments and their Impact on the Water Budget 
How Restoration Thinning Treatments on Conifer-dominated  
Watersheds Affect the Water Budget 
 
By Clinton Wyatt 
 
BACKGROUND 
The Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI) is a collaborative effort to restore unhealthy ponderosa pine 
forest ecosystems to increase forest resiliency and reduce the threat of catastrophic wildfires across four 
national forests along the Mogollon Rim, Arizona. A systematic review was conducted to synthesize the 
state of knowledge with respect to hydrological responses to forest restoration thinning and to evaluate the 
quality and type of references that exist within the literature. Two questions guided the systematic review: 
1) How do restoration thinning treatments conducted in conifer-dominated watersheds affect the water 
budget (the relationship between the input and output of water) and, 2) How do restoration thinning treat-
ments impact the groundwater system? 
 
METHODS 
The systematic review was conducted follow-
ing the Centre for Evidence-Based Conserva-
tion guidelines at: 
http://www.environmentalevidence.org/
Authors.htm. 
 
RESULTS/DISCUSSION 
In this systematic review, 37 relevant experi-
mental studies from around the world were 
identified. Results from 23 studies were used 
to answer question one and results from 15 
studies were used to answer question two; 
one study was included in analyses for both 
questions. Of these 37 studies, 31 were peer-
reviewed journal articles, five were project or 
technical reports from academic institutions 
or government agencies, and one was a dis-
sertation. In addition, 43 review articles were 
identified that were useful for reference; 
however, no experiments were conducted in 
these articles. 
 
The systematic review revealed that water 
yield can increase 10–35% percent when 20–
100% of a conifer-dominated watershed is 
treated (Figure 1). Groundwater results were  
June 2013 
 
Figure 1. The distribution of mean water yield percent increase as a 
function of mean percent area treated. Water yield increase was 
determined by taking water yield increase divided by mean annual 
streamflow to arrive at percent increase. Therefore, only those stud-
ies that reported mean annual streamflow are included in the figure. 

 
much less conclusive and no correla-
tion was drawn between removing 
trees 
and 
groundwater 
recharge. 
Therefore, question two could not be 
answered (Figure 2). 
 
Although all the studies reviewed 
showed a positive response of surface 
water yield to forest treatments, these 
responses appeared to vary across cli-
matic types and seemed to be affected 
by other variables (such as topogra-
phy, soils, aspect, elevation, etc.), so 
that there is no universal water yield 
response to change in forest cover. 
Without a universal relationship, re-
gional studies in the same forest type 
are probably the best indicators of wa-
ter balance response to 4FRI treat-
ments. The restoration thinning treat-
ments that will be used in 4FRI are 
different from those used in the stud-
ies reviewed. It is probable that an in-
crease in water yield will accompany 
the proposed thinning treatments con-
ducted on the 4FRI area. The respons-
es are expected to be variable as the 
treatment types are diverse. 
 
MANAGEMENT AND RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS 
Additional research and reviews may eliminate the uncertainties and variance found within studies of forest 
treatment effects on surface water yield and groundwater recharge. However, there may be an inherent 
structural limitation to how finely and conclusively results can be drawn from such studies. In a separate pa-
per, the author has recommended future research approaches that may better determine any possible rela-
tionships between forest thinning and water budget to minimize uncertainty.  
 
The development of a more systematic, structured, and standardized approach to developing controlled wa-
tershed experiments, measuring water budget variables, and reporting these variables will lead to more 
structured sets of data that will be useful to compare across studies. The methods used in measuring varia-
bles and collecting data appear to be appropriate, but a more rigorous application of testing against the null 
hypothesis as well as the transparency of results and description of methods would help future researchers 
and decision-makers draw useful conclusions. Many of the studies evaluated in this systematic review only 
reported mean annual results. Full disclosure of experimental data sets, while beyond the scope of most jour-
nal articles, would have facilitated the recognition of any actual relationships and the drawing of conclusions 
from these data.  
 
 
 
Figure 2. The distribution of groundwater table rise as a function of percent 
area of the forest treated. Only one of the 15 groundwater studies analyzed 
reported quantitative changes in groundwater recharge. The other 14 reported 
quantitative changes in the groundwater table elevation as a function of quan-
titative increase in groundwater recharge. 
CONTACT 
Dr. Abe Springer, abe.springer@nau.edu 
Sharon Masek Lopez, sharon.masek_lopez@nau.edu 
