USDA Forest Service RMRS-P-53CD.  2008. 
331
In: Olberding, Susan D., and Moore, Margaret M., tech coords. 2008. Fort Valley Experimental Forest—A Century of 
Research 1908-2008. Proceedings RMRS-P-53CD. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Research Station. 408 p.
Fort Valley’s Early Scientists:  
A Legacy of Distinction
Andrew J. Sánchez Meador, USFS, Washington Office-Detached, Forest 
Management Service Center, Ft Collins, CO; and Susan D. Olberding, USFS, 
Rocky Mountain Research Station, Flagstaff, AZ
Abstract—When the Riordan brothers of Flagstaff, Arizona asked Gifford Pinchot to 
determine why there was a deficit in ponderosa pine seedlings, neither party under-
stood the historical significance of what they were setting in motion for the field of 
forest research. The direct result of that professional favor was the establishment of 
the Fort Valley Experiment Station (Fort Valley) in 1908, and the insights produced 
through its research program are remarkable. The scientists that passed through Fort 
Valley are an accolade that commonly goes unmentioned, and includes extraordi-
nary individuals such as: Gustaf “Gus” Pearson, Emanuel Fritz, Edward C. Crafts, and 
Ruthford H. Westveld.
Introduction
The following offers a glimpse into the early years of various Fort Valley 
Experiment Station (Fort Valley) researchers. This article serves to demonstrate 
that Fort Valley was a proving ground for research foresters who ultimately had 
colossal impacts reaching much further than the ponderosa pine forest of northern 
Arizona. There is a primary focus on the foresters who came to Fort Valley to fur-
ther develop solid technical foundations for national forest management and how 
through their careers impacted early American silviculture and forestry at a national 
scale (Figure 1).

332
USDA Forest Service RMRS-P-53CD.  2008.
Figure 1. Known locations where early Fort Valley Experimental Forest scientists progressed to established research and/or service 
programs throughout the United States. The locations in black indicate places referenced in this manuscript.

USDA Forest Service RMRS-P-53CD.  2008. 
333
Gustaf “Gus” Adolph Pearson (1880–1949)
It makes sense to begin with Pearson (Figure 2), a Nebraska farm boy who grad-
uated from the University of Nebraska. Pearson joined the Forest Service in 1907 
and began his career studying depleted range conditions on the Wallowa National 
Forest in Oregon, but transferred to work with the Arizona ponderosa pines by the 
summer of 1908 and was named the first Fort Valley Director. His entire career re-
volved around Fort Valley and southwestern ponderosa pine regeneration. Pearson 
retired in 1945 and spent the last years of his life compiling his decades of research 
into a book that became THE manual on ponderosa pine management. He died at 
his Tucson desk in 1949 while editing this monograph and it was published posthu-
mously as The Management of Ponderosa Pine in the Southwest1.
He is buried in Flagstaff alongside his wife, May Perkins Pearson. In 1951, a 
154-acre ponderosa pine plot near Fort Valley was named the G.A. Pearson Natural 
Area by the Southwestern Section, Society of American Foresters (SAF), to honor 
and pay tribute to Pearson’s decades of service in perpetuating the southwestern 
ponderosa pine forest. The SAF also named Pearson one of the top four silvicultur-
alists of the twentieth century.
1 Pearson, G.A. 1950. Management of ponderosa pine in the Southwest. Agriculture 
Monograph 6. Washington, D.C., United States Government Printing Office.
Figure 2. Gustaf “Gus” Adolph 
Pearson served as the first 
Fort Valley Director and was 
instrumental to sending off 
many durable foresters. 1924 
photograph (USFS photo 193734) 
taken by E. S. Shipp.

334	
USDA Forest Service RMRS-P-53CD.  2008.
Edward C. Crafts (1910–1980)
Crafts was assigned to Fort Valley in 1932 and began work with the range staff 
who were examining the effects of livestock browsing on forest vegetation. While 
at Fort Valley, he was placed in charge of the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) 
camp at Mormon Lake and conducted a large amount of tree thinning in and around 
Flagstaff. After seven years in the Southwest with about as many job changes and 
duty stations, he was promoted to Forest Economist and transferred to the California 
Forest and Range Experiment Station in Berkeley, CA. His long Forest Service ca-
reer eventually led to him being named as USFS Assistant Chief in 19502, and an 
appointment by Secretary Udall as head of the Bureau of Outdoor Recreation.
Hermann Krauch (1886–1962)
Minnesota-born Hermann Krauch first arrived at Fort Valley in May 1913, where 
he worked on a Coconino National Forest marking study. Thus began his frequent 
occupancy of Fort Valley (as a base of operations) over the next three decades. He 
graduated with a degree in Forestry from the University of Minnesota in 1910 and 
accepted a summer job with the Kaniksu National Forest in Washington. By April 
1914, he was on the Pecos (now the Santa Fe) National Forest in charge of the 
Gallinas nursery that produced Douglas-fir and Engelmann spruce for transplanting 
onto burned forest areas. Krauch also headed the Cloudcroft nursery on the Lincoln 
National Forest and worked on timber reconnaissance, compiled working plan data, 
and miscellaneous investigations. He spoke German, wore a hearing aid (as did 
Pearson and stories are told of shouting matches between the two men), and was 
known for keeping copious notes.
Charles Knesal Cooperrider (1889–1944)
Charles “Coop” Cooperrider (Figure 3) is little known in today’s world, but a 
man considered a prophet by legendary Aldo Leopold. “Coop” recognized the re-
lationship between water, land, and people, and how the pace of use would deplete 
available natural resources. Cooperrider graduated from the University of Ohio 
in 1914 and moved to the arid Southwest to ease his tuberculosis. He joined the 
Forest Service in 1915 as assistant ranger on the Santa Fe National Forest and im-
mediately recognized the dangers associated with erosion caused by overgrazing 
cattle. “Coop” would later be assigned to District 3 headquarters in Albuquerque 
as a range scientist where he studied the effects of grazing. In 1927, when Range 
Research received appropriation, “Coop” led the southwestern division and created 
the foundation for watershed studies. He lived between Fort Valley, Tucson, and 
Sierra Ancha most of the time. Many in the USFS recognized and respected him 
and often sought his advice on watershed projects. The majority of his career was 
spent in the Southwest, except for a short time at the Forest Products Laboratory in 
Wisconsin.
2 Crafts E.C.; Schrepfer, S.R.. 1972. Edward C. Crafts: Forest Service researcher and 
congressional liaison - An eye to multiple use. Forest History Society.

USDA Forest Service RMRS-P-53CD.  2008. 
335
During World War II, Cooperrider was assigned to work in Mexico with the 
Guayule rubber project. His fragile health worsened while in Mexico and he died in 
1944 at 55 years of age. Leopold, who eventually would write Cooperrider’s obitu-
ary in the Journal of Wildlife Management3, considered “Coop” a mentor, a friend, 
and a man ahead of his time with respect to conservation.
Emanuel Fritz (1886–1988)
Emanuel Fritz, a Maryland native, graduated from Cornell in mechanical engi-
neering in 1908 and received a Masters in forestry from Yale University in 1914. He 
joined the U.S. Forest Service in 1915, working first in Montana and then eventually 
ending up at Fort Valley for about a year. His Recollections of Fort Valley4 article tells 
of life in the early days that mentions Pearson’s appreciation of Fritz’ engineering 
background and knack for dealing with troublesome equipment. He left Fort Valley 
to serve in World War I, after which he became an Assistant Professor of Forestry at 
UC-Berkeley. For the following seven decades he was a major figure in California 
forestry, co-founding the California state forestry program, serving as editor for the 
Journal of Forestry, and was instrumental in developing redwood forestry5.
Figure 3. Charles Knesal Cooperrider, an outspoken and respected rangeland and watershed 
scientist, who often publicly disagreed with Pearson and was said to have possessed a 
“spark of divinity” by Aldo Leopold. 1933 photograph (USFS photo 307644) taken by 
W.J. Cribbs.
3 Obituary of Charles Knesal Cooperrider, July, Journal of Wildlife Management, republished 
in Aldo Leopold’s Wilderness (Harrisburg, PA: Stackpole Books 1990). 229.
4 Fritz, Emanuel. 1964 Recollections of Fort Valley, 1916-1917. Forest History. Vol. 8 (3).
5 J.A. Zivnuska H.J. Vaux R.A. Cockrell. 1989. Emanuel Fritz, Forestry: Berkeley. University 
of California: In Memoriam. http://sunsite.berkeley.edu/uchistory/archives_exhibits/
in_memoriam/

336
USDA Forest Service RMRS-P-53CD.  2008.
Ruthford Henry Westveld (1900–1985)
Westveld (Figure 4) served at Fort Valley as a forest examiner and went on to 
work for the USFS in Arizona, New Mexico, and Oregon. After two short tenures 
at Michigan State and the University of Missouri, Westveld joined the faculty of the 
School of Forestry at the University of Florida in 1938 as Professor of Silviculture. 
While at Florida, he did pioneering work on the nutritional requirements of southern 
pines and wrote two widely used texts, Applied Silviculture and Forestry in Farm 
Management. He then served as Director of the Forestry School at Missouri from 
1947-1965. He was the creative and persistent force behind the McIntire-Stennis 
Act of 1962 that changed the face of forestry research by providing a continuing 
source of funding.
Figure 4. Ruthford Henry Westveld would go on to become a professor of 
Silviculture and was the creative and persistent force behind the McIntire-Stennis 
Act of 1962. 1920 photograph taken by C.M. Linthicum at FVEF.

USDA Forest Service RMRS-P-53CD.  2008.	
337
Clarence F. Korstian (1889–1968)
Like Pearson, Nebraska-born Korstian was educated in forestry at the University 
of Nebraska, but would go on to received his doctorate from Yale University. His 
brief tenure as silviculturist at Fort Valley helped prepare him for his next as-
signment in 1921 to the newly-opened Appalachian Forest Experiment Station in 
Asheville, NC, where he continued to specialize in silviculture. In 1930, he left the 
Forest Service and went to work for Duke University in Durham, NC, where he be-
came a professor of forestry and the first director of Duke Forest. He organized the 
Duke graduate school of forestry, and became its dean in 1938. He was president 
of the SAF national council from 1938-1941, and president of the North Carolina 
Forestry Association from 1943-1947.
Frank Wadsworth (1915– )
Frank Wadsworth began at his career at Fort Valley in 1938 by being tasked with 
the 30-year remeasurement and individual tree pruning of the Wing Mountain plots, 
nearby to Fort Valley. While at Fort Valley, Wadsworth participated in many of the 
weekend social gatherings often put on by May Perkins Pearson, Gus Pearson’s 
wife. Undoubtedly, it was at one of these functions where Wadsworth met Gus 
and May’s daughter, Margaret, who was a concert soprano and whom he would 
later marry. Because of perceived nepotism laws, Wadsworth transferred from Fort 
Valley and went to the USFS International Institute of Tropical Forestry (IITF) in 
San Juan, Puerto Rico, where he spent his career as the leader in the preservation of 
fragile tropical forests and served as the Director of the Institute of Tropical Forestry 
and Supervisor of the Caribbean National Forest for over 22 years. Wadsworth was 
instrumental in the formation of Puerto Rico’s Department of Natural Resources 
and Environment and the island’s Environmental Quality Board, and played major 
roles in the protection of a Puerto Rican forest, mangroves, and natural resources 
at Maricao, Arroyo, and Mona Island, respectively. Over the course of his career, 
he has written over 100 technical papers and co-authored a book about tropical for-
estry and preservation, Common Trees of Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands.
Conclusions
There can be no doubt that the time these scientists spent at Fort Valley was sig-
nificant and their influence has had a profound impact on American Forestry. Much 
of their legacy is currently housed at the historical archives, located at the Rocky 
Mountain Research Station in Flagstaff, AZ. Artifacts conserved here, such as per-
sonal diaries and photographs, provide fascinating glimpses into the lives of these 
amazing pioneers of forest science and range management from brief to expan-
sive. Examples include Pearson’s diaries detailing budgetary and logistic matters 
to Krauch’s diaries including many personal notes, such as what western novels 
he read (e.g., Zane Grey’s Riders of the Purple Sage) and details on the Forest 
Service’s new uniforms. While most of these men have passed on, their legacy and 
dedication to forest science and the field of forestry continue as a testament to the 
early USFS and the Fort Valley Experimental Forest.

338	
USDA Forest Service RMRS-P-53CD.  2008.
Acknowledgments
We thank Frank Wadsworth, Lynda Sánchez, and Katherine Sánchez Meador for 
reviewing earlier versions of this paper and for their helpful suggestions and insight. 
We thank the USFS Rocky Mountain Research Station and the NAU Ecological 
Restoration Institute. Finally, we are indebted to the scientists and foresters of the 
first USFS research facility established in this nation.
The content of this paper reflects the views of the author(s), who are responsible for the 
facts and accuracy of the information presented herein.
