2004 
THE MICHIGAN BOTANIST 
1  
ECOLOGY OF EASTERN PRICKLY PEAR CACTUS 
(OPUNTIA HUMIFUSA) IN OAK OPENINGS PRESERVE, 
NORTHWESTERN OHIO 
Scott R. Abella* and John F. Jaeger 
Metroparks of the Toledo Area  
5100 W. Central Ave.  
Toledo, OH 43615  
ABSTRACT  
Opuntiahumifusa (eastern prickly pear cactus) is listed as potentially threatened in Ohio. and we 
examined the characteristics of O. humifusa sites in Oak Openings Preserve in northwestern Ohio's 
Oak Openings region in an attempt to provide data that may help protect this species. Opuntiahumi­
fusa occurrences were associated with loose sands of the xeric Udipsamment Ottokee and Oakville 
soil series on sites that had been cleared before the 1940s during failed agricultural attempts. Shad­
ing by encroaching canopy trees is a threat to several O. humifusa populations in Oak Openings Pre­
serve, and treatments that reduce canopy cover at these sites may help sustain this species and in­
crease the proportion of flowering individuals. Because the patchy distribution of O. humifusamakes 
the species susceptible to local extinctions, the acquisition of sites by conservation organizations 
containing O. humifusa or providing suitable habitat is consistent with the perpetuation of this rare 
species in the Oak Openings region. Sandy sites previously disturbed by agricultural clearing, sand 
mining, or other soil disturbances should not be overlooked for their potential to provide O. humifusa 
habitat in this region. 
INTRODUCTION 
Opuntia humifusa (Raf.) Raf. (eastern prickly pear cactus) has a patchy but 
wide distribution in the eastern United States and southeastern Canada, ranging 
from Massachusetts through Wisconsin to southern Florida (Benson 1982). In 
the Great Lakes region, O. humifusa occurs in 10 counties in western lower 
Michigan (Voss 1985), southern Ontario including Point Pelee National Park 
(Reznicek 1982), four northern Ohio counties near Lake Erie and 12 southern 
Ohio counties (Cooperrider 1995), northern Indiana and illinois near the south­
ern tip of Lake Michigan (Swink & Wilhelm 1994), and scattered localities in 
southern Wisconsin (Benson 1982). 
Habitats of Opuntia humifusa in the Great Lakes region, based on herbarium 
records and published descriptions, vary widely (Noelle & Blackwell 1972).For 
example, Reznicek (1982) described two O. humifusa sites inland from Lake 
Erie in southern Ontario as low, south- and west-facing sandy ridges. In the 
Chicago region, O. humifusa occurs in Quercus savannas, old cemeteries on 
sandy soils that have been periodically mowed, and human-made limestone bar­
*Author for correspondence: sra8@dana.ucc.nau.edu; present address: Ecological Restoration 
Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5018 

2 
THE MICHIGAN BOTANIST 
Vol. 43 
rens (Swink & Wilhelm 1994). Kellerman (1901) reported that O. humifusa was 
common in open Quercus woods near Sandusky in northern Ohio, and this 
species also occurred in sand plains (Jennings 1908) and open fields (Moseley 
1899) in the same region. 
Opuntia humifusa is listed as potentially threatened in Ohio (Ohio Division 
of Natural Areas and Preserves 2000). Regions supporting O. humifusa are 
widely disjunct in Ohio, and suitable habitats within these regions are patchy, 
making O. humifusa prone to local extinctions (Noelle & Blackwell 1972; 
Cooperrider 1995). Nonetheless, there are few detailed studies of the habitats 
and ecology of this species in the Great Lakes region and in the eastern United 
States in general. To help fill this gap in our knowledge in Ohio, made more 
serious by the potentially threatened status of O. humifusa, we studied O. hu­
mifusa habitats in Oak Openings Preserve in northwestern Ohio. The objective 
of this study was to document the environmental, plant community, and his­
torical land-use characteristics of O. humifusa sites in Oak Openings Preserve 
in an attempt to provide data that may help protect this species. 
METHODS 
Study Species 
Nomenclatural history of Opuntia humifusa is convoluted (Noelle & Blackwell 1972). Gleason & 
Cronquist (1991)reportthatthis species hasbeen referred to as O. calcicola, O. compressa, O. opun­
tia, O. pollardii, O. rafinesquei, and O. vulgaris. Morphological characteristics of O. humifusa vary 
widely across its range, but authors in many regions have concluded that O. humifusa is a single 
species without varieties (Hanks & Fairbrothers 1969b; Voss 1985). This species often grows in 
clumps, andis typically 7.5-10cmtall (Benson 1982). Flowering occursin JuneandJuly(Cooperrider 
1995), with yellow, showy flowers (Figure I). Reproduction occurs both by seed and by the detach­
ment of partial or full pads from a parent plant-these fragments readily root on soil surfaces (Voss 
1985). Opuntia humifusa is a perennial andoverwinters in its vegetative form, but no information was 
foundin theliteratureas to thepotential length of itslife span. Opuntia humifusa often colonizesopen, 
sandy, disturbed areas, and the species may bereduced or eliminated by shading during succession 
(Wallace & Fairbrothers 1987). 
Study Area 
Oak Openings Preserve is managed by the Toledo Area Metroparks and is located in Lucas 
County, northwestern Ohio (Figure 2). The preserve consists of a 1496-ha mosaic of wet prairies, 
open fields, conifer plantations, Quercus savannas, woodlands, and forests. Soils are sandy and are 
derivedfrom beach dunes deposited during thePleistocene at the westernshoreline of Lake Warren, 
a glacial lake now partially occupied by LakeErie (Moseley 1928). Presettlement vegetation in this 
region,basedon 1821 landsurvey records, consisted of 51% Quercus velutina(blackoak) and Quer­
cus alba (white oak) savanna or barrens « 43 trees ha'), 23% Quercus woodland (> 43 trees ha'). 
and 27% treeless wet prairie(Brewer & Vankat 2001). Restoration of these nativeecosystemsis on­
goingandis a high priority in Oak Openings Preserve (Abellaet al, 2001). 
Data Collection 
TheToledo Metroparks maintains a continuously updateddatabase of rareplantlocations in Oak 
Openings Preservebasedon formal botanical surveys and observations throughout the preserve. Op­
untia humifusa occurs at eightknownsites in OakOpenings Preserve, and because of the unique and 
distinctive appearance of O. humifusa these sites likelyrepresentall or nearlyall extantpopulations 
of this species in Oak Openings Preserve. We sampled each of these sites in May, July, and August 
2002. 
At each site, we counted the number of Opuntia humifusa individuals and clumps. Distin­



2004 
THE MICillGAN BOTANIST 
5 
RESULTS 
Characteristics of the eight Opuntia humifusa sites in Oak Openings Preserve 
are summarized in Table 1 and are described individually in the following sec­
tions. Numbers after each site name in the following sections correspond to the 
site's number in Table 1. 
Reed Plantation (1)-Associates of Opuntia humifusa at this site include Rubus 
jlagellaris (northern dewberry), Fragaria virginiana (wild strawberry), Lepid­
ium campestre (field peppergrass), Rumex acetosella (sheep sorrel), Antennaria 
spp., occasional Asclepias tuberosa (butterfly-weed), and seedlings of Acer 
rubrum (red maple), Prunus serotina (black cherry), Quercus velutina, and Sas­
safras albidum (sassafras). Canopies consist of ca. 20-cm diameter Quercus ve­
lutina, Quercus palustris (pin oak), Pinus strobus(eastern white pine), and Pinus 
banksiana (jack pine). The site consists of an opening adjacent to the south of a 
Pinus banksiana plantation and north of an Acer rubrum-dominated forest on a 
different soil series (Tedrow, a moist series [Stone et al. 1980]). Few O. humifusa 
at this site flowered, and threats to this population appear to be shading by an en­
croaching canopy of Quercus and Pinus, smothering by leaf litter, and the pres­
ence of an invasive shrub Elaeagnus umbellata (autumn olive). 
Yucca Meadow (2)-This site has been restored to Quercus savanna by the thin­
ning of Quercus velutina and the removal of Acer rubrum. Pinus resinosa (red 
TABLE 1.Summary of characteristics of Opuntia humifusa sites in Oak Openings Preserve, north­
western Ohio 
Site 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
No.Opuntia 
clumps 
20 
18 
1 
2 
9 
15 
2 
5 
No.Opuntia 
individuals 
69 
61 
13 
3 
28 
79 
10 
32 
Size Opuntia 
area (m2)1 
6000 
2400 
100 
50 
400 
1000 
100 
100 
Landform 
Dune 
Dune 
Dune 
Dune 
Dune 
Dune 
Beach 
Beach 
type 
knoll 
knoll 
knoll 
ridge 
knoll 
knoll 
ridge 
ridge 
Elevation (m) 
215 
217 
216 
219 
215 
215 
215 
215 
Soil series-
Ottokee Oakville Oakville Oakville 
Oakville 
Ottokee Oakville Ottokee 
Oi horizon 
Patchy'' 
Absent 
Patchy 
Absent 
Patchy 
Absent 
Absent Patchy 
Canopy 
cover (%)4 
50 
<5 
<5 
0 
50 
50 
0 
0 
1939 land 
Agri-
Agri-
Agri-
Sand 
Agri-
Agri-
Agri-
Agri-
use 
culture 
culture 
culture 
dune 
culture 
culture 
culture culture 
1 Size of area containing Opuntia including area between clumps.  
20ttokee and Oakville series classified as mixed, mesic Aquic and Typic Udipsarnments (Stone et  
al. 1980).  
3 Patchy = ranges from absent to a maximum of 4 em thick across site.  
4 Average of site or point-sample above Opuntia for small-sized sites.  

6 
THE MICHIGANBOTANIST 
Vol. 43 
pine) plantations are adjacent to this site to the west, and the rest of the site is 
surrounded by closed-canopy Quercus forest. Andropogon scoparius (little 
bluestem), Krigia virginica (dwarf-dandelion), Lupinus perennis (wild lupine), 
Rubus jlagellaris, Lespedeza capitata (bush clover), Fragaria virginiana, Ascle­
pias tuberosa, and occasional Yucca filamentosa (yucca) dominate this site. En­
croachment by the exotic Elaeagnus umbellata is a possible threat to this popu­
lation of Opuntia humifusa. 
Vasvery Homestead (3)-This site is adjacent to a private inholding to the north, 
a road and a Pinus strobus plantation to the west, and a restored Quercus sa­
vanna to the south and east. Common plants near Opuntia humifusa at this site 
include Rubus jlagellaris, Euphorbia corollata (flowering spurge), Rhus copal­
tina (winged sumac), Lespedeza capitata, and seedlings of Quercus velutina. 
Two other state-listed plants, Asclepias amplexicaulis (blunt-leaf milkweed) and 
Prunus pumila (sand cherry) occur within 100 m of O. humifusa at this site. Be­
cause of its proximity to a private inholding, the area where O. humifusa occurs 
at this site was not included in restoration treatments that were applied to adja­
cent areas, and threats to this population of O. humifusa include shading by en­
croaching canopy trees and brush. 
Railroad Ridge (4)-Common plants around Opuntia humifusa at this site in­
clude Quercus velutina seedlings, Carex spp., Rubus jlagellaris, Euphorbia 
corollata, Rumex acetosella, Lepidium campestre, Asclepias tuberosa, Asclepias 
syriaca (common milkweed), Krigia virginica, Lespedeza capitata, Ambrosia 
artemisiifolia (common ragweed), and Conyza canadensis (horseweed). This 
site comprises the highest elevation of all O. humifusa sites, and soils consist of 
loose, shifting sand. A bike trail is located 30 m north of the site, and this trail 
occupies an old railroad bed present in 1939. The site was an open sandy area in 
1939, and is the only O. humifusa site not in agriculture at that time (Table 1). 
Removal of O. humifusa by park visitors is a potential threat to O. humifusa at 
this site because of its proximity to the trail, although there was no present evi­
dence that any O. humifusa have been recently removed. 
Jack Pine Opening (5)-This site consists of an opening within a Pinus 
banksiana plantation. Canopy trees include Quercus palustris and Quercus ve­
lutina, and ground-flora includes Rubus jlagellaris, Krigia virginica, Rumex 
acetosella, Rhus copallina, Yucca filamentosa, and seedlings of Quercus ve­
lutina, Quercus palustris, and Sassafras albidum. Potential threats to this pop­
ulation of Opuntia humifusa are shading by encroaching canopy trees and 
smothering by leaf litter. 
Douglas-Fir Border (6)-Adjacent to the east of a Pseudotsuga menziesii (Dou­
glas-fir) and Picea abies (Norway spruce) plantation, Opuntia humifusa on this 
site occur in an opening surrounded by Quercus saplings (Figure 3). Associates 
of O. humifusa include Pteridium aquilinum (bracken fern), Lepidium 
campestre, Andropogon scoparius, and Quercus velutina seedlings. Shading by 



2004 
THE MICHIGAN BOTANIST 
9  
agriculture in 1939, suggesting O. humifusa was present before clearing and the 
plants or seed survived, or O. humifusa did not occur on these sites before clear­
ing and became established sometime after farm abandomnent. It is possible that 
soil disturbances created by agricultural clearing provided a favorable environ­
ment for O. humifusa colonization. Many of the abandoned farms were con­
verted to Pinus plantations in the 1940s and 1950s when land for Oak Openings 
Preserve was acquired by the Toledo Metroparks (Abella & MacDonald 2002). 
Because all eight presently known O. humifusa sites occur within 100 m of a 
conifer plantation, it is uncertain if some O. humifusa sites were lost by the con­
version of abandoned farms to plantations. 
Origin and Distribution of Opuntia humifusa 
The origin of Opuntia humifusa in the Oak Openings region is unclear. In 
Wood County, 13 km east of the city of Bowling Green and 35 km southeast of 
Oak Openings Preserve, Moseley (1931) documented an O. humifusa occurrence 
on a site known to have been a long-term Native American campsite. Moseley 
(1931) also noted that O. humifusa occurrences around Sandusky in northern 
Ohio east of the Oak Openings region were associated with the presence of Na­
tive American artifacts. He postulated that Native Americans had introduced O. 
humifusa to northern Ohio because they favored its edible, succulent fruit. In 
Moseley's classic paper (1928) on the flora of the Oak Openings region based on 
his botanical surveys in the 1890s and early 1900s, he does not mention O. hu­
mifusa as occurring in the region. Moseley's routes through Oak Openings are 
uncertain, and there could be many reasons why he did not document the occur­
rence of O. humifusa if the species did occur in the Oak Openings region at that 
time. Noelle & Blackwell (1972) reported that the earliest known herbarium 
record of O. humifusa in Ohio other than for the Sandusky region is a collection 
in 1911 in Adams County in extreme southern Ohio. However, Noelle & Black­
well (1972) asserted that the absence of herbarium records for O. humifusa 
should be interpreted cautiously because of the scattered distribution of O. hu­
mifusa and the incompleteness of early collection records. The first published 
documentation of O. humifusa in the Oak Openings region appears to be by 
Easterly (1979) during his rare plant survey. It is uncertain how O. humifusa be­
came established in the Oak Openings region and for how long the species has 
been in this region. 
Protection of Opuntia humifusa 
Shading has been widely cited to reduce flowering and eventually eliminate 
Opuntia humifusa (Hanks & Fairbrothers 1969a; Reznicek 1982; Wallace & 
Fairbrothers 1987). Five of eight O. humifusa sites in Oak Openings Preserve ex­
hibited encroachment by trees or shrubs, and shading appears to be an imminent 
threat to these O. humifusa populations. Restoration treatments that restore the 
open Quercus savanna vegetation native to O. humifusa sites (Abella et al. 2001) 
would probably alleviate shading threats to O. humifusa and increase the pro­
portion of flowering individuals. Continued monitoring of these sites is neces­
sary to ascertain the temporal dynamics of O. humifusa. Although the presettle­
ment distribution of O. humifusa in Oak Openings Preserve is not known, the 

10 
THE MICHIGAN BOTANIST 
Vol. 43 
present fragmented nature of the preserve and the localized occurrences of O. 
humifusa suggest that establishing O. humifusa on additional sites in Oak Open­
ings Preserve might be desirable. Opuntia humifusa can be established by re­
moving pads from existing plants and planting the pads (Voss 1985). 
Because of the potentially threatened status of O. humifusa in Ohio, the ac­
quisition of sites by conservation organizations containing O. humifusa or pro­
viding suitable habitat in the Oak Openings region is consistent with the perpet­
uation of this rare species in Ohio. Results of this study suggest that sandy sites 
disturbed by agricultural clearing, sand mining, or other soil disturbances should 
not be overlooked for their potential to provide O. humifusa habitat in the Oak 
Openings region. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We thank Denise Gehring, Bob Jacksy, Jenny Finfera, Monique Beans, Chris Ferree, Karen  
Menard, Heather Norris, Mark Plessner, Kathryn Nelson, Sarah McCallum, Kim High, and others  
with the Toledo Metroparks for monitoring rare plant speciesin Oak Openings Preserve.Jenny Fin­ 
fera andBob Jacksy maintain therareplantdatabase. WealsothankNeil MacDonaldand Jenny Fin­ 
fera for reviewingthe manuscript.  
LITERATURE CITED 
Abella, S .R.,J. F.Jaeger,D. H. Gehring, R. G. Jacksy, K. S. Menard, & K. A. High. 2001. Restor­ 
ing historicplantcommunities inthe OakOpenings regionofnorthwestOhio.EcologicalRestora­ 
tion 19: 155-160.  
Abella,S. R., & N. W. MacDonald. 2002.Spatialand temporal patternsof easternwhite pine regen­
erationin a northwestern Ohiooakstand. Michigan Botanist41: 115-123. 
Benson, L. 1982. The cacti of the United States and Canada. Stanford University Press, Stanford, 
California. 1044pp. 
Brewer, L. G., & J. L. Vankat. 2001.The vegetation of the OakOpenings of northwest Ohio at the 
time of Euro-American settlement. Map and text. Ohio Biological Survey, Columbus, Ohio. 
Cooperrider, T. S. 1995. The Dicotyledoneae of Ohio. Part 2. Linaceae through Campanulaceae. 
Ohio StateUniversity Press, Columbus, Ohio.656 pp. 
Easterly,N. W. 1979.Rareandinfrequent plantspecies in theOakOpeningsof northwestOhio.Ohio 
Journal of Science 79: 51-58. 
Gleason, H. A, & A Cronquist. 1991. Manualof vascular plants of northeasternUnited States and 
adjacentCanada. New York Botanical Garden, Bronx, New York. 910 pp. 
Hanks, S., & D. E. Fairbrothers. 1969a. Habitats and associations of Opuntia compressa (Salisb.) 
Macbr. in New Jersey. Bulletinof the Torrey Botanical Club %: 592-596. 
Hanks, S. & D. E. Fairbrothers. 1969b. Diversity of populations of Opuntia compressa (Salisb.) 
Macbr. in New Jersey. Bulletinof the Torrey Botanical Club 96:641-652. 
Jennings, O. E. 1908. An ecological classification of the vegetation of Cedar Point. Ohio Naturalist 
8: 291-340. 
Kellerman, W. A 1901. Notes on the flora of Sandusky. Ohio Naturalist 1: 82~5. 
Moseley, E. L. 1899. Sandusky flora. OhioAcademy of Science, Special Paper Number 1. 167 pp. 
Moseley, E. L. 1928. Floraof theOak Openings. Proceedings ofthe Ohio Academyof Science,Vol- . 
ume 8, SpecialPaperNumber20:79-134. 
Moseley, E. L. 1931. Someplants thatwereprobably broughttonorthernOhio from the west by In­
dians. Papersof the Michigan Academy of Science, Arts andLetters 13: 169-172. 
Noelle, H. J., & W. H. Blackwell. 1972. The Cactaceae in Ohio. Castanea 37: 119-124. 
Ohio Division of Natural Areas and Preserves. 2000. Rare native Ohio plants: 2000-01 status list. 
Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Columbus, Ohio. 28 pp.  
Reznicek,A A 1982. The cactusin southwestern Ontario. Ontario Field Biologist 36: 35-38.  

11 
2004 
THE MICIDOAN BOTANIST 
Stone, K.L., E.H. McConoughey, G.D. Bottrell, & DJ. Crowner. 1980. Soil Survey of Lucas County, 
Ohio. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service. U.S. Govenunent Printing Of­
fice, Washington, D.C. 139 pp. 
Swink, E, & G. Wilhelm. 1994. Plants of the Chicago region. Indiana Academy of Science, Indi­
anapolis, Indiana. 921 pp. 
Voss, E.G. 1972.Michigan Flora. Part I. Cranbrook Institute of Science, Bloomfield Hills, Michigan. 
488 pp. 
Voss, E.G. 1985. Michigan Flora. Part II. Cranbrook Institute of Science, Bloomfield Hills, Michi­
gan. 727 pp. 
Voss, E.G. 1996. Michigan Flora. Part Ill. Cranbrook Institute of Science, Bloomfield Hills, Michi­
gan. 622 pp. 
Wallace, R. S., & D. E. Fairbrothers. 1987. The New England distribution of Opuntia humifusa 
(Raf.) Raf. Rhodora 89:327-332. 
