 The Ecological Restoration Institute and the Public Lands Institute Will Use Terrestrial Ecosystem 
Surveys to Assess Potential Landscape-Scale Treatments in Arizona and Nevada 
 
Resource managers need tools for developing and monitoring restoration prescriptions across large landscapes. A 
collaborative project between the Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University and the Public 
Lands Institute at the University of Nevada Las Vegas will use the U.S. Forest Service’s Terrestrial Ecosystem Sur-
vey to assess reference conditions and response functions for possible landscape-scale restoration treatments. 
 
Resource managers need a means of identifying practical management units when working with large landscapes; a 
method that identifies vegetation-environment relationships based on soils, topography, productivity, and microcli-
mate. This perspective is useful because topography, soils, and microclimate vary across landscapes, with vegetation 
and productivity responding to this spatial variability. With a map that subdivides large landscapes into units that 
have similar management needs and will likely respond similarly to treatment, managers can tailor specific treat-
ments to specific parts of the landscape. 
 
The U.S. Forest Service has invested a great deal of money in developing Terrestrial 
Ecosystem Surveys (TES), and, based on the results of preliminary work with these 
surveys, we believe that they have the potential to assist land managers implementing 
landscape-scale restoration projects. We intend to expand this work to enable other 
land managers (e.g., BLM, NPS, FWS, state, TNC, BIA, tribal lands, private lands) to 
take advantage of ecological land classifications and resource response functions, in 
anticipation of landscape-scale work throughout the western Grand Canyon/southern 
Nevada greater ecosystem. 
 
Three key pieces of reference information in most forest types are historical tree density, pattern, and fire regimes.  
Ongoing work suggests that both historical density and pattern in ponderosa pine forests is generally predictable 
among soil types near Flagstaff, Arizona.  While not a substitute for site-specific information, these relationships can 
help land managers understand the variability in reference conditions across landscapes. This information about ref-
erence conditions helps support the development of restoration prescriptions by allowing the prescriptions to be tai-
lored to specific sites and ecosystem types. For instance, in areas where natural understory recovery is slow due to 
infertile soils, prescriptions could include seeding to attempt to more rapidly restore productivity. 
 
A second component of the ERI-PLI project will assess information needs for planning landscape-scale forest resto-
ration in the Spring Mountains of southern Nevada. 
 
In the second part of the project, we will assess information needs for 
landscape-scale forest restoration at the Spring Mountains National 
Recreation Area District of the Humboldt-Toiyabe National Forest. We 
will take advantage of two existing resources.  First, we have made 
preliminary observations of forest structure and potential fire history at 
ten sites spanning a range of vegetation from pinyon-juniper through 
mixed conifer forests. Second, we will tie these observations and new 
observations to a TES that the Forest Service and NRCS are currently 
completing for the NRA. We will conduct more detailed analyses of 
our observation sites and expand observations to include different TES 
sites. When completed, we will write a report outlining the information 
needed to determine reference conditions (forest structure and fire his-
tory) in the Spring Mountains and make suggestions for research about how to obtain that information. 

 To determine the information needs for landscape-scale forest restoration in the Spring Mountains, we will use 
tested methods to reconstruct the historical forest structure at ten or more demonstration sites (2.5-acre plots) en-
compassing a range of TES types on the district. By also making rough observations about potential fire regimes 
(which could be examined in more detail in future research), we will be able to provide examples of the types of 
reference conditions occurring on the district. We will also measure current forest structure to determine the differ-
ence between reference conditions and current forests as a basis for restoration. We will use this information to 
provide recommendations for gathering further information that could assist managers in implementing strategi-
cally located, landscape-scale treatments. We anticipate that the difference between reference and current condi-
tions will vary among TES types, so we will be able to provide suggestions for what TES types require the most 
treatment. This may assist managers in prioritizing portions of the landscape for treatment using a landscape per-
spective. 
 
We believe this landscape-scale perspective is important for several reasons. First, many organisms require large 
areas in order to exchange genetic material and, thus, sustain evolutionary processes among populations. Second, 
large areas require treatment for tangibly reducing hazardous fuels in order to protect habitat from severe fire. 
Third, treatments required to restore landscape health as a whole may be suitable on some areas of the landscape 
but not on others. For these and other reasons, developing restoration prescriptions and effective monitoring strate-
gies suitable for large landscapes is an indispensible research and adaptive management need. 
 
The ERI team, led by Executive Director, Dr. W. Wallace Covington, and the Public Lands Institute group, led by 
Dr. Scott Abella, have been working together for several years to better understand the dynamics of dry, frequent-
fire forests in the American Southwest.  
 
 
FOR MORE INFORMATION 
Contact: 
Dr. Scott Abella, Program Manager, Public Lands Institute, University of Nevada Las Vegas, 4505 S. Maryland, 
Parkway, Las Vegas, NV 8915-2040, 702-895-5163, Scott.Abella@unlv.edu. 
Dr. Wally Covington, Executive Director, Ecological Restoration Institute, 928-523-7182, 
wally.covington@nau.edu. 
 
 
 
