Society and Natural Resources, 17:659-660. 2004 
Q Taylor & Francis
Copyright © Taylor & Francis Inc. 
~ Taybf.FnlnchGroup 
ISSN: 0894-1920 printl1521.0723 online 
DOl: 10.1080108941920490480679 . 
Introduction: Humans, Fire, and Forests-Part II 
In issue 17(6) of Society and Natural Resources, we introduced the first in a series of 
research articles on humans, fire, and forests. We continue that introduction of a new 
generation of research initiatives on humans and fire here . In issue 17(6) the research 
presentations were ' 'eclectic, reflecting the emerging range of fire studies now 
appearing in the literature. One study focused on public attitudes and perceptions 
toward fire issues, while the other two articles provided insights into experimental 
economics and lessons learned from the natural hazards research field. 
In this and subsequent issues of the journal that focus on humans and fire, the 
theoretical concept of community moves to center stage. As social scientists continue 
to investigate the relationships of people to wildland fire, the social context for 
human values, human behavior, and social interaction comes to the forefront. It is 
human community and its social/ecological environment that provide the linchpin 
for human action. As Wilkinson (1991) notes, there are three components to com­
munity: a geographical form (a common territory), community structure, and 
locality-oriented associational action. For Wilkinson, social interaction is the key 
ingredient. He notes, "Social interaction delineates a territory as the community 
locale; it provides associations that comprise the local society ; it gives direction to 
processes of collection action; and it is the source of community identity" (Wilkinson 
1991, 13). The articles included in this issue address these different aspects of 
community as they attempt to understand and explain human behavior and fire. 
Brunson and Shindler open this series of articles with a geographical perspective 
of community. They refer to social context in which values and social acceptability 
are defined and human actions are executed.'Their social context is geographical 
location. Their research area is physical community locations near federal land. The 
authors suggest that values and attitudes are individual responses, while social 
acceptability is an inherent contextual response initiated within a collective group 
such as a community. This article begins to place in perspective the idea of human 
landscapes and public lands as intertwined human space requiring national policy to 
be legitimized at the local scene. 
The article by Steelman and Kunkel embraces community in two ways­
structural responses and social responses. For these authors, structural responses are 
physical adaptations that individuals and their community make to interpret the 
social and biophysical environment in a way that mitigates fire damage. Social 
responses include collective interaction to entail better decision-making processes. 
Communities with effective decision-making structures and processes are primed to 
make effective choices. 
Moseley and Toth illustrate the role of community by addressing the question of 
whether rural communities are deriving benefits from the allocation of National Fire 
Plan (NFP) dollars. The NFP is not just about fire hazard reduction; it is also about 
providing economic benefits to communities and the workers and businesses that 
reside in those communities. The kinds of evaluation done by Moseley and Toth are 
essential for understanding if policy performance matches policy promises. 
659 

660 
Introduction: Humans, Fire, and Forests 
As these three articles illustrate, fire interacts with communities in many ways . 
The design of effective, efficient, and equitable policies and managerial actions is 
dependent on understanding and adapting to these social interactions. 
. Hanna J. Cortner 
Northern Arizona University 
Donald R. Field 
University of Wisconsin-Madison 
Reference 
Wilkinson, K. P. 1991. The community in rural America. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. 
