economics
The Economics of Ecological Restoration and
Hazardous Fuel Reduction Treatments in the
Ponderosa Pine Forest Ecosystem
Michael H. Taylor, Andrew J. Sanchez Meador, Yeon-Su Kim, Kimberly Rollins, and Hank Will
In this article, we develop a simulation model of the beneﬁts and costs of managing the ponderosa pine forest ecosystem in the southwestern United States. Using the
model, we evaluate and compare the economic beneﬁts and costs of ecological restoration and hazardous fuel reduction treatments. Both treatment approaches increase
the expected number of low-severity wildﬁres, which can promote postﬁre rehabilitation. Hazardous fuel reduction treatments are likely to reduce expected wildﬁre
suppression costs, but not enough to offset the costs of implementing treatments. Conversely, ecological restoration treatments do not necessarily reduce expected wild-
ﬁre suppression costs but fully restore the ecosystem in more than half of the simulation runs, which lowers the need for future ﬁre suppression and reduces the chance
of conversion to nonforest, alternative stable states. We ﬁnd that the choice between hazardous fuel reduction and ecological treatments will depend on the management
objective being pursued, as well as on site-speciﬁc factors such as the wildﬁre return interval and the economic value of biomass removed.
Keywords: wildﬁre, simulation model, state-and-transition model, ecological thresholds, policy
O
ne of the primary drivers of increasing wildﬁre hazard in
the United States and throughout the world is forest over-
crowding that is attributed, in part, to historical suppres-
sion of low-severity wildﬁres in frequent ﬁre regimes (Covington et
al. 1994, Fule´ et al. 2004, Ohlson et al. 2006, Wang et al. 2007).
This overcrowding has increased the frequency of severe, stand-re-
placing crown ﬁres that are often expensive and difﬁcult to suppress,
damage property and infrastructure, endanger human life, and lead
to undesirable, and sometimes irreversible, changes in ecosystem
function (Covington and Moore 1994, Hessburg et al. 1994, Fink-
ral and Evans 2008, Benayas et al. 2009, Evans et al. 2011). Fuels
and ﬁre managers seeking to reduce expected wildﬁre costs and
damages in this context have two treatment options: hazardous fuel
reduction treatments (HFRTs), which focus on reducing fuel load-
ing and changing fuel characteristics to achieve short-term reduc-
tions in wildﬁre hazard; or ecological restoration treatments (ERTs),
which are a composite of treatments targeting a more long-term
reduction in wildﬁre suppression costs and damages by restoring
historical stand composition and density (Hunter et al. 2007, Evans
et al. 2011). Despite the fact that escalating wildﬁre activity related
to forest overcrowding is a pervasive issue throughout the world,
there is no empirical research that has directly compared the eco-
nomic beneﬁts and costs of ERTs and HFRTs in this setting (Kline
2004, Mercer and Prestemon 2008).
In this article, we use simulation methods to evaluate and com-
pare the economic beneﬁts and costs of ERTs and HFRTs in the
ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa P.&C. Lawson) forest ecosystem of
the Colorado Plateau in the western United States (henceforth the
“PIPO ecosystem”). We focus on the PIPO ecosystem because re-
cent escalations in wildﬁre extent and severity related to forest over-
crowding along with the corresponding increases in wildﬁre sup-
pression costs and damages are a major public policy concern in the
PIPO ecosystem, as is the role that ERTs and HFRTs should play in
addressing this issue (Hunter et al. 2007, Evans et al. 2011, Ecolog-
ical Restoration Institute 2013). Our approach simulates long-run
wildﬁre activity and suppression costs with and without ERTs and
HFRTs and allows us to analyze how the two treatment approaches,
both of which reduce fuel accumulations, inﬂuence the expected
Manuscript received February 21, 2014; accepted June 9, 2015; published online July 16, 2015.
Afﬁliations: Michael H. Taylor (mhtaylor@unr.edu), University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV. Andrew J. Sanchez Meador (andrew.sanchezmeador@nau.edu),
Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ. Yeon-Su Kim (ysk@nau.edu), Northern Arizona University. Kimberly Rollins (krollins@unr.edu), University of
Nevada, Reno. Hank Will (hank.will@admenergy.com), University of Nevada, Reno.
Acknowledgments: We acknowledge support from the Ecological Restoration Institute of Northern Arizona University, the USDA Forest Service, and the USDA
Agricultural Research Service’s “Areawide Pest Management Program for Annual Grasses in the Great Basin Ecosystem.” These sponsors did not play any role in the
design of this study, in the article preparation, or in the decision to submit this article for publication. We thank Krista M. Gebert and Michael Hand from the USDA
Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station for providing us with the wildﬁre suppression cost data used in this study. The authors retain sole responsibility for
the results and views presented in this article. Northern Arizona University and University of Nevada are equal opportunity providers.
FUNDAMENTAL RESEARCH
For. Sci. 61(❚):000–000
http://dx.doi.org/10.5849/forsci.14-030
Copyright © 2015 Society of American Foresters
Forest Science • MONTH 2015
1

total number of wildﬁres, the instance of beneﬁcial wildﬁres (which
can facilitate ecosystem recovery postﬁre) relative to degrading wild-
ﬁres (which can damage ecosystem health), and expected wildﬁre
suppression costs. These reductions in expected wildﬁre suppression
costs are compared with treatment costs to determine whether either
treatment approach can be justiﬁed on the basis of wildﬁre suppres-
sion cost savings alone (i.e., whether the net beneﬁts of treatment are
positive). In addition, we consider how our conclusions change
when the economic value of biomass removed during implementa-
tion of ERTs, which are more likely to generate revenue from bio-
mass removal than HFRTs, is included in the analysis.
The analysis in this article illustrates how the expected outcomes
of ERTs and HFRTs are inﬂuenced by site-speciﬁc ecological and
economic conditions. In particular, the analysis considers how ex-
pected outcomes are inﬂuence by factors that vary with ecological
conditions, such as wildﬁre frequency, expected wildﬁre suppression
costs, and expected treatment longevity, as well as with economic
factors such as treatments costs and the market price of biomass
removed while performing ERTs. This analysis can help set realistic
expectations for the impacts of ERT or HFRT at a particular site.
Previous authors have noted that stakeholders often form unrealistic
expectations about what can be achieved through treatment (Finney
and Cohen 2003) and that these unrealistic expectations can “lead
to polarization of what should be a nondivisive issue” (Reinhardt et
al. 2008). In addition, the analysis allows us to consider broader
policy questions, such as when, if ever, will both ERTs and HFRTs
simultaneously be used as part of an optimal management strategy at
the landscape scale, where to perform treatment on a heterogeneous
landscape given a limited budget for management, and how antici-
pated changes in wildﬁre regimes, market conditions (e.g., treat-
ment costs and biofuel prices) and other factors are likely to change
the relative attractiveness of ERTs and HFRTs.
To the best of our knowledge, this article represents the ﬁrst
attempt in the literature to both analyze the long-run economic
beneﬁts and costs of ERTs in a forested ecosystem and evaluate and
compare the economic beneﬁts and costs of ERTs and HFRTs.
There have been several studies that have analyzed the economic
beneﬁts and costs of fuel treatments in forest ecosystems. The ana-
lytical frameworks developed in these previous studies, however, are
not suited to analyzing and comparing ERTs and HFRTs. For ex-
ample, many previous studies begin their analysis by assuming the
impacts of fuel treatments on wildﬁre activity rather than modeling
these impacts (Snider et al. 2006, Prestemon et al. 2012, Huang et
al. 2013), so that any comparison of the economic beneﬁts and costs
of alternative treatment strategies in these frameworks would be
tautological. Similarly, several studies that do model the effect of
fuel treatments on wildﬁre behavior do not incorporate dynamic
ecological models into their analysis (Mercer et al. 2007, Thompson
et al. 2013), and, as such, cannot evaluate how the HFRTs and, in
particular, the ERTs inﬂuence the dynamic trajectory of the ecosys-
tem and thus long-run wildﬁre activity and suppression costs. In a
recent study, Houtman et al. (2013) incorporated ecosystem dy-
namics into their economic framework using a state-and-transition
(STM) model based on wildﬁre condition classes. Rather than eval-
uating the economic beneﬁts and costs of fuel treatments (either
ERTs or HFRTs), however, their analysis focuses on whether letting
certain wildﬁres burn rather than being actively suppressed results in
net wildﬁre suppression cost savings over 100 years.
The simulation model developed and parameterized in this arti-
cle captures the ecological dynamics in the PIPO ecosystem using an
approach based on the STM ecological framework (sensu Westoby
et al. 1989). In the STM framework, an ecosystem is described as
being in one of several ecological states that are separated by ecolog-
ical thresholds. The STM framework has been used to model (both
mathematically and conceptually) the PIPO ecosystem in the
Southern Colorado Plateau (Fischer and Bradley 1987, Moir and
Dieterich 1988, Sesnie and Bailey 2003, Savage and Mast 2005), as
well as many other ecosystems in the United State and throughout
the world (Allen-Diaz and Bartolome 1998). The STM framework
allows us to incorporate ecosystem dynamics in our simulation,
including the role of wildﬁre as a catalyst for transitions between
ecological states, which is necessary to analyze the long-run impact
of ERTs and HFRTs on ecological condition, wildﬁre behavior, and
suppression costs. In addition, the STM framework allows us to
readily incorporate stochastic wildﬁre, suppression costs, and eco-
logical transitions in our simulation model. Incorporating these sto-
chastic elements in the model is particularly important for evalua-
tion of ERTs and HFRTs, for which policymakers may be more
interested in avoiding instances of the least desired outcome, such as
large, high-severity wildﬁres, than in maximizing the expected net
beneﬁts (beneﬁts minus costs) of the average outcome.
It is important to recognize that this article considers the ﬁnan-
cial beneﬁts of ERTs and HFRTs only in terms of wildﬁre suppres-
sion cost savings and the revenues from biomass removed during
treatment. In considering only this narrow set of ﬁnancial beneﬁts,
our analysis ignores potential reductions in the other market (e.g.,
damage to housing and other infrastructure) and nonmarket (e.g.,
postﬁre erosion) costs of wildﬁre from implementing treatments, as
well as the potential beneﬁts of fuel treatments in terms of enhanced
ecosystem services. Ignoring these additional beneﬁts implies that
our analysis understates the total economic beneﬁts of ERTs and
HFRTs. This shortcoming of the analysis, however, is in keeping
with the approach taken throughout this article, in which parame-
ters and assumptions are chosen deliberately to avoid overstating the
beneﬁts or understating the costs of fuel treatment. As a result of this
conservative approach, our results provide a lower bound for the
economic beneﬁts of fuel treatment and mean that we are able to
reach deﬁnite conclusions about the circumstances under which the
expected beneﬁts of fuel treatment are likely to outweigh the costs
but not vice versa.
Additionally, there are several other limitations to the modeling
approach taken in this article. For example, the analysis does not
consider the beneﬁts of fuel treatments in terms of reductions in
wildﬁre hazard and expected suppression costs on land adjacent to
the treatment site. Similarly, by analyzing the beneﬁts and costs of
fuel treatment on a representative parcel of land, the approach ig-
nores the inﬂuence of landscape features that can inﬂuence the wild-
ﬁre suppression cost savings from fuel treatment (e.g., the proximity
of the treatment site to wildland-urban interface communities), as
well as treatment costs. These and other limitations to our modeling
approach are discussed in greater detail below.
Materials and Methods
Stylized STM
We capture ecosystem dynamics for the PIPO ecosystem using a
STM model. STMs describe an ecosystem as being in one of several
ecological states that are separated by ecological thresholds. The
PIPO ecosystem analyzed in this article is a broad ecological classi-
ﬁcation that refers to several different ecological sites, each of which
2
Forest Science • MONTH 2015

can be represented by its own STM (Graham and Jain 2005). Be-
cause the economic data (wildﬁre suppression costs, treatment costs,
and others) are organized according to these broad classiﬁcations, we
develop a stylized STM that is intended to be broadly representative
of ecological sites found in PIPO ecosystem.
Our stylized STM for the PIPO system consists of ﬁve ecological
states (Figure 1). PIPO-A is characterized by a closed-canopy forest
with even-aged trees and a high fuel load. Because of the high fuel
loads, wildﬁres in PIPO-A are often intense crown ﬁres that cause
the system to transition to the postcrown state, PIPO-E. If the
system remains in PIPO-A for several decades without ﬁre or a fuel
treatment, it will eventually transition to PIPO-B, which is charac-
terized by a closed-canopy forest with a mixture of tree ages and
moderate fuel loads. Wildﬁres in PIPO-B are less likely to be intense
crown ﬁres than in PIPO-A. Without wildﬁre or treatment, the
system will eventually transition to PIPO-C, which is characterized
by an open-canopy forest with trees of all ages and a low fuel load.1
If the system remains in PIPO-C for a number of years and experi-
ences low-severity wildﬁres and/or fuel treatments at regular inter-
vals, it will transition to PIPO-D, the restored state. PIPO-D is
characterized by an open canopy and light fuel load. Regular low-
severity wildﬁres maintain the system in PIPO-D. The ﬁnal state,
PIPO-E, is the postcrown ﬁre state, which is characterized by high
fuel loads comprised of grasses and shrubs. After several decades in
PIPO-E without wildﬁre, the system may return along successional
pathways to PIPO-A, although it has been suggested that PIPO-E
may transition to an alternative stable state of grass and shrub land
(Savage and Mast 2005).
Simulation Methods
Simulation Model Description
The simulation model considers the progression of the PIPO eco-
system with and without fuel treatment. The analysis focuses on differ-
ences between the with- and without-treatment scenarios in terms of
wildﬁre occurrence, wildﬁre suppression costs, and other factors. The
initial state of the PIPO ecosystem is varied across simulation runs to
evaluatehowtheoutcomesofERTsandHFRTschange,dependingon
the ecological state of the land being treated. In the discussion of the
results, when we state that the initial state of the model is, for example,
PIPO-A, we are assuming that the initial state of the system is PIPO-A
with the maximum number of years before the system transitions to
PIPO-B via ecological succession (e.g., 100 years under our “baseline”
assumptions; see below for further detail). All results are reported on a
per-acre basis over a 200-year time horizon, with a 3% discount rate
used to calculate present values.2 All monetary results are presented in
constant 2011 dollars.
The strength of the model is that we can treat as stochastic
parameters wildﬁre occurrences, wildﬁre severity (given that a wild-
ﬁre has occurred), per-acre wildﬁre suppression costs in each year
given wildﬁre occurrence and severity, and postwildﬁre transitions
between ecological states in each year. Each run of the model con-
siders the progression of the system in the with- and without-treat-
ment scenarios with different randomly generated realizations of
these stochastic parameters in each year.3 The stochastic parameters
lead to substantial variations in key variables, including wildﬁre
suppression cost savings, between model runs. For this reason, re-
sults in this article are reported for 10,000 model runs unless other-
wise noted, and the discussion focuses on the expected values of key
variables, which are calculated as the mean of each resampled vari-
able over 10,000 model runs.
Figure 2 explains the sequence of events in year t in the mth run
of the simulation model. The state of the system in year t is described
by two state variables: St,m
V is the ecological state in year t (St,m
V can be
either PIPO-A, -B, -C, -D, or –E) and st,m
V is the number of years that
the system has been in St,m
V in year t. The variable st,m
V is necessary
because the system can only remain in a given state for a ﬁnite
amount of time in the absence of management treatment or wildﬁre
before transitioning to a new state. The superscript V indicates the
treatment scenario; V  T for a “treatment” scenario (T  ERT or
HFRT) and V  NT for a “no treatment” scenario.
Figure 1.
PIPO: stylized STM.
Forest Science • MONTH 2015
3

In the treatment scenarios, ERTs or HFRTs may take place in
years in which wildﬁre does not occur. The model assumes that the
year begins before the wildﬁre season and that wildﬁre occurs or does
no not occur before treatments take place. Each model run considers
a treatment schedule that determines whether a treatment occurs in
year t given St,m
V and st,m
V . The variable Tt,m
T is equal to 1 if a treatment
occurs in year t and 0 otherwise. In the no treatment scenario,
Tt,m
NT 0 for all St,m
NT and st,m
NT. If treatment is performed in year t, a
state-speciﬁc treatment cost, C(St,m
V ), is incurred. The treatment
schedules for ERTs and HFRTs that are assumed in the model and
the state-speciﬁc treatment costs for ERTs and HFRTs used in the
model are described below.
Figure 2 also illustrates how wildﬁre is included in the model.
The random variable P˜t,m
V is equal to 1 if a wildﬁre occurs in year t
and 0 otherwise. The probability that a wildﬁre occurs in year t (i.e.,
the probability that Pt,m
R  1 in year t) is pt,m
V , which depends on the
ecological state in year t, St,m
V . In years when a wildﬁre occurs, the
random variable Q˜ 1,t,m
V
(Q˜ 2,t,m
V
, Q˜ 3,t,m
V
) is equal to 1 if the wildﬁre is
low (moderate, high) severity and 0 otherwise. The probability that
Q˜ 1,t,m
V
(Q˜ 2,t,m
V
, Q˜ 3,t,m
V
) is equal to 1 is q1,t,m
V
(q2,t,m
V
, q3,t,m
V
), which
depends on the ecological state in year t, St,m
V , and, in the case of
HFRTs, on whether an HFRT has been performed in the previous
15 years, {Tu,m
HFRT}ut15
t1
.4 When a wildﬁre occurs in year t, wildﬁre
suppression cost is a random variable, WCt,m
V , that is drawn from a
state- and ﬁre severity-speciﬁc distribution of per-acre wildﬁre sup-
pression costs.
In years when a wildﬁre occurs, the postwildﬁre transitions be-
tween ecological states are stochastic. In particular, the probability
that the random variable S˜t1,m
V
is equal to PIPO-A (-B, -C, -D, -E)
in year t  1 is rA,i,t,m
V
(rB,i,t,m
V
, rC,i,t,m
V
, rD,i,t,m
V
, rE,i,t,m
V
), which depends
on the ecological state at time t, St,m
V , and whether the wildﬁre was
low (Q1,t,m
V
 1), moderate (Q2,t,m
V
 1), or high (Q3,t,m
V
 1)
severity.5 In the year after a wildﬁre occurs, st1,m
V
is always reset to
0. In years when wildﬁre does not occur, St1,m
V
and st1,m
V
are
deterministic and depend on the state of the system at time t, St,m
V
and st,m
V , as well as on whether or not an ERT or HFRT was per-
formed in year t. The assumptions concerning transitions between
ecological states in the model are described in detail below.
The net beneﬁts of fuel treatment are calculated as the present
value of the reduction in cumulative wildﬁre suppression costs re-
sulting from treatment less the present value of total treatment costs
over 200 years. The net beneﬁts from fuel treatment for the mth run
of the model are given by
NPVm 
t1
200
1
(1  r)t
i1
3
(P t,m
NT  Q i,t,m
NT  WC t,m
NT)

t1
200
1
(1  r)t
i1
3
(P t,m
T  Q i,t,m
T
 WC t,m
T )  T t,m
T  C(S t,m
T )
where r is the discount rate (r  3% for the results presented in this
article), Pt,m
V , Qt,m
V , i  1, 2, 3, and WCt,m
V , R  T, NT, are the
realizations of the random variables P˜t,m
V , Q˜ t,m
V , i  1, 2, 3, and
WCt,m
V in year t in the treatment and no treatment scenarios. The
expected value of net beneﬁts is calculated as the mean of net ben-
eﬁts for 10,000 model runs.
The simulation model presented in this article shares several
features with the simulation model presented in Taylor et al. (2013).
Figure 2.
Simulation model: mth model run, year t, treatment scenario V  T (ERT or HFRT), NT (no treatment). *q1,t,m
V
 q2,t,m
V
 q3,t,m
V
 1.
**rA,i,t,m
V
 rB,i,t,m
V
 rC,i,t,m
V
 rD,i,t,m
V
 rE,i,t,m
V
)  1.
4
Forest Science • MONTH 2015

Most notably, both models use the STM framework. As is argued in
the Introduction, among other advantages, the STM framework
allows ecosystem dynamics and stochastic elements to be incorpo-
rated into the simulation model and facilitates model parameteriza-
tion because the required ecological and economic data are collected
to be consistent with the STM framework. There are two important
differences, however, between the simulation model developed in
this article and the model in Taylor et al. (2013). First, the salient
features of wildﬁre activity in the PIPO ecosystem are different from
those of two rangeland ecosystems analyzed in Taylor et al. (2013).
These differences require that the simulation model presented in
this article expand on Taylor et al. (2013) to include new features
such as stochastic postwildﬁre transitions between ecological states
and variable wildﬁre severities (low, moderate, and high).
Second, there are differences between the fuel management is-
sues relevant to the PIPO ecosystem addressed in this article and
those addressed in Taylor et al. (2013). In particular, this article
expands on the analysis in Taylor et al. (2013) to consider both
ERTs and HFRTs (Taylor et al. only consider ERTs) and considers
the multistage ERTs that are necessary to rehabilitate a forest eco-
system that has been degraded by forest overcrowding due to histor-
ical suppression of low-severity frequent ﬁres. Analyzing these addi-
tional fuel management issues requires that the simulation model
presented in this article expand on Taylor et al. (2013) to include
new features such as HFRTs that change the conditional probability
that a wildﬁre is low, moderate, or high severity, decay in the effec-
tiveness of HFRTs over time, and reapplication intervals for both
HFRTs and multistage ERTs.
ERT Scenarios
ERTs inﬂuence wildﬁre behavior and wildﬁre suppression costs
in the simulation by moving the system from the less desirable states
of PIPO-A and PIPO-B to the more desirable states of PIPO-C and
PIPO-D. As is explained below, wildﬁre behavior and expected
suppression costs are inﬂuenced by transitions between ecological
states because of differences between states in wildﬁre return inter-
vals, in the likelihood that when a wildﬁre does occur it is of low,
moderate, or high severity, in the expected wildﬁre suppression costs
associated with a wildﬁre of given severity, and in expected postwild-
ﬁre ecological conditions.
Whereas ERTs inﬂuence wildﬁre behavior and expected suppres-
sion costs by causing the ecosystem to transition between ecological
states, it is assumed that ERTs do not do the following: change the
probability a wildﬁre of a given severity (low, moderate, or high
severity) will occur in a given ecological state; or change the expected
suppression costs associated with a wildﬁre of a given severity in a
given ecological state. Alternatively, if we assumed that for a period
after treatment, ERTs changed the probability of a wildﬁre of a
given severity occurring (e.g., increased the probability that when a
wildﬁre occurs it is low severity) or made wildﬁres easier and there-
fore less expensive to suppress, this would increase the wildﬁre sup-
pression cost savings from ERTs.
The typical treatment method used to perform ERTs in each
state in the PIPO ecosystem and the inﬂuence of ERTs on transition
between ecological states in the model are as follows. In even-aged
forest, PIPO-A, we assume that ERTs involve mechanical and/or
hand thinning (to open-up the canopy and restore historical spatial
composition) coupled with pile and burn of removed biomass (pre-
scribed ﬁre carries too high a risk/cost in this state) are used to move
the systems to intermediate-aged forest, PIPO-B. We assume that
after an ERT moves the system from PIPO-A to PIPO-B, the system
must recover for 20 years before a thinning treatment (thinning
smaller trees from below) followed by a prescribed burn (to remove
ﬁne fuels) can be used to move the system from PIPO-B to PIPO-C,
all-aged forest. Once the system has moved to PIPO-C, we assume
that regular prescribed burns (every 12 years in the absence of nat-
urally occurring wildﬁre) are performed for a period of 40 years to
control the regeneration of trees in open spaces and move the system
to the restored state, PIPO-D. This fully restored state can be main-
tained by regular prescribed burning and/or wildﬁre managed for
resource beneﬁts. Wildﬁre managed for resource beneﬁts (hence-
forth “wildland ﬁre use”) refers to the management of naturally-oc-
curring wildﬁres (i.e., not prescribed burns) as an HFRT. The cost
of wildland ﬁre use is limited to the cost of monitoring, which is
included in the calculation of wildﬁre suppression costs, rather than
as treatment costs. In addition, we do not consider any strategies to
rehabilitate the system from the postcrown ﬁre state, PIPO-E.
HFRT Scenarios
HFRTs inﬂuence wildﬁre behavior and wildﬁre suppression
costs in the simulation by increasing the conditional probability that
when a wildﬁre occurs it is of low severity for 15 years after treat-
ment.6 Fifteen years corresponds to the typical length of the period
that HFRTs mitigate wildﬁre severity reported in Biswell et al.
(1973).7 In this article, we deﬁne the “effectiveness” of an HFRT as
the conditional probability that a wildﬁre is of low severity in the
15-year period after treatment. For example, without an HFRT, the
conditional probability that a wildﬁre in PIPO-A is low severity,
given that a wildﬁre occurs, is 5%, whereas the conditional proba-
bility that a wildﬁre is high severity is 95% (in PIPO A, moderate-
severity ﬁres are deemed unlikely; see Table 2 for details on the
conditional probability that a wildﬁre is of low, moderate, or high
severity in each state). We refer to an HFRT treatment as being 90%
effective in PIPO-A if it changes the conditional probability of low-
severity wildﬁre to 90% and the conditional probability of a high-
severity ﬁre to 10% during the duration of the 15-year period after
treatment. Whereas HFRTs change the distribution of wildﬁre se-
verity for a period after treatment, it is assumed that HFRTs do not
(1) change the overall probability that a wildﬁre will occur in any
given ecological state, (2) cause the system to move between ecolog-
ical states, (3) change the successional trajectory from PIPO-A to
PIPO-B or from PIPO-B to PIPO-C, or (4) change the expected
suppression costs associated with a wildﬁre of a given severity (low,
moderate, or high severity) in a given ecological state. It is also
important to note that although both ERTS and HFRTs make
severe wildﬁre less likely, neither treatment removes the possibility
of a severe wildﬁre completely.
We assumed that HFRTs are only applied in PIPO-A and
PIPO-B. The typical treatment method used to perform HFRTs in
PIPO-A and PIPO-B includes a single or decreasingly effective pre-
scribed ﬁre and/or mechanical or hand thinning treatment(s). Al-
though HFRTs are generally successful in meeting short-term fuel-
reduction objectives such that a treated stand is probably more
resilient to high-severity wildﬁre (Stephens et al. 2012), they differ
from ERTs in that the primary objectives usually focus on the re-
duction of surface, ladder, and canopy fuel loads and usually do not
target historical composition, structural and function. For our sim-
ulations, the major difference between HFRTs and ERTs is that
HFRTs do not include the reintroduction of frequent ﬁre or moving
Forest Science • MONTH 2015
5

the age structure of the stand to an all-aged state as a primary objec-
tive and thus require more, decreasingly effective, mechanical treat-
ments to maintain fuel loads in PIPO-A and PIPO-B and cannot
facilitate transitions to PIPO-C. In model runs in which HFRTs are
pursued, the treatment regimes in PIPO-C and PIPO-D are the
same as the treatment regimes in PIPO-C and PIPO-D for the case
of ERTs. In addition, we do not consider the use of HFRTs in
PIPO-E.
Fuel Treatments and Wildﬁre Suppression Costs
As is explained above, ERTs and HFRTs can reduce cumulative
wildﬁre suppression costs over the 200-year time horizon by reduc-
ing the instances of severe wildﬁres in a given ecological state
(HFRTs), promoting ecological restoration to ecological states with
lower expected wildﬁre suppression costs (ERTs) and by reducing
the likelihood of the system transitioning to a degraded ecological
state with higher expected suppression costs because of a severe
wildﬁre (both ERTs and HFRTs). The analysis also assumes, how-
ever, that neither ERTs nor HFRTs change the expected costs asso-
ciated with suppressing a wildﬁre of a given severity in a given
ecological state. This assumption is counter to the evidence that fuel
treatments make wildﬁre suppression easier and therefore less costly
(Moghaddas and Craggs 2007, Murphy et al. 2007, Rogers et al.
2008, Bostwick et al. 2011).8 We do not, however, have informa-
tion about how ERTs and HFRTs reduce expected suppression
costs in the PIPO ecosystem. We are able to consider in the results,
however, how the expected wildﬁre suppression cost savings from
ERTs and HFRTs change if we assume that both treatment ap-
proaches change fuel conditions so that certain low- and moderate-
severity wildﬁres can be managed through wildland ﬁre use rather
than being actively suppressed.
Data and Parameters
The stylized STM for the PIPO ecosystem depicted in Figure 1 is
numerically implemented to simulate wildﬁre activity, ecological
transitions between states, and wildﬁre suppression cost with and
without treatment (ERT or HFRT). This section describes the pa-
rameters and data used in our model. Tables 1–4 summarize all
model parameters and the data described in this section, including
treatment costs, suppression costs, wildﬁre frequencies, and the
transitions between ecological states in the PIPO ecosystem.
Wildﬁre Suppression Costs
Wildﬁre suppression costs data for US Department of Agricul-
ture (USDA) Forest Service Regions 2, 3, and 4 from 1995 to 2011
were obtained from the USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain
Research Station. The data on wildﬁre suppression costs from the
USDA Forest Service were merged with data from the Monitoring
Trends in Burn Severity (MTBS) data set (Eidenshink et al. 2007)
to distinguish between acres burned in low-, moderate-, and high-
severity wildﬁres in each ecological state.9 In brief, we ﬁrst queried
the MTBS data set for all ﬁres that occurred in the Four Corners
states (Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico, and Utah) and then ﬁltered
for ﬁres that fell within the ponderosa pine forest type. This reduced
sample (n  2,477) was then combined with the wildﬁre suppres-
sion cost data (n  1,184) by ﬁre identiﬁcation, name, acreage, and
spatial location, paying close attention to ﬁres with the same name
or those that spatially overlapped. Last, estimates of proportions of
low, moderate, and high severity were summarized for each ﬁre
to obtain a ﬁnal sample (n  324) spanning the range of
costs/acreage/severity proportions of wildﬁres on USDA Forest Ser-
vice lands in the Four Corners region between 1995 and 2011. The
analysis assumes that all wildﬁres are suppressed regardless of their
characteristics, with the exception of low-severity wildﬁres in
PIPO-D, which are managed through wildland ﬁre use.10 Table 1
summarizes suppression costs for each wildﬁre severity for the ﬁve
states in the PIPO ecosystem.
In the simulation, a random draw from a state- and severity-spe-
ciﬁc (low-, moderate-, or high-severity) sample of per-acre wildﬁre
suppression expenditures is taken each time a wildﬁre occurs. In
order for our per-acre suppression cost distributions to reﬂect the
fact that a given acre is more likely to burn in a large ﬁre than in a
Table 1.
Wildﬁre suppression costs by ecological state ($000 in 2011 dollars).
Ecological state
NFDRS fuel
modela
Fire severity
n
Average expenditure
per ﬁre ($000/ﬁre)b
Total expenditure
($000)
Average acres
burned per
ﬁre (acres/ﬁre)
Total acres
burned
(acres)
Average expenditure
per acre ($/acre)
PIPO-A
F, G, H, or K
Low
13
1,389
18,051
5,532
71,916
393.9
Moderate
23
9,588
220,533
41,593
956,639
441.3
High
17
3,546
60,280
10,926
185,742
919.2
PIPO-B
U
Low
5
294
1,472
7,530
37,650
80.3
Moderate
5
6,057
30,286
17,403
87,015
886.2
Highc
0
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
PIPO-C
C or J
Low
22
1,149
25,284
7,683
169,026
276.6
Moderate
11
1,374
15,109
4,078
44,858
667.7
High
5
10,700
53,500
31,171
155,855
857.7
PIPO-D
A
Lowd
2
69
138
2,203
4,406
27.3
Moderate
2
553
1,106
23,230
46,460
38.3
Highc
0
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
PIPO-E
B, L, or T
Low
7
3,990
27,930
24,656
172,592
204.8
Moderate
1
1,700
1,700
5,143
5,143
368.4
High
1
5,700
5,700
9,629
9,629
625.0
NA, not applicable.
a See Endnote 9 for a discussion of NFDRS fuel models.
b Wildﬁre suppression costs are reported in constant 2011 dollars, using the “Government Consumption Expenditures and Gross Investment—Non-Defense” price index
from the US Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Economic Analysis as part of the National Income and Product Accounts. This price index captures the change in prices
relevant for wildﬁre suppression costs (e.g., labor, fuel, and mechanical equipment costs).
c In the simulation model, the cost of wildﬁre suppression for low-severity wildﬁres in PIPO-D is assumed to be $20 per acre. This corresponds to the cost of “wildland
ﬁre use.”
d The cost of high-severity ﬁres for PIPO-A is also used for PIPO-B and PIPO–D because of the lack of data on the cost of high-severity ﬁres in these two states.
6
Forest Science • MONTH 2015

small ﬁre, we draw from a weighted distribution of per-acre wildﬁre
suppression costs, with wildﬁre size used as weights. This approach
of using data on past wildﬁres to populate the state- and severity-
speciﬁc distribution of wildﬁre suppression costs assumes the fol-
lowing two factors: that the costs of suppressing future wildﬁres of
given size and severity in a given ecological state will be the same as
the costs of suppressing similar wildﬁres in the USDA Forest Service
data; and that the size distribution of future wildﬁres of a given
severity in a given ecological state will be the same as in the USDA
Forest Service data.11
The wildﬁre suppression cost data used in this article probably
understate actual per-acre wildﬁre suppression costs and, hence, the
expected wildﬁre suppression cost savings from implementing
HFRTs and ERTs, for two reasons. First, the data include only
wildﬁres of more than 100 acres (300 acres after 2003) that “es-
caped” initial suppression efforts by local and state agencies. Because
smaller wildﬁres tend to have larger per-acre suppression costs than
larger wildﬁres, their exclusion implies that ﬁres with higher per-acre
costs may be underrepresented in the distributions of per-acre wild-
ﬁre suppression costs that we draw from in our simulation. Second,
because of the difﬁculty of obtaining wildﬁre suppression expendi-
ture information from local and state agencies, these suppression
costs are excluded from our analysis. The data used in our analysis
include wildﬁre suppression expenditures incurred by the USDA
Forest Service for FY 1995–2003 and suppression expenditures in-
curred by both the USDA Forest Service and the US Department of
Interior, which houses the Bureau of Land Management, for FY
2004 onward.
Wildﬁre Frequency
To simulate stochastic wildﬁre occurrences, annual wildﬁre
probabilities and conditional probabilities of a low-, moderate-, or
high-severity wildﬁre were chosen by the authors using Schmidt et
al. (2002) and in consultation with two experts on wildﬁre behavior
for the PIPO ecosystem.12,13 The wildﬁre probabilities were chosen
to represent current conditions in the PIPO ecosystem, with the
exception of the annual wildﬁre probability in PIPO-D, which was
chosen to capture historical wildﬁre behavior. We assume a histor-
ical annual wildﬁre probability in PIPO-D because the goal of ERTs
in this article is to restore the system to PIPO-D, in which it can be
inexpensively maintained through a regime of frequent, low-inten-
sity wildﬁres. Table 2 reports annual wildﬁre probabilities in each
ecological state used in the simulation.
It is important to emphasize that the wildﬁre return interval on a
given acre captures both wildﬁre ignitions that occur on that acre
and ignitions that occur elsewhere on the landscape and spread to
that acre. As such, wildﬁre return intervals implicitly account for the
spatial spread of wildﬁre. Indeed, differences in wildﬁre return in-
tervals between ecological states in the PIPO ecosystem reported in
Table 2 are attributed to the inﬂuence of differences in vegetation
and stand densities between states on the wildﬁre hazard and the
spatial spread of wildﬁre rather than to differences in the rates of
wildﬁre ignitions (wildﬁre risk) between states.14 In addition, as the
wildﬁre return intervals were chosen to represent current conditions
in the PIPO ecosystem, they implicitly account for the inﬂuence of
wildﬁre suppression responses on wildﬁre sizes, given current sup-
pression resources and objectives in the study area. It is the case,
however, that the wildﬁre return intervals used in this study may not
capture future wildﬁre return intervals if factors such as climate
change (e.g., longer and more frequent drought) cause wildﬁres to
become more frequent. To investigate this possibility, we analyze
the sensitivity of our results to increases in wildﬁre frequency from
our baseline assumptions in the Results and Discussion section
below.
Wildﬁre return intervals are computed as the average interval
between two successive wildﬁres for a collection of points on a
landscape. Annual wildﬁre probabilities are the reciprocal of wildﬁre
return intervals under the assumption that wildﬁres occur according
to a geometric distribution (i.e., the probability of a wildﬁre is con-
stant and independent across years). An important advantage of
ﬁre-return intervals is the equivalence between the average ﬁre-re-
turn interval on a landscape and the ﬁre rotation interval, which is
Table 2.
Transitions between ecological states.
PIPO-A: even-aged forest
PIPO-B: intermediate-
aged forest
PIPO-C: uneven-
aged forest
PIPO-D: restored
PIPO-E: postcrown ﬁre
Description
Young trees, closed canopy,
high fuel load
Mixture of ages, closed
canopy, moderate
fuel load
All-aged trees, open canopy,
low fuel load
All-aged (old) trees, open
canopy, light fuel load
No ages, no canopy, high
fuel load
Time to transition
without wildﬁre
50–150 years 3 PIPO-B
60–100 years 3
PIPO-C
20–60 years 3 PIPO-D
60–500 years 3 PIPO-C
60–100 years 3 PIPO-E
Baseline model
assumption
100 years
80 years
40 years
200 years
80 years
Wildﬁre return interval
100 years
24–100 years
0–50 years
2–20 years
75–125 years
Baseline model
assumption (annual
probability)
100 years (0.01)
70 years (0.014286)
40 years (0.025)
10 years (0.1)
80 years (0.0125)
Conditional probability of
low-severity ﬁre
0.05
0.05
0.20
0.996
NA (0.00)
Transition with low-
severity ﬁre
3 PIPO-A
3 PIPO-B
0.90 3No change
3 PIPO-D
NA
0.10 3 PIPO-D
Conditional probability of
moderate-severity ﬁre
NA (0.00)
0.45
0.50
0.003
NA (0.00)
Transition with moderate-
severity ﬁre
NA
0.78 3 PIPO-A
0.60 3 PIPO-A
3 PIPO-C
NA
0.22 3 PIPO-C
0.40 3 PIPO-B
Conditional probability of
high-severity ﬁre
0.95
0.50
0.30
0.001
1.00
Transition with high-
severity ﬁre
3 PIPO-E
3 PIPO-E
3 PIPO-E
3 PIPO-E
3 PIPO-E
NA, not applicable.
Forest Science • MONTH 2015
7

the length of time required to burn the equivalent of a speciﬁc area
(Baker 2009).15 This equivalence implies that the average number
of acres burned predicted by the simulation model over the 200
years will hold for any size area. For example, if the simulation
model predicts an average of 1.6 wildﬁres over 200 years in 10,000
model runs, this implies than an area of 1,000 acres in the same
initial ecological state is predicted to experience an average of 1,600
burned acres over 200 years, with some areas burning multiple times
and others not burning at all. This argument also implies that the
per-acre expected net present value (NPV) of wildﬁre suppression
cost savings from ERTs and HFRTs reported in the results can be
“scaled-up” linearly to apply to larger treatment areas. It is not
reasonable, however, to scale the per-acre results reported in this
study to the landscape scale, as typically only a small fraction of a
landscape is treated at any point in time.
Transitions between Ecological States
We assume that the PIPO ecosystem will transition between
ecological states eventually without either treatment or wildﬁre.
Times for ecological transition used in the simulation are described
in Table 2 and were chosen by the authors and vetted by an expert
on wildﬁre in the PIPO ecosystem.16 In brief, we started with the
same subset of wildﬁres in the MTBS data set that were within the
PIPO ecosystem type located in the Four Corners states (Arizona,
Colorado, New Mexico, and Utah) that we used to obtain our
wildﬁre suppression cost information. The resulting ﬁre landscapes
(individual ﬁres classiﬁed by low, moderate, and high severity from
the MTBS data set) were further classiﬁed based on pre- and postﬁre
vegetation states. Transition probabilities were assigned based on
the observed proportions of land moving between states for the
observation period (2002–2012) within the entire Four Corners
area. Although our sample is limited to ﬁres with sufﬁcient data
reported, we assume that there is no systematic underreporting and
the sampled ﬁres are representative of typical transitions of PIPO
ecosystem.
We evaluate the sensitivity of our results to our assumptions
concerning the number of years to transition between ecological
states without wildﬁre or treatment in Appendix A. The analysis in
these appendixes demonstrates that the results from the baseline
model are invariant to substantial changes in these parameters from
baseline values.
Wildﬁre is a catalyst for transition between ecological states in the
PIPO ecosystem. Further, postwildﬁre transitions between states in
the PIPO ecosystem are inﬂuenced by wildﬁre severity. In Figure 1, the
postwildﬁre transition paths between states are color-coded for low-se-
verity (blue), moderate-severity (yellow), and high-severity (red) wild-
ﬁres. Postwildﬁre transition probabilities between states after low-,
moderate-, and high-severity wildﬁre for each state in the PIPO ecosys-
tem were chosen by the authors and vetted by an expert on wildﬁre in
the PIPO ecosystem and are reported in Table 3.17
Treatment Costs
As is explained above, we assume that the appropriate suite of
treatment methods for ERTs and HFRTs and, hence, per-acre treat-
ment costs, varies by ecological state in the PIPO ecosystem. Infor-
mation on treatment costs were obtained by contacting program
ofﬁcers from four national forests to gather the most recent transac-
tion evidence (FY 2008), expert opinion, and planning estimates.
Based on these estimates and previously published articles in this
region (Larson and Mirth 2004, Hjerpe and Kim 2008, Kim 2010),
average costs per acre are calculated for the proposed treatments in
each state. Table 4 reports the per-acre costs for ERTs and HFRTs
for each state in the PIPO ecosystem used in the simulation. Details
on how per-acre treatment costs for the PIPO ecosystem were cal-
culated are given in Appendix B.
Biomass Removal
The analysis also considers how including the revenue from the
sale of the biomass removed while performing ERTs in PIPO-A and
PIPO-B can inﬂuence the net economic beneﬁts from ERTs. We
only consider the revenue from ERTs in PIPO-A and PIPO-B be-
cause it is only in these states that fuel treatment involves
mechanical/hand thinning. Revenues from forest biomass vary sig-
niﬁcantly across regions in the United States (Galik et al. 2009),
including across sites in the PIPO ecosystems in the Southern Col-
orado Plateau, because of factors such as quality road access (Becker
et al. 2011), transportation costs (Han et al. 2004), and the absence
of biomass utilization facilities in many regions (Barbour et al. 2008,
Ince et al. 2008, Prestemon et al. 2008). Because of this variability in
revenues, we consider a range of per-acre revenue from biomass
removal in the analysis. We assume that revenue from the sale of
biomass is determined by two factors: the number of “bone-dry”
tons (short tons; 2,000 lb) of biomass removed per acre through
treatment and (ii) the market price per bone dry ton of biomass. We
assume removal of 11.2 bone-dry tons of biomass per acre (Rummer
et al. 2005) and a range of market prices drawn from existing re-
gional market prices for softwood biomass (Department of Energy
2011).
Table 3.
Transitions between ecological states after wildﬁre.
State before wildﬁre
State after wildﬁre
Total probability
PIPO-A
PIPO-B
PIPO-C
PIPO-D
PIPO-E
PIPO-A
0.05 (low)
Beneﬁcial
0.95 (severe)
Degrading
1.0
PIPO-B
0.35 (moderate)
Degrading
0.05 (low)
Beneﬁcial
0.10 (moderate)
Beneﬁcial
0.50 (severe)
Degrading
1.0
PIPO-C
0.30 (moderate)
Degrading
0.20 (moderate)
Degrading
0.18 (low)
Beneﬁcial
0.02 (low)
Beneﬁcial
0.30 (severe)
Degrading
1.0
PIPO-D
0.003 (moderate)
Degrading
0.996 (low)
Beneﬁcial
0.001 (severe)
Degrading
1.0
PIPO-E
1.00 (severe)
Degrading
1.0
Fire severity is in parentheses. Wildﬁres are classiﬁed as being either “Beneﬁcial” or “Degrading,” depending on the state the ecosystem transitions into after a wildﬁre, given
the initial state.
8
Forest Science • MONTH 2015

Results and Discussion
Tables 5–7 report results for the no treatment case, ERT, and
HFRT, respectively, under the default parameter assumptions re-
ported in Tables 1–4 (henceforth the “baseline” results). The results
for ERTs are reported for three different initial states: PIPO-A,
PIPO-B, and PIPO-C; the results for HFRTs are reported for two
initial states: PIPO-A and PIPO-B, as the treatment regime in
PIPO-C is the same for ERTs and HFRTs.
Wildﬁre Activity
The baseline results for ERTs and HFRTs reported in Tables 6
and 7 indicate that, given our assumptions and default parameters,
both treatment approaches probably increase the expected total
number of wildﬁres in the PIPO ecosystem over the 200-year time
horizon relative to the no treatment case reported in Table 5. ERTs
increase the total number of wildﬁres because they accelerate the
transitions from PIPO-A and PIPO-B, which have relatively long
wildﬁre return intervals (100 and 70 years, respectively), to PIPO-C
and PIPO-D, which have shorter wildﬁre return interval (40 and 10
years, respectively). In addition, transitions from PIPO-A and
PIPO-B to PIPO-C and PIPO-D reduce the number of high-sever-
ity crown ﬁres that cause the system to transition to PIPO-E, which
also has a relatively long wildﬁre return interval (80 years). The
Table 4.
Treatment costs (total costs of treatments, including operation and administration costs; 2011 dollars).
PIPO-A: even-aged
forest
PIPO-B: intermediate-
aged forest
PIPO-C: uneven-aged forest
PIPO-D: restored
PIPO-E: postcrown ﬁre
Management focus
Mechanical or hand
thinning to open
up canopy; pile/
burna
Pole size timber; thin
from below followed
by prescribed burn
Controlling regeneration in opening;
ﬁne fuels removed via prescribed
burn
Prescribed burn or wildland
ﬁre use
Reforestation
Ecological state after
treatment
PIPO-B (after 20
years)
PIPO-C (after 20 years)
PIPO-D (after 40 years)
PIPO-D
PIPO-A
Wildland ﬁre use
NA
NA
$10–$30
$8
NA
Prescribed ﬁre
$400–$600
$75–$300
$25–125
$12–$75
NA
Precommercial
thinning
$1,200-$2,000
NA
NA
NA
NA
Thinning
NA
$471–$766
NA
NA
NA
Reforestation
NA
NA
NA
NA
$800–$2,000
ERT total
$2,100
$500
$60
$45
$1,400
Treatment schedule
1 year
1 year
After 12 years without treatment or
wildﬁre
After 12 years without
treatment or wildﬁre
5 years after wildﬁre
HFRTb
$60
$60
NA
NA
NA
NA, not applicable.
a Any type of burn in PIPO-A will carry high risk/high expected cost.
b A single-entry or decreasingly effective prescribed ﬁre or mechanical/hand thinning treatment(s) is not intended to reintroduce frequent ﬁre or alter the stand’s age structure,
thus only effective and occurring in PIPO-A and PIPO-B.
Table 5.
No treatment results ($ per acre; 2011 dollars).
PIPO-A: even-aged forest
PIPO-B: intermediate-aged forest
PIPO-C: uneven-aged forest
Mean number of low-severity wildﬁres
0.07 (0, 1)a
0.24 (0, 1)
0.69 (0, 2)
Mean number of moderate-severity wildﬁres
0.16 (0, 1)
0.61 (0, 2)
0.76 (0, 2)
Mean number of high-severity wildﬁres
2.1 (0, 5)
1.97 (0, 5)
1.94 (0, 5)
Mean total number of wildﬁres
2.34 (0, 5)
2.83 (1, 6)
3.39 (1, 6)
Mean total number of beneﬁcial wildﬁres
0.10 (0, 1)
0.33 (0, 1)
0.71 (0, 2)
Mean total number of degrading wildﬁres
2.25 (0, 5)
2.5 (1, 5)
2.68 (1, 5)
Mean total suppression costs (NPV)b
$165 ($0, $655)
$200 ($3, $763)
$275 ($10, $807)
Final State (A, B, C, D, E)c
3,286, 401, 861, 16, 5,436
3,064, 828, 550, 103, 5,455
3,071, 845, 552, 279, 5,253
a 5th and 95th percentiles.
b Sum over 200 years using a 3% discount rate (following Loomis 2002).
c “Final state” is the ﬁnal state of the system (PIPO-A, PIPO-B, PIPO-C, PIPO-D, or PIPO-E) after 200 years.
Table 6.
ERTs: baseline results ($ per acre; 2011 dollars).
PIPO-A: even-aged forest
PIPO-B: intermediate-aged forest
PIPO-C: uneven-aged forest
Mean number of low-severity wildﬁres
6.14 (0, 18)a
8.48 (0, 21)
8.64 (0, 21)
Mean number of moderate-severity wildﬁres
0.64 (0, 2)
0.63 (0, 2)
0.61 (0, 2)
Mean number of high-severity wildﬁres
1.4 (0, 5)
1.17 (0, 5)
1.13 (0, 5)
Mean total number of wildﬁres
8.2 (2, 18)
10.3 (2, 21)
10.4 (2, 21)
Mean total number of beneﬁcial wildﬁres
6.2 (0, 18)
8.5 (0, 21)
8.7 (0, 21)
Mean total number of degrading wildﬁres
1.99 (1, 5)
1.78 (0, 5)
1.73 (0, 5)
Mean total suppression costs (NPV)b
$217 ($10, $728)
$256 ($16, $800)
$259 ($15, $811)
Mean number of treatments
4.9 (1, 9)
4.4 (1, 8)
4.5 (1, 8)
Mean treatment costs (NPV)b
$2,460 ($2,100, $3,038)
$730 ($500, $1,503)
$298 ($60, $1,093)
Final state (A, B, C, D, E)c
623, 567, 727, 5,126, 2,957
511, 500, 630, 5,960, 2,399
506, 503, 571, 6,090, 2,330
a 5th and 95th percentiles.
b Sum over 200 years using a 3% discount rate (following Loomis 2002).
c “Final state” is the ﬁnal state of the system (PIPO-A, PIPO-B, PIPO-C, PIPO-D, or PIPO-E) after 200 years.
Forest Science • MONTH 2015
9

results in Tables 5 and 6 also demonstrate, however, that by transi-
tioning the system from PIPO-A and PIPO-B to PIPO-C and,
eventually, to PIPO-D, ERTs are successful in reducing the number
of high-severity crown ﬁres (2.1 to 1.4 when the initial state is
PIPO-A) and increasing the number of moderate-severity wildﬁres
(0.2 to 0.6 when the initial state is PIPO-A) and low-severity wild-
ﬁres (0.1 to 6.1 when the initial state is PIPO-A). In the subsequent
sections, we discuss the implications of this change in the distribu-
tion of low-, moderate-, and high-severity wildﬁres for the instance
of ecologically beneﬁcial and degrading wildﬁre.
Because we assume that HFRTS do not change the time it takes
the ecosystem to transition from PIPO-A to PIPO-B (100 years) or
from PIPO-B to PIPO-C (80 years), HFRTs do not signiﬁcantly
change the total number of wildﬁres when the initial state is
PIPO-A, as the system remains in PIPO-A and PIPO-B for the
majority of the 200-year time horizon with and without HFRTs.
HFRTs do, however, increase the total number of wildﬁres from 2.8
to 5.6 when the initial state is PIPO-B because HFRTS facilitate the
transition from PIPO-C to PIPO-D in 40 years in the absence of
wildﬁre. Table 7 also indicates that although HFRTS do not reduce
the mean total number of wildﬁres, they do, as one would expect,
increase the number of low-severity wildﬁres from 0.1 to 1.7 over
200 years and reduce the number of high-severity wildﬁres from 2.1
to 0.5 over 200 years, while resulting in very little change in the
number of moderate-severity wildﬁres (0.2 to 0.1 over 200 years).
Beneﬁcial and Degrading Wildﬁres
One outcome of ERTs and HFRTs of particular interest to ﬁre
managers is how they affect the instances of “beneﬁcial” and “de-
grading” wildﬁres. Beneﬁcial wildﬁres are low- or moderate-severity
ﬁres that facilitate postﬁre ecosystem recovery, and, ultimately, are
beneﬁcial to ecosystem health and function. Conversely, degrading
wildﬁres provide little ecosystem beneﬁts and can damage ecosystem
health. Table 3 describes how beneﬁcial and degrading wildﬁres are
classiﬁed in our simulation. From Tables 6 and 7, although both fuel
treatment approaches increase the expected total number of wild-
ﬁres, they are both successful in reducing the number of degrading
wildﬁres and increasing the number of beneﬁcial wildﬁres. For ex-
ample, when the initial state is PIPO-A, ERTs decrease the number
of degrading wildﬁres over the 200-year time horizon from 2.3 to
2.0 and increase the number of beneﬁcial wildﬁres from 0.1 to 6.2.
Similarly, when the initial state is PIPO-A, HFRTs reduce the num-
ber of degrading wildﬁres from 2.3 to 0.8 and increase the number
of beneﬁcial wildﬁres from 0.1 to 1.7. The increase in the number of
beneﬁcial wildﬁres and the decrease in the number of degrading
wildﬁres reduce the likelihood that the system will transition to
PIPO-E, the postcrown ﬁre state. For example, when the initial state
is PIPO-A, the model predicts that at the end of 200 years, the
systems will be PIPO-E 54.4% of time without ERTs compared
with 29.6% of the time with ERTs.
Wildﬁre Suppression Costs
Tables 6 and 7 report the expected NPVs of wildﬁre suppression
costs for ERTs and HFRTs. Table 6 indicates that ERTs are not
effective in reducing wildﬁre suppression costs relative to the no
treatment case reported in Table 5 because the reduction in the
number of high-severity wildﬁres is more than offset by the increase
in suppression costs from more frequent low- and moderate-severity
wildﬁres. Conversely, HFRTs reduce the expected NPVs of wildﬁre
suppression costs from $170 to $121 per acre when the initial state
is PIPO-A and from $199 to $137 per acre when the initial state is
PIPO-B. The wildﬁre suppression cost savings associated with
HFRTs, however, are not enough to offset the costs of implement-
ing fuel treatments. For example, for HFRTs when the initial state is
PIPO-A, the expected NPV of treatment costs is $154 per acre and
the expected NPV of wildﬁre suppression cost savings is $51
($164–$113) per acre. Our ﬁnding that neither ERTs nor HFRTs
are economically justiﬁed in the PIPO system on the basis of wildﬁre
suppression cost savings alone is consistent with the results of Prest-
emon et al. (2012), who provide ranges of the long-run expected
economic beneﬁts of mechanical fuel treatments for all nonreserved
timberlands (both public and private) in the contiguous western
United States; this is the only other study we are aware of that
considers the wildﬁre suppression cost savings resulting from fuel
treatments for forested ecosystems in the western United States.
ERT: Wildﬁre Return Intervals
As we explain above, ERTs are not effective in reducing wildﬁre
suppression costs in our simulation model despite the facts that they
reduce the number of high-severity crown ﬁres and are effective at
rehabilitating the system to PIPO-D and avoiding transitions to
PIPO-E. When the system starts in PIPO-A, high-severity wildﬁres
in PIPO-A can occur early in the planning horizon, where, due to
discounting, they have a large inﬂuence on the calculation of the
expected value of net beneﬁts. These facts suggest that avoiding
high-severity wildﬁre in PIPO-A could be an important beneﬁt of
performing ERTs and that our baseline assumption of a 1% annual
wildﬁre probability in PIPO-A is likely to have a large inﬂuence on
the magnitude of expected net beneﬁts from ERTs. For this reason,
we consider in Table 8 how the expected net beneﬁts from ERTs
Table 7.
HFRTs: baseline results ($ per acre; 2011 dollars).
PIPO-A: even-aged forest
PIPO-B: intermediate-aged forest
Mean number of low-severity wildﬁres
1.72 (0, 4)a
4.42 (0, 12)
Mean number of moderate-severity wildﬁres
0.23 (0, 1)
0.43 (0, 1)
Mean number of high-severity wildﬁres
0.60 (0, 3)
0.70 (0, 3)
Mean total number of wildﬁres
2.54 (0, 5)
5.56 (1, 12)
Mean total number of beneﬁcial wildﬁres
1.73 (0, 4)
4.44 (0, 13)
Mean total number of degrading wildﬁres
0.81 (0, 3)
1.11 (0, 4)
Mean total suppression costs (NPV)b
$113 ($0, $487)
$77 ($2, $284)
Mean number of treatments
12 (5, 14)
9 (5, 14)
Mean treatment costs (NPV)b
$154 ($103, $203)
$148 ($243, $991)
Final State (A, B, C, D, E)c
2,250, 699, 4,783, 103, 2,165
2,219, 1,408, 786, 3,725, 1,862
a 5th and 95th percentiles.
b Sum over 200 years using a 3% discount rate (following Loomis 2002).
c “Final state” is the ﬁnal state of the system (PIPO-A, PIPO-B, PIPO-C, PIPO-D, or PIPO-E) after 200 years.
10
Forest Science • MONTH 2015

change with the annual probability of wildﬁre in PIPO-A. In addi-
tion, whereas ERTs are an effective tool to keep the system from
transitioning to PIPO-E, under our baseline assumptions the ex-
pected wildﬁre suppression costs for PIPO-E are relatively low,
which is another reason why fuel treatments are not effective in
reducing wildﬁre suppression costs. We also consider how the ex-
pected beneﬁts of fuel treatments change with increases in the an-
nual probability of wildﬁre in PIPO-E.
The results in Table 8 conﬁrm that the expected net beneﬁts
from treatment are indeed sensitive to our assumptions about the
annual probability of wildﬁre in PIPO-A and PIPO-E. Holding all
other parameters constant, an increase in the annual probability of a
wildﬁre in PIPO-A from our baseline of 1% increases the expected
wildﬁre suppression cost savings from treatment and, hence, the
expected net beneﬁts from fuel treatment, to $409 per acre at 5%
($2,507  $2,098  $409) and $656 per acre ($2,507  $1,851 
$656) at 10%. Increasing the annual wildﬁre probability in PIPO-E
also increases the expected net beneﬁts from ERTs, albeit by a
smaller amount than the increases in the wildﬁre probability for
PIPO-A. The analysis in this section focuses on changes in wildﬁre
return intervals in PIPO-A and PIPO-E because these two parame-
ters were likely to (and do) have a large impact on the model’s
predictions. It has been suggested that wildﬁre return intervals in the
PIPO ecosystems are likely to be reduced as a result of climate
change, invasive plants, and other factors (Westerling et al. 2006,
Millar et al. 2007, Abatzoglou and Kolden 2011). The analysis in
this section suggests that to the extent that climate change shortens
wildﬁre return intervals in PIPO-A and PIPO-E, ERTs will result in
signiﬁcantly larger wildﬁre suppression cost savings in the future
than they do at present.
HFRT: Treatment Effectiveness
Figure 3 considers how changes in the effectiveness of HFRTs
inﬂuence three ﬁre management outcomes: the expected number
of wildﬁres, the expected number of beneﬁcial and degrading
wildﬁres, and the expected wildﬁre suppression costs. Recall that
we deﬁne the “effectiveness” of an HFRT as the probability that
the treatment will ensure that a wildﬁre that occurs during the
duration of the treatment (15 years) will be low severity. Figure 3
illustrates how increasing treatment effectiveness reduces wildﬁre
suppression costs by changing the distribution of wildﬁres, re-
ducing the number of degrading wildﬁres (which generally have
high suppression costs), and increasing the number of beneﬁcial
wildﬁres (which generally have lower suppression costs). These
results imply that the beneﬁts of HFRTs depend in large measure
on whether the treatment is executed in a manner that allows for
a high degree of treatment effectiveness. That is, the beneﬁts of
HFRTs depend signiﬁcantly on the ability and diligence of the
fuels and ﬁre manager performing the treatments.
Posttreatment Wildland Fire Use
So far the analysis has assumed that neither ERTs nor HFRTs
change the expected suppression costs for a given wildﬁre. In this
section, we relax these assumptions and analyze the possibility that
ERTs and HFRTs change fuel conditions so that certain low- and
moderate-severity wildﬁres can be managed through “wildland ﬁre
use.” In particular, we consider the sensitivity of our results to dif-
ferent assumptions about the proportions of low- and moderate-se-
verity wildﬁres in PIPO-C that can be managed through wildland
ﬁre use after application of ERT or HFRT. We focus on PIPO-C
Table 8.
Expected net beneﬁts from ERT with changes in annual wildﬁre probabilities in PIPO-A and PIPO-E; initial state  PIPO-A ($ per
acre; 2011 dollars).
Annual wildﬁre probability in PIPO-E
Annual wildﬁre probability in PIPO-A
1%
5%
10%
15%
20%
1.25%
$2,507
$2,098
$1,851
$1,706
$1,591
5%
$2,444
$1,711
$1,456
$1,209
$1,088
10%
$2,366
$1,237
$795
$555
$523
15%
$2,312
$779
$259
$28
$122
20%
$2,199
$282
$398
$642
$819
Figure 3.
HFRTs: treatment effectiveness.
Forest Science • MONTH 2015
11

because both ERTs and HFRTs can reasonably be expected to re-
duce the probability of tree mortality in the event of a low- or
moderate-severity wildﬁre in PIPO-C; thus, both treatment options
increase the potential to manage certain low- or moderate-severity
wildﬁres through wildland ﬁre use.
Table 9 summarizes results from six assumptions concerning the
proportion of low- and moderate-severity wildﬁres in PIPO-C man-
aged via wildland ﬁre use after application of ERT or HFRT: 0%
(the baseline assumption), 20, 40, 60, 80, and 100% for three initial
ecological states: PIPO-A, PIPO-B, and PIPO-C. Table 9 reports
only how posttreatment wildland ﬁre use in PIPO-C inﬂuences
wildﬁre suppression costs, not changes in expected future wildﬁre
occurrence or severity. These results illustrate that allowing certain
low- and moderate-severity wildﬁres in PIPO-C to be treated
through wildland ﬁre use posttreatment leads to large reductions in
expected wildﬁre suppression costs for ERTs and smaller reductions
in expected wildﬁre suppression costs for HFRTs. For ERTs, the
large reductions are due to the fact that when the initial state is
PIPO-A or PIPO-B, ERTs effectuate a relatively rapid transition to
PIPO-C (21 years when the initial state is PIPO-A; 1 year when the
initial state is PIPO-B). This rapid transition to PIPO-C means that
the wildﬁre suppression cost savings associated with managing a
portion of low- and moderate-severity wildﬁres in PIPO-C through
wildland ﬁre occurs early in the planning horizon for ERTs, and, as
a result, has a strong impact on the calculation of the NPV of
wildﬁre suppression costs. In contrast, HFRTs do not reduce the
time required for the systems to transition from PIPO-A and
PIPO-B to PIPO-C, so that the wildﬁre suppression cost savings
associated with posttreatment wildland ﬁre use in PIPO-C are only
realized late in the planning horizon. These results indicate that our
assumption that neither ERTs nor HFRTs change the expected
wildﬁre suppression cost associated with a given wildﬁre leads our
baseline results to understate the wildﬁre suppression cost savings
associated with both ERTs and HFRTs and that the magnitude of
this understatement will depend on how early in the planning ho-
rizon the reduced suppression costs are realized.
ERT: Biomass Removal
The results reported in Table 10 demonstrate that including
revenue from the sale of the biomass removed while performing
ERTs in PIPO-A and PIPO-B can have a large effect on the net
economic beneﬁts from ERTs. For example, at a price of $25 per
bone dry ton, inclusion of biomass in the analysis increases the
expected present value of the economic beneﬁts of ERTs when the
Table 9.
Wildland ﬁre use for low- and moderate-severity wildﬁres in PIPO-C: mean total wildﬁre suppression costs (NPV) (2011 dollars).
Initial state
Low- and moderate-severity wildﬁres in PIPO-C managed via wildland ﬁre use
No treatment
0%a
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
ERTs
PIPO-A
$217 ($10, $728)b
$209 ($9, $715)
$206 ($8, $700)
$195 ($9, $698)
$191 ($8, $768)
$171 ($7, $754)
$165 ($0, $655)
PIPO-B
$256 ($16, $800)
$227 ($14, $719)
$212 ($13, $756)
$186 ($14, $648)
$171 ($12, $662)
$141 ($12, $596)
$200 ($3, $763)
PIPO-Cc
$259 ($15, $811)
$235 ($16, $765)
$215 ($15, $741)
$192 ($15, 663)
$165 ($13, $599)
$152 ($14, $648)
$275 ($10, $807)
HFRTs
PIPO-A
$113 ($0, $487)
$104 ($0, $447)
$118 ($0, $512)
$114 ($0, $507)
$123 ($0, $502)
$110 ($0, $446)
$164 ($0, $687)
PIPO-B
$77 ($2, $284)
$70 ($2, $322)
$68 ($2, $279)
$73 ($2, $247)
$69 ($2, $288)
$60 ($1, $234)
$202 ($3, $766)
a Baseline scenario reported on Tables 6 and 7.
b 5th and 95th percentiles.
c As we explain in the text above, we do not report results for HFRTs when the initial state is PIPO-C because the treatment regime in PIPO-C is the same for ERTs and
HFRTs, and, as such, there is little difference between the two approaches when the initial state is PIPO-C.
Table 10.
ERTs: biomass removal (2011 dollars).
Market price bone dry ton (11.2 bdt/acre)a
$25
$50
$75
$100
$125
$150
$175
$200
Initial state  PIPO-A
Mean revenue from biomass
removal (NPV)
$533
$1,063
$1,594
$2,121
$2,646
$3,189
$3,743
$4,294
Mean revenue from biomass
removal net of treatment
costs (NPV)
$2,039
$1,617
$1,202
$785
$376
$44
$474
$895
Mean wildﬁre suppression
costs savings and revenue
from biomass removal net
of treatment costs (NPV)
$2,095
$1,662
$1,253
$835
$420
$3
$424
$843
Initial state  PIPO-B
Mean revenue from biomass
removal (NPV)
$578
$1,148
$1,741
$2,297
$2,892
$3,501
$4,056
$4,636
Mean revenue from biomass
removal net of treatment
costs (NPV)
$421
$102
$210
$527
$834
$1,159
$1,468
$1,784
Mean wildﬁre suppression
costs savings and revenue
from biomass removal net
of treatment costs (NPV)
$479
$153
$155
$474
$783
$1,101
$1,413
$1,722
a The bone-dry tons refers to short tons (2,000 lb).
12
Forest Science • MONTH 2015

initial state is PIPO-A by $533 per acre. The results in Table 10 also
demonstrate, however, that the net economic beneﬁts of ERTs
(wildﬁre suppression cost savings plus the economic value of bio-
mass less the costs of treatment) are only positive for prices of bio-
mass that are several times the typical price of biomass per bone dry
ton in the study area (Department of Energy 2011).
Modeling Limitations
In this section, we discuss the limitations to our modeling ap-
proach and the implications of these limitations for our results. The
limitations to our modeling approach can be divided into three
categories. First, there are limitations related to elements that we
omit from our analysis. These include the costs of wildﬁre other
than wildﬁre suppression costs and the beneﬁts of fuel treatment in
terms of enhanced ecosystem services. Second, there are limitations
related to the fact that our approach does not consider spatial issues
related to the spread of wildﬁre and the impact of location-speciﬁc
characteristics on the beneﬁts and costs of fuel treatments. Third,
there are limitations on the implications of our results related to the
assumptions about how treatment costs are included in the model.
The discussion in this section explains why the limitations to our
modeling approach will cause our analysis to understate the eco-
nomic beneﬁts of ERTs and HFRTs. As we stated in the Introduc-
tion, an important strength of our analysis is that model parameters
and assumptions are chosen so that our results provide a lower-
bound estimate of the net economic beneﬁts from implementing
either fuel treatment option.
In addition to these three limitations, another important limita-
tion of our analysis is that we do not fully explore the potential
beneﬁts of ERTs and HFRTs in terms of improving the efﬁcacy of
the wildﬁre suppression response, thereby reducing suppression
costs. As this limitation was discussed above when we discuss the
data and parameters, we do not address it again in this section.
Additional Beneﬁts from Fuel Treatment
As we discuss in the Introduction, by focusing on a narrow set of
ﬁnancial beneﬁts from fuel treatment, the analysis in this article does
not consider several additional beneﬁts from fuel treatment. First, it
does not consider how fuel treatments can reduce the ﬁnancial, or
market, costs of wildﬁre other than wildﬁre suppression costs. Im-
portant ﬁnancial costs of wildﬁre not considered in the analysis
include damage to housing and other infrastructure and the costs of
postﬁre emergency rehabilitation. Second, the analysis also does not
consider potential reductions in the nonmarket cost to wildﬁre as a
result of treatment. These nonﬁnancial costs include postﬁre soil
loss and ﬂooding and the costs to human health from smoke and
particulate matter released during the wildﬁre. Third, the analysis
does not consider the potential beneﬁts of fuel treatments from
enhanced ecosystem services. Fuel treatments can enhance ecosys-
tem services by reducing the likelihood of ecologically degrading
wildﬁres, and, in the case of ERTs, by directly promoting eco-
logical restoration. Ecosystem services that can potentially be
improved by fuel treatment include wildlife habitat, erosion con-
trol, recreational opportunities, and the aesthetic beauty of the
landscape.18 Not considering these additional beneﬁts of fuel
treatments is not, strictly speaking, a limitation of our modeling
approach. Indeed, a strength of our framework is that it can
readily incorporate additional beneﬁts from fuel treatment as this
information becomes available.
In addition to not considering the additional beneﬁts from fuel
treatments listed in the previous paragraph, another limitation of
our analysis is that it cannot offer insight into the beneﬁts and costs
of ERTs of HFRTs under different assumptions about the expected
wildﬁre suppression response. This is an important limitation be-
cause it implies that it is not possible to use the results reported in
this article to infer the likely beneﬁts and costs of ERTs and HFRTs
in the wildland-urban interface where the wildﬁre suppression re-
sponse is likely to be more aggressive than in the wildland setting
considered in this article.19 The reason for this limitation is that the
wildﬁre suppression response inﬂuences both per-acre wildﬁre sup-
pression costs and wildﬁre size (and, hence, the wildﬁre return in-
terval), and these two effects have an offsetting inﬂuence on ex-
pected total suppression costs. As such, although previous authors
have found that wildﬁres in the wildland-urban interface are, on aver-
age, smaller and have higher per-acre suppression costs than ﬁres on
wildlands (Cohen 2000, Winter and Fried 2000), the overall impact of
these changes on expected total suppression costs, and, hence, on the
beneﬁts and costs of ERTs and HFRTs, depends on the magnitude of
these two effects. For this reason, we need speciﬁc information on both
per-acre suppression costs and wildﬁre return intervals from wildland-
urban interface communities in the study region to comment on the
beneﬁts and costs of ERTs and HFRTs in this setting.20
Spatial Wildﬁre Spread and Treatment Location
An important limitation of our approach is that we do not con-
sider the spatial spread of wildﬁre. This has three important limita-
tions for our results. First, not considering issues related to the
spatial spread of wildﬁre implies that we are ignoring the impact of
fuel treatments on wildﬁre behavior and suppression costs outside of
the treatment zone. This is potentially a signiﬁcant shortcoming
given the experimental evidence that fuel treatments can reduce the
wildﬁre hazard in large regions surrounding the treatment zone
(Finney 2001, Stratton 2004). It means that our per-acre analysis
will necessarily understate the expected wildﬁre suppression cost
savings from fuel treatments. Previous studies have suggested, how-
ever, that in the PIPO ecosystem, the majority of wildﬁre suppres-
sion cost savings from treatment occur on treated acres, with only
small reductions in acres burned and suppression costs occurring
outside the treated acreage due to the effect of the fuel treatments on
the spatial spread of wildﬁre (Thompson et al. 2013).
Second, the fact that the wildﬁre risk on one stand is dependent
on the fuel conditions on surrounding stands because of the spatial
spread of wildﬁre implies that fuel treatments must be performed at
or above a minimum spatial scale for the results in this article to
hold. In particular, fuel treatments must be performed on a sufﬁ-
ciently large scale for the movements in ecological state to inﬂuence
wildﬁre return intervals in the case of ERTs and to change the
instance of low-, moderate-, and high-severity wildﬁres in the case of
HFRTs. Although the minimum spatial scale for treatments is cer-
tainly larger than an acre, it is not possible for us to state deﬁnitively
the minimum scale for ERTs or HFRTs. We do not, however, view
our inability to deﬁne a minimum spatial scale for our results as a
signiﬁcant limitation of our analysis. This is because, in practice,
managers will only perform fuel treatments at a spatial scale that
they believe is sufﬁcient to inﬂuence wildﬁre behavior on the treated
acres, as well as on land adjacent to the treated area.
Third, the fact that the wildﬁre risk on one stand is dependent on
the fuel conditions on surrounding stands because of the spatial
Forest Science • MONTH 2015
13

spread of wildﬁre means that the fuel conditions (and, hence, wild-
ﬁre hazard) on land adjacent to the treatment site are likely to
inﬂuence the annual wildﬁre probability, the instance of low-,
moderate-, and high-severity wildﬁres, and even the per-acre sup-
pression costs on the treatment site. An additional limitation of our
analysis is that we do not consider the potential effects of wildﬁre
hazard on land adjacent to the treatment site on these model param-
eters. Ignoring these potential effects is equivalent to assuming that
the conditions on land adjacent to the treatment site are such that
the per-acre wildﬁre suppression costs reported in Table 1 and the
wildﬁre probabilities reported in Table 2, which were chosen to
represent average conditions of land in each of the ﬁve ecological
states in the PIPO ecosystem, hold for the treatment site. This
implicit assumption is consistent with the focus in this article on the
beneﬁts and costs of ERTs and HFRTs on an average acre.
Another limitation of our analysis is that, by focusing on ERTs and
HFRTs on an average acre, the analysis ignores the role of managerial
discretion in choosing locations of fuel treatments and in designing fuel
treatments. Landscape features such as topography (slope, aspect, and
others), distance to housing and other infrastructure, and proximity to
riparian areas imply that the spatial placement and design of fuel treat-
ments will have a large inﬂuence on their impact on wildﬁre hazard and
hence on their expected beneﬁts, as well as on treatment costs (Finney
2001, Agee and Skinner 2005). All else being equal, managers will
target areas for fuel treatments where the wildﬁre suppression cost sav-
ings and other beneﬁts from treatment are larger than average (e.g.,
areas near the wildland-urban interface) and/or where the costs of treat-
mentarelowerthanaverage(e.g.,areasthatareeasilyaccessiblebyheavy
equipment). Given these facts, not taking into account managerial dis-
cretion is likely to cause our analysis to further understate the net eco-
nomic beneﬁts of fuel treatments.
Treatment Cost Assumptions
This section discusses three assumptions about how treatment
costs are included in the simulation model. First, our analysis con-
siders only variable costs of implementing a fuel treatment and does
not consider ﬁxed costs.21 Our focus on variable costs implies that
when using the results of our analysis to evaluate a speciﬁc fuel
treatment project, the sum of the per-acre net expected beneﬁts
must be larger than the ﬁxed costs of the project for the net beneﬁts
for the project as a whole to be positive.
Second, the treatment cost estimates used in this article do not
consider how treatment costs vary with the size of treated area. For
a speciﬁc fuel treatment project, the previous literature has found
that the average per-acre treatment costs decrease with the size of the
treated area (Rummer 2008) and that this decline can be partially
attributable to declining variable costs (and partially attributable to
indivisible ﬁxed costs). In addition, at the regional scale, limits to the
number of trained foresters and the availability of specialized equip-
ment can constrain the number of treatment projects that can be
completed in a season and may also drive up variable treatment costs
in years where many projects take place.
Third, the analysis in this article does not consider third-party
damages from implementation of fuel treatments. Relevant third-
party damages include the smoke created by prescribed ﬁres, dam-
ages that occur if prescribed ﬁres escape the intended boundaries
(and the psychological harm this possibility inﬂicts on nearby resi-
dents), and soil compaction and increased erosion caused by heavy
equipment used for mechanical fuel thinning and removal. The
analysis in this article does not consider these potential additional
costs of implementing fuel treatments and, therefore, may under-
state the costs of ERTs and HFRTs in circumstances where these
additional costs are likely to be signiﬁcant.
Conclusions
The model developed here simulates management of a PIPO
ecosystem and evaluates and compares the economic beneﬁts and
costs of ERTs and HFRTs. More often than not, ERTs are success-
ful at restoring the ecosystem to PIPO-D, which is a ﬁre-resistant
state characterized by an open canopy and frequent, low-severity
wildﬁres. However, because restoration involves the system transi-
tioning to ecological states where wildﬁre is more frequent, ERTs
also increase the total expected number of wildﬁres. Further, ERTs
reduce the number of ecologically degrading wildﬁres that lead the
system to transition to the degraded, postcrown ﬁre state, which
reinforces the beneﬁts of ERTs in terms of ecological restoration.
ERTs increase expected wildﬁre suppression costs in our baseline
speciﬁcation, but this result is reversed if we shorten wildﬁre return
intervals in ecologically degraded states from the baseline values.
Conversely, HFRTs decrease expected wildﬁre suppression costs,
but these savings depend on the ability of the land manager to
achieve a high level of treatment effectiveness. We expanded our
analysis to consider how additional beneﬁts from ERTs and HFRTs
affect the results. Assuming that certain wildﬁres in healthy ecolog-
ical states are to be managed through wildland ﬁre use, rather than
being actively suppressed, leads to lower expected wildﬁre suppres-
sion costs for ERTs, which facilitate transitions to healthy ecological
states, and, similar, although quantitatively smaller, reductions for
HFRTs. Further, including revenues from the sale of biomass re-
moved when ERTs are performed signiﬁcantly increased the eco-
nomic beneﬁts from ERTs, but the net economic beneﬁts from
ERTs are only positive for biomass prices that are several times those
currently observed in the study area.
Given that we are not able to consider the full slate of economic
beneﬁts associated with the two treatment options, the analysis in
this article is not sufﬁciently comprehensive to allow us to conclude
categorically whether ERTs are preferable to HFRTs, or vice versa,
or whether it is more economically efﬁcient to direct treatment
effort toward degraded ecological states, such as PIPO-A, PIPO-B,
or PIPO-E, or toward PIPO-C, which is closer to restored condi-
tions. Neither ERTs nor HFRTs can be justiﬁed on the basis of
wildﬁre suppression cost savings alone, which is important for set-
ting up realistic expectations for both treatment options. Fuel treat-
ments are intended to modify ﬁre behavior, making wildﬁres more
acceptable in a given landscape, not necessarily to limit the extent of
wildland ﬁres (Reinhardt et al. 2008). The primary factors that
explained the majority of variation in wildland ﬁre suppression costs
were ﬁre size, proximity to the wildland-urban interface, and the
position of the private land burned (Gebert et al. 2007, Liang et al.
2008, Yoder and Gebert 2012). Thus, the choice between ERTs and
HFRTs for a particular site should depend on site-speciﬁc factors
such as the wildﬁre return interval and the economic value of bio-
mass removed, as well as the importance managers place on other
economic beneﬁts from fuel treatments not considered in the anal-
ysis (e.g., damage to housing and infrastructure and ecosystem
services).
More broadly, this is the ﬁrst study to evaluate and compare the
economic beneﬁts and costs of ERTs and HFRTs in a forested
ecosystem in which increasing wildﬁre hazard is driven by forest
14
Forest Science • MONTH 2015

overcrowding largely attributed to historical suppression of low-se-
verity wildﬁres in frequent ﬁre regimes. This innovation is impor-
tant because escalating wildﬁre activity related to forest overcrowd-
ing is a pervasive problem in the United States and throughout the
world, and the choice between ERTs and HFRTs is a prevalent
management concern in this context. We address this issue by de-
veloping a simulation model of the PIPO ecosystem based on the
STM ecological framework. This approach allows us to incorporate
ecological dynamics into the model, including the role of wildﬁre as
a catalyst for transitions between ecological states, as well as provi-
sions for treatment effectiveness and longevity. Incorporating these
elements is necessary to evaluate the long-run impact of ERTs and
HFRTS on ecological condition, wildﬁre behavior, and suppression
costs. In addition to analyzing the PIPO ecosystem, the simulation
model developed in this article can readily be adapted to evaluate
and compare the economic beneﬁts and costs of ERTs and HFRTs
in other forested ecosystems whose ecological dynamics can be de-
scribed in the STM framework.
Endnotes
1. Given the slow growth rate of ponderosa pines, a plausible alternative to our
assumption in the baseline model that it takes the ecosystem 80 years to transi-
tion from PIPO-B to PIPO-C through ecological succession is that there is no
successional pathway from PIPO-B to PIPO-C. We reconsidered the baseline
results reported in Tables 6 and 7 under the alternative assumption that there is
no successional pathway between PIPO-B and PIPO-C and found that there is
no appreciable difference between the alternative parameterization and the base-
line model’s predictions.
2. Given the discounting assumption, the 200-year time horizon is appropriate for
considering the long-run economic beneﬁts and costs of fuel treatments because
any beneﬁts and costs that occur more than 200 years in the future will have a
negligible inﬂuence on the present value of net beneﬁts. The 3% discount rate
used in this study is the discount rate used in beneﬁt-cost analysis by US federal
agencies such as the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the US
Department of the Interior, and the US Environmental Protection Agency (Loo-
mis 2002).
3. The realizations of the stochastic parameters in each year are generated using the
random number generator in Matlab.
4. q1,t,m
V
 q2,t,m
V
 q3,t,m
V
 1 for all t, m, and V.
5. rA,i,t,m
V
 rB,i,t,m
V
 rC,i,t,m
V
 rD,i,t,m
V
 rE,i,t,m
V
 1 for all t, m, i, and V.
6. There are three additional assumptions related to how HFRTs are included in
the model. First, it is assumed that in model runs where HFRTs are pursued,
they are performed every 15 years (year 1, year 16, …) in PIPO-A (PIPO-B)
until the system transitions to PIPO-B (PIPO-C). Second, if a wildﬁre occurs in
PIPO-A (PIPO-B) in the 15 years after the implementation of an HFRT and the
wildﬁre is low-intensity, then the treatment remains effective (i.e., continues to
increase the probability that a wildﬁre is low intensity) for the reminder of the
15-year life of the treatment. That is, a low-intensity wildﬁre does not undo the
effect of an HFRT. Third, we assume that when a low-intensity wildﬁre occurs
in the 15 years after the implementation of an HFRT, the ﬁre does not reset the
100-year “time to transition without wildﬁre” between PIPO-A to PIPO-B
(80-year time to transition without wildﬁre between PIPO-B to PIPO-C). In the
absence of an HFRT, a low-intensity wildﬁre in PIPO-A (PIPO-B) resets the
time to transition without wildﬁre so that it takes 100 years (80 years) to tran-
sition to PIPO-B (PIPO-C) after the low-intensity wildﬁre.
7. Biswell et al. (1973), Fernandes et al. (2004), and Finney (2005) report HFRT
mitigation of wildﬁre severity out to 15, 13, and 9 years, respectively. We elected
to use the 15 years reported in Biswell et al. (1973) because it is the only one of
the three studies focused on the southwestern United States.
8. It is also possible that by improving the effectiveness of the wildﬁre suppres-
sion response, fuel treatments can lower the size of the wildﬁres that do
occur. If this is the case, then fuel treatments would lower the effective
wildﬁre return interval in and around the treatment area. This additional
beneﬁts of fuel treatments is also not considered in the analysis in this article,
thus causing the results to further understate the wildﬁre suppression cost
savings associated with treatment.
9. The available data for wildﬁre suppression expenditures do not include informa-
tion that directly identiﬁes ecological state or states at the site of each ﬁre. The
data do include, however, the National Fire Danger Rating System (NFDRS)
fuel model category at the point of ignition. Correspondence between the eco-
logical states in our stylized STM for the PIPO ecosystem and the NFDRS fuel
models is made based on the vegetation composition descriptions in Anderson
(1982), as summarized in Table 1.
10. The simulation assumes that wildﬁre ﬁre use is employed for all low-intensity
wildﬁres in PIPO-D. This assumption is unrealistic in light of previous studies
ﬁnding that social pressure from residents in nearby communities and other
stakeholders can limit the use of many fuel management techniques, including
wildland ﬁre use (McCaffrey 2006, 2009, Winter et al. 2006). It is unlikely,
however, that relaxing this assumption so that only a portion of the low-intensity
wildﬁres in PIPO-D are managed wildland ﬁre use would meaningfully inﬂu-
ence our results. This is the case because the average costs of suppressing low-in-
tensity wildﬁres in PIPO-D is not much greater than the assumed cost of wild-
land ﬁre use ($60 versus $20 per acre; see Table 1) and because it generally takes
a long time (if ever) for the ecosystem to be rehabilitated to PIPO-D through
ecological succession or as a result of ERTs or HFRTs, so that changes in
suppression costs in PIPO-D will only have a small effect on NPVs because of
discounting.
11. Concerning suppression costs, previous studies such as that of Gebert et al.
(2007) have developed models to analyze the determinants of wildﬁre suppres-
sion costs and to predict future wildﬁre suppression costs. The models developed
in these studies could conceivably be used to predict changes in future suppres-
sion costs in response to anticipated changes in factors such as climate change,
frequency of drought conditions, and growth of the housing stock in the wild-
land-urban interface. The distributions of state- and intensity-speciﬁc per-acre
wildﬁre suppression costs used in the simulation model could then be updated to
incorporate these predicted changes. Modeling these predicted changes, how-
ever, is beyond the scope of this article.
12. The wildﬁre return intervals and the conditional probabilities of low-,
moderate-, and high-severity wildﬁre were chosen in consultation with Tessa
Nicolet (Regional Fire Ecologist at the USDA Forest Service) and Bruce Greco
(retired USDA Forest Service Fire Management Ofﬁcer, Coconino National
Forest).
13. Schmidt et al. (2002) report wildﬁre return intervals, rather than annual wildﬁre
probabilities. Annual wildﬁre probabilities are the reciprocal of wildﬁre return
intervals under the assumption that wildﬁres occur according to a geometric
distribution (i.e., the probability of a wildﬁre is constant and independent across
years).
14. There is an apparent inconsistency between the wildﬁre return intervals
reported in Table 2 and the “Average acres burned per ﬁre” reported in Table
1. The apparent inconsistency is that the differences in “Average acres
burned per ﬁre” between states reported in Table 1 do not support the extent
of the variation in wildﬁre return intervals (annual burn probabilities) be-
tween states (100 years in PIPO-A, 70 years in PIPO-B, 40 years in PIPO-C,
10 years in PIPO-D, and 80 years in PIPO-E) reported in Table 2. This
apparent inconsistency underlines the shortcomings of using the data re-
ported in Table 1 to calculate wildﬁre return intervals. Although the data
from Table 1 provide us with the best information available on wildﬁre
suppression costs in each ecological state in the study region given current
suppression resources and priorities, the data cover a relatively short period
(1995–2011) and only information on wildﬁres of 100 acres (300 acres
after 2003) that “escaped” initial suppression efforts by local and state agen-
cies is included, thus representing just a small sample of wildﬁres from the
region. As is pointed out in Baker (2009), wildﬁre return intervals calculated
over short time spans may be substantially inﬂuenced by one or two extreme
ﬁre years and as such may not be reliable indicators of future wildﬁre behav-
ior. This is the reason why we do not use the data reported in Table 1 to
calculate annual wildﬁre probabilities and why it is not surprising that “Av-
erage acres burned per ﬁre” reported in Table 1 do not agree with the wildﬁre
return intervals reported in Table 2.
15. The deﬁnition of the ﬁre rotation interval does not imply that the entire area will
burn during a cycle; rather, some sites will burn several time and others not at all.
16. The times for ecological transition were chosen in consultation with Dave Huff-
man of the Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University.
17. The postwildﬁre transition probabilities between states were chosen in consul-
tation with Dave Huffman of the Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern
Arizona University.
18. Several studies have quantiﬁed ecosystem services in western forests, including
the beneﬁts from conservation of critical wildlife habitat (Loomis and Gonza´lez-
Caba´n 2010), from reductions in wildﬁre-related losses (Butry et al. 2001, Lynch
2004, Snider et al. 2006, Combrink et al. 2013), and on the impact of fuel
treatments, wildﬁre, and forest health on real estate values (Kim and Wells 2005,
Mueller et al. 2009, Stetler et al. 2010). Unfortunately, these studies do not
quantiﬁed how these ecosystem services vary between ecological states in the
PIPO ecosystem, and, as such, the estimates of the value of ecosystem services
from these studies cannot be readily integrated into the simulation model.
19. The wildﬁre suppression cost data used to construct our distribution of per-acre
wildﬁre suppression costs only contain information on wildﬁre of 100 acres
(300 acres after 2003) that “escaped” initial suppression efforts by local and state
agencies. As a result, the data does not contain any information on wildﬁres in
Forest Science • MONTH 2015
15

the wildland-urban interface, as these wildﬁre are generally suppressed before
reaching the minimum size threshold. Similarly, our wildﬁre return intervals
were chosen to represent current conditions on wildlands in the PIPO ecosystem
and not in the wildland-urban interface.
20. There are two additional reasons why it is not possible to use the results
reported in this article to infer the likely beneﬁts and costs of ERTs and
HFRTs in the wildland-urban interface. First, human-caused wildﬁre igni-
tions are more common in the wildland-urban interface than in wildlands
(Cardille et al. 2001), which will cause the wildﬁre return interval in the
wildland-urban interface to differ from those on wildlands independent of
any differences in the wildﬁre suppression response. Second, ﬁre managers in
the wildland-urban interface may be obliged to aggressively suppress all
wildﬁres to reduce the possibility of damage to property, infrastructure, and
human life and to minimize the risk to human health related to released
smoke and particulate matter. This concern for “resources at risk” in the
wildland-urban interface may limit wildland ﬁre use in ecologically restored
states such as PIPO-D.
21. The variable costs of fuel treatment include labor and materials required to
perform treatment on an additional acre (or any unit of land) after the ﬁxed costs
of performing fuel treatment at a given site have been committed. The ﬁxed costs
of fuel treatment include the costs of transporting equipment to and from the
treatment site, the costs of equipment (including maintenance and deprecia-
tion), and the administrative costs of project planning and compliance.
Literature Cited
ABATZOGLOU, J.T., AND C.A. KOLDEN. 2011. Climate change in western
US deserts: Potential for increased wildﬁre and invasive annual grasses.
Rangel. Ecol. Manage. 64(5):471–478.
AGEE, J.K., AND C.N. SKINNER. 2005. Basic principles of forest fuel reduc-
tion treatments. For. Ecol. Manage. 211(1–2):83–96.
ALLEN-DIAZ, B., AND J.W. BARTOLOME. 1998. Sagebrush-grass vegetation
dynamics: Comparing classical and state-transition models. Ecol. Applic.
8(3):795–804.
ANDERSON, H.E. 1982. Aid to determining fuel models for estimating ﬁre
behavior. USDA For. Serv., Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-122, Intermountain
Forest and Range, Ogden, UT. 28 p.
BAKER, W.L. 2009. Fire ecology in Rocky Mountain landscapes. Island Press,
Washington, DC. 628 p.
BARBOUR, R.J., X. ZHOU, AND J.P. PRESTEMON. 2008. Timber product
output implications of a program of mechanical fuel treatments applied
on public timberland in the western United States. For. Policy Econ.
10(6):373–385.
BENAYAS, J.M.R., A.C. NEWTON, A. DIAZ, AND J.M. BULLOCK. 2009.
Enhancement of biodiversity and ecosystem services by ecological res-
toration: A meta-analysis. Science 325:1121–1124.
BECKER, D.R., S.M. MCCAFFREY, D. ABBAS, K.E. HALVORSEN, P. JAKES,
AND C. MOSELEY. 2011. Conventional wisdoms of woody biomass
utilization on federal public lands. J. For. 109(4):208–218.
BERRY, A.H., AND H. HESSELN. 2004. The effect of the wildland-urban
interface on prescribed burning costs in the Paciﬁc Northwestern
United States. J. For. 102(6):33–37.
BISWELL, H.H., H.R. KALLANDER, R. KOMAREK, R.J. VOGL, AND H.
WEAVER. 1973. Ponderosa ﬁre management: A task force evaluation of
controlled burning in ponderosa pine forest of central Arizona. Tall Tim-
bers Research Station, Misc. Publ. No. 2, Tallahassee, FL. 49 p.
BOSTWICK, P., J. MENAKIS, AND T. SEXTON. 2011. How fuel treatments
saved homes from the Wallow Fire. USDA For. Serv., Unpublished re-
port, Washington, DC. 14 p.
BUTRY, D.T., E. MERCER, J.P. PRESTEMON, J.M. PYE, AND T.P. HOLMES.
2001. What is the price of catastrophic wildﬁre? J. For. 99(11):9–17.
CALKIN, D.E., AND K. GEBERT. 2006. Modeling fuel treatment costs on
forest service lands in the western United States. West. J. Appl. For.
21(4):217–221.
CARDILLE, J.A., S.J. VENTURA, AND M.G. TURNER. 2001. Environmental
and social factors inﬂuencing wildﬁres in the Upper Midwest, United
States. Ecol. Applic. 11:111–127.
COHEN, J.D. 2000. Preventing disaster: Home ignitability in the wildland-
urban interface. J. For. 98:15–21.
COMBRINK, T., C. COTHRAN, W. FOX, J. PETERSON, AND G. SNIDER.
2013. Full cost accounting of the 2010 Schultz Fire. ERI—Issues in Forest
Restoration, Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona Uni-
versity, Flagstaff, AZ. 44 p.
COVINGTON, W.W., R.L. EVERETT, R. STEELE, L.L. IRWIN, T.A. DAER,
AND A.N.D. AUCLAIR. 1994. Historical and anticipated changes in
forest ecosystems of the Inland West of the United States. J. Sustain. For.
2:13–63.
COVINGTON, W.W., AND M.M. MOORE. 1994. Southwestern ponderosa
pine forest structure: Changes since Euro-American settlement. J. For.
92(1):39–47.
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION INSTITUTE. 2013. The efﬁcacy of hazardous fuel
treatments: A rapid assessment of the economic and ecological consequences of
alternative hazardous fuel treatments: A summary document for policy mak-
ers. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flag-
staff, AZ. 28 p.
EIDENSHINK, J., B. SCHWIND, K. BREWER, Z. ZHU, B. QUAYLE, AND S.
HOWARD. 2007. A project for monitoring trends in burn severity. Fire
Ecol. 3(1):3–21.
EVANS, A.M., R.G. EVERETT, S.L. STEPHENS, AND J.A. YOUTZ. 2011. Com-
prehensive fuels treatment practices guide for mixed conifer forests: California,
Central and Southern Rockies, and the Southwest. USDA For. Serv., South-
western Region and The Forest Guild, Albuquerque, NM. 106 p.
FERNANDES, P.A.M., C.A. LOUREIRO, AND H.S. BOTELHO. 2004. Fire
behavior severity in a maritime pine stand under differing fuel condi-
tions. Ann. For. Sci. 61:537–544.
FINKRAL, A.J., AND A.M. EVANS. 2008. Effects of thinning treatment on
carbon stocks in a northern Arizona ponderosa pine forest. For. Ecol.
Manage. 255:2743–2750.
FINNEY, M.A. 2001. Design of regular landscape fuel treatment patterns for
modifying ﬁre growth and behavior. For. Sci. 47(2):219–228.
FINNEY, M.A. 2005. The challenge of quantitative risk assessment for wild-
land ﬁre. For. Ecol. Manage. 211:97–108.
FINNEY, M.A., AND J.D. COHEN. 2003. Expectation and evaluation of fuel
management objectives. P. 353–366 in Fire, fuel treatments, and ecolog-
ical restoration: Conference proceedings: 2002 16–18 April, Fort Collins,
CO. USDA For. Serv., Proc. RMRS-P-29, Rocky Mountain Research
Station, Fort Collins, CO.
FISCHER, W.C., AND A.F. BRADLEY. 1987. Fire ecology of western Montana
forest habitat types. USDA For. Serv., Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-223, Inter-
mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Ogden, UT. 95 p.
FUL´E, P.Z., J.E. CROUSE, A.E. COCKE, M.M. MOORE, AND W.W. COV-
INGTON. 2004. Changes in canopy fuels and potential ﬁre behavior
1880–2040. Ecol. Model. 175:231–248.
GALIK, C.S., R. ABT, AND Y. WU. 2009. Forest biomass supply in the
southeastern United States implications for industrial roundwood and
bioenergy production. J. For. 107(2):69–77.
GEBERT, K.A., D.E. CALKIN, AND J. YODER. 2007. Estimating suppression
expenditures for individual large wildland ﬁres. West. J. Appl. For.
22(3):188–196.
GRAHAM, R.T., AND T.B. JAIN. 2005. Ponderosa pine ecosystems. In Proc. of
the symposium on ponderosa pine: Issues, trends, and management, 2004 Oc-
tober 18–21, Klamath Falls, OR, Ritchie, M.W., D.A. Maguire, and A.
Youngblood (tech. coords.), USDA For. Serv., Gen. Tech. Rep PSW-
GTR-198, Paciﬁc Southwest Research Station, Albany, CA. 281 p.
HAN, H., H.W. LEE, AND L.R. JOHNSON. 2004. Economic feasibility of an
integrated harvesting system for small-diameter trees in southwest
Idaho. For. Prod. J. 54(2):21–27.
HESSBURG, P.F., R.G. MITCHELL, AND G.M. FILIP. 1994. Historical and
current roles of insects and pathogens in eastern Oregon and Washington
forested landscapes. USDA For. Serv., Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-GTR-327,
Paciﬁc Northwest Research Station, Portland, OR. 72 p.
HJERPE, E.E., AND Y.S. KIM. 2008. Economic impacts of national forest
fuels reduction programs in the Southwest. J. For. 106(6):311–316.
16
Forest Science • MONTH 2015

HOUTMAN, R.M., C.A. MONTGOMERY, A.R. GAGNON, D.E. CALKIN,
T.G. DIETTERICH, S. MCGREGOR, AND M. CROWLEY. 2013. Allowing
a wildﬁre to burn: Estimating the effect on future wildﬁre suppression
costs. Int. J. Wildl. Fire 22(7):871–882.
HUANG, C.-H., A. FINKRAL, C. SORENSEN, AND T. KOLB. 2013. Toward
full economic valuation for forest fuels reduction treatments. J. Environ.
Manage. 130:221–231.
HUNTER, M.E., W.D. SHEPPERD, L.B. LENTILE, J.E. LUNDQUIST, M.G.
ANDREU, J.L. BUTLER, AND F.W. SMITH. 2007. A comprehensive guide
to fuels treatment practices for ponderosa pine in the Black Hills, Colorado
Front Range, and Southwest. USDA For. Serv., Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-
GTR-198, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, CO. 99 p.
INCE, P.J., H. SPELTER, K.E. SKOG, A. KRAMP, AND D.P. DYKSTRA. 2008.
Market impacts of hypothetical fuel treatment thinning programs on
federal lands in the western United States. For. Policy Econ.
10(6):363–372.
KIM, Y.-S. 2010. Ecological restoration as economic stimulus: A regional anal-
ysis. ERI—Issues in Forest Restoration, Ecological Restoration Institute,
Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ. 20 p.
KIM, Y.-S., AND A. WELLS. 2005. The impacts of forest density on property
values. J. For. 103(3):146–151.
KLINE, J. 2004. Issues in evaluating the costs and beneﬁts of fuel treatments to
reduce wildﬁre in the nation’s forests. USDA For. Serv., Res. Note PNW-
RN-542, Paciﬁc Northwest Research Station, Portland, OR. 49 p.
LARSON, D., AND R. MIRTH. 2004. A case study on the economics of
thinning in the wildland urban interface. West. J. Appl. For.
19(1):60–65.
LIANG, J., D.E. CALKIN, K.M. GEBERT, T.J. VENN, AND R.P. SILVERSTEIN.
2008. Factors inﬂuencing large wildland ﬁre suppression expenditures.
Int. J. Wildl. Fire 17:650–659.
LOOMIS, J.B. 2002. Integrated public lands management: Principles and ap-
plications to national forests, parks, wildlife refuges, and BLM lands. Co-
lumbia University Press, New York. 544 p.
LOOMIS, J., AND A. GONZ´ALEZ-CAB´AN. 2010. Forest service use of non-
market valuation in ﬁre economics: Past, present, and future. J. For.
108(8):389–396.
LYNCH, D.L. 2004. What do forest ﬁres really cost? J. For. 102(6):42–49.
MCCAFFREY, S.M. 2006. The public and wildland ﬁre management: Social
science ﬁndings for managers. USDA For. Serv., Gen. Tech. Rep. NRS-1,
Northern Research Station, Newtown Square, PA. 202 p.
MCCAFFREY, S.M. 2009. Crucial factors inﬂuencing public acceptance of
fuel treatments. Fire Manage. Today 69(1):9–12.
MERCER, D.E., AND J.P. PRESTEMON. 2008. Economic analysis of fuel treat-
ment. P. 294–307 in Cumulative watershed effects of fuels management in the
Eastern United States, LaFayette, R., M.T. Brooks, J.P. Potyondy, L. Audin,
S.L. Krieger, and C.C. Trettin (eds.). USDA For. Serv., Gen. Tech. Rep.
SRS-161, Southern Research Station, Asheville, NC.
MERCER, D.E., J.P. PRESTEMON, D.T. BUTRY, AND J.M. PYE. 2007. Eval-
uating alternative prescribed burning policies to reduce net economic
damages from wildﬁre. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 89(1):63–77.
MILLAR, C.I., N.L. STEPHENSON, AND S.L. STEPHENS. 2007. Climate
change and forests of the future: Managing in the face of uncertainty.
Ecol. Applic. 17(8):2145–2151.
MOGHADDAS, J.J., AND L. CRAGGS. 2007. A fuel treatment reduces ﬁre
severity and increases suppression efﬁciency in a mixed conifer forest.
Int. J. Wildl. Fire 16(6):673–678.
MOIR, W.H., AND J.H. DIETERICH. 1988. Old-growth ponderosa pine
from succession in pine bunchgrass forests in Arizona and New Mexico.
Natur. Areas J. 8(1):17–24.
MUELLER, J.M., J.B. LOOMIS, AND A. GONZ´ALEZ-CAB´AN. 2009. Do re-
peated wildﬁres change homebuyers’ demand for homes in high-risk
areas? A hedonic analysis of the short and long-term effects of repeated
wildﬁres on house prices in Southern California. J. Real Estate Finan.
Econ. 38(2):155–117.
MURPHY, K., T. RICH, AND T. SEXTON. 2007. An assessment of fuel
treatment effects on ﬁre behavior, suppression effectiveness, and struc-
ture ignition on the Angora Fire. USDA For. Serv., R5-TP 025, Paciﬁc
Southwest Region, Vallejo, CA. 32 p.
OHLSON, D.W., T.M. BERRY, R.W. GRAY, B.A. BLACKWELL, AND B.C.
HAWKES. 2006. Multi-attribute evaluation of landscape-level fuel man-
agement to reduce wildﬁre risk. For. Policy Econ. 8(1):824–837.
PRESTEMON, J.P., K.L. ABT, AND R.J. BARBOUR. 2012. Quantifying the
net economic beneﬁts of mechanical wildﬁre hazard treatments on tim-
berlands of the western United States. For. Policy Econ. 21:44–53.
PRESTEMON, J.P., K.L. ABT, AND R.J. HUGGETT JR. 2008. Market impacts
of a multiyear mechanical fuel treatment program in the US. For. Policy
Econ. 10(6):386–399.
REINHARDT, E.D., R.E. KEANE, D.E. CALKIN, AND J.D. COHEN. 2008.
Review: Objectives and considerations for wildland fuel treatment in
forested ecosystems of the interior western United States. For. Ecol.
Manage. 256:1997–2006.
ROGERS, G., W. HANN, C. MARTIN, T. NICOLET, AND M. PENCE. 2008.
Fuel treatment effects on ﬁre behavior, suppression effectiveness, and struc-
ture ignition, Grass Valley ﬁre, San Bernadino National Forest. USDA
For. Serv., R5-TP-026a, Region 5, Vallejo, CA. 35 p.
RUMMER, B. 2008. Assessing the cost of fuel reduction treatments: A critical
review. For. Policy Econ. 10(6):355–362.
RUMMER, B., J. PRESTEMON, D. MAY, P. MILES, J. VISSAGE, R. MC-
ROBERTS, G. LIKNES, ET AL. 2005. A strategic assessment of forest biomass
and fuel reduction treatments in western States. USDA For. Serv., Gen.
Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-149, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort
Collins, CO. 17 p.
SAVAGE, M., AND J.N. MAST. 2005. How resilient are southwestern pon-
derosa pine forests after crown ﬁres? Can. J. For. Res. 35:967–977.
SCHMIDT, K.M., J.P. MENAKIS, C.C. HARDY, J. WENDEL, AND D.L. BUN-
NELL. 2002. Development of coarse-scale spatial data for wildland ﬁre and
fuel management. USDA For. Serv., Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-87,
Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, CO. 41 p.
SESNIE, S., AND J.D. BAILEY. 2003. Using history to plan the future of
old-growth ponderosa pine. J. For. 101(7):40–47.
STEPHENS, L.S., J.D. MCIVER, R.E.J. BOERNER, C.J. FETTIG, J.B. FON-
TAINE, B.R. HARTSOUGH, P. KENNEDY, AND D.W. SCHWILK. 2012.
Effects of forest fuel reduction treatments in the United States. Bio-
Science 62(6):549–560.
STETLER, K.M., T.J. VENN, AND D.E. CALKIN. 2010. The effects of wild-
ﬁre and environmental amenities on property values in northwest Mon-
tana, USA. Ecol. Econ. 69:2233–2243.
STRATTON, R.D. 2004. Assessing the effectiveness of landscape fuel treat-
ments on ﬁre growth and behavior. J. For. 102(7):32–41.
SNIDER, G., P.J. DAUGHERTY, AND D. WOOD. 2006. The irrationality of
continued ﬁre suppression: An avoided cost analysis of ﬁre hazard re-
duction treatments versus no treatment. J. For. (104):431–437.
TAYLOR, M.H., K. ROLLINS, M. KOBAYASHI, AND R.J. TAUSCH. 2013. The
economics of fuel management: Wildﬁre, invasive plants, and the evo-
lution of sagebrush rangelands in the western United States. J. Environ.
Manage. 126:157–173.
THOMPSON, M.P., N.M. VAILLANT, J.R. HAAS, K.M. GEBERT, AND K.D.
STOCKMANN. 2013. Quantifying the potential impacts of fuel treat-
ments on wildﬁre suppression costs. J. For. 111(1):49–58.
US DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY. 2011. US billion-ton update: Biomass supply
for a bioenergy and bioproducts industry. ORNL/TM-2011/224, Oak
Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN. 235 p.
US GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTING OFFICE. 2006. Update on federal agency
efforts to develop a cohesive strategy to address wildland ﬁre threats. US
Government, GAO-06–671R, Washington, DC. 19 p.
WANG, X., H.S. HE, AND X. LI. 2007. The long-term effects of ﬁre sup-
pression and reforestation on a forest landscape in northeastern China
after a catastrophic wildﬁre. Landsc. Urban Plan. 79:84–95.
Forest Science • MONTH 2015
17

WESTERLING, A.L., H.G. HIDALGO, D.R. CAYAN, AND T.W. SWETNAM.
2006. Warming and earlier spring increases western US forest wildﬁre
activity. Science 313:940–943.
WESTOBY, M., B.H. WALKER, AND N. MEIR. 1989. Opportunistic manage-
ment for rangelands at disequilibrium. J. Range Manage. 42:266–274.
WINTER, G., AND J.S. FRIED. 2000. Homeowner perspectives on ﬁre haz-
ard, responsibility, and management strategies at the wildland-urban
interface. Soc. Natur. Resour. 13(1):33–49.
WINTER, G., C. VOGT, AND S. MCCAFFREY. 2006. Residents warming up
to fuels management: Homeowners? Acceptance of wildﬁre and fuels
management in the wildland-urban interface. P. 19–32 in The public
and wildland ﬁre management: Social science ﬁndings for managers, Mc-
Caffrey, S.M. (tech. ed.). USDA For. Serv., Gen. Tech. Rep. NRS-1,
Northern Research Station, Newtown Square, PA.
YODER, J., AND K. GEBERT. 2012. An econometric model for ex ante
prediction wildﬁre suppression costs. J. For. Econ. 18:76–89.
Appendix A: Sensitivity of the Results to the
Number of Years to Transition between
Ecological States without Wildﬁre
In this appendix, we examine the sensitivity of our results to our
assumption concerning the number of years to transition between
ecological states in the PIPO ecosystem without wildﬁre. We per-
form sensitivity analysis on these parameters because they have the
least empirical support in the ecology literature. Tables A1 and A2
report results for both ERTs and HFRTs when the initial state is
PIPO-A, and the times to transition between PIPO-A and PIPO-B
without wildﬁre are 50, 150, and 200% of the baseline value of 100
years. Similarly, Tables A3 and A4 (Table A5) report results for both
ERTs and HFRTs when the initial state is PIPO-B (PIPO-C) and
the times to transition in PIPO-B (PIPO-C) are 50, 150, and 200%
of the baseline value of 80 years (40 years).
We do not perform sensitivity analysis on our baseline as-
sumptions on the time to transition between ecological states
without wildﬁre in PIPO-D or PIPO-E. We do not perform
sensitivity analysis on these parameters because, in the case of
PIPO-D, the time to transition without wildﬁre is long (200
years), so that varying it, even substantially, is unlikely to inﬂu-
ence the results. Similarly, as the ecosystem only transitions to
PIPO-E after a crown ﬁre, which is a relatively rare occurrence,
varying our assumption about the number of years to transition
back to PIPO-A from PIPO-E without a wildﬁre has little effect
on the results reported in this article.
The results reported in Tables A1–A5 indicate that our results
are not sensitive to the number of years to transition without
wildﬁre and that our conclusions would largely be intact if we
were to change these parameters, even substantially, from the
baseline values. Our results are not sensitive to these assumptions
because the times to transition without treatment and wildﬁre
between PIPO-A and PIPO-B and PIPO-B and PIPO-C are
relatively long (80 and 100 years, respectively), so the changes in
expected wildﬁre suppression costs associated with changes in
these parameters occurs far in the planning horizon, and, as a
result, has little inﬂuence on the NPV of wildﬁre suppression
costs. On the other hand, whereas shortening (lengthening) the
time to transition between PIPO-C and PIPO-D leads to faster
(slower) rehabilitation to PIPO-D with ERT or HFRT, the in-
crease in the number of wildﬁres in PIPO-D is balanced by the
reduced per-ﬁre suppression costs in PIPO-D (the majority of
wildﬁres in PIPO-D are low-severity wildﬁres that can be man-
aged via wildland ﬁre use), so that on balanced shortening
(lengthening) the time to transition between PIPO-C and
PIPO-D has only a small inﬂuence on the NPV of wildﬁre sup-
pression costs associated with treatment.
Table A1.
Varying the time to transition without wildﬁre in PIPO-A: initial state PIPO-A, ERTs.
ERTs  PIPO-A
Number of years to transition without wildﬁre in PIPO-A
50 years
100 yearsa
150 years
200 years
Mean total number of wildﬁres: no
treatment
2.45 (1, 5)b
2.34 (0, 5)
2.23 (0, 5)
2.18 (0, 5)
Mean total number of wildﬁres: with
treatment
7.98 (2, 18)
8.2 (2, 18)
8.06 (2, 18)
8.06 (2, 18)
Mean total number of good wildﬁres:
no treatment
0.15 (0, 1)
0.10 (0, 1)
0.08 (0, 1)
0.06 (0, 1)
Mean total number of good wildﬁres:
treatment
6.07 (0, 18)
6.2 (0, 18)
6.1 (0, 18)
6.10 (0, 18)
Mean total number of bad wildﬁres:
no treatment
2.29 (0, 5)
2.25 (0, 5)
2.15 (0, 5)
2.12 (0, 5)
Mean total number of bad wildﬁres:
treatment
1.91 (0, 5)
1.99 (1, 5)
1.96 (0, 5)
1.96 (0, 5)
Mean total suppression costs (NPV):
no treatmentc
$174 ($0, $696)
$165 ($0, $655)
$154 ($0, $598)
$154 ($0, $598)
Mean total suppression costs (NPV):
with treatmentc
$217 ($10, $717)
$217 ($10, $728)
$219 ($9, $737)
$219 ($9, $737)
Mean number of treatments
4.9 (1, 8)
4.9 (1, 9)
4.9 (1, 9)
4.9 (1, 9)
Mean treatment costs (NPV)c
$2,443 ($2,100, $3,034)
$2,460 ($2,100, $3,038)
$2,464 ($2,100, $3,076)
$2,464 ($2,100, $3,076)
Final state: no treatment
(A, B, C, D, E)d
209, 183, 79, 4, 525
3,286, 401, 861, 16, 5,436
325, 112, 8, 0, 555
437, 0, 0, 0, 563
Final state: with treatment
(A, B, C, D, E)
66, 59, 73, 514, 288
623, 567, 727, 5,126, 2,957
68, 52, 74, 509, 297
68, 52, 74, 509, 297
a Baseline scenario reported in Tables 6 and 7.
b 5th and 95th percentiles.
c Sum over 200 years using a 3% discount rate (following Loomis 2002).
d “Final state” is the ﬁnal state of the system (PIPO-A, PIPO-B, PIPO-C, PIPO-D, or PIPO-E) after 200 years.
18
Forest Science • MONTH 2015

Table A2.
Varying the time to transition without wildﬁre in PIPO-A: initial state PIPO-A; HFRTs.
HFRTs (initial state  PIPO-A)
Number of years to transition without wildﬁre in PIPO-A
50 years
100 yearsa
150 years
200 years
Mean total number of wildﬁres: no
treatment
2.52 (1, 5)b
2.35 (0, 5)
2.2 (0, 5)
2.21 (0, 5)
Mean total number of wildﬁres: with
treatment
3.77 (1, 8)
2.54 (0, 5)
2.14 (0, 5)
2.05 (0, 5)
Mean total number of good
wildﬁres: no treatment
0.19 (0, 1)
0.10 (0, 1)
0.06 (0, 1)
0.05 (0, 0)
Mean total number of good
wildﬁres: treatment
2.75 (0, 7)
1.73 (0, 4)
1.60 (0, 4)
1.47 (0, 4)
Mean total number of bad wildﬁres:
no treatment
2.33 (0, 5)
2.25 (0, 5)
2.14 (0, 5)
2.16 (0, 5)
Mean total number of bad wildﬁres:
treatment
1.02 (0, 3)
0.81 (0, 3)
0.54 (0, 3)
0.58 (0, 3)
Mean total suppression costs (NPV):
no treatmentc
$158 ($1, $598)
$164 ($0, $687)
$171 ($0, $696)
$171 ($0, $652)
Mean total suppression costs (NPV):
with treatmentc
$99 ($1, $436)
$113 ($0, $487)
$122 (0, $522)
$120 ($0, $512)
Mean number of treatments
11.22 (5, 15)
12.0 (5, 14)
12.4 (5, 14)
11.5 (5, 13)
Mean treatment costs (NPV)c
$163 ($102, $171)
$154 ($103, $203)
$151 ($99, $159)
$152 ($104, $159)
Final state: no treatment
(A, B, C, D, E)d
203, 192, 67, 6, 532
3,283, 398, 859, 13, 5,447
324, 119, 6, 0, 551
424, 0, 0, 0, 576
Final state: with treatment
A, B, C, D, E)
119, 247, 11, 367, 256
2,250, 699, 4,783, 103, 2,165
136, 713, 6, 0, 145
823, 0, 0, 0, 177
a Baseline scenario reported in Tables 6 and 7.
b 5th and 95th percentiles.
c Sum over 200 years using a 3% discount rate (following Loomis 2002).
d “Final state” is the ﬁnal state of the system (PIPO-A, PIPO-B, PIPO-C, PIPO-D, or PIPO-E) after 200 years.
Table A3.
Varying the time to transition without wildﬁre in PIPO-B: initial state PIPO-B; ERTs.
ERTs (initial state  PIPO-B)
Number of years to transition without wildﬁre in PIPO-B
40 years
80 yearsa
120 years
160 years
Mean total number of wildﬁres: no treatment
3 (1, 6)b
2.83 (1, 6)
2.69 (1, 5)
2.56 (1, 5)
Mean total number of wildﬁres: with treatment
10.12 (2, 20)
10.3 (2, 21)
10.41 (2, 21)
10.29 (3, 21)
Mean total number of good wildﬁres: no treatment
0.52 (0, 2)
0.33 (0, 1)
0.27 (0, 1)
0.18 (0, 1)
Mean total number of good wildﬁres: treatment
8.40 (0, 20)
8.5 (0, 21)
8.70 (0, 21)
8.51 (0, 21)
Mean total number of bad wildﬁres: no treatment
2.48 (1, 5)
2.5 (1, 5)
2.43 (1, 5)
2.38 (0, 5)
Mean total number of bad wildﬁres: treatment
1.72 (0, 5)
1.78 (0, 5)
1.71 (0, 5)
1.78 (0, 5)
Mean total suppression costs (NPV): no treatmentc
$201 ($6, $689)
$200 ($3, $763)
$209 ($3, $763)
$192 ($0, $711)
Mean total suppression costs (NPV): with
treatmentc
$253 ($16, $803)
$256 ($16, $800)
$245 ($16, $753)
$253 ($16, $774)
Mean number of treatments
4.4 (1, 8)
4.4 (1, 8)
4.4 (1, 8)
4.5 (2, 8)
Mean treatment costs (NPV)c
$744 ($500, $1,545)
$730 ($500, $1,503)
$720 ($500, $1,549)
$727 ($508, $1,438)
Final state: no treatment
(A, B, C, D, E)d
295, 62, 73, 25, 545
3,064, 828, 550, 103, 5,455
326, 89, 38, 7, 540
303, 95, 55, 1, 546
Final state: with treatment
(A, B, C, D, E)
56, 42, 61, 608, 233
511, 500, 630, 5,960, 2,399
61, 44, 51, 608, 236
53, 56, 64, 591, 236
a Baseline scenario reported in Tables 6 and 7.
b 5th and 95th percentiles.
c Sum over 200 years using a 3% discount rate (following Loomis 2002).
d “Final state” is the ﬁnal state of the system (PIPO-A, PIPO-B, PIPO-C, PIPO-D, or PIPO-E) after 200 years.
Forest Science • MONTH 2015
19

Table A4.
Varying the time to transition without wildﬁre in PIPO-B: initial state PIPO-B; HFRTs.
HFRTs (initial state  PIPO-B)
Number of years to transition without wildﬁre in PIPO-B
40 years
80 yearsa
120 years
160 years
Mean total number of wildﬁres: no
treatment
3.06 (1, 6)b
2.80 (1, 5)
2.71 (1, 6)
2.58 (1, 5)
Mean total number of wildﬁres: with
treatment
7.48 (1, 17)
5.56 (1, 12)
4.23 (1, 8)
3.03 (1, 6)
Mean total number of good wildﬁres:
no treatment
0.51 (0, 2)
0.32 (0, 1)
0.25 (0, 1)
0.25 (0, 1)
Mean total number of good wildﬁres:
treatment
6.27 (0, 17)
4.44 (0, 13)
3.21 (0, 8)
2.08 (0, 5)
Mean total number of bad wildﬁres:
no treatment
2.54 (1, 5)
2.48 (1, 5)
2.45 (1, 5)
2.33 (0, 5)
Mean total number of bad wildﬁres:
treatment
1.22 (0, 4)
1.11 (0, 4)
1.02 (0, 3)
0.94 (0, 3)
Mean total suppression costs (NPV):
no treatmentc
$204 ($6, $676)
$202 ($3, $766)
$208 ($2, $721)
$193 ($1, $793)
Mean total suppression costs (NPV):
with treatmentc
$107 ($6, $335)
$77 ($2, $284)
$65 ($1, $239)
$65 ($1, $247)
Mean number of treatments
8.0 (3, 14)
9.0 (5, 14)
10.7 (6, 14)
11.5 (6, 14)
Mean treatment costs (NPV)c
$145 ($121, $165)
$148 ($243, $991)
$153 ($122, $160)
$153 ($121, $159)
Final state: no treatment
(A, B, C, D, E)d
307, 74, 69, 21, 529
3,073, 844, 567, 98, 5,418
326, 83, 50, 6, 535
301, 98, 59, 3, 539
Final state: with treatment
(A, B, C, D, E)
198, 90, 87, 464, 161
2,219, 1,408, 786, 3,725, 1,862
237, 162, 12, 343, 246
257, 186, 294, 20, 243
a Baseline scenario reported in Tables 6 and 7.
b 5th and 95th percentiles.
c Sum over 200 years using a 3% discount rate (following Loomis 2002).
d “Final state” is the ﬁnal state of the system (PIPO-A, PIPO-B, PIPO-C, PIPO-D, or PIPO-E) after 200 years.
Table A5.
Varying the time to transition without wildﬁre in PIPO-C: initial state PIPO-C; both ERTs and HFRTs.
Initial state  PIPO-C
Number of years to transition without wildﬁre in PIPO-C
20 years
40 yearsa
60 years
80 years
Mean total number of wildﬁres: no
treatment
4.88 (1, 18)b
3.39 (1, 6)
3.43 (1, 6)
3.44 (1, 6)
Mean total number of wildﬁres: with
treatment
14.67 (3, 24)
10.4 (2, 21)
7.85 (2, 18)
5.87 (2, 15)
Mean total number of good wildﬁres:
no treatment
2.43 (0, 18)
0.71 (0, 2)
0.83 (0, 2)
0.71 (0, 2)
Mean total number of good wildﬁres:
treatment
13.62 (0, 24)
8.7 (0, 21)
5.73 (0, 18)
3.33 (0, 15)
Mean total number of bad wildﬁres:
no treatment
2.45 (0, 6)
2.68 (1, 5)
2.6 (1, 5)
2.73 (1, 6)
Mean total number of bad wildﬁres:
treatment
1.05 (0, 5)
1.73 (0, 5)
2.12 (0, 5)
2.54 (0, 6)
Mean total suppression costs (NPV):
no treatmentc
$265 ($10, $784)
$275 ($10, $807)
$263 ($9, $775)
$277 ($12, $809)
Mean total suppression costs (NPV):
with treatmentc
$219 ($25, $774)
$259 ($15, $811)
$263 ($10, $787)
$279 ($9, $806)
Mean number of treatments
2.48 (1, 5)
4.5 (1, 8)
5.39 (1, 10)
6.22 (1, 12)
Mean treatment costs (NPV)c
$223 ($60, $1,126)
$298 ($60, $1,093)
$317 ($60, $1,072)
$332 ($60, $1,145)
Final State: no treatment
(A, B, C, D, E)d
270, 73, 36, 150, 471
3,071, 845, 552, 279, 5,253
299, 87, 56, 34, 524
296, 99, 48, 24, 533
Final state: with treatment
(A, B, C, D, E)
16, 16, 25, 801, 142
506, 503, 571, 6,090, 2,330
70, 60, 112, 436, 322
79, 92, 143, 284, 402
a Baseline scenario reported in Tables 6 and 7.
b 5th and 95th percentiles.
c Sum over 200 years using a 3% discount rate (following Loomis 2002).
d “Final state” is the ﬁnal state of the system (PIPO-A, PIPO-B, PIPO-C, PIPO-D, or PIPO-E) after 200 years.
20
Forest Science • MONTH 2015

Appendix B: Treatment Costs in Ponderosa Pine
Forest Ecosystems
The cost of the proposed treatments includes many different
components, which can be classiﬁed into two categories: operation
costs directly related to application of the treatment itself (e.g.,
equipment and labor); and administrative costs (e.g., site prepara-
tion, monitoring, and project planning). In addition, the proposed
treatments need to go through the process for National Environ-
mental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA) compliance, and the costs asso-
ciated with the process (e.g., archeological survey and documenta-
tion) should also be included in the administrative costs. Four
national forests were contacted to gather the most recent transaction
evidence (FY 2008), expert opinions, and planning estimates at
each. Based on these estimates and previously published articles in
this region (Larson and Mirth 2004, Hjerpe and Kim 2008), an
average cost per acre for the proposed treatments in each national
forest was calculated. Although the study is based on the most recent
and reliable estimates, some assumptions were necessary to generate
estimates of average treatment costs per acre. The following sources
of variation were not incorporated into treatment cost calculations
but should be acknowledged.
●Treatment costs for the Forest Service consist of ﬁxed (e.g., ad-
ministrative costs) and variable costs (e.g., operation costs). Fixed
costs per acre decrease signiﬁcantly as the project size increases. In
most cases, national forests reported average costs by dividing the
total expenditure by the treated acres. This is most evident in cost
variations for prescribed burning, for which cost per acre varies a
great deal depending on project sizes and locations.
●The administrative costs incurred by public agencies are mostly
ﬁxed costs often spread out over many years and involve multiple
branches within the agency, which make it difﬁcult to estimate a
per-acre base. The cost estimates also vary depending on how
much planning, preparation, operations, and monitoring are
done by agency personnel, rather than contracted out.
●Treatments within the wildland-urban interface are likely to be
more expensive because the treatments are smaller in size and
require more personnel and equipment as well as more intensive
monitoring (see Berry and Hesseln 2004, Calkin and Gebert
2006).
●Treatment costs probably vary depending on site conditions and
the severity of treatments. However, engineering cost estimation
models that can account for those variations are often designed to
minimize cost per harvested volume of merchantable timber and
are not directly applicable to ERTs (Rummer 2008), especially in
the Southwest where the majority of removed volume is probably
submerchantable in the conventional sense. ERTs are different
from commercial harvesting in terms of objectives, methods, and
outcomes. To achieve full restoration goals, the treatments
should be designed to emulate the structure of presettlement
forests (e.g., grouped/clumpy stand structure, rather than even-
spaced), treat fuel loads, and restore ﬁre in prescription as well as
reducing stand densities (Fule´ et al. 2004). Without these addi-
tional operations, logging itself can actually exacerbate the ﬁre
risk by deteriorating site conditions (Rummer 2008).
There are also inherent limitations to estimating costs based on
expert opinion, transaction evidence, and planning estimates. As
Rummer (2008) points out, these estimates document costs ex post
and may not accurately reﬂect changing treatment conditions and
technology. In fact, the Ofﬁce of Management and Budget believes
that the agencies cannot produce credible, long-term funding esti-
mates for wildland ﬁre risk reduction treatments at this point and
allows the agencies to publish the estimates only with sufﬁciently
reliable data (US Government Accounting Ofﬁce 2006).
Forest Science • MONTH 2015
21
