SOIL SEED BANK IN SOUTHWESTERN PONDEROSA PINE: 
IMPLICATIONS FOR ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION 
By Judith D. Springer  
A Thesis  
Submitted in Partial Fulfillment  
ofthe Requirements for the Degree of  
Master ofScience  
in Forestry  
Northern Arizona University 
May 1999 
W. Wallace Covington, Ph.D. ' 
_ )~ /Lr' ["' £Ci~{~ 
L~ura E. DeWald, Ph.D. 
/~ ~
~~ 
Thomas E. Kolb, Ph.D. 

ABSTRACT  
SOIL SEED BANK IN SOUTHWESTERN PONDEROSA PINE:  
IMPLICATIONS FOR ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION  
.nJDITH D. SPRINGER  
The objectives of my study were to: 1) obtain a baseline estimate of 
the plant species in the soil seed bank in a southwestern ponderosa pine 
forest prior to ecological restoration treatments (such as tree thinning and 
prescribed burning) ; 2) determine the relationship between soil seed bank 
species and the aboveground vegetation; and 3) determine species 
composition and seed density in the forest floor organic matter (0 
horizon) versus mineral soil. 
Results from the baseline study indicate that overstory canopy type 
has a significant influence on the species in the soil seed bank. In general, 
annual and biennial species are found in greater numbers in the soil seed 
bank than perennials. From a total of38 species, the most common 
species in the soil seed bank were Verbascum thapsus, Leonurus cardiaca, 
and Conyza canadensis. Six species were non-native and few perennial 
grasses emerged in seed emergence trials. 
ii 

In an area undergoing ecological restoration, 14 species emerged in 
seed emergence trials from seed bank samples collected after overstory 
trees were thinned and prior to prescribed burning, with an estimated seed 
density of3,152 seeds/mi. The most common species were Collinsia 
parviflora and Verbascum thapsus, which accounted for 45% and 30% of 
the germinants, respectively. 
Fifteen species were observed in the aboveground vegetation at this 
same site after thinning. Of these, Collinsia parviflora was the most 
common species. Although Verbascum thapsus accounted for 30% ofthe 
viable seeds in the seed bank, it accounted for only 3% ofthe plants in the 
aboveground vegetation. There were approximately 101 plants/m' in the 
thinned area, but only 0.4 plants/m' in the nearby unthinned control. 
There was a significant correlation between aboveground vegetation and 
the seed bank in the thinned area, but not in the control. 
There was a significantly larger number ofseeds in mineral soil than 
in the 0 horizon. However, a significantly greater number of non-native 
species occupied the 0 horizon versus the mineral soil. There was a 
significantly greater number ofviable seeds at the 0-5 em depth compared 
to the 5-10 em depth (including both organic matter and mineral soil). 
III 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I would like to thank my major professor Dr. Margaret M. Moore 
for her ideas, understanding, support, and sense of humor. I would also 
like to thank my other committee members Dr. W. Wallace Covington, 
Dr. Laura E. DeWald and Dr. Thomas E. Kolb for their insight, assistance 
with new ideas, and review ofthis thesis. Special thanks are warranted for 
Dr. Pete Fule, Amy Waltz, Doc Smith, Gina Vance, Becky Kerns, Tom 
Heinlein, Brad Blake, Rebecca Sayers, and Dr. Mike Kearsley for fielding 
my questions, offering advice, and helping me navigate around various 
hurdles; for Dr. Tina Ayers, Dr. H. David Hammond, Dr. Randy Scott, 
Nancy Brian, Lee Hughes, and John Anderson for assistance with plant 
identification; and for Greg Taylor and the other members ofthe BLM 
prescribed burn crew. 
I would also like to acknowledge the student workers, staff and 
graduate students at the NAU School ofForestry Ecological Restoration 
ProgramlEcology Lab who assisted with plot establishment, data 
collection, greenhouse weeding and watering, and other tasks related to 
my projects. They include Julie Blake, Jason Brooks, Codey Carter, 
Cheryl Casey, Walker Chancellor, Janelle Clark, Liza Comita, Marcy 
DeMillion, Mike Elson, Brandon Harper, Barbara Kent, Julie Korb, 
IV 

Lauren Labate, Tammy Lesh, Lisa Machina, Ted Ojeda, John Paul 
Roccaforte, Scott Schaff, Stacey Sprecher, Mike Stoddard, Dave 
Vanderzanden, Alex Viktora, Patty West, and Margot Wilkinson-Kaye. 
Funding for this study was provided by McIntire-Stennis grant 
ARZZ-NAU-MS53 . The BLM Arizona Strip District also provided 
funding for the overall restoration project at Mt. Trumbull. 
Finally, I would like to thank my husband Abe for his unflagging 
encouragement and support and also for his vigilance in watering the 
plants in my greenhouse study while I was away on fieldwork. 
v 

TABLE OF CONTENTS  
ABSTRACT 
ii  
CHAPTER 3. MANUSCRIPT: SOIL SEED BANK IN FIVE CANOPY  
TYPES AT Mr. TRUMBULL, MORAVE COUNTY, AZ.  
CHAPTER 4. MANUSCRIPT: EFFECTS OF TREE TIllNNING ON  
THE SOIL SEED BANK IN SOUTHWESTERN PONDEROSA PINE  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
.iv  
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
vi  
LIST OF TABLES 
viii  
LIST OF FIGURES 
x  
DEDICATION 
xi  
PREFACE 
xii  
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 
1  
CHAPTER 2. COMPREHENSIVE LITERATURE REVIEW 
4  
Abstract 
23  
Introduction 
24  
Study Area 
26  
Methods 
29  
Results 
, .. , 
34  
Discussion 
44  
Conclusion 
50  
Abstract 
51  
Introduction 
52  
VI 

Study Area 
54  
CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSIONS AND MANAGEMENT  
APPENDIX A: FLORA IN THE VICINITY OF MT. TRUMBULL,  
Methods 
57  
Results 
61  
Discussion 
73  
Conclusion 
81  
IMPLICATIONS 
83  
LITERATURECITED 
87  
MOHAVE COUNTY, ARIZONA 
96  
APPENDIX B: BIOGRAPHICAL STATEMENT 
102  
vii 

LIST OF TABLES 
Table  
Page 
2.1  
Number ofseeds and the predominant species present in the seed  
pools of various canopy types 
6  
3.1  
Ranges of litter depth in five canopy types at Mt. Trumbull 
31  
3.2  
Total number ofviable seeds in the soil seed bank from samples  
collected in five canopy types at Mt. Trumbull 
35  
3.3  
Viable seeds/rrr in the soil seed bank from samples collected from  
five canopy types at Mt. Trumbull 
37  
3.4  
A comparison ofbetween-subjects effects ofcanopy type on five plant  
functional groups and families at Mt. Trumbull, AZ 
39  
3.5  
Total number ofseedlings that emerged from organic and mineral soil  
samples in five canopy types at Mt. Trumbull 
40  
3.6  
Number ofseedlings ofeach species that emerged from mineral soil  
samples collected from five canopy types at Mt. Trumbull 
41  
3.7  
Number ofseedlings ofeach species that emerged from 0 horizon  
samples collected from five canopy types at Mt. Trumbull 
42  
4.1  
Number ofviable seeds that emerged from samples collected at Mt.  
Trumbull, September 1996, after thinning and prior to burning ....62  
4.2  
Estimated seed density/rrr' ofspecies that emerged from seed bank  
samples collected at Mt. Trumbull, September 1996, after thinning  
and prior to burning 
62  
4.3  
Species observed growing aboveground in three different treatments  
at Mt. Trumbull, 1997 
64  
4.4  
Number ofplants ofeach species/rrr observed in the aboveground  
vegetation at Mt. Trumbull, 1997. Averaged over 15 plots 
66  
Vlll 

4.5  
Relationship ofspecies found in the soil seed bank at Mt. Trumbull  
after thinning and in the aboveground vegetation in the following  
growing season 
67  
4.6  
Species observed growing aboveground in 3 different treatments at  
Mt. Trumbull, 1998 
69  
4.7  
Number ofplants ofeach species/m' observed in the aboveground  
vegetation at Mt. Trumbull, 1998 
70  
4.8  
Comparison ofthe aboveground vegetation in the two years following  
thinning 
71  
ix 

LIST OF FIGURES 
Figure  
Page 
2.1  
Diagram ofsoil seed bank dynamics 
8  
3.1  
Study area near Mt. Trumbull in northern Arizona 
26  
3.2  
Principal component analysis 
38  
4.1  
Study area near Mt. Trumbull in northern Arizona 
55  
4.2  
Example of 2 x 3 m herbaceous restoration plot 
58  
4.3  
Number ofplants ofeach species in the aboveground vegetation in  
1997, by treatment 
65  
4.4  
A comparison ofthe aboveground vegetation in the two years  
following overstory thinning 
72  
4.5  
The forest floor prior to overstory thinning 
77  
4.6  
Example ofunderstory plot number 17 after thinning ofoverstory 
trees, August 1997 
77 
4.7  
Understory plot number 17 in September, 1997 
78 
4.8  
Understory plot number 17 in August, 1998 
78 
x 

To Isaac 
Xl 

PREFACE 
This thesis was written in manuscript format. It contains an 
introduction, comprehensive literature review, two journal manuscript 
chapters, and a conclusion. Methods are contained in each ofthe manuscript 
chapters. The result is some redundant material, which hopefully I have 
kept to a minimum. Chapter 3 "Soil Seed Bank in Five Canopy Types at 
Mt. Trumbull, Mohave County, Arizona" will be submitted to the Canadian 
Journal ofBotany and Chapter 4 "Effects ofThinning on the Soil Seed Bank 
in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine" will be submitted to Restoration Ecology. 
Citations throughout the thesis follow the format ofthe Canadian Journal of 
Botany. Scientific names were taken mainly from Utah Flora (Welsh et aI. 
1993). Scientific names for those species not found in Utah Flora were 
taken from Intermountain Flora (Cronquist et at 1972, 1977, 1984, 1989, 
1994, 1997) and Arizona Flora (Kearney and Peebles 1960), respectively. 
These sources were also used to determine native versus non-native species. 
Where nativity is questionable, plants are indicated as native to the United 
States. 
xii 

CHAPTER 1  
INTRODUCTION  
"1 took in February three tablespoonfuls of mud from a little 
pond .. J kept it covered up for six months, pulling up and 
counting each plant as it grew; the plants were ofmany kinds, 
and were altogether 537 in number; and yet the viscid mud 
was all contained in a breakfast cup!" (Darwin 1859). 
Southwestern ponderosa pine herbaceous, shrub, and forb species 
(hereafter collectively referred to as understory) are essential for many 
ecological reasons including serving as food and habitat for animal species, 
serving a role in nutrient cycling and soil formation and stabilization, and 
providing a source offuel for low-intensity fires. In addition, the greatest 
biodiversity of species in southwestern ponderosa pine forests is contained 
in this understory layer of vegetation. Southwestern ponderosa pine 
understory species composition and cover have been adversely modified 
since Euro-American settlement (presettlement), due mainly to livestock 
overgrazing in the late nineteenth century and active fire suppression 
(Arnold 1950, Weaver 1951, Cooper 1960, Covington and Moore 1994, 
Touchan et al. 1995, Covington et al. 1997). Production ofunderstory 

species has probably also declined due to the two previous factors as well as 
to an increasing ponderosa pine tree density (Cooper 1960, Covington et al. 
1994, Covington and Moore 1994, Covington et al. 1997). 
Restoring the overstory tree structure to densities and patterns similar 
to pre-Euro-American conditions is important for restoring native 
herbaceous and shrub species to their historical levels in southwestern 
ponderosa pine ecosystems. Basic restoration treatments in these forests 
include protecting the remaining old-growth trees by removing organic 
matter from around the base, thinning postsettlement trees to presettlement 
patterns and densities, and reintroducing a fire regime that is similar to 
historical fires in frequency and intensity (Fule et al. 1997). Where natural 
regeneration ofthe understory is inadequate after overstory treatments, 
restoration through seeding and planting may be required. 
Knowledge ofseed bank ecology is essential for understanding 
successional patterns, plant community development, and population 
dynamics (perez et al. 1998). Key to restoring the understory in ponderosa 
pine ecosystems is an understanding ofthe past and present on-site plant 
material, including aboveground vegetation composition and biomass as 
well as viable seeds in the soil seed bank. Information on the quantity and 
type of species in the seed bank will give an indication ofthe species that 
will emerge following a disturbance, such as fire or thinning (Pratt et al. 
1984, Vose and White 1991, Brown 1992, Warr et aL 1993), and can 
possibly provide clues to the historical species composition. 
2 

The objectives ofmy study were to: 1) obtain a baseline estimate of 
the species found in the soil seed bank beneath five canopy types of 
overstory vegetation at the study site; 2) determine the species composition 
and seed density in forest floor organic matter versus mineral soil; 3) 
examine how ecological restoration thinning practices affect seeds in the soil 
seed bank; and 4) relate aboveground vegetation to viable seeds in the soil 
seed bank. 
I hypothesized that: 1) seed bank species will be strongly associated 
with dominant canopy types across the landscape; 2) more viable seeds will 
be found in the 0 horizon than in the mineral soil; 3) the number ofviable 
seeds will decrease with depth in the soil; 4) ecological restoration 
treatments such as thinning ofoverstory trees will change the distribution 
and number ofviable seeds that will be able to germinate after restoration 
treatments; and 5) different species will be found in the aboveground 
herbaceous vegetation than in the soil seed bank ofmature ponderosa pine 
forests. Ultimately this information will help in the decision making process 
to determine ifseeding ofnative understory species or control ofnon-native 
species is necessary to meet target goals ofecological restoration. 
3 

CHAPTER 2  
COMPREHENSIVE LITERATURE REVIEW  
Introduction  
Seed banks may be found in the canopy oftrees and shrubs (aerial 
seed banks) or belowground in the mineral soil or vegetative litter. The 
former type ofseed bank often consists of serotinous cones in genera such 
as Banksia which may persist in the canopy for long periods oftime, 
awaiting a fire or severe drought to open the cones (Enright and Lamont 
1989, Baskin and Baskin 1998). The latter type, the soil seed bank or seed 
P004 is defined by Simpson et at (1989) as all viable seeds present on or in 
the soil or associated litter. Another accumulation ofpotential plants in the 
soil is the bud bank and is defined as the accumulation of bulbs, bulbils, and 
buds on rhizomes, corms, and tubers (Harper 1977, Baker 1989, Simpson et 
aI. 1989). The soil seed bank. in southwestern ponderosa pine is the primary 
subject ofthis thesis, although portions ofthe bud bank. are also included. 
This literature review focuses on the soil seed bank. and discusses the 
soil seed bank across ecosystems, the natural history and ecology ofsoil 
seed banks, and soil seed banks in several southwestern ecosystems. In 
addition, it includes methods of measuring and estimating the species and 
seeds found in the soil seed bank. 
4 

Life history may dictate whether a plant species utilizes the soil for 
storage of its seeds. In annuals, the dormant seeds in the soil seed bank 
serve as a "genetic memory" ofpast selective conditions and act as a 
mechanism for storing genotypes for future environmental variability 
(Templeton and Levin 1979, White 1979, Eriksson 1992, Pake and Venable 
1996, Bai and Romo 1997). A single species can have more than one 
genotype to capitalize on variability in different habitats and thus enhance 
its ability to withstand environmental variability (Cavers 1995). In contrast 
to annuals, the adult population ofmost perennial species contains a genetic 
memory to withstand environmental variability, and in general, perennials 
do not rely on the soil seed bank. as a means ofmaintaining genetic variation 
(Bazzaz 1996). 
Since Charles Darwin first recorded his observations on the soil seed 
bank in 1859, an enormous amount of literature on soil seed banks has been 
accumulated - a literature far too extensive to be discussed in detail here. 
For in-depth information, there are comprehensive discussions ofseed bank. 
ecology (Harper 1977, Roberts 1981, Silvertown 1982, Leek et al1989, 
Thompson 1992, Baskin and Baskin 1998), literature reviews (Warr et al. 
1993, Thompson et al. 1997), bibliographic reviews (Vyvey 1989), and 
discussions on the relationship between seed banks and restoration ecology 
(Bakker et al. 1996). There are also numerous detailed discussions of 
sampling techniques (Champness 1949, Bigwood and Inouye 1988, Gross 
1990, Brown 1992, Warr et al, 1993, Ter Heerdt et al. 1996), and ofthe 
5 

appropriate size and number of samples to be collected (Benoit et al. 1989, 
Benoit et al. 1992, Dessaint et al. 1996). 
Soil Seed Banks across Ecosystems 
Soil seed banks are found in most terrestrial ecosystems, although 
their importance varies within and among ecosystems (Table 2.1). 
Table 2.1. Number of seeds and the predominant species present in the seed 
pools of various vegetation types. 
Vegetation type 
Location 
Seedslm2 
Predominant speeiesIVegetation types 
Arable fields 
England 
1,600-86,000 
Agricultural weeds 
Annual grassland 
California 
9,000-54,000 
Annual grasses 
Arable fields 
Minnesota 
1,000-40,000 
Agricultural weeds 
Freshwater marsh 
New Jersey 
6,405-32,000 
Annuals and perennials 
Arable fields 
Canada 
5,000-23,000 
Agricultural weeds 
Mojave desert 
Nevada 
800-18,750 
Winter annuals 
Meadow grassland 
USSR 
280-16,980 
Bromus inermis, Geranium pratense 
Ponderosa pine 
Washington 
13,052-14,463 
Annual forbs, non-natives 
Arable fields 
Honduras 
7,620 
Agricultural weeds 
Oak woodlands 
California 
5,760-6,850 
Stellaria media 
100 yr. Picea forest 
USSR 
1,200-5,000 
Early successional species 
Subalpine forest 
Oregon 
3,100 
Juncus sp. 
Chaparral 
California 
700-3,000 
Perennial shrubs 
Upland coniferous forest 
Alberta 
500-2,650 
Carex sp.• Salix sp. 
Zoysia grassland 
Japan 
1,980 
Zoysiajaponicus 
Coniferous forest 
Canada 
1,000 
Alnus rubra 
Prairie grassland 
Kansas 
300-800 
Annuals 
Salt marsh 
Wales 
31-566 
Sea rush 
Sagebrush semi-desert 
Utah 
3-92 
Grasses, forbs 
Ponderosa pine 
Arizona 
8-22 
Chenopodium sp., Gnaphalium sp. 
Sand pine scrub 
Florida 
20 
Cyperus sp., herbs 
Subarctic pinelbirch forest 
Canada 
0 
No viable seeds present 
From Biswell (1974), Harper (1977), Nelson and Chew (1977), Silvertown 
(1982), Pratt et al. (1984), Hassan and West (1986), Vose and White (1987), 
Fyles (1989), Marafion and Bartolome (1989), Ingersoll and Wilson (1993), 
Carrington (1997), Baskin and Baskin (1998). 
Thompson (1978) suggests that buried seed numbers increase with the 
frequency and intensity ofdisturbance and decrease with stress. Stress 
6 

occurs when the productivity ofall or part ofthe vegetation is insufficient to 
produce enough seeds to maintain the seed bank, and may be caused by a 
variety of factors including drought, temperature fluctuations, herbivory, 
and competition (Thompson 1978). The highest seed densities are found in 
temperate arable soils, primarily because most plants that are considered 
weeds form large soil seed banks, and also due to the amount and frequency 
ofsoil disturbance associated with most modem agricultural practices 
(Thompson 1978, Thompson et a1. 1993, Warr et al. 1993, Cavers 1995). 
Wetlands also typically have a very high buried seed density, again due to 
the frequency and intensity ofdisturbance (Cavers 1995), and also because 
they serve as catchments for wind and water dispersed seeds. The lowest 
numbers ofseeds in the soil seed bank generally occur in tropical rain forest, 
subarctic, arctic and alpine systems, and in some temperate woodlands and 
grasslands (Thompson 1978, Warr et al. 1993). 
Natural History of Soil Seed Banks 
In this section I outline the trends observed in soil seed banks, how 
seeds enter the soil, where seeds are located in the soil, dormancy, and 
losses from the seed bank, and I also discuss how disturbance relates to the 
soil seed bank. A diagram ofseed bank dynamics is shown in Figure 2.1. 
In general, there are many more potential plants in the form ofseeds 
that lie dormant below the soil surface than there are in the aboveground 
vegetation. Seeds will often accumulate in the soil in areas offavorable 
7  

microclimates for each species (Cardina and Sparrow 1996), and patches of 
aboveground vegetation can serve as seed entrapment sites and provide 
micro sites conducive to seedling establishment (safe sites). Thus, buried 
seeds may accumulate differentially between vegetated and bare soils 
(Ingersoll and Wilson 1993) and will often be found aggregated in the soil 
around the mother plant, existing vegetation, or sites which formerly 
contained vegetation. 
Seed Rain 
Predation 
~ 
I 
Dormant 
I 
Active 
~
Predation 
Seed 
I 
Stimuli 
Seed 
~ 
Bank 
I 
Bank 
I 
-,Ir 
Death 
(Decay, Dessication, Senescence, 
Pathogen Attack) 
Germmation 
Seedlings
.. 
~ 
" 
Death 
Figure 2.1 Diagram ofsoil seed bank dynamics (adapted from Harper 
1977). 
There is a well-documented lack ofcorrespondence in both 
abundance and species composition, and between the aboveground and 
belowground vegetation, particularly in sites that have not recently 
experienced disturbance (Thompson and Grime 1979, Donelan and 
8 

Thompson 1980, Silvertown 1982, Ingersoll and Wilson 1993, Warr et al, 
1993, Warr et al. 1994, Dutoit and Alard 1995). This lack of 
correspondence is especially noticeable in grasslands, wetlands, and 
woodlands (Warr et al. 1993). In frequently disturbed habitats, the species 
composition aboveground and belowground is generally similar (Warr et al. 
1993). The addition ofnitrogen is also responsible for decreasing the 
proportion ofspecies shared between the soil seed bank and the 
aboveground vegetation, due primarily to the suppression ofseed 
germination (Kitajima and Tilman 1996). 
Another widely observed trend is a dearth ofdominant tree, and 
sometimes also shrub, seeds in the soil seed bank of many temperate forest 
ecosystems, especially coniferous systems (Thompson 1978, Kramer and 
Johnson 1987, Ingersoll and Wilson 1990, Warr et al. 1994, Ferrandis et al. 
1996). However, Archibold (1979) found a large number ofwoody species 
seeds in the seed bank ofa mixed conifer boreal forest in Canada. 
Seeds can be dispersed in space as well as time ifthey retain their 
viability for long periods. The majority ofburied seeds die within a few 
years (Cavers 1995), but significant numbers ofseeds ofsome species can 
survive for decades or even 100 years or more (Kivilaan and Bandurski 
1981, Warr et al. 1993). The soil seed bank contains both persistent and 
transient seeds (Thompson and Grime 1979). Persistent seeds tend to 
survive in the soil for a year or more, while transient seeds rarely survive in 
the soil for more thana year. Transient seeds are normally larger and either 
9 

flattened or elongated, which tends to complicate burial (Thompson et al. 
1993). Persistent seeds tend to be small and compact (which probably leads 
to their ease ofburial), are generally from annual species, and are commonly 
found in arable and fire-prone habitats (Harper 1977, Eriksson 1992, 
Thompson et aI. 1993, Bakker et aL 1996). Several other factors also lead to 
persistence in the soils including germination cues and requirements, 
dormancy mechanisms, and resistance to pathogens (Thompson et al. 1993). 
Another consistent characteristic ofspecies with persistent seeds is the 
inhibition ofgermination by darkness (Grime 1979). 
Seed Distribution in the SoiJ 
How seeds enter the soil is not a well-understood process. It may be a 
gradual process by which seeds are incorporated into the litter and 
eventually buried, or it may be rapid due to freeze-thaw cycles, rainwater 
percolation, soil faunal activity, burrowing rodents, or trampling activity by 
large mammals (Warr et aI. 1993). Dung beetles are also known to bury 
seeds by incorporating them into balls ofdung (Wicklow et aI. 1984). 
The general trend is toward a decreasing seed density with increasing 
soil depth. Deeply buried seeds are assumed to be older than seeds near the 
surface (Warr et aL 1993, Warr et aL 1994), and their chances of 
germination decrease with depth (Cavers 1983, Cavers 1995). Seeds of 
short-lived (though not necessarily transient) species tend to be viable only 
near the surface. In contrast, viable long-lived (persistent) seeds may be 
10  

found throughout the soil profile. In order to germinate, these deeply buried 
seeds must be brought nearer to the surface by plowing, road building, 
windthrow, or other soil disturbances. Species that are lost from the 
aboveground vegetation may still sometimes be found deep in the soil, while 
those that have recently colonized an area may be found only near the 
surface (Milberg 1995). 
As would be expected, the soil layers (both organic and mineral) 
nearest the surface hold the greatest number ofviable seeds, and the litter 
layers tend to contain the greatest density ofseeds (Strickler and Edgerton 
1976, Granstrom 1982). Moore and Wein (1977) found the greatest seed 
viability in the upper 0-2 em ofthe 0 horizon, and Perez et aI. (1998) in the 
upper 5 em ofmineral soil. Kramer and Johnson (1987) found the greatest 
viability in the upper 0-5 em, which included both organic matter and 
mineral soil. 
Dormancy 
Seeds utilize a number ofsurvival strategies until a time when 
conditions are favorable for germination and growth initiation. The most 
common strategy is seed dormancy. A dormant reserve ofseeds in the soil 
is a means whereby plants employ rapid germination to capitalize on 
conditions after a disturbance. Silvertown (1982) suggests that dormant 
seeds are only produced in large numbers by species whose growing 
populations are subject to periodic local extinction. Such is the case for 
11 

grassland annuals, arable weeds and many other early successional species. 
However, not all early-successional species produce dormant seeds. 
There are numerous factors that cue seeds to break dormancy and 
germinate. These include light intensity, photoperiod, light quality, 
temperature, nitrates, oxygen and carbon dioxide levels, pH, moisture, 
physical abrasion of the seed coat (Silvertown 1982), smoke, heat 
scarification and high soil temperatures after fire, and presence ofchemicals 
found in charred wood (Christensen and Muller 1975, Keeley et al. 1985, 
Auld and Bradstock 1996, Keeley and Fotheringham 1997). In addition, 
there is some evidence that germination may be triggered by temperature 
fluctuations in the soil brought about by removal ofthe insulating effect of 
foliage, litter, or other organic matter (Grime 1979). Enforced dormancy 
may occur in species whose seeds are subjected to changes in the spectral 
composition of light rays that have been fihered through a dense leaf canopy 
(Grime 1979). 
Losses from the Soil Seed Bank 
Only a small percentage of buried seeds will ever germinate, the 
possibility ofgermination being dependent mostly on a favorable microsite 
climate. At least 95% ofall plant mortality typically occurs at the seed stage 
(Cavers 1983). The loss of seeds from the soil seed bank is mainly due to 
predation, germination, fungal attack, desiccation, senescence, and high fire 
temperatures (Harper 1977, Clark and Wilson 1994, also see Figure 2.1). 
12  

Most types ofdisturbance will deplete the seed bank through germination, 
High temperatures from fire can result in decreased seed density in the soil 
seed bank by killing some seeds and by stimulating germination in others 
(Clark and Wilson 1994). Closure ofthe overstory tree or shrub canopy 
may also result in impoverishment of the aboveground herbaceous or shrub 
vegetation which leads to a depleted or depauperate seed bank (Warr et al. 
1994). Seeds may also physically remain in the soil seed bank even though 
they have lost their viability and will never germinate. 
Disturbance 
As mentioned earlier, sites that undergo frequent disturbance usually 
have a large soil seed bank due to favorable conditions for, and increases in, 
germination following disturbance, and the subsequent reproduction and 
production ofseeds to reoccupy the soil (Thompson 1978). In addition, the 
seeds in the seed bank in these systems do not have to lie dormant for long 
periods oftime while awaiting favorable conditions for germination. The 
seed dormancy period is a time of high mortality for many species, and the 
loss of many seeds occurs during this time (Cavers 1995, Figure 2.1). 
However, one type ofsystem which experiences frequent disturbance, the 
intensively grazed system, is an exception to the trend toward large seed 
banks. Intensive grazing can cause decreases in seed rain that will lead to 
decreases in the soil seed bank ofsome species (Dutoit and Alard 1995, 
Bertiller 1996, Ghermandi 1997). Ifsevere enough, the grazing can 
13  

eliminate palatable perennial grasses from the above and belowground 
vegetation (Bertiller 1996). In contrast, Milberg (1995) found that the 
number ofspecies in the soil seed bank and in the aboveground vegetation 
can actually increase due to the transport ofseeds by grazing animals. 
The closer temporally an ecosystem is to a disturbance, the smaller 
the soil seed bank due to depletion by germination (Warr et aI. 1993, 
Mulugeta and Stoltenberg 1997). As seeds from the seed bank germinate, 
mature and reproduce, the seed bank continues to increase in size. 
Eventually succession may reach a point where the overstory vegetation 
begins to eliminate some understory species through shading or other 
competitive means. In frequently disturbed habitats, species composition 
between aboveground vegetation and the soil seed bank is generally similar, 
but there is little correspondence in undisturbed habitats as succession 
proceeds and the aboveground species composition changes (Warr et aI. 
1993). Communities with large persistent seed banks are characterized by a 
regime ofsevere, unpredictable disturbances such as cultivation, high­
intensity fire, or large fluctuations in water level (Thompson 1992). 
Predictable seasonal and small-scale disturbances, such as ice storms, 
windthrow, or small animal activity, do not promote the accumulation of 
large seed banks. In plant communities where disturbance is either 
intermediate in size and frequency or locally variable, there may be a 
combination of both short-lived and long-lived species in the seed bank. 
Systems such as old-growth Douglas-fir (Psuedotsuga menziesiiy forests, 
14 

which do not experience frequent disturbance, may have a decreased 
number of germinating seedlings following disturbance such as fire or 
logging (Ingersoll and Wilson 1990). 
The intensity and frequency ofdisturbance may also affect the 
density, composition, and location of viable seeds in the soil. Low-intensity 
fires may kill only seeds in the 0 horizon while allowing those in the 
mineral soil to survive. However, high intensity fires may heat the surface 
ofthe mineral soil enough to cause destruction ofthe entire seed bank (Flinn 
and Wein 1977, Flinn and Wein 1988). Some species utilize a strategy by 
which other reproductive plant parts, such as rhizomes, in the mineral soil 
are able to survive fire, sometimes even severe fire. These species may have 
a competitive advantage over species that must establish by seed (Flinn and 
Wein 1977, Flinn and Pringle 1983). Whether seeds survive a fire can also 
be contingent on conditions prior to the fire, i.e., whether fuels were moist 
or dry (Cushwa et al. 1968). 
As succession continues after disturbance, seed bankdensity and 
species diversity in the seed bank decrease so that late-successional 
communities often have relatively few buried viable seeds (Donelan and 
Thompson 1980, Warr et al 1993, Dutoit and Alard 1995). Early­
successional species are often short-lived, produce many more seeds than 
species that appear later in the successional sequence, and rely on a long­
term seed viability strategy for continued survival ofthe species in systems 
with low frequency ofdisturbance (Dutoit and Alard 1995). In temperate 
15 

mature woodlands, the light-demanding, early successional species often 
have been lost and replaced by shade-tolerant species, which generally 
produce few viable seeds and must re-invade sites by new propagules 
following disturbance (Warr et al. 1993, Dutoit and Alard 1995). Late 
successional ecosystem soils often possess the seeds ofall the preceding 
seral stages (Warr et al. 1993). 
Seed Banks in Ponderosa Pine and Selected Southwestern Ecosystems 
There is a vast amount ofliterature available on soil seed banks, and 
some ofthis research has occurred in certain ecosystems that also occur in 
the southwestern United States. In general, however, there have been very 
few studies actually conducted in the Southwest. I will only discuss those 
ecosystems that are included in my study area or adjacent to it, 
encompassing ponderosa pine forests, pinyon woodlands, sagebrush 
communities, and grasslands. 
Ponderosa Pine Forests 
In general, very little is known about seed bank ecology in ponderosa 
pine forests. At a ponderosa pine/Gambel oak study site near Flagstaff: AZ, 
Vose and White (1987) found about 8 viable seeds/nr' in burned plots and 22 
seeds/nr' in control plots. Ceanothus fendleri, a shrub species, sprouted 
prolifically by vegetative means after fire, but no seeds ofthis species were 
found in the seed bank. The conclusion was that seed rain is a more 
16 

important source of new seedlings after prescribed burning than is buried 
seed. 
In contrast, buried seeds may be a significant source ofcolonization 
in ponderosa pine forests ofeast central Washington. Pratt et al. (1984) 
estimated that there were approximately 13,052 ±1481 viable seeds/rrr' in the 
top 10 ern ofthe mineral soil and associated litter during the spring. In the 
autumn, this number increased to approximately 14,463 ±1356. Seeds of57 
species were present in the soil seed bank and 21 ofthese species were not 
found in the aboveground vegetation. Woody species accounted for only 
about 1% ofthe seed bank even though they dominated the aboveground 
vegetation. Two non-native species (Stel/aria media and Poa pratensis) 
accounted for 50% ofthe buried viable seed. The majority of viable grass and 
annual forb seeds were found in the litter, whereas perennial forb species 
were mainly found in the mineral soil. 
Pratt et al, (1984) suggest three possible reasons for the elevated 
estimates they found compared to most coniferous forests: 1) the ponderosa 
pine-snowberry community that they studied has high understory diversity 
and abundance (the site is a forest community with a meadow-steppe 
understory), 2) the study area was in an intermediate successional stage with 
both climax and early successional species present, and 3) the surface area 
sampled was larger than in most other studies. 
17 

Pinyon Woodlands 
Species diversity and abundance decrease with successional stage in 
soil seed banks ofSouthern California pinyon woodlands (Pinus edulis) as 
stands approach a closed canopy condition (Koniak and Everett 1982). This 
decrease corresponds with a decline in species frequency and composition in 
aboveground vegetation. Soil seed banks differ spatially in this ecosystem 
according to the micro site type. The duff (0 horizon or litter) microsite acts 
as a seed trap; however, the microsite with the highest seedling emergence is 
beneath shrub canopies. Dense stands ofshrubs act as windbreaks and 
accumulate both litter and seeds. Annual species accounted for 89% ofthe 
seedling emergence from four microsites (grass-forb, shrub-tree, tree-shrub, 
and tree). Collinsia parviflora dominated the seed bank. Other dominant 
species were Eriogonum vimineum, Cryptantha circumseissa, and Bromus 
teetorum (Koniak and Everett 1982). 
Shrublands/Sagebrush Communities 
Seed banks in Utah sagebrush communities differ both temporally 
and spatially. Soil seed bank densities are lower in burned sites immediately 
after fire based on soil seed bank data collected from a site in western Utah 
(Juab County). However, these densities increased to pre-fire levels within a 
year (85.5 ± 29.8 viable seeds/m' in unburned plots versus 38.7 ± 8.5 viable 
seeds/or' in burned plots) (Hassan and West 1986). Like other studies in 
semidesert and desert ecosystems, Hassan and West (1986) conclude that 
18 

seed bank densities are greater under shrub canopies than in the areas in 
between. However, "hot spots," areas occupied by shrubs prior to destruction 
by fire, may have almost complete depletion ofthe seed bank, probably due 
to germination in an area with higher organic matter and other favorable 
microsite conditions. 
Grasslands 
Grassland seed banks in Europe and North America are generally 
small, with the exception ofgrasslands that have been cultivated (Warr et al. 
1993). Soil seed banks in annual grasslands may be comparatively large. An 
annual grassland in coastal California contained 15,980 to 40,730 seeds/m' 
(Maraiion and Bartolome 1989). Annual grasslands are thought to be an 
unnatural artifact ofintensive grazing and drought combined with the 
invasion ofnon-native grasses and forbs (Keeley 1981). Seed reserves in 
annual grasslands are important as a dormancy mechanism for seedlings to 
emerge during the rainy season, rather than after fire, as in many other 
Southwest ecosystems. Regeneration from basal buds following 
aboveground destruction is well-developed in perennial grasses (Keeley 
1981) and may compensate for destruction ofseeds by fire and/or herbivory. 
Quantification oftbe Soil Seed Bank 
The two most common methods utilized in soil seed bank studies for 
determining the number ofseeds in the soil seed bank are the seed extraction 
19 

and the seed emergence methods (Brown 1992). Seed extraction is used to 
count the number of seeds in the soil, usually by separating the seeds from 
the soil by washing and sieving, and then by identifying the seeds that 
remain. Its main weaknesses are that it does not ascertain which seeds are 
viable, and it is extremely time- and labor-intensive. In the seed emergence 
method, samples are spread in trays and maintained under those conditions 
thought to promote as high a germination rate as possible, usually in a 
greenhouse (Bakker et at. 1996). The seed emergence method relies on 
germination of seeds and will therefore only approximate the number and 
type of viable seeds in the seed bank. The main limitation to the emergence 
method is that it detects only the readily germinable fraction ofthe seeds. 
Those species with seeds that require a certain environmental signal or cue to 
initiate germination will remain undetected ifthe required cue does not occur 
in the emergence test (Brown 1992). 
Ter Heerdt et at. (1996) have developed a seedling emergence method 
which involves concentrating (washing and sieving) the seeds prior to placing 
them onto sterilized soil. They found that this method increases the number 
ofseedlings that emerged as compared to unconcentrated samples, and it 
reduces the greenhouse space needed. Another method is to analyze the soil 
following seed emergence for seeds that did not germinate because they are 
no longer viable. 
A larger number of seeds will typically germinate under greenhouse 
conditions than in the field. However, seedling emergence under field 
20 

conditions can also be compared to emergence under greenhouse conditions 
ifestablished vegetation is first removed in the field. Most seeds that 
germinate in the field are those which reside in a thin light-penetrable layer 
ofsoil under prevailing weather conditions. Advantages ofexperimentation 
in the field are that a large area can be covered, and rare species and those 
with a patchy distribution will be revealed (Thompson et al. 1997). 
In general, when estimating the number ofseeds in the soil seed bank, 
it is more advantageous to collect a large number of small samples than a 
small number of large samples (Warr et al. 1993, Thompson et al. 1997). 
Many plant species tend to have a patchy distribution ofseeds in the soil over 
space and time. In order to capture this patchiness, it is necessary to collect 
many samples over a fairly wide area. 
Analysis of Soil Seed Bank Data 
Data obtained from seed bank studies are often highly skewed and 
non-normally distributed primarily due to the clustered seed distribution of 
many species in the soil (Warr et al. 1993, Thompson et al. 1997). This leads 
to a large number ofzeroes that accompany this distribution in studies that 
examine the presence/absence or frequency of species. In addition, standard 
statistical transformations often do not achieve normality, and thus non­
parametric statistical tests must be used . Even so, non-parametric tests can 
only be applied to the most common species found in the soil seed bank due 
to the loss ofpower that occurs with analysis ofuncommon or absent species 
21 

(Warr et al. 1993, Thompson et al. 1997). Data may also be examined using 
various multivariate techniques and ordinations to search for patterns. 
Software packages that are commonly used include TWINSPAN, 
DECORANA (Warr et al. 1993) and DECODA (peter Minchin 1999, 
personal communication, unreferenced). However, because ofthe difficulties 
in analysis, soil seed bank data are most often summarized descriptively 
(Warr et al. 1994). The specific analyses used in this thesis are described in 
Chapters 3 and 4. 
22  

CHAPTER 3  
MANUSCRIPT  
SOIL SEED BANK IN FIVE CANOPY TYPES AT  
MT. TRUMBULL, MOHAVE COUNTY, ARIZONA  
Abstract 
A soil seed bank study was conducted in northern Arizona to 
determine species composition prior to ecological restoration treatments, 
such as tree thinning and prescribed burning, and to relate the seed bank in 
the soil to the overstory canopy type. In addition, data were also collected 
to determine seed quantity and composition in the 0 horizon and in 
mineral soiL 
The five canopy types chosen for the baseline were old-growth and 
pole-sized ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa), Gambel oak (Quercus 
gambelii), New Mexico locust (Robinia neomexicanai, and big sagebrush 
(Artemisia tridentata). Soil seed bank samples were collected in the 
autumn and placed in a greenhouse for seed emergence trials. Thirty-eight 
species germinated in the study. The three most common species were 
Verbascum thapsus, Leonurus cardiaca, and Conyza canadensis. A 
principal component analysis revealed that overstory canopy type 
influenced soil seed bank species. The New Mexico locust canopy type is 
characterized by a soil seed bank dominated by non-native species and 
23  

members ofthe Scrophulariaceae and Chenopodiaceae families, while 
having few grasses, sedges or species in the Asteraceae family. The seed 
bank ofthe big sagebrush canopy type varied between sampling locations. 
Seed banks ofthe other three canopy types tend to be characterized by few 
grasses and sedges, and the number ofnon-native species is variable. A 
statistically significant difference in species composition based on overall 
canopy type was found. Numbers ofnon-native species and species in the 
Chenopodiaceae family differed significantly among canopy types. 
Seed germination was higher from mineral soil samples (61%) 
than from the 0 horizon (39%). When non-native species were separated 
from native species, a significantly larger number ofnon-native species 
germinated from the 0 horizon rather than from the mineral soil. 
Introduction 
Extensive changes in species composition, herbaceous productivity, 
fire frequency and intensity and other factors have occurred in the ponderosa 
pine forests ofthe southwestern United States since Euro-American 
settlement (hereafter called presettlement) (Cooper 1960, Covington et al. 
1997). Increasing tree densities, overgrazing, introduction of non-native 
plant species, and fire suppression are the main factors responsible for 
alterations in these ecosystems, especially in herbaceous and shrub 
understory composition and cover (Cooper 1960, Covington et aI. 1997). 
Knowledge ofpresettlement herbaceous vegetation is limited due to a 
reduced capacity for preservation ofnon-woody vegetation in the soil, and 
24 

limited historical records. A variety of methods, techniques, and tools have 
been used to determine historical herbaceous species composition and 
frequency. These methods and tools include historical records and 
photographs, packrat middens, palynology, relict sites (Kaufmann et al. 
1994), diaries, surveys, military expeditions (Dick-Peddie 1993), and opal 
phytoliths (Fisher et al. 1987, Piperno 1993, Fisher et al. 1995). Analyses of 
seeds in the soil seed bank can also be used as tools to reconstruct historical 
species composition, although their usefulness may be limited to the past 50 
years or so (Warr et al. 1994), and perhaps to only a few species. 
Nevertheless, seeds ofsome species found in the soil can be quite old 
(Granstrom 1982), and may prove useful in determining past frequency and 
composition ofthese species. Ultimately, the analyses ofsoil seed banks may 
be used in vegetation reconstruction, but they may be more useful in 
ecological restoration for determining how rapidly the understory vegetation 
ofan area may recover following ecological restoration treatments, 
identifying which species may germinate from the soil seed bank, and 
determining whether seeding ofnative species may be necessary. 
Some studies have shown that there are many more seeds in forest 
floor material or a horizon (also known as duffand litter) than in the 
underlying mineral soil in coniferous forests (Moore and Wein 1977, Kramer 
and Johnson 1987). This study was also designed to determine ifthe same 
principle is true for mature ponderosa pine forests in the Southwest. 
25 

Few studies exist of soil seed banks in present-day ponderosa pine 
(Pratt et al. 1984, Vose and White 1987). The objectives of my study are to 
obtain a baseline estimate of the species presently found in the soil seed bank 
in a ponderosa pine forest to assist in our understanding of seed bank ecology 
in these systems, to compare the soil seed bank species occurring under 
different dominant overstory species, and to determine whether there are 
differences in viable seed number between forest floor material (0 horizon) 
and mineral soil. My study is associated with a large-scale ecological 
restoration project, and the soil seed bank data will be used to aid in restoring 
understory species that historically occurred in the study area. 
My hypotheses are that: 1) similar seed bank species will occur with 
the same dominant overstory species across the landscape, and 2) there will 
be more seeds in the 0 horizon than in the mineral soil. 
In this chapter I will describe the baseline soil seed bank in five 
canopy types and examine the viable seeds in the 0 horizon versus those in 
the mineral soil. 
Study Area 
My study site is located within the Arizona Strip, the portion of 
northern Arizona that lies between Utah to the north and the Colorado River 
to the south. My study was conducted within an area between the Mt. 
Trumbull and Mt. Logan Wilderness Areas (Figure 3.1). The approximate 
26 

location ofthe study area is 36°22'30" N latitude and 113°10' W longitude. 
The elevation in the study area ranges from approximately 2,080 m to 2,290 
m. Much ofthe topography in the region is comprised ofrelatively recent 
volcanic rocks on top ofolder sedimentary rocks (Koons 1945), and the 
parent material for the soils in the vicinity ofMt. Trumbull is primarily 
derived from volcanic materials. The main soil type is Lozinta, an ashy 
skeletal over fragmental or cindery, mixed, mesic, Vitrandic Ustochrept 
(Alfred Dewall 1996, personal communication, unreferenced), although there 
are several other soil types in and around the study area. 
Climatological data for the Arizona Strip are limited due to sparse 
human settlement ofthe area. Most ofthe data currently available were 
collected from cities surrounding the Arizona Strip beginning in the early to 
mid-1900s. The regional climate differs from year to year because the 
Arizona Strip lies on the monsoon boundary. As in much ofthe Southwest, 
precipitation occurs annually in a bimodal distribution pattern. Thirty-four 
percent ofannual precipitation falls in the winter months of 
November through February. In years ofsummer monsoon, an average of 
35% ofannual precipitation falls during the months ofJuly through 
September (Altschul and Fairley 1989). Elevation also controls climate to a 
large degree in the Arizona Strip. Annual precipitation in the ponderosa pine 
type varies between 38-64 em (USDI BLM 1990). There are no perennial 
streams in the study area, but there are several springs in the vicinity ofMt. 
Trumbull and Mt. Logan. 
28 

The majority ofthe study area is ofthe ponderosa pine forest type, 
which is bordered by pinyon-juniper woodland. The ponderosa pine forest 
type in the Arizona Strip occurs at elevations ofapproximately 1,830-2,440 
m (USDI BLM 1990). Over 250 species of forbs, grasses, and shrubs have 
been identified in the ponderosa pine type and its transition zones in the 
vicinity ofMt. Trumbull and surrounding mountains (Appendix A). 
Preliminary data show that the last widespread, naturally occurring fire in the 
vicinity ofMt. Trumbull was in 1870. Fire scars collected from individual ponderosa 
pine trees indicate that fires occurred every four to six years prior to Euro-American 
settlement and use ofthe area (Pete Fule 1997, personal communication, 
unreferenced). 
Soil Seed Bank in Five Canopy Types 
Field and Greenbouse Metbods 
I chose three areas, each separated by several km, in which to collect 
baseline seed bank samples (EB-2, EB-3, and EB-5; see Figure 3.1). The 
same five canopy types were chosen in each area based on the dominant 
overstory species. The canopy types were old-growth ponderosa pine (Pinus 
ponderosa), pole-sized ponderosa pine, New Mexico locust (Robinia 
neomexicana), big sagebrush (Artemisia tridentatai, and Gambel oak 
(Quercus gambe/ii). The old-growth ponderosa pine canopy type consisted 
of large diameter ponderosa pines with red-yellow bark, an indicator ofold­
age trees in this species (Elias 1987). Pole-sized ponderosa pine stands were 
29  

dense stands of smaller diameter trees (less than approximately 40 em in 

dense stands of smaller diameter trees (less than approximately 40 em in 
diameter) that were younger and had not undergone a change in bark color. 
The remaining three canopy types only occur in relatively small and distinct 
patches in the study site. Therefore, a minimum patch size of 0.5 ha was 
chosen, but patches ranged in size to a maximum of 4 or more ha 
(approximately 10 acres or more). 
Soil seed bank samples were collected in mid-September, 1997. A 15 
meter line transect was established through the approximate center of each 
canopy type, and a sample was collected at one meter increments, for a total 
of45 samples per canopy type, and a total of225 samples overall (n=225). 
Samples were collected with a 5 em diameter bulk density hammer (slide 
hammer) and included a 5 em diameter forest floor or 0 horizon sample (at 
varying depths) plus the underlying mineral soil to a depth of 5 em, 
The average depth of 0 horizon material taken with the samples 
varied among the five vegetative types. The mean depth ofthe 0 horizon 
material in the old-growth ponderosa pine stands was 7.76 cmand the depths 
were 6.56, 3.18, 1.05, and 0.16 ern in pole stands, oak stands, locust stands, 
and sagebrush flats, respectively. The ranges of litter depth (0 horizon) are 
given in Table 3.1. 
Samples were temporarily stored in plastic bags and were placed in 
cold storage (4° C) for 6 weeks to satisfy chilling requirements for some of 
the seeds. Samples were removed from cold storage in mid-November, 1997 
and moved to the greenhouse. 
30 

The seed emergence method was used because of its ability to 
determine the viable fraction ofseeds. Methodology relating to sampling, 
Table 3.1. Ranges of litter depth in five canopy types at Mt. Trumbull. 
Canopy type 
Range of litter depth (ern) 
Old-growth ponderosa pine 
0.2 -18.5 
Ponderosa pine poles 
1.0-14.7 
Oak 
0.4 - 6.8 
Locust 
0-3.5 
Sagebrush 
0-0.5 
treatment ofsamples, and seedling inventory was adapted from Gross (1990), 
Brown (1992), and Warr et aI. (1993). 
Samples from each transect per canopy type (n=15) were composited 
and spread thinly over a layer ofapproximately 5 em ofsterile soil in 
approximately 11 x 11 ern plastic flats. These flats were arranged in random 
order on a greenhouse bench. Six flats holding only a mixture ofsterilized 
soil were randomly placed among the sample flats to account for species 
germinating due to possible greenhouse contamination. Flats were fertilized 
approximately every two weeks with a dilute nutrient solution (Miracle-Gro® 
and Miracid®, alternatively). Seedlings were inventoried at 10-14 day 
intervals. As seedlings germinated and could be identified, they were 
removed from the plastic flats to prevent competition among seedlings. Flats 
were watered as needed to maintain moist soil conditions until the end ofthe 
study in May, 1998 (6 months). Although seeds have been shown to 
germinate in the second year after initiation ofseed bank studies, most 
31 

studies have shown that the majority of seeds germinate within the first two 
months (Warr et al. 1993). According to Warr et al. (1993) there is little to 
be gained by prolonging seed bank studies for longer than six months. 
Statistical Methods 
A principal component analysis (PCA) was performed on the species 
data obtained from the five canopy types. Seed bank species that formed 
large families or functional groups were placed into five categories for the 
analysis: non-native species, grasses and sedges, Chenopodiaceae family, 
composite family (Asteraceae) and the Scrophulariaceae family. The 
objective ofthe PCA was to reduce the data to enable me to interpret patterns 
and trends and to determine under which canopy type the various seed bank 
species might be found. I then performed a multivariate analysis of variance 
(MANOVA) to determine ifthere were between-group differences within the 
five functional groups and families. 
Scientific Nomenclature 
Scientific names were taken mainly from Utah Flora (Welsh et al. 
1993). Scientific names for those species not found in Utah Flora were taken 
from Intermountain Flora (Cronquist et aI. 1972, 1977, 1984, 1989, 1994, 
and 1997) and Arizona Flora (Kearney and Peebles 1960). 
32 

Seeds in 0 Horizon versus Mineral Soil 
Field and Greenhouse Methods 
Soil seed bank samples were collected in mid-September 1997 from 
five canopy types based on the dominant overstory canopy: old-growth 
ponderosa pine, pole-sized ponderosa pine, New Mexico locust, Gambel oak, 
and big sagebrush. Three 0.0929 m2 (1 :ft?) 0 horizon samples were 
collected from each canopy type in EB-3 using a steel square and a serrated 
knife (n=15, see Figure 3.1). The soil beneath the 0 horizon samples was 
then collected to a depth of5 em with a bulk density hammer (slide hammer) 
and a trowel. These samples were stratified at 4° C for eight weeks and 
placed in a greenhouse. Approximately 1 cm of sterilized soil was placed in 
each flat beneath the samples. Upon germination and identification, 
seedlings were removed, and samples were stirred periodically to bring new 
viable seeds to the surface. Other seed emergence methodology is as outlined 
in the previous section. 
Statistical Methods 
Data were first transformed using a square root transformation to 
achieve a more normal distribution ofthe data. A t-test was then performed 
to determine ifthere were significant differences between the mean number 
ofseeds found in the 0 horizon versus those in the mineral soil. 
33  

Results 
Soil Seed Bank in Five Canopy Types 
Thirty-eight species germinated over six months in the greenhouse 
seed emergence experiment (Table 3.2). The only two species found in all 
five canopy types were Verbascum thapsus and Conyza canadensis. Conyza 
canadensis is found both in the aboveground vegetation at Mt. Trwnbull and 
as a greenhouse contaminant, so these results may not be representative. 
Three species were found in four ofthe canopy types (Chenopodium album 
var. berlandieri, Euphorbia serpyllifolia, and Poa pratensisi, and 16 species 
(42%) were found in only one canopy type. The old-growth ponderosa pine 
canopy type had the fewest germinating seedlings (38), whereas the locust 
canopy type had the most (575). However, 65% ofthe seedlings in the locust 
type were Verbascum thapsus. The highest species richness was in the 
sagebrush canopy type (19 species), although the oak and locust canopy types 
were very similar with 18 species each. The old-growth ponderosa pine type 
had 16 species. The lowest species richness was found in the pole-sized 
ponderosa pine canopy type with only 7 species. Again, Verbascum thapsus 
comprised a high number ofseedlings in this canopy type (81%). 
Overall, the three most common species were Verbascum thapsus, 
which comprised nearly halfofthe seedlings in the study, Leonurus cardiaca, 
and Conyza canadensis (note that this species was also a greenhouse 
contaminant. Numbers may be inflated by as much as 3-5%). Six ofthe 38 
34 

Table 3.2. Total number of viable seeds (producing seedlings) in the soil seed 
bank from samples collected in five canopy types at Mt. Trumbull, AZ. 
Old-growtb Pole-sized 
Oak 
Locust 
Sagebrush 
Total 
Ponderosa 
Ponderosa 
Pine 
Pine 
Aro~. 
5 
5 
Arenaria /anuginosa ssp. 
6 
6 
saxosa 
Argemone munita 
1 
Artemisia tridentata 
22 
23 
Asteraceae ­ unknown" 
I 
Bromus tectorum 
8 
9 
17 
Carex occidetualis 
1 
2 
3 
Chenopodium a/bum var. 
6 
9 
17 
ber/andieri 
Chenopodium botrys 
6 
6 
Chenopodium graveo/ens 
3 
I 
5 
Chenopodium /eptophyl/um -
5 
5 
Co//insia parviflora 
7 
2 
9 
Conyza canadensis** 
10 
7 
8 
76 
26 
127 
~~fu~a 
1 
1 
Dracocepha/um parviflorum -
3 
3 
E/ymus e/ymoides 
1 
1 
3 
Erigeron divergens 
2 
2 
78 
82 
Euphorbia serpyl/ijo/ia 
2 
1 
6 
28 
37 
Ga/ium bifolium 
2 
2 
Gayophytum diffusum 
3 
3 
7 
Leonurus cardioca 
124 
48 
172 
Lepidium sp. 
4 
I 
5 
Lupinus argerueus 
3 
3 
Microsteris gracilis 
2 
2 
Mimulus rubel/us 
3 
2 
5 
Muhlenbergia mimaissima 
I 
6 
7 
Nama dichotomum 
4 
2 
I 
7 
Penstemon barbatus 
I 
I 
Poa pratensis 
I 
32 
14 
48 
Po/ygonum convolvulus 
5 
5 
Po/ygonum doug/asii var. 
I 
1 
johnstonii 
Senecio eremophi/us var. 
5 
6 
macdouga/ii 
Senecio midtilobaius 
3 
3 
Sporobo/us cryptandrus 
4 
4 
Typha sp. 
I 
I 
2 
Verbascum thapsus 
2 
81 
14 
377 
35 
509 
Verbenabracteata 
I 
1 
8 
10 
Viola canadensis 
4 
3 
7 
Total 
38 
100 
189 
574 
256 
1,157 
* Identification based on vegetative characteristics - plant died before 
flowering.
** Conyza canadensis was also a greenhouse contaminant 
35 

species (16%) are believed to be non-native to the United States: Bromus 
tectorum, Chenopodium botrys, Leonurus cardiaca, Poa pratensis, 
Polygonum convolvulus, and Verbascum thapsus. The Typha sp. is also 
potentially non-native. Pratt et a1. (1984) found that two non-native species 
comprised almost 50% ofthe viable seeds in seed bank samples from a 
ponderosa pine forest in Washington. 
Species were evenly divided between biennials/perennials and 
annuals (50% ofeach) for all canopy types combined. Artemisia tridentata 
was the only woody species that germinated from the samples. Six species 
were grasses/sedges and three ofthese species were perennial grasses. They 
include Poa pratensis - a non-native, Elymus elymoides, and Sporobolus 
cryptandrus. 
Twenty families were represented in the samples for all canopy types 
combined. The most represented families were the Asteraceae (6 species), 
Poaceae (5 species), Chenopodiaceae (4 species) and Scrophulariaceae (4 
species). 
Results from soil seed bank studies are normally expressed as a mean 
number ofseeds/IIi (Roberts 1981). The total number ofseeds/m' for all 
canopy types in this study is given in Table 3.3. Results are the same as for 
Table 3.2, except expressed as the number of viable seeds per square meter. 
Results ofthe Principal Component Analysis (PCA) indicate that the 
first two factors explain approximately 67% ofthe variance in the data. 
Factor 1 indicates that grasses and sedges tend to be associated with members 
36 

Table 3.3. Viable seeds/m' in the soil seed bank from samples collected from 
five canopy types at Mt. Trumbull. 
Old-growth Pole-sized Oak 
Locust 
Sagebrush 
Total 
Ponderosa 
Ponderosa 
Pine 
Pine 
Arabis sp. 
57 
57 
Arenaria lanuginosa ssp. 
68 
68 
saxosa 
Argemone munita 
II 
II 
Artemisia tridentata 
II 
249 
260 
Asteraceae - unknown" 
II 
II 
Bromus tectorum 
91 
102 
193 
Carex occidentalis 
II 
23 
34 
Chenopodium album var. 
II 
68 
II 
102 
192 
berlandieri 
Chenopodium botrys 
68 
68 
Chenopodium graveolens 
II 
34 
II 
56 
Chenopodium leptophyllum 
­
57 
57 
Collinsia parviflora 
79 
24 
103 
Conyza canadensis 
113 
79 
91 
860 
294 
1437 
Corydalis aurea 
II 
II 
DracocephaJum parviflorum -
34 
34 
Elymus elymoides 
II 
II 
II 
33 
Erigeron divergens 
23 
23 
883 
929 
Euphorbia serpyllifolia 
23 
II 
68 
317 
419 
Galium bifolium 
23 
23 
Gayophytum diffusum 
II 
34 
34 
79 
Leonurus cardiaca 
1403 
543 
1946 
Lepidium sp. 
45 
II 
56 
Lupinus argenieus 
34 
34 
Microsteris gracilis 
23 
23 
Mimulus rubellus 
34 
23 
57 
Muhlenbergia mimaissima 
II 
68 
79 
Nama dichotomum 
45 
23 
II 
79 
Penstemon barbatus 
II 
11 
Poa pratensis 
II 
II 
362 
158 
542 
Polygonum convolvulus 
57 
57 
Polygonum douglasii var. 
11 
II 
johnstonii 
Senecio eremophilus var. 
57 
II 
68 
mocdougalii 
Senecio multilobatus 
34 
34 
Sporobolus cryptandrus 
45 
45 
Typha sp. 
11 
II 
22 
Verbascum thapsus 
23 
917 
158 
4267 
396 
5761 
Verbena bracteata 
II 
II 
91 
113 
Viola canadensis 
45 
34 
79 
Total seeds/m 2 
428 
1,132 
2,138 6,497 2,897 
13,092 
*Identification based on vegetative characteristics - plant died before 
flowering. 
** Conyza canadensis was also a greenhouse contaminant 
37 

ofthe Asteraceae family, while the Chenopodiaceae family, Scrophulariaceae 
family and the non-native species tend to be associated with each other. 
Factor 2 indicates that the Scrophulariaceae and Chenopodiaceae families are 
often associated with each other but not with non-native species. Although 
these interpretations appear to be in contrast, it may be true that the 
Chenopodiaceae and Scrophulariaceae families are often associated with non­
native species, but not always . 
Factor loadings were then plotted in order to associate the two factors 
with canopy type (Figure 3.2). The locust canopy type is characterized 
mainly by the non-native species, and the Chenopodiaceae and 
Scrophulariaceae families. There is overlap between the locust, oak and pole­
sized canopy types on Factor 2, and some overlap in Factor 1. Old-growth 
ponderosa pine, pole-sized ponderosa pine, and the oak canopy types were 
not associated with grasses and sedges. No trends were obvious in the 
sagebrush canopy type. 
The MANOVA reveals that canopy cover has a significant effect on 
the composition ofthe species found in the soil seed bank (Hotelling's Trace 
test; p<O.OOl). The significance ofbetween-group effects is given in Table 
3.4. The Chenopodiaceae family and the non-native species differ 
significantly (p<0.1 0) among canopy cover types, whereas there was no 
difference for graminoids, Asteraceae species, or Scrophulariaceae species. 
38 

Seeds in 0 Horizon versus Mineral Soil 
Thirty-eight species also emerged from samples taken from the 
mineral soil and 0 horizon (or forest floor) in five vegetative types (although 
these species are not all the same taxa as the 38 species that emerged from 
soil seed bank samples in the baseline analysis). A total of2,160 seedlings 
germinated. Sixty-one percent ofthe seedlings germinated from mineral soil 
samples (1,327 seedlings) and 39% germinated from the 0 horizon (833 
seedlings). The total number ofseedlings in each canopy type is given in 
Table 3.5. 
Table 3.5. Total number ofseedlings that emerged from organic and mineral 
soil samples in five canopy types at Mt. Trumbull. 
Canopy type 
Mineral 
Organic 
Old-growth ponderosa pine 
44 
40 
Ponderosa pine poles 
52 
7 
Oak 
690 
282 
Locust 
380 
470 
Sagebrush 
161 
34 
Total 
1327 
833 
The oak canopy type had the most viable seeds in the mineral soil, 
while the old-growth ponderosa pine canopy type had the least. The locust 
canopy type had the most viable seeds in the 0 horizon, and the ponderosa 
pine pole type had the least. In all canopy types, there were more viable 
seeds in the mineral soil, with the exception ofthe locust canopy type. The 
number ofeach species, broken down by organic and mineral soils, is given 
in Tables 3.6 and 3.7. 
40 

Table 3.6. Number ofseedlings ofeach species that emerged from mineral 
soil samples collected from five canopy types at Mt. Trumbull. 
Speeies 
Old-growtb 
Pole-sized Oak 
Loeusr 
Sagebrush Total 
Ponderosa 
Ponderosa 
pine 
Pine 
Agropyron sp. 
4
4 
Allium bisceptrum" 
4
4 
Arenaria lanuginosa ssp. saxosa 
2
2 
Artemisia carruthii. 
4
5 
9 
Bromus tectorum 
1
2 
Chenopodium a/bum var. berlandieri 
2 
12 
10 
25 
Chenopodium botrys 
1 
Chenopodium graveo/ens 
1 
Chenopodium /eptophy//um 
10 
10 
Convolvulus arvensis 
1 
Conyza canadensis ** 
1 
Corydalis aurea 
1 
Erigeron divergens 
1 
Euphorbia serpyllifolia 
3 
4 
82 
89 
Ga/ium bifolium 
3
3 
Gayophytum diffusum 
3
3 
Leonurus cardioca 
580 
10 
590 
Lotus sp. 
1 
Mimulus rubellus 
1
1 
Nama dichotomum 
17 
2 
20 
Penstemon pachyphyllus 
1 
1 
Po/ygonum convolvulus 
10 
10 
Po/ygonum douglasii varjohnstonii 
8 
6 
15 
Poa pratensis" 
7
7 
Senecio eremophi/us var. macdougalii 
5 
3
10 
19 
Senecio multilobatus 
3
3 
Typhasp. 
1 
1 
Verbascum thapsus 
6 
44 
54 
345 
50 
499 
Vio/a canadensis 
2 
2 
Unknown Asteraceae 
1 
Total 
44 
52 
690 
380 
161 
1327 
* Includes portions ofthe bud bank 
** Conyza canadensis was also a greenhouse contaminant (none detected in 
this component of the study). 
Thirty species germinated from the mineral soil. The most common 
species were Leonurus cardiaca and Verbascum thapsus; both non-natives. 
No other species came close to these two in number ofgerminants. Besides 
the two species mentioned above, there were at least five other non-native 
species that germinated in the mineral soil. These species were Bromus 
41 

Table 3.7. Number ofseedlings ofeach species that emerged from 0 horizon 
samples collected from five canopy types at Mt. Trumbull. 
Species 
Old-growtb 
Pole-sized 
Oak 
Locu st 
Sagebr ush 
Total 
Ponderosa 
Ponderosa 
Pine 
Pint 
Agropyron sp. 
3 
3 
Allium bisceptrum" 
4 
4 
Arenaria lanug inosa ssp. 
2 
3 
saxosa 
Artemisia sp. 
I 
Bromus tectorum 
6 
7 
Chenopodium album var. 
7 
8 
berlandieri 
Conyza canadensis" 
2 
Dracocephalum parviflorum -
2 
2 
Elymus elymoides 
2 
3 
3 
8 
Euphorbia serpyllifolia 
I 
17 
18 
Galium bifolium 
I 
Gayophytum diffusum 
I 
Leonurus cardiaca 
215 
7 
222 
Machaeranthera canescens 
I 
I 
Mirabilis linearis 
I 
Muhlenbergia mtmaissima 
I 
Penstemon pachyphyllus 
I 
Polygonum convolvulus 
15 
15 
Polygonum douglasii 
II 
6 
17 
Poa pratensis 
5 
6 
Senecio eremophilus var. 
16 
8 
5 
29 
macdougaJii 
Senecio multilobatus 
16 
16 
Typha sp. 
I 
I 
2 
Verbascum thapsus 
I 
4 
6 
444 
6 
461 
Vicia canadensis 
I 
I 
Unknown Poaceae 
I 
I 
Unknown Boraginaceae 
I 
I 
Total 
40 
7 
282 
470 
34 
833 
* Includes portions ofthe bud bank 
**Conyza canadensis was also a greenhouse contaminant (none detected in 
this component ofthe study). 
tectorum, Chenopodium botrys, Convolvulus arvensis, Polygonum 
convolvulus, and Poa pratensis. The Agropyron sp. is potentially non-native. 
There are six Agropyron and Elymus species at Mt. Trumbull (both genera 
were grouped under Agropyron until recently), and four ofthem are non­
42  

native. Although only 23% percent ofthe species were non-native, these 
species comprised 84% ofthe genninants. No woody species were present. 
Twenty-seven species germinated from the 0 horizon samples. The 
two most common species were again Leonurus cardiaca and Verbascum 
thapsus. Together they comprised 86% of the genninants, and Verbascum 
thapsus seedlings accounted for 94% ofthe genninants in the locust canopy 
type, while 76% ofthe seedlings in the oak canopy type were Leonurus 
cardiaca. At least five species (or 22%) were non-native (Bromus tectorum, 
Leonurus cardiaca, Polygonum convolvulus, Poa pratensis, and Verbascum 
thapsus (Agropyron sp. is also potentially non-native). One species, an 
unknown Boraginaceae, died before it could be keyed to species. Another 
unknown grass species did not flower and could not be identified based on its 
ligules or other vegetative characteristics. 
There was a significantly higher number (p<0.1 0) of viable seeds 
found in the mineral soil versus in the 0 horizon. However, when non-native 
species were separated from native species, there was a significantly higher 
number ofnon-natives in the 0 horizon. These results are suggestive, 
however, because ofthe differing volume between organic matter samples 
and mineral soil samples. 
43 

Discussion 
Soil Seed Bank in Five Canopy Types 
Each canopy type at Mt. Trumbull likely has different rnicrosite 
conditions, including differing decomposition rates, and variable temperature 
and moisture regimes, as well as numerous other biotic and abiotic factors. 
These differences may promote or impair the growth ofcertain species. 
Factors other than canopy type can also have significant effects on plant 
growth, in particular the soil type, which also varies across the landscape at 
Mt. Trumbull. These factors may in tum determine the type ofoverstory 
vegetation that can survive in the different soil types. The low species 
richness in the pole-sized ponderosa pine type is most likely a function of 
canopy closure which may cause a lack of moisture and nutrients as well as 
increased accumulation of needles at the soil surface (Covington et al. 1997). 
The high number ofviable Verbascum thapsus seeds is related to a high seed 
production as well as the ability of its seeds to remain viable for long periods 
oftime (Thompson et al. 1997). 
The number ofseeds per square meter in this study was comparable to 
other studies in coniferous forests, but results from two other studies in ponderosa 
pine were quite different from mine. Pratt et aI. (1984) found a total of 57 species 
in their seed bank study located in eastern Washington (4 shrubs, 8 graminoids, 
19 annual forbs, 25 perennial forbs and 1 tree) and a total of8,822 germinating 
seedlings. The number of viable seeds/m' was 13,052±1,481 for spring-collected 
samples and 14,463±1,356 for autwnn-collected samples. Vose and White (1987) 
44 

found a total of 3 species and 10 viable seeds in their seed bank samples collected 
in northern Arizona. There were 8.4 viable seeds/m' in burned samples and 22.1 
viable seeds/m' in control samples. None oftheir species were identified to taxa, 
so a breakdown of life history is not possible. Sample treatments varied as well. 
Similar to my study, Pratt et aI. (1984) stratified autumn-collected samples and 
churned samples periodically. However, their samples were heat-treated as well. 
Vose and White (1987) did not heat or stratify samples, and collected samples in 
the spring. 
In a ponderosa pine forest in Washington, over 60% ofthe species in the 
soil seed bank were non-native (Pratt et aI. 1984). Many ofthe species in my 
study were also non-natives. Two particularly numerous non-native species were 
Verbascum thapsus and Leonurus cardiaca. Verbascum thapsus can produce large 
numbers ofseed that remain viable in the soil for long periods oftime, often for 
more than 40 years, and perhaps well over a hundred years (Thompson et al. 
1997). In studies from western Europe, where Verbascum thapsus is a native 
species, the number ofviable seeds in the soil has ranged as high as 2,096 seeds/m' 
(Thompson et al. 1997), compared to a range of23 - 4,267 seeds/nr' , depending 
on canopy type, in my study. Verbascum thapsus is also a prolific seed producer 
(Kivilaan and Bandurski 1981). Both species have medicinal uses; however, they 
may be ofconcern in ecological restoration, based on target restoration goals. If 
this is the case, their numbers (as well as those ofother non-natives) in the soil 
seed bank should be monitored over time. 
45  

Within ponderosa pine forests, the aboveground vegetation is 
scattered or patchy, and this distribution is reflected in the soil seed bank 
vegetation as welL Animal species are also know to cache seeds (Harper 
1977, Mayer and Poljakoff-Mayber 1982). These phenomena make it 
difficult to capture a representative species distribution in soil seed bank 
samples. Seeds also tend to congregate around mother plants. This scattered 
distribution ofspecies is particularly apparent in much ofthe Mt. Trumbull 
area due to a large number of small-diameter ponderosa pines and a dense 
canopy that discourages growth of many ofthe understory species. In much 
ofthe area, there is also a lack of native perennial grass species. This lack of 
plant species, the scattered distribution of species, or the time ofcollection 
may explain the dearth of native perennial grasses as genninants from my soil 
seed bank samples. Because perennial grass species did germinate from 
some of my seed bank samples, and because there is a small number of 
perennial grasses across the landscape, the seed bank samples most likely 
indicate a general lack ofperennial grass seeds in the soil seed bank. 
Intensive grazing, such as occurred in much ofthe Southwest at the turn of 
the century (Touchan et al. 1995), may also cause a decrease in the number of 
grass species in the soil seed bank (Bertiller 1996). Therefore, these species 
may need to be seeded following restoration practices ifthere are no 
colonizing sources. 
The majority ofspecies in my study originated from buried seeds; 
however, a number of plants also originated from buried rhizomes (Poa 
46  

pratensis) and corms (Allium bisceptrum) (personal observation), and thus 
include portions ofthe bud bank. While all Allium bisceptrum seedlings 
germinated from corms, it was difficult to determine ifthe origin ofthe Poa 
pratensis seedlings was from pieces of buried vegetation or from buried 
seeds. In a boreal forest in northern Saskatchewan, Archibold (1979) found 
that after fire 87% ofplants originated from seed and 13% from remnant 
roots and rhizomes. Although propagules are not technically considered to be 
part ofthe soil seed bank, but rather a portion ofthe bud bank (Harper 1977, 
Baker 1989, Simpson et al. 1989), I have included them as part of my thesis 
because oftheir importance as a component ofthe vegetation following 
ecological restoration. 
Because ofdiffering germination requirements, not all species in the 
soil seed bank will have been captured in my samples. Although samples 
were stratified beforehand to simulate winter temperatures, it was not feasible 
to simulate fluctuating temperature, light, and moisture regimes, or fire. 
Conditions in the greenhouse provided maximum light, ample moisture, and 
adequate nutrients. These conditions most likely promoted the growth of 
early successional species that capitalize on decreased competition and 
removal ofthe canopy. Many annual species have a number ofdifferent 
genotypes within an ecosystem to withstand environmental variability 
(Bazzaz 1996). 
My samples did capture a number ofperennials that are not numerous 
across the landscape. One or two individuals represented most ofthese 
47  

species. Typha sp., for example, was an unusual occurrence in the seed bank 
ofa ponderosa pine forest. The greenhouse was ruled out as a source of 
seeds (Brad Blake, 1998, Northern Arizona University, personal 
communication), so the seeds were either persistent in the mineral soil for a 
long period oftime (two genninants came from the 0 horizon and one from 
the mineral soil) or were transient and arrived at the sampling site by airborne 
means. 
One or a few individuals also represented several other species. 
Continued monitoring in the field will determine ifthese few individuals in 
the soil seed bank will act as a sufficient colonizing source, and ifcontrol of 
non-natives (recruited from the soil seed bank) will be necessary. 
Seeds in 0 Horizon versus Mineral Soil 
The composition ofthe organic material overlying the mineral soil has 
a substantial effect on the seeds that are found within it. Most types of litter 
act as seed traps and litter can also inhibit germination (Kitajima and Tilman 
1996). Coniferous litter is acidic and requires a greater length oftime to 
decompose than oak or locust litter (both are deciduous species) (Kimmins 
1987). In addition, deep forest floors can be excessively wet, acidic, and cold 
(Kimmins 1987). All ofthese factors can contribute greatly to seed mortality, 
and ifthe litter layer is deep, a large number ofseeds will never reach mineral 
soiL In addition, some types ofpine, including ponderosa, are known to have 
an allelopathic effect on grasses and other species (Jameson 1968). 
48 

In contrast to several other studies in coniferous forests (Archibold 
1989), the number of viable seeds at Mt. Trumbull was highest in the mineral 
soil. This trend may be because ofthe properties ofthe litter discussed above 
or perhaps due to the decreasing number ofplants over time, which normally 
contribute seeds to the upper layers ofsoil. Pratt et al. (1984) found a higher 
number of viable seeds in a Washington ponderosa pine forest in the litter 
than in the mineral soil. More specifically, most grass and annual forb 
species seeds were contained in the litter, while those of perennial forb 
species were primarily found in the mineral soil. In contrast, no seeds in the 
litter germinated in a study by Vose and White (1987) in southwestern 
.: 
ponderosa pine. 
In my study, the species richness ofannualslbiennials and perennials 
was fairly evenly divided between the mineral soil and 0 horizon (13 species 
ofperennials in the mineral soil and 14 in the 0 horizon, and 17 species of 
annualslbiennials in the mineral soil and 12 in the 0 horizon). In the mineral 
soil, approximately 47% ofthe seeds were from perennial species, and 
approximately 32% ofthe seeds in the 0 horizon were from perennial 
species. However, when the two most common species (Leonurus cardiaca 
and Verbascum thapsus) were removed from the totals, these numbers were 
15% and 32%, respectively. 
49  

Conclusion 
Mt. Trumbull and the neighboring mountains are ponderosa pine sky 
islands, isolated from the nearest ponderosa pine forests on the Kaibab 
Plateau by nearly 50 km. Opportunities for seed dispersal to and from the 
area were historically fairly limited. With Euro-American settlement ofthe 
Arizona Strip has come an increased opportunity for seed dispersal on 
motorized vehicles (Clifford 1959, Schmidt 1989), livestock (Dutoit and 
Alard 1995), and footwear (Clifford 1956). Concomitant with Euro-
American settlement has been an influx ofnon-native species ofvegetation 
throughout the Southwest, either inadvertently or purposely through use of 
non-native species as forage or for soil stabilization. Protecting native 
vegetation and preventing introduction of non-native species (particularly 
those that are aggressive) is a high priority in ecological restoration ofthese 
areas. Seeding or transplanting native species may be necessary to meet 
target restoration goals for understory herbaceous and shrub vegetation. 
50 

CHAPTER 4  
MANUSCRIPT  
EFFECTS OF TREE THINNING ON THE SOIL SEED BANK IN  
SOUTHWESTERN PONDEROSA PINE  
Abstract 
I examined the soil seed bank in an area ofa ponderosa pine forest in northern 
Arizona that was undergoing ecological restoration treatments to determine the 
relationship between viable seed composition and density in the soil seed bank and 
the corresponding aboveground vegetation composition and density that emerges 
after tree thinning. My second objective was to determine if there are differences in 
the composition and density ofthe soil seed bank with soil depth following thinning 
ofoverstory trees. 
Fourteen species emerged in samples collected after overstory trees were 
thinned and prior to prescribed burning, with an estimated seed density of3,152 
seeds/mi. Eleven ofthe species were annuals or biennials and three were perennials. 
All were forbs; no perennial grasses or woody species emerged. One ofthe species 
was the non-native Verbascum thapsus. The two most common species were 
Collinsia parviflora and Verbascum thapsus, which accounted for 45% and 30% of 
the germinants, respectively. There was a significantly greater number of viable 
seeds at the 0-5 em depth compared to the 5-10 cm depth (including both organic 
51  

matter and mineral soil). Aboveground vegetation was also measured in the area. 
Fourteen species (and at least one unknown species) occurred in the aboveground 
vegetation after tree thinning. Six ofthese species did not germinate from soil seed 
bank samples. Collinsia parviflora was the most common species in the aboveground 
vegetation. Although Verbascum thapsus accounted for 30% of the viable seeds in 
the soil seed bank samples, it accounted for only 3% ofthe plants in the aboveground 
vegetation one year following thinning. There were approximately 101 aboveground 
plants/m' in the thinned area (and this number increased nearly fourfold by the 
second year following thinning), but only 0.4 plants/rrr in the unthinned control area. 
There was also a significant correlation between the number ofplants in the 
aboveground vegetation and the number of viable seeds in the soil seed bank in the 
thinned area. 
Introduction 
Several studies have shown that mature temperate forests contain fairly small 
soil seed banks (Warr et al. 1993). However, relatively little research has been 
conducted on buried seed reserves in coniferous forests (Archibold 1989). Because 
disturbance (principally fire) is characteristic of many drier coniferous forests in the 
western United States, early successional species are usually well represented in the 
seed bank (Archibold 1989), while late-successional species are virtually nonexistent. 
Two previous soil seed bank studies from ponderosa pine forests have very 
contrasting results. Vose and White (1987), in a study conducted in northern 
Arizona, found buried seed densities of 8.4 seeds/rrr' for burned areas and 22.1 
52 

seeds/m2 in an unburned control. Overstory tree density ranged from approximately 
120 stems per hectare in their below-canopy sawtimber stratum to approximately 
10,070 stems per hectare in the sapling stratum. Chenopodium sp., Gnaphalium sp., 
and one or more unidentified dicot species were the only species represented. No 
seeds germinated from the litter. The authors felt that seed rain is potentially more 
important than the buried seed component in contributing new seedlings after burning 
in this forest type. 
Pratt et a1. (1984) conducted a study in a ponderosa pine forest in eastern 
Washington in which 57 species germinated. The estimated seed density was 13,052 
± 1481 seeds/rrr for spring-collected samples and 14,463 ± 1356 seeds/m' for 
autumn-collected samples. Forty-five percent ofthe seeds were annual forb species, 
and 24 ofthe species were non-native. Three ofthese non-native species accounted 
for over halfofthe seed bank (Poa pratensis, Stellaria media, and Cerastium 
vulgatum). The high number ofviable seeds in this study was attributed to several 
factors. The most important was probably the location of the study, which was in a 
forest-steppe transition zone. The stand was also in an intermediate successional 
stage. 
My study was initiated to further our understanding ofthe soil seed bank in 
ponderosa pine forests and to determine: 1) the species composition ofthe soil seed 
bank in an area undergoing ecological restoration (primarily thinning ofpost­
settlement ponderosa pine trees); 2) whether there are differences in soil seed bank 
composition with depth in the soil following overstory thinning treatments, which 
may cause some soil disturbance; 3) the short-term effects ofthinning practices on 
53 

the soil seed bank and the aboveground vegetation; and 4) the relationship ofseeds in 
the soil seed bankto plants in the aboveground vegetation. 
Study Area 
The study site is located within the Arizona Strip, the portion of northern 
Arizona that lies between Utah to the north and the Colorado River to the south. My 
study was conducted within an area between the Mt. Trumbull and Mt. Logan 
Wilderness Areas, in the treatment unit marked as 96-1, a few hundred meters 
southwest ofEB-l (Figure 4.1). The approximate location ofthe study area is 
36°22'30" N latitude and 113°10' W longitude. The elevation in the study area 
ranges from approximately 2,080 m to 2,290 rn, Much ofthe topography in the 
region is comprised ofrelatively recent volcanic rocks on top ofolder sedimentary 
rocks (Koons 1945), and the parent material for the soils in the vicinity ofMt. 
Trumbull is primarily derived from volcanic materials. The main soil type is Lozinta, 
an ashy skeletal over fragmental or cindery, mixed, mesic, Vitrandic Ustochrept 
(Alfred Dewall 1996, personal communication, unreferenced), although there are 
several other soil types in and around the study area. 
Climatological data for the Arizona Strip are limited due to sparse 
human settlement ofthe area. Most ofthe data currently available were 
collected from cities surrounding the Arizona Strip and were gathered 
beginning in the early to mid-1900s. The regional climate differs from year 
to year because the Arizona Strip lies on a monsoonal boundary. As in much 
ofthe Southwest, precipitation occurs annually in a bimodal distribution 
54 

pattem Thirty-four percent ofannual precipitation falls in the winter months 
ofNovember through February. In years of summer monsoon, an average of 
35% ofannual precipitation falls during the months ofJuly through 
September (Altschul and Fairley 1989). Elevation also controls climate to a 
large degree in the Arizona Strip. Annual precipitation in the ponderosa pine 
type varies between 38-64 em (USDI BLM 1990). There are no 
perennial streams in the study area, but there are several springs in the 
vicinity ofMt. Trumbull and Mt. Logan. 
The majority ofthe study area is the ponderosa pine forest type, 
which is bordered by pinyon-juniper woodland. The ponderosa pine forest 
type in the Arizona Strip occurs at elevations ofapproximately 1,830-2,440 
m (USDI BLM 1990). Over 250 species of forbs, grasses, and shrubs have 
been identified in the ponderosa pine type and its transition zones in the 
vicinity ofMt. Trumbull and the surrounding mountains (Appendix A). 
Preliminary data show that the last widespread, naturally occurring fire in the 
vicinity ofMt. Trumbull was in 1870. Fire scars collected from individual ponderosa 
pine trees indicate that fires occurred every four to six years prior to Euro-American 
settlement and use ofthe area (pete Fule 1997, personal communication, 
unreferenced). 
An ongoing ecological restoration project, which encompasses my study area, 
contains several treatment units, based on the year in which ecological restoration 
thinning and burning treatments are scheduled for initiation. The area utilized for this 
study was a treatment unit approximately 13 hectares in size (33 acres). This area 
56 

was thinned in the summer of 1996 to recreate presettlement tree forest structure 
(density and pattern). A demonstration plot nearby had an overstory tree density in 
1995 of approximately 1396 trees/ha. These trees were thinned to approximately 104 
trees/ha in 1996 (Pete Fule and Amy Waltz 1996, Northern Arizona University, 
personal communication, unreferenced). A prescribed broadcast burn was conducted 
in the autumn of 1996. 
Methods 
Effect of Thinning Practices on the Soil Seed Bank 
Field Methods 
Twenty-seven herbaceous understory plots were established in 1996, after 
thinning ofoverstory postsettlement trees and prior to prescribed burning. These 
plots were located across a northeast-facing slope, and were 2 x 3 m in size with six 1 
m2 subplots contained within each plot (Figure 4.2). Five ofthese 2 x 3 m plots were 
established on skid trails, five in undisturbed areas (areas within the thinned unit 
where the surface was not directly impacted by thinning) and twelve plots in thinned 
areas that were covered with thinning slash. The twelve plots covered with moderate 
levels ofthinning slash would later be divided into two groups - one halfwould be 
burned and one half would be left unburned. Two oftbese plots were used as 
"insurance" in case the prescribed burn jumped the fireline into a plot that was to 
remain unburned, and would be discarded ifnot needed (seed bank samples were 
collected in these plots, however). An additional five plots were also established in a 
nearby control area which was unthinned and unburned. 
57 

Bouteloua gracilis 
C - Control 
Poa fendleriana 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Carex occidetalis 
Elymus elymoides 
Empty - (soil seed bank) 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X
-
X 
Figure 4.2. Example of2 x 3 m herbaceous sampling plot. Note six 1 m2 subplots. 
Soil seed bank samples were collected in all 27 understory plots in September 
1996, after thinning and prior to burning. Two soil seed bank samples (to a depth of 
5 em) were extracted with a 5 em diameter bulk density hammer (slide hammer) from 
a randomly selected 1 m2 subplot (labelled "Empty") (n=54) (Figure 4.2). Fifty-four 
additional seed bank samples were collected from each 2 x 3 m plot and divided into 
depths of0-5 em and 5-10 cm. Organic material was not intentionally included or 
removed; therefore, samples often included organic material because ofthe soil 
churning action ofthe mechanical thinning equipment. The subplot labelled 
"Control" would later be used to inventory aboveground vegetation (discussed in the 
next section). 
58 

Greenhouse Methods 
For a discussion ofthe various methods used for quantification ofthe seeds in 
the soil seed bank, see the discussion in the Literature Review. For this study, I used 
the seed emergence method outlined in Warr et al. (1993), Brown (1992), and Gross 
(1990) because ofits ability to determine the viable fraction of seeds; mainly those 
that would emerge following a disturbance such as thinning ofthe forest canopy. 
Samples were placed in cold storage (4° C) for 8 weeks and then spread thinly over a 
layer ofapproximately 5 ern of sterile soil in 15 x 20 cm plastic flats which were 
placed in a greenhouse. Six flats holding only a mixture ofsterilized soil were 
randomly placed among the flats to account for species germinating due to possible 
greenhouse contamination. All flats were fertilized approximately every two weeks 
with a dilute nutrient solution (Miracle-Gro® and Miracid®, alternatively). 
Seedlings were inventoried at 10-14 day intervals. As seedlings germinated and 
could be identified, they were removed from the flats to prevent competition 
between seedlings. Flats were watered as needed to maintain moist soil until the end 
ofthe study in May 1997. Although seeds have been shown to germinate in the 
second year after initiation ofseed bank studies, most studies have shown that the 
majority ofseeds germinate within the first two months (Warr et al. 1993). 
According to Warr et aI. (1993) there is little to be gained by prolonging seed bank 
studies for longer than six months. 
59 

Statistical Methods 
A paired sample t-test was conducted between the two depths at which seeds 
were collected (0-5 em and 5-10 ern) to determine if there was a significant 
difference in the mean number of seeds at these two depths. A square root 
transformation was necessary to normalize the data. 
Scientific Nomenclature 
Scientific names were taken mainly from Utah Flora (Welsh et aI. 1993). 
Scientific names for those species not found in Utah Flora were taken from 
Intermountain Flora (Cronquist et aI. 1972, 1977, 1984, 1989, 1994, 1997) and 
Arizona Flora (Kearney and Peebles 1960), respectively. 
Relationship of Seed Bank to Aboveground Vegetation 
Field Methods 
Aboveground vegetation was tallied in a randomly chosen 1 m2 subplot in 
each 2 x 3 m herbaceous understory plot (labeled "Control") (Figure 4.2). The 
aboveground vegetation was sampled three times during the 1997 growing season to 
determine ifthere was a relationship between the species in the current aboveground 
species composition and the species in the soil seed bank. Although the herbaceous 
understory plots were subjected to five treatments, only the three unburned treatments 
will be discussed here (control, skid trail, unburned slash). Aboveground vegetation 
was also inventoried in the same subplots in August 1998 to gain information on the 
role ofthe soil seed bank in plant succession. 
60 

Statistical Methods 
The data for this portion of the study were relatively normally distributed and 
a square root transformation failed to improve the distribution. A Pearson correlation 
was used to determine if there was a significant relationship between the 
aboveground vegetation and belowground soil seed bank in the thinned area and in 
the control. A regression equation was developed to determine if the quantity of 
aboveground vegetation could be predicted from viable seeds collected in seed bank 
samples. Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Tests were also used to determine ifthere were 
significant differences between the thinned area and the control in the number of 
seeds in the soil seed bankand in the aboveground vegetation. 
Results 
Effect of Thinning Practices on the Soil Seed Bank 
Fourteen species germinated in this study, with an estimated density of3,152 
seeds/m' in the samples collected after overstory trees were thinned and prior to 
prescribed burning. These species, their total number ofviable seeds, and their 
estimated seed denslty/rn' are given in Tables 4.1 and 4.2. 
Eleven ofthe fourteen species (or 75%) that emerged in the study were 
annuals or biennials. The three perennial species that germinated were Erigeron 
divergens, Senecio eremophilus var. maedougalii, and Verbena braeteata. No 
perennial grasses emerged. The three most common species were Collinsia 
61 

Table 4.1. Nwnber of viable seeds that emerged from samples collected at Mt. 
Trwnbull, September 1996, after thinning and prior to burning (0-5 em samples n=81, 
5.1-10 ern, samples n=27). 
Sampling Depth 
Species 
0-5 em 
5-10 em 
Total 
Chenopodium album var. berlandieri 
4 
5 
Chenopodium graveolens 
1 
1 
Chenopodium leptophyllum 
2 
2 
Collinsia parviflora 
110 
38 
148 
Conyza canadensis * 
I7 
2 
19 
Erigeron divergens 
2 
2 
4 
Euphorbia serpyllifolia 
1 
I 
Gayophytum diffusum 
2 
2 
Mimulus rubellus 
58 
II 
69 
Muhlenbergia minutissima 
I 
1 
Polygonum douglasii var. johnstonii 
3 
3 
Senecio eremophilus var. macdougalii 
I 
I 
Verbascum thapsus 
132 
7 
139 
Verbena bracteata 
3 
3 
Total 
337 
61 
398 
* Conyza canadensis was also a greenhouse contaminant 
Table 4.2. Estimated seed density/rrr ofspecies that emerged from seed bank 
samples collected at Mt. Trumbull, September 1996, after thinning and prior to 
burning. 
Sampling Depth 
Species 
0-5 em 
5-10 em 
Total 
Chenopodium album var. berlandieri 
25 
19 
44 
Chenopodium graveolens 
6 
6 
Chenopodium leptophyllum 
12 
12 
Collinsia parviflora 
687 
717 
1,404 
Conyza canadensis* 
99 
44 
143 
Erigeron divergens 
13 
13 
Euphorbia serpyllifolia 
6 
6 
Gayophytum diffusum 
II 
11 
Mimulus rubellus 
324 
198 
522 
Muhlenbergia minutissima 
6 
6 
Polygonum douglasii var. johnstonii 
17 
17 
Senecio eremophilus var. macdougalii 
6 
6 
Verbascum thapsus 
811· 
132 
943 
Verbena bracteata 
1 
1 
Total 
2,042 
1,110 
3,152 
* Conyza canadensis was also a greenhouse contaminant 
62 

parviflora, Mirabilis rubellus, and Verbascum thapsus. One species (Verbascum 
thapsusy was non-native. Collinsia parviflora and Verbascum thapsus accounted for 
45% and 30% ofthe genninants, respectively. Note that Conyza canadensis was also 
a greenhouse contaminant, and these numbers may be inflated by as much as 5-10%. 
There were also differences between the species with viable seeds in the seed 
bank between the thinned area and the control. Only three species germinated from 
samples collected in the control (Gayophytum diffusum, Mirabilis rubellus, and 
Verbascum thapsusy; versus thirteen species in the thinned area 
Although all fourteen species were found at the 0-5 cm depth, only six of 
these species (36%) were also found at the 5-10 cm depth, and these species were all 
annuals or biennials, with the exception ofErigeron divergens. Seeds found at the 
greater depth can be assumed to consist entirely ofpersistent species and are assumed 
to be older than those higher up in the soil profile (Warr et aI. 1993), unless their 
presence is due to contamination from previous sampling or from movement through 
the soil profile. The paired samples t-test had a significance ofp<0.004. Thus, there 
was a significantly greater number ofseeds at the 0-5 em depth, compared to the 5.1­
10 em depth. 
Aboveground Vegetation 
Fifteen species (one was an unidentifiable annual) were inventoried in the 
aboveground vegetation in the growing season following restoration treatments in the 
thinned and unburned plots. Only one species, Pinus ponderosa, germinated in the 
63  

untreated control area. These species are listed in Table 4.3 and their numbers are 
shown in Figure 4.3. 
Table 4.3. Species observed growing aboveground in three different treatments at 
Mt. Trumbull, 1997. 
Species 
Skid trail 
Unburned slash 
Control 
Argemone munita 
X  
Chenopodium album var. berlandieri 
X
X 
Chenopodium leptophyllum 
X  
Collinsia parviflora 
X
X 
Elymus elymoides 
X
X 
Euphorbia serpyllifolia 
X  
Euphorbia lurida 
X  
Gayophytum diffusum 
X
X 
Mimulus rubellus 
X
X 
Nicotiana attenuata 
X
X 
Penstemon barbatus 
X  
Pinus ponderosa 
X  
Polygonum douglasii var. johnstonii 
X
X 
Verbascum thapsus 
X
X 
Unknownannuals 
X
X 
Thirteen species were inventoried on plots located on skid trails, with a total 
of699 plants. Ten species were inventoried on plots which contained unburned slash 
from thinning, and there were 320 plants. There were approximately 101 plants/rn' in 
the thinned area and 0.4 plants/m' in the control (Table 4.4). The most common 
species in the thinned area were Collinsia parviflora and one or more unknown 
annuals, which I was unable to identify at the time ofinventory without destructive 
sampling. Collinsia parviflora comprised 45% ofthe genninants in the seed bank 
samples and 57% ofthe plants in the aboveground vegetation in the treated area. 
While Verbascum thapsus had a high number ofviable seeds in the seed bank 
samples, its aboveground vegetation was only 3% ofthe total vegetation. 
64 

492  
200  
180  
160  
140 
b 
~ 
-... 
1"1 
1\ ,,, ,, 
1\ 
1\ 
~ 
1\ 
1\ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~  
~ 
" 
~I 
.... 
~ 
~.
~ 
~ 
fWI -
c 
Q)  
120 
~ 
0' 
~ 
100
s 
t5. 
.... 
0 
0- 
]
80
VI 
~  
60  
40  
20  
~I
0 
/  
~ #
( 
# 
~ ,
, 
~ 
/ 
~
~ 
; 
~ 
)
o~Q,~ 
'Cl'~ 
~o~~4, 
~~f' 
~lO 
~\()\V 
~~~\ 
~\~V> 
. e,~~ 
()\\Q,~ 
'C~'C 
o~~Q, 
.(f~"'\ 
~~(J.~ 
#' f;}~~ 
Q,~ 
:(. 
\Q,~ 
\() 
.$> 
~o~ 
.().,Qj 
~~ 
:c~\ 
. ~~ 
o~
l~ 
~ .'i 
rj 
0 
~~ 
~'If:> 
~\V>~ 
~\~ 
¢'..f 
'9V>~ 
o~'I;, 
~~4, 
~~() 
\Cp~ 
~\Q,~ 
<t-~ 
e,\\'l 
Q,fl 
\)~ 
# 
o~o 
c 
.).~~ 
6~ 
~ 
~Q, 
it 
~ 
~f:> 
~Q,~ 
~ 
~ov 
~ 
G 
.~ 
~ 
~ 
~~  
~ 
G~Qj  
~<t4, 
Figure 4.3. Number of plants of each species in the aboveground vegetation in 1997, by treatments, Mt. Trumbull, AZ. 
~ Skid Trail 
• Slash/No Bum 
o Control 
... " 
.... 
....
~ 
~~ Ei 
.... 

Table 4.4. Mean number ofplants ofeach species/rrr observed in the aboveground 
vegetation at Mt. Trumbull, 1997. These numbers are averaged over 15 plots (treated 
area n= I0, control n=5). 
Species 
Treated area/m2 
ControVm2 
Argemone munita 
0.1 
Chenopodium album var. berlandieri 
4.3 
Chenopodium leptophyllum 
1.2 
Collinsia parviflora 
57.6 
Elymus elymoides 
0.1 
Euphorbia serpyllifolia 
1.5 
Euphorbia lurida 
0.2 
Gayophytum diffusum 
5.0 
Mimulus rubel/us 
3.5 
Nicotiana attenuata 
1.7 
Penstemon barbatus 
0.1 
Pinus ponderosa 
0.40 
Polygonum douglasii var. johnstonii 
2.3 
Verbascum thapsus 
2.9 
Unknown annuals 
20.5 
Total 
101 
0.40 
Out ofa total of 17 species (not including the unknown annual), 8 species 
were found in both the aboveground vegetation and the soil seed bank (47%). Six of 
the species found in the aboveground vegetation did not germinate from soil seed 
bank samples collected in the study (35%) (Table 4.5). These species were 
Argemone munita, Elymus elymoides, Euphorbia lurida, Nicotiana attenuata, 
Penstemon barbatus, and Pinus ponderosa (Argemone munita, Elymus elymoides, 
and Penstemon barbatus did germinate in the baseline study (see Chapter 3». Of 
these six species, four are perennials; Elymus elymoides (grass), Pinus ponderosa 
(tree), and Euphorbia lurida and Penstemon barbatus (both perennial forbs). 
Nicotiana attenuata is known to have higher germination rates in the presence of 
smoke than in unburned sites (Baldwin et al. 1994). 
66 

Three species found in the seed bank samples, but not in the aboveground 
vegetation were Conyza canadensis, Erigeron divergens, and Muhlenbergia 
minutissima. These three species have been located in the vicinity ofthe plots, so 
Table 4.5. Species found in the seed bank in an approximately 13 ha (33 acre) area at 
Mt. Trumbull, after thinning and in the aboveground vegetation in the following 
growmg season. 
Species 
Abovrground ngdatio Seed bank post-thinnin, 
Argemone munita 
Chenopodium album var. berlandieri 
Chenopodium leptophyl/um 
Collinsia parviflora 
x 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Conyza canadensis 
X 
Elymus elymoides 
X 
Erigeron divergens 
Euphorbia serpyllifolia 
Euphorbia lurida 
Gayophytum diffusum 
Mimulus rubel/us 
Muhlenbergia minutissima 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Nicotiana attenuata 
Penstemon barbatus 
Pinus ponderosa 
Polygonum douglasii var. johnstonii 
Verbascum thapsus 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
their absence in the aboveground vegetation is probably due merely to the scattered 
distribution ofvegetation which did not encompass the subplots. 
The Pearson correlation between the aboveground and belowground soil seed 
bank vegetation in the thinned area was significant at the 0.01 level (r2=O.775), 
indicating a positive relationship between the number ofseeds in the soil seed bank 
and the number ofplants in the aboveground vegetation. However, there was not a 
significant correlation between aboveground vegetation and soil seed bank vegetation 
in the unthinned control. 
67 

A regression equation was developed for the data to determine if the number 
ofaboveground plants can be predicted from the number of viable seeds collected in 
seed bank samples. The regression equation is Y=1.094 + 0.027X; where X= the 
number of viable seeds in the soil seed bank based on seed emergence, and Y = the 
number of plants in the aboveground vegetation in thinned areas. Further refinement 
ofthis equation is necessary before it can be used to predict aboveground vegetation 
in other areas because ofthe microsite conditions at the study site. Using the 
equation mentioned above, a significant relationship was found in the thinned area 
between number ofseeds in the soil seed bank and the number ofplants in the 
aboveground vegetation (R2=0.948; p<O.OOOl). Again, the relationship between the 
aboveground vegetation and belowground soil seed bank in the unthinned control was 
not significant. A slightly significant difference was found between the aboveground 
vegetation and the seeds in the soil seed bank in the thinned area and in the control 
(both at p=O.l05) using the Wilcoxon signed ranks test. 
To gain greater insights into the value ofthe soil seed bank and its role in 
plant succession, I inventoried the aboveground vegetation on the understory plots 
two years after thinning. The following tables (Tables 4.6 and 4.7) list the species 
found in the aboveground vegetation in the same subplots that were inventoried the 
previous year. Many ofthese species probably germinated from seeds produced by 
the previous year's vegetation, or from seed rain, but some may have germinated 
from seeds in the soil seed bank that required a longer period oftime for the 
appropriate germination cues to occur. The value ofthis data is to show the path of 
succession separate from the species that originated from the soil seed bank the first 
68  

year after the thinning disturbance. These data also give some indication of species 
richness and abundance under field conditions versus the species that will germinate 
from samples in the greenhouse. 
Table 4.6. Species observed growing aboveground in three different treatments at Mt. 
Trumbull, 1998 (two years after thinning). 
Species 
Skid Trail 
Unburned Slash Control 
Chenopodium album var. berlandieri  
X  
Chenopodium leptophyllum  
X  
Conyza canadensis  
X  
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X 
x 
X
X
X
X  
Bromus tectorum 
Elymus elymoides  
Erigeron divergens 
Gayophytum diffusum 
Lactuca serriola 
X  
X  
X  
Lotus wrightii 
X 
Microsteris gracilis 
X  
Pinus ponderosa 
X 
Polygonum douglasii 
Senecio eremophi/us var. macdougalii 
Senecio multi/obatus 
Verbascum thapsus 
X  
X  
Fourteen species were recorded in the thinned area and one (Pinus ponderosa) 
in the controL There were approximately 391 plants/nr' in the treated area and 0.2 
plants/m' in the control (Table 4.7). 
A comparison ofTables 4.4 and 4.7 reveals that, out ofa total of22 species, 
there were eight species found only in 1997, eight species found only in 1998, and 
seven species found in both years (Table 4.8). 
69  

Table 4.7. Average number ofplants ofeach species/rrr observed in the aboveground 
vegetation at Mt. Trumbull, 1998 (treated area n=10, control n=5). 
Species 
Treated area/nr' Coutrol/nr' 
Bromus tectorum 
Chenopodium album var. berlandieri 
Chenopodium leptophy/lum 
Conyza canadensis 
Elymus elymoides 
Erigeron divergens 
Gayophytum dijfusum 
Lactuca serriola 
Lotus wrightii 
Microsteris gracilis 
Pinus ponderosa 
Polygonum douglasii var. johnstonii 
Senecio eremophilus var. macdougalii 
Senecio multi/obatus 
Verbascum thapsus 
0.1 
264.5 
0.9 
0.6 
1.7 
2.8 
69.2 
6.8 
0.2 
17.1 
0.2 
22.7 
1.4 
0.2 
2.8 
Total 
391.0 
0.2 
The number ofplants in the aboveground vegetation/m' is shown in Figure 
4.4. Some species had a small number ofplants in the first year, but produced 
enough seeds to increase greatly in number in the second year (Chenopodium album 
var. berlandieri and Gayophytum diffusum). Some seeds may also have entered the 
plots through seed rain The majority ofspecies were found only in year one or year 
two. 
70 

Table 4.8. A comparison ofthe aboveground vegetation thinned area in 1997 and 
1998, Mt. Trumbull, AZ. 
Species 
1997 
1998 
Argemone munita 
x 
Bromus tectorum 
Chenopodium album var. berlandieri 
Chenopodium leptophyllum 
x 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Collinsia parviflora 
X 
Conyza canadensis 
X 
Elymus elymoides 
X
X 
Erigeron divergens 
X 
Euphorbia lurida 
Euphorbia serpyllifolia 
Gayophytum diffusum 
Lactuca serriola 
Lotus wrightii 
Microsteris gracilis 
X 
X 
X
X 
X 
X 
X 
Mimulus rubellus 
X 
Nicotiana attenuata ' 
Penstemon barbatus 
Pinus ponderosa 
Polygonum douglasii var. johnstonii 
Senecio eremophi/us var. macdougalii 
Senecio multi/obatus 
Verbascumthapsus 
Unknown annuals 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
71 

265 
70 
60 
~ 50 
8 
~ g 40 
!!l 
fa c. 
....
--l 
0
IV 
] 
30 
E 
:l 
Z 
20 
10 
o 
~ 
~ 
1.1997 1 
~ 
It! 1998 [ 
I 
( 
f. 
0' 
g 
, 
l 
Ilii 
I 
I 
-.J 
~ 
~ 
• 
rr 
~ 
_ 
I'iJ 
~ . ~ 
fl •
.... 
~
r 
~ 
i:-'I,I,~ 
~:~ 
~l' 
~v~ 
~o~~ 
~¢ 
. 'bot> 
e,~ 
~'bo~ 
~~~ ~v~ 
. 2f.~ 
~~ 
~'I,-' 
'$ll 
~I,~ 
~I,v-' 
o~~ 
~\ 
~I,vc, 
~l 
v~ 
~~~ ~I,~tf! 
t-\~<' 
~~~~ <It' ~ie, 
~~i~ 
'bo\~l~ ~~\0$ I' ~'6-'I,~' 
o..I' ~J'OJ ~~~ »~qj 
~~e,# 
~~'C 
\rt~'I 
c,'boovOJ ~~?JO 
~:s-~ #' ~~~ 
~ 
~v 
~~ 
\~ 
\~l 
~c; 
Yoc, 
o~
o~ 
. 
c,e, 
~' 
~c 
'J''' 
...o: 
XJ~ 
. # 
o~ 
~~ ' 
~'I,c; 
~V' 
(f ;#
t$~ 
'9~o 
~~~ 
~'I,.f 
~~.. (J'l! ~~ 
{:o~ 
~v~ 
~'I,~ 
of''''''' 
'l/ 
~~ ."o'¢-Oo 
....I,~ ...~~ 
~~. 
"Coo 
1J.~r9 
'0<' 
~V' 
rf 
(J' 
~ 
t 
(j~ 
~~, 
~~. 
$Qo" 
,*v-' 
S,,<' 
~ 
#~ 
~o 
~V' 
'bo~ 
~"fo 
'6-" 
o 
y~ 
,Ae,~o 
~ 
~
~ 
R 
~ &
if 
~
~ 
Figure 4.4. A comparison of the aboveground vegetation in the two years following overstory thinning, Mt. Trumbull, AZ. 

Discussion 
The most numerous species in the soil seed bank samples from Mt. Trumbull 
appears to be the non-native biennial Verbascum thapsus. The other most common 
species are annuals, in particular the Chenopodium species, Collinsia parviflora, 
Conyza canadensis, and Mimulus rubel/us. Conyza canadensis is found both in the 
field in the aboveground vegetation and as a greenhouse contaminant, and thus its 
numbers in the seed bank in this study should be viewed with some amount of 
caution (numbers may be inflated by as much as 5-10%). Some ofthese species, 
such as Verbascum thapsus can have a fairly high longevity in the soil, perhaps over 
100 years (Kivilaan and Bandurski 1981), although its longevity in many studies has 
been questioned. This trait may allow Verbascum thapsus to occupy the soil seed 
bank for decades following ecological restoration treatments. 
Verbascum thapsus, and other common species in my study have been found 
to have a high seed density in the soil in other studies. Thompson et aL (1997) give 
densities from Europe as high as 23,300 seeds/m' for Chenopodium album, 346 
seeds/rrr' for Conyza canadensis, and 2,096 seeds/m' for Verbascum thapsus. Vose 
and White (1987) found a small number ofChenopodium sp. in the soil seed bank 
near Flagstaff: AZ. The most common species found in my study were not shared by 
Pratt et al. (1984) in their Washington study. They found approximately 50 
Chenopodium album seeds/m', 33 Verbascum thapsus seeds/nr', 17 Conyza 
canadensis seeds/rn', and 117 Collinsia parviflora seeds/rrr'. It appears from my 
73 

study and that ofPratt et al. (1984) that there can be major differences in viable seed 
density within the soil seed bank across the landscape in ponderosa pine forests. 
The importance ofvarious life forms represented in the seed bank varies 
across ecosystems. Herbaceous species tend to dominate temperate soil seed banks 
(Warr et al. 1993). However shrubs and trees can be well represented in the soil seed 
bank in some conifer-dominated ecosystems (Archibold 1979, Morgan and 
Neuenschwander 1988). My results indicated that perennial grasses, shrubs, and 
trees are not well represented in the soil seed bank at Mt. Trumbull (see Chapter 3). 
Pratt et al. (1984) had similar results from a ponderosa pine forest in eastern 
Washington. The soil seed bank there was composed of45% annual forbs, and 
woody species accounted for only 1%. A relatively high number ofperennial grasses 
were found in soil seed bank samples collected in May from a ponderosa pine forest 
in northern Arizona (Brandon Harper and Margaret Moore, 1998, Northern Arizona 
University, personal communication, unreferenced). Tree stands had been thinned 
approximately five years earlier, and part ofthe site had been burned by prescription 
approximately three years earlier. Species included Blepharoneuron tricholepis, 
Festuca arizonica, Muhlenbergia montana, Elymus elymoides, Poafendleriana, Poa 
pratensis, and others. The presence ofthese grasses indicates that these species are 
capable ofutilizing the soil seed bank. Absence ofperennial grass species in my 
study at Mt. Trumbull may be due to the time ofcollection (mainly autumn), missed 
germination cues in the greenhouse, or most likely to the loss ofthese species from 
the aboveground vegetation and the soil seed bank over time. 
74  

The majority of seeds in the thinned area were in the upper 5 ern ofsoil, 
which generally included some organic material. In most studies, the greatest 
numbers ofseeds are in the 0 horizon (litter) (Moore and Wein 1977, Pratt et al. 
1984, Rydgren and Hestmark 1997). Pratt et al. (1984) found the viable seeds of 
most grass and annual species were contained primarily in the litter, probably due to 
either the short longevity ofthese species or to their recent introduction into the litter 
where the litter acts as a seed trap. Conversely, the seeds ofperennial forbs were 
contained primarily in the mineral soil, suggestive ofearlier introduction ofthese 
species and their increased longevity. Germinating seeds in studies where litter is 
removed mainly consist ofthe persistent seeds. Seeds from the 5-10 cm samples in 
my study were probably persistent because they were found in the mineral soil. One 
difficulty with sample collection is the presence or absence of litter. Litter can be 
included in a 0-5 em sample, or it can be removed prior to sampling. Thus the 
volume ofsamples at 0-5 cm may differ. Iflitter is included, the question arises as to 
what depth the sample should be extracted. Iflitter is removed before a sample is 
taken, a whole host of seeds will not be included in the sample: These factors should 
be kept in mind when interpreting results that compare differences in the soil seed 
bank with soil depth. 
The number of viable seeds decreases with soil depth in my study, which is 
consistent with other studies (Kellman 1970, Moore and Wein 1977, Pratt et al. 1984, 
Kramer and Johnson 1987, Archibold 1989, McGee and Feller 1993). Note that the 
previous manuscript chapter involved determining differences between organic 
matter and mineral soil, while this chapter describes differences in depth. Earthworms 
75 

playa significant role in vertical transport ofseeds in many ecosystems (Willems and 
Huijsmans 1994). However, because ofa relative dearth ofearthworms and other 
soil fauna in coniferous forests, vertical transport ofseeds by these organisms is 
probably insignificant (McGee and Feller 1993, Rydgren and Hestmark 1997). In 
southwestern ponderosa pine forests undergoing ecological restoration (including 
thinning ofpost-settlement ponderosa pine trees), or those that have been logged in 
the past, thinning equipment probably has a much greater impact on the movement of 
seeds in the soil than do most soil organisms. 
Thinning the postsettlement pole-sized trees had a significant impact on the 
emergence ofspecies from the soil seed bank into the aboveground vegetation. 
Thinning allows sunlight to reach the forest floor which stimulates germination of 
many species (Baskin and Baskin 1998). Figures 4.5 through 4.8 depict the 
conditions available at my study site for germination prior to and after thinning, and 
show the emergence ofvegetation in the aboveground vegetation. Figure 4.5 shows a 
heavy layer oforganic matter on top ofthe mineral soil and a dense tree canopy. 
After thinning ofpostsettlement trees, there is increased light (Figure 4.6); however, 
the dense organic layer will remain until a fire or some other disturbance removes it. 
The successful establishment ofvegetation from the soil seed bank in 
coniferous forests requires a reduction in surface organic matter, which occurs 
naturally with fire (Archibold 1989). However, mechanical thinning produces some 
dispersion ofthis organic matter and may bring seeds to the surface that would 
otherwise never germinate, while at the same time burying others. Certain seeds 
76 

buried at depth, which are perhaps now uncommon in the aboveground vegetation, 
may be brought to the surface where conditions are more amenable to germination. 
There is generally a poor correspondence between the aboveground 
vegetation and the seeds in the soil seed bank (Whipple 1978, Pratt et al. 1984, 
McGee and Feller 1993, Rydgren and Hestmark 1997). I found the same result in the 
unthinned control area of my study. However, I found a high correlation between 
these two variables following thinning. Litter generally has a viable seed species 
composition more similar to the aboveground vegetation than does the mineral soil 
(Rydgren and Hestmark 1997) for reasons outlined earlier. In nitrogen-deficient 
sites, there may also be a high correspondence between the species in the 
aboveground vegetation and in the soil seed bank, because nitrogen addition 
suppresses germination ofsome species (Kitajima and Tilman 1996). 
I also found some species in the aboveground vegetation that were not in the 
soil seed bank. Possible reasons for this phenomenon include spottiness ofseeds in 
the soil (which was not captured by my samples), season ofcollection, the seeds 
never existed in the soil seed bank (and entered the system through seed rain), and/or 
required germination cues that did not occur in the greenhouse. Germination cues 
provided a whole suite ofproblems. Ideally, all samples should have been subjected 
to numerous cues including excess water as well as periods ofinsufficient moisture, 
varying amounts of light, smoke, varying temperatures, etc. Covering the whole suite 
ofgermination cues is not possible in a study ofthis type. Therefore, it is difficult to 
determine how many viable seeds are actually present in a sample ofsoil. The 
79  

presence or absence ofaboveground vegetation and also the seed rain at the site will 
give some indication of the species that may be in the soil seed bank. Another option 
is to use the seed extraction method to count seeds. 
Those species present in the aboveground vegetation only in 1997 (the fIrst 
year following thinning) are most likely dependent on disturbance for germination 
and were able to restock the seed bank after reproduction. Those present only in 
1998 probably require a longer period oftime to germinate from the soil seed bank, 
required some germination cue that occurred in the second year, or their seeds were 
introduced from off-site by wind, water or animals. Vose and White (1987) found 
seed rain to be an important source ofcolonization following disturbance, such as 
fire. The majority of species were found in only one year. A large number of 
Collinsia parviflora plants were observed in 1997 and none in 1998. This could be 
due to the time of sampling. An inventory was conducted three times in 1997 
(including spring), but only once in 1998 (autumn). Since this annual species 
flowers early in the season, it may have been overlooked in 1998. 
I found few plants to act as a colonizing source outside ofthe thinned area. 
The ability ofan area to become revegetated following disturbance may be limited to 
the dispersal ability of species, with edges often having the highest diversity (Schott 
and Hamburg 1997). Probably only sites contiguous to the established community 
receive enough seed rain to produce much new vegetation. After logging and 
burning in a Douglas-fir forest (Clark and Wilson 1994), relatively few 
individuals established from seed after the first year. However, the second year after 
disturbance, there was a tremendous increase in individuals establishing from seed. 
80  

Conclusion 
Most ofthe viable seeds are found in the upper few centimeters ofthe 0 
horizon and mineral soil at the thinned portion of my study site at Mt. Trumbull, AZ. 
Thinning practices did not significantly alter the distribution ofseeds in the soil 
profile. However, thinning the postsettlement trees in southwestern ponderosa pine 
produces a tremendous increase in the composition and frequency ofaboveground 
vegetation from the soil seed bank. Whether this increase is attributable to increased 
light or moisture or some other environmental factor, or combination of factors, was 
not measured or determined by this study. 
The results of my study suggest that the soil seed bank is important for 
recolonizing a site after a disturbance such as thinning. The most common species in 
the soil seed bank at Mt. Trumbull are early successional annuals and biennials. 
These species help to stabilize the soil following disturbance, act as fuel for fire, and 
may prevent the establishment ofnon-natives. However, certain non-natives are also 
very common in the soil seed bank, particularly Verbascum thapsus, in the upper 0-5 
em of the soil. It may be important to follow any thinning practice by a prescribed 
burn to remove some non-native seeds and for germination cues of species that 
require heat or smoke. The greatest number ofviable seeds in the soil seed bank at 
Mt. Trumbull (based on seed emergence) are in the top 5 em ofthe mineral soil. 
Thus fire might be used as a tool to manipulate the species in the soil seed bank or the 
aboveground vegetation. Fire also decreases accumulated litter, releases nutrients, 
and stimulates germination ofsome species. Fire (heat or smoke) may be required as 
81 

a germination cue for some species (Baldwin and Morse 1994, Keeley and 
Fotheringham 1997), and may be necessary for long-term germination success of 
some species, such as Nicotiana attenuata in this study 
82 

CHAPTERS 
CONCLUSIONS AND MANAGEMENT IMPLICATIONS 
The importance ofthe soil seed bank at a particular site will vary across 
southwestern ponderosa pine forests, and is dependent on current and past land use, 
disturbance history, and past and current vegetation at the site. Continuous heavy grazing 
and high intensity fires can destroy seed sources, both in the soil seed bank and in the 
aboveground vegetation (Bertiller 1996, Ghermandi 1997, Trabaud et al. 1997). 
My results indicate that although perhaps less than 5% ofthe Verbascum thapsus 
in the soil seed bank will germinate in the first year following thinning (based on 
comparisons between numbers ofviable seeds in the soil seed bank and number ofpJants 
in the aboveground vegetation), this species may account for as much as 45% ofthe 
viable seeds in the soil seed bank. In addition, this species is opportunistic in its ability to 
germinate in stages to capitalize on new environmental conditions, such as when the 
herbaceous vegetation around it is removed (personal observation). This habit allows it 
to easily colonize a site after disturbance. My results also indicate that non-native species 
may be associated with particular overstory tree species, especially New Mexico locust. 
Also ofconcern is the Jack ofnative perennial grasses in the soil seed bank at Mt. 
Trumbull, as well as in the aboveground vegetation. These grasses are important for 
nutrient cycling, as forage, and as a source of fuel for low-intensity fires. They also 
function to stabilize the soil and protect it from erosion. Whether seeding is required 
83 

after ecological restoration treatments at a particular site will be dependent on the on-site 
vegetation, both aboveground and in the soil seed bank. Because perennial grasses are 
not well represented in the seed bank at Mt. Trumbull. it may be necessary to seed native 
grass species to meet particular management goals and to achieve target restoration goals. 
Another desirable restoration goal may be to seed other native species in order to 
return vegetation at the site to presettlement conditions. The species chosen for a 
particular seed mix will be based on such criteria as cost, functional role in the 
ecosystem, whether it serves as a food source, the location ofcollection, use as an erosion 
control. and other factors. Disadvantages ofseeding are the potential not only of 
introducing new genetic strains ofspecies already existing at the site, but also the 
potential ofintroducing entirely new species which have never been native to a region, or 
even native to the U.S. 
The greatest number of viable seeds in the soil seed bank at Mt. Trumbull (based 
on seed emergence) are in the top 5 em ofthe mineral soil. Only the seeds in the top few 
centimeters will germinate unless some type ofdisturbance or soil fauna moves seeds 
closer to the surface and therefore closer to the light levels required for germination of 
most species. Although thinning the overstory trees will allow increased light levels to 
reach the ground, it may be necessary to remove organic matter through prescribed 
burning to permit light to reach the viable seeds in the mineral soil. Thus fire might be 
used as a tool to manipulate the species in the soil seed bank or the aboveground 
vegetation. Ofparticular interest is whether fire can be used to control non-native species 
by destroying viable seeds in the top few centimeters ofsoil or litter. Fire also decreases 
accumulated litter, releases nutrients, and stimulates germination ofsome species. Fire 
84  

(or smoke) may be required as a germination cue for some species (Baldwin and Morse 
1994, Keeley and Fotheringham 1997), and may be necessary for long-term germination 
success ofsome species, such as Nicotiana attenuata, in this study. The heat ofa low 
intensity fire will penetrate, at most, only a few centimeters into the mineral soil (Moore 
and Wein 1977). A large number ofseeds will remain viable in the mineral soil to 
potentially recolonize an area. The severity ofa burn can become a selective force in seed 
germination (Morgan and Neuenschwander 1988). The location of seeds in the soil 
profile can also have a significant effect on survival. For instance, large accumulations of 
seed in the 0 horizon may be destroyed by fire (Moore and Weinn 1977, Morgan and 
Neuenschwander 1988). Thus, unburned areas, such as skid trails, can provide areas for 
recruitment and act as safe sites from fire for both native and non-native species. This 
allows species, which might otherwise be harmed by fire, to germinate, reproduce, and 
replenish the soil seed bank. However, soil compaction may also be a problem in these 
areas. 
Most studies indicate that there is little correlation between the aboveground 
vegetation and the soil seed bank. My results imply that although this may be true prior 
to thinning, there is a high correlation the first year following thinning. Aboveground 
vegetation may increase four-fold by the second year following thinning, and species 
composition may change dramatically between the first and second year following the 
disturbance. 
Baseline inventories ofspecies that utilize the soil for storage ofseeds 
can be used as indicators ofthe vegetation that will emerge following 
disturbances, including ecological restoration treatments (tree thinning, 
85 

prescribed burning, etc.). Future inventories can then monitor changes in the 
soil seed bank with elapsed time since these restoration treatments. Pre- and 
post-restoration analyses ofthe seed bank may give some indication ofthe 
historical composition ofthe seed bank, the relationship ofthe seed bank to 
other components in the ecosystem, and can aid in our understanding of 
population dynamics and succession in these systems. Seed bank studies can 
also be used to determine ifadditional seeding ofnative species or control of 
non-native species may be necessary to restore diversity and structure to 
areas undergoing ecological restoration. 
Future research needs include examining the role offire after thinning on the 
soil seed bank, competition between the seedlings emerging from the soil seed bank 
and those in seeding mixtures (as well as interspecific competition in the soil seed 
bank), the distribution ofseeds with depth in areas which have not been thinned , and 
further refinement ofthe regression equation to predict aboveground vegetation from 
the soil seed bank. 
86 

LITERATURE CITED 
Altschul, J.H., and Fairley, H.C. 1989. Man, models and management: an overview ofthe 
archaeology of the Arizona Strip and the management of its cultural resources. 
Prepared for USDA Forest Service and US Department ofthe Interior Bureau of 
Land Management. Submitted by Statistical Research, Plateau Archaeology, 
Dames and Moore, Inc. 
Archibold, O.W. 1979. Buried viable propaguIes as a factor in postfire regeneration in 
northern Saskatchewan. Canadian Journal of Botany, 57: 54-58. 
Archibold,O.W. 1989. Seed banks and vegetation processes in coniferous forests. In 
Ecology of soil seed banks. Edited by M.A. Leek, V.T.Parker and RL. Simpson. 
Academic Press, San Diego, CA. pp. 107-122. 
Arnold, J.F. 1950. Changes in ponderosa pine bunchgrass ranges in northern Arizona 
resulting from pine regeneration and grazing. Journal ofForestry, 48: 118-126. 
Auld, T.D., and Bradstock, RA. 1996. Soil temperatures after the passage ofa fire: do 
they influence the germination of buried seeds? Australian Journal ofEcology, 
21: 106-109. 
Bai, Y., and Romo, J.T. 1997. Seed production, seed rain, and the seedbank of fringed 
sagebrush. Journal ofRange Management, 50: 151-155. 
Baker, H.G. 1989. Some aspects ofthe natural history ofseed banks In Ecology of soil 
seed banks Edited by M.A. Leek, V. T. Parker and R L. Simpson. Academic 
Press, San Diego. pp. 9-21. 
Bakker, J.P., Poschlod, P., Strykstra, R.J., Bekker, RM., and Thompson, K. 1996. Seed 
banks and seed dispersal: important topics in restoration ecology. Acta Bot. Neerl. 
45: 461-490. 
Baldwin, LT., and Morse, L. 1994. Up in smoke n. Germination ofNicotiana attenuata 
in response to smoke-derived cues and nutrients in burned and unburned soils. 
Journal of Chemical Ecology, 20: 2373-2391. 
Baldwin, 1. T., Staszak-Kozinski, L., and Davidson, R 1994. Up in smoke: 1. Smoke­
derived germination cues for postfire annual, Nicotiana attenuata Torr. Ex. 
Watson. Journal ofChemical Ecology, 20: 2345-2371. 
Baskin, C.c., and Baskin, J.M. 1998. Seeds: ecology, biogeography, and evolution of 
87 

dormancy and germination. Academic Press, San Diego, CA. 
Bazzaz, F.A. 1996. Plants in changing environments. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK. 
Benoit, D. L., Derksen, D.A., and Panneton, B. 1992. Innovative approaches to 
seedbank studies. Weed Science, 40: 660-669. 
Benoit, D.L., Kenkel, N.C., and Cavers, P.B. 1989. Factors influencing the precision of 
soil seed bank estimates. Canadian Journal ofBotany, 67: 2833-2840. 
Bertiller, M.B. 1996. Grazing effects on sustainable semiarid rangelands in Patagonia: 
the state and dynamics ofthe soil seed bank. Environmental Management, 20: 
123-132. 
Bigwood, D.W., and Inouye, D.W. 1988. Spatial pattern analysis of seed banks: an 
improved method and optimized sampling. Ecology, 69: 497-507. 
Biswell, H.H. 1974. Effects offire on chaparral. In Fire and ecosystems Edited by T.T. 
Kozlowski and Cfi.Ahlgren. Academic Press, New York. Pp. 321-364. 
Brown, D. 1992. Estimating the composition ofa forest seed bank: a comparison ofthe 
seed extraction and seedling emergence methods. Canadian Journal ofBotany, 70: 
1603-1612. 
Cardina, J., and Sparrow, D.H. 1996. A comparison ofmethods to predict weed seedling 
populations from the soil seedbank. Weed Science, 44: 46-51 
Carrington, M. 1997. Soil seed bank structure and composition in Florida sand pine 
scrub. American Midland Naturalist, 137: 39-47. 
Cavers, P.B. 1983. Seed demography. Canadian Journal ofBotany, 61: 3578-3590. 
Cavers, P.B. 1995. Seed banks: memory in soil. Canadian Journal ofSoil Science, 75: lI­
B. 
Champness, S.S. 1949. Note on the technique ofsampling soil to determine the content of 
buried viable seeds. Journal ofthe British Grassland Society, 4: 115-118. 
Christensen, N.L., and Muller, C.H. 1975. Effects offire on factors controlling plant 
growth in Adenostoma chaparral. Ecological Monographs, 45: 29-55. 
Clark, D.L., and Wilson, M.V. 1994. Heat-treatment effects on seed bank species ofan 
old-growth Douglas-fir forest. Northwest Science, 68: 1-5. 
Clifford, H.T. 1956. Seed dispersal on footwear. Proceedings ofthe Botanical Society of 
The British Isles, 2: 129-131. 
88 

Clifford, H.T. 1959. Seed dispersal by motor vehicles. Journal ofEcology, 47: 311-315. 
Cooper, C.F. 1960. Changes in vegetation, structure, and growth of southwest pine 
forests since white settlement. Ecological Monographs, 30: 129-164. 
Covington, W.W., and Moore, M.M. 1994. Southwestern ponderosa forest structure: 
changes since Euro-American settlement. Journal ofForestry, 92: 39-47. 
Covington, W.W., Everett, R.L., Steele, R, Irwin, L.L., Daer, T.A, and Auclair, AN.D. 
1994. Historical and anticipated changes in forest ecosystems ofthe Inland West 
of the United States In Assessing forest ecosystem health in the inland West 
Edited by R N. Sampson and D. L. Adams. Haworth Press, Inc., New York. 
Pages 13-63. 
Covington, W.W., Fule, P.Z., Moore, M. M., Hart, S.C., Kolb. T.E., Mast, J.N., Sackett, 
S.S., and Wagner, M.R, 1997. Restoring ecosystem health in ponderosa pine 
forests ofthe Southwest. Journal ofForestry, 95: 23-29. 
Cronquist, A, Holmgren, AH., Holmgren, N.H., and Reveal, J.L. 1972. Intermountain 
flora: vascular plants ofthe Intermountain West, USA Volume 1: geological and 
botanical history ofthe region, its plant geography and a glossary. The vascular 
cryptograms and the gymnosperms. Hafuer Publishing Co., New York, NY. 
Cronquist, A , Holmgren, AH., Holmgren, N.H., Reveal, J.L., and Holmgren, P.K. 
1977. Intermountain flora: vascular plants ofthe Intermountain West, USA 
Volume 6: the monocotyledons. Columbia University Press, New York, NY. 
Cronquist, A , Holmgren, AH., Holmgren, N.H., Reveal, J.L., and Holmgren, P.K. 1984. 
Intermountain flora: vascular plants ofthe Intermountain West, USA Volume 4: 
Asteridae (except Asteraceae). The New York Botanical Garden, Bronx, NY. 
Cronquist, A , Holmgren, AH., Holmgren, N.H., Reveal, J.L., Holmgren, P.K., and 
Bameby, RC. 1989. Intermountain flora: vascular plants of the Intermountain 
West, USA Volume 3, Part B: FabaJes. The New York Botanical Garden, Bronx, 
NY. 
Cronquist, A, Holmgren, AH, Holmgren, N.H., Reveal, J.L., and Holmgren, P.K. 1994. 
Intermountain flora: vascular plants ofthe Intermountain West, USA Volume 5: 
Asterales. The New York Botanical Garden, Bronx, NY. 
Cronquist, A, Holmgren, N.H., and Holmgren, P.K. 1997. Intermountain flora: vascular 
plants ofthe Intermountain West, USA Volume 3, Part A: Subclass Rosidae 
(except Fabales). The New York Botanical Garden, Bronx, NY. 
Cushwa, C.T., Martin, RE., and Miller, RL. 1968. The effects of fire on seed 
89 

germination. Journal ofRange Management. 21: 250-254. 
Darwin, C. 1859. On the origin of species. J. Murray, London, England. 
Dessaint, F., Barralis, G., Caixinhas, M.L., Mayor, J-P., Recasens, J., and Zanin, G. 
1996. Precision ofsoil seedbank sampling: how many soil cores? Weed Research, 
36: 143-151. 
Dick-Peddie, W. 1993. New Mexico vegetation: past, present and future. University of 
New Mexico Press, Albuquerque, NM . 
Donelan, M., and Thompson, K. 1980. Distribution ofburied viable seeds along a 
successional series. Biological Conservation, 17: 297-311. 
Dutoit, T., and Alard, D. 1995. Permanent seed banks in chalk grassland under various 
management regimes: their role in the restoration of species-rich plant 
communities. Biodiversity and Conservation, 4: 939-950. 
Elias, T.S. 1987. The complete trees ofNorth America: field guide and natural history. 
Gramercy Publishing Company, New York, NY. 
Enright, N.J., and Lamont, B.B. 1989. Seed banks, fire season, safe sites and seedling 
recruitment in five co-occurring Banksia species. Journal ofEcology, 77: 1111­
1122. 
Eriksson, O. 1992. Evolution ofseed dispersal and recruitment in clonal plants. Oikos, 
63: 439-448. 
Ferrandis, P., Herranz, J.M., and Martinez-Sanchez, J.J. 1996. The role ofsoil seed bank 
in the early stages ofplant recovery after fire in a Pinus pinaster forest in SE 
Spain. International Journal of Wildland Fire, 6: 31-35. 
Fisher, RF., Bourn, C.N., and Fisher, W.F. 1995. Opal phytoliths as an indicator ofthe 
floristics ofprehistoric grasslands. Geodenna, 68: 243-255. 
Fisher, RF., Jenkins, M.J., and Fisher, W.F. 1987. Fire and prairie-forest mosaic of 
Devils Tower National Monument. American Midland Naturalist, 117: 250-257. 
Flinn, M. A , and Pringle, J.K. 1983. Heat tolerance ofrhizomes ofseveral understory 
species. Canadian Journal ofBotany, 61: 452-457. 
Flinn, M.A, and Wein, RW. 1977. Depth of underground plant organs and theoretical 
survival during fire. Canadian Journal ofBotany, 55: 2550-2554. 
Flinn, M.A, and Wein, R W. 1988. Regrowth offorest understory species following 
seasonal burning. Canadian Journal ofBotany, 66: 150-155. 
90  

Fule, P.Z., Covington, W.W., and Moore, M.M. 1997. Determining reference conditions 
for ecosystem management ofsouthwestern ponderosa pine forests. Ecological 
Applications, 7: 895-908. 
Fyles. J.W. 1989. Seed bank populations in upland coniferous forests in central Alberta. 
Canadian Journal ofBotany, 67: 274-278. 
Ghermandi.L. 1997. Seasonal patterns in the seed bank ofa grassland in north-western 
Patagonia. Journal of Arid Environments, 35: 215-224. 
Granstrom, A. 1982. Seed banks in five boreal stands originating between 1810 and 
1963. Canadian Journal ofBotany, 60: 1815-1821. 
Grime, J.P. 1979. Plant strategies and vegetation processes. John Wiley & Sons, 
Chichester, England. 
Gross, K.L. 1990. A comparison ofmethods for estimating seed numbers in the soil. 
Journal ofEcology, 78: 1079-1093. 
Harper, J.1. 1977. Population biology ofplants. Academic Press, San Diego, 
CA. 
Hassan, M.A., and West, N.E. 1986. Dynamics ofsoil seed pools in burned and unburned 
sagebrush semi-deserts. Ecology, 67: 269-272. 
Ingersoll, c.A. and Wilson, M.V. 1990. Buried propagules in an old-growth forest and 
their response to experimental disturbance. Canadian Journal ofBotany, 68: 1156­
1162. 
Ingersoll, C.A., and Wilson, M.V. 1993. Buried propagule bank ofa high subalpine site: 
microsite variation and comparisons with aboveground vegetation. Canadian 
Journal ofBotany, 71: 712-717. 
Jameson, D.A. 1968. Species interactions ofgrowth inhibitors in native plants of 
Northern Arizona. USDA Forest Service Research Note RM-113. 
Kaufmann, M.R, Graham, R T., Boyce Jr., D.A., Moir, W.H., Perry, 1., Reynolds, R.T., 
Bassett, R1., Mehlhop, P., Edminster, c.s., Block, W.M., and Corn, P.S. 1994. 
An ecological basis for ecosystem management. USDA Forest Service, GTR RM­
246. 
Kearney, T.H. and Peebles, RH. 1960. Arizona Flora Second Edition. University of 
California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA. 
Keeley, J.E. 1981. Reproductive cycles and fire regimes In Proceedings ofthe 
91 

conference: Fire regimes and ecosystem properties. USDA Forest Service GTR 
WO-26. 
Keeley, J.E., and Fotheringham, C.J. 1997. Trace gas emissions and smoke-induced seed 
germination. Science, 276: 1248-1250. 
Keeley, J.E., Morton, B.A, Pedrosa, A , and Trotter, P. 1985. Role ofallelopathy, heat 
and charred wood in the germination ofchaparral herbs and suffrutescents. 
Journal ofEcology, 73: 445-458 . 
Kellman, M.C. 1970. The viable seed content ofsome forest soil in coastal British 
Columbia. Canadian Journal ofBotany, 48: 1383-1385. 
Kelly, V.R. and Parker, V.T. 1990. Seed bank survival and dynamics in sprouting and 
nonsprouting Arctostaphylos species. The American Midland Naturalist, 124: 
114-123. 
Kimmins, J.P. 1987. Forest ecology. Macmillan Publishing Company, New York, NY. 
Kitajima, K.., and D. Tilman. 1996. Seed banks and seedling establishment on an 
experimental productivity gradient. Oikos, 76: 381-391. 
Kivilaan, A., and Bandurski, RS. 1981. The one hundred-year period for Dr. Beal's seed 
viability experiment. American Journal ofBotany, 68: 1290-1292. 
Koniak, S., and Everett, RL. 1982. Seed reserves in soils of successional stages of 
pinyon woodland. The American Midland Naturalist, 108: 295-303. 
Koons, E. D. 1945. Geology ofthe Uinkaret Plateau, Northern Arizona. Bulletin ofthe 
Geological Society ofAmerica, 56: 151-180. 
Kramer, N.B., and Johnson, F.D. 1987. Mature forest seed batiks ofthree habitat types in 
centralldaho. Canadian Journal ofBotany, 65: 1961-1966. 
Leek, M.A, Parker, V.T., and Simpson, R.L. 1989. Ecology of Soil Seed Banks. 
Academic Press, Inc. San Diego, CA 
Marafion, T., and Bartolome, IW. 1989. Seed and seedling populations in two contrasted 
communities: open grassland and oak (Quercus agrifoliay understory in 
California. Acta <:Ecologica/<:Ecologia Plantarum, 10: 147-158. 
Mayer, A.M., and Poljakoff-Mayber, A. 1982. The Germination ofSeeds. Pergamon 
Press Ltd., Oxford, England. Third Edition 
McGee, A., and Feller, M.C. 1993. Seed banks of forested and disturbed soils in 
southwestern British Columbia Canadian Journal ofBotany, 71: 1574-1583. 
92 

Milberg, P. 1995. Soil seed bank after eighteen years ofsuccession from grassland to 
forest. Oikos, 72: 3-13. 
Morgan, P., and Neuenschwander, L.F. 1988. Seed-bank contributions to regeneration of 
shrub species after clear-cutting and burning. Canadian Journal ofBotany, 66: 
169-172. 
• 
Moore, J. M., and Wein, RW. 1977. Viable seed populations by soil depth and potential 
site recolonization after disturbance. Canadian Journal ofBotany, 55: 2408-2412. 
Mulugeta, D., and Stoltenberg, D.E. 1997. Increased weed emergence and seed 
bank depletion by soil disturbance in a no-tillage system. Weed Science, 45: 234­
241. 
Nelson, J.F., and Chew, RM. 1977. Factors affecting seed reserves in the soil ofa 
Mojave Desert ecosystem, Rock Valley, Nye County, Nevada. The American 
Midland Naturalist, 97: 300-320. 
Pake, C.E., and Venable, D.L. 1996. Seed banks in desert annuals: implications for 
persistence and 'COexistence in variable environments. Ecology, 77: 1427-1435. 
Perez, C.J., Waller, S.S., Moser, L.E., Stubbendieck, J.L., and Steuter, AA 1998. 
Seedbank characteristics ofa Nebraska sandhills prairie. Journal ofRange 
Management, 51: 55-62. 
Piperno, D.R 1993. The nature and status ofphytolith analysis In current research in 
phytolith analysis: applications in archaeology and paleoecology Edited by D.M. 
Pearsall and D.R. Piperno. MASCA, University ofPennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
PA Pp. 9-18. 
Pratt, D.W., Black, RA, and Zamora, RA 1984. Buried viable seed in a ponderosa pine 
community. Canadian Journal ofBotany, 62: 44-52. 
Roberts, H.A 1981. Seed banks in soils In Advances in Applied Biology, VoL 
VI. Edited by T.H. Coaker. Academic Press, New York, NY. Pp. 1-55. 
Rydgren, K., and Hestmark, G. 1997. The soil propagule bank in a boreal old-growth 
spruce forest: changes with depth and relationship to aboveground vegetation. 
Canadian Journal ofBotany, 75: 121-128. 
Schmidt, W. 1989. Plant dispersal by motor cars. Vegetatio, 80: 147-152. 
Schott, G. W., and Hamburg, S.P. 1997. The seed rain and seed bank ofan adjacent 
native tallgrass prairie and old field. Canadian Journal ofBotany, 75: 1-7. 
Silvertown, J.W. 1982. Introduction to plant population ecology. Longman House, Essex, 
93 

England. 
Simpson, R L., Leek, M.A, Parker, V.T. 1989. Seed banks: general concepts and 
methodological issues In Ecology ofsoil seed banks Edited by M.A Leek, V. T. 
Parker and R L. Simpson. Academic Press, San Diego. pp. 9-21. 
Strickler, G.S., and Edgerton, P.J. 1976. Emergent seedlings from coniferous litter and 
soil in eastern Oregon. Ecology, 57: 801-807. 
Templeton, AR, and Levin, D.A 1979. Evolutionary consequences ofseed pools. The 
American Naturalist, 114: 232-249. 
Ter Heerdt, G.N.J.,Verweij, G.L., Bekker, RM., and Bakker, J.P. 1996. An improved 
method for seed-bank analysis: seedling emergence after removing the soil by 
sieving. Functional Ecology, 10: 144-151. 
Thompson, K. 1978. The occurrence of buried viable seeds in relation to environmental 
gradients. Journal ofBiogeography, 5: 424-30. 
Thompson, K. 1992. The functional ecology ofseed banks In Seeds: the ecology of 
regeneration in plant communities Edited by M. Fenner. CAB International, 
Wallingford Oxon, UK. Pp. 231-258. 
Thompson, K., Bakker, J.P., and Bekker, RM. 1997. The soil seed banks of north 
west Europe: methodology, density, and longevity. Cambridge University Press, 
London, UK. 
Thompson, K., Band, S.R, and Hodgson, J.G. 1993. Seed size and shape predict 
persistence in soil. Functional Ecology, 7: 236-241. 
Thompson, K., and Grime, J.P. 1979. Seasonal variation in the seed banks of herbaceous 
species in ten contrasting habitats. Journal ofEcology, 67: 893-921. 
Touchan, R, Swetnam, T.W., and Grissino-Mayer, H.D. 1995. Effects of livestock 
grazing on pre-settlement fire regimes in New Mexico In Proceedings: 
symposium on fire in wilderness and park management Edited by J.K. Brown, 
R W. Mutch, C.W. Spoon, and RH. Wakomoto. USDA Forest Service, GTR 
INT-GTR-320. Pp. 268-272. 
Trabaud, L., Martinez-Sanchez, J.J., Ferrandis, P., Gonzalez-Ochoa, AI., and Herranz, 
J.M. 1997. Vegetation epigee et banque de semances du sol: leur contribution ala 
stabilite cyclique des pinedes mixtes de Pinus halepensis et P. pinaster. Canadian 
Journal ofBotany, 75: 1012-1021. 
United States Department ofthe Interior Bureau ofLand Management. 1990. Proposed 
94  

Arizona Strip District resource management plan and [mal environmental impact 
statement. USDI BLM Arizona Strip District. 
Vose, J.M., and White, AS. 1987. Processes ofunderstory seedling recruitment 1 year 
after prescribed fire in an Arizona ponderosa pine community. Canadian Journal 
ofBotany, 65: 2280-2290. 
Vose, J.M., and White, AS. 1991. Biomass response mechanisms ofunderstory species 
the first year after prescribed burning in an Arizona ponderosa-pine community. 
Forest Ecology and Management, 40: 175-187. 
Vyvey, Q. 1989. Bibliographical review on buried viable seeds in the soil. Excerpta 
Botanica, 26: 311-320. 
Warr, S.J., Kent, M., and Thompson, K. 1994. Seed bank composition and variability in 
five woodlands in south-west England. Journal ofBiogeography, 21: 151-168. 
Warr, S.J., Thompson, K., and Kent, M. 1993. Seed banks as a neglected area of 
biogeographic research: a review of literature and sampling techniques. Progress 
in Physical Geography, 17: 329-347: 
Weaver, H. 1951. Fire as an ecological factor in the southwestern ponderosa pine forests. 
Journal of Forestry, 49: 93-98. 
Welsh, S.L., Atwood, N.D., Goodrich, S., and Higgins, L.C., 1993. A Utah Flora. 
Second Edition. Brigham Young University, Provo, UT. 
Whipple, S.A 1978. The relationship of buried, germinating seeds to vegetation in an 
old-growth Colorado subalpine forest. Canadian Journal ofBotany, 56: 1505­
1509. 
White, P.S. 1979. Pattern, process, and natural disturbance in vegetation. The Botanical 
Review, 45: 230-299. 
Wicklow, D.T., Kumar, R, and Lloyd, J.E. 1984. Germination of blue grama seeds 
buried by dung beetles (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae). Environmental Entomology, 
13: 878-881. 
Willems, J.H. and Huijsmans, K.G.A 1994. Vertical seed dispersal by earthworms: a 
quantitative approach. Ecography, 17: 124-130. 
95  

APPENDIX A:  
FLORA IN THE VICINITY OF MT. TRUMBULL, MOHAVE COUNTY,  
ARIZONA  
96  

Family 
Species 
Common Name 
Aceraceae 
Amaranthaceae 
Anacardiaceae 
Apiaceae 
Asclepiadaceae 
Asteraceae 
Berberidaceae 
Boraginaceae 
Acer grandidenuuum 
Amaranthus albus 
Rhus glabra 
Rhus aromatica var. trilobata 
Cymopterus multinervatus 
Cymopterus purpureus 
Lomatiumfoeniculaceum var. macdougalii 
Asclepias asperula var. asperula 
Asclepias subverticillata 
Agoseris glauca 
Antennaria sp. 
Artemisia carruthii 
Artemisia dracunculus 
Artemisiafrigida 
Artemisia tridentata 
Brickellia grandijlora 
Chaenaclis douglasii 
Chrysothamnus depressus 
Chrysothamnus viscidijlorus 
Cirsium wheeleri 
Conyza canadensis 
Erigeron bellidiastrum 
Erigeron divergens 
Erigeronjlageliaris 
Erigeron speciosus 
Eupatorium herbaceum 
Gutierrezia sarothrae 
Helianthus anomalus 
Hymenopappus filifolius 
Hymenoxys acaulis 
Hymenoxys cooperi 
Kuhnia chlorolepis 
Lactuca serriola 
Machaeranthera canescens 
Onopordum acanthium 
Rudbeckia sp. 
Sanvitalia abertii 1 
Senecio eremophilus var. macdougalii 2 
Senecio multilobatus 
Solidago sparsijlora 
Stephanomeria tenuifolia 
Taraxacum officinale 
Tetradymia canescens 
Townsendia incana 
Tragopogon dubius 
Verbesina encelioides 
Viguiera multiflora 
Mahonia fremomii 
Mahonia repens 
Cryptamha cinerea var. cinerea 
Hackellia sp. 
Lappula occidentalis 
97 
bigtooth -maple 
pale amaranth 
smooth sumac 
skunkbush sumac 
purple-nerved spring-parsley 
variable spring-parsley 
Macdougal's biscuitroot 
spider milkweed 
whorled milkweed 
mountain dandelion 
pussytoes 
Carruth's wormwood 
tarragon 
fringed sagebrush 
big sagebrush 
tasselflower 
Douglas'dustymaiden 
dwarfrabbitbrush 
viscid rabbitbrush 
Wheeler's thistle 
horseweed 
pretty daisy 
spreading daisy 
trailing daisy 
Oregon daisy 
white thoroughwort 
broom snakeweed 
sand sunflower 
hyalineherb 
stemless woollybase 
Cooper's bymenoxys 
false bonset 
prickly lettuce 
hoary aster 
Scotch thistle 
coneflower 
Abert's creeping zinnia 
Macdougal's groundsel 
Uinta groundsel 
alcove goldenrod 
slender wirelettuce 
common dandelion 
gray horsebrush 
silvery townsendia 
yellow salsify 
crownbeard 
showy goldeneye 
Fremont's mahonia 
Oregon-grape 
James's cryptanth 
stickseed 
western stickseed 

Brassicaceae 
Capparaceae 
Caprifoliaceae 
Caryophyllaceae 
Chenopodiaceae 
Convulvulaceae 
Cupressaceae 
Cyperaceae 
Ericaceae 
Euphorbiaceae 
Fabaceae 
Fagaceae 
Fumiariaceae 
Mertensia macdougalii I 
Arabis holboellii var. fendleri 
Chorispora tenella 
Descurainia pinnata var. iruermedia 
Draba sp. 
Lepidium densiflorum 
Streptanthus cordatus 
Cleome lutea 
Cleome serrulata 
Polanisia dodecandra 
Sambucus caerulea 
Symphoricarpos oreophi/us 
Arenariafendleri var. eastwoodiae 
Arenariafendleri var. glabrescens 
Arenaria lanuginosa ssp. saxosa 
Si/ene scouleri 
Stellariajamesiana 
Chenopodium album var. berlandieri 
Chenopodium botrys 
Chenopodium leptophyllum 
Chenopodium graveolens (incisum) I 
Salsola pestifer 
Convolvulus arvensis 
.Juniperus osteosperma 
Carex occidentalis 
Carex. sp. 
Arctostaphylos patula 
Arctostaphylos pungens 
Euphorbia brachycera 
Euphorbia lurida I 
Euphorbia serpy//ifolia 
Astragalus argophyllus 
Astragalus henrimontanensis 
Astragalus castoneaeformis I 
Astragalus oophorus var. caulescens 
Dalea oligophylla 
Dalea polygonoides 1 
Dalea searlsiae 
Lathyrus lanzswertii var. laetiviren 
Latus humistratus 
Latus plebeius 
Lotus iaahensis 
Lotus wrightii 
Lupinus argenieus 
Lupinus kingii 
Medicago sativa 
Melilotus oficinalis 
Phaseolus angustissimus 1 
Psoralidium tenuiflorum 
Robinia neomexicana 
Trifolium sp. 
Vida americana 
Quercus gambelii 
Quercus gambelii x turbinella 
Quercus turbinella 
Corydalis aurea 
98 
Macdougal's bluebells 
Fendler's rockcress 
musk-mustard 
western tansymustard 
whitlowgrass 
densecress 
twistflower 
yellow spiderflower 
Rocky Mtn, bee plant 
clammy-weed 
blue elderberry 
mountain snowberry 
Eastwood's sandwort 
basin sandwort 
sprawling sandwort 
Scouler's campion 
James' chickweed 
Berlandier's pigweed 
Jerusalem-oak 
narrowleaf goosefoot 
fetid goosefoot 
Russian thistle 
bindweed 
Utah juniper 
western sedge 
sedge 
greenleaf manzanita 
mexican manzanita 
shorthorn spurge 
San Francisco Mt. spurge 
thyme-leaved spurge 
meadow milkvetch 
Dana's milkvetch 
chestnut milkvetch 
pallid egg miJkvetch 
western prairie-clover 
sixweeks prairieclover 
Searles priarie-clover 
largeflower sweet-pea 
low trefoil 
longbracted trefoil 
Utah trefoil 
Wright's trefoil 
silvery lupine 
King's lupine 
alfalfa 
yellow sweet-clover 
slimleafbean 
prairie scurfpea 
New Mexico locust 
clover 
American vetch 
Gambel's oak 
hybrid 
turbinella live-oak 
golden corydalis 

Garryaceae 
Gentianaceae 
Geraniaceae 
Grossulariaceae 
Hydrophyllaceae 
Lamiaceae 
Liliaceae 
Linaceae 
Loasaceae 
Malvaceae 
Monotropaceae 
Nyctaginaceae 
Onagraceae 
Orobanchaceae 
Papaveraceae 
Pinaceae 
Poaceae 
Garrya jlavescens 
Swertia a/bomarginata 
Swertia radiata 
Erodium cicutarium 
Geranium caespitosum 
Geranium richardsonii 
Ribes cereum 
Ribes sp. 
Nama dichotomum I 
Phacelia crenulata var. corrugata 
Phacelia magellanica 1 
Phacelia sp. 
Dracocephalum parviflorum 
Leonurus cardiaca 
Marrubium vulgare 
Monardella odoratissima 
Allium bisceptrum 
Calochortus nuttallii 
Fritillaria atropurpurea 
Linum australe 
Linum perenne ssp. lewisii 
Mentzelia dispersa 
Mentzelia pumila 
Sphaera/cea munroana 
Sphaera/cea parvifolia 
Pterospora andromedea 
Mirabiltslinearisvar. decipiens 
Mirabilis linearis 
Mirabilis oxybaphoides 
Epilobium angustifolium 
Gayophytum diffusum 
Oenothera caespitosa 
Oenothera coronopifolia 
Oenotherajlava 
Orobanchefasciculata 
Argemone munita 
Eschscholtzia mexicana 
Pinus eduJis 
Pinus ponderosa 
Agropyron cristatum 
Agropyron intermedium var. imermedium 
Agropyron intermedium var. trichophorum 
Aristida purpurea 
Bouteloua curtipendula 
Bouteloua gracilis 
Bromus ciliatus 
Bromus inermis 
Bromus carinatus 
Bromus tectorum 
Elymus cinereus 
Elymus elongatus 
Elymus elymoides 
Elymus trachycaulus 
Eragrostis mexicana I 
Festuca ovina var. arizonica 
Koeleria macrantha 
99 
silk-tassel bush 
white-margined swertia 
elkweed 
storksbill 
James' geranium 
Richardson 's geranium 
wax currant 
currant 
wishbone fiddleleaf 
corugate phacelia 
varileaf phacelia 
phacelia 
smallflower dragonhead 
motherwort 
common horehound 
stinking horsemint 
Palmer's onion 
sego lily 
leopard-lily 
small yellow-flax 
blue flax 
entire mentzelia 
Wyoming stick leaf 
Munro's globemallow 
smalleafglobemallow 
pinedrops 
New Mexico umbrellawort 
narrowleaf umbrellawort 
spreading four o'clock 
fireweed 
diffuse groundsmoke 
tufted evening-primrose 
rootstock evening-primrose 
yellow evening-primrose 
cluster cancerroot 
armed pricklypoppy 
Mexican eschscholtzia 
two-needle pinyon 
ponderosa pine 
crested wheatgrass 
intermediate wheatgrass 
int. wheatgrass 
purple threeawn 
side-oats grama 
bluegrama 
fringed brome 
smooth brome 
mountian brome 
cheatgrass 
Great Basin wildrye 
tall wheatgrass 
squirreltail 
slender wheatgrass 
Mexican lovegrass 
Arizona fescue 
Junegrass 

Polemoniaceae 
Polygonaceae 
Polypodiaceae 
Portulacaceae 
Rammculaceae 
Rhamnaceae 
Rosaceae 
Rubiaceae 
Rutaceae 
Salicaceae 
Santalaceae 
Saxifragaceae 
Muhlenbergia mimuissima 
Muhlenbergia repens 
Muhlenbergia wrightii 
Munroa squarrosa 
Oryzopsis micrantha 
Poa fendleriana 
Poa pratensis 
Schizachyrium scoparium 
Secale cereale 
Sporobolus cryptandrus 
Stipa comata var. comata 
Stipa hymenoides 
Gilia aggregata 
Gilia aggregata var. arizonica 
Gilia multiflora 1 
1vficrosteris gracilis 
Navarretia breweri 
Phlox austromontana 
Phlox longifolia 
Eriogonum alatum 
Eriogonum cernuum 
Eriogonum corymbosum var. corymbosum 
Eriogonum pharnaceoides var. cervinum 
Eriogonum racemosum 
Eriogonum trichopes 
Eriogonum umbellatum 
Polygonum convolvulus 
Polygonum douglasii var. johnstonii 
Cheilanthesfeei 
Cystopterisfragilis 
Woodsia scopulina 
Portulaca oleracea 
Clematis ligusticifolia 
Delphinium nuttallianum 
Ranunculus oreogenes 
Ranunculus testiculatus 
Thalictrumfendleri 
Ceanothusfendleri 
Ceanothus martinii 
Amelanchier alnifolia 
Amelanchier utahensis 
Cercocarpus ledifolius 
Fallugia paradoxa 
Petrophytum caespitosum 
Prunus emarginata 
Purshia mexicana var. stansburyana 
Purshia tridentata 
Rosa woodsii var. ultramomana 
Galium bifolium 
Galium wrightii 
Kelloggia galioides 
Ptelea trifoliata ssp. pal/ida 
Populus tremuloides 
Comandra umbellata var. pal/ida 
Heuchera parvifolia 
Heuchera rubescens 
100 
annual muhly 
creeping muhly 
spike muhly 
false buffalograss 
little-seed ricegrass 
muttongrass 
Kentucky bluegrass 
little bluestem 
cultivated rye 
sand dropseed 
needle-and-thread grass 
Indian ricegrass 
scarlet gilia 
Arizona skyrocket 
manyflowered gilia 
little polecat 
Brewer's pincushion 
desert phlox 
longleaf phlox 
winged buckwheat 
nodding buckwheat 
Fremont's buckwheat 
wirestem buckwheat 
redroot buckwheat 
tanglefoot buckwheat 
sulphur buckwheat 
black bindweed 
Douglas' knotweed 
Fee's lipfem 
brittle-fem 
Rocky Mountain woodsia 
purslane 
white virgins-bower 
Nelson's larkspur 
mountain buttercup 
bur buttercup 
Fendler's meadowrue 
Fendler's mountain-lilac 
Martin's ceanothus 
serviceberry 
Utah serviceberry 
mountain mahogany 
Apache plume 
rock spiraea 
bitter cherry 
Stansbury cliffrose 
bitterbrush 
Arizona wildrose 
twinleaf bedstraw 
Wright's bedstraw 
Kelloggia 
common hoptree 
quaking aspen 
bastard toadflax 
little leaf alumroot 
red alumroot 

Scrophulareaceae 
Solanaceae 
Verbenaceae 
Violaceae 
Viscaceae 
Castilleja integra I 
Castilleja linariifolia 
Collinsia parvijlora 
Cordylanthus parvijlorus 
Mimulus bigelovii var. cuspidatus 
Mimulus rubel/us 
PedicuJaris centranthera 
Penstemon barbatus 
Penstemon eatonii 
Penstemon linarioides var. sileri 
Penstemon linarioides ssp.tv. unknown 
Penstemon ophianthus 
Penstemon pachyphyllus 
Penstemon palmeri 
Penstemon rostrijlorus 
Penstemon thompsoniae 
Verbascum thapsus 
Datura wrightli 
Nicotiana attenuata 
Physalis hederifolia 
Physalis hederifolia var. palmeri 
Solanumjamesii 
Solanum rostratum 
Solanum triflorum 
Verbena bracteata 
Verbena gooddingii 
Viola canadensis 
Viola matallii 
Phoradendron juniperinum 
1 
from Kearney and Peebles (1960) 
2 
from Cronquist et al. (1972, 1974, 1984, 1989, 1994, and 1997) 
101 
wholeleaf indian paintbrush 
linearleaf paintbrush 
blue-eyed Mary 
small-flower birdbeak 
Bigelow's monkeyflower 
reddish monkeyflower 
pinyon-juniper lousewort 
beardlip penstemon 
Eaton's penstemon 
Siler's penstemon 
mat penstemon 
Loa penstemon 
thickleaf penstemon 
Palmer's penstemon 
Bridges' penstemon 
Thompson's pensternon 
woolly mullein 
angels-trumpet 
coyote tobacco 
ivy-leaved ground-cherry 
Palmer's ground-cherry 
James ' potato 
buffalobur 
cutleaf nightshade 
prostrate vervain 
Goodding's vervain 
Canada violet 
Nuttall's violet 
juniper mistletoe 

APPENDIX B:  
BIOGRAPHICAL STATEMENT  
102  

Name of Author: 
Judith Diane (Brazis) Springer 
Place of Birth: 
Wooster, Ohio 
Date of Birth: 
September 7, 1966 
Educational Institutions Attended 
Northern Arizona University, School ofForestry, MS Program, 1996-I999 
Northern Arizona University, Non-degree Graduate Program, 1994-I995 
The Ohio State University, Continuing Education, 1990-I994 
The Ohio State University, College ofFood, Agriculture, and the Environment, B.S. 1988 
Professional Positions Held 
Research Technician, School ofForestry, Ecology Lab, Northern Arizona University, 
1998- present 
Graduate Research Assistant, School ofForestry, Northern Arizona University, 1996­
1997 
Student Research Aide, Ecology Lab, School ofForestry, Northern Arizona University, 
1994-1995 
Environmental Specialist II, Technical Assistance Section, Division ofHazardous Waste 
Management, Ohio Environmental Protection Agency, 1990-1994 
Volunteer Positions 
The Nature Conservancy, Northern Arizona Field Office, 1994-1995 
The Nature Conservancy, Ohio Chapter, 1990-1994 
Professional Affiliations 
American Penstemon Society 
Arizona Native Plant Society 
Ecological Society of America 
Society for Ecological Restoration 
103 
