Tribal Forestry 
The Right to Change Tribal Forest Management 
1 - ,.-
.,") 
-:t ,~ :'.....',> 
. 
1:,< ,__ ' Y' 
. 
.T~ditionalna~ionaJ for~t m~nagement . : , . 
-.  p"r9vided tbemMel(or.lndianforest il1a~- . ; 
agement upto the Ttibal Self-G~Yema~ 
. 
Act.of:1994. How, trihls'overeignq proY"ides 
a.new foundation for Hative American forest 
inanagement that offers the potential for " 
integrating ecological and cultural values. 
Two tribes-the White Mountain Apache of 
Arizona, and the Menominee of Wisconsin­
are incorporating long-term forest practices 
while clarifying social and economic 
incentives. 
By VictoriaYazzie-Du rglo 
N
ative American forest resources 
suffer the same pressures as the 
national forests. Incentives for 
economic development are strong, yet 
so is the need for management strate­
gies that ensure the future quality and 
quantity of the resource. Among the in­
terests pushing for rapid development 
of natural resources on tribal lands are 
federal agencies, including the Bureau 
of Indian Affairs, the Atomic Energy 
Commission, and the Department of 
Energy, as well as tribal constituencies 
(Gross 1981). Natural resources offer 
some tribal groups unprecedented eco­
nomic opportunities, and as a result the 
possibility ofoverutilization of these re­
sources is great (Trosper 1976). 
For decades managers of the national 
forests took the utilitarian approach of 
Gifford Pinchot and the Forest Service 
(Steen 1976; Dana and Fairfax 1980) : to 
promote "the greatest good for the great­
est number in the long run" (Huffman 
1984; Wilkinson 1984; Coggins .er al. 
1993, p. 607). The way society views the 
environment has changed, however, and 
this perspective has proven too narrow. 
Although there are now legal constraints 
on agency discretion (Plater et al, 1992; 
Coggins et al. 1993), the reforms gener­
ally fail to integrate ecological principles, 
ecological processes (jensen and Everett 
1994; Kaufman et al. 1994), and societal 
concerns (Grumbine W94). 
If tribal forestry professionals and 
consultants decide that neither ap­
proach-utilitarianor environmental­
will meet tribal goals, they must create 
their own system by combining tradi­
tional culture and current technology 
(Pecore 1992; Pecore and Nesper 1993; 
Yazzie-Pina and Covington 1993). 
Two Management Tracks 
Thenationalforests. The goals of For­
est Service managers have changed con­
siderably since mid-century, when the 
primary use of the national forests was 
timber production. With passage of the 
Multiple Use, Sustained Yield Act 
(MUSY) of 1960, Pinchor's utilitarian 
approach was tempered by emphasis on 
noncommodity resources, such as recre­
ation, range, watershed, and wildlife 
and fisheries. In 1976, Congress broad­
ened the list of uses to "renewable and 
nonrenewable resources, including but 
not limited to, recreation, range, timber, 
minerals, watershed, wildlife and fish, 
and natural scenic, scientific, and histor­
ical values" (16 U.S.c.A. §528 et seq.). 
The language of the act was so am­
biguous, however, that its implementa­
tion was difficult to challenge in court 
(Coggins 1982; Plater er al1992) . But 
in 1975, in Isaak Walton League of 
America, Inc. v. Butz, the court ordered 
the Forest Service to refrain from cut­
ting timber in the Monongahela Na­
tional Forest because it was violating 
the 1897 Organic Act. 
The Forest Service and the forest 
products industry asked Congress to re­
peal the offending provision of the Or­
ganic Act. As a compromise, the Na­
tional Forest Management Act (NFMA) 
was enacted (Dana and Fairfax 1980; 
leMaster 1984). This 1976 legislation 
was intended to limit the Forest Service's 
discretion and protect other resource val­
ues. Thus national forest management 
embraced at least the principle of long­
term resource management and nontirn­
ber values, even if it often conflicted 
with short-term economic interests. 
Tribal forests. Whereas NFMA is a 
procedural and substantive piece of leg­
islation relating to timber planning and 
its application on public lands, it has lit­
tle effect on tribal lands . Its jurisdiction 
stops at the borders of Indian country. 
Tribal lands. although not public, are 
held under the trust responsibility of the 
Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA). Only re­
cently have Native American tribes been 
recognized as competent to govern them­
selveswithin their traditional homelands 
(Saugee 1990; Saugee and Stearns 1994). 
The tribal regulations that direct Indian 
forest management are outlined in the 
code of federal regulations: 25 C.ER. 
Reprinted from Journal of Forestry, Vol. 96, No. 11, November 1998. Not for further reproduction. 
33 

163 et seq., which describes the applica­
ble forestry regulations, and the National 
Indian Forest Resources Management 
Act (NIFRMA) of 1990 (25 u.s.c 
3101 et seq.), which sets out the intent 
of Congress: "(1) the United States has 
a trust responsibility toward Indian for­
est lands; (2) existing Federal laws do 
not sufficiently assure the adequate and 
necessary trust management of Indian 
forest lands; (3) these lands shall provide 
economic benefits, including income, 
employment, and subsistence; and (4) 
provide natural benefits, including eco­
logical. cultural, and esthetic values" (25 
U.S.c. 310 1 §301).The secretary of the 
interior is directed to manage the forests 
"consistent with the trust responsibility 
and with the objectives of the beneficial 
owners ... to provide the authorization 
of necessary appropriations to carry out 
this title for the protection, conserva­
tion, utilization, management, and en­
hancement of Indian forest lands" (25 
us.c 3102 §303). 
Note the emphasis on economic 
benefits and utilization; the governing 
statutory principles in NIFRMA do 
not compel the BLA to include tradi­
tional values or perspectives in man­
agement. Federal decisions regarding 
tribal resource management may erode 
tribal sovereignty by neglecting tradi­
tional values or perspectives. 
NIFRMA requires tribal forest man­
agement to encompass "forest land de­
velopment, including forestation, thin­
ning, tree improvement activities, and 
the use of silviculture treatments to re­
store or increase growth and yield to the 
full productive capacity ofthe forest en­
vironment" (25 U.S.c. 3103 §304), 
suggesting a sustained-yield strategy. 
The interpretation of this statute de­
pends largely on agency discretion 
under the secretary of the interior "di­
rectly or through contracts, cooperative 
agreements, or grants under the Indian 
Self-Determination Act" (1979). Ac­
cording to section 305, management 
activities shall include "the develop­
ment, maintenance, and enhancement 
of Indian forest land in a perpetually 
productive state" and provide "effective 
management and protection through 
the application of sound silvicultural 
and economic principles." 
Again, there is emphasis on eco­
34 November 1998 
nomic benefits at the expense of the cul­
tural values of tribal lands. The trust 
duty does not embody a broader ecolog­
ical 
management philosophy; 
like 
NFMA and MUSY, it maintains a utili­
tarian bias. Although NIFRMA pur­
ports to incorporate tribal forestry de­
velopment into the beginning stages of 
forest planning, this 1990 act still em­
phasizes the commercial, "prod uctive" 
aspects of sustained-yield management 
by focusing on the stages for commer­
cializing tribal forests to provide jobs 
and income on Indian reservations. This 
emphasis is often reflected in practice. 
Indian tribes, under the federal trust 
responsibility, must comply with the Na­
tional Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) 
of 1969. Pertaining to Indian tribes, the 
act declares, "[I] t is the continuing re­
sponsibility of the Federal Government 
to use all practicable means ... to im­
prove and coordinate Federal plans, func­
tions, programs, and resources to the end 
that the Nation may ... fulfill the respon­
sibilities of each generation as trustee for 
succeeding generations ... [E]very deci­
sion we make should reflect considera­
tion of the seventh generation to 
come ..." (NEPA 1988). 
NEPA, then, acknowledges multi­
ple resource objectives (Suagee 1990; 
Saugee and Stearns 1994). NEPA also 
requires analysis of potential environ­
mental impacts from proposed timber 
sales and harvests, including effects on 
wildlife, cultural resources, habitat 
fragmentation, late seral habitat reten­
tion, water quality, and forest hydrol­
ogy. Along with other federal environ­
mental laws, including the Endangered 
Species Act, Clean Water Act, and 
Clean Air Act, the act represents a 
broader ecological assessment (Plater et 
al. 1992). It may also require federal 
agencies to integrate tribal culture with 
forest management through its re­
quirement for assessing the social im­
pacts of alternatives. 
Throughout most of the history of 
the United States, Congress has exer­
cised sweeping power over Native 
American peoples with little regard for 
their consent, either as tribes or as in­
dividuals. NEPA established the proce­
dural requirements for Indian tribes to 
participate in federal agency decision­
making (Saugee 1990; 40 C.ER. 
§ 1506.6). The federal government has 
lately given the tribes increased influ­
ence in Indian affairs, and tribal mem­
bers have the option to become more 
involved in self-government because 
NEPA sets forth guidelines for public 
participation (40 C.ER. §1506.6). 
Control of Forestlands 
The Tribal Self-Governance Act of 
1994 clarifies the BrA's trust responsi­
bility by defining the relationship be­
tween the federal government and 
tribal governments and granting each 
tribal government an inherent right to 
self-governance. Native Americans­
among the largest owners of commer­
cial forestry resources in the United 
States-now have a special right to 
their land and the right to manage it as 
sovereign nations under the protection 
of the federal government. Tribal coun­
cils face the challenge of achieving 
long-term quality and quantity of tim­
ber production while embracing cul­
tural values. 
Some argue that the increasingly com­
mercial orientation of tribal industrial 
forestry is necessary to meet economic 
needs (Davis 1993). Indeed, the tribes 
have economic problems, but the short­
term utilitarian perspective compromises 
traditional land uses and culture. As 
tribes begin to balance development with 
other values-protecting sacred areas, 
minimizing habitat fragmentation, pre­
serving old-growth stands, and minimiz­
ing large clearcucs-forestry strategies in 
Indian country may become more reflec­
tive of tribal members' preferences. For 
instance, silvicultural strategies that create 
a stand structure of large-diameter trees 
will ensure flexibility for future forest 
managers to manage according to chang­
ing management objectives. Such ap­
proaches to sustainabiliry may better pro­
tect cultural values. 
How can tribes incorporate non­
quantifiable values into forest manage­
ment? How can tribes use their right to 
self-governance to incorporate tradi­
tional culture with resource manage­
ment? The White Mountain Apache 
Tribe of Arizona and the Menominee 
Tribe ofWisconsin are rwo examples of 
tribal forestry that fuse two seemingly 
contradictory goals: economic devel­
opment and cultural values. 

An Exercise in Sovereignty 
As one of the largest Indian forestland 
holders, the White Mountain Apache 
Tribe of Arizona exercised tribal sover­
eignty by controlling harvesting on its 
reservation. In White Mountain Apache 
Tribe v. Bracker (1980, 448 U.S. 136), 
the tribe argued that the BIA had not 
incorporated the un ique cultural arid 
spiritual values associated with the land. 
The COUrt found that Southwest Forest 
Industries had severely overcut the. 
trib e's forest (Davis 1993). Under 25 
U.S.c. Section 406, sustained-yield 
timber management generally means 
that "harvesting should insure the fu­
ture productivity" of the land and that 
"cut-over areas should be reforested." 
The court's opinion confirmed the mis­
man agement of the BIA's trust respon­
sibility under the Self-Determination 
and Edu cation Assistance Act of 1979. 
To conserve its forests, the White 
Mountain Apache Tribe reduced timber 
harvesting. To make up the lost rev­
enue , the tribe promoted its Sunrise Ski 
Resort for recreat ion and tourism and 
collected livestock lease fees (D avis 
1993) . More important, the tribe set 
claim to its forestland by establishing a 
direct relationship with forestry profes­
sionals, rather than relying on the BIA. 
Although the overs ight functions re­
main with the BIA, forestry profession­
als present timber harvesting plans to 
the tribal council (Davis 1993), which 
then ensures that the values inherent in 
trib al traditions are considered along­
side short-term economic incentives. 
THE MENOMINEE TRIBE 
A Model for Indian Forest 
Management 
The Menominee Tribal Enterprises of 
Wisconsin is the model for forestry de­
velopment in the nation, not only for 
tribes but for national forest management 
as well. Pecore (1992) attributes the 
Menorninees' success-they maintain a 
standing timber volume that is greater 
today than when the reservation was es­
tablished in 1854-to the installation 
and maintenance of its continuous forest 
inventory (Pecore and Nesper 1993). 
The Menominee Tribal Enterpri ses 
employs sustained-yield management 
without sacrificing the value of the for­
ests as both a source of tradition and the 
means to meeting current econ omic 
goals (Pecore and Nesper 1993, p. 28). 
Cultural values underlie the Menomi­
nee Tribe's commitment to the forest 
and to the philosophy and practice of 
sustained-yield man agement. The "in­
tegrity of the forest signifies the health 
of the Menominee people" (Pecore 
1992; Pecore and Nesper 1993) . Its for­
est management approach is "taking the 
worst and leaving the best" (Pecore 
1992) and is the "spiritual basis" for 
sustained-yield management (Pecore 
and Nesper 1993, p. 28). 
Conclusion 
The laws that govern the USDA For­
est Service in the management of the na­
tional forests necessarily must vary from 
the laws that govern tribal forests. The 
Nat ional Forest Management Act of 
1976 outlines substantive and procedural 
guidelines for the Forest Serviceto pursue 
multiple-use 
man agement strategies 
while harvesting timber on a sustained­
yield basis. These guidelines are not ap­
plicable on tribal lands. A utilitarian bias 
is evident in the statutes that direct In­
dian forest management. The National 
Indian Forest Resources Management 
Act of 1990, for example, fails to strike a 
balance between utilization and conser­
vation . However, the Tribal Self-Gover­
nance Law of 1994 gives direct manage­
ment privileges to tribal governments. 
Under the Tribal Self-Governance 
Law and the procedural guidelines of 
NEPA, tribes have an opportunity to 
change the way their forestlands are 
managed and incorporate cultural val­
ues in management strategies. They can 
give future generations the choice of 
managing the land as their ancestors 
once did by conserving the quality and 
quantity oftheir resources. As the tribes 
act in their new sovereign capacity, they 
can protect and restore the natural en­
vironment that sustains tribal cultures. 
Literature Cited 
COGGINS, G.C 1982. Ofsuccotash syndromesand vac­
uous platitudes. University of Colorado LawReview 
(53):229, 279--80. 
COGGINS, G.C, CF. WILKINSON, and J.D. LES HY. 
1993. Federal public landand resource law. Westbury, 
NY: Foundation Press, Inc. 
DANA, ST., andS.K. FAIRFAX. 1980. Theforestandrange 
policydevelopment in the United States. 2nd ed. New 
York: McGraw-HilI. 
DAVlS, S.H. 1993.Self-determination and resources: A 
surveyof USIndian forestry. Cultural SurvivalQuar­
terly:24--27. 
GROSS, WT. 1981.Tribalresources, federal trust respon­
sibiJiry: United States energy development versus 
trustresponsibilitiesto Indiantribes. AmericanIndian 
Law Review 9:309-43. 
GRUMBIN E, R.E. 1994. What isecosystem management? 
Conservation Biology8(1):27-38. 
HUFFMAN, D. 1984. A history of forest policy in the 
United States. Environmental Law(8) :239. 
JENSEN, M.E., and R. EVERE"IT. 1994. Anoverviewof eco­
systemmanagement principles. In Ecosystem management: 
Principles andapplications, 6--15.General Technical Re­
port PNW-318. Portland, OR: USDA ForestService. 
KAUFMAN, M.R., R.T. GRAHAM, O.A. BOYCE)R., W.H. 
MOIR, L. PERRY, R.T. REYNOLDS, R.L. BASSETt, P. 
MEHWP, CB. EOMINITER, W.M. BOWCK, and P.S. 
CORN. 1994.An ecological basis forecosystem manage­
ment. Fort Collins, CO: USDAForest Service. 
LEMAsrER, D. 1984. Decadeof change: The remaking of 
Forest Servicestatutory authority during the 1970;. 
Westport,CT:Greenwood Press. 
NATlONAL ENVlRONMENTAL POLICYAcr OF 1969 (NEPA 
1988).42 U.S.CA. §4321 et seq.; 1970. Pub. L. 
91-190, 16U.S.CA. §1604 etseq.,83Stat. 852(cod­
ified as amended at 42 U.s.C §§ 4321 et seq., "The 
NationalEnvironmentalPolicyAct 1988"). 
PECORE, M. 1992. Menomineesustained-yieldmanage­
ment: A successful land ethic in practice. journalof 
Fomtry 90(7):12-16. 
PECORE, M., and L. NESPER. 1993. The trees will last 
forever. Cultural Survival Quarterly 28-31. 
PLATER, Z.J.B., ItH. ABRAMS,and W.GOLDFARB. 1992­
Environmentallawandpolicy: Nature, law,and society. 
St. Paul: WestPublishing Company. 
SAUGEE. D.B. 1990.The application of theNationalEn­
vironmental Policy Act to "development" in Indian 
country. American Indian Law&view 16:377-495. 
SAUGEE, D.B.,and C T. STEARNS. 1994. Indigenousself­
governance, environmentalprotection, and the con­
sent of the governed: A tribalenvironmental review 
process. Colorado journalof InternationalEnviron­
mental Law 6-Policy59(5):69- 104. 
STEEN, H. 1976. The UnitedStates Forest Service: A his­
wry. Seattle: Universityof Washington Press. 
TROSPER, R.L. 1976.American Indianmineralagreements: 
Literature search and reform proposals. In American In­
dianPolicy Rroieu: Commission, report onreservation and 
resourcesdevelopment and protection, 137-47. Washing­
ton, DC: Government Printing Office. 
WILKINSON, CF. 1984.The Forest Service:Acallfor a re­
turn to first principles. Public LandLawReview (5)I. 
YAZZIE-PINA, v., and W.w. COVINGTON. 1993. Conser­
vation biology, restoration ecology anda Navajo view 
of nature. In Sustainabl«ecological rystmzs:Implement­
ing an ecological approach to land management, 
122-24. General Technical Report R.J\{-247. Fort 
Collins, CO: USDAForestService. 
Victoria Yazzie-Durglo (yazzie@selway. 
umt.edu) is WIeHE doctoral scholar, 
School ofForestry, University ofMon­
tana, Missoula 59812. 
Journal of Forestry 
35 
