31
Ecological Restoration Institute 
Working Paper No. 31
Climate Change Impacts on 
Bark Beetle Outbreaks and 
the Impact of Outbreaks on 
Subsequent Fires
June 2014
SOUTHWEST 
FIRE     SCIENCE 
CONSORTIUM

Intermountain West Frequent-Fire Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing 
native species, structural characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological
Restoration International defines ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that 
initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity 
and sustainability….Restoration attempts to return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” 
(Society for Ecological Restoration International Science and Policy Working Group 2004).
Most frequent-fire forests throughout the Intermountain West have been degraded during 
the last 150 years. Many of these forests are now dominated by unnaturally dense thickets 
of small trees, and lack their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests 
in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing fires and increased 
insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers on reintroducing frequent, 
low-severity surface fires—often after thinning dense stands—and reestablishing productive 
understory plant communities.
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in 
researching, implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of frequent-fire forests of 
the Intermountain West. By allowing natural processes, such as low-severity fire, to resume 
self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem 
services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The Southwest Fire Science Consortium (SWFSC) is a way for managers, scientists, and 
policy makers to interact and share science. SWFSC’s goal is to see the best available science 
used to make management decisions and scientists working on the questions managers 
need answered. The SWFSC tries to bring together localized efforts to develop scientific 
information and to disseminate that to practitioners on the ground through an inclusive and 
open process.
This publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest 
Service and the Southwest Fire Science Consortium. The views and conclusions contained 
in this document are those of the author(s) and should not be interpreted as representing the 
opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of trade names or commercial 
products does not constitute their endorsement by the United States Government or the ERI.
Author: Monica Gaylord
Reviewers: Barbara Benz, Chris Fettig, David Huffman, Andrea Thode, and Barb Satink Wolfson, Amy Waltz 
Series Editor: Tayloe Dubay
Please use the following citation when referring to this Working Paper:
Gaylord, M.L. 2014. Climate Change Impacts on Bark Beetle Outbreaks and the Impact of Outbreaks on 
Subsequent Fires. ERI Working Paper No. 31. Ecological Restoration Institute and Southwest Fire Science 
Consortium, Northern Arizona University: Flagstaff, AZ. 7 p. 

Table of Contents
Introduction .........................................................................................................................................1
The Insect .....................................................................................................................................1
Ecological Role and Impacts ...................................................................................................1 
Climate Change and Bark Beetle Outbreaks ..............................................................................1
Direct Impacts of Temperature on Bark Beetles  ...............................................................2
Impact of Temperature Changes on Range Expansion or  
Contraction of Bark Beetles .....................................................................................................2
Indirect Effects on Bark Beetles: Impact of Climate Change on The Host .................2
Conclusions ..................................................................................................................................3
Management Implications .......................................................................................................3
Impact of Beetle Outbreaks on Future Fires ...............................................................................3
Changes in Fuels Post-Outbreaks ..........................................................................................4
Changes in Fire Behavior Post-Outbreaks ...........................................................................4
Attacked Stands Versus Unattacked Stands .........................................................................4
Research from Southwestern Forests ....................................................................................5
Management for Post-Beetle Outbreaks ..............................................................................5
Conclusions ..................................................................................................................................5
Management Implications .......................................................................................................6
References ...........................................................................................................................................6

1
Ecological Restoration Institute
CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON BARK BEETLE OUTBREAKS AND THE IMPACT OF OUTBREAKS ON 
SUBSEQUENT FIRES
Introduction
Te Insect
Bark beetles are small insects that can have profound 
impacts on forests. While some species of bark beetles 
primarily attack trees that are recently dead or dying, others 
attack live, vigorous trees and can cause tree mortality 
across extensive areas. Te Southwest is home to multiple 
species of bark beetles (Gaylord et al. 2006, Williams et al. 
2008). In southwestern ponderosa pine forests the most 
notable bark beetle species belong to the genus Ips or 
Dendroctonus. 
Ecological Role and Impacts
Bark beetles and ﬁre share similar roles in southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests. Similar to ﬁre, bark beetles 
are natural disturbance agents and help with nutrient 
redistribution. Tree mortality from bark beetles helps 
with snag formation, providing vital habitat for cavity 
nesting birds and bats, among other wildlife. Bark 
beetles are a food source for other insects and birds. At 
low bark beetle populations, tree mortality ranges from 
individual trees to small groups of trees leading to gap 
formation and increasing forest heterogeneity. Epidemics, 
or outbreaks, are also part of the natural cycle. In some 
ecosystems, such as mountain pine beetle in lodgepole 
pine, the forests are homogenized afer these outbreaks, 
helping to perpetuate lodgepole pine stands (Brown 1975). 
Historically, epidemics would subside due to excessively 
cold temperatures or because suitable host material (tree 
species or preferred diameter range) becomes depleted. 
  Current bark beetle outbreaks in some forest systems 
are considered unprecedented (Raﬀa et al. 2008, Bentz 
et al. 2009). Recent outbreaks appear to be driven by 
warmer/drier climate, an abundance of overstocked 
and homogeneous stands caused by past management 
decisions, or a combination of these and other factors 
(Raﬀa et al. 2008, Bentz et al. 2010, Fettig et al. 2013). In 
essence, large-scale outbreaks are a result of many of the 
same factors driving catastrophic ﬁres and, consequently, 
both disturbance agents are having impacts on ecosystems 
that are ofen outside of their historic range of variability. 
Climate Change and Bark Beetle Outbreaks 
Historically, tree mortality from bark beetles in 
southwestern forests is ofen correlated with drought events 
(Kleinman et al. 2012, USDA 2013). Climate models for 
the southwestern U.S. forecast more frequent and severe 
drought events (Seager et al. 2007). Given past associations 
between drought events and bark beetle outbreaks it 
appears likely that bark beetle-driven tree mortality could 
also increase. In addition to water deﬁcits, most models for 
the Southwest indicate this area will experience increased 
temperatures (Seager et al. 2007). During the most recent 
drought event in the Southwest (2002), temperatures 
were warmer than normal (Breshears et al. 2005). Both 
of these factors (higher temperatures and increased water 
stress) could impact bark beetle populations. Changes in 
temperature will likely have a direct impact on the beetle 
itself whereas water stress (exacerbated by increased 
temperatures and periods of drought) will indirectly 
impact the beetle via impacts on the host trees (Bentz et al. 
2010).
Figure 1: Pitch tube and frass in bark crevices on a ponderosa pine tree.
Key Information about Bark Beetles
• 
Native to pine ecosystems in the Southwest
• 
Natural disturbance agents 
• 
Range in size from 0.008-0.33 inches (2.0-8.3 
mm)
• 
Adults are black to reddish brown in color
• 
Kill trees by using a mass attack strategy that 
can overwhelm the tree’s defensive capabilities
• 
Lifecycle depends on species and location; can 
have multiple generations per year or only one 
generation every two years
• 
Active when ambient temperatures begin to 
exceed 59°F (15°C), although this varies by 
species 
• 
Majority of the lifecycle occurs under the bark 
of the tree
• 
Bark beetle success is measured by its ability to 
reproduce, for most beetle species tree death is 
a prerequisite for beetle success
Evidence of attack
• 
Resin is a tree’s primary defense against beetles 
• 
Pitch tubes will form on the tree bole (Fig. 1)
• 
Woodpeckers ofen ﬂake oﬀ the outer portion 
of bark
• 
Sawdust-like material (frass) will collect in 
bark crevices (Fig. 1)
• 
Needles ofen do not turn yellow until many 
months afer attack
• 
Beetles create “galleries” on the surface of the 
wood and in the bark (Fig. 2) 

2
Ecological Restoration Institute
CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON BARK BEETLE OUTBREAKS AND THE IMPACT OF OUTBREAKS ON 
SUBSEQUENT FIRES
Direct Impacts of Temperature on Bark Beetles
Because temperature is a major driver of their physiological 
processes, all bark beetle species will be aﬀected in some 
way by climate change. Depending on the species and their 
geographic location, the generation time for beetles can 
range from multiple generations per year to one generation 
every one to two years. Increased temperatures generally 
accelerate the rate of bark beetle development. Accelerated 
development may have positive or negative impacts 
on beetle populations depending on the circumstances 
(reviewed in Bentz et al. 2010). For instance, quicker 
beetle development and warmer temperatures earlier 
in the spring and/or later in the fall could allow beetles 
to increase the number of generations completed. Tis 
could allow for faster buildups of populations and a 
greater likelihood of beetle epidemics. On the other hand, 
accelerated development could cause increased beetle 
mortality. Because some stages of beetle development are 
much cold hardier than others (Bentz and Mullins 1999, 
Tran et al. 2007), accelerated development may cause the 
beetles to enter winter in a developmental stage that is not 
as resistant to freezing temperatures. Tis could lead to a 
decline in beetle populations due to higher mortality rates 
during winter. Similarly, beetles with only one generation a 
year are dependent on a relatively synchronous emergence 
in order to mass attack trees. Loss of synchrony could 
occur due to changing temperatures and this could be 
detrimental to these beetle species (Logan and Bentz 1999, 
Bentz et al. 2010). 
Impact of Temperature Changes on Range Expansion or 
Contraction of Bark Beetles
Increased temperatures could also allow beetles to spread 
farther north or to higher elevations than their historic 
range (Logan and Bentz 1999, Williams and Liebhold 2002, 
Tran et al. 2007, Sambaraju et al. 2011). Beetles entering 
new geographic regions will encounter diﬀerent beetle and 
predator complexes and it is unknown how these novel 
interactions will be resolved. In addition, beetles may be 
encountering new hosts. While these hosts likely have well 
developed defenses against those bark beetle species that 
already occur in their respective ranges, they may not be as 
well defended against the new beetle species. Furthermore, 
recent work in Canada suggests that host trees growing in 
regions that historically have been climatically inhospitable 
to bark beetles, may be less resistant to beetle attacks than 
trees of the same species growing in areas where outbreaks 
have historically occurred (Cudmore et al. 2010). Tus, 
with climate change beetles may move to new geographic 
areas where hosts may be less well-defended, leading to 
increased beetle populations. Conversely, if suitable hosts 
are restricted to a smaller range, or are not able to survive 
under changing climate conditions, the beetles may perish 
due to the loss of their food source (Williams and Liebhold 
2002). 
Indirect Eﬀects on Bark Beetles: Impact of Climate Change on 
the Host
An additional indirect impact of climate change on beetle 
populations is the impact warming temperatures and 
droughts could have on the host tree. Trees that are water 
stressed may be more susceptible to bark beetle attacks. 
Drought has well-established physiological impacts on trees 
(McDowell et al. 2008, McDowell 2011). In both ponderosa 
and piñon pine trees, water stress has been shown to reduce 
or even shut down photosynthesis, this leads to less carbon 
assimilation and eventual carbon limitation (Gaylord et al. 
2007, Plaut et al. 2012). Resin is the ﬁrst line of defense that 
bark beetles encounter when attacking a tree. Since resin is 
carbon based, lower amounts of carbon assimilation by the 
tree is hypothesized to lead to less resin production (Herms 
and Mattson 1992, McDowell et al. 2008). Lethal bark 
beetle attacks also can occur during drought due to reasons 
other than lower resin production. For instance, volatile and 
auditory emissions from trees during drought may attract 
beetles (Mattson and Haack 1987, Kelsey et al. 2014).  In 
fact, a recent study in piñon pine in New Mexico found that 
plots subjected to an experimental drought treatment had 
a much higher percentage of tree mortality than ambient 
and irrigated plots. Te majority of piñons that died in this 
study had evidence of piñon ips attacks, despite the fact 
that resin volume did not decline (Gaylord et al. 2013). 
Afer beetle populations have built up in stressed trees, 
some beetle populations, such as mountain pine beetle and 
spruce beetle begin to attack and kill even vigorous trees, 
while other outbreaks, such as piñon ips, subside once the 
trees are no longer stressed. 
  Past management actions may increase the impacts of 
climate change. For example, in ponderosa pine forests of 
the Southwest, years of ﬁre suppression have led to forests 
with higher stand densities; these increased densities also 
lead to increased competition among trees, particularly 
for limited resources such as water (Kolb et al. 1998). 
Increased temperatures could increase the level of water 
stress the trees experience (i.e., increased evaporation and 
transpiration with increased temperatures), that could 
accelerate the rate of tree mortality (Williams et al. 2013).
Figure 2: Bark beetle galleries.

3
Ecological Restoration Institute
CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON BARK BEETLE OUTBREAKS AND THE IMPACT OF OUTBREAKS ON 
SUBSEQUENT FIRES
Conclusions 
• Climate change will most likely increase the frequency 
and severity of bark beetle outbreaks in the Southwest.
• Increased beetle populations could occur due to the 
shortened generation times and longer developmental 
periods caused by increasing temperatures. However 
not all species will be able to successfully adapt to the 
increased temperatures (Bentz et al. 2014).
• Drought and increased temperatures will likely lead to 
more stressed trees and thus more susceptible hosts.
• Due to warming temperatures, beetles may be able 
to expand their range and encounter trees with lower 
resistance to bark beetle attacks. 
• Beetles distribution is dependent on the range of suitable 
host trees. If the suitable host-tree range contracts due to 
climate change, the bark beetle range will also contract. 
Conversely, if the host-tree range expands, the beetle 
range may also expand. 
• In addition, while we understand some of the 
interactions and feedbacks that might occur between 
bark beetles and their host, it is impossible to model all 
of the interactions that occur in an ecosystem, such as 
the impact of climate change on bark beetle predators or 
competing herbivores. Furthermore, when bark beetles 
enter the trees they bring along speciﬁc fungi as well as 
other organisms including mites and nematodes. Many 
of these other organisms are thought to play a role in 
beetle success. How these other organisms respond to 
changing temperatures could also inﬂuence the impact of 
climate change on beetle success (Six et al. 2011).
Management Implications
• Tinning appears to reduce water stress in southwestern 
forests, thus thinning treatments may help to mitigate 
some of the impacts of climate change (reviewed in Fettig 
et al. 2007).
• Managers should attempt to maintain or improve forest 
resilience through restoration, such as mechanical 
thinning and prescribed burning, or other management 
activities. Tese preventative treatments are the best 
option. Afer bark beetle populations build up, beetles 
are much more diﬃcult to control. Options include 
sanitation, salvage, and the use of insecticides and 
semiochemicals. Tese methods are generally only used 
on a small scale for individual, high-value trees or areas 
and are generally impractical at the landscape level 
(Gaylord 2014). 
Impact of Beetle Outbreaks on Future Fires
Landscape-level tree mortality from bark beetle epidemics 
is a concern for land managers in terms of future ﬁre 
risk and behavior. Te widely held assumption has been 
that bark beetle associated tree mortality increases ﬁre 
risk and severity. Intuitively this makes sense. High 
tree mortality leads to an increase in dry fuels on the 
landscapes. However, several recent papers (Romme et 
al. 2006, Kulakowski and Veblen 2007, Jenkins et al. 2008, 
Bond et al. 2009, DeRose and Long 2009, Klutsch et al. 
2011, Simard et al. 2011, Jenkins et al. 2012) as well as 
comprehensive literature reviews (Hicke et al. 2012, Jenkins 
et al. 2014) have suggested that the relationship is not as 
straightforward as ﬁrst thought. What is evident is that 
tree mortality from bark beetles is likely to impact ﬁre risk 
and behavior for many years afer the actual outbreak has 
ended. 
  Afer a beetle outbreak, aﬀected stands will undergo 
changes in tree species, fuel structure, fuel type, and canopy 
and surface fuel loads. All of these factors can impact 
future ﬁre risk and behavior. Many diﬀerent researchers 
have attempted to model the impact of the tree mortality 
and stand regrowth on future ﬁres. Although there is 
some disagreement among the diﬀerent models, there is 
general consensus that stand ﬁre susceptibility does not 
increase or decrease in a strictly linear fashion post-bark 
beetle outbreaks (reviewed in Hicke et al. 2012). Time 
since outbreak appears to be an important variable in 
determining stand susceptibility to ﬁre post-outbreak; 
however, because diﬀerent stand types will change at 
diﬀerent rates post-outbreak (rate of needle drying, snag 
fall, and understory regrowth are all variable and depend on 
multiple factors), most studies will address what “phase” a 
stand is in post-outbreak in addition to, or rather than just, 
“years” post-ﬁre (Box 1).
Green phase
Healthy, uninfested trees
Red phase
Needles still on the tree. 
Low foliar moisture content
*Note: Needle color depends on tree 
species, may be greenish
Gray phase
After needle drop
Trees appear gray
Fine twigs still remain on trees early in 
this phase, but will drop in the latter part 
Older or Old 
phase
Snags fall 
Understory vegetation increases
Seedlings establish
  Tere are also some acknowledged shortcomings 
of modeling potential ﬁre in stands post-bark beetle 
epidemics (Jenkins et al. 2012). For instance, the majority 
of the work on ﬁre models has been conducted in cooler, 
moister forest types such as lodgepole pine and spruce, 
little work has been done in drier, southwestern pine 
forests such as piñon and ponderosa. Since diﬀerent 
stand types can have very diﬀerent structures and ﬁre 
behavior, translating results from system to system should 
be done with caution. Clearly more research is needed 
in southwestern systems. In addition, most ﬁre models 
are based on live fuels. Dead fuels tend to be drier than 
live fuels and they have diﬀerent chemical composition; 
in particular they do not contain as many volatile oils, 
and thus their ﬂammability varies from live fuels (Jolly 
Box 1. Stands are categorized in “phases” in relation to bark beetle 
outbreaks (from Hicke et al. 2012).

4
Ecological Restoration Institute
CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON BARK BEETLE OUTBREAKS AND THE IMPACT OF OUTBREAKS ON 
SUBSEQUENT FIRES
et al. 2012). In fact, one study in lodgepole pine used a 
range of moisture scenarios and wind speeds to model 
ﬁre behavior (Schoennagel et al. 2012). Te researchers 
found that more active crown ﬁre was possible at lower 
wind speeds and with less extreme crown conditions in 
the stands with dead or dying needles versus the green 
stands. Moreover, the more open canopy and large 
surface fuel loads in stands in the gray phase and older 
lead to an increase in surface ﬁreline intensities. In fact, 
under extreme burning conditions the minimum wind 
speed for active crown ﬁres were 15.5-22 miles per hour 
(mph) lower for red, gray and older- stands compared 
to the green. To complicate matters further, in stands 
with an ongoing epidemic, there will likely be a range of 
stages of tree death with some trees with red or brown 
needles, others still fading, and others still green. Te 
percentage of trees within each of these categories will 
impact the potential for ﬁre and ﬁre behavior (Jenkins 
et al. 2008, 2012). For instance, studies of lodgepole pine 
in Yellowstone found that the likelihood of crown ﬁre 
increased in areas of heavy bark beetle associated tree 
mortality ( >50%) relative to areas with less tree mortality 
(Turner et al. 1999). Finally, modeling stand susceptibility 
to ﬁre post-beetle outbreaks over the longer term requires 
some inputs about snag fall and decomposition rates. 
Snag fall rates are variable or unknown for many forest 
types in the West.
Changes in Fuels Post-Outbreaks
Diﬀerent studies disagree slightly about the amount of 
fuels present early in the red phase, and again, results 
probably vary from system to system. Most of the studies 
conducted to date, primarily in moist, cool forest types, 
agree that 1-10 hour fuels increase during the latter 
half of the red phase and into the gray phase and then 
gradually decrease as these small fuels begin to break 
down and decompose (Jenkins et al. 2008, reviewed in 
Hicke et al. 2012, Figure 3). Tere is also a fair amount 
of agreement that both ladder fuels and 100-1,000-hour 
fuels begin to increase steadily as the gray phase ends. 
During this time, snag fall begins as does understory 
regrowth and development (Hicke et al. 2012). 
Changes in Fire Behavior Post-Outbreaks
With regard to ﬁre behavior, there is less agreement 
among the various models on what happens in the red 
and gray phase than in the older phase (reviewed in 
Hicke et al. 2012). In the framework developed by Hicke 
et al. (2012), based on research primarily conducted 
in spruce and lodgepole forest types, they indicated 
an increase in active crown ﬁre potential early in the 
red phase and then a swif decrease midway through 
the red phase leading to a gradual increase again as 
the stand begins to regrow. In addition, for surface ﬁre 
and torching potential, this study proposed a relatively 
uniform increase from the beginning of tree mortality 
through stand regrowth, although torching potential is 
proposed to have a slightly greater increase during the red 
phase than surface ﬁre does during this same time frame 
(Figure 4).
Attacked Stands Versus Unattacked Stands 
Tere has also been interest in the diﬀerence in ﬁre 
potential and severity in stands attacked by bark beetles 
versus unattacked stands.  A recent study, based primarily 
on work in lodgepole and spruce forests, reported the 
probability of crown ﬁres increases during the red phase 
as does crown ﬁre severity (assuming other conditions 
are favorable for ﬁre: climate, ignition, etc.) but the 
probability and intensity of surface ﬁre is not increased 
(Hicke et al. 2012). In the gray and older phases, the 
probability of surface ﬁre may increase but crown ﬁre 
probability and severity most likely decreases. Tis same 
team went on to say that, because crown ﬁre and surface 
ﬁre respond diﬀerently, it is diﬃcult to predict what the 
combined response will be within a stand. Furthermore, 
it is important to point out that crown ﬁre spread is 
controlled by more factors than just dead fuel quantity. 
For instance, live fuel moisture, wind speed, and canopy 
density also play a role. Romme et al. (2006) emphasized 
that once needle drop occurs, new gaps exist in the 
canopy and canopy bulk density is decreased, that may 
reduce the risk of crown ﬁres. In fact, a study conducted 
in lodgepole pine in Yellowstone suggested that mountain 
pine beetle outbreaks in these forests may actually 
Figure 3: Conceptual framework for change in fuels post-beetle out-
breaks (modified from Hicke et al. 2012).
Figure 4: Conceptual framework for changes in fire behavior post-
beetle outbreaks (modified from Hicke et al. 2012).

5
Ecological Restoration Institute
CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON BARK BEETLE OUTBREAKS AND THE IMPACT OF OUTBREAKS ON 
SUBSEQUENT FIRES
reduce the probability of active crown ﬁre in the short 
term because the canopies have been thinned (Simard 
et al. 2011), similarly, windspeeds predicted to sustain 
active crown ﬁre in lodgepole pine stands in Colorado 
were predicted to be lower in uninfested plots than 
infested plots (Klutsch et al 2011). In addition, in the San 
Bernardino Mountains of California, researchers found 
no evidence that pre-ﬁre tree mortality inﬂuenced ﬁre 
severity. Tis latter study was conducted in mixed conifer 
stands that experienced ﬁre approximately one year post 
bark beetle mortality (Bond et al. 2009).
Research from Southwestern Forests
Although the majority of the research discussed above is 
from lodgepole or spruce ecosystems, research conducted 
in New Mexico piñon and ponderosa pine systems found 
similar results. Allen (2007) suggested that vegetation 
dieback interacts with ﬁre activity by modifying fuel 
amounts and conﬁgurations. Essentially, bark beetle-
caused tree mortality alters the type of fuel available (dead 
versus live). Similarly, trees killed by beetles will initially 
exist as standing trees with lots of ﬁne fuels in the canopy 
(dead twigs and needles); however, these needles are 
generally shed fairly rapidly and the tree will eventually 
deteriorate to a larger fuel on the forest ﬂoor. In addition, 
afer tree death, trees will lose many of their ﬂammable 
biochemicals. Tese standing, woody fuel structures no 
longer sustain running crown ﬁres, so the risk of crown 
ﬁres may initially decrease (Allen 2007); however, surface 
ﬁne fuels increase rapidly from needle drop and also 
increased understory growth. Eventually, the dead trees 
fall and woody vegetation regenerates, leading to a high 
amount of both surface and ladder fuels (Allen 2007).   
  A more recent study (Floyd-Hanna et al. 2012) 
investigated changes in fuel structures afer the 
widespread mortality in 2002–2004 in piñon-juniper 
woodlands of southwestern Colorado. Tis study 
looked at how the widespread tree mortality (caused 
by drought and bark beetles) impacted the continuity 
of horizontal and vertical fuels. Te study started six 
years afer the majority of tree death had occurred. Teir 
study found that piñon-juniper stands were considerably 
less dense afer this disturbance event with lower 
structural complexity. Fire models found that while most 
characteristics of surface ﬁres (spread rate, ﬂame length) 
did not vary with diﬀerent levels of tree mortality, there 
was increased heat per unit area in stands with high 
mortality, most likely due to the increased amount of 
100-hour fuels and litter. Furthermore, since stands with 
high mortality will have a larger amount of 1,000-hour 
fuels, the researchers felt that this could lead to longer 
ﬁre residence time, in turn drying out canopy fuels and 
thus these stands might be more prone to torching ﬁre 
behavior despite the reduction in canopy. Nonetheless, 
the overall conclusion was that the majority of surface 
ﬁre characteristics were not changed substantially by the 
disturbance event and the likelihood of active crown ﬁre 
was likely reduced in most stands. One note of caution 
for managers is that the researchers predicted that surface 
ﬁres in these stands may be more diﬃcult to control under 
adverse weather conditions due to the increased surface 
fuel loads.
Management for Post-Beetle Outbreaks
Salvage logging post-beetle outbreaks has been suggested 
as a method to reduce stand susceptibility to ﬁre. Te 
ability to remove accumulated fuels afer bark beetle 
outbreaks is ofen constrained by economics or other 
management objectives. Tere are studies that have 
suggested that there is little ecological justiﬁcation to 
remove beetle-killed trees (Romme et al. 2006) and that 
removal of dead trees may not reduce high severity ﬁre 
(Bond et al. 2009). Conversely, a more recent study by 
Collins et al. (2012) found that harvesting decreased the 
amount of subalpine ﬁr in the lower canopy and increased 
the amount of lodgepole pine and aspen. Tese changes 
were thought to hinder torching and increase post-ﬁre 
tree survival in mature stands. In addition, coarse woody 
fuels were predicted to increase in the untreated stands 
within 30 years as the snags would begin to fail and fall 
to the forest ﬂoor. While this study suggested that salvage 
harvesting would change post-outbreak ﬁre behavior in 
stands, the authors also acknowledged that there are still 
many variables that are unknown with regards to ﬁre 
modeling. In addition, the authors pointed out that since 
treatment could only be done on a small percentage of the 
forest, it was unknown how treating small patches would 
impact ﬁre behavior across the larger landscape. Little 
research on this topic has been conducted in southwestern 
pine forests.
Conclusions 
• Due to multiple factors, the fire risk, fire behavior, and 
changes in fuels after bark beetle outbreaks are still 
somewhat difficult to model. 
• Time since outbreak and the amount of tree mortality 
are both key factors in subsequent fire risk and fire 
behavior and the relationship is not linear, i.e., there is 
neither a consistent increase in fire risk/intensity nor a 
consistent decline. 
• The most recent literature reviews suggest that the 
probability of active crown fire increases in the 
red phase. In the gray and old phases, surface fire 
probability increases due to increased surface fuel loads 
but active crown fire probability in these phases may 
decrease because of reduced canopy bulk density. 
• More research is needed to model fire behavior 
in southwest forests. For instance, managers need 
to adequately quantify the rate of snag fall and 
decomposition in different forest types across the 
Southwest. How quickly the understory responds to 
the disturbance event is also important in determining 
subsequent fire risk. 
• Due to the beetles’ preference for certain tree 

6
Ecological Restoration Institute
CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON BARK BEETLE OUTBREAKS AND THE IMPACT OF OUTBREAKS ON 
SUBSEQUENT FIRES
species and size, changes in stand structure and fuel 
characteristics, and hence future fire risk/behavior, after 
beetle outbreaks are dependent on stand composition 
(species, tree size) prior to outbreak.
• In all habitats, the likelihood of fire and fire behavior 
will depend on current weather conditions even when 
fuels loads are high. 
Management Implications 
• Managers should also consider other factors in bark 
beetle infested stands. For instance, it has been reported 
that bark beetle attacked trees have an increased 
tendency to snap off or uproot more easily than 
unattacked trees. Snag mitigation in attacked stands 
may also require more effort (reviewed in Jenkins et 
al. 2012) and increased surface fuels may make surface 
fires harder to contain (Floyd-Hanna et al. 2012).
• It is important to remember that stands have different 
historical fire regimes. Some stands, and particularly 
lodgepole pine forests and other higher elevation 
forests, historically have had stand-replacing fires. 
For instance in high elevation spruce stands, there is 
evidence to support that stands which have experienced 
a spruce beetle outbreak do not support higher intensity 
fires relative to stands with no outbreaks (reviewed 
in Jenkins et al. 2008). Fires in these systems appear 
to be driven by climate and, thus, changes in the fuels 
do not impact frequency or intensity of fires. Similar 
results have been reported for lodgepole pine forests 
(Kulakowski and Jarvis 2011). It must be noted that 
in the summer of 2013, Colorado experienced several 
large wildfires and to our knowledge no one has 
investigated the contribution of recent beetle mortality 
to those fires. 
References
Allen, C.D. 2007. Interactions across spatial scales among forest 
dieback, fire, and erosion in northern New Mexico landscapes. 
Ecosystems 10:797-808.
Bentz, B.J. and D.E. Mullins. 1999. Ecology of mountain pine beetle 
(Coleoptera: Scolytidae) cold hardening in the intermountain west. 
Environmental Entomology 4:577-587.
Bentz, B.J., C.D. Allen, M. Ayres, E. Berg, A. Carroll, M. Hansen, 
J. Hicke, L. Joyce, J. Logan, W. MacFarlane, J. MacMahon, S. 
Munson, J. Negrón, T. Paine, J. Powell, K. Raffa, J. Régnière, M. 
Reid, W. Romme, S. Seybold, D. Six, D. Tomback, J. Vandygriff, 
T. Veblen, M. White, J. Witcosky, and D. Wood. 2009. Bark beetle 
outbreaks in western North America: Causes and consequences. 
Univ. of Utah Press, Salt Lake City, UT. 42 pp.
Bentz, B.J., J. Régnière, C.J. Fettig, E.M. Hansen, J.L. Hayes, J.A. Hicke, 
R.G. Kelsey, J.F. Negrón, and S.J. Seybold. 2010. Climate change 
and bark beetles of the Western United States and Canada: direct 
and indirect effects. BioScience 60:602-613.
Bentz B., J. Vandygriff, C. Jensen, T. Coleman, P. Maloney, S. Smith, 
A. Grady, and G. Schen-Langenheim. 2014. Mountain pine beetle 
voltinism and life history characteristics across latitudinal and 
elevational gradients in the western United States. Forest Science 
available online: November 28, 2013
Bond, M.L., D.E. Lee, C.M. Bradley, and C.T. Hanson. 2009. Influence 
of pre-fire tree mortality on fire severity in conifer forests of the 
San Bernardino Mountains, California. The Open Forest Science 
Journal 2:41-47. 
Breshears, D.D., N.S. Cobb, P.M. Rich, K.P. Price, C.D. Allen, R.G. 
Balice, W.H. Romme, J.H. Kastens, M.L. Floyd, J. Belnap, J.J. 
Anderson, O.B. Myers, and C.W. Meyer. 2005. Regional vegetation 
die-off in response to global-change type drought. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences 102:15144-15148.
Brown, J.K. 1975. Fire cycles and community dynamics in lodgepole 
pine forests. In: Baumgartner, D.M. (ed). Management of 
Lodgepole Pine Ecosystems: Symposium Proceedings. Washington 
State University, pp. 429-456.
Collins, B.J., C.C. Rhoades, M.A. Battaglia, and R.M. Hubbard. 2012. 
The effects of bark beetle outbreaks on forest development, fuel 
loads and potential fire behavior in salvage logged and untreated 
lodgepole pine forests. Forest Ecology and Management 284:260-268
Cudmore, T.J., N. Bjorklund, A.L. Carroll, and B.S. Lindgren. 2010. 
Climate change and range expansion of an aggressive bark 
beetle: evidence of higher beetle reproduction in naïve host tree 
populations. Journal of Applied Ecology 47:1036-1043. 
DeRose, R.J., and J.N. Long. 2009. Wildfire and spruce beetle outbreak: 
simulation of interacting disturbances in the Central Rocky 
Mountains. EcoScience 16:28-38.
Fettig, C.J., K.D. Klepzig, R.F. Billings, A.S. Munson, T.E. Nebeker, 
J.F. Negron, and J.T. Nowak. 2007. The effectiveness of vegetation 
management practices for prevention and control of bark beetle 
infestations in coniferous forests of the western and southern 
United States. Forest Ecology and Management 238:24-53.
Fettig, C.J., M.L. Reid, B.J. Bentz, S. Sevanto, D.L. Spittlehouse, and T. 
Wang. 2013. Changing climates, changing forests: a western North 
American perspective. Journal of Forestry 111:214-228.
Floyd-Hanna, L., T. Crews, W.H. Romme, D. Hanna, M. Rocca, D. 
Hanna, and G. San Miguel. 2012. Effects of fires and insects on fuel 
structures in piñon-juniper and post-fire invasive communities. 
Final Report for Joint Fire Science Program Project Number 1497-
NR01-454.
Gaylord M.L. 2014. Impact of forest restoration treatments on 
southwestern ponderosa pine tree resistance to bark beetles. 
ERI Working Paper No. 30. Ecological Restoration Institute and 
Southwest Fire Science Consortium, Northern Arizona University: 
Flagstaff, AZ. 9 p.
Gaylord M.L., T.E. Kolb, K.F. Wallin, and M.R. Wagner. 2006. 
Seasonality and lure preference of bark beetles (Curculionidae: 
Scolytinae) and associates in a northern Arizona ponderosa pine 
forest. Environmental Entomology 35:37-47.
Gaylord M.L., T.E. Kolb, K.F. Wallin, and M.R. Wagner. 2007. Seasonal 
dynamics of tree growth, physiology, and resin defenses in a 
northern Arizona ponderosa pine forest. Canadian Journal of 
Forest Research 37:1173-1183.
Gaylord, M.L., T.E. Kolb, W.T. Pockman, J.A. Plaut, E.A. Yepez, A.K. 
Macalady, R.E. Pangle, and N.G. McDowell. 2013. Drought 
predisposes piñon-juniper woodlands to insect attacks and 
mortality. New Phytologist 198:567-578.
Herms, D.A., and W.J. Mattson. 1992. The dilemma of plants: To grow 
or defend. The Quarterly Review of Biology 67:283-335.
Hicke, J.A., M.C. Johnson, J.L. Hayes, and H.K. Preisler. 2012. Effects 
of bark beetle-caused mortality on wildfire. Forest Ecology and 
Management 271:81-90.
Jenkins, M.J., E. Hebertson, W. Page, and C.A. Jorgensen. 2008. Bark 
beetles, fuels, fires and implications for forest management in the 
Intermountain West. Forest Ecology and Management 254:16-34.
Jenkins, M.J., W.G. Page, E.G. Hebertson, and M.E. Alexander. 2012. 
Fuels and fire behavior dynamics in bark beetle-attacked forests 
in Western North America and implications for fire management. 
Forest Ecology and Management 275:23-34.
Jenkins, M.J., J.B. Runyon, C.J. Fettig, W.G. Page, and B.J. Bentz. 
2014. Interactions among the mountain pine beetle, fires, and 
fuels. Forest Science, available online: http://dx.doi.org/10.5849/
forsci.13-017
Jolly, W.M., R.A. Parsons, A.M. Hadlow, G.M. Cohn, S.S. McAllister, 
J.B. Popp, R.M. Hubbard, and J.F. Negrón. 2012. Relationships 
between moisture, chemistry, and ignition of Pinus contorta 
needles during the early stages of mountain pine beetle attack. 
Forest Ecology and Management 269:52–59.

7
Ecological Restoration Institute
CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON BARK BEETLE OUTBREAKS AND THE IMPACT OF OUTBREAKS ON 
SUBSEQUENT FIRES
Kelsey R.G., D. Gallego, F.J. Sanchez-Garcia, and J.A. Pajares. 2014. 
Ethanol accumulation during severe drought may signal tree 
vulnerability to detection and attack by bark beetles. Canadian 
Journal of Forest Research 44: 554–561.
Kleinman, S.J., T.E. DeGomez, G.B. Snider, and K.E. Williams. 2012. 
Large-scale pinyon ips (Ips confusus) outbreak in southwestern 
United States tied with elevation and land cover. Journal of Forestry 
110:194-200.
Klutsch, J.G., M.A. Battaglia, D.R. West, S.L. Costello, and J.F. Negrón. 
2011. Evaluating potential fire behavior in lodgepole pine-
dominated forests after a mountain pine beetle epidemic in north-
central Colorado. Western Journal of Applied Forestry 26:101-109.
Kolb, T.E., K.M. Holmberg, M.R. Wagner, and J.E. Stone. 1998. 
Regulation of ponderosa pine foliar physiology and insect 
resistance mechanisms by basal area treatments. Tree Physiology 
18:375-381.
Kulakowski, D., and D. Jarvis. 2011. The influence of mountain pine 
beetle outbreaks and drought on severe wildfires in northwestern 
Colorado and southern Wyoming: a look at the past century. Forest 
Ecology and Management 262:1686-1696.
Kulakowski, D, T.T. Veblen. 2007. Effect of prior disturbances on 
the extent and severity of wildfire in Colorado subalpine forests. 
Ecology 88:759-769.
Logan, J., and B.J. Bentz. 1999. Model analysis of mountain pine beetle 
(Coleoptera: Scolytidae) seasonality. Environmental Entomology 
28: 924-934.
Mattson W.J., and R.A. Haack. 1987. The role of drought in outbreaks 
of plant-eating insects. BioScience 37:110-118.
McDowell, N. 2011. Mechanisms linking drought, hydraulics, carbon 
metabolism, and vegetation mortality. Plant Physiology 155:1051-
1059.
McDowell, N., W.T. Pockman, C.D. Allen, D.D. Breshears, N. Cobb, T. 
Kolb, J. Plaut, J. Sperry, A. West, D.G. Williams, and E.A. Yepez. 
2008. Mechanisms of plant survival and mortality during drought: 
why do some plants survive while others succumb to drought? 
Tansley Review. New Phytologist 178:719-739.
Plaut, J.A., E.A. Yepez, J. Hill, R. Pangle, J. Johnson, J.S. Sperry, W.T. 
Pockman, and N.G. McDowell. 2012. Hydraulic limits preceding 
mortality in a piñon-juniper woodland under experimental 
drought. Plant, Cell and Environment 35:1601-1617.
Raffa, K.F., B.H. Aukema, B.J. Bentz, A.L. Carroll, J.A. Hicke, M.G. 
Turner, and W.H. Romme. 2008. Cross-scale drivers of natural 
disturbances prone to anthropogenic amplification: the dynamics 
of bark beetle eruptions. BioScience 58:501-517.
Romme, W.H., J. Clement, J. Hicke, D. Kulakowski, L.H. MacDonald, 
T.L. Schoennagel, and T.T. Veblen. 2006. Recent forest insect 
outbreaks and fire risk in Colorado forests: a brief synthesis of 
relevant research. Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, 24 pp.
Sambaraju, K.R., A.L. Carroll, J. Zhu, K. Stahl, R.D. Moore, and B.H. 
Aukema. 2011. Climate change could alter the distribution of 
mountain pine beetle outbreaks in western Canada. Ecography 
35:211-223.
Schoennagel, T., T.T. Veblen, J.F. Negrón, and J.M. Smith. 2012. Effects 
of mountain pine beetle on fuels and expected fire behavior in 
lodgepole pine forests, Colorado, USA. PLoS ONE 7.
Seager, R., M. Ting, I. Held, Y. Kushnir, J. Lu, G. Vecchi, H. Huang, 
A. Leetmaa, N. Lau, C. Li, J. Velez, and N Naik. 2007. Model 
projections of an imminent transition to a more arid climate in 
southwestern North America. Science 316:1181-1184. 
Simard, M., W.H. Romme, J.M. Griffin, and M.G. Turner. 2011. Do 
mountain pine beetle outbreaks change the probability of active 
crown fire in lodgepole pine forests? Ecological Monographs 81:3-24.
Six, D.L., M. Poulsen, A.K. Hansen, M.J. Wingfield, J. Roux, P. 
Eggleton, B. Slippers, and T.D. Paine. 2011. Anthropogenic 
effects on interaction outcomes: examples from insect-microbial 
symbioses in forest and savanna ecosystems. Symbiosis 53:101-121.
Trấn, J.K., T. Ylioja, R.F. Billings, J. Régnière, and M.P. Ayres. 2007. 
Impact of minimum winter temperatures on the population dynamics 
of Dendroctonus frontalis. Ecological Applications 17:882-899.
Turner, M.G., W.H. Romme, and R.H. Gardner. 1999. Prefire 
heterogeneity, fire severity, and early postfire plant reestablishment 
in subalpine forests of Yellowstone national Park, Wyoming. 
International Journal of Wildland Fire 9:21-36. 
USDA, Forest Service. 2013. Aerial survey maps; available online 
http://www.fs.usda.gov/detail/r3/forest-grasslandhealth/insects-
diseases/?cid=stelprdb5228467
Williams A.P., C.D. Allen, A.K. Macalady, D. Griffen, C.A. Woodhouse, 
D.M Meko, T.W. Setnam, S.A. Rauscher, R. Seager, H.E. Grissino-
Mayer, J.S. Dean, E.R. Cook, C. Gangodagamage, M. Cai, and N.G. 
McDowell. 2013. Temperature as a potent driver of regional forest 
drought stress and tree mortality. Nature Climate Change 3:292-297. 
Williams, D.W., and A.M. Liebhold. 2002. Climate change and the 
outbreak ranges of two North American bark beetles. Agricultural 
and Forest Entomology 4:87-99.
Williams, K. K., J. D. McMillin, T. E. DeGomez, K. M. Clancy, and A. 
Miller. 2008. Influence of elevation on bark beetle (Coleoptera: 
Curculionidae, Scolytinae) community structure and flight 
periodicity in ponderosa pine forests of Arizona. Environmental 
Entomology 37: 94-109.

For more information about forest restoration, contact the ERI at (928) 523-7182  or nau.edu/eri.
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution   
This report was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.
 NAU Printing Services/77531/300/06-14
 
Working Papers in Intermountain West Frequent-Fire Forest Restoration
1: 
Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons  and Adaptive Management Practices
2: 
Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3: 
Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
4: 
Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits
5: 
Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
6: 
Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
7: 
Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
8: 
Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
9: 
Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
10: The Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Restoration Model
11: Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration
12: Restoring Forest Roads
13: Treating Slash after Restoration Thinning
14: Integrating Forest Restoration Treatments with Mexican Spotted Owl Habitat Needs
15: Effects of Forest Thinning Treatments on Fire Behavior
16: Snags and Forest Restoration  
17: Bat Habitat and Forest Restoration Treatments
18: Prescribed and Wildland Use Fires in the Southwest: Do Timing and Frequency Matter? 
19: Understory Seeding in Southwestern Forests Following Wildfire and Ecological Restoration Treatments
20: Controlling Cheatgrass in Ponderosa Pine and Pinyon-Juniper Restoration Areas 
21: Managing Coarse Woody Debris in Frequent-fire Southwestern Forests
22: Restoring Spatial Pattern to Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
23: Guidelines for Managing Small Mammals in Restored Ponderosa Pine Forests of Northern Arizona
24: Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Burning 
25: Strategies for Enhancing and Restoring Rare Plants and Their Habitats in the Face of Climate Change and Habitat Destruction 
in the Intermountain West
26: Wildlife Habitat Values and Forest Structure in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine: Implications for Restoration
27: Fuel Treatment Longevity
28: Southwestern Mixed-Conifer Forests: Evaluating Reference Conditions to Guide Ecological Restoration Treatments
29:  Post-Wildfire Restoration of Structure, Composition, and Function in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine and Warm/Dry Mixed-
Conifer Forests
30: Impact of Forest Restoration Treatments on Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Tree Resistance to Bark Beetles

Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
nau.edu/eri
G1002207
