 
 
1
June 2013 
ERI Newsletter
 
Dolor Sit Amet
RESTORATION NEWS: ERI’s New Look Online 
ERI is pleased to announce the launch of our newly 
redesigned website. The new web design aligns with NAU’s 
recent site-wide renovation—a year-long effort to harmonize 
all university-affiliated web pages to enhance accessibility of 
content and page organization across all departments, 
research institutes, and schools. 
ERI’s new, easily navigable main menu takes you to our 
research pages, restoration information, publications and 
media, and other resources. The homepage is designed to 
feature our most recent publications and upcoming events in 
a rotating module so you can stay informed on the latest 
restoration science and research. The homepage is also 
streamlined to include breaking news stories related to 
wildfire, ecological restoration, and forest policy news. 
Visit the new ERI website at http://nau.edu/ERI. While 
there, feel free to join our social networks, including 
Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube, to stay up-to-date with 
ERI news and publications.  
June 2013

 
 
2
June 2013 
ERI Newsletter
 
National Conference on Ecosystem Restoration 
Dates: July 29-August 2, 2013 
Chicago, IL, Renaissance Schaumburg Convention 
Center Hotel 
More Information 
 
Ecological Society of America 98th Annual Meeting 
Date: August 4-9, 2013 
Minneapolis, MN 
More Information 
 
2013 Society for Ecological Restoration 5th World 
Conference 
Date: October 6-11, 2013 
Madison, WI 
More Information 
Early bird registration deadline June 13 
ERI IN THE NEWS 
ERI Director of Policy and Partnerships Diane Vosick 
testifying before the Senate Energy and Natural Resources 
Committee on June 4, 2013. 
Wyden Thumps White House for 'Baffling' Cuts to 
Hazardous Fuels Funding Chairman Ron Wyden 
criticized the Office of Management and Budget on 
June 4 for what he called a 'baffling' proposal to reduce 
funding for hazardous tree removals in 2014. More... 
 
Senate ENR Panel to Examine Wildland Fire 
Management Results from a recent ERI study were 
presented to lawmakers by Diane Vosick on June 4. 
More...   
UPCOMING EVENTS 

 
 
3
June 2013 
ERI Newsletter
NAU Study Estimates Financial Impact of 
Wildfire ERI released a study in late May on 
the impact of the 2010 Schultz Fire and 
subsequent flooding, which was estimated to 
cost more than $130 million. More... 
 
Sequester Guts Wildfire Prevention, Sets 
Up Bigger Blazes...and Leaves Locals to 
Pick up the Tab Fire ecologists, 
environmentalists, and firefighters describe 
an increasingly distorted federal budget that 
has apparently forgotten the old adage about 
an ounce of prevention. More...  
PUBLICATIONS 
The Schultz Fire burned more than 15,000 acres in the Coconino 
National Forest in Arizona in 2010. Photo: Mike Elson, USDA, 
Coconino National Forest 
ERI Fact Sheets:    
Huffman, D.W. 2013. Fact Sheet: Influence of Time Since Fire on Pinyon-Juniper Woodland 
Structure. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, 2p.   
Huffman, D.W. 2013. Fact Sheet: Understory Plant Community Responses to Hazardous Fuels 
Reduction Treatments in Pinyon-Juniper Woodlands of Arizona, USA. Ecological Restoration 
Institute, Northern Arizona University, 2p.   
Kalies, E.L. 2012. Fact Sheet: Restoration Effects on Small Mammals and their Predators. Ecological 
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, 2p.   
Masek Lopez, S. 2013. Fact Sheet: Forest Change and Water Balance: Investigating forest restoration 
treatment effects on soil water storage, evapotranspiration, groundwater recharge and surface water 
discharge. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2p.    
Nielsen, E. and F. Solop. 2013. Fact Sheet: Forest Health and Water Supply Protection Project Ballot 
Measure: Exit Poll Results. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2p.   
Roccaforte, J.P. 2012. Fact Sheet: Assessing Restoration Objectives Following a Second-entry 
Prescribed Fire in an Unharvested Mixed Conifer Forest. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern 
Arizona University, 2p.   
Stoddard, M. 2012. Fact Sheet: Herbaceous Vegetation Responses Six Years After Restoration 
Treatments. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, 2p.   

 
 
June 2013 
ERI Newsletter
Stoddard, M.T. 2013. Fact Sheet: An Example of Forest Restoration in a Warm/Dry Mixed-Conifer 
Forest. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, 2p.   
Vosick, D. 2013. Fact Sheet: Efficacy of Hazardous Fuel Treatments: A rapid assessment of the 
economic and ecologic consequences of alternative hazardous fuel treatments. Ecological Restoration 
Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2p.   
Yarborough, R.F. and Loberger, C. 2013. Fact Sheet: Tassel-eared Squirrel Habitat Use and 
Abundance in Managed Forests within the Wildland Urban Interface. Ecological Restoration Institute, 
Northern Arizona University, 2p.    
 
ERI Working Papers:   
Reif, S., R.F. Yarborough, S.S. Rosenstock, E.L. Kalies, and S. Hedwall.  2013.  Wildlife Habitat 
Values and Forest Structure in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine: Implications for Restoration. Ecological 
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, ERI Working Papers, 8 p.   
 
ERI White Papers:   
Combrink, T., C. Cothran, W. Fox, J. Peterson, and G. Snider. 2013. Full Cost Accounting of the 2010 
Schultz Fire. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. ERI–Issues in Forest 
Restoration, 44p.   
Fitch, A., Y.S. Kim, and A.E.M. Waltz. 2013. Forest Restoration Treatments: Their Effect on 
Wildland Fire Suppression Costs. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. ERI–
Issues in Forest Restoration, 12p.   
 
ERI Reports:   
Ecological Restoration Institute. 2013. The efficacy of hazardous fuel treatments: A rapid assessment of 
the economic and ecologic consequences of alternative hazardous fuel treatments: A document for 
policy makers. Northern Arizona University. 28p.   
Egan, D. and Dubay, T., eds. 2013. Breaking Barriers, Building Bridges: Collaborative Forest 
Landscape Restoration Handbook. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, 
212p.   
Moote, A. 2013. Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource 
Management. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, 44p. 
 
Published in Journals:   
Huffman, D.W., M.T. Stoddard, J.D. Springer, J.E. Crouse, and W.W. Chancellor. 2013. Understory 
Plant Community Responses to Hazardous Fuels Reduction Treatments in Pinyon-Juniper Woodlands 
of Arizona, USA. Forest Ecology and Management 289:478-488.   
Kalies, E.L., and W.W. Covington. 2012. Small Mammal Community Maintains Stability Through 
Compensatory Dynamics After Restoration of a Ponderosa Pine Forest. Ecosphere 3(9):Article 78, 1-
11.   
Kurth, V.J., N. Fransioli, P.Z. Fule, S.C. Hart, and C.A. Gehring. 2013. Stand-replacing Wildfires 
Alter the Community Structure of Wood-inhabiting Fungi in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests of 
the USA. Fungal Ecology 6:192-204.   

 
 
June 2013 
ERI Newsletter 
NEWS FROM THE FIELD 
McGlone, C.M., M.T. Stoddard, J.D. Springer, M.L Daniels, P.Z. Fulé and W.W. Covington. 2012. 
Nonnative Species Influence Vegetative Response to Ecological Restoration: Two Forests with 
Divergent Restoration Outcomes. Forest Ecology and Management 285:195-203. 
Ramstead, K.M., J. A. Allen, and A.E. Springer. 2012. Have wet meadow restoration projects in the 
Southwestern U.S. been effective in restoring geomorphology, hydrology, soils, and plant species 
composition? Environmental Evidence 1:11.   
Springer, J.D., P.Z. Fulé, and D.W. Huffman. 2012. Long-term Responses of Penstemon clutei (Sunset 
Crater Beardtongue) to Root Trenching and Prescribed Fire: Clues for Population Persistence. 
Calochortiana 1:164-171.   
Springer, J.D., M.T. Stoddard, D.C. Laughlin, D.L. Crisp, and B.G. Phillips. 2012. Ecology of Rusby's 
Milkvetch (Astragalus rusbyi), a Rare Endemic of Northern Arizona Ponderosa Pine Forests. 
Calochortiana 1:157-163.    
Wu, T. and Y.-S. Kim. 2013. Pricing ecosystem resilience in frequent-fire ponderosa pine forests. 
Forest Policy and Economics 27: 8-12.   
For more articles, please visit: http://library.eri.nau.edu 
AGENCY OUTREACH  
The Agency Outreach Team helps land managers and practitioners with project planning by providing 
approaches based on best available scientific research and years of practical experience in forestry. The 
team, which consists of U.S. Forest Service retirees, uses ERI publications, external research materials 
and localized field data to assist practitioners in determining a project area’s historical range of 
variation and to provide best science support for ecological restoration prescription design and 
development.      
The Outreach Team also works with practitioners to identify and assess research needs surrounding the 
restoration of overstocked forests, fuels management, restoration of understory plants, and soil 
management. To help answer these needs, the team works with ERI staff to synthesize important 
research papers into usable summaries, such as Desired Conditions (DC) Fact Sheets, or to develop 
long-term research projects. The team also works with ERI colleagues to produce ERI Working Papers, 
which bring together information about restoration topics.   
Selected Past Projects:   
• Santa Fe National Forest: Southwest Jemez Mountains CFLR Project HRV (Reference 
Conditions) Assessment Report.   
• Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest: Summary of Timber Mesa – Vernon WUI Field 
Work (Rapid Assessment), Summary Report for Beaver Creek Project (Rapid Assessment).   
• Kaibab National Forest: Photo Comparisons between the Implementation of the USDA-Forest 
Service Goshawk Guidelines and ERI Strict Sense Restoration.   
 

 
 
June 2013 
ERI Newsletter
SUMMER FIELDWORK  
ERI field crews will be keeping busy this summer collecting ecological data across the southern portion 
of the Colorado Plateau. Field work will focus on the 5-year post-treatment remeasurement of two sites 
within the ERI’s Long-term Ecological Assessment and Restoration Network (LEARN).  
The Mineral project, located in the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest in Arizona, is nested within the 
largest contiguous ponderosa pine forest in the world. The project spans an elevation gradient from the 
pinyon-juniper ecotone to the dry mixed-conifer ecotone.  
The Lower Middle Mountain project, located in the San Juan National Forest in southwestern 
Colorado, is situated in a warm-dry mixed-conifer forest. Mixed-conifer forests have suffered many of 
the same effects from heavy resource extraction and fire exclusion as ponderosa pine ecosystems, 
including increased tree density and increased susceptibility to stand- replacing crown fires and insect 
outbreaks.  
Staff and students will be collecting overstory, surface fuel, and regeneration data at both sites, and 
understory and fire history data at the Mineral site. Long-term monitoring data from both projects will 
contribute to LEARN and will provide insight into whether restoration treatments increase ecosystem 
resilience to increasing high-intensity crown fire in conjunction with a changing climate.   
For more information, contact: Mike Stoddard – 928.523.5910, or John Paul Roccaforte – 
928.523.7229 
Mineral site: Plot AS-EB2-2-19 prior to treatment in 2002 
Mineral site: Plot AS-EB2-2-19 one year after thinning and 
burning in 2009 
• Coconino National Forest: Summary Report for Clints Well Restoration Project, Flagstaff 
Pulliam Airport Fuels Reduction Project, Bald Mesa Demonstration Project – Long Term 
Study.   
For more information on agency outreach, contact: Mark Sensibaugh – Outreach Program 

 
 
June 2013 
ERI Newsletter
 
Lower Middle Mountain site: Prescribed surface fire was 
implemented as part of the full restoration treatment at the 
Lower Middle Mountain site. 
Lower Middle Mountain site: Open forest structure and 
abundant understory plant cover one year following a 
restoration treatment. 
PARTNERS 
Spotlight: National Forest Foundation 
http://www.nationalforests.org 
 
The National Forest Foundation (NFF) is the congressionally charted nonprofit partner of the U.S. 
Forest Service. The mission of the NFF is to engage Americans in community-based and national 
programs that promote the health and public enjoyment of the 193-million-acre National Forest 
System, and administer private gifts of funds and land for the benefit of the National Forests.    
The NFF works in close collaboration with local people and communities in order to help communities 
play a leading role in determining the future of our National Forests and Grasslands. The NFF works 
with a diverse mix of partners, including state and federal agencies, non-profit organizations, 
businesses, research and academic institutes, and thousands of individual volunteers, to leverage public 
and private resources to maximize conservation impact. NFF’s Conservation Connect learning network 
for collaboration offers coaching, best practices and peer learning opportunities to community-based 
groups and Forest Service employees involved in collaborative stewardship on National Forest System 
lands.    
NFF and ERI have successfully partnered on several projects, including the recently released 
sourcebook for collaborative resource management groups, “Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation 
and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management.” ERI and NFF also work together to develop 
and promote the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program Monitoring Network and jointly 
offer peer learning sessions about landscape monitoring questions and approaches. 
 
PO Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011 – nau.edu/eri – 928.523.7182 
