The Plant Press
THE ARIZONA NATIVE PLANT SOCIETY
VOLUME 33, NUMBER 1
SPRING 2009
continued next page
Printed on recycled paper.
Introduction
Tucson Audubon has been restoring habitat in desert riparian settings since 2000. All work
has taken place in the Santa Cruz River watershed with two project sites along the lower
Santa Cruz River in northern Pima County and one on the upper Santa Cruz River in Santa
Cruz County. A fourth very small project site is in a spring-fed canyon in the Tortolita
Mountains. Tucson Audubon also has plans to work at a more urban location along a wash
on the east side of Tucson. 
The restoration program is heavily influenced by Tucson Audubon’s conservation priorities.
These include riparian research, conservation and restoration, in some cases targeting
particular bird species. The Santa Cruz River is an area of major riparian habitat loss with
significant impacts in the previous century from grazing, erosion, channelization and
groundwater pumping. However, the river was also seen as an opportunity due to the
potential for reestablishing xeroriparian vegetation and, downstream from Tucson, the
In this Issue: 
Restoration of 
Arizona’s Wildlands 
1-5  Tucson Audubon’s Restoration
of Arizona Wildlands
6-7  From Field of Weeds to Riparian
Hotspot: The Rehabilitation of
Willow Wash at The Arboretum at
Flagstaff
8-9  Restoring Plant Diversity in a
Ponderosa Pine Forest
11-15  Ecology and Natural History of
Fendler’s Ceanothus
14-15  Riparian Restoration in the
Yuma Area
16-17  Using a Diverse Seed Mix to
Establish Native Plants on a
Sonoran Desert Burn
& Our Regular Features:
2  President’s Note 
10  Ethnobotany
18  AZNPS Merchandise
19  Who’s Who at  AZNPS 
20  Membership
Copyright © 2009. Arizona Native Plant Society. All rights reserved.
Special thanks from the editors to all who contributed time and efforts to this issue. 
above Santa Cruz River floodplain at Esperanza Ranch conservation easement. Photo courtesy
Kendall Kroesen.
Tucson Audubon’s Restoration
of Arizona Wildlands
by Kendall Kroesen, Restoration Program Manager, and Lia Sansom,
Restoration Specialist, Tucson Audubon Society

President’s Note
by Barbara G. Phillips  bgphillips@fs.fed.us
Coconino, Kaibab and Prescott National Forests, Flagstaff  
opportunity to work in the effluent-dominated reach where
limited cottonwood-willow vegetation was emerging
spontaneously. 
In this account we will focus on the three sites along the
Santa Cruz River, primarily the North Simpson Farm
where we have the most experience. These sites have a few
things in common like long term, heavy degradation from
either farm or cattle use or both. The river along all of
these sites flows nearly year-round because of effluent
releases from wastewater treatment plants upstream, so all
have some natural cottonwood and willow recruitment in
the river channel. High-intensity, fast flows from summer
rains prevent us from doing much work along the river as
plantings and irrigation there are often washed out.
Therefore, our work generally focuses on the xeroriparian,
upper floodplain regions of our sites. Fencing is a priority
on all sites to exclude cattle. However, all three Santa Cruz
River sites have continued to experience cattle incursions
from neighboring properties. After eight years of work the
restoration program is in the process of assessing overall
effectiveness and exploring new directions. 
North Simpson Farm
Tucson Audubon restoration work began in 2000 at the
North Simpson Farm, a 1,700-acre parcel owned by the
City of Tucson. The City has purchased and retired from
cultivation some old farms in the Santa Cruz River
floodplain in Avra Valley. A 1.3-mile reach of the effluent-
dominated stretch of the river flows through the site, which
is located west of Trico Road about two miles south of the
boundary between Pima and Pinal counties. Early in the
2 The Plant Press  ARIZONA NATIVE PLANT SOCIETY  Spring 2009  
We would like to dedicate this issue of The Plant Press to Tom
Moody, who died in January while flying from Flagstaff to
Yuma for a wetlands restoration project. Tom and his wife,
Stephanie Yard, were co-owners/engineers of Natural Channel
Design, an innovative ecological restoration company. His
legacy lives on in the Yuma Wetlands and Willow Wash at the
Arboretum at Flagstaff (featured in this issue), as well as at
Hart Prairie Preserve, Fern Mountain Botanical Area, Coconino
National Forest, and Picture Canyon in Flagstaff. 
You may note the absence of a few of our regular features in
this issue. Frankly, we ran out of space! Our authors provided
very interesting lengthy articles and since this whole issue is
devoted to wildland restoration and one long article features
the very interesting life history of the native buckbrush, we
decided to skip the “Conservation Committee Update” and
“Focus on a Native Plant” features, as well as the book review.
These columns will return in future issues. 
We wish to thank the following State Board members for their
efforts on behalf of the Arizona Native Plant Society. Jessa
Fisher has been our State Secretary and Happenings Editor for
three years. Ken Morrow has been our State Treasurer for many
years. And during his short tenure as Yuma Chapter President,
Shawn Pollard contributed to AZNPS at the local and state
levels. 
We now welcome Suzanne Cash as our State Secretary. Ana
Lilia Reina-Guerrero, and Tom Van Devender were recently
elected to two-year terms on the Board, and Andrew Salywon
and Kendall Kroesen were elected to one-year terms. We look
forward to their contributions at the State level of our Society.
above  Santa Cruz River at North Simpson Farm.
above  Meeting of existing permeable fill road (1999) Hart
Prairie Preserve, and new road, Fern Mountain Botanical Area,
(2008), looking south.  Natural Channel Design.  Bebb’s willow
trees on both sides of road. 

www.aznps.com (TEMPORARY)  The Plant Press  ARIZONA NATIVE PLANT SOCIETY 3
planning stages of Tucson
Audubon’s involvement in
this site, we decided to focus
our work on the northeast
corner of the site and along
both sides of the river where
unreinforced earthen berms
were built along the active
floodway after major floods
in 1983 and 1993.
Restoration at this site has
been accomplished with in-
lieu mitigation funds from
the Army Corps of Engineers
enforcement of the Clean
Water Act, grants awarded by
the Arizona Water Protection
Fund Commission, additional
funding from the Arizona
Partners for Wildlife program
of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service, and important in-
kind contributions from the
City of Tucson.
Prior to on-the ground work, a site assessment was prepared
for the Simpson site in order to guide our restoration efforts.
Information was gathered on a variety of site components
including site history, watershed, hydrology, topography,
climate, and existing and potential flora and fauna. Site goals
were created by combining information from the site
assessment with the principles of Permaculture, a systems
approach to integrated design of agriculture and human
settlements. Some of the Simpson site goals are:
1) Increase vegetation using sustainability techniques such as
rainwater harvesting, mulching, seed pelletization and
others
2) Focus recovery work on species selected for their
appropriateness to conditions at this site to create more
diverse habitat, increase stability and fertility of site soils,
stabilize erosion-prone areas, and displace nonnative
invasive species
3) Integrate the river with adjacent land outside flood control
berms to improve habitat connectivity on the site
4) Monitor site conditions to determine impacts of
restoration work so strategies can be adjusted if needed to
increase benefits
5) Encourage public participation in site work to support
stewardship of the site, increase understanding of riparian
areas in the Sonoran Desert ecosystem, and provide
nature-centered opportunities for the community.
None of our goals include a desire to return the Simpson site
to a historic condition. This area has been vastly altered by
agriculture for an extensive amount of time and the
hydrologic regime has been altered by the perennial flow of
effluent in an area that was historically ephemeral and by
flood control berms that changed the effects from flooding.
Therefore our plant palette, for seeds and containerized
plants, consists of native xeroriparian plant species suitable to
the present site conditions and that provide forage, cover and
nesting sites for native birds and other wildlife. In a strict
sense of the word, this is not “restoration” but probably fits
better under another label like reclamation, revegetation or
habitat creation. However, since much of our program is
outreach-based, we find that the public relates best to the
term “restoration.”
The ideal way to address Goal 3 probably would be to regrade
the earthen berms along the river to allow overbank flows and
channel meandering. This could possibly extend the mesic,
and perhaps hydric, plant communities that are constrained
by these berms. But this is impossible to achieve in the short
term due to active farmlands that could be impacted by
floodwaters exiting the Simpson Farm. With this
impediment, Tucson Audubon restoration staff saw an
opportunity. The berms provide microclimates in an
otherwise exposed flatland to assist in quickly establishing a
dense variety of plants. With their relatively steep incline,
continued next page
above  Artificial river berm along Santa Cruz River at North
Simpson Farm.

4 The Plant Press  ARIZONA NATIVE PLANT SOCIETY  Spring 2009
many micro-catchment basins could be
hand-dug in close proximity to each
other that would collect rainwater in
even minor rain events with little sheet
flow. Plants in these basins received
initial supplemental irrigation but were
rapidly and successfully removed from
irrigation after two years. It is our hope
that the plant communities on these
slopes are able to provide a seed source
and spread as time passes and the
berms slowly erode away. 
Extending xeroriparian vegetation away
from the river, up the berm and into
the floodplain outside the berm helps
to achieve Goal 3 in the sense of
vegetative connectivity. 
Until recently, most of our restoration work involved a
combination of seeding and planting. Early in the project,
large areas of the floodplain northeast of the river were
imprinted and seeded. Seeded areas were not irrigated. Initial
results suggested reasonable growth of annuals and
wildflowers from seed in the first spring season, particularly
of a seeded Plantago species. However, we have not seen
significant establishment of most seeded species, particularly
woody species. The exceptions to this are two saltbushes,
Atriplex canescens and A. polycarpa, which have grown from
seed at rates that have contributed to reestablishment of
vegetative cover. 
In addition to seeding, we planted native xeroriparian plant
species in a relatively dispersed manner (100-150 individuals
per acre). These were planted along drip irrigation lines
installed for this purpose. Short-term survival of plantings
has been relatively good but long-term survival has been
decreased in some areas by intense competition from invasive
plants, especially the invasive exotics Russian thistle (Salsola
sp.) and Bermudagrass (Cynodon dactylon).
We initially underestimated the tenacity of invasive plant
species at the Simpson site. Our early strategy was as quickly
as possible to get beyond the early stages of succession so that
natives, particularly woody shrubs and trees, would begin to
“shade out” or otherwise compete with exotics. Thus far we
have purposefully avoided the use of any herbicide. We
innovated some techniques such as crushing thick growths of
Russian thistle into a “mulch mats” that were thick enough to
make it difficult for new Russian thistle seedlings to
germinate and grow. However, the ground had to be exposed
in areas where transplantation was to occur and we were not
prepared for the overwhelming number of weeds, particularly
Russian thistle, that would grow along our irrigation lines
and compete with our transplants. The mulch mats were
helpful for a season or two in the areas with the thickest
infestations, but that did not help immediately around the
transplants, or where mulching did not provide a thick
enough mat. 
Tucson Audubon Society has a 99-year right-of-entry
agreement with the City of Tucson to do restoration work on
the Simpson Farm. This provides us with ample opportunity
assess our work and reassess site conditions to determine the
best methods for habitat establishment. We monitor the site
through a variety of methods to aid us in our continual
reassessment. Monitoring activities include avian surveys,
repeat photography, survival and growth of plantings,
vegetation structure, and river channel morphology. In the
near future, our efforts will focus on more intensive invasive
plant control, particularly of Russian thistle, and denser
native plantings. 
Martin Farm 
The Martin Farm is about one mile upstream (southeast)
from the North Simpson Farm, off of Trico-Marana Road. It
also straddles the Santa Cruz River, though the restoration
project site is limited to about 30 acres located on the
southwest side of the river. The restoration area again lies
mostly in the river’s floodplain, although the river’s
floodplain is much narrower here than it is at the North
Simpson Farm. 
Tucson Audubon’s
Restoration of
Arizona Wildlands 
continued
above  Drip irrigated vegetation being established at Martin Farm.

Restoration at the Martin Farm has been provided by 
in-lieu mitigation funds. 
The restoration area at the Martin Farm varies from
North Simpson Farm in that it was never farmed but has
been grazed. Prior to restoration work, limited numbers
of velvet mesquites, catclaw acacias and Mexican
paloverdes were present on the floodplain in a higher
density than at the North Simpson Farm. However, the
density of cottonwoods and willows close to the river is
much less than at Simpson.
The bulk of the restoration efforts took place on an upper
floodplain terrace, which flooded in the major flood of
summer 2006 prior to restoration work. This encouraged
a thick growth of summer annuals. The flood and the
thick insulating cover may have enhanced soil moisture
and contributed to the fairly good survival of plants
transplanted early in 2007. Irrigation of transplants used
water pumped from the river through a drip system. Plants
were irrigated, when necessary, through spring of 2008, and
rarely since then. 
The project has experienced relatively high plant survival and
growth rates at this site. Perhaps because of more intact soil
nutrients and perhaps more of a native annual seedbank,
exotic invasives have been less problematic here with the
exception of Bermudagrass, which has crept into more of our
irrigated areas in the course of this project. 
Esperanza Ranch
Esperanza Ranch is an 800-acre private parcel located along
the upper Santa Cruz River between Tubac and Amado, in
Santa Cruz County. This riparian restoration project is
located on a 300-acre conservation easement within the ranch
site that is managed by Tucson Audubon. 
The easement largely lies on floodplain land along the west
side of the Santa Cruz River and along the Chivas Wash, a
tributary that enters the floodplain from the west. Restoration
work here has been funded by the Esperanza Ranch
endowment provided by Devon Energy Corporation, the
Arizona Water Protection Fund Commission, the George A.
Binney Conservation Foundation, the Wallace Research
Foundation and a grant from the Environmental Protection
Agency administered by the Sonoran Institute.
Part of a historic ranch, large parts of the easement have been
farmed and heavily grazed. In large areas of the western
floodplain that lie above the active river channel floodway,
weedy native carelessweed (Amaranthus palmeri) grows
extremely densely with the commencement of summer rains.
The goal of revegetation on the floodplain is to create areas of
mixed native shrub and grassland, grading into denser
mesquite bosque closer to the river and along the wash
(similar to reference areas farther south along the river).
Initial strategy at the site called for hand-seeding over large
areas and extensive, rather than intensive, transplantation of
seedlings. Both seeds and transplants are not irrigated due to
a prohibition on groundwater pumping at the site and the
desire to experiment with more water harvesting techniques
at a larger scale. Survival of the initial plantings was about
30% after three years, which exceeded expectations as many
of the plants were installed during a particularly hot and dry
summer. 
As at the North Simpson Farm, hand distribution of seed has
not proven to be particularly effective. Inability to control
moisture levels may be a factor, as well outcompetition by
extraordinarily thick carelessweed in the summer season.
Populations of some spring annuals may have been enhanced
by seeding.
Lessons learned at this site are similar to those at the North
Simpson Farm. We are moving towards more intensive
restoration efforts in smaller areas where we can control
invasive plants more effectively and transplant denser stands
of desired native plants. We are currently experimenting with
carelessweed control plots to create relatively small areas of
intact native vegetation.
Conclusion
Riparian zones along many parts of the Santa Cruz River are
desiccated and contain depauperate plant communities. They
do not support the diversity of wildlife of which they are
capable. Because of historic changes in these floodplains, and
because of potential future climate change, it does not make
sense to attempt to restore to any particular past condition.
Tucson Audubon is using an adaptive management approach
to restoring functioning ecosystems that will support a wide
array of wildlife under current and future conditions. We
hope to support nesting, wintering and migrating birds as
well as other wildlife species that use riparian resources or
corridors. 

www.aznps.com (TEMPORARY)  The Plant Press  ARIZONA NATIVE PLANT SOCIETY 5
above  Santa Cruz River at Esperanza Ranch conservation easement.

6 The Plant Press  ARIZONA NATIVE PLANT SOCIETY  Spring 2009
From Field of Weeds to Riparian Hotspot: 
The Rehabilitation of Willow Wash at The Arboretum at Flagstaff
by Kris Haskins, The Arboretum at Flagstaff
The Arboretum at Flagstaff is home to many diverse habitats
that highlight the Colorado Plateau’s native flora. Since 1981,
when The Arboretum first opened, efforts have been made to
create and expand unique gardens for visitors to view the
wide array of plant life that the Colorado Plateau has to offer.
Our most recent endeavor, Willow Wash, has added three new
acres of gardens to the existing ten acres already under
cultivation. Willow Wash features three different riparian
habitats and their associated native plant life: a permanent
spring, an ephemeral stream, and a depressional wetland (see
Table 1 for species list). The story of how this project came
about is an interesting one. 
Few people realize that the 200 acres of land that Frances
McAllister originally donated to create The Arboretum was
actually a former working cattle ranch. Records reveal that the
property had been a cattle ranch for at least 20 years. An old
water tank and cattle chutes are still visible in the meadow
today. As many folks in the West are aware, cattle ranching
and native flora do not have a history of peaceful coexistence
and the flora typically lose out to the cattle. This scenario
describes what happened at The Arboretum as well. The years
of cattle grazing eventually took their toll and created a weed
field from the once native meadow (figure 1). However, the
cows were not the only ones at fault. The ranchers in charge
of the land actually planted the exotic grass, smooth brome
(Bromus enermis), for the cows as forage, but as luck would
have it, the cattle preferred the native bunchgrasses! The
cattle also damaged the wash that flowed through the
property. The wash, which is an extension of Sinclair Wash,
had been altered by years of cattle and anthropogenic use and
no longer funneled excess runoff water the way it should
(figure 2). Thus, a major project was born. 
There are many reasons why you might want to rehabilitate a
damaged habitat. However, the biggest reason is often to
bring back biodiversity of native flora and fauna. One of our
mission goals at The Arboretum is to provide the visitor with
a glimpse of the diversity of vegetation and habitat types they
might expect to see across the Colorado Plateau, including
riparian areas. A less thought-of reason to correct the damage
done by cows and humans over the years would be to return
ecosystem functions to the site. These ecosystem functions
might include nutrient cycling rates and water transpiration,
figure 1  A photo of Willow Wash and the field of weeds prior to construction. Note the carpet of smooth brome.  
figure 2 (inset) An example of what can happen when we tamper with natural hydrology.  This photo was taken in 2003 or 2005.

www.aznps.com (TEMPORARY)  The Plant Press  ARIZONA NATIVE PLANT SOCIETY 7
both of which can be altered by changes in vegetation. It is
amazing, when you think of it, how replacing native flora
with a weed field alters the entire ecosystem, from the types of
organisms and the texture of the soil to litter decomposition
rates and the rate at which nitrogen and carbon filter through
the system. Needless to say, this was going to be a large
undertaking for the crew at The Arboretum. 
As with any major project, the first step was to come up with
a design that was functional, aesthetic, and informative. To
accomplish the functional goal the wash was going to have to
be re-channeled to alleviate the risk of flooding and to create
the desired aquatic environments. Furthermore, a permeable
embankment needed to be created to protect surface flow
hydrology. Natural Channel Design, Inc., of Flagstaff, Arizona
was contracted to assess the meadow site and prepare the
final design (figure 3).    
Any plans that include manipulation of a waterway typically
require heaps and heaps of paperwork, including grant
proposal writing, applications for permits, and environmental
assessments. This project was no different. Funding and
resources were acquired from many different sources, such as
the Arizona Water Protection Fund Commission, the Arizona
Game and Fish Department, the Natural Resources
Conservation Service, the City of Flagstaff, and several local
private landowners.   
The design and construction of Willow Wash began in 2004
and continues today. The hardscaping is finally complete and
we have moved into the planting phase, our favorite part! We
are choosing native flora that will be representative of
Arizona’s riparian habitats and that fit into the different
hydrologic zones we will be highlighting (zones 2-6) in this
exhibit (figure 4). Woody plant representatives will feature
coyote willow (Salix lasiolepus) and narrowleaf cottonwood
(Populus angustifolia), as well as many other local favorites
(Table 1). A number of sedges have also been put in place
around the depressional wetland. We will continue to fill in
our wide open spaces this year so those of you interested in
getting your hands dirty, you are cordially invited to come on
out! Project completion is estimated for 2010; however, it will
take a few years for the vegetation to really take hold. We
expect this latest addition to our gardens will also
significantly increase the bird life viewable from our grounds.
Big things are happening here in Northern Arizona and we
hope to see all of you flora AND fauna lovers this year at The
Arboretum!

Table 1: Riparian or wetland plant species (partial list)
proposed for planting in Willow Wash at The
Arboretum at Flagstaff.  
Common Name
Scientific Name
Arizona Rose
Rosa arizonica
Bigtooth Maple
Acer grandidentatum
Blue Elderberry
Sambucus cerulea
Boxelder
Acer negundo
Buttonbush
Cephalanthus occidentalis
Coyote Willow
Salix exigua 
Gambel Oak
Quercus gambelii
Golden currant
Ribes aureum
Narrowleaf Cottonwood Populus angustifolia
New Mexico Olive
Forestiera neomexicana
Quaking Aspen
Populus tremuloides
Red-ossier Dogwood
Cornus stolonifera
Siver buffaloberry
Sheperdia argentea
Smooth sumac
Rhus glabra
Westen Virgin’s Bower
Clematis ligusticifolia
figure 3  Construction of Willow Wash in 2008.  The hardscaping
phase exposed a large amount of soil, but created the necessary
features for the riparian habitats.  
figure 4 An illustration of different riparian zones.  The
Arboretum will feature zones 2-6.

8 The Plant Press  ARIZONA NATIVE PLANT SOCIETY  Spring 2009
Restoring Plant
Diversity in a
Ponderosa Pine Forest
by Judy Springer1, Daniel Laughlin1,2 and Margaret M.
Moore2
Restoring the native plant community in northern Arizona
ponderosa pine forests is a complex proposition for many
reasons, including a lack of historical information on species
composition and changes that have occurred since Euro-
American settlement of the region. Numerous studies
indicate that northern Arizona’s pine forests are overcrowded
with small trees, due in part to a suppression of natural fires.
Ecological restoration treatments in these forests seek to
retain old-growth trees, return fire to the system, and increase
diversity of native plant species and animals. A collaboration
among the USFS Coconino National Forest, Rocky Mountain
Research Station, and NAU School of Forestry professors
Wally Covington, Margaret Moore and Pete Fulé was initiated
in 1992. An experiment was established to study the effects of
ecological restoration treatments, including tree thinning and
prescribed burning, on such long-term responses as
decomposition rates, soil nutrient changes, tree physiology,
and herbaceous plant species diversity and biomass
production. 
The Fort Valley Experimental Forest (originally called the
Coconino Experiment Station), located in ponderosa pine
forest approximately 6 miles northwest of Flagstaff near the
base of the San Francisco Peaks, was established in 1908 as
the first U.S. Forest Service research station. Since its
establishment, a number of collaborations have flourished
between the Forest Service, Northern Arizona University and
the Museum of Northern Arizona. A part of that forest was
designated as the G. A. Pearson Natural Area (GPNA), in
honor of Gustaf Adolph Pearson, who was the first director of
the Experimental Station. 
For this study, fifteen plots were installed on a portion of the
GPNA in 1992, and each plot was either assigned a treatment
(tree thinning alone or thinning and prescribed burning, also
known as a “composite” treatment) or was retained as a
control. The site was intensively prepared in order to bring
conditions as close as possible to those that were present
prior to settlement of the region by European Americans in
the late 1800s (prior to fire exclusion). Mechanical thinning
treatments resulted in the removal of many trees that would,
in the past, have been naturally thinned by fire. The
composite treatment also involved removing the recent pine
needle component of the forest floor (mostly needles, cones
and other accumulated organic material on the soil surface),
and then removing the remaining organic matter, known as
duff, from the site before returning the pine needles to the
soil surface. Harvested vegetation from a nearby prairie was
then scattered across these plots to simulate a “natural”
amount of fine fuels on the ground. These plots were then
burned in 1994, 1998, and 2002. Additionally, each plot was
stratified into one of four patch types (figure 1):
Presettlement (large clumps of old-growth ponderosa pine
trees), postsettlement removed (young trees thinned),
postsettlement retained, or remnant grass (grassy openings).
Eighty-nine species have been recorded so far in the study
area. Treatments significantly altered community
composition after five years, with several native grasses and
legumes driving the changes. In particular, Astragalus rusbyi
(Rusby’s milkvetch, figure 2), a Forest Service sensitive species
1 Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff; Judith.springer@nau.edu. 2 School of Forestry,
Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff.
figure 1  Example photos of each patch type used in this study:
(a) presettlement, (b) postsettlement retained, (c) remnant grass,
and (d) postsettlement removed. Plot centers for smaller
subplots are located between black buckets.  Photos courtesy
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. (From
Laughlin and others 2006).

www.aznps.com (TEMPORARY)  The Plant Press  ARIZONA NATIVE PLANT SOCIETY 9
endemic to a small area near the San Francisco Peaks, was
found to be more frequent and abundant in the treated units
over time. Muhlenbergia montana (mountain muhly) was
negatively affected by the repeated prescribed fires, most
likely due to the late fall season burns. For the first ten years
of the study, species richness (number of species per plot) did
not differ significantly among the three treatments. However,
eleven and twelve years after initiation of the study, more
species were detected in the thinning and burning treatment
than in the thinning alone or control plots. This suggests that
natural disturbance processes, such as surface fire, are
important for maintaining biodiversity in these forests. The
increased number of species in this treatment is probably due
in part to colonization of species from the soil seed bank,
from off-site, or from adjacent remnant patches of vegetation.
Presettlement patches, characterized by clumps of large, old-
growth ponderosa pine trees and a heavy accumulation of
needle litter on the ground, showed the lowest diversity and
abundance of plants prior to and after treatments were
conducted. Where small diameter pine trees were removed,
species richness increased to levels found in remnant grass
patches. There was great year-to-year variation across
treatments and patch types, especially in years of drought. 
The results from this study site suggest that removing trees
and applying prescribed fires increases native species richness,
and also changes the composition of the plant community.
Also, detectable differences may take as long as a decade to
manifest in our semi-arid climate. 
The composition of the plant community in ponderosa pine
forests changes slowly over time. We must keep in mind that
long-term monitoring of ecological studies is critical and that
figure 2  Rusby’s milkvetch.
Several Arizona Native Plant Society members attended
the Fifth Southwest Rare Plant Conference, “Changing
Landscapes in the Southwest,” in Salt Lake City March
16-20, 2009.  It was a time for exchanging inspiring
stories of successes, and hearing glum news about some
imperiled species. From the keynote address by
Intermountain flora expert Noel Holmgren, to the
diversity of short talks and twenty posters, there was
much to learn.  
The conference was extremely well-planned and went off
without any evident hitch. In addition, the caterers
outdid themselves with delicious nutritious food at
breaks, lunches, and poster session dinner. We enjoyed
renewing friendships with colleagues from all over the
Southwest, met new botanists, and brought home lots of
fresh ideas to enhance our abilities to study and preserve
Arizona’s native plants and their habitats. We hope to
have a coordinated meeting of the four state native plant
societies in the near future to exchange ideas about how
to more effectively promote knowledge, appreciation,
conservation, and restoration of native plants in the
Southwest. 
EDUCATION AND OUTREACH
COMMITTEE REPORT
by Wendy Hodgson, Education and Outreach
Committee Chair and Barbara Phillips, President
there may be year-to-year variation that is tied to
precipitation patterns. Restoring plant species diversity and
community composition to these forests is proving to be
more difficult than restoring ecosystem structure, such as tree
density and herbaceous biomass. 

Bibliography
Laughlin, D.C.; Bakker, J. D.; Daniels, M. L; Moore, M. M.; Casey, C.
A.; Springer, J. D. 2008. Restoring plant species diversity and
community composition in a ponderosa pine bunchgrass
ecosystem. Plant Ecology. 197:139-151. 
Laughlin, D.C.; Moore, M. M.; Bakker, J. D.; Casey, C. A.; Springer, J.
D.; Fulé, P. Z.; Covington, W. W. 2006. Assessing targets for the
restoration of herbaceous vegetation in ponderosa pine forests.
Restoration Ecology. 14:548-560. 
Moore, M.M.; Casey, C. A.; Bakker, J. D.; Springer, J. D.; Fulé, P. Z.;
Covington, W. W.; Laughlin, D. C.. 2006. Herbaceous response to
restoration treatments in a ponderosa pine forest, 1992-2004.
Rangeland Ecology and Management. 59:135-144.

10 The Plant Press  ARIZONA NATIVE PLANT SOCIETY  Spring 2009
Water is of utmost importance to the Hopi people, often
honored in ceremony and symbology. As part of their
creation story goes, Hopis were given three things from
their deity Ma’sau: corn, a planting stick, and a gourd of
water. With these three things they were assured survival on
the harsh mesas where they live, as long as they took care of
the land. As a dry farming community located in the high
desert of northeastern Arizona, Hopis depend on
precipitation and water from natural springs and washes to
water their crops of beans, corn, and squashes. In many
ways and with many actions, from the spiritual to political,
Hopis remain dedicated to fostering a healthy relationship
with the water on their land.
One exciting development supporting this is the
restoration of natural springs out at Hopi. Two
in particular have received a lot of attention and
community involvement. One is the spring at
the village of Hotevilla on Third Mesa, and the
other is Wepo Spring near Second Mesa. 
The Hopi Tribe and the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) helped fund the
Hotevilla Spring restoration. It is truly a
community endeavor, with people of all ages
helping out. The spring, which had not been
well cared for as of late, was cleaned up through
a group effort. A beautiful border around the
spring was built using traditional Hopi quarried
masonry and including sculptural stone art
reflecting clan symbols. Phase two of the project
will start soon, which includes rebuilding the
staircase to the spring and strengthening the
irrigated garden area.
The Wepo Springs and Terrace Gardens are located on the
northwest side of First Mesa. There is currently a
restoration project there in conjunction with the Hopi
Natwani Coalition and the Center for Sustainable
Environments at Northern Arizona University (NAU). The
irrigation system, catchment spring,  terraced fields, and
fruit trees there are all receiving attention and care. With
this wetland restoration, more native plants are growing
than in the past. 
As the Hopi say, Paatuwaqatsi, which means Water is Life.
The spring restoration projects on their homeland are a
wonderful testament to their deeply felt philosophy.
ETHNOBOTANY: PEOPLE USING NATIVE PLANTS
Spring Restoration at Hopi 
by Jessa Fisher, Flagstaff Chapter member  nightbloomingcactus@yahoo.com
above  Hopi corn growing at the Wepo Terrace Gardens.
above  Hopis tending to the restored Wepo Terrace Gardens. 
above  The restored Wepo Spring catchment basin. 

www.aznps.com (TEMPORARY)  The Plant Press  ARIZONA NATIVE PLANT SOCIETY 11
Arizona, Utah, Colorado, and the Rocky Mountains to South
Dakota. It is a relatively small shrub that typically attains no
more than two or three feet in height. Leaves are alternate,
grayish-green, elliptical, about 1 inch in length, minutely hairy
above, and woolly beneath with prominent veins. Slender grayish
stems can produce spines that can be up to one inch in length.
Flowers are white, perfect, 5-parted, up to 3/16 inches in width,
and borne in rounded clusters (figure 1). Fendler’s ceanothus
blooms from April through October, but typically reaches its
peak flowering in mid June to July. Fruit is a capsule that turns a
reddish brown as it matures. Mature seeds are a chocolate brown
and typically about 1/10 inch in diameter. As capsules dry in late
summer and crack open, seeds are forcibly ejected. Once
dispersed, these hard-coated seeds may lie dormant in the soil
for many years. 
Ceanothus is in the Rhamnaceae (Buckthorn) family, which is
represented in Arizona by other woody plants in Frangula,
Rhamnus, and Ziziphus genera. The USDA PLANTS database
(www.plants.usda.gov) describes 65 species of Ceanothus, all of
which are North American, and most are found in the western
United States. Fendler’s ceanothus is classified in the section
Euceanothus of the Ceanothus genus. This is the more ancient of
the two recognized sections (the other being Cerastes) and
includes species such as C. velutinus, C. intergerrimus, and C.
“You can see a lot by observing” — Yogi Berra
Although forests of the semiarid Southwest are not particularly
diverse in terms the number of plant species that may be found,
there may be upwards of 50 or more different kinds of plants on
any given acre in a ponderosa pine ecosystem. Botanical
attributes of nearly all of these species have been recorded and
described in various books on the flora of the region. However,
even in these ecosystems with relatively few species, the
ecological characteristics of most plants are only vaguely
understood. In order to understand the effects species have on
biotic and abiotic features and processes, and how these
processes in turn affect species’ populations, time, money, and
effort must be invested toward careful observation and
experimentation. Over the last decade, I and others at the
Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University
have collected detailed data on the life history characteristics and
ecological relationships of Fendler’s ceanothus. The information
that has come out of this work can help us better understand this
species and the ponderosa pine forest ecosystem. 
Fendler’s ceanothus 
Fendler’s ceanothus (Ceanothus fendleri Gray) is a semi-
evergreen shrub common in ponderosa pine forests from
northern Mexico, east to western Texas, and north through
Ecology and Natural History of 
Fendler’s Ceanothus by David W. Huffman1
figure 1  
Fendler’s ceanothus
(Ceanothus fendleri
Gray) in flower.
Photo by A.J. Sánchez
Meador.
1 Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff 86011; David.Huffman@nau.edu
continued next page

12 The Plant Press  ARIZONA NATIVE PLANT SOCIETY  Spring 2009
figure 2  Sketch of the belowground structure of Fendler’s
ceanothus (main box; Huffman unpublished). Aboveground stems,
indicated with an “A” in the sketch (along with stem height in cm;
e.g., A43 =aboveground stem of 43 cm in height) arise from
belowground horizontal branches, indicated with an “R” in the
sketch (along with branch segment length in cm; e.g., R22) or
directly from root crowns.  Root crowns (upper right box) are
persistent structures that produce resprouts after disturbance and
have tap roots that anchor the plant.  Close examination of root
crown cross-sections have indicated up to 30 growth rings on an
individual sample; however, longevity of individual plants is
unknown.
figure 3  Fendler’s
ceanothus utilizes a dual
regeneration strategy in
response to disturbance.
After low severity fire,
plants resprout from buds
on root crowns and
belowground branches
(upper photograph).  More
intense fires that transfer
greater levels of heat to
soils can stimulate
dormant seeds to
germinate (lower
photograph).  Fires that
smolder in deeper forest
floor layers have potential
to kill both established
plants and dormant seeds
Photos by D.W. Huffman. 
sanguineus. Other species of Ceanothus found in Arizona
include C. greggii, C. integerrimus, and C. martinii. 
In addition to its importance in native, wild ecosystems,
Fendler’s ceanothus makes an attractive addition to home
gardens and parks. Other common names for this plant include
buckbrush, deer brier, deerbrush, and mountain lilac. 
Plant Traits 
Fendler’s ceanothus is a relatively long-lived shrub that is often
found growing as diffuse patches of aboveground stems. Patch sizes
may reach six feet in diameter, and stem density within patches
may be as high as 10 stems per square foot. Stems often appear to
grow singly or in small, attached groups, arising directly from the
soil surface. Younger stems are supple and grayish green with a felty
surface. As stems age, bases become yellowish and waxy, and bases
are woody and on the oldest stems and may be furrowed with
reddish-black coloration. Excavations have indicated that such
patches are commonly formed of stems that originate from
horizontal, belowground branches or from persistent root crowns
(figure 2). Root crowns are plant anchor points that produce deep
tap roots as well as these belowground branches and aboveground
stems. Although maximum longevity of plants is unknown,
examination of a limited number of root crown cross-sections has
indicated up to 30 or more growth rings on individual samples. 
Like other Ceanothus species, Fendler’s ceanothus forms a
symbiotic relationship with Frankia, a type of bacteria that is
capable of fixing atmospheric nitrogen (N2) into a plant-usable 
form (NH4+). Frankia infects Ceanothus roots and stimulates the
formation of root nodules within which nitrogen fixation takes
place. Fendler’s ceanothus plants can fix around 0.1 lb of N per acre
per year. This N is used for plant growth and development but
can be released into the soil when the plant dies or sheds
leaves. In this way, Fendler’s ceanothus contributes to the
nitrogen budget of the forest ecosystem. 
Regeneration
To persist in forest plant communities, Fendler’s ceanothus
employs multiple life history strategies, including long-lived
plants, resprouting from belowground buds, and seed
dormancy. In particular, this species appears well adapted to
the frequent-fire disturbance regimes that characterized the
evolutionary environment of species associated with
ponderosa pine forest ecosystems. After low-intensity fire,
Fendler’s ceanothus resprouts from belowground branches
and root crowns (see Figure 3).  These new stems are
commonly long (up to about 50 cm) and unbranched. Long
stems produced after fires allow this species to rapidly regain
pre-disturbance size and competitive stature. Fires that burn
hotter, of course, can result in plant death. However, these
more intense fires often stimulate germination of dormant
seeds residing in the soil seed bank (figure 3).  Heat from fire
allows seed coats to open, which in turn facilitates absorption
of water and oxygen and begins the germination process.
Laboratory tests with locally collected seeds showed the
highest germination rates for seeds heated to around 194° F
(90° C); cooler heat treatments produced significant less
Ecology and Natural History of
Fendler’s Ceanothus continued

www.aznps.com (TEMPORARY)  The Plant Press  ARIZONA NATIVE PLANT SOCIETY 13
germination, whereas higher heat levels tended to kill seeds.
Similarly, in field experiments that tested effects of prescribed
fire on population responses, seedling emergence was highest on
plots showing moderate amounts (about 1.5 inches) of forest
floor consumed by the fires (in this experiment, forest floor
consumption was a surrogate measure for heat transferred to
soil). Emergence was relatively low on plots that burned less
completely as well as on those that showed greater levels of forest
floor consumption. Thus, in disturbance-free periods, long-lived
stems and persistent root crowns allow Fendler’s ceanothus
plants to survive in forest understories. In the event of a
disturbance such as fire, Fendler’s ceanothus can resprout, recruit
seedlings from a dormant seed bank, or both (figure 4). In very
intense fires, (i.e., those that transfer high levels of heat to forest
soils), both adult plants and dormant seeds may be killed. 
Ecological Relationships
In many ecosystems, due to higher levels of crude protein in
leaves, stems, and other parts, nitrogen fixing plants are
important forage resources for herbivores. Ponderosa pine forests
are no exception, and Fendler’s ceanothus is keenly sought after
by animals such as mule deer, Rocky Mountain elk, porcupine,
and rabbits (figure 5). For example, in field experiments that
examined responses of Fendler’s ceanothus plants to tree
thinning associated with forest restoration treatments, 44-69% of
all new branches produced were browsed over a two-year period.
This level of herbivory resulted in potential growth reduction of
79-92%, as compared with plants that were protected by wire
cages. This research indicated that in areas where forests are
thinned, thus creating an environment attractive to large
herbivores for foraging, persistence and growth of Fendler’s
ceanothus populations may be severely constrained by browsing.
This may present a conundrum of sorts for forest managers
concerned with improving habitat for animals such as deer and
elk. To improve habitat in these cases, use of forage resources
may need to be deferred or modified. 
Intense herbivory on Fendler’s ceanothus can lead to reduced
flower and fruit production. This may be due to a number of
reasons: 1) heavily browsed plants may not have adequate
resources (e.g., carbohydrate stores) to produce flowers; 2)
incipient flower buds may be removed by browsers; and 3) plants
may produce flowers, just to have them soon eaten. In addition
to affecting potential reproduction, such intense herbivory can
have effects that propagate through the ecosystem. For example,
laboratory studies have shown that up to 70% of seeds collected
from Fendler’s ceanothus plants may be infested by a parasitic
wasp (Eurytoma squamosa).  These tiny wasps lay their eggs on
very young ceanothus seeds and, as the seeds grow, the young
wasps develop. As larvae, the wasps consume the internal seed
tissues; larvae then pupate and metamorphose into adults; the
adults then chew their way out of the seed, fly away, and start the
process all over again (see figure 5).  Interestingly, this particular
wasp has very close ties with Fendler’s ceanothus and is not
known to parasitize seeds of any other plant species in Arizona
ponderosa pine forests. Further investigations of ceanothus seed
usage have indicated that up to 24% of the seeds produced in a
year may be consumed by other seed eaters, particularly birds
figure 4  Chart showing effects of fire severity on Fendler’s ceanothus
population characteristics.  As the depth of consumed forest floor
increases, more heat is transferred to soils. At low levels of forest floor
consumption, a smaller proportion of study plots showed adult plant
mortality (solid line); these plants survived and resprouted.  Similarly,
fewer plots showed seedling emergence (dashed line) at low levels of
forest floor consumption; too little heat was transferred to soil seed
banks to stimulate germination.  At highest levels of forest floor
consumption, all adult plants are killed along with seeds in the seed
bank (from Huffman 2003).
continued page 15
figure 5  Fendler’s ceanothus is highly sought after by both vertebrate and invertebrate herbivores.  Images here show browsed
Fendler’s ceanothus stems (left), an emerging seed parasite (center), and characteristic emergence holes from seed parasites (right).
Photos by D.W. Huffman.

14 The Plant Press  ARIZONA NATIVE PLANT SOCIETY  Spring 2009
Another model to create flood conditions suitable for riparian
habitat creates a natural flooded channel by excavating side
channels of the Colorado River. The Yuma East Wetlands, funded
by the Yuma Crossing National Heritage Area and designed by
Fred Phillips Consulting and Tom Moody of Natural Channel
Design, was once a saltcedar and giant reed forest so dense it was
an impenetrable black sterile thicket. The genius of this park’s
design was to bulldoze the existing decadent vegetation and
reshape the floodplain by using stop log structures on either end
of an excavated channel to back up naturally flowing water and
raise the water elevation to simulate flooding the banks. Decant
water from the City of Yuma water treatment plant is also fed
into a permeable ditch that seeps into a wetland composed of
saltgrass and mesquite. 
The City of Yuma Parks and Recreation created The Yuma West
Wetlands on what was once an old city dump bordering the
Colorado River. The area was capped with soil and now hosts a
boat launching site, trails, tree groves, a hummingbird garden,
pond, children’s climbing gym (the largest of its kind), and
burrowing owl recovery habitat bordered by a strand of lush
thick wetland and riparian vegetation. The gazebos around the
park are always occupied by large and small groups of people.
When I first started working
along the Lower Colorado
River in 1990, the general
consensus among biologists
was the river was dying a slow
death. Dams and water delivery
systems had starved the river of
its once prolific floods that
replenished riparian habitats.
Riparian restoration projects
faced many challenges
including the lack of water in
the floodplain, salinity, lack of
plant materials, competition
from invasive plants, and, of
course, funding. Early projects
often focused on mitigating dry
sandy deposits of dredged spoil
using drip irrigation or
cottonwood and willow pole
plantings with mixed success. 
A lot of water has gone under the bridge in the past 20 years.
Riparian restoration in the Yuma area is now transforming the
river’s edge. The City of Yuma, Yuma Crossing National Heritage
Area, Bureau of Reclamation, Bureau of Land Management,
Imperial and Cibola Wildlife Refuges and the Cocopah and
Quechan Tribes and Arizona Game and Fish Department all
have ongoing restoration projects. Biologists have learned to
artificially create the floods so necessary to the viability of this
habitat. 
The farming model plants agricultural fields along the river with
riparian trees and then flood irrigates. This requires water rights,
water delivery features such as irrigation ditches and pumps, and
farming equipment. Riparian habitat covered by pure saltcedar
stands can be converted into agricultural fields and salt tolerant
crops are planted until the soils are suitable for cottonwood and
willow trees or mesquite. In 1999, Bureau of Reclamation used
this agricultural model and successfully planted 12 acres of
cottonwood and willow trees in an agricultural field at the BLM
Pratt agricultural lease. During the first years after planting,
Bureau of Reclamation regularly flood irrigated the trees to
create flood-like conditions. The dense plantings from one-
gallon pots, seeds, or limb cuttings placed diagonally on a furrow
out-competed saltcedar seedlings to form a dense canopy of trees
that attract migratory birds.
Riparian Restoration in the Yuma Area
by Karen Reichhardt1
above  Migratory birds documented by Reclamation biologists
at the Pratt agricultural lease tree nursery.
1Bureau of Land Management, Yuma, Arizona

www.aznps.com (TEMPORARY)  The Plant Press  ARIZONA NATIVE PLANT SOCIETY 15
and rodents. Finally, a study that sampled entire invertebrate assemblages
over three years on Fendler’s ceanothus showed that 65 different families
from 13 invertebrate orders were represented. In this study, browsed plants
showed dramatically reduced numbers of insect individuals, numbers of
different insect families, and complexity of the insect assemblage (i.e.,
representation of insect guilds such as herbivores, predators, scavengers,
etc.) compared with plants that had been experimentally protected from
deer and elk. These above studies, when taken together, indicate the
importance of Fendler’s ceanothus to various organisms in the ponderosa
pine ecosystem and also suggest that resources associated with this plant
species can be significantly reduced for ecosystem food webs by intensive
herbivory.    
Lessons in our own backyard 
Conservation of native biodiversity begins by taking stock of the resident
taxa in our ecosystems and, of course, developing an appreciation for their
individual characteristics. More work is needed to identify and describe
ecological characteristics of many species, particularly those of native
plants. Information concerning life history traits, responses to disturbance,
and relationships with other organisms is critically important in
developing intelligent land management approaches. Such information
calls for careful and detailed observation and experimentation. 

Bibliography
Conard, S.G., A.E. Jaramillo, K, Cromack Jr., and S. Rose (comps.) 1985. The role
of the genus Ceanothus in western forest ecosystems. USDA Forest Service
General Technical Report PNW-182.
Covington. W.W. 2003. The evolutionary and historical context. Pp. 26-47 in
Friederici, P. (ed.), Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests.
Island Press. Washington, D.C. 
Epple. A.O. 1995. A field guide to the plants of Arizona. Falcon Press Publishing
Company, Inc., Helena, MT.
Huffman, D.W. 2003. Population ecology of Fendler ceanothus: responses to
herbivory and forest restoration treatments. Ph.D. dissertation, Northern
Arizona University, Flagstaff. 
Huffman, D.W., and M.M. Moore. 2003. Ungulate herbivory on buckbrush in an
Arizona ponderosa pine forest. Journal of Range Management 56:358-363.
Huffman, D.W., and M.M. Moore. 2004. Responses of Fendler ceanothus to
overstory thinning, prescribed fire, and drought in an Arizona ponderosa pine
forest. Forest Ecology and Management 198:105-115.
Huffman, D.W. 2006. Production, losses, and germination of Ceanothus fendleri
seeds in an Arizona ponderosa pine forest. Western North American Naturalist
66:365-373.
Huffman, D.W., D.C. Laughlin, K.M. Pearson, and S. Pandey. In review. Effects of
vertebrate herbivores and shrub characteristics on arthropod assemblages in a
northern Arizona forest ecosystem. Forest Ecology and Management.
Kearney, T.H., and R.H. Peebles. 1964. Arizona flora. University of California Press,
Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA.
Vose, J.M., and A.S. White. 1987. Process of understory seedling recruitment 1 year
after prescribed fire in an Arizona ponderosa pine community. Canadian Journal
of Botany 65:2280-2290.
Ecology and Natural History of
Fendler’s Ceanothus continued from page 13
above  Bird netting within the Pratt agricultural lease
tree nursery in 2003. 
Cibola and Imperial Wildlife Refuges, Arizona Game
and Fish Department and BLM have been planting
cottonwood and willow in agricultural fields or
converted floodplain to attract migratory birds. Bureau
of Reclamation is purchasing agricultural land in the
Parker area and has developed large acreages of
southwestern willow flycatcher habitat for the Lower
Colorado River Multi-Species Conservation Plan. 
The river may never return to mighty spring floods and
vast riparian floodplains. However, biologists are no
longer discussing the demise of riparian habitat, but
looking with optimism to the potential still possible
using resources available.
Restoration projects on the Lower Colorado River will
be interesting to watch over time to see how they
compare to unrestored riparian habitat. Factors to
consider are cost, maintenance requirements, habitat
value, and social value, to name a few. In the mean
time, if you haven’t visited Yuma recently, you will be
delighted to see the changing riparian landscape. A
mighty floodplain is still at the source of some desert
river jewels.


16 The Plant Press  ARIZONA NATIVE PLANT SOCIETY  Spring 2009
Using a Diverse Seed
Mix to Establish Native
Plants on a Sonoran
Desert Burn
by Judy Springer1 and Scott Abella2
Historically, seeds of both native and non-native species were
often applied to the landscape following wildfires in an effort
to prevent erosion or to improve availability of food sources
for domestic livestock or wildlife. The contemporary trend
among managers of public lands in the West is to seed with
native species to obtain an increase in diversity and to
improve wildlife habitat. The success of any seeding project in
Arizona is dependent on a little bit of luck and on
precipitation that falls at the proper intervals to ensure
survival of seedlings. Even with good precipitation, however,
many factors can conspire to prevent seedling establishment,
including seed predation by birds or rodents, or the use of
plant stock that is not adapted to the area in which it is
applied.
Unlike many ecosystems in the West that evolved with fire,
the Sonoran Desert is not thought to have burned frequently
or on a regular basis. Like many desert ecosystems, however,
the Sonoran has been invaded by non-native annual grasses
that ignite readily and provide an almost continuous source
of fuel on the ground when a fire is started. Attempting to
restore the native plant community in these ecosystems can
be very challenging. The use of native species has been
limited by a lack of available seed and by findings that native
desert species are often difficult to establish.
Following a June 2005 human-caused wildfire in the Cave
Creek Regional Park north of Phoenix, land managers at the
park teamed up with researchers from the Ecological
Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University in
Flagstaff to monitor the success of a seeding project. The park
is in the Arizona Upland Subdivision of the Sonoran Desert
and is populated by a diverse plant community that includes
many species of cacti, including giant saguaro (Carnegiea
gigantea), various small trees such as foothill palo verde
(Parkinsonia (Cercidium) microphyllum), shrubs such as
creosote bush (Larrea tridentata), and a number of native and
non-native annual and perennial grasses and wildflowers. The
site was seeded with a combination of slurry and mulch that
included seeds of 28 commercially available species native to
the site. By assigning a monetary value to large perennial
plants (e.g., cacti, shrubs) killed on park land by the fire, an
insurance settlement provided funding for the seeding. 
A team of researchers and land managers — including John
Gunn, Spur Cross Ranch Supervisor and the lead on the
seeding project — collected data at the site five times over an
approximately three year period from fall 2005 until spring
2008 (Figures 1 and 2). Species exhibited several different
establishment patterns through time on the burn. Some
species, such as several of the seeded grasses including
tanglehead (Heteropogon contortus) and curly-mesquite
(Hilaria belangeri), had emerged by the first fall, but plants
did not exhibit long-term survival. Only one grass, purple
threeawn (Aristida purpurea), exhibited substantial
establishment by the end of the study. 
Other species (e.g., creosote bush) were rarely observed,
although it is possible that seedlings emerged and died
between monitoring dates. No seeded shrubs became well
established. The perennial Beardtongue species (Penstemon
eatonii and P. parryi) exhibited an episodic emergence
pattern, where seedlings were recorded the first spring after
seeding, subsequently disappeared, were recorded again
during the second spring, then were absent during the third
spring (Figure 3).  Another category of species, exemplified
by the perennial desert senna (Senna covesii) and the annual
desert bluebells (Phacelia crenulata), became established early
on and were recorded throughout the monitoring period. 
We consider desert senna to be the most successful species in
this study. In addition to occupying nearly 60% of plots in all
five sampling times, it exhibited the highest relative cover of
any seeded species. By two years after seeding, it had attained
figure 1  A burned and unseeded area in Cave Creek Regional Park,
November 2005. Photo courtesy of John Gunn.
1Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011; judith.springer@nau.edu. 2 Public Lands
Institute and Department of Environmental Studies, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, NV 89154; scott.abella@unlv.edu

www.aznps.com (TEMPORARY)  The Plant Press  ARIZONA NATIVE PLANT SOCIETY 17
a density of approximately 2000 plants/ha (810 plants/acre).
Several other seeded forbs exhibited establishment more
episodic than desert senna, but still successful during multiple
monitoring periods. These species include Gordon’s
bladderpod (Lesquerella gordonii), California poppy
(Eschscholzia californica), Coulter’s lupine (Lupinus
sparsiflorus), and exserted Indian paintbrush (Castilleja
exserta). 
As of the last monitoring date, composition of non-seeded
species was generally similar on the seeded and a nearby
unseeded burn area. Native annuals such as curvenut
combseed (Pectocarya recurvata) and desert Indianwheat
(Plantago ovata) occurred at high frequencies in both areas.
Although exotics were present on the seeded area, the suite of
treatments (mulching, seeding, and fertilization) did not
increase frequencies above those on the untreated
burn. Nevertheless, there is concern that abundance
of Mediterranean grass (Schismus barbatus) and red
brome (Bromus rubens) will increase, thereby
accumulating fuel, and possibly competing with
native plants. 
Although only seven (25%) of the 28 seeded species
became established in 25% or more of plots by the
end of the monitoring period, the site appeared well
vegetated and contained flowering individuals. This
aesthetic component, and the avoidance of barren
land that may encourage illegal dumping or other
abuses, is a positive outcome of this seeding project
for park management. Two years after seeding,
seeded species comprised 54% of the species per
plot, on average, and 29% of species per plot after
three years. Long-term success of the seeding
depends on the ability of seeded species to persist
above ground or in the soil seed bank, or to facilitate the
establishment of other native species. 
Seeding has often been largely discouraged as an option for
revegetation of native species in North American warm
deserts, but this area of research begs further study. Our data
suggest that seeding native species may have potential as a
revegetation tool in these deserts. Our viewpoint is that in
evaluating seeding as an option, we need a better
understanding of which species are amenable to seeding
given current technology, which treatments can promote
success, and under which environmental site conditions
particular combinations of seeding components can be
effective. Full results of this research are expected to be
published in an upcoming issue of The Native Plants Journal.

figure 2  Researchers collect data in seeded plots, March 2008. Photo courtesy of Mark Daniels.
figure 3  Penstemon parryi, a native species in the seed mix,
shows off its colors in March 2008. Photo courtesy of Mark
Daniels.

You can purchase AZNPS t-shirts, booklets and posters from
our local chapters or by mail order. In addition, you can find
posters at the Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum, Audubon
Society, Boyce Thompson Arboretum, Desert Botanical
Garden, Organ Pipe National Monument, Saguaro Park (East
and West), The Arboretum at Flagstaff and Tohono Chul Park.
Questions? Sending an international order? Please contact
Nancy Zierenberg at nzberg4@cox.net
AZNPS Bumpersticker 
$1 each (price includes postage)  
AZNPS Logo Decal 
No glue! This is static stick so it can be easily moved. Display it
proudly on your window. Two for $1 (price includes postage)
18 The Plant Press  ARIZONA NATIVE PLANT SOCIETY  Spring 2009
Gifts for your favorite
Native Plant Enthusiast!
AZNPS Posters
Wildflowers of Northern Arizona
Sonoran Desert Wildflowers
Members:  $10 /  Non-members:  $12
Shipping/handling: $2.50 plus $0.50 for each
additional poster mailed to the same US address. 
Laminated: $20 (postage included)  
Wholesale pricing:
Shipping/handling are an additional charge and
depend upon the size of order. Please contact 
Nancy Zierenberg for specifics on shipping costs. 
10-49 posters  $6 each / 50+  $5 each
AZNPS Booklets
Desert Butterfly Gardening
Desert Bird Gardening
Desert Grasses  
Desert Shrubs
Desert Wildflowers 
Sonoran Desert Trees
(new edition)
Price per booklet ordered 
includes postage for US 
addresses only:
1-9   
$3.50 each
(any combination of titles)
10-49 $2.75 each (any combination of titles)
50+
$2.10 each (any combination of titles)

Who’s Who at AZNPS
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
PLUS FOUR NEW ONES
Greta Anderson, Director,
Conservation Chair
anderson_greta@yahoo.com
Mark Bierner, Vice President
bierner@ag.arizona.edu
Suzanne Cash, Director, Secretary
roxiep@msn.com
C. Douglas Green, Director, Phoenix
Chapter President
azbotman@yahoo.com
Wendy Hodgson, Director, Education
& Outreach Committee Chair
whodgson@dbg.org
Kendall Kroesen, Director
kkroesen@tucsonaudubon.org
Barbara G. Phillips, Director, President,
Editorial Committee Chair
bgphillips@fs.fed.us
Karen Reichhardt, Director, Yuma
Chapter President
ayekarina52@yahoo.com
Ana Lilia Reina-Guerrero, Director
analilia.reina@yahoo.com
Douglas Ripley, Director, Tucson
Chapter President  ripley@powerc.net
Andrew Salywon, Director
asalywon@dbg.org
Arlene Stigen, Director, Treasurer,
Finance Committee Chair
stigenbookkeeping@yahoo.com
Carl Tomoff, Director, Prescott Chapter
President   tomoff@northlink.com
Tom Van Devender, Director
yecora4@comcast.net
AZNPS COLLABORATORS
Marilyn Hanson, Website Editor
mfhanson@comcast.net
Julie St. John, The Plant Press Layout
Editor  julieDesign@cox.net
Nancy Zierenberg, Outreach &
Administrative Assistant
nzberg4@cox.net 
For order forms, please go 
to the AZNPS website at
www.aznps.com/merchandise
or just send your order with
payment (including your name,
address, phone and email) to:
Arizona Native Plant Society 
PO Box 41206, Tucson AZ 85717
Thank you for
your order!
Upcoming Issue 
The Value and Future 
of Floristics 
Contact The Plant Press Technical
Editor, Barbara Phillips, at
bgphillips@fs.fed.us for more
information on contributing articles,
illustrations, photos, or book reviews
on this topic… as well as themes you’d
like to see us cover in future issues. 
The Plant Press is a benefit of
membership in the Arizona Native
Plant Society. Suggestions are welcome
for book reviews, and articles on plant
use, conservation, habitats, and
invasive species
www.aznps.com (TEMPORARY)  The Plant Press  ARIZONA NATIVE PLANT SOCIETY 19
AZNPS T-shirts
It's especially important for AZNPS
members to have a good showing of
Datura tshirts at events where we are
volunteering — like weed pulls! Please
consider purchasing and wearing our
Society shirt. They are also great gift items!
Sacred Datura on Gildan pre-shrunk
Ultra 100% cotton. 
Specify Dark purple or Khaki
Specify S  M  L  or  XL  
Members:  $16  /  Non-members:  $18
Shipping/handling: 
$3 plus $1 for each additional t-shirt 
mailed to the same US address. 
Would you like to take a more active role in protecting Arizona’s native
plants? There are open Board positions — please contact any of the above board
members for more information on how you can get involved. You can also
contact your local chapter (see back cover) for local volunteer opportunities.

New Members
Welcome!
People interested in native plants are
encouraged to become members. People
may join chapters in either Phoenix,
Flagstaff, Prescott, Tucson, Yuma, or may
choose not to be active at a chapter level
and simply support the statewide
organization. For more information,
please write to AZNPS at the address
below, visit the AZNPS website at
www.aznps.com (temporary), or
contact one of the people below.
Phoenix Chapter: 
C. Douglas Green  480.998.5638
Flagstaff Chapter: 
Jessa Fisher  928.814.2644
Prescott Chapter: 
Carl Tomoff  928.778.2626
Tucson Chapter: 
Doug Ripley  520.212.6077
Yuma Chapter: 
Karen Reichhardt  928.317.3245
Membership Form
Name:
_______________________________________________________________
Address:
_______________________________________________________________
City/State/Zip:
_______________________________________________________________
Phone/Email:
_______________________________________________________________
Chapter preferred:
J State only   J Flagstaff   J Phoenix   
J Prescott   J Tucson   J Yuma
Enclosed:
J $15 Senior (65+)
J $75 Sponsor
J $15 Student
J $100 Plant Lover
J $25 Family/Individual
J $500 Patron
J $40 Organization
J $1,000 Lifetime
J $60 Commercial
Mail to: 
Arizona Native Plant Society
PO Box 41206, Tucson AZ 85717
Arizona Native Plant Society
PO Box 41206
Tucson AZ 85717
Nonprofit Org
US Postage
PAID
Tucson, AZ
Permit #690
Address Service Requested
