June 2009  Ecological Restoration  27:2    •  169
Ecological Restoration  Vol. 27, No. 2, 2009
ISSN 1522-4740  E-ISSN 1543-4079
©2009 by the Board of Regents of the 
University of Wisconsin System.
Review
Socioeconomic Barriers and the Role 
of Biomass Utilization in Southwestern 
Ponderosa Pine Restoration
Evan Hjerpe, Jesse Abrams and Dennis R. Becker
Abstract
There is general consensus that ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine systems is necessary and there 
exists ample ecological science suggesting that it is physically attainable. However, the pace of restoration has been 
noticeably slow and is far from approaching the landscape level. We conducted a review of published journal articles, 
book chapters, and proceedings on the restoration of ponderosa pine forests in the Southwest in order to identify and 
examine the primary socioeconomic barriers that are impeding the progress of ecological restoration in the region. 
The role of small-diameter wood utilization in the southwestern United States is highlighted as an example of broader, 
divergent socioeconomic contexts needing reconciliation if restoration is to expand to the ecosystem scale. A synthesis 
of opportunities for overcoming barriers and furthering the progress of forest restoration is provided.
Keywords: biomass, ecological restoration, ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa), restoration economics, small-diameter wood 
utilization
I
n the Southwest, multiple scales 
of restoration planning are being 
advanced and implemented by agency 
and university researchers (Friederici 
2003, GFHC 2007) and community-
based organizations (Friederici 2003, 
Lenart 2006), supported through a 
variety of federally appropriated pro-
grams (Moote 2003). While these 
efforts have had access to voluminous 
amounts of scientific information on 
historic conditions, treatment effects, 
fire behavior, and other relevant topics, 
the pace of implementation has often 
been alarmingly slow. For example, 
after ten years the Greater Flagstaff 
Forests Partnership has accomplished 
only one-third of the restoration 
acreage target it set out in 1996. The 
Blue Ridge Demonstration Project in 
eastern Arizona treated only a frac-
tion of the acres proposed for restora-
tion (Lenart 2006), and restoration 
projects in parts of New Mexico have 
been scaled back or canceled alto-
gether (Moote 2003, Burns 2003).
Across the Southwest, and in other 
parts of the nation as well, restora-
tion practitioners are experiencing the 
effects of economic and social chal-
lenges that are complicating science-
based restoration efforts. The physical 
possibilities of restoring these eco-
systems are clear, but it has become 
increasingly apparent that science is a 
necessary, but insufficient, component 
of restoration implementation. While 
attention to the economic feasibil-
ity and social acceptability legs of the 
proverbial three-legged stool is neces-
sary, there is also a pressing need to 
reconcile the historic and contempo-
rary contexts within which restoration 
practices occur. This includes broader 
implications of public perspectives 
on the relationship between humans 
and nature. The ability to economi-
cally prosper while enhancing the 
environment contrasts starkly with 
classical views of economic activity, 
particularly commodity-based forest 
extraction. This dichotomy is prob-
lematic for integrating economic feasi-
bility with restoration and is arguably 
at the root of much of the current 
social conflict over forest manage-
ment. The impediments to project 
implementation stemming from this 
contrast are highly evident in the res-
toration of southwestern ponderosa 
pine (Pinus ponderosa) and, in particu-
lar, the utilization of forest biomass 
and small-diameter wood removed via 
restorative treatments.
We pursued a literature review on 
southwestern ponderosa pine restora-
tion in order to examine socioeco-
nomic barriers hindering the progress 
of restoration, illustrate the manage-
ment implications of these barriers, 
and highlight ways in which forest 
restoration can be achieved in the 
Southwest and other regions of the 
United States given these obstacles. 
We focus on the issue of biomass and 
small-diameter wood utilization, as 
it exemplifies the often contentious 
and seemingly unpredictable socioeco-
nomic context present in southwestern 

170  •   
June 2009  Ecological Restoration  27:2
forest restoration. If ecological res-
toration is to expand to a meaning-
ful landscape level, greater attention 
will be needed on the economic and 
social factors that influence progress 
and provide motivation to see projects 
through.
Southwestern Ponderosa 
Pine Restoration
Following more than a century of 
intensive logging, grazing, and fire 
suppression, southwestern ponderosa 
pine forests are now well outside of 
their natural range of variability and 
are consequently subject to disease, 
insect epidemics, and uncharacteris-
tically intense and destructive wild-
fires (Covington and Moore 1994). 
Approximately 1.3 million hectares 
of ponderosa forests in Arizona and 
New Mexico are classified as Fire 
Regime Condition Class 3, which 
is to say that there is a departure of 
multiple fire-return intervals from the 
historic range, and forests are at high 
risk of losing key ecosystem compo-
nents. Another 2.3 million hectares 
of ponderosa pine are classified as Fire 
Regime Condition Class 2, signify-
ing a departure of at least one fire-
return interval from the historic range 
(Schmidt et al. 2002). Historic condi-
tions were characterized by tree densi-
ties ranging from 50 to 150 mature 
trees per hectare, a diverse understory 
of grasses and forbs, numerous open-
ings or lightly forested areas, and 
frequent low-intensity fires (Cooper 
1960, Covington et al. 1997, Moore 
et al. 1999). Current conditions are 
regularly characterized by tree densi-
ties approaching 2,500 or more trees 
per hectare, diminished understory 
productivity and species diversity, few 
forest openings, and infrequent but 
high-severity fires (Covington and 
Moore 1994, Moore et al. 1999, Allen 
et al. 2002).
In response to the imperiled state of 
southwestern forests, scientists, practi-
tioners, and community groups have 
advocated for some level of human 
intervention, whether in the form 
of structural manipulation through 
mechanical treatments or the reintro-
duction of natural or prescribed fire to 
achieve restoration objectives (Allen 
et al. 2002, Schumann 2004, Lenart 
2006). For the purpose of this analy-
sis, we consider actions intended to 
reduce tree density or hazardous fuel 
loads through mechanical treatments 
and the application of fire to be acts 
of forest restoration in the Southwest, 
recognizing that these actions are often 
initial, necessary steps toward broader 
ecological restoration.
Socioeconomic Barriers 
to Ponderosa Pine 
Restoration
In order to identify the salient socio-
economic barriers to forest restora-
tion, we conducted a review of journal 
articles, book chapters, and published 
conference proceedings that primarily 
focused on the restoration of pon-
derosa pine forests in the Southwest. 
We then narrowed our review to writ-
ings focused on economic or social 
issues in ponderosa pine restoration or 
that included a significant discussion 
of economic or social issues, thereby 
eliminating numerous studies focused 
on strictly ecological aspects. Through 
this filtering, we compiled 21 case 
studies, summarized in Table 1. As 
restoration efforts in the Southwest are 
relatively recent, all literature reviewed 
came from the last decade.
Our review identified three primary 
barriers: 1) insufficient funding for 
ponderosa pine restoration; 2) social 
conflict over restoration meanings and 
values; and 3) a lack of accounting for 
the nonmarket benefits of ponderosa 
pine restoration. Within the first two 
categories, three specific obstacles were 
consistently identified: a) the lack of 
an appropriately-scaled, wood prod-
ucts infrastructure; b) an inconsistent 
supply of wood; and c) a distrust of 
commercial enterprises leading to 
harvest restrictions. Other less fre-
quently identified barriers included 
poor policy design, human health and 
aesthetic objections, and insufficient 
public outreach.
Eager South, Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest, in eastern Arizona. The development of small-
diameter wood markets and processing infrastructure is needed to help restoration efforts in 
southwestern ponderosa pine expand to the landscape level. Photo courtesy of the Ecological 
Restoration Institute

June 2009  Ecological Restoration  27:2    •  171
Lack of Funding for Ponderosa 
Pine Restoration
Insufficient funding was the most 
prevalently cited socioeconomic bar-
rier to southwestern forest restoration 
progress (e.g., Larson and Mirth 1998, 
Lynch 2001, Daugherty and Snider 
2003). Owing to the abundant public 
acreage in a degraded state, restoring 
southwestern forests is an expensive 
venture. The cost of mechanical thin-
ning throughout the Southwest ranges 
from $750 to $1,750 per hectare 
(Larson and Mirth 2004, Lenart 2006, 
Hjerpe and Kim 2008) depending on 
site-specific tree densities and access.
Prescribed burning costs in the 
Southwest range from $250 to $500 
per hectare (Larson and Mirth 2004, 
Hjerpe and Kim 2008), while admin-
istration costs for thinning and burn-
ing have been estimated at $250–$375 
per hectare (Larson and Mirth 2004, 
Hjerpe and Kim 2008). Comprehen-
sive restoration of ponderosa pine 
ecosystems also includes a number of 
other activities such as road decon-
struction and riparian realignment, 
but the costs for these enhancements 
are highly variable and not consis-
tently tracked. Combining thinning, 
burning, and administrative costs 
yields an average of $2,000 per hectare 
to achieve a basic level of restoration. 
This cost can be considered a mini-
mum, as it does not account for addi-
tional ecosystem enhancements that 
are often included in southwestern 
forest restoration.
Extrapolating the per-hectare cost 
to the 3.6 million hectares determined 
by Schmidt and others (2002) to be 
out of the natural range of fire-return 
intervals produces an overall price tag 
of $7.2 billion. Costs for any future 
maintenance needs are not accounted 
for in this price estimate. Restoring 
only the ponderosa forests deemed 
to have missed multiple fire-return 
intervals (Condition Class III) would 
cost approximately $2.6 billion (1.3 
million hectares at $2,000 per hect-
are); this assumes that restoration 
treatments could be conducted on 
steep, sometimes inaccessible terrain. 
Both of these sums dwarf previous 
levels of federal funding for forest 
restoration. In addition, much of the 
existing funding is directed toward 
keeping communities and structures 
safe from the threat of fire. Even with 
a narrow focus of treating forests 
only in the wildland-urban interface, 
federal funding remains inadequate 
(Prestemon et al. 2008). Combining 
community protection with myriad 
other federal fiscal responsibilities such 
as national defense, education, infra-
structure, and disaster relief efforts 
leaves little for preventive treatments 
such as ecological restoration. While 
a rational argument can be made for 
federal investments of billions of dol-
lars directed toward ponderosa resto-
ration in the Southwest (Snider et al. 
2006), the national trend in recent 
years has been declining funding for 
public land management in general 
and for restoration specifically. Fur-
thermore, because benefits accrue to 
the general public and are hard to 
quantify, it is difficult to determine 
how restoration should be paid for, 
the distribution of benefits, and which 
areas should be restored first (Holl and 
Howarth 2000).
Conflict Stemming from 
Divergent Meanings and Values
Conflict over mechanical harvesting 
and prescribed burning is common 
in the Southwest. The region’s com-
plex cultural history and its transition 
from a resource-extractive economy 
to an amenity-driven economy, along 
with its significant percentage of 
public lands and a history of esca-
lating wildfires, have contributed to 
social discord regarding restoration 
activities. While most scientists and 
restoration practitioners agree on the 
basic tenets of southwestern ponder-
osa pine restoration, such as the fact 
that current forest conditions include 
too many trees (particularly in the 
smaller diameter classes) and that the 
dominant structure leaves forests sus-
ceptible to uncharacteristic fire behav-
ior and insect epidemics (Covington 
and Moore 1994, Allen et al. 2002, 
Schumann 2004), agreement on spe-
cific restoration prescriptions and 
techniques has been elusive. By its very 
nature, ecological restoration touches 
on fundamental questions about the 
relationships between people and the 
natural environment, and is therefore 
fertile ground for conflict. Social dis-
cord has been a common ingredient 
in planned restoration projects across 
the Southwest (e.g., Friederici 2003, 
Moote 2003, Lenart 2006) and is 
often manifested in the form of legal 
challenges (appeals and litigation), 
Table 1. Most frequently cited socioeconomic barriers to southwestern 
ponderosa pine restoration from a review of 21 case studies. In addition to 
the example references, the review included: Allen et al. 2002, Marzluff and 
Bradley 2003, Friederici 2005, Lenart 2006, Ostergren et al. 2006, Sisk et al. 
2006, Hjerpe and Kim 2008, and Lowell et al. 2008. 
Restoration barrier
Times 
referenced
Example references
Lack of funding
18
Daugherty and Snider 2003, Lynch 
2001
-Lack of small diameter 
utilization infrastructure
14
Larson and Mirth 2004, Fight et al. 
2004
-Inconsistent supply of 
wood
9
Larson and Mirth 1998, Lynch et al. 
2000
Conflict over restoration 
meanings and values
14
Friederici 2003, Moote 2003, 
Ostergren et al. 2008
-Harvesting restrictions 
and market distrust
8
Abella et al. 2006, Larson and Mirth 
2001
Lack of accounting for 
nonmarket benefits
7
Daugherty and Snider 2003, Romme 
et al. 2003, Snider et al. 2006

172  •   
June 2009  Ecological Restoration  27:2
attempts to sway members of the 
public or elected officials, and in some 
cases, direct physical confrontation 
(Burns 2003).
One of the most persistent and 
seemingly intractable debates in eco-
logical restoration concerns what 
exactly is meant by the term “resto-
ration.” Academics and practitioners 
have defined it in a variety of ways 
( Jackson et al. 1995, Higgs 1997, 
Noss et al. 2006), and regional sci-
entists have specifically defined res-
toration for southwestern ponderosa 
pine (Moore et al. 1999, Allen et al. 
2002). Even when focused on just 
ponderosa pine systems, “restoration” 
can be used to describe a variety of 
management actions, from tree thin-
ning for purposes of wildfire protec-
tion to attempts to re-create presettle-
ment forest structure, or the removal 
of roads and cattle and reintroduction 
of large predators (Moore et al. 1999, 
Allen et al. 2002). Public understand-
ings of forest restoration are further 
complicated by widespread concep-
tions of both fire and tree removal as 
powerful symbols of environmental 
degradation (Shindler 2007). In a 
series of interviews with southwestern 
forest stakeholders, Abrams (2005) 
found that a lack of clarity on the defi-
nition of restoration was perceived as a 
major impediment to moving forward 
with management activity.
In the Southwest, value conflicts 
commonly arise over the definition 
of ecological restoration, but also 
over the removal of large trees and 
the economic benefit derived from 
restoration byproducts. For example, 
during deliberations over planned res-
toration demonstrations in northern 
Arizona, at least three distinct resto-
ration approaches were advocated by 
different interests: university scien-
tists wanted to implement treatments 
based on the principle of ecological 
fidelity to historic (pre-Euroamerican 
settlement) conditions; environmental 
interest groups were concerned about 
the subsequent commercial incen-
tives derived from these restoration 
treatments and thus advocated for 
removing only the smallest low-value 
trees; and finally, some community 
officials wanted to focus primarily on 
hazardous fuels reduction with little 
consideration for ecological restoration  
criteria (Friederici 2003).
Lack of Accounting for 
Nonmarket Benefits of 
Restoration
Restoration of southwestern forests 
produces numerous ecological and 
social benefits that are often not 
accounted for or fully recognized. The 
effort to offset the high costs of pon-
derosa pine restoration has been aimed 
at utilizing thinned small-diameter 
wood and biomass. The sale of these 
products offers one type of economic 
benefit. Other economic benefits such 
as air, soil, and water quality improve-
ments, along with the provision of 
recreational opportunities, are non-
market in nature. A range of pos-
sible economic benefits derived from 
related restoration activities includes 
regional employment- and income-
multiplier effects, direct- and indirect-
use values, avoided costs, ecosystem 
service enhancements, and option and 
bequest values (Box 1). When fully 
incorporated into a comprehensive 
land-management accounting system, 
these values can provide avenues for 
recouping treatment costs and recog-
nition for the full suite of economic 
benefits associated with ponderosa 
pine restoration projects.
Some economic benefits, like the 
sale of thinned ponderosa pine mate-
rial, provide revenue to landowners 
and businesses that may sustain further 
investment in restoration activities. 
Regional benefits can be generated in 
the form of output, employment, and 
income, which in turn may stimulate 
investment in the skills, infrastructure, 
and equipment necessary to process 
byproducts of restoration or to carry 
out restoration activities. Restoration 
employment and income benefits also 
accrue to secondary businesses sup-
porting employees’ basic living needs, 
providing a multiplier effect in terms 
of benefits generated (Hjerpe and Kim 
2008).
Direct-use values can be traded in 
the market, as in the case of byproduct 
utilization such as thinned biomass 
and small-diameter logs. Other direct-
use values might include game and 
fish habitat improvements resulting in 
more hunting and fishing permits sold, 
increases in plant collection permits, 
and increased recreational revenues 
from enhanced ecological services 
in high-amenity locations. Groups 
dependent upon habitat for recre-
ational fishing or hunting may also 
be willing to fund forest restoration 
projects, as occurred recently when the 
Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation con-
tributed funds to the implementation 
of the White Mountain Stewardship 
Contract in eastern Arizona.
Indirect use values are values that 
typically accrue near or adjacent 
to the site being restored, such as 
an enhanced fishery resulting from 
restoration of freshwater spawning 
grounds. In the context of south-
western ponderosa pine restoration, 
Kim and Wells (2005) used a simple 
hedonic price model to illustrate a 
significant increase in property values 
for homes located close to forests 
that received restorative treatments. 
Ponderosa pine restoration can also 
be used as a preventive measure for 
reducing the damage and intensity of 
catastrophic crown fires. Recent con-
flagrations throughout the West are 
larger and burn at a greater intensity 
than wildfires of the past (Schoen-
nagel et al. 2004). In the highest risk 
forests, restoration can avert fatalities, 
structural losses, timber losses, reha-
bilitation costs, and enhance future 
existence values. Combining averted 
costs with other economic benefits 
has been estimated to produce some 
$3,500 per hectare in net benefits 
(Mason et al. 2006). Avoided costs 
can be substantial and, if reasonably 
estimated, can offset restoration costs 
via revenue transfer mechanisms.

June 2009  Ecological Restoration  27:2    •  173
Box 1. The economic benefits of ecological restoration arranged from market 
values to nonmarket values.
Economic Benefits of Ecological Restoration
Market Values
-Regional output, employment, and income multiplier effects
-Direct use values (utilization of biomass removed, increased game and fish permits, plant 
collection permits, and recreational revenues)
-Indirect use values (increased property values, increased tax revenues)
-Disaster avoidance costs (catastrophic wildfires, flooding, mudslides)
-Ecosystem service enhancements (water, soil, and air quality improvements that prevent 
future sanitation costs, carbon storage, pollination, etc.)
-Option and bequest values (unknown future economic benefits)
Nonmarket Values
 
Water, soil, and air quality improve-
ments, the reestablishment of biolog-
ical diversity, and increased carbon 
storage capacities are all ecosystem ser-
vice enhancements that may provide 
further economic benefit. By restor-
ing the ecological integrity of forests 
in the Catskill Mountain watershed, 
for example, New York City averted 
an $8 billion cost for new sanitation 
facilities and saved an estimated $6 
billion (Chichilnisky and Heal 1998). 
Option and bequest values, or the full 
range of resource opportunities pro-
vided by healthy ecosystems to future 
generations, provide additional ben-
efits. Passing on healthy ecosystems to 
future generations will preserve many 
economic possibilities that may be 
linked to forthcoming technological 
advancements, medical discoveries, 
and new energy sources.
Biomass and Small-
Diameter Wood Utilization
Biomass and small-diameter wood uti-
lization offers one way in which the 
costs of forest restoration activities in 
the Southwest may be reduced. The 
social complexity of small-diameter 
stand management rivals that of the 
associated technical and ecological 
issues (Findley et al. 2001), but the 
result of byproduct utilization may 
prove beneficial in terms of bringing 
together traditional adversaries, merg-
ing competing perspectives of land 
uses, and helping to fund restoration 
activities including the monitoring of 
treatment effects.
While efforts have been focused on 
increasing awareness and garnering 
greater federal appropriations, most 
southwestern community organiza-
tions and regional forest-health strate-
gies have placed increasing emphasis 
on utilizing restoration byproducts in 
hopes of ameliorating the high finan-
cial burden (Friederici 2003, Lenart 
2006, GFHC 2007). Revenues gen-
erated from the sale of restoration 
byproducts can reduce dependency 
on federal coffers for financing south-
western forest restoration. Unlike 
traditional forest products–based 
extraction, the forest products econ-
omy emerging in the Southwest is 
focused on the utilization of biomass 
and small-diameter wood from resto-
ration treatments, with recognition 
that restoration—not utilization—is 
the driving force (Lynch et al. 2000, 
Daugherty and Snider 2003). Ecolo-
gists and many environmental advo-
cates in the region second the need for 
byproduct utilization to fund restora-
tion (e.g., Allen et al. 2002, Romme 
et al. 2003). The challenge is that the 
economic and social infrastructure of 
the region is not adequately aligned 
with the capacity to harvest, pro-
cess, market, and sell small-diameter  
ponderosa pine.
Lack of Appropriately Scaled 
Infrastructure
The most widely referenced barrier 
to funding ponderosa pine restora-
tion is the lack of infrastructure for 
logging, manufacturing, and market-
ing (Table 1). Much of the traditional 
infrastructure has been dismantled 
following federal land management 
changes over the past 20 years (Fight 
et al. 2004). Furthermore, remnant 
harvesting, hauling, and processing 

174  •   
June 2009  Ecological Restoration  27:2
technologies are mostly ill-suited to 
the task of adding value to the type 
of material removed from restoration 
treatments. Much of the existing infra-
structure will need to be retooled in 
order to efficiently remove and utilize 
the variety of small-diameter trees and 
biomass from brush and harvest resi-
dues common in southwestern forest 
restoration scenarios.
Trees to be removed under a resto-
ration approach are primarily small 
diameter, placing wood-products 
businesses at a disadvantage due to 
increased costs of handling logs and 
substandard physical characteristics. 
This disadvantage is increased by the 
availability of cheaper, larger-diameter 
wood from other parts of the United 
States, Canada, South America, 
and New Zealand. Larger-diameter 
ponderosa pine is better suited for 
structural building applications (Her-
nandez et al. 2005) and is generally 
cheaper to harvest and process (Fight 
and Barbour 2005). Despite these 
economic disadvantages, however, 
biomass and small-diameter wood 
represent usable resources that offer 
entrepreneurial opportunities. Market 
development is occurring in areas of 
roundwood construction, landscap-
ing applications, densified fuels for 
heating, biochemical extraction, elec-
tricity generation, and engineered 
lumber and panels (Spelter et al. 1996,  
Friederici 2003, Lenart 2006).
Inconsistent Supply of Wood
Another funding barrier is inconsis-
tent supply. Supply transfers and con-
tractual requirements are more rigor-
ous for prospective wood processors in 
national forests than in private forests, 
leading to inconsistent and unpredict-
able supply, and complicating finan-
cial planning (Lynch et al. 2000, 
Mater Engineering 2004). Erratic 
and unpredictable supply of public 
timber is caused by delays in National 
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) 
analysis, archaeological site consider-
ations, litigation, seasonal restrictions, 
staff limitations, and budget appro-
priations. Without consistent supply 
upon which to develop viable busi-
ness plans, even with the abundance 
of material proposed to be removed, 
estimated at 283 million cubic meters 
of material 13–41 cm dbh for 0.9 
million hectares of at-risk ponderosa 
in the Southwest (Larson and Mirth 
1998), businesses are unable to predict 
payments for contracts to repay invest-
ment loans. Multiyear stewardship 
contracts, where the sale of material 
is used to offset treatment costs and 
where wood supply is somewhat more 
predictable, have shown promise as a 
tool to attract industry investment.
Social Conflicts
Much of the debate in the Southwest 
concerning ponderosa pine restoration 
is the result of conflicting perspec-
tives on the role of wood utilization in 
the context of forest restoration and, 
in particular, the role of commercial 
enterprises profiting from restoration 
efforts and the removal of large trees 
(Table 1). The removal of large trees 
is indicative of the debate over defi-
nitions of restoration, and there are 
several reasons for this. The recent 
flurry of restoration activity on public 
lands follows decades of national and 
local campaigning by wildlife, con-
servation, and environmental organi-
zations to reduce or eliminate com-
mercial timber harvesting on public 
lands (Clary 1986, Durbin 1996, Nie 
2003). At the same time, much of the 
recent population boom in the region 
consists of exurbanites for whom natu-
ral amenities are a major attraction 
(Marzluff and Bradley 2003). The 
idea of cutting down trees, particularly 
large trees, in the name of restoration 
can be anathema to those who moved 
to be “closer to nature.” Yet, for the 
most part, the contemporary debate 
is not whether to thin but rather what 
trees to thin and where (Allen et al. 
2002).
Distrust of commercial enterprises 
and profit motivations has, in many 
places in the Southwest, led to a 
restriction on the size of trees that can 
be harvested, often referred to as diam-
eter caps. A diameter cap provision is 
often added to projects at the insis-
tence of environmental groups, based 
on their fear that forest restoration 
could simply be a ruse for commercial 
logging and on a belief that larger trees 
are needed to replace presettlement 
trees lost through previous timber 
harvesting activities. Some scientists 
and restoration practitioners support 
the diameter cap concept in south-
western forest restoration (Allen et al. 
2002), while others find that it has 
the potential to prevent the achieve-
ment of restoration objectives by 
leaving too many trees and failing to 
re-create historic openings (Abella et 
al. 2006). Collaborative partnerships 
and multiparty monitoring efforts that 
work to provide the social license for 
experimentation and adaptive man-
agement may offer opportunities to 
move beyond diameter cap conflicts 
(Lenart 2006).
Conflicts over diameter caps are 
inextricably linked to issues of trust 
and judgment regarding the appro-
priateness of different forms of 
human intervention in natural sys-
tems, including the appropriateness of 
blending economic motives with res-
toration principles in order to pay for 
the necessary treatments. The diameter 
cap issue not only has implications for 
social conflict, it also has ramifications 
for restoration economics through its 
effects on the type of wood byproducts 
that are produced during restoration 
activities.
Next Steps
Our literature review reveals the pri-
mary socioeconomic barriers to the 
restoration of fire-adapted, southwest-
ern ponderosa pine forests. We have 
examined the relationship between 
these barriers and the role of biomass 
and small-diameter wood utilization. 
We offer the following four opportuni-
ties, synthesized from the case studies, 
for overcoming barriers to large-scale 
restoration in southwestern ponderosa 
pine forests. These steps may prove 
applicable to restoration in other parts 
of the country.

June 2009  Ecological Restoration  27:2    •  175
First, restoring ponderosa pine for-
ests to a level where fire can be safely 
reintroduced requires the reduction of 
large quantities of biomass, providing 
a usable resource for traditional wood 
products, bioenergy, biofuels, compos-
ites, and nontraditional manufactured 
products. If much of the excess mate-
rial can be utilized, product sales can 
pay for a large portion of ponderosa 
pine restoration costs. The selected 
case studies suggest that efforts are 
needed to help develop appropriate 
markets. These efforts must consider 
the predictability or consistency of res-
toration byproducts in order to amor-
tize investment costs and align the 
necessary human and physical capital 
with local restoration needs.
Secondly, giving greater recogni-
tion to nonmarket benefits of resto-
ration can augment the justification 
and rationale for restoration and dis-
tinguish approaches that provide the 
greatest return on investment. The 
reviewed case studies suggest that 
attention to nonmarket benefits may 
identify avenues for further funding 
and for increasing social acceptabil-
ity. Actions include the quantification 
of nonmarket benefits, gaining com-
pensation from indirect use benefi-
ciaries, averting future costs through 
preventive measures, estimating sav-
ings yielded from ecosystem service 
enhancements, and accounting for 
option and bequest values. Ponderosa 
pine restoration provides benefits to 
the general public by way of enhanced 
ecosystem functions, indirect use 
values, avoided cleanup costs from 
catastrophic wildfires, and resources 
for future economic possibilities. Cap-
turing the value of ecosystem service 
enhancements may offer the great-
est potential for funding restoration 
projects.
Thirdly, ponderosa pine restoration, 
unlike traditional commodity-based 
forest management, offers a unique 
opportunity to meet divergent inter-
ests simultaneously: restoration of 
degraded landscapes, community 
development through byproduct 
utilization, and long-term aesthetic 
enhancement. Fully unlocking the 
potential of these possibilities and 
incorporating the knowledge, skills, 
and beliefs of invested stakeholders 
will require changes on the part of 
restoration and forest management 
professionals who may be unaccus-
tomed to the sometimes slow, often 
delicate processes of trust-building, 
mutual learning, and shared decision 
making. It may also require profes-
sionals to move past appeals to “sci-
ence” as a neutral arbiter of envi-
ronmental conflicts, to confront the 
complex interplay of values, cultural 
understandings, and various forms of 
knowledge that provide the basis for 
restoration decisionmaking. Inclu-
sive collaboration can thus be used 
to determine restoration principles, 
plan for community needs from eco-
nomic development to wildfire risk 
reduction, gain the social license nec-
essary to test restoration alternatives, 
and monitor the effects of restoration 
practices.
Finally, incorporation of socioeco-
nomic considerations in restoration 
planning can provide safeguards for 
business investment. Recently, a group 
of land management agencies, envi-
ronmental interests, and commercial 
enterprises agreed to a set of resto-
ration principles that provide assur-
ances of ecological integrity while 
also providing financial assurances 
of biomass supply to businesses over 
a period of several years (NMBET 
2006). Such accords are necessary to 
encourage investment in appropriately 
scaled and matched infrastructure and 
may also reduce conflict by setting 
acceptable parameters for the type and 
magnitude of restoration that will be 
implemented.
Conclusion
The social context of resource manage-
ment is as important as biophysical or 
ecological knowledge (Hull and Gob-
ster 2000, Findley et al. 2001, Shindler 
et al. 2002). This is particularly true for 
restoration, where experience shows 
the peril in implementing projects 
without thorough consideration of 
socioeconomic dimensions (Hel-
ford 2000, Nabhan 2003). Whether 
projects fail or are delayed owing to 
a lack of funding or litigation, the 
socioeconomic barriers dominate the 
outcome. Scientists and practition-
ers embark on ambitious restoration 
projects assuming that good science 
will lead to expected outcomes, only 
to find a diversity of social values and 
relationships vastly complicating their 
efforts. The socioeconomic barriers to 
forest restoration and small-diameter 
wood and biomass utilization we have 
identified in the southwestern United 
States are indicative of issues plaguing 
ecological restoration efforts in many 
parts of the country. By more fully 
acknowledging the role of socioeco-
nomic values in restoration practice, 
we can now incorporate economic 
opportunity and wiser social policies 
to facilitate restoration.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the gradu-
ate students that provided thoughtful discus-
sions in a related graduate seminar instructed 
by the authors. The authors would also like 
to thank Ann Moote and Yeon-Su Kim for 
constructive reviews of this manuscript, as 
well as three anonymous reviewers.
References
Abella, S.R., W.W. Covington and P.Z. 
Fulé. 2006. Diameter caps for thin-
ning southwestern ponderosa pine for-
ests: Viewpoints, effects, and tradeoffs. 
Journal of Forestry 104:407–413.
Abrams, J.B. 2005. Report on a needs assess-
ment for collaborative landscape plan-
ning in the White Mountains of Ari-
zona. Ecological Restoration Institute, 
Flagstaff AZ: Northern Arizona Uni-
versity. http://www.eri.nau.edu/joomla/
files/Research/WMNeedsAssessment 
Final.pdf
Allen, C.D., M. Savage, D. Falk, K. Suck-
ling, T. Swetnam, et al. 2002. Ecological 
restoration of southwestern ponderosa 
pine ecosystems: A broad perspective. 
Ecological Applications 12:1418–1433.
Burns, S. 2003. Catron County, New 
Mexico: Mirroring the west, healing 
the land, rebuilding community. Pages 
89–115 in J. Kusel and E. Adler (eds), 

176  •   
June 2009  Ecological Restoration  27:2
Forest Communities, Community Forests. 
Washington DC: Island Press.
Chichilnisky, G. and G.M. Heal. 1998. 
Economic returns from the biosphere. 
Nature 391:629–630.
Clary, D. 1986. Timber and the Forest Ser-
vice. Lawrence: University Press of 
Kansas.
Cooper, C.F. 1960. Changes in vegetation, 
structure, and growth of southwest-
ern pine forest since white settlement.  
Ecological Monographs 30:129–164.
Covington, W.W., P.Z. Fulé, M.M. Moore, 
S.C. Hart, T.E. Kolb, et al. 1997. 
Restoring ecosystem health in ponder-
osa pine forests of the southwest. Journal 
of Forestry 95(4):23–29.
Covington, W.W. and M.M. Moore. 1994. 
Southwestern ponderosa forest struc-
ture: Changes since Euro-American set-
tlement. Journal of Forestry 92(1):39–47.
Daugherty, P.J. and G.B. Snider. 2003. Eco-
logical and market economics. Pages 
58–69 in P. Friederici (ed), Ecological 
Restoration of Southwestern Ponderosa 
Pine Forests. Washington DC: Island 
Press.
Durbin, K. 1996. Tree Huggers: Victory, 
Defeat, and Renewal in the Northwest 
Ancient Forest Campaign. Seattle WA: 
Mountaineers Books.
Fight, R.D. and R.J. Barbour. 2005. Finan-
cial analysis of fuel treatments. USDA 
Forest Service General Technical Report 
PNW-GTR-662.
Fight, R.D., G.L. Pinjuv and P.J. Daugherty. 
2004. Small-diameter wood process-
ing in the southwestern United States: 
An economic case study and decision 
analysis tool. Forest Products Journal 
54(5):85–89.
Findley, A.J., M.S. Carroll and K.A. Blat-
ner. 2001. Social complexity and the 
management of small diameter stands.  
Journal of Forestry 99(12):18–27.
Friederici, P. 2003. Ecological Restoration 
of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests. 
Washington DC: Island Press.
___. 2005. Challenges and opportunities in 
forest restoration outreach: The exam-
ple of southwestern ponderosa pine 
forests. Pages 73–81 in Proceedings: 
International conference on transfer 
of forest science knowledge and tech-
nology. USDA Forest Service General  
Technical Report PNW-GTR-726.
Governor’s Forest Health Councils (GFHC), 
State of Arizona. 2007. The statewide 
strategy for restoring Arizona’s forests. 
E. Aumack, T. Sisk and J. Palumbo, 
eds. Phoenix AZ: Arizona Public  
Service. www.azforests.org
Helford, R.M. 2000. Constructing nature as 
constructing science: Expertise, activist 
science, and public conflict in the Chi-
cago Wilderness. Pages 119–142 in P.H. 
Gobster and B.R. Hull (eds), Restor-
ing Nature: Perspectives from the Social 
Sciences and Humanities. Covelo CA: 
Island Press.
Hernandez, R., D.W. Green, D.E. 
Kretschmann and S.P. Verrill. 2005. 
Improved utilization of small-diame-
ter ponderosa pine in glued-laminated 
timber. USDA Forest Service Research 
Paper FPL-RP-625.
Higgs, E.S. 1997. What is good ecolog-
ical restoration? Conservation Biology 
11:338–348.
Hjerpe, E.E. and Y. Kim. 2008. Economic 
impacts of southwestern national forest 
fuels reductions. Journal of Forestry 
106:311–316.
Holl, K.D. and R.B. Howarth. 2000. Paying 
for restoration. Restoration Ecology 8:
260–267.
Hull, R.B. and P.H. Gobster. 2000. Restoring 
forest ecosystems: The human dimen-
sion. Journal of Forestry 98(8):32–36.
Jackson, L.L., N. Lopoukhine and D. Hill-
yard. 1995. Ecological restoration: A 
definition and comments. Restoration 
Ecology 3:71–75.
Kim, Y. and A. Wells. 2005. The impact of 
forest density on property values. Journal 
of Forestry 103:146–151.
Larson, D. and R. Mirth. 1998. Potential for 
using small-diameter ponderosa pine: A 
wood fiber projection. Forest Products 
Journal 48(6):37–42.
___. 2001. Projected economic impacts of 
a 16–inch tree cutting cap for ponder-
osa pine forests within the greater Flag-
staff urban-wildlands. Pages 154–160 in 
Ponderosa pine ecosystems restoration 
and conservation: Steps toward steward-
ship. USDA Forest Service Conference 
Proceedings RMRS-P-22.
___. 2004. A case study on the economics 
of thinning in the wildland urban inter-
face. Western Journal of Applied Forestry 
19(1):60–65.
Lenart, M. 2006. Collaborative steward-
ship to prevent wildfires. Environment 
48(7):9–21.
Lowell, E.C., D.R. Becker, D. Larson, R. 
Rummer and L. Wadleigh. 2008. An 
integrated approach to evaluating the 
economic costs of wildfire hazard reduc-
tion through wood utilization opportu-
nities in the southwestern United States. 
Forest Science 54:273–283.
Lynch, D.L. 2001. Financial results of 
ponderosa pine forest restoration in 
Southwestern Colorado. Pages 141–
148 in Ponderosa pine ecosystems res-
toration and conservation: Steps toward 
stewardship. USDA Forest Service  
Proceedings RMRS-P-22.
Lynch, D.L., W.H. Romme, and M.L. 
Floyd. 2000. Forest restoration in 
southwestern ponderosa pine. Journal of 
Forestry 98(8):17–24.
Marzluff, J.M. and G.A. Bradley. 2003. Eco-
logical restoration in the urban-wildland 
interface. Pages 353–370 in P. Friederici 
(ed), Ecological Restoration of Southwest-
ern Ponderosa Pine Forests. Washington 
DC: Island Press..
Mason, C.L., B.R. Lippke, K.W. Zobrist, 
T.D. Bloxton Jr., K.R. Ceder, et al. 
2006. Investments in fuel removals to 
avoid forest fires results in substantial 
benefits. Journal of Forestry 104:27–31.
Mater Engineering. 2004. Coordinated 
resources offering protocol (CROP). 
Technical Report on file with the 
Greater Flagstaff Forests Partnership.
Moore, M.M., W.W. Covington and P.Z. 
Fulé. 1999. Reference conditions and 
ecological restoration: A southwestern 
ponderosa pine perspective. Ecological 
Applications 9:1266–1277.
Moote, M.A. 2003. Community-based 
forest restoration. Pages 335–352 in 
P. Friederici (ed), Ecological Restoration 
of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests. 
Washington DC: Island Press.
Nabhan, G.P. 2003. Destruction of an 
ancient indigenous cultural land-
scape: An epitaph from Organ Pipe 
Cactus National Monument. Ecological 
Restoration 21:290–295.
New Mexico Biomass Evaluation Taskforce 
(NMBET). 2006. New Mexico forest 
restoration principles. www.fs.fed.us/
r3/spf/nm-restor-principles-122006.pdf
Nie, M. 2003. Drivers of natural resource-
based political conflict. Policy Sciences 
36:307–341.
Noss, R.F., P. Beier, W.W. Covington, R.E. 
Grumbine, D.B. Lindenmayer, et al. 
2006. Recommendations for integrat-
ing restoration ecology and conserva-
tion biology in ponderosa pine for-
ests of the southwestern United States.  
Restoration Ecology 14:4–10.
Ostergren, D.M., J.B. Abrams and K.A. 
Lowe. 2008. Fire in the forest: Public 
perceptions of ecological restoration 
in north-central Arizona. Ecological 
Restoration 26:51–60.
Ostergren, D.M., K.A. Lowe, J.B. Abrams 
and E.J. Ruther. 2006. Public per-
ceptions of forest management in 
north-central Arizona: The paradox 

June 2009  Ecological Restoration  27:2    •  177
of demanding more involvement but 
allowing limits to legal action. Journal 
of Forestry 104:375–382.
Prestemon, J.P., K.L. Abt and R.J. Huggest 
Jr. 2008. Market impacts of a multi-
year mechanical fuel treatment program 
in the U.S. Forest Policy and Economics 
10:386–399.
Romme, W.H., M. Preston, D.L. Lynch, 
P. Kemp, M.L. Floyd, et al. 2003. The 
ponderosa pine partnership: Ecology, 
economics, and community involve-
ment in forest restoration. Pages 99–125 
in P. Friederici (ed), Ecological Resto-
ration of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine  
Forests. Washington DC: Island Press.
Schmidt, K.M., J.P. Menakis, C.C. Hardy, 
W.J. Hann, D.L. Bunnell. 2002. Devel-
opment of coarse-scale spatial data for 
wildland fire and fuel management. 
USDA Forest Service General Technical  
Report RMRS-GTR-87.
Schoennagel, T., T.T. Veblen and W.H. 
Romme. 2004. The interaction of fire, 
fuels, and climate across Rocky Moun-
tain forests. BioScience 54:661–676.
Schumann, M. 2004. Fuel reduction proj-
ects in southwest ponderosa pine forests: 
A description of sites and treatments. 
National Community Forestry Center, 
Southwest Region Working Paper No. 
9. Santa Fe NM: The Forest Guild.
Shindler, B. 2007. Public acceptance of wild-
land fire conditions and fuel reduction 
practices: Challenges for federal forest 
managers. Pages 37–54 in T.C. Daniel, 
M.S. Carroll, C. Moseley and C. Raish 
(eds), People, Fire and Forests: A Synthe-
sis of Wildfire Social Science. Corvallis: 
Oregon State University Press.
Shindler, B.A., M.W. Brunson and G.H. 
Stankey. 2002. Social acceptability of 
forest conditions and management 
practices: A problem analysis. USDA 
Forest Service General Technical Report 
PNW-GTR-537.
Sisk, T.D., J.W. Prather, H.M. Hampton, 
E.N. Aumack, Y. Xu and B.G. Dick-
son. 2006. Participatory landscape anal-
ysis to guide restoration of ponderosa 
pine ecosystems in the American South-
west. Landscape and Urban Planning 
78:300–310.
Snider, G., P.J. Daugherty and D. Wood. 
2006. The irrationality of contin-
ued fire suppression: An avoided cost 
analysis of fire hazard reduction treat-
ments versus no treatment. Journal of 
Forestry 104:431–437.
Spelter, H., R. Wang and P. Ince. 1996. 
Economic feasibility of products from 
inland West small diameter timber. 
USDA Forest Service General Technical  
Report FPL-GTR-92.
Evan Hjerpe, Resource Economist, The 
Wilderness Society, 705 Christensen Dr, 
Anchorage, AK 99516, 907-272-9453, 
Fax: 907-272-1670, evan_hjerpe@ 
tws.org 
 
Jesse Abrams, Ph.D. Student, Oregon State 
University, College of Forestry, Corvallis, 
OR. 
 
Dennis R. Becker, Assistant Professor, Uni-
versity of Minnesota, Department of Forest 
Resources, St. Paul, MN
