Article 3 
Page 1 of 12 
• 
AULC Northern Arizona University 
Expanded Academic ASAP 
The Review ofPolley Research, Nov 2004 v21 i6 p767(16) 
Using parallel strategies to promote change: forestpolicymaking under George W. Bush. Jacqueline 
Vaughn; Hanna Cortner. 
Full Text: COPYRIGHT 2004 Policy Studies Organization 
In 2000, 122,827 wildfires burned 8.4 million acres of United States forests-Including the highly publicized Cerro Grande 
fire in New Mexico in which 250 structures were destroyed. In 2002,7.1 million acres were burned and 21 firefighters lost 
their lives. Three states, Arizona, Colorado, and Oregon, had their largest fires of the twentieth century, and the images of 
more than a thousand homes burning and forest devastation were deeply imprinted upon the public's memory. 
It is against this background that President George W. Bush framed wildfires and forest policy as a problem deserving of 
an immediate national response in late summer 2002. In the lexicon of public policymaking, the wildfires opened the 
"policy window" for the administration to change existing forest policies, many of which had been developed under former 
President Bill Clinton. 
Several explanations were offered as a rationale for the president's efforts to change the overall direction of fire and forest 
policies. Representatives Larry Craig (R-Idaho) and Scott McInnis (R-CO) charged that the regulatory process-­
specifically administrative appeals of United States Department of Agriculture Forest Service projects--were delaying the 
implementation of the National Fire Plan and the agency's hazardous fuels reduction projects. They directly accused 
environmental groups of filing appeals that were frivolous or designed to stall any attempts to reduce hazardous fuels in 
national forests. Forest Service officials noted that the "forest health crisis of tremendous proportions" was due to a 
"process predicament" and that the agency operated within a statutory, regulatory, and administrative framework that made 
it unable to effectively address rapid declines in forest health (United States Department of Agriculture Forest Service, 
2002b). Interests that had sought to open up the nation's public lands to increased timber sales and logging seized upon the 
fire damage and the new administration's more conservative political appointees to seek reform of what the American 
Forest and Paper Association called "current well-intentioned but misguided regulations" that delayed harvests of diseased 
or burned timber (Lazaroff, 2000). Environmental groups countered that timber groups were "cashing in their chips" after 
Bush had raised $1.7 million in contributions from timber executives at a Portland fundraising event. The Oregon Natural 
Resources Council called congressional hearings on a Forest Service report that showed procedural delays in 
implementing projects "a set-up for the Bush administration to cook up a 'solution' to the problem that will undoubtedly be 
a timber industry 'wish list' to weaken our environmental safeguards" (Oregon Natural Resources Council, 2002). 
By framing the problem in terms ofprocess and pointing blame at environmental groups misusing appeals procedures, the 
Bush administration was able to defme the forest and wildfire issue in ways that cast environmentalists as the major threat 
to the health ofthe nation's forests. Rather than having to defend its decades-old policies of fire exclusion, the Forest 
Service became an active partner with the president in calling for process reform that would also limit public participation 
in its decision making. The emphasis on process, rather than on the content of existing forest policy, also provided a 
reasonable explanation for the administration to take a lead in seeking both legislative and regulatory change. 
This study of policy change examines the parallel strategies the Bush administration used to substantially alter the 
direction offorest policy between 2001 and 2003. It begins with a brief description of the model of environmental 
policymaking process that begins with problem defmition, agenda-setting, and policy formulation, and how the cycle 
model has traditionally been applied to explain environmental policymaking and the president's role in the various stages 
of the process. This is followed by a summary of the Healthy Forests Initiative and an analysis of the presidential activity 
that took place simultaneously in the venues of legislative and administrative law and rulemaking. We contend that the use 
oftwo parallel policymaking paths enabled the Bush administration to pursue policy change more rapidly, and from a 
strategic standpoint, more effectively, than by relying on the legislative process alone. While this case represents a 
continuation ofthe shift in the balance ofpower in policymaking that began in the twentieth century (a marked decline in 
the role of Congress in favor of the president), it goes beyond that explanation. Here, we offer that the Bush 
administration's approach to changing forest policy represents an even more explicit example of presidential power 

Article 3 
Page 2 of 12 
resources used to initiate and formulate environmental policy change. 
The Traditional View of Environmental Policymaking 
From the beginnings of the study of public policy, scholars have used various ways to explain why governments choose to 
recognize some problems and take,action on others, and how some issues progress through stages or cycles (Anderson, 
1997; Downs, 1972; Dye, 1984; Kmgdon, 2003; Rochefort & Cobb, 1994). Typically, various stakeholders within a policy 
subsystem (government agencies, academics, the media, businesses, interest groups) seek to influence governmental 
decisions from their diverse perspectives on problems and solutions (Baumgartner & Jones, 1993) External factors, such as 
socioeconomic conditions, cultural values, and public opinion also affect policymaking and may place constraints on or 
pro~ote policy development. Policy change, whether attributable to advocacy coalitions (Sabatier & Jenkins-Smith, 1993), 
policy entrepreneurs (Mintrom, 1997), or focusing events (Birkland, 1997), often occurs in conjunction with a change in 
the political stream. This may include a change in administration or a shift in the ideological distribution of seats in 
Congress (Kingdon, 2003). 
Despite the nuances unique to different types of policies, there is general agreement that once a problem has been 
identified and defmed, and then placed on the systemic agenda for governmental action, legislative bodies given the 
constitutional authority to promulgate law formulate potential solutions. Once a solution is chosen, the administrative arm 
of government takes responsibility for policy implementation, often considered the most important and critical stage in the 
execution ofpolicy (Lindbloom & Woodhouse, 1993; Pressman & Wildavsky, 1973). 
In this traditional model of environmental policymaking, most scholars have focused on the president's legislative 
leadership and the use of his power resources during the policy formulation and adoption processes (Daynes, 1999; 
Shanley, 1992; Soden, 1999; Sussman & Kelso, 1999). Traditionally, presidents have the opportunity to define the 
environmental agenda, setting the tone of their administration and the issues that they bring to Congress to act upon. 
Usually this begins with the president's State of the Union address, in which he gives Congress his agenda for the coming 
year. While the use of power resources, such as the degree to which the president can mobilize public support or the 
expertise at the president's disposal ebbs and flows, presidents have tended to act quickly during the "honeymoon" period 
of their administration to push their legislative priorities. 
A typical example of the role of the chiefexecutive in environmental policymaking is air quality legislation. Before the  
advent of the environmental movement in the 1960s, air pollution was often not considered a problem, or, if so, was part of  
the "cost" of industrialized progress (Hays, 1987). The political and social activism of environmentalists, coupled with  
increased media attention, led to calls for government intervention and the expansion of federal authority into pollution  
control. With the passage of the Clean Air Acts (in 1963 and 1970), Congress made clear its intention to not only regulate  
both stationary and mobile pollution sources , but also to take a proactive approach by requiring various technology-forcing  
strategies. Among the industries targeted by Congress were automakers, which were subject to a broad spectrum of  
regulations and deadlines. When industry leaders argued that they were unable to comply with new rules, especially those  
on tailpipe emissions, Congress agreed to extend regulatory deadlines in the 1977 Clean Air Act Amendments.  
But from 1977 to 1990, neither the House nor the Senate voted on a comprehensive clean air measure. Presidential 
candidate George H.W. Bush promised that if elected., he would work with Congress to enact a new set of regulations to 
clean up the ail, and in 1989 he gave Congress a comprehensive set of air quality proposals . Despite bitter and often 
partisan debate, Bush in 1990 signed new Clean Air Act Amendments that he called the most significant air pollution 
legislation in history. The president took credit for serving as the person who broke congressional gridlock by taking the 
initiative, which Congress would ratify in the form of 788 pages of statute . Perhaps more importantly, the legislative 
changes led to more than 10,000 pages of implementing regulations requiring years of regulatory effort, primarily through 
rules promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency (Bryner, 1993; Cohen, 1992). 
The Clean Air Act Amendments present an excellent example of how presidents playa central role in initiating policy 
reform through legislative leadership. We also know that presidents and their administrations can exert further influence on 
the direction and scope of policy change in the implementation stage of policymaking as regulations to implement the 
resulting legislation are developed, although this particular facet of implementation, including the president's role, has been 
less frequently studied. We also know presidents have considerable administrative power to effect change in 
environmental policy in the absence of legislative action, using their executive powers and tools, for example, executive 
branch reorganization, the creation ofnew national monuments under the Antiquities Act, or astute use of the media. The 
case of the Healthy Forests Initiative illustrates the power of simultaneously combining two strategies--legislative and 
administrative--to accomplish a sweeping redirection of policy, a redirection that is likely to serve as a template for further 

Article 3 
Page 3 of 12 
environmental policy change. 
The Healthy Forests Initiative 
On August 22, 2002, President Bush arrived in Oregon for an aerial view of the Biscuit fire--the state's largest in history-­
before a ground tour of the site of the three-thousand-acre Squire fire, which had cost $2.2 million to suppress. Reaching 
out to shake the hand ofa state firefighter, Bush said he was trying to bring a little "common sense" to forest policy, 
noting, "We must discourage the endless delays that prevent good forest policy from going forward" (Fattig, 2002). 
After the speech, copies of the president's Healthy Forests Initiative were released, describing the administration's intention 
to work with Congress on legislation that would expedite implementation of fuels reduction and forest restoration projects. 
The Oregon speech set out the broad parameters of what Bush planned to do. Just two weeks after his August speech, a 
four-part legislative proposal was delivered to Congress by Agriculture Secretary Ann Veneman and Interior Secretary 
Gale Norton. It was designed to "streamline unnecessary red tape that prevents timely and effective implementation of 
wildfire prevention and forest health projects on public lands. Delays of these projects can have devastating environmental 
and social consequences when catastrophic fires strike" (United States Department of Agriculture/Department of the 
Interior, 2002). In effect, the administration sought to change Forest Service policy by reducing public participation in the 
decision-making process and allowing the agency to move forward more quickly without what it termed "procedural 
delays." 
Two of the four proposals delivered to Congress called for expediting the reduction of hazardous fuels in critical areas 
through collaborative processes, and development of long-term stewardship contracts to thin trees and remove dead wood. 
The third proposal would repeal the Appeals Reform Act that had mandated an administrative appeals process for Forest 
Service projects in 1993, and the fourth proposal "would establish common sense rules for courts when deciding on 
challenges to fuels reduction projects." The department secretaries also announced they were working on a fifth legislative 
piece that would address the 1994 Northwest Forest Plan's original promise of a sustainable habitat and forest economy 
that would be sent to Congress later (Clinton & Gore, 1993). In addition, the Council on Environmental Quality was at 
work on draft regulations and policy guidance to reduce the time and cost of planning and improve collaboration with local 
governments on hazardous fuels reduction projects. 
This process--a presidential announcement followed by an executive branch proposal to Congress-is typical of recent 
efforts to change public policy. This is not to say, however, that legislators had ignored the wildfire/forest issues before the 
president's Oregon tour. Rather, the Healthy Forests Initiative gave Congress the Bush administration's stamp of approval 
on a comprehensive plan that went far beyond prior legislative proposals. The Healthy Forests Initiative would also 
become part ofPresident Bush's stump speech as he campaigned for Republican candidates over the next three months, 
and became the keystone of his environmental policy agenda in 2003. 
Reform by Legislation 
The legislative process is perhaps the most visible way in which elected representatives seek to solve demanding policy  
problems. It is relatively visible, highly procedural and formalized, and what constituents expect their elected officials to  
do in Washington. This section examines the way in which the legislative process has been used to reform wildfire and  
forest policy under the Bush administration. Legislation is but one type of policy instrument, and in this case, was  
combined with regulatory reform to achieve a desired outcome in the most expeditious manner possible. From the  
perspective of the Bush administration and its supportive interests, the outcome that was sought was a reduction in  
regulatory constraints under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), the provisions of which had been used for  
thirty years by environmental interest groups to limit logging activities in national forests. Also specific to the goal of  
reducing regulatory constraints was the repeal of legal provisions that allowed for administrative appeals of Forest Service  
project decisions. More broadly, some stakeholders sought the repeal ofNEPA altogether.  
During the second session of the 107th Congress and the first session of the 108th Congress, President Bush used his allies  
in Congress to push for passage of the Healthy Forests Initiative in the legislative arena. With the nation's worst fire season  
and massive forest insect infestation as the backdrop for their expedited efforts, members of Congress moved forward  
rapidly in an attempt to implement this element of the president's environmental agenda. As is typical in the legislative  
process, several small, and often less expansive, bills are introduced at the beginning of the policy debate, literally getting  
the discussion going before the introduction of more comprehensive measures. One of the more publicly controversial  
proposals came in July 2002 from Senator Tom Daschle (D-SD), whose amendment to H.R. 4775 addressed the  
Supplemental Appropriations Act for FY 2002. Daschle's bill was limited to seven identified timber sale analysis areas--all  

Article 3 
Page 4 of 12 
of them in South Dakota-and sought to expedite the projects "notwithstanding NEPA." Although the Senator had worked 
with environmental organizations, the governor, and local stakeholders to fashion the proposal, he was quickly criticized 
for promoting legislation that benefited only his home state. 
A more defined political agenda began to form in late July as the fire season progressed. United States Representative  
Denny Rehberg (R-MT) sought to have the Secretary of Agriculture take prompt actions to address the risk to the national  
forests in H.R. 5214, the National Forest Fire Prevention Act. The measure pointed the finger at administrative and legal  
processes that were holding up immediate actions to create a defensible fuel zone in fire hazard or insect-infested areas and  
authorized additional timber treatments as needed.  
His colleague, Representative John Shadegg (R-AZ), sought to deal with the problem by authorizing regional foresters to  
exempt tree-thinning projects from administrative appeals and legal actions that delayed or prevented projects from  
moving forward. The bill, the Wildfire Prevention and Forest Health Protection Act of2002 (H.R. 5309), noted that there  
was an extraordinary wildfire threat to national forests, and cited a July 2002 Forest Service report that found 48 percent of  
projects that involved mechanical tree-thinning had been subject to challenge and appeal (United States Department of  
Agriculture, 2002a). The Forest Service report supposedly provided Shadegg with the statistical information that had been  
lacking in earlier attempts at reform, despite substantive questions about the study's methodology (Gehrke, 2002; Native  
Forest Network, 2002 ; Stempeck, 2002).  
In introducing his Healthy Forests Initiative in late August, President Bush virtually eliminated any further legislative  
attempts to change policy, instead making clear that the administration's proposal was the only one likely to get further  
support. As the 2002 fire season wound down, the president had little difficulty in securing support for his package among  
most of the western state members of Congress, who had already felt the heat after the 2000 fire season. The 107th  
Congress was filled with incumbents who were serious about satisfying their rural, resource-focused constituencies, even  
though there were less than a dozen seriously contested House seats at stake in the 2002 election. Environmentalists who  
appealed Forest Service decisions became an easy target for blame for delays in implementing fuel reduction projects,  
implied some. They therefore were responsible for the fires themselves.  
At the same time, Forest Service Chief Dale Bosworth was echoing the president's sentiments by calling for the repeal of 
the 1993 legislation that "forces the U.S. Forest Service to accept citizen appeals of all land-management decisions ... 
We've spent way too much time and way too much money doing analys is and paperwork ... I don't need my people sitting 
in windowless rooms doing paperwork. I need them out on the ground, getting the job done" (Devlin, 2002). The 
president's proposals also began to pick up support among the members of the Western Governors' Association--a 
powerful stakeholder in national fire planning. By September 2002 the administration had effectively teamed the debate to 
show that administrative appeals were keeping the Forest Service from doing its job. The only solution, it appeared, would 
be to do something about the appeals process itself. 
Congress responded with several bills designed to implement the president's forest policy agenda that went far beyond the 
July proposals. In the House, the Healthy Forests Reform Act of 2002 (H.R. 5319), sponsored by Representative McInnis, 
gained the most momentum. The bill called for collaborative dispute resolution to replace the existing appeals process, 
although allowing opponents ofForest Service projects to challenge agency actions in federal court. Representatives 
Shadegg and Rehberg abandoned their own proposals to join in sponsorship with McInnis. 
The speed at which the House sought to move forward rapidly on the president's proposal is indicated by the fact that the 
first hearing on the McInnis bill took place September 5, 2002--a day after it was introduced. At the hearing, McInnis 
called his bill "a reasoned and prudent approach to getting our arms around the West's wildfire crisis ." He went on to 
contend that it takes projects "upwards ofseveral years to work their way through the NEPA process and any subsequent 
appeals and lawsuits," and called for the existing Forest Service appeals process to be replaced with a predecisional 
procedure (McInnis, 2002). 
Amendments to the McInnis bill, renamed the Healthy Forests and Wildfire Risk Reduction Act of 2002, developed by a 
bipartisan group of House members led by Representative George Miller (D-CA) , gave the Forest Service the flexibility to 
streamline some environmental analyses, required new spending on forest thinning to reduce risk near communities; and 
preserved the rights of individuals to appeal and litigate controversial land management decisions . The five-year plan 
prohibited the Forest Service from using the flexibility to build roads in roadless forests . 
Leading environmental groups, including the Natural Resources Defense Council, Friends of the Earth, the Wilderness 
Society, the National Environmental Trust, and the American Lands Alliance, denounced Representatives George Miller 

Article 3 
Page 5 of 12 
(D-CA) and Peter DeFazio (D-OR) for trying to work out a deal with Republican leaders . But as quickly as the 
compromise seemed to come together, it unraveled. Miller and DeFazio removed their names from the proposal before the 
vote. Although the bill was approved by the House Resources Committee on a 23 to 14 voice vote, last minute negotiations 
did not allow the bill to be voted on by the full House before it adjourned for the election recess. 
Like their House counterparts, members of the Senate, including Senator Jon Kyl (R-AZ) and Senator Mike Enzi (R-WY), 
started early in the fire season to seek support for reform. After the Healthy Forests Initiative was unveiled, competing 
measures were introduced in the Senate by Senators Larry Craig (R-ID) and Pete Domenici (R-NM) that called for 
massive forest thinning that would be exempt from or limit NEPA review and the administrative appeals process. The 
Republican-sponsored bill ran headlong into partisan debate. Several members tried to broker a bipartisan compromise that 
had the support ofthe Bush administration, but failed to gain support for their measure. After two weeks of trying to come 
up with an agreement with Republican leaders, the Senate refused on a 50 to 49 party-line vote to limit debate on wildfire­
related amendments to the $19.3 billion Interior spending measure. Sixty votes were needed to overcome a ftIibuster, and 
no action was taken on the Craig-Dornenici proposal by the end of session. 
After the November 2002 elections, the president and members of his cabinet again took the lead in seeking forest reform, 
carefully crafting their comments and instructing Republican members to do the same. Republican pollster and strategist 
Frank Luntz had developed a "playbook" for the party that outlined the importance of using specific language in discussing 
environmental issues. In his "Nine Principles," the Luntz memo included "The best solutions to environmental challenges 
are common sense solutions." By implication, anyone who opposed the administration's proposals was not using common 
sense and was therefore unreasonable. (1) 
The administration struggled to keep the momentum for NEPA change rolling despite three other focusing events: 
concerns about North Korea's nuclear power capacity, the United States buildup of troops and materiel in the Persian Gulf 
.as preparatory to a war with Iraq, and the explosion of the space shuttle Columbia. The high visibility of all three of these  
crises pushed forest reform off the governmental agenda, at least for the short term. But even during the first few months  
of2003, officials warned that the 2003 fire season was likely to start earlier and be more intense due to massive insect  
infestation that had killed or damaged trees, underscoring the belief that legislative action must be swift to deal with the  
catastrophic fires that were inevitable.  
Representatives Greg Walden (R-OR) and McInnis gained the president's approval to introduce the Healthy Forests 
Restoration Act of2003. The measure, H.R. 1904, focused on hazardous fuel reduction projects on twenty million acres in 
both the national forests and on Bureau of Land Management lands near communities in the wildland/urban interface and 
municipal water sources. The WaldenlMcInnis bill codified recommendations in the Western Governors Association's fire 
strategy, including prioritization for funding projects in the wildland/urban interface. The most controversial elements 
dealt with NEPA, appeals, and judicial review of projects. 
To obtain the necessary Democratic support for the bill, McInnis and Walden tried a new strategy that expanded the issue 
beyond the West. In discussions with their colleagues, they discovered that members represented districts where there were 
massive insect infestations that posed a threat to timber operations. The House bill was redrafted with the cooperation of 
Bush administration officials, with new sections that called for university research on forests pests that infiltrated areas 
from Florida to Minnesota, authorizing "such sums as may be necessary." 
H.R. 1904 moved through the House with amazing alacrity: it was introduced April 25 to the House Resources Committee, 
and approved in draft form on April 30 by a vote of 32 to 17. The bill was formally introduced on May 1 for referral to the 
House Agriculture Committee, then approved on May 9 on a voice vote and without amendment. It reached the House 
floor on May 20, and was passed on a vote of256 to 170. 
The Senate's consideration of forest legislation in the 108'h Congress was more protracted and contentious for several  
reasons. Changes in leadership that resulted from the 2000 election put the fate of many environmental initiatives into the  
hands of Republicans with a more conservative agenda. In addition, differing versions of legislation were referred to  
competing committees, creating a jurisdictional battle over forest health issues between two powerful committees and a  
House bill that was significantly different than the competing Senate measures.  
Even though the Senate bills had much in common, committee testimony focused on the WaldenlMcInnis bill and the need  
for immediate attention to wildfire threats rather than support for the Senate measures. President Bush and Forest Service  
officials attempted to keep the spotlight on the House bill, virtually ignoring the Senate proposals and public criticism. In  
visits to communities ravaged by the summer's wildfires, and in public addresses, Bush repeatedly referred to the McInnis  

Article 3 
Page 6 of 12 
bill, urging Senate passage when senators returned from their August recess. In late September, a group often senators (six 
Republicans and four Democrats) announced that they had reached initial ~greement on changes to H.R . 1904. 
The last week of October 2003 saw a flurry of efforts to push the compromise measure to the Senate floor. Republicans 
agreed not to try to limit amendments to the bill; both Majority Leader Bill Frist (R-TN.) and Minority Leader Daschle 
said action was urgent, and that the risks of delay were simply too high. Some observers speculated that the alacrity of the 
Senate was in response to the massive wildfires that were ravaging hundreds of thousands of acres in southern California. 
The final amendment package was passed in the Senate by a vote of80 to 14 and sent on to a conference committee to 
reconcile the differences between the Senate and House versions of the bill. 
The House responded by rejecting the Senate version, and voted for a non-binding motion asking conferees to approve a 
conference report by November 13 in order to get a bill to President Bush by the end of November. The deadline was 
proposed to allow the Forest Service to use the expedited measures for fuel reduction before the 2004 fire season. 
President Bush issued a news release commending the Senate for their "bipartisan support for this common sense 
legislation," and urged the House and Senate to quickly resolve the differences in their bills " (Bush, 2003). On November 
19, House Resources Chair Richard Pombo (R-CA) announced that a compromise had been reached in bicameral, but 
informal negotiations. "We have a light at the end of the tunnel," Pombo said. "This bipartisan agreement puts the Healthy 
Forests legislation within reach of the White House" (House Committee on Resources, 2003). 
The House passed the conference committee compromise by a vote of286 to 140 on November 21; while the Senate 
agreed to the conference report on a voice vote, paving the way for the president to sign the bill into law on December 3, 
2003. The act as passed authorized $760 million annually for hazardous fuel treatments on twenty million acres of Forest 
Service and Bureau of Land Management lands, created new-and more limited-environmental assessment and appeals 
processes for those lands, and placed restrictions on the judicial review process . The act also included the provisions 
related to insects and disease and authorized appropriations for biomass utilization, watershed forestry assistance, a healthy 
forests reserve program, and forest monitoring and risk assessment. Although the compromise language did not include all 
of the elements announced in his August 2002 proposal, the timing of the final measure was crucial, corning just weeks 
after the disastrous southern California wildfires and just before Congress ended the session for its holiday recess. Bush 
could claim a major victory on the domestic front while his foreign policy and the ongoing struggle in Iraq were facing 
heavy criticism both at home and abroad. 
Reform by Rulemaking 
Historically, forest policy has been dominated by the managerial model in which government administrators were 
responsible for identifying policy options and making choices in the public's interest. When the Forest Service was 
founded., Gifford Pinchot sought to manage public lands and resources to produce the greatest good for the greatest 
number for the longest time--a concept of social welfare maximization that still exists in many agencies today. More 
recently, environmental policies have been formulated through a wide variety of public participation mechanisms, from 
facilitated mediation, regulatory negotiation, and formal scoping sessions to mass electronic mail and collaborative 
decision making. While there is still debate over the public's expectations and satisfaction with existing participatory 
processes, there is little question that the managerial model is no longer appropriate (Beierle, 1999; Cortner & Moote, 
1999; Davis, 1997; Mazmanian & Nienaber, 1979). 
Although the president initially had proposed preferred policy reforms to Congress, the Bush administration acted swiftly  
and almost simultaneously to use the regulatory process as a way of changing both the administrative appeals process and  
the overall direction of forest policymaking. When taking office in January 2001, Bush announced a review of all Clinton­ 
era proposed rules and regulations as one of his first acts as president. The Forest Service complied by including in the  
review the November 2000 final rule on land and resource management plans-a key target for policy change. Then,  
relying upon ongoing congressional discussion and hearings on the administrative appeals process during summer 2002,  
the administration sensed that there was sufficient support for change to mount a new round of Forest Service rulemaking  
in December 2002. Additional support in the form of media coverage of the 2000 and 2002 fire seasons framed the debate  
in such a way that there appeared to be little political cost to the president or the Forest Service.  
Rather than waiting for Congress to act on the Healthy Forests Initiative, a process that was time-consuming, partisan, and  
highly visible, the administration sought to use the administrative rulemaking process to affect change. In this way, the  
president could continue to seek support among members of Congress and the public for legislative reform, while at the  
same time, could use agency staff members to push reform through administrative rules. This two-pronged approach to  
changing forest policy was strategically sound because it doubled the chances of policy success. It also forced opponents  

Article 3 
Page 7 of 12 
oft.he p.r~s!dent's forest policies to divide their resources on two fronts concurrently, potentially lessening the impact of 
their cntICls~. From December 2002 through !~Iy. 2003, the Bush administration focused on a series of regulatory 
proposals to Implement the Healthy Forests Initiative, even before members of Congress had agreed to legislative reforms. 
Although the administrative a~peals process w~ used as a rationale for forest reform, others argued that it was actually a 
surrogate for a deeper, more difficult conversation about the purposes and management of the national forests (Coulombe 
2004). On December 11,2002, the Bush administration announced its intention to move on several regulatory fronts to 
' 
speed the thinning of forests and to reduce hazardous fuels on millions of acres ofpublic lands. At a briefing a few weeks 
later, Secretary of Agriculture Ann Veneman said, "Even though we have more agreement than we ever have had on what 
to do, we continue to be hampered by outdated, inefficient, and time-consuming processes that often delay projects to 
improve forests and rangeland health until it's too late" (Seelye, 2002). 
Subsequent to this announcement, the administration initiated two separate rulemaking activities that added five new  
categories of categorical exclusions (CEs). Under Council ofEnvironmental Quality regulations, agencies can identify  
categories of projects that are found to have no individual or cumulatively significant effect on the human environment.  
Projects defined as CEs do not require the preparation of an environmental assessment (EA) or an environmental impact  
statement (EIS) , and thus can be implemented more quickly.  
TIle first set of CE rulemaking related to NEPA documentation for fire management activities. Notice of the proposed 
action was published in the Federal Register on December 16,2002, and sought public comment on two new kinds of 
categorical exclusions for both Forest Service and Department ofthe Interior projects. The first category related to 
hazardous fuel reduction activities to reduce risk to communities and ecosystems, while the second covered postfire 
rehabilitation activities. The second set ofCE rulemaking was officially proposed January 8, 2003, almost a month alter 
the first. This proposal outlined three new categories of exclusions for limited timber harvesting on Forest Service lands, 
the first related to live tree harvest, the second to salvage of dead and dying trees, and the third to tree removal for 
preventing the spread of insects and disease. Nearly 39,000 responses were received during the comment period on the fire 
management CEs, ofwhich 1,900 were individual letters and more than 37,000 were form letters; 16,700 comments 
(including both form letters as well as individual letters) were received on the limited timber harvest CEs. 
In addition to public comment, proposed administrative rules go through a netherworld of regulatory review that is part of  
the mechanism of accountability built into current rulemaking. Although the process ofregulatory oversight is not unique  
to this particular rule change, it does exemplify the complexity ofthe rulemaking process and how arcane language and the  
maze ofprocedures can make it difficult for citizens to find their way (Kerwin, 2003). Before rules can be adopted agency  
officials must shepherd proposed rules through a series ofreviews that are designed, for the most part, to determine any  
unintended consequences of rulemaking prior to implementation of a new rule. Rulemaking reviews are usually conducted  
by the staff of the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) under the Office of Management and Budget  
(OMB). Since the Carter administration, presidents have used the executive order as a way ofchanneling or curtailing  
regulations. In this case, in addition to making a determination whether the new rules were subject to NEPA analysis (they  
were not), they were reviewed according to the provisions of several executive orders and reform legislation.  
Supporters ofthe expansion ofthe CE designations noted that it would speed up the thinning of trees to remove  
combustible vegetation on much larger parcels of land, helping to stabilize and rehabilitate forests. The majority of the  
proposed rules' opponents felt that the CE designations would facilitate the cutting of big trees without public consultation  
or appropriate study. However, the administration found that the proposed changes were reasonable, would add direction  
to field employees, and increase admin istrative efficiency. The fire management exclusions became effective June 5,2003,  
and the limited timber harvesting exclusions became effective July 29,2003.  
While much ofthe admin istration's efforts focused on how best to reduce hazardous fuel and thin forests , another part of  
the administration's initiative dealt with the role of the public in Forest Service project decision making and targeted the  
administrative appeals process. On December 18,2002, the agency proposed changes to the rule on public participation "to  
clarify certain provisions and reduce complexity in the current rule, improve efficiency ofprocessing appeals, encourage  
early and effective public participation in the environmental analysis of projects and activities, and ensure consistency with  
the provisions of the statutory authority" (67 Fed. Reg. 77451) . The subject of the rule changes was Section 322 of the  
Interior and Related Agencies Appropriation Act of Fiscal 1994, also known as the Appeals Reform Act (ARA).  
The proposed rule limited the administrative appeal process to those who submit "substantive" oral or written comments  
during the thirty-calendar-day public comment period on an environmental assessment for a specific project or activity (or  
forty-five days for a draft environmental impact statement) with the Forest Service responsible official given discretion for  

Article 3 
Page 8 of 12 
identifying which comments were "substantive." The rule would not allow the comment period to be extended, and 
allowed the agency to respond to electronically mailed comments using an automated electronic acknowledgment. Oral 
comments could be made via telephone or in person to the responsible official 's office, or, if during nonbusiness hours, at 
an official agency function designed to elicit public comment. In cases with multiple appellants, the appeal deciding officer 
could appoint the first name listed as the lead appellants to act on behalf of all parties to that appeal when the appeal did 
not specify a lead appellant. The previous designation of an "interested party" to the appeal was eliminated. The rule also 
required the responsible official to contact the appellant as soon as practicable and offer to meet and discuss resolution of 
the issued raised in the appeal. The date of the meeting must be within fifteen days after the closing date for the appeal, 
and located in the vicinity ofthe lands affected by the decision. Projects categorically excluded from further 
documentation under NEPA would be exempted from the regulations. 
Notice ofthe proposed rule was sent to more than 150 national organizations and federal agencies, with approximately 
25,000 comment letters received during the sixty-day comment period. Supporters ofthe rule changes stated that the 
changes would improve procedural effectiveness and efficiency, reduce the abuse of the appeals process, and improve 
forest conditions. Environmental groups and those opposing the rule contended that the changes would reduce a citizen's 
right to participate in the project planning process, might result in increased litigation, and would decrease forest health. 
As a result ofthe public comments and analysis, some minor changes were made before the final rule was published in the 
Federal Register. There was some reorganization resulting in sections having new titles or new designations, and 
clarification added to proposed sections. Definitions such as "emergency situation" and "principal newspaper" were 
refined, Much of the controversy appeared to be over the term "substantive comments," with the majority of those 
commenting on the rule opposing the terminology. Some found the term too vague, others felt it would limit public 
participation, and some questioned who would have the discretion to determine if a comment was "substantive" or not. The 
final rule revised the defmition somewhat, giving the responsible official the responsibility for determining if comments 
received met the definition. For the most part, however, the rule remained virtually unchanged when it was published on 
June 4, 2003. 
Rep. Tom Udall (D-CO), a member ofthe House Committee on Resources and the Subcommittee on Forests and Forest 
Health, referred to the regulatory changes as "a revolution ... The synergistic effects ofthese radical rollbacks are 
breathtaking. I predict that the assault will only foment more controversy and stimulate more distrust of the Forest Service 
for years to come" (Udall, 2003). 
(
The Spillover Effect: Forest Policy as a Template for Broader Environmental Change 
One of the reasons why this analysis ofthe Bush administration's wildfire and forest policy agenda is of value is that it is 
indicative ofthe major strategies used by the president to effect broader environmental change. The consequences ofthe 
president's Healthy Forest Initiative are being carried over to other environmental policy areas to further limit the 
implementation of the National Environmental Policy Act and reduce the role of the public in environmental 
policymaking. 
There are more than a dozen other environmental policy areas where the Bush administration has used a combination of 
the legislative and regulatory processes, backed up by litigation, to change the direction of environmental policy within the 
last three years. When Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Administrator Christie Todd Whitman resigned in May 
2003, observers questioned whether the former New Jersey governor had been dissatisfied with the direction she had 
received from the White House. Some believed she felt that the president's advisors and staff were improperly 
"reinterpreting" legislation and policies that had been enacted under previous administrations. Since the policies were not 
being "revised," there was no requirement for public comment, and the policy changes became effective immediately. 
For example, after Whitman's departure, the EPA made what were considered "industry-friendly" revisions to the Clean 
Air Act, rescinded a twenty-seven-year old policy that banned the sale of real estate contaminated with cancer-causing 
PCBs, and virtually abandoned programs like Superfund in favor of less restrictive policies. Jeff Ruch, director of Public 
Employees for Environmental Responsibility, noted that many ofthe actions took place in August 2003 when Congress 
was out oftown (Paskus, 2003). 
It seems the timing of policy changes was carefully orchestrated to take advantage of openings in the policy window (or ' 
calendar). A draft revision of the rules implementing the Clean Air Act Amendments that dealt with New Source Review 
was announced on New Year's Eve as a way of "streamlining" requirements that older power plants and factories conform 
to newer air pollution laws. The administration's plans allowed companies to expand their facilities without also updating 
(

Article 3 
Page 9 of 12 
their pollution control systems. One observer noted the haste in which EPA sought to make the revisions reality. "They 
were under such pressure to put the rule out [in August] before Congress returned to town that they failed to clean up the 
internal edits in the rule" (Paskus, 2003). 
Conservation groups increasingly sought to tum the spotlight on what they called "a rollback of environmental 
regulations" by noting that many of the Bush administration's announcements about policy initiatives were timed to 
coincide with "Freaky Fridays," a term that has been subsequently picked up by the general media to describe the 
administration's strategically timed release ofpolitically controversial material. The Natural Resources Defense Council 
(NRDC) used the term in compiling a list of more than one hundred environmental policy rollbacks, with more than half 
announced on Fridays or just before holidays. "Friday is always a terrible day for coverage, and the fewest people read 
newspapers on Saturdays, so even if a story does get cranked out fewer people are going to see it," one NRDC leader 
noted. But "it's a very effective strategy, a very cynical strategy" (Ring, 2003). 
The group cited as examples the EPA's relaxation of new source review air pollution regulations (two decisions on Fridays 
in October and November 2002, then another on New Year's Eve; the EPA's reduction of wetlands protection on a Friday 
in January 2003; a settlement of a lawsuit over wilderness in Utah that opens the door for development on a Friday in April 
2003; and on another Friday in October 2003, a 5 p.m. press conference on the dumping of mine tailings on federal land 
just before the three-day Columbus Day weekend). Similarly, congressional Republicans announced they had finished a 
draft of the administration's proposals for a broad energy bill on a Friday afternoon, even though the 1,700-page measure 
was still being printed. 
Conclusion 
The Bush administration's efforts to implement reform ofmany Clinton-era policies are built upon carefully crafted, and 
largely successful, strategies. In partnership with the Republican-led Congress, the president has moved forward quickly 
on a wide-ranging shift in environmental policies. By seizing upon the open policy window, and by simultaneously and 
aggressively using both legislative and administrative approaches to effect policy change, he has achieved a major 
redirection offorest policy. These strategies have benefited from the use of more subtle tools such as the timing of 
announcements and the development of specific language to characterize problems, policy participants, and desired 
solutions. Change in forest policy is controlled and expedited through the use of certain tools and strategies that have, for 
the most part, confounded the efforts of environmental organizations and advocates to stop or even slow down those 
outcomes. 
Note 
(I) Although the memo was never released publicly, several organizations, including the Environmental Working Group 
and the National Environmental Trust, made copies of portions of The Luntz Research Companies' document on their web 
site. 
References 
Anderson, 1. E. (1997). Public policymaking (3rd ed.). New York: Houghton-Mifflin. 
Antiquities Act of 1906, Pub. L. No. 59-209, 59th Cong., 1st Sess., 16 U.S.c. Sections 431-433 (1906). 
Appeals Reform Act. Interior and Related Agencies Appropriation Act of Fiscal Year 2003, Pub. L. No.1 02-381 , 102nd 
Cong., 2nd Sess., 106 Stat. 1374 (1992). 
Baumgarmer, F. & Jones, B. (1993). Agendas and instability in American politics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Beierle, T. C. (1999). Using social goals to evaluate public participation in environmental decisions. Policy Studies 
Review, 16(3-4),75-103. 
Birkland, T. A. (1997). After disaster: Agenda setting, public policy and focusing events . Washington, DC: Georgetown 
University Press. 

Article 3 
Page 10 of12 
Bryner, G. C. (1993). Blue skies, green politics: The Clean Air Act of 1990. Washington, DC: Congressional Quarterly 
Press.  
Bush, G. W. (2003, October 30). Statement on Healthy Forests Restoration Act. News release Retrieved from  
www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2003 [accessed October 31,2003].  
Clean Air Act, Pub. 1. No: 88-206, 88th Cong., 1st Sess., 77 Stat. 392 (1963).  
Clean Air Act Amendments of 1970, Pub. 1. No. 91-604, 91st Cong., 2nd Sess., 42 U.S.C. Section 7401-7671 (1970).  
Clean Air Act Amendments of 1977, Pub. 1. No. 95-95, 95th Cong., 1st Sess., 91 Stat. 685 (1977).  
Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990, Pub. 1. No. 101-549, 101st Cong., 2nd Sess., 104 Stat. 2399 (1990).  
Clinton, W. J., & Gore, A. (1993). The forest plan for a sustainable economy and a sustainable environment. Washington,  
DC: White House.  
Cohen, R. E. (1992). Washington at work: Back rooms and clean air. New York: Macmillan.  
Coulombe, M. J. (2004). Exercising the right to object: A brief history of the Forest Service appeals process. Journal of  
Forestry, 102(2), 10-13.  
Cortner, H. J., & Monte, M. A. (1999). The politics of ecosystem management. Washington, DC: Island Press.  
Davis, S. (1997). Does public participation really matter in public lands management? Some evidence from a national  
forest. Southeastern Political Review, 25, 253-279.  
Daynes, B. (1999). Bill Clinton: Environmental president. In D. 1. Soden (Ed.). The environmented presidency (pp. 259­ 
312). Albany, NY: State University of New York Press .  
Devlin, S. (2002, September 12). Forest chief says '93 appeals law should be axed. The Missoulian. Retrieved from  
www.missoulian.com/archives/index [accessed February 8, 2003].  
Downs, A. (1972). Up and down with ecology: The issue attention cycle. The Public Interest, 28, 38-50.  
Dye, T. R. (1984). Understanding public policy (5th ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.  
Fattig, P. (2002, August 23). The tour: Pushing "common sense" at fire site. Medford Mail Tribune. Retrieved from  
www.mailtribune.com [accessed February 14,2004].  
Gehrke, R. (2002, October 2). Environmentalists, Forest Service agree that fire report was rushed, figures off. Las Vegas  
Sun. Retrieved from www.lasvegassun.com/sunbin/stories [accessed December 28,2002].  
Hays, S. P. (1987). Beauty, health, and permanence: Environmental politics in the United States, 1955-1985. Cambridge:  
Cambridge University Press.  
Healthy Forests and Wildfire Risk Reduction Act of 2002, proposed in 107th Cong., 2nd Sess. (2002).  
Healthy Forests Reforms Act of2002, H.R. 5319, proposed in 107th Cong., 2nd Sess. (2002).  
Healthy Forests Restoration Act of2003, Pub. 1. No. 108-148, 108th Cong., 1st Sess., 117 Stat. 1887 (2003).  
Kerwin, C. (2003). Rulemaking: How government agencies write law and make policy (3rd ed.) Washington, DC:  
Congressional Quarterly Press .  

Article 3 
Page 11 of 12 
Kingdon, 1. (2003). Agendas, alternatives, and public policies (2nd ed). New York: Longman.  
Lazaroff, C. (2000, September 5). Logging does not reduce fire risk, two studies conclude. Environmental News Service.  
Retrieved from www.forest.org/archive/general [accessed February 16,2004].  
Lindbloom, C. E., & Woodhouse, E. J. (1993). The policy-making process (3rd ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.  
Mazmanian, D., & Nienaber, J. (1979). Can organizations change? Environmental protection, citizen participation, and the  
Army Corps of Engineers. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.  
McInnis, S. (2002). Opening statement. H.R. 5319. The Healthy Forests Reforms Act. U.S. Congress. House. Committee  
on Resources Hearing on Initiatives for Wildfire Prevention. (September 5) at http://www.house.gov/search accessed  
January 24,2003.  
Mintrom, M. (1997). Policy entrepreneurs and the diffusion of innovation. American Journal of Political Science, 41(3),  
738-771.  
National Environmental Policy Act, Pub. L. No. 91 190, 91st Cong., 1st Sess., 42 U.S.C. Section 4321 et seq . (1970).  
National Forest Fire Prevention Act, proposed in 107th Cong., 2nd Sess. (2002).  
Native Forest Network. (2002, October 1). Freedom of Information Act request reveals info for U.S. Forest Service  
"report" was gathered in hours . News release. Retrieved from http://www.nativeforest.org/ press room [accessed  
December 28,2002].  
Oregon Natural Resources Council, et al. (2002). Environmental safeguards under attack by the Bush administration,  
News release (June 11).  
Paskus, L. (2003, September 29). Who's at the helm? High Country News, 3.  
Pressman, J., & Wildavsky, A. (1973). Implementation. Berkeley: University of California Press.  
Ring, R. (2003, November 30). Freaky Fridays with the Bush administration. High Country, News, 3.  
Rochefort, D. A., & Cobb, R. W. (1994). The politics of problem definition: Shaping the policy agenda. Lawrence:  
University Press of Kansas.  
Sabatier, P. A., & Jenkins-Smith, H. (1993). The advocacy coalition framework: Assessment, revisions, and implications  
for scholars and practitioners. In P. A. Sabatier & H. Jenkins-Smith (Eds.) . Policy change and learning: An advocacy 
coalition approach (211-236). Boulder, CO: Westview. 
Seelye, K. C. (2002, December 12). Bush proposes change to allow more thinning offorests. New Fork Times. Retrieved 
from http://www.nytimes.com/2002/12/12/politics [accessed December 12,2002].  
Shanley, R A. (1992). Presidential influence and environmental policy. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.  
Soden, D. L. (1999). The environmental presidency. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.  
Stempeck, B. (2002, October 3). Study was quick, but it also low-balled estimates--USFS. Retrieved from  
http://www.eenews.netlsample [accessed December 28,2002].  
Supplemental Appropriations Act for Further Recovery and Response to Terrorist Attacks on the United States, Pub. L.  
No. 107-206, 107th Cong., 2nd Sess., 116 Stat. 820 (2003).  
Sussman G., & Kelso, M. A. (1999). Environmental priorities and the president as legislative leader. In D. Soden (Ed.),  

Article 3 
Page 12 of 12 
The environmental presidency (pp. 113-146). Albany, NY: State University of New York Press. 
Udall, T. (2003, November 24). Our publicly owned forests are being Subverted. High Country News, 17. 
United States Congress. House Committee on Resources. (2003, November 19). Deal struck on healthy forests, Senate to 
appoint conferee. News release. Retrieved from http://www.resourcescommittee.house.gov [accessed November 20, 
2003] . 
US Department ofAgriculture. (2002, September 5). USDA and DOl deliver legislation to implement president's Healthy  
Forests Initiative. News release. Retrieved from http ://www.doLgov/news/020905 [accessed September 7, 2002].  
US Department ofAgriculture, Forest Service. (2002a). Factors affecting timely mechanical fuel treatment decisions.  
Washington, DC: US Department of Agriculture.  
--. (2002b). The process predicament: How statutory, regulatory, and administrative factors affect national forest  
management. Washington, DC: US Department ofAgriculture.  
Wildfire Prevention and Forest Health Protection Act of2002, proposed in 107th Cong o2d Sess. (2002). 
Jacqueline Vaughn is Professor of Political Science at Northern Arizona University. Her most recent books are Green  
Backlash: The History and Politics of Environmental Opposition in the U.S., Environmental Activism, and Environmental  
Politics: Domestic and Global Dimensions, 4th ed. Her policy research has appeared in the Journal of Forestry, Policy  
Studies Journal, PA Times, and in her book, Disabled Rights: American Disability Policy and the Fight for Equality.  
Hanna Cortner of Cortner and Associates (Flagstaff, AZ) previously served as Professor in the Ecological Restoration 
Institute at Northern Arizona University and Professor in the School of Renewable Natural Resources at the University of 
Arizona. She is coauthor of the Politics of Ecosystem Management and co-editor of The State and Nature. She has also 
published extensively on public policy in the area of natural resources, including work in the areas of fire, forests , and 
water policy. 
Article A126l20083 
THOMSON 
About Expanded Academic ASAP 
.. 
Copyright and Terms of Use 
GAl.E 
