Vegetation –environment relationships and ecological species groups
of an Arizona Pinus ponderosa landscape, USA
Scott R. Abella* and W. Wallace Covington
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ, 86011-5017, USA; *Author for
correspondence (e-mail: scott.abella@nau.edu)
Received 12 May 2005; accepted in revised form 11 January 2006
Key words: Ecosystem classification, Forest, Ground flora, Indicator species, Soil, Understory
Abstract
Pinus ponderosa forests occupy numerous topographic and soil complexes across vast areas of the south-
western United States, yet few data exist on species distributions and vegetation –environment relationships
for these environmentally diverse landscapes. We measured topography, soils, and vegetation on 66, 0.05-ha
plots within a 110,000-ha P. ponderosa landscape in northern Arizona, USA, to discern vegetation –envi-
ronment relationships on this landscape. We analyzed associations of environmental variables with plant
communities and with single-species distributions, and we classified ecological species groups (co-occurring
plant species exhibiting similar environmental affinities). Gradients in community composition paralleled
gradients in soil texture, available water, organic C, total N, and geographic precipitation patterns. Soil
parent material, affected by the presence or absence of volcanic activity, is a primary factor constraining
vegetation patterns on this landscape. Using discriminant analysis, we built a model that correctly classified
the most important of four grasses (Bouteloua gracilis, Muhlenbergia montana, Sporobolus interruptus, or
Festuca arizonica) on 70 –80% of plots based on five environmental variables related to soil moisture and
resource levels. We also classified 52 of the 271 detected plant species into 18 ecological species groups.
Species groups ranged from Phacelia and Bahia groups occupying xeric, volcanic cinder soils low in organic
C and total N, to Festuca and Lathyrus groups characterizing moist, loam and silt loam soils. We applied
the species groups by estimating P. ponderosa diameter increment in a regression tree using abundances of
species groups. The most rapid P. ponderosa diameter growth of 5 mm/year occurred on plots with high
importance of the Festuca and Lathyrus groups. Our results on this semi-arid landscape support several
general ecological species group principles chiefly developed in temperate regions, and suggest that vege-
tation –environment research has great potential for enhancing our understanding of P. ponderosa forests
occupying vast areas of the southwestern United States.
Introduction
In combination with analyses of communities and
individual species, classifying ecological species
groups is one method for discerning vegetation –
environment
relationships.
Ecological
species
groups
consist
of
co-occurring
plant
species
sharing similar environmental aﬃnities (Spies and
Barnes 1985; Godart 1989; Grabherr et al. 2003).
Species groups are based on the theory that
evolutionary and community processes such as
competition
confine
species
to
environmental
complexes where they are best adapted (Host and
Pregitzer 1992; Kashian et al. 2003). Species group
Plant Ecology (2006) 185:255 –268
 Springer 2006
DOI 10.1007/s11258-006-9102-y

research identifies environmental gradients corre-
lated with species distributions, classifies species
assemblages
occupying
similar
environmental
complexes, and relates species distributions to
management-oriented
variables
such
as
tree
growth (Hix 1988; Host and Pregitzer 1991). Once
species groups are developed for an area, their
distribution can be used for inferring soil proper-
ties and other variables relatively difficult to
measure (Pregitzer and Barnes 1982; Meilleur
et al. 1992). While often all species of a group
occur together on a site, presence of one species of
a group has been interpreted to suggest that the
site meets requirements of all species of that group
(Kashian et al. 2003). Including several species in a
group for indicating environmental conditions
may compensate for absences of individual species
resulting from reasons unrelated to environmental
site factors (Barnes et al. 1998). This has been
perceived as an advantage of using species groups,
rather
than
individual
species,
for
indicating
environmental conditions (Spies and Barnes 1985).
Species groups have typically been constructed
using combinations of ﬁeld observations, inspec-
tion of tabular species  site matrices, and multi-
variate analyses such as cluster analysis (Spies and
Barnes 1985; Godart 1989; Kashian et al. 2003).
The size of groups varies within and among studies,
ranging from fewer than three to greater than eight
species (Bergeron and Bouchard 1984; Godart
1989; Host and Pregitzer 1991). As in many mul-
tivariate studies in plant ecology, species groups
are hypotheses about species distributions and
their relationships to environmental factors. These
hypotheses have practical value for estimating site
conditions,
and
are
tractable
for
refinement
through experimental research developing causal
relationships about species distributions (Pabst
and Spies 1998).
In North America, species groups have been
most frequently developed in eastern temperate
ecosystems. Species groups have been constructed
in a variety of ecosystems, including Quebec
southern boreal forests (Bergeron and Bouchard
1984), Michigan hardwood forests and conifer
woodlands (e.g., Archambault et al. 1989; Simp-
son et al. 1990; Kashian et al. 2003), South Car-
olina Appalachian mountain forests (Abella and
Shelburne 2004), and Georgia Coastal Plain Pinus
palustris P. Mill. savannas (Goebel et al. 2001).
Kashian et al. (2003), for example, classified eight
species groups incorporating 31 species occurring
along soil texture and drainage gradients on a
Michigan
Pinus
banksiana
Lamb.
landscape.
Presence of a Fragaria group indicated soils
containing fine-textured bands where P. banksiana
height growth was rapid, whereas a Rubus group
indicated high water tables that restricted rooting
depth and slowed P. banksiana growth. On a
southern
Appalachian
landscape,
soil
solums
averaged 120 cm thick when a Sanguinaria group
typified by Sanguinaria canadensis L. was abun-
dant, compared to only 61 cm thick when this
group was sparse (Abella and Shelburne 2004).
Species-rich, productive sites were associated with
thick soil solums, which could be readily identified
without making soil measurements by observing
the distribution of the Sanguinaria group. These
studies illustrate that species groups have been
useful for indicating environmental site conditions
on a range of landscapes, and suites of environ-
mental factors affecting species distributions differ
among landscapes.
Species groups have largely been European and
eastern North American concepts, little applied in
western North America (Pabst and Spies 1998).
Plant community classifications termed habitat
typing (e.g., Daubenmire 1961; Hanks et al. 1983)
and analyses of individual indicator species (e.g.,
Korstian 1917; Klinka et al. 1989) have been more
common in western North America. Analyzing
environmental relationships of plant communities
as wholes, indicator and single-species distribu-
tions, and ecological species groups are comple-
mentary
approaches
to
studying
vegetation –
environment relationships (Mueller-Dombois and
Ellenberg 1974; Klinka et al. 1989; McCune and
Grace 2002). Analyses of single-species distribu-
tions complement construction of ecological spe-
cies groups in at least three ways: (i) single-species
distributions are building blocks for classifying
ecological species groups, (ii) not all species readily
fit into species groups, and (iii) common species
particularly faithful to environmental factors have
strong indicator value by themselves.
In this study, we combine analyses of plant
communities, single species, and ecological species
groups to discern vegetation-environment rela-
tionships on a southwestern United States Pinus
ponderosa
P.&
C.
Lawson
landscape.
Pinus
ponderosa forests occupy more than 3.4 million
hectares in Arizona and New Mexico alone, and
256

inhabit a variety of landscapes differing in topog-
raphy and soil parent material (Brown 1994). Few
vegetation –environment data, however, have been
published for this environmentally diverse and
widespread forest type. We undertook this study
within a 110,000-ha Arizona P. ponderosa land-
scape to: (i) determine environmental gradients
most strongly correlated with plant distributions
on this landscape, (ii) classify ecological species
groups, and (iii) illustrate an application of the
species groups by predicting diameter increments
of old P. ponderosa based on species group abun-
dances.
Methods
Study area
This study was performed at elevations between
1920 and 2660 m in northern Arizona, USA on the
north half of the Coconino National Forest and
on the Northern Arizona University Centennial
Forest (Figure 1). Based on Jameson’s (1969)
regional climate study and three weather stations
each with >35 years of records, precipitation
increases and temperatures decrease from east to
west across the study area. Mean total precipita-
tion ranges from 42 to 56 cm/year, snowfall from
152 to 233 cm/year, and mean maximum daily
temperatures
from
15.7
to
17.5 C
(Western
Regional Climate Center, Reno, NV). Slope gra-
dients are less than 10% on most of the landscape,
occasionally greater in deep ravines and on cinder
cones. Volcanic activity has affected soil properties
in many parts of the study area, with the most
recent volcanic eruptions occurring ca. 900 years
ago near Sunset Crater in the northeastern part of
the study area (Moore et al. 1976). Major soil
subgroups include Typic and Udic Argiborolls,
Typic and Mollic Eutroboralfs, Typic Ustorthents,
and Vitrandic Ustochrepts (Miller et al. 1995).
Forests are primarily pure Pinus ponderosa, but
P. ponderosa occurs with Populus tremuloides
Michx. or Quercus gambelii Nutt. in some areas.
Site selection and ecosystem classiﬁcation
We used a terrestrial ecosystem survey (TES) soil
map (Miller et al. 1995) of the study area to
randomly select six mapping units for sampling in
each of 11 TES types (55, 500, 513, 523, 536, 551,
558, 570, 582, 585, and 611) covering a range of
soil types. TES classifies soils to families and
provides information similar to county soil surveys
common in the eastern United States (Miller et al.
1995). We did not sample springs, deep ravines, or
other rare ecosystems
(Crawford Zimmerman
et al. 1999), as our focus was on widespread
landscape ecosystems occupying >95% of the
study area. We sampled one 20  25 m (0.05 ha)
plot in each mapping unit (n=66 plots) in areas
exhibiting open canopies, relatively intact unders-
tories, and no visual indications of major recent
disturbance.
Areas
dominated
by
old
trees
(establishing before 1875) most frequently met
these criteria (Kerns et al. 2003). The utility of
ecological species groups and site relationships
across disturbance gradients (e.g., sites burned by
crown fire) were not assessed in this study.
Disturbance effects on ecological species groups
depend on species persistence and re-colonization
processes (Kashian et al. 2003). These processes
are poorly known in Pinus ponderosa forests, and
are important to study in future research.
Ecological species groups often are developed in
conjunction with ecosystem classiﬁcation because
species distributions can then be interpreted among
environmental gradients treated as continuums or
compared among ecosystem types (Archambault
et al. 1989; Goebel et al. 2001; Abella et al. 2003).
We classified the 66 plots into 10 ecosystem types
(Figure 1) internally similar in environmental and
vegetational
characteristics
detailed
in
Abella
(2005). We named ecosystems based on environ-
mental features (topography or soil parent material)
and diagnostic plant species. Ecosystems ranged
from
sandy-textured
black
cinders/Phacelia
ecosystems containing dry volcanic cinder soils and
low plant cover, to silt loam mesic basalt/Festuca
ecosystems with high cover of Festuca arizonica
Vasey, Carex geophila Mackenzie, and Lupinus
argenteus Pursh. Other ecosystems included treeless
park/Symphyotrichum
ecosystems
occupying
depressions often with clay loam soils, and aspen/
Lathyrus ecosystems containing mixed Populus
tremuloides-Pinus ponderosa- forests with loamy
soils high in total N and plant cover. Aspen eco-
systems were named for their dominant vegetation
rather than soil or topographic properties, because
P. tremuloides likely influences soils differently than
257

does P. ponderosa. Also, it is unclear how long
P. tremuloides clones have occupied our sample
plots to influence soils. There is some circularity in
comparing species distributions among ecosystem
types partially classified based on vegetation com-
position. We make these comparisons in this study
for their descriptive value, recognizing that vegeta-
tion and abiotic components of ecosystems are
interrelated.
Field and laboratory procedures
We sampled ground ﬂora in 15, 1-m2 subplots
centered at 0.5, 5, 12.5, 20, and 24.5 m along the
bottom, middle, and top axes of each of the 66,
0.05-ha plots. We visually categorized areal per-
cent cover of each species rooted in each subplot as
0.1, 0.25, 0.5, and 1% up to 1% cover, at 1%
intervals to 10% cover, and at 5% intervals above
Figure 1. Location of 66 sample plots classified into ecosystem types within a 110,000-ha Arizona Pinus ponderosa landscape, USA
(UTM zone 12). Geographic features are abbreviated as GF and weather stations as WS. Although at similar elevations (2128 –
2244 m), precipitation averages 56 cm/year at Fort Valley (station 1), 54 cm/year at the Flagstaff Airport (station 2), and 42 cm/year
at Sunset Crater (station 3). Ecosystem type abbreviations are as follows: AN = aspen/Lathyrus, BC = black cinders/Phacelia,
CB = clay basalt/Gutierrezia, MB = mesic basalt/Festuca, ML = mesic limestone/mixed flora, PK = park/Symphyotrichum,
RB = rocky basalt/Sporobolus, RC = red cinders/Bahia, XB = xeric basalt/Muhlenbergia, and XL = xeric limestone/Bouteloua.
258

10% cover. We also surveyed the whole 0.05-ha
plot for species not already occurring in subplots.
We recorded these species on a presence/absence
basis, and assigned them a frequency of one and
the lowest cover value for computing importance
values. We calculated importance values on a plot
basis for each species as the average of relative
frequency and relative cover (summing to 100%
for each plot). Frequency, cover, and importance
values provided similar results in statistical anal-
yses, so we chose to use importance values to
integrate frequency and cover. Sampling occurred
from May-August 2003. Nomenclature follows
USDA-NRCS (2004).
Topographic variables we collected on each plot
included slope gradient, transformed aspect (Beers
et al. 1966), and terrain shape index (a measure
of local topographic shape; McNab 1989). We
measured rock cover every 0.3 m on a 25-m tran-
sect by recording the percentage of rock intercepts
out of 83 points. We collected composite soil
samples from 0 to 15 and 15 to 50 cm layers by
digging a 50-cm deep pit at the northwest and
southeast corners of each plot.
Soil samples were air dried, sieved through a
2-mm sieve, and analyzed for CaCO3 equivalent
(Goh
et al.’s
[1993]
approximate
gravimetric
method), texture (hydrometer method), pH (1:2
soil:0.01 M CaCl2), and organic C and total N
(C/N analyzer after HCl removal of inorganic C)
following Bartels and Bigham (1996) and Dane
and Topp (2002). Analysis of duplicate samples
every 10 samples indicated that analytical error
averaged <5%. We estimated soil available water
capacity for each plot based on texture, gravel, and
organic matter (organic C  1.724) using Saxton
et al.’s (1986) equations.
We measured Pinus ponderosa diameter growth
on all plots except for six treeless plots in park/
Symphyotrichum ecosystems by coring two trees
per plot at 40 cm above ground level. We selected
trees for coring that were open-grown dominants
establishing before 1875 (prior to Euro-American
settlement of the study area). We used annual
mean increment from age 50 –150 years averaged
on a plot basis as a growth measure to represent
the early-middle life stage of P. ponderosa (Schu-
bert 1974). These data facilitate identification of
productive sites in presettlement forests, before
growth was impacted by exclusion of historically
frequent fire, competition from increased densities
of small-diameter stems, and other factors associ-
ated with settlement (Feeney et al. 1998). Old trees
also were most readily available for sampling on
our plots because relatively intact understories
formed part of our plot location criteria, and these
understories most commonly occurred outside
patches of old trees (Kerns et al. 2003). We
mounted, sanded, and cross-dated cores using
local tree-ring chronologies.
Statistical analyses
To identify environmental variables most strongly
correlated with plant community composition, we
ordinated the vegetation importance value matrix
with
environmental
vectors
using
non-metric
multidimensional
scaling
(autopilot,
thorough
mode) in PC-ORD (McCune and Meﬀord 1999).
We used discriminant analysis (SAS Institute
1999) to model distributions of four major grasses
based on environmental variables. We employed
stepwise selection (p< 0.15 to enter or stay) to
identify variables for inclusion in the model, and
we also manually entered combinations of vari-
ables (Tabachnick and Fidell 1996). Five of the six
variables identified in stepwise selection provided
high discriminatory power for as few variables as
possible. We used equal prior probabilities, and
employed
cross-validation
(jackknifing)
for
examining model robustness (SAS Institute 1999).
We developed ecological species groups in an
R-mode
analysis
(McCune
and
Grace
2002)
including hierarchical cluster analysis (Sørensen
distance and )0.25 Flexible Beta group linkage
method) and non-metric multidimensional scaling
in PC-ORD (McCune and Mefford 1999). We
relativized importance values for these analyses by
species sums of squares to emphasize habitat
preferences, avoiding groupings based on the
commonness or rarity of species (McCune et al.
2000). Species groups identified in non-metric
multidimensional scaling were similar to those
identified in cluster analysis, and we also examined
species

plot
matrices
to
refine
groupings
portrayed by these multivariate analyses (Kashian
et al. 2003). We included 52 species in species
groups,
representing
common
species
whose
distributions could be assessed based on available
data. While species groups identified in these
analyses are a logical classification of species
259

displaying similar environmental affinities, this
classification is one of a few reasonable groupings
arriving at similar conclusions (Kashian et al.
2003; Abella and Shelburne 2004).
We used a regression tree model (Breiman et al.
1984) in SAS JMP software (SAS Institute 2002)
to estimate Pinus ponderosa diameter increment
based on species group importance values (sums of
importance values of constituent species in a
group). Regression trees partition independent
variables similar to a dichotomous botanical key,
and provide point estimates for dependent vari-
ables corresponding to different levels of inde-
pendent variables (McCune and Grace 2002).
Results and discussion
Community –environment gradients
Plant community composition was correlated with
moisture-aﬀecting soil physical properties such as
texture, Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM)
easting probably partly reﬂecting a precipitation
gradient (Jameson 1969; Figure 1), and soil-re-
source gradients such as total N (Figure 2). Vari-
ables most strongly correlated (Pearson r2>0.2)
with axis 1 or 2 of the community ordination
included 0 –15 cm sand, 0 –50 cm available water
capacity,
15 –50 cm
silt,
0 –15 cm
organic
C,
15 –50 cm total N, UTM easting, and 15 –50 cm
pH.
Festuca
arizonica
and
Lupinus
argenteus
increased in community importance with increasing
soil available water capacity, silt, organic C, and
total N concentrations. Bahia dissecta (Gray) Britt.,
in contrast, increased with increasing sand and
decreasing available water, organic C, and total N.
Species composition was not strongly correlated
(r2<0.08) with the topographic variables of slope
gradient, aspect, and terrain shape index. Gently
sloping ravines and drainages on this landscape are
common, but these topographic features apparently
need to be especially large or steep before they
appreciably affect vegetation patterns (Crawford
Zimmerman et al. 1999). Soil parent material,
rather than topography, primarily structures vege-
tation patterns at broad scales on this landscape
(Figure 2). Parent material on this landscape largely
depends on the presence or absence of volcanic
activity and on the age and type of volcanic material
(Welch and Klemmedson 1975; Moore et al. 1976).
Modeling species distributions
Grasses
had
the
highest
average
importance
among plant lifeform groups in all 10 classiﬁed
ecosystem types, consistent with these forests being
described as forested grasslands (Cooper 1960).
We modeled which one of four dominant grasses
had the highest importance value at different levels
of five environmental variables using discriminant
analysis (Table 1). The model correctly classified
the most important grass on 80% of plots in
resubstitution and 70% in cross-validation. Con-
sistent with ordination results (Figure 2), Festuca
arizonica was most important on plots with high
soil available water capacity. Bouteloua gracilis
(Willd. ex Kunth) Lag. ex Griffiths, however,
dominated plots with lower water-holding capac-
ities and also occurred in clay basalt/Gutierrezia,
xeric limestone/Bouteloua, and cinder ecosystems
where precipitation is sparse (Figure 1). Sporobo-
lus interruptus Vasey occupied clayey sites and was
largely restricted to plots of the rocky basalt/
Sporobolus ecosystem exhibiting high surface rock
cover (>10%) usually occurring in the study
area’s south half. Muhlenbergia montana (Nutt.)
A.S. Hitchc. was important on a range of plots,
but importance of this species declined while
importance of F. arizonica increased in moist,
loam-silt loam basalt/Festuca and aspen/Lathyrus
ecosystems. This concurs with Hanks et al. (1983),
who noted that F. arizonica occupied moister sites
than M. montana, which occurred over a broader
range of dry-moist sites. These distributional dif-
ferences may be related to photosynthetic path-
ways, with the C4 M. montana more competitive
on drier sites than the C3 F. arizonica (Sage and
Monson 1999).
Plots misclassiﬁed by the model mostly occurred
where two species had nearly equal importance
values. Misclassiﬁcations occurred for dry plots
where
Bouteloua
gracilis
and
Muhlenbergia
montana were co-dominant, and on plots of mesic
limestone/mixed flora ecosystems where Festuca
arizonica and M. montana were co-dominant
(Table 1). Nevertheless, this model’s reasonably
good accuracy suggests that quantitative species –
environment models have potential for predicting
plant
distributions
across
southwestern
Pinus
ponderosa landscapes.
Similar to grasses, many forbs occupied char-
acteristic environmental complexes, illustrated for
260

six species along soil texture and fertility gradi-
ents
(Figure 3).
Bahia
dissecta,
for
example,
dominated plots sandier and lower in total N
than did Lupinus argenteus. Occupying interme-
diate
site
conditions,
Pedicularis
centranthera
Gray was important on plots containing 0.05 –
0.1% total N and 20 –40% 15 –50 cm sand.
Penstemon linarioides Gray occurrences were not
soil-texture specific, but 0 –15 cm pH exceeded
6.5 in 89% (8/9) of this species’ occurrences.
Antennaria parvifolia Nutt. andVicia americana
Muhl. ex Willd. exhibited similar distributions,
occupying loam and silt loam sites of lower pH
than P. linarioides. These similarities in single-
species distributions form the basis for classifying
ecological species groups.
Figure 2. Non-metric multidimensional scaling ordination of a 66 plot  271 species importance value matrix for 10 ecosystem types of
an Arizona Pinus ponderosa landscape. Vector lengths are proportional to correlations with community composition. Community
composition was more closely related to soil properties reflecting parent materials than to topographic variables. For soil variables,
A = 0 –15 cm and B = 15 –50 cm. UTM(x) = Universal Transverse Mercator easting and is partly correlated with a precipitation
gradient. Vector abbreviations for species are as follows: BAHDIS = Bahia dissecta, BOUGRA = Bouteloua gracilis, CARGEO =
Carex geophila, ERIDIV = Erigeron divergens, FESARI = Festuca arizonica, GUTSAR = Gutierrezia sarothrae, HYMRIC =
Hymenoxys richardsonii, LUPARG = Lupinus argenteus, MUHMON = Muhlenbergia montana, and SYMASC = Symphyotrichum
ascendens.
261

Ecological species groups
We classiﬁed 18 ecological species groups con-
taining 52 of 271 total species detected in this
study (Figure 4, Table 2). Similar to analyses at
community
and
single-species
levels,
groups
differentiated along soil texture and other gradi-
ents reflecting moisture and nutrient availability.
The Phacelia group, for example, consisting of
Phacelia serrata J. Voss,Penstemon clutei A. Nels.,
and Physaria newberryi Gray, was restricted to
plots in black cinders/Phacelia ecosystems con-
taining the driest surface soils in the study area.
Upper
0 –15 cm
sand
concentration
averaged
92%, 15 –50 cm organic C only 0.2%, and 15 –
50 cm total N only 0.02% in the three plots where
the Phacelia group occurred. Similarly, Erysimum
capitatum (Dougl. ex Hook.) Greene and Hymen-
oxys subintegra Cockerell comprising the Erysi-
mum group were restricted to red cinders/Bahia
ecosystems, and also indicated sandy sites low in
organic C and total N. In contrast, the Festuca
group, consisting of Festuca arizonica, Lupinus
argenteus, and Carex geophila, indicated moist,
loam-silt loam productive soils rich in C and N.
On 13 plots where total importance of the Festuca
group
exceeded
30%
(range = 30 –51%),
0 –
15 cm silt averaged 52%, 15 –50 cm organic C
1.5%, and 15 –50 cm total N 0.13%. Although
overlapping
in
distribution,
the
Muhlenbergia
group typified by Muhlenbergia montana indicated
sandier textures and lower soil-resource levels than
the Festuca group. Upper 0 –15 cm silt averaged
19% lower, and 15 –50 cm organic C and total N
were half as concentrated on the 13 plots where the
Muhlenbergia group was most important (impor-
tance values = 26 –43%) compared to the 13 plots
where the Festuca group was most important.
Bouteloua
gracilis,
Elymus
elymoides
(Raf.)
Swezey, and Muhlenbergia wrightii Vasey ex Coult.
each exhibited unique distributions and were
classified
into
single-species
groups
(Table 2).
Bouteloua
gracilis,
for
instance,
dominated
climatically dry ecosystems irrespective of soil
parent material or texture. This species occurred
with other dry-site groups such as the Phacelia or
Hymenopappus groups in some ecosystems. How-
ever, B. gracilis was more widely distributed
among dry ecosystems than were other dry-site
species groups, which usually were most important
Table 1. Discriminant functions predicting which one of four dominant grasses has the highest importance value at different levels of
five environmental variables for an Arizona Pinus ponderosa landscape.
Bouteloua gracilis
n = 19a
Festuca arizonica
n = 17
Muhlenbergia montana
n = 18
Sporobolus interruptus
n = 5
Discriminant functions
Variable
Constant
)1403
)1362
)1368
)1386
15 –50 cm pH
17.61649
15.91682
15.787
8.74846
0 –50 cm AWCb
1406
1575
1465
1478
0 –15 cm clay (%)
0.83406
0.48799
0.66308
0.74321
15 –50 cm gravel (%)
1.7305
1.94237
1.83275
1.85903
UTM easting (m)c
0.0055
0.00538
0.00543
0.00556
Resubstitution accuracyd
% Classified into groups
Bouteloua gracilis
74
0
16
11
Festuca arizonica
0
88
12
0
Muhlenbergia montana
17
6
56
22
Sporobolus interruptus
0
0
0
100
Cross-validation accuracy
63
88
50
80
a Number of plots where a species exhibited the highest importance value among the four modeled species out of 59 plots where at least
one of these species occurred.
b AWC = available water capacity (Saxton et al. 1986).
c UTM = Universal Transverse Mercator coordinates, partly correlated with a gradient of increasing precipitation from east to west
across the study area (Jameson 1969).
d Classification accuracy by resubstitution into the discriminant function. Values in bold are % correctly classified into a group.
Overall classification accuracy using equal priors was 80% for resubstitution and 70% for cross-validation. Tabachnick and Fidell
(1996) provide methodological details for discriminant analysis.
262

Figure 3. Distribution of six forbs along soil texture and fertility gradients on an Arizona Pinus ponderosa landscape. Distributions
represent the 12 plots where a species was most important or all occurrences if a species occurred on fewer than 12 plots.
263

in only one or two dry ecosystems. Classifying
B. gracilis into an existing dry-site group would
weaken the indicator value of that group and
misrepresent
B. gracilis’s
distribution. Several
previous species-group classifications also have
contained some single-species groups (Bergeron
and Bouchard 1984; Simpson et al. 1990; Meilleur
et al. 1992).
Our results on this semi-arid landscape support
several general species group principles chieﬂy
developed on temperate landscapes (e.g., Spies and
Barnes 1985; Grabherr et al. 2003; Kashian et al.
2003). For example, authors in eastern USA
forests have concluded that while some species
groups are restricted to only one ecosystem type,
most groups occur in several ecosystems but are
Figure 4. R-mode non-metric multidimensional scaling ordination of 49 species constituting 15 ecological species groups of an Arizona
Pinus ponderosa landscape. Three species (Bouteloua gracilis, Elymus elymoides, and Muhlenbergia wrightii) forming single-species
groups are not shown. Species are abbreviated by the first three letters of each of the genus and species names, and their full names and
group identities are given in Table 2.
264

quantitatively most important in only a few
(Archambault et al. 1989; Abella and Shelburne
2004). Our findings concur with this principle be-
cause only a few groups, such as the Phacelia and
Erysimum groups, were restricted to one ecosystem
type. Furthermore, distributions of closely related
groups like the Festuca and Muhlenbergia groups
were only distinguishable quantitatively (Table 2).
Species groups also are reported to more strongly
indicate environmental complexes than single-
factor gradients (Spies and Barnes 1985; Archa-
mbault et al. 1989; Meilleur et al. 1992), which
also agrees with our results. While a soil texture
gradient corresponded with the Bahia group’s
distribution, for example, most other groups could
not be differentiated along single-factor gradients.
This point is exemplified by the Hymenopappus
group, which occurred on a range of soil textures
Table 2. Summary of ecological species groups and their environmental affinities for an Arizona Pinus ponderosa landscape between
1920 and 2660 m elevations.
Dry-site groups
Phacelia group: Restricted to dry, gravelly, black cinder soils of the Sunset Crater volcanic field low in organic C and total N (BC)a
Phacelia serrata, Penstemon clutei, Physaria newberryi
Aristida group: Characteristic of dry, gravelly, sandy or sandy loam black or red cinder soils on or near cinder cones (BC, RC)
Aristida arizonica, Brickellia eupatorioides, Penstemon ophianthus
Erysimum group: Characteristic of dry, sandy loam red cinder soils on or near cinder cones (RC)
Erysimum capitatum, Hymenoxys subintegra
Hymenopappus group: Most abundant on climatically dry limestone or basalt soils (XL, CB)
Hymenopappus filifolius, Plantago argyraea, Penstemon linarioides
Bouteloua group: Climatically dry sites on soils with various parent materials (BC, RC, XL, CB)
Bouteloua gracilis
Bahia group: Most abundant on red and black cinder soils and less abundant on basalt or limestone soils (BC, RC)
Bahia dissecta, Nama dichotomum, Chenopodium graveolens, Muhlenbergia minutissima
Gutierrezia group: Frequent on climatically dry limestone or basalt soils (XL, CB)
Gutierrezia sarothrae, Hymenoxys richardsonii, Eriogonum racemosum
Dry-moist groups
Muhlenbergia group: Dry-moist soils including black and red cinders, limestone, and basalt (most dominant in XB)
Muhlenbergia montana, Geranium caespitosum, Pseudocymopterus montanus, Lotus wrightii
Oxytropis group: Diverse group of dry-moist soils of a variety of parent materials (several ecosystems)
Oxytropis lambertii, Artemisia carruthii, Penstemon virgatus, Packera multilobata, Thalictrum fendleri, Poa fendleriana
Elymus group: Widespread species occurring on 97% of plots and consistently of medium-high abundance (all ecosystems)
Elymus elymoides
Intermediate and moist-site groups
Sporobolus group: Characteristic of loamy or clay loam basalt soils with high (>10%) surface rock cover (RB)
Sporobolus interruptus, Lathyrus laetivirens, Pedicularis centranthera
Blepharoneuron group: Provisional group with both species most abundant on moist basalt and limestone soils (RB, MB, ML)
Blepharoneuron tricholepis, Ceanothus fendleri
Solidago group: Common on limestone and moist basalt soil (ML, MB)
Solidago velutina, Potentilla subviscosa, Antennaria parvifolia, Vicia americana
Festuca group: Dominant on moist, loam-silt loam basalt soils with high organic C and total N (MB, AN)
Festuca arizonica, Lupinus argenteus, Carex geophila
Lathyrus group: Restricted to aspen ecosystems containing moist, loamy soils with high organic C and total N (AN)
Lathyrus lanszwertii, Populus tremuloides
Erigeron group: Occupied all soils except cinder soils but most abundant in two ecosystem types (CB, PK)
Erigeron divergens, Antennaria rosulata
Muhlenbergia wrightii group: Abundant in treeless parks but also occurred on limestone and basalt forested soils (PK, ML, MB)
Muhlenbergia wrightii
Symphyotrichum group: Dominant in parks containing deep, primarily clay loam soils (PK)
Symphyotrichum ascendens, Allium geyeri, Arenaria fendleri, Coreopsis tinctoria, Iris missouriensis
a Ecosystem types where species groups were most characteristic are given in parenthesis: AN = aspen/Lathyrus, BC = black cinders/
Phacelia, CB = clay basalt/Gutierrezia, MB = mesic basalt/Festuca, ML = mesic limestone/mixed flora, PK = park/Symphyotri-
chum, RB = rocky basalt/Sporobolus, RC = red cinders/Bahia, XB = xeric basalt/Muhlenbergia, and XL = xeric limestone/Bout-
eloua.
265

illustrated by Penstemon linarioides’s distribution
(Figure 3).
High
importance
of
this
group,
however, was indicative of dry soils, often of xeric
limestone/Bouteloua
or
clay
basalt/Gutierrezia
ecosystems. Dry soils of these ecosystems resulted
from multifactor gradients of clayey or sandy
textures, low precipitation, and low-moderate
organic C concentrations.
Species groups are based on the theory, derived
from voluminous literature, that species are con-
ﬁned to environmental complexes where they are
best adapted (Mueller-Dombois and Ellenberg
1974; Pregitzer and Barnes 1982; Kashian et al.
2003). The strong associations we observed be-
tween environmental variables and species distri-
butions support this theory (e.g., Figures 2, 3).
However, disturbance and other factors should
not be overlooked for their role in governing
species distributions. It is particularly difficult to
disentangle environmental and disturbance factors
when a given distinct environmental complex, or
ecosystem type, also has a distinct disturbance
regime (Host and Pregitzer 1992). Park/Symphyo-
trichum ecosystems from our data set illustrate this
point. These ecosystems contain an unique envi-
ronment (Abella 2005), but also are intensively
grazed by ungulates (Clary 1975). Several species
of the Symphyotrichum (e.g., Arenaria fendleri
Gray) and Erigeron (Erigeron divergens Torr. &
Gray , Antennaria rosulata Rydb.) groups are
relatively unpalatable (Clary 1975). This could
partly explain why these species thrived in the
heavily grazed park ecosystems, making causal
relationships of these species with environmental
factors less certain. These observations underscore
a research need in Pinus ponderosa forests to better
understand the relative roles and interactions of
environmental
factors
and
past
and
present
disturbances on species distributions.
Estimating tree growth
We applied the species groups by predicting past
diameter growth of old, open-grown Pinus pon-
derosa based on species-group importance values
using a regression tree (Figure 5). Increasing
importance of the Festuca and Lathyrus moist-site
groups indicated rapid P. ponderosa growth. In
contrast,
increasing
importance
of
the
Bahia
group, often in the red cinders/Bahia ecosystem,
signified slow growth. Growth differences were
substantial, ranging from 5.0 mm/year when the
moist-site groups were important, to 2.4 mm/year
when importance of the Bahia group equaled or
exceeded two. Other groups generally indicative of
slow tree growth included the Sporobolus group
occupying rocky sites with clayey subsoils, and the
Bouteloua group inhabiting climatically dry sites.
Daubenmire (1961) and Stansfield et al. (1991)
also found that plant distributions predicted tree
growth fairly reliably in P. ponderosa forests.
These findings are consistent with understory
plants serving as phytometers useful for indicating
environmental site conditions, which affect trees
Figure 5. Regression tree estimating diameter growth of old, open-grown Pinus ponderosa based on species group importance values.
Terminal nodes represent predicted mean P. ponderosa diameter increment in mm/year (predicted value ± standard deviation). The
model does not include plots in treeless park/Symphyotrichum ecosystems or plots in black cinders/Phacelia ecosystems because of
unusually high tree growth variability. Species-group abbreviations are as follows: FA = Festuca arizonica, BD = Bahia dissecta,
LL = Lathyrus lanszwertii, and SV = Solidago velutina.
266

and other ecosystem components (Kashian et al.
2003).
Conclusion
Species groups classiﬁed in this study are initial
multivariate hypotheses about which species often
growth together and have similar environmental
requirements. Site conditions and Pinus ponderosa
growth can be reasonably estimated on this land-
scape by observing plant species distributions. We
believe that studies of communities and individual
species combined with classifications of ecological
species groups provide a stronger understanding of
vegetation-environment relationships than study-
ing either one alone. For example, our analysis of
Lupinus argenteus’s distribution found that this
species dominated plots containing the most soil N
(Figure 3). Correspondingly, the Festuca group, of
which L. argenteus was a member, dominated high
soil N plots. Additional research could clarify
whether L. argenteus’s N-fixing ability was a
causal factor increasing soil N concentrations and
affecting the distribution of the whole Festuca
group. Several forms of vegetation-environment
research will likely prove useful for furthering
our understanding of species distributions on
environmentally diverse P. ponderosa landscapes.
Acknowledgements
We thank Judy Springer, Kyle Christie, Allison
Bair,
Steve
Buckley,
Katie
Allen,
Brandon
Williams, Scott Sink, and students and staﬀat the
Ecological Restoration Institute for help with
ﬁeldwork;
Sheila
Sandusky
of
the
Coconino
National Forest and J.J. Smith and Keith Pajkos
of the Centennial Forest for permission to collect
samples; Brian Zimmer for performing soil anal-
yses; Steve Overby, Lauren Hertz, and the U.S.
Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station
for use and operation of their C/N analyzer; Dan
Guido and Steve Hart for use of texture equipment
and advice on soil analyses; Joe Crouse for
constructing
Figure 1;
and
Margaret
Moore,
Carolyn Sieg, Pete Fule´ , and two anonymous
reviewers for reviewing the manuscript. This study
was funded by the U.S. Forest Service and the
Ecological Restoration Institute.
References
Abella S.R., Shelburne V.B. and MacDonald N.W. 2003.
Multifactor classification of forest landscape ecosystems of
Jocassee Gorges, southern Appalachian Mountains, South
Carolina. Can. J. Forest Res. 33: 1933 –1946.
Abella S.R. and Shelburne V.B. 2004. Ecological species groups
of South Carolina’s Jocassee Gorges, southern Appalachian
Mountains. J. Torrey Bot. Soc. 131: 220 –231.
Abella S.R. 2005. Environmental and vegetational gradients on
an Arizona ponderosa pine landscape: implications for
ecological restoration. Ph.D. dissertation, School of Forestry,
Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, Arizona, USA.
Archambault L., Barnes B.V. and Witter J.A. 1989. Ecological
species groups of oak ecosystems of southeastern Michigan.
Forest Sci. 35: 1058 –1074.
Barnes B.V., Zak D.R., Denton S.R. and Spurr S.H. 1998.
Forest Ecology. John Wiley and Sons Inc., New York.
Bartels J.M. and Bigham J.M. (eds),
1996. Methods of Soil
Analysis. Part 3. Chemical Methods. Soil Science Society of
America and American Society of Agronomy, Madison,
Wisconsin, USA.
Beers T.W., Dress P.E. and Wensel L.C. 1966. Aspect trans-
formation in site productivity research. J. Forest. 64: 691 –
692.
Bergeron Y. and Bouchard A. 1984. Use of ecological species
groups in analysis and classification of plant communities in
a section of western Quebec. Vegetatio 56: 45 –63.
Breiman L., Friedman J.H., Olshen R.A. and Stone C.J. 1984.
Classification
and
Regression
Trees.
Wadsworth,
Inc.,
Belmont, California, USA.
Brown D.E (ed.),
1994. Biotic Communities: Southwestern
United States and Northwestern Mexico. University of Utah
Press, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
Clary W.P. 1975. Range management and its ecological basis in
the ponderosa pine type of Arizona: the status of our
knowledge.
General
Technical
Report
RM-128.
U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain
Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, Colo-
rado, USA.
Cooper C.F. 1960. Changes in vegetation, structure, and
growth of southwestern pine forests since white settlement.
Ecol. Monogr. 30: 129 –164.
Crawford Zimmerman J., DeWald L.E. and Rowlands P.G.
1999. Vegetation diversity in an interconnected ephemeral
riparian system of north-central Arizona, USA. Biol. Con-
serv. 90: 217 –228.
Dane J.H. and Topp G.C. (eds),
2002. Methods of Soil
Analysis. Part 4. Physical Methods. Soil Science Society of
America, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
Daubenmire R. 1961. Vegetative indicators of height growth of
ponderosa pine. Forest Sci. 7: 24 –34.
267

Feeney S.R., Kolb T.E., Covington W.W. and Wagner M.R.
1998. Influence of thinning and burning restoration treat-
ments on presettlement ponderosa pines at the Gus Pearson
Natural Area. Can. J. Forest Res. 28: 1295 –1306.
Godart M. 1989. Ecological species groups in forest commu-
nities in South Belgium. Vegetatio 81: 127 –135.
Goebel P.C., Palik B.J., Kirkman L.K., Drew M.B., West L.
and Pederson D.C. 2001. Forest ecosystems of a Lower Gulf
Coastal Plain landscape: multifactor classification and anal-
ysis. J. Torrey Bot. Soc. 128: 47 –75.
Goh T.B., St. Arnaud R.J. and Mermut A.R. 1993. Carbon-
ates. In: Carter M.R. (ed.), Soil Sampling and Methods of
Analysis, Lewis Publishers, Boca Raton, Florida, USA, pp.
177 –185.
Grabherr G., Reiter K. and Willner W. 2003. Towards objec-
tivity in vegetation classification: the example of the Austrian
forests. Plant Ecol. 169: 21 –34.
Hanks J.P., Fitzhugh E.L. and Hanks S.R. 1983. A habitat type
classification system for ponderosa pine forests of northern
Arizona. General Technical Report RM-97. U.S. Department
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and
Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA.
Hix D.M. 1988. Multifactor classification and analysis of
upland hardwood forest ecosystems of the Kickapoo River
Watershed, southwestern Wisconsin. Can. J. Forest Res. 18:
1405 –1415.
Host G.E. and Pregitzer K.S. 1991. Ecological species groups
for upland forest ecosystems of northwestern Lower Michi-
gan. Forest Ecol. Manag. 43: 87 –102.
Host G.E. and Pregitzer K.S. 1992. Geomorphic influences on
ground-flora and overstory composition in upland forests of
northwestern Lower Michigan. Can. J. Forest Res. 22: 1547 –
1555.
Jameson D.A. 1969. Rainfall patterns on vegetation zones in
northern Arizona. Plateau 41: 105 –111.
Kashian D.M., Barnes B.V. and Walker W.S. 2003. Ecological
species groups of landform-level ecosystems dominated by
jack pine in northern Lower Michigan, USA. Plant Ecol. 166:
75 –91.
Kerns B.K., Moore M.M., Timpson M.E. and Hart S.C. 2003.
Soil properties associated with vegetation patches in a Pinus
ponderosa-bunchgrass mosaic. West. North Am. Nat. 63:
452 –462.
Klinka K., Krajina V.J., Ceska A. and Scagel A.M. 1989.
Indicator Plants of Coastal British Columbia. UBC Press,
Vancouver.
Korstian C.F. 1917. The indicator significance of native vege-
tation in the determination of forest sites. Plant World 20:
267 –287.
McCune B. and Mefford M.J. 1999. PC-ORD: Multivariate
Analysis of Ecological Data. Version 4. User’s Guide. MjM
Software Design, Gleneden Beach, Oregon, USA.
McCune B., Rosentreter R., Ponzetti J.M. and Shaw D.C.
2000. Epiphyte hapitats in an old conifer forest in western
Washington, USA. Bryologist 103: 417 –427.
McCune B. and Grace J.B. 2002. Analysis of Ecological
Communities. MjM Software Design, Gleneden Beach,
Oregon, USA.
McNab W.H. 1989. Terrain shape index: quantifying effect of
minor landforms on tree height. Forest Sci. 35: 91 –104.
Meilleur A., Bouchard A. and Bergeron Y. 1992. The use of
understory species as indicators of landform ecosystem type
in heavily disturbed forest: an evaluation in the Haut-Saint-
Laurent, Quebec. Vegetatio 102: 13 –32.
Miller G., Ambos N., Boness P., Reyher D., Robertson G.,
Scalzone K., Steinke R. and Subirge T. 1995. Terrestrial
Ecosystems Survey of the Coconino National Forest. U.S.
Forest Service, Southwestern Region.
Moore R.B., Wolfe E.W. and Ulrich G.E. 1976. Volcanic rocks
of the eastern and northern parts of the San Francisco
volcanic field, Arizona. J. Res. U.S. Geol. Survey 4: 549 –560.
Mueller-Dombois D. and Ellenberg H. 1974. Aims and Meth-
ods of Vegetation Ecology. John Wiley and Sons, New York.
Pabst R.J. and Spies T.A. 1998. Distribution of herbs and
shrubs in relation to landform and canopy cover in riparian
forests of coastal Oregon. Can. J. Bot. 76: 298 –315.
Pregitzer K.S. and Barnes B.V. 1982. The use of ground flora to
indicate
edaphic
factors
in
upland
ecosystems
of
the
McCormick Experimental Forest, upper Michigan. Can. J.
Forest Res. 12: 661 –672.
Sage R.F. and Monson R.K. (eds),
1999. C4 Plant Biology.
Academic Press, New York.
SAS Institute 1999. SAS/STAT User’s Guide Version. 8. SAS
Institute, Inc., Cary North, Carolina, USA.
SAS Institute 2002. JMP Version 5 User’s Guide. SAS Institute,
Inc., Cary, North Carolina, USA.
Saxton K.E., Rawls W.J., Romberger J.S. and Papendick R.I.
1986. Estimating generalized soil-water characteristics from
texture. Soil Sci. Soc. America J. 50: 1031 –1036.
Schubert G.H. 1974. Silviculture of Southwestern ponderosa
pine: the status of our knowledge. Research Paper RM-RP-
123. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky
Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort
Collins, Colorado, USA.
Simpson T.B., Stuart P.E. and Barnes B.V. 1990. Landscape
ecosystems and cover types of the reserve area and adjacent
lands of the Huron Mountain Club. Occasional Papers of the
Huron Mountain Wildlife Foundation Number 4. Huron
Mountain Wildlife Foundation, Big Bay, Michigan, USA.
Spies T.A. and Barnes B.V. 1985. Ecological species groups of
upland northern hardwood – hemlock forest ecosystems of
the Sylvania Recreation Area, Upper Peninsula, Michigan.
Can. J. Forest Res. 15: 961 –972.
Stansfield W.F., McTague J.P. and Lacapa R. 1991. Dominant-
height and site-index equations for ponderosa pine in east-
central Arizona. Can. J. Forest Res. 21: 606 –611.
Tabachnick B.G. and Fidell L.S. 1996. Using Multivariate
Statistics. Harper Collins, New York.
USDA-NRCS
[U.S.
Department
of
Agriculture,
Natural
Resources Conservation Service] 2004. The PLANTS Data-
base, Version 3.5. National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge,
Louisiana, USA.
Welch T.G. and Klemmedson J.O. 1975. Influence of the biotic
factor and parent material on distribution of nitrogen and
carbon in ponderosa pine ecosystems. In: Bernier B. and
Winget C.H. (eds), Forest Soils and Forest Land Manage-
ment, Les Presses de l’Universite’ Laval, Quebec, Canada,
pp. 159 –178.
268
