 
News Release  
 
 
 
 
Contact: bonnie.stevens@nau.edu 
Friday, Aug. 21, 2009  
 
Ecological Restoration Pioneer to Receive Prestigious Award 
 
FLAGSTAFF, Ariz. – He’s been called the father of restoration and next week, founder and 
executive director of the Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University Dr. 
William “Wally” Covington will be honored by the Society for Ecological Restoration 
International  at its 19th world conference in Perth, Australia. 
 
The Regents’ Professor of Forest Ecology in the School of Forestry at NAU will be receiving the 
prestigious Theodore M. Sperry Award. Sperry, mentored by conservationist Aldo Leopold, is 
considered one of the pioneers of ecological restoration through his revolutionary work on the 
Curtis Prairie, the world's oldest restored prairie, occupying some 60 acres in southern 
Wisconsin.  
 
“More than any other single individual, Wally Covington has provided the combination of 
science and vision for restoration of ponderosa pine forests of North America, where he has 
worked for more than 30 years, both as a graduate student and then as a member of the faculty 
of NAU. During this time, he has contributed enormously to the basic understanding of structure 
and function of ponderosa pine forests, as reflected in a truly extraordinary lifetime record of 
publication in restoration ecology,” said the Society’s Awards Committee Chair Alan Unwin.   
 
Through the Sperry Award, the Society honors individuals who have made a significant 
advancement to the science or technique used in restoration practices. SER representatives say 
Dr. Covington has been the leading voice for ecological restoration in the dynamic ponderosa 
pine ecosystems on the Intermountain West.  He also is a key player in national and 
international forest policy, an important voice in legislation promoting ecological restoration 
and widely known for developing the presettlement model of restoration labeled the “Flagstaff 
Plan” by then Secretary of the Interior Bruce Babbitt. 
  
“When you are drawn to the vast ponderosa pine forests and spend decades diagnosing and 
treating them as if they were a sick patient, you become very focused on finding solutions to 
restore health,” said Dr. Covington. “It is with great respect for the members of the Society of 
Ecological Restoration International that I am deeply touched, extremely honored and 
enthusiastically encouraged. Thank you for noticing, appreciating and motivating those of us 
who have been feeding a lifelong passion, following a dream and lucky to live long enough to 
see the results of science-based approaches making a difference on the ground.” 
 
The ERI at NAU was established in 1997. Since then Dr. Covington, ERI researchers and students 
have been facilitating the restoration of dry, frequent-fire forest ecosystems in the North 
American West from Mexico to Canada. Dr. Covington also has been instrumental in the 
creation of the Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes with the states of Arizona, New 
Mexico and Colorado. 
###     
