New Fire-Climate Study Underway in Mexico 
by Larissa Yocom, NAU Forestry Graduate Student  
 
Three of the sites sampled in 2007 were 
 located on this mountain in Coahuila. 
 
measurements of fuel dynamics. A set of unique relict sites, where fire regimes and forest 
structures were least perturbed by humans during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, will 
also be incorporated. 
The 2007 field season was very successful as the research team sampled seven sites for fire 
scars and one site for forest age/structure data in just two weeks. Twelve people participated, 
including researchers and students from NAU, the University of Arizona, Rocky Mountain Tree-
Ring Research, Inc., Universidad Autónoma Agraria “Antonio Narro,” and INIFAP CENID-
RASPA--a government research agency in Mexico. 
Sites sampled were located in the Sierra Madre Oriental mountain range in eastern Mexico, in 
the states of Coahuila and Nuevo León. The sites were all located at or above 10,000 feet in 
elevation. The research team collected 254 fire scar samples. Most samples were Mexican 
mountain pine (Pinus hartwegii), but there were some Mexican white pine (Pinus ayacahuite), 
Vejar fir (Abies vejari), and Douglas fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii) as well. Almost all samples were 
cut from stumps, logs, or standing dead trees. In addition, one or two samples from live trees 
were taken at each site. 
I will be processing the fire scar samples and analyzing the data during the 2007-2008 academic 
year here at NAU. After the samples are prepared, the dates of past fires will be determined. Fire 
years will then be compared with climate reconstructions to determine what effect climate events 
have on fire occurrence. 
New Fire-Climate Study 
Underway in Mexico 
  
If Opportunity Doesn't  
Knock, Build a Door 
Working Group Forms 
in Northern Arizona to 
Develop Native Seed 
Supply 
  
ERI Collaborates in 
Creation of a Statewide 
Strategy for Restoring 
Arizona’s Forests 
  
ERI Art Gallery 
  
Diversity in a Dry 
Forest: 
Place-based Ecological 
Restoration in the 
Wahoo Watershed  
ERI Graduate Students 
and Their Research 
 
Alumni Corner  
 
Does Coarse Woody 
Debris Play a Role in the 
Recovery of Pinyon-
Juniper Woodlands 
After Severe Fire? 
Daniel Laughlin Wins 
Another Award from 
Ecological Society of 
America 
Staff News 
This summer a group of researchers from the 
United States and Mexico gathered in the remote 
Sierra Madre Oriental Mountains of Mexico to start 
collecting data for a study that will focus on fire, 
climate, and forest structure.  Led by the ERI’s Dr. 
Pete Fulé, the research project will try to determine 
whether widespread climate events, such as El 
Niño, or local characteristics, such as fuel, 
topography and ignition events, have the greatest 
effect on fire occurrence. The project, which is 
funded by the National Science Foundation, also 
aims to develop a new network of long-term fire 
and climate  chronologies  together  with  
Pictured at Ejido La Encantada, Peña Nevada (state of 
Nuevo León): Front  (l to r): Vicenta Constante García, 
INIFAP CENID‐RASPA; Julián Cerano Paredes, INIFAP 
CENID‐RASPA. Back (l to r): Dr. Pete Fulé, NAU & ERI; Erica 
Bigio, student, U of A; Cameron Fulé, volunteer, Flagstaff, 
AZ; Gustavo Medellín Pérez, Ejido La Encantada; Armando 
Becvort, student, Universidad Autónoma Agraria “Antonio 
Narro”; Larissa Yocom, student, NAU 

 
 
If Opportunity Doesn't Knock, Build a Door 
by Susan Nyoka, ERI Research Technician  
 
This past summer, NAU School of Forestry faculty and NAU’s 
Centennial Forest staff, along with ERI staff and graduate 
students, collaborated in “building a door” for NAU sophomore, 
Ryan Thomas. Ryan, who is legally blind, participated in a four-
week internship that provided him with hands-on experience in 
laboratory, field, and educational settings in the field of forestry-
-his chosen major. 
During the course of his internship, Ryan participated in various 
projects, including serving as a counselor-in-training with the 
Centennial Forest’s Junior Forestry Academy where he 
mentored campers and presented some of the curriculum. Ryan 
also served on the crew assisting Ph.D. student Liz Kalies with 
her research project looking at small mammal responses to 
forest management, and he travelled to Mount Trumbull with 
the ERI to assist botanists in collecting data for a seeding study. 
During the final week of his internship, Ryan worked in 
Assistant Professor Andy Thode’s forestry lab collecting 
biomass data for a greenhouse experiment along with various 
other lab-related tasks, including data entry.  
I recently interviewed Ryan to discuss his internship and the 
lessons he learned from the experience. Ryan told me that his 
primary goal in participating in the internship was to gain work 
experience, although he also set out to alleviate doubts about 
his abilities and disprove some assumptions others may have 
about his limitations. Indeed, when I talked with people who 
interacted with Ryan, they said that he often exceeded their 
expectations in his ability to find solutions and modify methods 
of assigned tasks to suit his needs. When I asked Ryan about 
his best experience, he said that he especially appreciated Dr. 
Thode's approach because she allowed him to try a variety of 
tasks rather than assuming something was too difficult for him 
to take on. This vote of confidence was useful in helping Ryan 
discover ways to adapt field and lab methods so he will be 
able to work more independently in the future. Ryan 
conceded that accommodating him in lab and field 
environments may require some preparation and creativity, 
which was not always possible for the projects he 
participated in for the internship due to their short duration. 
However, with just a few adjustments, Ryan can easily see 
himself working fully and independently on any of the 
research projects he participated in this past summer. He 
suggests that adaptations may be as simple as using puff 
paint on plot layout diagrams to make them accessible or 
installing JAWS software on a computer to enable him to 
perform data entry on a spreadsheet. 
 
In the end, the “door of opportunity” has proven to open in 
both directions, providing a win-win situation for all parties. 
Ryan obtained forestry-related work experience, while NAU 
faculty, staff, and students not only benefited from Ryan's 
hard work and enthusiasm, they also came away with an 
expanded view of what is possible for a blind student and 
how best to accommodate their abilities. As Ryan so 
eloquently stated, “The main things are to observe, keep an 
open mind, and occasionally wing it.”  
 
Working Group Forms in Northern Arizona to Develop 
Native Seed Supply 
by Judy Springer, ERI Research Specialist, Sr. 
The Northern Arizona Native Seed Alliance (NANSA) was 
formed in March, 2007 in order to increase the supply of 
locally grown native seeds and plants for northern Arizona 
revegetation and restoration projects. The NANSA is 
comprised of a large number of individuals, for-profit and 
non-profit organizations, government agencies, NAU 
elements (the ERI, NAU Ecological Monitoring and 
Assessment Program, NAU Research Greenhouse 
Complex), Arizona Game and Fish Department, U.S. 
2
NAU Senior Forester 
Academy Challenge 
ropes course (team 
challenge; Ryan is on the 
left, partner Enzo is on 
the right) 
Junior Forester Academy 
group (Back, left to right: 
Ryan, Cheryl Miller, Enzo 
(counselor in training), 
Front: camp nurse and 
counselors)

 
 
Working Group Forms in Northern Arizona to Develop 
Native Seed Supply, continued 
Forest Service, Arboretum at Flagstaff, Coconino Natural 
Resource Conservation District, Museum of Northern Arizona, 
The Nature Conservancy, Bureau of Land Management, 
National Park Service, and numerous others. Janet Lynn, of 
NAU’s Ecological Monitoring and Assessment Program, is the 
coordinator of the organization. 
The mission statement of the NANSA states that the alliance is 
“a task force comprised of individuals, government agencies, 
non-profit organizations, and commercial businesses who are 
interested in developing a source of native plant materials for 
revegetation following wildfires, restoration, and other 
revegetation projects in northern Arizona.”  
The NANSA is working at developing a venue that will help 
members share information and collaborate on native plant 
research, education, and applied projects in our region. The 
alliance is also currently seeking funding to conduct research 
on such topics as 1) requirements and techniques for growing 
native plants--from seed collection to commercial production; 2) 
selection of the best species for use in revegetation and wildlife 
habitat projects on the Colorado Plateau; 3) ecology and life 
history of native plant species; and 4) economic feasibility of 
growing native plants in northern Arizona. The NANSA is 
working in tandem with the Uncompahgre Plateau Project 
(http://www.upproject.org/), and others across the Colorado 
Plateau, to form a partnership known as the Colorado Plateau 
Native Plant Initiative. This organization also has native seed 
increase as one of its main goals. 
Meetings are held monthly, and a workshop on seed production 
and increase will be held on Oct. 31, 2007 in conjunction with 
the Ninth Biennial Conference of Research on the Colorado 
Plateau in Flagstaff: 
http://sbsc.wr.usgs.gov/cprs/news_info/meetings/biennial/2007/i
ndex.asp 
For further information, or to be added to the e-mail list, please 
contact Janet Lynn (NAU/ EMA) at janet.lynn@nau.edu or Judy 
Springer (NAU/ERI) at judy.springer@nau.edu. 
 
ERI Collaborates in the Creation of a Statewide Strategy 
for Restoring Arizona’s Forests 
by Dave Egan, ERI Editor/Writer 
 
and promote wood products industries that can utilize small-
diameter timber and biomass. 
Several current and former members of the ERI played 
important roles in the creation of this important policy 
statement. They included Wally Covington, Diane Vosick, 
Jesse Abrams, Pete Fulé, Victoria Yazzie, and Dave Egan. 
Diane, in particular, was very engaged in this process and was 
instrumental in organizing people, writing various parts of the 
strategy, making presentations at public meetings, and 
strategizing ways to bring people with different perspectives 
together to reach consensus. Victoria helped the group make 
important connections with tribal leaders in the state, and Dave 
aided Jean Palumbo, the project coordinator, with the editing, 
layout, and final print publication of the 150-page document. 
In this project, ERI staff worked as members of the Statewide 
Strategy Subcommittee of the Governor’s Forest Health 
Oversight Council, which was co-chaired by Ethan Aumack 
(Grand Canyon Trust) and Thomas Sisk (NAU, ForestERA). 
The subcommittee was populated with Arizonans from the 
environmental community, wood products industry, and federal 
and state agencies. 
The plan has five key strategies:  
 
Increase the human and financial resources 
dedicated to restoring Arizona’s forests and 
protecting communities 
 
Coordinate and implement action at the landscape 
scale 
 
Increase the efficiency of restoration, fire 
management, and community protection activities 
On July 25, 2007, Arizona 
Governor Janet Napolitano 
released a first-of-its-kind, 
20-year plan to restore the 
state’s forests. The plan calls 
for increased funding to 
implement landscape-scale 
ecological restoration of 
Arizona’s now fire-prone 
forests, protect Arizona’s  
citizens and infrastructure,
3

 
ERI Collaborates in the Creation of a Statewide Strategy 
for Restoring Arizona’s Forests, continued 
 
Encourage ecologically sustainable, forest-based 
economic activity  
 
Build public support for accomplishing restoration, 
community protection, and fire management across 
the state 
These strategies are supported by 16 recommendations and 
50 action items. 
In addition to sections that discuss the current state of 
Arizona’s forests, the policy context for restoration, economic 
considerations for restoring forest health and building a 
collaborative foundation for the strategy, the strategy includes 
detailed accounts of nine forested landscapes across the state. 
Print copies of the strategy are available from Ethan Aumak, 
The Grand Canyon Trust, 2601 N. Fort Valley Road, Flagstaff, 
AZ 86001; (928) 774-7488 x 210, Fax: (928) 774-7570, 
eaumack@grandcanyontrust.org. The strategy can be viewed 
online at http://www4.nau.edu/eri/DownloadFiles/12459-
60Statewide-final.pdf    
 
ERI Art Gallery 
by Robin Long 
 
who is a  senior majoring in environmental engineering. 
Kaitlin’s photographs are of landscapes and cityscapes she 
experienced during her travels earlier this year throughout 
Scandinavia, where she was part of the NAU Study Abroad 
Program. 
Visitors are welcome to view the art gallery during normal 
business hours—8 a.m. to 5 p.m., Monday through Friday--
except when the room is scheduled for other ERI activities. 
Call Linsey Baker at 928/523-7182 to make sure there are no 
conflicts. Arrangements can also be made to contact the 
artists, and items are often available for sale.  
Past exhibits have included photographs, paintings and 
quilts, usually with an environmental theme. We would like to 
acknowledge past exhibitors: Patty Kohany, Joe Trudeau, 
Erin Thurston, Joel Viers, Brandon Oberhardt, Megan 
Robertston, and Danielle Gift.  
 
Diversity in a Dry Forest: Place-based Ecological 
Restoration in the Wahoo Watershed 
by Matt Tuten, ERI Research Technician 
 
Heading west from the Black Range Ranger District office in 
Truth or Consequences, New Mexico on my first visit to the 
site of a proposed forest restoration project, it seemed 
unlikely that a montane ponderosa pine forest existed 
anywhere near the desert scene of bare rock, blue grama 
grass, and creosote scrub I saw from my car window. Aside 
from a few brief incursions into pinyon- and juniper-dotted 
hills, the scene remained similar for the nearly 60-mile 
journey. However, a dramatic change took place shortly after 
passing the dusty hamlet of Winston, New Mexico. I was 
soon in a familiar ponderosa pine landscape, one showing 
the signs of an ecosystem where fires had not occurred for 
decades: a landscape of dense pines with interlocking 
crowns, fire-scarred stumps, trees encroaching into grassy 
meadows, and a thick layer of pine needles and forest litter 
where one might expect an understory of bunchgrasses. 
My purpose in this part of the world was to assist the Wahoo 
Watershed Workgroup, a local collaborative forestry group, 
with the planning and monitoring of a 70-acre forest 
restoration treatment. The group, founded in 2003, exists to 
involve community members in the work of forest restoration. 
It is funded by the Collaborative Forest Restoration Program, 
a federally funded program that exists in New Mexico, but not 
other western states. This program prods collaborative 
forestry groups to complete restoration activities within the 
national forests of the state. It encourages loggers, ranchers, 
rangers, birders, and bikers to come together to develop 
restoration projects capable of sustaining ecosystem and 
community values. The Sierra County Water Conservation 
The ERI is proud to feature 
original art by its students, staff, 
and alumni in our ERI Art 
Gallery, which is located in Room 
35 of the NAU Forestry Building. 
Our current exhibit is a series of 
photographs by Kaitlin Tymrak, 
Dense pine 
stands within the 
first project site 
before treatment. 
This area was 
thinned during the 
Spring of 2005. 
4

 
 
Diversity in a Dry Forest: Place-based Ecological 
Restoration in the Wahoo Watershed, continued:  
District had obtained a grant from this program to initiate forest 
restoration activities, and a group of us from the ERI were on-
board to assist the planning and monitoring of three forest 
restoration projects during the course of three years. 
Initially, the task seemed fairly straight forward. We were 
working in a relatively pure ponderosa pine stand near the 
Continental Divide. Evidence of historical forest conditions 
abounded in the form of fire-scarred tree stumps, old yellow-
barked pines, and the occasional ancient juniper or oak. We 
collected a few fire-scarred tree cross-sections and developed 
a monitoring and assessment framework for the initial 40-acre 
area. After analysis of the stand and fire scar data, we found 
that a massive influx of pine establishment occurred in the last 
70 to 80 years, and that there were no fires during the same 
time period. This was not exactly surprising--a similar story is 
told in many western national forests. Our recommendations 
for the restoration of this area were: Replace the old stumps 
and old dead pines with young trees and retain all of the old, 
yellow-barked trees in the area; then remove the remainder of 
the many small, suppressed trees. 
 
Ancient pinyon, juniper and oak woodlands within the highest 
reaches of the second project area 
After this trip and other later trips to this site, I was confident 
the pinelands of the Gila National Forest operated under the 
same principles as the well-researched pinelands near 
Flagstaff, Arizona. That is, remove fire from the ecological 
equation and pine regeneration, once kept in check by 
frequent surface fires, will grow up, dominate the landscape, 
and crowd out understory plant species. This story holds true 
for much of northern Arizona, but the Black Range of the Gila 
National Forest is a long way from Flagstaff. 
Our second project within the surrounding area drove this 
point home. This 120-acre parcel of land was less than a mile  
away from our first project, but it was a far from homogenous 
pine stand. A network of intermittent dry creeks dissected this 
landscape, draining uplands rising 400 feet above their 
cobbled beds. Several cottonwood groves dotted the eroded 
stream banks. Pine regeneration crowded old meadows. 
Following our assessment, more forest complexity emerged. 
The ponderosa pine-dominated bottomlands and meadows 
blend seamlessly into a rocky pine, oak, and juniper savanna 
on the midslope. Eventually the pine-dominated forest 
transitions into a dense and ancient pinyon, alligator juniper, 
and gray oak forest at the highest extents of the project area. 
Little historical evidence of these species in the form of old 
trees, stumps or downed logs was present in the bottomlands, 
although many small-diameter pinyon and junipers were seen 
growing beneath the canopy of large noble pines.  
Each of these tree species, including the cottonwoods growing 
along the streambank, has a different response to the 
management activity and natural processes they experienced 
during the last century. There is little evidence that the current 
condition of the dense pinyon, juniper, and oak forests of the 
uplands is outside the natural range of conditions expected in 
this forest type. Logging did not take place in these 
inaccessible areas and fires have difficulty burning in these 
stands. It is very likely that these same past management 
activities were an important disturbance factor in the 
ponderosa pine lowlands. Here the lack of fires during the last 
century has resulted in unnaturally high tree densities and 
uncharacteristic species compositions. Needless to say, the 
prescription we developed for this site differed dramatically 
from that of the first. 
As we begin the third project with the Wahoo Watershed 
Workgroup, I look back on the lessons we’ve learned during 
our first attempts at ecological restoration within this 
watershed. I’ve learned about the give-and-take that is 
necessary for meaningful collaboration to occur within a group 
of diverse stakeholders. I’ve learned forest restoration thinning 
in the Southwest is expensive, especially when it takes place 
almost two hours away from the nearest economic center. 
Most importantly I’ve learned to avoid painting the landscape 
with a broad brush. In much the same way an artist paints or 
draws from life, recreating what he or she sees, we forest 
practitioners must attempt to restore places, not idealized 
landscapes. Our task is to restore complex mosaics of 
different ecological parts. To do this, we must see the places 
where we work for what they really are, and we can only do 
this through an unbiased assessment of the parts before we 
attempt to improve or restore the whole. Call it the basis of 
good forest stewardship, I like to consider it job security. 
 
5

 
 
ERI Graduate Students and Their Research 
by Mark Daniels, ERI Research Specialist 
 
with the ERI is centered on the landscape-scale restoration 
projects at Mount Trumbull, on the Arizona Strip. Using data 
collected on monitoring plots before and after treatment, and 
FVS and FIRESUM computer models, Cordie will attempt to 
forecast changes in tree structure, biomass, potential forest 
products, carbon and nutrients under alternative scenarios of 
restoration treatments and scheduling. Another aspect of her 
research will look at bird communities in the treated and control 
units at Mount Trumbull to analyze the effects of the treatments. 
The goal of both of these research projects is to provide 
guidance to land managers for effective long-term management 
of the ecosystem. At present, Cordie has begun analyzing the 
FVS data, and has collected field data on bird populations at the 
site. 
  
NAU. Her current research involves a series of projects looking 
at small mammal communities in the context of the forest 
restoration and thinning projects being conducted around 
Flagstaff. For her first study, Liz collected field data (trapping 
small mammals) at about 100 sites southwest of Flagstaff. To 
analyze this data, she will use a technique called occupancy 
modeling to track changes in small mammal biodiversity over 
time and in response to various management practices. The 
second portion of her research will address changes in the 
composition of fungal communities in response to forest 
management practices. Analyzing hair and fecal samples of  
 
several mammal species, Liz will attempt to determine 
which species are primarily responsible for the dispersion 
of fungal spores, and put this in the context of how forest 
treatments affect forest mammal communities. The third 
major component of her research will be to assess the 
effects of the changing mammal communities on one of 
their primary predators, the northern goshawk, which has 
been in decline across the Southwest. Liz hopes that 
outcomes of these three studies will help to effectively 
incorporate wildlife conservation issues into large-scale 
forest management in the Southwest. 
 
 
and between her time in school, she worked on a variety of 
research projects in Montana, Wyoming, Colorado, and 
North Dakota. Valerie’s research at NAU centers around 
the effects of wildfire on soil and forest floor properties, 
using sampling across a chronosequence of fires (a series 
of fires that burned at different times in the past, in this 
case from 2 to 35 years ago) to assess changes over time. 
The first part of her study examines rates of nitrogen 
mineralization after wildfire, in an attempt to understand the 
dynamics of this important ecosystem process after stand-
replacing wildfire in ponderosa pine forests. Valerie is also 
growing native species in burned forest soils to measure 
above- and belowground biomass and nutrient uptake, to 
get a more realistic idea of what soil nutrients are actually 
available for plant use.  A third component of her project, 
presently in its earliest phases, is to attempt to characterize 
the fungal species that participate in decay of woody debris 
after wildfires. Results from these studies may help 
researchers understand the ecosystem processes that 
operate after wildfires, and help future rehabilitation efforts. 
 
Corinne (Cordie) Diggins 
received her bachelor’s degree in 
wildlife conservation from the 
University of Delaware in 2006, 
and worked on various research 
projects in Delaware, Kentucky, 
Maryland, and Maine before 
coming to NAU. Her research 
Liz Kalies received a bachelor’s 
degree in environmental science 
from Cornell University in 1998, 
and a master’s in environmental 
science with a focus on wildlife 
ecology from Yale University in 
2004.  She worked on research 
projects in Connecticut and 
Massachusetts before coming to  
Valerie Kurth received 
her bachelor’s degree in 
biology from Macalester 
College in St. Paul, 
Minnesota in 1999, and a 
master’s degree in 
forestry from the 
University of Montana in 
Missoula in 2004. During 
6

 
 
 
researcher and teacher  in Pennsylvania, Missouri, Oregon, 
and Belize before coming to Flagstaff to accept a botanist 
position with the ERI. His Ph.D. research concerns the long-
term effects of climate variability and forest structural 
changes on herbaceous plant communities. Using data from 
a series of recently relocated historic monitoring plots, Daniel 
will attempt to answer three broad questions: 1) What are the 
relationships between inter-annual climatic variability and 
herbaceous productivity and diversity in ponderosa pine 
forests?, 2) To what extent has the herbaceous understory 
changed since the beginning of the 1900s?, and 3) What 
types of functional consequences have followed in the wake 
of the observed changes in herbaceous communities? With 
several seasons of data already collected, including re-
mapping the vegetation on almost 100 1-m
2 plots, as well as 
information from soil cores and biomass samples from 
around the plots, Daniel will analyze his data using a variety 
of techniques, including structural equation modeling--a 
cutting-edge method for characterizing relationships between 
the many interrelated variables in complex ecological 
systems. 
 
course of his botanical work with ERI, Chris noticed a major 
invasion of cheatgrass (an invasive annual grass species) 
across the Mount Trumbull ecological restoration site, and 
decided to study the invasion and possible ways to counter it 
for his Ph.D. research. In the first aspect of his project, Chris 
examined the ecological factors that influenced why certain  
patches on the landscape remain dominated by native 
species and resist invasion by cheatgrass. He then went on 
to study ways land managers might be able to fight 
cheatgrass invasions, including physical removal of 
cheatgrass biomass and seeding with native species. Finally, 
Chris is also conducting a greenhouse study on the abilities 
of three native plant species to compete with cheatgrass 
under a variety of nutrient and water conditions. Chris has 
completed field work for the first two parts of the project, and 
is planning to begin the greenhouse study next summer. 
 
She also co-owned a native plant nursery in Durango, 
Colorado for two years—an experience that will serve her 
well in her master’s program at NAU. For her project, Donna 
will develop a feasibility study on the production and use of 
native seeds for large-scale revegetation projects, such as 
seeding after forest fires, restoration projects, or highway 
construction. Seed sources for large-scale projects like these 
have been difficult to come by, which often results in land 
management agencies seeding with non-native species. 
There are currently efforts underway to initiate native seed 
production on a larger scale (see Judy Springer’s article on 
the Northern Arizona Native Seed Alliance in this issue), and 
Donna’s work will help inform such efforts so that they have 
the best chance of success. 
 
treatments after wildfires in northern Arizona ponderosa pine 
forests. Using three treatments (seeding with two widely used 
non-native grass species, a mix of common native grasses 
Daniel Laughlin 
received his bachelor’s 
degree in biology from 
Calvin College in Grand 
Rapids, Michigan in 
1999, and his master’s 
degree in ecology from 
Penn State University in 
2002. Daniel worked as a 
Chris McGlone received both 
his bachelor’s and master’s 
degrees in biology from New 
Mexico State University in 
1995 and 2001, respectively. 
After working in a variety of 
botanical and ecological 
positions in New Mexico, Chris 
came to the ERI in 2001 as a 
research specialist. During the 
Donna Peppin received a 
bachelor’s degree in 
environmental conservation 
from Northern Michigan 
University in Marquette in 
2003, and has worked as a 
researcher and native plant 
specialist around Michigan 
and southwestern Colorado. 
Ken Stella received his bachelor’s 
degree in natural resources from 
Humboldt State University in 
Arcata, California in 2002. Since 
then he has worked as a 
consultant and researcher in 
various locations around California 
and Colorado. Ken’s research 
focuses on the response of plant  
7

 
 
 
and forbs, and an unseeded control) Ken will attempt to 
quantify and analyze the effects of each treatment on the 
regeneration of plant communities after fire, and determine 
which treatment was most effective at producing high rates of 
plant cover. Ken collected data from three recent wildfires in 
the 2006 and 2007 field seasons, and will return to all three 
sites for one more season of data collection in 2008. 
 
research technician. Matt’s research project will attempt to 
statistically compare two forest improvement treatments 
(evidence-based ecological restoration thinning and thinning 
based on requirements for northern goshawk habitat) in a 
replicated experiment on the Kaibab National Forest, north of 
the Grand Canyon. On-the-ground application of the goshawk 
guidelines across the Southwest (which are mandated by U.S. 
Forest Service policy) has been difficult and inconsistent, and 
land managers have recently proposed using evidence-based 
ecological restoration thinning as a way to satisfy the 
requirements for goshawk habitat in a more standardized 
fashion. Matt’s research involves marking both treatments on 
replicated 1-hectare study plots with colored flagging, and 
then measuring and mapping all trees and historical forest 
evidences on the plots. This will allow him to model 
differences in forest structure and composition following the 
two treatments and compare them to the historical forest 
structure, so that land managers may scientifically determine if 
evidence-based ecological restoration treatments are actually 
compatible with the goshawk guidelines. 
 
Connecticut, Washington, D.C., Montana, Idaho, Australia, 
and Panama. Her research at NAU involves examining the 
factors that influence fire regimes in the Sierra Madre Oriental 
and Occidental mountains in Mexico. Larissa and a group of 
researchers from the United States and Mexico, led by ERI’s 
Dr. Pete Fulé, travelled to several sites in the Sierra Madre 
Oriental this past summer to collect more than 250 fire scar 
samples, and measure various site and stand characteristics. 
Larissa’s work now involves dating all the fire scars and 
reconstructing the fire history of the sites, after which she will 
try to match up the historical fire patterns with a variety of 
climatic cycles, such as El Niño-Southern Oscillation and the 
Pacific Decadal Oscillation. She will then attempt to determine 
if these large-scale climate patterns or more local site 
characteristics, such as topography, elevation and fuel load, 
are more important in influencing the fire regimes. (See 
Larissa’s report on this project in this newsletter, on page 1). 
 
Alumni Corner 
by Robin Long, ERI Student Services Coordinator 
  
Allison Snyder and her husband, Derek 
After almost four years assisting with data management in the 
National Park Service Inventory and Monitoring Program’s 
Pacific Island Network, Allison (Cocke) Snyder (M.S. 
Forestry '04) has returned to Flagstaff. Allison now works at 
the NPS office on campus where she manages natural 
resource data for the NPS Southern Colorado Plateau 
Network, which includes 19 national parks and monuments 
throughout Arizona, New Mexico, Colorado, and Utah. Allison 
and her husband, Derek, have bought a home in Kachina 
Village. She is happy to be back in the Southwest and is 
looking forward to her first winter in four years. Rumor has it 
that she still wears her trademark flip-flops even though the 
temperatures are already dropping below freezing at night 
here in Flagstaff! 
 
Matt Tuten received his 
bachelor’s degree in biology, 
geography, and environmental 
studies from Gustavus Adolphus 
College in Saint Peter, 
Minnesota in 2001. He then 
worked on research projects in 
Colorado and New York before 
joining the ERI in 2002 as a 
Larissa Yocom received a 
bachelor’s degree in public 
policy analysis and biology from 
Pomona College in Claremont, 
California in 1999, and a 
master’s degree in  environ-
mental science from Yale 
University in 2006. Larissa has 
worked in a variety of research 
and coordination positions in  
8

 
 
  
He already “dove in” to his research project this past summer 
in the Adirondacks Mountains of New York, where he was 
spotted riding a duckie about a mile north of the headwaters of 
the Hudson River. The project goal was to take water velocity 
measurements at different depths, but Jeff writes, “We spent 
most of our time getting swept away by the flood currents!”  
  
 resources manager II in Flagstaff. She finds herself busy 
educating others on the fact that she is now Megan Date. Cool 
last name, Megan!   
 
 “This is a super sweet position.”  Not only is he working as a 
resource advisor on prescribed burns, but he also is involved 
with Burned Area Emergency Recovery teams and on post-fire 
salvage operations. Newlyweds Jon and Ali were married in 
January and are enjoying living close to swimming holes in the 
woods and doing some daily fishing on the way home from 
work. 
 
  
one look at her proud parents. 
Have alumni news to share?  Please send your news to 
Robin Long at robin.long@nau.edu or call (928) 523-7187. 
 
Does Coarse Woody Debris Play a Role in the Recovery 
of Pinyon-juniper Woodlands After Severe Fire? 
by Dave Huffman, ERI Research Associate, and Joe 
Crouse, NAU Forestry Applications Systems Analyst 
 
Ecosystems characterized by the presence of pinyon pine 
(Pinus edulis, P. monophylla) and juniper (Juniperus spp.) 
trees occur on millions of acres across the American 
Southwest. These ecosystems are commonly referred to as 
the “pinyon-juniper”, or “PJ” forest type. Pinyon-juniper 
ecosystems are typically found in semi-arid environments 
and their structure ranges from open savanna to closed 
woodland formations. Presently, there is keen interest in 
identifying management approaches that restore ecological 
integrity, conserve biological diversity, and sustain the 
resource values of these ecosystems. Developing such 
approaches requires fundamental understanding of natural 
processes and dynamics. Fire and patterns of recovery after 
disturbance are two key processes we are researching at 
the Ecological Restoration Institute. 
Jeff Muehlbauer (B.S. 
Chemistry & Biology ’07) and 
his new wife, Jacque, are 
settling in comfortably in 
Chapel Hill, North Carolina. 
Congratulations are in order for 
these two high school 
sweethearts. Jeff is pursuing a 
Ph.D. in riparian ecology at the 
University of North Carolina.
Wedding bells continue! Megan 
Van Horne (M.S. Forestry ’05) 
married Sam Date in June at 
Old Orchard Beach, Maine at 
what looks like a lovely beach 
wedding. Megan works with the 
Arizona State Lands  
Department as a natural 
Jon Lamb (B.S. Forestry 
’07) checked in from 
northern California where 
he is enjoying his job as a 
fuels specialist on the 
Beckworth Ranger District 
on the Plumas National  
Forest.  In Jon’s own words
And we have a new member of 
the ERI family! Ruby Joy Ball 
was born September 20th, 
2007 in Flagstaff to Randall 
and Laura Ball (B.S. Nursing 
’07).  Ruby was 6 lbs. 14 oz. 
and 19.5 inches long when she 
arrived.  She seems to be 
already living up to her middle 
name as you can tell by taking 
Juniper trees 
establishing near 
the logs and 
branches of trees 
killed in a severe 
fire 30 years ago. 
9

 
Severe fires that kill most or all of the trees are common in 
pinyon-juniper woodlands of the Southwest. These fires are 
often small in size but in hot, droughty summers when winds 
are strong, dense woodlands of hundreds to thousands of 
acres may burn in a single blaze. Several researchers have 
described the sequence of vegetative recovery after such 
fires. Recovery is typically slow and may require up to 300 
years before dense woodlands reoccupy the burned site. 
Generally, it is thought that annual plants disseminated by 
the wind establish on the site immediately after fire; then 
shrubs, perennial grasses, and herbs gain ground and mainly 
replace the annuals; next there is a period when shrubs and 
small trees are most abundant; and finally shrubs and 
perennials lose their hold and trees again form a woodland 
structure. The rate of the recovery process appears to 
depend on several factors, including density of the woodland 
before fire, past management (e.g., woodcutting, livestock 
grazing), fire severity, availability of propagules (i.e., seeds, 
and sprouts), and presence of “nurse” structures. 
It has been shown that seedlings of pinyon, and to some 
extent juniper, establish well beneath shrubs and other trees 
as well as near large rocks. Seeds are often deposited close 
to these structures by animals. Some birds may use shrubs 
as perches, while other animals intentionally cache seeds in 
these specific types of locations. Shrubs and rocks function 
as “nurses” by providing young seedlings with protection from 
harsh environmental conditions. Since shrubs and rocks can 
function as nurse structures, it seems plausible that standing 
dead trees, logs, and even stumps may play a similar role. 
However, little research has been done to describe the role of 
coarse woody debris in affecting patterns of ecosystem 
recovery after severe fire. 
 
Over time, coarse woody debris may function as a “nucleus” 
around which woodlands develop after severe disturbance. 
This image shows (A) coarse wood left after a fire that 
probably occurred before 1900, (B) a juniper tree that has 
established and grown since the fire, and (C) younger pinyon 
pine trees that have established beneath the older juniper. 
Coarse woody debris can be defined as dead trees or tree 
fragments (e.g., stumps, logs, large branches, or chunks of 
wood) greater than about 3 inches in diameter. The 
ecological roles, rates of input, and spatio-temporal patterns 
of coarse woody debris in pinyon-juniper ecosystems have 
not been thoroughly studied. Research done by Mike 
Stoddard with the ERI indicates that slash (i.e, boles, tops, 
and branches left over after tree thinning) reduces soil 
erosion and helps grasses establish. Other scientists have 
found similar results on a variety of sites. In addition to 
protecting seedlings from harsh environmental conditions 
and stabilizing soil, coarse wood may also trap wind-blown 
seeds, provide a source of carbon and stimulate nutrient 
cycling, and protect seedlings from herbivory. These effects 
may continue for a period of decades since wood 
decomposition can be very slow in the dry conditions of the 
Southwest. Once trees grow and provide shade, they may 
provide microsites suitable for yet more trees to regenerate. 
In this way, coarse woody debris may function as a sort of 
nucleus around which woodlands eventually develop after 
severe disturbance. The amount and type of coarse woody 
debris left after fire is influenced by several factors, including 
initial woodland conditions, fire intensity, and management 
actions. If coarse woody debris does play an important role in 
facilitating  recovery of woodland conditions after such 
disturbances, management interventions may be planned 
that emphasize conservation of dead wood in order to 
accelerate tree establishment and sustain habitat. 
In 2007, we began a project to address questions related to 
post-fire recovery patterns in pinyon-juniper ecosystems of 
northern Arizona. In particular, we are studying spatial 
arrangement of coarse woody debris, shrubs, and tree 
regeneration. We will evaluate associations among these 
components by mapping their exact point locations, as found 
on large sample plots, and analyzing these maps using 
spatial statistics. With these data we will be able to compare 
the relative importance of coarse woody debris and shrubs 
as nurse structures for both pinyon and juniper tree 
establishment. We will also be able to assess the relative 
benefit of standing dead trees, logs, or other types of coarse 
wood for tree regeneration. Finally, since sample plots were 
placed in fires of different ages, we will be able to ask 
additional questions related to the length of time, or the 
period in woodland development, during which coarse woody 
debris is an effective facilitator of tree regeneration. These 
studies are intended to increase our understanding of natural 
processes in southwestern pinyon-juniper woodlands and 
assist efforts to conserve and restore these valuable 
ecosystems. 
 
10

 
 
Daniel Laughlin Wins Another Award from the Ecological 
Society of America 
by Dave Egan, ERI Writer/Editor 
Daniel Laughlin, an ERI research specialist and winner of the 
2006 Ecological Society of America’s E. Lucy Braun Award 
for Excellence in Ecology, recently won the 2007 E.C. Pielou 
Student Award in Statistical Ecology from the Statistical 
Ecology Section of ESA.  
Daniel’s award-winning work, which he co-authored with 
former ERI employee, Scott Abella, and presented at the ESA 
Conference this August in San Jose, California, is titled 
“Explaining gradients in plant community composition with a 
general multivariate model.” When asked about his most 
recent award, Daniel said, “I was very excited about the 
results of our study, and I am honored that the Statistical 
Ecology Committee felt the same way.” For his efforts, Daniel 
will receive a check for $200 and a book written by the famed 
statistical ecologist and writer, Eveleyn C. Pielou, at next 
year’s ESA meeting in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. 
Congratulations, Daniel!!  
For those interested in learning more about Daniel’s work you 
can read the abstract of his ESA talk (following), or contact 
him at Daniel.Laughlin@nau.edu 
Abstract: Analysis and interpretation of community 
composition is difficult due to the high dimensionality of 
community datasets. Data reduction methods, such as 
ordination, can reduce a community matrix down to at least 
two orthogonal axes, suggesting that at least two major 
ecological processes generate gradients in species space. 
Based on assembly and response rule theory, we 
hypothesized that plant community composition is a function 
of the interactions among three general constructs: abiotic 
and biotic factors and disturbance history. We sampled 
vegetation and soils on 75 randomly located plots across a 
broad soil gradient within a 110,000-ha ponderosa pine forest 
in northern Arizona to evaluate this hypothesis. General 
multivariate models have appeal when analyzing ecological 
systems because they have the potential to shed light on the 
relative importance of multifaceted factors (e.g., abiotic 
gradients). We evaluated the relationships between ordination 
results and environmental conditions using structural equation 
modeling. The model employed composite variables, which 
specify the combined effects of multiple factors on a response 
in order to simplify the complex specific model, to address the 
general hypothesis, and to evaluate the relative importance 
of the three theoretical constructs. We identified two 
independent compositional gradients in ponderosa pine 
forest understory plant communities, suggesting that there 
were at least two underlying ecological processes that 
generated these gradients. Interestingly, the general model 
suggested that abiotic factors explained one compositional 
gradient (R
2=0.71), and biotic factors and disturbance history 
explained the second compositional gradient (R
2=0.61) in 
this system.  
 
Staff News: 
Krista Coquia Joins ERI as Web Content Manager; 
Hágoónee' and See You Soon Wishes to Victoria Yazzie 
and Charlie Denton 
 
Krista has many varied interests and is constantly taking 
classes to satisfy her inquisitive nature. She has a degree in 
biology from San Francisco State University (1993), and a 
master’s degree in art history from the University of California 
Riverside (1997), where her thesis was “Andrea del Sarto’s 
Madonna of the Harpies” (Look it up and learn something 
about Italian Renaissance painting!!). Prior to accepting her 
new position with ERI, Krista was studying reptiles in the  
Mojave Desert and working on a second master’s degree in 
biology at California State Polytechnic University. 
In addition to her experiences in academia, Krista is very 
skilled with computers, developing databases, and, naturally, 
in creating and maintaining web sites. She has created web 
sites for Scripps College's permanent art collection, Cal 
Poly's Biology Department, The Physiological Ecology of 
Reptiles Lab, and for various artists and art studios. Krista 
has also taught digital photography and digital imaging 
classes while working at Scripps College. 
Krista’s husband, James is a ceramic artist. He is at NAU 
pursuing a degree in ceramics from the University’s highly 
Krista Coquia joined the ERI 
team in mid-July replacing 
Chuck Bullington as the ERI 
web content manager. She 
works with Yiqun Lin, who 
oversees programming the 
web site, and Dave Egan, ERI 
editor/writer, as a member of 
the web site team. 
11

 
respected ceramic arts program. When not at her computer, 
Krista enjoys woodworking, gardening, taking care of her 
chameleons, and tending her bonsai plants. She’ll be busy 
next year with a new joy—a baby girl!! 
 
Intro to Forestry, Fisheries and Wildlife; and Internships in 
Natural Resources. Her longer-term goals include helping the 
college, which only became fully accredited in 1998, develop 
a forestry program. The Menominee Nation is known 
worldwide for their sustainable forestry practices, and Victoria 
interacts with personnel from Menominee Tribal Enterprises 
as part of her work with students. She writes of her 
experience, “Field work with the students has turned out to be 
rather rewarding for all. I have had MTE Forestry participate. 
There is great support here.” 
 
and New Mexico.  Fortunately for ERI and its clients, Charlie 
will be returning to ERI on a temporary, part-time basis in the 
near future. In the meantime, he has a new wood planer to 
play with and a “honey-do” list that’s longer than his arm!! 
Happy retirement, Charlie! It’s well deserved. 
 
 
Agave, northern Mexico 
Photo credit: Larissa Yocom 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Northern Arizona University
Ecological Restoration Institute
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ  86011 
Victoria Yazzie, former 
assistant to the director, 
left ERI in July to take a 
teaching position at the 
College of Menominee 
Nation in Keshena, 
Wisconsin. In her first 
semester at CMN, Victoria 
is teaching Intro to 
Environmental Science; 
Charlie Denton has officially 
retired from ERI after six 
years as an integral member 
of the ERI Agency Outreach 
Team. During that time, 
Charlie has been a leader in 
terms of working with Forest 
Service personnel and 
community leaders who are 
interested in restoring 
frequent-fire forests in Arizona 
12
