SEPTEMBER 1997 Restoration Ecology Vol. 5 No. 3, pp. 265–270
265
© 1997 Society for Ecological Restoration
Effectiveness of Road 
Ripping in Restoring 
Infiltration Capacity of 
Forest Roads
Charles H. Luce1
Abstract
Many forest roads are being closed as a step in water-
shed restoration. Ripping roads with subsoilers or
rock rippers is a common practice to increase the infil-
tration capacity of roads before closure. When consid-
ering the effectiveness of ripping for reducing runoff
and erosion and the potential reduction in slope sta-
bility by saturating road fills, it is important to know
how ripping changes the infiltration capacity of forest
roads. Hydrographs from simulated rainfall on 1 3 1 m
plots were analyzed to find the saturated hydraulic
conductivity, an indicator of infiltration capacity. I ex-
amined saturated hydraulic conductivity for three
treatments on two different soils. One road was built
in a soil derived from the metamorphic belt series ge-
ology of northern Idaho, a soil noted for its high rock
fragment content. The second road was built in a
sandy soil derived from decomposed granitics of the
Idaho batholith. On each soil, five plots were in-
stalled on a road before ripping, and nine plots were
installed on the same road segment following ripping,
four covered with a heavy straw mulch and five with-
out. Three half-hour rainfall events with intensities
near 90 mm/hr were simulated on each plot. Results
show that ripping increases hydraulic conductivities
enough to reduce risk of runoff but does not restore
the natural hydraulic conductivity of a forested slope.
The unripped road surfaces had hydraulic conductivi-
ties in the range of 0–4 mm/hr, whereas ripped roads
were in the range of 20–40 mm/hr after the second
event. Surface sealing and tilled soil subsidence pro-
cesses are important in reducing the hydraulic con-
ductivity of the soils with repeated wetting. Subsi-
dence appears to be important on the granitic soil,
whereas surface sealing was more important on the
belt series soil.
Introduction
atural surface runoff in most forests is restricted to
channels and nearby areas. Construction of forest
roads substantially alters the hillslope hydrology by
causing surface flow in areas far from established chan-
nels. Overland flow from forest roads can carry sedi-
ment eroded from the road surface, extend channel sys-
tems (Montgomery 1994; Wemple, 1994), and increase
the probability of landslides (Sidle et al. 1985). Water-
sheds with dense road networks commonly experience
increased sedimentation and peak flows.
To reduce watershed degradation by roads that are
no longer needed, many roads are being closed and
obliterated. Methods to carry this out vary from simple
closure with an earth berm at the road entrance to com-
plete recontouring of the surface. One of the more pop-
ular methods is ripping, where a bulldozer drags rock
rippers or subsoilers through the road to break up the
compacted layers forming the road. This method pro-
duces a result similar in appearance to plowing and is
meant to enhance infiltration to reduce runoff and flow
concentration. The loosened surface deters further vehi-
cle access, and the improved seedbed enhances revegeta-
tion. Vegetation, in turn, maintains infiltration capacity,
stabilizes the road prism, and protects against erosion.
Several researchers have examined the problem of sur-
face soil compaction in reclaiming roads, mined lands,
and degraded rangeland. Some of the early research on
roads examined plant densities following various treat-
ments. Kidd and Haupt (1968) examined effectiveness of
scarification to a 12 inch depth and other factors on
growth of grass species on recently closed logging roads.
Scarification followed by seeding increased the number
of surviving plants per unit area but did not change the
percentage ground cover relative to no scarification.
Ripping and related activities are an important part
of reclaiming mined lands, and there is substantial liter-
ature on the effectiveness of various treatments for
mine reclamation. Most studies have examined the ef-
fectiveness of soil amendments and plant selection in
achieving appropriate plant cover (see for example
Farmer et al. 1974). Ripping is considered so fundamen-
tal that few studies have addressed it directly. Verma
and Thames (1978) point out that deep chiseling (a spe-
cific tillage technique similar to ripping but shallower)
is effective in preventing runoff and erosion on rela-
N
1U.S.D.A. Forest Service Intermountain Research Station, 1221 
S. Main, Moscow, ID 83843, U.S.A.
This paper was written and prepared by U.S. government 
employees on official time, and, therefore, it is in the public 
domain and not subject to copyright. The use of trade or firm 
names in this paper is for reader information only and does 
not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of Agriculture 
of any product or service.

Effectiveness of Road Ripping
266
Restoration Ecology
SEPTEMBER 1997
tively flat slopes. They also point out that the effect is
temporary, usually less than 1 year, and that chiseling
must be used in conjunction with other treatments.
Gifford (1975) reviewed a few studies on the effective-
ness of ripping in decompacting rangeland soils. The arti-
cles reviewed there showed that deep ripping could
greatly decrease runoff from natural events, while shallow
ripping with little surface disturbance had little effect. The
papers reviewed also suggested that effectiveness of rip-
ping treatments on rangelands decreases over time.
Agricultural operations and the reactions of soil to
tillage have been under scrutiny for centuries. Two pro-
cesses examined by contemporary researchers, soil crust-
ing (also called surface sealing) by rainfall and tilled soil
subsidence, are important to freshly tilled mineral road
soils. Among authors who have measured the develop-
ment of crusts on soils during rainfall are Mohammed
and Kohl (1987), Loch and Foley (1994), Sharma et al.
(1981), Jennings et al. (1987), and Bosch and Onstad
(1988). High-energy raindrop impact drives the process
by breaking apart aggregates on the surface and redis-
tributing the fine particles to fill pores, thereby reduc-
ing the saturated hydraulic conductivity of the surface
layer. This process seems most important in soils with
enough clay content to form aggregates that are other-
wise water stable. To study the effects of soil settlement
on four freshly tilled soils, Onstad et al. (1984) examined
bulk density, saturated hydraulic conductivity, and ran-
dom roughness height while applying 15.2 cm of water
with no raindrop impact energy (using furnace filters).
They found that dry bulk density rose quickly, and satu-
rated hydraulic conductivity dropped quickly, as water
was added. Soil settlement is a well-known problem in
regions of silty and sandy soils because of their low cohe-
sion under saturated conditions.
Tilled agricultural soils typically have saturated hydrau-
lic conductivities in the range of 2 to 30 mm/hr, whereas
mildly disturbed forest soils (bare mineral soil, no com-
paction) have conductivities in the range of 60 to 80 mm/
hr (Luce 1995). These figures suggest that ripping may not
entirely restore the hillslope hydrology. Roads gener-
ally have saturated hydraulic conductivities less than 4
mm/hr, so a tilled soil still represents an improvement.
Given these insights, one must seriously question the
degree of hydrologic recovery provided by ripping. If
the purpose of the ripping is, in part, to prevent surface
runoff, it must increase the infiltration capacity of the
soil. Infiltration capacity at a particular time is a func-
tion of soil properties and the soil moisture content at
that time. Saturated hydraulic conductivity is a reason-
able standard for comparing infiltration capacity among
soils or treatments, as it is independent of soil moisture
and represents the infiltration capacity of a soil near satu-
ration. This study examined the response of saturated
hydraulic conductivities of roads to ripping.
Methods
Saturated hydraulic conductivities were measured on an
unripped road, a ripped road, and a ripped road with a
heavy straw mulch application, on two soils during three
sequential simulated rainfall events. The three sequential
simulated rainfall events were used to determine hy-
draulic conductivity changes with added water and rain-
splash. The first soil was derived from metasedimentary
belt series parent materials. Belt series soils have high
rock fragment content and high fine content (Fig. 1).
Plasticity indexes for road soils in the belt series soils
range from 5 to 10%, and clay content ranges from 18 to
25% of the fraction finer than 4 mm (Idaho Panhandle
National Forests, unpublished data). The second soil
was derived from Idaho batholith granitics. Most of the
road material came from alluvial deposits of the South
Fork of the Salmon River. These materials were sandy
with some rock fragments and low fines (Fig. 1). Plastic-
ity indexes for road soils on the South Fork Salmon River
road range from 0 to 10% (Payette National Forest, un-
published data). The mulch was added to reduce the
raindrop kinetic energy impact important to the surface
sealing processes and to determine the result of wetting
only on soil consolidation. This provided a control to see
whether surface sealing contributed to a decline in satu-
rated hydraulic conductivity following ripping.
Ripping on the belt series road was accomplished us-
ing a Caterpillar D-9 bulldozer with three 4-foot ripping
teeth spaced 2.5 feet apart. Small, 8-inch “wings” were
welded to the bars about 1 foot from the tip to promote
fracture in the soil. The resulting ripped soil was well
fractured and turned over to a depth of roughly 3 feet.
Figure 1. Particle size distribution for the two soils for all par-
ticles smaller than 20 mm. Steeper parts of the graph indicate 
areas of high relative frequency. The belt series soil shows a 
bimodal distribution, peaking in gravels (.2 mm) and silts 
(,0.05). The granitics are sandier, peaking in the coarse sand 
to fine gravel region (,3 mm and .0.5 mm).

Effectiveness of Road Ripping
SEPTEMBER 1997 Restoration Ecology
267
On the granitics, a large road construction grader with
2-foot ripping teeth with 2-foot spacing was used. The
resulting ripped soil had large, flat clods, between 3 and
4 inches thick and 8–14 inches wide jumbled in a well
tilled sand. The clods were formed from the original
road surface, and the material underneath fractured
more completely. The depth of tilled material was be-
tween 2 and 2.5 feet. Saturation overland flow was not
observed from the rainfall simulations used here, so the
lack of depth did not affect the results printed here.
Mulch was added such that the soil underneath was not
visible, a loading much greater than typically applied
for erosion control.
The hypothesis was that the belt series soil would ex-
hibit a modest increase in hydraulic conductivity with
ripping, that the protection of the rock fragments would
yield only a minor decrease over the course of the rain-
fall due to surface sealing, and that the matrix of cohe-
sive fines would prevent tilled soil settling. It was further
expected that the granitic soil would increase modestly
in hydraulic conductivity with initial ripping, decrease
slightly with increased rainfall due to settling, and show
no difference in decrease when mulch was added.
For each treatment, 1 3 1 m plots were constructed
with sheet metal boundaries and a trough at the down-
slope end to collect runoff. On each soil, five plots were
installed on a road before ripping, and nine plots were
installed on the same road segment following ripping,
four covered with a heavy straw mulch and five without.
A modified Purdue rainfall simulator provided rain-
fall for the sprinkling infiltrometer plots. The rainfall
simulator oscillates a downward-pointed irrigation sprin-
kler nozzle through a small arc to cover the plot and im-
mediately surrounding area with spatially uniform
rainfall. Measurements of rainfall energy under a simi-
lar simulator (Foltz et al. 1995) suggest that the rainfall
kinetic energy was about half that of natural rainfall.
However, Mohammed and Kohl (1987) successfully used
a similar design and nozzle to observe surface sealing
on agricultural soils. Rainfall was applied at approxi-
mately 90 mm/hr to each plot during three 30-minute
rainfall events. The first event was conducted under ex-
isting soil moisture conditions, the second event was
carried out roughly 20 hours later, and the third event
was typically started within 45 minutes of completing
the second event. The high rainfall intensity and short
interval between storms are not meant to simulate po-
tential storm occurrences but are used to find the aver-
age saturated hydraulic conductivity of the plot. Sprin-
kling infiltrometers require that the precipitation intensity
exceed the highest saturated hydraulic conductivity on
the plot. Past experiences with forest soils and the po-
tential of a ripped road to meet these hydraulic conduc-
tivities suggested that 90 mm/hr would be appropri-
ate. Actual rainfall intensity for each event was measured
at the beginning and end of each event using a sheet
metal plot cover. Timed runoff samples were collected
in 1000-ml bottles.
Runoff hydrographs were analyzed by the method of
Luce and Cundy (1994) to find infiltration parameters
for Philip’s (1969) equation, including saturated hy-
draulic conductivity and sorptivity. The method is es-
sentially a curve fitting procedure for a kinematic wave
model of Hortonian overland flow (Cundy & Tento
1986; Luce & Cundy 1992). The curve fitting procedure
uses a genetic algorithm, which robustly finds the opti-
mum fit for three variables simultaneously and makes it
possible to detect changes in saturated hydraulic con-
ductivity independent of routing effects and changes in
moisture content and depression storage that occur
over time.
Bulk density and moisture content were measured
with a calibrated nuclear densiometer. Between two
and four measurements were taken on the surface
within or adjacent to each plot before and after each
rainfall event.
The treatments, plots, soils, and events constitute a
full-factorial ANOVA design. There were three treat-
ments, two soils, with three events as repeated measures
and five replicates (plots) for each cell in the design.
Analysis consisted primarily of planned comparisons
within this ANOVA design.
Results and Discussion
Hydraulic conductivities for all soils, treatments, and
events are summarized in Figure 2. Figure 3 shows the
Figure 2. Average hydraulic conductivities by treatment and 
rainfall event. Before ripping there is no statistical difference 
between the granitics and belt series. The increase in hydrau-
lic conductivity following ripping was statistically significant 
and significant relative to probable rainfall. Mulching follow-
ing ripping protected the belt series from surface sealing, but 
did not prevent the collapse of the granitic soil. Following col-
lapse, the differences between the ripped and ripped and 
mulched granitic soil are not statistically significant.

Effectiveness of Road Ripping
268
Restoration Ecology
SEPTEMBER 1997
variation within the treatment for each soil. Before rip-
ping, the roads were nearly impervious. Saturated hy-
draulic conductivities for the roads fell in the range of
0 to 12 mm/hr (Fig. 3). These values agree well with
other observations (Reid 1981; Luce & Cundy 1994).
The saturated hydraulic conductivity of a ripped
road following three rainfall events was significantly
greater than that of the road surface before ripping
(p(Kp 5 Kr3) 5 0.005 for granitics, and p(Kp 5 Kr3) ,
1026 for the belt series). Results varied greatly from plot
to plot, but most saturated hydraulic conductivities af-
ter the third rainfall event on a ripped road were in the
range of 22 to 35 mm/hr for the belt series and 7 to 25
mm/hr for the granitics. These conductivities are mod-
est compared to the saturated hydraulic conductivity of
a lightly disturbed forest soil of 60 to 80 mm/hr (Luce
1995). The increase in conductivity probably represents
significant gains in terms of reducing runoff, however.
For example, snowmelt, which was observed ponding
on the South Fork road before ripping, would most
likely infiltrate with the road in a ripped condition be-
cause snowmelt rates seldom exceed 15 mm/hr. Snow-
melt rates measured during the peak snowmelt season
of 1986 at the Central Sierra Snow Lab never exceeded
4 mm/hr (Tarboton et al. 1995). Precipitation-duration-
frequency information for northern and central Idaho
shows that the 1-hour 100-year event is between 25 and
33 mm/hr (Miller et al. 1973). This indicates that rip-
ping provides some protection for rare events as well.
Hydraulic conductivity values for the ripped treat-
ment on the granitic soil decreased about 50% with
added rainfall (p(K1 5 K2) 5 0.00015). This corresponded
to field observations of soil settlement and large clods of
soil created by the fracture of the road surface dissolving
under the rainfall. Figure 4 shows bulk density re-
sponses to treatments and rainfall, including the large
increase in bulk density with the first rainfall event on
the granitics (p(rrg0 5 rrg45) 5 0.000094). Both results
compare well with those of Onstad et al. (1984).
While not evident in Figure 2 or the statistics, the sat-
urated hydraulic conductivity of the ripped belt series
soils also dropped from its initial value. Initially, and
for much of the first event, the ripped plots on the belt
series soil showed no runoff. During these periods, run-
off from higher areas flowed to low areas and into macro-
pores. On some plots, runoff from nearly the entire plot
could be seen draining into a single macropore for short
periods. The macropores were formed during the rip-
ping by fracturing of large, weak, brittle boulders. Trench-
ing revealed that the ripping process had changed the
soil from a matrix and clast-supported fabric to a partly
open work fabric (Selby 1993) leaving a few large voids.
Erosion of fine sediment and small gravel eventually
clogged these macropores. Most macropores clogged
within the first 30-minute rainfall. This is one process
described by Mohammed and Kohl (1987) as important
in surface sealing. Because of the nearly binary re-
sponse of the plot runoff to macropores at this scale, the
fitting algorithm interpreted this process as a high de-
pression storage and fit the hydraulic conductivity to
the final 10–15 minutes of high flow on the hydrograph.
The hydraulic conductivity during the last 10–15 min-
utes differed little from the hydraulic conductivity for
the next rainfall event. Comparison of the amount of
rainfall applied in 15 minutes, about 0.04 m, to the po-
rosity times the ripped depth, 0.40 m, suggests that sat-
uration overland flow was not observed and that the re-
sponse was because of a change in the infiltrating surface.
Figure 3. Distribution of saturated hydraulic conductivities 
by treatment across all events. P 5 prior to ripping, R 5 
ripped, M 5 ripped and mulched.
Figure 4. Dry bulk density of soil near the surface by treat-
ment and cumulative rainfall applied to the plot. Density is 
statistically constant before ripping on both soils. Following 
ripping the belt series maintained a constant density, while 
the density of the granitics rose after the first event. After 
mulching the density increase of the granitics was again statis-
tically significant, and the increase in density for the mulched 
belt series soils was only marginally significant.

Effectiveness of Road Ripping
SEPTEMBER 1997 Restoration Ecology
269
Saturation overland flow would yield runoff rates close
to the rainfall rate; this situation was not recorded.
Examination of what happens when the mulch is ap-
plied supports these observations. The straw mulch ab-
sorbs the kinetic energy of the raindrops and prevents
splash erosion. Under the mulch, one would expect lit-
tle transport of sediment and little surface sealing, but
soil settlement should be the same as under unpro-
tected conditions. The effect on hydraulic conductivity
is striking. The belt series soil responded by maintain-
ing a high hydraulic conductivity through all three
events (p(K1 5 K2 5 K3) 5 0.51). The hydraulic conduc-
tivities for the granitic soil dropped to values similar to
those of the ripped condition without mulch for the sec-
ond and third events (p(Kr(2,3) 5 Km(2,3)) 5 0.203). The
bulk density of the granitics under a heavy mulch in-
creased significantly (p(rmg0 5 rmg45) 5 0.03), much as it
did without the mulch. A less significant rise in bulk
density also occurred in the belt series soil (p(rmb0 5
rmb45) 5 0.07), but it is not clear why. Only minor set-
tling was observed in the field.
Although it was not quantified, water flowing from
the mulched plots was visibly cleaner than that flowing
from the ripped plots. This observation fits with conclu-
sions of many other studies (Burroughs & King 1989)
that reduction of the rainfall impact reduces erosion.
Little information exists on the durability of infiltra-
tion increases beyond these few initial rainstorms. Gif-
ford (1975) reviewed several studies where the effect of
ripping compacted rangelands decreased over a period
of years, and similar behavior would be expected for
roads. Anecdotal observations of roads ripped in earlier
years revealed that after one winter, the surfaces were
nearly as solid and dense as the original road surfaces.
Near the South Fork Salmon River plots, dry bulk den-
sities of a road ripped one year earlier were similar to
the final (after third event) densities measured on the
ripped and mulched plots. At this site, tree planters had
difficulty inserting hoedads, normally an effective in-
strument, to dig small holes. Hand watering was neces-
sary to keep the trees alive because of the low infiltra-
tion capacity and porosity.
Where a contractor had inadvertently incorporated
some of the organic layer from the surrounding for-
est soil during the ripping operation, the ripped road
retained its looseness. In mining and rangeland re-
habilitation, endeavors similar to road rehabilitation,
soil amendments are commonly used to increase soil
organic content. Several studies (Skujins & Richard-
son 1984; Page-Dumroese et al. 1990; Aguilar 1992;
Sidle et al. 1993; Hudson 1994) highlight the impor-
tance of organic matter content for soil productivity,
structure, and erosion protection. In those studies, or-
ganic matter was amended as topsoil, sludge, or sur-
face mulch that later decomposed. Direct incorpora-
tion of composts may be necessary to prevent tilled soil
settlement.
Conclusions and Recommendations
These results support the hypothesis that both soils in-
creased in hydraulic conductivity immediately follow-
ing ripping. I hypothesized that the belt series soil
would retain most of this initial increase, whereas the
granitic soil would lose hydraulic conductivity over
time. However, the hypothesis that the rock fragments
in the belt series soil would prevent surface sealing was
not supported. Fines eroded from between fragments
were sufficient to clog macropores. The combination of
cohesive fines and large voids supported by fragmented
clasts yielded little soil settlement. On the granitics, the
hypothesized soil settling was observed under both
mulched and unmulched conditions, which led to a de-
crease in hydraulic conductivity following the initial in-
crease, as expected.
Ecological restoration of forest roads and watersheds
requires improved vegetation cover and improved in-
filtration for forest road surfaces. These findings sug-
gest that ripping can be a reasonably effective step in
the restoration process. Even considering the effects of
settling and surface sealing, ripping increases hydraulic
conductivities modestly, enough, perhaps, to prevent
runoff and erosion from most rainfall and snowmelt
events. These increases do not represent “hydrologic re-
covery” for the treated areas, however, and a risk of
erosion and concentration of water into unstable areas
still exists. These continuing risks must be considered in
the design of the restoration project so that runoff does
not drain to streams or unstable hillslopes. While the
roughness of the seedbed is increased and traffic re-
duced, the increases in porosity are slight enough that
only very hardy plants may initially take advantage of
the improved surface.
The findings on soil settlement and surface sealing
highlight the fact that freshly tilled road soils are sterile
and poorly structured. Ripping and subsoiling alone
provide only temporary and marginal improvements.
Amended organic matter would likely enhance both the
short-term effectiveness and durability of gains in poros-
ity and infiltration capacity, greatly accelerating restora-
tion of the road’s hydrologic and ecological function.
Acknowledgments
Dennis Gordon of the Payette National Forest and Judith
McHugh and Craig Ely of the Coeur d’Alene National
Forest arranged for ripping sites and equipment. The ex-
pert field crew management and simulator operation of
Ben Kopyscianski and Bob Brown are also gratefully ac-

Effectiveness of Road Ripping
270
Restoration Ecology
SEPTEMBER 1997
knowledged. This research was supported by a grant
from the San Dimas Technology and Development Cen-
ter, Forest Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture.
LITERATURE CITED
Aguilar, R. 1992. Applying sewage sludge to restore southwest-
ern rangeland: status of research. Pages 542–551 in Proceed-
ings of the New Mexico Conference on the Environment,
Vol. 1. New Mexico Environment Department, Harold Run-
nels Bldg., Santa Fe, New Mexico.
Bosch, D. D., and C. A. Onstad. 1988. Surface seal hydraulic con-
ductivity as affected by rainfall. Transactions of the Ameri-
can Society of Agricultural Engineers 31(4):1120–1127.
Burroughs, E. R., Jr., and J. G. King. 1989. Reduction of soil ero-
sion on forest roads. General Technical Report INT-264.
United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, In-
termountain Research Station, Ogden, Utah.
Cundy, T. W., and S. W. Tento. 1986. Solution to the kinematic wave
approach to overland flow routing with rainfall excess given by
Philip’s equation. Water Resources Research 21(8):1132–1140.
Farmer, E. E., R. W. Brown, B. Z. Richardson, and P. E. Packer.
1974. Revegetation research on the Decker coal mine in south-
eastern Montana. Research Paper INT-162. United States De-
partment of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Re-
search Station, Ogden, Utah.
Foltz, R B., C. H. Luce, and P. Stockton. 1995. The kinetic-energy
field under a rainfall simulator. Pages 388–397 in Proceed-
ings of the American Society of Civil Engineers Watershed
Management Conference. T. J. Ward, editor. July 1995, Aus-
tin, Texas.
Gifford, G. F. 1975. Beneficial and detrimental effects of range im-
provement practices on runoff and erosion. Pages 216–248 in
Proceedings of the American Society of Civil Engineers Wa-
tershed Management Symposium, Logan, Utah.
Hudson, B. D. 1994. Soil organic matter and available water ca-
pacity. Journal of Soil and Water Conservation 49(2):189–194.
Jennings, G. D., A. R. Jarrett, and J. R. Hoover. 1987. Simulated rain-
fall duration and sequencing affect soil loss. Transactions of the
American Society of Agricultural Engineers 30(1):158–165.
Kidd, W. J., and H. F. Haupt. 1968. Effects of seedbed treatment
on grass establishment on logging roadbeds in central Idaho.
Research Paper INT-53. United States Department of Agricul-
ture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station, Ogden,
Utah.
Loch, R. J., and J. L. Foley. 1994. Measurement of aggregate break-
down under rain: comparison of tests of water stability and
relationships with field measurements of infiltration. Austra-
lian Journal of Soil Research 32:701–720.
Luce, C. H. 1995. Forests and Wetlands. Chapter 8 in A. D. Ward
and W. J. Elliot, editors. Environmental hydrology. CRC
Press. Boca Raton, Florida.
Luce, C. H., and T. W. Cundy. 1992. Modification of the kinematic
wave—Philip infiltration overland flow model. Water Re-
sources Research 28(4):1179–1186.
Luce, C. H., and T. W. Cundy. 1994. Parameter identification for a
runoff model for forest roads. Water Resources Research 30(4):
1057–1069.
Miller, J. F., R. H. Frederick, and R. J. Tracey. 1973. Precipitation
frequency atlas of the United States. NOAA Atlas 2. United
States Department of Commerce, National Weather Service.
United States Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
Mohammed, D., and R. A. Kohl. 1987. Infiltration response to ki-
netic energy. Transactions of the American Society of Agri-
cultural Engineers 30(1):108–111.
Montgomery, D. R. 1994. Road surface drainage, channel initia-
tion, and slope instability. Water Resources Research 30(6):
1925–1932.
Onstad, C. A., M. L. Wolfe, C. L. Larson, and D. C. Slack. 1984.
Tilled soil subsidence during repeated wetting. Transactions
of the American Society of Agricultural Engineers 27:733–736.
Page-Dumroese, D. S., H. Loewenstein, R. T. Graham, and A. E.
Harvey. 1990. Soil source, seed source, and organic-matter
content effects on Douglas-fir seedling growth. Soil Science
Society of America Journal 54(1):229–233.
Philip, J. R. 1969. Theory of infiltration, Advances in Hydro-
science, 5:215–296.
Reid, L. M. 1981. Sediment production from gravel-surfaced forest
roads, Clearwater Basin, Washington. University of Washing-
ton, College of Fisheries, Fisheries Research Institute. FRI-
UW-8108. Seattle, Washington.
Selby, M. J. 1993. Hillslope materials and processes. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, New York.
Sharma, P. P., C. J. Gantzer, and G. R. Blake. 1981. Hydraulic gra-
dients across simulated rain-formed soil surface seals. Soil
Science Society of America Journal 45:1031–1034.
Sidle, R. C., A. J. Pearce, and C. L. O’Loughlin. 1985. Hillslope sta-
bility and land use. Water Resources Monograph 11. Ameri-
can Geophysical Union, Washington, D.C.
Sidle, R. C., R. W. Brown, and B. D. Williams. 1993. Erosion pro-
cesses on arid minespoil slopes. Soil Science Society of Amer-
ica Journal 57(5):1341–1347.
Skujins, J., and B. Z. Richardson. 1984. Humic matter enrichment
in reclaimed soils under semiarid conditions. Geomicrobiol-
ogy Journal 4(3):299–311.
Tarboton, D. G., T. G. Chowdhury, and T. H. Jackson. 1995. A
spatially distributed energy balance snowmelt model. Pages
141–155 in Proceedings of Biogeochemistry of Seasonally
Snow-Covered Catchments, July 1995, Boulder, Colorado.
International Association of Hydrologic Sciences Publication
number 228.
Verma, T. R., and J. L. Thames. 1978. Grading and shaping for ero-
sion control and vegetative establishment in dry regions. Pages
399–409 in F. W. Schaller and P. Sutton, editors. Reclamation of
Drastically Disturbed Lands. American Society of Agronomy,
Crop Science Society of America, Soil Science Society of Amer-
ica, Madison, Wisconsin.
Wemple, B. C. 1994. Hydrologic integration of forest roads with
stream networks in two basins, Western Cascades, Oregon.
M.S. Thesis. Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon.
