34
Ecological Restoration Institute 
Working Paper No. 34
Climate Change and  
Fire in the Southwest
June 2015
SOUTHWEST 
FIRE     SCIENCE 
CONSORTIUM

Intermountain West Frequent-Fire Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing 
native species, structural characteristics, and ecological processes. Te Society for Ecological
Restoration International deﬁnes ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that 
initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity 
and sustainability….Restoration attempts to return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” 
(Society for Ecological Restoration International Science and Policy Working Group 2004).
Most frequent-ﬁre forests throughout the Intermountain West have been degraded during 
the last 150 years. Many of these forests are now dominated by unnaturally dense thickets 
of small trees, and lack their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests 
in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing ﬁres and increased 
insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers on reintroducing frequent, 
low-severity surface ﬁres—ofen afer thinning dense stands—and reestablishing productive 
understory plant communities.
Te Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in 
researching, implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of frequent-ﬁre forests of 
the Intermountain West. By allowing natural processes, such as low-severity ﬁre, to resume 
self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem 
services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
Te Southwest Fire Science Consortium (SWFSC) is a way for managers, scientists, and 
policy makers to interact and share science. SWFSC’s goal is to see the best available science 
used to make management decisions and scientists working on the questions managers 
need answered. Te SWFSC tries to bring together localized eﬀorts to develop scientiﬁc 
information and to disseminate that to practitioners on the ground through an inclusive and 
open process.
Tis publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest 
Service and the Southwest Fire Science Consortium. Te views and conclusions contained in 
this document are those of the author(s) and should not be interpreted as representing the 
opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of trade names or commercial 
products does not constitute their endorsement by the United States Government or the ERI.
Author: Larissa L. Yocom Kent
Reviewers: Julio Betancourt, Peter Brown, Peter Fulé, Barb Satink Wolfson, Andrea Tode, Amy Waltz, and 
Diane Vosick 
Series Editor: Tayloe Dubay
Cover Photo: Ground fuels burn with low intensity during a scheduled prescribed burn at Gus Pearson Natural 
Area in the Ft. Valley Experimental Forest, U.S. Forest Service. Change in southwestern ecosystems is inevitable, 
but there is sound evidence that treating forests with thinning and prescribed burning for ecological restoration 
and fuel hazard reduction can reduce ﬁre severity and can potentially increase a forest’s resilience to climate 
change. Photo by Jake Bacon, courtesy of the Ecological Restoration Institute, Ft. Valley Experimental Forest, and 
Rocky Mountain Research Station (U.S. Forest Service).
Please use the following citation when referring to this Working Paper:
Kent, L.Y. 2015. Climate Change and Fire in the Southwest. ERI Working Paper No. 34. Ecological Restoration 
Institute and Southwest Fire Science Consortium, Northern Arizona University: Flagstaﬀ, AZ. 6 p.

Table of Contents
Introduction............................................................................................................................... 1
Climate Change Predictions for the Southwest................................................................... 1
Impacts of Climate Change on Fire in the Southwest......................................................... 1
	
Alteration of Fuel Condition............................................................................................ 2
	
Changes in Fuel Loading.................................................................................................. 3
	
Changes in Ignitions......................................................................................................... 3
Summary and Conclusion....................................................................................................... 3
References................................................................................................................................ 5

1
Ecological Restoration Institute
CLIMATE CHANGE AND FIRE IN THE SOUTHWEST
Introduction
Global climate change will lead to shifs in climate 
patterns and ﬁre regimes in the Southwest over the 
coming decades. Te intent of this working paper is 
to summarize the current state of scientiﬁc knowledge 
about climate change predictions in the Southwest as 
well as the pathways by which ﬁre might be aﬀected. 
While the paper is focused on the Southwest, in 
particular Arizona and New Mexico, some of the 
material cited covers a broader area.
Climate Change Predictions for the Southwest
In the Southwest, temperature is predicted to rise by more 
than 3 degrees Fahrenheit (up to 9 degrees F) by the year 
2100, with temperature rise higher in the summer and 
fall than winter and spring (Cayan et al. 2013). Across 
the Southwest, an average of 17 more freeze-free days 
are projected by 2100 (Cayan et al. 2013). Tere is no 
disagreement among various general circulation models 
that temperature will increase; the only question is how 
much, and that depends partly on emissions in coming 
decades. In terms of extreme events, heat waves are 
projected to increase in frequency, intensity, duration, 
and spatial extent, and higher relative humidity during 
heatwaves will keep nighttime temperatures particularly 
elevated (Gershunov et al. 2013).
Predicting precipitation in the Southwest is 
diﬃcult, in part because variability in precipitation 
in the Southwest over time, from days to decades, is 
greater than for other parts of the United States (Cayan 
et al. 2013). In addition, the models are not able to 
perfectly capture current precipitation patterns in the 
Southwest, so precipitation predictions for the future 
may be imperfectly modeled as well (McAfee et al. 2011). 
Depending on emissions scenarios, models used, and 
approaches taken, groups of researchers have arrived at 
diﬀerent predictions for precipitation in the Southwest. 
For example, in the Colorado River Basin, Wi et al. (2012) 
projected slightly higher annual precipitation through 
the year 2079. However, they also projected a decrease in 
winter snowfall for most of the Basin. On the other hand, 
many studies have predicted that the Southwest will be 
drier over the coming century (Seager et al. 2007, Seager 
and Vecchi 2010), with drying and warming already 
evident in the Southwest (Overpeck and Udall 2010). 
Spatial variability for regional projections is high; many 
models predict precipitation surpluses in the north and 
deﬁcits in the south. Te emissions scenario used also 
aﬀects precipitation projections, with higher-emissions 
scenarios resulting in less precipitation on average 
(Cayan et al. 2013) (Figure 1). Finally, models predict 
diﬀerent outcomes depending on the season; modeling 
of atmospheric circulation patterns predicts that storm 
tracks will move north, resulting in decreased winter 
precipitation in the Southwest, but on the other hand 
some models forecast increased winter precipitation. 
It is agreed, however, that winter snowpack is likely to 
decrease because of increasing temperatures, which 
will reduce spring runoﬀ and result in decreased soil 
moisture by early summer (Cayan et al. 2013). Summer 
precipitation predictions vary widely, in part because the 
monsoon is poorly understood and modeled at this time 
(Cayan et al. 2013). 
In terms of extreme events, both enhanced 
precipitation events and droughts are projected to 
intensify in the coming century (Gershunov et al. 2013). 
Droughts, including droughts during severe La Niña 
events, are predicted to be worse than any drought since 
at least the Medieval Climate Anomaly (1100–1300 
CE) (Seager et al. 2007, Dominguez et al. 2010, Cook 
et al. 2015). Te changes are projected to be driven by 
a decrease in winter precipitation (Seager and Vecchi 
2010), and droughts are projected to last longer than 
historical droughts; up to 12 years or more (Cayan et al. 
2010).
Impacts of Climate Change on  
Fire in the Southwest
Hessl (2011) proposed that there are three pathways 
through which ﬁre activity might be inﬂuenced 
by climate change: changes in fuel condition (fuel 
moisture), changes in fuel loading, and changes in 
Figure 1. From Cayan et al. (2013). Projected temperature changes for 
high and low emission scenarios. Annual temperature change (degrees 
F) from historical (1971–2000) for early- (2021–2050; top), mid- (2041–
2070; middle) and late- (2070–2099; bottom) 21st century periods. Results 
are the average of 16 statistically downscaled climate models. Source: 
Nakicenovic and Swart (2000), Mearns et al. (2009).

2
CLIMATE CHANGE AND FIRE IN THE SOUTHWEST
Ecological Restoration Institute
ignitions. Ecosystems in which ﬁres are typically limited 
by fuel moisture (higher-elevation or higher-latitude, 
wetter ecosystems) are likely to be most aﬀected by 
either increased or decreased fuel moisture. Ecosystems 
in which ﬁres are typically limited by fuel (drier, less 
productive ecosystems) are likely to be most aﬀected by 
increases or decreases in fuel loading (Westerling and 
Bryant 2008, Flannigan et al. 2009, Littell et al. 2009). 
Changes in ignitions may happen anywhere, although 
Krawchuck et al. (2009) note that there are few areas of 
the globe where ignitions are a limiting factor for ﬁre. 
Most studies have focused on climate change impacts on 
area burned, with some also forecasting ﬁre occurrence 
or other ﬁre regime attributes; however, predicting ﬁre 
severity is much more diﬃcult (Flannigan et al. 2009).
An important point to keep in mind is that 
short-term and long-term climate change impacts on 
fire regimes may be different (Rocca et al. 2014). For 
example, in the short term, fire risk may be increased 
due to climate change (e.g., higher temperatures, 
longer fire seasons, lower fuel moisture), but in the 
long term, fire risk may decrease if fuels change 
with a changing climate (e.g., a forested ecosystem 
does not return after a fire) (Rocca et al. 2014). 
Additionally, land use changes over the past century 
(fire exclusion, logging, grazing) have resulted in 
altered forest structure and increased fuel loadings 
in many forests in the Southwest. These changes may 
magnify impacts from climate change, for example 
when both high fuel loads and climate conditions 
allow for the occurrence of a severe crown fire. 
Alteration of Fuel Condition
Fuel condition (fuel moisture) could be altered by 
changing ﬁre seasons, increased droughts or wet 
periods, or changing ﬁre weather (Hessl 2011). In terms 
of changing ﬁre seasons, we have already started to 
see a longer ﬁre season across the western US, which 
has been linked to more large ﬁres and ﬁres of longer 
duration (Westerling et al. 2006) (Figure 2). Fire seasons 
are projected to increase around the globe in places 
where the ﬁre season isn’t already all year (Flannigan 
et al. 2013), and the ﬁre season for very large wildﬁres 
(>50,000 acres) is also projected to lengthen (Stavros et 
al. 2014).
Changes in climate patterns and ﬁre weather may 
also alter fuel condition. Decreases in relative humidity 
through the year 2089 are forecasted to increase days 
of high ﬁre danger in the Southwest and other parts of 
the American West, as measured by the energy release 
component (Brown et al. 2004). Temperature will also 
play a role; Spracklen et al. (2009) found that increasing 
temperature will lead to 54% more area burned across 
the American West in the period 2046–2055, compared 
to the period 1996–2005. A study in the Southern 
Rockies Ecoregion, which included parts of Wyoming, 
Colorado, and New Mexico, agreed: the authors 
found that area burned and number of ﬁres have been 
increasing over the past few decades, and area burned 
is likely to increase through the year 2070 by two to 
ﬁve times due to both temperature and precipitation 
changes (Litschert et al. 2012). Te increase in area 
burned will depend on which climate scenario turns 
out to be most accurate; all climate scenarios project 
increased temperature, but precipitation may increase or 
decrease (Litschert et al. 2012). Te National Research 
Council (2011) also predicted large increases in area 
burned across the West due to a 1.8 degrees F increase 
in temperature, with projections for diﬀerent regions 
ranging from a 74% increase in Southwest deserts to a 
656% increase in parts of the Rocky Mountains.
Hessl (2011) points out that ﬁre-climate 
relationships that have been described for the recent 
past may not hold true for the future. Tis is because 
relationships between climate and ﬁre are speciﬁc to 
particular ecosystems and fuel types, but vegetation 
shifs and changes in fuel characteristics may occur with 
climate change. For example, climate change may result 
in conditions more conducive to the establishment of 
invasive grasses, and also increase the chances of ﬁre 
ignition and spread, promoting the ﬁre-invasive cycle 
(Abatzoglou and Kolden 2011). Additionally, humans 
Box 1: Predicting Climate Change and Impacts
Climate change predictions are based on scenarios 
of global human activity, and include greenhouse 
gas emissions as the primary driver of climate 
change in the future (IPCC 2013). Te emissions 
scenarios are then used in models to project climate 
over the next century. Dozens of models have been 
built that incorporate aspects of the global climate 
system (e.g., atmosphere, oceans, land and sea ice, 
and greenhouse gases) to understand how the global 
climate operates and how climate variables like 
temperature, precipitation, cloud cover, and storm 
tracks might change (Flato et al. 2013). Finally, 
impacts of climate change (on ﬁre, air quality, human 
health, etc.) are predicted. Levels of uncertainty 
increase as researchers predict 1) emissions, 2) 
atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases, 
3) radiative forcing (energy that warms the Earth), 
4) climate change, and ﬁnally, 5) impacts of climate 
change (Myhre et al. 2013). However, it is possible to 
have a high degree of conﬁdence in climate change 
predictions if there is both strong evidence and 
agreement among models (Stocker et al. 2013).

3
Ecological Restoration Institute
CLIMATE CHANGE AND FIRE IN THE SOUTHWEST
may change ignition or suppression patterns compared 
to the recent past (Hessl et al. 2011). 
Changes in Fuel Loading
Fuel loading may change with climate change for many 
reasons, including changes in dominant species, insect 
outbreaks, mortality events, severe drought, severe ﬁre, 
reduced ﬁre, or changes in regeneration. Tree mortality 
events are already increasing in the western United 
States (van Mantgem et al. 2009) and worldwide (Allen 
et al. 2010) due to recent warming and droughts, and 
are likely to continue impacting forested ecosystems as 
climate changes further. In the Southwest, vegetation 
cover is projected to decline, mostly due to increasing 
temperatures, and most species are predicted to shif 
north by an average of 58 miles (Notaro et al. 2012). 
Yucca and oak are projected to expand their range, 
and pine and juniper ranges are projected to shrink 
(Notaro et al. 2012). Allen and Breshears (1998) provide 
an excellent example of how an extreme event (the 
1950s drought) led to a shifing of the ecotone between 
ponderosa pine and piñon-juniper woodland by over 
1.2 miles in less than ﬁve years, showing that range 
expansions and contractions, along with changes in 
species dominance, can happen very quickly.
Disturbances themselves may impact fuel type and 
amount. Williams et al. (2010) estimated that 7.6–11.3% 
of southwestern forests and woodlands were heavily 
impacted by bark beetle-induced mortality from 1997 
to 2008, and 2.7–3.0% of forests and woodlands were 
burned in moderate to high-severity ﬁre from 1984 to 
2006. Tese disturbances are likely related to drought 
and high temperatures during these decades, and are 
likely to continue aﬀecting southwestern forests and 
woodlands. Regeneration afer severe ﬁre in ponderosa 
pine forests in the Southwest can result in dense stands 
of young trees, or tree regeneration may not happen, 
and a previously forested ecosystem can switch to a non-
forested shrub or grass community (Savage and Mast 
2005, Strom and Fulé 2007). Even without severe ﬁre, 
changes in regeneration patterns could result in forests 
converting to non-forested ecosystems over the next 
century if the most severe emissions scenario occurs 
(Azpeleta et al. 2014).
Changes in fuel loading may result in increased 
or decreased ﬁre activity, depending on whether fuel 
loading is enhanced or diminished. Even if ﬁre activity 
increases, there is likely to be a self-limiting aspect of 
ﬁre over time, with severe ﬁres only able to burn when 
enough vegetation has grown back to carry another ﬁre 
(Williams et al. 2010).
Changes in Ignitions
Only one study, published in 1994, has attempted to 
predict changes in lightning with climate change. Price 
and Rind (1994) predicted that in the Southwest, due 
to an increase in thunderstorms and a decrease in 
precipitation, the number of lightning ﬁres will increase 
by 61%, while the area burned in lightning ﬁres will 
increase 141% in a scenario where CO2 doubles. Tis is 
equal to a 7.6 degrees F increase in temperature. Human 
ignitions are not tied to climate change, but may increase 
with increasing population density as well. Ignitions are 
the least understood pathway through which climate 
change might inﬂuence ﬁre activity in the future.
Summary and Conclusion
Climate change will increasingly alter climate averages, 
extreme climate events, and ecological processes in the 
coming years and decades. Temperature is universally 
forecasted to rise in the Southwest. Models disagree 
about precipitation; some predict increased precipitation 
and some predict decreased precipitation, and there 
also may be variability by area and by season. It is 
generally agreed, however, that snowpack and spring/
early summer runoﬀ will be less in a warmer climate. In 
addition, droughts will likely be more intense and last 
longer.
Climate change may impact ﬁre through three 
pathways: alteration of fuel moisture, alteration of fuel 
loading, and alteration of ignitions. Alteration of fuel 
moisture in the Southwest may happen through longer 
ﬁre seasons, increased temperatures, decreased relative 
humidity, or changes in precipitation. Alteration of fuel 
loading has been predicted due to tree mortality and loss 
of vegetation cover, range shifs, changes in regeneration 
patterns, and disturbances themselves, such as insect 
outbreaks and severe ﬁre. Lightning ignitions may 
increase, but ignitions are the least understood aspect of 
how climate change may inﬂuence ﬁre.
Diﬀerent ecosystems will respond to climate change 
diﬀerently. Ecosystems in which ﬁres are generally 
Figure 2. From Wester-
ling et al. (2006). Annual 
frequency of large (23,000 
acres) western U.S. forest 
wildﬁres (bars) and mean 
March through August 
temperature for the west-
ern United States (line).

4
CLIMATE CHANGE AND FIRE IN THE SOUTHWEST
Ecological Restoration Institute
limited by fuel moisture (wetter, more productive 
ecosystems which typically need a drought year to 
burn) will be most aﬀected by changes to fuel moisture. 
Ecosystems in which ﬁres tend to be limited by fuel 
availability (drier, less productive ecosystems in which 
ﬁre may be limited by fuel continuity) will be most 
aﬀected by changes to fuel loading. Any changes in 
ignitions will likely aﬀect all ecosystem types. Te 
impacts of climate change on ﬁre regimes may change 
over time; ﬁre risk may be high initially but decrease in 
the long term with changes in vegetation and fuels.
Change in southwestern ecosystems is inevitable. 
Managers must include climate change predictions 
in management strategies, despite the uncertainties 
that remain in predicting ﬁre activity into the future. 
Adding to the challenge is that climate not the only 
thing changing; land use, population density in the 
wildland urban interface, invasive species, and ﬁre 
management are also changing. However, there are steps 
that managers can take. For example, we know that 
treating forests with thinning and prescribed burning 
for ecological restoration and fuel hazard reduction 
does reduce ﬁre severity. “Buying time” for a forest 
and potentially increasing resilience to climate change 
by reducing the chance of high-severity ﬁre may be a 
sound strategy. Management goals in the face of climate 
change could also include managing for ecosystem 
services such as clean air and water, soil health, and 
native species. 
More guidance is available from: USDA Forest 
Service Climate Change Adaptation Plan 2014: http://
www.usda.gov/oce/climate_change/adaptation/Forest%20
Service.pdf
Box 2: Historical Climate-Fire Relationships
Regional and global climate patterns aﬀect ﬁre 
occurrence across the Southwest, and we know a 
great deal about these ﬁre-climate relationships by 
studying patterns of ﬁre and climate captured in 
tree rings. Climate reconstructions from tree rings 
are built by collecting tree cores, crossdating and 
measuring the rings, calculating statistical relationships 
between the tree-ring measurements and the modern, 
instrumentally-measured climate variable of interest, 
and then using these relationships to reconstruct that 
climate variable in the period before instrumental 
measurements were taken, as far back in time as the 
tree rings go. Historical low-severity ﬁre dates are 
determined by collecting cross-sections of ﬁre-scarred 
trees, crossdating the rings, and determining the dates 
of ﬁre scars present in the wood to the precise year of 
occurrence. Ten, ﬁre dates and climate patterns can 
be compared over long time periods to understand 
relationships between them.
Some of the ﬁre-climate relationships that have been 
evaluated in the Southwest include:
Drought: High synchrony in ﬁres across Arizona and 
New Mexico were linked to severe drought (Swetnam 
and Betancourt 1998).
Temperature: Synchronous ﬁre years were tied to 
decadal- and century-scale variations in temperature 
in sequoia groves in California (Swetnam 1993).
El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO): Large areas 
burned in Arizona and New Mexico were historically 
correlated with cool phases of ENSO (La Niña 
conditions) (Swetnam and Betancourt 1990).
Paciﬁc Decadal Oscillation (PDO): Area burned 
in the Southwest was linked to cool phases of the 
PDO; PDO enhances or suppresses ENSO phases 
(Westerling and Swetnam 2003)
Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO): Positive 
phases of AMO were linked to high ﬁre synchrony 
across western North America (Kitzberger et al. 
2007).
Although none of these ﬁre-climate relationships can 
be used to predict ﬁre in any given area, and although 
some of the relationships have become weaker in the 
modern period with an increase in human-caused 
ﬁres, understanding the relationships between ﬁre 
and these climate variables is still valuable for ﬁre 
management and regional planning.

5
Ecological Restoration Institute
CLIMATE CHANGE AND FIRE IN THE SOUTHWEST
References
Abatzoglou, J.T. and C.A. Kolden. 2011. Climate change in western 
US deserts: potential for increased wildﬁre and invasive annual 
grasses. Rangeland Ecology and Management 64: 471-478.
Allen, C.D., and D.D. Breshears. 1998. Drought-induced shif of a 
forest-woodland ecotone: Rapid landscape response to climate 
variation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 95: 
14839-14842.
Allen, C.D., A.K. Macalady, H. Chenchouni, D. Bachelet, N. 
McDowell, M. Vennetier, T. Kitzberger, A. Rigling, D.D. 
Breshears, E.H. Hogg, P. Gonzalez, R. Fensham, Z. Zhang, J. 
Castro, N. Demidova, J-H. Lim, G. Allard, S.W. Running, A. 
Semerci, and N. Cobb. A global overview of drought and heat-
induced tree mortality reveals emerging climate change risks 
for forests. Forest Ecology and Management 259: 660-684.
Azpeleta, A.A., P.Z. Fulé, K.L. Shive, C.H. Sieg, A. Sánchez Meador, 
and B. Strom. 2014. Simulating post-wildﬁre forest trajectories 
under alternative climate and management scenarios. 
Ecological Applications 24(7): 1626-1637.
Cayan, D.R., T. Das, D.W. Pierce, T.P. Barnett, M. Tyree, and A. 
Gershunov. 2010. Future dryness in the southwest US and the 
hydrology of the early 21st century drought. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences 107(50): 21271-21276.
Cayan, D., M. Tyree, K.E. Kunkel, C. Castro, A. Gershunov, J. 
Barsugli, A.J. Ray, J. Overpeck, M. Anderson, J. Russell, B. 
Rajagopalan, I. Rangwala, and P. Duﬀy. 2013. Future climate: 
projected average. In: Assessment of Climate Change in the 
Southwest United States: A Report Prepared for the National 
Climate Assessment, edited by G. Garﬁn, A. Jardine, R. 
Merideth, M. Black, and S. LeRoy, 101–125. A report by the 
Southwest Climate Alliance. Washington, DC: Island Press.
Cook, B.I., T.R. Ault, and J.E. Smerdon. 2015. Unprecedented 21st 
century drought risk in the American Southwest and Central 
Plains. Science Advances 1: e1400082.
Brown, T.J., B.L. Hall, and A.L. Westerling. 2004. Te impact of 
twenty-ﬁrst century climate change on wildland ﬁre danger in 
the western United States: an applications perspective. Climatic 
Change 62: 365-388.
Dominguez, F., J. Cañon, and J. Valdes. 2010. IPCC-AR4 climate 
simulations for the Southwestern US: the importance of future 
ENSO projections. Climatic Change 99: 499-514.
Flannigan, M., Krawchuk, M.A., de Groot, W.J., Wotton, B.M., 
and Gowman, L.M. 2009. Implications of changing climate for 
global wildland ﬁre. International Journal of Wildland Fire 18: 
483–507.
Flannigan, M., A.S. Cantin, W.J. de Groot, M. Wotton, A. Newbery, 
and L.M. Gowman. 2013. Global wildland ﬁre season severity 
in the 21st century. Forest Ecology and Management 294: 54-
61.
Flato, G., J. Marotzke, B. Abiodun, P. Braconnot, S.C. Chou, W. 
Collins, P. Cox, F. Driouech, S. Emori, V. Eyring, C. Forest, 
P. Gleckler, E. Guilyardi, C. Jakob, V. Kattsov, C. Reason, 
and M. Rummukainen. 2013. Evaluation of Climate Models. 
In: Climate Change 2013: Te Physical Science Basis. 
Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifh Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
[Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. 
Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and 
New York, NY, USA.
Gershunov, A., B. Rajagopalan, J. Overpeck, K. Guirguis, D. 
Cayan, M. Hughes, M. Dettinger, C. Castro, R.E. Schwartz, M. 
Anderson, A.J. Ray, J. Barsugli, T. Cavazos, and M. Alexander. 
2013. Future climate: projected extremes. In: Assessment of 
Climate Change in the Southwest United States: A Report 
Prepared for the National Climate Assessment, edited by G. 
Garﬁn, A. Jardine, R. Merideth, M. Black, and S. LeRoy, 126–
147. A report by the Southwest Climate Alliance. Washington, 
DC: Island Press.
Hessl, A.E. 2011. Pathways for climate change eﬀects on ﬁre: 
Models, data, and uncertainties. Progress in Physical Geography 
35(3): 393-407.
IPCC. 2013: Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change 2013: 
Te Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I 
to the Fifh Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. 
Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and 
P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.
Kitzberger, T., P.M. Brown, E.K. Heyerdahl, T.W. Swetnam, and 
T.T. Veblen. 2007. Contingent Paciﬁc-Atlantic Ocean inﬂuence 
on multicentury wildﬁre synchrony over western North 
America. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
104(2): 543-548.
Krawchuck, M.A., M.A. Moritz, M-A. Parisien, J. Van Dorn, and K. 
Hayhoe. 2009. Global pyrogeography: the current and future 
distribution of wildﬁre. PLos ONE 4(4): e5102.
Litschert, S.E., T.C. Brown, and D.M. Teobald. 2012. Historic and 
future extent of wildﬁres in the Southern Rockies Ecoregion, 
USA. Forest Ecology and Management 269: 124-133.
Littell, J.S., D. McKenzie, D.L. Peterson, and A.L. Westerling. 2009. 
Climate and wildﬁre area burned in western U.S. ecoprovinces, 
1916-2003. Ecological Applications 19: 1003-1021.
McAfee, S.A., J.L. Russell, P.J. Goodman. 2011. Evaluating IPCC 
AR4 cool-season precipitation simulations and projections for 
impacts assessment over North America. Climate Dynamics 
37: 2271-2287.
Myhre, G., D. Shindell, F.-M. Bréon, W. Collins, J. Fuglestvedt, 
J. Huang, D. Koch, J.-F. Lamarque, D. Lee, B. Mendoza, T. 
Nakajima, A. Robock, G. Stephens, T. Takemura and H. 
Zhang. 2013. Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing. 
In: Climate Change 2013: Te Physical Science Basis. 
Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifh Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
[Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. 
Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and 
New York, NY, USA.
National Research Council. 2011. Climate stabilization targets: 
emissions, concentrations, and impacts over decades to 
millennia. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Notaro, M., A. Mauss, and J.W. Williams. 2012. Projected 
vegetation changes for the American Southwest: combined 
dynamic modeling and bioclimatic-envelope approach. 
Ecological Applications 22(4): 1365-1388.
Overpeck, J., and B. Udall. 2010. Dry times 
ahead. Science 328(5986): 1642-1643.
Price, C., and D. Rind. 1994. Te impact of a 2 x CO2 climate on 
lightning-caused ﬁres. Journal of Climate 7: 1484-1494.
Rocca, M.E., P.M. Brown, L.H. MacDonald, and C.M. Carrico. 
Climate change impacts on ﬁre regimes and key ecosystem 
services in Rocky Mountain forests. Forest Ecology and 
Management 327: 290-305.
Savage, M., and J.N. Mast. 2005. How resilient are southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests afer crown ﬁres? Canadian Journal of 
Forest Research 35: 967-977.
Seager, R., and G.A. Vecchi. 2010. Greenhouse warming and the 
21st century hydroclimate of southwestern North America. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107(50): 
21277-21282.
Seager, R., M. Ting, I. Held, Y. Kushnir, J. Lu, G. Vecchi, H.-P. 
Huang, N. Harnik, A. Leetmaa, N.-C. Lau, C. Li, J. Velez, and 
N. Naik. 2007. Model projections of an imminent transition to 
a more arid climate in southwestern North America. Science 
316:1181-1184.
Spracklen, D.V., L.J. Mickley, J.A. Logan, R.C. Hudman, R. 
Yevich, M.D. Flannigan, and A.L. Westerling. 2009. Impacts 
of climate change from 2000 to 2050 on wildﬁre activity and 
carbonaceous aerosol concentrations in the western United 
States. Journal of Geophysical Research 114: D20301.
Stavros, E.N., J.T. Abatzoglou, D. McKenzie, and N.K. Larkin. 
2014. Regional projections of the likelihood of very large 
wildland ﬁres under a changing climate in the contiguous 
Western United States. Climatic Change 126: 455-468.

6
CLIMATE CHANGE AND FIRE IN THE SOUTHWEST
Ecological Restoration Institute
Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, L.V. Alexander, S.K. Allen, 
N.L. Bindoﬀ, F.-M. Bréon, J.A. Church, U. Cubasch, S. Emori, 
P. Forster, P. Friedlingstein, N. Gillett, J.M. Gregory, D.L. 
Hartmann, E. Jansen, B. Kirtman, R. Knutti, K. Krishna 
Kumar, P. Lemke, J. Marotzke, V. Masson-Delmotte, G.A. 
Meehl, I.I. Mokhov, S. Piao, V. Ramaswamy, D. Randall, M. 
Rhein, M. Rojas, C. Sabine, D. Shindell, L.D. Talley, D.G. 
Vaughan and S.-P. Xie. 2013. Technical Summary. In: Climate 
Change 2013: Te Physical Science Basis. Contribution of 
Working Group I to the Fifh Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., 
D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. 
Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, 
NY, USA.
Strom, B.A. and P.Z. Fulé. 2007. Pre-wildﬁre fuel treatments aﬀect 
long-term ponderosa pine forest dynamics. International 
Journal of Wildland Fire 16: 128-138.
Swetnam, T.W., and J.L. Betancourt. 1990. Fire-Southern 
Oscillation relations in the southwestern United States. Science 
249: 1017-1020.
Swetnam, T.W., and J.L. Betancourt. 1998. Mesoscale disturbance 
and ecological response to decadal climatic variability in the 
American Southwest. Journal of Climate 11: 3128-3147.
van Mantgem, P.J., N.L. Stephenson, J.C. Byrne, L.D. Daniels, J.F. 
Franklin, P.Z. Fulé, M.E. Harmon, A.J. Larson, J.M. Smith, 
A.H. Taylor, and T.T. Veblen. 2009. Widespread increase of tree 
mortality rates in the western United States. Science 323(23): 
521-524.
Westerling, A.L., and T.W. Swetnam. 2003. Interannual to decadal 
drought and wildﬁre in the western United States. Eos, 
Transactions American Geophysical Union 84(49): 545-560.
Westerling, A.L., H.G. Hidalgo, D.R. Cayan, and T.W. Swetnam. 
2006. Warming and earlier spring increase western US forest 
wildﬁre activity. Science 313(5789): 940-943.
Westerling, A.L., and B.P. Bryant. 2008. Climate change and 
wildﬁre in California. Climatic Change 87(Suppl 1): S231-S249.
Wi, S., F. Dominguez, M. Durcik, J. Valdes, H.F. Diaz, and C.L. 
Castro. 2012. Climate change projection of snowfall in the 
Colorado River Basin using dynamical downscaling. Water 
Resources Research 48: W05504.
Williams, A.P., C.D. Allen, C.I. Millar, T.W. Swetnam, J. 
Michaelsen, C.J. Still, and S.W. Leavitt. 2010. Forest responses 
to increasing aridity and warmth in the southwestern United 
States. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107(50): 
21289-21294.

7
Ecological Restoration Institute
CLIMATE CHANGE AND FIRE IN THE SOUTHWEST

For more information about forest restoration, contact the ERI at (928) 523-7182  or nau.edu/eri.
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Aﬃrmative Action Institution   
Tis report was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.
 NAU Printing Services/77531/300/06-14
 
Working Papers in Intermountain West Frequent-Fire Forest Restoration
1: 
Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons  and Adaptive Management Practices
2: 
Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3: 
Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
4: 
Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Beneﬁts
5: 
Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
6: 
Butterﬂies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
7: 
Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
8: 
Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
9: 
Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
10: Te Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Restoration Model
11: Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration
12: Restoring Forest Roads
13: Treating Slash afer Restoration Tinning
14: Integrating Forest Restoration Treatments with Mexican Spotted Owl Habitat Needs
15: Eﬀects of Forest Tinning Treatments on Fire Behavior
16: Snags and Forest Restoration  
17: Bat Habitat and Forest Restoration Treatments
18: Prescribed and Wildland Use Fires in the Southwest: Do Timing and Frequency Matter? 
19: Understory Seeding in Southwestern Forests Following Wildﬁre and Ecological Restoration Treatments
20: Controlling Cheatgrass in Ponderosa Pine and Pinyon-Juniper Restoration Areas 
21: Managing Coarse Woody Debris in Frequent-ﬁre Southwestern Forests
22: Restoring Spatial Pattern to Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
23: Guidelines for Managing Small Mammals in Restored Ponderosa Pine Forests of Northern Arizona
24: Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Burning 
25: Strategies for Enhancing and Restoring Rare Plants and Teir Habitats in the Face of Climate Change and Habitat Destruction 
in the Intermountain West
26: Wildlife Habitat Values and Forest Structure in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine: Implications for Restoration
27: Fuel Treatment Longevity
28: Southwestern Mixed-Conifer Forests: Evaluating Reference Conditions to Guide Ecological Restoration Treatments
29:  Post-Wildﬁre Restoration of Structure, Composition, and Function in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine and Warm/Dry Mixed-
Conifer Forests
30: Impact of Forest Restoration Treatments on Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Tree Resistance to Bark Beetles
31: Climate Change Impacts on Bark Beetle Outbreaks and the Impact of Outbreaks on Subsequent Fires
32. An Evaluation of Fire Regime Reconstruction Methods
33. Te 2012 Mexican Spotted Owl Recovery Plan Guidelines for Forest Restoration in the American Southwest

Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
nau.edu/eri
