 
Cutting-edge jobs supported by old wood on 
Navajo Reservation  
BONNIE STEVENS Special to the Sun | Posted: Sunday, April 10, 2011 5:00 am 
 
Rick Wacha Anjelita Apachito is the safety officer for the Alamo Navajo Project. From this small lumberyard in 
Socorro, N. M., she and others are carving a wood products niche out of trees that few people wanted. (Bonnie 
Stevens/Special to the Arizona Daily Sun)  
Hope for forests and communities at risk is spreading like wildfire in an isolated village south of 
Albuquerque. Ecologists say what's happening on the Alamo Navajo Reservation could well be a 
model for forest restoration across the West where there are too many trees and not enough jobs. 

In a small lumberyard in Socorro, N.M., young adults are learning how to cut down trees, 
operate logging equipment and split firewood. Derek Padilla is the crew leader. "This project is 
helping me because it's near my home on the reservation." 
The Alamo Navajo Reservation consists of only about 2,000 people. Nearly 70 percent are 
unemployed and most are living below the national poverty level. Nearby is the Cibola National 
Forest, unnaturally thick with pinyon and juniper trees. The area is considered New Mexico's 
most dangerous place for homes and businesses during fire season. 
"We've removed natural fire from a lot of the ecosystems throughout the West," says Wally 
Covington, Arizona's director for the Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes. "That has 
allowed forests to build up these ground fuels and ladder fuels and that's what we're trying to 
deal with across millions of acres. We're trying to mimic what science tells us would be a more 
natural condition." 
To achieve this desired condition, SWERI is providing training along with equipment, such as 
wood splitters and yarders. 
"We now have people here who are trained in felling, trained in primary processing and trained 
in restoration monitoring," says SWERI's New Mexico Director Andrew Egan. "They are really 
making New Mexico forests healthier and making New Mexico a safer place to be because we 
are reducing the impacts of potential wildfires." 
With SWERI, the Alamo Navajo School Board has created a wood products program out of trees 
that nobody wanted. "We sell firewood all over the country," says the school board's Natural 
Resource Specialist Bill Ferranti. "Our biggest market is in west Texas. We shipped some to 
Chicago. We shipped some to North Carolina. We shipped more than 300 cords last year." 
It's a collaboration supported by Old Wood. Owner David Old is building a business out of sticks 
and branches in Las Vegas, N.M. "The whole plant is really scaled and geared for making 
flooring from smaller trees. We are not about cutting down the big trees." 
If his idea stacks up, Old will construct a new foundation for some 50 employees in a $2-million-
dollar a year operation. 
Old Wood's first order for pinyon wood flooring cut by the Alamo Navajo crew is scheduled to 
go to a San Francisco restaurant. 
Bonnie Stevens is the Program Director for Public Education and Information for the Ecological 
Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University. 
 
Posted in Local on Sunday, April 10, 2011 5:00 am Updated: 11:30 pm. 
 
