Ecological Restoration Institute
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
www.eri.nau.edu
Ecological Restoration Institute 
Working Paper No. 23
Guidelines for 
Managing Small
Mammals in Restored
Ponderosa Pine Forests
of Northern Arizona
May 2010 
23

Working Papers in Intermountain West Frequent-fire Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native
species, structural characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological Restoration
International defines ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the
recovery of an ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability….Restoration
attempts to return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration
International Science & Policy Working Group 2004).
Most frequent-fire forests throughout the Intermountain West have been degraded during the last
150 years. Many of these forests are now dominated by unnaturally dense thickets of small trees, and
lack their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly
susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing fires and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration
of these forests centers on reintroducing frequent, low-severity surface fires—often after thinning
dense stands—and reestablishing productive understory plant communities.
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching,
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of frequent-fire forests of the Intermountain
West. By allowing natural processes, such as low-severity fire, to resume self-sustaining patterns, we
hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational
opportunities.
The ERI Working Papers series presents findings and management recommendations from research
and observations by the ERI and its partner organizations. While the ERI staff recognizes that every
restoration project needs to be site specific, we feel that the information provided in the Working
Papers may help restoration practitioners elsewhere.
This publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Service. The
views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the author(s) and should not be
interpreted as representing the opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of
trade names or commercial products does not constitute their endorsement by the United States
Government.
Cover Photo: The golden-mantled ground squirrel (Spermophilus lateralis) pictured here was one of
eight small mammals studied by NAU researchers to determine how they would react to ecological
restoration thinning treatments. The results indicate that thinning had a generally positive or neutral
effect on six of the species, including the golden-mantled ground squirrel.
Photo courtesy of George Andrejko, Arizona Game and Fish Department

Guidelines for Managing Small Mammals in Restored Ponderosa Pine Forests 
of Northern Arizona
Introduction
Restoration thinning and burning treatments in southwestern
ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) forests are designed to both
reduce the risk of wildfire and restore ecosystem functions and
structure, including maintaining or reestablishing habitat for
wildlife populations. However, we found limited quantitative
data regarding wildlife responses to restoration treatments and
changes in forest structure because most previous studies were
conducted at small temporal and spatial scales, and they
generally focused on bird species (Kalies et al. 2010). In
addition, although habitat components, such as Gambel oak
(Quercus gambelii), large-diameter trees, snags and down
wood, are thought to be important to wildlife, there is debate
about treatment targets on the landscape (Abella et al. 2006,
Noss et al. 2006). In this ERI working paper, we present the
results of a study that assessed small mammal responses to
treatments--responses previously unexamined at the
community level or at large temporal and spatial scales in
southwestern ponderosa pine forests.
Our study focused on eight species of small mammals: the
Mogollon vole (Microtus mogollonensis (formerly Mexican
vole, M. mexicanus; Frey and LaRue 1993, Frey and Yates
1995), Mexican woodrat (Neotoma mexicana), deer mouse
(Peromyscus maniculatus), tassel-eared squirrel (Sciurus aberti),
golden-mantled ground squirrel (Spermophilus lateralis), rock
squirrel (Spermophilus variegates), gray-collared chipmunk
(Tamias cinereicollis), and Botta’s pocket gopher (Thomomys
bottae). Small mammals are important in forest ecosystems
because they recycle nutrients by processing vegetation,
disperse fungal spores and seeds, and aerate and turn soils.
Small mammals are also prey for predators including the
northern goshawk (Accipiter gentilis; a U.S. Forest Service
Sensitive Species), Mexican spotted owl (Strix occidentalis
lucida; federally threatened), and other avian and mammalian
species (Reynolds et al. 1992, Block et al. 2005). The dispersion
of ectomycorrhizal fungi, which is critical to tree growth and
health, is likely heavily reliant on small mammal disturbance
and transfer through feces (Johnson 1996). For example,
tassel-eared squirrels are known to disperse ectomycorrhizal
fungi in ponderosa pine forests (States 1984, Dodd et al. 2003),
and ground squirrels and other species may play this role as
well (Pyare and Longland 2001).
Although small mammal species may serve similar functional
roles in the ecosystem, their habitats differ. For example,
chipmunks and deer mice are generalists, found in a variety of
forest types and age classes. Meanwhile, research suggests that
tassel-eared squirrels are specialists and may respond
negatively to a reduction in ponderosa pine trees, which they
depend on for nesting (Patton 1977, Dodd et al. 2006).
However, Wightman and Rosenstock (unpublished data)
found that up to 75% of the landscape can be treated while
still providing adequate habitat for tassel-eared squirrels. Other
small mammals, including the Mogollon vole, golden-mantled
ground squirrel, and pocket gopher, occupy more open forest
structure and may benefit from openings and the increased
understory vegetation cover (Converse et al. 2006, Bagne and
Finch 2009). Woodrats and rock squirrels are associated with
more specific habitat features, such as shrub cover and rocky
outcrops, respectively (Hoffmeister 1986, Block et al. 2005).
Thus, land managers need to consider both forest structural
differences and fine-scale habitat features when considering
small mammal-habitat relationships in treated ponderosa pine
forests.
Small Mammal-Habitat Relationships
During 2006-2009, we trapped eight species of small mammals
at 294 sites in northern Arizona, on the Coconino National
Forest near Flagstaff and the Kaibab National Forest near Jacob
Lake. Historically, these areas experienced a variety of forest
management practices, including high grading (early 1900s),
commercial logging (1970-1990s) and fuels reduction and
restoration treatments (late 1990s-present). This land use
history created a range of stand structures in terms of tree
basal area and density from which we randomly selected sites.
We used occupancy modeling (MacKenzie et al. 2006) and
model selection to determine wildlife responses to thinning
treatments and habitat features (see Kalies 2010 for further
details on the study). We evaluated small mammal occupancy,
or the probability (from 0 to 1) of a species being present at a
site, rather than small mammal density because occupancy is
less susceptible to year-to-year environmental changes. We
analyzed 14 habitat variables to determine which were most
important in predicting small mammal species and
community occupancy (Table 1). These variables are presented
below along with an explanation of how they affected small
mammal occupancy.
Pine basal area/tree density
Tree density and basal area are critical habitat variables because
they 1) can be directly manipulated through management and 2)
affect most of the small mammal community. Tree density
(which ranged from 16 trees/acre to 1,943 trees/acre; average 286
trees/acre) was highly correlated with pine basal area in our
study. Six of the eight small mammal species decreased in
occupancy on sites with higher pine basal area, whereas tassel-
eared squirrels and woodrats increased in those areas (Figure 1).
Tassel-eared squirrels use the tree canopy for cover, food and
nesting (Patton 1977), while woodrats are usually found in sites
with high tree and shrub density and down wood for cover
(Block et al. 2005). Of the variables we analyzed, this one had the
greatest effect on the overall small mammal community (7 of the
8 species; Table 1).
Time since treatment
Time since treatment (thinning or logging) represents a range
from current restoration or fuels reduction treatments (0
years) to stands that have not been treated since the late 1800s
(109 years); most sites in this study were treated less than 20
years ago. Time since treatment was an important variable for
four species--Mexican woodrat (+), Mogollon vole (-),
1
Ecological Restoration Institute

rock squirrel (-), and gray-collared chipmunk (-) (Table 1).
The only species that increased in occupancy in untreated sites
were woodrats, tassel-eared squirrels, and pocket gophers
(Figure 2). Woodrats and tassel-eared squirrels benefit from
the cover of increased tree density and basal area associated
with greater time since treatment or no treatment. Pocket
gophers may be associated with untreated sites (although they
also occupy sites with lower pine basal area, see above) because
they require areas where they can create burrow systems free of
the disturbance (i.e., compaction) caused by the heavy
machinery used during thinning treatments.
Presence of Slash/Duration of Slash Piles
After thinning treatments, slash was piled and then burned
immediately or within three years. Either the presence or
duration of slash piles left on the ground was important for
woodrats, golden-mantled ground squirrels, and rock squirrels
(Table 1). Duration of slash was the only variable to produce
positive occupancy responses from all but one small mammal
species--the pocket gopher (Figure 3), which lives
underground and derives no benefits from slash. Moreover,
pocket gophers may have been adversely affected by machinery
as explained above.
Understory vegetation
A structurally and compositionally diverse understory provides
food and cover for many small mammal species. We found a
positive relationship between understory vegetation cover,
richness, and height. We excluded understory vegetation height
from further analysis because it was not well represented
across the sites sampled. Understory vegetation species
richness was important for two species--gray-collared
chipmunk (+) and Botta’s pocket gopher (+) (Table 1).
Meanwhile, understory vegetation cover was an important
variable for five species--Mogollon vole (+), gray-collared
chipmunk (+), Botta’s pocket gopher (+), Mexican woodrat
(-), and rock squirrel (-) (Table 1). Woodrat, tassel-eared
squirrel, and rock squirrel occupancy was negatively associated
with increased understory vegetation cover (Figure 4). This
may be because these three species rely on fungi, pine trees,
and nuts more heavily than understory vegetation for food
(Hoffmeister 1986).
Clumpiness
We attempted to assess the “clumpiness” of trees, which we
defined as the percent understory vegetation cover divided by
the total overstory basal area per acre. The rationale behind
this ratio is that in two stands of equal basal area, a more
clumpy arrangement of trees would result in higher understory
percent cover than evenly spaced trees. In our metric, high
values indicate a clumpy arrangement and low values indicate
an even distribution of trees. Clumpiness was an important
variable for three species--Mogollon vole (+), Botta’s pocket
gopher (+), and Mexican woodrat (-) (Table 1). Woodrats
probably responded negatively because they prefer dense cover.
Vole and pocket gopher occupancy increased in “clumpy” areas
because they eat herbaceous vegetation and require open areas
to build their elaborate tunnel and burrow systems.
This variable identified species that are particularly sensitive to
openings, although all species’ responses to clumpiness
followed the same trends we observed for understory
vegetation cover (Figure 4).
Gambel oak basal area
Gambel oak basal area was an important variable for rock
squirrels (+), Mogollon voles (-), and golden-mantled ground
squirrels (-) (Table 1). Rock squirrels are highly associated with
oak clumps in rocky areas for burrowing and cover. The other
three species whose occupancy increased (Mexican woodrat,
deer mouse, tassel-eared squirrel) may take advantage of oaks
for cover or acorns as a food source (Figure 5).
Large trees
We defined densities of large trees using three thresholds: trees
greater than 16 inches, greater than 20 inches, and greater than
24 inches in diameter at breast height (DBH) per acre. Density
of trees greater than 20 inches DBH was an important variable
for the greatest number of species (three species; Table 1).
Nearly all species increased in occupancy, except for voles and
golden-mantled ground squirrels (Figure 6). Large trees are
important for nesting and cover, particularly for tassel-eared
squirrels (Patton and Green 1970). They also provide food,
such as truffles, that is associated with mature tree clumps in
open, forest stands (Korb et al. 2003).
Snags
We excluded two variables--densities of snags greater than 20
inches and 24 inches DBH per acre--from the analysis because
the variables were not well represented across the sites we
sampled. We found most small mammal species (six of eight)
decreased in occupancy in response to total (all sizes) snag
density, but five of the eight species (all, except golden-mantled
ground squirrel, rock squirrel, Botta’s pocket gopher) increased
in occupancy in response to density of snags greater than 16
inches DBH (Figure 7). While small mammals may not be as
closely associated with snags as other wildlife species, such as
cavity-nesting birds, larger snags provide habitat for small
mammals in the form of nesting habitat and cover from
predators.
Down wood
In response to down wood, half the community (Mogollon
vole, Mexican woodrat, golden-mantled ground squirrel, gray-
collared chipmunk) increased in occupancy and the other half
(deer mouse, tassel-eared squirrel, rock squirrel, and Botta’s
pocket gopher) decreased. However, down wood was
important to only two species--deer mouse (-) and Botta’s
pocket gopher (-) (Table 1). Thus, this was not one of the
more important variables to the overall small mammal
community in this study. However, these results should be
interpreted with caution because our study sites had low
volumes of down wood, and occupancy rates may have been
highly influenced by a few outliers (Table 1). Previous research
shows that down wood is an important habitat feature for
small mammals because it is used for cover, nesting, and food
(Chambers 2002, Converse et al. 2006).
Guidelines for Managing Small Mammals in Restored Ponderosa Pine Forests 
of Northern Arizona
Ecological Restoration Institute
2

Guidelines for Managing Small Mammals in Restored Ponderosa Pine Forests 
of Northern Arizona
Ecological Restoration Institute
Management Implications and
Recommendations
In this section we discuss the management implications of
these results and make recommendations based on our
findings in respect to eight species of small mammals in
northern Arizona ponderosa pine forests. While our
recommendations will likely increase occupancy of small
mammals, we understand that land managers will determine
the desired rates of small animal occupancy in a particular
landscape according to the goals and objectives of a given
project.

Restoration treatments will likely increase occupancy for
most species of small mammals. Retaining dense clumps
and stands of trees on the landscape will ensure habitat
for tassel-eared squirrels and Mexican woodrats.

Higher understory vegetation cover, height, and species
richness will benefit most small mammal species. In
particular, increased clumpiness and openings will help
increase the occupancy of Mogollon voles and pocket
gophers.

Retaining slash piles on the landscape for several years,
rather than immediate burning, will increase small
mammal occupancy.

While only one species responded positively to trees
greater than 16 inches DBH, three species responded to
trees greater than 20 or 24 inches DBH. This may be
relevant in determining diameter caps.

Retaining larger snags (greater than 16 inches) during
restoration treatments will increase small mammal
occupancy.

Managers typically retain Gambel oak when
implementing thinning treatments, which has resulted in
an increase in oak density during the past several
decades (Abella and Fulé 2008). Our results showed that
increasing oak basal area is not a strong driver of
occupancy for the small mammal community, although
it is likely important to other wildlife species, especially
birds and bats (Rosenstock 1998, Bernardos et al. 2004).

Down wood is an important habitat feature for some
members of the small mammal community, but less
important than overstory and understory vegetation
composition and structure, according to the results of
this study. Slash may be serving as surrogate habitat in
the absence of down wood or other types of cover at
treated sites.

Although tassel-eared squirrels remain an indicator of
the negative effects of restorative thinning treatments, we
suggest the golden-mantled ground squirrel as an
indicator of the positive effects because the species had a
strong positive response to treatment, slash, and reduced
pine basal area. Furthermore, Mogollon voles showed a
dramatic response to understory vegetation cover and,
thus, may be a good indicator of a restored site.

The occupancy modeling approach was highly effective
in evaluating the response of the small mammal
community to treatment and other habitat attributes.
Conclusions
These results support the inference that the small mammal
community in southwestern ponderosa pine forests is adapted
to an open forest structure with low tree density and a well-
developed herbaceous ground cover. However, both open
stand and dense stands occurred naturally prior to Euro-
American settlement (Noss et al. 2006). Creating and
maintaining both stand types across the landscape will lead to
higher overall small mammal species diversity. Current forest
management in the Southwest tends to promote retention of
Gambel oak trees, large ponderosa pine trees, snags, and
down wood. Our results showed that these attributes are good
for some species, but there is no “one-size-fits-all” solution for
the small mammal community at the fine scale. A diversity of
these features across the landscape will yield the greatest
diversity of small mammal species, and will ensure that
associated ecosystem functions (e.g., prey for predators,
dispersal of fungi) will be maintained as well.
Acknowledgments
We extend thanks to our funding agencies including the
Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona
University (Forest Service Agreement 05-CR-11031600-079
and State of Arizona Technology, Research and Innovation
Fund), Arizona Game and Fish Wildlife Conservation Fund
Grant 080023, the ARCS Foundation, and the Garden Club of
America. We obtained Northern Arizona University
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee approval of
our trapping methodology (protocol #06-005).
3

Guidelines for Managing Small Mammals in Restored Ponderosa Pine Forests 
of Northern Arizona
Ecological Restoration Institute
4
Table 1. Habitat variables analyzed, average and range of each variable, species’ responses (positive or negative), and total number of responses
across the community. Responses are shown only for variables that are considered to be strong drivers of occupancy for each species.
Ponderosa
pine basal
area
(ft2/
acre)
Time
since
treat-
ment
(years)
Pres-
ence
of
slash
piles
Time
slash
piles
left
intact
(years)
Under-
story
vegeta-
tion
(%
cover)
Under-
story
species
rich-
ness
Clump-
inessa
Gambel
oak
basal
area
(ft2/
acre)
Trees
>16in
(#/
acre)
Trees
>20in
(#/
acre)
Trees
>24in
(#/
acre)
All
snags
(#/acre)
Snags
>16in
(#/
acre)
Down
wood
volume
(ft3/ft2)
Average
(range) of
habitat
variable
145
(0-475)
24
(1-109)
0.2
(0-1)
0.4
(0-3)
21
(0-65)
8
(1-19)
0.3
(0-6)
8
(0-183)
28
(0-97)
10
(0-97)
4.4
(0-65)
22
(0-453)
1.0
(0-16)
155
(0-
6267)
Mogollon
vole
-
-
+
+
-
-
-
-
+
Mexican
woodrat
+
+
+
-
-
Deer
mouse
+
+
+
-
Tassel-
eared
squirrel
+
+
Golden-
mantled
ground
squirrel
-
+
+
-
-
-
Rock
squirrel
-
-
+
-
+
Gray-
collared
chipmunk
-
-
+
+
+
-
+
Botta's
pocket
gopher
-
+
+
+
+
-
-
Total #
species
7
4
2
2
5
2
3
3
2
3
2
4
4
2
a Clumpiness was calculated as: percent understory vegetation cover/total overstory basal area per acre.
Figure 1
Figures 1-7 display the occupancy rates of eight small
mammals in seven different habitat settings.

Guidelines for Managing Small Mammals in Restored Ponderosa Pine Forests 
of Northern Arizonaz
Ecological Restoration Institute
5
Figure 2
Figure 3
Figure 4

Guidelines for Managing Small Mammals in Restored Ponderosa Pine Forests 
of Northern Arizona
Ecological Restoration Institute
6
Figure 5
Figure 6
Figure 7
Trees > 20 Inches (#/acre)
Snags > 16 Inches (#/acre)

Guidelines for Managing Small Mammals in Restored Ponderosa Pine Forests 
of Northern Arizona
Ecological Restoration Institute
7
References
Abella, S.R. and P.Z. Fulé. 2008. Changes in Gambel oak
densities in southwestern ponderosa pine forests since
Euro-American settlement. Report Research Note RMRS-
RN-36. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Dept. of Agriculture Forest
Service Rocky Mountain Research Station.
Abella, S.R., P.Z. Fulé, and W.W. Covington. 2006. Diameter
caps for thinning southwestern ponderosa pine forests:
viewpoints, effects, and tradeoffs. Journal of Forestry
104:407-414.
Bagne, K.E. and D.M. Finch. 2009. Response of small
mammal populations to fuel treatment and precipitation
in a ponderosa pine forest, New Mexico. Restoration
Ecology. Available online at
http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/cgi-
bin/fulltext/122648890/PDFSTART.
Bernardos, D.A., C.L. Chambers, and M.J. Rabe. 2004.
Selection of Gambel oak roosts by southwestern Myotis in
ponderosa pine-dominated forests, northern Arizona.
Journal of Wildlife Management 68:595-601.
Block, W.M., J.L. Ganey, P.E. Scott, and R. King. 2005. Prey
ecology of Mexican spotted owls in pine-oak forests of
northern Arizona. Journal of Wildlife Management
69:618-629.
Chambers, C.L. 2002. Forest management and the dead wood
resource in ponderosa pine forests: effects on small
mammals. Pages 679-693 in Proceedings of Proceedings
of the Symposium on the Ecology and Management of
Dead Wood in Western Forests. General Technical Report
PSW-GTR-181:679-693.
Converse, S.J., W.M. Block, and G.C. White. 2006. Small
mammal population and habitat responses to forest
thinning and prescribed fire. Forest Ecology and
Management 228:263-273.
Dodd, N.L., R.E. Schweinsburg, and S. Boe. 2006. Landscape-
scale forest habitat relationships to tassel-eared squirrel
populations: implications for ponderosa pine forest
restoration. Restoration Ecology 14:537-547.
Dodd, N.L., J.S. States, and S.S. Rosenstock. 2003. Tassel-eared
squirrel population, habitat condition, and dietary
relationships in north-central Arizona. Journal of Wildlife
Management 67:622-633.
Frey, J.K. and C.T. LaRue. 1993. Notes on the distribution of
the Mogollon vole (Microtus mogollonensis) in New
Mexico and Arizona. Southwestern Naturalist 38:176-178.
Frey, J.K. and T.L. Yates. 1995. Hualapai vole (Microtus
mogollonensis hualpaiensis) genetic analysis. Unpublished
report to the Arizona Game and Fish Department,
Phoenix, Arizona.
Hoffmeister, D.F. 1986. Mammals of Arizona. Tucson:
University of Arizona Press.
Johnson, C. N. 1996. Interactions between mammals and
ectomycorrhizal fungi. Trends in Ecology & Evolution
11(12):503-507.
Kalies, E.L. 2010. The effects of forest management on small
mammal community dynamics in ponderosa pine
ecosystems. Doctoral dissertation. School of Forestry,
Northern Arizona University.
Kalies, E.L., C.L. Chambers, and W.W. Covington. 2010.
Wildlife responses to thinning and burning treatments in
southwestern conifer forests: a meta-analysis. Forest
Ecology and Management 259:333-342.
Korb, J.E., N.C. Johnson, and W.W. Covington. 2003.
Arbuscular mycorrhizal propagule densities respond
rapidly to ponderosa pine restoration treatments. Journal
of Applied Ecology 40:101-110.
MacKenzie, D.I., J.D. Nichols, J.A. Royle, K.H. Pollock, L.L.
Bailey, and J.E. Hines. 2006. Occupancy estimation and
modeling. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Noss, R.F., P. Beier, W.W. Covington, R.E. Grumbine, D.B.
Lindenmayer, J.W. Prather, F. Schmiegelow, T.D. Sisk, and
D.J. Vosik. 2006. Recommendations for integrating
restoration ecology and conservation biology in
ponderosa pine forests of the southwestern United States.
Restoration Ecology 14:4-10.
Patton, D.R. 1977. Managing southwestern ponderosa pine for
the Abert squirrel. Journal of Forestry 75:264-267.
Patton, D.R. and W. Green. 1970. Abert's squirrels prefer
mature ponderosa pine. Report Research Note RM-169.
Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Dept. of Agriculture Forest Service
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station.
Pyare, S. and W.S. Longland. 2001. Patterns of
ectomycorrhizal-fungi consumption by small mammals
in remnant old-growth forests of the Sierra Nevada.
Journal of Mammalogy 82:681-689.
Reynolds, R.T., R.T. Graham, M.H. Reiser, R.L. Basset, P.L.
Kennedy, D.A. Boyce, Jr., G. Goodwin, R. Smith, and E.L.
Fisher. 1992. Management recommendations for the
northern goshawk in the southwestern United States.
General Technical Report RM-217. Fort Collins, CO: U.S.
Dept. of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain
Forest and Research Station.
Rosenstock, S.S. 1998. Influence of Gambel oak on breeding
birds in ponderosa pine forests of northern Arizona.
Condor 100:485-492.
States, J.S. 1984. Hypogeous, mycorrhizal fungi associated
with ponderosa pine: sporocarp phenology. Page 271 in
R. Molina, ed., Proceedings of 6th North American
Conference on Mycorrhizae. Covallis, OR: Oregon State
University, Forest Research Laboratory.
Wightman, C.S. and S.S. Rosenstock. Unpublished data.
Tassel-eared squirrel responses to fuel reduction and
forest restoration treatments: Mosaics matter.
Resources
Arizona Game and Fish Wildlife Restoration Research
http://www.azgfd.gov/w_c/research_forest_restoration.
shtml
Occupancy modeling tools and information
http://www.uvm.edu/envnr/vtcfwru/spreadsheets/
occupancy/occupancy.htm

Guidelines for Managing Small Mammals in Restored Ponderosa Pine Forests 
of Northern Arizona
8
Ecological Restoration Institute

Written by Dr. Elizabeth L. Kalies and Dr. Carol L. Chambers
Reviewed by Shaula Hedwall, Dr. David Patton, and Steven Rosenstock
Series Editor: Dave Egan
For more information about forest restoration,
contact the ERI at 928-523-7182 or www.eri.nau.edu
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution   
NAU Printing Services/69820/250/05-10
Working Papers in Intermountain West Frequent-fire Forest Restoration
1:
Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons and Adaptive Management
Practices
2:
Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3:
Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
4:
Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits
5:
Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
6:
Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
7:
Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
8:
Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
9:
Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
10: The Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Restoration Model
11: Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration
12: Restoring Forest Roads
13: Treating Slash after Restoration Thinning
14: Integrating Forest Restoration Treatments with Mexican Spotted Owl Habitat Needs
15: Effects of Forest Thinning Treatments on Fire Behavior
16: Snags and Forest Restoration  
17: Bat Habitat and Forest Restoration Treatments
18: Prescribed and Wildland Use Fires in the Southwest: Do Timing and Frequency Matter? 
19: Understory Seeding in Southwestern Forests Following Wildfire and Ecological
Restoration Treatments
20: Controlling Cheatgrass in Ponderosa Pine and Pinyon-Juniper Restoration Areas 
21: Managing Coarse Woody Debris in Frequent-fire Southwestern Forests
22: Restoring Spatial Pattern to Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests

Ecological Restoration Institute
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
www.eri.nau.edu
2ERITA83
