Copyright © 2007 by the author(s). Published here under license by the Resilience Alliance.
Fiedler, C. E., P. Friederici, and M. Petruncio. 2007. Monitoring old growth in frequent-fire landscapes.
Ecology and Society 12(2): 22. [online] URL: http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art22/
Synthesis, part of a Special Feature on The Conservation and Restoration of Old Growth in Frequent-fire
Forests of the American West
Monitoring Old Growth in Frequent-fire Landscapes
Carl E. Fiedler 1, Peter Friederici 2, and Mark Petruncio 3
ABSTRACT. In this article, we discuss how to monitor the structural and functional attributes of old growth,
as well as its associated plant communities and wildlife, both to determine the possible need for treatment
and to assess post-treatment progress toward desired conditions. Monitoring can be used to detect conditions
(or agents) that threaten existing old growth and also to document indicators of healthy, functioning old-
growth systems.
Key Words: disturbance agents; monitoring; physiological/functional indicators; risk assessment;
structural indicators
INTRODUCTION
Old-growth management goals are based on the
ecological, economic, and social expectations
associated with specific ownerships and old-growth
stands. Certain stand features are especially useful
as indicators of old-growth conditions and post-
treatment progress toward desired conditions.
Choosing which old-growth indicators to monitor
depends on management goals and objectives,
although time and money are also major constraints
in deciding what to measure. Some structural
indicators that can be used to assess old-growth
conditions are listed in Table 1.
STRUCTURAL INDICATORS
The popularity of monitoring structural features is
due to their close relationship with functions and
processes, and their ease of measurement. One
general indicator of treatment success in old-growth
areas is post-treatment conditions that would allow
fire use. Some measures of progress toward old-
growth goals (e.g., structural) are readily
quantifiable after treatment, whereas others are
either more subjective (e.g., resiliency to
disturbance processes) or require one or more years
to 
respond 
(e.g., 
tree 
regeneration, 
tree
physiological response, understory vegetation, or
wildlife populations).
Minimum Structural Requirements
Structural requirements for old-growth ponderosa
pine (Pinus ponderosa var. ponderosa) are
presented here as an example of a frequent-fire
forest type. The structural requirements presented
in Table 2 are less restrictive for most features than
the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) Forest
Service requirements (Green et al. 1992, Mehl 1992,
Hamilton 1993, USDA Forest Service 1993), so that
potential old-growth stands can also be identified.
Potential old growth includes forest stands
(Categories 2 and 3; see article by Fiedler et al. in
this issue for definition of these categories) that are
likely to develop into old growth in the future if
stand vigor is maintained. It is important to identify
potential old-growth areas because some existing
old-growth stands will inevitably be lost to stand-
replacing disturbances.
1College of Forestry and Conservation, University of Montana, 
2School of Communication, Northern Arizona University, 
3Forestry Program, Yakama
Nation

Ecology and Society 12(2): 22
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art22/
Table 1. Structural indicators of old growth
Stand density (e.g., number of trees, basal area, or stand density index)
Spatial distribution of old trees (clumped or random)
Species composition
Live crown ratio
Diameter class distribution
Age class distribution
Age of oldest trees
Number of canopy layers
Canopy cover
Snag density (number of dead trees)
Dead and downed logs (number or volume of downed logs)
Amount of dead or broken tops/boles
Minimum Diameter Requirements
The minimum structural requirements for old
growth listed in Table 2 apply to ponderosa pine
stands on dry sites. A minimum diameter of 38 cm,
equating to an age of about 125 years, was found to
be a reasonable old-growth threshold for dry
ponderosa pine forests in eastern Montana (Morgan
et al. 2002). As site quality increases (e.g., soil depth
and available water increase), minimums for live
tree density and diameter also increase. For
example, higher-quality sites may have from 25 to
100 old trees per hectare that are at least 50 cm in
diameter.
Minimum Age Requirements
Stand age has been proposed as a threshold for old-
growth definition. However, Hunter and White
(1997) surveyed the ecological literature in search
of step-functions, or sharp changes in forest
attributes over a few years, that might provide
evidence for stand age as a threshold for old growth,
but found none. Although a “litmus” age is difficult
to define because of the gradual transition from
mature forest to old-growth characteristics, stands
with large ponderosa pine trees that pre-date the
period from about 1860 to 1880 are commonly
considered “old growth.” These dates, although
arbitrary, approximate the period when Euro-
American settlement and broad-scale livestock
grazing began to fundamentally change the
frequent-fire regime that historically shaped drier
western forests.
Coarse Woody Debris
The number of snags and logs and the thickness of
the forest floor generally increase as fire frequency
decreases. Various accounts of ponderosa pine
stand conditions from the late 1800s and early 1900s
included descriptions of widely spaced trees and
few downed logs (Hessburg and Agee 2003). A
study by Morgan et al. (2002) also reported few
snags and downed logs in old-growth pine stands in
eastern Montana. In contrast, Youngblood et al.
(2004) reported a considerable volume of coarse
woody debris in old-growth ponderosa pine stands
in Oregon and California, although this high volume
of dead and downed material likely developed after
many decades without fire.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 22
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art22/
Table 2. Minimum stand structural requirements for old-growth ponderosa pine
Parameter
Minimum Value
Live tree density
20–25 trees per ha (tph)
Diameter at breast height (dbh)
38–50 cm (dry sites); >50 cm (moister sites)
Age at breast height
125–150 years
Number of canopy layers
1 story, 2 stories, or multi-storied
Tree decadence
Not required, but expected if some very old trees are present
Snag density
5 per ha >25 cm diameter (desired)
Downed logs
Not required, but numbers increase in the absence of fire
Old-growth Quality
Indices of old-growth quality or “old-growthness”
(Spies and Franklin 1988) generally rate stands on
the premise that old-growth functions increase as
numbers of large trees, snags, and downed logs
increase. Pfister et al. (2000) point out that one
potentially attractive feature of index methods is the
flexibility they provide to address the great variation
in old-growth conditions. One general problem with
index methods is that old-growth attributes are not
expressed on a comparable basis. Another
shortcoming of indices that comprise numerous
attributes is that a stand can rate relatively high in
overall index value, yet support few large trees
(Pfister et al. 2000). More qualitative indices,
derived from public perceptions of aesthetics and
spiritual values, can also be developed using survey
methods.
PHYSIOLOGICAL/FUNCTIONAL
INDICATORS
Other useful indicators of old-growth status are
derived from the physiological condition of the
component trees (Table 3). Physiological indicators
provide both direct and indirect measures of tree
vigor and nutrient status. For example, the
availability of soil nutrients, particularly nitrogen,
in old-growth stands declines as nutrients
increasingly become bound in standing trees and
forest floor materials. The carbon:nitrogen ratio
increases as organic matter accumulates on the
forest floor, thereby decreasing the amount of
nitrogen available for growth and reducing tree
vigor.
Post-treatment responses in terms of ponderosa pine
regeneration and the understory plant community
also provide useful benchmarks for evaluating
progress toward old-growth goals. These plant-
based yardsticks of changed environmental
conditions and increased resource availability are
natural/ecological indicators of whether treatments
had the desired effects.
Tree Vigor Indices
Monitoring should focus on individual tree
characteristics that reflect vigor, such as live crown
ratio or foliage color and density, or employ vigor
classifications (e.g., Keen 1936, Salman and
Bongberg 1942) that reflect growth potential and
resistance to bark beetles. Maintaining visual
manifestations of vigor increases the likelihood that
young trees will survive and develop to become
large-tree components of old-growth stands.
Increment cores can also reveal slowing radial
growth and declining tree vigor caused by stand
density levels that are too high relative to a site’s
available resources.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 22
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art22/
Table 3. Physiological/nutritional indicators of
old growth
Forest Descriptors
Live crown ratio
Foliage color
Foliage density/needle length
Leaf nitrogen content
Pre-dawn leaf water potential
Oleoresin exudation pressure
Radial growth increment
Carbon:nitrogen ratio in forest floor
Ponderosa Pine Regeneration
Regeneration and reasonable juvenile height growth
of shade-intolerant species are useful measures of
progress toward sustainable old-growth conditions
in frequent-fire forest ecosystems. Although
regeneration is neither required nor desired
throughout the stand, periodic establishment of
ponderosa pine regeneration in openings or low-
density areas created by treatments is one important
indicator of treatment success. Presence of pine
seedlings alone is not sufficient because small trees
must develop rapidly enough to eventually become
part of the overstory. Indeed, very slow height
growth of shade-intolerant regeneration is a key
indicator that treatments did not adequately reduce
density (Arno and Fiedler 2005).
Understory Species’ Productivity, Composition,
and Lifeforms
Historical old-growth stands had productive
understory communities, particularly herbaceous
plants. Low biomass productivity of herbaceous
species is a characteristic of today’s dense, old-
growth stands. Conversely, significantly increased
understory productivity following treatment is a key
indicator of progress toward functioning old-growth
conditions (Wienk et al. 2004, Moore et al. 2006).
Species composition of the understory community
is a prime indicator of a functioning old-growth
forest community. Healthy old-growth communities
should support high native species diversity and low
presence and cover of exotic species, especially
invasive exotics. Old-growth pine forests with
uninterrupted fire regimes maintain greater native
species diversity than old-growth forests from
which fire has been excluded (Laughlin et al. 2004).
Restoration treatments have been shown to
significantly increase native species diversity,
although they can also increase exotic species
richness and cover, at least over the short term.
Exotic species response appears to be an integral,
although unwanted, byproduct of restoration for the
first 3–5 years following treatment (Dodson and
Fiedler 2006). Exotic response appears to be
associated with increasing intensity of treatment or
multiple treatments (e.g., thinning followed by
burning) over a short time period.
Historical old-growth stands in frequent-fire
regimes were dominated by forbs and graminoids,
with relatively few large shrubs. Today’s stands
typically exhibit a dense layer or patches of
coniferous seedlings and saplings, greater shrub
composition, and reduced numbers and cover of
native forbs and grasses. Restoration treatments
differentially affect each of these lifeforms.
Thinning and burning significantly reduce shrubs

Ecology and Society 12(2): 22
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art22/
(Griffis et al. 2001) and small conifers, and
significantly increase native graminoids (Griffis et
al. 2001) and forbs (Laughlin et al. 2004, Wienk et
al. 2004). Each of these changes provides a useful
benchmark of progress toward more functional and
sustainable old-growth conditions.
ASSOCIATED WILDLIFE
Monitoring wildlife is a useful tool in old-growth
management not only because it conveys important
information about wildlife populations, but because
it indirectly monitors habitat conditions and the
effectiveness 
of 
old-growth 
restoration 
or
maintenance treatments. Many animal species that
live in fire-dependent western forests respond
specifically to some of the attributes that make up
old-growth forest stands, such as vertical layering,
horizontal patchiness, large living and dead trees,
and trees with decay or mistletoe brooms (Spies
1998, Hunter 1999). Some play important roles in
forest ecology, and in creating and perpetuating
particular forest structures, such as Abert’s squirrels
dispersing mycorrhizal fungi (States and Gaud
1997), elk foraging on aspen suckers, and songbirds
scattering seeds of trees and shrubs.
For these reasons, as well as public interest in
wildlife, and federal and state protection of
endangered species, monitoring wildlife is a key
step in comprehensive management of current or
future old-growth forests. However, monitoring
wildlife is often difficult, time consuming, and
expensive. Managers need to carefully weigh
decisions about which species to monitor and for
how long as they plan and implement old-growth
treatments.
Choosing Species to Monitor
Because it is infeasible to monitor all or most of the
species that live in association with a particular tract
of forest, managers generally choose a few target
species that serve as indicators for habitat
conditions. For species with special legal status,
such as the Mexican spotted owl (Strix occidentalis
lucida), monitoring may be mandated. Such
indicator species need to be chosen carefully. They
generally should be species that are relatively easy
to locate and census. Birds are often chosen as
indicators precisely for this reason. It is vitally
important to monitor species that truly rely on old-
growth conditions. In some southwestern forests,
for example, both Mexican spotted owls and great
horned owls (Bubo virginianus) may be present in
old-growth stands, yet only the former is believed
to rely primarily on old-growth conditions.
Therefore, it is the species most likely to provide
credible information about the success of restoration
treatments and their effects on wildlife.
One promising approach is to identify a suite of
species that represents all the species expected to be
present in a particular ecosystem, which Lambeck
(1997) has labeled a “restoration assemblage.” In
the case of treatments aimed at preserving or
restoring old-growth structure, for example, these
might be species that use different parts of an old-
growth ecosystem—tree canopies, snags, exfoliating
bark, downed woody debris, or the herbaceous
understory. Raphael et al. (2001) used this approach
and identified the pygmy nuthatch (Sitta pygmaea)
as an indicator for old-growth conditions in the
interior Columbia River Basin because it uses large
snags for nesting and live trees for foraging.
Whatever method is employed, it is vital that
indicator species be carefully selected because it is
easy to choose species that do not represent a full
range of ecological uses (Block et al. 2001). More
details on selecting species to monitor and devising
monitoring protocols can be found in Thompson et
al. (1998) and Morrison (2002).
Spatial Scale
In choosing species to monitor, it is essential to
consider the scale of the areas treated. Monitoring
can only document treatment effects on wildlife
species if the treatments are large enough to truly
affect habitat usage. In Arizona, for example, a set
of experimental blocks was established outside
Flagstaff to monitor the effects of various
restoration treatments in ponderosa pine forest. The
blocks were only 14 ha in size, which was too small
to monitor effects on songbirds, deer, raptors, and
many other species with home ranges as large or
larger than the blocks (Fulé 2003). However, the
blocks are large enough to monitor butterfly activity
and some other species, such as small mammals
(Chambers and Germaine 2003).
Monitoring must also consider the placement of
treatment areas within a larger landscape context.
Variables affecting the larger landscape, such as
extreme weather events, drought, climate shifts, and

Ecology and Society 12(2): 22
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art22/
large-scale management decisions, can affect
wildlife populations and overwhelm the effect of
habitat changes at the scale of a single home range.
Temporal Scale
The dimension of time is critical because it allows
researchers to begin to understand trends and
population dynamics, rather than merely acquiring
a snapshot of wildlife populations at a single point
in time. For example, Battin and Sisk (2003) showed
that some bird species remain in altered habitats
created by treatments intended to enhance old-
growth conditions, but that these habitats sometimes
represent population sinks that do not bolster overall
populations.
Optimally, monitoring protocols would incorporate
specific measures of population dynamics, such as
reproductive success. However, it is often more
feasible to use relative population change as a partial
surrogate for more precise measures of population
change. In the case of treatments intended to
conserve or develop old-growth conditions, it is
particularly important to measure both short- and
long-term wildlife responses to treatment. For
example, a thinning treatment in an area that
currently lacks old-growth structure may initially
remove much tree biomass and disturb soils,
resulting in a decline in wildlife abundance or
diversity. After a few years of regrowth, however,
the understory may show greater diversity and
richness of plant species than before treatment,
resulting in a concomitant increase in wildlife
activity. After a few decades, increased tree growth
may translate into incipient old-growth conditions
and an increase in associated wildlife species.
Monitoring protocols that incorporate measurements
at varied times after treatment are needed to detect
such changes.
MONITORING DISTURBANCE
PROCESSES AND ASSESSING RISK
Perpetuating old-growth ponderosa pine stands
requires maintaining resistance to disturbance
agents (insects, disease, and wildfire) that can cause
unprecedented levels of damage. Although each of
these agents is an integral part of a healthy old-
growth ecosystem, historically they have operated
to damage or kill trees at the tree or clump level, not
the stand level. Today, that is no longer the case.
However, a number of hazard rating systems can be
used to assess relative risk from these agents. For
example, some of the individual-tree characteristics
listed in Table 2 can be used to develop stand-level
hazard ratings for bark beetles (Dendroctonus spp.),
dwarf mistletoe (Arceuthobium spp.), and wildfire
hazard.
Bark Beetle Hazard
Bark beetle hazard increases as stand density and
moisture stress increase, and as oleoresin exudation
pressure decreases (Vité 1961). Two tree vigor–
beetle susceptibility classifications have been
developed for ponderosa pine (Keen 1936, Salman
and Bongberg 1942). These classifications are most
useful when bark beetles are at endemic rather than
epidemic levels, and for rating bark beetle hazard
in the Inland Northwest/California variety of
ponderosa pine.
Dwarf Mistletoe
Dwarf mistletoe is a parasitic plant that grows on
trees and extracts resources that would otherwise be
used for tree growth. Hawksworth (1979) developed
a mistletoe rating system, ranging from class 1
(minor infection, with little effect on tree
physiological function) to class 6 (severe infection,
likely to result in tree mortality). Although mistletoe
infection is undesirable at any level, it is a problem
that must be endured in Category 1 old-growth
areas, regardless of severity. In contrast, because of
the limited resources available for managing stands
for future old growth, treatments should only be
considered in Category 2 areas if they are uninfected
or have light (class 1 or 2) dwarf mistletoe ratings.
Virtually no level of infection should be tolerated
in Category 3 stands because of the long period
(decades to centuries) that will be required for such
stands to develop old-growth characteristics, even
with thoughtful management.
Wildfire Hazard
Wildfire hazard can be measured at the landscape
level or the stand level, using various readily
available models. Fire Regime Condition Class (
http://www.frcc.gov/) is a tool that assesses the
degree of departure from the historical natural fire

Ecology and Society 12(2): 22
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art22/
regime and reflects changes in vegetation, fuels, and
associated disturbances at a landscape scale.
Models, such as the Fuels Management Analyst Plus
(Fire Program Solutions LLC 2005; http://www.fir
eps.com/software/ug_fma.pdf) and the Fire and
Fuels Extension to the Forest Vegetation Simulator
(Beukema et al. 1997; http://www.treesearch.fs.fed.
us/pubs/5593), can provide stand-level assessments
of hazard. These models use various individual tree
or stand-level measurements as inputs to calculate
wildfire hazard rating in terms of fire behavior
potential, crown fire potential, and available fuel
potential. Wildfire hazard generally increases as
surface fuels, canopy bulk density, and ladder fuels
increase, and as height-to-live crown decreases
(Agee and Skinner 2005).
CONCLUSION
Monitoring is an essential component of projects
designed to develop or maintain old-growth
characteristics. Maturing and old-growth forest
conditions, and the kinds of treatments that may be
needed to modify or maintain them, vary greatly at
local and regional scales. Through monitoring,
valuable information can be obtained for refining
treatment prescriptions to better match specific
forest conditions, sites, and landowner objectives.
Monitoring is an imperfect science, especially in
relation to old growth or incipient old-growth
forests. Resources will never be sufficient to
monitor everything that managers or researchers
would like to know. Nor can we know now some of
the important questions of the future—particularly
given a changing climate. For these reasons, it is
vital to design monitoring protocols that are both
broad (measure a variety of indicators) and flexible
(open to modification over time). Experience and
knowledge gained through monitoring can help
ensure that today’s well-intentioned treatments will
ultimately achieve their long-term goals.
Responses to this article can be read online at:
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art22/responses/
LITERATURE CITED
Agee, J. K., and C. N. Skinner. 2005. Basic
principles of forest fuel reduction treatments. Forest
Ecology and Management 211:83–96.
Arno, S. F., and C. E. Fiedler. 2005. Mimicking
nature’s fire: restoring fire-prone forests in the West. 
Island Press, Washington, D.C., USA.
Battin, J., and T. D. Sisk. 2003. Assessing
landscape-level influences of forest restoration on
animal populations. Pages 175–190 in P. Friederici,
editor. Ecological restoration of southwestern
ponderosa pine forests. Island Press, Washington,
D.C., USA.
Beukema, S. J., J. A. Greenough, D. C. E.
Robinson, W. A. Kurz, E. D. Reinhardt, N. L.
Crookston, J. K. Brown, C. C. Hardy, and A. R.
Stage. 1997. An introduction to the fire and fuels
extension to FVS. Pages 191–195 in R. Teck, M.
Moeur, and J. Adams, editors. Proceedings of the
forest vegetation simulator conference. U.S. Forest
Service General Technical Report INT-373.
Block, W. M., A. B. Franklin, J. P. Ward, Jr., J.
L. Ganey, and G. C. White. 2001. Design and
implementation of monitoring studies to evaluate
the success of ecological restoration on wildlife.
Restoration Ecology 9:293–303.
Chambers, C. L., and S. S. Germaine. 2003.
Vertebrates. Pages 268–285 in P. Friederici, editor.
Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa
pine forests. Island Press, Washington, D.C., USA.
Dodson, E. K., and C. E. Fiedler. 2006. Impacts
of restoration treatments on alien plant invasion in
Pinus ponderosa forests, Montana, USA. Journal
of Applied Ecology 43:887–897.
Fire Program Solutions, LLC. 2005. Fuels
Management Analyst Plus v 1.2.20. Fire Program
Solutions, LLC, Estacada, Oregon, USA.
Fulé, P. Z. 2003. Monitoring. Pages 402–416 in P.
Friederici, editor. Ecological restoration of
southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Island Press,
Washington, D.C., USA.
Green, P., J. Joy, D. Sirucek, W. Hann, A. Zack,
and B. Naumann. 1992. Old-growth forest types of
the northern region. U.S. Forest Service, Northern

Ecology and Society 12(2): 22
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art22/
Region R1 SES 4/92.
Griffis, K. L., J. A. Crawford, M. R. Wagner, and
W. H. Moir. 2001. Understory response to
management treatments in northern Arizona
ponderosa pine forests. Forest Ecology and
Management 146:239–245.
Hamilton, R. G., compiler. 1993. Characteristics
of old-growth forests in the Intermountain Region. 
Unpublished report on file at USDA Forest Service,
Intermountain Region, Ogden, Utah, USA.
Hawksworth, F. G. 1979. The 6-class dwarf
mistletoe rating system. U.S. Forest Service General
Technical Report RM-48.
Hessburg, P. F., and J. K. Agee. 2003. An
environmental narrative of Inland Northwest United
States forests, 1800–2000. Forest Ecology and
Management 178:23–59.
Hunter, M. L., Jr., editor. 1999. Maintaining
biodiversity in forest ecosystems. Cambridge
University Press, New York, New York, USA.
Hunter, M. L. Jr., and A. S. White. 1997.
Ecological thresholds and the definition of old-
growth forest stands. Natural Areas Journal 
17:292–296.
Keen, F. 1936. Relative susceptibility of ponderosa
pine to bark-beetle attack. Journal of Forestry 
34:919–927.
Lambeck, R. J. 1997. Focal species: a multi-species
umbrella for nature conservation. Conservation
Biology 11:849–856.
Laughlin, D. C., J. D. Bakker, M. T. Stoddard,
M. L. Daniels, J. D. Springer, C. M. Gildar, A. M.
Green, and W. W. Covington. 2004. Toward
reference conditions: wildfire effects on flora in an
old-growth ponderosa pine forest. Forest Ecology
and Management 199:137–152.
Mehl, M. S. 1992. Old-growth descriptions for the
major forest cover types in the Rocky Mountain
Region. In M. R. Kaufmann, W. H. Moir, and R. L.
Bassett, technical coordinators. Old-growth forests
in the Southwest and Rocky Mountain regions:
Proceedings of a workshop. U.S. Forest Service
General Technical Report RM-213.
Moore, M. M., C. A. Casey, J. D. Bakker, J. D.
Springer, P. Z. Fulé, W. W. Covington, and D. C.
Laughlin. 2006. Herbaceous vegetation responses
(1992–2004) to restoration treatments in a
ponderosa pine forest. Rangeland Ecology and
Management 59:135–144.
Morgan, T. A., C. E. Fiedler, and C. W. Woodall. 
2002. Characteristics of dry site old-growth
ponderosa pine in the Bull Mountains of Montana,
USA. Natural Areas Journal 22:11–19.
Morrison, M. L. 2002. Wildlife restoration:
techniques for habitat analysis and animal
monitoring. Island Press, Washington, D.C., USA.
Pfister, R. D., W. L. Baker, C. E. Fiedler, and J.
W. Thomas. 2000. Contract review of old-growth
management on school trust lands: supplemental
biodiversity guidance. Report to the Montana
Department of Natural Resources and Conservation.
Raphael, M. G., M. J. Wisdom, M. M. Rowland,
R. S. Holthausen, B. C. Wales, B. G. Marcot, and
T. D. Rich. 2001. Status and trends of habitats of
terrestrial 
vertebrates 
in 
relation 
to 
land
management in the interior Columbia River Basin.
Forest Ecology and Management 153:63–88.
Salman, K. A., and J. W. Bongberg. 1942. Logging
high-risk trees to control insects in the pine stands
of northeastern California. Journal of Forestry 
40:533–539.
Spies, T. A. 1998. Forest structure: a key to the
ecosystem. Northwest Science 72:34–39.
Spies, T. A., and J. F. Franklin. 1988. The diversity
and maintenance of old-growth forests. Pages 296–
314 in R. Szaro and D. Johnston, editors.
Biodiversity on managed landscapes. Oxford
University Press, New York, New York, USA.
States, J. S., and W. S. Gaud. 1997. Ecology of
hypogeous fungi associated with ponderosa pine. I.
Patterns of distribution and sporocarp production in
some Arizona forests. Mycologia 89:712–721.
Thompson, W. L., G. C. White, and C. Gowan. 
1998. Monitoring vertebrate populations. Academic
Press, San Diego, California, USA.
U.S. Department of Agriculture. 1993. Region 6
interim old growth definition for Douglas-fir series,

Ecology and Society 12(2): 22
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art22/
grand fir/white fir series, interior Douglas-fir series,
lodgepole pine series, Pacific silver fir series,
ponderosa pine series, Port Orford-cedar and tanoak
(redwood) series, subalpine fir series, and western
hemlock series. USDA Forest Service, Pacific
Northwest Region, Portland, Oregon, USA.
Vité, J. 1961. The influence of water supply on
oleoresin exudation pressure and resistance to bark
beetle attack in Pinus ponderosa. Contribution
Boyce Thompson Institute 21:37–66.
Wienk, C. L., C. H. Sieg, and G. R. McPherson. 
2004. Evaluating the role of cutting treatments, fire
and soil seed banks in an experimental framework
in ponderosa pine forests of the Black Hills, South
Dakota. Forest Ecology and Management 192:375–
393.
Youngblood, A., T. Max, and K. Coe. 2004. Stand
structure in eastside old-growth ponderosa pine
forests of Oregon and northern California. Forest
Ecology and Management 199:191–217.
