Charting Quadrats with a Pantograph
Robert R. Hill
Ecology, Vol. 1, No. 4. (Oct., 1920), pp. 270-273.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0012-9658%28192010%291%3A4%3C270%3ACQWAP%3E2.0.CO%3B2-S
Ecology is currently published by Ecological Society of America.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/esa.html.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
The JSTOR Archive is a trusted digital repository providing for long-term preservation and access to leading academic
journals and scholarly literature from around the world. The Archive is supported by libraries, scholarly societies, publishers,
and foundations. It is an initiative of JSTOR, a not-for-profit organization with a mission to help the scholarly community take
advantage of advances in technology. For more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
http://www.jstor.org
Fri Mar 7 17:41:44 2008

CHARTING QUADRATS WITH A PANTOGRAPH 
Grazing Examiner, U. S. Forest Service 
The quadrat method of recording changes in the composition of vege- 
tation has been used by the Forest Service in connection with its various 
grazing investigations for a number of years. The accurate history thus 
compiled of the changes in plant formations, especially under different con- 
ditions of grazing, is invaluable in developing principles of range manage- 
ment. On the Santa Rita Range Reserve, in southern Arizona, eighty chart 
quadrats are.mapped each year and as many more will be established in the 
near future. It is obvious to those familiar with quadrat charting that the 
mapping of this number of quadrats involves a great deal of work. 
The method of charting heretofore followed is the common one in which 
straps are used to divide the quadrat into square decimeters, and the vegeta- 
FIG. 
I. Pantograph used for charting quadrats, folded for carrying. 
270 

CHARTING QUADRATS WITH A PANTOGRAPH 
* 7 I  
tion within each decimeter is mapped on a reduced scale by ocular estimate, 
supplemented by actual measurement. 
The recognized disadvantages of 
this method led the writer to experiment with the pantograph as a practical 
means of avoiding them. Now, the pantograph is commonly considered as 
adapted for use only when operated upon a drafting table. For mapping 
vegetation in the field it would seem quite unusable. Nevertheless the ex- 
periments showed surprisingly good results. 
In fact, when mounted upon a 
suitable frame the pantograph registers the outline of vegetation as accu- 
rately as though the work were done on a drafting table. This is not to say 
that the result of this method of charting is a perfect reproduction of the 
outlines of vegetation ; it is simply an accurate tracing of the outlines which 
were followed by the operator. 
The production of accurate charts is largely 
a matter of acquiring system and skill in guiding a needle around the out- 
lines of plants. 
As a result of the experiments with the pantograph the instrument was 
used in charting most of the established quadrats at the Santa Rita Range Re- 
serve in the fall of 1919. The instrument (fig. I )  used is of wood with arms 
40 inches long and set to reduce to 1/3.75 which, when applied to a meter quad- 
rat produces a square approximately 10.5 inches on a side. A table 21 inches 
square, made of three-ply veneer and with demountable legs 10 inches high, 
was used to support the pantograph, which was mounted on a pivot at one 
corner. A metal leg I inch high with a ball roller, and attached to one arm, 
supported the instrument and, when the instrument was being used, swung 
back and forth across the table. The only other mpdification of the instru- 
ment was the substitution of a steel needle 10 inches long for the short 
needle used in tracing the outline of the figure to be reproduced. 
The needle 
not only supported one arm of the pantograph when not in motion but also 
enabled the outlines of the vegetation to be traced while the instrument re- 
mained high enough to be out of contact with the stems of the plants. The 
form for registering the charts was placed on the table after the insxrument 
was set in position along one edge of the quadrat, and adjusted so as to 
record properly and then fastened with thumb-tacks. 
It requires the services of two persons to chart successfully; one, who 
should be skilled in charting and familiar with the flora, to trace the outline 
of the vegetation and call out the proper symbols; the other to record the 
symbol for each species and to lift the recording pencil from one outline to 
the next. The equipment can be carried handily by the operators either on 
foot or on horse. An average day's work as conducted at the Reserve was 
the charting and describing of fifteen quadrats, although as many as twenty 
were completed in one day. An average day's work for one man using the 
hand method is four or five quadrats. 
The advantages of charting meter quadrats with the pantograph as com- 
pared with the use of straps are: 

272 
ROBERT R. HILL 
I. The results are fully as accurate; the pantograph will record as accu- 
rately as the skill of the operator in following the outline of plants will 
permit. 
2. The pantograph can be used with entire disregard of the presence of 
rocks or impenetrable soil-factors 
very important in using straps. 
3. The rank growth of vegetation is even less of an obstacle to accuracy 
with the pantograph than it is with the strap method, because the foliage 
can readily be held with one hand while the outline of the plant is traced 
with the other. Where straps are used the rank foliage is very apt to pre- 
vent the straps from lying accurately in position. 
4. The work can be done more rapidly with the pantograph and with 
much less tedium. (Two persons, only one of whom need be skilled, can 
chart fully three times as many quadrats with the pantograph as one skilled 
person can chart with straps.) 
5. The pantograph is especially efficient in locating individual seedlings 
or one-stemmed plants and in tracing the outline of crowns of low bushes. 
The principal disadvantage so far encountered in the use of the panto- 
graph is the fact that the instrument is more cumbersome than the equip- 
FIG. 
2. Pantograph used for charting quadrats, set up ready for use. 
ment used with the strap method. This is believed to be offset by the shorter 
time required to set up the pantograph. Moreover, the perfected instru- 
ment should be very easily carried and manipulated. The pantograph can be 
used on any degree of slope where quadrats are apt to be located ; is equally 
useful whether the vegetation is scattered or dense; or whether it consists 
of perennials or annuals, and the data can be as readily compiled as the data 
obtained with the hand method, for in either case standard forms should be 
used in charting. 

C H A R T I N G  QUADRATS \VITII A PAKTOGRAPH 
2/'3 
Before general use is made of the pantograph in charting, the scale of 
reduction should be standardized. 
In future work at the Santa Rita Rz-
serve it is planned to use the scale of I to 5. This is a convenient scale for 
mapping meter quadrats since the reduced base is 2 decimeters square. 
The principal improvement which is needed in the instrument is a stand 
which can be quickly and easily set up ; which will be rigid when in use ; capable 
of being folded into compact form and strong enough for field use. The ac- 
companying illustrations (figs. I and 2) are of a rough model of a stand de- 
signed to embody these qualities. The finished stand will consist of a frame 
shaped like a sector of a circle, mounted on three legs and supporting a map-
holder. The frame will have two arms reaching out from a pivot, on which the 
pantograph will be mounted, to a curved track where will run the ball- 
bearing peg used to support the weight of the pantograph and enabling it to 
be moved smoothly back and forth through an ark of about go degrees. 
The arms will be 2; inches long and two inches wide. The track will be 
42 inches long, measured on the outer edge, and 3 inches wide. The map- 
holder will be 12 inches long and 10inches wide. The material for these 
parts will be quarter-inch hardwood reinforced with brass strips. The legs 
will be of metal; will be bolted onto the frame and made to fold up. The 
map-holder will be attached to one arm of the frame by means of a bolt 
which will slide along a slot set diagonally across the under surface of the 
holder and along a slot of similar length on the arm. This arrangement 
will allow the holder to be adjusted readily into any position so that the 
recording pencil will register properly with reference to the position of the 
quadrat. The record sheets will be held in place by spring clamps. The 
pantograph will be attached by means of a spring socket on the end of the 
pivot arm which will fit onto a peg with a ball head. This peg will be an 
extension of a bolt which will also hold the arms together. 
By removing 
this bolt and bringing the arms together toward the track, the stand may be 
folded quickly and in this position can be carried handily. 
It is not presumed that the instrument just described will need no refine- 
ments. Continued use of the instrument will doubtless suggest several im- 
provements. The experience already had, however, of charting quadrats 
with the pantograph has convinced the writer that the method is thoroughly 
sound and should reduce the burden commonly associated with this phase 
of ecological work.= 
= I t  is not known what it will cost to manufacture the charting pantograph but it is 
believed that the price should not exceed twenty dollars. 
