26
Ecological Restoration Institute 
Working Paper No. 26
Wildlife Habitat Values 
and Forest Structure in 
Southwestern Ponderosa Pine: 
Implications for Restoration
February 2013

Working Papers in Intermountain West Frequent-ﬁre Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing 
native species, structural characteristics, and ecological processes. Te Society for Ecologi-
cal Restoration International deﬁnes ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that 
initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity and 
sustainability….Restoration attempts to return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Soci-
ety for Ecological Restoration International Science & Policy Working Group 2004).
Most frequent-ﬁre forests throughout the Intermountain West have been degraded during 
the last 150 years. Many of these forests are now dominated by unnaturally dense thickets 
of small trees, and lack their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests 
in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing ﬁres and increased 
insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers on reintroducing frequent, 
low-severity surface ﬁres—ofen afer thinning dense stands—and reestablishing productive 
understory plant communities. 
Te Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in research-
ing, implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of frequent-ﬁre forests of the 
Intermountain West. By allowing natural processes, such as low-severity ﬁre, to resume self-
sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem services, 
wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
 
Te ERI Working Papers series presents ﬁndings and management recommendations from 
research and observations by the ERI and its partner organizations. While the ERI staﬀ 
recognizes that every restoration project needs to be site speciﬁc, we feel that the information 
provided in the Working Papers may help restoration practitioners elsewhere.
 
Tis publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Ser-
vice and the Southwest Fire Science Consortium. Te views and conclusions contained in 
this document are those of the author(s) and should not be interpreted as representing the 
opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of trade names or commercial 
products does not constitute their endorsement by the United States Government or the ERI.
Cover Photo: An American Robin (Turdus migratorius) perches on a ponderosa pine branch. 
Photo by George Andreijko, Arizona Game and Fish Department

Ecological Restoration Institute
1
Introduction
Southwestern ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) forests have 
undergone substantial changes in structure and function since the 
late 1800s (Cooper 1960, Covington and Moore 1994, Swetnam and 
Baisan 1996). Among inﬂuences of previous forest management 
practices, alteration of ﬁre regimes has played the greatest role in 
shaping current forest conditions (Fulé et al. 2002). Pre-1900 ﬁre 
return intervals in southwestern ponderosa pine forests ranged from 
2-15 years (Fulé et al. 2002, Grissno-Mayer et al. 2004); however, ﬁre 
has been eﬀectively excluded from much of the landscape for the 
last 100 years or more. Te lack of ﬁre in these forests has resulted 
in increased tree densities, decreased average tree diameter, and an 
increased risk of uncharacteristic, high-severity wildﬁres. Te goal 
of forest restoration is to return forest conditions to their natural 
range of variability in order to safely restore a frequent ﬁre regime. 
However, many forests are currently too dense to accommodate 
the reintroduction of ﬁre without mechanical thinning. Terefore, 
to reduce the risk of uncharacteristic ﬁre and increase the ability 
of a forest to withstand ﬁre occurrence, managers use a variety of 
mechanical treatments, including thinning, to reduce surface fuels, 
increase height to live crowns, and decrease crown density.
Restoration: Spatial Patterns and 
Wildlife Habitat
Te spatial pattern of trees and groups of trees retained following 
thinning is an important factor aﬀecting wildlife habitat quality in 
managed landscapes. Much of the southwestern ponderosa pine 
landscapes were naturally heterogeneous (Covington and Moore 
1994, Allen et al. 2002, Fulé et al. 2002), with trees in groups or groups 
and openings between with a herbaceous understory, that gave the 
forest an open, meadow-like appearance. Te heterogeneity in habitat 
was used by a diversity of wildlife species. In addition, Gambel oak 
(Quercus gambelii) provides high-quality wildlife habitat for some 
species in its various growth forms, and is a desirable component of 
ponderosa pine forests where it naturally occurs (Bernardos et al. 
2004, Rosenstock 1996). Restoring the natural variability of forest 
composition and structure on the landscape should, in turn, restore 
native wildlife populations (Kalies et al. 2012). However, creation of 
this spatial pattern and composition has been an evolving process. 
In the mid-1990s, forest managers in the Southwest recognized an 
immediate need to reduce ﬁre-risk in the wildland urban interface 
(WUI), areas of forested lands adjacent to communities and associated 
infrastructure. At that time, wildlife habitat objectives were ofen 
considered secondary to fuel management objectives and the forest 
structure and pattern resulting from WUI treatments (e.g., evenly 
spaced trees with little-to-no layering of canopy structure) lacked 
characteristics important for wildlife. In these early days of ponderosa 
pine restoration, wildlife managers recognized a need to better 
communicate wildlife habitat values to forest managers conducting 
restoration in southwestern ponderosa pine. Over time, wildlife fuels 
reduction treatments evolved to incorporate more restoration-based 
designs (e.g., an aggregated tree pattern with grassy openings, and 
a multi-layered canopy structure), creating habitat ofen selected by 
wildlife. Tese treatments gave greater consideration to wildlife habitat 
needs while still focusing on reducing ﬁre risk. 
Restoration treatments in the WUI continue to be top priority for 
forest managers today. In addition, recent ﬁre-risk reduction studies 
suggest that restoration treatments must be strategically located across 
the landscape, including remote areas outside the WUI (Finney 2001, 
Ager et al. 2010). As the scope of forest restoration broadens to a 
landscape scale, there is potential to impact wildlife habitats in a way 
that has population-level impacts. Much of this plays out in the forest 
structure, pattern, and composition created at the site-speciﬁc scale.
Te following discussion describes a heterogeneous, multi-aged, 
aggregated forest structure that reﬂects conditions that likely existed 
prior to interruption of natural ﬁre regimes and other signiﬁcant 
anthropogenic interventions. We incorporated the best currently 
available science regarding “natural” forest structure within an 
ecological framework (e.g., historic range of variability and reference 
stand conditions), and wildlife habitat relationships in southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests. Te information provided is not intended 
to be prescriptive, but rather descriptive of forest condition and 
structures hypothesized to meet short- and long-term wildlife needs 
within the ponderosa pine forest type. Given the inherent variability 
associated with diﬀerences in soils, aspect, topography, and other 
variables, the information presented here must be interpreted 
and applied with a local ecological context. We also caution about 
extrapolation of information to meadows, high-elevation savannahs 
and grasslands, and other areas that have experienced signiﬁcant pine 
encroachment following exclusion of ﬁre. We recommend monitoring 
the described forest structure and pattern and wildlife responses, and 
using adaptive management to adjust treatments accordingly.
Forest Composition Varies at Different Scales
Descriptions provided are most appropriately applied at the ﬁne- to 
mid-scale, which we deﬁne here as ranging roughly from <1 acre 
to 1000 acres. It is important to understand forest and ecological 
processes at diﬀerent scales because landscapes are spatially 
dependent (Turner 1989). While an over-all aggregated, or grouped, 
tree pattern separated by openings is widely accepted as the dominant 
pattern of pre-settlement, natural tree occurrence in southwestern 
ponderosa pine (Fitzgerald 2005), random historic tree distribution 
patterns have been observed on varying soil types and settings (Abella 
2008, Reynolds et al. (unpublished data), Schneider 2012). Terefore, 
elements such as single tree and group density become less important 
at the landscape scale and elements such as patches, stand density, 
canopy cover, and basal area become more appropriate. 
We recognize that modiﬁcations to forest composition and structure 
may beneﬁt some wildlife species and adversely impact others. As 
there is no single prescription or forest condition that will maximize 
habitat value for all species, tradeoﬀs are unavoidable. It is unclear 
whether some species of concern may have beneﬁted from forest 
conditions that are now viewed as ecologically unsustainable. For 
example, Ganey et al. (1999) noted that closed-canopy ponderosa 
pine-Gambel oak forests are used for roosting by the federally 
threatened Mexican spotted owls (Strix occidentalis lucida). 
Restoration treatments would aim to reduce the amount of closed-
canopy forest on the landscape. However, Mexican spotted owls 
may have evolved in a landscape containing relatively few patches of 
such closed-canopy forest embedded in a matrix of open forest, and 
thus their habitat requirements may be very compatible with forest 
restoration at the landscape scale.
Group, patch, interspace, and opening are deﬁned in the following 
ﬁgures. Please refer to the two ﬁgures for spatial arrangement of 
deﬁned terms. “Openings” should not be confused with meadows, 
which are characterized by moist conditions, soil type, thinner O 
horizons, thinner A horizons, and higher pH, and a lack of historical 
tree evidences (Kerns et al. 2003). Openings and interspaces diﬀer 
from meadows because they shif from a treeless state to a treed state, 
in the same dynamic process by which groups and patches shif from 
a treed state to a treeless state. Openings should also not be confused 
with “regeneration openings,” a prescriptive designation applied to 
10–20% of a given stand per the northern goshawk guidelines in the 
U.S. Forest Service Southwestern Region Forest Plans (USDA 1995).
Conclusion
Trough scientiﬁc inquiry and adaptive management, managers have 
learned to reduce the risk of uncharacteristic, high-severity ﬁre and 
increase resilience using the tools of forest restoration.  Managers 
use a variety of mechanical treatments, including thinning, to reduce 
surface fuels, increase height to live crowns, and decrease crown 
density. Restoring the natural variability of forest composition and 
structure on the landscape should, in turn, restore native wildlife 
populations.  It is feasible to reduce ﬁre risk, restore natural ﬁre 
regimes, and improve habitat quality for a variety of wildlife species 
if strategic thought is given to the spatial pattern of trees and 
groups of trees retained following thinning. Table 1 synthesizes 
available studies on wildlife habitat management prescriptions and 
provides management recommendations designed to restore forest 
heterogeneity and improve wildlife habitat.
 
Wildlife Habitat Values and Forest Structure in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine: 
Implications for Restoration

2
3
Figure 1. Example spatial configuration of groups, interspaces, patches, and openings within a ponderosa 
pine site in a wildland (or equivalent word) setting. Groups of trees with interlocking canopies vary in size 
and are separated by interspaces. Patches of grouped trees vary in size, and larger patches are oriented perpen-
dicular to the prevailing wind vectors and are separated by large openings up- and downwind. Not drawn to 
any scale.
Figure 2. Example spatial configuration of groups, interspaces, patches, and openings within a ponderosa pine 
site in an urban interface setting (e.g., City Wellfield, Flagstaff). Groups of trees with interlocking canopies 
vary in size and are separated by larger interspaces compared to sites outside the interface. Patches of grouped 
trees may be smaller in size compared to sites outside the interface, and large patches, where appropriate, are 
oriented perpendicular to the prevailing wind vectors and are separated by large openings up- and downwind. 
Tree density may be lower near dwellings and structures. Not drawn to any scale.
Ecological Restoration Institute
Wildlife Habitat Values and Forest Structure in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine: 
Implications for Restoration
Ecological Restoration Institute
Wildlife Habitat Values and Forest Structure in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine: 
Implications for Restoration

Ecological Restoration Institute
4
5
Wildlife Habitat Values and Forest Structure in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine: 
Implications for Restoration
Ecological Restoration Institute
Wildlife Habitat Values and Forest Structure in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine: 
Implications for Restoration
Structural 
Elements
Aggregation
Age Structure
Interlocking 
Canopies
Separation
#Trees/
Aggregation
Area (acres)
Recommendations*
Wildlife References
Group
• Small size and 
relatively dense 
aggregation
•Should be based 
upon the size 
and frequency 
distributions 
of natural 
disturbances28
• Can be similar 
(e.g., a group of 
yellow pines), 
but a mixture of 
uneven and even 
age structure is 
desirable29, 30, 37
•Snags retained5
•Regeneration in 
and along edge of 
group, in “safe sites” 
(micro-sites with 
reduced overstory 
and herbaceous 
competition, e.g., 
the ash bed of a 
consumed log where 
seedlings establish 
above lethal ﬂaming 
zone)30 
• Desired for 
all trees in the 
group
• Must be 
maintained for 
older, larger trees
• Can allow for 
some growth 
in groups with 
smaller trees 
• Break in 
canotpy 
(inter-
spaces)
• 3-44 trees if dbh >36 
cm or yellow-bark*52
• Some groups of 
smaller trees may have 
>44 stems52
• 88% of trees ≥106 
years old occurred in 
groups of 3 or more 
trees in Gus Pearson 
Natural Area52
• 0.1 – 0.536
• 0.15 – 0.358
• Can be ~2x height 
of mature trees 47
• Manage for a range of sizes and density in groups
• Retain existing group structure informed by pre-settlement evidences 
and natural disturbance regimes when available3, 16
• Avoid removing trees within the group, particularly those that encourage 
vertical diversity40
• Retain snags and down woody debris within groups7, 12, 39, 55
• Retain some percentage of trees with dwarf-mistletoe brooms26
• Retain shrub and oak components20, 33, 37, 44
• Turkey >30 trees/group50, 51
• Breeding birds – uneven aged within groups44
• Foliage-gleaning songbirds – favor denser groups44
• Tassel-eared squirrels – >5 trees/group10, 11, positively associ-
ated with interlocking trees12 (although evidence exists for no 
eﬀect of tree aggregation35)
• Mule deer – ≥0.10 acres (range 0.05-0.10)20 , ≥ 0.098 acre6
• Down woody debris – lizards22, small mammals6, 24, 43, bears47
• Interspersion of age classes within group: American robin – 
high, band-tailed pigeon – moderate, chipmunks – moderate, 
cottontails – high, mourning dove – high, northern ﬂicker – 
high, tassel-eared squirrel – moderate40
• Oak retention – songbirds44, 45 bear 33, deer20
• Mogollon voles and Botta’s pocket gopher associated with 
aggregated tree arrangement24
Patch
• Large in size 
and more loosely 
aggregated
• Contains 2 
or more groups 
and individual 
trees scattered 
throughout
• Uneven aged  
across the patch30
• The goal should be 
toward at least 4 age 
classes intermingled 
intimately in the 
same group
• Snags retained5
• Regeneration 
in “safe sites” (see 
deﬁnition in group) 
52
• In groups 
embedded in the 
patch but not 
across the patch
• Openings
• Varies based on 
density and spatial 
arrangement of groups 
and single trees
• Varies based on density 
and spatial arrangement 
of groups45
• Should be >0.75 acres 
up to any acreage
• Larger groups 
downwind of larger 
openings
• Create a mosaic (a patchwork) of groups and openings, of variable size 
and shape
• Retain snags and down woody debris within groups7, 12, 39, 55
• Retain shrub and oak components20, 33, 37, 44
• Breeding birds – ≥5 acres in size, high density of VSS644
• Bats – larger, older, denser groups; patches of Gambel oak; 
patches of snags4, 38
• Down woody debris – lizards22, small mammals6, 43, bears37
• Oak retention – songbirds23, 44, 45, bears33, deer20
• No association between 8 bird species and spatial arrange-
ment of Gambel oak23
Inter-space†
• Break in 
canopy between 
groups
• Little to no 
regeneration 
maintained by 
frequent ﬁre
• None
• Groups
• Extremely low; little 
to no regeneration 
progress to tree-size36
• Small in size26
• Enhance inter-spaces between existing groups26
• Retain down woody debris7, 12, 39, 55
• Retain shrub and oak components20, 33, 37, 44
• Raptors – increased small mammal forage availability with 
high interspace-to-group ratio 37
• Oak retention – songbirds23, 44, 45, bears33, deer20
Opening†
• Break in 
canopy between 
groups
• Regeneration 
events controlled by 
restoration of a more 
frequent ﬁre interval
• Snags retained4
• None
• Patches
• None; should remain 
treeless
• Large in size
• 100’ to 150’ wide, 0.25-
0.5 acres36
• Create a mosaic (patchwork) of openings and tree groups, with larger 
openings surrounding, and upwind of large tree groups
• Orientation should be perpendicular to prevailing wind; more and larger 
openings desirable; can be larger than 10% of stand; can be >200 feet wide; 
create irregular shapes
• Retain down woody debris7, 39, 55
• Retain shrub and oak components20, 33, 37, 44
• Maximize herbaceous species diversity
• Northern goshawks – ¼ to 4 acres40
• Turkeys – ≤0.15acre50
• Bears – ≤1 acre, <25% in openings33
• Oak retention – songbirds44, 45, bears33, deer20
• Mexican spotted owls – 1 to 2 acres55
Table 1. Structural elements of ponderosa pine forest affecting wildlife in the Southwest. Ranges of numbers are provided for each 
structural element to demonstrate variability; the intent is not to have one number drive implementation. Structural elements are 
referenced from published ecological studies of the historic range of variability in southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Wildlife 
responses to those structural elements are referenced from published wildlife ecology studies in southwestern ponderosa pine forests, 
and are supplemented with un-cited management recommendations that may enhance heterogeneity in wildlife habitat.
* Thinning projects should emphasize the rare VSS classes and ages within the group, patch, and stand, and focus fuels reduction on the most 
common VSS class.
† Very little information is available on the historic range of variability for forest interspaces and openings, particularly in terms of size and 
proportion of the stand or landscape. However, a preponderance of literature exists on wildlife use and selection for forest openings on the land-
scape scale. If a particular spatial arrangement of groups does not meet fuel-reduction objectives, we recommend increasing the size of open-
ings rather than decreasing the size of heterogeneity of groups and patches.

6
References
1 Abella, S.R. 2008. Managing oak in southwestern ponderosa pine  
 
 
forests: The status of our knowledge. General Technical Report
 
RMRS-GTR-218. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
 
Research Station, Fort Collins, CO. 27 pp.
2 Ager, A.A., N.M. Vaillant, and M.A. Finney. 2010. A comparison of   
 
landscape fuel treatment strategies to mitigate wildland fire risk in
 
the urban interface and preserve old forest structure. Forest 
 
Ecology and Management 259: 1556 – 1570.
3 Allen, C.D., M. Savage, D.A. Falk, K.F. Suckling, T.W. Swetnam,  
 
 
T. Schulke, P.B. Stacey, P. Morgan, M. Hoffman, J.T. Klingel. 2002
 
Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine 
 
ecosystems: a broad perspective. Ecological Applications 12:1418- 
 
1433.
4 Bernardos, D. A., C. L. Chambers, and M. J. Rabe. 2004. Selection  
 
 
of Gambel oak roosts by southwestern Myotis in ponderosa 
 
pine-dominated forests, northern Arizona. Journal of Wildlife
 
Management 68:595-601.
5 Chambers, C.L. 2002. Forest management and the dead wood resource  
 
in ponderosa pine forests: effects on small mammals. Pages 679-
 
693 in Proceedings of the Symposium on the Ecology and
 
Management of Dead Wood in Western Forests, USDA Forest
 
Service General Technical Report PSW-181. Albany, CA.
6 Chambers, C.L., and S.S. Germaine. 2003. Vertebrates. In: Friederici,
 
P., ed. Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine
 
forests. Washington, DC: Island Press:268-285.
7 Chambers, C.L., and J.N. Mast. 2005. Ponderosa pine snag dynamics
 
and cavity excavation following wildfire in northern Arizona. 
 
Forest Ecology and Management 216:227-240.
8 Cooper, C.F. 1961. Pattern in ponderosa pine forests. Ecology 42:493-
 
499.
9 Covington, W.W. and M.M. Moore. 1994. Southwestern ponderosa 
 
forest structure and resource conditions: changes since Euro-
 
American settlement. Journal of Forestry 92(1):39-47.
10 Dodd, N.L., S.S. Rosenstock, C.R. Miller, and R.E. Schweinsburg.
 
1998. Tassel-eared squirrel population dynamics in Arizona: index 
 
techniques and relationships to habitat condition. Arizona Game 
 
and Fish Department Technical Report 27, Phoenix.
11 Dodd, N.L., J.S. States, and S.S. Rosenstock. 2003. Tassel-eared squirrel 
 
population, habitat condition, and dietary relationships in north- 
 
central Arizona. Journal of Wildlife Management 67:622-633.
12 Dodd, N.L., R.E. Schweinsburg, and S. Boe. 2006. Landscape-
 
scale forest habitat relationships to tassel-eared squirrel 
 
populations: implications for ponderosa pine forest restoration. 
 
Restoration Ecology 14:537-547.
13 Finney, M.A., 2001. Design of regular landscape fuel treatment 
 
patterns for modifying fire growth and behavior. Forest Science 47: 
 
219–228.
14 Fitch, H.S. 1954. Life history and ecology of the five-lined skink, 
 
Eumeces fasciatus. University of Kansas Publications, Museum of 
 
Natural History 8:1-156.
15 Fitzgerald, S.A. 2005. Fire ecology of ponderosa pine and the 
 
rebuilding of fire-resilient ponderosa pine ecosystems. Pp 197-
 
225 in Ritchie, M.W.; Maguire, D.A.; Young blood, A. (tech. 
 
coords.). Proceedings of the Symposium on Ponderosa Pine: 
 
Issues, Trends, and Management. General Technical Report PSW-
 
GTR-198. USDA Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Research 
 
Station, Albany, CA. 281 pp.
16 Fule, P.Z., W.W. Covington, and M.M. Moore. 1997. Determining 
 
reference conditions for a ecosystem management of southwestern 
 
ponderosa pine forests. Ecological Applications 7: 895-908.
17 Fule, P.Z., W.W. Covington, M.M. Moore, T.A. Heinlein, and A.E.M.  
 
Waltz. 2002. Natural variability in forests of the Grand Canyon, 
 
USA, Journal of Biogeography 29:31-47. 
18 Ganey, J.L., W.M. Block, J.S. Jenness, and R.A. Wilson. 1999. Mexican
 
spotted owl home range and habitat use in pine-oak forest: 
 
implications for forest management. Forest Science 45(1):127-135.
19 Garnett, G. N., R. L. Mathiasen, and C. L. Chambers. 2004. A
 
comparison of wildlife use in broomed and unbroomed ponderosa 
 
pine trees in northern Arizona. Western Journal of Applied Forestry 
 
19:42-46.
20 Germaine, S.S., H.L. Germaine, and S.R. Boe. 2004. Characteristics of 
 
mule deer day-bed and forage sites in current-condition and 
 
restoration-treated ponderosa pine forest. Wildlife Society Bulletin 
 
32:554-564.
21 Grissino-Mayer, H.D., W.H. Romme, M.L. Floyd, and D.D. Hanna. 
 
2004. Climatic and human influences on fire regimes of the 
 
southern San Juan Mountains, Colorado, USA. Ecology 85:1708-
 
1724.
22 James, S.E., and R.T. M’Closkey. 2003. Lizard microhabitat and fire fuel  
 
management.Biological Conservation 114:293-297.
23 Jentsch, S., R. W. Mannan, B. G. Dickson, and W. M. Block. 2008. 
 
Associations among breeding birds and Gambel oak in 
 
Southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Journal of  Wildlife 
 
Management 72:994-1000.
24 Kalies, E. L. and C. L. Chambers. 2010. Guidelines for managing 
 
small mammals in restored ponderosa pine forests of northern 
 
Arizona. Northern Arizona University, Ecological Restoration 
 
Institute, Flagstaff, Arizona.
25 Kalies, E. L., Brett G. Dickson, Carol L. Chambers, and W. W. 
 
Covington. 2012. Small mammal community occupancy responses 
 
to restoration treatments in ponderosa pine forests, northern 
 
Arizona, USA. Ecological Applications 22:204–217.
26 Kaufman, M.R., K.C. Ryan, P.Z. Fule, W.H. Romme. 2004. Restoration 
 
of ponderosa pine forests in the interior western U.S. after logging, 
 
grazing, and fire suppression. In: J.A.Stanturf, and P. Madson, 
 
editors. Restoration of Boreal and Temperate Forests. CRC Press.
27 Kerns, B.K., M.M. Moore, M.E. Timpson, and S.C. Hart. 2003. Soil 
 
properties associated with vegetation patches in Pinus ponderosa-
 
bunchgrass mosaic. Western North American Naturalist 63:452-
 
462.
 
28 Lindenmayer, D.B., and J.F. Franklin. 2002. Conserving forest 
 
biodiversity: a comprehensive multi-scale approach. Island Press, 
 
Washington, D.C.
29 Long, J.N., and F.W. Smith. 2000. Restructuring the forest: goshawks 
 
and the restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine. Journal of 
 
Forestry 98:25-30.
30 Mast, J.N., P.Z. Fule, M.M. Moore, W.W. Covington, and A.E.M. Waltz. 
 
1999. Restoration of presettlement age structure of an Arizona 
 
ponderosa pine forest. Ecological Applications 9:228-239.
31 Moir, W. H., B. W. Geils, M. A. Benoit, and D. Scurlock. 1997. Ecology 
 
of Southwesternponderosa pine forests. In: W.M. Block and D. M. 
 
Finch, technical editors. Songbird ecology in Southwestern 
 
ponderosa pine forests: a literature review. Gen. Tech. Rep. 
 
RM-GTR-292. Fort Collins, CO: Rocky Mountain Forest 
 
and Range Experiment Station, Forest Service, U.S. Department of 
 
Agriculture; 3-27.
32 Moore, M.M., D.W. Huffman, P.Z. Fule, W.W. Covington, J.E. Crouse. 
 
2004. Comparison of  historical and contemporary forest structure 
 
and composition on permanent plots in southwestern ponderosa 
 
pine forests. Forest Science 50:162-176.
33 Mollohan, C.M. 1987. Black bear habitat use in northern Arizona. 
Arizona Game and Fish Department, Research Branch, Final 
Report Project W-78-R, Work Plan 4 Job 19, Phoenix, AZ. 35pp.
34 Passovoy, M.D., and P.Z. Fule. 2006. Snag and woody debris dynamics 
following severe wildfires in northern Arizona ponderosa pine 
forests. Forest Ecology and Management 223:237-246.
35 Patton, D. R., R. L. Wadleigh, and H. G. Hudak. 1985. The effects 
of timber harvesting on the Kaibab squirrel. Journal of Wildlife 
Management 49:14-19.
36 Pearson, G.A. 1950. Management of ponderosa pine in the Southwest. 
Agriculture Monograph 6. Washington, D.C., United States 
Government Printing Office. 
37 Pilliod, D.S., E.L. Bull, J.L. Hayes, B.C. Wales. 2006. Wildlife and 
invertebrate response to fuel reduction treatments in dry 
coniferous forests of the Western United States: a synthesis. Gen. 
Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-173. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 
34pp.
38 Rabe, M. J., T. E. Morrell, H. Green, J. C. DeVos, Jr., and C. R. Miller. 
1998. Characteristics of ponderosa pine snag roosts used by 
reproductive bats in northern Arizona. Journal of  Wildlife 
Management 62:612-621.
39 Randall-Parker, T., and R. Miller. 2002. Effects of prescribed fire in 
ponderosa pine on key wildlife habitat components: preliminary 
results and a method for monitoring. Pages 823-834 in W. F. 
Laudenslayer Jr. et al., technical coordinators. Proceedings of the 
symposium on the ecology and management of dead wood in 
western forests. U.S. Forest Service General Technical Report 
PSW-GTR-181.
40 Reynolds, R.T., R.T. Graham, M.H. Reiser, and others. 1992. 
Management recommendations for the northern goshawk in the 
southwestern United States. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-217. Fort 
Collins, CO: Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station, Forest Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture; 90p.
41 Reynolds, R.T., R.T. Graham, and D.A. Boyce, Jr. 2006. An ecosystem-
based conservation strategy for the northern goshawk. Studies in 
Avian Biology 31: 299-311.
42 Reynolds, R.T., Sánchez Meador, A.J., Youtz, J.A., Nicolet, T., Jackson, 
P.L., Matonis, M.S., Delorenzo, D., and A.D. Graves. In Review. 
Restoring resiliency and sustainability of frequent-fire forests in 
the Southwestern U.S.: A science-based framework. U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station. 
43 Roberts, A.R. 2003. Ponderosa pine restoration treatment effects on 
Peromyscus trueii and Peromyscus maniculatus in northwestern 
Arizona. M.S. thesis, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff.
44 Rosenstock, S.S. 1996. Habitat relationships of breeding birds in 
northern Arizona ponderosa pine and pine-oak forests: a final 
report. Arizona Game and Fish Department, Research Branch 
Technical report 23, Phoenix, AZ. 53pp.
45 Sánchez Meador, A.J. 2006. Modeling spatial and temporal changes 
of ponderosa pine forests in northern Arizona since Euro-
American settlement. Ph.D. dissertation. Northern Arizona 
University, Flagstaff, AZ, 150pp.
46 Schneider, E. 2012. Reference conditions and historical changes in an 
unharvested ponderosa pine stand: Implications for forest health. 
M.S. thesis. Northern Arizona University, School of Forestry, 
Flagstaff, AZ. 
47 Smith, D.M., B.C. Larson, M.J. Kelly, and P.M.S. Ashton. 1997. The 
practice of silviculture: applied forest ecology, (9th edition). John 
Wiley & Sons. New York. 537pp.
48 Swetnam, T.W., and C.H. Baisan. 1996. Historical fire regime patterns 
 
in the southwestern United States since AD 1700. Pages 11–32 in 
 
C.D. Allen, editor. Proceedings of the 2nd La Mesa Fire 
 
Symposium. U.S. Forest Service General Technical Report RM-
 
GTR-286, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, 
 
Fort Collins, Colorado, USA.
49 Turner, M.G. 1989. Landscape ecology: The effect of pattern on 
 
process. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 20:171-197.
50 Wakeling, B.F., and T.D. Rogers. 1995. Winter habitat relationships of 
 
Merriam’s turkey along the Mogollon Rim, Arizona. Arizona 
 
Game and Fish Department, Research Branch Technical Report 
 
16, Phoenix, AZ. 41pp.
51 Wakeling, B.F., and T.D. Rogers. 1998. Summer resource selection and 
 
year-round survival of male Merriam’s turkeys in north-central 
 
Arizona, with associated implications from demographic 
 
modeling. Arizona Game and Fish Department, Research Branch 
 
Technical Report 28, Phoenix, AZ. 50pp.
52 White, A.S. 1985. Presettlement regeneration patterns in a 
 
southwestern ponderosa pine stand. Ecology 66:589-594.
53 Wightman, C.S., and S.S. Germaine. 2006. Forest stand characteristics
 
altered by restoration affect western bluebird habitat quality. 
 
Restoration Ecology 14:653-661.
54 Wightman, C.S., S.S. Germaine, and P. Beier. 2007. Landbird 
 
community composition varies among seasons in a heterogeneous 
 
ponderosa pine forest. Journal of Field Ornithology 78:184-194.
55 USDA Fish and Wildlife Service. 1995. Recovery plan for the Mexican 
 
spotted owl – Vol. I. Albuquerque, New Mexico. 172pp.
7
Ecological Restoration Institute
Wildlife Habitat Values and Forest Structure in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine: 
Implications for Restoration
Ecological Restoration Institute
Wildlife Habitat Values and Forest Structure in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine: 
Implications for Restoration

Notes
8
Ecological Restoration Institute
Wildlife Habitat Values and Forest Structure in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine: 
Implications for Restoration

Working Papers in Intermountain West Frequent-ﬁre Forest Restoration
1: 
Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons and Adaptive Management  
 
Practices
2:  
Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3:  
Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
4:  
Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Beneﬁts
5:  
Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
6:  
Butterﬂies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
7:  
Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
8:  
Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
9:  
Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
10:  Te Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Restoration Model
11:  Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration
12:  Restoring Forest Roads
13:  Treating Slash afer Restoration Tinning
14:  Integrating Forest Restoration Treatments with Mexican Spotted Owl Habitat Needs
15:  Eﬀects of Forest Tinning Treatments on Fire Behavior
16:  Snags and Forest Restoration  
17:  Bat Habitat and Forest Restoration Treatments
18:  Prescribed and Wildland Use Fires in the Southwest: Do Timing and Frequency   
 
Matter? 
19:  Understory Seeding in Southwestern Forests Following Wildﬁre and Ecological   
 
Restoration Treatments
20:  Controlling Cheatgrass in Ponderosa Pine and Pinyon-Juniper Restoration Areas 
21:  Managing Coarse Woody Debris in Frequent-ﬁre Southwestern Forests
22:  Restoring Spatial Pattern to Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
23:  Guidelines for Managing Small Mammals in Restored Ponderosa Pine Forests of   
 
Northern Arizona
24:  Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Burning 
25: 
Strategies for Enhancing and Restoring Rare Plants and Teir Habitats in the Face of 
 
Climate Change and Habitat Destruction in the Intermountain West
26: 
Wildlife Habitat Values and Forest Structure in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine: 
 
Implications for Restoration
Written by Sarah Reif, R. Fenner Yarborough, Steven S. Rosenstock, Elizabeth L. Kalies, 
and Shaula Hedwall
With collaboration from Catherine Wightman, Andi Rogers, Rick Miller, and Ron Sieg
Reviewed by Andrew Sánchez Meador, Sue Sitko, and Joe Ganey
Series Editor: Tayloe Dubay
For more information about forest restoration, 
contact the ERI at 928-523-7182 or eri.nau.edu
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Aﬃrmative Action Institution   
 NAU Printing Services/71109/250/02-11

Ecological Restoration Institute
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
eri.nau.edu
1859000
