 
Fact Sheet: Restoring the Ecological and Social Integrity of Western 
Forests 
 
Unnatural wildfires and unprecedented insect and disease outbreaks threaten the 
ecological and social sustainability of many western wildlands. Among the most 
endangered of these wildlands are forests dominated by ponderosa pine. There are 3.4 
million acres of these forests in Arizona alone. 
  
The Situation 
 
Ponderosa pine forests need low-intensity fire. Low-intensity ground fire is the natural 
and crucial way to maintain a healthy ponderosa pine forest. Prior to Euro-American 
settlement, southwestern ponderosa pine forests burned frequently and at low intensity. 
These fires burned on the ground through grasses, dead pine needles, and other small 
fuels. They reduced fuels; controlled populations of young pine trees; and maintained 
robust populations of grasses, wildflowers, and shrubs--and the wildlife that depends on 
them. 
 
Today’s fires in those forests are different. In the nineteenth and twentieth centuries 
overgrazing by livestock removed many of the grasses that carried ground fire. Large, 
old-growth trees were logged. Fires were suppressed. As a result, small pines have 
proliferated, while grasses and wildflowers have declined. Today, when fire begins, it has 
the opportunity to burn quickly through the closely packed crowns of extremely dense 
pine stands. These crown fires are dangerous to human communities and can be 
ecologically devastating, destroying large areas of wildlife habitat, causing erosion, and 
degrading watershed values. 
 
 
      
 
 
    Unnaturally severe crown fire 
 
       
      Natural, low-intensity ground fire 
 
Ecological Restoration Institute/Northern Arizona University 
1

The size, frequency, and intensity of forest fires are increasing. In the 1950s, a 200-
acre crown fire was considered large in northern Arizona. In 2002, the Rodeo-Chediski 
Fire burned 469,000 acres, an area half the size of Long Island. The trend is likely to 
continue unless action is taken to restore forests to their former health and vigor.  
 
The same conditions that cause severe fires cause other problems. Unnaturally severe 
fires are just one of several symptoms of the much greater problem of degraded forest 
health. Other symptoms of unhealthy ponderosa pine forests include: unnatural levels of 
beetle and disease outbreaks; declining wildlife and plant diversity; decreased flow in 
seeps, springs, and streams; and degraded habitat for humans.  
 
Not all forests are alike: Some need high-intensity fire. Crown fire is natural in some 
forest types, such as lodgepole pine forests and high-elevation spruce-fir forests. Fires in 
these ecosystems are naturally rare but, when they occur, tend to be severe. Crown fires 
help rejuvenate these forests and promote the growth of such plants as aspen. Such areas 
should not be managed according to the same guidelines as ponderosa pine forests. 
 
 
The Solution 
 
Scientists at the Ecological Restoration Institute and elsewhere are developing a variety 
of science-based comprehensive treatments to reverse these trends. Treatments typically 
include some combination of cutting small trees, raking heavy fuels away from old-
growth trees, and prescribed burning. Thinning and raking are necessary to reduce fuel 
loads so that low-intensity fire can play its natural role in keeping forests open and 
allowing grasses, shrubs, and wildflowers to grow. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gus Pearson Natural Area, Arizona, before and after restoration treatment 
 
 
The Policy Challenges 
 
Attention has focused on a symptom rather than on the core problem. Attempting to 
suppress fires in overly dense ponderosa pine forests is expensive. For the past several 
years, the federal government has spent $2 to fight unnatural fire for every $1 spent to 
Ecological Restoration Institute/Northern Arizona University 
2

Ecological Restoration Institute/Northern Arizona University 
3
prevent losses by restoring forests and avoid suppression costs and risks. It would be 
more cost-effective to focus proactively on the overall problem of degraded forest health 
than on the difficult, and sometimes impossible, task of controlling fires once they start. 
 
Policies need to acknowledge that different forest types exist. Management policies 
that lump all forest types into a single solution fail because different forest types have 
different characteristics. Some forests naturally possess high fuel loads and burn 
catastrophically under natural conditions while others, like most ponderosa pine forests, 
do not. Much political acrimony centers results from failure to acknowledge ecological 
differences and the need for different management approaches. 
 
Policies should focus on forest restoration, not just on reducing hazardous fuels. 
Policy makers should establish restoring the health and sustainability of forest 
ecosystems, not just hazardous fuel reduction, as a primary goal. By reversing the 
problem of declining forest health, restoration-based treatments provide the broadest 
possible solution to the problem of unnatural wildfire. Restoring forests enhances natural 
resource values: plant and wildlife diversity, watershed function, aesthetic enjoyment, 
recreational opportunities, and long-term sustainability. 
   
Old-growth trees and stands should be defined by forest type and excluded from 
harvest. Most forest types have less than 5 percent of their old growth remaining. These 
are ecologically significant components of the ecosystem and should be saved. 
 
Forest management should strive for the re-establishment of conditions that permit 
natural fire to burn. Fire plays a crucial and irreplaceable role in maintaining the 
ecological health of many forest types. Managing forests so that natural fire can burn will 
reduce suppression costs, lower danger to human communities, and maintain forest 
health. 
 
Protecting communities and their surrounding forests is essential. Much political 
debate has centered on where to focus forest thinning and management efforts. It is 
critical to treat forests in and near human communities. But those human communities are 
embedded in highly valued forest landscapes. Restoration treatments should be 
implemented both near communities and in the greater forest landscape in order to 
protect watersheds, endangered species habitat, archaeological sites, and fire “corridors” 
that enable fire to move rapidly into towns.  
 
 
 
