1266
INVITED FEATURE
Ecological Applications
Vol. 9, No. 4
1266
Ecological Applications, 9(4), 1999, pp. 1266–1277
q 1999 by the Ecological Society of America
REFERENCE CONDITIONS AND ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION:
A SOUTHWESTERN PONDEROSA PINE PERSPECTIVE
MARGARET M. MOORE,1 W. WALLACE COVINGTON, AND PETER Z. FULE´
School of Forestry, Northern Arizona University; Flagstaff, Arizona 86011 USA
Abstract.
Ecological restoration is the process of reestablishing the structure and func-
tion of native ecosystems and developing mutually beneﬁcial human–wildland interactions
that are compatible with the evolutionary history of those systems. Restoration is based
on an ecosystem’s reference conditions (or natural range of variability); the difference
between reference conditions and contemporary conditions is used to assess the need for
restorative treatments and to evaluate their success. Since ecosystems are highly complex
and dynamic, it is not possible to describe comprehensively all possible attributes of ref-
erence conditions. Instead, ecosystem characteristics with essential roles in the evolutionary
environment are chosen for detailed study. Key characteristics of structure, function, and
disturbance—especially ﬁre regimes in ponderosa pine ecosystems—are quantiﬁed as far
as possible through dendroecological and paleoecological studies, historical evidence, and
comparison to undisrupted sites. Ecological restoration treatments are designed to reverse
recent, human-caused ecological degradation. Testing of restoration treatments at four sites
in northern Arizona, USA, has shown promise, but the diverse context of management
goals and constraints for Southwestern forest ecosystems means that appropriate applica-
tions of restoration techniques will probably differ in various settings.
Key words:
ecological restoration; ecosystem management; evolutionary environment; Pinus pon-
derosa; range of variability.
INTRODUCTION
In this paper, we apply the concepts of evolutionary
environment and reference conditions to ongoing eco-
logical restoration projects in southwestern ponderosa
pine (Pinus ponderosa Laws.) ecosystems. These con-
cepts are central to restoration, because they describe
the environments in which native species evolved, pro-
vide a range of sustainable conditions in ecosystem
composition, structure, and function, and can be used
as a baseline to evaluate effects and outcomes of res-
toration treatments (Covington et al., in press).
Ecological restoration is the ‘‘process of reestablish-
ing to the extent possible the structure, function, and
integrity of indigenous ecosystems’’ (Society for Eco-
logical Restoration 1993 [emphasis added]). However,
ecological restoration should not be construed as a ﬁxed
set of procedures or as a simple recipe for land man-
agement. Rather, it is a broad intellectual and scientiﬁc
framework that includes the ‘‘ecological ﬁdelity’’ of
restored systems, as well as developing mutually ben-
eﬁcial human–wildland interactions (Higgs 1997) com-
patible with the evolutionary history of native ecolog-
Manuscript received 18 May 1998; revised 22 January
1999; accepted 25 January 1999; ﬁnal version received 25
February 1999. For reprints of this Invited Feature, see foot-
note 1 p. 1177.
1 E-mail: margaret.moore@nau.edu
ical systems. In other words, ecological restoration
consists not only of restoring ecosystems, but also of
developing human uses of wildlands that are in har-
mony with the natural history of these complex eco-
logical systems (Society for Ecological Restoration
1993). We use the ecological restoration framework in
our research to do the following: (1) develop a deeper
understanding of ecosystem structure and function in
southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems; (2) bring
about conditions as close as possible to reference con-
ditions so that natural processes can continue; and (3)
communicate with land managers and the public about
ecosystem change and factors to be considered in set-
ting management objectives, such as determining de-
sired future conditions.
In this paper we summarize how concepts about evo-
lutionary environments and reference conditions are
applied to four ongoing ecological restoration projects
in southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems in northern
Arizona, USA. The projects include the following stud-
ies: (1) a small (4-ha) area near Flagstaff, Arizona, the
Gus Pearson Natural Area (GPNA), a National Science
Foundation (NSF) sponsored experiment on U.S. For-
est Service managed lands (Covington et al. 1997); and
three larger projects located at (2) Mt. Trumbull near
Fredonia, Arizona, managed by the Bureau of Land
Management; (3) Camp Navajo near Bellemont, Ari-
zona, managed by Arizona Army National Guard (U.S.

November 1999
1267
HISTORICAL VARIABILITY
Department of Defense land); and (4) Grand Canyon
National Park, managed by the National Park Service.
We work cooperatively with the federal and state agen-
cies in an adaptive management framework to conduct
these larger ecological restoration projects (see Walters
and Holling 1990).
Each project is unique, in that the environmental
conditions and the ‘‘players’’ differ slightly at each site,
but similar questions and concerns have been raised
regarding restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine:
1) What constitutes natural state(s) and processes
for these ecosystems (the evolutionary environment
concept)?
2) What was the role of humans before and after
Anglo-American and Hispanic settlement?
3) What are appropriate reference conditions and
variables to measure?
4) What is ecological restoration?
5) What treatments are best for restoration?
We will address each of these questions in relation
to pertinent literature and will present our perspective,
based on the four northern Arizona projects, on which
ecosystem variables are essential to know, and which
are practical to apply in an ecological restoration con-
text, for southwestern ponderosa pine.
Southwestern ponderosa pine forests have been the
focus of a wealth of conservation and restoration re-
search. Aldo Leopold recognized the negative effects
of disrupting natural processes in this region (Leopold
1924, 1937), initiating his lifelong contributions to the
land ethic and the importance of restoring biodiversity.
Pearson (1923, 1950) initiated ecological and silvicul-
tural studies; Weaver (1951) pioneered prescribed
burning research; Cooper (1960) demonstrated changes
in ponderosa pine forest structure due to changing land
use practices; and Dieterich (1980), Swetnam and Bais-
an (1996), and others applied and reﬁned dendrochron-
ological techniques for reconstructing ﬁre disturbance
regimes. From the establishment of the ﬁrst Experi-
mental Forest in the U.S. Forest Service (1909, Fort
Valley, Arizona), through continuing involvement of
agency and academic researchers and practitioners,
ecological restoration attempts in the Southwest are
based on a broad scientiﬁc foundation.
THE EVOLUTIONARY ENVIRONMENT CONCEPT
The term evolutionary environment, or evolutionary
habitat, refers to the environment in which a species
or groups of species evolved, i.e., the environment (or
habitat) of speciation (Smith 1958, Geist 1978). Over
evolutionary time, species not only adapt to their evo-
lutionary environment, but they may also come to de-
pend upon those conditions for their survival (Mayr
1942, Mooney 1981, Wilson 1992). Thus, the greatest
threat to biological diversity is the loss of evolutionary
habitats (Noss and Csuti 1994); habitat restoration of-
fers the greatest hope for reversing this loss (Mac-
Mahon and Jordan 1994, Dobson et al. 1997). Since
evolution is an ongoing process, and rates of evolution
are functions of many factors (demography, genetic
variability, and selection pressure, among others), as-
sessing the time scale of the evolutionary environment
requires an understanding of the paleohistory and ecol-
ogy of the species involved.
Evolutionary environment for ponderosa pine
Ponderosa pine is the most widespread member of
an ecologically similar group of western long-needled
pines in the subsection Ponderosae. These pines share
evolutionary traits, such as protected buds, thick bark,
proliﬁc seed production, rapid seedling growth, long
resinous needles, highly ﬂammable litter, and longev-
ity, all of which are interpreted as adaptations to fre-
quent, low-intensity surface ﬁres (Mutch 1970, Mc-
Cune 1988, Barton 1993).
The oldest conﬁrmed paleoecological record of these
western long-needled pines comes from British Colum-
bia, Canada in the Eocene (55–35 3 106 yr BP) (Ax-
elrod 1986). The evolution and spread of pines during
the Cenozoic era appears to be related to the devel-
opment of aridity and seasonal climates, together with
periods of active volcanism and mountain building.
These events created new environments and migration
routes suitable for the stress-adapted pines (Axelrod
1986) and created conditions conducive to frequent,
surface ﬁres (Pyne 1982).
Ponderosa pine (Pinus cf. ponderosa) ﬁrst appears
in the fossil record in the mid- to late Miocene (17–
12 3 106 yr BP) in western Nevada (Axelrod 1986).
Ponderosa pine needles from packrat middens, in the
Santa Catalina mountains of southern Arizona, date
from ;14 000 yr BP (Van Devender 1990). Pollen re-
cords and macrofossils from northern Arizona suggest
appearance in the area ;10 600 yr BP (Anderson 1989).
Given the variability in environments over paleo-
ecological times, it is clear that evolution does not
occur at speciﬁc points on the surface of the earth.
Instead, organisms are quite mobile when viewed on
evolutionary time scales. Over the ;50 3 106 yr that
western long-needled pine ecosystems have existed,
they have presumably moved up and down in elevation
and across latitude and longitude, tracking favorable
environmental conditions.
In addition to such long-term inﬂuences as climatic
change and mountain building, the evolutionary en-
vironment of southwestern ponderosa pine includes im-
portant short-term (decades to centuries) disturbance
events
including
El
Nin˜o–Southern
Oscillation,
drought, ﬁres, and insect outbreaks (Swetnam and Be-
tancourt 1998). These events vary in kind, frequency,
and intensity and often control local population struc-
tures (Pickett and White 1985, Covington et al. 1994,
Swetnam and Betancourt 1998).

1268
INVITED FEATURE
Ecological Applications
Vol. 9, No. 4
What was the role of Native Americans?
For North America, the recent evolutionary envi-
ronment generally includes Native Americans as par-
ticipants during $10 000 yr (Pyne 1982, Parsons et al.
1986, Kay 1995, Hunter 1996). Highly structured cul-
tures existed throughout North America, and these peo-
ple inﬂuenced ecosystems through their cultural, hunt-
ing, agricultural, and burning practices (Smith 1989,
Denevan 1992, Anderson and Moratto 1996).
Humans lived in southwestern ponderosa pine eco-
systems for millennia prior to the late 1800s, and this
occupation may have had an appreciable effect on eco-
systems in local areas (Hack 1942, Samuels and Be-
tancourt 1982, Altschul and Fairley 1989). At Grand
Canyon, for example, there is evidence of long human
occupancy beginning in Paleoindian times (11 500–
9500 yr BP) and declining ;AD 1150–1200 (Altschul
and Fairley 1989). More recent evidence of Native
American inﬂuence includes the disruption of the local
ﬁre regime in the ponderosa pine forests of the Chuska
Mountains (northeastern Arizona) ;1830, when sheep
grazing caused a dramatic reduction in the herbaceous
material (ﬁne fuels) in the area (Savage 1991).
The role of humans in the landscape should not be
trivialized, but we also must be cautious not to exag-
gerate their relative importance in certain locales. For
example, in contrast to the role of humans as ﬁre start-
ers in the Sierra Nevada (Anderson and Moratto 1996),
Swetnam and Baisan (1996) and Swetnam et al. (1999)
argue that the natural ﬁre frequency in the forested
areas of the Southwest was high enough that human-
caused ignitions would have had a relatively minor
impact, except in special circumstances. Such a special
circumstance is suggested by Seklecki et al. (1996),
where unusual patterns of ﬁre occurrence and season-
ality were associated with periods of warfare between
Apaches and Hispanic settlers in southern Arizona.
Importance of Anglo-American and Hispanic
settlement
The environmental pressures associated with Anglo-
American and Hispanic settlement are relatively recent
in comparison to the evolutionary processes of the past
10 000 yr or longer. Furthermore, of course, the settle-
ment of the region by Anglo-American and Hispanic
colonists in the Southwest was not simultaneous. His-
panic settlement dates from the 16th century in parts
of New Mexico and Arizona, but the ecological effects
of this settlement on upland ecosystems and ponderosa
pine ﬁre regimes appears to have been limited and lo-
calized, perhaps because people lived in compact com-
munities and did not exploit extensive forage resources
away from towns (Touchan et al. 1996, Baisan and
Swetnam 1997). Several relatively large areas of Ari-
zona and New Mexico highlands (Kaibab Plateau, Mo-
gollon Rim, and Gila Wilderness) were not settled by
Anglo-Americans until the late 1800s. Spanish ex-
plorers passed through northern Arizona in search of
gold, but did not establish settlements; Anglo-Ameri-
can settlement of northern Arizona did not begin until
the 1860s (Altschul and Fairley 1989). Beginning
;1870, industrial-scale resource exploitation, with as-
sociated domestic livestock grazing and ﬁre exclusion
and suppression, proceeded at a rapid pace throughout
the Southwest (Cooper 1960). Consequences have in-
cluded introduction of exotic plants, animals, and land
use practices, as well as the disruption of natural dis-
turbance regimes. These changes are unprecedented in
magnitude in the ponderosa pine type of the Southwest
and are viewed as creating new evolutionary trajec-
tories (Covington et al. 1994; see also Dobson et al.
[1997] for examples from different regions of the Unit-
ed States).
REFERENCE CONDITIONS
The concept of reference conditions (or range of nat-
ural variability or historical range of variability) refers
to the following: (1) the spectrum and variablility of
natural conditions in ecosystem composition, structure,
and function (Kaufmann et al. 1994, 1998, Swanson et
al. 1994); (2) a point of reference against which to
evaluate changes in ecosystems (Morgan et al. 1994,
Kaufmann et al. 1998); and (3) a criterion for mea-
suring the success of ecological restoration treatments
and ecosystem management experiments (Christensen
et al. 1996).
In theory, characterization of reference conditions
should take any and all ecosystem components into
account, including organisms, structures, biogeochem-
ical cycles, disturbance processes, abiotic factors, etc.,
and should include the time depth and spatial scales to
assure that all inﬂuencing factors are considered. In
practice, however, many of these variables are poorly
understood (e.g., mycorrhizal associations) or difﬁcult
to measure (e.g., belowground production). Holling
(1992) argued that at certain scales, ecological thresh-
olds are controlled by a small group of keystone or
highly interactive organisms and abiotic processes.
Keystone variables, in turn, strongly affect their own
environment and entrain other structures and processes.
Relatively long lists of important ecological vari-
ables have been suggested for a variety of ecosystems,
such as temperate deciduous forests (Keddy and Drum-
mond 1996) and arid regions (Aronson et al. 1993).
Experience and practical constraints have led us to se-
lect a subset of keystone variables to reﬂect the evo-
lutionary environment, as well as for developing a set
of reference conditions for southwestern ponderosa
pine ecosystems.
Southwestern ponderosa pine
The evolutionary environment concept is an impor-
tant guide for identifying key variables of ecosystem
structure and process (i.e., reference conditions) in

November 1999
1269
HISTORICAL VARIABILITY
southwestern ponderosa pine. In general, we use the
following procedure to establish a set of baseline (or
reference) conditions that are practical to measure at
each of our project sites: (1) determine the key vari-
ables; (2) quantify the key disturbance regime(s), es-
pecially the historical ﬁre regime; (3) use dendroeco-
logical techniques to quantify forest structure and tree
pattern before and after Anglo-American settlement;
(4) use other lines of evidence to conﬁrm forest struc-
ture and tree pattern before and after Anglo-American
settlement; and (5) determine the current and historical
understory herbaceous and shrub composition. We feel
that this provides the minimum information needed for
any ecological restoration project in this habitat; here
we present the rationale for choosing these.
Select key variables.—The essential set of key vari-
ables of process and structure we have chosen to mea-
sure is relatively small, based on the evolutionary en-
vironment of ponderosa pine, and practical to quantify.
In the semiarid setting of southwestern ponderosa pine
ecosystems, the key variables include the predominant
contagious disturbance process, ﬁre, and the autotro-
phic organisms (trees, shrubs, and herbaceous plants)
responsible for microclimate and primary production
(Hunter and Price 1992, Fule´ et al. 1997). These dom-
inant organisms entrain other communities (fungi, in-
sects, and vertebrates) and indicate ecosystem function
(nutrient cycling and productivity). Human activity has
been a signiﬁcant disturbance force since Anglo-Amer-
ican settlement, including livestock grazing, ﬁre sup-
pression, old-growth tree harvesting, and potential im-
pacts from global climate change.
Other factors have locally important effects in pon-
derosa pine ecosystems, but are generally less ubiq-
uitous, including bark beetles, defoliators, parasites,
disease, lightning, air pollution, tassel-eared squirrels,
and microorganisms. We cannot measure a compre-
hensive set of variables at all restoration sites, but
where the project size and resources permit, we have
collaborated on studies to improve understanding of
the interactions among organisms and processes at a
variety of trophic levels (see Covington et al. 1997).
Quantify the historical ﬁre regime, the key distur-
bance process.—Measurement or reconstruction of
past ﬁre regimes and forest structure in southwestern
ponderosa pine forests is relatively precise compared
to many other temperate systems because of the dry
climate, slow decomposition rates, and relatively recent
impacts of Anglo-American settlement (;1870 in
northern Arizona) (Covington and Moore 1994a, Swet-
nam and Baisan 1996, Covington et al. 1997, Swetnam
et al. 1999). Dendroecological methods (Fritts and
Swetnam 1989, Fule´ et al. 1997) can be used to de-
termine ﬁre recurrence within recent evolutionary his-
tory, centuries to millennia (e.g., Grissino-Mayer 1995,
Swetnam and Baisan 1996, Swetnam et al. 1999). A
thorough comparison of southwestern ﬁre history in-
formation (Swetnam and Baisan 1996) shows the fol-
lowing: (1) southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems
have experienced high-frequency, low-intensity sur-
face ﬁres for $300–500 yr; (2) low-frequency, high-
intensity stand replacement ﬁres were very rare or non-
existent; (3) ﬁre frequency ﬂuctuated (with climate)
from ;2–20 yr prior to the late 19th century; and (4)
a sudden cessation of frequent ﬁre occurred with An-
glo-American settlement (1870–1890), due to both
heavy grazing by livestock that removed ﬁne fuels (i.e.,
herbaceous material) and active ﬁre suppression prac-
tices.
The range of variability for pre-Anglo-American set-
tlement (hereafter presettlement) ﬁre frequency at
many of our northern Arizona project areas is less (;2–
8 yr using all trees scarred, and 2–15 yr for larger ﬁres)
(Fule´ et al. 1997; P. Z. Fule´, unpublished data) than
the regional estimates (2–20 yr) given by Swetnam and
Baisan (1996). However, local variability (2–8 yr) com-
pared to the regional variability (2–20 yr) is substan-
tially less than the subsequent ;120-yr period of ﬁre
exclusion (Fule´ et al. 1997). The key point is, if ﬁre
recurrence could be safely restored to a scale measured
in years, rather than centuries, ﬁre would regulate eco-
system structures and processes in a more natural man-
ner in southwestern ponderosa pine than exists today.
Quantify forest structure and pattern before and af-
ter ﬁre regime disruption.—Trees are dominant struc-
turing organisms in forests. Southwestern forests in-
clude ponderosa and pinyon (Pinus edulis) pines, oaks
(Quercus spp.), junipers (Juniperus spp.), Douglas-ﬁr
(Pseudotsuga menziesii [Mirb.] Franco), and white ﬁr
(Abies concolor [Gordon and Glendinning] Lindl.).
These trees are interspersed in a matrix of understory
herbaceous and woody plants. In addition to their eco-
logical roles, the long-lived trees and remnant snags,
stumps, and logs provide evidence of past vegetation
structure (composition, age, size, density, and spatial
patterns).
While forest ﬁre regimes can be determined with
relative precision for the last 400–500 yr in the South-
west, forest structures and evidence of past regenera-
tion dynamics can be reconstructed, at least to the time
of settlement (White 1985), and to some degree even
earlier (Mast et al. 1999). For example, complete re-
construction of living and dead tree age distributions
in 1876, at the the Gus Pearson Natural Area (GPNA)
experimental restoration site, shows that tree estab-
lishment ranged ;1–4 trees per hectare per decade over
the 300 yr before 1876 (Mast et al. 1999). This rate is
several orders of magnitude below the hundreds to
thousands of trees per hectare which established fol-
lowing grazing and ﬁre exclusion in the early 20th
century (Fig. 1A, B) (Cooper 1960, Covington and
Moore 1994a, Savage et al. 1996, Covington et al.
1997).
Past forest structure is often reconstructed to ap-

1270
INVITED FEATURE
Ecological Applications
Vol. 9, No. 4
FIG. 1.
A 50 3 50 m stem-mapped plot from a typical
northern Arizona ponderosa pine project site (Mt. Trumbull).
These plots demonstrate (A) reconstructed presettlement for-
est structure (reference structure) circa 1870; (B) contem-
porary (1995) forest structure showing live trees only; and
(C) density and pattern of the trees after the area had been
thinned in a restoration treatment. The shaded areas are pro-
jected crowns of live trees, and the small circled 3 symbols
denote evidence of presettlement dead trees (stumps, snags,
logs, etc.).
proximately the time of Anglo-American settlement,
because the changes in natural disturbance regimes and
forest structure initiated by this period are unprece-
dented in recent evolutionary history. The period in
which settlement-related activities began to signiﬁ-
cantly affect native ecological systems is determined
based on the sudden cessation in frequent ﬁres (deter-
mined from ﬁre scars) and on other lines of evidence
(see Reference conditions: southwestern ponderosa
pine: Multiple lines of evidence). Through ﬁre scar
data, we know that a frequent ﬁre regime existed at our
project sites prior to settlement. Ultimately, we infer,
given what we know about the evolutionary environ-
ment of western long-needled pines, that a relatively
open, uneven-aged (or multi-aged) forest structure de-
veloped under a frequent, surface ﬁre regime. Of
course, the exact species composition, density, and pat-
tern will vary from place to place. For instance, pre-
settlement ponderosa pine tree densities are twice as
high on coarse-textured soils, compared to ﬁne-tex-
tured soils, in northern Arizona (Covington and Moore
1994b), and the pattern of the former is more ‘‘grove-
like’’ (large areas occupied by continuous, yet rather
open, tree cover) (M. M. Moore, personal observa-
tions), whereas the latter are distinct and smaller groups
of trees (Cooper 1961, White 1985). This variability
in tree density and pattern must be reﬂected in site-
speciﬁc ecological restoration treatments.
The use of a particular reference year around Anglo-
American settlement (vs. an earlier date) is also very
practical. In the absence of low-intensity surface ﬁres
during the past 120 yr, direct evidence of past forest
structure (snags, stumps, logs, and old-growth trees)
still exists today, due to slow decomposition rates (Fule´
et al. 1997). If we used an earlier date (for instance,
1780) as our reconstruction year, then much of the pre-
settlement-era wood evidence would have been con-
sumed by the frequent ﬁres and lost. In other words,
structure at the time of settlement is the latest and best
estimate of forest structure consistent with the evolu-
tionary environment for a particular site within our
study areas. However, this practice of choosing a spe-
ciﬁc reference year is sometimes misinterpreted as a
view of static or ‘‘equilibrium’’ ecosystems or some
ﬁxed ecosystem structure over time (Shinneman and
Baker 1997). This is not the case; ecosystems change
over time and continue to evolve. Our approach, com-
paring predisruptive (presettlement) vegetation con-
ditions to postdisruptive (postsettlement) ones (Leo-
pold 1941, McIntosh 1985, Foster et al. 1990) at a
crucial reference year, is simply a reasonable and eco-
logically sound way to help the land manager visualize
and describe what the forest structure looked like prior
to ﬁre regime disruption.
Multiple lines of evidence.—Comparing the results
of dendroecological reconstruction of ﬁre regimes and
forest structure with other lines of evidence is a basic
component of retrospective ecological research (see
Foster et al. 1990, Swetnam et al. 1999). Multiple lines
of evidence include historical photographs (Fig. 2; see
also Smith and Arno [1999] and Swetnam et al. [1999]),
early forest or land surveys and inventories (Woolsey
1911), early historical accounts (Cooper 1960), and
results developed by other researchers in other eco-
systems.
Currently, we are relocating and measuring perma-
nent stem-mapped plots established in the early 1900s
across several ponderosa pine sites in Arizona and New
Mexico (Woolsey 1912, Pearson 1923). The approach
of remeasuring historical plots (e.g., Minnich et al.
1995) or sampling relatively undisturbed sites where
the natural ﬁre regime has continued (Madany and West
1983, Fule´ and Covington 1996) are important methods
for establishing reference conditions.
Determine understory herbaceous and shrub com-
position.—The understory herbaceous and shrub spe-
cies in southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems pro-
vide rapid nutrient turnover and a fuel matrix to carry
frequent surface ﬁres. The understory plants also pro-
vide the majority of plant biodiversity (75–85 species/
ha at GPNA, M. Moore, unpublished data).
Dendroecological reconstruction supported by his-
torical data provides powerful quantitative support for

November 1999
1271
HISTORICAL VARIABILITY
FIG. 2.
A comparison over time of the Mt. Trumbull, Arizona, restoration site as seen from nearby Mt. Logan. The top
sketch is by H. H. Nichols, an artist who accompanied John Wesley Powell to the Arizona Strip during Powell’s second
expedition to the Grand Canyon in 1870 (Powell 1961). The bottom photograph was taken from the same location circa
1994–1995. Note the increased tree density and the reduced herbaceous vegetation in Potato Valley (midground) during the
intervening ;125-yr period.
understanding changes in tree structure and ﬁre re-
gimes, but these techniques provide only limited ref-
erence data for herbaceous production, abundance, and
diversity. Two studies conducted at the GPNA site ex-
amine herbaceous plants at different temporal scales.
Opal phytolith sampling is being used to investigate
the long-term stability of forest–grass patches over cen-
turies and the relative abundance of certain woody and
herbaceous species (Kerns and Moore 1997, Kerns
1999), while current biomass production and species
composition are measured on an annual basis in this
restored experimental site (Covington et al. 1997).
These measurements support the development of fur-
ther hypotheses and help researchers set quantitative
targets (or ranges) for the understory component of the
ecosystem in an ecological restoration context.
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION
One dictionary deﬁnition of ‘‘restore’’ is to put or
bring back into a former or original state; repair or

1272
INVITED FEATURE
Ecological Applications
Vol. 9, No. 4
renew (Merriam-Webster 1989). The Society for Eco-
logical Restoration (1993) deﬁned ecological restora-
tion as ‘‘the process of reestablishing to the extent pos-
sible the structure, function, and integrity of indigenous
ecosystems and the sustaining habitats that they pro-
vide.’’ Deﬁnitions of ecological restoration remain the
subject of much discussion (Jordon et al. 1987, Ralston
1994, Jackson et al. 1995, Hobbs and Norton 1996,
Higgs 1997, McQuillan 1998). One common attribute
is the desire to reestablish (as closely as possible) pre-
vious characteristics of an ecosystem’s composition,
vertical structure, pattern, function, and dynamics (Jor-
don et al. 1987, Aronson et al. 1993, Hobbs and Norton
1996, Dobson et al. 1997, Higgs 1997). Thus, a major
goal of ecological restoration is the restoration of de-
graded ecosystems, in order to emulate conditions that
prevailed before disruption of natural structures and
processes, i.e., environmental conditions that have in-
ﬂuenced native communities over recent evolutionary
time. Leopold (1941), Dobson et al. (1997), and others
further suggest that we will develop a deeper under-
standing
of
how
ecosystem
components function
through the process of restoration.
A central premise of ecological restoration is that
restoration of natural systems to conditions consistent
with their recent evolutionary environments will pre-
vent their further degradation, while simultaneously
conserving their native plants and animals (Society for
Ecological Restoration 1993).
Practitioners of ecological restoration recognize that
a failure to include human interactions with restored
systems is not only unrealistic, but also undesirable for
long-term sustainability (Higgs 1997). In fact, in cases
where novel conditions prevent natural system func-
tions, ongoing management may be required to com-
pensate for the altered conditions. In many respects
ecological restoration might best be judged by whether
the techniques used are setting the ecosystem on a tra-
jectory that will eventually lead to the recovery of self-
sustaining ecosystem structure and function (Bradshaw
1984, MacMahon and Jordan 1994, Jackson et al.
1995). Outside of nature preserves, however, some de-
gree of human interaction will probably always be in-
cluded in the sustainable system.
Ecological restoration treatments suggested for
southwestern ponderosa pine
Based on reference conditions, an ecological resto-
ration prescription tailored to the speciﬁc ecological
and management concerns at each project site is de-
veloped and implemented on test areas. An example at
the Gus Pearson Natural Area (GPNA) is described in
detail by Covington et al. (1997). The general frame-
work is the following:
1) Leave all presettlement trees (those predating the
ﬁre regime disruption date [circa 1870 to 1880] in
northern Arizona).
One argument against this practice is that some pre-
settlement
trees
(.120-yr-old)
would
have
been
thinned by surface ﬁres, had the ﬁre regime not been
disrupted; therefore, the basal area (and density) of
presettlement trees today may be on the high end of
pre-1870 reference conditions. There are several rea-
sons, however, why this argument is not appropriate
for
southwestern
ponderosa
pine.
First,
logging
throughout the Southwest has removed the majority of
presettlement trees. Second, even in unharvested areas,
low natural mortality rates that existed prior to ﬁre
regime disruption, have increased under the competi-
tive stress of dense postsettlement forests (Biondi 1996,
Sackett et al. 1996, Feeney et al. 1998, Mast et al.
1999). Demographic analysis of presettlement age
structure in the GPNA study site (Mast et al. 1999)
suggests that only ;1–3% of the trees died per decade,
consistent with the 3.3% mortality per decade measured
by Pearson (1950) on trees .30.5 cm in a virgin pon-
derosa pine stand from 1925–1940, a period when com-
petitive stress from postsettlement trees was probably
still relatively low (Biondi 1996). Low mortality rates
make sense in relatively open forest conditions; in con-
trast, old-growth pines are dying 2–83 faster in current
dense GPNA forest conditions (Sackett et al. 1996).
Third, presettlement trees are the slowest variable to
restore in the system, and they represent centuries
worth of genetic and structural diversity. The last rea-
son is a cultural one: many people are willing to reduce
the number of trees per hectare in an area as long as
the thinned trees are not old.
2) Retain postsettlement trees as necessary to re-
place dead presettlement trees (snags, stumps, logs,
etc.); while restoring, to the greatest extent possible,
the species composition, density, age, biomass distri-
butions, and tree pattern present around the time of ﬁre
regime disruption.
Other
postsettlement trees are
thinned and removed off site or burned in place (Fig.
1). The exact number of trees retained depends on many
factors, including the desires and objectives of the re-
source agencies and the public. Typically a ‘‘buffer’’
of 150–300% of the presettlement tree density has been
retained on our project sites to compensate for possible
posttreatment mortality and underestimation of preset-
tlement tree densities.
3) Protect the presettlement and large postsettlement
trees from cambial girdling and root mortality, by rak-
ing the forest ﬂoor fuels (.100 yr of accumulated fuels
in many cases) from the tree base.
4) Burn under prescription with repeated surface
ﬁres to approximate the natural ﬁre cycle. Fire pre-
scriptions are designed to consume thinning residues
and forest ﬂoor fuels with minimal impacts on retained
trees (e.g., raking of fuels from presettlement trees and
snags). Initial burns to consume these unnaturally
heavy fuels are usually done in the fall for safe burning
conditions, but prescribed burns could eventually be

November 1999
1273
HISTORICAL VARIABILITY
allowed in the natural ﬁre season after restoration of
forest structure and light fuel loads.
5) If natural regeneration of the herbaceous and
shrub communities is inadequate, then reseed or trans-
plant the treatment area with a species mix of native
plants, as needed.
6) Control exotic plant species, as needed.
7) Defer or regulate grazing of ungulates (both do-
mestic and wild), so that the treated area can recover
and so that the herbaceous fuels will be adequate for
repeated burning at natural intervals.
In general, the two-pronged rationale behind these
ecological restoration treatments is (Covington et al.
1997): (1) that facilitating partial recovery of ecosys-
tem structure and function can lead to reestablishment
of natural self-regulatory processes that, in turn, will
eventually lead to restoration of at least part of the
original ecosystem dynamics; and (2) that both resto-
ration of ecosystem structure and reintroduction of ﬁre
are necessary for restoring rates of decomposition, nu-
trient cycling, and net primary production to more nat-
ural, predisruptive levels. Restoration of natural con-
ditions is most important where mandated by law or
policy (national parks, wilderness, natural areas, etc.),
but this goal can be useful in any setting where people
place a value on natural ecosystem characteristics (e.g.,
reduce wildﬁre hazard, maintain habitat for native spe-
cies, etc.). In areas where some other goal is predom-
inant, there are still beneﬁts from managing in a manner
relatively close to natural conditions. For example, sup-
pose timber production were the primary goal in a par-
ticular ponderosa pine forest. Selection of a timber
management regime, based on uneven-aged silviculture
with frequent underburning, would be fairly likely to
support many elements of natural habitats and pro-
cesses, in contrast to selection of an even-aged, ﬁre
suppression management regime.
Structure and function
There have been interesting debates in the literature
on whether restoration of frequent-ﬁre ecosystems must
include ‘‘intentional structural restoration’’ (e.g., thin-
ning) (Bonnicksen and Stone 1985), or if ﬁre alone
could do the job (Parsons et al. 1986, Christensen 1987,
Parsons 1989, Stephenson 1999). Perhaps the major
conclusions from these debates are that it depends: in
ecological terms, it depends on the speciﬁc species
composition, soils, fuels, and so on, of the site; and,
in terms of cultural acceptance of alternative manage-
ment practices, it depends on the speciﬁc social and
political context.
If it were possible to restore southwestern forests
with ﬁre alone, an ecological restoration project could
reintroduce low-intensity, surface ﬁres every 2–10 yr
over large areas with little or no structural manipula-
tion. However, southwestern ponderosa pine and lower
elevation mixed-conifer forests have experienced tre-
mendous increases in tree densities and fuel accumu-
lations over the past century, and most now support
fuel conditions that favor high-intensity crown ﬁres. In
these altered structures, ﬁre no longer functions as it
did in presettlement forests.
Earlier experiments that simply reintroduced ﬁre into
these systems often had detrimental effects, from a res-
toration perspective. For example, S. Sackett, J. Die-
terich, and W. Covington initiated such an experiment
on the Chimney Spring experimental burning area near
Flagstaff, Arizona, in 1976 (Dieterich 1980, Sackett
1980, Covington and Sackett 1984). Their results dem-
onstrated that many old-growth pine trees were killed
by cambial girdling and root mortality, while postset-
tlement poles and saplings were not adequately thinned
by ﬁre as originally intended (Sackett et al. 1996).
Reestablishment of herbaceous composition and pro-
duction at Chimney Spring has been slow, probably
because of the lack of tree thinning and intense soil
heating under presettlement trees (Harris and Coving-
ton 1983, Andariese and Covington 1986). In contrast,
initial results from the restoration experiment at the
GPNA, where many postsettlement trees were removed
and litter raked prior to burning, are encouraging (Cov-
ington et al. 1997). Herbaceous production in treated
areas has rapidly outstripped controls, even in areas
that had been dense with postsettlement trees before
restoration (Covington et al. 1997). Prior to treatment,
these areas had only scattered grasses, sedges, and
forbs. Old-growth trees have had an unexpectedly rapid
positive response, showing reduced water stress, in-
creased resin ﬂow, and foliar toughness, which are in-
dicators of insect resistance (Feeney et al. 1998). In
addition, Kaye and Hart (1998) reported that microbial
nitrogen transformation rates increased in the restored
sites, relative to the controls, suggesting higher micro-
bial activity in the restored areas.
Limitations of our ecological restoration approach
Despite the initial success of the GPNA experi-
ment—the ﬁrst site where quantitative posttreatment
information has been collected—the ecological resto-
ration approach does have limitations, especially when
implemented at the operational level. These limitations,
however, are not restricted to restoration-type treat-
ments. They are largely limitations associated with al-
most any land management activity, especially those
involving tree thinning and prescribed burning.
Beginning with the initial concept, ecological res-
toration projects are bound to be confronted with a wide
variety of opinions. This seems to be especially true
on federal lands. Project implementation is often be-
deviled by disagreements over treatment details and by
insufﬁcient funding. Even where environmental groups
and resource management agencies appear to advocate
nearly identical tree thinning and prescribed burning
treatments, for instance, arguments over issues such as

1274
INVITED FEATURE
Ecological Applications
Vol. 9, No. 4
tree diameter limits, single vs. multiple entries, and
residual forest density have slowed the progress of ini-
tial restoration projects in northern Arizona. In large
part, these disagreements may stem more from a long
history of antagonistic relationships among the organ-
izations involved, rather than from an actual impasse
over the restoration work itself. The low value of the
small-diameter forest products removed in the resto-
ration thinnings contributes to the difﬁculty in funding
these projects (Larson and Mirth 1998). In many cir-
cumstances land management agencies cannot afford
the monitoring investment and thus fall short of adap-
tive management ideals. When the projects are oper-
ationally implemented, there are additional limitations
associated with smoke from prescribed ﬁres, slash dis-
posal, and short-term aesthetic degradation from both
thinning and prescribed ﬁre activities.
National parks and designated wilderness areas can
pose particularly difﬁcult challenges to restoration ef-
forts. These lands are mandated to be managed in their
natural conditions, but the types of human activities
often needed for restoration, such as tree thinning, may
be seen as incompatible with park and wilderness reg-
ulations. Recognizing the damage caused by disruption
of natural processes, the National Park Service has been
a leader in restoring ﬁre regimes in the Sierra Nevada
National Parks (Parsons and van Wagtendonk 1996,
Stephenson 1999) and elsewhere. Yet arguments con-
tinue over the appropriate procedures (see Ecological
restoration: Structure and function). Currently, Grand
Canyon National Park is developing small-scale tests
of thinning treatments at sites where changes in forest
structure and fuel accumulation have been too great to
allow ﬁre-only treatments (Nichols et al. 1994). Re-
lying on a minimum tool analysis, wilderness-sensitive
restoration work may rely heavily, or exclusively, on
human and animal-powered operations, trading higher
costs for decreased mechanical impacts. Additional
constraints are posed by the U.S. Forest Service’s pro-
hibition of most management ignitions in wilderness
(Parsons and Landres 1998).
CONCLUSIONS
The evolutionary environment concept and reference
conditions are central to determining ecologically
based restoration treatments in southwestern ponderosa
pine ecosystems. The goal for the restored ponderosa
pine forest ecosystem in our projects is not the creation
of an exact copy of the presettlement forest, because
trees and other plants have aged, some have died, and
animal communities have changed. However, the re-
stored forest is a reasonably close match to the pre-
settlement forest, conserving the structure and pattern
of the slowest developing organismic variables (old
trees) and providing resources for native herbaceous
plants and shrubs to return to their natural, more pro-
ductive state. Within the restored forest structure, ﬁre
and other processes can presumably have ecological
effects more similar to the roles they played over evo-
lutionary history.
Ecological restoration is founded in conservation bi-
ology principles. Strict-sense restoration (Aronson et
al. 1993) is broadly consistent with management goals
for parks, wilderness, and natural areas, although res-
toration practices may not be easily implemented in
these areas (see Parsons 1989, Parsons and Botti 1996).
On the other hand, a more liberal approach to resto-
ration is central to ecosystem management approaches
on many other public lands (Kaufmann et al. 1994,
Covington et al., in press). For example, Kaufmann et
al. (1998) described reference conditions for ecosystem
management in the Sacramento Mountains, New Mex-
ico, USA. Fiedler et al. (1996) and Hardy and Arno
(1996) described the use of silvicultural and prescribed
burning approaches for improving health of ponderosa
pine forests in the Inland and Paciﬁc Northwest forests.
Dahms and Geils (1997) explain how ecological (or
ecosystem) restoration could be used as one strategy
for improving forest ecosystem health for lands ad-
ministered by the U.S. Forest System in the Southwest.
Ecological restoration is not a panacea nor does it
meet all land management objectives. Neither the pre-
settlement ecosystem nor any other ecosystem is ideal
for providing habitats for each species or individual
organism, or for all the commodity and amenity needs
of humans (also see McQuillan [1998]). Relatively
open forests with frequent ﬁres are probably not best
suited
to
maximize
wood
production,
maximize
downed woody debris, or give dense hiding cover to
animals. However, real ecosystems cannot simulta-
neously meet all conﬂicting objectives. In many set-
tings, restoration of natural ecosystem structure and
process will hold a lower priority than other concerns.
The hope of restored ecosystems is to reduce and per-
haps reverse human-caused degradation, conserve the
most fragile links of natural systems (such as rare spe-
cies and old organisms), and reduce the potential for
catastrophic ecosystem change. These are, in our view,
appropriate goals for management of natural ecosys-
tems across many federal lands.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Cooperation and ﬁnancial support for the ecological res-
toration projects mentioned in this article were provided by
the U.S. Department of the Interior Bureau of Land Man-
agement (Mt. Trumbull, Arizona), U.S. Department of the
Interior National Park Service (Grand Canyon National Park),
and Department of Defense National Guard Bureau and Ar-
izona Army National Guard (Camp Navajo). Funding for the
Gus Pearson Natural Area ecosystem restoration experiment
was provided by the National Science Foundation (Grant
DEB-9322706). S. F. Arno, W. H. Moir, D. J. Parsons, P.
Morgan, R. K. Vance, and an anonymous reviewer provided
comments and reviews that greatly improved earlier versions
of this manuscript.

November 1999
1275
HISTORICAL VARIABILITY
LITERATURE CITED
Altschul, J. H., and H. C. Fairley. 1989. Man, models, and
management: an overview of the archaeology of the Ari-
zona Strip and the management of its cultural resources.
Report prepared for U.S. Forest Service and U.S. Depart-
ment of the Interior Bureau of Land Management, by Sta-
tistical Research, Plateau Archaeology, Dames and Moore,
Contract No. 53-8371-6-0054.
Andariese, S. W., and W. W. Covington. 1986. Changes in
understory production for three prescribed burns of dif-
ferent ages in ponderosa pine. Forest Ecology and Man-
agement 14:193–203.
Anderson, M. K., and M. J. Moratto. 1996. Native American
land-use practices and ecological impacts. Pages 187–206
in Sierra Nevada Ecosystem Project: ﬁnal report to Con-
gress, Volume II. University of California, Davis, Califor-
nia, USA.
Anderson, R. S. 1989. Development of the southwestern pon-
derosa pine forests: what do we really know? Pages 15–22
in U.S. Forest Service General Technical Report RM-185.
Aronson, J., C. Floret, E. LeFloc’h, C. Ovalle, and R. Pon-
tanier. 1993. Restoration and rehabilitation of degraded
ecosystems in arid and semi-arid lands. I. A view from the
south. Restoration Ecology 1:8–17.
Axelrod, D. I. 1986. Cenozoic history of some western
American pines. Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden
73:565–641.
Baisan, C. H., and T. W. Swetnam. 1997. Interactions of ﬁre
regimes and land use in the central Rio Grande Valley. U.S.
Forest Service Research Paper RM-RP-230.
Barton, A. M. 1993. Factors controlling plant distributions:
drought, competition, and ﬁre in montane pines in Arizona.
Ecological Monographs 63:367–397.
Biondi, F. 1996. Decadal-scale dynamics at the Gus Pearson
Natural Area: evidence for inverse (a)symmetric compe-
tition? Canadian Journal of Forest Research 26:1397–1406.
Bonnicksen, T. M., and E. C. Stone. 1985. Restoring natu-
ralness to national parks. Environmental Management 9:
479–486.
Bradshaw, A. D. 1984. Ecological principles and land rec-
lamation practices. Landscape Planning 11:35–48.
Christensen, N. L. 1987. Succession and natural disturbance:
paradigms, problems, and preservation of natural ecosys-
tems. Pages 62–86 in J. K. Agee and D. R. Johnson, editors.
Ecosystem management for parks and wilderness. Univer-
sity of Washington Press, Seattle, Washington, USA.
Christensen, N. L., et al. 1996. The scientiﬁc basis for eco-
system management. Ecological Applications 6:665–691.
Cooper, C. F. 1960. Changes in vegetation, structure, and
growth of southwestern pine forests since white settlement.
Ecological Monographs 30:129–164.
. 1961. Pattern in ponderosa pine forests. Ecology 42:
493–499.
Covington, W. W., R. L. Everett, R. W. Steele, L. I. Irwin,
T. A. Daer, and A. N. D. Auclair. 1994. Historical and
anticipated changes in forest ecosystems of the Inland West
of the United States. Journal of Sustainable Forestry 2:13–
63.
Covington, W. W., P. Z. Fule´, M. M. Moore, S. C. Hart, T.
E. Kolb, J. N. Mast, S. S. Sackett, and M. R. Wagner. 1997.
Restoration of ecosystem health in ponderosa pine forests
of the Southwest. Journal of Forestry 95:23–29.
Covington, W. W., and M. M. Moore. 1994a. Southwestern
ponderosa forest structure and resource conditions: changes
since Anglo-American settlement. Journal of Forestry 92:
39–47.
Covington, W. W., and M. M. Moore. 1994b. Postsettlement
changes in natural ﬁre regimes and forest structure: eco-
logical restoration of old-growth ponderosa pine forests.
Journal of Sustainable Forestry 2:153–181.
Covington, W. W., and S. S. Sackett. 1984. The effect of a
prescribed burn in southwestern ponderosa pine on organic
matter and nutrients in woody debris and forest ﬂoor. Forest
Science 30:183–192.
Covington, W. W., W. A. Niering, E. E. Starkey, and J. L.
Walker. In press. Ecosystem restoration and management
of public lands: principles and concepts. In N. C. Johnson,
A. J. Malk, W. T. Sexton, and R. Szaro, editors. Ecological
stewardship: a common reference for ecosystem manage-
ment. Elsevier Science, Oxford, UK.
Dahms, C. W., and B. W. Geils, technical editors. 1997. An
assessment of forest ecosystem health in the Southwest.
U.S. Forest Service General Technical Report RM-GTR-
295.
Denevan, W. M. 1992. The pristine myth: the landscape of
the Americas in 1492. Annals of the Association of Amer-
ican Geographers 82:369–385.
Dieterich, J. H. 1980. Chimney Spring forest ﬁre history.
U.S. Forest Service Research Paper RM-220.
Dobson, A. P., A. D Bradshaw, and A. J. M. Baker. 1997.
Hopes for the future: restoration ecology and conservation
biology. Science 277:515–522.
Feeney, S. R., T. E. Kolb, W. W. Covington, and M. R. Wag-
ner. 1998. Inﬂuence of thinning and burning restoration
treatments on presettlement ponderosa pines at the Gus
Pearson Natural Area. Canadian Journal of Forest Research
28:1295–1306.
Fiedler, C. E., S. F. Arno, and M. G. Harrington. 1996. Flex-
ible silvicultural and prescribed burning approaches for im-
proving health of ponderosa pine forests. Pages 69–74 in
U.S. Forest Service General Technical Report RM-GTR-
278.
Foster, D. R., P. K. Schoomaker, and S. T. A. Pickett. 1990.
Insights from paleoecology to community ecology. Trends
in Ecology and Evolution 5:119–122.
Fritts, H. C., and T. W. Swetnam. 1989. Dendroecology: a
tool for evaluating variations in past and present forest
environments. Advances in Ecological Research 19:111–
188.
Fule´, P. Z., and W. W. Covington. 1996. Changing ﬁre re-
gimes in Mexican pine forests: ecological and management
implications. Journal of Forestry 94:33–38.
Fule´, P. Z., W. W. Covington, and M. M. Moore. 1997. De-
termining reference conditions for ecosystem management
in southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Ecological Appli-
cations 7:895–908.
Geist, V. 1978. Life strategies, human evolution, environ-
mental design: toward a biological theory of health. Spring-
er-Verlag, New York, New York, USA.
Grissino-Mayer, H. D. 1995. Tree-ring reconstructions of
climate and ﬁre history at El Malpais National Monument,
New Mexico. Dissertation. University of Arizona, Tucson,
Arizona, USA.
Hack, J. T. 1942. The changing physical environment of the
Hopi Indians of Arizona. Papers of the Peabody Museum
of American Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard Uni-
versity, volume 35, no. 1. Harvard University Press, Cam-
bridge, Massachusetts, USA.
Hardy, C. C., and S. F. Arno, editors. 1996. The use of ﬁre
in forest restoration. U.S. Forest Service General Technical
Report INT-GTR-341.
Harris, G. R., and W. W. Covington. 1983. The effect of a
prescribed ﬁre on nutrient and standing crop of understory
vegetation in ponderosa pine. Canadian Journal of Forest
Research 13:501–507.
Higgs, E. S. 1997. What is good ecological restoration? Con-
servation Biology 11:338–348.
Hobbs, R. J., and D. A. Norton. 1996. Towards a conceptual

1276
INVITED FEATURE
Ecological Applications
Vol. 9, No. 4
framework for restoration ecology. Restoration Ecology 4:
93–110.
Holling, C. S. 1992. Cross-scale morphology, geometry, and
dynamics of ecosystems. Ecological Monographs 62:447–
502.
Hunter, M. D., and P. W. Price. 1992. Playing chutes and
ladders: heterogeneity and the relative roles of bottom-up
and top-down forces in natural communities. Ecology 73:
724–732.
Hunter, M. L., Jr. 1996. Benchmarks for managing ecosys-
tems: are human activities natural? Conservation Biology
10:695–697.
Jackson, L. L., N. Lopoukhine, and D. Hillyard. 1995. Eco-
logical restoration: a deﬁnition and comments. Restoration
Ecology 3:71–75.
Jordan, W. R., M. E. Gilpin, and J. D. Aber. 1987. Resto-
ration ecology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK.
Kaufmann, M. R., et al. 1994. An ecological basis for eco-
system management. U.S. Forest Service General Technical
Report RM-246.
Kaufmann, M. R., L. S. Huckaby, C. M. Regan, and J. Popp.
1998. Forest reference conditions for ecosystem manage-
ment in the Sacramento Mountains, New Mexico. U.S. For-
est Service General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-19.
Kay, C. E. 1995. Aboriginal overkill and native burning:
implications for modern ecosystem management. Western
Journal of Applied Forestry 10:121–126.
Kaye, J. P, and S. C. Hart. 1998. Ecological restoration alters
nitrogen transformations in a ponderosa pine–bunchgrass
ecosystem. Ecological Applications 8:1052–1060.
Keddy, P. A., and C. G. Drummond. 1996. Ecological prop-
erties for the evaluation, management, and restoration of
temperate deciduous forest ecosystems. Ecological Appli-
cations 6:748–769.
Kerns, B. K. Phytolith assemblages and soil characteristics
from a southwestern ponderosa pine–bunchgrass commu-
nity. Dissertation. Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff,
Arizona, USA.
Kerns, B. K., and M. M. Moore. 1997. Use of soil charac-
teristics and opal phytoliths to examine vegetation stability
in a ponderosa pine–bunchgrass community. Bulletin of
Ecological Society of America 78:73.
Larson, D., and R. Mirth. 1998. Potential for using small-
diameter ponderosa pine: a wood ﬁber projection. Forest
Products Journal 48:37–42.
Leopold, A. 1924. Grass, brush, timber, and ﬁre in southern
Arizona. Journal of Forestry 22:1–10.
. 1937. Conservationist in Mexico. American Forests
37:118–120.
. 1941. Wilderness as a land laboratory. Living Wil-
derness 6:3.
MacMahon, J. A., and W. R. Jordan, III. 1994. Ecological
restoration. Chapter 14 in G. K. Meffe and C. R. Carroll,
editors. Principles of conservation biology. Sinauer, Sun-
derland, Massachusetts, USA.
Madany, M. H., and N. E. West. 1983. Livestock grazing–
ﬁre regime interactions within montane forests of Zion Na-
tional Park, Utah. Ecology 64:661–667.
Mast, J. N., P. Z. Fule´, M. M. Moore, W. W. Covington, and
A. E. M. Waltz. 1999. Restoration of presettlement age
structure of an Arizona ponderosa pine forest. Ecological
Applications 9:228–39.
Mayr, E. 1942. Systematics and the origin of species. Co-
lumbia University Press, New York, New York, USA.
McCune, B. 1988. Ecological diversity in North American
pines. American Journal of Botany 75:353–368.
McIntosh, R. P. 1985. The background of ecology: concept
and theory. Cambridge University Press. New York, New
York, USA.
McQuillan, A. G. 1998. Defending the ethics of ecological
restoration. Journal of Forestry 96:27–31.
Merriam-Webster. 1989. The new Merriam-Webster dictio-
nary. Merriam-Webster, Springﬁeld, Massachusetts, USA.
Minnich, R. A., M. G. Barbour, J. H. Burk, and R. F. Fernau.
1995. Sixty years of change in California conifer forests
of the San Bernardino Mountains. Conservation Biology
9:902–914.
Mooney, H. A. 1981. Adaptations of plants to ﬁre regimes:
integrating summary. Pages 322–323 in Fire regimes and
ecosystem properties. U.S. Forest Service General Tech-
nical Report WO-26. Washington, D.C., USA.
Morgan, P., G. H. Aplet, J. B. Hauﬂer, H. C. Humphries, M.
M. Moore, and W. D. Wilson. 1994. Historical range of
variability: a useful tool for evaluating ecological change.
Journal of Sustainable Forestry 2:87–111.
Mutch, R. W. 1970. Wildland ﬁres and ecosystems—a hy-
pothesis. Ecology 51:1046–1051.
Nichols, T., B. Callenberger, and G. Kleindienst. 1994. Re-
port of the task force review of the hazard fuel situation
on the North Rim of the Grand Canyon. Report on ﬁle at
the Division of Resource Management, Grand Canyon Na-
tional Park, Arizona, USA.
Noss, R. F. and B. Csuti. 1994. Habitat fragmentation. Pages
237–264 in G. K. Meffe and C. R. Carroll, editors. Prin-
ciples of conservation biology. Sinauer, Sunderland, Mas-
sachusetts.
Parsons, D. J. 1989. Restoring ﬁre to the Sierra Nevada
mixed conifer forest: reconciling science, policy, and prac-
ticality. Pages 271–279 in Restoration ’89: the new man-
agement challenge. First annual meeting, Society for Eco-
logical Restoration.
Parsons, D. J., and S. J. Botti. 1996. Restoration of ﬁre in
National Parks. Pages 29–31 in U.S. Forest Service General
Technical Report INT-GTR-341.
Parsons, D. J., D. M. Graber, J. K. Agee, and J. W. van
Wagtendonk. 1986. Natural ﬁre management in National
Parks. Environmental Management 10:21–24.
Parsons, D. J., and P. B. Landres. 1998. Restoring natural
ﬁre to wilderness: how are we doing? Pages 366–373 in T.
L. Pruden and L. A. Brennan, editors. Tall Timbers Fire
Ecology Conference Proceedings, No. 20. Tall Timbers Re-
search Station, Tallahassee, Florida, USA.
Parsons, D. J., and J. W. van Wagtendonk. 1996. Fire re-
search and management in the Sierra Nevada National
Parks. Pages 25–48 in W. L. Halvorson and G. E. Davis,
editors. Science and ecosystem management in the National
Parks. The University of Arizona Press, Tucson, Arizona,
USA.
Pearson, G. A. 1923. Natural reproduction of western yellow
pine in the Southwest. U.S. Forest Service Bulletin No.
1105. Washington, D.C., USA.
. 1950. Management of ponderosa pine in the South-
west. U.S. Agriculture Monograph 6. Washington, D.C.,
USA
Pickett, S. T. A., and P. S. White. 1985. The ecology of
natural disturbance and patch dynamics. Academic Press,
Orlando, Florida, USA.
Powell, J. W. 1961. The exploration of the Colorado River
and its canyons. Formerly titled: Canyons of the Colorado.
Dover, New York, New York, USA.
Pyne, S. J. 1982. Fire in America: a cultural history of wild-
land and rural ﬁre. Princeton University Press, Princeton,
New Jerseu. USA.
Ralston, H., III. 1994. Conserving natural value. Columbia
University Press, New York, New York, USA.
Sackett, S. S. 1980. Reducing natural ponderosa pine fuels
using prescribed ﬁre: two case studies. U.S. Forest Service
Research Note RM-392.
Sackett, S. S., S. M. Haase, and M. G. Harrington. 1996.

November 1999
1277
HISTORICAL VARIABILITY
Lessons learned from ﬁre use for restoring southwestern
ponderosa pine ecosystems. Pages 53–60 in U.S. Forest
Service General Technical Report RM-GTR-278.
Samuels, M. L., and J. Betancourt. 1982. Modeling the long-
term effects of fuelwood harvest on pinyon–juniper wood-
lands. Environmental Management 6:505–515.
Savage, M. 1991. Structural dynamics of a southwestern pine
forest under chronic human inﬂuence. Annals of the As-
sociation of American Geographers 81:271–289.
Savage, M., P. Brown, and J. Feddema. 1996. The role of
climate in a pine forest regeneration pulse in the south-
western United States. Ecoscience 3:310–318.
Seklecki, M. T., H. D. Grissino-Mayer, and T. W. Swetnam.
1996. Fire history and the possible role of Apache-set ﬁres
in the Chiricahua Mountains of southeastern Arizona.
Pages 238–246 in U.S. Forest Service General Technical
Report. RM-GTR-289.
Shinneman, D. J., and W. L. Baker. 1997. Nonequilibrium
dynamics between catastrophic disturbances and old-
growth forests in ponderosa pine landscapes of the Black
Hills. Conservation Biology 11:1276–1288.
Smith, B. D. 1989. Origins of agriculture in eastern North
America. Science 246:1566–1571.
Smith, H. Y., and S. F. Arno, editors. 1999. Eighty-eight years
of change in a managed ponderosa pine forest. U.S. Forest
Service General Technical Report. RMRS-GTR-23.
Smith, M. 1958. Theory of evolution. Penguin Books, New
York, New York, USA.
Society for Ecological Restoration. 1993. Mission statement,
Society for Ecological Restoration. Restoration Ecology 1:
206–207.
Stephenson, N. L. 1999. Reference conditions for giant se-
quoia forest restoration: structure, process, and precision.
Ecological Applications 9:1253–1265.
Swanson, F. J., J. A. Jones, D. A. Wallin, and J. H. Cissel.
1994.
Natural variability—implications for ecosystem
management. Pages 85–99 in U.S. Forest Service, General
Technical Report PNW-GTR-318.
Swetnam, T. W., C. D. Allen, and J. L. Betancourt. 1999.
Applied historical ecology: using the past to manage the
future. Ecological Applications 9:1189–1206.
Swetnam, T. W., and C. H. Baisan. 1996. Historical ﬁre re-
gime patterns in the southwestern United States since AD
1700. Pages 11–32 in U.S. Forest Service General Tech-
nical Report RM-GTR-286.
Swetnam, T. W., and J. L. Betancourt. 1998. Mesoscale dis-
turbance and ecological response to decadal climatic vari-
ability in the American Southwest. Journal of Climate 11:
3128–3147.
Touchan, R., C. D. Allen, and T. W. Swetnam. 1996. Fire
history and climatic patterns in ponderosa pine and mixed-
conifer forests of the Jemez Mountains, northern New Mex-
ico. Pages 33–46 in U.S. Forest Service General Technical
Report RM-GTR-286.
Van Devender, T. R. 1990. Late Quaternary vegetation and
climate in the Sonoran Desert, United States and Mexico.
Pages 134–165 in J. L. Betancourt, T. R. Van Devender,
and P. S. Martin, editors. Packrat middens: the last 40,000
years of biotic change. University of Arizona Press, Tucson,
Arizona, USA.
Walters, C. J., and C. S. Holling. 1990. Large-scale man-
agement experiments and learning by doing. Ecology 71:
2060–2068.
Weaver, H. 1951. Fire as an ecological factor in the south-
western ponderosa pine forests. Journal of Forestry 49:93–
98.
White, A. S. 1985. Presettlement regeneration patterns in a
southwestern ponderosa pine stand. Ecology 66:589–594.
Wilson, E. O. 1992. The diversity of life. Norton, New York,
New York, USA.
Woolsey, T. S., Jr. 1911. Western yellow pine in Arizona and
New Mexico. U.S. Forest Service Bulletin 101.
. 1912. Permanent sample plots. Forest Quarterly 10:
38–44.
