Reframing the Grazing Debate:
Evaluating Ecological Sustainability
and Bioregional Food Production
Matthew R. Loeser1
Thomas D. Sisk1
Timothy E. Crews2
Kurt Olsen1
Craig Moran1
and
Christina Hudenko1
1Center for Environmental Sciences and Education
Northern Arizona University
PO Box 5694
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5694
2Environmental Studies Program
Prescott College
220 Grove Avenue
Prescott, AZ 86301
Abstract.
The semi-arid grasslands of the Colorado Plateau are productive, diverse, and
extensive ecosystems.  The majority of these ecosystems have been altered by human land
use, primarily through the grazing of domestic livestock, yielding a plethora of environ-
mental and social consequences that are tightly interconnected.  From an agroecological
perspective, untangling these issues requires both an understanding of the role of livestock
grazing in bioregional food production and the effect of that grazing on ecological
sustainability.  To address the former, we discuss the importance of cattle ranching as a
bioregional food source, including estimates of meat production and water use in Arizona.
To address the latter, we present data from a long-term project addressing changes in native
plant community composition, under a range of alternative livestock management strate-
gies.  Our study site near Flagstaff, AZ includes four different management treatments: (1)
conventional low-intensity, long-duration grazing rotations; (2) high-intensity, short-dura-
tion rotations; (3) very high-impact, very short-duration grazing (to simulate herd impact);
and, (4) livestock exclosure.  Preliminary results suggest belowground properties are re-
sponding more quickly to grazing treatments than aboveground properties.  Particular
Email:  Matthew R. Loeser, matthew.loeser@nau.edu
   3

4     REFRAMING THE GRAZING DEBATE
response variables, such as cyanobacteria and diatoms, show a marked short-term response
to very high-impact, short-duration grazing, but long-term implications are as yet un-
known.
Key words:  ecological sustainability, bioregional food production, livestock grazing,
biological diversity, participatory research.
INTRODUCTION
Two years ago, we addressed the 4th Biennial Conference of Research on the
Colorado Plateau on the issue of the ecological sustainability of cattle grazing on arid
rangelands (Sisk et al. 1999).  At that time, our focus was on the role of science in
helping to resolve the contentious and often bitter social battle over grazing policy
and practices, and the opportunities presented by public participation in the scientific
process (Sclove 1998).  We demonstrated that the current level of understanding of
grazing impacts in the Southwest often lacked a rigorous scientific foundation, and
we suggested an approach for designing research efforts to address scientific issues
underlying environmental conflict.  The centerpiece of our efforts has been an experi-
ment designed to test a set of hypotheses derived from differing claims voiced by
ranchers, resource managers, and environmentalists about the ecological impacts of
livestock grazing on the Colorado Plateau.  Here we provide an update, expanding on
the scientific and policy themes that are so closely interwoven in the grazing debate.
Currently, consensus on the issue of livestock grazing in the Southwest does
not appear to be on the near horizon of the socio-political landscape.  This impres-
sion is particularly apparent in the mainstream media that tend to emphasize the
contentiousness of environmental issues (e.g., Rotstein 1999).  However, deeper
investigation into the ecological literature provides some evidence of a broad agree-
ment on livestock impacts.  For example, Belsky et al. (1999) summarized roughly
100 papers from the scientific literature that measured the effects of cattle grazing on
riparian zones in the western U.S.  Their review found considerable evidence that
cattle grazing often has negative effects on stream channel morphology, soils, vegeta-
tion, and wildlife.  This review and others (e.g., Platts 1991, Kauffman and Krueger
1984, Armour et al. 1994), make a compelling case that livestock grazing should be
carefully controlled, if not altogether eliminated, along riparian zones.
Riparian ecosystems, however, represent only a fraction of grazed lands in the
Southwest, and information from this sensitive habitat-type does not necessarily
pertain to other ecosystems.  Upland grasslands, which constitute the majority of
grazed lands, differ substantially from riparian ecosystems in structure, function, and
evolutionary history, and the impacts of livestock grazing on these two ecosystems
may be very different.  Although we know of no rigorous scientific comparison of
Southwestern riparian and upland responses to similar grazing systems, the litera-
ture suggests that the response of upland systems are more varied.  Rambo and

LOESER ET AL.     5
Faeth (1999), studied semi-arid grasslands that had been excluded from grazing for
over eight years, and showed that ungrazed grasslands had fewer plant species than
adjacent, grazed plots.  Insect species richness, however, showed no significant differ-
ence.  In studies of ground-foraging birds, Bock et al. (1984) found that grazed areas
and adjacent exclosures had similar abundances in years of average rainfall, but
exclosures supported nearly 3 times as many birds as the grazed areas following two
consecutive drought years (Bock and Bock 1999).  This complexity of organismal
responses to grazing, as well as an overall paucity of rigorous scientific information,
has motivated our efforts to address relevant ecological questions through manipu-
lative experiments conducted in concert with ranch management teams.  We provide
a brief retrospective on our involvement with two such groups that include environ-
mental advocates and policy makers, and explain how this experience has provided a
broader context for considering trade-offs associated with livestock grazing in the
Southwest.
Ground Zero for Grazing Policy
For several decades, the center of conflict regarding grazing policy has focused on
whether grazing degrades “the land.”  Fifty years of research provides clear, but
equivocal evidence:  it does in some places and at some times, and at other times and
places it does not.  In fact, there is also compelling evidence that livestock grazing can
speed the recovery of certain degraded sites (van Wieren 1991), and that grazing may
increase productivity in some ecosystems (McNaughton et al. 1997, Milchunas et al.
1989).  Clearly, further efforts to characterize grazing as “good” or “bad” are overly
simplistic and, we believe, problematic.  Instead, two broad questions emerge:  (1)
how and where can grazing be practiced in an ecologically sustainable manner; and (2)
how do we, the public, wish to manage our public grasslands in the Southwest?  The
answers to the former question will come from greater collaborative interaction among
ranchers, research scientists, environmental groups, and the public who plan and
apply on-the-ground management.  We are optimistic that the collaborative groups,
being founded with increasing frequency across the West, will be at the forefront of
collaborative decision-making.  The latter question however, is less tractable.  Ex-
treme, polarizing views are propagated daily through the media as demonstrated by
the well-circulated jingle “cattle-free by ’93" (now “2003”) and the directly opposing
political views espoused through the ranching industry.  In fact, the contest has
become so mythologized and self-referential that it is easy to lose sight of the real
questions, such as whether regional agriculture is important to the four-corners states,
what lands can be grazed sustainably and profitably, and what alternative land man-
agement should replace grazing in areas where it is unsustainable or not desired by
the public.
Bioregional Perspective of Food Production
The scientific debate over livestock grazing has focused primarily on single spe-
cies’ responses (such as endangered species) and overall forage production.  Ecosys-
tems grazed by livestock have justifiably been compared to ungrazed areas to ascer-

6     REFRAMING THE GRAZING DEBATE
tain human impacts on natural systems.  Interestingly, few comparisons are made
between the biological diversity and ecosystem function of grazed ecosystems and
other agroecosystems.  In other words, if we assume that humans are going to
impact natural ecosystems to produce food and fiber through agriculture, it seems
appropriate to consider the relative ecological impacts of different agricultural prac-
tices in the arid Southwest.
Inherent to conventional agroecosystems dedicated to annual crop production
is the nearly total replacement of native plant and animal communities.  They gener-
ally consist of non-native plants (both crops and weeds), and fauna (especially birds,
mammals, and arthropods) that can exist in communities that experience distur-
bance at high frequencies and intensities through actions such as plowing soils, which
often increase erosion rates and contribute to a decline in soil organic matter (Davidson
and Ackerman 1993).  Rarely do modern agricultural systems generate sufficient
nutrients internally to balance nutrients exported in crops, thus most farms depend
on large inputs of synthetic fertilizers (Doerge et al. 1991).  The crop uptake of these
fertilizers however is fairly inefficient, often not higher than 50%, with residue nutri-
ents often making their way into waterways, or the atmosphere (Matson et al. 1998).
Inputs of pesticides including insecticides, herbicides and fungicides are also com-
monplace in conventional agroecosystems.  While the pesticides applied today are
less persistent in the environment than those used in previous decades, they are
nonetheless highly toxic and relatively indiscriminate in the species that they affect.
Finally, modern agroecosystems require substantial fossil fuel subsidies in the pro-
duction process.  The energy used to cultivate, harvest, synthesize and apply fertiliz-
ers, and irrigate, primarily comes from fossil fuels.  The energy return on each fossil-
fuel calorie invested in agriculture tends to be quite low (Pimentel and Pimentel
1996).
When compared with agro-ecosystems dedicated to annual agriculture, plant
species diversity in grazed, upland agroecosystems in the Southwest appear relatively
intact (Hughes 1996, Rambo and Faeth 1999).  The specific ecological impacts of
cattle grazing are often difficult to estimate, given the lack of non-grazed ecosystems
that can be used as controls.  However, this is not to say that livestock grazing is
innocuous, because there is strong evidence that grazing can alter community com-
position of particular ecosystems through mechanisms such as selective biomass
removal, alteration of soil properties, fire suppression, and transport of exotic spe-
cies (Fleischner 1994).  Indirect consequences of livestock grazing, such as the intro-
duction of grasses for forage, especially Lehmann lovegrass (Eragrostis lehmanniana)
and buffelgrass  (Pennisetum ciliare), have had profound impacts on community dy-
namics in the Southwest (Bock and Bock 1998, Burquez and Martinez-Yrizar 1997).
Where exotics have not been intentionally introduced, however, grazed ecosystems
are generally dominated by native, perennial species (Rambo and Faeth 1999).
Estimating total costs of any agriculture is challenging given the gulf that exists
between actual and perceived costs of natural resources.  But without accurate cost
estimates, the grazing debate remains awash with ambiguous statements.  In 1990,
crop agriculture in Arizona used approximately 5.2 million acre feet of water (Eden

LOESER ET AL.     7
and Wallace 1992).  Livestock in Arizona consume approximately 15 gallons animal-
unit -1 day -1, which translates into an estimated annual water consumption by all
range-fed Arizona livestock of only 8,384 acre-feet of water (1 acre-foot water =
1233.482 m3; Table 1).  When ranchers manage their livestock using horses, livestock
grazing on Western rangelands may represent the only food production system in
the United States that is based largely on solar energy rather than fossil fuel inputs.  In
other words, the work performed and inputs used to grow crops or raise animals in
most agroecosystems involves a very significant reliance on commercial energy (Pimentel
and Pimentel 1996).  Producing livestock on western rangelands, however, relies
heavily on native rates of net primary productivity, while using wind, gravity and/or
solar panels to provide water.
Tradeoffs
Livestock grazing may have lower ecosystem impacts than annual agriculture,
but it is also much less productive.  A critical question, therefore, is whether the
production of food from rangelands balances the tradeoffs in native ecosystem
diversity and productivity that may occur with livestock grazing.  To begin to address
this question, it is important to develop a sense of arid rangeland food productivity.
Following, we estimate levels of meat produced by cattle grazing on Arizona range-
lands, excluding feedlot productivity.  While these estimates are crude, we believe they
provide a reasonable, approximate understanding of potential protein production.
Table 1.  Estimated annual meat production and livestock water consumption according
to ecosystem type in Arizona.
Ha animal
edible beef
water
Acres
Area
%
 unit-1
prod.3,4
protein5
consumed6
Ecosystem
AUM-1, 1
(ha)
cover
year-1
kg year-1
kg year-1
m3 year-1
Chaparral
12.5
1,303,452
4
61
1,871,842
411,805
442,808
Grassland
4.1
5,793,686
24
20
25,376,344
5,582,795
6,003,092
Pinon-Juniper
12.5
5,164,781
18
61
7,416,964
1,631,732
1,754,576
Ponderosa
19.8
885,079
3
96
807,634
177,679
191,056
Desert
20.0
9,143,387
31
97
8,257,226
1,816,611
1,953,374
Total
22,290,385
80
43,730,113
9,620,625
10,344,905
1
AUM = animal unit month = the area (in acres) required to feed one steer or cow/calf unit for 1 month.  AUMs based on
actual stocking rates for different Arizona ecosystems reported in USFW (1999)
2
D. Brown (pers. comm.)
3
In an animal’s first year on the range, it will gain ~190 kg, and if it is left for a second year, it will gain ~330 kg in a good
(wet) year and as low as 165 in a dry year.  On average, therefore, an animal gains approximately 219 kg yr-1 (A. Kessler
and D. Moroney, pers. comm.)
4
Edible meat constitutes ~40% of the total animal weight
5
Beef is ~22% protein (Ensminger et al. 1983) and the average yearly protein requirement for a person is ~23.7 kg
6
One cow or steer requires 15 gallons of water per day (Naeser and St. John 1998)

8     REFRAMING THE GRAZING DEBATE
Stocking rates of livestock on lands in Arizona range between 4 and 20 acres
AUM-1 (an animal unit month is either one steer or cow-calf pair) for desert, chaparral
and woodland ecosystems (USFW 1999).  This range in stocking rates reflects the
variation in herbaceous, aboveground net primary productivity of the different eco-
systems.  By making conservative assumptions about stocking rates, we estimate
that the current grazing of 80% of Arizona’s land surface (Mayes and Archer 1982)
results in sufficient protein production to supply one million people with 40% of
their annual requirements (assuming 65g protein capita-1 day -1).  Alternatively, if
livestock numbers were decreased by 50% across all ecosystem types, then the 40% of
Arizona land that would remain grazed could supply one million people with ap-
proximately one-fifth of their annual protein requirements.  This latter level of food
production is large enough that we believe the value of bioregional food production
needs to be considered in the debate regarding livestock grazing in the arid South-
west.  Elimination of livestock grazing in the Southwest would substantially impede
any regional movement toward greater reliance on bioregional food production, and
would shift agricultural activity, as well as the concomitant environmental impacts, to
other regions.  The potential socio-economic implications of such a proposal are
beyond the scope of this paper, but undoubtedly warrant further consideration.
Reshaping the Debate
Native Habitats as the Endpoint
Although plant surveys have been a mainstay of the vast majority of grazing
studies, the emphasis has often been placed on total forage, without regard for the
particular species that make up the community (e.g., Holechek et al. 1999).  Increasing
public recognition of the value of native habitats and native species has made this an
issue of contention in the current grazing debate.  Dramatic declines in native habi-
tats, such as the degradation or loss of 80% of Western riparian ecosystems (U.S.
Department of Interior 1994), underscore the rapidity of change wrought by hu-
mans.  Moreover, the list of nonnative plant species in Arizona has doubled in the
past 50 years to roughly 330 and continues to grow (Burgess et al. 1991).  Complicat-
ing this issue is the fact that the establishment of many nonnative plants in grass-
lands was aided in the early 1900s by government-subsidized seeding programs that
intentionally (and unintentionally) included nonnative plants (Bahre 1995, Cox and
Ruyle 1998).  This trend in the loss of native habitats and native species is the product
of multiple land-use actions, many of which are historically associated with, but not
inherently necessary to livestock production (e.g., road building, erosion of
streambanks, extensive fencing, chaining of trees, etc.).
Many examples of landscapes severely degraded by overgrazing exist and the
mismanagement of rangeland has fueled a widespread anti-grazing sentiment.  Many
environmental groups have advocated the complete removal of cattle from large
tracts of land, and this approach has been implemented on many National Park
Service lands (Anderson 1993).  The responses of arid and semi-arid grasslands to
exclusion from cattle grazing have been mixed, with changing richness of native
species ranging from dramatic increases (Brady et al. 1989) to slight decreases (Rambo

LOESER ET AL.     9
and Faeth 1999).  When interpreting vegetation responses to livestock removal,
however, it is important to recognize that virtually all lands that are accessible to cattle
or sheep in the Southwest have been grazed intensively at one time or another.
Lands currently excluded from grazing do not necessarily represent the state of semi-
arid grassland ecosystems prior to the introduction of domestic livestock (Milton et
al. 1994), an ecological state that remains poorly understood and whose restoration is
beyond current technical capacity.  Instead, lands where grazing has been eliminated
represent the likely endpoint of cattle removal from similar ecosystems that are
currently being grazed.  Thus, constructive approaches to resolving the present graz-
ing debate will include the assessment of expected outcomes of different levels and
styles of rangeland management (including livestock removal), rather than a restricted
and largely theoretical choice between current conditions and those that predomi-
nated prior to the arrival of domestic grazers.
A Role for Research
Clearly, a broad range of land management options currently exists, and many
are being implemented and evaluated across the Southwest.  Science provides a frame-
work for measuring and interpreting the environmental implications of each option.
To assess some key elements of the ecological sustainability of grazing in semi-arid
grasslands, we asked the following question:  Do belowground and aboveground
variables affecting grassland composition and function, respond in a predictable
manner to increasing grazing intensity?  For belowground properties, we measured
soil compaction and specific members of the microbiotic community, whereas we
measured plant cover and macro-arthropods as aboveground properties.
METHODS
Meaningful application of science to grazing issues will require comparisons of
the effects of actual management practices, as well as experimental treatments de-
signed to elucidate the relationships between grazing and ecosystem sustainability.
In 1997 we initiated a study of grazing impacts in a semi-arid grassland in Arizona.
Our experimental design, replicated in time and space, consists of four treatments in
three blocks on the landscape (a total 12 study plots; see Sisk et al. 1999).  The four
treatments are as follows: (1) conventional low-density, long-duration grazing rota-
tions (CON); (2) high-density, short-duration rotations inspired by Savory (1988)
Holistic Resource Management (HRM); (3) very high-impact, short-duration grazing
to simulate herd impact (VHI); and (4) livestock exclosure (EXC).  Stocking rates and
rotations for the first two treatments are determined by ranchers and land manage-
ment agencies on adjoining pastures, while the latter two treatments are imple-
mented on fenced 1-ha experimental plots created and managed by researchers.  The
timing of the graze event for each of the three cattle treatments falls within the
months of May-October, but specific dates vary between years due to fluctuating
environmental conditions and ranching logistics.  Of the four treatments, only the
VHI treatment does not represent a current grazing policy, but it does simulate herd
behavior, and serves as a critical upper-end treatment to study the potential spectrum

10     REFRAMING THE GRAZING DEBATE
of responses.  In all CON and HRM plots, we have carefully matched elevation,
exposure, soil type, and vegetation type so that spatially and temporally extensive
treatment effects can be complemented with the exclosure and VHI treatments imple-
mented on 1-ha plots.  For the purpose of this paper, we present data from one
study site on the southern edge of the Colorado Plateau.
Site Description
Located at 2160m elevation in north-central Arizona, our primary field site is
Reed Lake, characterized by Upper Great Basin grassland (Brown 1994) surrounded
by Ponderosa Pine forest.  Dominant perennial grasses are Agropyron smithii (western
wheat grass) and Elymus elymoides (squirrel-tail grass).  Soil type is fairly homogeneous
among study plots and across our study site of approximately 25 ha, with a standard
error of less than 10% for each soil particle size class.  The top 8 cm of soil is, on
average, comprised of 42% sand, 12% silt, and 44% clay (Fig. 1).  Annual precipita-
tion averages between 300 mm and 460 mm with the majority generally falling as
monsoonal rains between June and September (Brown 1994).
Response Variables
Soil Compaction
As the intensity of cattle grazing increases, the amount of trampling increases.
We measured soil compaction in the top 5 cm of the soil surface with a pocket soil
penetrometer (Ben Meadows Company, Atlanta, GA 30341).  In October of 1999,
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
SAND
SILT
CLAY
Percent composition
Figure 1.  Soil composition for 12, 1-ha plots at the Reed Lake study site.  Consistency
in proportional representation of particle size classes suggests that results from the
grazing experiment are not confounded by differences in soil type.

LOESER ET AL.     11
each plot was measured in three locations that were haphazardly selected (except for
one of three plots in the conventional treatment that was missed due to a rain-
storm).  Within each of these locations the average of three readings was used as a
final soil compaction measurement.  This sampling event followed the conclusion
of grazing for 1999, and was chosen to represent the cumulative compaction for that
year.  Data were analyzed with ANOVA.
Soil Microbiotic Community
Alterations of soil quality can have effects on cyanobacteria populations and,
consequently, on their role as nitrogen fixers (Evans and Belnap 1999).  In 1999, we
employed a slide-incubation technique to assess cyanobacteria and diatoms (Rossi
and Riccardo 1927, Rossi et al. 1935).  Prior to the 1999 grazing season, five micro-
scope slides were placed in each corner of EXC and VHI plots, which minimized
potential disruption due to researchers in the plot.  Slides remained in the ground for
26 days to incubate microbes and were subsequently transported to the laboratory.
Cyanobacteria filaments and diatoms were then counted at 20X magnification with a
phase contrast microscope.  Data were analyzed with a nested ANOVA.
Plant Cover
Beginning in 1997, before the EXC and VHI treatments were initiated, we
conducted annual ground cover (both basal and foliar cover) surveys using the modi-
fied-Whittaker plot design (Stohlgren et al. 1995).  A modified-Whittaker plot was
placed within each of the 12 plots and permanently marked, so that the researchers
can return annually to conduct surveys.  Data were analyzed for 1997-99 with a
repeated measures ANOVA.
Arthropods
In 1998 we conducted sweep-net surveys of plots in the EXC and VHI treat-
ments before and after the VHI grazing event.  Total abundance of these vegetation-
dwelling arthropods was calculated for each plot.  Data were analyzed with a repeated
measures ANOVA.
RESULTS
Soil Compaction
In comparison with the EXC and CON treatments, the HRM and VHI treat-
ments showed greater soil compaction (df=3, F=15.308, P=0.006; Fig. 2).  These
increases are likely to have effects on other soil properties, including bulk density and
infiltration rates, but the extent of these effects will depend on the persistence of
these differences, which can only be determined through longer-term study.
Soil Microbiotic Community
Our VHI treatment had roughly 50% less colonization by cyanobacteria and
diatoms, in comparison with the EXC plots (df=1, F=8.98, P=0.0047; Fig. 3).  Be-
cause these organisms alter soil structure and fix nitrogen, these declines in abun-
dance may portend further ecological consequences.

12     REFRAMING THE GRAZING DEBATE
Plant Cover
We found plant cover to be fairly similar among treatments, ranging from 78%
to 88% (Fig. 4).  Year-to-year variation in total plant cover was not significant, whereas
treatment type was a significant factor (df=3, F=9.87, P<0.0001).  At a finer scale of
inspection, total plant cover measurements showed the HRM treatment to be con-
sistently lower than the EXC and CON treatments by about 7-9%.  Furthermore, the
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
CYANOBACTERIA
DIATOMS
EXC
VHI
b 
a 
b 
a 
Organisms per slide 
Figure 3.  Abundance of cyanobacteria and diatoms in exclosures (EXC) and very
high-intensity (VHI) plots following two years of treatment.  Different letters denote
significant differences in abundances (df=1, F=8.98, P=0.0047).
Figure 2.  Soil compaction under four grazing treatments, following three years of
treatment.  EXC = livestock exclosure; CON = conventional, low-density, long-duration
grazing; HRM = high-intensity, short-duration grazing; VHI = very high-intensity, short-
duration grazing to simulate herd impact.  Different letters denote significant
differences in the degree of soil compaction (df=3, F=15.308, P=0.006).
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
EXC
CON
HRM
VHI
kg/cm^2
a 
b 
b 
a 

LOESER ET AL.     13
VHI treatment exhibited an 8% decline in plant cover after one year of treatment, but
this difference did not persist into 1999.  In general, short-term effects of treatments
were measured, but their long-term implications remain unclear.  Finer resolution
measures, such as comparisons of community composition, are addressed in a sepa-
rate paper (Loeser et al. in prep.).
Arthropods
Pre-graze and post-graze sampling of EXC and VHI plots showed a decline of
greater than 50% in arthropod abundance following the VHI grazing event in 1998
(df=1, F=5.95, P=0.07; Fig. 5).  In contrast to this short-term response, the pre-graze
abundance, which is a measure of response since the 1997 grazing event, did not
differ between treatments, suggesting that long-term effects may be negligible.
DISCUSSION
Although we are in the early stages of a long-term study, we have detected short-
term differences among four treatments reflecting a gradient of grazing intensity.  In
general, it appears that soil properties and belowground processes are more sensitive,
over the short-term, to differences in grazing treatments than are aboveground prop-
erties.  This supports similar conclusions drawn by Anderson (1995) who argued
that belowground organisms may be keenly susceptible to land-use change.  Mea-
surements of short-term changes in above- and belowground communities due to
grazing were not unexpected, however, the more ecologically and policy relevant
questions involve long-term shifts in biological diversity and ecosystem productivity.
65 
70 
75 
80 
85 
90 
95 
1997 
1998 
1999 
Percent Cover 
EXC 
CON 
HRM 
VHI 
ab
a 
ab
ab
a 
a 
b 
b 
a 
a 
b 
ab
Figure 4.  Percent plant cover for four grazing treatments (see Fig. 2 and text for
treatment descriptions).  EXC and VHI treatments were initiated following data
collection in 1997, while CON and HRM treatments were put in place more than 12
years prior to initiation of this study.  Between-year differences were not significant
for any treatment; significant within-year differences among treatments are denoted
by different letters (df=3, F=9.87, P<0.0001).

14     REFRAMING THE GRAZING DEBATE
While these questions will only be answered with longer-term datasets, the short-
term changes we have detected indicate that the experimental treatments have had
significant, measurable effects that capture relevant impacts along a gradient of graz-
ing intensities.
Belowground Properties
If the fundamental structure of the soil is being altered by the more intensive
grazing treatments, as suggested by an increase in compaction in HRM and VHI
plots, we would expect belowground soil organisms to respond.  Furthermore, soil
structural changes will likely affect other abiotic parameters, such as water penetration
and retention. Preliminary results from our soil moisture measurements suggest
that more heavily compacted sites have 1-5% less soil moisture (Loeser et al. unpub.).
These alterations in soil abiotic parameters likely explain the nearly two-fold decrease
in cyanobacteria and diatoms in the VHI compared to EXC treatments.  Soil micro-
organisms in particular have limited mobility and are known to be sensitive to com-
paction (Whitford et al. 1995).  Preliminary results from other ongoing studies at this
site suggest that soil microarthropod abundance is roughly 40% lower in VHI plots
than EXC plots (Loeser et al. unpub.).
Aboveground Properties
While belowground properties appear to be responding quickly to treatment
effects, aboveground organisms, including plants and arthropods, have not yet dem-
onstrated clear trends.  Plots of the HRM treatment consistently showed lower
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Pre-Graze
Post-Graze
Arthropods per plot
EXC
VHI
a 
a 
a 
b 
Figure 5.  Arthropod abundance in exclosures (EXC) and very high-intensity (VHI)
plots, before and after the 1998 grazing event, as determined by sweep net samples.
Different letters denote a significant difference (df=1, F=5.95, P=0.07).

LOESER ET AL.     15
ground cover than EXC plots, but because this was evident at the time that experi-
ment began, it cannot be ascribed to the treatment itself.  A treatment effect did occur
in VHI plots after only one year, resulting in a loss of 10% of the live plant cover, but
this difference did not persist into subsequent years.  When we tested the possible
relationship between arthropod samples and plant data, we did not find significant
correlations (R2=0.01, P=0.12).  Arthropod samples collected shortly after the VHI
grazing event showed a significant decline in total arthropod abundance, but samples
from 1999, collected prior to grazing, did not differ significantly among treatments.
While this suggests rapid recovery of the arthropod fauna, future collections over
larger areas will be needed to determine long-term trends.  Although our initial
results are not conclusive, they indicate that alternative grazing treatments, such as the
EXC and VHI treatments, have mixed effects on plants and arthropod communi-
ties.
Although aboveground measurements, such as plant cover and species rich-
ness, tend to dominate the grazing literature, we have demonstrated that measure-
ments at multiple trophic levels offer additional information and provide a tractable
approach for investigating grazing impacts on underlying ecosystem processes.  A
traditional animal- or forage-based approach would likely conclude that these treat-
ment effects do not differ significantly, but clearly the impacts are more complicated,
particularly within the soil.  While additional data over an extended time period will
be required to untangle grazing impacts and their ecological consequences, significant
short-term differences in particular response variables between the two most extreme
treatments indicate the methods that we employed to measure changes in this sys-
tem are robust, and that long-term research efforts are justified.
Assessing the multi-faceted environmental implications of livestock grazing in
the Southwest requires objective quantification of grazing impacts.  We believe that
an assessment of the environmental impacts of grazing should also examine graz-
ing policy in the context of the increasing need for ecologically sustainable agriculture.
Our research demonstrates short-term negative effects of very high grazing events on
soil fauna and arthropods, but has not yet demonstrated long-term patterns in
aboveground properties.  As one of the very few bioregionally significant food
production systems on the southern Colorado Plateau, grazing provides a significant
source of edible protein that utilizes grassland communities comprised largely of
native species.  Efforts to generate more detailed and credible information on cattle
and grassland community production levels might serve as common ground for
opposing parties to discuss real-world compromises and the inclusive environmen-
tal impacts of livestock grazing versus increasing reliance on food, water, and energy
imports to support the region’s growing human population.  We strongly believe
that future research should move beyond the simplistic approach of grazed-versus-
ungrazed comparisons to address a wider range of grazing practices, in order to more
effectively determine whether an ecologically sustainable and socially acceptable level
of grazing may exist for the publicly owned semi-arid grasslands of the Colorado
Plateau.

16     REFRAMING THE GRAZING DEBATE
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation and support of the Flying M, Bar-T-
Bar, Hart, and Orme ranches, the Diablo Trust, and the Orme working group.  Nu-
merous undergraduate researchers have contributed to this project, including, R.
Eisfeldt, M. King, E. Stanley, A. Keller, C. Moran, H. Greer, K. Coyle, T. Keeler, K.
Olsen, C. Hudenko, L. Dunlop, S. Mezulis, G. Kendall, J. Chirco, and J. White.  We
also acknowledge the contributions of P. West, A. Tomei, T. Wojtowicz, J. Wolf, D.
Rowland, C. Meyer, J. Battin, L. Ries, and S. Kelly.  This study has been supported
through a NAU Organized Research Grant and in-kind donations from the U.S.
Forest Service and the Diablo Trust.
LITERATURE CITED
Anderson, B. 1993. Grazing management plan: Wupatki National Monument and
Flagstaff areas, Arizona. National Park Service, Washington, D.C.
Anderson, J. M. 1995. The soil system. Pages 406-411 in H. A. Mooney, J. Lubchenco, R.
Dirzo, and O. E. Sala, (eds.) Global Biodiversity Assessment. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, MA.
Armour, C., D. Duff, and W. Elmore. 1994. The effects of livestock grazing on Western
riparian and stream ecosystems. Fisheries 19: 9-12.
Bahre, C. J. 1995. Human impacts on the grasslands of southeastern Arizona. Pages 230-
264 in M. P. McClaran and T. R. VanDevender, (eds.) The desert grassland. The
University of Arizona Press, Tucson, AZ.
Belsky, A. J., A. Matzke, and S. Uselman. 1999. Survey of livestock influences on stream
and riparian ecosystems in the western United States. Journal of Soil and Water
Conservation 54: 419-431.
Bock, C. E., and J. H. Bock. 1998. Factors controlling the structure and function of
desert grasslands: a case study from southeastern Arizona. Pages 33-43 in B.
Tellman, D.M. Finch, C. Edminster, and R. Hamre, (eds.) Proceedings— Future of
arid grasslands:  identifying issues, seeking solutions, Tucson, AZ; October 9-13,
1996. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-3.
Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, CO.
Bock, C. E., and J. H. Bock. 1999. Response of winter birds to drought and short-
duration grazing in southeastern Arizona. Conservation Biology 13: 1117-1123.
Bock, C. E., J. H. Bock, W. R. Kenney, and V. M. Hawthorne. 1984.  Responses of birds,
rodents and vegetation to livestock exclosure in a semidesert grassland. Journal of
Range Management 37: 239-244.
Brady, W. W., M. R. Stromberg, E. F. Aldon, C. D. Bonham, and S. H. Henry. 1989.
Response of a semidesert grassland to 16 years of rest from grazing. Journal of
Range Management 42: 284-288.
Brown, D. E. 1994. Biotic Communities: Southwestern United States and Northwestern
Mexico. University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City, UT.
Burgess, T. L., J. E. Bowers, and R. M. Turner. 1991. Exotic plants at the Desert
Laboratory, Tucson, Arizona. Madrono 38: 96-114.
Burquez, A., and A. Martinez-Yrizar. 1997. Conservation and landscape transformation
in Sonora, Mexico. Journal of the Southwest 39: 371-398.

LOESER ET AL.     17
Cox, J. R., and G. B. Ruyle. 1998. The influence of climate, soil, and grazing on the
distribution of Lehmann Lovegrass. Pages 150-155 in B. Tellman, D.M. Finch, C.
Edminster, and R. Hamre, (eds.) Proceedings— Future of arid grasslands:
identifying issues, seeking solutions, Tucson, AZ; October 9-13, 1996. U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-3. Rocky
Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, CO.
Davidson, E. A., and I. L. Ackerman. 1993. Changes in soil carbon inventories following
cultivation of previously untilled soils. Biogeochemistry 20: 161-193.
Doerge, T. A., R. L. Roth, and B. R. Gardner. 1991. Nitrogen Fertilizer Management in
Arizona. College of Agriculture, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ.
Eden, S., and M. G. Wallace. 1992. Arizona Water: Information and Issues. University
of Arizona, Tucson, AZ.
Ensminger, M. E., A. H. Ensminger, J. E. Konlande, and J. R. K. Robson. 1983. Foods
and Nutrition Encyclopedia. Pegus Press, Clovis, CA.
Evans, R. D., and J. Belnap. 1999. Long-term consequences of disturbance on the
nitrogen dynamics in a arid ecosystem. Ecology 80: 150-160.
Fleischner, T. L. 1994. Ecological costs of livestock grazing in western North America.
Conservation Biology 8: 629-644.
Holechek, J. L., H. Gomez, F. Molinar, and D. Galt. 1999. Grazing studies: what we’ve
learned. Rangelands 21: 12-16.
Hughes, L. E. 1996. What’s in an exclosure? Rangelands 18: 201-203.
Kauffman, J. B., and W. C. Krueger. 1984. Livestock impacts on riparian ecosystems and
streamside management implications...a review. Journal of Range Management 37:
430-437.
Matson, P. A., R. L. Naylor, and I. Ortiz-Monasterio. 1998. Integration of environmen-
tal, agronomic, and economic aspects of fertilizer management. Science 280: 112-
115.
Mayes, H. M., and T. F. Archer. 1982. Arizona Cattle Ranches on Public Land. College
of Agriculture, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ.
McNaughton, S. J., F. F. Banyikwa, and M. M. McNaughton. 1997. Promotion of the
cycling of diet-enhancing nutrients by African grazers. Science 278: 1798-1800.
Milchunas, D. G., W. K. Lauenroth, P. L. Chapman, and M. K. Kazempour. 1989. Plant
communities in relation to grazing, topography, and precipitation in a semiarid
grassland. Vegetatio 80: 11-23.
Milton, S. J., W. Richard, J. Dean, M. A. du Plessis, and W. R. Siegfried. 1994. A
conceptual model of arid rangeland degradation. BioScience 44: 70-76.
Naeser, R., and A. St. John. 1998. Water use and the future of the Sonoita Valley. Pages
186-200 in B. Tellman, D.M. Finch, C. Edminster, and R. Hamre, (eds.) Proceed-
ings- Future of arid grasslands:  identifying issues, seeking solutions, Tucson, AZ;
October 9-13, 1996. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service Proceedings
RMRS-P-3. Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, CO.
Pimentel, D., and M. Pimentel. 1996. Food, Energy, and Society. University Press of
Colorado, Boulder, CO.
Platts, W. S. 1991. Livestock grazing. American Fisheries Society Special Publication 19:
389-423.
Rambo, J. L., and S. H. Faeth. 1999. Effect of vertebrate grazing on plant and insect
community structure. Conservation Biology 13: 1047-1054.
Rossi, G., and S. Riccardo. 1927. The direct microscopical and bacteriological examina-

18     REFRAMING THE GRAZING DEBATE
tion of agricultural soil. International Congress of Soil Science Proceedings and
Papers 3: 9-13.
Rossi, G., S. Riccardo, G. Gesue, M. Stanganelli, and T. K. Wang. 1935. Direct micro-
scopic and bacteriological examination of the soil. Soil Science 41: 53-66.
Rotstein, A. H. 1999. Cattle ranchers face uncertain future prices, politics imperil
Arizona herds. Pages B5. Arizona Republic, Phoenix, AZ.
Savory, A. 1988. Holistic Resource Management. Island Press, Washington, D.C.
Sclove, R. E. 1998. Better approaches to science policy. Science 279: 1283.
Sisk, T. D., T. E. Crews, R. T. Eisfeldt, M. King, and E. Stanley. 1999. Assessing impacts
of alternative livestock management practices: raging debates and a role for science.
Pages 89-103 in C. van Riper, III and M. A. Stuart, (eds.) Proceedings—Fourth
Biennial Conference of Research on the Colorado Plateau, Flagstaff, AZ; U.S.
Geological Survey, FRESC Report Series. U.S. Geological Survey, Flagstaff, AZ.
Stohlgren, T. J., M. B. Falkner, and L. D. Schell. 1995. A modified-Whittaker nested
vegetation sampling method. Vegetatio 117: 113-121.
U.S. Department of the Interior. 1994. Western Riparian Wetlands (Chapter 12). The
Impact of Federal Programs on Wetlands - A Report to Congress by the Secretary
of the Interior. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Washington, D.C.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife. 1999. Biological opinion for Southwest region, U.S. Forest
Service: Ongoing livestock grazing activities on allotments. U.S. Fish and Wildlife,
Region 2, Albuquerque, NM.
van Wieren, S. E. 1991. The management of populations of large mammals. Pages 103-
127 in I. F. Spellerberg, F. B. Goldsmith, and M. G. Morris, (eds.) The scientific
mangement of temperate communities for conservation. Blackwell Scientific
Publications, Oxford, England.
Whitford, W. G., G. S. Forbes, and G. I. Kerley. 1995. Diversity, spatial variability, and
functional roles of invertebrates in desert grassland ecosystems. Pages 152-195 in
M. P. McClaran and T. R. Van Devender, (eds.) The desert grassland. The University
of Arizona Press, Tucson, AZ.
