 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Managing Naturally Ignited Wildland Fire to Meet Fuel Reduction and  
Restoration Goals in Frequent-Fire Forests 
By Mark Sensibaugh and Dr. Dave Huffman 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Fire is a key process that has 
played a central role in structur-
ing and regulating the function 
of forest ecosystems over mil-
lennia. There is increasing inter-
est in using fire, particularly nat-
urally ignited wildland fires 
(Figure 1), to  provide a cost-
effective alternative, or comple-
ment, to mechanical thinning. 
However, 
more 
information 
about the efficacy of wildfire 
providing ecological, economic, 
and social benefits is needed. 
This fact sheet provides a brief 
overview of policy guidelines, benefits, costs, and constraints for managing naturally ignited wildland fire in or-
der to meet fuels reduction and restoration objectives.   
NATURALLY IGNITED WILDLAND FIRE USE PLANNING 
Policy guidance allows managers to meet a variety of resource objectives for naturally ignited wildfires (see 
USDA and USDOI 2009).    
 
 
Following a natural ignition, fire managers are required to assess the fire and identify an appropriate strate-
gic response. This guidance is in contrast to human-caused wildfires where initial action is restricted to 
suppression rather than management for resource benefit.  
 
Appropriate responses to naturally ignited wildfires depend on the Land/Resource Management Plans 
(LRMPs) and Fire Management Plans (FMPs) for that administrative unit. The web-based Wildland Fire 
Decision Support System (WFDSS) provides managers with a suite of analysis tools including fire spread 
probability and spatially explicit analysis of resources at risk (Calkin et al. 2011). 
 
LRMPs and FMPs must identify areas where using naturally ignited wildland fire is suitable. Key assess-
ment elements include: safety, cost efficiency, a foundation of sound science, objectives or desired out-
comes, risk assessment and, where applicable, the involvement of other agencies, cooperators and partners. 
 
The process associated with managing a wildland fire for resource benefits is more efficient than that of 
management-ignited prescribed fire because it is not subject to extensive review and appeals at the time of 
ignition. The planning and environmental analysis for managing a wildland fire is completed upfront when 
the LRMP or FMP is developed. Thus, planning activities associated with managing a wildland fire are 
more strategic, whereas management of prescribed fire requires specific analysis and decisions.  
    Fact Sheet: Managing Naturally Ignited Wildland Fire to Meet Fuel Reduction and Restoration  
                           Goals in Frequent-Fire Forests  
 
 
 
  
 April 2014 
Figure 1. Decision tree for public land management of wildland fires as based on inter-
agency policies and guidelines.  

 
 
The FMP is not a decision document. It outlines implementation and operational strategies only (i.e., 
where managed wildfire can occur and what resources need protection).  
 
Under current guidelines, a wildland fire may be managed to accomplish one or more objectives, and ob-
jectives can change as the fire spreads across the landscape. Objectives are affected by changes in fuels, 
weather, and topography; varying social understanding and tolerance; and involvement with other entities.  
 
BENEFITS, COSTS AND CONSTRAINTS 
Benefits, costs, and constraints of managing 
wildland fires for resource benefit generally revolve 
around ecological efficacy, risk, economics, predict-
ability, and social acceptance. Although new tools 
are being developed to predict fire effects and risk 
(see Keane and Karau 2010, and Taber et al. 2013), 
managers rely on expert judgment and are ultimately 
responsible for outcomes. A desire to strictly mini-
mize risk can lead to a suppression strategy rather 
than allowing a fire to burn for resource benefit. Un-
certainty about actual benefits versus costs also in-
fluences management decisions.  
 
Benefits 
 
Managed wildfires can reduce hazardous fuels and 
restore more open stand structure in frequent-fire 
forests that have become dense as a result of decades 
of fire exclusion (Fulé et al. 2004, Fulé and Laughlin 
2007, Hunter et al. 2011, Larson et al. 2013). 
 
 
Small patches (<200 acres) of high-severity fire (i.e., where most trees are killed) may contribute to land-
scape-scale heterogeneity and emulate historical patterns in some dry forests (Iniguez et al. 2009, Margo-
lis and Balmat 2009). 
 
Use of natural ignitions is often a more acceptable treatment option than mechanical thinning for remote, 
roadless, and Wilderness areas (Miller 2003). 
 
Heterogeneous effects of wildland fire that leave standing dead trees, dead and down logs, and patches of 
early successional plants may provide important habitat for a range of wildlife species (Halofsky et al. 
2011). 
 
Wildfires managed for resource benefit may represent a low-cost option for meeting fuels reduction and 
restoration goals in comparison to mechanical methods (North et al. 2012). Although data aren’t readily 
available in published literature, costs may be assumed to be similar to prescribed fire, if suppression ef-
forts are minimal. In addition, a decision to allow a wildfire to burn under acceptable fuels, weather, and 
topographic conditions may save overall costs compared to implementing a suppression strategy, when 
looking at suppressing a subsequent fire in the same area with more adverse burning conditions. 
 
Costs/Constraints 
 
Predicting where and when a wildfire will occur, and whether its effects will be beneficial or detrimental 
to ecosystems or other values is imprecise. 
 
Variability in fire effects on stand structure may create coarse-grain landscape patterns that do not closely 
resemble pre-fire exclusion spatial characteristics of many frequent-fire forests (Sánchez Meador et al. 
2011, Larson and Churchill 2012, Reynolds et al. 2013).  
 
Low-intensity fires that consume surface fuels and raise crown base heights without affecting stand struc-
ture may reduce potential for crown fire while doing little to restore ecosystem health.  
 
High costs and resource allocation needed to suppress escaped fires are likely to negate any anticipated 
economic benefits. In fact, suppression costs are likely to be higher than if mechanical treatments had 
been done to reduce fuel loading and fire behavior (North et al. 2012). 
 
A firefighter monitors fire activity on the Armstrong Fire, Kaibab Na-
tional Forest, Tusayan Ranger District. The lightning-caused fire was 
ignited on August 8, 2011 and burned 2,500 acres. The wildfire was 
managed for the following resource objectives: returning fire to a fire-
adapted ecosystem, enhancing wildlife habitat, and protecting private 
property, cultural and range resources. Photo courtesy of USFS 

Contact 
Mark Sensibaugh, Mark.Sensibaugh@nau.edu 
Dave Huffman, David.Huffman@nau.edu 
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
 
 
 
Public acceptance is not as strong for letting naturally ignited wildfires burn as it is for suppression or for 
utilizing intentionally ignited prescribed fires (Kneeshaw et al. 2004).  
 
Although not a direct cost, there are a lack of incentives for managers to implement management of 
wildland fire to accomplish resource objectives.  
CONCLUSION 
Naturally ignited wildland fires have strong potential for complementing prescribed fire and mechanical thinning 
to meet fuels reduction and restoration goals. However, managers must weigh the risks and benefits in ecologi-
cal, economic, and social terms. New tools (e.g., WFDSS) to help with this process recently have been developed 
and continue to be refined. Policy guidelines assist in providing  flexibility and accountability for decisions at 
multiple steps in planning and management processes. With the formidable extent of forest health, fuels accumu-
lation, and uncharacteristic crown fire problems across the western U.S., it is recommended that managers con-
sider greater use of wildland fire to complement other strategies for meeting fuels and restoration goals. In addi-
tion to increasing incentives and streamlining policies, more research is needed to better understand strategies 
that bolster success of wildland fires for meeting ecological objectives across the landscape at all scales.  
REFERENCES 
Calkin, D.E., Thompson. M.P., Finney, M.A., Hyde. K.D. 2011. A real-time risk assessment tool supporting wildland fire decisionmak-
ing. Journal of Forestry 109:274-280. 
Fulé, P.Z., Cocke, A.E., Heinlein, T.A., Covington, W.W. 2004. Effects of an intense prescribed forest fire: is it restoration? Restoration 
Ecology 12:220-230. 
Fulé, P.Z., Laughlin, D.C. 2007. Wildland fire effects on forest structure over an altitudinal gradient, Grand Canyon National Park, USA. 
Journal of Applied Ecology 44:136-146. 
Hunter, M.E., Iniguez, J.M., Lentile, L.B. 2011. Short- and long-term effects on fuels, forest structure, and wildfire potential from pre-
scribed fire and resource benefit fire in southwestern forests, USA. Fire Ecology 3:108-121.  
Halofsky, J.E., Donato D.C., Hibbs D.E., Cambell J.L., Donaghy Cannon M., Fontaine J.B., Thompson J.R., Anthony R.G., Borman 
B.T., Kayes L.J., Law B.E., Peterson D.L., and Spies T.A. 2011. Mixed- severity fire regimes: lessons and hypotheses from Kla-
math-Siskiyou Ecoregion. Ecosphere 2(4): art40. doi: 10.1890/ES10-00184.1 
Iniguez, J.M., Swetnam, T.W., Baisan, C.H., 2009. Spatially and temporally variable fire regime on Rincon Peak, Arizona, USA. Fire 
Ecology 5:3-21. 
Keane, R.E., and Karau, E. 2010. Evaluating the ecological benefits of wildfire by integrating fire and ecosystem simulation models. 
Ecological Modeling 221:1162-1172. 
Kneeshaw, K., Vaske, J.J., Bright, A.D., Abshier, J.D. 2004. Situational influences of acceptable wildland fire management actions. So-
ciety and Natural Resources 17:477-489. 
Larson, A.J., Belote, T.R., Cansler, C.A., Parks, S.A., Dietz, M.S. 2013. Latent resilience in ponderosa pine forest: effects of resumed 
frequent fire. Ecological Applications 23:1243-1249. 
Larson, A.J., Churchill, D. 2012. Tree spatial patterns in frequent-fire forests of western North America, including mechanisms of pat-
tern formation and implications for designing fuel reduction and restoration treatments. Forest Ecology and Management 267:74-
92. 
Margolis, E. Q., Balmat, J. 2009. Fire history and fire-climate relationships along a fire regime gradient in the Santa Fe Municipal Wa-
tershed, NM, USA. Forest Ecology and Management 258:2416-2430. 
Miller, C. 2003. Wildland fire use: a wilderness perspective on fuel management. Pp. 379-386 in Omi, P., Joyce, L.A. (tech eds). Fire 
and fuels treatments, and ecological restoration. USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29. 
North, M., Collins, B.M., Stephens, S. 2012. Using fire to increase the scale, benefits, and future maintenance of fuels treatments. Jour-
nal of Foresty 110:392-401. 
Reynolds, R.T., Sánchez Meador, A.J., Youtz, J.A. Nicolet, T. Matonis, M.S., Jackson, P.L., DeLorenzo, D.G., Graves, A.D. 2013. Re-
storing composition and structure in southwestern frequent-fire forests: a science-based framework for improving ecosystem resili-
ency. USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-310. 
Sánchez Meador, A.J., Parysow, P.F., Moore, M.M. 2011. A new method for delineating tree patches and assessing spatial reference 
conditions of ponderosa pine forests in northern Arizona. Restoration Ecology 19:490-499. 
Taber, M.A., Elenz, L.M., Langowski, P.G. 2013. Decision Making for Wildfires: A Guide for Applying a Risk Management Process at 
the Incident Level. USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-298. 
USDA and USDOI. 2009. Guidance for Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy. U.S. Department of Agriculture 
and U.S. Department of Interior. February 13, 2009. 
 
 
 
 
