 
 
Working together 
06/04/2003 
To the editor:  
In 1996, fires around Flagstaff inspired the creation of the Greater Flagstaff Forests 
Partnership (GFFP) and a constructive working relationship between the Ecological 
Restoration Institute/NAU and the Grand Canyon Trust. For seven years ERI scientists 
and staff have collaborated with staff of the Grand Canyon Trust and the GFFP to design 
and implement science-based, research supported forest treatments that reduce the risk of 
unnatural fire while restoring forest ecosystems.  
We believe the Sun's article entitled "Covington, GC Trust Take Off Gloves," may lead 
the reader to infer that there is a contentious relationship between ERI and the Trust and 
that the disagreement is over the Healthy Forest Initiative. The Trust opposes the so-
called Healthy Forests Restoration Act and ERI has voiced support for the concept in the 
past, today ERI has serious reservations about the bill passed by the House and is 
working to improve it in the Senate.  
Readers of the article might infer that Covington and the ERI endorse this legislation. 
This is not the case. Although Covington and others in ERI do provide scientific 
information and testimony to Congress, it is ERI policy not to endorse legislation or 
candidates. The ERI is explicitly nonpartisan.  
The commitment of ERI and the Trust to work together is strong, just as is our joint 
commitment to the GFFP, the community of Flagstaff, and restoring the forests of 
northern Arizona.  
Our efforts combined with the work of the GFFP are yielding results and not just at Fort 
Valley, our initial collaboration. Through hard work and cooperation thinning will begin 
to protect 2,000 homes in Kachina Village, Forest Highlands, Mountainaire, wildlife 
habitat, and the Pumphouse Wash watershed. We are now working to design treatments 
for Woody Ridge, a strategic location for fuel breaks and restoration treatments designed 
to prevent fire from entering Flagstaff. There is far more agreement than conflict in 
Flagstaff when it comes to forest restoration. Working together we will protect our 
forests, economic livelihood and quality of life for future generations.  
BILL HEDDEN  
President, The Grand Canyon Trust  
WALLY COVINGTON  
Regents' Professor and Director The Ecological Restoration Institute at NA  
 
