 
 
He's harnessing the power of fungi 
By BONNIE STEVENS 
Special to the Sun 
05/09/2004 
Suggesting that mushrooms and other fungi 
do not get the respect they deserve, a 
Northern Arizona University liberal studies 
major hopes to change that this summer 
with experiments involving the restoration 
of forest roads.  
As Joe Trudeau, 24, explains, fungus plays 
an important role in the forest ecosystem. 
Mycorrhizal fungi consists of microscopic 
organisms that grow on the roots of plants 
and help them absorb more nutrients; 
saprophytic fungi, like the mushrooms you 
find in the woods, are critical decomposers 
of wood, which put nutrients such as stored 
carbon dioxide back into the soil.  
"Almost every plant on earth forms a 
symbiotic relationship with fungi," he said. 
"Spores are found in healthy soil, but soil 
that's been compacted, such as soil in forest 
roads, can lose its structure including its 
mycorrhizal and saprophytic fungi."  
 
 
Often land management agencies will work to restore degraded forest areas with seeds 
from native grasses and wildflowers.  
Sometimes plants will grow from these seeds and sometimes they won't.  
"The difference can be that fungi spores are not present in the soil," said Trudeau.  
As a research assistant for the Ecological Restoration Institute at NAU, Trudeau plans to 
conduct experiments on about 350 feet of a forest road in the NAU Centennial Forest, a 
few miles west of The Arboretum at Flagstaff. He plans to first spread wood chips - 
created from the removal of small trees in overcrowded sections of the forest - over the 
road, then spray a mixture of seeds from native grasses and wildflowers and spores from 
both kinds of fungi.  

"This hasn't been done around here before, and I believe what we'll see is greater success 
in restoring the road," he said.  
Trudeau will be revisiting the road to monitor his project for the next five years.  
The forest road was built in June 2003 as part of a tree thinning project designed to 
improve forest health. As Trudeau explains, roads are a necessary evil of sorts when it 
comes to forest health.  
"You have to build roads to get the equipment in there to thin the overcrowded forest but 
even the impact from a temporary road can hurt the soil, and we don't want to hurt the 
ecosystem while we're trying to help it," he said  
 
