22
Ecological Restoration Institute
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
www.eri.nau.edu
Working Papers in Southwestern 
Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
Restoring Spatial
Pattern to Southwestern
Ponderosa Pine Forests
June 2008 

Working Papers in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native
species, structural characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological Restoration
International defines ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates
the recovery of an ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability….Restoration
attempts to return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration
International Science & Policy Working Group 2004).
In the southwestern United States, most ponderosa pine forests have been degraded during the last
150 years. Many ponderosa pine areas are now dominated by dense thickets of small trees, and
lack their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly
susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing fires and increased insect and disease epidemics.
Restoration of these forests centers on reintroducing frequent, low-intensity surface fires—often
after thinning dense stands—and reestablishing productive understory plant communities.
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching,
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. By
allowing natural processes, such as fire, to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish
healthy forests that provide ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The ERI Working Papers series presents findings and management recommendations from
research and observations by the ERI and its partner organizations. While the ERI staff recognizes
that every restoration project needs to be site specific, we feel that the information provided in the
Working Papers may help restoration practitioners elsewhere.
This publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Service.
The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be
interpreted as representing the opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of
trade names or commercial products does not constitute their endorsement by the United States
Government.
Cover photo: A clump of ponderosa pine on limestone soils to the southeast of Flagstaff, Arizona. Note
the interlocking crowns of the taller trees and the stunted growth of the overtopped trees within the
clump. Photo by Dave Egan

Restoring Spatial Pattern to Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
Introduction
Until recently, forest managers have largely ignored the value
of maintaining dynamic spatial patterns in forested
ecosystems. In the American Southwest, where the norm is
overstocked forests that are extremely susceptible to
catastrophic fires and/or insect infestations and disease,
restoring a spatial pattern of openings and tree groups would
help alleviate these threats and move the forests within their
historic range of variability. This ERI working paper focuses
on restoring a dynamic spatial pattern to ponderosa pine
forests in the American Southwest. It also addresses basic
questions that land managers and others have about how to
restore active spatial patterns across the forested Southwest.
Some of the fundamental ideas suggested in this working
paper are:
•
Forest openings are critical to the ecological functioning
of ponderosa pine ecosystems. Along with decreasing
the number of trees, the restoration of openings should
be a central focus of ecological restoration efforts
throughout the forested Southwest.
•
Because each site is unique, the importance of site
analysis cannot be emphasized enough. Soils,
topography, aspect, and the historic spatial structure of
pre-European settlement openings and trees should be
analyzed in order to help guide the process of pattern
development and restoration.
•
Following restoration treatments, periodic, surface
fires—either human-set or from lightning—are the best
way to maintain forest openings and restore natural
processes. If not burned (or thinned) after treatment,
the openings will fill in with trees and the health of the
stand will again become compromised.
Dynamic Spatial Patterns in Plant
Communities
Early plant ecologists, such as Cowles (1899) and Watt (1947),
described plant communities as patchy and shifting, both
spatially and temporally. Building on their ideas and findings,
other ecologists have studied the causes and development of
spatial patterns within plant communities. Analyzing the
work of these more recent ecologists, Dale (1999) identified
three general reasons for spatial patchiness: 1) the
reproductive tendencies of certain plants (especially clonal
plants, such as aspens and braken fern), 2) environmental
factors (e.g., soil type, soil depth, soil nutrients,
topography/aspect, bedrock type and patterns, climatic
patterns—both regional and local), and 3) disturbance
processes (e.g., fire, windthrow, flooding, insects and diseases,
disturbances by animals/humans).
While the reproductive and structural tendencies of plants are
important, they tend to produce relatively small-scale patterns
(hundreds of acres) and are dependent on environmental
factors and/or disturbance processes for their location, spatial
extent, and longevity. Thus, while knowledge of these
reproductive tendencies is important, developing an
understanding of the environmental conditions and disturbance
processes that exist within a plant community or an ecosystem
provides an even more essential understanding of vegetative
patterns on the landscape and the reasons for their existence.
Environmental factors provide the backdrop upon which
plants grow and sort themselves into communities. These
factors are, for most part, stable and long-lived and, if left
alone (i.e., undisturbed), would result in a “balanced nature”
or climax condition where species adapted to specific
environmental conditions would form integrated, self-
perpetuating communities and ecosystems (White 2006).
However, the natural world does not operate that way.
Instead, it consists of a relatively stable foundation of
environmental elements with a shifting vegetative cover
(where it is vegetated) that responds to, and is adapted to,
disturbances and disturbance events. This results in plant
communities and ecosystems that are dynamic and in flux
(White 2006).
Many ecologists (e.g., Bormann and Liken 1979, Pickett and
White 1985, Clark 1991) have studied the importance of
disturbance events in creating pattern in ecosystems. In doing
so, they have developed various terms for this phenomena.
For example, Heinselman (1973), after examining the effects
of fire on a boreal forest landscape of northern Minnesota,
described what he found as a “shifting mosaic.” Remmert
(1991) used the term, “mosaic-cycle” to explain the
interaction between disturbance events, regeneration, and
spatial pattern. More recently, various plant ecologists and
landscape ecologists have begun to study and describe the
“resistance” and “resilience” of a spatial pattern to disturbance
(Jentsch et al. 2002).
Spatial Pattern in Frequent-fire Southwest
Forest Landscapes
The spatial pattern of most ponderosa pine forests in the
American Southwest prior to Euro-American settlement was
typically more open and patchy than today, with large trees
often growing in uneven-aged groups in a matrix of grassy,
savanna-like gaps (Whipple 1856; Beal 1858; Pearson 1923;
Cooper 1960, 1961; White 1985; Covington and Moore 1994;
Mast et al. 1999). This pattern was initially created by
environmental factors (e.g., soil types, topographic
conditions, climate), and perpetuated and modified by fire
caused by lightning or Native Americans or some
combination of both (Swetnam and Baisan 1996, Covington
2003). Native Americans likely burned these landscapes to
increase habitat for game species, enhance seed production,
create proper material for basketmaking, and encourage the
growth of edible or medicinal plants (Pyne 1982, Stewart
2002, Alcoze 2003); or for warfare purposes (Seklecki et al.
1996). Lightning during annual dry periods would, likewise,
have ignited fires that killed tree seedlings and saplings and
promoted the growth of a grassy, herbaceous understory
(Swetnam and Baisan 1996, Allen 2002).
1
Ecological Restoration Institute

While other disturbances (e.g., tree disease, insect outbreaks)
existed prior to European settlement, these natural forces
caused only relatively small-scale changes in the spatial
pattern (Larsson et al. 1983). Fire, regardless of its cause, was
the disturbance factor that modified the spatial pattern of
forested landscapes across the Southwest. When combined
with the infrequent reproduction cycle of shade-intolerant
ponderosa pine and safe sites created by windthrows, frequent
surface fire produced an ever-shifting spatial mosaic of grass-
and forb-covered openings along with patches of
regenerating, mature, and old-age ponderosa pine (Pearson
1910, Cooper 1960, White 1985).
Restoring this spatial pattern to its previous condition is vital
to the health of the ponderosa pine ecosystem because 1)
openings account for the highest level of plant diversity in
this ecosystem (Laughlin et al. 2006); 2) the grass component
in these openings provides the fuel for the low-severity,
surface-level fires that are the essential process in maintaining
the ecosystem; 3) the recent increase in ponderosa pine
density has occurred at the expense of openings and,
therefore, diminishes the health of the ecosystem and its
processes; and 4) the historic, clumpy spatial pattern also
appears critical to ensuring that there are genetic
“neighborhoods” to support a healthy ponderosa pine
population (Addicott et al. 1987, DeWald 2003), the growth of
large trees (Ronco et al. 1985, Biondi 1996, Ffolliott et al.
2000), and improved wildlife habitat for certain species
(Ffolliott et al. 1977, Graham et al. 1994, Waltz and Covington
1999, Wightman and Germaine 2006). Reintroducing a
clumpy spatial pattern may also be a key factor in reducing
the risk from catastrophic, stand-replacing crown fires (Fulé
et al. 2007).
Moving From Overstocked Forests to a
Dynamic Ecosystem Pattern
While many policymakers, ecologists, and land managers
agree that the number of ponderosa pine in today’s
southwestern forests must be reduced in order to decrease the
potential of catastrophic wildfire and increase diversity within
the system, there is limited research and discussion about
spatial pattern, what it should look like, and how best to
achieve it (although see Cooper 1961, Mast and Wolf 2004,
Sanchez-Meador 2006). There are, however, some general
ideas about how to proceed.
Perhaps the first thing to recognize is that a one-size-fits-all
approach to managing ponderosa pine-dominated landscapes
will not work because each stand within a landscape is unique.
Moreover, as White and his colleagues (1999) point out, there
is a need for site-specific data because disturbance regimes
vary even within single vegetation types (see also Brown et al.
2001). This suggests that land managers need to carefully
analyze various environmental factors (e.g., soils, topography,
climate, microclimate, adjacent vegetative types, wildlife uses,
etc.) of a stand as well as its disturbance history in order to
better understand its dynamic nature. Studying and analyzing
existing historic evidence (openings, snags, stumps, stump
holes) is a key way to understand the spatial patterns of
southwestern ponderosa pine forests (Friederici 2004,
Sanchez-Meador 2006). This type of analysis can be useful in
establishing a reference pattern when studied across several
stands or patches, and then interpreted in conjunction with
soils, topography, and climatic data, such as that found in
Terrestrial Ecosystem Surveys. It forms the basis for the kind of
treatments suggested by the ERI and others (e.g., Allen et al.
2002). With this information in hand, land managers can then
develop restoration prescriptions aimed at restoring a spatial
pattern that is consistent with the evolutionary history of the
site and meets contemporary fire protection, increased
biodiversity, and wildlife enhancement goals.
While the field work of marking, thinning, and/or burning to
create a dynamic spatial pattern will likely take place on the
stand level, it’s important to recognize that these activities are
part of a larger scale effort. Integrating landscape- and stand-
level goals and objectives is necessary in order to establish the
conditions that will create a dynamic mosaic of healthy forests
and wildlife habitats that interact as they should with natural
processes, such as surface fire, insects, and pathogens. In
addition to seeking patterns that will lower the risk of
catastrophic fire and increase biodiversity, planners working
at the landscape level should consider how stands (patches)
will fit together across the landscape to provide corridors and
networks of habitat for wide-ranging animal species as well as
those that require specific habitat types (Noss and Friederici
2006). Planning a schedule for logical and economically viable
thinning of woody material from the forest will also be needed.
Developing a Pattern Language for Restoring
Spatial Patterns in Ponderosa Pine
Architect Christopher Alexander’s 1977 work, A Pattern
Language, offers some seminal ideas about how to design
building and landscape features for sustainable human use.
These basic concepts are: 1) use classic, tested patterns
because they are reliable; 2) identify patterns at different
scales as well as their hierarchical relationships, and 3) set
general rules, but allow for adaption according to
circumstances and contexts. While originally written for
architects and landscape architects, Alexander’s ideas can also
be adapted to forest restoration.
Whether planners and designers are ultimately concerned
about a building or a clump of trees, they begin by looking at
the largest patterns first, which in the case of forest
restoration would be at the landscape level. The language of
the pattern in such a situation focuses on processes and uses
the terminology established by forest ecologists––“shifting
mosaic,”“dynamic stability,” or “mosaic-cycle”––to describe a
spatial pattern that operates at that scale. The use of this
terminology suggests a forested landscape that is process
driven and able to exist in multiple states of vegetative
Restoring Spatial Pattern to Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
Ecological Restoration Institute
2

Restoring Spatial Pattern to Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
Ecological Restoration Institute
structure and composition. From an implementation
perspective, there is a recognition that patterns designed at
the landscape level require patience and strategic efforts to
accomplish; they can never be completed in just one action.
At the stand level, the language of the pattern describes
something more like buildings and the spaces between them.
Here, the terms––“groups,”“clumps,”“interspaces,” and
“openings”––can be used to describe essential elements in the
spatial arrangement of the stand  (Figure 1). We can also
identify these areas in terms of their intended use––for
example, “wildlife area,”“timber area,”“old-growth area,”
“herbaceous area”––while recognizing that although these uses
remain consistent throughout the landscape, their locations
may shift depending on disturbance patterns and
environmental conditions. In fact, land managers should
consider using environmental conditions, as previously
described, to set the context for a particular part of the pattern
(e.g., large groups oriented perpendicular to the prevailing
winds, or distinct clumps and larger openings on basalt soils
and less distinct clumps and smaller openings on sedimentary
soils) and/or uses (e.g., clumps and snags available for wildlife
use by birds of prey, bats, and cavity nesters).
The use of a pattern language also allows land managers to
describe the general pattern but remain flexible in how to
make the pattern. For instance, by remaining open to the use
of various silvicultural and other thinning techniques,
managers can, if necessary, modify the stand so as to create a
pattern that fits the historical legacy of the stand, allows for
the return of key disturbance processes such as frequent
surface fire, and helps move the landscape toward a dynamic
and resilient state rather than a static one that is susceptible to
catastrophic disturbances.
Frequently Asked Questions about Restoring
Spatial Patterns in Southwest Ponderosa
Pine Forests
1.
What elements (functions, structure, processes) are
needed in order to identify and/or quantify the historic
range of variation for a healthy spatial pattern for
ponderosa pine?
The concept of a historic range of variability (HRV) can
help land managers assess and understand the dynamic
nature of the stands and landscapes they are working to
restore (Morgan et al. 1994, Fulé et al. 1997, Moore et al.
1999, Swetnam et al. 1999, Egan and Howell 2001, Smith
2006). The central idea of an HRV study is to determine
how the disturbance processes and/or structural
composition of a given stand or landscape operated
dynamically over time. The findings of such a study help
land mangers identify the frequency, intensity, and spatial
scale of key variables within the system. By identifying the
HRV of key ecosystem variables, land managers can
determine how those variables reacted to disturbance
(e.g., how tree density responded to fire frequency).
In order to establish an HRV for a stand in a
southwestern ponderosa pine forest, the following data
are useful: fire return interval, tree density/unit area (or
basal area), vegetation patterns, at least a qualitative
measure of herbaceous biomass, and data about historic
animal populations and/or composition (Fulé et al. 1997,
Morrison 2001). Table 1 (see page 6) is an example of a
HRV data set that identifies pre-European settlement
trees per acre at various locations in New Mexico and
northern Arizona. If the data are from a reasonably long
time period (e.g., a century or more) variables such as
those suggested should provide enough intersecting,
supporting evidence to identify the HRV. Finally,
information obtained either new or existing HRV studies
should be integrated with information about the
contemporary situation.
3
Clump: A small cluster of trees, typically of similar age and
size, sometimes variable ages; interlocking crowns; more or
less isolated from adjacent clumps. The Forest Service (Youtz
et al. 2008) does not recognize clumps, only groups.
Dynamic: Active, rather than static; changing with time under
the influences of natural energetics and processes.
Group: A non-uniform arrangement of clumps and interspaces
surrounding by openings; size varies, but typically 0.75 acres
or much more; includes uneven-aged trees of various size
classes.
Inter-space: A break in the canopy between trees in clumps:
relatively small in size; little to no tree regeneration due to
frequent fire and shade intolerance of ponderosa pine; no
interlocking crowns.
Landscape: A dynamic mosaic of stands representing a
sustainable mix of structural stages; 1,000-10,000 acres in size.
Meadow: An opening that is always treeless; not the same as
openings or inter-spaces; typically has a high level of
herbaceous biodiversity; may have different soil type or soil
moisture than opening or inter-space.
Opening: A spatial break between groups of trees; varies in
size from 0.08-1.5 acres depending on site conditions; covered
with herbaceous vegetation; largely treeless except for snags
and clumps of young seedlings or saplings; some large coarse
woody debris; kept open by frequent, surface fires.
Patch: A relatively homogeneous area that differs from its
surroundings (Forman 1995). Patches are the basic unit of the
landscape that change and fluctuate--a process called patch
dynamics. Patches have a definite shape and spatial
configuration, and can be described compositionally by
internal variables such as number of trees, number of tree
species, height of trees, or other similar measurements
(Forman 1995); similar to a stand.
Stand: A biotic community that includes any number of
openings and groups, but possesses sufficient uniformity of
composition, age, and spatial arrangement to be
distinguishable from adjacent communities or stands. 
Figure 1. Pattern language terms for ponderosa pine

Restoring Spatial Pattern to Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
Ecological Restoration Institute
Land managers can find out more about techniques for
gathering HRV data and how to compile and analyze
that data by referring to the ERI Working Paper 7
(Friederici 2004), which contains specific information
about establishing reference conditions in southwestern
ponderosa pine forests.
2.
Did the spatial pattern of group and openings shift across
the landscape over time?
Yes, the spatial pattern of groups and openings did
change with time. For example, a tree-dating study of
existing and dead trees at Gus Pearson Natural Area
(Mast et al. 1999, Fulé and Moore unpublished) shows
that younger trees established themselves in clumps and
groups at some distance from older trees, growing in
what were previously openings. However, this dynamic
process took considerable time given the centuries-long
life span of ponderosa pine and the vagaries of pine
reproduction in the Southwest. Any number of random
events (drought, poor seed crop, excessive seed
predation, extreme monsoon), regular disturbances
(surface fire, freeze-thaw cycles, herbivory), and
competition from grasses helped to shape the shifting
mosaic of tree groups and openings. Moreover, while
they did occur, changes in the ponderosa pine spatial
pattern would have been relatively small (i.e., stand size)
because ponderosa pine seeds typically disperse within
210 feet on the downwind side and within 60 feet on the
upwind side of the parent tree (Pearson 1910).
Staff from the ERI has gathered anecdotal evidence
which suggests that the spatial pattern of ponderosa pine
forests may have shifted slightly more on sedimentary
soils (limestone, sandstone) than on basalt soils. These
observations and other research (Table 1 in this paper,
Sanchez-Meador 2006) also indicate that, in general,
sedimentary soils tend to produce more trees per acre,
larger clumps and groups, and smaller openings (0.08-
0.8 acre) relative to those found on basalt soils (0.2-1.5
acre). Variations on this generalization are typically due
to site conditions, especially better soils and/or increased
soil moisture. For example, data in Table 1 indicates that
more presettlement ponderosa pine were found on sites
with more available moisture in the Santa Fe National
Forest than on sites near Flagstaff, Arizona, despite the
fact that basalt is the soil parent material at each of these
study sites.
3.
Can land managers leave existing groups of trees in
historical opening while areas that historically contained
groups of trees remain treeless? If so, is this still ecological
restoration?
Where treatment goals and objectives call for optimizing
large trees, managers may choose to retain trees that are
in former grassland openings. It’s important to
remember that, in terms of ecological restoration, the
critical goal is to restore the spatial pattern and the
processes and species composition that support it. That
means that groups and openings do not have to be in the
same place they were sometime in the past. What it does
mean is that land managers are going to start with a
close approximation of the historic spatial pattern and
set that in motion, allowing it to ebb and flow as it did in
the past. If the treatments lead to improved forest health,
recovery of the understory, and allows for the safe
reintroduction of low-intensity, surface fires then land
managers are moving the site from a degraded state to a
healthy one. However, managers should take all
precautions to maintain existing high-quality and/or
even slightly degraded meadow openings or parklands
because the biodiversity they contain is difficult, if not
impossible, to replace or restore.
4.
Were historic clumps, groups, and stands even-age or
uneven age?
The historic southwestern ponderosa pine landscape
consisted of uneven-aged stands, uneven-aged groups, and
both uneven-aged and even-aged clumps as well as lone
trees. For example, a study of ponderosa pine regeneration
over several centuries at Gus Pearson Natural Area (Mast
et al. 1999, Fulé and Moore unpublished) shows relatively
even-age clumps (most clumps had at least two age
cohorts) and uneven age groups. The findings also
indicate, however, that uneven-age composition in clumps
does occur, and that some clumps do have a linear
orientation, which suggests that they formed in the
organic remains of a fallen tree or snag.
5.
What evidence is there to demonstrate that pre-European
settlement clumps of trees had interlocking crowns even
in younger age classes or small-diameter trees? Are such
clumps of younger trees sustainable over time?
We have evidence from historical photographs,
eyewitness accounts, and scientific studies of historical
field evidence which indicates that only large ponderosa
pines had interlocking crowns prior to or shortly after
European settlement. Clumps of smaller trees may have
had interlocking crowns for short periods of time, but
they were typically thinned out by surface fire, drought,
and/or inter-tree competition. Today’s smaller trees with
interlocking crowns are not a sustainable situation at the
scale of a stand or landscape due to effects of
competition, fire, drought, and insects. This situation is
displayed at Taylor Woods experimental site, near
Flagstaff, Arizona, where overstocked, dog-hair stands of
ponderosa pine grow very poorly and provide little if any
wildlife habitat, while ponderosa pine at lower stocking
rates grows vigorously with interlocking crowns where
they have been left to grow close enough together.
4

Restoring Spatial Pattern to Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
Ecological Restoration Institute
6.
The U.S. Forest Service in Region 3 has as its goal a
regulated, sustainable uneven-age stand structure. Is this
goal necessary or will an unregulated, all-age
silivicultural system meet their multiple resource needs?
Current attempts to achieve forest management goals
through the use of VSS classes—a system based on
regulated developmental stages rather than a dynamic
spatial pattern--are being promoted in order to establish
desired critical wildlife habitat (i.e., northern goshawk),
to reduce the risk of catastrophic crown fire across the
landscape, and to produce a forested landscape that
operates within the historic range of variability (Youtz et
al. 2008). However, this approach, as generally applied,
maintains high forest cover at the stand level at all times
and does not allow the pattern dynamics of the forest to
naturally occur across the landscape, relying instead on
scheduled 20-year cutting cycle (including the removal
of large, old trees—VSS6) and prescribed fire on a 10- to
20-year cycle to promote forest regeneration.
This regulated, scheduled re-entry strategy may not be
necessary to achieve the goals of providing goshawk
habitat or returning the landscape to conditions within
the historic range of variability. Research from the ERI
shows that while there are natural temporal gaps in
southwestern ponderosa pine regeneration, those gaps
are relatively short (30-40 years) and do not jeopardize
the sustainability of the southwestern ponderosa pine
forests (Mast et al. 1999, Bailey and Covington 2002).
Hence, the unregulated ponderosa pine ecosystem was
previously sustainable and will likely be that way once
forests are appropriately thinned to reconfigure their
natural spatial pattern and fire is allowed to return as a
natural disturbance process.
Suggested Recommendations
4
Forest openings are critical to the proper functioning of
ponderosa pine ecosystems. Along with decreasing the
number of trees, their recovery should be a central focus
of ecological restoration efforts throughout the
Southwest.
4
Because each stand is unique, the importance of
site/stand analysis cannot be emphasized enough. Soils,
topography, aspect, and the historic spatial structure of
pre-European settlement openings and trees should be
analyzed in order to help guide the process of pattern
development and restoration.
4
Create a spatial pattern that is consistent with the
historic evidence on the land, remembering that soil
type, topographic aspect, and moisture level play
significant roles in determining the size of clumps,
groups, and openings.
4
Use historic evidence complemented by analysis of the
enviro-historical condition of the stand to make
decisions about leave trees. While this approach initially
involves a short learning curve for tree markers, it
provides benefits across the board in terms of meeting
the goals and objectives typically part of southwestern
forest management plans.
4
Where treatment objectives call for maximizing the
number of large trees, managers may choose not to
retain trees nearest the historic clumps because they may
be smaller than trees in former grasslands or openings.
That choice is acceptable restoration if retaining the
habitat qualities associated with the larger trees is
important. However, the decision should not
compromise the creation of forest openings or existing,
high-diversity or even mildly degraded meadows or
parklands.
4
Periodic, surface fires—either human-set or from
lightning—are the best way to maintain forest openings
and restore natural processes. If not burned (or
thinned), the openings will fill in with trees and the
health of the stand will again become compromised.
4
Think in the context of the entire landscape and in long
time frames. Ecosystems are dynamic and areas that are
now openings may become treed in the future and vice
versa. Managers need to take a long-term view of their
activities and see their work as putting the ecosystem
back in motion again, that is, back within its range of
natural variability with a shifting pattern of forest
openings and clumps and groups of trees.
5

Restoring Spatial Pattern to Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
Ecological Restoration Institute
6
Location
Plot Size
Pre-
settlement
Pipo
Trees/Acre
% Slope/
Aspect/
Soil Parent
Material
Elevation
(feet)
Reference & Date
Prescott NF,
Spruce Ridge
2005
10 Acres
11
W and steep,
granite
7,100
Denton, Lund, Bedell
Prescott NF,
Hassayampa
Lake 2005
10.0 acres
11
Generally SE
and steep,
granite
7,000
Denton, Lund, Bedell
Coconino NF,
Bar-M Study
Area 1991
Seventy
0.62-acre
plots
23
Gently rolling,
basalt
6,800-7,200
Covington and Moore 1992
Gus Pearson
Natural Area
1993
7.9 acres
24
Flat, E aspect,
basalt
7,500
Mast et al. 1999
Apache-
Sitgreaves
(Eager
South) 2005
10.5 acres
24
Variable, basalt
7,800
Denton, Lund
Camp
Navajo,
W. of
Flagstaff
62 plots
across
1,378
acres
26
Gently rolling,
includes
Volunteer Mt.,
basalt
7,100-8,000
Fulé, Covington, and
Moore 1997
East Fork,
Jemez RD-
Santa Fe NF.
2005
7.8 acres
45
Flat, basalt
7,800-7,900
Tutten, Lund
Redondo,
Jemez RD-
Santa Fe NF
2005
11.3 acres
56
Rolling, basalt
7,700-7,900
Smith
Kaibab NF,
Goshawk
Unit #25
2005
Two 5-acre
plots
22-24
Flat, limestone
6,700
Smith, Lund, Denton,
Bedell
Cibola NF,
NM 2005
2.4 acres
24
Gentle,
limestone
Unavailable
Denton, Bedell, Lund
North Kaibab,
Kaibab NF
2007
Six 5-acre
plots
46-74
Flat, limestone
7,300-7,500
Tutten
North Kaibab
NF, 1991
46, 0.62-
acre plots.
56
14-40% slope,
limestone
6,800-7,800
Covington and Moore 1992
Table 1. Pre-European Ponderosa Pine Trees per Acre at Sites in Northern Arizona and New Mexico
Pre-European settlement trees per acre include both live and dead evidence. Basalt soils are typically moderately deep to deep,
fine-textured soils with varying concentrations of rock on the surface and within the soil profile. Granitic soils are typically shallow
to moderately deep, coarse-textured soils with high rock content on surface and in profile. Limestone soils are typically
moderately deep to deep, fine-textured soils. Surface horizons textures range from loam to clay loam with normally 15- to 35-
percent rock content. Subsurface horizon is typically clay. Denton, Smith, Lund, and Bedell are, or were, members of the ERI
Agency Outreach Team; Tutten is an ERI research associate. 

Restoring Spatial Pattern to Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
Ecological Restoration Institute
7
References
Addicott, J.F., J.M. Aho, M.F. Antolin, D.K. Padilla, J.S.
Richardson, and D.A. Soluk. 1987. Ecological
neighborhoods: Scaling environmental patterns. Oikos
49:340–346.
Alcoze, T. 2003. First Peoples in the pines: Historical ecology
of humans and ponderosas. Pages 48-57 in P. Friederici
(ed.), Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa
pine forests. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Alexander, C., S. Ishikawa, M. Silverstein, M. Jacobson, I.
Fiksdahl-King, and S. Angel. 1977. A pattern language:
Towns, buildings, construction. Oxford, England: Oxford
University Press.
Allen, C.D. 2002. Lots of lightning and plenty of people: An
ecological history of fire in the upland Southwest. Pages
143-193 in T.R. Vale (ed.), Fire, native peoples, and the
natural landscape. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Allen, C.D., M. Savage, D.A. Falk, K.F. Suckling, T.W.
Swetnam, T. Schulke, P.B. Stacey, P. Morgan, M. Hoffman,
and J. Klingel. 2002. Ecological restoration of
southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems: A broad
perspective. Ecological Applications 12(5):1418-1433.
Bailey, J.D. and W.W. Covington. 2002. Evaluating ponderosa
pine regeneration rates following ecological restoration
treatments in northern Arizona, USA. Forest Ecology and
Management 155(1-3):271-278.
Beale, E.F. 1858. Wagon road from Fort Defiance to the
Colorado River. Washington, D.C.: 35th Congress. 1st
Session, Senate Executive Document 124.
Biondi, F. 1996. Decadal-scale dynamics at the Gus Pearson
Natural Area: Evidence for inverse (a)symmetric
competition. Canadian Journal of Forestry 26:1397-1406.
Bormann, F.H. and G.E. Likens. 1979. Pattern and process in a
forested landscape. New York, NY: Springer.
Brown, P.M., M.W. Kaye, L.S. Huckaby, and C.H. Baisan.
2001. Fire history along environmental gradients in the
Sacramento Mountains, New Mexico: Influences of local
patterns and regional processes. Ecoscience 8(1):115-126.
Clark, J. 1991. Disturbance and tree life history on the shifting
mosaic landscape. Ecology 72(3):1102-1118.
Cooper, C.F. 1960. Changes in vegetation, structure, and
growth of southwestern pine forests since white
settlement. Ecological Monographs 30(2):129-164.
___. 1961. Pattern in ponderosa pine forests. Ecology
42(3):493-499.
Covington, W.W. 2003. The evoluntionary and historical
context. Pages 26-47 in P. Friederici (ed.), Ecological
restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests.
Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Covington, W.W. and M.M. Moore. 1992. Postsettlement
changes in natural fire regimes: Implications for restoration
of old-growth ponderosa pine forests. Pages 81-99 in M.R.
Kaufmann, W.H. Moir, and R.L. Bassett (eds.), Old-growth
forests in the Southwest and Rocky Mountain regions: The
status of our knowledge. Proceedings of a Workshop,
Portal, Arizona, March 9-13, 1992. USDA Forest Service
General Technical Report RM-213.
R
___. 1994. Southwestern ponderosa pine: Changes since
Euro-American settlement. Journal of Forestry 92(1):2-29.
Cowles, H.C. 1899. The ecological relations of the vegetation
on the sand dunes of Lake Michigan. Parts 1-4. Botanical
Gazette 27: 95-1 17, 167-202. 281-308, 361-391.
Dale, M.R.T. 1999. Spatial pattern analysis in plant ecology.
Cambridge Studies in Ecology. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
DeWald, L.E. 2003. Conserving genetic diversity during
restoration thinning. Pages 226-227 in P. Friederici (ed.),
Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine
forests. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Egan, D. and E.A. Howell. 2001. Introduction. Pages 1-23 in
D. Egan and E.A. Howell (eds.), The historical ecology
handbook: A restorationist’s guide to reference
ecosystems. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Ffolliott, P.F., R.E. Thill, W.P. Clary, and F.R. Larson. 1977.
Animal use of ponderosa pine forest openings. Journal of
Wildlife Management 41(4):782-784.
Ffolliott, P.F., M.B. Baker, Jr., and G.J. Gottfried. 2000. Heavy
thinning of ponderosa pine stands: An Arizona case study.
Ft. Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain
Research Station Research Paper RM-RP-22.
Forman, R.T.T. 1995. Land mosaics: The ecology of landscapes
and regions. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
Friederici, P. 2004. Establishing reference conditions for
southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Working Papers in
Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration No. 7.
Flagstaff, AZ: Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern
Arizona University.
Fulé, P.Z., W.W. Covington, and M.M. Moore. 1997.
Determining reference conditions for ecosystem
management of southwestern ponderosa pine forests.
Ecological Applications 7(3):895-908.
Fulé, P.Z., J.P. Roccaforte, and W.W. Covington. 2007.
Posttreatment tree mortality after forest ecological
restoration, Arizona, United States. Environmental
Management 40(4):623-634.
Heinselman, M.L. 1973. Fire in the virgin forests of the
Boundary Waters Canoe Area, Minnesota. Quaternary
Review 3:329-382.
Jentsch, A., C. Beierkuhnlein, and P.S. White. 2002. Scale, the
dynamic stability of forest ecosystems, and the persistence
of biodiversity. Silva Fennica 36(1):393-400.
Larsson, S., R. Oren, R.H. Waring, and J.W. Barrett. 1983.
Attacks of mountain pine beetle as related to tree vigor of
ponderosa pine. Forest Science 29:395-402.
Laughlin, D.C., M.M. Moore, J.D. Bakker, C.A. Casey, J.D.
Springer, P.Z. Fulé, and W.W. Covington. 2006. Assessing
targets for restoration of herbaceous vegetation in
ponderosa pine forests. Restoration Ecology 14:548-560.
Mast, J.N., P.Z. Fulé, M.M. Moore, W.W. Covington, and A.
Waltz. 1999. Restoration of presettlement age structure of
an Arizona ponderosa pine forest. Ecological Applications
9:228-239.

Restoring Spatial Pattern to Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
8
Ecological Restoration Institute
Mast, J.N. and J.J. Wolf. 2004. Ecotonal changes and altered
tree spatial patterns in lower mixed-conifer forests, Grand
Canyon National Park, Arizona, U.S.A. Landscape Ecology
19:167-180.
Moore, M.M., W.W. Covington, and P.Z. Fulé. 1999. Reference
conditions and ecological restoration: A southwestern
ponderosa pine perspective. Ecological Applications
9(4):1266-1277.
Morgan, P., G.H. Aplet, J.B. Haufler, H.C. Humphries, M.M.
Moore, and W.D. Wilson. 1994. Historical range of
variability: A useful tool for evaluating ecosystem change.
Journal of Sustainable Forestry 2(1/2):87-111.
Morrison, M.L. 2001. Techniques for discovering historic
animal assemblages. Pages 295-314 in D. Egan and E.A.
Howell (eds.), The historical ecology handbook: A
restorationist’s guide to reference ecosystems.
Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Noss, R.F. and P. Friederici. 2006. Integrating ecological
restoration and conservation biology: A case study from
southwestern ponderosa pine forests. ERI Issues in Forest
Restoration. Flagstaff, AZ: Ecological Restoration
Institute, Northern Arizona University.
Pearson, G.A. 1910. Reproduction of western yellow pine in
the Southwest. Washington, D.C.: USDA Forest Service
Circular 174.
___. 1923. Natural reproduction of western yellow pine in the
Southwest. Washington, D.C.: USDA Forest Service
Bulletin 1105.
Pickett, S.T.A. and P.S. White (eds.). 1985. The ecology of
natural disturbance and patch dynamics. Orlando, FL:
Academic Press.
Pyne, S.J. 1982. Fire in America: A cultural history of wildland
and rural fire. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Remmert, H. 1991. The mosaic-cycle concept of ecosystems.
Ecological studies, vol. 85. Berlin, Heidelberg, and New
York City: Springer.
Ronco, Jr., F., C.B. Edminster, and D.P. Trujillo. 1985. Growth
of ponderosa pine thinned to different stocking levels in
northern Arizona. Ft. Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station
Research Paper RM-RP-262.
Sanchez-Meador, A.J. 2006. Modeling spatial and temporal
changes of ponderosa pine forests in northern Arizona
since Euro-American settlement. Ph.D. dissertation.
School of Forestry. Northern Arizona University,
Seklecki, M.T., H.D. Grissino-Mayer, and T.W. Swetnam.
1996. Fire history and the possible role of Apache-set fires
in the Chiricahua Mountains of southeastern Arizona.
Pages 238-246 in P.F. Ffolliott, L.F. DeBano, M.B. Maker,
Jr., G.J. Gottfried, G. Solis-Garza, C.B. Edminster, D.G.
Neary, L.S. Allen, and R.H. Hamre (tech. coords.), Effects
of fire on Madrean Province Ecosystems: A symposium
proceedings. USDA Forest Service General Technical
Report RM-GTR-289.
Smith, E. 2006. Historical range of variation and state and
transition modeling of historical and current landscape
conditions for ponderosa pine of the southwestern U.S.
Prepared for the U.S. Forest Service, Southwestern Region
by The Nature Conservancy, Tucson, AZ.
Stewart, O., edited by H.T. Lewis and M.K. Anderson. 2002.
Forgotten fires: Native Americans and the transient
wilderness. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Swetnam, T.W., C.D. Allen, and J.L. Betancourt. 1999. Applied
historical ecology: Using the past to manage the future.
Ecological Applications 9(4):1189-1206.
Swetnam, T.W. and C.H. Baisan. 1996. Historical fire regime
patterns in the southwestern United States since AD 1700.
Pages 11-32 in C.D. Allen (tech. ed.), Fire effects in
southwestern forests: Proceedings of the Second La Mesa
Fire Symposium, Los Alamos, NM, March 29-31, 1994.
Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain
Forest and Range Experiment Station. General Technical
Report RM-GTR-286.
Waltz, A.E.M. and W.W. Covington. 1999. Butterfly richness
and abundance increase in restored ponderosa pine
ecosystem (Arizona). Ecological Restoration 17(4):244-
246..
Watt, A.S. 1947. Pattern and process in the plant community.
Journal of Ecology 35:1-22.
Wightman, C.S. and S.S. Germaine. 2006. Forest stand
characteristics altered by restoration affect western
bluebird habitat quality. Restoration Ecology 14(4):653-
661.
White, A.S. 1985. Presettlement regeneration patterns in a
southwestern ponderosa pine stand. Ecology 66(2):589-
594.
White, P.S. 2006. Disturbance, the flux of nature, and
environmental ethics at the multipatch scale. Pages 176-
198 in D. Lodge and C. Hamlin (eds.), Religion and the
new ecology: Environmental prudence in a world in flux.
Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
White, P.S., J. Harrod, W.H.Romme, and J. Betancourt. 1999.
Pages 281-332 in R.C. Szaro, N.C. Johnson, W.T. Sexton,
and A.J. Malik (eds.), Ecosystem stewardship: A common
reference for ecosystem management, vol. 2. Oxford,
England: Elsevier Science.
Whipple, A.W. 1856. Report of explorations for a railway
route near the thirty-fifth parallel of north latitude from
the Mississippi River to the Pacific Ocean. Washington,
D.C.: Volume 3, Railroad Report, 33rd Congress, 2nd
Session, House Executive Document 91.
Youtz, J.A., R.T. Graham, R.T. Reynolds, and J. Simon. 2008.
Implementing northern goshawk habitat management in
southwestern forests: A template for restoring fire-
adapted forest ecosystems. Pages 173-191 in R.L. Deal
(tech. ed.), Integrated restoration of forested ecosystems
to achieve multiresource benefits: Proceedings of the 2007
National Silviculture Workshop. Portland, OR: USDA
Forest Service Pacific Northwest Research Station General
Technical Report PNW-GTR-733.

Written by Dave Egan
Reviewed by W. Wallace Covington, Charles Denton, Pete Fulé, Dennis Lund, Steve
Rosenstock, Diane Vosick
Series Editor: Dave Egan
For more information about forest restoration,
contact the ERI at 928-523-7182 or www.eri.nau.edu
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution   
NAU Printing Services/G64764/900/05-08
Working Papers in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
1:
Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons and Adaptive Management
Practices
2:
Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3:
Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
4:
Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits
5:
Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
6:
Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
7:
Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
8:
Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
9:
Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
10: The Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Restoration Model
11: Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration
12: Restoring Forest Roads
13: Treating Slash after Restoration Thinning
14: Integrating Forest Restoration Treatments with Mexican Spotted Owl Habitat Needs
15: Effects of Forest Thinning Treatments on Fire Behavior
16: Snags and Forest Restoration  
17: Bat Habitat and Forest Restoration Treatments
18: Prescribed and Wildland Use Fires in the Southwest: Do Timing and Frequency Matter? 
19: Understory Seeding in Southwestern Forests Following Wildfire and Ecological
Restoration Treatments
20: Controlling Cheatgrass in Ponderosa Pine and Pinyon-Juniper Restoration Areas 
21: Managing Coarse Woody Debris in Frequent-fire Southwestern Forests

Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
ERI34FL
