 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Five-Year Post-Restoration Conditions and Simulated Climate Change Trajectories in a 
Warm/Dry Mixed-Conifer Forest, Southwestern Colorado, USA 
 
By Mike Stoddard, Senior Research Specialist 
Introduction 
Wildfire frequency and severity in the western United States 
has increased as a result of fire suppression, increasing tem-
perature, and prolonged drought. Detrimental ecological im-
pacts from these uncharacteristic disturbances include loss of 
critical wildlife habitat, increased vulnerability to invasive 
plant species, ecosystem shifts from forest to non-forest. 
Warm/dry mixed conifer forests were historically dominated 
by fire-resistant tree species and low-severity fire regimes. 
Management in these dry coniferous forests has primarily 
focused on thinning smaller trees followed by prescribed fire 
to reduce wildfire severity, restore forest structure and in-
crease resiliency across landscapes. Evaluating treatment 
effectiveness in terms of reducing wildfire severity and eco-
logical responses is a flourishing topic. However, there is 
limited information on the longevity of these treatments, spe-
cifically with respect to their effectiveness in maintaining 
ecosystem integrity, such as composition, structure, and 
function (Tierney et al. 2009), and increasing resilience to 
disturbances under future climate conditions.  
 
In this study, we field tested alternative treatments (thin plus burn, burn-only, and control) for restoring a warm/dry 
mixed-conifer forests and then simulated stand dynamics under various future climate scenarios over the next 50 years. 
Mixed-conifer forests provide unique habitats for rare species, valuable biodiversity, and numerous recreational oppor-
tunities. Recent landscape-scale fires (e.g., Rodeo-Chediski Fire [2002], Hayman Fire [2002], Las Conchas fire [2011], 
and Wallow Fire [2011]) have burned large severe patches, compromising the integrity of these ecosystems. 
Key Questions and Findings 
1. How do forest characteristics, such as tree density, mortality, and regeneration, differ among alternative restora-
tion prescriptions five years following treatment (based on empirical evidence)? 
 
Mean basal area and tree density were significantly lower in the thin/burn treatment (49.2 ft2/acre; 47.3 
trees/acre) compared to prescribed burn (89.3 ft2/acre; 128.1 trees/acre) and control (116.7 ft2/acre; 218.7 
trees/acre). No significant changes occurred in forest structure in the four years following initial treatment. 
 
Tree mortality four years following treatment was observed primarily in smaller trees and less fire-tolerant 
species. Mortality of larger trees (>16 inches) averaged 16% in thin/burn (2.7 trees/ac), 9% in burn (2.1 
tree/ac), and 4% in control treatments (1.0 trees/ac). 
 
Changes in regeneration were largely due to increases in aspen. Aspen regeneration increased 119% in the 
thin/burn treatment, and 31% in burn, while decreasing (-22%) in the control. 
   Fact Sheet: Five-Year Post-Restoration Conditions and Simulated Climate Change Trajectories 
in a Warm/Dry Mixed-Conifer Forest 
 
February 2016 
Middle Mountain, San Juan National Forest, five years 
following thin/burn restoration treatment. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. How might forest characteristics following restoration treatments change under differing future climate sce-
narios (based on modeled simulations)? 
 Simulations showed that the thin/burn treatment was the most 
resilient to climate change, with average mid-century (2063) ba-
sal area decreasing less (-45%) than other treatments (-82% in the 
burn and -88% in the control). 
 Changes following three different climate scenarios indicated that 
all sites became consistently less suitable for mixed-conifer forest 
species. One notable exception was observed; models suggested 
that ponderosa pine in the thin/burn treatment may be retained at 
higher proportions thereby maintaining a forested structure. 
Conclusions  
Considering global increases in large, high-severity fire occurrence, and 
increases in tree densities in warm/dry mixed-conifer forests resulting 
from decades of fire suppression, there is an urgent need for large-scale 
implementation of ecological restoration treatments in these ecosystems. 
Compounding this urgency are projections of increased drought, warmer 
temperatures, and more extreme weather events. Results from previous 
studies suggest restoration treatments can increase forest resiliency, improve drought tolerance, and improve eco-
system function (Fulé et al. 2012). Our results justify the use of restoration treatments for enhancing long-term 
ecosystem resilience to future climate.  
 
References 
Fulé, P.Z., Crouse, J.E., Roccaforte, J.P., Kalies, E.L. 2012. Do thinning and/or burning treatments in western USA ponderosa or 
Jeffrey pine dominated forests help restore natural fire behavior? Forest Ecology and Management 269, 68-81. 
 
IPCC. 2013. IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) Climate change 2013: the physical science basis. In: Stocker, T.F., 
Qin, D., Plattner, G.-K., Tignor, M., Allen, S.K., Boschung, J., Nauels, A., Xia, Y., Bex, V., Midgley, P.M. (Eds.), Contribution 
of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, United 
Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, Cambridge University Press, 1535 pp. 
 
Tierney, G.L., D., Faber-Langendoen, B.R. Mitchell, W.G. Shriver, J.P. Gibbs. 2009. Monitoring and evaluating the ecological in-
tegrity of forest ecosystems. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 7: 308-316. 
 
   
 
Contact 
Mike Stoddard, Mike.Stoddard@nau.edu 
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
 
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
 
Stoddard, M.T., A.J. Sánchez Meador, P.Z. Fulé   J.E. Korb. 2015. Five year post-restoration conditions and simulated climate change 
trajectories in a warm/dry mixed conifer forest, southwestern Colorado, USA. Forest Ecology and Management, 356: 253-261. 
(http://library.eri.nau.edu/gsdl/collect/erilibra/index/assoc/D2011502.dir/doc.pdf) 
Research Highlights 
 Thin/burn treatment sustained tree 
densities and basal area within the 
range of site-specific reference 
conditions,  whereas prescribed 
burn treatment and control re-
mained outside (higher) those con-
ditions 
 Changes five years following 
treatments were largely due to in-
creases in sprouting species.  
 Forest structural conditions were 
predicted to persist in the thin/burn 
treatment under projected climate 
change.  
Figure 1. Basal area by species before treatment (2003), five years after treatment (2013) and simulated future changes 
using the most conservative climate model. ABCO= Abies concolor; PIPO =Pinus ponderosa; POTR = Populus tremuloides; 
PSME =Pseudotsuga menziesii (Representative Concentration pathways 6.0 (IPCC 2013)). 
