 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Fire History of a Mixed Conifer Forest on the Mogollon Rim, 
Northern Arizona, USA 
By David W. Huffman, Director of Research and Development  
Introduction 
Mixed conifer forests ecosystems comprise about 4.2 million acres in the American Southwest. In general, it 
is thought that low-severity surface fires characterized natural fire regimes of southwestern warm/dry mixed 
conifer (Reynolds et al. 2013). However, mixed severity, comprised of both surface fire and high-severity 
patches, in the lower mixed conifer zone have been documented. Recently, Williams and Baker (2012) sug-
gested that forest structural characteristics reconstructed from Public Land Survey records could be used to 
infer fire regimes, and concluded that large areas along the Mogollon Rim experienced historical high-
severity fire. 
 
Our research questions were: 1) what was 
the historical frequency of surface fire at a 
Mogollon Rim site (Figure 1) near the land-
scape described in Williams and Baker 
(2012)?; 2) was there evidence of modern 
changes in fire regime?; and 3) was there 
evidence of high-severity or mixed-severity 
fire? To reconstruct the historical fire re-
gime, we used complementary approaches 
of composite fire scar analysis, point fire 
interval analysis, natural fire rotation, and 
landscape analysis, and compared the re-
sults to develop a robust interpretation. To 
assess evidence of high-severity fire, we 
compared tree establishment dates with 
dates of widespread fires at the site level, 
and evaluated fine-scale patterns of tree ag-
es and stump density relative to fire scarred 
trees. 
 
Results 
 Composite analysis of crossdated fire scars (Figure 2, page 2) from 133 trees indicated a mean fire in-
terval (MFI) for the 2,800-acre site ranging between 2 and 8.5 years during the period 1670–1879. By 
using all fire dates in the dataset (composited), MFI provided an estimate of fire frequency for any lo-
cation at the site.  
 Mean point fire interval (MPFI) was 11.8 years and ranged between 2 and 61 years. Complementary to 
MFI, this analysis provided an estimate of the fire frequency experienced by any given tree (point). 
 
     Fact Sheet: Fire History of a Mixed Conifer Forest on the Mogollon Rim, Northern 
 
 
Arizona, USA 
 
 
 
  
 
April 2015 
Figure 1. Partial tree cross-section collected at the Mogollon Rim site. 
This cross-section shows scars from numerous low-severity fires that 
occurred at the site prior to 1879.  

 
 Mean natural fire rotation was 14.4 years. This analysis provided an estimate of the time required for 
the entire landscape to experience fire.  
 Frequent fires halted abruptly after 1879.  
 Density of most tree species increased substantially after fire regime disruption, with southwestern 
white pine (Pinus strobiformis) and white fir (Abies concolor) showing large numerical gains.  
 Tree establishment patterns compared with widespread fire dates did not suggest historical high-
severity fires at the site level 
 We found no large areas of dead, charred trees that would indicate past occurrence of high-severity 
fire. However, spatial locations of “young” plots without nearby fire scars suggested the possibility of 
historical high-severity disturbances ≤ 62 acres in size. Young plots were those that lacked large, old 
(>150 years) trees and large stumps.   
Conclusions 
 Complementary analytical approaches con-
verged to indicate that widespread, frequent, low-
severity fires characterized the historical disturb-
ance regime of this mixed conifer forest for at least 
200 years prior to 1879.  
 Increases in tree density, particularly white fir 
and southwestern white pine, were apparent imme-
diately following fire regime disruption in 1879. 
Increases in densities of smaller, shade tolerant 
trees has likely resulted in a landscape-scale shift 
from low-severity surface fire to an increase in the 
potential for high-severity crown fire. 
 Our results sharply contrasted with those report-
ed by Williams and Baker (2012) for a landscape 
near our study site. Although we could not make 
direct comparisons to their study, we suggest that 
relationships between forest structure and fire re-
gime characteristics are complex, and inferring one from the other should be verified using multiple 
lines of evidence (Fulé et al. 2014). 
 Current conditions at our study site call for restoration of forest structure and function.  
Literature Cited 
Fulé, P.Z., T.W. Swetnam, P.M. Brown, D.A. Falk, D.L. Peterson, C.D. Allen, G.H. Aplet, M.A. Battaglia, D. Binkley, C. Farris, 
R.E. Keane, E.Q. Margolis, H. Grissino-Mayer, C. Miller, C. Hull Sieg, C. Skinner, C.L. Stephens, and A. Taylor. 2014. 
Unsupported inferences of high severity fire in historical western United States dry forests: Response to Williams and 
Baker. Global Ecology and Biogeoraphy 23:825-830. 
Reynolds, R.T., A.J. Sánchez Meador, J.A. Youtz, T. Nicolet, M.S. Matonis, P.L. Jackson, D.G. DeLorenzo, and A.D. Graves. 
2013. Restoring composition and structure in southwestern frequent-fire forests: a science-based framework for improving 
ecosystem resiliency. USDA Forest Service, General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-310. 
Williams, M.A., and W.L. Baker. 2012. Spatially extensive reconstructions show variable-severity fire and hetergeneous structure 
in historical western United States dry forests. Global Ecology and Biogeography 21:1042-1052. 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Contact 
Dave Huffman, David.Huffman@nau.edu  
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
 
 
Figure 2. Stand conditions at the mixed conifer fire history site. Image 
shows a large remnant ponderosa pine tree as well as an abundance 
of younger trees of various species. Density of most tree species in-
creased substantially after fire regime disruption in the late 1800s. 
This Fact Sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
 
Huffman, D.W., T.J Zegler, and P.Z Fulé. 2015. Fire history of a mixed conifer forest on the Mogollon Rim, northern 
Arizona, USA. International Journal of Wildland Fire, http://dx.doi.org/10.1071/WF14005. 
