EcologicalApplications, 15(2). 2005. pp. 532-542 
I[) 2005 by the Ecological Society of America 
FEDERAL FOREST-FIRE POLICY IN THE UNITED STATES 
SCOTT L. STEPHENS',' AND LAWRENCE W. RUTH2 
I Division of Ecosystem Science , Deparlment ofEnvironmental Science. Policy. and Management. /5/ Hilgard Hall.  
University of California, Berkeley, California. 94720-3/10 USA  
2University of California Center for Forestry. /45 Mulford Hall. College of Natural Resources, University of California,  
Berkeley, California. 94720-3//4 USA  
Abstract. 
Forest-fire policy of U.S. federal agencies has evolved from the use of small 
patrols in newly created National Parks to diverse policy initiatives and institutional ar­
rangements that affect millions of hectares of forests. Even with large expenditures and 
substantial infrastructure dedicated to fire suppression, the annual area burned by wildfire 
has increased over the last decade. Given the current and future challenges of fire man­
agement, and based on analytical research and review of existing policies and their im­
plications, we believe several changes and re-emphases in existing policy are warranted. 
Most importantly, the actual goal of fuels-management projects should be the reduction of 
potential fire behavior and effects, not the simple reduction of fuels. To improve safety and 
economic efficiency, fire-suppression policies should recognize differences in the charac­
teristics of wildfires, and strategies should be tailored to better respond to the unique 
demands of each fire. Where forest fires are burning large areas, as in the western United 
States, reducing the trend of increased amounts of burned area may require a diversity of 
treatments, including prescribed burning, mechanical fuels treatment, and increased use of 
the Wildland Fire Use Policy. Assessment of how fire is affecting forests would be enhanced 
if land-management agencies reported the area burned by low-, mixed-, and high-severity 
fire and what proportion is outside the des ired trend or range of conditions for each forest 
type. Congress should provide an improved budgetary process for fire and fuels manage­
ment, with a larger annual federal fire-suppression budget. Additionally, reducing annual 
area burned will require long-term coordinated efforts by federal and state governments, 
with robust partnerships between land-management agencies and the public in collaborative 
planning and stewardship. Research and adaptive management are essential in allowing 
fire-hazard-reduction projects to move forward where proposed projects are met with un­
certainty and mistrust. While legislative reform may be desirable, a strategy that is not 
entirely dependent on new legislation is needed. Building on existing programs that are 
consistent with a science-based strategy will enable land-management agencies to better 
utilize information in pursuit of the overall objective of reducing uncharacteristically severe 
wildfires. 
Key words: 
fire hazard; fire suppression; forest policy; fuels management; u.s. government 
policy; wildfire. 
INTRODUCTION 
The objective of this paper is to present specific ideas 
to reform and to improve U.S . forest-fire policy and 
Even with large expenditures and substantial infra­
management. To be achieved, substantive reform re­
structure dedicated to fire suppression in the United 
quires better development, dissemination, and utiliza­
States, the annual area burned by wildfire has increased 
tion of scientifically based information to assist in the 
in the last decade (USDA-USDI 2000, WGA 2000, 
efficient formulation and implementation of policy
NWCG 200 I). Given the current and future challenges 
(Franklin and Agee 2003). The ensuing discussion will 
posed by wildland fire, a review and reexamination of 
develop a conceptual agenda for this policy. Finally, 
existing policy is warranted. This paper reviews the 
the paper will consider how to enable these changes, 
reasons why the area burned by wildfire is increasing, 
recognizing that the mixed public and governmental 
and discusses strategies for responding to an increas­
context, as well as setting of the land-management 
ingly dangerous and difficult problem, with implica­
agencies themselves with their own histories and tra­
tions for communities, federal land-management agen­
ditions, may naturally resist policy changes. 
cies, firefighters, and society itself. 
HISTORICAL CONTEXT 
Federal forest-fire management in the United States 
Manuscript received 19 March 2004; revised 8 June 2004 ; 
accept ed 16 June 2004, Corresponding Editor: D. L. Peterson, 
began in 1886 when the U.S. Army began to patrol the 
, E-mail: stephens@nature.berkeley.edu 
newly created National Parks (Agee 1974) . Early re­
532 

April 2005 
UNITED STATES FEDERAL FOREST-FIRE POLICY 
533 
sponsibilities included patrols for fire suppression, un­
authorized livestock grazing, and timber harvesting. In 
1891, Congress authorized President Harrison to es­
tablish forest reserves, later to be known as "National 
Forests" (Pinchot 1907, Pyne 1982, Ruth 2000). Gif­
ford Pinchot became the first Chief of the agency that 
would manage the reserves, and under his direction a 
national forest-fire policy was initiated. The suppres­
sion of forest fires dominated early forest policy. 
Henry Graves, the second chief of the U.S. Forest 
Service (USFS) initially demonstrated some openness 
to the cautious use of fire (Carle 2002). This idea was 
supported by USFS managers in California and plans 
were created to produce a permit system to allow pri­
vate land owners to use controlled fire. However, the 
idea of using fire in forest management was strongly 
debated within the USFS. ChiefGraves assigned forest 
examiner Stuart Show to study the issue (Carle 2002) 
and he reported that the agency should adopt a strong 
fire-suppression policy. 
Chief Graves eventually supported a strong fire-sup­
pression program declaring "the first measure neces­
sary for the successful practice of forestry is protection 
from fire" (Graves 1910:7, Pyne 1982). The earliest 
federal fire-control policy was written shortly after 
Graves was appointed (DuBois 1914) . William Gree­
ley, the third USFS Chief, took over the agency in 1920 
and continued the strong endorsement of fire suppres­
sion , stating "the conviction was burned into me is that 
fire prevention is the number 1 job of American for­
esters" (Greeley 1951 :23). During Greeley's nine-year 
tenure fire suppression was paramount in federal and 
private forest management. 
A scientific study was initiated in California on the 
merits of fire suppression vs. light underbuming, and 
its conclusions continued to support a strong fire-sup­
pression policy (Show and Kotek 1924) . The concept 
of light underburning was modeled after earlier Native 
American uses of fire in northern California (CIaI' 
1959). Passage of the federal Clarke-McNary Act in 
1924 tied federal appropriations to the state first adopt­
ing fire-suppression and this law effectively created a 
national fire-suppression policy. 
The policy of fire suppression was debated in the 
southeast United States (Schiff 1962, Pyne 1982, Bis­
well 1989, Carle 2002) because the use of fire was 
culturally accepted in this area (Shea 1940, Komarek 
1962, Schiff 1962). Further, several large wildfires in 
this region reinforced the need to consider policies that 
utilized prescribed burning to reduce fuel hazards. 
Eventually, a change in fire policy allowed the first use 
of prescribed fire on federal lands, with burning taking 
place in Florida's Osceola National Forest in 1943 
(Bickford and Newcomb 1946). 
Research initiated in the southeast (Chapman 1926) 
and western United States (Weaver 1943, Cooper 1960, 
Biswell 1961) began to identify landscape conditions 
that could be attr ibuted to fire suppression. For the first 
time, significant changes in the structure, composition, 
and fuel loads were documented in forests that pri­
marily experienced frequent, low- to moderate-inten­
sity fire regimes. The implications of these investiga­
tions were profound but not utilized by contemporary 
policy. The very policy of fire suppression that had 
been adopted decades earlier was actually producing 
forests with high fire hazards, and these forests were 
being burned by high-severity wildfire. 
In 1962, partially in response to the results of the 
increasing number of scientific studies in fire ecology, 
the U.S. Secretary of the Interior requested a study on 
the status of federal wildl ife management. The "Leo­
pold report" identified fire suppression as a pol icy that 
was adversely affecting wildlife habitats (Leopold et 
al. 1963). Contemporaneously, the first use of pre­
scribed fires on federal lands in the west occurred in 
1968 at Sequoia-Kings Canyon National Parks (Cali­
fornia; USDI 1968), and two years later in Yosem ite 
National Park (California; Kilgore 1974, Parsons et al. 
1986, van Wagtendonk 1991). The National Park Ser­
vice (NPS) continued to suppress unwanted wildfires, 
but fire was also used to meet resource objectives. 
In 1968, the first prescribed natural fire program in 
Sequoia-Kings Canyon National Parks was created 
(USDl 1968, Kilgore 1974, Parsons et al. 1986). This 
occurred because of earlier research on the effects of 
prescribed fire in mixed-conifer forests (Biswell 1961, 
Hartesveldt and Harvey 1967, Kilgore and Briggs 
1972) and because of the recent change in NPS fire 
policy. Creation of the National Wilderness System in 
1964 also advanced the philosophy of wildland fire use 
in remote forested areas (Pyne 1982). Some USFS wil­
derness areas such as the Selway-Bitterroot (Idaho and 
Montana) and Gila (New Mexico) began a program of 
prescribed natural fire in the late 1960s, but other Na­
tional Forest lands with similar management philoso­
phies were rare. 
Shortly after the NPS revised its fire policy, the 
USFS did so as well. Henry Debruin, Director of Fire 
and Aviation Management for the USFS, stated "we 
are determined to save the best of the past as we change 
a basic concept from fire is bad to fire is good and bad" 
(DeBruin 1974 :12) . While this statement represented a 
major shift in the philosophy of the USFS, fire sup­
pression was still to dominate agency policy for the 
coming decades (Franklin and Agee 2003). The use of 
fire in the management of forests would remain very 
rare in the USFS. 
Between 1960 and 2003, wildfires on Bureau of Land 
Management, Bureau of Indian Affairs, National Park 
Service, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, USFS, and all 
State lands averaged 1 642000 ha annually (data from 
NIFC [2004]). Between 1994 and 2003 , the average 
amount of area burned increased to I 925000 ha, and 
between 1999 and 2003 , it averaged 2271 000 ha/yr. 
The amount of land burned by wildfire in the last five 
years is 38% larger than the average in 1960-2003. 

534 
e
8 Q
Ecological Applications 
SCOTT L. STEPHENS AND LAWRENCE W. RUTH 
Vol. IS, No.2 
Federal fire-suppression costs in 2000 and 2002 were 
1.3 and 1.6 billion U.S. dollars, respectively (NIFC 
2004). Similar expenditures occurred in 2003 but an 
estimate of the final cost is not yet available. 
The emerging trajectory is troubling: despite large 
expenditures and infrastructure (aircraft, firefighters, 
command eenters, logistical support, ctc.) dedicated to 
fire suppression, the annual area burned by wildfire has 
increased over the last deeade (USDA-USDI 2000, 
WGA 2000, NWCG 2001). 
RECENT FIRE POLICIES AND INITIATIVES 
Federal fire policy has been significantly modified 
since 1995 to recognize and embrace the role of fire 
as an essential ecological process (USDA 1995, USDI­
USDA 1995, NWCG 200 I). The 2001 federal wildland 
fire-management policy (NWCG 200 I:23) stated that 
"Fire, as a critical natural process, will be integrated 
into land and to resource management plans and activ­
ities on a landscape scale, and across agency bound­
aries. " 
One of the main objectives of the 1995 fire-policy 
revision was to reduce fire hazards annually on 
I 200 000 ha offorests using mechanical and prescribed 
fire treatments (USDA 1995). Progress toward this goal 
has been slower than anticipated (GAO 2003), due to 
constraints on smoke production; difficulties in plan 
preparation; regulatory review; potential impacts on 
sensitive, threatened, and endangered species; and bud­
getary procedures that have delayed fuels-management 
projects. Progress has also been impaired because of 
the significant risks inherent in the activity, such as the 
individual and professional risks facing managers for 
the consequences of prescribed fires that escape despite 
proper planning and execution (Benner and Wade 
1992). Another significant problem with the current 
system is there are few incentives or rewards for in­
dividuals that successfully produce proactive programs 
that use prescribed fire and mechanical methods to re­
duce potential fire behavior and effects. 
The National Fire Plan, established in "A Report to 
the President in Response to the Wildfires of 2000" 
(USDA-USDI 2000), is now being implemented using 
the "Collaborative Approach for Reducing Wildfire 
Risks to Communities and the Environment: Ten-Year 
Comprehensive Strategy" (TYCS; WGA 2001) . Both 
the National Fire Plan and the TYCS recognize that if 
hazardous fuels are not reduced, the number of severe 
wildland fires and the costs associated with suppressing 
them will continue to increase". Implementation of the 
National Firc Plan is designed to be a long-term. mul­
tibillion-dollar effort (GAO 2003). The TYCS was de­
veloped without direct federal input and recognizes that 
key decisions in setting priorities for restoration and 
fuels management should be made collaboratively at 
local levels. As such, the TYCS requires an ongoing 
process whereby the local, Tribal, State, and Federal 
land-management, scientific, and regulatory agencies 
exchange the required technical information to facili­
tate the decision-making process. In fiscal year 2001 
(I October 2000 -30 September 200 I), the first year the 
National Fire Plan was in effect, Congress increased 
funding for reduction of hazardous to US $40 I million 
(US $108 million was allocated in 2000) (GAO 2003). 
Congress continued this increased funding in 2002 and 
2003. 
The Healthy Forests Initiative (HFI), introduced by 
President Bush in August 2002, sought to address per­
ceived difficulties in implementing fuels-management 
projects by streamlining and shortening administrative 
and pubic review and by limiting appeals processes. 
The specific objectives of the HFI were to (I) facilitate 
timely reviews of forest-health restoration and reha­
bilitation projects, (2) amend rules for project appeals 
to hasten the process of reviewing forest-health pro­
jects, and (3) require prompt judicial responses to legal 
challenges by setting time limits for review. The new 
procedures were designed to enable the Departments 
of Agriculture and Interior to give priority to forest­
thinning projects so that they could proceed within one 
year. 
Many of the ideas presented in the HFI were enacted 
as the Healthy Forests Restoration Act (HFRA 2003), 
including expediting environmental analysis, expedit­
ing administrative review before decisions are issued, 
encouraging courts to expedite judicial review of legal 
challenges, and directing courts that consider a request 
for an injunction on an HFRA-authorizerl project to 
balance the short- and long-term environmental effects 
of undertaking the project against the effects of taking 
no action. New ideas contained in the HFRA that were 
not in the HFI include requirements governing the 
maintenance and restoration of old-growth forest 
stands, requiring that HFRA projects maximize reten­
tion of larger trees in areas other than old-growth 
stands, requiring at least 50% of the dollars allocated 
to HFRA projects be used to protect communities at 
risk of wildland fire, and to encourage project perfor­
mance to be monitored and evaluated. 
The multiple legislative and administrative efforts 
all provide support for "fuels reduction" in response 
to a "wildfire problem" that is both perceived and real. 
Irrespective of these initiatives, there is no compre­
hensive policy to deal with fire and fuels , and there are 
few indications that such a policy is in development 
(Franklin and Agee 2003). While the effects of forest 
fires are commonly discussed and debated by the pub­
lic, politicians, scientists, and land managers, a number 
of scientific questions about fires and their effects re­
main. Accordingly, scientific information pertinent to 
specific regional issues and situations is somewhat lim­
ited . Further, there are few policy analyses available to 
provide credible information on the range of possible 
strategies, or to provide estimates and comparative 
evaluations of safety, effectiveness, and environmental 
impacts. 

Q
April 2005 
UNITED STATES FEDERAL FOREST-FIRE POLICY 
535 
The lack of information and analysis cripples efforts 
to respond appropriately to accumulated fuels and high 
fire hazards. Equally, a lack ofsystematic consideration 
of the relative effectiveness of the current disparate 
national, regional, and local strategies toward wildfire 
has obscured the information that we now possess. The 
effect has been to impede progress on two fronts, by 
impeding thoughtful reemphasis of policies that are or 
are likely to be effective, and by preventing more com­
prehensive reforms that will enable federal agencies to 
better respond to the threats posed by wildfire. In the 
next section we give specific recommendations on how 
federal forest-fire policy can be improved. 
POLICY ANALYSIS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
Fuel types and treatment effectiveness 
The primary objective of fuels-management projects 
should be a reduction of potential fire behavior and 
effects, not simply the reduction of forest fuels. Recent 
federal fire policies and initiatives all seek to reduce 
fire hazard by reducing fuels. This strategy possesses 
an intuitive appeal, but application of the strategy may 
not significantly alter fire hazards. Fire behavior is not 
simply a function of fuels, but also of weather and 
topography. Fuels are the main fire-behavior compo­
nent that can be directly affected by management, but 
the type of management action and its effectiveness 
with respect to a particular type of fuel are critical in 
predicting whether the action will reduce potential fire 
behavior and effects. Local climate conditions can also 
be influenced by treatments, resulting in trade-offs be­
tween reducing canopy cover that increases air tem­
peratures and wind speeds (van Wagtendonk 1996). 
A brief introduction to the variety of wildland fuels 
and their characteristics is necessary to understand ex­
actly why this knowledge and specificity is an impor­
tant ingredient in achieving the overall objective. Wild­
land fuels are comprised of four groups: ground, sur­
face, ladder, and crown. Each of these has a different 
potential to influence fire behavior. Ground fuels in­
clude the duff and litter on the soil surface and gen­
erally do not contribute to wildfire spread or intensity. 
Surface fuels include all dead and down woody ma­
terials, grasses, other herbaceous plant materials, and 
short shrubs, which are often the most hazardous fuels 
in many forests. This is particularly likely in forests 
where vegetative species composition, density, and 
structure have been influenced by decades of fire sup­
pression (Stephens 1998, Agee 2003). Ladder fuels are 
trees or tall shrubs that provide vertical continuity from 
surface fuels to the crowns of tall trees . Crown fuels 
are those in the overstory. 
Reducing surface fuels will limit the intensity offires 
and allow more of the forest to survive when it does 
bum. Thinning treatments can be directed to effectively 
reduce ladder and crown fuels . However, where logging 
residues (activity" fuels) are left on site, potential fire 
behavior and effects may be either similar to or more 
extreme than an untreated forest (Stephens 1998). Fi­
nally, in forests that experienced frequent, low-inten­
sity to moderate-intensity fire regimes prior to a long 
period of fire suppression, fuels treatments should fo­
cus on surface, ladder, and then crown fuels (Stephens 
1998, Agee 2003). The difference between fuel types, 
the subtlety of their interactions, and differences in 
their behavior in different types of fire regimes are all 
important in developing fuels-management strategies 
to appropriately reduce potential fire behavior and ef­
fects. 
The USFS has used the "condition-class system" to 
identify and prioritize areas in need of fuels treatments 
(Schmidt et al. 2002). This national system attempts to 
identify the number of fire-return intervals that have 
been missed due to fire suppression. The assumption 
is forests that have missed more intervals will have 
higher hazards, but there are exceptions. Many pon­
derosa pine (Pinus ponderosa Laws.) and Jeffrey pine 
(Pinus jeffreyi Grev. and Bait) forests have missed 10­
15 fire intervals but the effects of 100 years of fire 
suppression on the amounts and arrangement of fuels 
and potential for uncharacteristically severe fire may 
be greater in a"mixed-conifer forest, which have missed 
only 3-4 fire intervals (Franklin and Agee 2003, Ste­
phens 2004). This occurs because mixed-conifer forests 
are generally more productive, resulting in more rapid 
fuel accumulations. An index based on historic fire­
return intervals departure is therefore not the best basis 
for setting fuel-treatment priorities (Franklin and Agee 
2003). The condition-class system is also a coarse clas­
sification system that was never intended for use at the 
local level , which requires evaluation at much finer 
spatial scales. Federal scientists have recognized this 
problem and in 2003 began the "Iandfire project" 
whose objective is to produce fine-resolution condi­
tion-class data for the entire country in approximately 
three years. 
Current fire policies attempt to generate high levels 
of "acres treated" with minimal evaluation of treat­
ment effectiveness. Most fuel treatments on USFS 
lands do not even measure fuels before and after treat­
ment, something that would be a fundamental aspect 
of any evaluation program. Current federal fire policies 
include the National Fire Plan Operations Reporting 
System (NFPORS) that allows the federal agencies to 
record expenditures and treatment locations, but it can­
not be used to determine if treatments accomplished 
their objectives (GAO 2002). A strong commitment to 
adaptive management and all-party monitoring is need­
ed to overcome this problem. 
Fire and landscapes 
Fire itself can help to reduce the total amount of area 
burned by wildfire. Many fires ignited by lightning in 
remote areas can produce positive effects, provided 
they are carefully managed and monitored. These fires 

536 
Ecological Applications 
SCOTT L. STEPHENS AND LAWRENCE W. RUTH 
Vol. 15, No.2 
could also serve to reduce fire hazards and to assist in 
the reintroduction of fire as an ecosystem process, par­
ticularly in Western forests that have experienced large 
wildfires in the last decade (NWCG 200 I). Improved 
utilization of the existing Wildland Fire Use Policy 
provides for careful and gradual reintroduction of fire 
into landscapes (NWCG 200 I). There is risk in such a 
program, of course. But unless fuels-management tech­
niques are employed in appropriate forest types (those 
that once experienced frequent, low-to-moderate inten­
sity fire regimes) at necessary spatial scales and ar­
rangements (Finney 200 I), many of these forests will 
continue to be subject to uncharacteristically severe 
fires. The USFS Wildland Fire Use Policy is under­
utilized; less than five percent of national forests have 
approved fire plans (Ingalsbee 200 I). Creation of fire 
plans should be a priority in all forests with hazardous 
fuel conditions. The Wildland Fire Use Policy already 
provides a mechanism for addressing an important 
component of accumulated wildland fuels . Broader im­
plementation would offer an unprecedented opportu­
nity to gather valuable ecological and organizational 
information about the results of the experience across 
an array of regions and landscapes. 
To be effective, landscape fuel-reduction strategies 
should be better linked to past fire causes. Lightning 
strikes are stochastic, making it difficult for fire man­
agers to forecast areas of higher ignition potential. Stra­
tegically placed area treatments (SPLATs) may be an 
effective strategy to reduce landscape fire behavior in 
large, heterogeneous areas (Finney 2001). SPLATs are 
a system of overlapping area fuel treatments designed 
to minimize the area burned by high-intensity head fires 
in diverse terrain. The performance of SPLATs has not 
been field tested, but computer simulations have pro­
duced promising results. 
Human-caused fires commonly occur near transpor­
tation corridors (highways, roads, trails), campgrounds, 
and urban areas, making it possible for fire managers 
to forecast areas of higher ignition potential. Defensible 
fuel profile zones (DFPZs) placed near areas of high 
human-caused ignitions can be used to decrease the 
probability of large, high-severity fires by improving 
suppression efficiency (Kalabokidis and Omi 1998, 
Agee et al. 2000). DFPZs are linear landscape elements 
approximately 0.5-1.0 km wide, typically constructed 
along roads to break up fuel continuity and provide a 
defensible zone for fire-suppression forces. Installation 
and maintenance of these structures (SPLATs and 
DFPZs) at appropriate spatial scales should reduce for­
est-fire area and severity. DFPZs will be effective in 
reducing losses in the urban-wildland intermix only if 
they are used in combination with combustion-resistant 
homes that have defensible space from wildland and 
domestic vegetation. Continued growth of human pop­
ulations in the urban-wildland interface is one of the 
most challenging issues facing fire managers because 
it places additional assets at risk and reduces manage­
ment options. 
Fire as an ecosystem process 
To be effective across diverse forest types and con­
ditions in the United States, fire policy should better 
recognize and respond to the diversity of fire regimes 
in U.S. forests. Some management activities can reduce 
the severity of wildfires in some forests (Martin et al. 
1989, van Wagtendonk 1996, Weatherspoon and Skin­
ner 1996, Stephens 1998, Moore et al. 1999, Fule et 
al. 200 I, Pollet and Omi 2002), but some fore st types 
such as Rocky Mountain lodgepole pine (Pinus con­
torta val'. latifolia) Dougl. are adapted to and require 
periodic high-severity, stand-replacement fires (Rom­
me and Knight 1981, Turner and Romme 1994, Veblen 
et al. 1994, Christensen et al. 1998). 
Assessment of how fire is affecting forests would be 
enhanced if information were provided by land-man­
agement agencies about the specific type of fire and 
whether the particular ecosystem is adapted to it. Agen­
cies should report the actual amount of area burned by 
low-, mixed-, and high-severity fire and which pro­
portion of these categories is outside the desired con­
ditions or trends for each forest type . Natural varia­
tions , or reference conditions derived from historical 
ecology, can be used to assist in the definition of de­
sired severity categories (Swetnam et al. 1999, Ste­
phens et aI., 2003, Stephens and Gill 2005). Currently, 
the only wildfire data recorded on USFS lands are total 
area burned, dominant vegetation types within the pe­
rimeter, and fire location. Ground-based severity mea­
surements are recorded for some fires, but these mea­
surements cover only a small portion of the burned 
area. Remote sensing can assist in the evaluation of 
fire severity at large spatial scales. This type ofanalysis 
should be routinely done on all forest fires. 
Despite the complexity inherent in local fire regimes, 
regional fire activity often oscillates in phase with year­
to-year climate variabili ty (Clark 1988, ' Swetnam 
1993) . For example, the area burned annually .across 
the southern United States tends to decrease in EI Nino 
years and increase during La Nina years (Swetnam and 
Betancourt (990). In northern California, the impact of 
climate change on wildland fire and suppression effec­
tiveness is predicted to change in the inland regions of 
the state (Fried et al. 2004). Despite enhancement of 
fire-suppression efforts, the number of escaped fires 
(those exceeding initial containment lim its) is forecast 
to increase by 51% in the south San Francisco Bay area 
and 125% in the Sierra Nevada (Fried et aJ. 2004). In 
addition to the increased suppression costs and eco­
nomic damages, changes in fire severity of this mag­
nitude would have widespread impacts on vegetation 
distribution, forest condition, and carbon storage, and 
greatly increase the risk to property, natural resources, 
and human life. Changing climates may necessitate ere­

April 2005 
UNITED STATES FEDERAL FOREST-FIRE POLICY 
537 
ation of fire policies that are easily adaptable because 
of large uncertainties. 
Administrative and management constraints 
Many species-specific conservation strategies de­
veloped in recent years, espe cially those developed to 
comply with the Endangered Species Act, or species 
viability requirements of public-land management stat­
ues such as the National Forest Management Act or 
Federal Land Management Policy Act, can be classified 
as fine-filter approaches.' Fine-filter approaches are 
conservation strategies designed for individual species 
without strong consideration given to maintaining nat­
ural ecosystem processes (Agee 2003). Coarse-scale 
strategies, on the other hand , seek to preserve biolog­
ical diversity of forests, primarily by maintaining a 
variety of ecosystems and structures across the land­
scape. In many forests, before fire suppression, fire 
served as a natural coarse filter. 
Many fine-scale strategies, such as those often em­
ployed to respond to con cerns regard ing the viability 
of threatened and endangered spe cies , produce exten­
sive management constraints such as the systematic 
exclusion of fire from fire-d ependent habitats, or the 
restriction that prescribed fire cannot be used until a 
specified amount of precipitation occurs. Such con­
straints essentially removes prescribed fire as a man­
agement option. The fine-scale filter may achieve short­
term objectives for indi vidu al species, but generally 
leaves the majority of the habitat at risk to large, cat­
astrophic wildfire (Agee 2003 ). Th is strategy is likely 
to fail in the long-term because without effective fuel­
reduction treatments, most wildland areas will even­
tually bum under severe wildfire condition s. Fine- and. 
coarse-filter approaches, how ever, may be employed 
simultaneously. To be more effective, successful con­
servation strategies should emph asize the coarse-filter 
approach, utilizing the fine-filter in carefully selected 
areas only when absolutely necessary (Agee 2003). 
Questions have been raised about the ability of fed­
eral agencies to efficiently execute fuels-management 
projects (HFRA 2003 ). A recent analysis determined 
that there is litt le evidence that fuels-management pro­
jects are being significantly delayed once they are re­
leased to the publ ic for comment (in 2001 and 2002, 
final decisions on 95% of the 762 fuels-managem ent 
projects were made in 90 days or less; GAO 2003). 
Reforms may be needed to reduce the time requ ired to 
produce the necessary Environmental Impact State­
ments (EISs) and Environmental Assessments (EAs) . 
EISs and EAs could be improved if they focused on 
defining the desired range of conditions or trends in­
stead of focusing on spatial and temporal management 
• Endangered Species Act of 1973 (as amended), U.S. 
Code title 16, sections 1531- J544 (1994); National Forest 
Management Act of 1976, Public Law 94-588, Statutes at 
Large 90:2949; Federal Land Management Policy Act of 
1976, U.S. Code title 43, sections t700-1784 (1994). 
constraints (fine-filter approach); the latter is much 
more common today. We should focus 011 the outcomes 
of fuels-management projects, not on the methods used 
to reduce hazards. Present high transaction costs are 
probably reducing the opportunity for successful fuel ­
reduction projects in federal forests. 
Many wildland areas in the United States have ex­
perienced an increase in area burned over the last de­
cade (USDA-USDI 2000 , WGA 200 I, NWCG 200 I), ' 
and active mana gement (Agee 2003 ) is nece ssary to 
reduce this trend. Prescribed fire can be used to redu ce 
fuel hazards in many of these forests. Unfortunately, 
multiple constraints (air quality, wildlife, weather, and 
personnel availability) routinely limit periods for burn­
ing operations. As a result, many fire managers may 
have a single week or less when burning is actually 
pennilied . With such limitations, it is simply not pos­
sibl e to use fire to reduce high hazards on millions of 
hectares of forests. Smoke from forest fires (of appro­
priate severity and size) is a natural ecos ystem com­
ponent, and regu lations should be adapted to allow 
more burning opportunities while also considering pub­
lic health . In contrast, wildfires produce extreme 
amounts of smoke that can inundate large areas for 
weeks or months, producing a variety of effects and 
unw anted impacts. 
Many species of wildlife have co-evolved with fire 
(Smith 2000), and any local or regional reintroduction 
of fire must be carefully monitored to ensure species 
viab ility. Additionally, adaptive-management pro­
grams must be used to learn from management actions. 
(Shindler and Cheek 1999) because there is insuffi cient 
information on the ecological effects of fuels treat­
ments. Mechanical treatments may be appropriate for 
use in combination with prescribed fire (Stephens 
1998), a practice that has the potential to redu ce fire 
hazards and emissions in certain cases. Using mechan­
ical methods in fire-hazard-reduction treatments can 
produce timber resources, but when this occurs, the 
primary objective must continue to be the reduction in 
potential fire behavior and effects. 
Seventy percent of the fund ing from the National 
Fire Plan has been directed to fire suppression , resulting 
in the hiring of approximately 5500 firefighters and the 
purchasing of hundreds of vehicles and aircraft. Similar 
investments in professional fire ecology or fue ls-man­
agement positions have not occurred. Large-scale fuel s 
management programs have been planned in all West­
ern states, but implementation of these programs has 
been challenging. In the Pacific Northwest there are 
approximately 3.6 X 106 ha of forests in need of fuel 
treatment. The treatment goal for this area in 2004 is 
52000 ha. At this rate , It would take 69 years to treat 
all of the area once , a period that approxi mates the 
effective duration of fire suppression. USFS lands in 
Cali fornia include approximately 6.2 X 106 ha of for­
ests that are in need of fuel treat men ts. The current 
management plan forecasts treatment of 23% of this 

File # 18TQ 
Ecological Applications 
SCOTI L. STEPHENS AND LAWRENCEW. RUTH 
538 
area in 20 years. If the goal were to treat the entire 
area it would require 87 years. The use of SPLATs 
(strategically placed area treatments) should reduce the 
total area that needs to be treated before landscape fire 
behavior and effects are reduced, but the challenges to 
treat very large area are formidable. The costs of treat­
ments can be high, especially when many small trees 
need to be removed and there is no market for such 
materials. Many plans underestimate the actual costs 
of implementing effective fuels treatments, especially 
in forests dominated by small trees. 
Social interactions and institutions 
Sustainable fire policies must respond to complex 
social, political, and economic forces. Currently, there 
are diverse opinions among Executive-branch officials, 
Congress. federal agencies, state and local govern­
ments, Tribes, environmental groups, and commodity 
groups, as to what should actually be done to reduce 
fire hazards in federal forests. Diversity and disagree­
ment can be healthy in any debate, and may eventually 
strengthen any policy. Even with better collaborative 
efforts that occur earlier in the planning process, and 
the streamlined administrative review of fuels mjlD­
agement projects provided by the HFRA (2003), sat­
isfying legal requirements may still derail the best in­
tentions offederal land managers, the public, and other 
interests. The requirements of federal law and due pro­
cess may in some instances permit a single interest to 
override others, and derail a collaborative effort to in­
stitute a regional or local fuels-management plan. 
Mechanisms for collaborative stewardship should be 
refined and created to encourage participants to interact 
on how to proceed in the face of disagreements as to 
what policies are appropriate and effective. Actions 
that may assist this interaction include (I) initiating 
small projects that provide an opportunity for a local 
dialog on the outcomes of fuel treatments, (2) locating 
projects in areas where there is substantial agreement 
on restoration objectives, (3) reflecting and celebrating 
accomplishments in order to build relationships, trust, 
and support, (4) creating an extensive, well-designed 
adaptive-management program to learn from manage­
ment actions, (5) initiating all-party monitoring to as­
sure credible post-treatment data and analysis (moni­
toring should be coordinated by a non-federal group to 
ensure independence), (6) striving to distribute the 
costs and benefits of restoration equitably, and (7) en­
suring that scientific data and other information gained 
as a result of the adaptive-management process is ac­
tually used. 
This would provide information to land managers 
and scientists that will help to improve future man­
agement actions, and would also provide information 
to federal, state, and local governments and the public 
regarding the effectiveness of elements of legislation 
and policy in achieving the overall objective of reduc­
ing losses from wildfire. In establishing and imple-
Vol. 15. No.2 
menting collaborative projects, and utilizing experi­
mentation and adaptive management, successes on the 
ground will serve as opportunities to gain knowledge 
and experience, and to reflect and to revise policies and 
prescriptions, and serve as precedents for eventual 
broader application at landscape scales. 
Although the National Forest Plan (USDA-USDI 
2000), the Ten-Year Comprehensive Strategy (TYCS; 
WGA 2001), and HFRA (2003) apply to all federal 
agencies (USFS, National Park Service, Bureau of 
Land Management, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, De­
partment of Defense) each agency will implement these 
policies within its own institutional contexts. This will 
result in different aspects of the policies being empha­
sized in different areas . Allowing some diversity in 
implementation is an opportunity to learn which strat­
egy is the most effective. Certainly the federal agencies 
should work coUaborately to reduce potential fire be­
havior and effects, particularly at mutual property 
boundaries. 
Fire-suppression costs and strategies 
Large fire-suppression expenditures in 2002 and 
2003 required extraordinary emergency expenditures. 
Funds available for fire suppression in these years were 
insufficient due to the fact that the resources allocated 
for fire suppression by the federal budget process were 
inadequate. Additional emergency funding was secured 
by the recission of funds that had been appropriated 
from unrelated management and research programs 
(GAO 2004) . The federal Office of Management and 
Budget influenced the reallocation of these resources, 
forcing the USFS to use funds from non-suppression 
activities to pay for suppression. Ironically, the recis­
sion removed resources from fuels-management pro­
grams that were authorized by the National Fire Plan 
and TYCS. In 2003, according to the Chief of the U.S. 
Forest Service, approximately 60000 ha ofUSFS land 
were left untreated when funds were transferred to fight 
wildfires (Bosworth 2004). Another impact of the re­
cissions is negative impacts on collaborations with pri­
vate, state, and federal partners (GAO 2004). 
To prevent this pattern from recurring, Congress 
should provide a larger federal fire-suppression budget. 
The present annual budget is approximately US $400 
million. Despite this sum. recent experience suggests 
that it may be insufficient, as suppression costs of>US 
$1 billion have occurred in three of the last four years 
prior to 2004 . Accordingly, the President and the Con­
gress should consider and develop more realistic bud­
gets and multiyear funding, such as a trust fund or 
reserve account. Current-year fire-suppression budgets 
could also be calculated by using a moving-average of 
suppression costs for the previous five years. This strat­
egy responds to trends in total area burned and asso­
ciated costs, and is designed to produce a more realistic 
estimate of fire-suppression costs. If present-year sup­
pression costs are lower than an average of the previous 

April 2005 
UNITED STATES FEDERAL FOREST-FIRE POLICY 
539 
five years, any unused resources could be saved to meet 
obligations incurred in future high-cost years. This 
would remove the need for future rescissions, which 
will help to ensure that critically needed fuel-manage­
ment projects move forward. 
Fire-suppression strategies, for reasons of effect ive­
ness and efficiency, should recognize that each wildfire 
is different, and tailor strategies and tactics to the 
unique demands of each fire. Wildfires can be separated 
into general categories along a spectrum of size and 
complexity (Jerry Williams, personal communication). 
They range from the small initial attack fire to the 
enormous and complex megafire. During the last de­
cade, approximately 97-99% of all wildland fires have 
been successfully suppressed during initial attack. The 
majority of these fires are < 0.1 ha in size, and, col­
lectively, they bum a very small area. 
The U.S. fire-suppression system is designed to be 
very effective in initial attack operations because of 
spatially distributed suppression resources, excellent 
early fire-detection abil ity, and appropriate tactics and 
training for these events. Fires that escape initial attack 
can be classified as "transition" or " extended-attack" 
fires . Current policy responds to such fires essentially 
the same as it does to an initial attack event. This strat­
egy can produce dangerous situations because these 
fires can change behavior quickly due to the fact that 
they are actively growing and that they often bum un­
der varying weather conditions. Among other things, 
the majority of fire-fighter fatalities in the last decade 
have occurred on these types of fires, which include 
the Storm King Mountain fire (Colorado) in 1994 and 
the Thirtyrnile fire (Washington state) in 2002 . Tact ics 
could be rev ised to recognize that initial attack tactics 
are not safe and effective during changing fire condi­
tions. 
The largest fires, classified as "rnegafires" by public 
agencies, produce extreme fire behavior ma inly be­
cause of severe fire weather and substantial accumu­
lations of fuels. It is common for fire-suppression agen­
cies to commit a large amount of resources to fight 
these fires even though the probability of success is 
very low. In many cases fire managers continue to ag­
gressively fight megafires because of public perception 
and liability concerns (e.g., you have to at least look 
like you are doing something or people and politicians 
will protest). Fire policy should be changed to reflect 
a more refined index of threats, potential harm, and 
possible effectiveness. This in tum would allow man­
agers to take a defensive posture until conditions 
change. Suppression operations can be applied to the 
flanks of such fires but expending tens of millions of 
dollars during their peak burn ing periods cannot be 
justified. Congress will have to debate and approve this 
change in policy, because the federal land-management 
agencies cannot implement this change without strong 
congressional support. 
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS 
Taken together, these recommendations would sub­
stantially change the course and conduct of national for­
est-fire policy. The proposed changes are as follows: 
I) Restate the objectives of fuels-management pro­
grams to be the reduction of potential fire behavior 
and effects. 
2) Adopt policies and programs that are straightfor­
ward and pragmatic and that also reflect awareness 
and sensitivity to environmental and social im­
pacts of these programs. 
3) Improve the budgeting process for both fuels man­
agement and fire suppression to ensure funding 
sufficient to achieve overall and annual program 
objectives. 
4) Initiate a vigorous adaptive-management program 
that utilizes a rigorous program of monitoring, 
experimentation, and research to improve fire and 
fuels -management policies, strategies, and pro­
jects. Create a national accounting system to col­
lect accurate information on the location, costs, 
and effectiveness of fuels treatments. 
5) Periodically evaluate particular strategies and pro­
gress toward the overall objective of redu cing po­
tential fire behavior and effects. Have independent 
sc ientific panels conduct the rev iews , with the re­
sults and any recommendations transmitted to the 
government for consideration by the executive and 
legislativc branches, 
6) Utilize and publicize the results of adaptive man­
agement to educate land managers, other agencies, 
elected officials, scientists, and the public. 
A long-term commitment from the U.S . Administra­
tion, Congress, Governors, land-management agencies, 
Tribes, and the public, is required to begin to reduce 
hazards and decrease the annual area burned by un­
characteristically severe wildfire. A reduction in me­
gafires will probably only occur when fuels-manage­
ment projects have been installed in appropriate forest 
types at necessary spatial scales and arrangements. 
Managers cannot abandon areas of reduced firc hazards 
once they are created; they will have to be maintained 
into the future to remain effective. 
CONCLUSION: POLICY AND POLITICS 
Man aging wildland fire in the United States has 
evolved considerably from the initial efforts of the 
USFS and other public agencies. The recent trajectory 
of wildland fire in the United States, however, reveals 
that the average annual area burned is increasing. Fur­
ther, this increase is occurring despite a parallel rise in 
resources and funds utilized to manage fuels and sup­
press fire. Analysis of the effectiveness of various wild­
land fire policies indicates that despite scientific and 
widespread public concern, recent policy initiatives do 
not yet sati sfactorily or comprehensively address cer­
tain significant and essential components of the issue. 

540 
Ecological Applications 
SCOTT L. STEPHENS AND LAWRENCE W. RUTH 
Sev eral recent programs, especially the National Fire 
Plan (USDA-USDI 2001), the Ten-Year Comprehen­
sive Strategy (WGA 200 I), and other initiatives, 
though perceived as essentially acceptable by federal 
managers, remain controversial. Individual site-specif­
ic projects, even at relatively small scales, are often 
problematic. More importantly, even if implemented as 
designed, the total effect of existing federal programs, 
including the He althy Forest Restoration Act (HFRA 
2003), remains a less-than-comprehensive approach to 
wildland fire. Other forces such as global climate 
change (Tom and Fried 1992, Karl 1998, Fried et al. 
2004) may further complicate fire management. Cli­
mate change may lead to differences in plant distri­
butions (Bachelet et al. 200 I) and lightning frequency 
(Price and Rind 1994), which could increase ignitions 
and the length of fire seasons, further exacerbating 
wildfire effects. 
Policy-making depends on technical and scientific 
information, but the choices made are inherently po­
litical ones . For this reason, even if a particular issue 
is relatively uncomplicated and the design ofa solution 
may be eas ily understood, policy formulation is often 
complicated. Substantive objectives, such as fuel haz­
ard reduction, must compete for legislative and ad­
ministrative attention and resources with other worth­
while objectives and programs. Similarly, other forces 
can deflect the consideration of substantive objectives 
and priorities, even when they are supported by sci­
entific and technical information. Budgetary concerns, 
for example, may override even the soundest program­
matic proposals. The policy process generally responds 
to conflicting objectives by making choices about pri­
orities and methods as it designs programs. Compli­
cated arguments are often reduced to simple ones, in 
order to enact a program intended to address essential 
aspects of a particular issue. These aspects of legis­
lative and policy processes may help those attempting 
to create new fire policy to further understand the gaps 
and shortcomings in the present policy environment. 
The preceding review of wildland fire policies argues 
that despite recent legislative enhancements, the pre­
sent amalgamation of pol ices remains inadequate and 
does not provide a comprehensive scientific framework 
to address the issues and problems of wildland fire. 
Refocusing federal and public agency efforts will re­
quire partial redirection of the missions of land-man­
agement agencies. For this reason, the US Congress, 
with the assistance of the National Academy of Sci­
ences, should commission an independent and thorough 
review of wildland fire-fighting and fuels-management 
objectives and strategies. The results will inform Con­
gress and the public on the status and effectiveness of 
wildland fire polices and on continuing and emer ging 
issues. The information is also likely to be useful to 
agencies who must ensure that their fire-fighting and 
fuels-treatments strategies are effective and efficient, 
if for no other reasons than that they must protect public 
Vol. 15, No. 2 
safety and must maximize scarce resources. Finally, to 
the extent that the report confirms existing data that 
tend to suggest that current policies insufficiently pur­
sue the objective of reducing fire severity, this infor­
mation would provide additional support for legislative 
reforms to change the ' behavior of federal land-man­
agement agencies. 
The nature of the legislative and policy processes 
suggest that it will be difficult to successfully promote 
and enact major legislation to substantively reform and 
redirect existing fire policy. Despite recent attention 
focused on the issue in Congress in the aftermath of 
the fires of 2003, legislative support for the elements 
of the proposal will take time . While Congress's recent 
attention may be unlikely to extend to additional leg­
islative init iatives, enactment of the HFRA clearly did 
not settle all of the outstanding fuel-man agement issues 
and concerns. Indeed, budget and funding issues are 
likely to require ongoing congressional attention (Bos­
worth 2004). Further, even if the series of legislative 
and programmatic changes were enacted, the physical 
setting, natural variability, and large area of fuels ac­
cumulations and fire hazards that are already identified 
suggest that the successful implementation of such a 
program will require substantial shift in agency be­
havior and priorities. 
Many of the essential ingredients of a science-based 
national program are already being implemented at a 
variety of scales in disparate locations on federal and 
private lands, as small-to-medium-scale fuels-manage­
ment programs, research investigations (e.g., The Na­
tional Study of Fire and Fire Surrogate Treatments for 
Ecological Restoration), and management programs in­
cluding ongoing prescribed natural fire areas (van Wag­
tendonk 1994, Rollins et al. 200 I). Community-based 
efforts from the National Fire Plan are reducing fire 
hazards in the urban-wildland intermix using collab­
orative agreements. This offers an opportunity to ob­
serve the effectiveness of an overall approach aimed a 
reduction of potential fire severity. Employing these 
strategies with collaborative planning and adaptive 
management will point the way for developing a sci­
ence-based federal wildland policy. Experimentation 
and research (e.g., The Joint Fire Sciences Program) 
should be encouraged as tools to enable safer and more 
effective methods of addressing the problems caused 
by uncharacteristically severe forest fires . 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We thank Em ily Moghaddas, Neil Sug ihara, and Jason 
Moghadda s for reviewing an earlier version of this manu­
script. We thank Jerry Williams for dis cussions about fire 
suppression and the anonymous reviewers who provided feed­
back that improved the paper. 
LITERATURE CITED 
Agee, J. K. 1974 . Fire management in the National Parks. 
. 
Western Wildlands 1:27- 33. 
Agee, J. K. 2003 . The fallaey of passive management. Con­
servation Biology in Practice 1:18-25. 

April 2005  
UNITED STATES FEDERAL FOREST-FIRE POLICY 
541 
Agee, J. K., B. Bahro, M. A. Finney, P.N. Omi, D. B. Saps is, 
C. N. Skinner, J. W. Wagtendonk, and C. P. Weatherspoon. 
2000. The use of shaded fuelbrcaks in landscape fire man­
agement. Forest Ecology and Management 127 :55-66. 
Bachclet, D., R. P. Ne ilson, J. M. Lenihan, and R. J. Drapck. 
2001 . Climate change effects on vegetation distribution 
and carbon budget in the Un ited States. Ecosystems 4: 164­
185. 
Benner, J., and D. Wade . 1992 . Florida's prescribed burn ing 
act of 1992. Journal of Forestry 90:27-30. 
Bickford, C. A., and L. S. Newcomb. 1946 . Prescribed burn­
ing in the Florida flatwoods. Fire Control Notes 7: 17-23. 
Biswell, H. H. 1961. The big trees and fire. National Parks 
and Conservation Magazine 35 :11-14. 
Biswell, H. H. 1989 . Prescribed burning in California wild­
land vegetation management. University of California 
Press, Berkeley, California, USA . 
Bosworth, D. 2004. "Fircfighting transfers hurt partnerships 
the most, Bosworth says." Env ironment and Energy Daily, 
J2 March 2004, BudgetIForests (Dan Berman, reporter). 
(http://www /eenews.netlEEDaily.php) 
Carle, D. 2002. Burning questions: Americas fight withna­
ture's fire . Praeger Publishers, Westport, Connecticut, USA. 
Chapman, H. H. 1926. Factors determining natural regen­
cration of longleaf pine on cut-over lands in the LaSalle 
Parish, Louisiana. Bulletin number 16. Yale School of For­
estry, New Haven, Connecticut, USA. 
Christensen, N. L., J. K. Agee, P. E Brussard, J. Hughes, D. 
H. Knight, G. W. Minshall, J. M. Peek, S. J. Pyne, F. J. 
Swanson, J. W. Thomas, S. Wells , S. E. Williams, and H. 
A. Wright. 1998. 
Interpreting thc Yellowstone fires of 
1988. BioScience 39 :678-685 . 
Clar, C. R. 1959 . Ca lifornia government and forestry. Di­
visi on of Forestry, State of California, Sacramento, Cali­
forn ia, USA. 
Clark, J. S. 1988 . Effects of climate change on fire reg imes 
in Northwestern Minnesota. Nature 334:233-235. 
Cooper, C. E 1960. Changes in vegetation structure and 
growth of southwestern pine forests since white settlement. 
Ecological Monographs 30 :129-164. 
DeBruin, H. W. 1974 . From fire control to fire management: 
a major policy change in the Forest Service. Proceedings 
of the Tall Timbers Fire Ecology Conference 14:11-17. Tall 
Timbers Rese arch Station, Tall ahassee Florida, USA. 
DuBois, C. 1914 . Systematic fire protection in the California 
fore sts. U.S. Forest Service, Washington, D.C., USA . 
Finney, M. A. 2001. Design of regular landscape fuel treat­
ment patterns for modifying fire growth and behavior, For­
est Science 47:219-228. 
Franklin, J. E, and J. A. Agee . 2003. Forging a science-based 
national forest fire policy. Issues in Science and Technology 
20:59-66. 
. 
Fried, J. S., M. S. Torn, and E. Mills. 2004. The impact of 
climate change on wildfire severity: a regional forec ast for 
Northern California. Climatic Change 64 :169 -1 91. 
Fule, P. Z., A. E. M. Waltz, W. W. Covington, and T. A. 
He inlein. 200 I. Measuring fore st restoration effectiveness 
in hazardous fuels reduction. Journal of Forestry 99:24­
29. 
GAO  [U.S . General Accounting Office] . 2002. Severe wild­
land fires: leadership and accountahility needed to reduce 
risks to communities and resources. Report GAO-02-259. 
U.S. Gen eral Accounting Office, Washington, D.C., USA . 
GAO [U.S. General Accounting Office]. 2003 . Forest service 
fuels reduction. Report GAO-03-689R. U.S. General Ac­
counting Office, Washington, D.C., USA. 
GAO [U.S. General Accounting Office ]. 2004 . Wildfire sup­
pre ssion fund ing transfers cause project cancellations and 
delays, strained relationships, and management disruptions. 
Report GAO-04-612. U.S. General Accounting Office, 
Washington, D.C., USA . 
Graves, H. S. 1910. Protection of forests from fire. Forest 
Service Bull etin 82. USDA Forest Service, Washington, 
D.C., USA. 
Greeley, W. B. 1951. Forests and men . Doubleday, Garden 
City, Long Island, New York , USA . 
Hartesveldt, R. J., and H. T. Harvey. 1967 . The fire ecology 
of sequoia regeneration. Proceedings of the Tall Timbers 
Fire Ecology Conference 6:65-77. Tall Timbers Research 
Station, Tallahassee, Florida, USA . 
HFRA [Healthy Forest Restoration Act]. 2003. Healthy For­
est Restoration Act of 2003 . Public Law 108-148, Statutes 
at Large I 17:1887. 
Ingalsbee, T. 2001. Wildland fire use in roadless areas: re­
storing ecosystems and rewilding landscapes. Fire Man­
agement Today 61 :29- 32. 
Kalabokidis, K. D., and P. N. Omi. 1998. Redu ction of fire 
hazard through thinning residue disposal in the urb an in­
terface. International Journal of Wildland Fire 8:29-35. 
Karl , T. R. 1998. Regional trends and variations of temper­
ature and precipitation. Pages 4 I 2-425 in R. T. Watson, 
M. C. Zinyowera, R. H. Moss, and D. J. Dokken, editors. 
The Regional Impacts of Climate Change: An assessment 
of vulnerability. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
UK. 
Kilgore, B. M. 1974 . Fire management in National Parks: an 
overview. Proceedings of the Tall Timbers Fire Ecology 
Conference. 14:45-57. Tall Timbers Research Station, Tal­
lahassee, Florida, USA . 
Kilgore, B. M., and G. S. Briggs. 1972 .  Restoring fire to high 
elevation forests in California. Journal of Forestry 70 :266­
271. 
Komarek, E. V. 1962. The use of fire: an hist orical back­
ground. Proceedings of the Tall Timbers Fire Ecology Con ­
ference 1:7-10. Tall Timbers Research Station, Tallahassee 
Florida, USA . 
Leopold, S. A., S. A. Ca in, C. A. Cottam, I. N. Gabrielson, 
and T. L. Kimball. 1963 . Wildlife management in the Na­
tional Parks. American Forestry 69 :32-35; 61-63. 
Martin, R. E., J. B. Kauffman, and J. D. Landsberg. 1989 . 
Use of prescribed fire to reduce wildfire potential. General 
Technical Report PSW-GTR-109. USDA Forest Service, 
Pacific Southwest Rese arch Station, Berkeley, Cal ifornia, 
USA. 
Moore, M. M., W. W. Covington, and P. Z. Fule. 1999 . Ref­
erence conditions and ecological restoration: a Southwest­
ern ponderosa pine perspective. Ecological Applications 9: 
1266--1277. 
NIFC [National Interagency Fire Center]. 2004. Urban-wild­
land and wildland fire statistics. (http://Www.nifc.govl), 
National Interagency Fire Center, Boise, Idaho, USA. 
NWCG [National Wildfire Coordinating Group]. 2001. Re­
view and update of the 1995 federal wildland fire man­
agem ent pol icy. National Interagency Fire Center. Bo ise, 
Idaho, USA . 
Parsons, D. J., D. M. Graber, J. K. Agee, and J. W. van 
Wagtendonk. 1986. Natural fire management in National 
Parks . Environmental Management 10:21-24. 
Pinchot, G. 1907. The use of the National Forests. USDA 
Fore st Ser vice, Washington, D.C., USA . 
Pollet, J., and P. N. Omi. 2002. Effect of thinning and pre­
scribed burning on wildfire severity in ponderosa pine for­
ests. International Journal of Wildland Fire 11: 1-10. 
Price, C., and D. Rind . 1994. The impact ofa 2 X CO , climate 
on lightning cau sed fires. Journal of Climate 7: 1484-1494. 
Pyne, S. J.  1982. Fire in America: a cultural history of wild­
land and rural fire . Princeton Un iversity Press, Princeton, 
New Jersey, USA. 

542 
Ecological Applications
scorr L. STEPHENS AND LAWRENCE W. RUTH 
Vol. 15, No.2 
Rollins, M. G., T. W. Swetnam, and P. Morgan. 2001. Eval­
uating a century of fire patterns in two Rocky Mountain 
wilderness areas using digital fire atlases. Canadian Journal 
of Forest Research 31:2107-2123. 
Romme, W. H., and D'. L. Knight. 1981. Firc frequency and 
subalpine forest succession along a topographic gradient 
in Wyoming. Ecology 62 :319-326. 
Ruth, L. 2000. Conservation on the cusp : the reformation of 
national forest policy in the Sierra Nevada. University of 
California, Los Angeles, Journal ofEnvironmental Law and 
Policy 18:1-97. 
Schiff, A. L. 1962. Fire and water; scientific heresy in the 
Forest Service. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mas­
sachusetts, USA . 
Schmidt, K. M., J. P. Mcnakis, C. C. Hardy, W. J. Hann, and 
D. L. Bunnell. 2002 . Development of coarse-scale spatial 
data for wildland fire and fuel management. General Tech­
nical Report RMRS-GTR-87. USDA Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA . 
Shea, J. P. 1940. Our pappies burned the woods and set a 
pattern of human behavior in the southern forests that calls 
for new methods of fire prevention. American Forests 46: 
159-162. 
Shindler, B., and K. A. Cheek. 1999. Integrating citizens in 
adaptive management: a propositional analysis. Journal of 
Conservation Ecology 3:13-29. 
Show, S. B., and E. I. Kotok. 1924. The role of fire in the 
California pine forests. USDA Bulletin number 1294. Unit­
ed States Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C. , 
USA . 
Smith, J. K. 2000. Wildland fire in ecosystems: effects of 
fire on fauna. General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-42. 
Volume I. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Re­
search Station, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA. 
Stephens, S. L. 1998. Effects of fuels and silvicultural treat­
ments on potential fire behavior in mixed conifer forests 
of the Sierra Nevada, CA . Forest Ecology and Management 
105:21-34. 
Stephens, S. L. 2004 . Fuel loads , snag abundance, and snag 
recruitment in an unmanaged Jeffrcy pine-mixed conifer 
forest in northwestern Mexico. Forest Ecology and Man­
agementI99:103-113. 
Stephens, S. L., and S. J. Gill. 2005 . Forest structure and 
mortality in an old-growth Jeffrey pine-mixed conifer for­
est in Northwestern Mexico. Forest Ecology and Manage­
ment, 205 :15-28. 
Stephens, S. L., C. N. Skinner, and S. J. Gill. 2003 . Den­
drochronology-based fire history of Jeffrey pine-mixed co­
nifer forests in the Sierra San Pedro Martir, Mexico. Ca­
nadian Journal of Forest Research 33:1090-1101. 
Swetnam,  T. W. 1993. Fire history and climate change in 
sequoia groves. Science 262:885-889. 
Swetnam, T. W., C. D. Allen, and J. L. Betancourt. 1999. 
Applied historical ecology: using the past to manage for 
the future. Ecological Applications 9: 1189-1206. 
Swetnam, T. w., and J. I. Betancourt. 1990. Fire-southern 
oscillation relations in the Southwestern United States. Sci­
ence 249:1017-1020. 
Torn, M. S., and J. S. Fried. 1992. Predicting the impact of 
global warming on wildfire. Climatic Change 21:257-274. 
Turner, M. G., and W.H. Romme. 1994. Landscape dynamics 
in crown fire ecosystems. Landscape Ecology 9:59-77. 
USDA [U.S. Department of Agriculture]. 1995. Course to 
the future : positioning fire and aviation management. 
USDA Forest Service, Department of Fire and Aviation 
Management, Washington, D.C ., USA . 
USDA-USDI. 2000. A report to the President in response 
to 
the 
wildfires 
of 2000. 
USDA 
and 
USDI. 
] 
(www.fireplan.gov\president.cfm). 
USDI [U.S. Department of the Interior]. 1968. Compilation 
of the fire administrative policies for the National Parks 
and monuments of scientific significance. U.S . National 
Park Service, Washington, D.C., USA . 
USDI-USDA. 1995. Federal wildland fire management and 
policy and program review. USD[ Bureau of Land Man­
agement, Boise, Idaho, USA. 
van Wagtendonk, J. W. [991 . The evolution of National Park 
fire policy. Fire Management Notes 52:10-15. 
van Wagtendonk, J. W. 1994. Spatial patterns of lightning 
strikes and fires in Yosemite National Park. Proceedings of 
the Conference on Fire and Forest Meteorology 12:223-231. 
Society of American Foresters, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. 
van Wagtendonk, 1. W. 1996. Use of a deterministic fire 
growth model to test fuel treatments. Pages 1155-1166 in 
Assessments and scientific basis for management options. 
Sierra Nevada Ecosystem Project. Final Report to Con ­
gress. Volume II. University of California, Centers for Wa­
ter and Wildland Resources, Davis, California, USA. 
Veblen, T. T., K. S. Hadley, E. M. Nell, T. Kitzberger, M. 
Reid, and R. Villalba. 1994. Disturbance regime and dis­
turbance interactions in a Rocky Mountain subalpine forest. 
Journal of Ecology 82: 125-136. 
Weatherspoon, C. P., and C. N. Skinner. 1996. Fire silvicul­
ture relationships in Sierra Forests. Pages 1167-1176 in 
Assessments and scientific basis for management options. 
Sierra Nevada Ecosystem Project. Final Report to Con­
gres s. Volume II. University of California, Centers for Wa­
ter and Wildland Resources, Davis, California, USA. 
Weaver, H. 1943. Fire as an ecological and silvicultural factor 
in the ponderosa pine region of the Pacific slope. Journal 
of Forestry 41:7-15. 
WGA [Western Governor's Association] . 2001. A collaborative 
approach for reducing wildland fire risk to communities and 
the environment: lO-ycar comprehensive strategy. Western 
Governors' 
Association 
[accessed 
10 
May 
2003] 
(www.westgov.orglwga/in itiatives/fire/final_fireJPt.pdf). 
