A panel of 
practitioners and 
researchers advises 
creation of separate 
program to support 
restoration-related 
research. 
148 
Supporting Research 
in Restoration Biology 
NSF Workshop Offers 
Recommendations 
by Edith B. Allen, W. Wallace Covington, 
andDonFalk 
W
hen the National Science Foun-
dation initiated· the Special Pro-
gram in Conservation and Restoration Bi-
ology ( CRB) in 1989, restorationists saw it 
as a milestone in the coming age of resto-
ration. Most previous research in restora-
tion had been funded privately or, where 
state and federal funds were involved, was 
more often for the utilitarian purposes of 
reclamation or rehabilitation. This was the 
first time restoration was treated as a legit-
imate area for basic research. The CRB 
Program seemed like a move that would 
help improve the quality of restoration re-
search and promote increased participa-
tion by academic researchers. 
However, the results of the program 
have been disappointing. Out of some 15 
proposals funded each year, on average 
only one or two were restoration proposals. 
This reflected the small proportion of res-
toration proposals submitted and raises the 
question of why so few researchers chose 
to submit restomtion-oriented proposals. 
In contrast, the program has been enor-
mously successful for conservation re-
searchers, who submitted the bulk of the 
funded proposals. Conservation genetics 
and population-level conservation re-
search have made great strides in both ba-
sic and applied research since 1989, and 
have become part of mainstream research 
in population ecology and genetics. Partly 
for this reason, future proposals in this area 
are likely to be well received by reviewers 
and panelists engaged in mainstream ge-
netics and population biology research. In 
fact, "mainstreaming" is the intent of spe-
cial programs at NSF, the idea being to pro-
mote areas that have previously been ne-
glected, raising them to the status of 
traditional research areaS. Special pro-
grams at NSF are designed to last some four 
years, but after seven years of the CRB Pro-
gram restoration research has still not be-
come part of ecological mainstream re-
. search, ;md has progressed little in 
conceptual development. 
To help change this trend in restora-
tion research, we organized a workshop on 
"Developing the Conceptual Basis for Res-
toration Biology." We consulted with 
Scott Collins, a CRB program officer, on 
the approaches and results that would be 
most useful for NSF. There are social, po-
litical and economic limitations to resto-
ration, but NSF can help only in the area 
of scientific limitations so we focused our 
workshop on the scientific aspects of res-
toration. We all felt that one of the reasons 
so few ecologists cllose to submit proposals 
is that restoration is still viewed as a dis-
cipline without the conceptual basis 
needed to support basic research. Michael 
Soule and Kathryn Kohm's book, Research 
Priorities for Conservation Biology (1989), 
helped to develop the conceptual basis for 
conservation biology, but a similar ap-
proach has never been taken for restora-
tion. While Soule and Kohm discussed res-
toration, they presented it as a job for land 
managers, and not a scientific discipline. 
They also downplayed the importance of 
·restoration for conservation, arguing that 
REsToRATION & MANAGEMENT Nons 
14:2 Winter 1996 

we should be more concerned with con-
serving existing land than restoring dis-
turbed sites. However, interest in restora-
tion research has been increasing, and 
ecologists have pointed out the need for 
restoration to develop its own conceptual 
base (Pickett and Parker, 1994}. It was 
with this in mind that we assembled a 
group of restoration researchers and prac-
titioners to discuss this issue. 
The workshop was held at the Na-
tional Center for Ecological Analysis and 
Synthesis in Santa Barbara on Aprill9-21, 
1996. Of the 3 7 participants, about one-
third were practicing restorationists and/or 
agency researchers, and two~thirds had 
university affiliations. There were approx-
imately equal proportions of participants 
with interests in population, community, 
ecosystem and landscape ecology, repre-
senting both aquatic and terrestrial habi-
tats. The participants included researchers 
who had been on the CRB panel as review-
ers, several who had had proposals funded 
by the program, and several whose propos-
als had been rejected. Below ~re the results 
of four general areas of discussion, includ-
ing the interactions between practitioners 
and scientists, a summary of basic concepts 
in need of research; problems mttinsic t6 
restoration research, and recommenda-
tions the group made to NSF regarding the 
restoration research program. 
Interactions Between 
Researchers and Practitioners 
During the first day of the workshop we 
discussed the need for a better relationship 
between restoration researchers and prac-
titioners. There are thousands of restora-
tion projects underway across the United 
States, but reiatively little involvement by 
researchers in planning and carrying them 
out. The workshop began with presenta· 
tions of several prominent case studies, in-
cluding those being carried out at the Kis-
simmee River, Midwestern prairies, and 
streams in the Pacific Northwest. The 
group felt that in all these . cases results 
could be improved through the use of adap-
tive management-building partnerships 
between practitioners and researchers, and 
closing the decision-making loop. from 
planning to implementation,· to assess-
ment ~nd redesign. 
While practitioners have taken the 
lead in this area, often contributing at ba-
sic as well as applied levels, it was clear that 
their success is often limited by their un-
derstanding of the ecosystems involved. 
Restorationists typically think in terms of 
particular kinds of ecosystems, which often 
results in a product-oriented rather than a 
process-oriented approach to restoration. 
We have to remember that ecosystems are 
living, changing systems, and that their di-
versity, functioning, and dynamic pro-
. cesses remain largely unstudied. Further-
more, the assessment portion of the 
decision-making loop of adaptive manage-
ment is still open, and this has lead to nu· 
merous failed efforts. At the same time, 
failure has often been due to agency-man-
dated restoration plans that fly in the face 
of what restorationists already know. This 
underlines the importance of closer collab-
oration among agencies, land manage-
ment agencies, and scientists at all stages 
of the process. Ultimately, the practice 
needs to be grounded in science, and sci-
entists need opportunities to conduct re-
search in real-life restoration settings. 
Conceptual Iss~~~ in 
Restoration Biology 
The second day of the workshop was de-
voted to the conceptual issues that form 
the basis of the report to NSF. Scientists 
working at the population, community, 
ecosystem, and landscape levels discussed 
conceptual issues'restorationists deal with 
at those levels-first in talks by individual 
speakers, and then in discussion groups. In 
addition to the report to NSF, participants 
agreed to write more-extended treatments 
that will be published in Restoration Ecol-
ogy. The charge to the participants was to 
develop conc~ptual issues in a form that 
might be used in a call for proposals to an 
NSF restoration program. The groups dis-
cussed scientific issues that are central to 
restoration ecology, and identified specific 
conceptual and practical research needed 
to advance. the science of restoration ecol-
ogy. These included: 
• Defining reference conditions or refer-
ence sites; 
• Determining the genetic effects of non-
indigenous populations on indigenous 
populations; 
RESTORATION & MANAGEMENT NOTES 
14:2 Winter 1996 
• Understanding community develop-
ment on restored sites; 
• Identifying and restoring natural distur-
bance-regimes; 
• Developing and using quantitative 
methods for evaluating unreplicated res-
toration trials; 
• Defining the minimum area needed to 
restore ecosystem functioning; 
• Understanding the landscape and scale 
effects on the outcome of restoration ef-
forts . 
Even though practitioners regularly 
confront many of these issues in their 
work, there is a lack of basic research that 
must be conducted before restorationists 
can practice their art and be assured of the 
outcome. In this way, a restoration re-
search program can feed directly into the 
practice. 
Intrinsic Problems of 
Restoration Ecology 
The group also discussed problems intrin-
sic to restoration that might discourage 
submission of proposals or place restora-
tion-related proposals at a disadvantage in 
the review process. We identified three 
such problems. The first was lack of control 
when research is carried out in concert 
with an actual restoration project. In cases 
where scientists have cooperated with 
agency-directed restoration projects, they 
have typically played little or no part in the 
project design. Generally, such projects are 
mandated, and proceed along a set time-
table that does not accommodate the 
needs of the researcher. Reviewers under-
standably frown on this lack of control. To 
alleviate this problem, reviewers must be 
sensitized to the limitations imposed by 
practical work. Likewise, researchers must 
take a pro-active approach and assert their 
. interests in the planning of projects. In ad-
dition, new statistical methods are needed, 
and are being developed in several disci-
plines such as landscape ecology and 
aquatic ecology, where replication is also 
limited or not possible. 
The second problem the group dis· 
cussed was the fundamental difficulty of 
identifying the critical elements that de-
fine the ecosystem being restored. Being. 
149 

complex systems, ecosystems offer a virtu-
ally limitless array of processes and inter-
actions, any of which may repay investi-
gation from a purely intellectual point of 
view. Outside restoration ecology, the 
ecologist is free to investigate whatever he 
or she finds intriguing. But the task of re-
storing an ecosystem places ce.nain con-
straints on this process, placing a premium 
on identifying factors that actually play key 
roles in the ecology of the system and pri-
oritizing research objectives accordingly. 
This not necessarily a· compromise-in 
fact it offers a basis-for organizing research 
in a way that is both intellectually rigorous 
and of maximum practical value. At the 
same time, the resulting priorities may con-
flict with those of the research community, 
and tl'fus can cause problems in the review 
process. 
Third, we discussed the problem of se-
lecting reference sites or reference condi-
tions. It is unclear whether inability to de-
fine reference conditions has inhibited 
restoration research, but the kinds of m~a­
surements needed to compare restored and 
reference sites certainly are problematic. 
Species composition may be a convenient 
index of success, but evaluations should 
also indudc a,<,:;essnients of funci:iori, 
which are usually more difficult to design 
and implement. A related problem is time, 
since the usual two· to three-year funding 
period may be inadequate for much resto-
ration-related research . . The NSFs Long 
Term Research in Environmental Biology 
(LTREB) program would be suitable for 
smaller projects, and linkages with Long 
Term Ecological Research (L TER) sites 
150 
obviously provide opportunities for long• 
term studies that deal with ecosystem types 
found in the 18 sites of the L TER network. 
Recommendations for a New 
Restoration Biology Program 
The final topic of discussion was the form 
that a revised Restoration Biology Program 
should take at NSF. All of the participants 
agreed that the program is ineffective in its 
present form, and that a panel that is over-
whelmingly dominated by conservation 
biologists will continue to fund conserva-
tion biology proposals in preference to 
those related to restoration. The discuss-
ants recommended that a separate resto-
ration program is needed. This program 
could take several forms. A special resto-
ration competition that replaces the exist-
ing CRB Program could be created. Or res-
toration could be subsumed under the 
existing programs in the Division of 
Environmental Biology, which includes 
Ecosystem Studies, the Ecology Program, 
Population Biology, Systematics, and 
Longterm Programs (L TER and L TREB). 
All of the participants ·also agreed that co-
operation between NSF and agencies with 
an iutt:rest or niandate in restoration · · 
should be encouraged. Of course, inter-
agency cooperation is currently in fashion, 
but it is especially desirable in the area of 
restoration because of the high costs and 
large areas involved, and because of the im-
portance of coordinating funding and ac-
commodating the wide range of interests 
that are commonly involved in restoration 
efforts. 
In addition to direct funding of resto·. 
ration research, investigators and agencies 
might also arrange for "in kind" support-
for example, providing access to restora-
tion.sites in exchange for needed research. 
All participants agreed on the importance 
of this idea, and recommended that NSF 
should take a leadership role in initiating 
new inter-agency efforts no matter what 
the form of the new restoration program 
maybe. 
The full report of the group's discus-
sion is available on the World Wide Web 
site of the National Center for Ecological 
Analysis and Synthesis at http://www. 
nceas. ucsb.edu/nceas. web/rsrch/proposals/ 
95ALLEN 1/results 1.html 
REFERENCES 
Pickett, S.T.A. and V.T. Parker. 1994. Avoid-
ing the old pitfalls: opportunities in a new 
discipline. Restoration Ecolog:y 2:75-79. 
Soule, M.E. and KA. Kohm, eds. 1989. Re-
search Priorities for Consewation Biology. 
Covelo, CA: Island Press. 
Dr. Edith B. Allen is a NatuTal Resources Exten-
sion Specialist in the Department of Boran:y and 
Plant Sciences, Univenit:y of California, Rivers~ . 
CA 9252I-iJI24 (909/787-2123); and also 
serves as Associate Editor of Restoration Ecolog,. 
Dr. W. Wallace Covington is Regents Professor of 
Forest Ecolo/D in the Department of Forestry Sci-
ences, Northern Arizona Uni11ersicy, Flagstaff, AZ. 
86011. 
Don Falk is the Execurl11e Director of the Sociecy 
for Ecological Restoration, 1207 Seminole High-
wa:y, Madison, W153711 . 
RESTORATION & MANAGEMENT NOTES 
14:2 Winter 1996 
