USDA Forest Service RMRS-P-53CD.  2008.	
171
In: Olberding, Susan D., and Moore, Margaret M., tech coords. 2008. Fort Valley Experimental Forest—A Century of 
Research 1908-2008. Proceedings RMRS-P-53CD. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Research Station. 408 p.
Characteristics of Buckbrush Shrubs 
Exposed to Herbivores after  
Seven Years of Protection
W. Walker Chancellor, David W. Huffman, Ecological Restoration Institute, 
Flagstaff, AZ; and Margaret M. Moore, School of Forestry, Northern Arizona 
University, Flagstaff, AZ
Abstract—In dense ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa Laws.) forests of northern 
Arizona, forage limitations may lead to severe herbivory by large ungulates on certain 
plant species. In 1999, we fenced 76 buckbrush (Ceanothus fendleri Gray) shrubs to 
protect them from herbivores and study growth and reproduction in response to for-
est restoration treatments implemented on the Fort Valley Experimental Forest. After 
seven years, we removed fences from around half the plants and examined herbivore 
impacts on vegetative characteristics. In spring, and again in fall, we measured stem 
heights and took photographs of exposed shrubs and protected controls. In fall, we 
also collected stems to analyze size, biomass, and leaf area. Plants exposed to her-
bivores had significantly less leaf area and total leaf weight than protected control 
plants. Stem length, diameter, and weight were statistically similar between exposed 
and control groups. Results from this study suggest that temporary protection from 
herbivores during the early stages of forest restoration may enhance rates of develop-
ment and persistence of native plants such as buckbrush.
Introduction
Buckbrush (Ceanothus fendleri Gray) is a native shrub species, common in pon-
derosa pine (Pinus ponderosa Laws. var. scopulorum Engelm.) forests of northern 
Arizona. As a nitrogen-fixer, its leaves, stems, and flowers are relatively nutritious, 
which makes buckbrush a preferred browse plant for large ungulates such as mule 
deer (Odocoileus hemionus) and Rocky Mountain elk (Cervus elaphus) (Urness 
et al. 1975, Allen 1996). In some areas, herbivory on buckbrush can be severe 
and constrain growth, flowering, and stem recruitment (Huffman and Moore 2003). 
Large mature buckbrush plants typically have stout woody stems and spines that 
discourage herbivory (Kearney and Peebles 1964). Where herbivory is severe, how-
ever, plants may remain small and have reduced structural defenses. In this study, 

172	
USDA Forest Service RMRS-P-53CD.  2008.
we were interested in herbivore effects on buckbrush during the process of ponde-
rosa pine forest restoration. Specifically, we wondered if protecting buckbrush from 
large herbivores for a period of several years following forest thinning would allow 
plants to develop resistant morphologies. If this were true, we would expect few 
differences between control plants (those that remained protected from herbivores) 
and exposed plants for which protection had been removed. Conversely, if plants 
did not develop adequate defenses during the protection period, exposing them to 
herbivores should result in measurable morphological differences compared with 
controls. This research was designed to provide information that could be used by 
forest managers to anticipate outcomes and refine restoration prescriptions for pon-
derosa pine forests of northern Arizona.
Methods
Study Design
We conducted our study on the Fort Valley Experimental Forest in Coconino 
County approximately 10 km northwest of Flagstaff, AZ. In 1998-1999, forest units 
of 14-16 hectares in size were thinned as part of a larger ecological restoration 
experiment conducted at the site (see Fulé et al. 2001 for restoration prescription 
details). Soon after thinning, we located 76 buckbrush plants and built “rabbit 
wire” exclosures around them in order to protect the shrubs from large herbivores. 
Exclosures were 2 x 2 m in area and 1.4 m in height. In the center of these, we 
established circular sample plots, each with a radius of 56.4 cm (1 m2 in area). 
Exclosures were left in place for seven years until 2006. In spring of 2006, we 
randomly selected half of the exclosures (n = 33) to remove. We counted stems on 
plots, collected stem height measurements, and took photographs of the buckbrush 
shrubs within plots at the time of exclosure removal.
In October, one growing season after exclosures had been removed, we returned 
to the plots and again collected stem height measurements and took photographs. 
We also harvested stems for detailed laboratory analysis. Stems were systematically 
selected by harvesting the three closest to the center of each plot. Stems were stored 
in a cooler until processed in the laboratory. For each harvested stem, we measured 
leaf area, stem length and diameter, and stem and leaf biomass (dry weight) in the 
lab. One-sided leaf area per stem was measured by removing all leaves, placing 
them on a light table, and using a video projection system (AGVIS). Stem length 
was measured to the nearest cm and diameter was measured to the nearest mm us-
ing a digital caliper. Stems and leaves were dried at 70 ºC for 48 hours then weighed 
to determine biomass.
Data Analyses
To test for differences between protected controls and exposed plants, we used 
one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). The Shapiro-Wilk and Leven’s tests were 
used to test for data normality and homogeneity of variance, respectively. Raw data 
were transformed using natural logarithm values when the above tests indicated 
that ANOVA assumptions had not been met. Statistical differences were considered 
significant at P ≤ 0.05.

USDA Forest Service RMRS-P-53CD.  2008.	
173
Spring pretreatment differences in mean stem number and height between control 
and exposed groups were tested and no significant differences were found. For late 
summer post-treatment stem collections, parameters tested were mean leaf area per 
stem, leaf weight per stem, stem weight, stem length, and stem diameter. We also 
used simple linear regression (P < 0.05) to test relationships between stem length 
and leaf weight per stem. All tests were performed using SAS JMP Version 4.
Results
Plants exposed to herbivores for one growing season had significantly less leaf 
area per stem and total leaf weight per stem than protected control plants (Table 1). 
Leaf area and leaf weight differed between control and exposed groups by a factor 
of four.
No significant differences in stem length, stem diameter, or stem weight were 
found between protected control and exposed plants (Table 1). 
Regressions indicated significant (P < 0.001) positive relationships between stem 
length and leaf weight per stem (Figure 1). This relationship was stronger for plants 
protected from herbivores than those that had been exposed.
Table 1. Means (and standard errors) of buckbrush (Ceanothus fendleri) characteristics 
for protected control and exposed plants. P-values less than 0.05 indicate statistically 
significant differences between control and exposed means.
Variable 	
Control	
Exposed	
P-value 
Leaf Area (cm2) 	
40.63 (1.19)	
10.13 (1.21)	
< 0.001
Leaf Weight (g stem-1)	
0.321 (1.21)	
0.076 (1.22)	
< 0.001
Stem Weight (g)	
0.836 (0.812)	
0.829 (1.23)	
0.9694
Stem Length (cm)	
22.85 (1.09)	
19.88 (1.10)	
0.1743
Stem Diameter (mm)	
2.90 (1.06)	
2.91 (1.07)	
0.9526
Figure 1. Relationships  
(P < 0.001) between 
stem length and leaf 
weight per stem for 
protected control (solid 
circles) and exposed 
(gray squares) buckbrush 
plants. Leaf weight 
values have been natural 
log-transformed to 
improve linearity.

174	
USDA Forest Service RMRS-P-53CD.  2008.
Discussion and Conclusions
Results from this study suggest that short-term protection during the early stages 
of forest restoration may allow buckbrush plants to develop characteristics that 
provide resistance to herbivory. For example, stem characteristics such as length, 
diameter, and weight were similar between protected control plants and those 
that were exposed for one growing season after seven years of protection. Since 
buckbrush stems produce woody tissue and spines as they grow larger and older, 
protection for a number of years appears to allow these defensive structures to 
develop and increase this species’ resistance to herbivory by large animals such as 
Rocky Mountain elk. This conclusion is supported by earlier work done by Huffman 
and Moore (2003) at the Fort Valley site, which showed that buckbrush plants pro-
tected from large herbivores for two years had stem lengths averaging more than 
two-times longer than those of plants that had never been protected. In addition, 
protected plants in Huffman and Moore’s (2003) study had larger stem diameter 
and more current-year biomass than unprotected plants. Intensive use appeared to 
create a positive feedback loop by keeping buckbrush plants in a reduced form with 
few mechanisms to deter further herbivory. In our study, seven years may have 
been a long enough period of protection to allow defensive structures to develop. 
However, because we examined buckbrush characteristics only one year after pro-
tection was removed, it is not clear whether these plants will remain resistant if 
herbivore pressure continues to be high in the future. Similarly, for other species 
without defensive structures, longer-term protection may be needed (Shepperd and 
Fairweather 1994).
Although stem size and weight were similar between protected and exposed 
plants, we found large differences in leaf area and leaf weight between the two 
treatment groups. Total dry weight of leaves on individual stems may be predicted 
from stem length and the equations presented in this study may be used by man-
agers to determine forage availability and for monitoring. This relationship was 
weaker for stems defoliated as a result of exposure to herbivory. Defoliation may 
lead to a variety of plant responses both detrimental as well as beneficial to persis-
tence of populations (Maschinski and Whitham 1989); however, we did not attempt 
to assess such effects in our study. More work is needed to determine the effects of 
short-term, intensive losses of buckbrush leaf area on processes such as flowering 
and viable seed production. The data presented in this study suggest that treatments 
to restore northern Arizona ponderosa pine forests should include temporary meth-
ods to decrease herbivory in order to help conserve populations of native plants.

USDA Forest Service RMRS-P-53CD.  2008.	
175
References
Allen, C.D. 1996. Elk response to the La Mesa fire and current status in the Jemez 
mountains. pp.179-195 in Allen, C.D. (ed.), Proceedings of the 2nd La Mesa Fire 
Symposium. USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RM-GTR-286, Rocky 
Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, CO, U.S.A.
Fulé, P.Z.; McHugh, C.; Heinlein, T.A.; Covington, W.W. 2001. Potential fire behavior 
is reduced following forest restoration treatments. Pp. 28-35 in Vance, R.K., C.B. 
Edminster, W.W. Covington, and J.A. Blake (comps.), Ponderosa pine ecosystems 
restoration and conservation: steps toward stewardship. USDA Forest Service 
Proceedings RMRS-P-22.
Huffman, D.W.; Moore, M.M. 2003. Ungulate herbivory on buckbrush in an Arizona 
ponderosa pine forest. Journal of Range Management. 56: 358-363.
Kearney, T.H.; Peebles, R.H. 1951. Arizona flora. University of California Press, Los 
Angeles, CA, U.S.A.
Maschinski, J.; Whitham, T.G. 1989. The continuum of plant responses to herbivory: 
the influence of plant association, nutrient availability, and timing. The American 
Naturalist.134: 1-19.
Shepperd, W.D.; Fairweather, M.L. 1994. Impact of large ungulates in restoration of 
aspen communities in a southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystem. Pp. 344-347 in 
Covington, W.W., and L.F. DeBano (tech. eds.), Sustainable ecological systems: 
implementing an ecological approach to land management. USDA Forest Service 
General Technical Report RM-247.
Urness, P.J.; Neff, D.J.; Watkins, R.K. 1975. Nutritive value of mule deer forages on 
ponderosa pine summer range in Arizona. Res. Note RM-304. Fort Collins, CO, 
U.S.A. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station.
The content of this paper reflects the views of the author(s), who are responsible for the 
facts and accuracy of the information presented herein.
