13
Ecological Restoration Institute
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
www.eri.nau.edu
Working Papers in Southwestern 
Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
Treating Slash after
Restoration Thinning
August 2005 

Working Papers in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native species, structural
characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological Restoration International
defines restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an
ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability. . . . Restoration attempts to return
an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration International 2004).
In the southwestern United States, most ponderosa pine forests have been degraded during the last
150 years; many areas are now dominated by dense thickets of small trees and have lost their once
diverse understory. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing
fires and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers on
reintroducing frequent, low-intensity surface fires—often after first thinning dense stands—and
reestablishing productive understory plant communities. The Ecological Restoration Institute at
Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, implementing, and monitoring ecological
restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. By allowing natural processes such as fire to
resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem
services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
Every restoration project needs to be site specific, but the detailed experience of field practitioners
may help guide practitioners elsewhere. The Working Papers series presents findings and
management recommendations from research and observations by the ERI and its partner
organizations.
This publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Service.
The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be
interpreted as representing the opinions or policies of the U.S. Government. Mention of trade
names or commercial products does not constitute their endorsement by the U.S. Government.
1: Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons and Adaptive Management Practices
2: Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3: Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
4: Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits
5: Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
6: Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
7: Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
8: Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
9: Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
10: The Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Restoration Model
11: Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration
12: Restoring Forest Roads

Treating Slash after Restoration Thinning
Introduction
Restoration thinning of ponderosa pine forests often results in large quantities of slash
that can be challenging to treat. As is true of most aspects of forest restoration, there is
no one-size-fits-all approach for dealing with slash. In fact, there are several options
commonly used in southwestern forests, each with its own advantages and
disadvantages. It is important for land managers to understand the long-term
implications of slash removal methods on ecosystem processes. This paper presents
standard methods for disposing of slash, as well as the ecological and logistical tradeoffs
associated with each method.
Ecosystem Considerations
Soil
Healthy soil is the building block for all other ecosystem processes. The use of
mechanized equipment for thinning a restoration site and piling slash can cause soil
compaction and degrade the overall quality of the soil (Elseroad et al. 2003). High-
intensity fires, whether broadcast burns or in slash piles, can also severely damage soils,
leaving them sterile and unproductive.
Fungi
Mycorrhizal fungi are part of the natural biota in southwestern forest ecosystems and
often serve as a good indicator of ecosystem health. Found in the soil, these fungi
promote the growth and diversity of native plants, bind soil particles, and inhibit the
growth of invasive plant species (Marler et al. 1999). Approximately eighty percent of
vascular plants form a mutualistic relationship with arbuscular mycorrhizae (Korb and
Springer 2003). Research suggests that mycorrhizal fungi can be disrupted when slash is
burned, even at temperatures as low as 80°C (Selmants et al. 2003).
Seed bank
Existing seeds in the soil are important for the recolonization of a restoration site. If the seed bank has adequate
numbers of viable native seeds, a plant community may be able to reestablish itself without manual seeding (Korb
and Springer 2003). Seed banks vary according to location, site history, and the degree of disturbance. Low-intensity
short-duration burns generally do not severely impact the seed bank; in fact, such fires appear to stimulate the
germination and growth of many native herbaceous plants (unpublished data, Scott Abella, Ecological Restoration
Institute). However, invasive plants are likely to colonize both areas disturbed by mechanized equipment and areas
where high-intensity fires have burned, resulting in reduced regeneration of native plants.
Plants
The method by which slash is treated directly influences understory plants. Low-intensity broadcast burns of slash
release nitrogen and can result in rapid plant growth. High-intensity burns and heavy use of mechanized
equipment can disturb soils and result in widespread colonization by invasive plant species (Korb et al. 2004;
Haskins and Gehring 2004).
Wildlife
Southwestern ponderosa pine forests are home to many birds, mammals, reptiles, and amphibians (Chambers and
Germaine 2003). If left at a restoration site, larger coarse woody debris can serve as habitat for a number of species,
especially small mammals (Randall-Parker and Miller 2002)
Slash Treatment Methods
Leaving some slash on a restoration site can result in ecological benefits. Course woody debris can protect forest
soils and new seedlings, provide habitat for wildlife, and release valuable nutrients such as nitrogen or phosphorus
into the ecosystem over time (Graham et al. 1994). Some research suggests that leaving 8 to 13 tons per acre of
course woody debris is appropriate in southwestern ponderosa pine forest ecosystems; however, this value is only a
guideline and will not be suitable for every restoration site (Graham et al. 1994).
Slash Disposal: Points
to Consider
1. How much slash will be
produced?
2. Will the slash increase
wildfire hazard or
prescribed fire intensity?
3. How much has been
budgeted for slash
removal?
4. How much slash should
be left onsite to enhance
ecosystem functions?
5. Have the ecological
consequences of each
slash disposal method
been considered?
1
a

Unfortunately, leaving too much slash can increase fire risk and lock up nitrogen. In dealing with slash managers
must balance fire risk with the ecological benefits of leaving some slash in place. They also must assess what is
logistically and financially feasible. Each of the following slash treatment methods has advantages and
disadvantages.
Pile and Burn
Unmarketable wood and debris can be mechanically or manually gathered and piled in small stacks throughout the
restoration site. The piles are then burned when conditions are acceptable – usually when overall fire risk is low.
•
Advantages. Piles can be burned in a controlled manner. This method is relatively inexpensive.
•
Disadvantages. Piled slash can provide habitat for beetles that attack pine trees (Parker 1991). Slash pile
fires can burn as hot as 700°C at the soil surface and at 250°C four inches under the surface (DeBano et al.
1998). Heated soils experience changes to pH, total nitrogen, and organic carbon. The physiochemical
modifications become permanent when soil temperatures reach 180°C (Giovanni et al. 1988). Burning
slash piles with high-intensity fire significantly reduces densities of arbuscular mycorrhizal propagules
(Korb et al. 2004); in fact, these fungi are disrupted at temperatures as low as 80°C (Selmants et al. 2003).
Slash pile scars often remain unvegetated for a long time unless seeds are manually distributed. In some
cases, invasive species take hold at slash pile sites and spread from them (Korb et al. 2004).
•
Recommendations. Build small slash piles on existing roads or disturbed areas to minimize damage to
undisturbed soils. If it is not possible to build piles on an existing road, revegetate pile sites with native
seeds and inoculate them with arbuscular mycorrhizal propagules. This can be done by scooping some
nearby soil onto them; avoid soil from areas infested with invasive plants. Research suggests that these
linked efforts greatly minimize slash pile scars (see box).
Broadcast Burn
If funding is limited or a minimal amount of slash has been produced, scattering and broadcast burning the slash
can be a viable option.
•
Advantages. Low-intensity fires release nitrogen into the ecosystem and can stimulate understory plant
growth. Prescribed burns reduce the risk of catastrophic wildfire by decreasing the overall forest fuel load.
•
Disadvantages. Broadcast burns feeding on heavy loads of slash can be destructive to soils, fungi, the seed
bank, and plants, and can kill trees remaining after thinning. Smoke from large broadcast fires may be
burdensome to the public.
•
Recommendations. Scatter slash away from leave trees in order to protect them during prescribed fire. If
large amounts of slash remain, broadcast burn during cooler, wetter periods when the slash is damp.
Ensure that slash quantities are small enough to retain some open burn windows.
Chip or Grind
Not regularly used in southwestern forests, this method uses machinery to chip or grind the slash into small pieces.
•
Advantages. Small amounts of chipped slash spread around a restoration site can protect soil and
seedlings. Chips can also hold moisture.
•
Disadvantages. Broadcast burning of chips substantially increases the heat of subsequent fire and can
damage soils. If chips are not burned they increase the risk of fire, suppress herbaceous vegetation, and
lock up valuable nitrogen. Using a chipper increases project costs.
•
Recommendation. Reduce fire risk by transporting chips to areas where they can readily be used as mulch,
such as hiking trails, playgrounds, or subdivisions.
Lop and Scatter
The slash is lopped to within 2 or 3 feet of the ground. It naturally compresses over time and then can be broadcast
and burned at a later date. Alternatively, a bulldozer can also be used to compress the slash.
•
Advantages. Compressed slash breaks down faster than undisturbed course woody debris. Mechanical
compression can reduce the intensity of prescribed burns (Jerman et al. 2004). Compressed slash holds less
oxygen and is not in a vertical arrangement, resulting in lower tree mortality when broadcast burned.
•
Disadvantages. If slash is mechanically compressed, increased use of machinery and operator time results
in higher expense. Soil compaction and disturbance can result. Tightly packed slash can cause high soil
temperatures during fire.
•
Recommendation. Rake slash away from old-growth trees to further ensure that they are not damaged by
broadcast burning (see Working Paper 3: Protecting Old Growth from Prescribed Fire for more information).
Treating Slash after Restoration Thinning
a
2

Treating Slash after Restoration Thinning a
3
Haul It Away
This method is generally used only if the restoration project is small and minimal slash has been produced. The
slash is loaded on trucks and taken to another location, where it is usually burned.
•
Advantages. Since the slash is not piled or burned on the restoration site, damage to the soil, fungi, or seed
bank will be minimal.
•
Disadvantages. This can be a very expensive method for removing slash.
•
Recommendation. Try to limit soil impacts at the restoration site by driving and parking trucks only in
designated areas.
General Recommendations
•
To minimize buildup of pine engraver beetle (Ips pini) populations, try to avoid creating slash from
January until the summer monsoon season begins. If slash is created during the late winter through early
summer, treating it within 6 weeks will reduce the risk of beetle-caused pine mortality.
•
Remove as much slash from a restoration site as the budget allows, while still taking into account the
ecological value of retaining some on site. Removing most or all material over 4 inches in diameter can
help mitigate beetle outbreaks (Parker 1991).
•
Minimize soil damage by understanding what soil type is present and adjusting the season of treatment
and use of mechanized equipment accordingly (see Working Paper 5: Limiting Damage to Forest Soils
During Restoration).
•
Use native plant seeds to reseed slash pile scars and, if necessary, areas where slash has been broadcast
burned.
•
In areas of severe soil disturbance – such as slash pile sites – inoculate the soil with arbuscular mycorrhizal
propagules or undisturbed soils (see Working Paper 12: Restoring Forest Roads).
Restoring Slash Pile Scars:
Experimental Results
An experiment was conducted in the ponderosa pine forests of northern Arizona to evaluate the best methods
for increasing the abundance and diversity of native plants and arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) propagules
within slash pile scars (Korb et al. 2004). In this study, several plots located within the fire gradient of slash pile
scars were tested to see which treatments produced the best ecological responses. Each plot was randomly
assigned to one of the following five treatments. All of the topsoil used was collected from a road construction
site close to the restoration area.
Treatment 1: Control. The slash pile scar did not receive any treatment.
Treatment 2: Sterilized soil addition. Soil was steam-sterilized for 48 hours to remove all living
organisms and then added at a depth of 2 centimeters.
Treatment 3: Live soil addition. Soil containing microorganisms and plant propagules and
inoculated with AM fungi was added at a depth of 2 centimeters.
Treatment 4: Native seed addition (without soil). Approximately 11 grams of 19 different native
seeds were added directly to the plot. The seeds were selected to match native vegetation growing
near the slash pile scar.
Treatment 5: Native seed and live soil addition. Soil containing microorganisms, plant propagules,
AM fungi, and the same seed amendment mixture in treatment 4 was added at a depth of 2 cm.
Plant density results
Plots that received native seed and live soil amendments (treatment 5) had the greatest native understory
richness and fewest invasive plants among any of the treatment groups. Two years after the treatments, plots
that received this treatment had approximately 11.9% understory cover, similar to areas adjacent to the slash
pile scar. Plots that received only native seeds (treatment 4) had more understory growth than treatments 1, 2,
or 3, but less understory growth than treatment 5. The control plots (treatment 1) and those that received only
sterilized soil (treatment 2) had less then .01% understory cover two years after treatment.
Arbuscular mycorrhizae results
Plots that received native seed and live soil amendments (treatment 5) also had the highest density of effective
arbuscular mycorrhizal root colonization. The control and sterilized soil plots (treatments 1 and 2, respectively)
had the lowest densities of understory cover and effective arbuscular mycorrhizal propagules. Higher densities
of arbuscular mycorrhizae result in more growth of native understory plants.

Treating Slash after Restoration Thinning
a
4
References
Chambers, C. L., and S. S. Germaine. 2003. Vertebrates. Pp. 268-285 in Ecological restoration of southwestern
ponderosa pine forests, ed. P. Friederici. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
DeBano, L. F., D. G. Neary, and P. F. Ffolliott. 1998. Fire’s effects on ecosystems. New York: Wiley.
Elseroad, A. C., P. Z. Fulé, and W. W. Covington. 2003. Forest road revegetation: Effects of seeding and soil
amendments. Ecological Restoration 21(3):180-185.
Giovanni, G., S. Lucchesi, and M. Giachetti. 1988. Effects of heating on some physical and chemical parameters
related to soil aggregation and erodibility. Soil Science 146:255-262.
Graham, R. T., A. E. Harvey, M. F. Jurgensen, T. B. Jain, J. R. Tonn, and D. S. Page-Dumroese. 1994. Managing coarse
woody debris in forests of the Rocky Mountains. Research paper INT-477. Ogden, Utah: USDA Forest Service
Intermountain Research Station.
Haskins, K. E., and C. A Gehring. 2004. Long-term effects of burning slash on plant communities and arbuscular
mycorrhizae in a semi-arid woodland. Journal of Applied Ecology 41(2):379-388.
Jerman, J. L., P. J. Gould, and P. Z. Fulé. 2004. Slash compression treatment reduced tree mortality from prescribed
fire in southwestern ponderosa pine. Western Journal of Applied Forestry 19(3):149-153.
Korb, J. E., N. C. Johnson, and W. W. Covington. 2004. Slash pile burning effects on soil biotic and chemical
properties and plant establishment: Recommendations for amelioration. Restoration Ecology 12(1):52-62.
Korb, J. E., and J. D. Springer. 2003. Understory vegetation. Pp. 233-250 in Ecological restoration of southwestern
ponderosa pine forests, ed. P. Friederici. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Marler, M. J., C. A. Zabinski, and R. M. Callaway. 1999. Mycorrhizae indirectly enhance competitive effects of an
invasive forb on a native bunchgrass. Ecology 80(4):1180-87.
Parker, D. L. 1991. Integrated pest management guide: Arizona five-spined ips, Ips lecontei Swaine, and pine engraver,
Ips pini (Say), in ponderosa pine. R-3 91-8. Alburquerque, N. Mex.: USDA Forest Service Southwestern Region.
Randall-Parker, T., and R. Miller. 2002. Effects of prescribed fire in ponderosa pine on key wildlife habitat
components: Preliminary results and a method for monitoring. Pp. 823-834 in Proceedings of the Symposium on
the Ecology and Management of Dead Wood in Western Forests, tech. coords. William F. Laudenslayer, Jr., et al.
General technical report PSW-181. Albany, Calif.: USDA Forest Service Pacific Southwest Research Station.
www.fs.fed.us/psw/publications/documents/gtr-181/061_Randall.pdf.
Selmants, P. C., A. Elseroad, and S. C. Hart. 2003. Soils and nutrients. Pp. 144-160 in Ecological restoration of
southwestern ponderosa pine forests, ed. P. Friederici. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.

For More Information
For more information about forest restoration, contact the ERI at 928-523-7182 or www.eri.nau.edu.
Written by Kimberly Lowe
Reviewed by Scott Abella, Charlie Denton, Timothy Duck, Julie Korb, Dennis Lund, and Joel McMillin
Series Editor Peter Friederici
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution   
NAU Printing Services/G57xxxx/2500/07-05

Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
2ERI35AE
