 
 
News Release 
 
 
 
 
 
Contact: Bonnie Stevens 
Tuesday, Feb. 2, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
    928-523-6228 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                              928-380-4349 
 
Beetle Mania Rocks Northern Arizona Lab 
 
Flagstaff, Ariz. – A phenomenon being dubbed Beetle Mania is playing out in northern 
Arizona. As can be expected, it involves rock music, but instead of screaming fans there are 
cheering scientists who have found a way to make bark beetles crazy with sound.  
 
In a Northern Arizona University School of Forestry lab, researchers are listening to the 
sound of western forests under attack, the scratching, scraping, crunching of the Ips bark 
beetle and its cousins chewing the life out of ponderosa, pinyon and lodgepole pines.   
 
Armed with sonic bullets, they are firing back with Rush Limbaugh, Queen, Guns N‟ Roses 
and manipulated sounds of the bugs themselves.  
 
“Our interest is to use acoustic sounds, specific only to each species, that make beetles 
uncomfortable and not want to be in that environment,” said NAU Forest Entomology 
Professor Dr. Richard Hofstetter. 
 
Barely a quarter-of-an-inch long, bark beetles are tiny and powerful killers. When they amass 
by the thousands, they become a lethal army, tunneling through millions of acres of trees 
already stressed by drought and overcrowded forest conditions. 
 
“You can get thousands, even tens of thousands of bark beetles colonizing a tree and that 
tree can die very quickly, within a day or two,” he said. 
 
British Columbia Invasion 
 
The evidence for this exists all over the West. In fact, the beetles‟ British Columbia invasion 
that ended just last year wiped out some 10 million acres.  
 
Pondering this deadly infestation is truck driver turned research assistant Reagan McGuire. 
“I read an article in the local paper that bark beetles have killed 74-million trees in Arizona 
and New Mexico. So I got to thinking, what if we could fight back with sound, what if we 
could alter their behavior by producing acoustic stress.” 
 
After McGuire convinced Hofstetter to look into this kind of research, he quit his truck driving 
job and joined the lab.  
 
“I thought, „What would be the nastiest, most offensive sound?‟ To me, that would be Rush 
Limbaugh or heavy metal,” said McGuire. 
 
Researchers began collecting infested tree trunks in the fall. And because bark beetles live 
and tunnel through the phloem, or living tissue of the tree just under the bark, they started 
creating phloem sandwiches, slices of infested pine trees encased in Plexiglas, to build ant 
farms of sorts. Using tiny speakers, like the kind in musical greeting cards, they piped sound 
in and also recorded sounds coming out, sounds the bugs were making.  
 

 
 
Beetle Mania/page 2 
 
Beetle Mania 
 
They blasted the beetles with rock music and Rush Limbaugh commentary played 
backwards. Discouraged by the results, the scientists started firing the insects‟ own sounds 
back at them. They couldn‟t believe what they saw. 
 
“We could use a particular aggression call that would make the beetles move away from the 
sound as if they were avoiding another beetle. Or we could make our beetle sounds louder 
and stronger than that of a male beetle calling to a female, which would make the female 
beetle reject the male and go toward our speaker,” said Hofstetter. “We found we could 
disrupt mating, tunneling and reproduction. We could even make the beetles turn on each 
other, which normally they would not do.”       
 
Wearing a headset, McGuire would listen and watch the beetles on a computer monitor 
hooked up to a microscope. “We observed and recorded beetles mating two or three times. 
Then we‟d play the beetle sounds that we manipulated and watch in horror as the male 
beetle would tear the female apart. This is not normal behavior in the natural world.” 
 
Music to their Ears 
 
So in the spotlight and under the microscope are bark beetles and their communication 
sounds and patterns. 
  
“If we know how they hear and what they hear, we can disrupt that behavior,” said NAU 
forest science doctorate student Kasey Yturralde. “If we can do that, we may be able to stop 
this mass aggregation and the killing of trees. But right now, we don‟t even know where the 
beetles‟ ears are.” 
 
Hearing the need for a better understanding of bark beetle anatomy is University of Arizona 
Neurobiology Department Professor Dr. Wulfila “Wulfi” Gronenberg. By inserting tiny 
electrodes and performing what amounts to bark beetle brain surgery, Gronenberg is 
working to find where and how the sound is perceived. 
 
“Insects can have ears almost anywhere, on their wings, legs, antennas or abdomen. It‟s 
important to find out all about the sound these beetles use to communicate. Then we can 
aim that sound and do something to their brains so they don‟t respond properly.”   
 
Defense against Infestation  
 
Researchers are seeking funding to help them continue looking for the sound, maybe even 
ultrasound, that can be used strategically to keep beetles from damaging individual or entire 
stands of trees. 
 
Right now, bark beetles are hibernating in the snow-covered forests, where they will awake 
to a feast of vulnerable trees. But inside the lab, scientists are waiting to greet the sleepy 
pests with what they hope will be a rude awakening.   
 
###   
