Biomass Estimation 
for Four Common Grass Species in 
Northern Arizona Ponderosa Pine 
STEVEN W. ANDARIESE 
AND W. WALLACE 
COVINGTON 
Abstract 
Vegetation allometric relations were examined for 4 important 
grass species in southwestern ponderosa pine (Pinusponderosa). 
Logarithmic regressions were developed relating aboveground 
biomass to basal area, height, and number of seedheads, as well as 
3 factors: overstory type (pole, yellow pine), burning treatment 
(unburned, prescribed burn 2-, 5-, and 7-yr previously), and site (3 
locations). Basal area was defined as longest basal diameter multi- 
plied by the widest perpendicular diameter. Of the metric variables, 
basal area proved to be the best predictor of biomass. Height and 
number of seedheads did little to increase Rl values. Burning 
treatment was a significant factor for Sitanion longejolium and 
Muhlenbe&a mon&na. Overstory type significantly affected Poa 
fenderiana and Festuca ankonica equations. Site effects were 
important for all but SuMion lonsefolfum When biomass regres- 
sions are used for species such as these, sampling efficiency can be 
improved by including factors such as overstory type, burning 
history, and locale. Final regression equations relating biomass of 
each species to basal area and significant factors were significant at 
60.05 
and had adjusted Rz values ranging from 0.81 to 0.87. 
A validation test using 20% of the data not used in developing 
the regressions indicated that these equations are adequate predic- 
tors. When used with double sampling, weight prediction based on 
basal area indices should provide a more objectively measured 
predictor than percent cover. 
Allometric relationships 
are often used to estimate understory 
biomass (e.g., Brown and Marsden 
1976, Ohmann et al. 1981, 
Olson and Martin 
1981). When compared with harvesting, 
the 
application 
of regression equations based on these relationships 
can result in lower sampling costs (or higher precision) due to 
relatively greater sampling efficiency (Reese et al. 1980). Most 
understory biomass equations are developed using fairly subjective 
ocular estimates of percent cover as the independent 
variable. 
Ocular 
estimates 
have the disadvantage 
of varying 
between 
observers as well as over time for a single observer, introducing 
unknown, but potentially substantial, 
error into the biomass esti- 
mates. We felt that using some combination 
of basal area, plant 
height, or number of seedheads might overcome these problems. 
A recent study of the effect of prescribed burning on understory 
production 
in northern 
Arizona (Andariese 
1982), provided us 
with the opportunity 
to test this technique for a ponderosa pine- 
bunchgrass type and to determine if overstory conditions, site, or 
burning treatment significantly alter the allometric relationship. 
Methods 
Three study sites on basalt soils were located on the Coconino 
National Forest. The overstory at each site was exclusively ponde- 
rosa pine (pinus ponderosa 
Laws.). The sites were burned during 
the fall 2, 5, and 7 years before sampling in 1981. 
Sampling in burn and nearby control stands was stratified by 
overstory type. Pole stands were defined as those dominated 
by 
trees IO-30 cm dbh; yellow pine stands were defined as open, old 
growth areas dominated by trees greater than 30 cm dbh. 
The 4 most common species were used for evaluating the tech- 
nique: squirreltail (Sit&on 
longefolium J.G. Smith), muttongrass 
(Poa fendleriunu (Steud.) Vasey), Arizona fescue (Festucu urizon- 
Authors are research assistant and associate professor, School of Forestry, North- 
ern Arizona University, Flagstaff 86011. 
Manuscript accepted 26 December 1985. 
472 
icu Vasey), and mountain muhly (Muhknbergiu montunu (Nutt.) 
Hitche.). At each site, approximately 
20 plants per treatment (burn 
and control) were selected in pole stands and IS plants per treat- 
ment were selected in yellow pine stands for each species. Data 
were collected for each species after seedhead production 
was 
complete. Muttongrass was collected in late June, Arizona fescue 
in mid August, squirreltail in late August, and mountain muhly in 
early September. 
Plants were selected to ensure adequate sampling of the range of 
plant basal areas encountered 
in the field. Since defining an indi- 
vidual of a bunchgrass is difficult, an individual plant was defined 
as green plant material with horizontal 
basal discontinuities 
no 
greater than 2.5 cm. For each plant, the longest basal diameter and 
the widest basal diameter perpendicular 
to this were recorded to 
the nearest 0.25 cm. Plant basal area was defined as the product of 
these 2 diameters. In addition, plant height (extended length of the 
longest blade) and number of seedheads were recorded. The plant 
was then clipped at ground level. Samples were returned to the lab 
and sorted. Green material was dried at 80° C to constant weight 
and weighed to the nearest 0.01 g. 
Initially, to determine the best form for the model and to deter- 
mine the best predictor of plant weight for each species, equations 
were developed for each site-overstory-treatment 
combination. 
Then 80% of the data were used to develop one final predictive 
equation for each species; the remaining 20% were used for valida- 
tion. To account for variation due to differences in site, overstory 
type, and treatment, dummy variables representing these factors 
and their interaction with basal area were entered into each equa- 
tion using a stepwise procedure (Nie et al. 1975). Only dummy 
variables with significant Fvaiues wO.05) 
were used in the final 
equations. 
To validate each regression equation, 
it was applied to the 
remaining 20% of the data to predict dry weight. The mean squared 
difference between predicted and observed loge of dry weight was 
compared to the residual mean square of the equation (see Snee 
1977). 
Results and Discussion 
Plant basal area proved to be the best predictor of plant weight 
for each species. Height and number of seedheads added little to RJ 
values and we felt that the small increase in predictive precision did 
not justify the increased cost of measuring these plant characteris- 
tics. Consequently, 
they were not included in the final equations. 
To obtain linearity and constant variance, the linearized form of 
the allometric equation, 
log. Y = lo&A 
+ JqlogX), 
was used as the model for predictive equations for each species. 
Final prediction equations for squirreltail, 
muttongrass, 
Ariz- 
ona fescue, and mountain 
muhly (Table I) all exhibited F ratios 
significant at the 0.05 probability level. Adjusted Rz values ranged 
from 0.81 for muttongrass 
and squirreltail 
to 0.87 for Arizona 
fescue. Corrections for logarithmic bias should be applied to the 
predictions (Baskerville 1972). 
Results of this regression analysis compared favorably 
with 
those of other studies. In 14 stands throughout western Montana 
and northern Idaho, Brown and Marsden (1974) developed regres- 
sion equations to predict weight per unit area or graminoids (live 
JOURNAL 
OF RANGE MANAGEMENT 
39(5), September 
1986 

Table 1. 
mubly. 
Regression equations* of plant basal uee in cm2 (X) on plant dry weight in g (Y) for squirreltail, muttongrass, Arizona fescue, end mountain 
Species 
Squirreltail 
Muttongrass 
Arizona fescue 
Mountain 
muhly 
Equation2 
lo& Y = - 0.578 + 0.453(log, 
X) + 0. I5 1 (BT) 
lo&Y 
q  - 1.14 + 0.602(log. 
X) - O.l46(BSl) + O.O83(BS2) 
-0.296(08) 
lo& Y = - 1.12 + 0.724 (log. X) - 0.15qBSl) 
- 0.128 (BSZ) 
-0).302(S2) + 0.230@2) - 0.231(OS) 
log. Y q  - 1.26 + 0.617(log. 
X) + O.OOS(BSl) - 0.121 (BSZ) 
+0.166(T) 
N 
SEE’ 
171 
0.495 
173 
0.51s 
138 
0.436 
169 
0.456 
R2 
(adjusted) 
.81 
.81 
.87 
.86 
IEquationsareoftheform1og.Y 
=a + b(1og.X). Dummyvariablesare included whensi 
if sate is 5 yr bum, 0 if o!henvlse; OS = I if overstory type is pole, 0 if yellow pine.; T = 1 I .f” 
ificant (K.05) and an defined as follows: S 1 = I if site is 7 yr burn, 0 if otherwise; 
S2 = 1 
treatment is burn,0 if control; BS I = S I * log, X, BS2 = S2 l 1og.X; and BT = T * log. X. 
ZAll equations are slgmficant at the K.05 level. Corrections for loaarithmic bias must be made when using these equations (see Baskerville 1972). 
‘Standard error of the estimate. 
and dead material) from percent cover and average height. They 
reported a relatively low Rz value of 0.30, most likely due to the 
variety of species and sites included in the analysis. Payne (1974) 
developed equations 
to predict dry weight per unit area from 
percent cover for various species in southwestern Montana. Corre- 
lation coefficients for grass species ranged from 0.72 (Rz=O.52) for 
Festuca idahoensis Elmer. to 0.97 (Rz=O.94) for Bromus tectorum 
L. In northeastern 
Minnesota, 
Ohmann 
et al. (1976) used the 
standard allometric equation (log-log transformation) 
to develop 
regression equations which predicted total above ground biomass 
from stem diameter for 5 shrubs. They reported R2 values that 
ranged from 0.13 for Corylus comuta Marsh. to 0.94 for Ainus 
crispa (Ait.) Pursh. 
Dummy variables which proved to be significant QKO.05) in our 
study suggest that treatment, overstory type, and site are important 
in the allometric relationship 
between basal area and weight for 
some species. Dummy variables representing 
treatment were sig- 
nificant in the equations 
for squirreltail 
and mountain 
muhly. 
Overstory dummy variables were significant in muttongrass 
and 
Arizona fescue equations; site dummy variables were significant in 
muttongrass, 
Arizona 
fescue, and mountain 
muhly equations. 
These results militate against indiscriminant 
application of regres- 
sion equations, even on seemingly similar sites. Overstory condi- 
tions, burning history, and local site conditions all should be taken 
into account to optimize the precision of the technique. 
The RJvalues reported here show that plant basal area is a good 
predictor of plant weight for 4 common grass species. In addition, 
the mean square difference between predicted and observed lo&of 
dry weight was in close agreement with the residual mean square of 
the regression equation (Table 2), indicating the equations made 
Table 2. Meen square difference between predicted end observed lo& of 
dry weight for 20% of the date not used in predictive equations end 
residue1 man square for each regression equation. 
Squirreltail 
Muttongrass 
Arizona fescue 
Mountain muhly 
Mean Square 
Residual Mean 
Difference Predicted 
Square Regression 
vs Observed 
Equation 
.259 
.245 
so7 
.265 
.265 
.I90 
.250 
.208 
accurate predictions of independent 
data (see Snee 1977). We feel 
that when biomass estimates of these species are required, sam- 
pling efficiency can be improved with the use of double sampling 
(Reese et al. 1980) and predictive equations such as those presented 
here. (Double sampling differs from our method however, in that it 
assumes random sampling as opposed to plant selection based on 
basal area.) Furthermore, 
the basal area diameters are more objec- 
tively measured prediction 
variables than the most traditional 
percent cover estimations, which vary substantially 
from observer 
to observer and even with observer among sampling dates. Thus, 
the use of plant basal area should obviate this considerable limita- 
tion in the widely used double sampling technique. 
Literature Cited 
Anduiese, S.W. 19I32. Time response graphs for understory production 
following fall prescribed burning in Arizona ponderosa pine on basalt 
soils. M.S.F. Thesis, Northern Arizona Univ., Flagstaff. 
Beskervilk, G.L. 1972. Use of logarithmic regression in estimation of plant 
biomass. Can. J. Forest. 249-53. 
Brown, J.K., and M.A. Mareden. 1976. Estimating fuel weights of grasses, 
forbs, and small woody plants. USDA Forest Serv. Res. Note. INT-210. 
Nie, N.H., C.H. Hull, J.G. Jenkins, K. Steinbrenner, and D.H. Brent. 1975. 
SPSS: statistical package for the social sciences. 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill 
Book Company, New York, N.Y. 
Ohnunn, L.F., D.F. Grigal, end R.B. Brender. 1976. Biomass estimation 
for 5 shrubs from northeastern Minnesota. USDA Forest Serv. Res. 
Pap. NC-133. 
Ohnunn, L;F., D.F. Crigel, and L.L. Rogers. 1981. Estimating 
plant 
biomass for undergrowth species of northeastern Minnesota. USDA 
Forest Serv. Gen. Tech. Rep. NC-61. 
Olson, C.M., end R.E. Mertin. 1981. Estimating biomass of shrubs and 
forbs in central Washington Douglas-fir stands. USDA Forest Serv. 
Res. Note PNW-380. 
Payne, G.F. 1974.Cover-weight relationships. J. Range Manage. 27:403-404. 
Reese, G.A., R.L. Bayn, and N.E. Weat. 1980. Evaluation of double- 
sampling estimators of subalpine herbage production. J. Range manage. 
33:300-306. 
Snee, Ronald D. 1977. Validation of regression models: methods and 
examples. Technometrics 19:415-428. 
JOURNAL 
OF RANGE MANAGEMENT 
39(5), September 
1996 
473 
