10
Ecological Restoration Institute
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
www.eri.nau.edu
Working Papers in Southwestern 
Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
The Stand Treatment
Impacts on Forest Health
(STIFH) Model
April  2005 

Working Papers in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native species, structural
characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological Restoration International
defines restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an
ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability. . . . Restoration attempts to return
an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration International 2004).
In the southwestern United States, most ponderosa pine forests have been degraded during the last
150 years; many areas are now dominated by dense thickets of small trees and have lost their once
diverse understory. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing
fires and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers on
reintroducing frequent, low-intensity surface fires—often after first thinning dense stands—and
reestablishing productive understory plant communities. The Ecological Restoration Institute at
Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, implementing, and monitoring ecological
restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. By allowing natural processes such as fire to
resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem
services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
Every restoration project needs to be site specific, but the detailed experience of field practitioners
may help guide practitioners elsewhere. The Working Papers series presents findings and
management recommendations from research and observations by the ERI and its partner
organizations.
This publication would not have been possible without significant funding from the USDA Forest
Service. The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and
should not be interpreted as representing the opinions or policies of the U.S. Government.
Mention of trade names or commercial products does not constitute their endorsement by the
U.S. Government.
1: Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons and Adaptive Management Practices
2: Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3: Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
4: Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits
5: Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
6: Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
7: Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
8: Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
9: Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions

The Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Model
Treatment Type
Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) restoration treatments—
multi-aged group selection prescription.
Treatment Objectives
The STIFH restoration treatments seek to promote forest sustainability by
creating a balanced distribution of tree size classes in a clumpy spatial
arrangement that emulates historic forest conditions. This involves focused
thinning in diameter classes that have an over-abundance of trees—usually the
smaller to mid-sized diameter classes. The thinning treatment is primarily
designed to reduce the continuity of surface and ladder fuels; however, it strives
for a broad ecosystem response, including positive changes in understory cover,
wildlife habitat, and hydrological functions. It aims to create aesthetically
pleasing forests in which old yellow-barked pines, larger blackjack pines, and
oaks become very visible within and among clumps.
Steps
Overstory Trees:
•
The diameter at breast height (dbh) of all trees in the treatment area is
systematically estimated. These data are used to create a bar chart that
illustrates the frequency distribution of the trees in each size class
(Figure 1). Most contemporary ponderosa pine forests have a high
abundance of small to mid-sized diameter trees and few large-diameter
trees.
•
A target basal area is chosen. Because forests are continually growing, the
target should be chosen with future conditions in mind. If a forest is
treated to a basal area of 50 ft2/acre today it will likely grow to 80 ft2/acre
within 20 years. Looking at historical data for the treatment site is
invaluable in determining an appropriate target basal area; read more
about this in Working Paper 7: Establishing Reference Conditions for
Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests. At the Fisher West site, a target basal
area of 50 ft2/acre was chosen because it
combined fire risk reduction with a low
likelihood of social or political controversy.
•
The target basal area is converted into a
desired size distribution across diameter
classes. This requires choosing the optimal
number of trees to be left standing in each size
class after thinning. This number is known as
the target value. Target values are site-specific
and depend on a stand’s starting condition
and the target basal area after treatment.
Distributions should slope down to the right
to account for tree mortality and the natural
slowing of diameter growth with increased
size.
Treatment Options
This Working Paper is one
of a series that describes
the planning and
implementation of
restoration treatments in
southwestern ponderosa
pine forests. It presents the
best scientifically based
knowledge currently
available about treatment
types and effects. But this
Working Paper is not a
prescription. Restoration
decisions need to be made
with close attention to
local conditions—there is
no “one size fits all”
approach, and specific
prescriptions must be
determined according to
project objectives. Use this
publication as an aid in
making informed decisions
about how to restore more
natural conditions, and
greater health, to the
southwestern ponderosa
pine forests.
1
Figure 1. Pre- and post-treatment diameter class
distributions of pine and oak trees at the STIFH Fisher
West plot; note that no thinning of oaks was done.
a

•
The target value is used to determine how many trees to
remove from each size class. Putting the frequency data into a
bar graph will help make it obvious where thinning efforts
should be focused. At the Fisher West plots, for example, far
more trees were removed from the 2-inch diameter class than
from any other size class.
•
Spatial patterns are evaluated in determining which trees to
remove. At the Centennial Forest, markers used presettlement
spatial patterns—evidenced by stumps, logs, and old trees—as
a reference in selecting which trees to remove and which to
retain. Trees retained were generally clumped together, with
openings of variable size between groups of variable size
(Figure 2). Every prescription is site specific, but creating
groups of trees that provide cover and thermal protection for
wildlife is an important component of this prescription, as is
creating open meadows for wildlife foraging.
• Extra trees in middle-sized diameter classes are left in order to
meet the target basal area if there are few large-diameter trees.
Many southwestern ponderosa pine forest stands have few, if
any, large-diameter trees. If too few are present to reach the
ideal target value, more trees can be left in smaller size classes
to meet the target basal area. At the Fisher West plot, for
example, extra trees were left in the 10-inch class to
compensate for the scarcity of large trees. The trees were left in
tight clumps to better emulate single large trees.
Fire:
Slash from the Centennial Forest thinning treatment was
collected into large piles to be burned during the cooler winter months. Although effective, burning
slash may harm local soil health and stimulate the growth of invasive species (Korb and Springer 2003).
There will also be a broadcast burn one to two years after the slash burning, and plans call for future
maintenance burns as fuel loads accumulate.
Understory Vegetation:
Treatment of understory vegetation at the Centennial Forest STIFH restoration sites was minimal.
Squirreltail grass (Elymus elymoides) was broadcast seeded only in highly disturbed places; no other
seeding has taken place or is planned. Deciding on whether to seed or to allow natural regeneration of
understory cover depends on several factors, including densities of existing vegetation at the site,
richness of the seed bank, soil conditions, and management history (Springer et al. 2001). In either case
it is important to control invasive plant species. Read how to do this in Working Paper 8: Controlling
Invasive Plant Species as Part of Restoration Treatments.
Grazing :
Intermittent grazing of cattle and sheep is planned for the Centennial Forest STIFH restoration sites,
but several 1/10th-acre areas have been fenced and protected from grazing. Comparing the fenced and
unenclosed areas will allow an assessment of the effects of grazing on understory vegetation.
The Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Model
a
2
Figure 2. Simulation, created using the
USDA Forest Service Stand Visualization
System, showing pre- and post-treatment
tree densities at a representative acre in the
Fisher West stand. Trees with rounded
crowns are oaks. Because the spatial
distribution shown represents average stand
density rather than a specific stand, tree
locations are approximate.

The Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Model a
Where It’s Been Done
This treatment has been implemented at the Centennial Forest near Flagstaff, where many experimental
restoration treatments are currently being tested (Northern Arizona University 2002).
Results
The initial Centennial Forest STIFH restoration treatments were implemented in 2003 and 2004. Since
these treatments are very new, there is little site-specific data indicating how they have influenced
specific ecosystem components. However, this prescription is based upon similar prescriptions whose
effects have been assessed. For example, the number and placement of remaining trees in the STIFH
restoration treatments is similar to that in the presettlement thinning prescription with a 1.5/3
replacement rate (see Working Paper 9: Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement
Conditions). The main difference between these two treatments is the criteria by which trees are selected
for removal. The STIFH treatment retains more trees in smaller diameter classes.
Overstory Trees:
It is expected that trees remaining at the STIFH restoration sites will be healthier following treatment,
as has been the case at a nearby site treated with similar thinning intensity (Wallin et al. 2004). There
will be less competition for water and soil nutrients and a reduced risk of stand-replacing wildfire. Post-
treatment stand structure reflects but does not precisely replicate presettlement conditions, with
variably sized groups of ponderosa pine distributed throughout the treatment area.
Understory Vegetation:
Preliminary monitoring results show an increase in grasses and forbs at the Centennial Forest treatment
sites; however, it is too early to draw definitive conclusions from these data. Monitoring is projected to
continue seasonally for several years. Results from similar treatments have shown a positive reaction of
understory vegetation to intensive tree thinning (Abella and Covington 2004; Huffman and Moore
2004; Moore and Deiter 1992). This includes increased plant diversity and richness, as well as more
plant cover within open areas (Korb et al. 2003). However, invasive plant species have also increased in
number and cover at some sites (Abella and Covington 2004). Ponderosa pine seedlings can be
expected to regenerate sporadically (Bailey and Covington 2002).
Fire:
The main purpose of this treatment is to substantially minimize the threat of catastrophic wildfire
through surface fuel and ladder fuel reduction. Models used during the planning process projected that
treating Centennial Forest sites with this prescription will keep fire moving on the ground, rather than
in tree crowns, because of the drastically reduced fuel loads and increased distance between clumps of
tree crowns. This lowered susceptibility to severe fire should persist for decades rather than years, as is
the case with many lighter thinning treatments.
Soils and Hydrology:
Intense thinning is known to make more soil water available to remaining trees (Kaye et al. 1999), but
such measurements have not yet been made at the Centennial Forest sites. It is also expected that the
combination of thinning and burning will make nutrients more readily available both to remaining
trees and to understory vegetation, as has been the case at other restoration sites (Kaye and Hart 1998).
Total road density in the project area was halved, which should improve the area’s hydrological
functioning.
3

The Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Model
a
4
Wildlife:
Given the response of wildlife in similar restoration prescriptions, researchers anticipate an increase in
the abundance and diversity of some butterflies (Waltz and Covington 2004) and birds at the STIFH
restoration sites. Impacts on wildlife are likely to vary depending upon species, time since treatment,
and many other factors (Chambers and Germaine 2003). Future monitoring of treatment sites may aid
in understanding of these impacts.
Social Issues:
The STIFH restoration sites have been toured by various groups and organizations. So far the response
has generally been positive, as people appreciate the openness and considerable reduction in fire risk
this prescription provides.
Costs
The overall cost of implementing this prescription in the Centennial Forest varied from $327 per acre
to over $700 per acre, depending on initial stand densities, the market value of removed trees, and other
factors. For this particular project, some roads were in need of improvement for the safe movement of
machinery, and this added to the overall operational costs.
Discussion
There are many benefits to using this treatment option for forest restoration. The prescription is easily
modeled; it is based on historic forestry practices, ensuring credibility; many smaller trees are left
standing, which creates a stable age structure; and trees left standing can be grouped to emulate
presettlement conditions and create benefits for many wildlife species. Because of the resulting open
stand structure, stand-replacing fire and severe bark beetle outbreaks should be rare in treated stands in
the future. It is important to emphasize the key role that fire must play in future maintenance: without
regular fires or thinning designed to emulate fire, thinned stands will grow progressively denser over
time.
Current conditions play an important role in determining what stands will look like after treatment. A
thinned stand with some old yellow pines will look unlike one that lacks large, old trees, and may play a
different ecological role. As always, local conditions and objectives should dictate replacement rates and
thinning methods.
References
Abella, S. R., and W. W. Covington. 2004. Monitoring an Arizona ponderosa pine restoration: Sampling
efficiency and multivariate analysis of understory vegetation. Restoration Ecology 12:359-367.
Bailey, J. D., and W. W. Covington. 2002. Evaluating ponderosa pine regeneration rates following
ecological restoration treatments in northern Arizona, USA. Forest Ecology and Management
155:271-278.
Chambers, C. L., and S. S. Germaine. 2003. Vertebrates. Pp. 268-285 in Ecological restoration of
southwestern ponderosa pine forests, ed. P. Friederici. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Huffman, D. W., and M. M. Moore. 2004. Responses of Fendler ceanothus to overstory thinning,
prescribed fire, and drought in an Arizona ponderosa pine forest. Forest Ecology and Management
198:105-115.
Kaye, J. P., and S. C. Hart. 1998. Ecological restoration alters nitrogen transformations in a ponderosa
pine-bunchgrass ecosystem. Ecological Applications 8:1052-1060.

For More Information
For more information about forest restoration, contact the ERI at 928-523-7182 or www.eri.nau.edu.
For information about the Centennial Forest, contact:
Northern Arizona University Centennial Forest
Box 15018
Flagstaff, Arizona 86011
928-523-3031
www.for.nau.edu/centennialforest/
Written by Kimberly Lowe
Figure 2 illustrations by Andrew Sánchez-Meador
Reviewed by John Bailey, John Bedell, W. Wallace Covington, Charlie Denton, Peter Z. Fulé, Doc Smith, J. J.
Smith, and Diane Vosick
Series Editor Peter Friederici 
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution   
NAU Printing Services/G56420/5M/02-05
Kaye, J. P., S. C. Hart, R. C. Cobb, and J. E. Stone. 1999. Water and nutrient outflow following the
ecological restoration of a ponderosa pine-bunchgrass ecosystem. Restoration Ecology 7:252-261.
Korb, J. E., W. W. Covington, and P. Z. Fulé. 2003. Sampling techniques influence understory plant
trajectories after restoration: An example from ponderosa pine restoration. Restoration Ecology
11:504-515.
Korb, J. E., and J. D. Springer. 2003. Understory vegetation. Pp. 233-250 in Ecological restoration of
southwestern ponderosa pine forests, ed. P. Friederici. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Moore, M. M., and J. A. Deiter. 1992. Stand density index as a predictor of forage production in
northern Arizona pine forests. Journal of Range Management 45:267-271.
Northern Arizona University. 2002. Centennial Forest plan. Unpublished document.
www.for.nau.edu/centennialforest/cfplan/Centennial%20Forest%20Plan.doc.
Society for Ecological Restoration International. 2004. The SER International primer on ecological
restoration. www.ser.org/pdf/primer3.pdf.
Springer, J. D., A. E. M. Waltz, P. Z. Fulé, M. M. Moore, and W. W. Covington. 2001. Seeding versus
natural regeneration: A comparison of vegetation change following thinning and burning in
ponderosa pine. Pp. 67-73 in Ponderosa pine ecosystems restoration and conservation: Steps toward
stewardship, comp. G. K. Vance et al. Proceedings RMRS-22. Ogden, Utah: USDA Forest Service.
www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs/rmrs_p022/rmrs_p022_067_073.pdf.
Wallin, K. F., T. E. Kolb, K. R. Skov, and M. R. Wagner. 2004. Seven-year results of thinning and burning
restoration treatments on old ponderosa pines at the Gus Pearson Natural Area. Restoration Ecology
12:239-247.
Waltz, A. E. M., and W. W. Covington. 2004. Ecological restoration treatments increase butterfly
richness and abundance: Mechanisms of response. Restoration Ecology 12:85-96.

Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
2ERI35AE
