IMPLEMENTING ADAPTIVE ECOSYSTEM RESTORATION IN
WESTERN LONG-NEEDLED PINE FORESTS
Wallace Covlnqton'
ABSTRACT. This paper discusses the restoration of western long-needled pine ecosys-
tems in general with a focus on developing adaptive ecosystem management projects
which will simultaneously restore these ecosystems and advance basic understanding
of how these systems operate. The paper begins with some backgrou nd remarks on
ecosystem restoration. Next comes a brief overview of the evolutionary context of
long-needled.pine forests of western North America. Then I present a broad overview
of human caused changes in the structure and function of long-needled pine forests.
Next I illustrate these changes for the ponderosa pine forests around Flagstaff.
Arizona. Finally, I close with a call for interagency cooperation to implement adaptive
ecosystem restoration of western long-needled pine ecosystems at an operational
scale.
INTRODUCTION
A fundamental postulate of ecosystem management
is that restoring and manag ing ecosystems consistent
with conditions present during their evolutionary history
is the most effective strategy for preserving diversity,
maintaining endangered species, and avoiding cata-
strophic disruption of ecosystem functioning (Society for
Ecological Restoration, 1993). Ecological restoration
rests on the premise that the entire ecosystem will
function best under the conditions to which its compo-
nent organisms have become adapted over evolutionary
time. Restoration does not mean that the ecosystem can
be returned completely to the presettlement era nor
does it imply a rigid, uniform prescription for manage-
ment of every acre of forest land. In fact. on most of the
land , restoration will be used to maximize compatibility
between both natural processes and structures and
human habitat requirements.
For western long-needled pine forests, ecosystem
resto ration implies that dense patches of postsettlement
trees shou ld be thinned to promote tree and grass
growth and vigor ; that native grasses. shrubs. and
wildflowers be enco uraged to provide forage for wild and
domestic animals as well as enriching the soil and
holding moisture; that a range of tree ages. especially of
1 Regen ts' Professor, College of Ecosystem Science and
Management, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ
44
the oldest trees, be maintained to ensure habitat and
genetic diversity; that heavy. unnatural postsettlement
fuels be treated and then that prescribed fire be re-
introduced on regular intervals to carry out its natural
role. Within this broad-based approach. there is room fOI
emphasis on specific goals for timber. range , water, or
wildlife and game production, recreational opportunities,
and human homesites. As the field trips and talks at this
conference have shown we are a long way from healthy
ecosystems such as these. Today all resources and
ecological processes are suffering from current forest
conditions.
AN EVOLUTIONARY CONTEXT
.
Ponderosa pine is the most widespread member of
an ecologically similar group of long-needled pine in the
section ponderosae. Principal members of this group are
Arizona pine (formerly class ified as a five-ne edled
subspecies of ponderosa pine), Durango pine, Apac he
pine, and Jeffrey pine. These species share the morph o-
logical characteristics of having thick bark; protected
buds, prolific seed production, longevity. and abundant
and highly flammable Iitterfall, all of which are consid-
ered to be adaptations to frequent. low-intensity surface
fires. They are analogous to the red pine forests of the
Great Lakes region of North America and long-leaf pine
of the southeastern United States.

The earliest paleoecological record of this group of
yellow pines comes from 50 million-year-old macrofos-
sils found in British Columbia. Ponderosa pine macro-
fossils dating from 26.5 million years ago have been
found near Creed , Colorado. Throughout the late
Pliocene and the Quaternary ice ages species of ponde-
rosa pinelbunchgrass ecosystems have migrated up and
down in elevation and latitude tracking favorable climatic
conditions. At various points in time, ponderosa pinel
bunchgrass communities were much more prevalent,
most notably during the Pliocene (2-5 million years ago)
when these ecosystems occupied 200-300 million acres
of North America and provided extensive habitat for the
modern biota of today as well as other some species
now extinct , including some species of the prehistoric
megafauna such as mammoths, ground sloths, and
saber toothed tigers. Clearly , ponderosa pine/bunch-
grass ecological systems havecoevolved with frequent
surface fires and open park-like stand conditions for
many millions of years.
.
Since Pliocene times these forests have provided
important evolutionary habitat for an exceptionally
diverse biota, much of which appears to be adapted to
frequent fire. For the past 10-30 thousand years these
forests have been vital resources for numerous human
cultures, most recent ly (1850-present) for Euro-Ameri-
can industrialization.
.
Early human cultures in North American forests
supplemented lightning ignitions by using fire as a
hunting, gathering, and agricultural tool. Native Ameri-
cans used fire to extend the range of ponderosa pine
parklands into adjacent forest and woodland types (Arno
1985). Soon after Euro-American settlement of the
region, a period of intense resource exploitation began
during which the ecosystem capital of large old-growth
trees and lush herbaceous vegetation generated tre- .
. mendous wealth for the rapid expansion of the then
infant Euro-American econoniy. However, intensive
exploitation exacted its toll on the ecosystem, setting
into motion changes which would result in the depauper-
ate conditions we see today.
POSTSETILEMENT CHANGES IN SOUTHWESTERN
PONDEROSA PINE
Old-growth tree populations and their dependent
communities have been, and are continuing to crash
precipitously, first from logging and th en from competi-
tion with irrupting postsettlement tree populations and
crownfire. Heavy livestock grazing broke grass fuel
continuity and active fire suppress ion eliminated the
~resettleme nt fire regime. In the absence of frequent
fires striking changes occurred: tree species less
.
45
adapted to frequent fire have invaded (at the expe nse of
other plants), and conifer tree biomass. both live and
d~ ad, has ~ t~ad i ly a~cu n: u l8:ted . contributing to progres-
sively declinmg biodiversity , Increasing susceptibility to
insect and disease epidemics , and supporting a shift
from frequent, low intensity surface fires to larger and
larger crownfires (Cooper 1960, Covington and Moore
1994b, Swetnam and Baisa n 1994) .
To a society with high de mands for wood products,
the increase in tree density at first see med beneficial to
many. However, after 50-70 years of fire exclusion,
foresters and ecologists, beginning with Aldo Leopold in
the 1930's, began sounding the alarm that fire exclusion
in these long-needled pine forests was leading to rapidly
accelerating ecological degradation. For example,
Harold Weaver in 1943 summarized conditions in
eastside Washington ponderosa pine:
"Dense, even-aged stands of ponderosa-pine reproduction
havedeveloped...enormous areas are growing up to
dense, even-aged stands of white-fir [sic], Douglas-fir, and
incense-cedar [sic] reproduction under the merchantable
ponderosa pines...for the past 20 years epidemics of the
western pine beetle have killed and are continuing to kill
billions of board feet of ponderosa pine worth many
millions of dollars. Because of these ecological changes,
which are continuing to take place, the fire hazard has
increased tremendously. Fires. when they do occur, are
exceedingly hot and destructive and are turning extensive
areas of forest into brush fields."
Soon other researchers pointed out additional unde-
sirable consequences of fire exclusion in ponderosa
"
pine forests. Studies in Utah (Madany and West 1983,
Stein 1987), Montana (Gruell et al. 1982), Idaho (Steele
et al. 1986), Wash ington (Weaver 1943), California
(Laudenslayer et al. 1989). and the Southwest (Cooper
1960, Covington and Sackett' 986, Covington and
Moore 1994a,b) have shown that increased tree density,
fuel loading, and crownfire occurrence are common
consequences of fire exclusion throughout the ponde-
rosa pine type.
.
Various authors (e.g., Arnold 1950, Cooper 1960,
Biswe1l1972, Weaver 1974, Kilgore 1981, Williams et al.
1993, Covington and Moore 1994a,b) have inferred that
associated with these increases in tree density, forest
floor depth, and fuel loading in ponderosa pine ecosys-
tems have been :
i
1. Decreases in soil moistu re and nutri ent ava ilability;"
2. Decreases in net product ivity and diversity of
herbaceous plants and shrubs;
3. Decreases in tree vigor, especially in the oldest
age class of pine;
4. Decreases in animal productivity;
5. Decreases in stream and spring flows;

6. Increases in susceptibility to pine bark beetles ; and
7. Increases in fire severity and size.
In sum , the implication is that today 's tree densities and
fue l loads in ponderosa pine ecosystems are not sus-
tainable. However , with few exceptions these inferences
have not bee n supported by intensive ecosystem
management-oriented research.
Public recogn ition of the severity of these ecological
changes has led to considerable debate over implica-
tions of various management scenarios (including no
action) on ecosystem health and sustainability. Further-
more, researchers, other natural resource professionals,
and the lay public are embroiled in an often rancorous
debate over what, if anything, should be done. Concerns
about overcutting of old-growth trees (or for some
factions practically any commodity uses of forestlands)
has led some environmental groups and some scientists
to argue against any role for mechanical treatments in
restoration of ponderosa pine ecosystem health. How-
ever, others point to evidence that without mechanical
treatment to reduce unnatural fuel loads, the ensuing
fires, even under controlled conditions, can kill old-
growth trees and other vegetation, and cause such
intense soil heating that restoration of natural condltlons
is retarded, if not precluded, for the foreseeable future
(see review by Covington et al. 1994). Aldo Leopold
suggested several lines of evidence for a potential
synergy between innovative commodity resource uses
and restoration and maintenance of ecosystem health:
"... Leopold set out to define conservation in the following
terms: as 'a universal symbiosis with land, economic and
aesthetic, public and private;' as 'a protest against
destructive land use;' as an effort 'to preserve both utility
and beauty;' as 'a positiveexercise of skill and. insight, not
merely a negative exercise of abstinence and caution;'
and, finally, as 'a state of harmonybetween men and
land.'" (passage from Callicott 1994).
However, objective scientific data to support such
management actions are inadequate.
Systematic field research in combination with synthe-
sis from existing knowledge can help fill this information
gap by providing a sound scientific basis for evaluating
the consequences of various ecosystem management
options and designing adaptive ecosystem management
projects. It is a fairly straightforward task to determine
the effects of wildfires, prescribed fire, understory
thinning, and bark beetle-induced tree mortality on key
ecosystem and human resource characteristics of long-
needled pine ecosystems. Collection of field data in
combination with synthesis of historical data and eco-
logically-based response funct ions can be used to
examine the relative effects of fire, cutting , and bark
beetle infestation treatments on:
46
1. Tree composition, density, spatial pattern, size,
age structure, growth efficiency, and biomass;
2. Fuel composition and structure;
3. Herbaceous and shrub compos ition and biomass;
and
4. Selected wildlife and human habitat values.
Because ecosystem management uses the concept of
the range of natural or historical variability as a key
reference point (Morgan et al. 1994), a fundamental
comparison should be analysis of treatment effects in
relation to conditions which prevailed before disruption
of the natural fire regime in these forests.
EXAMPLES OF RESTORATION AT WORK
The impacts of Euro-American settlement in ponde-
rosa pine ecosystems has been devastating to the
native biota-.The basic chain of events, familiar to us all,
consisted of cutting out the old-growth trees, extirpation
of predators, introduction and subsequent irruption of
livestock populations, and as a consequence, disruption
of natural fire regimes.
Dendrochronological analysis of multiple fire scars
from the Chimney Spring Interval Burning Study Area 7
miles north of Flagstaff indicates that the average fire
interval on this site was 2.3 years before fire regime
disruption in 1877 (Dieterich 1980). Beginning in 1877
thousands of head of cattle were introduced into the
area. The ensuing overgrazing eliminated the herba-
ceous fuels which had carried fires across the land-
scape holding pine populations in check.
With the completion of the transcontinental railroad in
1882, logging began in earnest in the Flagstaff vicinity.
Thus began a population crash of the largest and oldest
trees which continues to the present. The next event
was an irruption of dense forest stands and a crash of
herb- and shrub-based food webs. These tree popula-
tion irruptions are apparent not only at the landscape
level but also within stands. Photo series from a resto ra-
tion study at the Pearson Natural Area north of Flagstaff
show open forest conditions in 1909, the seedling
population explosion by 1938, and the dense sapling
and pole thickets of today which compete with the
old-growth trees and provide ladder fuels for fires to
reach their crowns (Covington and Moore 1994a).
Similar photo series are available from Montana, Or-
egon, South Dakota, California, and elsewhere. The
upshot of this tree populaticn irruption has been the
conversion of diverse park-like stands to dense forests.
In a very real sense what we have witnessed throughout
the western long-needled pine forests is the flip-side of

forest fragmentation: the fragmentation of the once vast
herbaceous and shrub vegetation which once served as
thesurface matrix for these diverse and productive
parklike pine forests. From a biodiversity standpoint,
these tree population irruptionshavecaused a tremen-
dous simplification of net primaryproductivity to the point
atwhich todayvirtually all is concentrated in trees.
The reconstructed sequence of events for theBar-M
study area25 miles south of Flagstaff is instructive
(Covington and Moore 1994a). Steadily increasing tree
density has leadto increasing crown closure, a continu-
ousfuel ladder, heavy forest floor accumulations, and a
crash of herbaceous production. Perhaps mostdevas-
tating has beenthe irruptionof increasingly large and
devastating crownfires, which werenotpartofthe
evolutionaryexperience of mostof these ecological
systems. When youthink aboutit, it would bevery
difficultto design a more devastating assault onthe
biodiversity of ponderosa pine/bunchgrass ecosystems.
Imagine the outcome of an environmental assessment
of fire exclusion conducted in the 1870's if theyknew
thenwhat we knownow.
CONCLUSION
Although at differing stages,thesetransformations
are ubiquitous throughout the range of ponderosa pine
from Canadato Mexico (Covington et al. 1994). In
addition to areasin the Southwest, I have visited sites
fromthroughout this range from Kamloops, British
Columbia, the BlackHills (South Dakota), Colville Indian
Reservation in Eastern Washington, theSierra Nevada
of California, the SierraMadreOccidental of Mexico. In
Mexico, somestill burn on a 3-10 yearinterval (Fule and
Covington 1994, Fuleand Covington, thisvolume).
Settingthese ecosystems on a more sustainable path
is straightforward. Whatis needed areinteragency
cooperators of practitioners andresearchers from
throughout this range who are interested in implement-
ing ecosystemrestoration in an adaptive ecosystem
management context (Williamset al. 1993). A team of
scientists at NAU is working on one such project with the
ArizonaStrip Districtof the Bureau of Land Management .
(Taylor, this volume). Inthat projectweareinitiating
cooperative ecosystem management work to answer
questionsregarding whetherexisting disturbances can
restore ecosystem structureand function, to testhypoth-
eses regarding ecosystem restoration treatments, and to
establish demonstration areas to serve as public infor-
mation and education areas.
In conclusion, it seems clear that ecological restora-
tion of western long-needled pine ecosystems offers
unparalleled opportunities for implementing ecosystem
47
management with a win/win outcome. We could restore
ecological integrityand improve resource values, paid
for at least in part by removal of postsettlement trees.
The risks of inaction far outweigh the risks of implement-
ing ecosystem restoration.
LITERATURE CITED
Arno, S.F. 1985. Ecological effects and management
implications of Indianfires. Pages 81-86 in Proceed-
ings-Symposium and Workshop on Wilderness Fire.
November 15-18, 1983, Missoula, MT. USDA Forest
Service GeneralTechnical report INT-182, Inter-
mountain Forest and Range ExperimentStation,
Ogden, UT,
Arnold, J. F. 1950. Changes in ponderosa pine bunch-
grass ranges in northern Arizona resultinq from pine
regeneration and grazing. J. Forestry48:118-126.
Biswell, H. H. 1972. Fire ecology in ponderosa pine
grassland. Proc. Tall Timbers Fire Ecology Conf.
12:69-97.
Callicott, J.B. 1994. A brief history of American conser-
vation philosophy. pp. 10-14 in W.W. Covington and
L.F. DeBano (eds.). Sustainable ecological systems: .
implementing an ecological approach to land man- .
agement. USDA Forest Service General Technical
Report Rm-247. 363 p.
Cooper, C. F. 1960. Changes in vegetation, structure
and growthof southwestern pine forests since white
settlement. Ecol. Monogr. 30:129-164.
Covington, W. W., and M. M. Moore. 1994a. Changes in
multiresource conditions in ponderosa pine forests
sinceEuro-American settlement. Journal of Forestry
92:39-47.
Covington, W. W., and M. M. Moore. 1994b. Post-
settlement changes in natural fire regimes and forest
structure: ecological restoration of old-growth ponde-
rosapine forests. Journal of Sustainable Forestry
2:153-181
Covington, W.W., R.L. Everett, R. Steele, L.L. Irwin, T.A.
Daer, and A.N.D. Auclair. 1994. Historical and antici-
pated changes in forest ecosystems of the Inland
West of the United States. Journal of Sustainable
Forestry 2:13-63.
Covington, W.W., and S.S. Sackett. 1986. Effect of
periodic burning on soil nitrogen concentrations in
ponderosa pine. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 50:452-457.
Dieterich, J. H. 1980.Chimney Spring forest fire history.
USDA For. Ser. Res. Pap. RM-220, 8 p.
Fule, P.Z., and W.W. Covington. 1994. Fire regime
disruption and pine-oak forest structure in the Sierra
Madre Occidental, Durango, Mexico. Restoration
Ecology 2(4):261-272.

Grue ll, G. E., W. C. Schimdt, S. F. Arno, and W. J.
Reich. 1982. Seventy years of vegetative change in a
managed ponderosa pine forest in western Montana -
Implications for resource management. USDA For.
Ser. Gen. Tech . Rep. INT-130.
Kilgore, B. M. 1981. Fire in ecosystem distribution and
structure: Western forests and scrublands. Pages
58-89 In fire regimes and ecosystem properties.
USDA For. Ser. Gen. Tech . Rep. WO-26.
Laudenslayer, W.F. Jr., H.H. Darr, and S. Smith. 1989.
Historical effects of forest management practices of
easts ide pine communities in northeastern California.
Pages 26-34 in Multiresource Management of Ponde-
rosa Pine Forests. USDA Forest Service General
Technical Report RM-185 , Rocky Mountain Forest
and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, CO. 282
pages.
Madany, M.H., and N.E. West. 1983. Livestock graz-
inrfire regime interactions within montane forests of
Zion National Park, Utah. Ecology 64:661-667.
Morgan, P., G.H. Aplet, J.B. Haufler, H.C. Humphries,
M.M. Moore, and W.D. Wilson. 1994. Historical range
of variability: A useful tool for evaluating ecological
change. Journal of Sustainable Forestry 2:87-111.
Society for Ecological Restoration. 1993. Mission
statement. Restoration Ecology 1:206-207.
48
Steele , R., S.F. Arne, and K. Geier-Hayes. 1986. Wild-
fire patterns change in central Idaho's ponderosa
pine-Douglas-firforest. Western Journal of App lied
Forestry 1:16-18.
Stein, S. J. 1987. Fire history of the Paunsaugunt
Plateau of southern Utah. Great Basin Naturalist
48:58-63.
Swetnam, T.W., and C.H. Baisan. 1994. Historical fire
regime patterns in the southwestern United States
since AD 1700. In Allen, C.D. (ed.), Proceedings of
the 2nd La Mesa Fire Symposium, March 29-30,
1994, Los Alamos, New Mexico. National Park
Service publication.
Weaver, Harold. 1943. Fire as an ecological and silvicul-
tural factor in the ponderosa pine region of the Pacific
Slope. Journal of Forestry 41:7-14.
Weaver, Harold. 1974. Effects of fire on temperate
forests: Western United States. pp. 279-319, in T. T.
Kozlowski and C. E. Ahlgren (editors), Fire and
Ecosystems, Academic Press, New York.
Williams, J.T., R.G. Schmidt, R.A. Norum, P.N. Omi,
and R.G. Lee. 1993. Fire-related considerations and
strategies in support of ecosystem management.
USDA Forest Service Staffing Paper, Washington,
D.C.
