United States
Department of
Agriculture
Forest Service
Rocky Mountain
Forest and Range
Experiment Station
Fort Collins,
Colorado 80526
General Technical
Report RM-217
Management Recommendations
for the Northern Goshawk
in the Southwestern United States

Reynolds, Richard T.; Graham, Russell T.; Reiser, M. Hildegard; and
others. 1992. Management recommendations for the northern goshawk in
the southwestern United States. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-217, Ft. Collins, CO:
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest
and Range Experiment Station. 90 p.
Present forest conditions – loss of a herbaceous and shrubby understory,
reductions in the amount of older forests, and increased areas of dense tree
regeneration – reflect the extent of human influence on these forests. These
changes may also be affecting goshawk populations. Information on
goshawk nesting habitat and foraging behavior, and the food and habitats of
selected goshawk prey, was therefore synthesized to develop a set of
management objectives, desired forest conditions, and management
recommendations. Key objectives of the guidelines are to provide (1)
nesting, post-fledging, and foraging areas for goshawks, and (2) habitat to
support abundant populations of 14 primary goshawk prey. Thinning trees
in the understory, creating small openings in the forest, and prescribed fires
should help produce and maintain the desired forest conditions. Other
habitat elements critical for maintaining both goshawk and prey
populations include abundant snags and large downed logs, woody debris,
interspersion of different tree sizes across the landscape, and the majority of
a goshawk’s home range in older-aged forests. These guidelines should also
benefit forest health, soil productivity, and the habitats of other old-growth-
dependent plants and animals.

Management Recommendations
for the Northern Goshawk
in the Southwestern United States
Richard T. Reynolds1, Russell T. Graham,
M. Hildegard Reiser, Richard L. Bassett, Patricia L. Kennedy,
Douglas A. Boyce, Jr., Greg Goodwin, Randall Smith, and E. Leon Fisher
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station and
Southwestern Region Forest Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture2
August, 1992
USDA Forest Service
General Technical Report RM-217
1Author affiliations are listed in Appendix 6.
2The Rocky Mountain Station is headquartered in Fort Collins. Colorado, in cooperation with Colorado State University; the
Southwestern Region is headquartered in Albuquerque, New Mexico.


























































































U.S. Department of Agriculture
Forest Service
Rocky Mountain Forest and
Range Experiment Station
The Rocky Mountain Station is one of eight regional
experiment stations, plus the Forest Products
Laboratory and the Washington Office Staff, that make
up the Forest Service research organization.
RESEARCH FOCUS
Research programs at the Rocky Mountain Station are
coordinated with area universities and with other
institutions. Many studies are conducted on a
cooperative basis to accelerate solutions to problems
involving range, water, wildlife and fish habitat, human
and community development, timber, recreation,
protection, and multiresource evaluation.
RESEARCH LOCATIONS
Research Work Units of the Rocky Mountain Station
are operated in cooperation with universities in the
following cities:
Albuquerque, New Mexico
Flagstaff, Arizona
Fort Collins, Colorado
Laramie, Wyoming
Lincoln, Nebraska
Rapid City, South Dakota
Rocky
Mountains
Southwest
Great
Plains
*Station Headquarters: 240 W. Prospect Rd., Fort Collins,CO 80526
