 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928/523-7182, FAX 928/523-0296, www.eri.nau.edu 
Understory Plant Community Responses to Hazardous Fuels Reduction Treatments  
in Pinyon-Juniper Woodlands of Arizona, USA  
 
 
By David W. Huffman 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Hazardous fuels reduction projects with the primary goal of reducing potential for uncontrollable wildfire are being 
implemented widely in dry forests of the western United States. Information concerning ecological responses to fuels 
reduction treatments is becoming increasingly available for frequent-fire forests. However, response data are lacking 
from other major ecosystems, such as pinyon-juniper woodlands, where natural fire regimes may be characterized by 
infrequent, high-severity fire. Such woodlands are being treated, particularly in wildland-urban interface areas, using 
fuels reduction principles most appropriate for frequent-fire types (Schoennagel and Nelson 2011). In this study, we 
examined understory plant community responses five years after implementation of a fuels reduction experiment at a 
pinyon-juniper woodland site in Arizona (Huffman et al. 2009). Treatments were overstory thinning (Thin), thinning 
followed by prescribed burning (Thin + Burn), burning alone (Burn), and untreated controls (Control). We wanted to 
understand if understory cover and species richness differed between fuels reduction approaches. We also wondered if 
treatments affected understory community composition. In addition to these questions, we evaluated differences in 
cover of invasive species, biological soil crusts, and bare soil as indicators of ecosystem integrity and function. An-
swers to these questions provide information to help managers balance the potentially competing goals of hazardous 
fuels reduction and conservation of ecological integrity in pinyon-juniper woodlands. 
 
RESEARCH FINDINGS 
 
Experimental units that received thinning, and thinning 
followed by prescribed fire, showed significantly great-
er understory cover after five years (2006-2011) than 
units that were only burned and those that were not 
treated (Fig. 1).  
 
 
Cover changes were driven primarily by increases in 
annual forbs and nonnative species (primarily cheat-
grass).  
 
 
We found no significant effects of treatments on under-
story species richness or community composition.  
 
 
Cover of biological soil crust and bare soil cover — 
indicators of changes in ecosystem function — were not 
affected by treatment.  
 
 
 
 
 Fact Sheet:  Understory Plant Community Responses to Hazardous Fuels  
Reduction Treatments in Pinyon-Juniper Woodlands of Arizona, USA  
February 2013 
Figure 1. Understory plant cover on thin-only and thinned 
plus prescribed fire plots was significantly greater than cover 
on burn-only plots five years after treatment (2006–2011). 

 
MANAGEMENT IMPLICATIONS 
 
Hazardous fuels reduction principles have been developed for 
frequent-fire forest types, but these treatment approaches may 
negatively affect ecological conditions when applied to infre-
quent-fire systems such as persistent pinyon-juniper woodlands 
(see Romme et al. 2009).  
 
 
Although results from our study indicated that hazardous fuels 
treatments in pinyon-juniper woodlands may increase understory 
abundance within five years of treatment, changes were not large 
(Fig. 2). 
 
 
A lack of significant differences between fuel reduction alterna-
tives in cover of biological soil crust and bare soil suggested that 
these treatments may not have produced strong effects on func-
tional attributes such as soil stability or hydrological processes. 
 
 
Results from this study indicated that thinning treatments fol-
lowed by prescribed fire may lead to rapid increases in nonnative 
species cover. This may be of particular concern where popula-
tions of cheatgrass (Bromus tectorum) occur. Increases in com-
munity dominance by this species may substantially alter disturb-
ance patterns in infrequent-fire systems.  
 
 
Managers that desire to reduce hazardous fuels while simultane-
ously conserving integrity of pinyon-juniper woodlands should 
consider utilizing thinning treatments that emulate stand structur-
al patterns that result from natural disturbance (Huffman et al. 
2012) and not burning thinning slash. 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
Huffman, D.W., Crouse, J.E., Chancellor, W.W., and Fulé, P.Z. 2012. Influence of time since fire on pinyon-juniper 
woodland structure. Forest Ecology and Management 247:29-37.  
Huffman, D.W., Fulé, P.Z., Crouse, J.E., Pearson, K.M., 2009. A comparison of fire hazard mitigation alternatives in 
pinyon-juniper woodlands of Arizona. Forest Ecology and Management 257:628-635. 
Romme, W.H, Allen, C.D., Bailey, J.D., Baker, W.L., Bestelmeyer, B.T., Brown, P.M., Eisenhart, K.S., Floyd, M. L., 
Huffman, D.W., Jacobs, B.F., Miller, R.F., Muldavin, E.H., Swetnam, T.W., Tausch, R.J., Weisberb, P.J. 2009. 
Historical and modern disturbance regimes, stand structures, and landscape dynamics on piñon-juniper vegeta-
tion of the Western United States. Rangeland Ecology and Management 62:203-222.  
Schoennagel, T., Nelson, C.R., Theobald, D.M., Carnwath, G.C., Chapman, T.B., 2009. Implementation of National 
Fire Plan treatments near the wildland-urban interface in the western United States. Proceedings of the Nation-
al Academy of Science 106:10706-10711. 
Contact 
 
David W. Huffman, David.Huffman@nau.edu  
 
 
This Fact Sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
Huffman, D.W., Stoddard, M.T., Springer, J.D., Crouse, J.E., Chancellor, W.W. 2013. Understory 
plant community responses to hazardous fuels reduction treatments in pinyon-juniper wood-
lands of Arizona, USA. Forest Ecology and Management 289:478-488.  
 
Figure 2. Ecological Restoration Institute staff 
compared understory cover on permanent quad-
rats (bottom) within experimental units that were 
thinned only, thinned and burned (middle), 
burned only, and left untreated (top).  
