ERI–Issues in Forest Restoration
Forest Restoration Treatments: Their Effect on Wildland Fire  
Suppression Costs

The Ecological Restoration Institute 
 
Te Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, 
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of dry, frequent-ﬁre forests in the Intermountain 
West. Tese forests have been signiﬁcantly altered during the last century, with decreased ecological  
and recreational values, near-elimination of natural low-intensity ﬁre regimes, and greatly increased risk 
of large-scale ﬁres. Te ERI is working with public agencies and other partners to restore these forests  
to a more ecologically healthy condition and trajectory—in the process helping to signiﬁcantly reduce  
the threat of catastrophic wildﬁre and its eﬀects on human, animal, and plant communities.
Cover photo: 
Several ﬁre crews, comprised of more than 6,000 ﬁreﬁghters from across the country, fought night and day to 
suppress the Wallow Fire, which ignited on May 29, 2011 in eastern Arizona and burned more than 538,000 acres. 
Photo: U.S. Forest Service
Northern Arizona University
Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
928-523-7182
nau.edu/eri
Northern Arizona University 
School of Forestry
P.O. Box 15018
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5018
Publication date: May 2013
Authors: Ryan A. Fitch, Ecological Restoration Institute and School of Forestry, Northern Arizona University
Yeon-Su Kim, PhD, Northern Arizona School of Forestry, Northern Arizona University
Amy E.M. Waltz, PhD, Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University
Editor: Dave Egan
Series Editor: Tayloe Dubay
Please contact the ERI for reproduction policies: 928-523-5697
All material copyright © 2013 ERI, NAU
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Afﬁrmative Action Institution   
NAU Printing Services/05-13

Table of Contents
1
Executive Summary .....................................................................................................................2
Introduction ...................................................................................................................................2 
The Ecological Restoration Solution: Will it Reduce Suppression Costs? ..............................3 
Methods and Study Area .............................................................................................................3 
Regression Analysis and Suppression Costs ............................................................................5 
 
Results .................................................................................................................................7
 
Regression Analysis and Suppression Costs ..................................................................8 
Discussion .....................................................................................................................................9 
Management Implications .........................................................................................................10 
Conclusion ..................................................................................................................................10 
References  ................................................................................................................................. 11

Executive Summary
We modeled the eﬀects of proposed forest restoration treatments in Arizona’s Four Forest Restoration Initiative 
(4FRI) on ﬁre behavior characteristics and ﬁre suppression costs. We found two signiﬁcant factors that help explain 
total wildﬁre suppression costs: 1) distance from the wildﬁre to the wildland-urban interface and 2) the proportion 
of ﬁres with high burn severity. Given our results, we estimate a range for wildland suppression costs at $706–$825 
per acre for the current conditions of the 4FRI landscape. After the proposed forest restoration treatments, the 
suppression costs should be reduced to $287–$327 per acre for the same size ﬁre.
Introduction
Federal land management agencies, including the USDA Forest Service (USFS) and agencies within the 
Department of Interior (DOI), have experienced a signiﬁcant rising trend in wildland ﬁres and subsequent 
wildland ﬁre suppression expenditures. For example, the appropriations for wildland ﬁre management activities 
by these agencies rose from $1.2 billion annually from 1996–2000 to more than $2.9 billion annually during 
2001–2007 (GAO 2009, Table 1). Tis rising trend is forecast to continue with higher frequency of wildland 
ﬁre occurrences, longer durations of wildland ﬁre seasons (Westerling et al. 2006), and the continued expansion 
of residential development within the vulnerable wildland-urban interface, also known as WUI (Headwaters 
Economics 2008).
Table 1. Forest Service and Interior Wildland Fire Appropriations, Fiscal Years 1996 through 2007 
Total appropriations (millions of dollars) 
Fiscal year 
Nominal 
Inﬂation-adjusted
a
1996 
$772.4 
$984.2
1997 
$1,432.1 
$1,793.3
1998 
$1,116.7 
$1,381.7
1999 
$1,159.3 
$1,415.9
2000 
$1,598.9 
$1,914.2
2001 
$2,859.9 
$3,344.7
2002 
$2,238.8 
$2,569.0
2003 
$3,165.1 
$3,560.2
2004 
$3,230.6 
$3,541.6
2005 
$2,929.8 
$3,144.0
2006 
$2,701.4 
$2,775.4
2007 
$3,047.0 
$3,047.0
Source: GAO analysis of Congressional Research Service data.
Tere have been considerable research eﬀorts designed to understand the factors aﬀecting the overall costs of wildland 
ﬁres (Donovan and Rideout 2003, Lynch 2004, Calkin et al 2005, Gebert et al. 2007, Liang et al. 2008, Prestemon et 
al. 2008). Tese studies indicate that the increasing trend in wildland ﬁre suppression expenditures corresponds to a trend 
of increasing acres burned by large, wildland ﬁres (i.e., ﬁres greater than 988 acres in size). While these large wildland 
2

3
ﬁres are relatively small in number, they account for nearly 98 percent of the total acres burned (Calkin et al. 2005). Te 
frequency of large ﬁres has markedly increased since the mid-1980s with almost four times as many large ﬁres burning 
nearly seven times more land between 1987 and 2003 compared to the period 1970–1986.
Total wildland ﬁre suppression cost has also been positively correlated with various spatial factors, in addition 
to ﬁre size. For example, Liang and colleagues (2008) examined 100 wildland ﬁres greater than 300 acres in 
size between 1996 and 2005, and found that 58 percent of the variation in wildland ﬁre suppression costs was 
attributed to ﬁre size and percentage of private land burned. Likewise, after examining 1,550 wildland ﬁres 
across the United States, Gebert and colleagues (2007) discovered that total housing value within 20 miles of 
the wildland ﬁre ignition point had a positive eﬀect on expected suppression cost. Yoder and Gebert (2012) 
also found that housing values and other values-at-risk positively contribute to an increase in ﬁre suppression 
costs. Although total ﬁre size (area burned) increases overall suppression cost, expected suppression cost per acre 
decreases as ﬁre size increases due to the ﬁxed nature of many ﬁre suppression related expenditures.  
 
 
The Ecological Restoration Solution:  
Will it Reduce Suppression Costs?
Trough the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program (CFLRP) and other measures, the USFS 
and its partners have plans and projects under way to restore forested landscapes that are now susceptible to 
large wildﬁres. Using ecological forest restoration principles, these projects envision returning forests to healthy 
ecological conditions, increasing ecosystem services, protecting forest communities from catastrophic wildﬁre, 
and providing support to local and regional economies. In terms of increasing ﬁre safety, ecological restoration 
treatments are designed to change ﬁre behavior conditions from high-severity crown ﬁres to low-severity surface 
ﬁres, largely by thinning trees using mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning. Tese approaches, which 
have been successful at smaller scales, will be applied to hundreds of thousands acres on now ﬁre-prone forested 
landscapes. Te questions we sought to answer in our research were: 1) What will be the eﬀect of restoration 
treatments on ﬁre behavior at the landscape scale?  2) If these treatments are successful, what, if any, ﬁre 
suppression cost savings might be realized? 
Methods and Study Area
To answer our questions, we began by adopting the Cost plus Net Value Change (C+NVC) model because it 
provides a basis for determining the relationship between wildland ﬁre suppression costs and fuel treatments. 
In the C+NVC model, costs (C) are all costs associated with wildland ﬁre suppression and fuel treatments. 
Meanwhile, NVC represents all other ﬁre-related losses, including property and facilities damage as well as other 
value changes in non-market ecosystem services. Teoretically, some aspects of fuel treatments can be considered 
substitutes for suppression costs for a given level of NVC, while some components of fuel treatments complement 
those in ﬁre suppression (Donovan and Rideout 2003, Rideout et al. 2008). Tus, an increase in fuel treatments 
does not necessarily imply a reduction in suppression costs unless optimum NVC was set at a ﬁxed level. Rather 
than viewing fuel treatments as a substitute for ﬁre suppression, fuel treatments and ﬁre suppression expenditures 
are viewed as inputs to NVC in terms of their individual marginal and joint eﬀects. 
Next, we employed wildland ﬁre models to determine wildland ﬁre suppression costs per acre in order to predict 
changes in wildland ﬁre suppression costs. Using FlamMap via the ArcFuels extension in conjunction with 
ArcGIS, we selected the factors of “ﬂame length,” “crown ﬁre activity,” and “burn probability” to categorize the 

4
potential of severe wildﬁre across the landscape. We then established a baseline analysis with the ﬁre models 
to show how the restoration treatments aﬀected ﬁre behavior on the treated landscape. Since the restoration 
treatments produced reductions in wildland ﬁre probability and/or wildland ﬁre severity potential, we were then 
able to estimate the changes in wildland ﬁre suppression costs. Comparing the expected reduction in wildﬁre 
suppression costs with treatment costs will provide a metric for the cost-beneﬁt analysis of treatment costs to 
avoided wildland ﬁre suppression costs for a given NVC level. 
Our initial study area for modeling ﬁre behavior is a portion of the Coconino National Forest, which is south/
southeast of the City of Flagstaﬀ, Arizona and is designated as restoration unit 1 (RU1) as part of the CFLRP-
funded Four Forest Restoration Initiative Project, or 4FRI  (Figure 1). 
Current analysis of the landscape is limited strictly to reducing the costs of wildland ﬁre suppression (C). We 
have not incorporated treatment costs into the calculation of C, because ﬁnal costs of the proposed treatment 
are highly uncertain at this point depending on the rate of resulting biomass utilization from the 4FRI project. 
For example, past estimates of similar mechanical thinning operations in the area was $300–$433 per acre, 
but the current contractor proposed to pay the USFS up to $22 per acre for recovery of the materials. If ﬁre 
suppression costs are to be mitigated, it seems appropriate to focus on the factors and treatments that relate to 
ﬁres categorized as “large” in size or where the severe wildﬁre threat is greatest (Pollet and Omi 2002).
We used the current conditions of the entire 4FRI landscape to create the landscape ﬁles (LCPs) for the 
ﬁre modeling carried out in FlamMap, version 3 (Mary Lata and Neil McCuster, personal communication). 
Te LCP consisted of a compilation of fuel model, canopy cover, height to live crown (canopy base height), 
canopy bulk density, slope, aspect, and elevation raster layers. Te LCP was then cropped to focus on the 
4FRI treatment area, RU1. Two ﬁles—a fuel moisture ﬁle and a wind ﬁle—were created to approximate 
environmental conditions. Each ﬁle was based on conditions observed during the Schultz Fire, which occurred 
under non-extreme ﬁre conditions. Te Schultz Fire burned more than 15,000 acres north of Flagstaﬀ in 2010, 
Figure 1. Study Area RU 1 
within the 4FRI (Source: Four 
Forest Restoration Initiative 
Draft Proposed Action Scoping 
Report, June 2011).

5
and we assumed the ﬁre conditions for the Schulz Fire were conservative and would be present in the RU1 area 
during ﬁre season. Wind speed and direction were also based on conditions during the Schultz Fire, that is, a 
20-mph wind out of the southwest (Mary Lata, personal communication). We used the Scott/Reinhardt 2001 
Crown Fire Calculation Method (Scott and Reinhardt 2001) to calculate ﬂame length and crown ﬁre activity 
outputs in FlamMap.
Using a ﬂame length categorization model (Ager et al. 2011), we categorized the ﬂame length outputs into 
hauling categories (a typical categorization that corresponds directly to suppression eﬀorts required: 0–4 feet, 4–8 
feet, 8–11 feet, and 11+ feet) in order to determine the eﬀectiveness of initial wildland ﬁre suppression activities. 
Because of the various resource costs associated with more severe wildland ﬁres, we found this categorization to 
be useful in assessing burn severity. A ﬁfth ﬂame length category, 20-foot or higher ﬂame lengths, was included 
in the ﬁre behavior analysis to show areas where we expect to observe high burn severity ﬁre conditions.
Crown ﬁre activity outputs from FlamMap are expressed in crown activity potential as classiﬁed by “active crown 
ﬁre,” “passive crown ﬁre,” “surface ﬁre,” and “unburned.” Crown ﬁre activity was used as one of the ﬁre behavior 
proxies for burn severity. If a pixel was in the active crown ﬁre category, that pixel was estimated as indicating 
high burn severity. 
Burn probabilities were calculated from 1,000 random ignitions. Previous case studies using burn probability 
applied considerably higher numbers of random ignitions, but lack of computing power limited our runs. Te 
resolution of calculations was set to 394 feet (120 meters); the maximum simulation time was one day (1,440 
minutes); and the interval for minimum travel paths was 1,640 feet (500 meters). 
FlamMap outputs were transferred into ArcGIS 10 for geospatial referencing and further analysis. We used 
the spatial analyst tool, “Raster Calculator,” to combine the ﬁre behavior metrics, burn probability, and the 
boundaries of the suggested treatment area within the RU1 area. Te “Reclassify” and “Calculate” tools were used 
to ﬁnd the number of acres in each of the combined ﬁre behavior metrics and burn probability categories within 
the treatment area. Tese outputs were exported to Excel 2010 to calculate the total acres of each of the ﬁre 
behavior metrics and burn probability categories.
Regression Analysis and Suppression Costs
We calculated the expected wildﬁre suppression costs within the RU1 study area using a general linearized 
model output for the average cost per acre of $695 within the USDA National Forest System Region 3 (Gebert 
et al. 2007). In addition, we compared this cost to our results from the regression analysis. Te wildland ﬁre 
suppression cost estimate is also based solely on suppression costs and did not include rehabilitation and other net 
value changes. No consideration was given to the probability of ﬁre spreading into the area. 
We employed a regression analysis based on 39 wildland ﬁres, each more than 1,000 acres in size, that occurred 
within the overall 4FRI area between 2001 and 2009 in order to estimate wildland ﬁre suppression costs. Table 
2 provides information about the variables used and information sources. Other variables of interest that were 
identiﬁed and collected include: vegetation cover type, proximity to the WUI area, proportion of private land 
burned, and total acres of the landscape being modeled. We used designated WUI areas as deﬁned by each of 
the national forests within our sample. Te “Euclidean Distance Tool” within the “Spatial Analyst” toolbox of 
ArcGIS was used to calculate this distance (Table 3). 

6
With the ﬁre behavior outputs available to us from the FlamMap ﬁre modeling, we used burn severity and 
dominant vegetation type to represent ﬁre behavior and distance to WUI and proportion of ﬁre burned in private 
land to represent ﬁre location. We represented other locational variables that might aﬀect ﬁre suppression costs 
by the dummy variable for each national forest where each ﬁre occurred. Tis model helped us understand and 
forecast wildland ﬁre suppression costs given our ability to model the impacts of proposed treatments on changes 
in ﬁre behavior.
Table 2. Dependent and independent variables used in the regression analysis
Variable
Description
Source
Cost
Forest Service and DOI suppression expenditure
US Forest Service
Size (fz)
Number of acres burned
www.mtbs.gov
Distance to WUI (ﬂ)
Shortest distance from WUI perimeter to ﬁre perimeter
National Forest web-
site
Burn Severity (fb)
Proportion of ﬁre that burned at high, medium, and low 
severity
www.mtbs.gov
Private Land (ﬂ)
Proportion of ﬁre burned in private land
www.land.state.az.us
Dominant Vegetation 
Type (fb)
Vegetation type that had the highest percent cover 
within the ﬁre perimeter
National Forest web-
site
Forest (ﬂ)
Dummy variable for the National Forest in which the ﬁre 
occurred
National Forest web-
site
Table 3. Equations from the regression analysis 
Equation
P-value
R2
C/A = 245.29664** - 0.01227* x D + 16.10641** x H
0.00
0.33
C = 406,343 - 46.9942 x D + 94,510** x H + 124.6876** x A
0.00
0.59
C = total suppression expenditure, A = acres burned, P = % private land, D = distance to WUI, and H = % high severity burn.
**, P < 0.01; *, P < 0.1

7
Results
Fire Behavior
In terms of ﬁre behavior, we found several related results. Tey are:
1. According to the models, if ﬁre were to occur under current conditions in the proposed treatment area 
we estimate 50,287 acres would burn at high severity. After restoration treatments, we project this 
would decrease to 4,502 acres, a reduction of 45,785 acres (see Figure 2). In other words, under the 
current conditions, 28.6 percent of the 175,617 acres of proposed treatment area is likely to burn at 
high severity while only 2.6 percent of the same area would be at high severity following the proposed 
restoration treatment. 
2. We observed a large decrease in passive and active crowning within the boundaries of the treated areas. 
Tis resulted because the treated areas had fewer trees per acre, decreased canopy bulk density, and an 
increase in canopy base height compared to the current conditions.
3. Te models showed a decrease in ﬂame length within the treatment compared to the current conditions.
4. Models showed an overall increase in the probability that areas in the treated landscape will burn when 
compared to the current conditions. Te ranges of burn probabilities are 0–27.4 percent and 0–32.8 
percent for current and treated conditions, respectively. Tis was especially the case in the northwestern 
boundaries of the treatment areas and is likely due to “opening” the landscape, causing wind to have a 
larger impact on ﬁre behavior. 
Figure 2. Distribution of estimated high burn severity from active crown ﬁre activity and ﬂame  
length greater than 20 feet. Current conditions and proposed treatment as (a) and (b), respectively. 

8
Regression Analysis and Suppression Costs
Our results show the total acres burned was signiﬁcant in predicting wildland ﬁre suppression costs as expected, 
although we also found that the percent of area burned at high severity better explained the variation of 
suppression costs. With regards to distance from the WUI, we found a marginal (three-foot increase) decrease 
in suppression costs of $46.99 for total expenditures and $0.01 for cost per acre when total acres burned and 
proportion of high burn severity were held constant. Tis result is consistent with previous ﬁndings of higher 
wildland ﬁre suppression costs in WUI areas (Donovan et al. 2004, Liang et al. 2008). Te proportion of area 
with a high burn severity variable had a marginal (in terms of a 1 percent increase) increase in suppression cost  
of $94,510 for total expenditures and $16.11 for cost per acre when total acres burned and distance from WUI 
held constant. 
Using the more conservative estimate of high burn severity being deﬁned as active crown ﬁre or ﬂame lengths 
greater than 20 feet, our linear regression result estimates a wildland ﬁre suppression cost of $706 per acre for 
RU1 area in its current condition. Te linear regression model estimate for wildland ﬁre suppression cost after 
ecological restoration treatment is $287 per acre—a signiﬁcant diﬀerence of $419 per acre. Using the total cost 
linear regression equation, our estimates are $25 million and $22.5 million for the current conditions and post 
treatment, respectively. However, if other factors of wildland ﬁre costs, including rehabilitation and ecosystem 
service loss, are included to suppression costs, the total cost of wildﬁres (C+NVC) has been estimated to be in 
the range of 2 to 30 times greater than the costs associated with suppression alone (Western Forestry Leadership 
Coalition 2010).
If we expand high burn severity to include both passive and active crown ﬁre or ﬂame lengths greater than 11 
feet, our regression equation estimates suppression costs to be $825 per acre for current conditions and $327 per 
acre after restoration treatment—a diﬀerence of $498 per acre. In terms of total suppression costs, our regression 
estimates are $25.7 million for the current conditions and $22.8 million post treatment. Tese estimates are 
summarized in Table 4.
Table 4. Estimated wildland ﬁre suppression costs
Per Acre Cost
Total Cost
Current conditions with active 
crown ﬁre or ﬂame length > 20 ft.
$706
$25,006,591
Current conditions with passive 
and active crown ﬁre or ﬂame 
length > 11 ft.
$825
$25,706,910
Post-treatment with active crown 
ﬁre or ﬂame length > 20 ft.
$287
$22,549,331
Post-treatment with passive and 
active crown ﬁre or ﬂame length > 
11 ft.
$327
$22,784,661

9
Discussion
Recent studies of large wildﬁres have repeatedly pointed to the size of the ﬁre as the most signiﬁcant factor in 
determining wildﬁre suppression costs. While recognizing the importance of ﬁre size, we also suspected that ﬁre 
behavior characteristics play an important role when modeling wildﬁre suppression expenditures. In this study, 
we used linear regression models focused on ﬁre behavior characteristics and produced promising preliminary 
results. Our regionally speciﬁc regression analysis estimates a per acre suppression cost in the range of $706 to 
$825 under current conditions with signiﬁcantly lower costs, ranging from $287 to $327 per acre, after restoration 
treatments. Previous research by Gebert and colleagues (2007) found that the average suppression cost for large 
(greater than 300 acres) wildﬁres was $695 per acre for the Southwest region between 1995 and 2004.  
Assuming that our results are relatively accurate (and we do acknowledge that a parameter estimate bias may be 
present due to our relatively small sample of wildﬁres greater than 1,000 acres; see Yoder and Gebert 2012), what 
do they mean in terms of the overall costs of maintaining and restoring forest health? To determine this answer, 
we studied the ability of the restoration treatments to help defray wildland ﬁre suppression costs using a cost-
beneﬁt analysis. Tese results suggest to us that whenever a restoration treatment costs less than $420 per acre 
on our conservative estimate ($498 per acre on our expanded classiﬁcation), the restoration treatment will have a 
positive net saving with regards to suppression costs. Similarly, the treatments would produce a net saving if the 
treatments can be implemented over the landscape at a total cost of $2.5 million or less (less than $2.9 million as 
the upper end range). Of course, this is assuming a constant NVC level as discussed above.
Fire size has long been correlated with ﬁre suppression costs. We acknowledge this association in our econometric 
model, but sought to predict ﬁre suppression costs through ﬁre behavior characteristics we can model. Our total 
expenditure model is largely driven by the explanatory variable “total acres burned.” In both the treated and 
untreated landscape, we are assuming the same number of acres will burn, the area encompassed by the proposed 
treatments. Te reduction in total expenditure is strictly due to changes in ﬁre behavior characteristics (burn 
severity). Te goal of restoration treatments in this area is not to mitigate ﬁre size or prevent the occurrence of 
ﬁre, but to reintroduce ﬁre into the landscape in a socially acceptable and ecologically resilient manner. 
Our ongoing research is currently expanding the use of our regression analysis by including ﬁres from the 2010 
ﬁre season as well as ﬁres that occurred on the Tonto National Forest. Once this modeling is completed, we will 
have a larger sample size to strengthen the results reported in this paper. We plan to reﬁne the measure of burn 
severity that can be derived from ﬁre behavior modeling outputs because predicting ﬁre behavior is critical to the 
inputs that we have identiﬁed for estimating wildland ﬁre suppression costs.
Fireﬁghters perform blacklining 
operations, where hand drip 
torches are used to burn fuels 
along a perimeter to limit a ﬁre’s 
growth. Photo courtesy of the 
Ecological Restoration Institute

10
Management Implications
Te results of this study identiﬁed several management implications and important research areas for the future. 
• 
As with any restoration treatment, reduction of severe wildland ﬁres is only one of the goals and beneﬁts. 
Other beneﬁts include the enhancement of additional ecosystem services such as improved carbon 
storage, water yields and ﬁltration, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities. All of these improved 
or maintained ecosystem service beneﬁts need to be considered in the overall cost-beneﬁt analysis of 
implementing restoration treatments. Further analysis of the NVC of the landscape is required to 
determine the true cost of wildland ﬁre (Donovan and Rideout 2003).
• 
We found that restoration treatments may create unintended, negative consequences. In particular, 
while they reduce burn severity of the treated area, such activities may increase the burn probability 
of areas adjacent and outside the management boundary. To oﬀset this tendency, managers and ﬁre 
planners might examine the values and infrastructure at risk in the adjacent areas prior to treatment 
implementation, paying particular attention to wind direction and ﬁre spread probabilities. 
• 
Our models indicate that high burn severity conditions are interspersed throughout the landscape under 
the current conditions but change to a disconnected, spotty conﬁguration of high burn severity following 
restoration treatments (Figure 2). Tis may aﬀect the wildﬁre suppression cost estimate as areas under 
“severe” conditions could be allowed to burn, with suppression eﬀorts focused on areas that exhibit lower 
predicted severity (i.e., have smaller ﬂame length or surface ﬁres). Under these circumstances, a more 
holistic estimate of ﬁre suppression costs, one that includes low burn severity, could be beneﬁcial. 
• 
Reintroducing prescribed ﬁres is a typical restoration goal and may be implemented instead of or as a 
complement to mechanical thinning. Tere are costs involved when using this approach that are often 
not included in ﬁre suppression cost studies, including this one. A more detailed measure of wildﬁre 
suppression costs linked to diﬀerences in ﬁre behaviors could provide a more accurate measure of the total 
estimated suppression costs.
Conclusion
In this paper, we applied wildﬁre models and an econometric regression model to predict per acre wildland ﬁre 
suppression costs as well as changes in total wildland ﬁre suppression costs within a proposed landscape-scale 
restoration project, the Four Forest Restoration Initiative in northern Arizona. Our results suggest that changing 
potential ﬁre behavior through ecological restoration treatments can have a generally positive eﬀect on projected 
wildland ﬁre suppression costs. For instance, if the 4FRI restoration treatments can be implemented at a cost less 
than our estimated treatment costs of $706–$825 per acre, then, based strictly on cost savings from wildland ﬁre 
suppression costs, the restoration treatments will be cost eﬃcient. Tis level of cost eﬃciency may not reﬂect the 
true economic value, however, because our analysis does not take into account net value changes to the landscape. 
For example, the 4FRI ecosystem could be providing greater quantities or qualities of ecosystem services (e.g., 
more water, cleaner water) following restoration treatments. Additionally, the ecosystem may be more resilient to 
future ecosystem disturbances (e.g., wildland ﬁre) thereby altering the net value change component of the model. 
Finally, our results complement the U.S. Forest Service Risk and Cost Analysis Tools Package (R-CAT), which 
is now required for all projects funded by the USFS Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program, and 
are not meant to replace that procedure.

11
References
Ager, A.A., N.M. Vaillant, and M.A. Finney. 2011. Integrating ﬁre behavior models and geospatial analysis for 
wildland ﬁre risk assessment and fuel management planning. Journal of Combustion 2011(Article ID 572452).
Allen, C.C., M. Savage, D. Falk, K.F. Suckling, T.W. Swetnam, T. Schulke, P.B. Stacey, P. Morgan, M. 
Hoﬀman, and J.T. Klingel. 2002. Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems: A broad 
perspective. Ecological Applications 12(5):1418-433.
Calkin, D.E., K.M. Gebert, G.J. Jones, and R.P. Neilson. 2005. Forest service large ﬁre area burned and 
suppression expenditure trends, 1970-2002. Journal of Forestry 103(4):179-183. 
Calkin, D.E. and K.M. Gebert. 2009. Economics of wildland ﬁre risk management. Tucson, AZ: Wildﬁre 
Lessons Learned Center. Online at: http://www.wildﬁrelessons.net/documents/Economics.pdf
Donovan, G.H., P. Noordijk, and V. Radeloﬀ. 2004. Estimating the impact of proximity of houses on wildﬁre 
suppression costs in Oregon and Washington. In Proceedings of the Second International Symposium on Fire 
Economics, Planning, and Policy: A global view.
Donovan, G.H. and Rideout, D.B. 2003. A Reformulation of the Cost plus Net Value Change (C+NVC) Model 
of Wildﬁre Economics. Forest Science, Vol. 49, No. 2, pp. 318 – 323.
Gebert, K.M., D.E. Calkin, and J. Yoder. 2007. Estimating suppression expenditures for individual large 
wildland ﬁres. Western Journal of Applied Forestry 22(3):188-196.
Government Accountability Oﬃce (GAO). 2009. Wildland ﬁre management: Federal agencies have taken 
important steps forward, but additional action is needed to address remaining challenges. Washington, DC: 
Government Accountability Oﬃce. Online at: http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d09906t.pdf.
Headwaters Economics. 2008. Montana wildﬁre cost study technical report. Bozeman, MT: Headwaters 
Economics. Online at: http://headwaterseconomics.org/pubs/wildﬁre/HeadwatersEconomics_FireCostStudy_
TechnicalReport.pdf
Liang, J., D.E. Calkin, K.M. Gebert, T.J. Venn, and R.P. Silverstein. 2008. Factors inﬂuencing large wildland 
ﬁre suppression expenditures. International Journal of Wildland Fire 17:650-659.
Pollet, J. and P.N. Omi. 2002. Eﬀect of thinning and prescribed burning on crown ﬁre severity in ponderosa pine 
forests. International Journal of Wildland Fire 11(1):1-10.
Rideout, D.B., Y. Wei, A.G. Kirsch, and S.J. Botti. 2008. Toward a uniﬁed economic theory of ﬁre program 
analysis with strategies for empirical modeling. Pages 361-380 in T.P. Holmes, J.P. Prestemon, and K.L. Abt, eds., 
Te economics of forest disturbances: Wildﬁres, storms, and invasive species. Dordrecht, Te Netherlands: Springer.
Scott, J.H. and E.D. Reinhardt. 2001. Assessing Crown Fire Potential by Linking Models of Surface and Crown 
Fire Behavior. USFS Rocky Mountain Research Station: Research Paper RMRS RP 29.

12
Westerling, A.L., H.G. Hidalgo, D.R. Cayan, and T.W. Swetnam. 2006.Warming and earlier spring increase 
western U.S. forest wildfire activity. Science 313: 940-943.
Western Forestry Leadership Coalition. 2010. The true cost of wildfire in the western U.S. Lakewood, CO: 
Western Forestry Leadership Coalition. Online at: http://www.wflccenter.org/news_pdf/324_pdf.pdf.
Yoder, J. and K. Gebert. 2012. An econometric model for ex ante prediction wildfire suppression costs. Journal  
of Forest Economics 18:76-89.

13
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native species, structural characteristics, and 
ecological processes. Te Society for Ecological Restoration International deﬁnes ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that 
initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability. … Restoration attempts to 
return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration International 2004).
Troughout the dry forests of the western United States, most ponderosa pine forests have been degraded during the last 150 
years. Many ponderosa pine areas are now dominated by dense thickets of small trees, and lack their once diverse understory of 
grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing ﬁres and increased insect 
and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers on reintroducing frequent, low-intensity surface ﬁres—often after 
thinning dense stands—and reestablishing productive understory plant communities.
Te Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, implementing, and monitoring 
ecological restoration of dry, frequent-ﬁre forests in the Intermountain West. By allowing natural processes, such as ﬁre, to 
resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and 
recreational opportunities.
Te ERI Issues in Forest Restoration series provides overviews and policy recommendations derived from research and 
observations by the ERI and its partner organizations. While the ERI staﬀ recognizes that every forest restoration is site 
speciﬁc, we feel that the information provided in the series may help decision makers elsewhere.
Tis publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Service. Te views and conclusions 
contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the opinions or policies of 
the United States Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products does not constitute their endorsement by the 
United States Government or the ERI.
ERI—Issues in Forest Restoration
1. Forestlands Health and Carbon Sequestration: Strengthening the Case for Western Forest Restoration
2. Smoke from Prescribed Burning: Issues on Public Forestlands of the Western United States
3. Public Perceptions of Forest Restoration in the Southwest: A Synthesis of Selected Literature and Surveys
4. Integrating Ecological Restoration and Conservation Biology: A Case Study from Southwestern Ponderosa  
 
Pine Forests
5. Communications between Forest Managers and Property Owners in Pine Flat, Arizona: A Case Study of Community  
 
Interactions in a High Fire Hazard Area
6. Wilderness Management and the Restoration of Fire: An Analysis of Laws and Regulations in Northern Arizona
7. Navigating the Motives and Mandates of Multiparty Monitoring
8. Forest Service Contracting: A Basic Guide for Restoration Practitioners
9. Case Study of Community Stewardship Success: The White Mountain Stewardship Contract
10.  What to Expect from Collaboration in Natural Resource Management: A Research Synthesis for Practitioners
11.  Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI) Biophysical Monitoring Workshop Report
12.  Carbon Credits for Restored Western Forests?
13.  Ecological Restoration as Economic Stimulus: A Regional Analysis
14.  Exploring the Potential of Obtaining Carbon Credits for Restoration Activities on Navajo Tribal Forest Lands
15.  Integrating Domestic and Wild Ungulate Grazing into Forest Restoration Plans at the Landscape Level
16.  Workforce Needs of the Four Forests Restoration Initiative Project: An Analysis
17.  A Full Cost Accounting of the 2010 Schultz Fire

Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
ERI34KV
Return Service 
Requested
Non-Proﬁt Org
U.S. Postage 
PAID
Northern Arizona 
University
