 
COMPARING METHODS OF  
RECONSTRUCTING FIRE HISTORY USING FIRE SCARS IN A 
SOUTHWESTERN PONDEROSA PINE FOREST 
By Megan L. Van Horne 
 
A Thesis 
Submitted in Partial Fulfillment 
of the Requirements for the Degree of 
Master of Science 
in Forestry 
 
Northern Arizona University 
May 2005 
Approved:  
 
 
_______________________________ 
Peter Z. Fulé, Ph.D., Chair 
 
 
_______________________________ 
Carolyn Hull Sieg, Ph.D. 
 
 
_______________________________ 
Thomas E. Kolb, Ph.D. 
 
 
_______________________________ 
Thomas W. Swetnam, Ph.D. 
 

 
ii
ABSTRACT 
 
COMPARING METHODS OF  
RECONSTRUCTING FIRE HISTORY USING FIRE SCARS IN A 
SOUTHWESTERN PONDEROSA PINE FOREST 
Megan L. Van Horne 
 
Fire scars have been used extensively to understand the historical role of fire in 
ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa Dougl. ex Laws.) ecosystems.  However, the sampling 
methods and interpretation of fire scar data have been criticized as statistically invalid, 
biased, and leading to exaggerated estimates of fire frequency.  We tested alternative 
sampling schemes by comparing “targeted” sampling, random sampling, and grid-based 
sampling to a complete census of all 1,479 fire-scarred trees in a one square kilometer 
study site in northern Arizona.  The effects of sample size and area sampled on fire 
frequency estimates were also tested.  Given a sufficient sample size, we concluded that 
all tested sampling methods result in reliable estimates of the true fire frequency, with 
mean fire intervals very similar to the census.  We also investigated the usefulness of 
three techniques developed to compensate for spatial uncertainties: 1) fire intervals from 
individual trees, 2) the interval between the tree origin and the first scar, and 3) filtering, 
a technique used to classify large fires.  The seasonality distributions of the census and 
targeted sample were also compared.  Quantification of the differences in sampling 
approaches cannot resolve all the limitations of fire scar methods, since scarred trees are 

 
iii
inherently point-sources of data.  But measurement of sampling uncertainty did reduce 
the scope of uncertainty in interpretation of fire regime statistics. 

 
iv
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
 
I would like to recognize my committee chair, Pete Fulé, for his support of this 
project and his continued dedication to improving the science of ecological restoration.  I 
also appreciate the other members of my committee, Tom Swetnam, Carolyn Hull Sieg 
and Tom Kolb, for their input, patience and words of encouragement.  They all 
contributed different, yet necessary, pieces of the puzzle.  After three years of specimen 
collection, preparation, crossdating and data entry of the largest fire scar collection I 
know of, all the staff and students at the Ecological Restoration Institute deserve 
recognition for their endless efforts.  A special thanks to Daniel Fairbairn who dedicated 
an entire summer to crossdating, Nevin Yepa and Ethan Hulme who spent more time 
collecting and sanding than I did, and Don Normandin for helping me manage this whole 
process.  I had the privilege of spending time at the Laboratory of Tree-Ring Research at 
the University of Arizona during my dendrochronological infancy.  The staff and students 
there were instrumental in my progress and continued to support me throughout this 
study.  Rudy King (USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station) provided 
sound analytical advice.  Thanks to the School of Forestry Mission Research program for 
funding this project, and J.J. Smith and the Centennial Forest for permitting this study 
and providing the gold mine of fire scars.  This work could not have been completed 
without the heckling from my peers, constantly asking how many more specimens I had 
to crossdate and if I could at least take a lunch break away from the microscope.  Thanks 
to my family for always supporting my chosen direction in life.  And thank God for my 
good eyesight.  

 
v
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
ABSTRACT........................................................................................................................ ii 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ................................................................................................. iv 
LIST OF TABLES............................................................................................................. vi 
LIST OF FIGURES ..........................................................................................................vii 
PREFACE.......................................................................................................................... ix 
CHAPTER 1. Introduction.................................................................................................. 1 
CHAPTER 2. Literature Review ........................................................................................ 3 
Fire Regimes........................................................................................................... 3 
Uncertainty.............................................................................................................. 4 
CHAPTER 3. Comparing Methods of Reconstructing Fire History Using Fire Scars in a 
Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forest................................................................................ 10 
Abstract................................................................................................................. 10 
Introduction........................................................................................................... 11 
Methods................................................................................................................. 15 
Results................................................................................................................... 24 
Discussion............................................................................................................. 27 
CHAPTER 4. Management Implications ......................................................................... 50 
Social Implications................................................................................................ 50 
Ecological Implications ........................................................................................ 51 
CHAPTER 5. Literature Cited.......................................................................................... 54 
 

 
vi
LIST OF TABLES 
Table 1.  Mean fire intervals (years) for all sampling methods at Centennial Forest, 
northern Arizona (1682-1881). The filter categories include all fire years in which scars 
were present (all), fire years in which at least 10% of the recording specimens scarred 
(10%), and fire years in which at least 25% of the recording specimens scarred (25%).  
*see Figure 2 for grid layout maps. .................................................................................. 39 
 

 
vii
LIST OF FIGURES 
Figure 1.  This study site, Flagstaff and other fire history study sites including Dieterich 
1980, Davis 1987 and Swetnam et al. 1990, Heinlein 1996, and Fulé et al. 1997 are 
shown in the ponderosa pine forest type (shaded area) in northern Arizona.................... 40 
 
Figure 2.  Maps of sampling grids used to test the effect of grid-based methods of 
sampling.  (a) Sampling grid 1 had 41 plots spaced at 141 m.  Concentric circles are 20, 
40 and 60 m search radii.  Mean fire interval (MFI) was compared between samples taken 
from the three search radii.  (b) Sampling grid 2 was a checkerboard with 100-1 ha cells.  
MFI of the black cells was compared to MFI of the white cells using the specimen in 
each cell with the most fire scars...................................................................................... 41 
 
Figure 3.  Study area map showing the 1,479 census (points) and 40 targeted sample 
(stars) specimen locations.  Lines are 5 m contours. ........................................................ 42 
 
Figure 4.  Composite fire history of all fire scarred trees (1682-1881) showing the 
number of trees scarred, number of trees susceptible to fire scarring (recording trees), and 
total number of fire-scarred trees present (sample depth) per year. The 10% and 25% 
filter lines indicate the minimum number of scarred trees required in that year to be 
included in the filter composite......................................................................................... 43 
 
Figure 5.  Mean fire intervals (MFIs) (years) from several samples showing the effect of 
(a) sample size and (b) area sampled.  (a) Random samples of different sizes were used to 
test the effect of sample size.  10 samples were taken per unique combination of sample 
size and filter level (MFIs displayed by the small shapes), and the means of the sample 
MFIs are shown by the large shapes.  (b) MFIs were computed for all combinations of 
each area category (4, 8, 16, 32, 64 and 100 ha) and displayed by the small shapes.  The 
large shapes indicate the means of the sample MFIs........................................................ 44 
 
Figure 6.   Distribution of individual fire intervals for the census data with three levels of 
filtering and the point (per tree) fire intervals.  The 25th and 75th percentiles are denoted 
by either side of the shaded boxes with the median (vertical line) separating them.  The 
whiskers extend to the 5th and 95th percentiles.  The black dots are all the extreme values, 
and the white diamonds indicate the mean for each sample............................................. 45 
 
Figure 7.  Origin-to-first scar (OS) interval for all trees with piths.  This interval indicates 
the age of a tree when it received its first visible fire scar................................................ 46 
 
Figure 8.  Trees with origin-to-first scar (OS) intervals occurred in close proximity to 
scarred trees during two major fire years, 1737 and 1794.  OS trees are only mapped here 
if the OS interval overlaps the fire year shown................................................................. 47 
 
Figure 9.  Seasonality distribution by percent of fire scars for the targeted sample and 
census.  D – dormant, EE – early earlywood, ME – middle earlywood, LE – late 
earlywood, L – latewood, U – undetermined.................................................................... 48 

 
viii
 
Figure 10.  Percent of catfaces (radial axes) by direction of formation (angular axes in 
degrees).  Note: this is not oriented like a compass.......................................................... 49 
 

 
ix
PREFACE 
 
 
This document was written in manuscript format so that Chapter 3 may be 
submitted for publication in a scientific journal, so the reader may encounter some 
repeated information in this chapter.  The conclusions of the whole thesis are contained in 
Chapter 3 since it is the only manuscript chapter.  To reduce redundancy, there is one 
Literature Cited section (Chapter 5) that includes references from the whole thesis.  The 
plural pronoun “we” in Chapter 3 refers to the collaborating authors of the manuscript, 
who will be added when the manuscript is submitted for publication.   

 
1
CHAPTER 1 
Introduction 
 
Crossdated fire scars provide concrete evidence of the presence of fire in an exact 
year and location.  Fire scars have been used extensively in the southwestern United 
States as evidence of the natural frequent fire regime.  However, uncertainties associated 
with sampling and interpreting fire scar data have led to criticisms of these methods.  The 
uncertainties include the inherent limitation that fire scars are imperfect recorders of fire, 
so while a fire scar proves the presence of fire, the absence of a fire scar does not 
necessarily mean that fire did not burn in that location.  Scars destroyed by subsequent 
fires or decay, and error introduced when sampling are also sources of uncertainty.  
Sampling error is one of the major topics of criticism because targeting, the standard 
method of fire scar sampling, is based on recovering historic evidence of fire in the 
natural record, not a statistical design.  Therefore, targeting has no measure of accuracy 
or precision and was said to lead to overestimates of fire frequency.  Other criticisms 
focus on the interpretation of fire interval distributions, unscarred trees adjacent to 
scarred trees, and the unscarred portion of trees before the first fire scar.   
These uncertainties and criticisms are detailed in Chapter 2 along with a review of 
the literature relevant to the fire history of ponderosa pine forests in the Southwest and 
how fire regimes are studied.  Chapter 3 addresses the issues of fire scar sampling and 
interpretation raised in Chapter 2 by collecting and mapping the entire population of trees 
scarred before Euro-American settlement in a representative case study area.  Targeted, 
random, area-based and grid-based sub-samples of the population are then compared to 

 
2
the census to determine how well the sample mean fire intervals (MFIs) represented the 
population MFI.  We also investigated the usefulness of several techniques developed to 
compensate for the uncertainties: fire intervals from individual trees, the interval between 
the tree origin and the first scar, and filtering, a technique used to classify the large fires.   
Chapter 4 outlines the management implications of this thesis, including social 
and ecological considerations.  

 
3
CHAPTER 2 
Literature review 
 
Fire Regimes  
Ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa Dougl. ex Laws.) forests of the southwestern 
United States are known to have burned predominantly in a surface fire regime, 
characterized by frequent, low-intensity fires (Covington & Moore 1994; Pyne et al. 1996; 
Moore et al. 1999).  Fire history studies from a range of elevations in the southwestern 
ponderosa pine reported fire return intervals from 2-17 years (Swetnam & Baisan 1996).  
Historical documents, photographs and other ecological studies support the theory that 
the fire regime in the ponderosa pine forests helped to maintain a relatively open forest 
structure with large trees and a diverse and productive understory (Weaver 1951; Cooper 
1960; Moore et al. 1999).   
In the last century, a combination of events led to a radical change in the fire 
regime and consequently an increase in tree density and fuels (Covington & Moore 1994; 
Fulé et al. 1997).  Overgrazing of domestic livestock during Euro-American settlement in 
the late 1800’s and fire suppression throughout the 1900’s are often identified as the 
causes of this change (Cooper 1960; Dieterich 1980; Madany & West 1983), but 
researchers caution against this simple assumption as climate change is also a powerful 
force that can cause similar changes (Allen et al. 2002; Swetnam & Baisan 2003).  Millar 
and Woolfenden (1999) highlight the challenges of interpreting ecological changes 
because climate is a possible confounding factor.  However, in the southwestern United 
States, researchers have concluded that grazing and fire suppression are primarily 

 
4
responsible for the shift from a frequent, low-intensity fire regime to one with infrequent, 
high-intensity fires (Swetnam et al. 1999).  
Understanding the historical fire regime is critical for those managers who want to 
restore an ecosystem or model management prescriptions and desired outcomes after 
natural processes and conditions (Fulé et al. 1997).  This brings up the question of how to 
define “natural.”  Since there is a suite of conditions that could be considered natural, the 
terms “reference conditions” and “range of natural variability” are often used to describe 
what is natural (Fulé et al. 1997; Moore et al. 1999).  This description often includes the 
structure, composition and function of an ecosystem and must be defined for a specific 
region and a period of time (Stephenson 1999).  In the southwestern United States, 
reference conditions are typically determined for the time prior to Euro-American 
settlement (Fulé et al. 1997; Moore et al. 1999; Allen et al. 2002). 
Ponderosa pine is one of many species known to sustain scars from fire while 
remaining alive (Weaver 1951).  A fire scar appears within the annual growth ring in 
which it occurred, so by using crossdating techniques an accurate date of the fire event 
can be determined from the scar (Stokes & Smiley 1968; Arno & Sneck 1977; Dieterich 
1980; Madany & West 1983).  Taken in combination with other fire scars on the tree, one 
can compute a mean fire interval (MFI), a point-based estimate of fire frequency (Agee 
1993).   
 
Uncertainty 
Fire scars provide a valuable and precise way to study fire history, but 
uncertainties are inherent when using fire scars to estimate fire frequency and spatial 

 
5
patterning of fires for three main reasons: 1) fire scars are not necessarily recorded 
consistently on individual scarred trees so they are an incomplete point source of data 
(Dieterich & Swetnam 1984), 2) more recent fire events may have consumed remnant fire 
records, and 3) error is introduced by the process of sampling the population of fire scars 
(Fall 1998).  These uncertainties frame a discussion over the correct application of MFIs, 
how to interpret unscarred trees, and the sampling methods used in fire history research, 
including the possibility of correcting for any bias introduced in sampling.  Few 
researchers have attempted to quantify the extent of uncertainty in fire scar studies, yet 
most acknowledge that the problem exists (Fall 1998).  Baker and Ehle (2001) suggested 
“bracketing” MFIs with correction factors to compensate for the perceived uncertainties.  
They assessed 18 studies in ponderosa pine forests that reported MFI values of 5-21 years.  
When their bracketing methods were applied, they calculated the MFI to be 22-308 years.  
In contrast, Fall (1998) argued that current methods are biased in the opposite direction, 
towards under-representing fire occurrence because many unscarred trees may have 
actually burned but failed to scar.  It is likely that uncertainties in fire-scar formation and 
their preservation through time have resulted in both of these views being appropriate in 
different areas at different times. 
 
Interpretation of fire interval distributions 
Dieterich and Swetnam (1984) studied a single tree with 42 fire scars in which 
none of the four cross-sections from the tree, taken individually, recorded all 42 scars.  
To calculate fire frequency based on a single cross-section from a single tree would 
underestimate the true fire frequency of the whole stand because of unrecorded fire 

 
6
events and loss of fire scars from decay, breakage, and subsequent fire events.  Since tree 
rings are imperfect recorders of fire, Dieterich (1980) compiled fire dates from many 
trees in an area to produce a master fire chronology and a composite MFI more 
representative of the entire study area than a single tree.   
A composite, or whole site, MFI typically results in a much shorter interval 
compared to that of an individual tree, or point fire interval.  While Baker and Ehle (2001) 
suggested that the composite MFI overestimates fire occurrence and is not area-explicit, 
the point MFI is likely to underestimate fire occurrence because of unrecorded fires.  A 
composite is most useful when applied to homogeneous areas (Dieterich 1980) because 
different burning patterns occur on different landscape features (Arno & Petersen 1983).  
More fires are encountered as the study area increases in size (Kilgore & Taylor 1979; 
Falk & Swetnam 2002), so temporal and spatial heterogeneity of fires are difficult factors 
to capture with one estimate of fire frequency (Lertzman et al. 1998).  Some approaches 
to resolving this problem include filtering the composite to exclude the fires that occur on 
fewer than a determined percentage of trees (Grissino-Mayer 1995), or using the median 
fire interval which is less affected by the skewed distribution of intervals than the mean 
(Taylor & Skinner 1998).  A different method, called the annual fire frame, attempts to 
capture the spatial variability by expanding a “frame” over the study area until the MFI 
reaches the maximum of one fire per year (Swetnam & Baisan 2003; Falk 2004).   
Another potential source of uncertainty is the period of time between tree 
germination and the first fire scar, called the origin-to-scar (OS) interval (Baker 1989).  It 
was argued that for a ponderosa pine tree to survive, it must have experienced a fire-free 
interval of at least 50 years and therefore this fire-free interval must be included in the 

 
7
population MFI (Baker and Ehle 2001).  Alternatively, Stephens et al. (2003) asserted 
that it is impossible to know the true fire-free interval since many trees survive fires 
without scarring.  Most trees are much older than 50 years when they scar for the first 
time, and many are younger.  Another argument in opposition to the OS interval when 
calculating MFI is one of the basic sources of uncertainty mentioned earlier, that fire 
scars may be burned away by subsequent fires, so the true OS interval cannot be 
quantified (Stephens et al. 2003).   
 
Interpretation of Unscarred Trees 
A crossdated fire scar indicates the presence of a fire in a specific year.  A nearby 
fire scar in the same year may lead the observer to infer that the area between the trees 
also burned if the fuels, topography and absence of natural fuelbreaks are consistent with 
this inference.  A different interpretation is that only a small patch, ignited by lightning, 
burned around the base of each tree (Minnich et al. 2000).  In the case of small patches of 
discontinuous fire, Minnich et al. (2000) argued that a composite MFI based on the fire 
scars would overestimate the actual fire frequency since it does not account for the 
unburned area.  Other studies that use composites (Dieterich 1980) use the definition of 
MFI to explain that every unit of ground is not necessarily burned at that average interval 
(Romme 1980; Swetnam & Baisan 2003).  Because trees are imperfect recorders of fire, 
the absence of a fire scar does not necessarily indicate the absence of a fire, so it is 
impossible to know how much area was left unburned in each fire year in a densely fire-
scarred area.  This type of uncertainty can never be completely resolved, but some 
authors have reported mean and median fire intervals at several spatial scales with 

 
8
different filters to show the variability in patterns of fire (Swetnam & Baisan 1996; 
Stephens et al. 2003).   
 
Sampling 
A standard approach to sampling fire scars is to systematically search an area for 
trees showing multiple scars and long records of fire to compile a complete inventory of 
fire years in that area (Arno & Sneck 1977; Agee 1993; Swetnam & Baisan 1996; 
Swetnam & Baisan 2003).  This method, called “targeting,” has been criticized as 
undesirable and statistically invalid because it is not a random sample from a well-
defined population (Johnson & Gutsell 1994).  Because it is partially subjective and there 
is currently no statistical validation for targeting, it is said to lead to estimates of fire 
frequency where neither the accuracy nor the precision are known (Johnson & Gutsell 
1994).  Swetnam and Baisan (1996) argued that random sampling would not result in a 
complete or unbiased record of fire in frequent surface fire regimes unless very large 
numbers of trees were sampled.  They supported the targeting method based on the 
argument that trees are a natural archive of historical data and not consistently reliable 
recorders of fire, so they should not be treated “as if they all belong to the same statistical 
population”.  However, Swetnam and Baisan (2003) recognize that “statistical 
descriptions and tests of fire interval distributions are inherently limited in objectivity, 
resolution and reliability”, and should be complemented with other historical description 
of fire occurrence and forest conditions.   
A different approach to estimating fire frequency is by area-based measurements, 
one of which is the natural fire rotation (Heinselman 1973).  This method calculates the 

 
9
time it takes for an area of interest to burn completely (Romme 1980), and is equivalent 
to fire cycle and fire return period (Li 2002).  Based on time-since-fire maps and such 
parameters as stand age and species composition, this measure of fire frequency is most 
appropriately applied to high-severity fire regimes (Agee 1993).  The low-intensity, 
surface fires in the southwestern ponderosa pine forests maintain uneven-aged stands and 
do not generally result in new stand initiation, so the stand characteristics necessary to 
make area-based estimates for the pre-documentary period do not exist (Dieterich 1980; 
Brown & Sieg 1996). 
Johnson and Gutsell (1994) assert that time-since-fire maps are the only 
statistically valid method of reconstructing fire events and calculating fire frequency 
since they can account for spatial and temporal variability.  Baker and Ehle (2001) 
showed the identity of the fire interval and the fire rotation.  However, applying the fire 
rotation methods to fire intervals assumes that the fire-scarred trees constitute the entire 
area burned in a given year (Minnich et al. 2000).  Instead, targeting is a method used in 
high frequency, low intensity surface fire regimes where time-since-fire maps cannot 
easily be constructed (Brown & Sieg 1996).  The effects of other sampling strategies, 
such as grid-based (Arno et al. 1995; Heyerdahl 1997) and random sampling, are also 
unknown.  
Given the variety of opinions about appropriate sampling methods and 
interpretation of fire scar data, we propose that a thorough practical investigation is 
needed of the uncertainties and criticisms detailed here.  In the following chapter, we do 
so. 

 
10
CHAPTER 3 
Comparing Methods of Reconstructing Fire History Using Fire Scars  
in a Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forest 
 
Abstract 
Fire scars have been used extensively to understand the historical role of fire in 
ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa Dougl. ex Laws.) ecosystems.  However, the sampling 
methods and interpretation of fire scar data have been criticized as statistically invalid, 
biased, and leading to exaggerated estimates of fire frequency.  We tested alternative 
sampling schemes by comparing “targeted” sampling, random sampling, and grid-based 
sampling to a complete census of all 1,479 fire-scarred trees in a one square kilometer 
study site in northern Arizona.  The effects of sample size and area sampled on fire 
frequency estimates were also tested.  Given a sufficient sample size, we concluded that 
all tested sampling methods result in reliable estimates of the true fire frequency, with 
mean fire intervals very similar to the census.  We also investigated the usefulness of 
three techniques developed to compensate for spatial uncertainties: 1) fire intervals from 
individual trees, 2) the interval between the tree origin and the first scar, and 3) filtering, 
a technique used to classify large fires.  The seasonality distributions of the census and 
targeted sample were also compared.  Quantification of the differences in sampling 
approaches cannot resolve all the limitations of fire scar methods, since scarred trees are 
inherently point-sources of data.  But measurement of sampling uncertainty did reduce 
the scope of uncertainty in interpretation of fire regime statistics. 
 

 
11
Introduction 
Fire scars provide a valuable and precise way to reconstruct fire history, but 
uncertainties are inherent when using fire scars to estimate fire frequency and spatial 
patterning of fires for three main reasons: 1) fire scars are not necessarily recorded 
consistently on individual scarred trees so they are an incomplete point source of data 
(Dieterich & Swetnam 1984), 2) more recent fire events may have consumed remnant fire 
records, and 3) error is introduced by the process of sampling the population of fire scars 
(Fall 1998).  These uncertainties frame a discussion over the correct application of mean 
fire intervals (MFI), how to interpret unscarred trees, and the sampling methods used in 
fire history research, including the possibility of correcting for any bias introduced in 
sampling.  Few researchers have attempted to quantify the extent of uncertainty in fire 
scar studies, yet most acknowledge that the problem exists (Fall 1998).  Baker and Ehle 
(2001) suggested “bracketing” MFIs with correction factors to compensate for the 
perceived uncertainties.  They assessed 18 studies in ponderosa pine forests that reported 
MFI values of 5-21 years.  When their bracketing methods were applied, Baker and Ehle 
(2001) calculated the MFI to be 22-308 years.  In contrast, Fall (1998) argued that current 
methods are biased in the opposite direction, towards under-representing fire occurrence 
because many unscarred trees may have actually burned but failed to scar.  It is likely that 
uncertainties in fire-scar formation and their preservation through time have resulted in 
both of these views being appropriate in different areas at different times.  
 
 
 

 
12
Interpretation of fire interval distributions 
To calculate fire frequency based on a single cross-section from a single tree 
would probably underestimate the true fire frequency of the whole stand because of 
unrecorded fire events and loss of fire scars from decay, breakage, and subsequent fire 
events.  A composite (Dieterich 1980), or whole site, MFI typically results in a much 
shorter interval compared to that of an individual tree, or point fire interval.  Composites 
are used to capture the complete record of fire in an area and because temporal and 
spatial heterogeneity of burning is impossible to capture from a single tree.  While Baker 
and Ehle (2001) suggested that the composite MFI overestimates fire occurrence and is 
not area-explicit, the point MFI is likely to underestimate fire occurrence because of 
unrecorded fires.  One approach to resolving this problem is filtering the composite, or 
including fire dates that occur on greater than a determined percentage of trees (Grissino-
Mayer 1995).  Ten percent and 25% filtered composites have been used to represent the 
fires that have a bigger influence on the study site, excluding small spot fires (Swetnam 
& Baisan 1996; Baker & Ehle 2001). 
Another potential source of uncertainty is the period of time between tree 
germination and the first fire scar, called the origin-to-scar (OS) interval (Baker 1989).  It 
was argued that for a ponderosa pine tree to survive, it must have experienced a fire-free 
interval of at least 50 years and therefore this fire-free interval must be included in the 
estimate of MFI (Baker & Ehle 2001).  Alternatively, Stephens et al. (2003) asserted that 
it is impossible to know the true fire-free interval since many trees survive fires without 
scarring.  Most trees are much older than 50 years when they scar for the first time and 
many are younger.  Another argument in opposition to the OS interval when calculating 

 
13
MFI is one of the basic sources of uncertainty mentioned earlier, that fire scars may be 
burned away by subsequent fires, so the true OS interval cannot be quantified (Stephens 
et al. 2003).   
 
Interpretation of Unscarred Trees 
A crossdated fire scar indicates the presence of a fire in a specific year.  A nearby 
fire scar in the same year may lead the observer to infer that the area connecting the trees 
also burned if the fuels, topography and absence of natural fuelbreaks are consistent with 
this inference.  A different interpretation is that only a small patch, ignited by lightning, 
burned around the base of each tree (Minnich et al. 2000).  In the case of small patches of 
discontinuous fire, Minnich et al. (2000) argued that a composite MFI based on the fire 
scars would overestimate the actual fire frequency since it does not account for the 
unburned area.  Other studies that use composites (Dieterich 1980; Swetnam and Baisan 
2003) use the definition of MFI to explain that every unit of ground is not necessarily 
burned at that average interval (Romme 1980).  Because trees are imperfect recorders of 
fire, the absence of a fire scar does not necessarily indicate the absence of a fire, so it is 
impossible to know how much area was left unburned in each fire year in a densely fire-
scarred area.  This type of uncertainty can never be completely resolved, but some 
authors have reported mean and median fire intervals at several spatial scales with 
different filters to show the variability in patterns of fire (Swetnam & Baisan 1996; 
Stephens et al. 2003).   
 
 

 
14
Sampling 
A standard approach to sampling fire scars is to systematically search an area for 
trees showing multiple scars and long records of fire to compile a complete inventory of 
fire years in that area (Arno & Sneck 1977; McBride 1983; Agee 1993; Swetnam & 
Baisan 1996; Swetnam & Baisan 2003).  This method, called “targeting”, has been 
criticized as undesirable and statistically invalid because it is not a random sample from a 
well-defined population (Johnson & Gutsell 1994).  Because it is partially subjective and 
there is currently no statistical validation for targeting, it is said to lead to estimates of 
fire frequency where neither the accuracy nor the precision are known (Johnson & 
Gutsell 1994).  Swetnam and Baisan (1996) argued that random sampling would not 
result in a complete or unbiased record of fire in frequent surface fire regimes unless very 
large numbers of trees were sampled.  They supported the targeting method based on the 
argument that trees are a natural archive of historical data and not consistently reliable 
recorders of fire, so they should not be treated “as if they all belong to the same statistical 
population”.  However, Swetnam and Baisan (2003) recognize that “statistical 
descriptions and tests of fire interval distributions are inherently limited in objectivity, 
resolution and reliability”, and should be complemented with other historical descriptions 
of fire occurrence and forest conditions.   
Johnson and Gutsell (1994) assert that time-since-fire maps and fire rotation (the 
time required to burn over an area equal to the study area) are the only statistically valid 
method of reconstructing fire events and calculating fire frequency since they can account 
for spatial and temporal variability.  Baker and Ehle (2001) showed the identity of the fire 
interval and the fire rotation.  However, applying the fire rotation methods to fire 

 
15
intervals assumes that the fire-scarred trees constitute the entire area burned in a given 
year (Minnich et al. 2000).  Instead, targeting is a method used in high frequency, low 
intensity surface fire regimes where time-since-fire maps cannot easily be constructed 
(Brown & Sieg 1996).  The effects of other sampling strategies, such as grid-based (Arno 
et al. 1995; Heyerdahl 1997) and random sampling, are also unknown.   
The critical discussion of fire scar data led us to design a study in which we 
sampled and mapped an entire population of ponderosa pine trees scarred before Euro-
American settlement.  In this study we ask the following questions: 
1) Are targeting and other methods of sampling (random, grid-based) accurate? 
2) How do sample size, area sampled and filtering affect MFI estimates? 
3) Should OS intervals, “bracketed” intervals and point MFIs be included in fire 
history? 
4) Previous fire ecology studies in this region concluded that surface fires were 
frequent and led to recommendations for thinning and burning for forest 
restoration.  Are our results consistent with these interpretations? 
 
Methods 
Study site   
This study was conducted on 100 ha in Northern Arizona University’s Centennial 
Forest approximately 20 km southwest of Flagstaff, Arizona; latitude 35°05’N, longitude 
111°50’W.  Figure 1 shows this study site in relation to other nearby fire history studies 
(Dieterich 1980; Davis 1987; Swetnam et al. 1990; Heinlein 1996; Fulé et al. 1997).  This 
is a case study, but because of the comparable landscape features, stand conditions and 

 
16
land use history, these results may be applicable to much of the southwestern ponderosa 
pine forest type.  Located north of the Mogollon Rim at 2,200 m elevation, this site was 
selected for its relatively low variation in vegetation and topography, and the lack of 
natural barriers to fire spread.  Ponderosa pine is the dominant species with Gambel oak 
(Quercus gambelii Nutt.) in low abundance in the understory.  Basal areas at this site 
were very similar to those across the extent of the northern Arizona ponderosa pine (Bell 
unpublished data; FIA 2004), ranging from zero to 45.9 m2/ha, averaging 19.1 m2/ha.  
Slopes range from 0 to 10%.   
The average annual precipitation in Flagstaff is approximately 54 cm (1950-2004) 
with most of the precipitation falling in late winter and late summer (Western Regional 
Climate Center 2004).  The soils are predominately sandy loams and loams (Abella 2005) 
with basalt cinders and limestone parent material (Miller et al. 1995).   
Timber extraction began in the site and surrounding areas during railroad 
construction in the 1880’s, and at about the same time overgrazing led to widespread 
exclusion of fire (Dieterich 1980; Fulé et al. 1997).  Sporadic logging activities and fire 
suppression continued throughout the 20th century.  The most recent activity in the site 
was timber harvesting and burning piles of logging slash in the 1980’s and 1990’s.   
 
Field methods 
The boundaries of the study area were marked.  To test the effect of different 
sampling methods, the targeted sample was collected first.  We systematically walked 
through the site examining each fire-scarred tree we encountered for number of visible 
scars and soundness.  Forty trees with multiple scars and long records of fire distributed 

 
17
spatially throughout the sampling unit were selected to comprise the targeted sample.  
These specimens were identified for the targeted sample in the field and preferentially 
chosen over other fire-scarred trees.  After completing the targeted sample collection, a 5 
by 5 cell grid overlaid on the 100 ha study site was flagged to delineate boundaries for 
organized collection and analysis of the census.  The grid consisted of 25 4-ha cells.  The 
entire population of trees with visible fire-scar evidence comprised the census.  Cross-
sections from all remaining fire-scarred trees were collected (those not collected in the 
targeted sample) in the census using the same procedures as the targeted sample.  Several 
specimens were too deteriorated to collect, so the catface was documented and mapped.   
We recognized that buried scars may have existed on the site, but we did not 
deliberately sample for them.  The stands within the site were primarily second-growth 
with old cut stumps remaining.  All the stumps were examined for evidence of fire-
scarring including buried scars, but trees with no visible evidence of fire-scarring were 
not sampled.  The likelihood of missing a buried scar was low since a fire-scarred tree 
would probably not be able to heal over considering the high frequency of fire.  Judging 
from the high number of fire dates encountered on the site, any buried scars that may 
have occurred would probably not yield any new fire dates.  However, some point 
locations of established fire dates may have been excluded because we did not sample for 
buried scars.  
Scarred trees included living trees, snags, logs, and stumps.  Full cross-sections 
from stumps and logs, and partial cross-sections from live and standing dead trees were 
collected, a standard technique that can be done without killing live trees (Arno & Sneck 
1977; Heyerdahl & McKay 2001).  A 5-cm thick cross-section was extracted from the 

 
18
region of the tree that appeared to have the most complete fire record using a chainsaw.  
In cases where multiple sides or heights on the catface appeared to have recorded 
different fires, multiple cross-sections from that tree were extracted.  In a preliminary 
assessment of the study site, we noticed that all the older (>100 yrs) fire-scarred trees had 
been harvested, but fire scars were still evident on many stumps of these trees.  Thus, no 
living old growth trees were sampled.  The only living trees with fire scars were young 
trees clustered around burned slash piles and appeared to be scarred within the last 25 
years.  Since we were primarily interested in the fire regime before Euro-American 
settlement, we only collected samples from about 70% of these trees to verify that the fire 
date was outside our time frame of analysis.  However all these trees were measured and 
mapped in the field.  
Each fire-scarred tree was documented by recording the diameter at stump height, 
the number of cross-sections taken, the number of pieces per cross-section, the number of 
visible scars on the specimen, the aspect of the catfaces, the height of the cross-sections 
on the bole, and the UTM coordinates from a Garmin® global positioning system (GPS), 
accurate to within 15 m.  The condition of the tree was also recorded: living, snag, stump 
or log.   
 
Laboratory methods 
All specimens were mounted on plywood and surfaced using an electric belt 
sander with increasingly fine sandpaper until the cells were clearly visible.  Initially a 
ring-width chronology from Gus Pearson, Arizona (Graybill 1987) was used to crossdate 
the targeted specimens.  The targeted specimens supplemented with 20 tree cores were 

 
19
then used to build a master ring-width chronology specific to the study site.  All 
remaining specimens were crossdated with the site master ring-width chronology, 
according to standard procedures (Stokes & Smiley 1968).  All specimens were visually 
crossdated when possible.  COFECHA software (Holmes 1983) was used to assist with 
dating difficult specimens.  The rings on the difficult specimens were measured with an 
Acu-Rite glass scale and encoder with 2 µm precision and Measure J2X software. The 
COFECHA outputs were checked carefully against the cross-sections to verify the dating.  
Many specimens remained undated even after COFECHA was employed.  If a specimen 
had an injury that could not be unquestionably identified as a fire scar, we did not include 
the date of that injury.  If a fire scar could not be dated to an exact year, we did not 
include the estimated year.  Specimens that contained no fire scars, or had fire scars 
where the exact year could not be determined, were not crossdated.  
  The season of fire occurrence was identified using the following categories 
based on the relative position of the fire scar within the annual ring: early earlywood (EE), 
middle earlywood (ME), late earlywood (LE), latewood (L), dormant (D), and 
undetermined (U) (Baisan & Swetnam 1990).  Radial growth generally occurs between 
May and September in northern Arizona ponderosa pine (Pearson 1924; Gaylord 2004), 
representing the range of fire-scar seasonality categories from EE to L.  Dormant season 
scars were dated to the year following the scar, indicating an early season fire before 
radial growth commenced, because fall fires are rare in this region (Baisan & Swetnam 
1990).  All the targeted specimens and 40% of the entire collection was checked by other 
dendrochronologists to independently verify the dates of the wood specimen, the fire 
dates and seasons of the fire events.  Any unresolved discrepancies were considered 

 
20
undateable.  We also identified the years in which each tree with dateable fire scars was 
recording.  A tree is considered “recording” after the initial injury when it is susceptible 
to be rescarred by subsequent fires, excluding any years in which decay or other fires 
may have destroyed a fire scar (Grissino-Mayer 1995). 
 
Data analysis 
The data were analyzed in groups based on targeting, random selection or location.  
Each individual fire-scarred tree will be called a specimen (even if more than one cross-
section was collected from that tree) and each group of specimens analyzed will be a 
sample.  FHX2 software (Grissino-Mayer 1995) was used to analyze combinations of fire 
history data from specimens.  Since FHX2 analysis is limited to 255 specimens, the 
composite fire chronology for each sample that exceeded this limitation was run in FHX2.   
The 200 year period from 1682 to1881 was used in all analyses for consistency 
unless otherwise stated.  The minimum number of trees recording in this period was 39 
trees in 1881.  This is a sufficient number of trees with which to conduct this analysis 
(Falk and Swetnam 2003).  The year 1881 is the last year of analysis because it was the 
last fire year in the study area before grazing and fire suppression interrupted the natural 
fire regime.  Prior to the late 1600’s, the results would be confounded by the lack of fire 
scar data.  The year 1682 was chosen to make an even 200 year period of analysis.  
Although it is somewhat arbitrary, 1682 is a reasonable date to begin the analysis. 
For each sample, the MFI for all scars (no filter) and for 10%- and 25%-scarred 
filters was computed in FHX2 (Dieterich 1980; Swetnam & Baisan 1996).  Filters only 
include those fire years that are recorded by the determined minimum percentage of 

 
21
recording trees, and can be used to infer fire size; no filter includes fires of all sizes 
whereas a 25% filter only includes the larger fires.  There are many relevant descriptive 
statistics for fire interval distributions, but the MFI is reported for all the samples as a 
basis for comparison (Baker & Ehle 2001).  These samples are subsets of the census data, 
so the same specimens may be included in multiple samples.  Because of lack of 
independence and spatial autocorrelation, we are not testing for statistically significant 
differences of the means.  Instead, graphical and tabular representations of the means are 
used to show the effect of sampling methods.  Ranges and standard deviations (SD) of 
fire intervals are also discussed.  
A geographic information system (GIS) was used to map the locations of the 
samples by the UTM coordinates recorded in the field to assist with the spatial 
interpretations.  The original UTM coordinates were used except where the trees falsely 
appeared to be out of the study area due to the GPS error.  UTM coordinates of these 
trees were moved to the site boundary nearest to the original location.   
 
Sampling method 
The analyses outlined above were applied to the census and the following samples.  
1) Census.  The census provided a baseline to test the effect of all other sampling 
methods.  The census fire history was assembled using all scars and represented the 
most complete possible fire-scar-based fire history of the site.   
2) Targeted sample.  The targeted sample was analogous to other fire history studies in 
the region and was conducted to test the effect of this standard method of sampling in 

 
22
ponderosa pine forests.  The targeted sample consisted of 40 specimens with multiple 
scars and long records of fire.   
3) Sample size (random samples).  Random samples were used to test the effect of 
increasing sample size.  Eight sample sizes were tested: 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70 and 
80 specimens.  Within each random sample, all crossdated specimens with fires were 
randomly sampled without replacement.  Sampling with replacement occurred at the 
scale of the separate samples, but not within a single sample.  For each sample size, 
the MFIs for ten random samples were averaged.  These samples were also used to 
compare random sampling against the census data.   
4) Area sampled.  The study area was spatially subdivided into 25 grid cells of equal 
size.  This analysis considered 6 areas of different sizes to test the effect of increasing 
the size of the study area on MFI.  The areas tested were 4 ha (1 cell), 8 ha (2 cells), 
16 ha (4 cells), 32 ha (8 cells), 64 ha (16 cells) and 100 ha (25 cells).  All dated fire 
scars were included in this analysis.  The 100-ha sample is equivalent to the census.  
The MFI for each area was calculated as an average of the MFIs for each combination 
of that size.  That is, there are four combinations of 16 adjacent cells arranged in a 
square.  Those four combinations were averaged to get the 16-cell MFI; however the 
MFI for each of the four combinations is shown graphically.   
5) Grid-based samples.  This analysis explored two alternative grid-based sampling 
approaches (Arno et al. 1995), and can be thought of as systematic targeting 
(Heyerdahl 1997; Fulé et al. 1997).  Grid 1 had a spacing of 141 m arranged 
diagonally over the study area yielding 41 plots (see Figure 2a).  The spacing of these 
plots was determined by the original 25 cell grid, locating one plot in the middle of 

 
23
each cell and one plot at the corner of 4 adjacent cells.  Each sample included 1-4 
specimens with the highest number of observed scars in the field from within three 
search radii, 20 m, 40 m and 60 m.  The samples consisted of different numbers of 
specimens per plot to approximately mimic the size of the targeted sample (n=40).  
There were two samples assessed within the 40 m radius, sample (a) with one 
specimen per plot, and sample (b) with two specimens per plot.  Grid 2 is a 
checkerboard with 100-1 ha blocks (see Figure 2b).  MFIs were calculated using the 
specimen with the highest number of observed scars in the field from each of the 50 
white cells, then the 50 black cells.  The number of observed scars in the field was 
recorded at the time of specimen collection.  These samples were constructed using 
the field data in a GIS.  
 
Origin-to-first scar intervals and point MFIs 
The analyses of the origin-to-first scar (OS) interval and the individual, or point, 
MFI addressed the interpretation of fire intervals rather than sampling issues.  The point 
MFIs were calculated for each specimen in the census then plotted in comparison to the 
census composites with the three levels of filtering.  The OS interval distribution of all 
154 specimens with piths was analyzed and the proportion of OS intervals less than 50 
years reported (Baker & Ehle 2001).  The OS interval was also determined for the 47 
specimens having piths within the 200 year period of analysis and OS intervals less than 
the point MFI.  These 47 specimens were mapped and the dates of the OS intervals were 
compared to the fire dates of their nearest recording neighbors to determine if the OS 
interval was truly fire-free, based on adjacent trees.   

 
24
Season and direction of scarring  
Seasonal distribution of fires from the census and targeted sample data was 
plotted and a chi-square goodness of fit test was performed to determine if these 
distributions differed.  
Gutsell and Johnson (1996) stated that fire scars only form on the leeward side of 
a tree because vortices of hot gasses accumulate there causing local cambial mortality.  
To test this hypothesis, directions of all catfaces were plotted in a circular histogram and 
the Rayleigh test (Zar 1984) was conducted to test for an angular concentration of 
catfaces.   
 
Results 
Collection summary 
A total of 1,479 fire-scarred trees were documented and mapped (Figure 3), of 
which 1,246 (84%) were collected.  Of the 233 (16%) specimens that were not collected, 
189 (13%) had a high level of decay preventing us from collecting a viable specimen.  
The remaining 44 (3%) were not collected because they were young (<100 yrs) living 
trees with one scar clustered with other living recently-scarred trees that we sampled.  
The following percentages were computed based on the 1246 collected specimens.  We 
were able to crossdate 777 (62%) specimens and identify their fire dates, 67 (5%) of 
which were from live trees.  Of the 459 (37%) collected but not crossdated, 303 (24%) 
contained no fire scars that could be dated to an exact year.  The remaining 156 (13%) 
had clearly visible fire scars, but we failed to crossdate them because of decay, and short 
or complacent ring series.  Ten (<1%) of the collected specimens are missing.  

 
25
During the period of analysis (1682-1881), the percentage of recording trees 
varied between 16% and nearly 100% of the total sample depth (Figure 4).  The total 
sample depth peaked between 1725 and 1750, whereas the number of recording trees 
were greatest between 1800 and 1820.  Both sample depth and recording trees declined 
sharply approaching the end of the period of analysis.  The fires that scarred more than 
25% of the recording trees were clustered together in time.  Primarily large fires and few 
small fires occurred between 1784 and 1813, with longer fire intervals occurring between 
1784-1788 and 1788-1794.  Conversely, fires scarring fewer trees occurred almost 
annually from 1831 to 1850, but few large fires were recorded during this period.  There 
was also a notable lack of fires recorded between 1873 and 1881.   
 
Sampling method 
Composite MFIs of all the sampling methods were within 2.18 years of each other 
and within 2.75 years of the census (Table 1).   
Census and targeted sample.  The census with no filter represented the maximum 
possible number of fire dates, so the census MFI was the shortest computed in this study.  
The targeted sample was slightly longer than the census with no filter and a 10% filter, 
but slightly shorter than the census with a 25% filter.  The targeted sample captured the 
one specimen with the most scars in the whole study, and included many more highly-
scarred specimens than the other samples.  The SD of the census with no filter was 0.7 
years with fire intervals ranging from 1 to 4 years.  The targeted sample SD was 1.1 years 
with fire intervals from 1 to 6 years.  

 
26
Sample size (random samples) and area sampled.  Mean MFI decreased towards 
an asymptote as the sample size increased for no filter and a 10% filter, while the mean 
MFI filtered at 25% remained fairly constant (Figure 5a).  The variability within each set 
of 10 runs of each unique combination of sample size and filter level increased as the 
filter level increased.  These trends were similar for area sampled (Figure 5b).  The 25% 
filtered means of MFI were very similar between small and large areas sampled.  The 
MFIs decreased as area sampled increased for the less restrictive filters.  Within the 
different samples of the same-sized area, variability was highest in the 25% filter MFIs 
and lower for the less restrictive filters.   
As the sample size increased, the variability of fire intervals within a single 
sample decreased.  SD of fire intervals in the random data sets of at least 40 specimens 
with no filter ranged from 1.1 to 1.87 years.  The maximum fire intervals in the same data 
sets ranged from 7 to 12 years.  The minimum fire interval for these data sets was one 
year.  Variability of SD and ranges of fire intervals increased with more restrictive filters.   
Grid-based samples.  In the samples based on Grid 1, the longest MFIs resulted 
from the 20 m and 40 m search radii where the sample size was about 30.  The other two 
samples, one with a larger search radii and both with bigger sample sizes, resulted in 
shorter MFIs.  The MFIs from the black and white cells in Grid 2 were very similar 
(Table 1).  
 
Point and origin-to-first scar intervals 
The census composite MFIs with filters varied between 1.66 and 6 years.  The 
variability of point MFIs was much greater, with a mean of 12 years and range from 2 to 

 
27
133 years (Figure 6).  The targeted point MFI was 1.2 times shorter than the point MFI 
from the census data.  
The average OS interval was 101.5 years.  The distribution of OS intervals 
increased until the 61-80 interval class, then declined (Figure 7).  There were 36% of all 
the specimens with pith that scarred before age 70; 19.5% of these specimens scarred 
before age 50.  The distance from a tree with an OS interval to its nearest neighbor 
scarred within the tree’s OS interval ranged from 1 to 72 m, averaging 25 m.  Of the fire-
scarred neighbors, 87% were the closest recording neighbor to the tree in question.  Many 
trees that scarred later in their lives remained unscarred during the most extensive fire 
years, including 1737 and 1794 (Figure 8). 
 
Season and direction of scarring 
Most fires burned in the early part of the growing season (Figure 9).  Although the 
patterns of seasonality were similar between the targeted sample and the census, there 
was a statistically significant difference (chi-square goodness of fit test, p<0.05) between 
these distributions. 
Catfaces formed in all directions; however the distribution was unimodal and 
weighted towards the North and East (Figure 10).  The Rayleigh test confirmed that there 
was an angular concentration (p<0.001). 
 
Discussion 
 Are targeting and other methods of sampling (random, grid-based) accurate? 

 
28
We needed to establish criteria in the absence of statistical testing in order to 
assess how well the sample MFIs represented the census MFI.  We chose three different 
levels at which to determine similarity.  The most restrictive criterion was a 95% 
confidence interval (C.I.) of the census MFI.  Since the range of fire intervals was only 1 
to 4 years in the census, the 95% C.I. is very small, 0.13 years, so the threshold for 
similarity is 1.79 years.  None of the samples fell within this C.I., and one could conclude 
that none of the samples reliably represent the true fire history.  A threshold at the other 
extreme would include MFIs less than 25 years, the maximum interval considered to 
represent a frequent fire regime (Pyne et al. 1996).  This assessment would lead to the 
conclusion that all methods of sampling, including the point estimate, are adequate 
representations of the fire frequency.  An intermediate approach to the question of 
reliability is to assume that all MFIs within one year of the census MFI are similar 
enough to represent the true fire frequency.  One year is a reasonable threshold for 
ecological and management considerations as well.  The threshold for samples is then 
2.66 years.  Samples with similar MFIs to the census include the targeted sample, random 
samples of at least 50 specimens, areas of at least 16 ha, and grid-based samples with at 
least 35 specimens.  We will use the intermediate criterion to conclude that all sampling 
methods tested in this study, given a sufficient sample size, will result in a reliable 
estimate of the true fire frequency. 
 
How do sample size, area sampled and filtering affect MFI estimates? 
We have shown through our random samples of increasing size, and others have 
shown with fire scar accumulation curves (Falk & Swetnam 2002; Stephens et al. 2003) 

 
29
that there is a mathematical threshold at which little new information is gained with 
additional specimens.  This threshold was approximately 50 randomly sampled 
specimens in this study.  However, a similar MFI resulted from a smaller sample of 
targeted and grid-based specimens because we selected the specimens with the most fire 
dates in these samples.  Swetnam and Baisan (1996) were correct that a larger sample 
size is needed to accumulate the same fire history data in a frequent surface fire regime 
when using random sampling than when using targeted sampling.   
Sample size and area sampled are linked.  The sample sizes in the 4- and 8-ha 
areas fell below the 50 specimen threshold, so the longer MFIs in these samples, 3.49 and 
2.79 years, respectively, may be a product of the small sample size, not necessarily a 
factor of area sampled.  The same relationship was present in the 20 m and 40 m samples, 
n = 29 and 31, respectively, based on Grid 1.  Even though there appeared to be an 
inverse relationship between search radius and MFI, these instances of longer MFIs, 3.52 
and 3.13 years, respectively, seem to be a function of sample size, not necessarily search 
radius.   
The MFIs with a 25% filter were remarkably consistent as sample size or area 
sampled increased.  This means that the large fires were captured with fewer specimens 
in a smaller area, but smaller fires continued to be discovered with more samples over a 
larger area.  Some researchers were concerned that fire scar methods were weighted 
towards small fires (Minnich et al. 2000; Baker & Ehle 2001), but filtering proved to be 
an effective technique, finding stability across spatial scales at the 25% level.  Filtering at 
other levels accounts for greater spatial variability.  At the fine scale, fires burned every 1 
to 2 years.  A slightly coarser scale (10% filter) showed that widespread fires burned 

 
30
about every 3 years, and a very coarse scale (25% filter) showed that large fires averaged 
every 6 years.  One level of filtering can be useful for some applications, but filtering is 
most effective at detecting spatial differences in fires when more than one level is applied. 
Filtering MFIs is just one way to account for variability.   
Ranges and standard deviations of MFIs are also important to consider in terms of 
the spatial patterns of fire and the ecological significance of variability that occurs within 
a site.  The range (1 to 12 years) and SD (1.1 to 1.87 years) of fire intervals in random 
data sets of at least 40 specimens indicates that a single point on the landscape probably 
burns at a different frequency than the composite MFI (2.28 to 2.82 years).  Ecologically, 
this mosaic of fire frequencies allows for shifting patterns of understory vegetation and 
tree regeneration. 
 
Should OS intervals, “bracketed” intervals, and point MFIs be included in fire history? 
Two arguments were made in the literature that attempted to explain why most 
trees are older than 50 when they scar for the first time: 1) fires killed the young trees 
instead of scarring them, leaving no lasting evidence of the fire’s presence, and 2) fire 
was absent around the seedling during its establishment (Baker 1989; Gutsell & Johnson 
1996; Keeley & Stephenson 2000; Baker & Ehle 2001).  While these are both logical 
explanations, a third possible conclusion missing from this list is that fire was present, but 
failed to leave a scar.  The maps of widespread fire years (Figure 8) show that it is highly 
likely that most trees experienced more than one fire without scarring, especially since 
some scarred trees are only 1 m away from a tree during its unscarred OS interval.  The 
distribution of OS intervals in this study (Figure 7) was similar to Baker and Ehle’s (2001) 

 
31
Figure 3 for ponderosa pine, except all measures of central tendency were approximately 
20 years longer in this study.   
It has been noted that in frequent fire regimes where post-fire regeneration does 
not typically occur in even-aged cohorts, the pith of a tree is not a surrogate for fire 
occurrence, so assuming that the OS interval is the same as a fire interval is incorrect 
(Baker 1989).  The same argument can be made for the first scar.  Thus far, it has been 
assumed that hot, passing fires are the only cause of initial scarring, but this discussion 
would be lacking without investigating other possible causes of initial scarring.  In the 
Southwest, where lightning strike densities are some of the highest in the country, many 
trees become susceptible to fire scarring after a lightning strike wound.  Deep fuelbeds 
with large branches that accumulate and ignite and smolder at the base of older trees are 
another likely cause of initial scarring.  Other agents of scarring include humans, other 
animals, physical processes and disease (Agee 1993).  Like the pith, the first scar may not 
be a good indicator of a typical fire, or fire at all, leading to greater uncertainty about the 
true meaning of the OS interval.  Further uncertainty and overestimation of the OS 
interval is likely when considering the possibility of the first scar being burned away, 
broken or decayed over time.   
The point MFI may be useful metric of the maximum fire interval at the scale of 
individual trees (Baker & Ehle 2001).  Even though individual trees did not necessarily 
scar with every fire, as shown by Dieterich and Swetnam (1984) comparing both sides of 
the same catface, they still recorded fires on average every 12 years in this study.  This is 
longer than all the composite MFIs regardless of sampling method, yet still indicative of 
a frequent fire regime (<25 years).  While the OS interval and other bracketing 

 
32
techniques are derived somewhat arbitrarily, the point MFI is an exact interval between 
two recorded fires and may be a useful measure for some purposes.  Unlike a composite 
of fire years, the point MFI is strongly affected by the quality (number of fires) per 
specimen.  Targeted sampling yields higher quality samples which may overestimate the 
point MFI and would not be appropriate for quantifying the maximum fire interval.  In 
this study, the targeted point MFI was overestimated by a factor of 1.2 (<2 years).  
Although this was a small difference, if the point MFI is used to represent the maximum 
fire interval in other studies, a random sample of fire-scarred remnants should be used to 
quantify this interval.  We caution against applying this factor as a bracketing factor to all 
fire scar studies. 
Bracketing includes such useful techniques as filtering and point fire intervals 
which we have already discussed.  It also includes the OS interval, an erroneous estimate 
of fire intervals, such as stated by Baker and Ehle (2001) “Targeting likely decreases the 
mean composite FI by a factor of two to three times,” which we have shown to be untrue.  
Baker and Ehle’s (2001) bracketed estimate, 22-308 years, implies that ponderosa pine 
forests can persist over generations with MFIs that characterize stand-replacing fire 
regimes.  We have seen in recent years that even a fire interval of ~100 years in 
ponderosa pine can lead to type conversion (Friederici 2003; Savage & Mast in press).  It 
is important to recognize that occasional torching of trees led to local patches of mortality, 
but the purpose of an estimated MFI is to describe the dominant trends in fire frequency.  
Considering many frequency estimates from filtered and unfiltered composites, and 
individual trees, gives enough evidence as to the nature of the fire regime to negate the 
need for any further bracketing. 

 
33
 
How does this study relate to other fire history studies in the region and the 
management of these forests?  
The previously published fire history studies from the region of our study site also 
reported high fire frequency before Euro-American settlement.  Dieterich (1980) reported 
MFIs of 2.4 years at Chimney Springs and 1.8 years Limestone Flats; sites on the San 
Francisco Peaks had an MFI of 5.2 years (Heinlein 1996); Fulé et al. (1997) reported a 
3.7 year MFI for Camp Navajo (Figure 1). These studies also reported a similar end to the 
frequent fire regime, from 1876 at Chimney Springs (Dieterich 1980) to 1883 at Camp 
Navajo (Fulé et al. 1997).   
The pattern of large synchronous fires, recorded on this site between 1784 and 
1813, has been noted in different sites around the southwestern United States and Mexico, 
and other regions of the world (Stephens et al. 2003).  This trend occurred in the mid-19th 
century in Colorado, USA and Patagonia, Argentina (Veblen & Kitzberger 2002), and in 
the early 19th century in Mexico (Stephens et al. 2003).  Attributed to shifting climatic 
patterns, other indicators of this gap in the fire regime are decreasing fire frequencies, and 
a shift in the season of burning (Swetnam & Baisan 2003).  Dieterich (1980) reported a 
period of very frequent fires in his nearby Chimney Springs study between 1850 and 
1865, similar to the pattern found in this study from 1831 to 1850.  It is unclear if the 
varied frequency of large fires over time in this study is a function of multi-decadal 
climate variability or other factors.   
Through our findings, showing that targeted, grid-based, and even random 
methods are robust and unbiased at this study site, we are confident in the results of 

 
34
previous studies and their recommendations for management.  Since this is a case study, 
our results may not be entirely representative of other studies, especially because we 
tested sampling methods within a single site.  Other patterns are likely to emerge if these 
methods were tested across landscapes (Falk 2004; Grissino-Mayer et al. 2004).  
However, even given perfect knowledge of the historic fire regime, it is unlikely that 
managers would implement equally frequent, widespread fires because of other 
constraints of budgets, risk of escaped fires and smoke impacts on nearby communities.   
In recent years, wildfires in the Southwest have dramatically increased in size and 
severity, resulting in undesirable ecological effects (Agee 1993; Kolb et al. 1994; 
Swetnam et al. 1999) and increased costs of suppression and rehabilitation (National Fire 
Plan 2004; GAO 2004).  Recent legislation has encouraged thinning to reduce the hazards 
of the increased fuel loads as one way to mitigate the severity of these fires (Healthy 
Forest Restoration Act 2003).  As the cost of wildfires continues to increase, policy 
makers are eager for information to help guide management policy.  Since management 
recommendations are based partially on historic forest conditions and fire frequencies, it 
is important to have information collected in such a way that accurately represents the 
true historic conditions.  
One area for managers and researchers to explore is the pattern of unburned 
patches within a fire boundary.  Although large strides are still necessary to attain the 
means of reintroducing fire in some areas, replicating the spatial patterns of burning may 
be a key to promoting natural variation within the ponderosa pine ecosystem.  Modern 
calibration of fire regimes (Farris et al. 2003; Fulé et al. 2003), evolutionary ecology 
(Moore et al. 1999) and historical documentation (Cooper 1960) support the 

 
35
understanding of the changes in the fire regime and forest structure that occurred in the 
last century.  It is this understanding of the historical context that will lead to its judicious 
application.   
 
Season and direction of scarring 
There was a statistically significant difference of the seasonal distributions of fire 
scars between the census and targeted sample, but there would be no difference in the 
application of either data set.  Both lead to the conclusion that early season fires 
dominated the fire regime.  The statistical difference does, however, highlight the quality 
of the targeted specimens since the season of fire scars was identified 5.6% more times in 
the targeted sample than in the census.   
The hypothesis that catfaces only form on the downwind side is not substantiated 
by our data since scars formed in all directions.  The angular concentration of catfaces 
corresponds to the downwind side of trees with respect to the prevailing winds out of the 
southwest during fire season, as Gutsell and Johnson (1996) explained.  However, the 
formation of catfaces in other directions leads to the conclusion that while vortices of hot 
gasses on the lee side of trees are likely causes of many catfaces, other environmental and 
causative factors must be considered in future research. 
 
Conclusion 
We acknowledge that while some of the research questions can be answered by 
our data, others are issues of interpretation and are inherently unknowable.  The 
uncertainty and related criticism that targeting and other sampling methods have an 

 
36
unknown effect on estimates of fire frequency have been resolved at this study site.  We 
think that all methods of sampling outlined in this study are reliable given a sufficient 
sample size, and that any 50 specimens would yield a fair estimate of the fire frequency.  
Targeting is preferred because it requires the smallest sample size, yields the same results 
as other sampling methods and is likely to result in longer reliable records of fire.  There 
is no perfect interpretation of fire intervals, but a useful portrayal of the fire regime can 
be gleaned by combining a number of the results reported in this study.  The minimum 
MFI in this 100 ha study site is 1.66 years (census MFI), and the maximum estimate is 12 
years (point MFI).  Relatively widespread fires occurred every 2.83 years (census MFI 
with 10% filter) on average, and the largest fires had an average frequency of 6 years 
(census MFI with 25% filter).   
The other uncertainties, highlighting the imperfections of the fire scar record, will 
never entirely be resolved.  An issue, central to Baker and Ehle’s (2001) argument 
although not stated in this way, is simply the definition of a fire.  Is a fire the outer 
perimeter of a burn, including both burned and unburned areas (Swetnam & Baisan 1996)?  
Or is a fire only the surface area actually burned above some threshold of intensity?  
Baker and Ehle (2001) insisted on the latter definition by claiming the identity between 
fire interval and fire rotation and by arguing that the period of tree-origin-to-first-scar 
must be a fire-free interval.  The fundamental problem is the interpretation of fire 
occurrence between the fire-scarred trees.  All researchers agreed that fire scars are point 
data, that fires include a range of burning intensities and unburned areas within their 
perimeters, and that the absence of scarring is not necessarily equated with absence of 
fire.  Swetnam and Baisan (1996) suggested that when 25% of more of the sample trees 

 
37
dispersed over a landscape with no natural fuelbreaks were scarred in a given year, it 
could be assumed that one or more fires burned over much of the study site.  Minnich et 
al. (2000) and Baker and Ehle (2001) essentially adopted the opposite perspective, 
suggesting that burning could be clearly associated only with the scarred tree locations.  
By assuming that previously unscarred trees would have been killed by a fire, Baker and 
Ehle (2001) interpreted unscarred trees in the intervening spaces between scarred tree 
locations as evidence of fire absence, contributing to their long (22-308 year) bracketing 
of ponderosa pine fire intervals. 
The census of fire-scarred trees in this study provides a fine-grained approach to 
addressing interpretation of unscarred trees.  We have shown mapped evidence that many 
trees remained unscarred through many fire events before incurring their first scar.  There 
will always be unscarred trees within a fire boundary and areas between scarred trees 
with no remaining evidence of fire.  We propose that the definition of a fire remains as 
the area within the perimeter of a fire boundary, although it is understood that fires burn 
in a mosaic of intensity and severity within their perimeters.  Compensating, or 
bracketing, for this type of uncertainty using unreliable factors is unnecessary and 
confuses the application of this data.   
Some researchers rely solely on mathematical models to avoid subjectivity, but 
Agee (1993) warned that “mathematical models, which usually have rigid assumptions 
about the nature of the system, can be just another form of storytelling if they are not 
carefully interpreted”.  The definition of a MFI is widely understood and infers some 
variability in microsites that may have burned with varying frequencies due to subtle 
differences in topography or vegetation (Romme 1980; Dieterich 1980).   

 
38
When recommending and implementing prescribed burn plans, scientists and 
managers should be aware of the uncertainties inherent in fire scar data and base their 
decisions on more than an estimated MFI.  Ecological, historical and photographic 
records support evidence of a predominantly frequent fire regime in the Southwest.  
Instead of quantitatively compensating for uncertainties, we should simply take care 
when interpreting MFIs and be thorough in our investigations of reference conditions.   

 
39
Table 1.  Mean fire intervals (years) for all sampling methods at Centennial Forest, northern Arizona (1682-1881). The filter 
categories include all fire years in which scars were present (all), fire years in which at least 10% of the recording specimens 
scarred (10%), and fire years in which at least 25% of the recording specimens scarred (25%).  *see Figure 2 for grid layout 
maps. 
 
Filter 
Census 
Targeted 
 
 
 
 
 
 
All 
1.66 
2.23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10% 
2.83 
3.00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25% 
6.00 
5.43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Random Sample Size 
Filter 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
All  
4.41 
3.71 
3.05 
2.82 
2.43 
2.58 
2.46 
2.28 
10% 
4.41 
3.82 
3.21 
3.05 
2.98 
3.11 
3.16 
3.14 
25% 
4.94 
5.87 
6.00 
6.25 
6.84 
5.95 
6.28 
5.66 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sampled Area 
 
 
 
Filter 
1 cell  
2 cells 
4 cells 
9 cells 
16 cells  
 
 
 
All  
3.49 
2.79 
2.41 
2.07 
1.85 
 
 
 
10% 
3.66 
3.24 
3.08 
2.98 
2.89 
 
 
 
25% 
5.52 
5.44 
5.51 
5.67 
5.86 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GRIDS* 
Search Radius (m) 
Checkerboard 
 
 
Filter 
20 
40(a) 
40(b) 
60 
black  
white 
 
 
All  
3.52 
3.13 
2.54 
2.28 
2.28 
2.54 
 
 
10% 
3.52 
3.4 
2.91 
2.71 
2.87 
2.96 
 
 
25% 
4.87 
5.24 
6 
6.39 
4.71 
4.95 
 
 
n 
29 
31 
67 
39 
44 
35 
 
 
specimens per plot 
all (1-4) 
1 
2 
1 
1 
1 
 
 
 

 
40
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  This study site ( h ), Flagstaff (□) and other fire history study sites including 
Dieterich 1980 (●), Davis 1987 and Swetnam et al. 1990 (♦), Heinlein 1996 (▲) and Fulé 
et al. 1997 (■) are shown in the ponderosa pine forest type (shaded area) in northern 
Arizona.   
 
 

 
41
  (a) 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Kilometers
 
               (b) 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Kilometers
 
Figure 2.  Maps of sampling grids used to test the effect of grid-based methods of 
sampling.  (a) Sampling grid 1 had 41 plots spaced at 141 m.  Concentric circles are 20, 
40 and 60 m search radii.  Mean fire interval (MFI) was compared between samples taken 
from the three search radii.  (b) Sampling grid 2 was a checkerboard with 100-1 ha cells.  
MFI of the black cells was compared to MFI of the white cells using the specimen in 
each cell with the most fire scars. 

 
42
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Study area map showing the 1,479 census (points) and 40 targeted sample 
(stars) specimen locations.  Lines are 5 m contours.   

 
43
 
 
 
 
Year
1700
1720
1740
1760
1780
1800
1820
1840
1860
1880
Number of trees
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
400
500
sample depth
recording trees
25% filter
10% filter
total scarred 
 
 
Figure 4.  Composite fire history of all fire scarred trees (1682-1881) showing the 
number of trees scarred, number of trees susceptible to fire scarring (recording trees), and 
total number of fire-scarred trees present (sample depth) per year. The 10% and 25% 
filter lines indicate the minimum number of scarred trees required in that year to be 
included in the filter composite. 

 
44
(b) Area sampled (ha)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Mean Fire Interval (years)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
(a) Sample size
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Mean Fire Interval (years)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
all (no filter)
10% filter
25% filter
mean all
mean 10%
mean 25%
 
 
Figure 5.  Mean fire intervals (MFIs) (years) from several samples showing the effect of 
(a) sample size and (b) area sampled.  (a) Random samples of different sizes were used to 
test the effect of sample size.  10 samples were taken per unique combination of sample 
size and filter level (MFIs displayed by the small shapes), and the means of the sample 
MFIs are shown by the large shapes.  (b) MFIs were computed for all combinations of 
each area category (4, 8, 16, 32, 64 and 100 ha) and displayed by the small shapes.  The 
large shapes indicate the means of the sample MFIs. 

 
45
 
 
 
 
Fire Interval (years)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
140
Point
Census 25%
Census 10%
Census All
 
 
Figure 6.   Distribution of individual fire intervals for the census data with three levels of 
filtering and the point (per tree) fire intervals.  The 25th and 75th percentiles are denoted 
by either side of the shaded boxes with the median (vertical line) separating them.  The 
whiskers extend to the 5th and 95th percentiles.  The black dots are all the extreme values, 
and the white diamonds indicate the mean for each sample.  

 
46
 
 
 
 
OS interval (years)
0
20
40
60
80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260 280 300
460 480
Percent
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
mean = 101.5 yrs
median = 84 yrs
 
 
Figure 7.  Origin-to-first scar (OS) interval for all trees with piths.  This interval 
indicates the age of a tree when it received its first visible fire scar.  

 
47
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Trees with origin-to-first scar (OS) intervals occurred in close proximity to 
scarred trees during two major fire years, 1737 and 1794.  OS trees are only mapped here 
if the OS interval overlaps the fire year shown.   

 
48
 
 
 
 
D
EE
ME
LE
L
U
Percent
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Census
Targeted
Earlywood
 
 
Figure 9.  Seasonality distribution by percent of fire scars for the targeted sample and 
census.  D – dormant, EE – early earlywood, ME – middle earlywood, LE – late 
earlywood, L – latewood, U – undetermined.  

 
49
 
 
 
 
0
5
10
0
5
10
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
 
 
Figure 10.  Percent of catfaces (radial axes) by direction of formation (angular axes in 
degrees).  Note: this is not oriented like a compass.   
 

 
50
CHAPTER 4 
Management Implications 
 
Social Implications 
In recent years, wildfires in the Southwest have dramatically increased in size and 
severity, resulting in undesirable ecological effects (Agee 1993; Kolb et al. 1994; 
Friederici 2003) and increased costs of suppression and rehabilitation (National Fire Plan 
2004; GAO 2004).  Recent legislation has encouraged thinning to reduce the hazards of 
the increased fuel loads as one way to mitigate the severity of these fires (Healthy Forest 
Restoration Act 2003).  Many agree that restoration of ponderosa pine ecosystems is 
necessary to avoid further losses because of increased susceptibility to crown fires, 
drought, insects and pathogens (Covington & Moore 1994; Allen et al. 2002; Fulé et al. 
2004).   
As the cost of wildfires continues to increase, policy makers are eager for 
information to help guide management policy.  Policy makers are coming to understand 
that many ecosystems evolved with and depend on fire, and that continuing the fire 
suppression policy will only lead to greater losses (GAO 2004).  Since management 
recommendations are based partially on historic forest conditions and fire frequencies, it 
is important to have information collected in such a way that accurately represents the 
true historic conditions.  However, fire history is only one piece of the larger 
management puzzle.  Managers must consider the risks of escaped fires and smoke 
impacts on nearby communities.  The costs of restoring stand densities and frequent fire, 
including the possible loss of revenue from timber harvesting, must be weighed against 

 
51
the climbing costs of fire suppression and rehabilitation.  A mosaic of treatments 
representing the range of natural variability can be applied across broad landscapes while 
monitoring and adaptively managing for the economic, social and ecological outcomes 
(Kolb et al. 1994; Allen et al. 2002). 
 
Ecological Implications 
Many studies suggest that decreasing ecosystem health is characterized by high 
intensity fire events, an increase in bark beetle and pathogen related mortality, a shift in 
understory dominance from native to exotic species, a decrease in nutrient cycling, 
altered hydrologic regimes, and a loss of wildlife habitat with an increase in tree density 
since the time of Euro-American settlement in the late 1800’s (Weaver 1951; Kolb et al. 
1994; Covington & Moore 1994; Swetnam et al. 1999; Covington 2003).  Although there 
is broad consensus that many of these changes are at least partly a consequence of a 
century of fire exclusion, the solution remains under debate (Cooper 1960; Stephenson 
1999; Moore et al. 1999; Allen et al. 2002).  There is general agreement that restoring 
ponderosa pine ecosystems to similar conditions under which they evolved would allow 
their for long-term sustainability (Fulé et al. 1997; Moore et al. 1999).   
Those who support ecosystem restoration debate between reintroducing the 
natural processes and rebuilding the structural aspects of the reference ecosystem.  
Process restoration considers type and frequency of disturbance, while structure 
restoration includes species composition and arrangement (Stephenson 1999).  In the 
Southwest, this means the decision between reintroducing frequent fires and 
mechanically thinning dense stands of young trees before burning.  In one case study in 

 
52
ponderosa pine, process restoration proved to be more cost effective, but was not as 
successful at thinning the dense young trees, while the structural approach restored more 
natural forest attributes, but was costly and resulted in soil damage and exotic species 
invasions (Fulé et al. 2004).  Allen et al. (2002) recognize that it is unsafe to reintroduce 
fire without thinning in some areas with developments, but other remote areas may be 
good candidates for process restoration.  Others support the reintroduction of fire as a key 
ecological process, but allege that structural restoration is premature, citing considerable 
uncertainties in the fire history and weak data describing reference conditions (Baker & 
Ehle 2001). 
The ecological consequences of misdirected restoration activities are sometimes 
great and reference conditions are only attainable for fire regimes and forest structure 
(Stephenson 1999).  Reintroducing fire in one heavily stocked stand in Northern Arizona 
killed many of the old-growth, legacy trees without affecting the general stand conditions 
(Sackett et al. 1995).  The resulting structure may be imprecise and poorly suited for 
future climate conditions (Millar & Woolfenden 1999; Allen et al. 2002), but if failures 
are recognized and used for learning, they can lead to continued adaptation of restoration 
practices (Allen et al. 2002).   
Many previous fire history studies using the targeting method reported high fire 
frequencies (<20 yr MFI, 10-100 ha sites) before Euro-American settlement (Swetnam & 
Baisan 1996).  Fire scars are just one line of historical evidence indicating a frequent fire 
regime, yet it is still important to test the validity of these methods.  Modern calibration 
of fire regimes (Fulé et al. 2003; Farris et al. 2003), evolutionary ecology (Moore et al. 
1999) and historical documentation (Cooper 1960) support the understanding of the 

 
53
changes in the fire regime and forest structure that occurred in the last century.  It is this 
understanding of the historical context that will lead to its judicious application. 

 
54
CHAPTER 5 
Literature Cited 
 
Abella, S.R. 2005. Vegetational and environmental gradients on an Arizona ponderosa 
pine landscape: implications for ecological restoration. Ph.D. Dissertation. Northern 
Arizona University, Flagstaff, Arizona. 
Agee, J.K. 1993. Fire ecology of Pacific Northwest forests. Island Press, Washington, D. 
C. 
Allen, C.D., Savage, M., Falk, D.A., Suckling, K.F., Schulke, T., Swetnam, T.W., Stacey, 
P.B., Morgan, P., Hoffman, M., and Klingel, J.T. 2002. Ecological restoration of 
southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems: a broad perspective. Ecological 
Applications 12: 1418-1433. 
Arno, S.F. and Petersen, T.D. 1983. Variation in estimates of fire intervals: a closer look 
at fire history on the Bitterroot National Forest. USDA Forest Service RP-INT-301. 
Arno, S.F., Scott, J.H., and Hartwell, M.G. 1995. Age-class structure of old-growth 
ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir stands and its relationship to fire history. USDA Forest 
Service RP-INT-481. 
Arno, S.F. and Sneck, K.M. 1977. A method for determining fire history in coniferous 
forests of the Mountain West. USDA Forest Service GTR-INT-42. 
Baisan, C.H. and Swetnam, T.W. 1990. Fire history on a desert mountain range: Rincon 
Mountain Wilderness, Arizona, USA. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 20: 1559-
1569. 
Baker, W.L. 1989. Effect of scale and spatial heterogeneity on fire-interval distributions. 
Canadian Journal of Forest Research 19: 700-706. 
Baker, W.L. and Ehle, D.S. 2001. Uncertainty in surface-fire history: the case of 
ponderosa pine forests in the western United States. Canadian Journal of Forest 
Research  31: 1205-1226. 
Brown, P.M. and Sieg, C.H. 1996. Fire history in interior ponderosa pine communities of 
the Black Hills, South Dakota, USA. International Journal of Wildland Fire 6: 97-105. 
Cooper, C.F. 1960. Changes in vegetation, structure and growth of southwestern pine 
forests since white settlement. Ecological Monographs 30: 129-164. 
Covington, W.W. 2003. The evolutionary and historical context. In Ecological 
Restoration of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests. Edited by  P. Friederici. Island 
Press, Washington. pp. 26-47. 
Covington, W.W. and Moore, M.M. 1994. Southwestern ponderosa forest structure: 

 
55
changes since Euro-American settlement. Journal of Forestry 92: 39-47. 
Davis, K. 1987. Fire history of Walnut Canyon National Monument. Unpublished report 
to the National Park Service, Flagstaff Area National Monument files. 
Dieterich, J.H. 1980. The composite fire interval - a tool for more accurate interpretations 
of fire history. In Proceedings of the Fire History Workshop, Tucson, Arizona, 20-24 
Oct. 1980. Technical coordinators: M.A. Stokes and J.H. Dieterich. USDA Forest 
Service GTR-RM-81, pp. 8-14. 
Dieterich, J.H. and Swetnam, T.W. 1984. Dendrochronology of a fire-scarred ponderosa 
pine. Forest Science 30: 238-247. 
Falk, D.A. 2004. Scaling rules for fire regimes. Ph.D. Dissertation. University of Arizona, 
Tucson, Arizona. 
Falk, D.A. and Swetnam, T.W. 2002. Scaling rules and probability models for surface 
fire regimes in ponderosa pine forests. In Fire, Fuel Treatments, and Ecological 
Restoration: Conference Proceedings. 16-18 April 2002. Fort Collins, Colorado. 
Technical editors: P.N. Omi and L.A. Joyce. USDA Forest Service RMRS-P-29. 
Fall, J.G. 1998. Reconstructing the historical frequency of fire: a modeling approach to 
developing and testing methods. M.S. Thesis. Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, 
British Columbia. 
Farris, C.A., Baisan, C.H., and Swetnam, T.W. 2003. A comparison of fire regime 
characteristics reconstructed from fire scar data and mapped fires in a frequently 
burned Arizona wilderness. In Second International Wildland Fire Ecology and Fire 
Management Congress, 16-20 Nov 2003, Orlando, Florida. 
FIA. 2004. Forest inventory and analysis national program [online]. Available from 
http://www.fia.fs.fed.us/tools-data/data/ [cited 28 March 2005]. 
Friederici, P. 2003. Introduction. In Ecological Restoration of Southwestern Ponderosa 
Pine Forests. Edited by  P. Friederici. Island Press, Washington. pp. 561. 
Fulé, P.Z., Cocke, A.E., Heinlein, T.A., and Covington, W.W. 2004.  Effects of an 
intense prescribed forest fire: is it ecological restoration? Restoration Ecology 12: 220-
230. 
Fulé, P.Z., Covington, W.W., and Moore, M.M. 1997. Determining reference conditions 
for ecosystem management of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Ecological 
Applications 7: 895-908. 
Fulé, P.Z., Heinlein, T.A., Covington, W.W., and Moore, M.M. 2003.  Assessing fire 
regimes on Grand Canyon landscapes with fire-scar and fire-record data. International 
Journal of Wildland Fire 12: 129-145. 

 
56
GAO. 2004. Wildland Fires: Forest Service and BLM need better information and a 
systematic approach for assessing the risks of environmental effects. GAO-04-705. 
Gaylord, M.L. 2004. Bark beetle and tree physiology seasonal patterns in nothern 
Arizona. M.S. Thesis. Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, Arizona. 
Graybill, D.A. 1987. Gus Pearson, Arizona ring width chronology. Tree-Ring Search 
Engine http://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/paleo/treering.html. 
Grissino-Mayer, H.D. 1995. Tree-ring reconstructions of climate and fire history at El 
Malpais National Monument, New Mexico. Ph.D. Dissertation. University of Arizona, 
Tucson, Arizona. 
Grissino-Mayer, H.D., Romme, W.H., Floyd, M.L., and Hanna, D.D. 2004. Climatic and 
human influences on fire regimes of the southern San Juan Mountains, Colorado, USA. 
Ecology 85: 1708-1724. 
Gutsell, S.L. and Johnson, E.A. 1996. How fire scars are formed: coupling a disturbance 
process to its ecological effect. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 26: 166-174. 
Healthy Forest Restoration Act. 2003. H.R. 1904 [online]. Available from 
http://www.theorator.com/bills108/hr1904.html [cited 6 December 2004]. 
Heinlein, T.A. 1996. Fire regimes and forest structure in lower mixed conifer forests: San 
Francisco Peaks, Arizona. M.S. Thesis. Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, 
Arizona. 
Heinselman, M.L. 1973. Fire in the virgin forests of the Boundary Waters Canoe Area, 
Minnesota. Quaternary Research 3: 329-382. 
Heyerdahl, E.K. 1997. Spatial and temporal variation in historical fire regimes of the 
Blue Mountains, Oregon and Washington: the influence of climate. Ph.D. Dissertation. 
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington. 
Heyerdahl, E.K. and McKay, S.J. 2001. Condition of live fire-scarred ponderosa pine 
trees six years after removing partial cross sections. Tree-Ring Research 57: 131-139. 
Holmes, R.L. 1983. Computer-assisted quality control in tree-ring dating and 
measurement. Tree-Ring Bulletin 43: 69-78. 
Johnson, E.A. and Gutsell, S.L. 1994. Fire frequency models, methods and interpretations. 
Advances in Ecological Research 25: 239-287. 
Keeley, J.E. and Stephenson, N.L. 2000. Restoring natural fire regimes to the Sierra 
Nevada in an era of global change. In Wilderness Science in a Time of Change 
Conference. Vol. 5. Wilderness Ecosystems, Threats, and Management, Missoula, 
Montana, 23-27 May 1999. Compiled by D.N. Cole, S.F. McCool, W.T. Borrie, J.O 
O'Loughlin. USDA Forest Service RMRS-P-15. pp. 255-265. 

 
57
Kilgore, B.M. and Taylor, D. 1979. Fire history of a sequoia-mixed conifer forest. 
Ecology  60: 129-142. 
Kolb, T.E., Wagner, M.R., and Covington, W.W. 1994. Concepts of forest health: 
utilitarian and ecosystem perspectives. Journal of Forestry 92: 10-15. 
Lertzman, K.P., Donner, B., and Fall, J. 1998. Three kinds of heterogeneity in fire 
regimes: at the crossroads of fire history and landscape ecology.  Northwest Science 
72: 4-22. 
Li, C. 2002. Estimation of fire frequency and fire cycle: a computational perspective. 
Ecological Modeling   154: 103-120. 
Madany, M.H. and West, N.E. 1983. Livestock grazing - fire regime interactions within 
montane forests of Zion National Park, Utah. Ecology 64: 661-667. 
McBride, J.R. 1983. Analysis of tree rings and fire scars to establish fire history. Tree-
Ring Bulletin 42: 51-67. 
Millar, C.I. and Woolfenden, W.B. 1999. The role of climate change in interpreting 
historical variability. Ecological Applications  9: 1207-1216. 
Miller, G., Ambrose, N., Boness, P., Reher, D., Robertson, G., Scalzone, K., Steinke, R., 
and Subirge, T. 1995. Terrestrial Ecosystem Survey. USDA Forest Service 
Southwestern Region 3. Albuquerque, NM. 405. 
Minnich, R.A., Barbour, M.G., Burk, J.H., and Sosa-Ramirez, J. 2000. Californian 
mixed-conifer forests under unmanaged fire regimes in the Sierra San Pedro Martir, 
Baja California, Mexico. Journal of Biogeography  27 : 105-129. 
Moore, M.M., Covington, W.W., and Fulé, P.Z. 1999. Reference conditions and 
ecological restoration: a southwestern ponderosa pine perspective. Ecological 
Applications 9: 1266-1277. 
National Fire Plan. 2004. Large Fire Suppression Costs, Strategies for Cost Management 
[online]. Available from http://www.fireplan.gov/resources/annual_report.html [cited 
6 December 2004]. 
Pearson, G.A. 1924. The growing season of western yellow pine. Journal of Agricultural 
Research 29: 203-204. 
Pyne, S.J., Andrews, P.L., and Laven, R.D. 1996. Introduction to wildland fire, second 
edition. John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York. 
Romme, W.H. 1980. Fire history terminology: Report of the ad hoc committee. In 
Proceedings of the Fire History Workshop, Tucson, Arizona, 20-24 Oct. 1980. 
Technical coordinators: M.A. Stokes and J.H. Dieterich. USDA Forest Service GTR-
RM-81, pp. 135-137. 

 
58
Sackett, S.S., Haase, S.M., and Harrington, M.G.  1995. Lessons learned from fire use for 
restoring southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems. In Conference on Adaptive 
Ecosystem Restoration and Management: Restoration of Cordilleran Conifer 
Landscapes of North America, Flagstaff, Arizona. 6-8 June 1995. Technical 
coordinators: W.W. Covington and P.K. Wagner.  USDA Forest Service GTR-RM-
278, pp. 54-61. 
Savage, M. and Mast, J.N. in press. How resilient are southwestern ponderosa pine 
forests after crown fires? Canadian Journal of Forest Research. 
Stephens, S.L., Skinner, C.N., and Gill, S.J. 2003. Dendrochronology-based fire history 
of Jeffrey pine-mixed conifer forests in the Sierra San Pedro Martir, Mexico. Canadian 
Journal of Forest Research 33: 1090-1101. 
Stephenson, N.L. 1999. Reference conditions for giant sequoia forest restoration: 
structure, process, and precision. Ecological Applications 9: 1253-1265. 
Stokes, M.A. and Smiley, T.L. 1968. An introduction to tree-ring dating. University of 
Chicago, Chicago. 
Swetnam, T.W., Allen, C.D., and Betancourt, J.L.  1999. Applied historical ecology: 
using the past to manage for the future. Ecological Applications 9: 1189-1206. 
Swetnam, T.W. and Baisan, C.H. 1996. Historical fire regime patterns in the 
southwestern United States since AD 1700. In Fire Effects in Southwestern Forests: 
Proceedings of the Second La Mesa Fire Symposium, Los Alamos, New Mexico, 29-
31 March 1994. Edited by C.D. Allen.  USDA Forest Service GTR-RM-286, pp. 11-
32 . 
Swetnam, T.W. and Baisan, C.H. 2003. Tree-ring reconstructions of fire and climate 
history in the Sierra Nevada and southwestern United States. In Fire and Climate 
Change in Temperate Ecosystems of the Western Americas. Edited by  T.T. Veblen, 
W.L Baker, G. Montenegro and T.W. Swetnam. Springer, New York. pp. 158-195. 
Swetnam, T.W., Wright, W.E., Caprio, A.C., Brown, P.M., and Baisan, C.H. 1990. Fire 
scar dates from Walnut Canyon National Monument, Arizona. Unpublished report to 
the National Park Service, Flagstaff Area National Monument files. 
Taylor, A.H. and Skinner, C.N. 1998. Fire history and landscape dynamics in a late-
successional reserve, Klamath Mountains, California, USA. Forest Ecology and 
Management  111: 285-301. 
Veblen, T.T. and Kitzberger, T. 2002. Inter-hemispheric comparison of fire history: the 
Colorado front range, U.S.A., and the northern Patagonian Andes, Argentina. Plant 
Ecology 163: 187-207. 
Weaver, H. 1951. Fire as an ecological factor in the southwestern ponderosa pine forests. 
Journal of Forestry 49: 93-98. 

 
59
Western Regional Climate Center. 2004. Western U.S. historical climate summaries 
[online]. Available from http://www.wrcc.dri.edu/cgi-bin/cliMAIN.pl?azflag [cited 13 
April 2005]. 
Zar, J.H. 1984. Biostatistical analysis, second edition. Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood 
Cliffs. 
