 
PRE-FIRE TREATMENT EFFECTS AND UNDERSTORY PLANT COMMUNITY 
RESPONSE ON THE RODEO-CHEDISKI FIRE, ARIZONA  
 
Amanda M. Kuenzi 
 
A Thesis 
Submitted in Partial Fulfillment 
Of the Requirements for the Degree of  
Master of Science 
in Forestry 
 
Northern Arizona University 
December 2006 
 
Approved: 
 
_____________________________ 
Peter Z. Fulé, Ph.D., Co-Chair 
 
_____________________________ 
Carolyn Hull Sieg, Ph.D., Co-Chair 
 
_____________________________ 
Margaret M. Moore, Ph.D. 
 

ABSTRACT 
PRE-FIRE TREATMENT EFFECTS AND UNDERSTORY PLANT COMMUNITIY 
RESPONSE ON THE RODEO-CHEDISKI FIRE, ARIZONA  
AMANDA M. KUENZI 
 
High severity wildfires have been increasing across southwestern ponderosa pine 
forests in recent decades. As the effects of wildfire become more widespread across the 
landscape, the need for information about the ecological effects of fire on understory 
vegetation is mounting. We investigated understory plant community response to the 
Rodeo-Chediski fire by conducting parallel studies on the White Mountain Apache Tribal 
lands (WMAT) and the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests (A-S). We estimated plant 
canopy cover by species and quantified total plant species richness on 1000m2 plots. We 
established 71 plots on WMAT lands. Plots were stratified by fire severity (low and high) 
and pre-fire treatment (cut/burned and untreated). We found significantly higher plant 
cover on areas that were burned by severe fire, but did not detect significant differences 
due to pre-fire treatment. There was no significant difference in cover of exotic species 
between high and low severity sites. Indicator species were primarily early successional 
species or species that were included in the post-fire seed mix.  
We established 84 plots on the A-S. This study consisted of 7 paired stands of 
treated (pre-fire fuel reduction) and untreated sites. These sites had been established by 
the USDA Forest Service in 2002 after the fire to assess effectiveness of fuel-reduction 
treatments in altering fire behavior. We found significantly higher plant cover on areas 
that had not been treated, and had therefore burned with higher severity. There was no 
 
2

significant difference in cover of exotic species between treated and untreated stands. 
Indicator species were primarily early successional species or species that were included 
in the post-fire seed mix.  
In both studies we found a limited response of exotics, which is surprising given 
the history of active management by both land agencies. Other studies have shown higher 
exotic species presence following severe wildfires in areas with histories of active 
management that included practices such as logging, grazing, and seeding. The pre-fire 
plant community must not have had large populations of exotic species, despite past 
management practices to result in a native-dominated post-fire community. Whether the 
few exotic species we observed, including a number of species seeded following the fire, 
persist and spread in the post-fire plant community remains to be seen. 
 
3

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
 
I would like to thank my co-advisors, Dr. Peter Z. Fulé and Dr. Carolyn Hull Sieg, 
for their tireless efforts to produce this work. They have been incredibly supportive and 
informative; I feel blessed to have worked with such wonderful people. In addition, I 
thank Dr. Margaret M. Moore for serving as a committee member. Her advice has been 
most helpful. I also thank my colleague, Barbara A. Strom, for all of her hard work on 
this project, especially for her GIS work. 
 
I thank the White Mountain Apache Tribal Council for access to their land and 
logistical support for the project. I personally thank Paul Declay, WMAT Forest 
Manager; Jim Youtz, formerly of Ft. Apache Agency BIA Forestry; and Robert LaCapa. I 
thank Mary “Mama Baer” Stuever for her invaluable efforts and input. 
Thanks to the ERI field crew members and staff including: Steve Till, Mark 
Daniels, Daniel Laughlin, Susan Nyoka, Teresa Dekoker, Rob Hastings, Shawnte 
Greenway, Lang Suby, Jeff Rainey, Chris Gonzales, and Ken Baumgartner, for two long 
summers of data collection and plant keying.  
 
I thank Scott Curran for technical support, including designing the database, 
facilitating electronic data collection in the field, and many hours spent training me in the 
ways of query building. For statistical help I thank: Dr. Jonathon Bakker, Daniel 
Laughlin, Dr. Mike Kearsley, and Rudy King. 
 
I thank all my family and friends, and the loving community of Flagstaff, 
Arizona, a very nurturing place for learning. I also thank my loving boyfriend, Andrew 
M. Baker for keeping me a happy woman during the writing of this thesis.  
 
4

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
LIST OF TABLES………………………………………………………………………...6 
 
LIST OF FIGURES……………………………………………………………………….7 
 
PREFACE…………...…………………………………………………………………….9 
 
Chapter 1: Introduction…………………………………………………………………..10 
 
Chapter 2: Limited response of exotic species after a severe landscape-scale wildfire…19 
 
Chapter 3: Influence of pre-fire fuel reduction treatments on understory response 
following a severe wildfire, Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests, USA………………...51 
 
Chapter 4: Conclusions and Management Implications…………………………………77 
 
APPENDICES…………………………………………………………………………...82 
 
 
5

LIST OF TABLES 
Chapter 2 
Table 1. Plant canopy cover classes used to classify percent cover within a 20- by 50-cm 
quadrat (modified from Daubenmire 1959).…..…………………………………………40 
 
Table 2. Overstory characteristics of sites on White Mountain Apache Tribal lands by 
pre-fire treatments and severities. Pre-fire data are based on standing live and dead trees. 
Post-fire data are based on live trees only. Data are means (standard error)…………….41 
 
Table 3. A summary of the permuted p-values for DISTLM tests for univariate plant 
canopy cover and richness, by category. An asterisk indicates significance.....................42 
Table 4. Summary of exotic species by fire severity. Classification of ‘noxious’ is based 
on designation in four southwestern states, according to Sieg et al. (2003). Species in the 
‘seeded’ category may have been seeded throughout the known history of the WMAT 
lands, not uniquely as part of the BAER efforts (pers. comm., J. A. Youtz, 2006). A total 
of 31 exotic species were found on high severity plots and 24 on low severity plots..….43 
 
Table 5a. Species present only in untreated or only in cut and burned sites….…………44 
 
Table 5b. Species present only in high severity sites or only in low severity sites...........44 
 
Table 6. Indicator species by year and level of fire severity..…………………………...45 
 
Table 7: A comparison of cover and richness of exotic plant species following severe 
wildfires in the Southwest ……………………………………………………………….46 
 
Chapter 3 
Table 1.  Cover classes and midpoints used to classify percent cover within a 20- by 50-
cm quadrat (modified from Daubenmire 1959).…………………………………………70 
 
Table 2. Pre- and post-fire overstory characteristics, on treated and untreated sites. Pre-
fire values were estimated after the fire by combining living and fire-killed tree data.....71 
 
Table 3. Indicator Species1 of treated and untreated areas on the Apache-Sitgreaves 
National Forest (table structure modified from Huisinga et al., 2005)…………………..72 
 
6

LIST OF FIGURES 
Chapter 2 
 Figure 1. a) Average (+SE) richness on 1000m2 plot by fire severity (H= high, L= low), 
treatment, and year on the WMAT plots. No significant difference was found for 
treatment or severity in either year. b) Average (+SE) plant canopy cover on 20- by 50-
cm quadrats by fire severity (H= high, L= low), treatment, and year on the WMAT 
plots.In 2004, a significant difference was found for the severity effect (p=.0002). The 
interaction between severity and treatment was significant (p=.0233) in 
2005………………………...…………………………………………………………….47 
 
Figure 2. Average (+SE) cover, by plant groups, fire severity (H= high, L= low), 
treatment, and year. a) Exotic forbs: no significant differences. b) Exotic graminoids: no 
significant differences. c) All forbs: a significant difference was found between high and 
low severity in 2004 at p=.007 and in 2005 at p=.0002. d) All graminoids: a significant 
difference was found between high and low severity in 2004 at p=.0137 and in 2005 at 
p=.0014. e) Shrubs: a significant difference was found between high and low severity in 
2004 at p=.025 and in 2005 at p=.009. f) Tree regeneration (<1.4m tall): the interaction 
between fire severity and treatment was significant in 2004 at p=.0137 and in 2005 at 
p=.0014…………………………..………………………………………………………48 
 
Figure 3. Ordinated plant communities based on plant cover data by severity level. 
Vector length indicates strength of correlation. a) 2004 data. Stress level is 19.71 for a 3-
d solution. Low severity plots were positively correlated with basal area and trees per 
hectare. b) 2005 data. Stress level is 19.31 for a 3-d solution. Low severity plots were 
also positively correlated with basal area and trees per hectare……….………………...49 
 
Figure 4. Average frequency (proportion of quadrats + SE) of Triticum aestivum, or 
common wheat, by year, fire severity (H = high, L = low) and treatment……...……….50 
 
Chapter 3 
Figure 1. Total richness (no. species/1000m2) (a) and total plant canopy cover (20- by 50-
cm quadrats) (b) for treated and untreated sites in 2004 and 2005. An asterisk (*) 
indicates a significant difference. Error bars are standard errors………………………...73 
 
Figure 2. Percent cover (mean + standard error) of a) exotic forbs b) exotic graminoids c) 
all forbs d) all graminoids e) shrubs and f) tree regeneration < 1.4 m tall for untreated and 
treated sites in 2004 and 2005……………………………………………………………74 
 
Figure 3. Percent cover (mean + standard error) of a) annual and biennial forbs b) 
perennial forbs c) legumes d) C4 graminoids and e) C3 graminoids for untreated and 
treated sites in 2004 and 2005…………………………………………………………....75 
 
 
7

Figure 4. Ordinated plant community cover data by treatment using the Bray-Curtis 
distance measure. Vector length indicates strength of correlation. a) 2004 data, stress 
level is 20.33 for a 3-d solution. Treated plots were positively correlated with basal area 
and trees per hectare. Untreated plots were positively correlated with overstory canopy 
openness. b) 2005 data, stress level is 20.58 for a 3-d solution. Treated plots were 
positively correlated with basal area and trees per hectare. Untreated plots were positively 
correlated with overstory canopy openness………………………………………..…….76 
 
 
8

PREFACE 
 
 
This thesis contains two manuscript chapters intended for publication. The 
manscripts are Chapter 2: “Limited response of exotic species after a severe landscape-
scale wildfire” and Chapter 3: “Influence of pre-fire fuel reduction treatments on 
understory response following a severe wildfire, Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests, 
USA.” These chapters use “we” instead of “I” because they include co-authors. A list of 
the literature cited appears at the end of each chapter. The text has been edited to avoid 
redundancy wherever possible.  
 
9

Chapter 1 
Introduction 
Across the southwestern United States, fires are increasing in severity and 
frequency (Westerling et al. 2006). As the effects of wildfire become more widespread 
across the landscape, the need for information about the understory plant community 
response is mounting (Abella 2004). Years of fire suppression have resulted in ponderosa 
pine (Pinus ponderosa P.& C. Lawson var. scopulorum Engelm.) forests that have much 
higher tree density than in pre-European settlement conditions (Covington & Moore 
1994, Covington et al. 1997). Understory plants make up the majority of the plant 
biodiversity of southwestern ponderosa pine forests (Moore et al. 2006). However, in 
dense forests little sunlight reaches the understory, and large amounts of leaf litter 
prevent plant growth. As wildfire returns to the landscape, openings in the canopy and 
bare mineral soil allow new opportunity for plants to colonize.  
Disturbance ecology 
 
Grime (1977) outlined three strategies for plant establishment in response to stress 
and disturbance. He defines stress as “the external constraints which limit the rate of dry-
matter production of all or part of the vegetation.” Stress is the result of lack of water, 
nutrients, sunlight, any other limiting factor, or the addition of some factor, such as a 
pollutant that inhibits growth. Grime defines disturbance as “destruction of vegetation,” 
and can include human causes such as plowing or mowing, and natural events such as 
floods, windstorms, and of course, fire. He outlined the ruderal (R-selection), competitive 
(C-selection), and stress-tolerant (S-selection) strategies of plant evolution. Ruderal 
species, or R-selected species, are adapted to environments with high disturbance but low 
 
10

stress, and therefore colonize areas that are potentially high in nutrients and other 
resources after disturbance. Ruderal species typically have a short life-span and invest 
many resources into reproduction, for example, by high seed production. Competitive 
species are adapted to low disturbance and low stress. This strategy maximizes vegetative 
growth. Stress-tolerant species are adapted to high stress and low disturbance, and 
therefore do not invest many resources into vegetative growth or high reproductive rates. 
S-selected species are adapted to tolerate unfavorable conditions and generally have 
longer life-spans. Grime also related these ideas about plant adaptation strategies to the 
classic ecological concept of r- and K- selected species (Pianka 1970). The ruderal 
species strategy corresponds to r-selected species, sharing the characteristics mentioned 
above, and the stress-tolerant strategy corresponds to K-selection. The competitive 
strategy falls between the two extremes. These strategies describe a gradient of plant 
traits, and invasive exotic plants may fall anywhere along that gradient. However, the 
characteristics of the ruderal or r-selected species are more likely found in invasive plants 
(D'Antonio & Chambers 2006). Lake & Leishman (2004) stated that some form of 
disturbance is necessary for invasion of exotics into natural ecosystems, and that the type 
of disturbance determines how successful the invasion will be. Many exotic species use 
this strategy to invade bare mineral soil to fill the gaps left by the consumed vegetation, 
as do some early successional native species. Commonly, these are annual or biennial 
species.  
Effects of exotic species 
 
World-wide, exotic species invasion threatens biodiversity. It is the second 
greatest threat to threatened and endangered species in the U.S., the first being habitat 
 
11

loss (Wilcove et al. 2000). Exotic, invasive plants can affect fire regimes by altering fuel 
loads, fuel continuity, and fuel packing ratios (Brooks et al. 2004). Because exotic plants 
commonly invade after disturbances such as fire, some species can become part of a 
feedback loop, creating more fuels that can alter fire regimes. High severity fire has been 
shown to increase some exotic species. Crawford et al. (2001) found twice as much cover 
of exotic species on high severity burns as on moderate burns on three wildfires in 
northern Arizona.  
Management 
Many studies have shown that fuel reduction treatments make significant impacts 
on fire behavior and severity (Finney et al. 2005, Pollet & Omi 2003, Strom & Fulé in 
press). However, the disturbance created by fuel reduction treatments also has an effect 
on the understory (Sieg et al. 2003). Fuel reduction treatments can increase exotic plant 
cover (Dodson & Fiedler 2006, Griffis et al. 2001, Keeley 2006, Wienk et al. 2004), 
possibly setting the stage for increased exotic cover after wildfire through increased 
exotics in the seed bank and propagule pressure from surrounding plant communities. 
However, the reduction in fire severity is likely a more beneficial trade-off as it has been 
shown that wildfires have greater potential for exotic species invasion than do fuel 
treatments (Griffis et al. 2001, Hunter et al. 2006). Griffis et al. (2001) found >40% more 
exotic forbs on sites that had been severely burned by wildfire than on those that were 
thinned and prescribed burned. Other factors can increase exotics in an ecosystem as 
well. Grazing, past seeding practices, and road building are all avenues for exotic species 
introduction. Huisinga et al. (2005) reported a native species-dominated understory after 
an intense prescribed fire on the North Rim of Grand Canyon National Park,which they 
 
12

attributed to limited grazing and and no logging. The same has been found in other lands 
managed for preservation. Foxx (1996) found almost no exotic species in a 16-year study 
of the 1977 La Mesa fire at Bandelier National Monument. However, there have been 
contrasting findings regarding the role of management in promoting exotic invasion. 
Fornwalt et al. (2003) compared two forested areas in the Colorado Front Range. One 
had been actively managed by the Forest Service, including logging, grazing, and 
prescribed burning. The other area had been almost completely undisturbed since the 
beginning of the 20th century. They found no differences in exotic species richness or 
cover on the two areas. 
Seeding 
 
Beyers (2004) stated that effective erosion control is rarely accomplished by post-
fire seeding. She noted that seeded grass species can displace native annual forbs, and 
reduce tree seedling survival. Barclay et al. (2004) examined the effects of seeding 
Lolium multiflorum Lam. (ryegrass), which is widely used by land management agencies 
as part of Burned Area Emergency Rehabilitation. They found cover of native forbs was 
higher in non-seeded areas and survivorship of conifer seedlings decreased in seeded 
areas. They suggested that the short-term presence of ryegrass may affect the long-term 
succession of post-fire plant communities and that seeding may introduce other exotic 
species. Keeley (2006) cited one example of the introduction of over one billion Bromus 
tectorum L. (cheatgrass) seeds onto the burned areas of the 2000 Cerro Grande fire in 
New Mexico by aerial seeding. Triticum aestivum L. (common wheat) is another cereal 
grass that has been used for erosion mitigation due to its non-persistent nature. However, 
the effects are the same in that its application can result in decreased native forb cover 
 
13

and pine seedling recruitment (Keeley 2004). In addition, seeding with nonpersistent 
grasses may create an “ecological vacuum” in the second year post-fire that can lead to 
invasion by colonizing exotics (Keeley 2006). 
Research goals 
The Rodeo-Chediski fire burned 189,650 ha in east-central Arizona from June 18 
to July 7, 2002, leaving behind a mosaic of burn severities on on 113,700 ha of the White 
Mountain Apache tribal land and 67,670 ha of the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests. 
This fire exhibited some of the most extreme fire behavior ever seen in the Southwest 
(USDA Forest Service, 2002). However, even under such extreme conditions, prior fuel 
reduction treatments resulted in areas of low severity burns (Cram & Baker 2003, Finney 
et al. 2005, Strom & Fulé in press). High severity areas were seeded after the fire, using a 
combination of native and exotic species. The landscape of treated and untreated areas, 
combined with high and low burned severities allows for a unique opportunity to 
investigate a “natural experiment” on the short-term understory species response.  
There is limited information available on fuel reduction treatments and post-
wildfire effects on understory communities. The goal of this project was to quantify plant 
community composition under different severities and treatments. We broke our research 
into two portions, investigating the White Mountain Apache Tribal lands and the Apache-
Sitgreaves National Forests separately. For each area of the study we were interested in 
total plant canopy cover and richness, cover and richness of exotic species, and the 
response of various plant groups. We were also interested in the response of the seeded 
species. Data were collected from July to early September (to coincide with the monsoon 
season) in 2004 and 2005.We analyzed data using both univariate and multivariate 
 
14

methods as recommended by Abella (2004). We ran Indicator Species Analyses to 
provide further insight as to which species were dominant under the differing conditions. 
Chapter 2 focuses on the work done on the White Mountain Apache tribal land. Chapter 3 
describes the study on the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests.  
 
15

References 
 
 
Abella, S.R., 2004. Tree thinning and prescribed burning effects on ground flora in 
Arizona ponderosa pine forests: a review. Journal of the Arizona-Nevada Academy of 
Science 36, 68-76. 
Barclay, A.D., Betancourt, J.L., Allen, C.D., 2004. Effects of seeding ryegrass (Lolium 
multiflorum) on vegetation recovery following fire in a ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) 
forest. International Journal of Wildland Fire 13, 183-194. 
Beyers, J.L., 2004. Postfire seeding for erosion control: effectiveness and impacts on 
native plant communities. Conservation Biology 18, 947-956. 
Brooks, M.L., D'antonio, C.M., Richardson, D.M., Grace, J.B., Keeley, J.E., DiTomaso, 
J.M., Hobbs, R.J., Pellant, M., Pyke, D., 2004. Effects of invasive alien plants on fire 
regimes. BioScience 54, 677-688. 
Covington, W.W., Fulé, P.Z., Moore, M.M., Hart, S.C., Kolb, T.E., Mast, J.N., Sackett, 
S.S., Wagner, M.R., 1997. Restoring ecosystem health in ponderosa pine forests of the 
Southwest. Journal of Forestry 95, 23-29. 
Covington, W.W., Moore, M.M., 1994. Southwestern ponderosa forest structure changes 
since Euro-American settlement. Journal of Forestry 92, 39-47. 
Cram, D.S. and Baker, T.T. 2003. Annual report: Inventory and classification of wildland 
fire effects in silviculturally treated vs. untreated forest stands of New Mexico and 
Arizona. College of Agriculture and Home Economics, New Mexico State University. 
Las Cruces, NM. 46 pp. 
Crawford, J.A., Wahren, C.-H.A., Kyle S., Moir, W.H., 2001. Responses of exotic plant 
species to fires in Pinus ponderosa forests in northern Arizona. Journal of Vegetation 
Science 12, 261-268. 
D'Antonio, C.M., Chambers, J.C., 2006. Using Ecological Theory to Manage or Restore 
Ecosystems Affected by Invasive Plant Species. In: Falk, D.A., Palmer, M.A., Zedler, 
J.B. (Eds.), Foundations of Restoration Ecology. Island Press, Washington D.C., pp. 260-
279. 
Dodson, E.K., Fiedler, C.E., 2006. Impacts of restoration treatments on alien plant 
invasion in Pinus ponderosa forests, Montana, USA. Journal of Applied Ecology 43, 
887-897. 
Finney, M.A., McHugh, C.W., Grenfell, I.C., 2005. Stand- and landscape-level effects of 
prescribed burning on two Arizona wildfires. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 35, 
1714-1722. 
 
16

Fornwalt, P.J., Kaufmann, M.R., Huckaby, L.S., Stoker, J.M., Stohlgren, T.J., 2003. Non-
native plant invasions in managed and protected ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir forests of the 
Colorado Front Range. Forest Ecology and Management 177, 515-527. 
Foxx, T.S., 1996. Vegetation succession after the La Mesa fire at Bandelier National 
Monument. Craig D. Allen. Fire Effects in Southwestern Forests: Proceedings of the 
Second La Mesa Fire Symposium. RM-GTR-286. Fort Collins, CO, USDA Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station.   
Griffis, K.L., Crawford, J.A., Wagner, M.R., Moir, W.H., 2001. Understory response to 
management treatments in northern Arizona ponderosa pine forests. Forest Ecology and 
Management 146, 239-245. 
Grime, J.P., 1977. Evidence for the existence of three primary strategies in plants and its 
relevance to ecological and evolutionary theory. The American Naturalist 111, 1169-
1194. 
Huisinga, K.D., Laughlin, D.C., Fulé, P.Z., Springer, J.D., McGlone, C.M., 2005. Effects 
of an intense prescribed fire on understory vegetation in a mixed conifer forest. Journal of 
the Torrey Botanical Society 132, 590-601. 
Hunter, M.E., Omi, P.N., Martinson, E.J., Chong, G.W., 2006. Establishment of non-
native plant species after wildfires: effects of fuel treatments, abiotic and biotic factors, 
and post-fire grass seeding treatments. International Journal of Wildland Fire 15, 271-
281. 
Keeley, J.E., 2004. Ecological impacts of wheat seeding after a Sierra Nevada wildfire. 
International Journal of Wildland Fire 13, 73-78. 
Keeley, J.E., 2006. Fire management impacts on invasive plants in the western United 
States. Conservation Biology 20, 375-384. 
Lake, J.C., Leishman, M.R., 2004. Invasion success of exotic plants in natural 
ecosystems: the role of disturbance, plant attributes and freedom from herbivores. 
Biological Conservation 117, 215-226. 
Moore, M.M., Casey, C.A., Bakker, J.D., Springer, J.D., Fulé, P.Z., Covington, W.W., 
Laughlin, D.C., 2006. Herbaceous vegetation responses (1992-2004) to restoration 
treatments in a ponderosa pine forest. Rangeland Ecology & Management 59, 135-144. 
Pianka, E.R., 1970. On r- and K- selection.  American Naturalist 104, 592-597. 
Pollet, J. and Omi, P.N. 2002. Effect of thinning and prescribed burning on crown fire 
severity in ponderosa pine forests. International Journal of Wildland Fire. 11:1-10. 
Sieg, C.H., Phillips, B.G., and Moser, L.P. 2003. Exotic Invasive Plants. In Ecological 
Restoration of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests. P.Friederici, ed. Island Press, 
Washington, pp. 251-267. 
 
17

Strom, B.A., Fulé, P.Z., in press. Pre-wildfire fuel treatments affect long-term ponderosa 
pine forest dynamics. International Journal of Wildland Fire. 
USDA Forest Service, 2002. Rodeo-Chediski fire effects summary report: Apache-
Sitgreaves National Forests.  Washington, D.C., USDA Forest Service.  
Westerling, A.L., Hidalgo, H.G., Cayan, D.R., Swetnam, T.W., 2006. Warming and 
earlier spring increase western U.S. forest wildfire activity. Science 313, 940-943. 
Wienk, C.L., Sieg, C.H., McPherson, G.R., 2004. Evaluating the role of cutting 
treatments, fire and soil seed banks in an experimental framework in ponderosa pine 
forests of the Black Hills, South Dakota. Forest Ecology and Management 192, 375-393. 
Wilcove, D. S., Rothstein, D., Dubow, J., Phillips, A., Losos, E.. 2000. Leading threats to 
biodiversity: What’s imperiling U.S. species. Pp. 239–54 in Precious heritage: The status 
of biodiversity in the United States. ed. B. A. Stein, L. S. Kutner, and J. S. Adams.  
Oxford University Press, New York. 
 
18

Chapter 2 
Limited response of exotic species after a severe landscape-scale wildfire 
 
Abstract 
 
The Rodeo-Chediski fire burned approximately 189,650 ha in east-central 
Arizona from June 18 to July 7, 2002, 113,700 ha of it on the White Mountain Apache 
tribal land (WMAT). In 2004 and 2005, we measured cover and richness in the 
understory plant community in areas of high and low severity in each of two treatments: 
(1) tree cutting and prescribed burning, or (2) left untreated, in the 11 years prior to the 
wildfire. Cutting and burning reduced the degree of severe burning, but severely burned 
areas in either treatment were similar. Total understory plant canopy cover was 
significantly higher in areas of high severity (p = .0002 in 2004 and p = .0001 in 2005). 
Overall, response of exotic species was surprisingly low at less than 3% cover across all 
years, severities, and treatments. There were no significant differences in exotic species 
cover between high and low severity or between treated and untreated. Areas of high 
severity burn were seeded after the fire with several native grasses, native forbs, and 
common wheat (Triticum aestivum L.). Wheat had a strong presence in the plant 
community in 2004, but was uncommon by 2005. Indicator Species Analysis showed all 
indicators of high severity were seeded or early successional species. Indicators of low 
severity included several perennial bunchgrasses. While our results show that wheat 
declined quickly and exotic plants were uncommon, whether the die-off of wheat created 
a vacuum for exotic plant invasion in subsequent years can only be addressed by 
continuing to monitor these sites.   
 
19

Introduction 
Increasing numbers of large wildfires in ponderosa pine forests in recent decades 
(Westerling et al. 2006) have raised concerns about long-term ecological consequences. 
In addition to the loss of timber and increased soil erosion, large wildfires may greatly 
alter post-fire plant communities by providing ideal habitat for a number of exotic species 
(Brooks et al. 2004, Kerns et al. 2006, Sieg et al. 2003). When  existing plant biomass is 
removed by a disturbance resources become available to invading exotic plants (Bataineh 
et al. 2006, Swope 2003). Exotic plant invasions threaten the ecological health of forests 
world-wide and can alter fire regimes (Brooks et al. 2004, Lake & Leishman 2004).  
In southwestern ponderosa pine forests, Griffis et al. (2001) examined understory 
response between stands that were thinned, thinned and prescribed burned, burned by 
stand-replacing wildfire, and unmanaged control stands. They found that while overall 
plant canopy cover increased with treatment intensity (the most intense being stand-
replacing wildfire, the least intense being thinned only), exotic species cover and species 
richness increased dramatically after wildfire. Native graminoid cover and species 
richness were higher on forested stands compared to areas severely burned in the 1996 
wildfire. Crawford et al. (2001) noted that higher species richness after moderate to high 
severity fire was due to exotic species and early successional native species such as 
Conyza canadensis (L.) Cronq. (Canadian horseweed), and cautioned about using 
prescribed burns as a management tool if exotic species removal is the desired outcome. 
In contrast, a study by Huisinga et al. (2005) found that total plant species richness and 
abundance both increased after a high intensity wildfire in Grand Canyon National Park, 
mainly due to an increase in native plants. They attributed the limited exotic species 
 
20

response to the fact that this area was never logged and rarely grazed by livestock 
(grazing in GCNP ceased in the mid 1930’s), so there were few or no exotic species seeds 
present in the seed bank. However, other factors, such as the remoteness of their study 
area, lack of nearby roads, and the Park policy of not seeding after fire, may have 
contributed to the rarity of exotic species in their study. A 16-year study by Foxx (1996) 
on the 1977 La Mesa fire in Bandelier National Monument, NM also found few exotic 
species across the entire burned area, perhaps because of the “preservation” management 
strategy of the National Park Service. One seeded species, slender wheatgrass (Elymus 
trachycaulus (Link) Gould ex Shinners), was initially a dominant species after the fire but 
dropped out within a decade. Early successional species, such as fetid goosefoot 
(Chenopodium graveolens Willd.), were also dominant right after the fire and eventually 
dropped out. 
The largest severe wildfire in the Southwest, the Rodeo-Chediski fire, burned 
approximately 189,650 ha in east-central Arizona from June 18 to July 7, 2002, leaving a 
mosaic pattern of burn severity on 113,700 ha of White Mountain Apache tribal land 
(henceforth WMAT).  The fire burned through vegetation types including chaparral, 
piñon-juniper woodland, ponderosa pine forest, and isolated pockets of mixed conifer 
(Finney et al. 2005, Strom 2005, USDA Forest Service 2002). Many forested stands 
within the fire’s perimeter had been managed by the tribe for decades, utilizing 
commercial timber harvests, non-commercial thinning, and prescribed burning.  The 
severity of the Rodeo-Chediski fire was substantially reduced in areas that had received 
recent (<11 yrs pre-fire) treatments (Finney et al. 2005, Strom 2005).   
 
21

 
We investigated the effect of the pre-fire management practices and fire severity 
on the plant community after a large, intense wildfire. Given the long history of timber 
management on the WMAT land and the varied severity patterns created by the Rodeo-
Chediski fire, a matrix of conditions was present. We hypothesized that fire severity 
would override pre-fire timber management practices in affecting the post-fire plant 
community. That is, severely burned areas would resemble each other whether or not pre-
fire treatments had occurred. We hypothesized that high burn severity areas would have:  
1) higher total plant canopy cover; 2) greater richness of early successional species; and 
3) higher exotic species richness and plant canopy cover, compared to areas classified as 
low burn severity. We also expected that species seeded post-burn would attain higher 
cover in high severity areas, and that Triticum aestivum L. (henceforth referred to as 
common wheat), seeded post-fire, would be a prominent species in seeded areas, but 
would not persist over time.  
 
Methods 
Site selection 
The WMAT lands lie south of the Mogollon Rim in central-eastern Arizona. 
Maximum and minimum temperatures for the region, as reported at the Heber Ranger 
Station by the Western Regional Climate Center (www.wrcc.dri.edu) range from 29.3ºC 
in July to -8.8ºC in January, based on 1950-2005 averages. Average total annual 
precipitation is 44.4 cm and average annual total snowfall is 97.3 cm. Precipitation during 
the years of data collection was lower than the 55-year averages. The area received 33.3 
cm of precipitation in 2004 and 40.7 cm in 2005. Total snowfall in winter of 2003/2004 
 
22

was 50.3 cm and 22.9 cm in winter of 2004/2005. Elevation for the study area ranges 
from 2,000-2,295 m. All sites were above 2000 m to ensure they fell in a ponderosa pine-
dominated ecosystem, and at less than 45% slope. The average slope was 17.2%. Study 
sites were randomly selected within the combinations of two levels of fire severity and 
two levels of pre-fire forest management practices (henceforth referred to as treatments). 
Fire severity was determined from a remotely sensed Differenced Normalized Burn Ratio 
(∆NBR) map. The thresholds for low and high severity were assigned by Strom (2005) 
based on field measurements of another fire in northern Arizona by Cocke et al. (2005). 
If we arrived at a site classified as ‘low severity’ and did not see any living trees, we 
rejected it. If a site classified as ‘high severity’ had many living trees, then it was 
rejected. The treatment categories were ‘cut and burned’ within 10 years prior to the fire 
or ‘no treatment’ within the same period. The boundaries of these treatments were 
provided by the tribe. For consistency, plots were restricted to soil types of the Overgaard 
series including Overgaard gravelly fine sandy loam and Overgaard gravelly loam. This 
was the most common soil type found within the fire perimeter. These are well-drained 
alluvial soils derived from sandstone, quartzite, and granite (Mitchell 1981) and are 
classified as fine, mixed, active, frigid Typic Paleustalfs (Soil Survey Staff 2006). 
High severity areas of the Rodeo-Chediski fire were seeded during Burned Area 
Emergency Rehabilitation (BAER). The seed mix used on WMAT lands included the 
exotic species common wheat, applied at a rate of 16.8 kg ha-1. Common wheat is often 
seeded in order to create a non-persistent ground cover to control erosion and noxious 
weed invasion (Keeley 2004). The remainder of the seed mix included: E. trachycaulus, 
western wheatgrass (Pascopyrum smithii (Rydb.) A. Löve), switchgrass (Panicum 
 
23

virgatum L.), green needlegrass (Nassella viridula (Trin.) Barkworth), mountain brome 
(Bromus marinatus = Bromus carinatus H. & A.) (Welsh et al. 1993), sideoats grama 
(Bouteloua curtipendula (Michx.) Torr.), sand dropseed (Sporobolus cryptandrus (Torr.) 
Gray), plains coreopsis (Coreopsis tinctoria Nutt.), purple prairie clover (Dalea purpurea 
Vent.), blue flax (Linum lewisii Pursh), and black-eyed susan (Rudbeckia hirta L.) (J.A. 
Youtz, pers. comm., 2003).  
Measurement 
Six study sites, with three plots each, were measured in each severity and 
treatment combination. Plot centers were a subset of those used in Strom (2005) to assess 
overstory tree structure after the wildfire. At each plot center, we established two 44.8 m 
transects, crossing perpendicularly, resulting in a 31.7 m x 31.7 m square, approximately 
1000 m2. We measured plant canopy cover in 20- by 50-cm quadrats spaced at 4-m 
intervals along each transect, for a total of 20 quadrats for each plot. Within each quadrat, 
we measured total plant canopy cover, cover of forbs, exotic forbs, graminoids, exotic 
graminoids, shrubs, and trees < 1.4 m tall, plus cover by species using six cover classes 
(Table 1) (Daubenmire 1959). We also estimated cover of litter, rocks, logs, bare ground, 
and moss. Plant nomenclature and nativity classification follows USDA-NRCS PLANTS 
Database (2006) and Welsh et al. (1993). One exception was Portulaca oleracea L. (little 
hogweed), which was listed as ‘introduced’ on the PLANTS database, but we classified 
as ‘native’ based on Byrne & McAndrews (1975). We lumped species to the generic level 
when vegetative characteristics were insufficient to identify at species level. In addition, 
we quantified plant species richness for the entire plot by recording all species that 
occurred within each 1000-m2 plot. Overstory canopy cover was estimated from a 
 
24

hemispherical photograph at each plot center using a digital camera with a 180º fisheye 
lens (Nikon CoolPix E4300 and FC-E8 Fisheye Converter Lens). Hemispherical photos 
were analyzed using Gap Light Analyzer (Institute of Ecosystem Studies 1999) to 
quantify percent canopy openness. Overstory data and physical characteristics (aspect, 
slope) were measured in 2004.  
Statistical Methods 
 
We analyzed the data using DISTLM (Anderson 2001 & 2004), a permutation 
procedure software which analyzes multivariate data, so it was an appropriate choice to 
test differences in the plant community. For consistency, we also used DISTLM for 
analyzing univariate measures for richness and abundance because these data evidenced 
non-normality and heterogeneous variances. We carried out 9999 permutations for each 
test. Euclidean distance was used for univariate data and the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity 
measure was used for plant community data. The alpha level was 0.05. 
We performed non-metric multi-dimensional scaling ordination of the cover data 
by species using PC-ORD software (McCune & Mefford 1999). The ordination was done 
using the Bray-Curtis distance measure (Faith et al. 1987). The parameters were set such 
that 40 runs were performed with real data, 50 runs were performed with randomizations 
(to determine how likely the observed stress value of the final solution would be by 
chance alone), a maximum of 400 iterations per run, and an instability criterion of 
0.00001. Finally, we used PC-ORD to identify Indicator Species of treatments and fire 
severity classes. Indicator species values were calculated for each species as relative 
frequency X percent canopy cover. Species with p < 0.05 and an Indicator Value > 25 
(Dufrêne & Legendre 1997) were identified as indicator species.  
 
25

Results 
In high severity areas across both treatments tree density declined by 95% and 
basal area declined by 90% after the fire (Table 2). In low severity areas tree density 
declined by 40% and basal area declined by 18%. The pre-fire tree density was mainly 
composed of ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa P.& C. Lawson var. scopulorum 
Engelm.), but also had Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii (Mirbel) Franco), Gambel oak 
(Quercus gambelii Nutt.), white fir (Abies concolor
 
 (Gord. & Glend.) Lindl. ex Hildebr.) 
and junipers (Juniperus osteosperma (Torr.) Little and Juniperus deppeana Steud.). Post- 
fire high severity areas had no living A. concolor or P. menziesii trees. The tree density of 
P. ponderosa decreased by more than 75%, Juniperus spp.decreased by 30%, and Q. 
gambelii decreased by 40%. In low severity areas, the tree density of A. concolor 
decreased by 70%, Juniperus spp.decreased by 6%, P. ponderosa decreased by 30%, P. 
menziesii decreased by 40%, and Q. gambelii decreased by 75%. Canopy openness post-
burn was >65% in high severity areas and <46% in low severity areas (Table 2). 
We found a total of 310 species across all sites and years, but we focused on the 
151 species found on at least 5% of the plots and for analysis of cover we used only the 
87 species found within at least 5% of the transect quadrats. Total plant species richness 
was not significantly different for any combination of severity and treatment in either 
year (Table 3, Fig. 1a). Analyzing differences in richness for all forbs and all graminoid 
species separately, there were no differences in forb richness for severity or treatment but 
graminoids were significantly richer in high severity burns in 2005 and in areas that had 
been cut and burned in 2004 (Table 3).  
 
26

Total plant cover was significantly higher in high severity areas than on low 
severity areas in 2004, supporting our hypothesis that fire severity was more influential 
than pre-wildfire forest management practices (Table 3, Fig. 1). However, the interaction 
between severity and treatment was significant for total plant cover in 2005. Contrary to 
our hypothesis that high severity areas would have more exotic cover than low severity 
areas, neither exotic forbs nor exotic graminoids showed significant differences for 
severity or treatment effect (Fig. 2a,b). There were 35 exotic species overall, but 13 were 
found on at least 5% of the plots and were included in analyses (Table 4). Total forb, 
graminoid, and shrub cover was significantly higher in high severity areas but showed no 
significant difference for treatment effects, for both 2004 and 2005 (Fig. 2 c-e). Tree 
regeneration cover had a significant interaction between severity and treatment effects in 
both 2004 and 2005, indicating that the response to fire severity was not consistent 
between treatments (Fig. 2f).  
 
Multivariate assessment of plant canopy cover of individual species showed 
significant differences in both years for severity effect (p = 0.0001 in both years). The 
cover by species was significantly different for treatment effect in 2004 (p = 0.044), but 
not significant in 2005 (p = 0.10). This appeared to be driven by one species, Robinia 
neomexicana Gray (New Mexico locust), which had nearly 32 times more cover in 
untreated areas than in areas that were thinned and burned. To test differences in the 
composition of the plant community we analyzed the presence/absence of species and 
found significant differences for both years for both treatment (2004, p = 0.0036; 2005, p 
= 0.0046) and severity effects (p = 0.0001 both years). In each case, the difference was 
driven by very few species (Tables 5a,b).  
 
27

 
Ordinated plant communities were separated by severity level based on plant 
canopy cover data, providing a qualitative illustration of the differences in plant 
community cover data (Figure 3a,b). However, when grouped by treatments instead of by 
severities the distinction could not be made, supporting the results of the permutation 
procedure. No separation was evident using presence/absence data either, although a 
significant difference was found in the permutation procedure. 
We identified 9 indicator species for high severity in 2004 and 10 in 2005 (Table 
6). B. carinatus, E. trachycaulus, and common wheat were seeded species. Chenopodium 
album L. (lambsquarters), C. graveolens, Cirsium wheeleri (Gray) Petrak (Wheeler’s 
thistle), and C. canadensis were indicator species in both 2004 and 2005 on high severity 
sites. In 2005, additional high severity indicator species were Bahia dissecta (Gray) Britt. 
(ragleaf bahia), B. curtipendula, P. smithii, and Pseudognaphalium macounii (Greene) 
Kartesz (Macoun's cudweed). In low severity areas, Koeleria macrantha (Ledeb.) J.A. 
Schultes (prairie Junegrass), Muhlenbergia longiligula A.S. Hitchc. (longtongue muhly), 
Packera neomexicana (Gray) W.A. Weber & A. Löve (New Mexico groundsel), and Poa 
fendleriana (Steud.) Vasey (muttongrass) were indicator species in 2004. K. macrantha 
and P. neomexicana dropped out as indicators of low severity sites in 2005.  
Frequency of common wheat dramatically declined from 2004 to 2005 (Figure 4). 
In 2004, wheat was highest in high severity areas that had received no pre-fire treatment. 
In low severity areas in 2004, wheat was only detected in areas that had not received 
treatment, and was not detected at all on low severity sites in 2005.  
 
28

Discussion 
 
Across the entire Rodeo-Chediski fire on tribal lands, treatment substantially 
reduced fire behavior over the landscape (Finney et al. 2005). Over 60% of the area that 
had been thinned and prescribed burned within a decade of the fire burned with low 
severity, as opposed to only 20% of the area that had not been treated for the same time 
period (Strom 2005). However, comparing areas of high and low severity within treated 
and untreated areas, the hypothesis that fire severity would play a more important role in 
the post-wildfire plant community than treatment was upheld to some degree. There was 
significantly higher plant canopy cover in 2004 in high severity sites compared to low 
severity burned sites, but no difference due to treatment effect. Sabo (2006) found that 
basal area must be reduced to 8 m2 ha-1 or less to to result in an increase in understory 
production. Clary & Ffolliott (1966) found an understory response at 5-18 m2 ha-1. Basal 
area in the high severity sites after the fire was 1.9 m2 ha-1 in untreated sites and 0.9 m2 
ha-1 in treated sites, clearly low enough to result in an understory response. In low 
severity areas basal area was 21.6 m2 ha-1 and 14.0 m2 ha-1, respectively. Differences in 
post-fire overstory structure, combined with other factors such as variable precipitation 
(Moore et al. 2006), likely contributed to differences in understory cover between high 
and low severity sites. 
We predicted that there would be greater cover of exotic plants in areas that 
burned with higher severity; to our surprise, this hypothesis was not upheld. Other studies 
in national parks and monuments, which are managed for preservation, have shown 
relatively low cover of exotics. Some studies in more actively managed landscapes, 
including national forests, have shown higher exotic cover. This study and the 
 
29

accompanying research we did on the Apache-Sitgreaves NF have shown low exotic 
cover despite active management and fire use over a long period of time (Table 7). 
Husinga et al. (2005) found 28% total plant cover six years after an intense prescribed 
fire, and of that, <1% was exotic plant cover. Eight years post-burn, they found 50% total 
plant cover, and only 1.0% was exotic species. They attributed the cover of native plants 
in their study to the fact that the area had not been heavily managed or grazed. In 
contrast, the lands of the White Mountain Apache reservation have been managed for 
decades for thinning and grazing, but the exotic species cover is similar with <1% cover 
in both 2004 and 2005.  
Our results contrast with Crawford et al. (2001), who found twice as much exotic 
cover on high severity burns as on moderate burns. However, a substantial portion of the 
exotic cover in the Crawford et al. (2001) study was C. album. Huisinga et al. (2005) 
recognized the difficulty in distinguishing C. album from other native, broad-leaved 
Chenopodium species (e.g. C. fremontii), and considered the possibility of 
misidentification of C. album when discussing the results of Crawford et al. (2001). In 
addition, Crawford et al. (2001) classified Conyza canadensis and Chenopodium 
graveolens as exotics. We classify both species as native based on USDA-NRCS 
PLANTS Database (2006). Even with these changes, mean exotic plant cover was twice 
as high on high severity burns compared to moderate burns (59% vs 20%, respectively) 
in the Crawford et al. (2001) paper. In our study, all broad-leaved Chenopodium were 
called C. album, but were easily distinguished from C. graveolens, C. botrys, and C. 
leptophyllum, which were the other species found on our plots. If another native, broad-
 
30

leaved Chenopodium were misidentified as C. album, then it would have resulted in an 
inflated meausurement in exotic forbs.  
 
The exotic species we found on at least 5% of plots, and therefore included in 
analysis, included only four designated as “noxious” in one or more southwestern state, 
Bromus tectorum L. (cheatgrass), Cirsium vulgare (Savi) Ten. (bull thistle), Erodium 
cicutarium (L.) L’Hér. Ex. Ait. (redstem storksbill) and Verbascum thapsus L. (common 
mullein). Other noxious species, Onopordum acanthium L. (Scotch thistle) and 
Convolvulus arvensis L. (field bindweed) were found on fewer than 5% of plots, but 
Linaria dalmatica (L.) P. Mill. Ssp. dalmatica (Dalmatian toadflax) and Salsola tragus L. 
(Russian thistle) were not found at all. Most exotic species found are not considered 
noxious in southwestern states, were found in very low cover, or were seeded (Table 4, 
Fig 2 a,b). 
Our finding that cover of exotic plants did not differ significantly between 
treatments is in agreement with Hunter et al.’s (2006) results. While they recognized 
there is some potential for fuel-treatments to increase propagule pressure of exotic plants, 
their results did not support this. However, in contrast to our study, they found fire 
severity to be a major predictor of exotic species establishment.  
 
It might have been logical to expect that some exotic plant species would 
establish following disturbances due to seed bank germination. While we had no pre-fire 
vegetation data, seeding had been done in past decades as part of rehabilitation after 
logging operations on skid trails, log landings, and roads. Exotic species were used for 
seeding until the late 1990’s, when the policy was revised to using only native species. In 
the mid 1990’s the White Springs fire was revegetated using a seed mix that included 
 
31

Agropyron desertorum (Fisch. ex Link) J.A. Schultes (desert wheatgrass), Dactylis 
glomerata L. (orchardgrass), and Bromus inermis Leyss. (smooth brome). Eragrostis 
curvula (Schrad.) Nees (weeping lovegrass) was also seeded on road closures on the 
eastern side of the fire, but did not spread across the landscape (J. A. Youtz, personal 
communication, 2006). While these species were detected in our plots, they were minor 
species. 
Precipitation greatly affects understory plant communities. The study area 
received more total precipitation in 2005 than it did in 2004, but there was over twice as 
much snowfall in 2004. These levels of precipitation were less than the 55-year averages. 
Perhaps insufficient precipitation, especially snowfall, played a role in limiting the 
response of exotic, annual species.  
 
When we looked at the plant community data by species composition, we found 
the species with significantly higher cover in high severity sites matched closely with the 
results from the Indicator Species Analysis. Of the 13 species found to be indicator 
species for high severity (Table 6) five were specifically seeded in high severity areas (B. 
curtipendula, B. carinatus, E. trachycaulus, P. smithii and common wheat). Whether 
these seeded native grass species will remain dominant over time remains to be seen. 
Foxx (1996) observed that the seeded grass, E. trachycaulus, was dominant in the years 
after the 1977 La Mesa fire, but was not observed after 1985. The remaining eight species 
are disturbance adapted, or increase in response to fire. Ceanothus fendleri Gray 
(Fendler’s ceanothus) resprouts vigorously after fire, and dormant seeds in the seed bank 
are stimulated to germinate by heat (Huffman & Moore, 2004). Both C. album and C. 
graveolens are disturbance adapted (Laughlin et al., 2004), and Crawford et al. (2001) 
 
32

found C. album to have a strong response to high severity burn. B. dissecta, C. wheeleri, 
C. canadensis, and P. macounii are disturbance tolerant or dependent on disturbances for 
their establishment. Lotus wrightii (Gray) Greene (Wright’s deervetch) was shown to be a 
dominant species on the La Mesa fire by Foxx (1996) and DiTomaso et al. (1999) report 
Lotus spp. increase in response to fire.  
Four species were indicators of low severity sites. K. macrantha, M. longiligula, 
and P. fendleriana are all perennial bunch grasses, which are adapted to low severity fire 
by sprouting from leaf bases insulated by old leaf sheaths (Bond et al. 1996) or from 
below the soil surface where they are protected (Young 1983). In addition, P. 
neomexicana was an indicator of low severity in one year.  
 
The significant differences in plant species composition based on presence or 
absence of species for treatment and severity effects were driven by few species in each 
case (Table 5 a, b). Of the 155 species found on at least 5% of the plots, 14 were unique 
to untreated areas, 8 unique to cut and burned, 8 unique to high severity areas, and 4 to 
low severity areas. These small differences can probably be accounted for more by the 
pre-existing plant community than it can to actual wildfire or treatment effects. An 
exception may be some of the species that occurred in high severity but not on low 
severity in 2005. These included Amaranthus hybridus L. (slim amaranth), Ambrosia 
acanthicarpa Hook. (flatspine burr ragweed), and P. oleracea which are known to grow 
in disturbed areas (Ecological Restoration Institute 2005).  
Our hypothesis that wheat would not persist over time was upheld. Wheat nearly 
disappeared from our plots by 2005. Keeley (2004) suggested that the large die-off of 
wheat creates “an ecological vacuum,” which can present opportunity for invasion of 
 
33

exotics. While our research can not fully address this concern, we observed a minor, but 
non-significant increase in exotic forb cover in 2005 in only one category, untreated/high 
severity, which increased from 1.15% cover (SE = 0.87) to 2.1% cover (SE = 1.47) in 
2005. All other combinations of severity and treatment showed slight declines in exotic 
forb cover in 2005. Exotic graminoid cover also declined slightly in all categories, except 
low severity/cut & burn sites, where exotic graminoid cover was absent in 2004 and 
averaged 1.2% in 2005. These short-term data do not show support for the dieoff of 
wheat resulting in an ecological vacuum that is subsequently filled with exotics, but 
longer -term data may lend support to that hypothesis.  
 
Conclusions 
While it may be gratifying to observe that the response of exotic species was 
unexpectedly low in the first two years following the Rodeo-Chediski fire, we see few 
concrete reasons why the exotic response was so low. The WMAT land has been 
managed for logging, grazing, and hunting, unlike preserves that had similar low post-fire 
responses by exotics. Management practices such as thinning and prescribed burning do 
have the potential to increase exotics due to disturbance, but tend to not have as 
detrimental effect as severe wildfire (Hunter et al. 2006). Therefore fuel reduction 
treatments are important for reducing the overall severity of wildfire (Finney et al. 2005, 
Savage & Mast 2005, Strom 2005). Finally, we recommend that managers strongly 
consider not using exotic species in post-wildfire seeding projects. There were 13 exotic 
species found on 5% or greater of the plots in this study. Of those, three had been seeded 
in past management practices (A. desertorum, D. glomerata, and wheat). In addition B. 
 
34

inermis, E. curvula, and Lolium perenneL. (perennial ryegrass) had been seeded in past 
years but were found on less than 5% of plots. Most of the remaining exotic species 
include fire-followers, and other species such as common mullein, which is listed as 
noxious in Colorado, but tends to be ephemeral after disturbances (Sieg et al. 2003). 
While our results show that common wheat declined quickly, the cautions about wheat 
seeding raised by Keeley (2004) about the die-off of wheat creating a vacuum for exotic 
plant invasion in subsequent years can only be addressed by continuing to monitor these 
sites in the future.
 
35

References 
 
Anderson, M.J. 2001. A new method for non-parametric multivariate analysis of 
variance. Austral Ecology 32-46. 
Anderson, M.J. 2004. DISTLM v.5: a FORTRAN computer program to calculate a 
distance-based multivariate analysis for a linear model (computer program). Department 
of Statistics, University of Auckland, New Zealand. 
 
Bataineh, A.L., Oswald, B.P., Bataineh, M.M., Williams, H.M., and Coble, D.W. 2006. 
Changes in understory vegetation of a ponderosa pine forest in northern Arizona 30 years 
after a wildfire. Forest Ecology and Management 235: 283-294. 
Bond, W.J. and van Wilgen, B.W. 1996. Fire and Plants. Chapman & Hall, New York, 
NY. pp. 34-50. 
Brooks, M.L., D'antonio, C.M., Richardson, D.M., Grace, J.B., Keeley, J.E., DiTomaso, 
J.M., Hobbs, R.J., Pellant, M., and Pyke, D. 2004. Effects of invasive alien plants on fire 
regimes. BioScience 54: 677-688. 
Byrne, R. and Andrews, J.H. 1975. Pre-Columbian purslane (Portulaca oleracea L.) in 
the new world.  Nature 253:726-727. 
Clary, W.P., Ffolliott, P.F. 1996. Differences in herbage-timber relationships between 
thinned and unthinned ponderosa pine stands. Fort Collins, CO, USA, Rocky Mountain 
Forest and Range Experiment Station.  
Cocke, A.E., Fulé, P.Z., and Crouse, J.E. 2005. Comparison of burn severity assessments 
using Differenced Normalized Burn Ratio and ground data. International Journal of 
Wildland Fire 14: 189-198. 
Crawford, J.A., Wahren, C.-H.A., Kyle S., and Moir, W.H. 2001. Responses of exotic 
plant species to fires in Pinus ponderosa forests in northern Arizona. Journal of 
Vegetation Science 12: 261-268. 
Daubenmire, R.F. 1959. A canopy-coverage method.  Northwest Science 33:43-64. 
DiTomaso, J.M., Kyser, G.B., Hastings, M.S. 1999. Prescribed burning for control of 
yellow starthistle (Centaurea solstitialis) and enhanced native plant diversity. Weed 
Science 47, 233-242. 
Dufrêne, M. and Legendre, P. 1997. Species assemblages and indicator species: the need 
for a flexible asymmetrical approach. Ecological Monographs 67: 345-366. 
Ecological Restoration Institute. 2005. Plants of northern Arizona forests. Northern 
Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ. 609 pp. 
 
36

Faith, D.P., Minchin, P.R., and Belbin, L. 1987. Compositional dissimilarity as a robust 
measure of ecological distance. Vegetatio 69: 57-68. 
Finney, M.A., McHugh, C.W., and Grenfell, I.C. 2005. Stand- and landscape-level 
effects of prescribed burning on two Arizona wildfires. Canadian Journal of Forest 
Research 35: 1714-1722. 
Foxx, T.S. 1996. Vegetation succession after the La Mesa fire at Bandelier National 
Monument. In Fire Effects in Southwestern Forests: Proceedings of the Second La Mesa 
Fire Symposium, 29-31 March 1994, Los Alamos, NM. Edited by Craig D. Allen. USDA 
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, CO. 
pp. 47-69. 
Griffis, K.L., Crawford, J.A., Wagner, M.R., and Moir, W.H. 2001. Understory response 
to management treatments in northern Arizona ponderosa pine forests. Forest Ecology 
and Management 146: 239-245. 
Huffman, D.W. and Moore, M.M. 2004. Responses of Fendler ceanothus to overstory 
thinning, prescribed fire and drought in an Arizona ponderosa pine forest. Forest Ecology 
and Management 198: 105-115. 
Huisinga, K.D., Laughlin, D.C., Fulé, P.Z., Springer, J.D., and McGlone, C.M. 2005. 
Effects of an intense prescribed fire on understory vegetation in a mixed conifer forest. 
Journal of the Torrey Botanical Society 132: 590-601. 
Hunter, M.E., Omi, P.N., Martinson, E.J., Chong, G.W. 2006. Establishment of non-
native plant species after wildfires: Effects of fuel treatments, abiotic and biotic factors, 
and post-fire grass seeding treatments.  International Journal of Wildland Fire 15:271-
281. 
Institute of Ecosystem Studies. 1999. Gap Light Analyzer (computer program). Simon 
Fraser University. http://www.ecostudies.org/gla 
Keeley, J.E. 2004. Ecological impacts of wheat seeding after a Sierra Nevada wildfire. 
International Journal of Wildland Fire 13: 73-78. 
Keeley, J.E. 2006. Fire management impacts on invasive plants in the western United 
States. Conservation Biology 20, 375-384. 
Kerns, B.K., Thies, W.G., and Niwa, C.G. 2006. Season and severity of prescribed burn 
in ponderosa pine forests: Implications for understory native and exotic plants. 
Ecoscience 13: 44-55. 
Lake, J.C. and Leishman, M.R. 2004. Invasion success of exotic plants in natural 
ecosystems: the role of disturbance, plant attributes and freedom from herbivores. 
Biological Conservation 117: 215-226. 
 
37

Laughlin, D.C., Bakker, J.D., Stoddard, M.T., Daniels, M.L., Springer, J.D., Gildar, C.N., 
Green, A.M., and Covington, W.W. 2004. Toward reference conditions: wildfire effects 
on flora in an old-growth ponderosa pine forest. Forest Ecology and Management 199: 
137-152. 
McCune. B., and Mefford, M.J. 1999 PC-ORD (computer program). Multivariate 
Analysis of Ecological Data, Version 4. MJM Software Design, Gleneden Beach, 
Oregon. 
Mitchell, W.R. 1981. Soil Survey of Fort Apache Indian Reservation, Arizona, Parts of 
Apache, Gila, and Navajo Counties. USDA Soil Conservation Service and United States 
Department of Interior Bureau of Indian Affairs in cooperation with Arizona Agricultural 
Experiment Station.  
Moore, M.M., Casey, C.A., Bakker, J.D., Springer, J.D., Fulé, P.Z., Covington, W.W., 
Laughlin, D.C., 2006. Herbaceous vegetation responses (1992-2004) to restoration 
treatments in a ponderosa pine forest. Rangeland Ecology & Management 59, 135-144. 
Sabo, K.E., 2006. Overstory and understory production in varying stand structural types 
in northern Arizona ponderosa pine forests.  Flagstaff, AZ, Northern Arizona University.  
Savage, M. and Mast, J.N. 2005. How resilient are southwestern ponderosa pine forests 
after crown fires? Canadian Journal of Forest Research 35: 967-977. 
Sieg, C.H., Phillips, B.G., and Moser, L.P. 2003. Exotic Invasive Plants. In Ecological 
Restoration of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests. P.Friederici, ed. Island Press, 
Washington, pp. 251-267. 
Soil Survey Staff, Natural Resources Conservation Service, United States Department of 
Agriculture. Official Soil Series Descriptions [online]. Available from 
http://soils.usda.gov/technical/classification/osd/index.html  [accessed 17 July 2006]. 
 
Strom, B.A. 2005. Pre-fire treatment effects and post-fire forest dynamics on the Rodeo-
Chediski burn area, Arizona. Flagstaff, AZ, Northern Arizona University.   
 
Swope, S.M. 2003. Exotic plant invasions in relation to diversity, limiting resources and 
livestock grazing in Arizona grasslands.  Flagstaff, AZ, Northern Arizona University.   
USDA Forest Service. 2002.Rodeo-Chediski fire effects summary report: Apache-
Sitgreaves National Forests.  Washington, D.C., USDA Forest Service.  
USDA, NRCS. 2006. The PLANTS Database (http://plants.usda.gov, 29 November 
2006). National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490 USA 
Welsh, S.L., Atwood, N.D., Goodrich, S., and Higgins, L.C. 1993. A Utah Flora. 2nd ed. 
Brigham Young University, Provo, UT. 
 
38

Westerling, A.L., Hidalgo, H.G., Cayan, D.R., and Swetnam, T.W. 2006. Warming and 
earlier spring increase western U.S. forest wildfire activity. Science 313: 940-943. 
Young, Richard P. 1983. Fire as a vegetation management tool in rangelands of the 
Intermountain Region. In: Monsen, Stephen B.; Shaw, Nancy, compilers. Managing 
Intermountain rangelands--improvement of range and wildlife habitats: Proceedings; 
1981 September 15-17; Twin Falls, ID; 1982 June 22-24; Elko, NV. Gen. Tech. Rep. 
INT-157. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain 
Forest and Range Experiment Station: 18-31.
 
39

Table 1. Plant canopy cover classes used to classify percent cover within a 20- by 50-cm 
quadrat (modified from Daubenmire 1959).  
 
Cover Class 
Range of Coverage 
Midpoint 
T 
0 – .999 % 
.5 
1 
1 – 5 % 
3 
2 
6 – 25 % 
15.5 
3 
26 – 50 % 
38 
4 
51 – 75 % 
63 
5 
76 – 95 % 
85.5 
6 
96 – 100 % 
98 
 
 
 
40

Table 2. Overstory characteristics of sites on White Mountain Apache Tribal lands by 
pre-fire treatments and severities. Pre-fire data are based on standing live and dead trees. 
Post-fire data are based on live trees only. Data are means (standard error). 
 
Severity 
Treatment 
% Canopy 
Openness 
Post-fire 
Density 
(trees/ha)  
Post-fire 
Density 
(trees/ha)  
Pre-fire 
Basal area 
(m2/ha) Post-fire 
Basal area 
(m2/ha) Pre-fire 
High 
No Trt 
66.9 (2.3) 
44.2 (35.9) 
508.5 (137.5) 
1.9 (1.5) 
15.1 (3.1) 
 
Cut & Burn 
65.1 (1.6) 
9.9 (4.6) 
632.5 (168.7) 
0.9 (0.4) 
12.0 (1.7) 
Low 
No Trt 
39.4 (2.4) 
647.5 (147.6) 
937.6 (184.1) 
21.6 (2.8) 
25.5 (3.0) 
 
Cut & Burn 
45.6 (2.1) 
343.0 (65.3) 
728.7 (222.6) 
14.0 (1.8) 
17.8 (2.8) 
 
 
 
41

Table 3. A summary of the permuted p-values for DISTLM tests for univariate plant 
canopy cover and richness, by category. An asterisk indicates significance. 
 
Cover 
 
Severity 
Treatment 
Interaction 
Category 
2004 
2005 
2004 
2004 
2004 
2005 
Total cover 
0.0002* 
0.0001* 
0.0675 
0.7403 
0.2165 
0.0233* 
Forbs 
0.0069* 
0.0002* 
0.0908 
0.5402 
0.5921 
0.2846 
Exotic Forbs 
0.2202 
0.0619 
0.7133 
0.5139 
0.5785 
0.6411 
Graminoids 
0.0137* 
0.0014* 
0.0737 
0.9288 
0.9144 
0.5401 
Exotic Graminoids 
0.0695 
0.9705 
0.7419 
0.7570 
0.4874 
0.2176 
Shrubs 
0.0251* 
0.0086* 
0.6120 
0.5163 
0.6663 
0.3300 
Trees 
0.0049* 
0.0831 
0.1714 
0.3117 
0.0020* 
0.0006* 
Richness 
 
Severity 
Treatment 
Interaction 
Category 
2004 
2005 
2004 
2005 
2004 
2005 
Total Richness 
0.1115 
0.0565 
0.1181 
0.2037 
0.9857 
0.4153 
Forbs 
0.4098 
0.2662 
0.0999 
0.0960 
0.7640 
0.4610 
Graminoids 
0.0876 
0.0471* 
0.0421* 
0.1531 
0.8841 
0.9034 
 
42

 Table 4. Summary of observed exotic species by fire severity. Classification of ‘noxious’ 
is based on designation in at least one of four southwestern states, according to Sieg et al. 
(2003). Species in the ‘seeded’ category may have been seeded throughout the known 
history of the WMAT lands, not uniquely as part of the BAER efforts (pers. comm., J. A. 
Youtz, 2006). A total of 31 exotic species were found on high severity plots and 24 on 
low severity plots.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Severity 
 Species Present1
High 
Seeded 
Noxious 
Other 
 
Agropyron desertorum 
Bromus tectorum 
Bromus japonicus 
 
Bromus inermis2
Cirsium vulgare 
Chenopodium album 
 
Dactylis glomerata 
Convolvulus arvensis 
Echinochloa crus-galli 
 
Eragrostis curvula 
Erodium cicutarium  
Kochia scoparia 
 
Lolium perenne 
Onopordum acanthium 
Lactuca serriola 
 
Triticum aestivum 
Verbascum thapsus 
Lolium arundinaceum 
 
 
 
Malva neglecta 
 
 
 
Medicago lupulina 
 
 
 
Melilotus officinalis2
 
 
 
Poa compressa2
 
 
 
Poa pratensis 
 
 
 
Polygonum aviculare 
 
 
 
Polygonum convolvulus2
 
 
 
Polypogon viridis 
 
 
 
Rumex acetosella 
 
 
 
Setaria viridis 
 
 
 
Sonchus asper 
 
 
 
Taraxacum officinale 
 
 
 
Tragopogon dubius 
Low 
Seeded 
Noxious 
Other 
 
Agropyron desertorum 
Bromus tectorum 
Bromus japonicus 
 
Bromus inermis 
Cirsium vulgare 
Chenopodium album 
 
Dactylis glomerata 
Convolvulus arvensis 
Eragrostis lehmanniana 
 
Eragrostis curvula 
Verbascum thapsus 
Lactuca serriola 
 
Triticum aestivum 
 
Lolium arundinaceum2
 
 
 
Medicago lupulina 
 
 
 
Melilotus officinalis2
 
 
 
Poa compressa2
 
 
 
Poa pratensis 
 
 
 
Polygonum aviculare 
 
 
 
Polygonum convolvulus2
 
 
 
Rumex acetosella 
 
 
 
Rumex crispus 
 
 
 
Taraxacum officinale 
 
 
 
Tragopogon dubius 
1Species that are found on >5% of the plots within the entire study (not by severity) are in bold. These 
species were used in all analyses. 
2Species found only in 2005. 
 
43

 
44
 
Table 5a. Species present only in untreated or only in cut and burned sites. 
 
Species found only in Untreated Sites 
2004 
2005 
Achnatherum nelsonii (Scribn.) Barkworth
X 
 
Amaranthus hybridus L.
 
X 
Amaranthus powellii S. Wats.
 
X 
Ambrosia acanthicarpa Hook.
X 
X 
Brickellia grandiflora (Hook.) Nutt.
X 
 
Cercocarpus montanus Raf.
X 
X 
Frasera speciosa Dougl. ex Griseb
X 
X 
Lathyrus laetivirens Greene ex Rydb.
X 
 
Mahonia repens (Lindl.) G. Don
X 
X 
Opuntia sp.
X 
 
Portulaca oleracea L.
 
X 
Rhus glabra L.
X 
X 
Rhus trilobata Nutt.
X 
X 
Townsendia exscapa (Richards.) Porter
 
X 
 
 
 
Species found only in Cut & Burned Sites 
2004 
2005 
Amaranthus powellii S. Wats.
X 
 
Antennaria parvifolia Nutt.
X 
 
Chamaesyce fendleri (Torr. & Gray) Small
 
X 
Dactylis glomerata L.
X 
 
Dyssodia papposa (Vent.) A.S. Hitchc.
 
X 
Ipomoea costellata Torr.
 
X 
Muhlenbergia minutissima (Steud.) Swallen
X 
 
Piptochaetium pringlei (Beal) Parodi
X 
 
 
Table 5b. Species present only in high severity sites or only in low severity sites.  
 
Species found only in High Severity Sites 
2004 
2005 
Agropyron desertorum (Fisch. ex Link) J.A. Schultes
 
X 
Amaranthus hybridus L.
 
X 
Ambrosia acanthicarpa Hook.
 
X 
Dyssodia papposa (Vent.) A.S. Hitchc.
X 
X 
Mahonia repens (Lindl.) G. Don
X 
X 
Pennellia longifolia (Benth.) Rollins
 
X 
Portulaca oleracea L.
 
X 
Sporobolus compositus (Poir.) Merr.
X 
 
 
 
 
Species found only in Low Severity Site 
2004 
2005 
Desmodium grahamii Gray
X 
 
Microsteris gracilis (Hook.) Greene
X 
 
Pseudotsuga menziesii (Mirbel) Franco
X 
 
Quercus turbinella Greene
 
X 
 
 
 
 

Table 6. Indicator species by year and level of fire severity. 
 
Year 
 
 
 
Severity
Species
Indicator
Value 
P value 
Avg Cover 
(SE) 
Comments* 
2004 
 
 
 
High 
Bromus carinatus 
72.2
0.0010
4.8 (0.8) 
Seeded species
 
 
Ceanothus fendleri  
61.3 
0.0020 
13.3 (1.7) 
Fire resprouter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chenopodium album  
37.4 
0.0010 
1.0 (0.4) 
Disturbance adapted 
Chenopodium graveolens
63.9 
0.0100 
1.9 (0.4) 
Disturbance adapted 
Cirsium wheeleri 
33.5 
0.0230 
2.0 (0.5)
 
 
Disturbance adapted 
Conyza canadensis 
67.1 
0.0010 
2.2 (0.4)
 
 
Disturbance adapted 
 
Elymus trachycaulus 
59.1 
0.0010 
3.9 (0.5)
 
 
Seeded species
 
 
 
Lotus wrightii 
61.1 
0.0010 
3.4 (0.5)
Triticum aestivum
42.5 
0.0010 
1.6 (0.6)
 
 
Seeded species
Low
 
Koeleria macrantha  
32.1 
0.0170 
0.9 (0.2) 
 
Muhlenbergia longiligula  
35.3 
0.0030 
3.4 (0.9) 
 
Packera neomexicana  
47.9 
0.0010 
0.2 (0.04) 
 
Poa fendleriana  
40.2 
0.0010 
0.8 (0.2) 
 
2005
High 
Bahia dissecta 
68.7 
0.0010 
3.6 (0.7) 
  Disturbance adapted 
 
 
Bouteloua curtipendula  
31.0 
0.0040 
1.4  (0.4) 
Seeded species 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bromus carinatus  
68.0
0.0010
3.9 (0.6) 
Seeded species
Ceanothus fendleri  
58.7 
0.0030 
18.5 (2.2) 
Fire resprouter 
Cirsium wheeleri 
48.3 
0.0020 
3.1 (0.8)
 
 
Disturbance adapted 
Conyza canadensis
68.6 
0.0010 
2.0 (0.4)
 
 
Disturbance adapted 
 
Elymus trachycaulus 
63.9 
0.0010 
3.9 (0.6)
 
 
Seeded species
 
 
 
Lotus wrightii 
52.6 
0.0100 
3.1 (0.5)
Pascopyrum smithii 
41.8 
0.0010 
2.1 (0.6)
 
 
Seeded species
Pseudognaphalium macounii  
38.7 
0.0440 
0.9 (0.3) 
Disturbance adapted 
Low
 
Muhlenbergia longiligula  
37.4 
0.0020 
4.7 (1.1) 
 
Poa fendleriana  
26.9 
0.0270 
0.7 (.2) 
 
*”Disturbance adapted” indicates that species has been associated with burned areas in other studies. “Seeded species” 
indicates this species was in the seed mix used on the burned area. 
 
45

46
 
Table 7: A comparison of cover and richness of exotic plant species following severe wildfires in the Southwest. 
♦Tallied for the entire study, not per plot or per m2. 
Site 
  Author (year) 
Time 
since 
fire 
Notes
# of
plots 
 
 
Method for 
quantifying 
cover 
Cover  
of exotics♦  
(area sampled) 
Richness  
of exotics♦
(area sampled) 
Wht. Mtn. Apache Tribal land, AZ 
Kuenzi (2006)  
 
 
2 yrs 
3 yrs 
This study. 
71 
cover class 
0.9% in 2004 
0.7% in 2005 
(2m2 =20*.1m2) 
35, 13 on >5% plots†  
(≈ 1000m2) 
Apache-Sitgreaves NF, AZ 
Kuenzi (2006) 
 
 
2 yrs 
3 yrs 
Also Rodeo-Chediski fire.  
84 
cover class 
0.3% in 2004 
1.6% in 2005 
(2m2 =20*.1m2) 
38, 14 on >5% plots†  
(≈ 1000m2) 
Kaibab and Coconino NF, AZ 
Crawford et al. (2001) 
 
 
2 yrs 
Data were pooled from 3 
wildfires 
34 
cover class 
59% in High sev* 
20% in Mod sev*
(2.4m2=24 * 0.1m2) 
25*  
(2.4m2=24 * 0.1m2) 
Coconino NF, AZ 
Griffis et al. (2001) 
 
 
<5 yrs 
Data based only on the 10 
wildfire plots 
10 
11 min search 
and abundance 
rating 
≈ 50% forbs, 
≈ 8% graminoids 
(375 m2) 
10  
(375 m2) 
Grand Canyon NP, AZ 
Husinga et al. (2005) 
 
 
 
6 yrs  
8 yrs 
This was an intense 
prescribed fire 
60 
point intercept 
0.7% in 1999   
1% in 2001 
(2, 50-m transects, 
166 pts ea.)  
4 
(1000m2) 
 
Bandelier Nat’l Monument, NM 
Barclay et al. (2004) 
 
 
2 yrs 
Data based only on non-
seeded plots in 1998 
49 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
line intercept
≈ 18% in High sev●
≈ 15% in Mod sev● 
(50-m transect) 
? 
Bandelier Nat’l Monument, NM 
  Foxx (1996)  
8 yrs 
Data is based only on the first 
8 years of data collection 
after the fire 
 
?
cover class
≈ 0.1% 
(50 quadrats) 
3 
(1858.1 m2) 
 
*These numbers have been adjusted from the original study based on Huisinga et al. (2005). C. album was subtracted from the total. C. canadensis was also subtracted due to 
misclassification as an exotic.
†All analysis was done on species occurring on over 5% of the plots. 
● C. canadensis was classified as an exotic and included in this measure.
 

2004                                   2005
H
L
H
L
Avg 
Richness
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
NO TRT
CUT & BURN
2004                                   2005
H
L
H
L
Total plant
% Cover
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
 
a 
Figure 1. a) Average (+SE) richness on 1000m2 plot by fire severity (H= high, L= low), 
treatment, and year on the WMAT plots. No significant difference was found for 
treatment or severity in either year. b) Average (+SE) plant canopy cover on 20- by 50-
cm quadrats by fire severity (H= high, L= low), treatment, and year on the WMAT 
plots.In 2004, a significant difference was found for the severity effect (p=.0002). The 
interaction between severity and treatment was significant (p=.0233) in 2005. 
 
47

 
2004                             2005
H
L
H
L
Forbs
% Cover
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
2004                                   2005
H
L
H
L
Exotic Forbs
% Cover
0
1
2
3
4
2004                                     2005
H
L
H
L
Graminoids
% Cover
0
5
10
15
20
25
NO TRT
CUT & BURN
2004                                       2005
H
L
H
L
Tree regeneration
% Cover
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
2004                                   2005
H
L
H
L
Exotic Graminoids
% Cover
0
1
2
3
4
5
2004                                            2005
H
L
H
L
Shrubs
% Cover
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
 
a 
d
b 
e 
c 
f 
 
Figure 2. Average (+SE) cover, by plant groups, fire severity (H= high, L= low), 
treatment, and year. a) Exotic forbs: no significant differences. b) Exotic graminoids: no 
significant differences. c) All forbs: a significant difference was found between high and 
low severity in 2004 at p=.007 and in 2005 at p=.0002. d) All graminoids: a significant 
difference was found between high and low severity in 2004 at p=.0137 and in 2005 at 
p=.0014. e) Shrubs: a significant difference was found between high and low severity in 
2004 at p=.025 and in 2005 at p=.009. f) Tree regeneration (<1.4m tall): the interaction 
between fire severity and treatment was significant in 2004 at p=.0137 and in 2005 at 
p=.0014. 
 
48

High
Low
High
Low
a 
% Canopy Openness 
Basal Area 
TPH 
b 
TPH 
% Canopy Openness 
Basal Area 
 
Figure 3. Ordinated plant communities based on plant cover data by severity level. 
Vector length indicates strength of correlation. a) 2004 data. Stress level is 19.71 for a 3-
d solution. Low severity plots were positively correlated with basal area and trees per 
hectare. b) 2005 data. Stress level is 19.31 for a 3-d solution. Low severity plots were 
also positively correlated with basal area and trees per hectare. 
 
49

2004                                   2005
H
L
H
L
Frequency
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
NO TRT
CUT & BURN
 
Figure 4. Average frequency (proportion of quadrats + SE) of Triticum aestivum, or 
common wheat, by year, fire severity (H = high, L = low) and treatment.  
 
 
50

Chapter 3 
Influence of pre-fire fuel reduction treatments on understory response following a severe 
wildfire, Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests, USA 
 
Abstract 
 
We studied differences in the understory plant communities between paired 
treated (pre-fire fuel reduction) and untreated sites on the Apache-Sitgreaves National 
Forests after the Rodeo-Chediski fire in 2004 and 2005, two and three years postfire, 
respectively. We analyzed species composition and cover using univariate and 
multivariate methods. We hypothesized that untreated sites would burn more severely 
and result in more open stands with higher plant cover overall, as well as higher exotic 
species cover and shrub cover compared to treated stands. Total plant canopy cover in 
both years and shrub cover in 2005, were higher on untreated areas. No significant 
differences were found for exotic species cover and overall the cover of exotics was 
extremely low (<2%). We examined differences in functional groups including C3 
graminoids, C4 graminoids, legumes, annual/biennial forbs, and perennial forbs. Cover of 
annual/biennial forbs was significantly higher in untreated areas in both years, due 
largely to early successional species. Cover of C3 graminoids and perennial forbs were 
higher in treated sites in 2005 only. Legume and C4 graminoid cover did not differ 
between treated and untreated sites. The fire was seeded with several native and non-
native grasses and one penstemon. Using Indicator Species Analyses, we identified 
several seeded species as well as species common after fires as indicators in untreated 
areas. It is unclear how long seeded species, as well as other early successional plants, 
 
51

will persist, but the fire-caused tree mortality in untreated areas is expected to have long-
term effects on plant communities.  
 
Introduction 
Wildfires in the western United States have increased in size, duration, and 
frequency over the past several decades (Westerling et al. 2006). Although data are 
limited, fuel reduction treatments that include thinning and slash management have the 
potential to reduce extreme fire behavior compared to untreated stands (Finney et al. 
2005, Strom 2005). Strom (2005) found a considerable difference between treated and 
untreated areas on the Rodeo-Chediski fire. Over 60% of the area that had been thinned 
and prescribed burned within a decade of the fire burned with low severity, as opposed to 
only 20% of the area that had not been treated for the same time period. Fuel reduction 
treatments may also influence post-wildfire understory plant communities, but few 
studies have attempted to assess the role of pre-fire fuel reduction treatments on 
understory composition compared to areas that did not receive fuel reduction treatments.  
The potential role of pre-wildfire fuel reduction on understory communities is dependent 
on a number of factors, such as the resultant fire severity, the types and abundance of 
various plant propagules available for colonization, and weather.    
Research from a number of wildfires suggests that severely burned areas are more 
likely to provide habitat for a number of disturbance-tolerant species, increasingly 
including exotic species. A combination of overstory removal and exposure of bare 
ground provides habitat for a number of disturbance-dependent species. Griffis et al. 
(2001) compared four treatments in Pinus ponderosa P. & C. Lawson var. scopulorum 
 
52

Engelm. (ponderosa pine) forests: unmanaged, thinned, thinned and burned, and wildfire. 
They found that exotic species richness and abundance increased with disturbance 
severity; severely burned wildfire sites had more than 40% greater abundance of exotic 
species than other treatments or unmanaged stands. Crawford et al. (2001) found the 
average cover of exotic species following a 1996 wildfire was twice as high on high 
severity sites as it was on moderate severity sites. They also found the average cover of 
Conyza canadensis (L.) Cronq. (Canadian horseweed), a disturbance-adapted native, was 
27% on moderately burned sites and 18% on high severity sites, as opposed to 0% cover 
on unburned sites.  
The type and abundance of various plant propagules available for post-wildfire 
colonization also influences understory composition. Response to fire is species-specific 
(Vose & White, 1991). Some plant species exhibit a strong response after disturbance, 
including severe wildfire but do not remain in the system over the long term. Foxx (1996) 
found this relationship for Chenopodium graveolens Willd. (fetid goosefoot), which was 
a dominant species one year after the 1977 La Mesa fire but disappeared by 1985. In 
addition, fire and fuel treatments can shift the structure of the understory. Species that 
have the ability to resprout after fire can outcompete species that are obligate seeders 
(Calvo et al., 2003). Shrubs can often increase after fires by this strategy. Ceanothus 
fendleri Gray (Fendler’s ceanothus) increases following burning due to resprouting and 
fire-stimulated germination (Huffman & Moore 2004).  
Previous management practices, including past seeding operations and land use, 
also affect the plant community after wildfire. Huisinga et al. (2005) found greater than 
95% native species on burned sites after an intense prescribed fire, and attributed this to a 
 
53

native-dominated pre-fire plant community due to the absence of a history of thinning 
and limited grazing in the history of their study site. Thinning and fuel reduction 
operations also create bare mineral soils and thus potentially increase exotic species (Fulé 
et al. 2005, Wienk et al. 2004). However, Hunter et al. (2006) found that wildfires had a 
greater effect on non-native establishment than did fuel treatments. Their study found 
slightly higher incidence of non-natives in thinned areas at only one of the three wildfires 
they sampled, but the results were not significant. Exotic species may also establish 
following severe wildfires due to increased propagule pressure from post-fire seeding 
practices (Barclay et al. 2004, Keeley 2004). Seeding is often done as part of Burned 
Area Emergency Rehabilitation (BAER) on public lands. However, there is little 
evidence to suggest that seeding decreases post-fire erosion (Robichaud et al. 2000) and 
seeded species may displace native early successional species (Beyers 2004, Keeley et al. 
2006).  
Finally, extreme variations in precipitation and temperature can greatly affect 
post-wildfire plant community composition and abundance. Bataineh et al. (2006) found 
a significant difference in species composition 30 years after a wildfire; however they 
could not differentiate the effects of the fire from drought effects. Moore et al. (2006) 
found that drought was also influential on the understory response following restoration 
treatments over a 13-year period. They found that while mean standing crop in thinned 
and burned stands remained much higher than mean standing crop in control stands, it did 
decrease from 1999-2004, which included one year (2002) in which precipitation was 
75% below average. They found C4 graminoids were not as affected as other functional 
groups, which they attributed to their greater water-use efficiency. This sensitivity of 
 
54

understory communities to extreme weather variations in this region complicates our 
understanding of plant community response to various forest management practices.  
 
The Rodeo-Chediski fire burned 189,000 ha from June to July 2002, creating a 
fire mosaic across the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest (A-S) and White Mountain 
Apache tribal lands, and exhibited some of the most severe fire behavior in Arizona’s 
history. A total of 67,670 ha burned on the A-S National Forest lands (USDA Forest 
Service 2002), and of those 20,005 ha burned with high severity and were seeded. In 
addition, 1,325 ha on the east side of the fire were seeded again the following year when 
more seed supply became available (Kendell Hughes, Apache-Sitgreaves National 
Forests, personal communication 2006). 
The objective of this study was to investigate the effects of pre-wildfire fuel 
reduction treatments on post-wildfire plant communities on paired, treated and untreated 
stands. We hypothesized that since untreated plots burned with greater severity and had 
lower post-fire tree survival compared to treated plots (Strom 2005), total plant canopy 
cover, cover of disturbance-adapted exotic species, and shrub cover would be higher on 
untreated plots compared to treated plots. 
 
Methods 
Study Area 
 
The Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests lie north of the Mogollon Rim in central-
eastern Arizona. Maximum and minimum temperatures, as reported at the Heber Ranger 
Station by the Western Regional Climate Center (www.wrcc.dri.edu) range from 29.3ºC 
in July down to -8.8ºC in January, based on 1950-2005 averages. Average total annual 
 
55

precipitation is 44.4 cm and average annual total snowfall is 97.3 cm. Precipitation during 
the years of data collection was lower than the 55-year averages. The area received 33.3 
cm of precipitation in 2004 and 40.7 cm in 2005. Total snowfall in winter of 2003/2004 
was 50.3 cm and 22.9 cm in winter of 2004/2005. Elevation for the study area ranges 
from 1,990-2,138 m. Soils are fine, mixed Mollic Eutroboralfs and fine, mixed Typic 
Eutroboralfs. Forests are dominated by P. ponderosa, Quercus gambelii Nutt. (Gambel 
oak), and Juniperus deppeana Steud. (alligator juniper)(USDA Forest Service 1989). All 
sites were above 2000 m to ensure they fell in a P. ponderosa-dominated ecosystem, and 
at less than 45% slope. The average slope was 9%.  
Site Selection and Measurement 
Our measurements took place from mid-July to early September in 2004 and 
2005. We collected data on seven pairs of treated and untreated study sites on the 
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests (A-S) that had been established by the USDA Forest 
Service immediately following the fire in 2002. Non-commercial thinning for fuel 
reduction had been done between 1990 and 1999. Slash was most commonly pile burned, 
but on one site slash had been lopped and scattered and on one site slash was crushed. 
Each treated site was paired with an untreated site of similar topography with no road or 
other fire break in between (USDA Forest Service 2002, L. Wadleigh and C. Hoffman, 
pers. comm. 2003, 2006). Data were collected on 2 grids of 3 plots each at each site 
resulting in 42 plots per treatment (84 plots total). 
In 2002, the seed mix, aerially applied at 35.9 kg/ha, contained: Hordeum vulgare 
L. (annual barley), Lolium perenne L. (annual rye), Elymus trachycaulus (Link) Gould ex 
Shinners (slender wheatgrass), and Bromus marginatus Nees ex Steud. (B. marginatus = 
 
56

B. carinatus Hook. & Arn.) (Welsh et al. 1993) (mountain brome). In 2003, seed was 
applied again, this time using different seed mixes on the east and west sides of the fire. 
All seven pairs of sites were on the east side of the fire. The seed mix used on the east 
side, applied at 23.3 kg/ha, consisted of: Pascopyrum smithii (Rydb.) A. Löve (western 
wheatgrass), Bouteloua curtipendula (Michx.) Torr. (sideoats grama), Festuca ovina L. 
(sheep fescue), Koeleria macrantha (Ledeb.) J.A. Schultes (prairie Junegrass), 
Penstemon palmeri Gray (Palmer’s penstemon), and H. vulgare. (Kendell Hughes, 
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest, personal communication 2006) 
Plot centers were the same as those used in Strom & Fulé (in press), who 
measured overstory tree structure.  At each plot center, we established two 44.8-m 
transects crossing perpendicularly, resulting in a 31.7-m x 31.7-m square, approximately 
1000 m2. We measured plant canopy cover in 20- by 50-cm quadrats spaced at 4-m 
intervals along each transect, for a total of 20 quadrats for each plot.  Within each 
quadrat, we measured total plant canopy cover, cover of forbs, exotic forbs, graminoids, 
exotic graminoids, shrubs, and trees < 1.4 m tall, plus cover by species using six cover 
classes (Table 1) (Daubenmire 1959). We also estimated cover of litter, rocks, logs, bare 
ground, and moss. Plant nomenclature and nativity classification follows USDA-NRCS 
PLANTS Database (2006) and Welsh et al. (1993). In addition, we quantified plant 
species richness by recording all species that occurred within each 1000-m2 plot. 
Overstory canopy cover was estimated from a hemispherical photograph at each plot 
center using a digital camera with a 180º fisheye lens (Nikon CoolPix E4300 and FC-E8 
Fisheye Converter Lens). Hemispherical photos were analyzed using Gap Light Analyzer 
(Institute of Ecosystem Studies 1999) to quantify percent canopy openness. Overstory 
 
57

data and physical characteristics (aspect, slope) were gathered during the data collection 
for Strom (2005). 
Statistical Methods 
We analyzed the data using DISTLM (Anderson 2001 & 2004), a permutation 
procedure software for multivariate data, so it was an appropriate choice to test 
differences in the plant community. For consistency, we also used DISTLM for analyzing 
univariate measures for richness and abundance because these data evidenced non-
normality and heterogeneous variances. The univariate tests were run to test for 
differences in total richness and total abundance (plant canopy cover), plus abundance for 
the six categories of plant habit. We also followed Moore et al. (2006) in analyzing cover 
by five functional groups: C3 graminoids, C4 graminoids, legumes, non-leguminous 
annual/biennial forbs, and non-leguminous perennial forbs. We used multivariate tests to 
investigate differences in plant community composition based on presence/absence data 
and plant canopy cover data for the six plant habit categories. We carried out 9999 
permutations for each test. Euclidean distance was used for univariate data and the Bray-
Curtis dissimilarity measure was used for plant community data. The alpha level was 
0.05. 
We used non-metric multi-dimensional scaling ordination of the cover data by 
species using PC-ORD software (McCune & Mefford 1999), using the Bray-Curtis 
distance measure (Faith et al. 1987). The parameters were set such that 40 runs were 
performed with real data, 50 runs were performed with randomizations (to determine how 
likely the observed stress value of the final solution would be by chance alone), a 
maximum of 400 iterations per run, and an instability criterion of 0.00001. Finally, we 
 
58

used PC-ORD to identify Indicator Species of treatments and fire severity classes. 
Indicator species values were calculated for each species as relative frequency X percent 
canopy cover. Species with p < 0.05 and an Indicator Value > 25 (Dufrêne & Legendre, 
1997) were identified as indicator species.  
 
Results 
Based on our reconstruction of pre-fire overstory structure through measurement 
of living plus fire-killed trees, pre-fire basal area was nearly identical on treated and 
untreated stands, but tree density was over twice as high on untreated stands (Table 2). 
There was an 84% decrease in tree density and about a 55% decrease in basal area across 
treatments after the fire. Tree density of J. deppeana
 
 decreased by 92%, P. ponderosa by 
more than 60%, and Q. gambelii
 
 by 42%. 
Univariate analysis 
We found 334 species on all plots, but our analyses focused only on the 139 
species found on at least 5% of the plots. In total, we found 38 exotic species, 13 of 
which occured on at least 5% of the plots and therefore were included in the analyses. 
Total plant species richness did not differ significantly (p = 0.22, 2004; p = 0.72, 2005) 
between treated and untreated sites in either year (Figure 1a). However, total plant 
canopy cover was significantly higher on untreated sites compared to treated sites in both 
years (p = 0.002 in 2004, p = 0.015 in 2005) (Figure 1b). Forb cover was significantly 
higher in both 2004 and 2005 in areas that were not treated compared to untreated areas 
(p = 0.009 in 2004, p = 0.047 in 2005). Shrub cover was also higher on untreated sites 
than on treated sites in 2004 (p = 0.016), and was marginally higher on untreated sites in 
 
59

2005 (p = 0.054). Cover of exotic species (forbs or graminoids), graminoids, or 
regeneration trees did not differ significantly between treated and untreated sites (Figure 
2 a-f).  
Funtional groups 
Cover of C4 (warm season) graminoids did not differ in response to thinning, but 
cover of C3 (cool season) graminoids was significantly higher in untreated areas in 2005 
(p = 0.043) (Figure 3 d, e). Cover of nonleguminous perennial forbs was significantly 
higher in untreated areas in 2005 (p = 0.034).  Cover of nonleguminous annual and 
biennial forbs was significantly higher in untreated areas in both years (p = 0.026, 2004 
& 2005). Legume cover did not differ significantly on treated and untreated areas in 
either year (Figure 3 a-c).  
Multivariate analysis 
Our multivariate analyses indicated that plant community composition, based on 
presence/absence data, did not differ between treated and untreated areas.  However, 
using species abundance (cover) data, we detected significant differences in the plant 
community composition between treated and untreated areas (p = 0.024 in 2004 and p = 
0.049 in 2005). The significant differences in plant community composition based on 
species abundance data were supported by the ordinations of cover data by treatments. A 
separation can be seen in both years (Figure 4 a,b), and was positively correlated with 
canopy openness (untreated areas), trees per hectare (TPH) (treated areas) and basal area 
(treated areas). These ordinations are intended as an illustration of the plant community 
cover data more so than a quantitative analysis. The Indicator Species Analysis identified 
12 indicator species of untreated areas in each year, five of which were indicators in both 
 
60

years: C. canadensis, B. carinatus, Heleomeris multiflora Nutt. (showy goldeneye), 
Cirsium wheeleri (Gray) Petrak (Wheeler’s thistle), and E. trachycaulus (Table 3). Only 
one species, K. macrantha, was identified as an indicator species of treated areas.  
 
Discussion 
 
Our hypothesis that the untreated areas, where most trees were killed by fire, 
would have greater plant cover was upheld. This result matches the results of many other 
post-fire plant community studies (Crawford et al. 2001, Griffis et al. 2001, Huisinga et 
al. 2005).  The untreated areas burned more severely, as evidenced by higher tree 
mortality and greater post-fire canopy openness. Sabo (2006) found that basal area must 
be reduced to 8 m2 ha-1 or less to result in an increase in the understory production. Clary 
& Ffolliott (1966) found an understory response at 5-18 m2 ha-1. Basal area in the 
untreated sites was 2.8 m2 ha-1 after the Rodeo-Chediski fire, but the treated sites, which 
did not experience as much tree mortality had an average basal area of 13.9 m2 ha-1. 
Therefore, it is likely that the resulting increase in light on the severely burned untreated 
sites was responsible to some degree for the increase in plant canopy cover of understory 
species.  
 
Our hypothesis that there would be greater exotic cover in untreated areas was not 
upheld. This result contrasts with findings in other managed forests in the Southwest that 
have experienced severe fire.  In the absence of pre-fire vegetation data, we can only 
assume that this is due largely to an absence of many non-natives in the pre-fire 
community. However, unlike the Huisinga et al. (2005) study that also found low non-
native response, our study site does have a history of logging, livestock grazing, and road 
 
61

building. In addition, many of the typical exotic species found on burned areas were not 
detected in our study. Linaria dalmatica (L.) P. Mill. (Dalmatian toadflax) and Centaurea 
diffusa Lam. (diffuse knapweed) were not detected at all. Dodge (2004) found a strong 
relationship between fire severity and L. dalmatica growth and reproduction. Wolfson et 
al. (2005) reported that C. diffusa responds favorably to severe wildfire. Bromus tectorum 
L. (cheatgrass) was observed on only two plots in 2004 and seven plots in 2005 (only 
once did its cover measure over 1%). Cirsium vulgare Savi (Ten) (bull thistle) was 
observed on only two plots in 2004 and four plots in 2005.  
Lastly, the hypothesis that there would be greater shrub cover in untreated areas 
was upheld in the 2004 season, but not in 2005. This was driven by C. fendleri, which 
was also an indicator species in 2004. It is interesting to note that shrub cover was 
actually higher in untreated areas in 2005 than it was in untreated areas in 2004. 
However, there was no significant difference between shrub cover in untreated and 
treated areas in 2005 due to increased shrub cover in treated areas in 2005 as well. 
The analyses by functional groups showed the majority of the species found at 
higher cover in untreated areas were nonleguminous, annual, biennial, or perennial forbs. 
This is consistent with what Moore et al. (2006) found in restoration treatements, but the 
response they saw was driven by an exotic species, common mullein. Mullein was not an 
indicator species in our study. The only exotic species that met the criteria for an 
indicator was Lactuca serriola L. (prickly lettuce), and that was only in 2005. One 
leguminous species, L. wrightii, was identified as an indicator species of untreated plots. 
Legumes, including a number of Lotus species, often increase in abundance after fire 
(DiTomaso et al. 1999). 
 
62

Moore et al.’s (2006) study included 10 years of data and was subject to drought 
effects. Their study demonstrated that variations in precipitation can affect understory 
response in this region. C3 graminoids were dominant until drought occurred. In contrast, 
our study showed significantly higher cover of C3 graminoids in 2005, in spite of less 
winter precipitation that year compared to 2004. C4 graminoids have better water use 
efficiency. Moore et al. (2006) reported C4 graminoids withstood the years of drought 
during their study better than C3 graminoids. We had lower cover of C4 graminoids than 
C3 graminoids, but if climate trends continue along the trajectory of warming and 
drought, there may be a shift in the composition of graminoids in the future. Both years 
of data collecition of our study (2004 & 2005) had less-than-average rainfall and were 
comparable, although there was less snowfall in 2005. 
The community composition showed no differences based on presence/absence 
data, but did show differences based on cover. This was supported by the results of the 
Indicator Species Analysis. K. macrantha, a perennial bunchgrass, was the only indicator 
species of treated areas. It was also included in the seed mix. Perennial bunch grasses are 
adapted to low severity fire by sprouting from leaf bases insulated by old leaf sheaths or 
from below the soil surface where they are protected (Young 1983). The species that 
were indicators of untreated areas included three other seeded species: B. carinatus, E. 
trachycaulus, and P. smithii. Many of the remaining indicator species often increase 
following fire. C. fendleri  resprouts after fire, and germination is heat-stimulated 
(Huffman & Moore 2004). Crawford et al. (2001) found strong responses to high severity 
burning for: C. wheeleri, C. canadensis, Erigeron divergens Torr. & Gray (spreading 
fleabane), Q. gambelii, and Polygonum douglasii Greene (Douglas’ knotweed). Lotus 
 
63

spp. was an indicator in Laughlin et al. (2004) (our study listed L. wrightii as an 
indicator), as was P. douglasii (Laughlin et al. 2004). Penstemon linarioides Gray 
(toadflax penstemon) could not be found in the literature as an indicator in other studies. 
However, P. barbatus (Cav.) Roth (beardlip penstemon) has been shown to have a strong 
germination response to heat and smoke (Abella 2006). L. serriola has been shown to 
increase with high severity fire (Wienk et al. 2004). H. multiflora, Eriogonum 
racemosum Nutt. (redroot buckwheat), B. dissecta (Gray) Britt., and Erigeron 
colomexicanus A. Nels.(running fleabane) were also indicators of untreated areas.  
 
Conclusions 
 
While this study documented plant community response in the short-term (2- and 
3- years postfire), the trends we observed may not persist over time. It is likely that early 
successional species such as like C. canadensis will not persist in the long-term. Some of 
the seeded species may not persist either, as was seen in long-term monitoring after the 
1977 La Mesa fire (Foxx 1996). Strom and Fulé (in press) applied a forest simulation 
model to the post-Rodeo-Chediski tree structure; simulation results indicated that 
untreated areas were more likely to undergo a vegetation type conversion from a P. 
ponderosa-dominated ecosystem to a combination of Quercus spp., Juniperus spp., Pinus 
spp., and Robinia neomexicana Gray (New Mexico locust). These changes have long-
term implications for the understory plant community. It is likely that high plant cover 
will persist given a shorter, more open overstory canopy with more deciduous species. 
Warm-season C4 graminoids may increase in response to the more open canopy. In 
general, in areas of high fire severity, such as our untreated sites, there may be a long-
 
64

term shift away from shade-tolerant species typically found in the P. ponderosa 
understory. Such sites, with high or complete canopy mortality, make up the majority of 
the post-fire landscape.  Finally, extreme climatic variability, common in this region, will 
likely play a pivotal role in determining the structure and composition of the post-fire 
plant community.  
 
65

References 
 
 
Abella, S.R. 2006. Effects of smoke and fire-related cues on Penstemon barbatus seeds. 
American Midland Naturalist 155, 404-410. 
Anderson, M.J. 2001. A new method for non-parametric multivariate analysis of 
variance. Austral Ecology 32-46. 
Anderson, M.J. 2004. DISTLM v.5: a FORTRAN computer program to calculate a 
distance-based multivariate analysis for a linear model (computer program). Department 
of Statistics, University of Auckland, New Zealand. 
 
Barclay, A.D., Betancourt, J.L., Allen, C.D. 2004. Effects of seeding ryegrass (Lolium 
multiflorum) on vegetation recovery following fire in a ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) 
forest. International Journal of Wildland Fire 13, 183-194. 
Bataineh, A.L., Oswald, B.P., Bataineh, M.M., Williams, H.M., and Coble, D.W. 2006. 
Changes in understory vegetation of a ponderosa pine forest in northern Arizona 30 years 
after a wildfire. Forest Ecology and Management 235: 283-294. 
Beyers, J.L. 2004. Postfire seeding for erosion control: effectiveness and impacts on 
native plant communities. Conservation Biology 18, 947-956. 
Calvo, L., Santalla, S., Marcos, E., Valbuena, L., Tárrega, R., Luis, E. 2003. 
Regeneration after wildfire in communities dominated by Pinus pinaster, an obligate 
seeded, and in others dominated by Quercus pyrenaica, a typical resprouter. Forest 
Ecology and Management 184, 209-223. 
Clary, W.P., Ffolliott, P.F. 1966. Differences in herbage-timber relationships between 
thinned and unthinned ponderosa pine stands. U.S. Forest Research Note RM-74, Fort 
Collins, CO, USA, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station.  
Crawford, J.A., Wahren, C.-H.A., Kyle S., Moir, W.H. 2001. Responses of exotic plant 
species to fires in Pinus ponderosa forests in northern Arizona. Journal of Vegetation 
Science 12, 261-268. 
Daubenmire, R.F. 1959. A canopy-coverage method.  Northwest Science 33:43-64. 
DiTomaso, J.M., Kyser, G.B., Hastings, M.S. 1999. Prescribed burning for control of 
yellow starthistle (Centaurea solstitialis) and enhanced native plant diversity. Weed 
Science 47, 233-242. 
Dodge, R.S. 2004. Dalmatian toadflax (Linaria dalmatica) response to wildfire and 
native species revegetation in ponderosa pine forest. Flagstaff, AZ, Northern Arizona 
University. 
Dufrêne, M., Legendre, P. 1997. Species assemblages and indicator species: the need for 
a flexible asymmetrical approach. Ecological Monographs 67, 345-366. 
 
66

Faith, D.P., Minchin, P.R., and Belbin, L. 1987. Compositional dissimilarity as a robust 
measure of ecological distance. Vegetatio 69: 57-68. 
Finney, M.A., McHugh, C.W., Grenfell, I.C. 2005. Stand- and landscape-level effects of 
prescribed burning on two Arizona wildfires. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 35, 
1714-1722. 
Foxx, T.S. 1996. Vegetation succession after the La Mesa fire at Bandelier National 
Monument. Craig D. Allen (ed). Fire Effects in Southwestern Forests: Proceedings of the 
Second La Mesa Fire Symposium. RM-GTR-286. Fort Collins, CO, USDA Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station.  
Fulé, P.Z., Laughlin, D.C., Covington, W.W. 2005. Pine-oak forest dynamics five years 
after ecological restoration treatments, Arizona, USA. Forest Ecology and Management 
218, 129-145. 
Griffis, K.L., Crawford, J.A., Wagner, M.R., Moir, W.H. 2001. Understory response to 
management treatments in northern Arizona ponderosa pine forests. Forest Ecology and 
Management 146, 239-245. 
Huffman, D.W., Moore, M.M. 2004. Responses of Fendler ceanothus to overstory 
thinning, prescribed fire and drought in an Arizona ponderosa pine forest. Forest Ecology 
and Management 198, 105-115. 
Huisinga, K.D., Laughlin, D.C., Fulé, P.Z., Springer, J.D., McGlone, C.M. 2005. Effects 
of an intense prescribed fire on understory vegetation in a mixed conifer forest. Journal of 
the Torrey Botanical Society 132, 590-601. 
Hunter, M.E., Omi, P.N., Martinson, E.J., Chong, G.W. 2006. Establishment of non-
native plant species after wildfires: effects of fuel treatments, abiotic and biotic factors, 
and post-fire grass seeding treatments. International Journal of Wildland Fire 15, 271-
281. 
Institute of Ecosystem Studies. 1999. Gap Light Analyzer (computer program). Simon 
Fraser University. http://www.ecostudies.org/gla
Keeley, J.E. 2004. Ecological impacts of wheat seeding after a Sierra Nevada wildfire. 
International Journal of Wildland Fire 13, 73-78. 
Keeley, J.E., Allen, C.D., Betancourt, J., Chong, G.W., Fotheringham, C.J., Safford, H.D. 
2006. A 21st century perspective on postfire seeding. Journal of Forestry 104, 1-2. 
Laughlin, D.C., Bakker, J.D., Stoddard, M.T., Daniels, M.L., Springer, J.D., Gildar, C.N., 
Green, A.M., Covington, W.W. 2004. Toward reference conditions: wildfire effects on 
flora in an old-growth ponderosa pine forest. Forest Ecology and Management 199, 137-
152. 
 
67

McCune. B., and Mefford, M.J. 1999 PC-ORD (computer program). Multivariate 
Analysis of Ecological Data, Version 4. MJM Software Design, Gleneden Beach, 
Oregon. 
Moore, M.M., Casey, C.A., Bakker, J.D., Springer, J.D., Fulé, P.Z., Covington, W.W., 
Laughlin, D.C. 2006. Herbaceous vegetation responses (1992-2004) to restoration 
treatments in a ponderosa pine forest. Rangeland Ecology & Management 59, 135-144. 
Robichaud, P.R., Beyers, J.L., Neary, D.G. 2000. Evaluating the effectiveness of postfire 
rehabilitation treatments. Fort Collins, CO, USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station General Technical Report, RMRS-GTR-63.  
Sabo, K.E. 2006. Overstory and understory production in varying stand structural types in 
northern Arizona ponderosa pine forests.  Flagstaff, AZ, Northern Arizona University.  
Strom, B.A., Fulé, P.Z. in press. Pre-wildfire fuel treatments affect long-term ponderosa 
pine forest dynamics. International Journal of Wildland Fire. 
Strom, B.A. 2005. Pre-fire treatment effects and post-fire forest dynamics on the Rodeo-
Chediski burn area, Arizona. Flagstaff, AZ, Northern Arizona University.   
USDA Forest Service. 1989. Terrestrial ecosystem survey of the Apache-Sitgreaves 
National Forests.  Southwest Region, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service.  
USDA Forest Service. 2002. Rodeo-Chediski fire effects summary report: Apache-
Sitgreaves National Forests.  Washington, D.C., USDA Forest Service.  
USDA, NRCS. 2006. The PLANTS Database (http://plants.usda.gov, 29 November 
2006). National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490 USA 
Vose, J.M., White, A.S. 1991. Biomass response mechanisms of understory species the 
first year after prescribed burning in an Arizona ponderosa-pine community.  Forest 
Ecology and Management 40, 175-187. 
Welsh, S.L., Atwood, N.D., Goodrich, S., Higgins, L.C. 1993. A Utah Flora. Brigham 
Young University, Provo, UT. 
Westerling, A.L., Hidalgo, H.G., Cayan, D.R., Swetnam, T.W. 2006. Warming and 
earlier spring increase western U.S. forest wildfire activity. Science 313, 940-943. 
Wienk, C.L., Sieg, C.H., McPherson, G.R. 2004. Evaluating the role of cutting 
treatments, fire and soil seed banks in an experimental framework in ponderosa pine 
forests of the Black Hills, South Dakota. Forest Ecology and Management 192, 375-393. 
Wolfson, B.A.S., Kolb, T.E., Sieg, C.H., Clancy, K.M. 2005. Effects of post-fire 
conditions on germination and seedling success of diffuse knapweed in northern Arizona. 
Forest Ecology and Management 216, 342-358. 
 
68

Young, R.P. 1983. Fire as a vegetation management tool in rangelands of the 
Intermountain Region. Monsen, Stephen B. and Shaw, Nancy. Managing Intermountain 
rangelands--improvement of range and wildlife habitats.  Ogden, UT, USDA, Forest 
Service.  
 
69

Table 1.  Cover classes and midpoints used to classify percent cover within a 20- by 50-
cm quadrat (modified from Daubenmire 1959).  
 
Cover Class 
Range of Coverage 
Midpoint 
T 
0 – .999 % 
.5 
1 
1 – 5 % 
3 
2 
6 – 25 % 
15.5 
3 
26 – 50 % 
38 
4 
51 – 75 % 
63 
5 
76 – 95 % 
85.5 
6 
96 – 100 % 
98 
 
 
70

Table 2. Pre- and post-fire overstory characteristics, on treated and untreated sites. Pre-
fire values were estimated after the fire by combining living and fire-killed tree data. 
 
Treatment 
% Canopy 
Openness 
Post-fire 
Density 
(trees/ha)  
Post-fire 
Density 
(trees/ha)  
Pre-fire 
Basal area 
(m2/ha)  
Post-fire 
Basal area 
(m2/ha)  
Pre-fire 
Untreated 
60.1 (1.2) 
35.1 (10.1) 
1562.7 (620.6) 
2.8 (0.8) 
18.2 (1.3) 
Treated 
50.4 (1.2) 
321.9 (44.1) 
642.7 (134.1) 
13.9 (1.2) 
18.4 (1.2) 
 
71

 
Table 3. Indicator Species1 of treated and untreated areas on the Apache-Sitgreaves 
National Forest (table structure modified from Huisinga et al., 2005). 
 
 
1Species are ranked by Indicator Value within treatments. Average percent cover is given for each species 
for each treatment. Bold type indicates the site (untreated or treated) with which a species was most 
strongly associated.  
Year 
Indicator species 
Functional 
group2 
Seeded  
species 
Indicator 
value 
p-value 
Untreated 
Treated 
2004 Untreated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Polygonum douglasii 
A 
 
58.0 
0.023 
2.7 (0.5) 
1.0 (0.48) 
 
Lotus wrightii 
L,P 
 
52.3 
0.007 
1.5 (0.4) 
0.5 (0.15) 
 
Conyza canadensis 
A 
 
50.0 
0.001 
1.0 (0.2) 
0.3 (0.12) 
 
Erigeron divergens 
A 
 
46.9 
0.003 
1.1 (0.3) 
0.2 (0.06) 
 
Eriogonum  racemosum 
P 
 
46.1 
0.005 
0.6 (0.1) 
0.2 (0.05) 
 
Quercus gambelii 
T 
 
42.5 
0.012 
1.5 (0.3) 
0.6 (0.25) 
 
Bromus carinatus 
C3 G 
X 
41.0 
0.002 
1.4  (0.4) 
0.2 (0.08) 
 
Heliomeris multiflora 
P 
 
38.9 
0.003 
1.1 (0.5) 
0.1 (0.04) 
 
Cirsium wheeleri 
P 
 
30.9 
0.036 
0.7 (0.2) 
0.2 (0.09) 
 
Erigeron colomexicanus 
A 
 
28.7 
0.001 
0.6 (0.2) 
0.1 (0.04) 
 
Elymus trachycaulus 
C3 G 
X 
26.3 
0.003 
0.8 (0.2) 
0.4 (0.15) 
 
Ceanothus fendleri 
S 
 
25.9 
0.006 
0.6 (0.2) 
0.1 (0.05) 
 
Treated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Koeleria macrantha 
C3 G 
X 
38.3 
0.001 
0.1 (0.06) 
0.6 (0.16) 
2005 Untreated  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bahia dissecta 
A,P 
 
63.9 
0.016 
2.4 (0.46) 
0.9 (0.22) 
 
Conyza canadensis 
A 
 
61.6 
0.001 
2.6 (0.45) 
1.1 (0.37) 
 
Heliomeris multiflora 
P 
 
57.5 
0.001 
1.7 (0.60) 
0.2 (0.11) 
 
Erigeron divergens 
A 
 
55.1 
0.019 
1.7 (0.38) 
0.5 (0.12) 
 
Bromus carinatus 
C3 G 
X 
47.2 
0.001 
1.8 (0.40) 
0.02(0.02
) 
 
Quercus gambelii 
T 
 
42.5 
0.012 
2.1 (0.43) 
1.0 (0.30) 
 
Cirsium wheeleri 
P 
 
41.6 
0.008 
1.3 (0.35) 
0.3 (0.10) 
 
Lactuca serriola3 
A 
 
39.8 
0.025 
0.7 (0.20) 
0.3 (0.13) 
 
Erigeron colomexicanus 
A 
 
32.7 
0.004 
1.3 (0.34) 
0.3 (0.16) 
 
Elymus trachycaulus 
C3 G 
X 
31.0 
0.001 
0.7 (0.24) 
0.1 (0.05) 
 
Penstemon linarioides 
P 
 
30.8 
0.044 
1.8 (0.51) 
0.7 (0.28) 
 
Pascopyrum smithii 
C3 G 
X 
28.0 
0.035 
0.8 (0.25) 
0.2 (0.09) 
 
Treated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Koeleria macrantha 
C3 G 
X 
46.8 
0.013 
0.2 (0.04) 
0.5 (0.12) 
2Functional group codes: C3 G = C3 graminoid, A = nonleguminous annual and biennial forb, P = 
nonleguminous perennial forb, L= leguminous forb, S = shrub, T = tree. 
3Exotic species 
 
 
72

 
Year
2004
2005
Total Richness
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
UNTREATED
TREATED
Year
2004
2005
Total % Cover
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
 
a
*
b
*
Figure 1. Total richness (no. species/1000m2) (a) and total plant canopy cover (20- by 50-
cm quadrats) (b) for treated and untreated sites in 2004 and 2005. An asterisk (*) 
indicates a significant difference. Error bars are standard errors. 
 
 
73

 
Year
2004
2005
Exotic Forbs
% Cover
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
UNTREATED
TREATED
Year
2004
2005
Exotic Graminoids
% Cover
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Year
2004
2005
Forbs
% Cover
0
10
20
30
40
50
Year
2004
2005
Graminoids
% Cover
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Year
2004
2005
Shrubs
% Cover
0
1
2
3
4
5
Year
2004
2005
Trees
% Cover
0
1
2
3
4
5
 
Figure 2. Percent cover (mean + standard error) of a) exotic forbs b) exotic graminoids c) 
all forbs d) all graminoids e) shrubs and f) tree regeneration < 1.4 m tall for untreated and 
treated sites in 2004 and 2005. 
 
 
 
74

Year
2004
2005
Annual and Biennial Forb
% Cover
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
UNTREATED
TREATED
Year
2004
2005
Perennial Forb
% Cover
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Year
2004
2005
Legume
% Cover
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Year
2004
2005
C3 Graminoid
% Cover
0
2
4
6
8
Year
2004
2005
C4 Graminoid
% Cover
0
1
2
3
4
5
 
a
d
*
*
b
e
*
*
c
 
Figure 3. Percent cover (mean + standard error) of a) annual and biennial forbs b) 
perennial forbs c) legumes d) C4 graminoids and e) C3 graminoids for untreated and 
treated sites in 2004 and 2005. 
 
75

Unthinned
Thinned
Unthinned 
Thinned 
b
a
TPH 
Basal Area 
% Canopy Openness 
Basal Area 
TPH 
% Canopy Openness 
 
Figure 4. Ordinated plant community cover data by treatment using the Bray-Curtis 
distance measure. Vector length indicates strength of correlation. a) 2004 data, stress 
level is 20.33 for a 3-d solution. Treated plots were positively correlated with basal area 
and trees per hectare. Untreated plots were positively correlated with overstory canopy 
openness. b) 2005 data, stress level is 20.58 for a 3-d solution. Treated plots were 
positively correlated with basal area and trees per hectare. Untreated plots were positively 
correlated with overstory canopy openness.
 
76

Chapter 4 
Conclusions and Management Implications 
 
Chapters 2 and 3 included discussion of the individual studies. A brief 
comparison of the two study areas, the White Mountain Apache Tribal lands and the 
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests, is presented here along with future research needs 
and management implications. 
 
Similarities and Differences  
Pre-wildfire management practices reduced fire severity on both the White 
Mountain Apache Tribal lands (WMAT) and the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests (A-
S) (Strom 2005). The main differences in the study designs were that the WMAT study 
included a severity factor based on the ∆NBR map and the A-S study had a paired 
(treated/untreated) design. The untreated areas on the A-S were analogous to the high 
severity sites on the WMAT. Both sites had significantly higher understory plant canopy 
cover on areas that were not treated, which we attributed to a more open canopy structure 
caused by higher tree mortality on high severity burns. The ordinated plant communities 
showed similar relationships between basal area, tree density, and % canopy openness for 
both studies. Species found in untreated and high severity areas were correlated with 
higher canopy openness, while low severity and treated sites had higher basal area and 
tree density. There was no significant difference in plant species richness between 
treatments on either site. Richness was slightly higher in the WMAT study with 151 
species on 5% of plots compared to 138 species on 5% of the plots on the A-S study. 
There was no significant difference in the amount of exotic species cover in either case. 
There were 13 exotic species on the WMAT and 14 on the A-S. However, both sites had 
 
77

plant communities largerly dominated by disturbance-adapted native species, based on 
results from the Indicator Species Analyses.  
 
The seed mixes on each site were composed mostly of native grasses and some 
native forbs as well. Several of the seeded grass species were indicator species of the high 
severity/untreated areas (WMAT/A-S respectively), including Bromus carinatus Hook. & 
Arn. (mountain brome), Elymus trachycaulus (Link) Gould ex Shinners (slender 
wheatgrass), and Pascopyrum smithii (Rydb.) A. Löve (western wheatgrass). On both 
sites, Koeleria macrantha (Ledeb.) J.A. Schultes (prairie Junegrass) was an indicator of 
low severity/treated areas (WMAT/A-S respectively; it was seeded on A-S). The 
Indicator Species Analysis showed similarities between the plant communities on both 
sites. Species that were not seeded, but were indicators of high severity/untreated areas 
included: Ceonothus fendleri Gray (Fendler’s ceanothus), Cirsium wheeleri (Gray) Petrak 
(Wheeler’s thistle), Conyza canadensis (L.) Cronq. (Canadian horseweed), Lotus wrightii 
(Gray) Greene (Wright’s deervetch), and Bahia dissecta (Gray) Britt. (ragleaf bahia) 
(2005 only). C. fendleri resprouts vigorously after fire, and dormant seeds in the seed 
bank are stimulated to germinate by heat (Huffman & Moore, 2004). C. wheeleri, C. 
canadensis, and B. dissecta are disturbance tolerant or dependent on disturbances for 
establishment. L. wrightii was shown to be a dominant species on the La Mesa fire by 
Foxx (1996) and DiTomaso et al. (1999) reported that Lotus spp. increased in response to 
fire. The similarities in plant communities were also due to their proximity to one 
another.   
 
 
78

Management Implications 
 
Given the limited response of exotic species on both studies, these results do not 
have much bearing on managing for exotics. Maintaining an understory with limited or 
no exotics is the best prevention for post-wildfire exotic invasion. Using seed mixes for 
rehabilitation that include only native species is also important for reducing the potential 
for large-scale invasion. However, any seeding practices, whether native or exotic species 
are used, has the potential to introduce a suite of non-seedmix species.  The limited 
response of exotic species is unexpected, as that these lands have been actively managed 
for all of their recent history. The A-S is public land, which is used for recreation, timber, 
and livestock grazing, and has been seeded with exotic species for decades. The WMAT 
lands have been managed in a similar manner, but have less public access for recreational 
purposes. In both cases, however, previous management would lead one to expect that a 
large-scale exotic invasion would occur after a fire of the size and severity of the Rodeo-
Chediski.  
These two companion studies offer insight to the short-term response of 
understory vegetation to a large, severe wildfire. In the future, a long-term portrait of the 
understory will be more useful for determining post-fire management of the understory as 
was done in Foxx (1996). Future data collection is needed to assess the persistence of 
seeded species and early successional plants. In addition, the exotics currently present in 
low cover do have the potential to establish. Bromus tectorum L. (cheatgrass) and 
Cirsium vulgare (Savi) Ten. (bull thistle) are both currently present in very low cover, but 
whether they become established and spread remains to be seen. Other noxious species 
such as Convolvulus arvensis L. (field bindweed) and Onopordum acanthium L. (Scotch 
 
79

thistle), which were found on less than 5% of plots on the WMAT, also have the potential 
to establish and spread over a larger area.  
Overall, the most important lesson learned from the Rodeo-Chediski fire is that 
fuel reduction treatments, including prescribed burning and thinning, result in lower 
severity burns (Strom 2005). The study design on the A-S examined forest structure at 
the stand level. The WMAT study was designed over a larger landscape scale, but the 
two studies show analogous results. If wildfires do continue to increase as projected with 
global warming trends (Westerling et al. 2006), larger expanses of understory will 
become affected. In addition, if the modeling scenarios in Strom & Fulé (in press) do 
come to fruition at a landscape scale, this will have broad implications for the understory. 
As ecosystems shift from Pinus ponderosa P.& C. Lawson (ponderosa pine) dominated 
to shrubfield dominated systems, typical shade-tolerant species may be replaced by other 
functional groups, such as C4 graminoids. Given the current state of southwestern forests, 
this could occur on a vast scale. This creates a conundrum for land managers. Fuel 
reduction treatments are necessary for reducing high severity fire, but at the same time 
such treatments may create disturbances that support a number of invasive exotic species 
(Sieg et al. 2003). Careful monitoring of exotic species populations and planning to avoid 
their spread are needed in concert with fuel reduction treatments.  
 
 
 
80

References 
 
 
DiTomaso, J.M., Kyser, G.B., Hastings, M.S. 1999. Prescribed burning for control of 
yellow starthistle (Centaurea solstitialis) and enhanced native plant diversity. Weed 
Science 47, 233-242. 
Foxx, T.S. 1996. Vegetation succession after the La Mesa fire at Bandelier National 
Monument. In Craig D. Allen (ed). Fire Effects in Southwestern Forests: Proceedings of 
the Second La Mesa Fire Symposium. RM-GTR-286. Fort Collins, CO, USDA Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station.  
Huffman, D.W., Moore, M.M. 2004. Responses of Fendler ceanothus to overstory 
thinning, prescribed fire and drought in an Arizona ponderosa pine forest. Forest Ecology 
and Management 198, 105-115. 
Sieg, C.H., Phillips, B.G., and Moser, L.P. 2003. Exotic Invasive Plants. In P.Friederici 
(ed). Ecological Restoration of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests. Island Press, 
Washington, pp. 251-267. 
Strom, B.A., Fulé, P.Z. in press. Pre-wildfire fuel treatments affect long-term ponderosa 
pine forest dynamics. International Journal of Wildland Fire. 
Strom, B.A. 2005. Pre-fire treatment effects and post-fire forest dynamics on the Rodeo-
Chediski burn area, Arizona. Flagstaff, AZ, Northern Arizona University.   
Westerling, A.L., Hidalgo, H.G., Cayan, D.R., Swetnam, T.W. 2006. Warming and 
earlier spring increase western U.S. forest wildfire activity. Science 313, 940-943. 
 
81

APPENDICES 
 
Appendix i. Species list for White Mountain Apache Tribal lands study 
Species name 
Authority 
Origin 
Growth Habit 
Achillea millefolium 
L. 
 
Forb 
Achnatherum nelsonii 
(Scribn.) Barkworth 
 
Graminoid 
Agropyron desertorum 
(Fish. Ex Link) J.A. Schultes 
Exotic 
Graminoid 
Amaranthus hybridus 
L. 
 
Forb 
Amaranthus powellii 
S. Wats. 
 
Forb 
Ambrosia acanthicarpa 
Hook. 
 
Forb 
Antennaria marginata 
Greene 
 
Forb 
Antennaria parvifolia 
Nutt. 
 
Forb 
Apocynum androsaemifolium 
L. 
 
Shrub 
Arabis sp. 
 
 
Forb 
Arctostaphylos pringlei 
Parry 
 
Shrub 
Arctostaphylos pungens 
Kunth 
 
Shrub 
Arenaria lanuginosa 
(Michx.) Rohrb. 
 
Forb 
Arenaria lanuginosa ssp. saxosa 
(Gray) Maguire 
 
Forb 
Artemisia carruthii 
Wood ex Carruth. 
 
Forb 
Artemisia ludoviciana 
(Nutt.) Keck 
 
Forb 
Astragalus humistratus 
Gray 
 
Forb 
Astragalus sp. 
 
 
Forb 
Astragalus tephrodes 
Gray 
 
Forb 
Bahia dissecta 
(Gray) Britt. 
 
Forb 
Blepharoneuron tricholepis 
(Torr.) Nash 
 
Graminoid 
Bouteloua curtipendula 
(Michx.) Torr. 
 
Graminoid 
Bouteloua gracilis 
(Willd. ex Kunth) Lag. ex Griffiths 
 
Graminoid 
Brickellia grandiflora 
(Hook.) Nutt. 
 
Forb 
Bromus carinatus 
Hook. & Arn. 
 
Graminoid 
Bromus ciliatus 
L. 
 
Graminoid 
Bromus japonicus 
Thunb. ex Murr. 
Exotic 
Graminoid 
Bromus tectorum 
L. 
Exotic 
Graminoid 
Calliandra humilis 
Benth. 
 
Forb 
Carex sp. 
 
 
Graminoid 
Carex geophila 
Mack. 
 
Graminoid 
Castilleja sp. 
 
 
Forb 
Ceanothus fendleri 
Gray 
 
Shrub 
Cercocarpus montanus 
Raf. 
 
Shrub 
Chaetopappa ericoides 
(Torr.) Nesom 
 
Forb 
Chamaesyce fendleri 
(Torr. & Gray) Small 
 
Forb 
Chenopodium album 
L. 
Exotic 
Forb 
Chenopodium graveolens 
Willd. 
 
Forb 
Chenopodium sp. 
L. 
 
Forb 
Cirsium vulgare 
(Savi) Ten 
Exotic 
Forb 
Cirsium wheeleri 
(Gray) Petrak 
 
Forb 
Cologania angustifolia 
Kunth 
 
Forb 
Commelina dianthifolia 
Delile 
 
Forb 
Comandra umbellata 
(L.) Nutt. 
 
Forb 
Conyza canadensis 
(L.) Cronq. 
 
Forb 
Coreopsis tinctoria 
Nutt. 
 
Forb 
Cordylanthus wrightii 
Gray 
 
Forb 
Cyperus sp. 
 
 
Graminoid 
Cyperus fendlerianus 
Boeckl. 
 
Graminoid 
Dactylis glomerata 
L. 
Exotic 
Graminoid 
Dalea albiflora 
Gray 
 
Forb 
 
82

Species name 
Authority 
Origin 
Growth Habit 
Dalea candida 
Willd. 
 
Forb 
Desmodium grahamii 
Gray 
 
Forb 
Dyssodia papposa 
(Vent.) A.S. Hitchc. 
 
Forb 
Elymus elymoides 
(Raf.) Swezey 
 
Graminoid 
Elymus trachycaulus 
(Link) Gould ex Shinners 
 
Graminoid 
Epilobium brachycarpum 
K. Presl. 
 
Forb 
Eriogonum alatum 
Torr. 
 
Forb 
Erigeron colomexicanus 
A. Nels. 
 
Forb 
Erigeron divergens 
Torr. & Gray 
 
Forb 
Erigeron flagellaris 
Gray 
 
Forb 
Erigeron neomexicanus 
Gray 
 
Forb 
Eriogonum racemosum 
Nutt. 
 
Forb 
Erigeron speciosus 
(Lindl.) DC. 
 
Forb 
Frasera speciosa 
Dougl. ex Griseb. 
 
Forb 
Geranium caespitosum 
James 
 
Forb 
Hedeoma hyssopifolia 
Gray 
 
Forb 
Heliomeris multiflora 
Nutt. 
 
Forb 
Heterotheca villosa 
(Pursh) Shinners 
 
Forb 
Hieracium fendleri 
Schultz-Bip. 
 
Forb 
Houstonia wrightii 
Gray 
 
Forb 
Hymenoxys bigelovii 
(Gray) Parker 
 
Forb 
Hymenopappus filifolius 
Hook. 
 
Forb 
Hymenopappus mexicanus 
Gray 
 
Forb 
Ipomopsis aggregata 
(Pursh) V. Grant 
 
Forb 
Ipomoea costellata 
Torr. 
 
Forb 
Juniperus deppeana 
Steud. 
 
Tree 
Koeleria macrantha 
(Ledeb.) J.A. Schultes 
 
Graminoid 
Lactuca serriola 
L. 
Exotic 
Forb 
Lathyrus laetivirens 
Greene ex Rydb. 
 
Forb 
Lathyrus lanszwertii  var. leucanthus 
(Rydb.) Dorn 
 
Forb 
Lepidium densiflorum 
Schrad. 
 
Forb 
Linum aristatum 
Engelm. 
 
Forb 
Linum lewisii  var. lewisii 
Pursh 
 
Forb 
Linum neomexicanum 
Greene 
 
Forb 
Lithospermum incisum 
Lehm. 
 
Forb 
Lithospermum multiflorum 
Torr. ex Gray 
 
Forb 
Lotus wrightii 
(Gray) Greene 
 
Forb 
Lupinus argenteus 
Pursh 
 
Forb 
Machaeranthera canescens 
(Pursh) Gray 
 
Forb 
Mahonia repens 
(Lindl.) G. Don 
 
Shrub 
Medicago lupulina 
L. 
Exotic 
Forb 
Mirabilis decipiens 
(Standl.) Standl. 
 
Forb 
Muhlenbergia longiligula 
A.S. Hitchc. 
 
Graminoid 
Muhlenbergia minutissima 
(Steud.) Swallen 
 
Graminoid 
Muhlenbergia montana 
(Nutt.) A.S. Hitchc. 
 
Graminoid 
Muhlenbergia virescens 
(Kunth) Kunth 
 
Graminoid 
Nassella viridula 
(Trin.) Barkworth 
 
Graminoid 
Oenothera elata 
Kunth` 
 
Forb 
Oenothera pubescens 
Willd. ex Spreng. 
 
Forb 
Opuntia sp. 
 
 
Cactus 
Packera neomexicana 
(Gray) W.A. Weber & A. Love 
 
Forb 
Panicum bulbosum 
Kunth 
 
Graminoid 
Pascopyrum smithii 
(Rydb.) A. Love 
 
Graminoid 
Pedicularis centranthera 
Gray 
 
Forb 
Penstemon barbatus 
(Cav.) Roth 
 
Forb 
 
83

Species name 
Authority 
Origin 
Growth Habit 
Penstemon linarioides 
Gray 
 
Forb 
Pennellia longifolia 
(Benth.) Rollins 
 
Forb 
Penstemon virgatus 
Gray 
 
Forb 
Phaseolus angustissimus 
Gray 
 
Forb 
Phaseolus grayanus 
Woot. & Standl. 
 
Forb 
Phlox gracilis 
(Hook.) Greene 
 
Forb 
Pinus ponderosa 
P. & C. Lawson 
 
Tree 
Piptochaetium pringlei 
(Beal) Parodi 
 
Graminoid 
Poa fendleriana 
(Steud.) Vasey 
 
Graminoid 
Polygonum aviculare 
L. 
Exotic 
Forb 
Polygonum douglasii 
Greene 
 
Forb 
Portulaca oleracea 
L. 
 
Forb 
Pseudognaphalium macounii 
(Greene) Kartesz 
 
Forb 
Pseudotsuga menziesii 
(Mirb.) 
 
Tree 
Pseudocymopterus montanus 
(Gray) Coult. & Rose 
 
Forb 
Quercus gambelii 
Nutt. 
 
Tree 
Quercus grisea 
Liebm. 
 
Shrub 
Quercus turbinella 
Greene 
 
Shrub 
Rhus glabra 
L. 
 
Tree 
Rhus trilobata 
Nutt. 
 
Shrub 
Robinia neomexicana 
Gray 
 
Tree 
Rosa woodsii 
Lindl. 
 
Shrub 
Rubus idaeus 
(Michx.) Focke 
 
Shrub 
Rudbeckia hirta 
L. 
 
Forb 
Schoenocrambe linearifolia 
(Gray) Rollins 
 
Forb 
Schizachyrium scoparium 
(Michx.) Nash 
 
Graminoid 
Senecio wootonii 
Greene 
 
Forb 
Silene antirrhina 
L. 
 
Forb 
Silene laciniata 
Cav. 
 
Forb 
Solidago sp. 
L. 
 
Forb 
Sporobolus compositus 
(Poir.) Merr. 
 
Graminoid 
Sporobolus cryptandrus 
(Torr.) Gray 
 
Graminoid 
Sporobolus interruptus 
Vasey 
 
Graminoid 
Symphyotrichum falcatum 
Lindl. 
 
Forb 
Taraxacum officinale 
G.H.Weber ex Wiggers 
Exotic 
Forb 
Thalictrum fendleri 
Engelm. ex Gray 
 
Forb 
Thermopsis montana var. montana 
Nutt. 
 
Forb 
Thlaspi montanum 
L. 
 
Forb 
Townsendia exscapa 
(Richards.) Porter 
 
Forb 
Tragopogon dubius 
Scop. 
Exotic 
Forb 
Tradescantia pinetorum 
Greene 
 
Forb 
Triticum aestivum 
L. 
Exotic 
Graminoid 
Verbascum thapsus 
L. 
Exotic 
Forb 
Vicia pulchella 
Kunth 
 
Forb 
Wyethia arizonica 
Gray 
 
Forb 
 
 
 
 
 
 
84

Appendix ii. Species list for Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests study. 
Species name 
Authority 
Origin 
Growth Habit 
Achillea millefolium 
L. 
 
Forb 
Amaranthus hybridus 
L. 
 
Forb 
Antennaria parvifolia 
Nutt. 
 
Forb 
Arctostaphylos pringlei 
Parry 
 
Shrub 
Arctostaphylos pungens 
Kunth 
 
Shrub 
Arenaria lanuginosa 
(Michx.) Rohrb. 
 
Forb 
Arenaria lanuginosa ssp. saxosa 
(Gray) Maguire 
 
Forb 
Aristida arizonica 
Vasey 
 
Graminoid 
Artemisia carruthii 
Wood ex Carruth. 
 
Forb 
Artemisia ludoviciana 
(Nutt.) Keck 
 
Forb 
Astragalus humistratus 
Gray 
 
Forb 
Astragalus sp. 
 
 
Forb 
Astragalus tephrodes 
Gray 
 
Forb 
Bahia dissecta 
(Gray) Britt. 
 
Forb 
Blepharoneuron tricholepis 
(Torr.) Nash 
 
Graminoid 
Bouteloua curtipendula 
(Michx.) Torr. 
 
Graminoid 
Bouteloua gracilis 
(Willd. ex Kunth) Lag. ex Griffiths 
 
Graminoid 
Bromus carinatus 
Hook. & Arn. 
 
Graminoid 
Bromus inermis 
Leyss. 
Exotic 
Graminoid 
Bromus japonicus 
Thunb. ex Murr. 
Exotic 
Graminoid 
Bromus tectorum 
L. 
Exotic 
Graminoid 
Calliandra humilis 
Benth. 
 
Forb 
Carex sp. 
 
 
Graminoid 
Carex geophila 
Mack. 
 
Graminoid 
Castilleja sp. 
 
 
Forb 
Ceanothus fendleri 
Gray 
 
Shrub 
Chaetopappa ericoides 
(Torr.) Nesom 
 
Forb 
Chamaesyce fendleri 
(Torr. & Gray) Small 
 
Forb 
Chenopodium album 
L. 
Exotic 
Forb 
Chenopodium graveolens 
Willd. 
 
Forb 
Chenopodium leptophyllum 
(Moq.) Nutt. ex S. Wats. 
 
Forb 
Chenopodium sp. 
L. 
 
Forb 
Cirsium vulgare 
(Savi) Ten 
Exotic 
Forb 
Cirsium wheeleri 
(Gray) Petrak 
 
Forb 
Cologania angustifolia 
Kunth 
 
Forb 
Commelina dianthifolia 
Delile 
 
Forb 
Comandra umbellata 
(L.) Nutt. 
 
Forb 
Conyza canadensis 
(L.) Cronq. 
 
Forb 
Cyperus fendlerianus 
Boeckl. 
 
Graminoid 
Dalea albiflora 
Gray 
 
Forb 
Dalea candida 
Willd. 
 
Forb 
Desmanthus cooleyi 
(Eat.) Trel. 
 
Forb 
Dichanthelium oligosanthes 
(J. A. Schultes) Gould 
 
Graminoid 
Drymaria leptophylla 
(Cham. & Schlecht.) Fenzl ex 
Rohrb. 
 
Forb 
Echeandia flavescens 
(J.A. & J.H. Schultes) Cruden 
 
Forb 
Elymus elymoides 
(Raf.) Swezey 
 
Graminoid 
Elymus trachycaulus 
(Link) Gould ex Shinners 
 
Graminoid 
Epilobium brachycarpum 
K. Presl. 
 
Forb 
Eragrostis pectinacea var. 
pectinacea 
(Michx.) Nees ex Steud 
 
Graminoid 
Eriogonum alatum 
Torr. 
 
Forb 
Erigeron colomexicanus 
A. Nels. 
 
Forb 
 
85

Species name 
Authority 
Origin 
Growth Habit 
Erigeron divergens 
Torr. & Gray 
 
Forb 
Erigeron flagellaris 
Gray 
 
Forb 
Erigeron neomexicanus 
Gray 
 
Forb 
Eriogonum racemosum 
Nutt. 
 
Forb 
Erodium cicutarium 
(L.) L'Her. ex Ait. 
Exotic 
Forb 
Gayophytum diffusum 
Torr. & Gray 
 
Forb 
Geranium caespitosum 
James 
 
Forb 
Gutierrezia sarothrae 
(Pursh) Britt. & Rusby 
 
Shrub 
Hedeoma hyssopifolia 
Gray 
 
Forb 
Helianthus annuus 
L. 
 
Forb 
Heliomeris multiflora 
Nutt. 
 
Forb 
Heterotheca villosa 
(Pursh) Shinners 
 
Forb 
Hieracium fendleri 
Schultz-Bip. 
 
Forb 
Hordeum jubatum 
L. 
 
Graminoid 
Houstonia wrightii 
Gray 
 
Forb 
Hymenoxys bigelovii 
(Gray) Parker 
 
Forb 
Hymenopappus filifolius 
Hook. 
 
Forb 
Hymenopappus mexicanus 
Gray 
 
Forb 
Hymenothrix writghtii 
Gray 
 
Forb 
Ipomoea costellata 
Torr. 
 
Forb 
Ipomopsis multiflora 
(Nutt.) V. Grant 
 
Forb 
Juniperus deppeana 
Steud. 
 
Tree 
Koeleria macrantha 
(Ledeb.) J.A. Schultes 
 
Graminoid 
Lactuca serriola 
L. 
Exotic 
Forb 
Lactuca  tatarica 
(L.) C.A. Mey. 
 
Forb 
Lathyrus laetivirens 
Greene ex Rydb. 
 
Forb 
Lepidium densiflorum 
Schrad. 
 
Forb 
Linum neomexicanum 
Greene 
 
Forb 
Lolium perenne ssp. perenne 
L. 
Exotic 
Graminoid 
Lotus wrightii 
(Gray) Greene 
 
Forb 
Lupinus argenteus 
Pursh 
 
Forb 
Machaeranthera gracilis 
(Nutt.) Shinners 
 
Forb 
Mirabilis decipiens 
(Standl.) Standl. 
 
Forb 
Muhlenbergia longiligula 
A.S. Hitchc. 
 
Graminoid 
Muhlenbergia minutissima 
(Steud.) Swallen 
 
Graminoid 
Muhlenbergia montana 
(Nutt.) A.S. Hitchc. 
 
Graminoid 
Muhlenbergia virescens 
(Kunth) Kunth 
 
Graminoid 
Muhlenbergia wrightii 
Vasey ex Coult. 
 
Graminoid 
Nicotiana attenuata 
Torr. ex S. Wats. 
 
Forb 
Oenothera pubescens 
Willd. ex Spreng. 
 
Forb 
Opuntia sp. 
 
 
Cactus 
Packera neomexicana 
(Gray) W.A. Weber & A. Love 
 
Forb 
Pascopyrum smithii 
(Rydb.) A. Love 
 
Graminoid 
Pedicularis centranthera 
Gray 
 
Forb 
Penstemon barbatus 
(Cav.) Roth 
 
Forb 
Penstemon linarioides 
Gray 
 
Forb 
Pennellia longifolia 
(Benth.) Rollins 
 
Forb 
Penstemon virgatus 
Gray 
 
Forb 
Phaseolus angustissimus 
Gray 
 
Forb 
Phlox gracilis 
(Hook.) Greene 
 
Forb 
Phlox longifolia 
Nutt. 
 
Forb 
Pinus ponderosa 
P. & C. Lawson 
 
Tree 
Plantago argyraea 
Morris 
 
Forb 
Poa compressa 
L. 
Exotic 
Graminoid 
Poa fendleriana 
(Steud.) Vasey 
 
Graminoid 
 
86

Species name 
Authority 
Origin 
Growth Habit 
Poa pratensis 
L. 
Exotic 
Graminoid 
Polygonum douglasii 
Greene 
 
Forb 
Portulaca oleracea 
L. 
 
Forb 
Pseudognaphalium macounii 
(Greene) Kartesz 
 
Forb 
Pseudocymopterus montanus 
(Gray) Coult. & Rose 
 
Forb 
Psoralidium lanceolatum 
(Pursh.) Rydb. 
 
Forb 
Psoralidium tenuiflorum 
(Pursh.) Rydb. 
 
Forb 
Quercus gambelii 
Nutt. 
 
Tree 
Quercus grisea 
Liebm. 
 
Shrub 
Quercus turbinella 
Greene 
 
Shrub 
Robinia neomexicana 
Gray 
 
Tree 
Schoenocrambe linearifolia 
(Gray) Rollins 
 
Forb 
Schizachyrium scoparium 
(Michx.) Nash 
 
Graminoid 
Senecio flaccidus 
Less. 
 
Forb 
Silene antirrhina 
L. 
 
Forb 
Silene laciniata 
Cav. 
 
Forb 
Solidago sp. 
L. 
 
Forb 
Sporobolus cryptandrus 
(Torr.) Gray 
 
Graminoid 
Sporobolus interruptus 
Vasey 
 
Graminoid 
Symphyotrichum falcatum 
Lindl. 
 
Forb 
Taraxacum officinale 
G.H.Weber ex Wiggers 
Exotic 
Forb 
Thelesperma megapotamicum 
(Spreng.) Kuntze 
 
Forb 
Thlaspi montanum 
L. 
 
Forb 
Townsendia exscapa 
(Richards.) Porter 
 
Forb 
Tragopogon dubius 
Scop. 
Exotic 
Forb 
Tradescantia pinetorum 
Greene 
 
Forb 
Triticum aestivum 
L. 
Exotic 
Graminoid 
Verbascum thapsus 
L. 
Exotic 
Forb 
Vicia americana 
Muhl. ex Willd. 
 
Forb 
Vulpia octoflora 
(Walt.) Rydb. 
 
Graminoid 
Wyethia arizonica 
Gray 
 
Forb 
Yucca angustissima 
Engelm. ex Trel. 
 
Shrub 
 
 
 
 
 
 
87
