17
Ecological Restoration Institute
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
www.eri.nau.edu
Working Papers in Southwestern 
Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
Bat Habitat and Forest
Restoration Treatments
January 2007 

Working Papers in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native
species, structural characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological Restoration
International defines ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates
the recovery of an ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability….Restoration
attempts to return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration
International Science & Policy Working Group 2004).
In the southwestern United States, most ponderosa pine forests have been degraded during the last
150 years. Many ponderosa pine areas are now dominated by dense thickets of small trees, and
lack their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly
susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing fires and increased insect and disease epidemics.
Restoration of these forests centers on reintroducing frequent, low-intensity surface fires—often
after thinning dense stands—and reestablishing productive understory plant communities.
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching,
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. By
allowing natural processes, such as fire, to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish
healthy forests that provide ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The ERI Working Papers series presents findings and management recommendations from
research and observations by the ERI and its partner organizations. While the ERI staff recognizes
that every restoration project needs to be site specific, we feel that the information provided in the
Working Papers may help restoration practitioners elsewhere.
This publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Service.
The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be
interpreted as representing the opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of
trade names or commercial products does not constitute their endorsement by the United States
Government.
Cover photo: A silver-haired bat (Lasionycteris noctivagans) echolocating as it flies among ponderosa
pines in northern Arizona. The process of echolocating requires bats to fly with their mouths open in
order to transmit the reflected audible signals they use to determine the location of trees and other
objects, including prey. 
Photo by Bruce D. Taubert

Bat Habitat and Forest Restoration Treatments
Introduction
Northern Arizona is home to at least 20 species of bats—or
two-thirds of the bat species found in the state (Cockburn
1960, Hinman and Snow 2003). Only a couple of these species
live exclusively in ponderosa pine forests while the rest inhabit
a variety of ecosystem types from desert scrub to pinyon-
juniper to ponderosa pine-Gambel oak and mixed conifer
(Arizona Game and Fish Department 1996, Hinman and
Snow 2003). Bats are an important part of the forest ecology
of northern Arizona because they prey on insects such as
midges, moths, beetles, flies, mosquitoes, termites, and ants.
They typically roost in the cavities of live trees and snags,
under loose tree bark, in tree stumps and logs, in rock
crevices, or in caves.
As the new era of ecologically restoring forest ecosystems in
the Southwest moves from experiments to full
implementation, the question arises: What effects will
restoration treatments have on forest wildlife, including often
forgotten or poorly understood animal groups, such as bats?
Thinning, for instance, might remove snags where bats roost,
and burning could inadvertently destroy or alter such
roosting sites. While it’s true that fire will create new snags,
given the present forest conditions, they will be younger,
smaller-diameter snags that are more susceptible to fire, and
not the 27-inch-plus-diameter snags bats most often use.
In this working paper, we look at research and studies that
provide some recommendations about ways to maintain bat
habitat while restoring forest tree health and vitality.
Bats and Restoration Treatments
Early research results indicate that treatments designed to
restore the health of crowded, fire-deficient ponderosa pine
forests may be beneficial to bats. Shelly Johnson, a graduate
student working with Professor Carol Chambers at the
Northern Arizona University School of Forestry, has been
recording bat calls in three thinning treatments at the Fort
Valley Experimental Forest near Flagstaff, where seven of
Arizona’s bat species are known to live. The treatments consist
of heavily thinned plots (57 trees/acre), moderately thinned
plots (69 trees/acre), lightly thinned plots (98 trees/acre), and
untreated plots (480 trees/acre).
Their preliminary results are showing trends that indicate bats
seem to exhibit more activity in the treated plots than the
untreated plots, although the researchers cannot say which
species of bats they are recording. Johnson and Chambers say
they need more data before they call the present trends
conclusive, and they want to be sure that the low number of
calls in the control areas are due to reduced bat activity and
are not the result of acoustic interference from dense tree
canopies.
Ben Solvesky, who is also working with Professor Chambers,
has been surveying bat roosts in the ponderosa pine forests
south of Flagstaff. He found that maternity colonies of
roosting bats used relatively tall and large diameter snags with
loose bark.
Michael Herder, a
bat expert with the
Bureau of Land
Management,
obtained similar
results when he
studied bat roost
site preferences in
pine and oak snags
in restored areas of
Mount Trumbull in
northern Arizona
(Herder and Jackson
1999). He and his colleagues captured more than 900 bats of
13 different species with long-legged myotis (Myotis volans),
fringed myotis (M. thysanodes), and big brown bat (Eptesicus
fuscus) being the most abundant species. They also located 45
roost sites using radio telemetry tracking methods. Of these,
40 day roosts of long-legged myotis were located in ponderosa
pine snags. Roost snags used by long-legged myotis shared
several characteristics including being large (28-inch dbh) and
tall (70 feet) with large fissures and/or loose bark, and
occurring within 1.5 miles from a water source—often in
close proximity to a natural drainage. Given his findings,
Herder suggests leaving all snags in ecological restoration
treatment areas.
Importance of Forest Roost Sites
Research points to roost sites as key habitats for bats because
bats spend more than half their lives roosting (Kunz and
Pierson 1994). Roosts provide a place for bats to raise their
young and they shelter bats from the elements and predators.
Roosts also contain microclimates suited to bats and typically
occur near foraging areas and water (Hinman and Snow
2003).
Bat researchers have also observed that tree-roosting species,
such as silver-haired bats (Lasionycteris noctivagans), fringed
myotis, big brown bats, Arizona myotis (Myotis occultus) and
Yuma myotis (Myotis yumanensis), tend to switch maternity
roost sites throughout the year. This behavior may be a way to
avoid predators or a response to unfavorable conditions in the
roost. Since a maternity colony may require multiple roosts
for raising young each summer, managers should recognize
that estimates of snags needed for birds may be insufficient
for bat populations (Hinman and Snow 2003).
While more research needs to be done, some researchers have
found that maternity roosts tend to occur where there are
clusters of large ponderosa pine snags or Gambel oaks with
internal cavities (Rabe et al. 1998, Hinman and Snow 2003,
Bernardos et al. 2004). This suggests that female tree-roosting
bats may seek out clusters of appropriate trees in order to save
energy, protect their young, and aid their roost-switching
tendencies.
Given the importance of bat roosts, both Herder and
Chambers caution that any restoration treatment should
maintain adequate numbers of snags because these are the
sites where females raise their young.
1
a
Ecological Restoration Institute
long-legged myotis

Foraging Habitat 
Bats in northern Arizona are insectivorous, which means that
the type and availability of prey may change dramatically
between seasons or habitat types. Insectivorous bats typically
feed at the edges of forests or within opening in forested areas
(Hinman and Snow 2003). Researchers know that bats are
relatively loyal to foraging sites and they suspect that dramatic
changes to such sites, such as clearing and fire, may affect bat
foraging behavior. Unfortunately, we do not know enough the
relationship between foraging area and bat requirements to
provide management recommendations.
Water Features
Water features are very important to bats because they
provide drinking water and excellent foraging habitat. The
usefulness of a water feature to bats depends on its
accessibility, how long and when it holds water, the
surrounding vegetation, and its location in terms of the other
two major habitat components—roosting sites and forage
habitat.
Recommendations
These findings suggest the following consideration for bats
when developing a restoration treatment for a forested
landscape in the Southwest:
•
Leave as many tall, large-diameter snags as possible. In
general, the larger the snag the better, although a variety
of decay classes should be kept to accommodate different
species of bats (see ERI Working Paper 16 for
information about snags and decay classes).
•
Optimum minimum size for ponderosa pine roost snags
is 26 inches dbh and 70 feet tall. For Gambel oak, snags
should have internal cavities and be at least 10 inches in
diameter (Bernardos et al. 2004).
•
Preserve clumps of large-diameter ponderosa pine snags
or groups of large oaks.
•
Snags along draws that lead to water or snags near bodies
of water should be considered a high priority because
bats tend to select roosts that are close to water features
since they are excellent foraging habitat.
•
Preserve water features such as lakes, streams, wildlife
drinkers, springs, livestock tanks, and ponds. Keep
artificial water features full during droughty periods and
keep all water features clear of anything (e.g., fencing)
that would impede clear flight paths for bats (Tuttle et al.
2006).
•
Save any snags that have evidence of use by bats (roosts
and guano droppings).
•
Replace snags and roost trees lost through prescribed fire
or logging whenever possible by installing artificial
roosts, if necessary.
•
Be aware that spraying pesticides for moths or beetles
can negatively affect the distribution of insects that serve
as prey for bats (Hinman and Snow 2003). Seek and use
alternatives to pesticides whenever possible.
•
Maintain forest edges and openings within stands as
foraging habitats for insectivorous bat species.
•
Make sure there is a continuous supply of large
ponderosa pine or oak that will provide bat habitat. A
monoculture of small trees is not likely to contain
adequate snags for bats now or in the future.
Artificial Roosts 
Artificial roosts are a viable alternative to natural snags,
especially for situations where fire has destroyed natural
snags. In such cases, artificial roost sites can provide
temporary shelter for some species until natural roosts
develop. Michael Rabe, of the Arizona Game and Fish
Department, and his colleagues have seen bats switch roosts,
especially after rains, which Rabe believes may indicate a need
for more roosts than are naturally available.
Experiments involving artificial roosts attached to tree trunks
have revealed that bats do use such roosts when they are
available (Rabe et al. 1998, Chambers et al. 2002). Chambers
and her colleagues (2002) showed that bats will use artificial
bat roosts made of either fiberglass resin or wood. The resin
roosts made by Wesco Enterprises cost $51 apiece (plus $250
or $300 for the construction of a casting mold) and can last
indefinitely with annual maintenance (re-caulking the top
and sides of the roost). The company can fashion and paint
the roosts to look like any tree species, if provided with a tree
bark sample. Wooden roosts are significantly cheaper—about
$5 apiece—but deteriorate more quickly and are more visible.
Valerie Horncastle, a researcher with the Arizona Game and
Fish Department, found in the first two years of an ongoing
study that bats regularly use south-, southwest- and east-
facing bat boxes, but rarely use boxes that face north. As for
the appearance of artificial wooden roosts, Horncastle reports
that plywood designs stained lighter than their host trees have
received just as much use by bats as boxes painted to match
Bat Habitat and Forest Restoration Treatments
a
Ecological Restoration Institute
2
Artificial roosts, such as
this one made of
fiberglass, can provide
habitat for bats. They can
be used when snags and
other roosts sites are
limited, but should not be
used to simply replace
natural roosting sites. 
Photo by Carol Chambers
Bats will also use wooden
bat houses like this one.
There are many designs
available. 
Photo by Carol Chambers

Bat Habitat and Forest Restoration Treatments a
Ecological Restoration Institute
3
trees. Chambers agrees that bats don’t seem to favor
camouflaged bat boxes, but she continues to paint them in
order to discourage vandalism by people. Both researchers
have been placing artificial roosts more than 7 feet off the
ground, and they suggest placing artificial roosts 7-50 feet
above the ground for best results.
Additional Management and 
Conservation Considerations 
Bats are sometimes overlooked in conservation planning
efforts because they are difficult to observe and study. For
example, it may be hard to determine a species’ overall
geographic range because many species are patchily
distributed due to specialized habitat requirements (although
see Hinman and Snow 2003 for species range maps in
Arizona). In addition, seasonal distributions of many bat
species differ greatly throughout the year, and we know very
little about the seasonal habitat shifts of most North
American bat species. To offset this lack of knowledge,
conservation strategies should include both summer and
winter habitat, and should incorporate diverse features that
support the multiple roost requirements of many forest bat
species.
Prior to any forest restoration effort, consider hiring a bat
expert or a university student interested in studying bats to
survey bat populations in your locale. Such surveys can
provide valuable information that will inform your
restoration and/or conservation decisions.
On the Web
Arizona Game and Fish Bat Conservation and Management
www.gf.state.az.us/w_c/bat_conservation.shtml
Bat Conservation International
www.batcon.org/home/default.asp
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service bat information
www.fws.gov/endangered/bats/links.htm
Bat Conservation and Management
www.batmanagement.com
Organization for Bat Conservation
www.batconservation.org
Sources for Artificial Roosts
Wesco Enterprises
3235 Monier Circle #1,
Rancho Cordova, CA 95742 
(916) 635-1270
Bat Conservation and Management
www.batmanagement.com/Ordering/batboxes/housemanual.pdf
References
Arizona Game and Fish Department. 1996. Mammal Diversity
Review Notes.
Bernardos, D.A. 2001. Use of ponderosa pine-Gambel oak
forests by bats in northern Arizona. Master’s thesis.
School of Forestry, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff.
Bernardos, D.A., C.L. Chambers, and M.L. Rabe. 2004.
Selection of Gambel oak roosts by southwestern myotis in
ponderosa pine-dominated forests, northern Arizona.
Journal of Wildlife Management 68(3):595-601.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2002. Rabies:
Epidemeology. http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dvrd/rabies/
Epidemiology/Epidemiology.htm.
Chambers, C.L., V. Alm, M.S. Siders and M.J. Rabe. 2002. Use
of artificial roosts by forest-dwelling bats in northern
Arizona. Wildlife Society Bulletin 30(4):1085-1091.
Cockburn, E.L. 1960. Order Chiroptera: Bats. Pp. 31-66 in The
recent mammals of Arizona: Their taxonomy and
distribution. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
Herder, M. 2000. Managing deadwood for bat habitat.
Resource Notes No. 17. National Applied Resources Science
Center.
Herder, M. and J.G. Jackson. 1999. Characteristics of
ponderosa pine snags selected as roosts by long-legged
Myotis bats, Myotis volans. In Proceedings of the ecology
and management of dead wood in western forests.
November 2-3, 1999 Reno, Nevada.
Hinman, K.E. and T.K. Snow, eds. 2003. Arizona bat
conservation strategic plan. Technical Report 213.
Nongame and Endangered Wildlife Program, Arizona
Game and Fish Department.
http://www.gf.state.az.us/pdfs/w_c/bat/NGTR%20213%20
-%20Arizona%20Bat%20Conservation%20Strategic%20
Plan.pdf.
Kunz, T.H., and E.D. Pierson. 1994. Bats of the world: An
introduction. Pp. 1-46 in R.W. Nowak, Walker's bats of
the world. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Nagorsen, D.W. and R.M. Brigham. 1993. Bats of British
Columbia. Vancouver: University of British Columbia
Press.
Rabe, M.J., T.E. Morrell, H. Green, J.C. Devos, and C.R. Miller.
1998. Characteristics of ponderosa pine snag roosts used
by reproductive bats in northern Arizona. Journal of
Wildlife Management 62(2):612-621.
Tuttle, S.R., C.L. Chambers, and T.C. Theimer. 2006. Potential
effects of livestock water-trough modifications on bats in
northern Arizona. Wildlife Society Bulletin 34(3):602-608.

Bat Habitat and Forest Restoration Treatments
a
4
Ecological Restoration Institute
Bats and Rabies
Given that wildlife biologists are only now beginning to
understand the ecology of bats, it’s no wonder that the
general public harbors various misconceptions about these
animals. One such misunderstanding is that all bats are
rabid. In fact, only a very small percentage (0.1-0.5%) of
the wild bat population is infected with rabies (Nagorsen
and Brigham 1993), and the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (2002) attributes only 1.3 deaths per year
to rabid bats. This is not to downplay the serious nature of
rabies, which is a potentially fatal viral disease that affects
the nervous systems of humans and other mammals, but
the chances of someone dying from a rabid bat are
extremely low when compared to deaths from other
carriers of rabies (especially dogs and cats).
Of course, people working in forests or other outdoor
environments may encounter bats on a more regular basis
than the general public. They should keep the following in
mind about bats and bat-related diseases:
•
Never handle any bats unless you are wearing leather
gloves.
•
Have yourself vaccinated, as needed, for protection
against rabid animals.
•
Seek immediate medical help if you are bitten and
have not been vaccinated; try and capture the rabid
bat and send it to a laboratory for rabies testing.
•
Bats normally bite only in self defense; aggressive
behavior is rare even in rabid bats.
•
Provide educational materials about bats to visitors to
natural areas; emphasize that visitors should not
handle or touch any wild animals they might find,
including bats.
•
Bats do not transmit the West Nile Virus even though
they eat mosquitoes that do spread the disease.
•
Histoplasmosis, an airborne fungal disease related to
bats and bat guano, is relatively rare in the arid
climate of northern Arizona.
For more information about bats and rabies consult the
following web sites:
Bat Conservation International
http://www.batcon.org/home/index.asp?idPage=91&idSub
Page=62
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dvrd/rabies/bats_&_rabies/
bats&.htm
Bats Found in Northern Arizona Forests
Forest obligates
Silver-haired bat (Lasionycteris noctivagans) 
Western red bat (Lasiurus blossevillii)
Hoary bat (Lasiurus cinereus)
Forest common
Big brown bat (Eptesicus fuscus)
Southwestern myotis (Myotis auriculus)
California myotis (Myotis californicus)
Western small-footed myotis (Myotis ciliolabrum)
Long-eared myotis (Myotis evotis)
Arizona myotis (Myotis occultus)
Fringed myotis (Myotis thysanodes)
Long-legged myotis (Myotis volans)
Yuma myotis (Myotis yumanensis)
Forest occasional
Pallid bat (Antrozous pallidus pallidus)
Townsend’s big-eared bat (Corynorhinus townsendii)
Spotted bat (Euderma maculatum)
Greater western mastiff (Eumops perotis californicus)
Allen’s lappet-browed bat (Idionycteris phyllotis)
Big free-tailed bat (Nyctinomops macrotis)
Western pipistrelle (Pipistrellus hesperus)
Mexican free-tail bat (Tadarida brasiliensis mexicana)  
Arizona myotis

Written by Anne Minard and Dave Egan
Bat photographs: Bruce D. Taubert
Other photographs: Carol Chambers
Reviewed by Carol Chambers and Angela McIntire
Series Editor: Dave Egan   
For more information about forest restoration,
contact the ERI at 928-523-7182 or www.eri.nau.edu
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution   
NAU Printing Services/G62334/1M/02-07
Working Papers in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
1: Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons and Adaptive Management Practices
2: Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3: Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
4: Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits
5: Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
6: Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
7: Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
8: Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
9: Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
10: The Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Restoration Model
11: Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration
12: Restoring Forest Roads
13: Treating Slash after Restoration Thinning
14: Integrating Forest Restoration Treatments with Mexican Spotted Owl Habitat Needs
15: Effects of Forest Thinning Treatments on Fire Behavior
16: Snags and Forest Restoration  

Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
ERITA44
