A
sk a forester what he or she thinks 
of diameter caps—prohibitions 
on cutting trees larger than a 
given dbh—and you’ll probably get a 
thoughtful response that concludes with 
“but as a forester, it’s like tying one of my 
hands behind my back,” or words to that 
effect. Nonetheless, diameter caps are of-
ten proposed by individuals and groups 
concerned about retaining large mature 
and old-growth timber and associated 
wildlife habitat. Since 1994, for exam-
ple, the so-called eastside screens have 
prohibited the harvesting of most trees 
Research Matters: How Do Diameter 
Caps Affect Forest Resources?
By Steve Wilent
RESEARCH MATTERS  n  Page 4
Untreated (a.) and post-treatment (b.) ponderosa pine stands in the southwestern United States. The transi-
tion from current to desired condition and the resulting changes in structure, composition, and function are 
the primary goals of landscape-scale collaborative efforts to restore forest ecosystems, such as the Four 
Forests Restoration Initiative in northern Arizona. CREDIT: A.J. Sánchez Meador
a. Current Condition
b. Desired Condition

4
The Forestry Source
21 inches DBH or larger on millions of 
acres of Forest Service land east of the 
Cascade Mountain crest in Oregon and 
Washington.
How do diameter caps affect forest 
health and wildﬁre risk reduction treat-
ments? In an article in the March edition 
of the Journal of Forestry, Andrew J. Sán-
chez Meador, Kristen M. Waring, and 
Elizabeth L. Kalies describe their use of 
computer-based models to provide some 
answers. In the abstract of “Implications 
of Diameter Caps on Multiple Forest Re-
source Responses in the Context of the 
Four Forests Restoration Initiative: Re-
sults from the Forest Vegetation Simula-
tor,” the authors explain that they “used 
the most commonly proposed prescrip-
tion for the Four Forest Restoration Ini-
tiative in northern Arizona to explore 
the implications of diameter caps for 
multiple resource responses through the 
use of model simulations. We found that 
implementing progressively smaller caps 
in southwestern ponderosa pine may 
result in relatively similar live tree den-
sities, canopy cover, and large snag den-
sities, but higher basal areas, mean tree 
size, torching indices, and scenic beauty 
with lower water yield and herbaceous 
production. When diameter-cap scenari-
os are compared, tradeoffs exist, and no 
single metric is suited for overall scenario 
evaluation.”
The Four Forest Restoration Initia-
tive (4FRI) encompasses 2.4 million acres 
on four national forests. The ﬁrst stew-
ardship contract awarded to date calls for 
thinning and fuels-reduction treatments 
on 300,000 acres over 10 years. 4FRI’s 
Large Tree Retention Strategy calls for re-
taining large post-settlement trees greater 
than 16 inches DBH.
I recently spoke with Sánchez 
Meador, the paper’s lead author, about the 
study and its implications for forest man-
agers and stakeholders in the Southwest 
and elsewhere. Meador, an SAF member 
and an assistant professor at Northern 
Arizona University’s School of Forestry, is 
program director of biometrics and forest 
management at the university’s Ecological 
Restoration Institute. 
Why did you pursue this line of inquiry?
The ponderosa pine ecosystem, the 
main ecosystem in the Four Forests Res-
toration Initiative area, historically was 
heterogeneous and contemporarily is 
more homogenous. My dissertation work 
focused on quantifying that spatial pat-
tern, and one of the things I found was 
that if you go out and look at a stand to-
day, you’ll see that the largest youngest 
trees—the trees established after wide-
spread railroad logging, overgrazing, and 
ﬁre suppression—are in the middle of 
the openings that were historically where 
the majority of our species diversity oc-
curred—grasses, forbs, shrubs, and so on. 
That got me thinking about some of the 
nontraditional effects of our treatments. If 
you go into a stand and do fuels reduc-
tion, the largest of the youngest trees that 
you’re going to leave, under a diameter 
cap, are exactly where you don’t want 
them to be, if you’re trying to re-create 
structural heterogeneity.
Here in the Southwest, we’ve been 
dealing with the diameter-cap issue for 
a long time, starting in the 1990s. With 
the 4FRI, it morphed into what the Forest 
Service and the stakeholder group call the 
Large Tree Retention Strategy, but basical-
ly, there were certain interest groups that 
didn’t want large trees to be cut. So diam-
eter caps are something we have to deal 
with. How is that affecting multiple ob-
jectives? And what effects do treatments 
have, with and without diameter caps?
Largely speaking, as most foresters 
know, if you just look at one metric, such 
as trees per acre, you can use a variety of 
treatments that achieve that target. But 
when you start looking at integrating 
multiple resource objectives, which is 
what the Multiple-Use Sustained-Yield 
Act mandates for all federal lands, it be-
comes more complicated. All of a sudden, 
metrics like basal area start to fall apart in 
terms of their ability to quantify the suc-
cess or failure of a treatment.
Foresters often feel limited by diameter 
caps, so in a way, your paper is preach-
ing to the choir. Were you trying to reach 
other groups?
I often try to make the point that using 
a single metric, which even foresters tend 
to do, can be problematic. Some might 
use canopy cover or basal area to quanti-
fy success. So I was trying to remind the 
choir that often we need multiple metrics 
to evaluate success. At the same time, I 
was hoping to catch the larger stakehold-
ers—municipalities that are concerned 
with wildland ﬁre, environmental groups, 
state and Native American land managers, 
private landowners, industry. The paper 
lays out why foresters, speciﬁcally those 
working for federal agencies, might be 
a little bit apprehensive about diameter 
caps. We’re being asked to juggle multiple 
objectives, but the 16-inch cap, which is 
primarily what we deal with here in the 
Southwest, causes a lot of problems, espe-
cially with respect to the tradeoff between 
wildﬁre hazard and wildlife habitat.
What are some of the limitations of using 
the Forest Vegetation Simulator [FVS] for 
this kind of analysis?
We talk about some of those in the 
paper. With these arid, ﬁre-dependent 
ponderosa pine ecosystems, the spa-
tial heterogeneity in the system is what 
gives us a wildﬁre hazard buffer. Because 
FVS is a spatially implicit model, it just 
doesn’t do the best job of modeling the 
true observed effects of something like a 
group selection harvest or some type of 
patchy mosaic thinning. That’s one big 
drawback, but one big plus is that FVS 
is the primary simulation tool for feder-
al foresters, silviculturists, fuels manag-
ers, and wildlife biologists. We wanted 
to stick with the tools that they would 
likely use during the National Environ-
mental Policy Act (NEPA) process to 
evaluate treatment alternatives and make 
decisions.
You’ve probably heard the old saying 
that all models are wrong, but some of 
them are useful. Models are never meant 
to tell the forester or land manager what 
to do; they are meant to help advise the 
forester or land manager about their op-
tions. Sure, there are inherent limitations 
with models, but they are largely not an 
issue unless people start believing that 
treatment A versus treatment B results 
in a one-foot change in ﬂame length, or 
something of that nature. 
Did anything surprise you in doing the 
research and running the models for this 
paper?
The results of using a 30-inch cap 
and a 12-inch cap were very different, of 
course, but it surprised me that the sim-
ulations with intermediate caps didn’t re-
ally differ all that much. If we’re talking 
about small diameter caps or large diam-
eter caps, that’s a good to discussion to 
have, because there are some real trade-
offs and beneﬁts at play. But the difference 
between a 16-inch cap and an 18-inch 
cap is splitting hairs. 
The other thing that was a little bit 
surprising is how insensitive basal area 
is. As I get older, I ﬁnd myself despising 
certain metrics, and the two that don’t 
really tell us much of anything are basal 
area and canopy cover. But those are the 
primary metrics that collaboratives and 
stakeholder groups use—we’ve been giv-
ing them those metrics for years, so those 
are the metrics that they understand the 
most. Largely speaking, those metrics are 
some of the most insensitive to the types 
of treatments that we’re doing. That could 
be a function of FVS and the non-spa-
tially explicit manner in which it models 
things, but this paper did make me come 
to the conclusion that, when people ask 
me what metric is best, I ought to start 
off by saying, well, it’s not canopy cover 
or basal area. I now tend to lean toward 
some of the composite metrics, such as 
diameter distribution, which is a forest-
er’s best friend, but which the layperson 
doesn’t really understand. 
The paper discussed in this article is 
available in the March edition of the Journal 
of Forestry and is online at www.eforester
.org/publications/jof/index.cfm. 
A Four Forests Restoration Initiative project underway on the Flagstaff Ranger District, Coconino National 
Forest, Arizona. CREDIT: US Forest Service
RESEARCH MATTERS  
n From page 1
