Utilitarian 
and Ecosystem 
Perspectives 
SneralflU:tOn kAti to thefaih4Tt! ofmany souJhwestern ponderosa pine fornts to meet cri­
teria neededto satisfY an ecosystem definition ofa healthyfornt. Forexampk, high stand 
dnuity and forestfloor accumulations make these fo1Y!sts increasingly vulnerabk to wide­
spreaddntructive fires. 
ByT.E. Kolb, M.R. Wagner, and 
w.w. Covington 
10 
July 1994 
e 
he term "forest health" is being increas­
ingly used in the context of forestry and 
natural resource: management. For exam­
ple, the term has been the subject of sev­
eral articles in the JOURNAL OF FORESTRY 
and a recent Society ofAmerican Foresters 
task force: report, Sustaining Long-Term 
Forest' Health and Productivity (Society of 
American Foresters 1993). "Forest health" 
is also increasingly used in government 
mandates concern ing foresr management. 
For instance, the Forest Ecosystems and 
Atmospheric Research Act of 1988 man­
dated surveys to monitor long-term trends 
in the health of forest ecosystems (Burk­
man and Hertel 1992). Moreover, forest 
health has emerged as a central objective 
for the desired future condition of forests; 
to some extent it replaces management for 
sustained commodity output (USDA For­
est Service 1993a, Society of American 
Foresters 1993). 
Despite its widespread use, forest 
health is frequently used without a dear 
definition, making its application co forest 
management difficult. Where the term has 
been defined (Mclnrire 1988, Monnig and 
Byler 1992 , USDA Forest Service: 1992. 
USDA Forest Service: 1993a), alternative 
definitions and viewpoints of forest health 
have not been thoroughly discussed. 
Given its growing use and importance as a 
management objective, the overall conce:pt 
1 

Hea th  
needs to be more thoroughly examined. 
Foresters and other natural resource pro­
fessionals are and will be participants in 
public debates over land management that 
use health analogies and metaphors. The 
potential for miscommunication is great. 
Therefore, it is essential that a common 
definition and conceptual understanding 
be agreed on. The need for clarity is even 
greater when a healthy forest is viewed as a 
desired future condition and maintenance 
of forest health is viewed as a constraint 
that may limit forest uses on public lands. 
This article discusses different defini­
tions of forest health, problems in scaling 
the concept of health from individual trees 
to ecosystems, and the relationship be­
tween forest health and pest management. 
Southwestern ponderosa pine (Pinuspan­
derosa) forests are often used as an exam­
ple. The central point is that ambiguity 
should be minimized by defining the term, 
or at least by discussing the concepts in­
cluded, each time it is used. 
Conventional Definitions 
Although forest health is a relatively 
new term in forestry, notions of land 
health have ,existed for millenia (Norton 
1991). Most contemporary views of forest 
health stem from the writings ofAldo Leo­
pold (Leopold 1949, Callicorr and Flader 
1992). In several essays, Leopold decried 
widespread symptoms of land "sickness," 
such as reduced vegetation cover and the 
ensuing soil erosion , resulting from land 
abuse. He argued for the practice of land 
health in which practitioners would seek 
to maintain the susrainabiliry of ecological 
conditions and processes by conserving 
the ecological integrity or coevolved diver­
sity of the land. Leopold supported the 
restoration of sample native ecosystems 
present before industrialization of the 
American landscape. These restored areas 
were to serve both as laboratories and as 
standards for comparison in the practice of 
land health (Flader 1974). 
More recent definitions offorest health 
range between utilitarian and ecosystem 
perspectives. From a utilitarian perspec­
tive, a desired state of forest health can be 
considered "a condition where biotic and 
abiotic influences on forests (e.g., pestS, 
pollution, silvicultural treatments, har­
vesting) do not threaten management ob­
jectives now or in the future" (USDA For­
est Service 1993a, p. vi). That is, a forest is 
considered to be healthy if management 
objectives are satisfied, and unhealthy jf 
they are not. "Consistency with objec­
tives" is a central theme in many utilitar­
ian definitions of forest health (Monnig 
and Byler 1992; Society ofAmerican For­
esters 1993; Wilson and Tkacz, in press) 
and is rooted in the traditional definition 
Dwaifmistktoe, a common componnu of 
southwest"", ponderosa pine forests, re­
drues tre« gnnurh and increase» morudity: 
however, it 17UlY alsoincrease thediversityof 
species andabundance of birdpopulations. 
of pests as species that interfere with in­
tended uses of forests (Barbosa and Wag­
ner 1989). This theme has been criticized 
because, on one hand, a healthy forest de­
pends on meeting management objectives; 
on the other hand, a healthy forest is a 
management objective according to recent 
ecosystem management philosophies 
(Wagner, in press). Thus, this utilitarian 
approach to defining forest health suffers 
from circular logic, where a desired state of 
forest health depends on the occurrence of 
a healthy forest! 
The utilitarian definition takes into 
consideration a landowner's management 
objectives and recognizes the inevitable in­
fluence of humans on forests. Moreover, 
the utilitarian definition implies that a 
healthy forest can be described by many 
standards. A single forest condition could 
be viewed as healthy from one perspective 
or use but unhealthy from another. For ex­
ample, a common component in south­
western ponderosa pine forests is dwarf 
mistletoe (Arceuthobium vagina tum). 
Dwarf mistletoe is known to reduce the 
Journal of Forestry 
11 

'I 
growth of ponderosa pine (Beatty 1982) 
and increase mortality (Hawksworth and 
Ceils 1990) , and would be viewed as un­
healthy from the perspective ofwood fiber 
production. However, bird abundance and 
species richness is higher when dwarf mis­
tletoe is present (Bennetts 1991). Conse­
quently, the presence of dwarf mistletoe 
may constitute a healthy condition from 
the perspective of bird species habitat and 
diversity. Thus dependency on objectives 
can create obvious problems in generating 
a definition of forest health. 
The utilitarian perspective is especially 
appropriate in situations with unambigu­
ous management objectives for manage­
ment units. However, this situation is 
largely restricted to private industrial for­
estlands that emphasize the production of 
wood fiber, and wilderness areas that em­
phasize the preservation of biodiversity 
and natura! processes. Managing for mul­
tiple objectives. which occurs on most Na­
tional Forest System lands, complicates the 
prioritization of objectives. Some authors 
have proposed simplifying the formulation 
ofobjectives-and consequently the evalu­
ation of forest health-by returning to a 
management philosophy that allocates 
land to categories ofsimilar uses (Seymour 
and Hunter 1992, Wagner, in press). 
Such difficulties indicate the need for 
an ecosystem perspective that emphasizes 
the basic ecological processes that create 
and maintain forest conditions to poten­
tially satisfy a range of diverse objectives. 
For example, "A forest in good health is a 
fully functioning community of plams 
and animals and their physical environ­
rnenr" and "A healthy forest is an ecosys­
tem in balance" (Monnig and Byler 1992, 
p. 16). These statements are a good start­
ing point for thinking about forest health 
from an ecological perspective. Terms such 
as "balance" and "function" effectively 
steer us toward the complex relationships 
that ecosystems exhibit. However, these 
definitions specify conditions that can be 
difficult to understand and measure: In 
balance with what? What is meant by fully 
functioning? 
Other ecosystem definitions include the 
idea of resilience: "A healthy forest is one 
rhar is resilient to changes" (joseph er al. 
1991, p. 7); "The term forest health de­
notes the productiviry of forest ecosystems 
and their ability to bounce back afier stress" 
(Radloff er al. 1991, p. 42); or "Forest 
health can bedefined as the ability ofa fOr­
est to recover from natural and human­
12 
July 1994 
caused stressors" (USDA Forest Service 
1992, p. 10). While resilience to cata­
strophic change at the landscape level may 
be a desired component ofa healthy forest, 
measuring the degree of resilience is diffi­
cult. Although lack ofresilience is evident a 
posteriori when a forest has been signifi­
cantly altered by stress or disturbance, the a 
priori presence of resilience is difficult to 
quantify. In other words, we really don't 
know the degree of resilienceofa forest un­
til it has been exposed to and changed by 
stressor disturbance. This difficulty in mea­
suring resiliencesuggests the problems ass0­
elated with its use in defining forest health . 
The health of 
a stand must 
consider many 
more dimensions 
than the health 
of a single tree. 
planned, a quantitative approach to defin­
ing forest health will likely require many 
more years of research and monitoring. 
In the absence of detailed quantitative 
information on desired rates of ecosystem 
processes, presem definitions of forest 
health from an ecosystem perspective must 
at least include a qualitative statement of 
the types of processes, structures, and re­
sources needed to support productive for­
ests in the sense of satisfying at least some 
of society's objectives. For example, we 
consider a healthy forest ecosystem to have 
the following characteristics: 
• the physical environment, biotic re-
An Alternative Definition 
A more usefuldefinition of forest health 
from an ecosystem perspective should in­
clude specific types and rates of ecological 
processes, and numbers and arrangement 
of structural elements that characterize di­
verse, productive, forest ecosystems in ma­
jor biogeographic regions . Haskell et al. 
(1992) suggest that a healthy ecosystem 
should be free from "distress syndrome." 
This syndrome is characterized by reduced 
primary productivity; loss of nutrient capi­
tal; loss of biodiversity; increased fluctua­
tions in key populations; retrogression in 
biotic structure (a reversal of the normal 
successional processes whereby opportu­
nistic species replace species more special­
ized in habitat and resource usc); and wide­
spread incidence and severity of disease 
(RaPPOrt 1992). 
Unfortunately, quantitative informa­
tion on rates of many essential ecosystem 
processes that create and maintain diverse, 
productive forest ecosystems is presently 
not available for many regions. Although 
monitoring and assessment programs are 
sources, and trophic networks to support 
productive forests during at leastsome se­
ra! stages; 
• resistance to catastrophic change andJ 
or the abiliry to recover from catastrophic 
change at the landscape level; 
• a functional equilibrium berween 
supply and demand of essential resources 
(water, nutrients, light, growing space) for 
major portions of the vegetation; and 
• a diversity of seral stages and stand 
structures that provide habitat for many 
native species and all essential ecosystem 
processes. 
Specifications within these four criteria 
allow for definitions that span the gap be­
tween natural landscapes (i.e., preindus­
trial or presettlement characteristics) and 
artificial landscapes (e.g., intensively man­
aged for industrial uses). 
This definition implies that a useful 
ecosystem concept of forest health must 
consider patterns and rates of change in 
forest composition and structure, or suc­
cessional processes. Leopold recognized 
the temporal variability of forest vegeta­

non when he wrote that "health is the ca­
pacity of the land for self-renewal" (Le­
opold 1949. p. 259). Any definition offor­
est health must consider the capaciry for 
forest replacement within the timespan of 
successional processes. 
Acceptable rates and patterns of forest 
replacement following disturbance will 
vary widely among different ecosystems 
and climatic regions, but should reflect 
historical rates and parrerns (Monnig and 
Byler 1992) to the extent that these rates 
and patterns meet human needs. For ex­
ample. a long succession to forest cover 
following disturbance is not necessarily an 
indication ofpoor forest health ifslow suc­
cession is characteristic because of natu­
rally harsh environmental conditions. This 
definition also recognizes that catastrophic 
change in vegetation composition and 
structure following stress or disturbance is 
inevitable over portions of a landscape. 
However, catastrophic change may be un­
desirable when it occurs at spatial scales 
other than those experienced over a long 
historic time period. 
An emphasis on the balanced avail ­
ability of resources for portions of the 
vegetation, instead of for all the vegeta­
(Ion , recognizes succession as a natural 
process that can occur at least in part be­
cause of changes in resource supply to 
vegetation components. For example, the 
emergence of late-successional species is 
partially a consequence of the decline of 
early-successional species as they fail to 
acquire resources at levels sufficient to 
meet their high nutritional and metabolic 
demands. We should not automatically 
assume that all instances of decline by a 
single species, or groups of species with 
similar ecological characteristics (i.e. , 
early-successional or pioneer types), re­
flect poor forest health. Evaluation of for­
est health must be made within the con­
text of successional processes and ecosys­
tem dynamics. 
The Problem of Scale 
Much of the current ambiguiry about 
forest health has arisen from attempts to 
take a concept developed at the individual 
organism level and apply it to a landscape 
process. Most dictionary definitions of 
"health" emphasize the condition or func­
tioning ofa single organism. Extension of 
this concept to a complex system, such as 
a forest, is based on making an analogy 
between the functioning of an organism 
and an ecosystem. For example, Kessler 
(1992) compared the health of a human 
with the health ofa forest ecosystem. This 
presents both scientific and practical 
problems (Ehrenfeld 1992) . From a scien­
tific perspective, it is difficult to deter­
mine a normal state for communities 
whose characteristics are often in flux be­
cause of disturbance. From a practical 
perspective, attempts to define health in 
rigorous scientific terms may diminish its 
present value as an intuitive. general con­
cept. In fact, Ehrenfeld concluded that 
health is not a valid ecological concept, al­
though it does have value as a bridge be­
tween scientists and nonscientists regard­
ing attainment ofvalues from ecosystems. 
Although the limitations of the term sug­
gest that it should not be used in a rigor­
ous ecological context, it is likely that 
"health" will continue to be used to de­
scribe and mandate management objec­
tives for forests. 
Health has been applied to forest eco­
systems at several scales ranging from an 
Journal of Forestry 
13 

individual tree to the landscape level. The 
concept becomes more ambiguous as the 
system to which it is applied becomes in­
creasingly complex. One definition of 
health, absence of disease (Haskell et al, 
1992), actually leads to a precise definition 
for individual trees because disease can be 
defined as a "deviation in the normal func­
tioning of a plant caused by some type of 
persistent agent" (Manion 1991 , p. 8). In 
this context, the health of a tree can be 
evaluated by such indicators as crown con­
dition, gtowth rate, and external signs of 
disease-causing agents. A dead or dying 
tree is not healthy. 
The health of a stand must consider 
many more dimensions than the health of 
Much of the current 
ambigUity about forest 
health has arisen from 
attempts to take a concept 
developed at the individual 
organism level and apply it 
to a landscape process. 
a tree. The health of a stand relates to the 
management objectives for that stand 
(utilitarian perspective) and to the long­
term functioning of the organisms and 
trophic networks that constitute the stand 
(ecosystem perspective). Tree mortality in 
a stand would not indicate an unhealthy 
condition as long as the rate of mortality 
was not greater than the capacity for re­
placement. Stand 'objectives such as wild­
life habitat, soil and water prorecrion, and 
preservation of biodiversity do not re­
quire that all trees be healthy. A dead tree 
is not healthy, but it may be parr of a 
healthy stand. 
And again, the health ofa forest ecosys­
tem or landscape is more complex than the 
health of a stand. The health of an ecosys­
tem depends both on society's objectives 
for the forest (utilitarian perspective) and 
on the interaction of biotic-including 
human-and abiotic processes that pro­
duce the range of habitats required for 
continued existence of native species (eco­
system perspective). 
14 
July 1994 
A Need for Sideboards 
The concept of forest health must have 
clear bounds. Many forest pest manage­
ment specialists think of themselves as for­
est health specialists. For example. the cur­
rent emphasis of the USDA Forest Ser­
vice's National Center of Forest Health 
Management is the development of pest 
management strategies and technologies 
(USDA Forest Service 1993b). However, 
based on our definition of forest health, 
forest health specialists would require 
broad trainingin physiology, ecology, and 
ecosystem science. 
We suggest restricting the term "forest 
health" to the examination of the role of 
biotic and abiotic agents in ecosystem­
level processes. Pest management would 
then be a subdiscipline emphasizing the 
role ofbiotic and abiotic agents in the pro­
duction of commodity outputs. Entomol­
ogists and pathologists would continue 
and hopefully increase their examination 
ofthe role ofinsects and diseases in ecosys­
tem-level processes. 
The Southwestern Ponderosa Pine 
Given our definition of a healthy forest 
ecosystem, when is a forest:considered un­
healthy? The type of thinking needed to 
answer this question can be illustrated by 
using ponderosa pine forests in southwest­
ern United States as a case study. The four 
essential dements in our definition of for­
est ecosystem health are (l) physical and 
biotic resources to suPPOrt forest cover; (2) 
resistance to catastrophic change andlor 
ability to recover after catastrophe; (3) 
functional equilibrium between supply 
and demand of essential resources; and (4) 
diversity of seral stages and stand struc­
tures. The physical and biotic resources are 
in place to support ponderosa pine forests 
in most areas of the Southwest that have 
historically supported them, except per­
haps some riparian sites. Using this crite­
rion, these ponderosa pine forests are 
probably healthy. However, it would be 
difficult to argue that this forest type is 
healthy under the other three criteria. 
A significant threat of catastrophic 
change in forest composition and struc­
ture at the landscape levelexists in much of 
this forest due to pine bark beetles (Den­
droctonus spp., Ipsspp.). These insects are 
well known to reach outbreaks when forest 
Stand density exceeds the carrying capacity 
ofthe site (Sartwell and Stevens 1971. Bar­
bosa and Wagner 1989). Conditions are 
favorable for pine bark beetle in northern 
Arizona and "it is probably only a matter 
of time before another large outbreak oc­
curs" (Wilson and Tkacz, in press) . Tree 
morrality associated with widespread bark 
beetleoutbreaks often increases the risk of 
severe, stand-replacing wildfire over large 
areas. 
The present high stand density and for­
est floor accumulations in many south­
western ponderosa pine forests. compared 
to presettlernent conditions (Covington 
and Moore 1992. 1994), has increased the 
destructive potential of wildfires until 
there is a significant risk ofeliminating for­
est cover at the landscape level. These fac­
tors have also probably created an imbal­
ance between demand and supply ofwater, 
nutrients. and growing space for major 
portions of the vegetation (Covington and 
Sackett 1986), especially herbaceous vege­
tation (Covington and Moore 1994). Nu­
trient cycling rates are likely low because of 
fire exclusion and the lack of compensat­
ing factors such as microbial decomposi­
tion. This creates a situation in which large 
nutrient reserves in forest floor material are 
in a form unavailable to plants (Covington 
and Sackett 1990). 
The relarivdy homogeneous nature of 
the southwestern ponderosa pine forest 
does not provide a balanced diversity ofse­
ral stages and stand structures. Underrep­
resented types include native prairie vege­
tation, tree regeneration, and old-growth 
(USDA Forest Service 1993c). Forests 
tend to be even-aged with a dense, uni­
form canopy and little recent regeneration 
These conditions were created in the early 
part of this century by grazing practices, 
fire exclusion, and other environmental 
conditions favorable to pine establish­
ment. Thus, many southwestern ponde­
rosa pine forests fail to meet three of the 
four criteria needed to satisfy our ecosys­
tem definition of a healthy forest. 
Forest Health Summary 
Although problems arise in using 
health concepts to describe the complex 
array offactors that influence ecosystems, 
the gtowing use ofthe term demands that 
natural resource managers understand 
health issues. Individual views ofa healthy 
forest may vary considerably between util­
itarian and ecosystem perspectives, as well 
as over spatial scales. However. the ecosys­
tem perspective of forest health does not 
necessarily conflict with the utilitarian 
perspective if both are applied to large 
landscapes with a mosaic of different 

Manysouthwestern 
ponderosa pine forests 
fail to meetcriteria 
neededto satisfy our 
ecosystem definition of 
a healthy forest. 
stand ages, structures, and levels of man­
agement that satisfy the range of demands 
placed on the landscape by society. Satis­
fying these demands requires maintain­
109, over the landscape, many native spe­
cies and all the ecosystem processes that 
ultimately provide resources and habirat 
for their survival. 
Real forest health problems exist in 
some areas in the western United States 
where conditions have been altered over 
the past severaldecades by intensively har­
vesting early successional species or ex­
cluding fire in fire-adapted ecosysrems 
(Wickman 1992, O'Laughlin et al. 1993, 
Covington and Moore 1994). However, 
present concerns over forest health also re­
flect a failure to define management objec­
nves that are acceptable to society. 
In the absence of well-defined and 
widely publicized management objec­
tives that reflect the diversity of values 
held by society, forest health will con­
tinue to be a concern-even with dra­
matic breakthroughs in scientific under­
standing of forest ecosystem processes. 
On the other hand, public expectations 
must be tempered with the understand­
109 that, in many cases, the range of po­
tential values from forests is limited by 
biological constraints. 
Foresr scientists can provide informa­
tion on types and rares of ecological pro­
cesses that lead to and maintain certain 
forest conditions, and design management 
strategies to produce these conditions. 
However, the specific forest conditions 
that satisfy public objectivesare ultimately 
a socioeconomic decision. mm 
Literature Cited 
BARIlOSA, P. and M.R. WAGN ER . 1989. Inrroduc­
rion to Forest and shade tree entomology. 
Acad. Press, San Diego.639 p. 
BEATIY, J.S. 1982. Inregrared pest managemem 
guide: southwestern dwarf mlsrleroe , Ar­
ceutbobium lIaginatum subsp, eryptopodum 
(Engelrn.) Gill, in ponderosa pine. USDA 
For. Serv.• Washington . DC. Rep. R-3. 82­
13.1 2 p. 
BENNETTS. R.E. 1991. The influenceof dwarf rnis­
tleroe on bird communities in Colorado pon­
derosa pine forests. MS thesis, Dep, Fish. & 
Wild\. Biol., Colorado State Univ.• Fort Col­
lins. 
BURKMAN. WG., and G.D. HERTEL. 1992. Forest 
health moniroring. J. For. 90(9):26-27. 
CuUCOTI. J.B.• and S.L. FLADER. eds, 1992. The 
Rivet of the Mother of God and other essays 
by Aida Leopold. Univ, Wisconsin Press. 
Madison. 384 p. 
COVINGTON. W.W.• and M.M. MOO RE. 1992. 
Postsertlernenr changes in natural fire regimes: 
implications for restoration of old-growth 
ponderosa pine forests. In Old-growth forests 
in the Southwesr, proceedings of a workshop, 
M.R. Kaufmann, W.H. Moir, and R.L. Bas­
sett. tech. coords., p. 81-99. USDA For. Servo 
Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-213. 
--. 1994. Southwestern ponderosa pine for­
est structure: changes since Euro-American 
settlement. J. For. 92(1):39-47. 
COVINGTON. W.W, and S.S. SACKETI. 1986. Ef­
fectsof periodic burning on soil nitrogen con­
centration in ponderosa pine. J. Soil Sci. Soc. 
Am. 50:452-57. 
--. 1990. Fire effectson ponderosa pine soils 
and their management implications. In Effects 
offire managementofsouthwestern n.arural re­
sources, J.S. Krammes, tech. coord., p. 105­
II. USDAFor. Servo Gen.TechRep. RM-191. 
EHRENFELD, D. 1992. Ecosystem health and eco­
logical theories. In Ecosystem health, R. Cos­
tanza, B.G. Norton. and B.D. Haskell, eds., p. 
135-43 . Island Press. Washington, DC. 
FLA.DER, S.L. 1974. Th inking like a mountain: 
AIda Leopoldand the evolution of an ecologi­
cal altitude [award deer, wolves. and forests. 
Univ, Missouri Press. Columbia. 
HAsKEU.. B.D.• B.G. NORTON, and R. COSTANZA. 
1992 . What is ecosystem health and why 
should we worry about it? In Ecosystem 
health, R. Costanza. B.G. Narron. and B.D. 
Haskell, eds., p. 3-20. Island Press, Washing­
ton, DC. 
HAWlCSWORTH, EG.• and B.W GEILs. 1990. How 
long do misrleroe-infecred ponderosa pines 
live? West. J. App\. For. 5(2):47-48. 
JOSEPH, P., T. KIETH, L KuNE, J. SCHWANKE. A. KA· 
NASKJE, and O. OvERHULSER. 1991. Restoring 
forest health in the Blue Mountains: a 10-year 
strategic plan. For. Log 61(2):3-12. 
KEsSLER, W.B. 1992. A parable of paradigms: per­
sonal wellness and forest health. J. For. 90(4): 
18-20. 
LEOPOLD, A. 1949. A Sand County almanac and 
sketches here and there. Oxford Univ, Press. 
New York. 228 p. 
MANION, P.D. 1991. Tree disease concepts. Pren­
rice-Hall, EnglewoodCliffs, NJ. 402 p. 
McINTIRE, T., ed, 1988. Forest health through sil­
viculture and integrated pest management-a 
strategic plan. USDA For. Serv.• Washington. 
DC. 26 p. 
MONNIG, E., and J. BYLER. 1992. Foresthealth and 
ecological integrity in the northern Rockies. 
USDA For. Servo FPM Rep. 92-7.18 p. 
NORTON. B.G. 1991. Ecological health and sus­
rainable resource management. In Ecological 
economics: the science and management of 
susrainabiliry, R. Costanza, ed., p. 102-77. 
Columbia Univ, Press,New York. 
O'LAUGHLIN. J., J.G. MACCRACKEN, D.L. ADAMS, 
S.c. BUNTING, K.A. BLATNER, and C.E. KEE­
GAN Ill. 1993. Forest health conditions in 
Idaho: executive summary. Policy Anal. 
Group, Coil. For., Wild!. & RangeSci., Univ. 
Idaho, Moscow. Rep. 11. 
RADLOFF, D., R. loOMIS, J. BERNARD, and R. BIRD­
SEY. 1991. Foresthealth monitoring: rakingthe 
pulse of America's forests. In Agriculture and 
the environrnent-the 1991 yearbookof agri­
culture, p. 41-47. USDA For. Serv., Washing­
ron. DC. 
RAPPORT. D.J. 1992. What is clinical ecology? In 
Ecosystem health, R. Costanza, B.G. Norton. 
and B.D. Haskell, eds., p. 144-56. Island 
Press, Washmgton, DC. 269 p. 
SAR1WELL, c.. and R.E. STEVENS. 1971. Thinning 
ponderosapine to prevent outbreaksof moun­
tain pine beetle. In Proceedingsof precommer­
cialthinning of coastaland intermountain for­
estsin the PacificNorthwest, D. Baumgartner, 
ed.• p. 4 1- 52. Wash. State Univ, Coop. Ext. 
Serv., Pullman. 
SEYMOUR, R.S., and M.L. HUNTER JR. 1992. New 
forestry in eastern spruce-fir forests: principles 
and applications to Maine. Univ. Maine Agric. 
Exp. Sm.•Orono. Misc. Pub!.716. 
SOCIETY OF AMERICAN FORESTERS. 1993. Taskforce 
report on sustaining long-term forest health 
and productivity. Soc. Am. Por., Bethesda, 
MD . Pub!. 93-02. 83 p. 
USDA FOREST SERVICE. 1992. Northeastern area 
forest health report . USDA For. Servo Rep. 
NA-TP-03-93. 57 p. 
--. 1993a. Healthy forests for America's fu­
ture: a strategic plan. USDA For. ServoMP­
1513.58 p. 
--. 1993b. National Center of Forest Health 
Management strategic plan. USDA For. Serv., 
Morgantown. wv. 17 p. 
--. 1993c. Changing conditions in south­
western forests and implications on land Stew­
ardship. USDA For. Serv., SW region. 8 p. 
WAGNER, M.R.The healthymultiple-useforesteco­
system: an impossible dream? In Proceedings, 
conference on sustainable ecological systems. 
USDA For. Servo Gen. Tech. Rep. (In press.) 
WICKMAN, B.E. 1992. Forest health in the Blue 
Mountains: the influence of insects and dis­
ease.USDA For.Servo Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW­
6TR-295. 15 p. 
WILSON, J.L., and B.M. TKACZ. Searus of insects 
and diseases in the Southwest:implicationsfor 
forest health. In Proceedings, conference on 
sustainable ecological systems. USDA For. 
ServoGen. Tech. Rep. (In press.) 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
TE. Kolb is assistantprofessor, and M.R. 
mzgnerand WW Covington areprofessors, 
Northern Arizona Unioenity. School ofFor­
estry, PO Box15018, Flagstaff86011-5018. 
Journal of Forestry 
15 
