Changes in Fire Regimes and Forest Structures  
of Unharvested Petran and  
Madrean Pine Forests  
Peter z. Fule and W. Wallace Covington1 
Abstract.-In both Petran montane forests of the southwestern US and 
Madrean montane forests of northern Mexico, similar ecological 
processes of frequent, low-intensity fires maintained relatively open 
forests of large trees in the past. A comparison of examples from an 
unharvested ponderosa pine forest of northern Arizona, USA, with over 
100 years of fire exclusion, and an unharvested mixed-species pine 
forest of northwestern Durango, Mexico, with approximately 50 years of 
fire exclusion, show that tree populations have irrupted, small trees are 
densely aggregated in clumped stands, and fuel loading and vertical 
continuity have increased, .raising the susceptibility of these sites to 
high-intensity crown fires. In contrast, a reconstruction of the 
pre-fire-exclusion structure of the Arizona site as well as data from 
another Durango site currently under a frequent fire regime both share 
open forest structures with low fuel loads and little vertical fuel continuity. 
These ecological similarities suggest that Mexican forest managers may 
benefit from studying the deleterious effects of long-term fire exclusion 
in the US, while both US and Mexican managers could make use of 
unharvested, frequent-fire sites in Mexico as benchmarks of ecosystem 
erocess and -structure. 
INTRODUCTION 
Fire is a common and powerful disturbance in 
forested ecosystems of northern Mexico and the 
southwestern United States. The paper focuses on 
the fire ecology of Petran (Rocky Mountain) and 
Madrean montane pine forests (Pase and Brown 
1982). From an island biogeography perspective, 
the land masses of the Colorado Plateau and 
Rocky Mountains to the north and the SierraMa­
dre Occidental to the south, function as the 
ecological and evolutionary mainlands for the 
smaller montane islands of the Madrean archipel­
ago. Similar ecological processes of frequent, 
low-intensity fires maintained relatively open for­
ests of large trees in the past in both regions. 
However, fire exclusion in the last 50 to 120 years 
has led to substantial change in forest structure 
'Research specialist end professor, School of Forestry, Northern Ari­
zona University, P.O. Box 15018, FlagstBff, AZ 8B011. 
both in most southwestern US forests and in some 
regions of northern Mexico. 
In the initial section of this paper, the role of 
fire and the effects of extended fire exclusion will 
be reviewed with an example from an unhar­
vested southwestern US site. Next, data from 
unharvested forest sites in the Sierra Madre Occi­
dental will show that fire is an important 
ecological force affecting forest structure, fuels, 
and regeneration, and that disruption of the fre­
quent fire regime in Madrean forests leads to 
changes similar to those observed in fire-excluded 
US forests. Finally, we will compare the implica­
tions of current and potential patterns of forest 
structure, fuel loading, and fire behavior, with re­
spect to the US and Mexican forests. 
FIRE EXCLUSION IN A PETRAN PINE 
FOREST 
The ecological role of fire has been described 
in several studies in Arizona and New Mexico. 
408  

Mean fire intervals (MFIs) prior to European­
American settlement of this region ranged from 2 
to 10 years in forests of ponderosa pine (Pinus 
ponderosa) and Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menzi­
esii) until the 1870's to 1880's, when frequent, 
low-intensity fires ceased in the majority of south­
western US forests (review by Swetnam 1990). The 
exclusion of fires through a combination of active 
fire suppression and livestock grazing of grass fu­
els has been implicated as a key factor in the 
development of dense, stagnated forests, high fuel 
loading, reduced herbaceous production, and in­
creased soil erosion throughout the western US 
(Weaver 1951; Cooper 1960; Bahre 1991; Savage 
1991; Covington and Moore 1994; Covington et al. 
1994). Over a century of fire exclusion in ponder­
osa pine forests has led to increased incidence of 
crown fires in Arizona (Cooper 1960; Swetnam 
1990) as well as further north in Idaho (Steele et 
al. 1986), and even the so-called "collapse" of the 
Blue Mountain ponderosa pine ecosystem in Ore­
gon (Mutch et al. 1993). 
A specific example from the Petran ponderosa 
pine forest of northern Arizona illustrates many 
of these ecosystem changes. The Gus Pearson 
Natural Area was set aside within the Fort Valley 
Experimental Forest, the oldest experimental for­
est in the National Forest System, to serve as a 
virgin forest "standard of comparison for other 
managed, utilized, and artificial ecosystems" 
(Avery et al. 1976). However, as part of normal 
management policy, fire continued to be excluded 
Figure 1. -A never-harvested Petran ponderosa pine forest In the 
Gus Pearson Natural Area, Fort Valley Experimental Forest, 
Arizona, USA. Following a century of fire exclusion, forest floor 
and vertical fuels increased to hazardous levels, exemplified by 
the dense "doghalr" trees shown here, so a three-hectare area 
W.ils decommissioned from the Natural Area In 1987 and Is 
currently an experimental site for ecological restoration. 
409 
Table 1.-Forest structural characteristics at the Gus Pearson 
Natural Area restoration site. The last fire occurred in this 
region in 1876 (Dieterich 1980). The 1876 reconstruction Is 
based on SUbtracting the measured growth Increment of 
trees between 1876 and 1992, as well as estimating the 
1876 
characteristics 
of 
measured 
dead 
trees 
(reconstruction methods described In COVington and 
Moore 19941.. 
1992 
measurement 
1876 estimate 
Trees per hectare 
3098 
60 
Quadratic mean diameter (em) 
11.9 
48 
Woody fuel loading 
(metric ton/ha) 
Presettlement patches 
35.8 
total woody fuel loading 
Postsettlement patches 
12 .2 
approxlmately 1 ton/ha 
Grassy open ings 
4.2 
Herbaceous production 
(kg/ha) 
Presettlement patches 
90 
total herbaceous production 
Postsettlement patches 
240 
over 1000 kg/ha 
Grassyo~8 
970 
from the region, where in presettlement times 
fires occurred every 2 to 4 years until the final 
presettlement fire in 1876 (Dieterich 1980). Be­
tween 1920 and the late 1980's, the forest density 
and fuel loading in the Pearson Area increased to 
such high levels that forest administrators became 
concerned about protecting the adjacent historic 
Fort Valley buildings from a catastrophic wildfire. 
A three-hectare portion of forest (fig. 1) was offi­
cially decommissioned from the Natural Area in 
1987 to create a defensible· firebreak. It has since 
become the site of an intensive research effort to 
restore the structural and functional charac­
teristics of the presettlement forest (Covington 
and Moore 1994, Covington and others in prepa­
ration). 
Measurement of all trees on the restoration 
site in 1992 showed a forest dominated by dense 
patches-of small trees, over 3,000 trees per hectare 
with a quadratic mean diameter of 11.9 cm (table 
1). Applying measurements of age and growth of 
living trees, as well as decomposition rates of 
snags and downed dead trees, the estimated re­
construction of forest structure in 1876 was 
strikinglydifferent: only 60 trees/ha and a quad­
ratic mean diameter of 48 em, over 4 times greater 
than the mean 1992 diameter. The spatial distribu­
tion of trees changed from the 1876 pattern of 
dispersed, relatively open patches of trees in a 
bunchgrass matrix to the 1992 pattern in which 
dense pine thickets formed the matrix with 

grasses reduced to small openings. These changes 
in tree patterns had been documented previously 
by Covington and Sackett (1992) for a similar site 
5 km from our study area. Herbaceous production 
in the tree-dominated majority of the site aver­
aged only 100-200 kg/ha in 1992, but forest floor 
fuel loadings ranged from 12 ton/ha under post­
settlement trees to 36 ton/ha under old-growth 
tree patches. In contrast, estimated average pre­
settlement values in this forest type are over 1000 
kg/ha of herbaceous production and around 1 
ton/ha of forest floor fuel loading (Covington and 
Moore 1994). 
Although this site has remained "undis­
turbed" since European-American settlement, 
dramatic changes in forest structure have oc­
curred. The exact mechanisms of such changes are 
not clear and may vary by a complex interplay of 
site-specific factors (e.g., see Savage 1991, Bahre 
1991), but they are consistent with fire exclusion. 
While the Pearson Area is an unusual ponderosa 
pine forest in that it has remained unharvested, 
similar changes in forest density, fuels, and under­
story production have been found in forest 
ecosystems adapted to frequent fire throughout 
the western US and Canada (Covington et al. 
1994). Several negative consequences of these 
changes are clear (Covington and Moore 1994): 
economic values of the forest have been reduced 
as grass production, water storage, and timber 
growth and quality have declined; amenity values 
have also declined as people find dense ponder­
osa forests less attractive; habitats for wildlife 
have changed from a grass-based system to a less 
diverse tree-based system; and the stagnated trees 
have become more susceptible to insects, disease, 
drought, and fire. 
Focusing on fire, in 1876 the restoration site 
was characterized by grass and needle litter fuels, 
with dispersed, fire-pruned large trees. An 1876 
fire would be fast-moving but of low intensity. By 
1992, however, the site was dominated by small 
trees with vertical as well as horizontal fuel conti­
nuity, meaning that fires could spread rapidly 
both along the ground and up into the crowns. 
Rotten woody fuels, quick to ignite, and deep duff 
layers, averaging 8 ern under the old-growth 
patches, had replaced the presettlement light 
grass fuels. Smoldering combustion of heavy fuels 
like these caused lethal soil temperatures and 
killed old-growth trees even under prescribed 
burning conditions at a nearby experimental site 
(Harrington and Sackett 1990). A fire would have 
substantially greater intensity in the 1992 fuels 
than in the 1876 fuels and could more easily torch 
Figure 2.-ln June, 
1993, the 
Trick fire palHd through 
demonstration thinning liteI located 5 km from the GUI 
Pearson Natural Area. Pa..lng from the rear to the foreground 
of the photo,the fire crowned through the denser ltand caullng 
high mortality (at left), but caUled only a light Iurface burn In 
the adjacent, more open stand (at right). 
trees or crown through stands. A 1993 wildfire 
near the restoration site clearly demonstrated the 
relationship between forest structure and fire be­
havior (fig. 2). As the fire passed through 
demonstration stands thinned to different grow­
ing stock levels, the denser stand was killed but 
the adjacent, more open stand had only a light 
surface burn with incomplete fuel consumption. 
Beyond small-scale fire effects, the broad in­
crease in forest density and fuel loading in 
ponderosa pine forests has brought many stands 
into synchrony across the landscape to support 
large crown fires (Covington and Moore 1992). 
The size of fires and the occurrence of crown fires 
in southwestern ponderosa pine have increased 
through this century (Cooper 1960, Swetnam 
1990). Furthermore, regional analysis of fire oc­
currence and climate data by Tom Swetnam and 
others has shown that a pattern of severe fire 
years follows the recurring EI Niii.o-Southern Os­
cillation events (Swetnam 1990, Swetnam and 
Betancourt 1990, Baisan and Swetnam 1990). The 
combination of potential synchronies in both fuel 
structures as well as weather conditions raises the 
prospect of increasingly destructive wildfires that 
could threaten both ecological sustainability and 
resource values. 
FIRE REGIME DISRUPTION IN A MADREAN  
FOREST  
In contrast to the century-long exclusion of 
fire from most western US and Canadian forests, 
frequent fire has continued well into this century 
410  

and even up to the present in many northern 
Mexican forests for a variety of reasons (see Gon­
zalez-Caban and Sandberg 1989, Fule and 
Covington in press). Even before the effects of fire 
exclusion were fully recognized by foresters and 
scientists in the US, Aldo Leopold (1937) and Joe 
Marshall (1957,1962) compared pine-oak forests 
in southern Arizona and northern Sonora and 
Chihuahua, suggesting that heavier grazing and 
fire exclusion in the US forests had led to the 
dense thickets of "dwarfed" trees, increased ero­
sion, and high fuel loading common in the 
southwestern US forests, but not seen in northern 
Mexico. In Marshall's words (1962), 
If we grant that this contrast is too 
abruptand too coincident with the interna­
tional boundary to be due exclusively to 
climate/ then -we must look for man-made 
causes of the difference in vegetation. The 
outstanding cause seems to be fire... There 
has until very recently been no protection 
on the Mexico side from naturally occur­
ring fires. These sweep through the grass/ 
killing young junipers/ eliminating debris/ 
and leaving unscathed the tall clear trunks 
ofthe widely spacedpines. 
Little quantitative information exists about the 
role of fire in northern Mexican pine forests,al­
though studies on fire recurrence and vegetation 
dynamics have been carried out in chaparral and 
pifton communities' (Minnich 1983, Segura and 
Snook 1992). In perhaps the first Mexican forest 
fire history study, Jack Dieterich (1983) found that 
frequent fires, with a mean fire interval (MFI) 
around 4 years, continued into the 1970's in pine­
oak forests of the Sierra de los Ajos of northern 
Sonora, a site which is currently being studied in 
greater detail by several of the other investigators 
in this conference (Baisan and Swetnam 1994, Vil­
lanueva-Diaz and McPherson 1994). 
In order to expand our knowledge of fire­
adapted ecosystems and quantify the differences 
in fire regime and forest structure between US and 
Mexican pine forests, we selected a study region 
in northwestern Durango at the crest of the Sierra 
Madre Occidental in 1993. The forests are domi­
nated by Durango pine (Pinus durangensis) but a 
total of 8 pine species, over 4 oak species, and 
several other tree species including madrone (Ar­
butu~ spp.), alder (Alnus sp.), and juniper 
~unlperus spp.) were encountered on the study 
SItes (Fule and Covington in press). This diversity 
refl~cts the ~igh biological diversity of Mexico, 
which contains approximately half the world's 
species in the Pinus (Martinez 1948, Perry 1991) 
and Quercus (Nixon 1993) genera. The two never­
harvested sampling sites, each approximately 70 
ha in size, were closely matched in elevation, 
slope, aspect, slope position, and species composi­
tion. Both sites had ample evidence of fire in the 
form of fire-scarred trees and charred wood, but 
the first site, Arroyo Verde, appeared to have had 
little recent fire disturbance whereas the second 
site, Arroyo Laureles, had burned as recently as 
1991. 
On a 150 m X 150 m sampling grid we estab­
lished plots to measure the species, condition, 
diameter at breast height (dbh), live crown ratio, 
and presence of lightning scars on each tree. We 
collected increment cores from all pines over 6 em 
dbh. In addition, fuels were measured along a pla­
nar transect, regeneration density was tallied on 
nested 40 m2 subplots, and fire scars were cut 
from live or dead trees within or near to each sam­
pling plot. Further details on site characteristics, 
sampling methods, results, and analysis are given 
in Fule and Covington (in press). 
Fire scar analysis confirmed the apparent dif­
ference in recent fire regimes at the two sites. 
Frequent fires occurred at both sites prior to 1945, 
with an average of approximately 4 years between 
fires that scarred at least one sample tree at both 
sites. After 1945 the frequent fire regime was dis­
rupted at Arroyo Verde (fig. 3). Arroyo Verde had 
only three fires, each scarring only a single sample 
tree, between 1945 and 1992, while Arroyo Laure­
les had 15 fires, 9 of which scarred 2 or more 
samples, in the same time period. 
til 
QJ  
QJ  
~ 15 
"0 
QJ 
;"'" 10 
('"j 
7J'l 
~ 
~ 5 
QJ 
"Q 
ie
0 
1980  
Figure 3.-eomparlson of fire occurrence over the last century at 
Arroyo Verde .(Slte 1, N = 22 fire scar samples) and Arroyo 
Laureles (Site 2, N = 28), Durango, Mexico. Prior to 1945, fires 
were frequent at both sites, but fire was virtually excluded from 
slle 1 after 1945. 
411  

Table 2.-Foreat structural characteristics at two study sites In 
Durango, Mexico. Fires were frequent at both sites prior to 
1945, but have been excluded from most of the Arroyo 
Verde site since 1945 (see Fule and Covington In press for 
further information}. 
Arroyo Verde 
Arroyo Laureles 
Trees per hectare 
2730 
647 
Quadratic mean diameter (em) 
10.4 
27.1 
Woody fuel loading (metric ton /hal 
15 .8 
10.6 
Changes in the forest structure are correlated 
with the disruption in fire regime at Arroyo 
Verde. Small pines, oaks, and other trees were 
dense at Arroyo Verde, averaging 2730 trees over 
breast height per hectare with a quadratic mean 
diameter of 10.4 cm (table 2). Analysis of age 
structure showed that approximately 60% of the 
current pines larger than 6 cm in dbh established 
after the 1945 fire, implying that the forest was far 
more open prior to fire exclusion. At Arroyo 
Laureles, where numerous large and small fires 
have continued up to the present, stand structure 
was strongly influenced by the thinning effect of 
frequent fire. The number of trees per hectare was 
an order of magnitude lower but average diame­
ter was over twice that of Arroyo Verde (table 2). 
However, regeneration density (all trees below 
breast height) was similar at both sites, averaging 
6,200 stems/ha at Arroyo Verde, 8,730 stems/ha 
at Arroyo Laureles (see Fule and Covington in 
press for further information). The apparent 
mechanism for reducing high regeneration den­
sity to low overstory density at Arroyo Laureles is 
frequent fire. 
Fuel structures also differed between the sites. 
Under fire exclusion, the woody fuel loading at 
Arroyo Verde was 50% greater than that of Arroyo 
Laureles. More importantly, the Arroyo Verde fuel 
load included 11.7 ton/ha of rotten woody fuels, 
which are highly ignitable, as opposed to only 2.6 
ton/ha in this category at Arroyo Laureles. Aver­
age duff depths at Arroyo Verde were twice those 
of Arroyo Laureles. Finally, the frequent fires at 
- Arroyo Laureles maintained a well-spaced over­
story of trees with fire-pruned boles. Spatial 
distribution of the trees was generally random, 
approaching a uniform distribution at scales be­
low 8 m (fig. 4). The dense forest at Arroyo Verde, 
on the other hand, was highly clustered into thick­
ets of trees. The numerous small trees at Arroyo 
Verde provide functional fuel ladders for fires to 
crown. 
The changes in overstory structure and fuel 
loading at Arroyo Verde suggest that under suit­
able weather conditions the next fire at the site is 
likely to be stand-replacing, implying that a half 
Figure 4a.-Approximate projection of live tree crowns (crown 
radius proportional to tree diameter at breast height) on a 2,500 
m2 stem-mapped plot at the fire-excluded Arroyo Verde site. 
Spatial analysis with the Ripley's k(t) statistic (Duncan 1990) 
showed significant clumpIng at all scales from 1 to 25 m. 
Figure 4b.-Approximate projection of live tree crowns on a 2,500 
m2 stem-mapped plot at the frequent-fire Arroyo Laureles site. 
Spatial analysis showed the distribution to be significantly 
uniform at scales below 8 m and random between 9 and 25 rn, 
century of fire exclusion may have been sufficient ­
to move this forest from a frequent, low-intensity 
fire regime to an infrequent, high-intensity re­
gime. Beyond the evident economic and 
environmental damage such a fire would cause, 
the question for foresters, landowners, and scien­
tists is: what kind of ecological community will 
succeed from the ashes of the uneven-aged, mixed 
species forests which were adapted to frequent, 
low-intensity fires? 
Since quantitative information on fire occur­
renee and forest structure is lacking in much of 
northern Mexico, it is difficult to generalize about 
412  

the representativeness of the Arroyo Verde and 
Arroyo Laureles sites. However, evidence of fre­
quent fire in the past can be found throughout the 
pine forests we have visited in Durango, Chihua­
hua, and Sonora. Disturbing signs of -change 
paralleling those observed earlier this century in 
the southwestern US are also evident, including 
the establishment of dense pine seedling and sap­
ling thickets (fig. 5). Just as many US foresters 
responded in the 1930's, some Mexican foresters 
today praise the "good regeneration" on these 
sites without anticipating the potential problems. 
Tree-ring studies have shown that Madrean for­
ests are highly sensitive to recurring climatic 
fluctuations (Stahle and Cleaveland 1993), raising 
the possibility of synchronous extreme fire 
weather years similar to those seen in the south­
western US (Swetnam 1990). If dense fuel 
conditions also synchronize across landscapes, 
Mexican foresters will eventually encounter in­
creasing numbers of fires of unprecedented size 
and severity. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In comparing the fire regimes and forest struc­
tures of two unharvested pine forests, one in the 
Petran forest of Arizona and the other in the Ma­
drean forest of Durango, we found that similar 
processes of frequent, low-intensity fire and simi­
lar structures of open forests dominated by large 
trees prevailed in the past. Disruption of the fre­
quent, low-intensity fire regime and extended fire 
exclusion has led to similar increases in forest 
density, forest floor fuel loading, and spatial ag­
gregation at the Pearson restoration site as well as 
. ~ 
I ~fl "/ ' '~~·~'~~~V . 
~ ~1:t. ' ~ 
L....> ~ :, <
' \, 
" 
. ~:-
-· ·Z . 
i"I:l ~;'~"'" 
.. 
f.~ · · ·;~ ~,A ~ 
~
.'. . 
, 
" 
.:....... ': .' 
~(.. 
... 
,
••~ 
I.:,. 
3~1. 
~. ' .. :'." -~ fA~~ , ..  
.: ~; 'i 4;.'~, ~,"~ ..:,§1 ....};~ ' . . 
: ~ •• •,j "l:;~ 
.. ,
1rr ~"~l/;
rl 1f . ,'r"'l ': ':\ •_-' ,.... ... \. ',!',jf , J
'
~. 
(J
.~ 
_
. 
to 
~ ~ . 
• 
' ; .. 'f 
"1 w. 
<0 
• 
• "F 
' \" 
.t;'~
Ito , 
: c. , \7<"" '" 
! ::..'~! ',"
' 
,} :~" " . 'N" 
'.~ ,.; . ' 
-: 
. 
.'}!:
. 
# 
., ~ 
~ ~...;. 
. 
",,'.1"" .:» _-.-J 
t 
<' .... . 
~.. 
';"," 
; :t. #. ~ 
....~ ..'".. ~ 
$J,, ~~~ ...r !" l" It 
~ 
.. i" 
.' ij. 
_~ ..._., ',. 
... 
~~:,~ 
ut 
.. 
,.. 
." -", . •.: 
,.. 
;..,., 
. 
...... 
1 
.,," 
'" I 
.. 
;.~ 
r' 
..,. r 
I: . ... )1(.' 
.. 
'" 
..... ,~ ~-
. 
" .I't 
.. 
r· 
~ .. 
• \o;4':' .r>"' ..... ... 
"'V'\ ,"~ ."j' 
" 
_.', "·f 
, ":-... 
,' 
-..t \ ..' -~ : . 
~ :'",~,,­
.. , 
~;fl'""·f· ·,l 
.-;" 
~ .l 
r., 
-
. .-l· \.". 
;, 
" 
. 
.11A' " 
.;; 
lI .-
I 
, ~
~ 1 , 
• 
... ­
~•.-= 
.l,.... 
-• •j-.~ '.. 
j 
• r, 
( 
., (l! 
. ~~ . 
. 
'\~ 
~ 
.
' 
.-~ 
. .. 
'
. 
" . . ..~\
"'~ ~ .'. 
I
'
I L "
'. 
: . ~ '; . 
.~ 'i* . ...'-:;\I . 
, I , .~ ~;. 
I 
~. ' "
. 
:
.:
L . , J. '~ "~ I' ~.. II I 
. \ '. 
,.1. 
_
~, 
~
. 
-
". 
., 
... t
t l
,,.,.... ..a .~~ ~ .': t · 
II 
>-
I
l .
,j ' . ' II 
• 
' '-'Ii' 
. I 
...... ~ , 
-..:
-
I
I, 
.'
I 
,, ~ 
~ 'r-
"
. 
~ 
.I~~.\". 
'I'" I 
!" 
. 
• .' .';;" 
I 
~. ~ 
'.•-'
.J" 
•
_ . 
~ ..c .' 
_ 
~ i\ 
. ' 
I ' 
r l i f \ 
-~ ..;'O- .'~ . _ ~~ 
. 
~
. 
. ~' ~-J,) 
" ':'-.\ ~Q~.~ .~ 
' ~ \~...}.~2-':' ~ ~\ " ~~. 
the Arroyo Verde site. The Arroyo Laureles site 
(with continued frequent fire) stands apart as a 
rare example of data from a modem pine forest 
not yet subjected to harvesting or fire exclusion. 
We do not mean to imply that fire is the sole 
determining factor of forest structure. There are 
many important differences in climate, soils, and 
species composition between the Petran and Ma­
drean sites (Pase and Brown 1982) and even 
between the two Durango sites (Full! and Cov­
ington in press). Only long-term data in 
conjunction with controlled experimental studies 
could distinguish among the factors of distur­
bance, site, life history characteristics, and many 
other factors. Nonetheless, the magnitude of for­
est structural change correlated with the striking 
disruption in frequent fire regimes, and the eco­
nomic, ecological, and social consequences of this 
change, underscore the need for increased re­
search and management intervention to prevent 
excessive increases in both live and dead fuels. 
Several implications can be drawn from these 
results: 
• First, disturbance regimes of frequent, low-in­
tensity surface fires appear to be an important 
structuring force in Cordilleran pine forests of 
both the US and Mexico. Disruption of these 
fire regimes leads to tree irruptions and in­
creased fuel loads which threaten ecosystem 
sustainability on both sides of the border. 
• Second, further research is essential to charac­
terize the forest dynamics of northern Mexico, 
quantifying disturbance regimes, climatic rela­
tionships, biological diversity, and vegetation 
structure. Unharvested sites still under fre­
quentfire regimes are incomparable in ecologi­
cal value but they are disappearing rapidly, 
both in the high Sierra Madre and in the dry 
foothill forests which cover many more mil­
lions of hectares. Research which draws to­
gether Mexican and US participants to solve 
common problems, as in this conference, 
would allow the interchange and synthesis of 
ideas, perceptions, and methods. 
• Third, if changes in Mexican forests are indeed 
following the patterns of those in southwest­
ern US forests on a broad scale, then Mexican 
foresters could be well served by studying the 
ecosystem-scale problems now encounteredin 
the US and Canada and actively seeking to 
prevent their appearance in Mexico. Pre­
scribed fire, silvicultural treatments, and man­
Figure 5.-Dense pine seodllng establishment In a Madrean 
plne-oak forest of northwestern Durango, Mexico. Such scenes 
agement of wildlife and domestic livestock are 
are common In this region where Initial harvost and fire roglme 
some tools which should be explored to main­
-dIsruptions havo occurred In the past few docades. 
tain productive, healthy, diverse forests. Simi­
413 

larly, for US foresters trying to restore the bal­
ance in degraded ecosystems, forests of north­
ern Mexico can present a benchmark and a 
testing ground for ideas about ecological res­
toration. 
•  Finally, comparative research examining the 
ecological and evolutionary implications of 
changes in fire regimes and ecosystem struc­
ture could greatly benefit by placing Madrean 
archipelago research into the larger context of 
the Petran and Madrean mainlands. In 1937 
Aldo Leopold urged to us to work together 
when he wrote: 
/'...the Sierra Madre offers us the 
chance to describe, and define, in actual 
ecological measurements, the lineaments 
and physiology of an unspoiled mountain 
landscape. What is the mechanism of a 
natural forest? A natural watershed? A 
natural deer herd? A natural turkeyrange? 
On our side of the line we have few or no 
natural samples left to measure. I can see 
here the opportunity for a great interna­
tional research enterprise which will 
explain our own history and enlighten the 
joint task ofprofiting byits mistakes." 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors thank the Ejido Salto de Camel­
lones for permission to sample the Durango study 
sites. Financial and in-kind support for research in 
Mexico was provided by the Unidad de Conser­
vaci6n y Desarrollo Integral "Topia", the Uni6n de 
Ejidos y Comunidades "General Emiliano Za­
pata", the Northern Arizona University School of 
Forestry, and the USDA Forest Service Pacific 
Northwest Experiment Station, Global Environ­
mental 
Protection 
program, 
cooperative 
agreement number PNW 93-0456. Support for for­
est restoration at the Fort Valley Experimental 
Forest is provided by the USDA Forest Service 
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station, the Coconino National Forest, the Pacific 
Southwest Forest and Range Experiment Station, 
Kaibab Renewable Resources, and grant number 
DEB-9322706 from the National Science Founda­
tion. Special thanks to Ing. Carlos Zapata Perez, 
Ing. J. Guadalupe Paredes Perez, Brad Ruess, and 
many others. 
414 
LITERATURE CITED 
Avery, c.c., F.R Larson, and G.H. Schubert. 1976. Fifty­
year records of virgin stand development in 
southwestern ponderosa pine. USDA Forest Service 
General Technical Report RM-22, Rocky Mountain For­
estand Range ExperimentStation, Fort Collins,CO. 
Bahre,C.J.1991.Alegacyofchange.Historic human impact 
on vegetation in the Arizona borderlands. The Univer­
sityofArizona Press, Tucson.231 pages. 
Baisan, C.H., and T.W. Swetnam. 1994. Historical land­
scape patterns of fire occurrence in remote mountains 
of southwestern New Mexico and northwestern Mex­
ico: a cross-border comparison. Poster presented at the 
9th Annual Landscape Ecology Symposium, March 
23-26,1994, Tucson, AZ. 
Cooper, c.F. 1960. Changes in vegetation, structure, and 
growth of southwestern pine forests since white settle­
ment. Ecology 42:493-499. 
Covington, W.W., and M.M. Moore. 1992. Post-settlement 
changes in natural disturbance regimes: implications 
for restoration of old-growth ponderosa pine ecosys­
tems. Pages 81-99 in Old-growth forests in the 
Southwest and Rocky Mountain Region. Proceedings 
of the symposium. March 9-13, Portal, Arizona. USDA 
ForestService General Technical Report RM-213,Rocky 
Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort 
Collins,CO. 
Covington, W.W., and MM . Moore. 1994. Southwestern 
ponderosa forest structure and resource conditions: 
changes since Euro-American settlement. Journal of 
Forestry 92(1):39-47. 
Covington, W.W.,and s.s. Sackett.1992.Soil mineral nitro­
gen changes following 
prescribed burning in 
ponderosa pine. Forest Ecology and Management 
54:175-191. 
Covington, vc«; RL. Everett, RW.Steele, L.I.Irwin, T.A. 
Daer, and AN .D. Auclair. 1994. Historical and antici­
pated changes in forest ecosystems of the Inland Westof 
the United States.journal ofSustainable Forestry. 
Dieterich, J.H. 1980. Chimney Spring forest fire history. 
USDA Forest Service Research Paper RM-220, Rocky 
Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort 
Collins, CO. 
Dieterich, J.H. 1983.Historia de los incendios forestales en 
la Sierra de los Ajos, Sonora. Nota Tecnica No.8, CI­
FONOR-INIF., S.F.F.,S.A.R H.,Mexico. 
Duncan, R. 1990. Spatial analysis programmes. School of 
Forestry, University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New 
Zealand. 
Fule, PZ., and W.w. Covington. In press. Fire regime dis­
ruption and pine-oak forest structure in the Sierra 
Madre Occidental, Durango, Mexico. Restoration Ecol­
ogy. 
Gonzalez-Caban, A., and D.v. Sandberg. 1989. Fire man­
agement and research needs in Mexico. Journal of 
Forestry 87:20-26. 
Harrington, M.G.; and 5.5. Sackett. 1990. Using fire as a 
management tool in southwestern ponderosa pine. 
Pages 122-133 in Krammes, j S . (tech. coor.), Effects of 

Fire Management of Southwestern Natural Resources. 
Proceedings of the symposi um, November 15-17,1988, 
Tucson; AZ . United States Department of Agriculture 
Forest Service General Technical Report RM-191, 
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Sta­
tion, FortCollins, CO. 
Leopold, A. 1937. Conservationist in Mexico . American 
Forests 37:118-120,146. 
Marshall, J.T. Jr. 1957. Birds of pine-oak woodland in 
southern Arizona and adjacent Mexico. Pacific Coast 
Avifauna 32:1-125. 
Marshall, J.T.Jr. 1962. Land use and native birds of Ari­
zona. Journal of the Arizona Academy of Science 
2:75-77. 
Martinez, M. 1948.Los pinos mexicanos.Segunda edici6n, 
aumentada considerablemente. Ediciones Botas, 
Mexico . 
Minnich, R.A. 1983. Fire mosaics in southern California 
and northern BajaCalifornia.Science 219:1287-1294. 
Mutch, R.W., SF. Arno, J.K. Brown, CEoCarlson, RD. 
Ottmar, and J.L.Peterson. 1993.Forest health in the Blue 
Mountains: a managementstrategy for fire-adapted eco­
systems. UnitedStates Departmentof Agriculture Forest 
Service General Technical Report PNW-310, Pacific 
NorthwestExperimentStation,Seattle,WA. 
Nixon, K.C. 1993. The genus Quercus in Mexico. Pages 
447-458 in Ramamoorthy, T.P., et al. (eds), Biological 
Diversity of Mexico: Origins and Distribution. Oxford 
University Press, New York. 
Pase, C.P.,and D.E. Brown.1982. Rocky Mountain (Petran) 
and Madrean montane conifer forests. Desert Plants 
4(1-4):43-48. 
Perry, J.P.Jr. 1991. The pines of Mexico and Central Amer­
ica. Timber Press, Portland. 
Savage, M. 1991. Structural dynamics of a southwestern 
pine forest under chronic human influence. Annals of 
the Association of American Geographers 81:271-289. 
Segura, G., and L.c. Snook. 1992. Stand dynamics and 
regeneration patterns of a pinyon pine forest in east 
central Mexico . Forest Ecology and Management 
47:175-194. 
Stahle, D.W., and M.K.Cleaveland .1993. Southern Oscil­
lation extremes reconstructed from tree rings of the 
Sierra Madre Occidental and southern Great Plains. 
Journal ofClimate 6:129-140. 
Steele, R., S.P. Arno, and K. Geier-Hayes. 1986. Wildfire 
patterns change in central Idaho's ponderosa 
pine-Douglas-fir forest. Western Journal of Applied 
Forestry 1:16-18. 
Swetnam, T.W.1990. Fire history and climate in the south­
western United States. Pages 6-17 in Krammes, J.5. 
(tech.coor.), Effects of Fire Management of Southwest­
ern Natural Resources.Proceedings of the symposium, 
November 15-17, 1988, Tucson, AZ . United States De­
partment of Agriculture Forest Service General 
Technical Report RM-191, Rocky Mountain Forest and 
Range ExperimentStation, FortCollins, CO. 
Swetnam, T.W., and J.L. Betancourt. 1990. Fire-Southern 
Oscillation relations in the southwestern United 
States.Science 249:1017-1020. 
Villanueva-Diaz, J., and G.R. McPherson. 1994. Forest 
stand structure of the Animas Mountains and the 
Sierra de los Ajos. Paper presented at the Conference 
on Biodiversity and Management of the Madrean Ar­
chipelago, September 19-23,1994,Tucson, AZ. 
Weaver, H. 1951. Fire as an ecological force in the 
southwestern pine forests. Journal of Forestry 
57:12-20. 
415  
