USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
117
Mt. Trumbull Ponderosa Pine
Ecosystem Restoration Project
Ken Moore1, Bob Davis2, and Timothy Duck3
Abstract–This paper describes recent and current studies on the Parashant National
Monument in northern Arizona. These studies support the Mt. Trumbull Ponderosa
Pine Ecological Restoration Project. A major goal of the project is to allow wildfire to
resume its historic role in maintaining forest health following decades of declining
sustainable conditions.
Background
T
he frequent, low intensity fire regime that naturally occurred in south-
western ponderosa pine forests (Covington et al. 1999) was disrupted
when European-American settlers arrived in the area in the late 1800s and
early 1900s. Livestock grazing removed fine fuels that carry fire and logging
altered the age class structure of forests. Wildfire suppression reduced the
number of acres burned and increased the fire return interval. As a result,
much of the ponderosa pine forest in the southwest is functioning outside of
the range of natural variability and is in poor and declining health.
The most famous use of timber from the area was for use in the Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints’ St. George Temple. Due to the technologi-
cal limitations of logging using mule and oxen to skid in the remote, rugged
mountains, as well as those imposed by the use of portable steam sawmills
(which were not able to handle the largest trees), a sizeable portion of the old
growth was not harvested and remains standing today.
Today the forest consists of the remnants of the pre-settlement forest along
with approximately 100 years of regeneration. The previously open, park-like
stand, with tree densities around 50 per acre (Mast et al. 1999), has changed
to “dog hair,” with stand densities over 400 trees per acre. These stands are
susceptible to disease, insect infestations, catastrophic wildfire, and drought
(figure 1).
Introduction
For the past seven years, the Bureau of Land Management, working with
the Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI) at Northern Arizona University
and the Arizona Game and Fish Department, have been implementing a large
scale, ponderosa pine ecosystem restoration project in the Mt. Trumbull/Mt.
Logan area.
The Mt. Trumbull Ponderosa Pine Ecosystem Restoration Project involves
public lands managed by the Bureau of Land Management within the newly
designated Grand Canyon-Parashant National Monument in northern
1Natural Resource Specialist, Parashant
National Monument (PNM), St. George,
UT.
2Forester, PNM, St. George, UT.
3Ecologist, PNM, St. George, UT.

118
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
Arizona.  As a “sky island,” the approximately 17,000 acre ponderosa pine
forest sits atop 7,000-8,000 ft mountains amid a piñon-juniper/sagebrush/
grassland community. The forest contains 500-year-old ponderosa pine along
with old growth piñon, juniper, and New Mexican locust.
The goals of the Mt. Trumbull restoration project are to 1) restore pre-
settlement ecosystem health and function to a ponderosa pine forest in the
recently designated Parashant National Monument, just north of the Grand
Canyon; 2) reduce fuel loads and disrupt fuel continuity to reduce the risk of
catastrophic wildfire; and 3) gather information on a wide variety of ecosys-
tem components and processes in order to understand the effects of restora-
tion treatments. By reducing fuel loads and reestablishing an herbaceous
understory we hope to one day restore natural fire processes. Treatments
include merchantable and non-merchantable timber harvesting, prescribed
fire, and seeding of native herbaceous species. Due to the existing high fuel
loads, a variety of techniques have been used to reduce mortality of pre-settlement
ponderosa pine trees from treatment activities.
The project includes an adaptive management provision that allows manag-
ers to incorporate lessons learned into future treatments. For example, cur-
rent treatments leave more trees than the earliest efforts. These additional
“insurance trees” allow for some mortality from natural and anthropogenic
impacts (such as prescribed burning).
Figure 1—“Dog hair” stand of post-settlement ponderosa pines at Mt. Trumbull, Arizona.
Moore, Davis, and Duck
Mt. Trumbull Ponderosa Pine Ecosystem Restoration Project

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
119
The project can be broken out into seven distinct phases or efforts:
1. Project planning and regulatory compliance
2. Ecosystem inventory and timber marking
3. Merchantable and non-merchantable thinning
4. Prescribed burning
5. Restoration of native grasses and forbs by seeding
6. Maintenance of periodic low intensity grass fires in restored areas
7. Monitoring (occurs throughout all phases of the project)
Project Planning and Regulatory Compliance
This project was initiated prior to the designation of the area as a National
Monument. Current efforts must balance the needs of the restoration experi-
ment with Monument values. In order to ensure that project impacts do not
impair Monument values and to provide our public interests with sufficient
information to understand the project and its anticipated effects, we prepare
environmental assessments for all treatment activities.
Ecosystem Inventory and Timber Marking
Table 1 shows pretreatment forest stand density data compiled from 128
20 ¥ 50 meter ecosystem monitoring plots established by Northern Arizona
University within all existing and proposed ecosystem restoration units. In
these plots researchers tallied all stems of ponderosa pine, gambel oak (Quercus
gambelii ), juniper (Juniperus osteosperma), and piñon pine (Pinus edulis ) ≥1
inch dbh. Stems/plot were extrapolated to stems/acre for the entire restoration
Table 1—Pretreatment forest stand density.
Overstory
Pole
Overstory
Pole
Overstory:
Pole:
Overstory
Pole
Unit(# plots)
ponderosa
ponderosa
oak
oak
juniper/piñon juniper/piñon
locust
locust
Total
Lava (3)
84
108
46
17
- / 4
- / -
-
11
270
Trick Tank (11)
131
83
82
111
- / -
- / 6
1
15
429
Rye Flat (10)
126
100
42
67
7 / 2
7 / 5
-
-
356
N. Sawmill (8)
229
263
7
44
29 / 2
67 / 27
-
-
668
High Meadow (16)
117
103
74
166
6 / 2
9 / 13
3
6
499
Lower Sawmill (5)
57
26
62
76
26 / 9
29 / 16
-
10
311
EB-1 (4)
55
33
3
5
- / -
- / -
-
-
96
EB-2 (4)
88
57
117
50
- / -
- / -
-
-
312
EB-3 (5)
62
48
-
-
- / 1
- / -
-
-
111
EB-4 (2)
260
577
-
41
10 / -
33 / 33
-
-
954
EB-5 (6)
168
89
22
22
29 / 2
54 / -
-
-
386
Cinder (8)
87
27
33
22
- / -
- / 3
1
-
173
Hi-Lo (13)
134
103
20
73
14 / 7
20 / 15
20
10
416
Nixon (9)
124
100
20
4
18 / 4
38 / 13
-
-
321
Spring (10)
64
26
15
34
30 / 18
23 / 55
-
-
265
Boundary (4)
55
11
16
11
19 / 18
49 / 43
-
-
222
War Club (4)
104
106
1
16
22 / 3
174 / 24
-
-
450
Corner (6)
154
252
2
16
25 / 10
68 / 25
-
-
552
Mean stems/acre
117
117
31
43
13 / 4
31 / 15
1
3
377
Mt. Trumbull Ponderosa Pine Ecosystem Restoration Project
Moore, Davis, and Duck

120
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
units. The table shows overstory stems (≥5.9 in. dbh) and pole stems (≥1 in.,
£ 5.9 in. dbh) and total stems per acre for the restoration units.
Ecosystem monitoring plots used to collect the data shown in table 1 are
based on National Park Service long term vegetation and fuels monitoring
plots as described in the Western Region Fire Monitoring Handbook (1992).
Under conventions described in this handbook, all trees greater than or equal
to 5.9 inches dbh are classed as overstory trees. Trees that are greater than 1
inch and less than 5.9 inches are classed as pole trees. Growth increment core
samples, used to determine age, are taken from all live pre-settlement trees on
each long term ecosystem monitoring plot. In addition, a 10% random sample
of all living post-settlement age trees are cored for accurate age determina-
tion. This information is available upon request from the BLM, St. George
Field Office.
The ecosystem monitoring plots established by NAU in proposed treat-
ment areas and in the control area show that current forest conditions are
dense. Overstory, pole, and regeneration data show a mean of 569 trees/acre
in the treatment unit plots and 600 trees/acre in the control unit plots. Treat-
ment unit plots and control unit plots show very similar composition before
implementation of restoration prescriptions on treatment areas, with 47% and
48% ponderosa pine, respectively and 30% and 33% gambel oak, respectively.
Oak is a dominant species in terms of tree density, but makes up only 10.5%
and 13% of the basal area in treatment and control unit plots respectively.
Juniper and piñon pine have higher densities in treatment unit plots. New
Mexico locust appears to have higher densities in the control unit plots but
variability is very high due to the patchy distribution of locust. In terms of
basal area, juniper, piñon, and locust collectively contribute less than 10% of
the stand basal area on treatment unit plots, and less than 3% on control unit
plots (NAU 1997).
Diameter distributions show that 50% of current live trees are less than 20
cm (7.8 in.) dbh. Of these smaller trees, ponderosa pine are the major compo-
nent.  Numbers of non-ponderosa pine drop off at the higher diameter classes
(NAU 1997). NAU has reconstructed the forest structure from long term
ecosystem monitoring plots. 1870 was chosen as the pre-disturbance date
based on preliminary fire scar data, which shows the last widespread naturally
occurring fire to be in 1870, in addition to logging and grazing records, which
place domestic livestock grazing in the Mt. Trumbull area around 1870
(Altschul and Fairley 1989). Increment cores were taken from all live trees
identified as pre-settlement in the field, based on conservative size criteria and
bark coloration. After laboratory analysis of the tree core data, age data were used
to confirm or reject the field determination. For each cored pre-settlement tree of
any species, the 1870-1996 radial growth increment was measured on the
core and the 1870 diameter at breast height was calculated. For dead trees
(snags and logs), the year of death of each tree was estimated based on tree
diameter and condition class. To determine the 1870 diameter of dead trees,
growth estimates over the 1870 to death date periods were applied. For these
preliminary data, NAU used a predictive regression relationship between di-
ameter and basal area increment that was developed for pre-settlement pine
trees from samples taken from Camp Navajo Army Depot, Bellemont, AZ.
Results from plots show the reconstructed 1870 forest had an average of 22
trees/acre (55 trees/ha) versus 349 trees/acre (863 trees/ha) in 1996 for all
species, while basal area in the reconstructed forest was only 35.7 ft2/acre
versus 130.7 ft2/acre in 1996. These values are within the low range of pre-
settlement forest densities and basal areas found in ponderosa pine forests in
the southwest. Pine density in the Mt. Trumbull area falls within the range of
Moore, Davis, and Duck
Mt. Trumbull Ponderosa Pine Ecosystem Restoration Project

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
121
7-116 ponderosa pine/ha reported in several early National Forest invento-
ries and other studies in the region (Covington and Moore 1994).
Merchantable Timber Harvest and
Non-Merchantable Thinning
BLM uses a combination of timber sales, thinning contracts, and its own
workforce to reduce the density of trees within restoration units. Only post-
settlement trees are cut. Timber sales remove between 2,500 and 3,000 board
ft/ac from the units. The primary products are boards, poles, palettes, grape
trellis, sawdust, and fuelwood.  Trees less than 18" DBH are logged at a loss,
which is amortized by profits from larger trees (up to 28"). Loggers are re-
quired to protect residual trees from their harvest operations. Loggers are
hauling 12"-28" trees, all post-settlement.
Early in the project BLM reduced the maximum size of ponderosa that was
allowed to be cut from 28" to 22" and received no bids; the project lost one
year due to the failure to attract any commercial partners. We now include
larger (up to 28" DBH) post-settlement trees, although few of the trees cut
are of the maximum size. We now mark more leave trees than we did origi-
nally to provide insurance against losses during burning and logging opera-
tions.
In addition, ladder fuels composed of post-settlement ponderosa pine, piñon
pine, or juniper trees of less than 10 inches diameter breast height (dbh) are
thinned with power saws. Post-settlement trees are limbed with power saws to
reduce fire spread from the forest floor into the canopy. Pre-settlement trees
are limbed to a height of approximately 6-8 feet. Snags greater than 12 inches
dbh are prepped (e.g., fireline is constructed around these features) in an
effort to reduce ignition.
The BLM fuels reduction crew prepares units for burning by reducing the
height of any activity fuels, thinning unmerchantable trees, preparing firelines,
and raking litter from the base of pre-settlement trees. Logging slash is lopped
and scattered, then a low intensity broadcast burn is started under environ-
mental conditions conducive for burning (hot and dry enough to allow for
consumption of litter, but not so hot and dry as to allow tree mortality from
scorch height or canopy damage).
Consumption of deep layers of forest floor litter generates high amounts of
heat energy. Studies at Fort Valley and Long Valley Experimental Forests
showed very high mineral soil temperatures during burning. Smoldering
combustion takes place in deep layers of forest litter and may continue for
durations of 72 hours. Burning for this length of time can result in either
temperatures exceeding 140∞F, causing cambium death, or lower tempera-
tures for longer durations, which also cause tissue death (Harrington and Sackett
1988).
Prescribed Burning
Following preparation of burn units, BLM introduces low intensity pre-
scribed fires to reduce duff depth from a range of 1-10" to a range of .25-2",
and to reduce fuel loading from an average of 10 tons per acre to a range of
1-6 tons per acre. To prevent degradation of the Grand Canyon airshed,
Mt. Trumbull Ponderosa Pine Ecosystem Restoration Project
Moore, Davis, and Duck

122
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
favorable winds that carry particulate matter away from the canyon are neces-
sary. Sagebrush that exists in places as a significant understory shrub are not
excluded from prescribed fire.
Table 2—Prescription parameters in the use of prescribed fire.
Prescription parameters
Prescribed fire behavior
(forest understory)
Cool
Hot
Desired
Outside (max.)
Fuel model (s)
9
9
9
9
Live fuel moisture (%)
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
1000 hr. moisture (%)
16% = 50%
6% =90%
10% =75%
6%
used in lieu of
duff reduction
duff reduction
duff reduction
duff moisture
Soil moisture (%)
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Rate-of-spread (ch/hr)
2 chains/hour
2-6 chains/hour
2 chains/hour
2-6 chains/hour
Flame length (ft)
1 foot
2-3 feet
2 foot
2-3 foot
Scorch height (ft)
2 feet
3-4 feet
1 foot
3-4 feet
Type of fire
strip headfire
backing
backing
Probability of ignition (%)
60%
Spotting distance (mi)
.3 - .4 mile
Table 3—Environmental parameters in the use of prescribed fire.
Environmental parameters
Acceptable range
(forest understory)
Cool
Hot
Desired
Air temperature (degrees F)
30˚
75˚
50˚
Relative humidity (%)
46%
20%
35%
Wind speed (midflame, mph)
2
8
5
Outside burn block
Wind direction
west
northeast,
south,
at critical holding
northwest,
southwest,
point—minimum
east
southeast
acceptable moisture
1 hr fuel moisture (%)
11
5
7
5
10 hr fuel moisture (%)
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
1000 hr fuel moisture (%)
16
6
10
6
Restoration of Native Grasses and Forbs
by Seeding
The herbaceous and shrub understory of southwestern ponderosa pine for-
ests is important for many ecological reasons, including food and habitat for
herbivores, nutrient cycling, soil formation and stabilization, and its contribu-
tion to biological diversity and aesthetic appeal. Understory species composi-
tion and cover have been adversely modified since Euro-American settlement
and understory production has declined with increasing tree density. Key to
restoring the understory is an understanding of the on-site plant material,
including above ground vegetation as well as viable seeds in the soil bank.
To obtain a baseline of the species in the current soil seed bank at Mt.
Trumbull, soil samples were collected in September 1997 from 5 vegetation
types within three of the experimental block units. Soil samples were collected
in April 1997 from unburned, lightly burned, and severely burned patches
within the 33 acre subunit of the 96-1 restoration unit. Samples were placed
Moore, Davis, and Duck
Mt. Trumbull Ponderosa Pine Ecosystem Restoration Project

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
123
in the NAU greenhouse for several months. Germination from these samples
was compared to samples taken in a control (untreated) area to determine
where recruitment of plants from the seed bank occurs in a restored area.
Preliminary results indicate that a large number of seeds survive in the soil
seed bank in unburned and lightly burned patches within the landscape mo-
saic. The survival of these seeds has implications for seeding and recruitment,
as well as exotic species control. Samples will be collected in the future from
the experimental units to document changes in the seed bank over time and
with ecological restoration treatments.
Further research is needed to determine if perennial grasses and forbs uti-
lize the soil seed bank for seed storage. The majority of species that store seeds
in the soil seed bank are early successional annuals. In order to restore areas to
historic species composition and frequency, seeding of species that have been
extirpated from an area may be required, especially if those species are not
found in the soil seed bank. BLM has been applying seed to the units after
they have been burned in order to reduce exotic weed invasion and to assess
the effectiveness of seeding.
Efforts to use local genotypes are made, although local varieties are not
always available. Some seed used on the project was collected far way, even
though the species is considered to be an historic native of Mt. Trumbull.
Seed is applied using hand-held spreaders, usually within six months of the
burn treatment. Open sites are “back-dragged” using rakes or chains dragged
behind an ATV.
Table 4—2001 Rye Flat seeding.  Example of seed mix and application rates
used at the Mt. Trumbull Restoration Project.
Total weight
Lbs/acre
Species
(lbs PLS*)
(80 acres)
Big bluegrass   (Poa ampla)
50
0.6
Sand dropseed  (Sporobolus cryptadrus)
40
0.5
Sideoats grama  (Bouteloua curtipendula)
120
1.5
Utah serviceberry  (Amelanchier utahensis)
40
0.5
Fringed sagebrush  (Artemisia frigida)
40
0.5
Wood’s rose  (Rosa woodsii)
40
0.5
Arizona fescue (Festuca arizonica)
140
1.75
Prairie Junegrass  (Koeleria cristata)
80
1.0
Bottlebrush squirreltail (Sitanion hystrix)
100
1.25
Slender wheatgrass (Agropyron trachycaulum)
100
1.25
Mountain brome  (Bromus marginatus)
100
1.25
Western wheatgrass  (Agropyron smithii)
100
1.25
TOTAL
950
11.85
* Percent live seed
Maintenance of Periodic Low Intensity Grass
Fires in Restored Areas
Due to delays in implementing the project, re-entries have not yet occurred.
The plan is to complete the restoration process phase 1 throughout the area,
then re-enter blocks with fire as funding and conditions allow.
Mt. Trumbull Ponderosa Pine Ecosystem Restoration Project
Moore, Davis, and Duck

124
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
Monitoring
The Mt. Trumbull Ecosystem Restoration Project combines landscape scale
operational restoration treatments with comprehensive research. The Ecological
Restoration Institute at NAU and the Arizona Game and Fish Department
are heading up the research efforts tied to BLM’s operational treatments. The
research/monitoring studies accompanying this project are varied, but focus
on the effects of ponderosa pine ecosystem restoration treatments on vegeta-
tion structure and composition, and wildlife. To determine the effects of treat-
ments upon vegetation, 250 long term ecosystem monitoring plots have been
established across 4,500 acres of ponderosa pine forest. In addition, studies
are in place to monitor the effects of restoration treatments upon small mam-
mals, Abert’s squirrels, mule deer, bats, Merriams’s turkey, reptiles, passerine
birds, and insects.
To achieve sustainable management of ponderosa pine forest ecosystems, a
scientific basis must be developed for understanding the structure and dynam-
ics of healthy ecosystems. To quantify the effects of present day disturbances,
forests where high-intensity wildfires, bark beetle outbreaks, and other factors
are resetting the pattern of succession must be measured and compared.
However, NAU and BLM believe the threat to current unsustainable ecosys-
tems is so imminent that carefully planned and closely monitored treatments
to restore ecosystem health, based upon the best existing knowledge and de-
signed to adapt rapidly as new information is learned need to be carefully
initiated now. NAU, AGFD and BLM are providing a program of scientific
study which is providing the information and technologies needed by BLM to
carry out ecosystem restoration in an adaptive, “learn by doing manner.” NAU,
AGFD and BLM are providing an integrated plan of research, experimenta-
tion, and feedback, intended to lay the groundwork for integrated ecosystem
management by providing scientists, land managers, and the public with tested
procedures for restoring ecosystem health.
NAU Scientific Study
NAU scientific study consists of three elements:
- systematic analysis of changes in forest structures and disturbance regimes
since disruption of the natural fire regime;
- comparison of the effects of contemporary disturbances from high-inten-
sity wildfire, bark beetle mortality, prescribed fire, and understory thin-
ning; and
- initiation of restoration treatments in an adaptive management setting.
Sampling is occurring at a series of study areas, ranging from those with
extended fire exclusion to those still under frequent regimes. Sampling is be-
ing carried out at Mt. Trumbull, Beaver Creek Biosphere Reserve, Arizona;
the Sierra Tarahumara, Chihuahua, Mexico; La Michilia Biosphere Reserve,
Durango, Mexico; and other sites within the southwestern ponderosa pine
forest.  NAU has carefully selected sampling sites that maximize efficient col-
lection of data most valuable to ecological understanding and management
planning at regional, national, and international levels. By applying the same
sampling and analysis methods on a range of study areas stretching across the
southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystem of North America, this systematic
approach is aiding in producing a unified, comparable data set for addressing
the natural range of variability of pre-disruption forests, as well as the range of
contemporary forest conditions. These quantitative data are being used to sup-
port the development of operational ecosystem restoration and management
Moore, Davis, and Duck
Mt. Trumbull Ponderosa Pine Ecosystem Restoration Project

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
125
plans across portions of the Southwest, not only within the Mt. Trumbull/
Logan area.
Specific NAU studies include:
1) Permanent ecosystem monitoring plots for long-term monitoring.
Long-term monitoring is essential to assess current conditions, reconstruct
pre-settlement ecosystem structure, and evaluate the effects of restoration treat-
ments. Monitoring involves recordation of pre-treatment data, assessing cur-
rent conditions, followed by multiple post-treatment recordation of data and
analysis on the same plots to determine changes to the ecosystem. Permanent
monitoring plots have been established on a 300 ¥ 300 meter grid across Mt.
Trumbull. A total of 249 permanent ecosystem monitoring plots are in place
across approximately 4,800 acres of ponderosa pine/gambel oak forest.
2) Experimental blocks.
The experimental blocks are designed for detailed measurements of the
effects of ecosystem restoration treatments, and complement the landscape
scale sampling provided by the permanent ecosystem monitoring plots for
long-term monitoring described above. The purpose of the experimental blocks
is to quantify restoration effects through intensive measurements at a series of
five controlled study sites.  Each block consists of a 50-140 acre area divided
into two similar units. Treatments—ecosystem restoration and control—have
been randomly assigned to each unit. Basic measurements at each experimen-
tal block include contemporary and pre-settlement (pre-1870) forest struc-
ture (species composition, size distribution, age distribution), current
understory composition and density, canopy closure, fuel loading, and photo-
graphs.
3) Passerine bird habitat and population responses to ecological restoration.
The diversity and abundance of passerine birds is being quantified with
point counts over approximately 2000 acres in the Mt. Trumbull/Logan area
using a before-after-control-impact-pairs design. Habitat characteristics, as-
sessed on the permanent monitoring plot grid, are correlated with bird counts.
Baseline data collected over three breeding seasons (1996-98) will be com-
pared with post-treatment data.
4) Restoration of grasses, wildflowers, and shrubs.
The objective of this study is to develop practical methods for restoring
native understory diversity and productivity. Key to restoring the understory
is an understanding of the on-site plant material, including above ground veg-
etation as well as viable seeds in the soil bank. Soil samples were collected
from different treatment areas and germination compared to samples taken in
a control (untreated) area.
5) Butterfly response to ecological restoration
Butterflies are an excellent group to study to examine changes in habitat.
Because the butterfly larval stage is typically host specific, butterfly diversity
can be a good indicator of host-plant species diversity. Different species of
butterflies feed on a variety of plants, including trees, shrubs, grasses, and
forbs. Because both adult and larval stages are important food sources for
birds and other animals, population studies of this trophic level will provide
habitat information complementing studies on birds and mammals. Butterfly
species diversity and abundance is examined before and after treatment in the
restoration units, as well as compared between control and treated units. Pri-
marily, NAU is looking for changes in butterfly community structure in re-
sponse to the changes in forest structure and herbaceous structure caused by
Mt. Trumbull Ponderosa Pine Ecosystem Restoration Project
Moore, Davis, and Duck

126
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
the restoration treatments. In addition, analysis of abundance and species data
is occurring, as well as sampling of butterfly communities in pre-settlement
like forests.
6) Effects of high-intensity fire.
This study focuses on measuring ecosystem structure (trees, shrubs, grasses,
forbs, dead biomass) in sites burned with high-intensity fire, reconstructing
pre-burn conditions where possible, and comparing present and forecast con-
ditions over the burned area. Two severe wildfires in the Mt. Trumbull/Logan
area were sampled in 1996, the Lava fire (approximately 20 acres), and the
Logan fire (approximately 150 acres). This study  follows permanent plots
over several years in a forest which burned with high intensity following ap-
proximately 60 years of fire exclusion.
7) Effect of thinning and sprouting in gambel oak.
The purpose of this research is to examine the potential ecological restora-
tion of gambel oak, specifically by discovering ways in which the growth rate
of existing old-growth gambel oak can be increased and how the growth rate
of replacement large-sized oak can be enhanced. Two interrelated questions
regarding the ecological restoration of gambel oak addressed in this research
are: 1) Does thinning within oak clumps result in an increase in the growth of
residual large oaks? 2) What is the effect of sprouting on the growth rate of
large oak trees?
8) Wilderness restoration study.
Thirty-four ecosystem monitoring plots in the Mt. Logan Wilderness Area
were analyzed in 1998, and the data was used to reconstruct the forest struc-
ture in 1870, the date of the last natural fire in the wilderness area. In addi-
tion, a social survey is being conducted to assess public response to wilderness
restoration. A social survey to assess the local populations of St. George,
Hurricane, Fredonia, Colorado City, and Kanab on their attitudes towards
Mt. Logan Wilderness restoration treatments has been completed.
9) A potential wilderness treatment: forest restoration without wood removal.
This study will apply a variation of a full restoration treatment that does not
remove any wood from the sites. All logs and slash generated from the thin-
ning have been left on the ground. Cut trees were limbed to put as much
wood as possible in contact with the ground to accelerate decomposition. The
logs were bucked into four-foot sections to reduce the chances of an Ips beetle
outbreak and slash was moved from under the crowns of the residual trees to
prevent fire damage. Comparisons will be made between this technique and
conventional wood removal techniques to an untreated area. The effects to be
studied include site damage, understory recovery, and fire behavior.
10) Dendroclimatic reconstruction.
Increment cores collected in 1996 from old ponderosa pine trees were cross
dated and measured to develop a long tree-ring width chronology for the Mt.
Trumbull area. Currently, a third dendrochronologist is checking the chro-
nologies to improve correlations. This chronology will be correlated with
weather data to create a model that will reconstruct past climatic trends and
will be compared with tree age data and fire history results to search for past
climate-plant-disturbance connections and to suggest potential future changes.
11) Fire History.
Frequent, low intensity fire regimes are characteristic of ponderosa pine
throughout its range, but specific knowledge of the characteristics of
Moore, Davis, and Duck
Mt. Trumbull Ponderosa Pine Ecosystem Restoration Project

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
127
pre-settlement fire patterns in the Mt. Trumbull/Logan area is important to
guide the reintroduction of fire and to permit evaluation of the restored fire
disturbance regime. Fire history reconstruction based on dendrochronologi-
cal measurement of fire scarred trees, stumps, and logs is being undertaken in
the Mt. Trumbull/Logan area to estimate the frequency and seasonality of
pre-settlement fire, determine the date of fire exclusion, and develop a record
of post-settlement fires. A key feature of the project is the landscape scale of
sampling across the entire ponderosa pine forest, allowing researchers to
explore questions of fire size, intensity, and variability within the ecosystem,
issues that have exceeded the scope of many previous studies.
12) Modeling forest structure change.
The success of management is largely based upon the ability to predict the
consequences of alternative actions. Assessing the future cumulative impacts
of ecosystem management practices, involving highly complex and variable
interactions, is challenging. NAU is applying a process simulation model,
FIRESUM, to forecast the effects of alternative forest structural conditions,
understory and fuel characteristics, and fire occurrence. FIRESUM was de-
signed to integrate fire behavior and effects modeling together with ecologi-
cal process modeling. The model has been calibrated to southwestern ponderosa
pine forests and will be initialized with data from the permanent monitoring
plots in the Mt. Trumbull/Logan area. Comparisons among past and present
ecosystem structures, as well as potential future alternatives, will be made.
13) Habitat relationships of the Kaibab squirrel and other sciurids.
In 1997 a project was initiated to investigate habitat relationships of Kaibab
squirrels, rock squirrels, and cliff chipmunks in the five Mt. Trumbull ecologi-
cal restoration experimental blocks (EB-1 through EB-5). As a continuation
of that study, track stations and a tassel-eared squirrel feeding index were used
in the five experimental blocks in May and August of 1998 in these same
locations which were used in August of 1997. This study will provide infor-
mation on the nature and distribution of Kaibab squirrel feed trees and their
relation to restoration treatments, as well as habitat use information.
14) Indigenous land management practices.
In 1998, a project was initiated to explore indigenous land management
practices, focusing on the Kaibab Paiute band.  In particular, researchers are
seeking to determine the use of fire in the Paiute culture, as well as Paiute
knowledge of the ethnobotanical uses of the plants found in the Mt. Trumbull
areas. This information will be used to explore relationships between indig-
enous knowledge and contemporary restoration practices.
Arizona Game and Fish Department Scientific Study
NAU studies focus mainly upon vegetative response to restoration treat-
ments. Given the acknowledged need to incorporate a wildlife component into
this research, the Arizona Game and Fish Department (AGFD) has taken the lead
in securing additional funding and devising studies to determine the effects of
restoration treatments upon a variety of wildlife species. AGFD has assumed
responsibility for overall wildlife research coordination and implementation.
AGFD has identified a number of focal wildlife species and species groups
for evaluating the effects of forest restoration treatments. Focal species were
selected and evaluated with respect to the following criteria:
- their use of or association with habitat components that will be altered by
restoration treatments;
Mt. Trumbull Ponderosa Pine Ecosystem Restoration Project
Moore, Davis, and Duck

128
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
- AGFD’s ability to measure changes in population density and/or habitat
use;
- roles in ecosystem function; and
- economic/recreational value.
The selected species and species groups are: passerine birds, mule deer,
Kaibab squirrel, Merriam’s turkey, and herpetofauna. Sampling arrays for these
focal species are overlaid to the fullest degree possible, to maximize efficiency
and increase AGFD’s ability to assess the effects of restoration treatments on
all forest wildlife.
Specific objectives of wildlife studies are to:
- describe the short-term effects of restoration treatments on forest habitat
characteristics;
- quantify short-term effects of restoration treatments on selected wildlife
species, including response variables describing diversity, abundance, re-
production, and habitat use;
- identify focal species and areas for long-term monitoring of treatment
effects on wildlife populations, communities, and habitats; and
- develop habitat management recommendations for future implementa-
tion of restoration treatments in southwestern forests.
Data are being collected at two scales, reflecting the home range sizes and
anticipated responses of focal species to the restoration treatments. For passe-
rine birds and herpetofauna, a large number of individual home ranges have
been encompassed within individual treatment blocks, as well as the control
area. Consequently, detectable responses in population and community pa-
rameters may occur within these subunits, which is the focus of sampling.
Mule deer, Merriam’s turkey, and Kaibab squirrel have home ranges encom-
passing multiple treatment blocks and/or occur at relatively low densities on
the study area. For these species, responses to treatment are only detectable at
larger scale and may primarily be reflected in patterns of habitat use, rather
than population parameters. Sampling for these species is occurring over larger
aggregate units of treatment blocks.
Passerine bird studies
AGFD will extend the NAU passerine bird studies into the post treatment
phase. Point count and nest monitoring procedures conducted during the
pre-treatment phase in 1996 and 1997 will be repeated following treatments
in the area of the study for 2-3 years. The impacts of the treatments upon
avian abundance, diversity, and reproductive success will be analyzed. The
preliminary phase of this study is now complete and results are available in
Final Report—Heritage Grant I96008, Bird Abundance and Diversity Prior to
Restoration Treatments for Old Growth Ponderosa Pine.
Aerial photographs and GIS vegetative covers
In spring of 1997 low altitude, high resolution aerial photographs were
taken of the entire RCA. Cartographers at the Bureau of Land Management
National Applied Sciences Center will scan, ortho-photographically correct,
and prepare digital copies of the original photos. Once completed, AGFD will
incorporate these into a GIS Arc/Info data base for the Mt. Trumbull RCA.
AGFD will employ photo interpretation, site visits, and GIS overlays of NAU’s
300 m grid vegetation data to define and delineate the major vegetative cover
types present. This GIS information will then be applied to various wildlife/
vegetation studies in the RCA.
Moore, Davis, and Duck
Mt. Trumbull Ponderosa Pine Ecosystem Restoration Project

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
129
Mule deer studies
Mule deer have been captured and radio-telemetered at Mt. Trumbull.
Following collection of field data, habitat selection analysis will be conducted.
Landscape scale habitat selection analyses will be conducted on the first two
years of data once aerial photographs for the area are entered into GIS.
Telemetered deer were located once monthly during the winter of 1998 to
learn where they travel during this season.  General and micro-habitat data
collection components of the study are ongoing.
Kaibab squirrel studies
Tests of a track count index in ponderosa pine habitats on the Coconino
National Forest (Dodd 1996) have shown extremely high correlations (r=0.98)
between squirrel abundance and habitat use on the Mt. Trumbull restoration
study area. Count data is obtained from track plate arrays established in both
treatment and control areas. Each array consists of a randomly located grid of
track plates.  Treatment and control arrays are sampled concurrently, for a 48
hour period, annually. Feeding and sign counts (fungi digs, cone cores, peeled
twigs, and terminal clippings) are counted in a sampling grid. To date, 6 sam-
pling grids have been installed in untreated areas, and sign counts and popu-
lation estimates have been completed for the areas of sampling.
Herpetofauna studies
These studies are being conducted to document the effects of forest resto-
ration treatments on reptile species richness and relative abundance. Data col-
lection relies primarily upon pitfall trapping. Pitfall arrays are overlaid on the
300 m ¥ 300 m grid system placed on the study area by NAU personnel.  In
addition to pitfall arrays, plywood shaders will be placed on the ground in
conjunction with artificial PVC tubing burrows. Lizards caught or seen in the
arrays/substrates are included in data tallies. Data has currently been collected
at 76 pitfall arrays. Several arrays in the study area have never captured lizards,
suggesting that lizards are influenced by the varying habitat types present in
the RCA, and that certain current habitat conditions are not suitable for
them.
Migrant songbirds
The objectives of the migrating songbird study are similar to those of the
reptile study. AGFD is determining the current habitat relationships of au-
tumn and spring migrant songbirds at the site through pre-treatment censusing.
Then, AGFD will evaluate the response of migrating songbirds to ponderosa
pine forest restoration at Mt. Trumbull. Pre-treatment data are being col-
lected at 136 survey points, which are superimposed on NAU ecosystem moni-
toring plots. As treatment units are restored to pre-settlement conditions,
post-treatment surveys will be conducted at the same grid points. Seventy-
nine bird species were recorded on the RCA during fall surveys.
Nestling provisioning rates and fledging rates
In 1998 AGFD initiated a study of parental food provisioning rates to nest-
lings for several bird species that are currently common breeders in the area,
and which may be affected by ecosystem restoration treatments. AGFD deter-
mined hatching dates, number of chicks, growth rates, food provisioning rates,
fledge dates and fledging success for western bluebird nests and white-breasted
Mt. Trumbull Ponderosa Pine Ecosystem Restoration Project
Moore, Davis, and Duck

130
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
nuthatch nests. In addition, vegetation will be measured at nest sites for com-
parison with available habitat values.
Information on this subject is available in the report Short-term Wildlife
Responses to Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration Treatments in the Mt. Trumbull
Area, Arizona, reports for 1997, 1998, and 1999.
BLM bat roost study
BLM’s primary role in this ecosystem restoration project is implementation
of operational treatments and assistance to NAU and AGFD studies where
necessary.  However, BLM is conducting one bat roost study that will comple-
ment NAU and AGFD’s research.
Objectives of the Northern Arizona Bat Roost Inventory are to identify
and map key use areas for bats on BLM-administered public lands on the
Arizona Strip. Key use areas included roosts in trees, snags, caves, mines, cliff
faces, bridges, and culverts; watering areas at springs, stock tanks, and
catchments; and foraging areas. Priority was given to bat species of concern as
listed on the AGFD’s Wildlife of Special Concern in Arizona (AGFD 1997)
and the Arizona BLM Sensitive Species List (BLM 1998). Within a 15 mile
radius of the Mt. Trumbull Ecosystem Restoration project; the study was de-
signed to:
- locate bat roosts in all habitat types;
- identify characteristics of trees/snags used as bat roosts;
- map the availability of suitable roost trees/snags;
- develop a model to predict which trees/snags are most likely to be occu-
pied roosting sites during the active season;
- apply the model to control areas, pre-treatment, and treated areas within
the context of the Ecosystem Restoration Project;
- evaluate the impacts of ecosystem restoration treatments on bat popula-
tions and the availability of roost habitat;
- where possible, document roost-switching and/or evidence of roost site
fidelity; and
- evaluate the level of bat use of wildlife water developments in the area.
Future work will again focus primarily on Myotis volans in the Mt. Trumbull
area in a continuing effort to document the impacts to forest dwelling bats
from the ecosystem restoration project, and to develop the predictive model
for identifying potential roost trees/snags. A minimum of 20 additional snag
roosts will be required to lend statistical credibility to the sample size (Herder
and Jackson 1999).
Results from all wildlife project components will be compiled by AGFD
and project cooperators into a comprehensive final report. This report will
assess the short term effects of restoration treatments, and identify research
and management options for future treatments. Results will also be presented
at appropriate professional meetings and conferences, and submitted for pub-
lication in peer reviewed journals.
Conclusion
BLM intends to continue implementing the treatments in the Mt. Trumbull
and Mt. Logan area, while AGFD and NAU-ERI will continue their research
on the impacts of those treatments. Some units will receive second and third
burn and seed treatments. Land use planning for the newly designated Parashant
National Monument will provide new goals and objectives for the area. BLM
Moore, Davis, and Duck
Mt. Trumbull Ponderosa Pine Ecosystem Restoration Project

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
131
fire and resources staff, along with our colleagues at NAU and AGFD, hope
to restore the ponderosa pine forest ecological integrity. Ultimately, our goal
is to allow wildfire to play its historic role in maintaining forest health.
Literature Cited
Altschul, J.H. and Fairley, H.C. 1989. Man, models, and management: An overview
of the archaeology of the Arizona strip and the management of its cultural resources.
Report prepared for USDA Forest Service and USDI Bureau of Land Management
by Statistical Research, Plateau Archaeology, Dames and Moore, Inc. Contract
#53-8371-6-0054.
Arizona Game and Fish Department. 1997. Wildlife of special concern in Arizona.
Arizona Game and Fish Department. Phoenix, AZ.
Bureau of Land Management. 1998. Arizona BLM sensitive species list. Bureau of
Land Management, Arizona State Office. Phoenix, AZ.
Dodd, N.L. 1996.  Tassel-eared squirrel research project: April 1996 trapping results
assessment. Arizona Game and Fish Department, Research Branch, Phoenix, AZ.
Unpubl. Rep.
Covington, W.W., P.Z. Fule, M.M. Moore, S.C. Hart, T.E. Kolb, J.N. Mast, S.S.
Sackett, and M.R. Wagner. 1997. Restoring ecosystem health to ponderosa pine
forests of the southwest. Journal of Forestry. 95:23-29.
Covington, W.W., and M.M. Moore. 1994. Southwestern ponderosa forest structure:
Changes since Euro-American settlement. Journal of Forestry. 92: 39-47.
Figure 2—Post treatment example from Mt. Trumbull.
Mt. Trumbull Ponderosa Pine Ecosystem Restoration Project
Moore, Davis, and Duck

132
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
Moore, Davis, and Duck
Mt. Trumbull Ponderosa Pine Ecosystem Restoration Project
Harrington, M.G. and S.S. Sackett. 1988. Using fire as a management tool in
southwestern ponderosa pine. Panel paper presented at the conference, Effects of
Fire in Management of Southwester Natural Resources. Tucson, AZ.
Herder, M.J. and J.G. Jackson. 1999. Impacts of the Mt. Trumbull ecosystem
restoration project on forest dwelling bats. Preliminary report. Bureau of Land
Management, Arizona Strip Field Office.
Mast, J.N., P.Z. Fule, M.M. Moore, W.W. Covington, and A.E.M. Waltz. 1999.
Restoration of presettlement age structure of an Arizona ponderosa pine forest.
Ecological Applications. 9(4): 228-239.
National Park Service, Western Region. 1992. Western region fire monitoring
handbook. National Park Service publication. San Francisco, CA.
Northern Arizona University. 1997. Mt. Trumbull Ecosystem Restoration Project -
Progress Report, April 1997. Forest Ecology Lab, School of Forestry, College of
Ecosystem Science and Management, Northern Arizona University. Flagstaff, AZ.
