Copyright © 2007 by the author(s). Published here under license by the Resilience Alliance.
Kaufmann, M. R., D. Binkley, P. Z. Fulé, M. Johnson, S. L. Stephens, and T. W. Swetnam. 2007. Defining
old growth for fire-adapted forests of the western United States. Ecology and Society 12(2): 15. [online]
URL: http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art15/
Synthesis, part of a Special Feature on The Conservation and Restoration of Old Growth in Frequent-fire
Forests of the American West
Defining Old Growth for Fire-adapted Forests of the Western United
States
Merrill R. Kaufmann 1, Daniel Binkley 2, Peter Z. Fulé 3,4, Marlin Johnson 5, Scott L. Stephens 6, and 
Thomas W. Swetnam 7
ABSTRACT. There are varying definitions of old-growth forests because of differences in environment
and differing fire influence across the Intermountain West. Two general types of forests reflect the role of
fire: 1) forests shaped by natural changes in structure and species makeup—plant succession—that are
driven by competitive differences among species and individual trees and by small-scale disturbances, and
2) forests where plant succession processes are disrupted by major biological disturbances (fire, insects,
wind, or drought) extending across larger areas. Some case examples of old-growth forests where fire was
historically frequent are used. The examples sketch out the typical biophysical settings, fire regime, natural
disturbance factors, spatial features of patches, and the processes and conditions that produce spatial changes
of the landscape over time. These examples confirm the complexity of describing or defining old growth
in frequent-fire forests. We define fire-adapted forests at three spatial scales, whereas the standard definition
of old growth refers to a patch or stand condition. Our definition is based on ecological principles rather
than on the cultural aspects of old growth. It focuses on central tendencies, given all the possible
combinations of conditions and processes, that move forests toward old growth in the fire-adapted forests
of the Intermountain West.
Key Words: fire-adapted forests; fire frequency; fire intensity; fire interval; fire severity; old-growth forests;
old-growth landscapes; old-growth patches; old-growth stands
INTRODUCTION
There are two broad types of forests that reflect
different roles for fire. Some forests are shaped over
time by the natural competitive differences among
species and individual trees and by small-scale
disturbances affecting one or a few trees at a time.
In other forests, plant succession processes are
disrupted with some regularity by major biological
disturbances, such as fire, insects, wind, or even
drought, that extend across larger areas. Because
each of these broad types includes old-growth
forests, we might expect difficulty finding a single
definition of old growth suitable for all forests.
Forests in the coastal Pacific Northwest and other
areas where climates are wet are typical examples
of forests driven largely by natural plant succession
and small-scale disturbances. Such forests usually
have an overstory dominated by large, old trees with
multiple layers of younger, smaller trees beneath
the overstory ready to replace the large, old trees
when they die. Because these forests rarely become
very dry and fire is unlikely for three or more
centuries, there often is a large amount of decaying
wood from fallen trees.
But the Pacific Northwest model of old-growth
forests is not appropriate for forests where fire is a
frequent ecosystem process (Kaufmann et al. 1992).
In drier regions, forest types have evolved more in
response to disturbance by fire than in response to
successional processes in the absence of fire. Old
trees become a part of such forests because of
adaptations that allow them to survive all but the
most severe fires. Just as there are many different
types of forests for the diverse array of climates,
soils, and topography in the western United States,
1U.S. Forest Service (retired), 
2Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, 
3Northern Arizona School of Forestry, 
4Ecological Restoration Institute, 
5U.S. Forest
Service, Southwest Region, 
6University of California Berkeley, 
7Lab of Tree Ring Research, University of Arizona

Ecology and Society 12(2): 15
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art15/
there are many different types of old-growth forests.
Except for the moist, coastal regions of the West
and high-elevation forests of the Rocky Mountains,
there is a wide array of forests that experience fire
relatively frequently (i.e., <35-year intervals).
These forests include, among others, ponderosa pine
(Pinus ponderosa) in a number of different climatic
regions in the West; giant sequoia (Sequoiadendron
giganteum)–mixed conifer forests in California; and
mixed-conifer forests with ponderosa pine,
Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii), true firs
(Abies spp.), and other species in the southern and
central Rockies and the San Francisco Peaks near
Flagstaff, Arizona.
Recognition of the keystone role of frequent surface
fire in ponderosa pine dynamics was seminal in a
revolution of fire ecology understanding, and in fire
management practices, in the mid- and late-20th 
century. Harold Biswell, Gus Pearson, Harold
Weaver, and Charles Cooper, to name just a few of
the early scientists who studied ponderosa pine,
developed a general paradigm of ponderosa pine
forest structure and dynamics, although not
consistently with an eye to fire ecology. This
paradigm has generally continued today as a basic
foundation of our understanding, but with some
important modifications in the last decade. The most
common description of natural and old-growth
ponderosa pine forests is that they are “uneven-aged
stands composed of relatively small, even-aged
groups.” Park-like forests with open canopies and
grassy understories were typical in the more
productive stands of northern Arizona and New
Mexico. A variety of other conditions occurred in
less productive, rockier, or steeper terrains, where
understory grass cover was sparser and shrub layers
became more common.
No single definition for old growth is adequate for
this broad assortment of forests and climatic
conditions (Kaufmann et al. 1992). That said,
however, it has been assumed, all too often, that old-
growth forests should all be like those in the Pacific
Northwest. For several decades, national debate
about forest management focused on those forests,
and some of the best contemporary descriptions of
old-growth features came out of those discussions.
In this chapter, we focus on the features and
characteristics of old-growth forests found where
fire is an important and relatively frequent
component of the forest environment.
ECOLOGICAL AND CULTURAL
IMPORTANCE OF OLD GROWTH
The key structural and functional feature of old-
growth forests in frequent-fire landscapes is the
fine-scale diversity of groups of big trees
interspersed with grassy openings or canopy gaps
(see article by Binkley et al. in this issue). For
example, a hectare of old-growth forest might have
15 patches of trees, with each patch covering about
0.05 ha. Tree canopies would cover about one-third
of the stand, with canopy openings comprising other
two-thirds. This fine-scale pattern would result in
180–370 m of edges between tree patches and
openings (note, however, that considerable
variation exists among frequent-fire, old-growth
forests). Understory vegetation would do well in
this forest, as would animal species that depend on
understory vegetation. Animals that can use fairly
open clumps of trees may also do well, but this
structure would not support species that require
dense forests.
Forested landscapes in most of the frequent-fire
ecosystems in North America have been influenced
by humans for many centuries. Burning by Native
Americans, both accidental and planned, happened
extensively during the past 10 000 or more years.
Although humans directly modified fire regimes
and forest conditions in many places and times, their
effects were not spatially or temporally uniform,
and some forest landscapes with plenty of lightning
and infrequent human visitation were not
significantly altered by human fire uses.
Old growth has been defined many times and in
many ways. It is difficult to write a definition of old
growth that will be applicable to all forests. To some
people, old growth is simply a forest that has not
been disturbed by logging. “Untrammeled by man,”
“cathedral old growth,” “legacy forests,” and other
terms come to mind.
DEFINITIONS
Traditional and Emerging Definitions and
Descriptions of Old Growth
Old-growth forest definitions have varied during the
last two decades (Frelich and Reich 2003). Public
and scientific interest in United States’ old-growth
forests began in the Pacific Northwest. Early old-
growth definitions targeted coastal Douglas-fir and

Ecology and Society 12(2): 15
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art15/
western hemlock (Tsuga heterophylla) forests that
were the main habitat of the northern spotted owl
(Strix occidentalis caurina). One early definition
(1989) developed by Jerry Franklin and Thomas
Spies (United States Department of Agriculture
(USDA) 2003) from this period is:
 
Oldgrowth 
forests 
are 
ecosystems
distinguished by old trees and related
structural attributes...that may include tree
size, accumulations of large dead woody
material, number of canopy layers, species
composition, and ecosystem function. 
Several international organizations have also
defined old-growth forests, including:
 Old-growth forest is forest which contains
significant amounts of its oldest growth
stage—usually senescing trees—in the
upper stratum and has not been subject to
any disturbance. Department of Natural
Resources and Environment, Victoria,
Australia.
The old growth forests have been described
by 
the 
adjective 
primeval, 
ancient,
wilderness, virgin, pristine while in
forester’s terminology they are called as
over-matured, decadent, and senescent, old
growth. The old growth forests may be
defined as a climax forest that has never
been disturbed by man. The old growth
forests can be classified as per the age and
disturbance criteria. European Environment
Agency, Copenhagen, Denmark. 
Both of these definitions are similar to that proposed
by Franklin and Spies (1989) in that they mainly
pertain to forests having no severe recent
disturbance, and through time, succession produces
large, old trees with multiple canopy layers.
Old-growth forests have been defined by the Society
of American Foresters (Helms 1998) as:
 The (usually) late successional stage of
forest development. Old growth forests
generally contain trees that are large for the
species and site and sometimes decadent
(over mature) with broken tops, often a
variety of tree sizes, large snags and logs,
and a developed and patchy understory.
Due to large differences in forest types,
climates, 
site 
quality, 
and 
natural
disturbance history, (e.g., fire, wind, and
diseases and insect epidemics), old growth
forests vary extensively in tree size, age
classes, presence and abundance of
structural elements, stability, and presence
of understory. 
More recently, Franklin, Spies, and Robert Van Pelt
defined old-growth forests for the Washington State
Department of Natural Resources (WSDNR 2005).
They referred to forests on the west or east side of
the Cascade Range as “westside” or “eastside,” and
noted large differences depending on forest type and
natural disturbance regime:
 
Temperate 
old-growth 
forests 
are
characterized by a high diversity of
structures, and a high level of heterogeneity
in the spatial arrangement of the individual
structures. For example, old growth forests
typically incorporate a variety of sizes and
conditions of live trees, snags, and logs on
the forest floor, including some specimens
that are old and/or large for the forest type
and site under consideration. Spatial
heterogeneity is present vertically—in the
form of a vertically continuous but variably
dense canopy, and horizontally—apparent
in patchiness (including gaps) in stand
density.
Old-growth conditions vary in detail among
essentially all forest types in terms of their
exact attributes, which is why type-specific
definitions are necessary. However, old-
growth 
conditions 
differ 
profoundly
between moist westside forests, which are
characterized by highly infrequent, stand
replacement events, and dry eastside
forests, which were characterized by
frequent low-severity fire events. Patterns
of old-growth forest structure differ
dramatically between west- and eastside
forests, reflecting the differing disturbance
regimes. Westside forests are characterized
by stand-replacement disturbance or tree
reproduction regimes that occur at very
long intervals; for example, return intervals
of wildfire and severe windstorms in
western Washington were typically 250 to
more than 400 years. Dry eastside forests
—specifically the ponderosa pine and dry
mixed conifer plant associations—were

Ecology and Society 12(2): 15
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art15/
subject to frequent, low to moderate severity
wildfires that created small openings in the
stand where tree reproduction could develop. 
The recent definitions from the United States stress
the differences in old-growth forests that occur in
differing environments and fire regimes. This is
critically important because old-growth forests that
develop with a frequent, low- to moderate-severity
fire regime will be profoundly different than those
that develop in moist coastal areas of Oregon,
Washington, and northwestern California or at
higher elevations in the Rocky Mountains.
Keeping Track of Fire Intensity, Fire Severity,
Fire Frequency, and Fire Interval
Four terms used to characterize a fire regime—fire
intensity, fire severity, fire frequency, and fire
interval—are often used interchangeably and
incorrectly. To avoid confusion in our definitions
and descriptions of old growth, we need to clarify
what we mean by each term. Fire intensity refers to
the energy release during the combustion process.
Although fire intensity is important in understanding
fire behavior and immediate effects, it is not a good
descriptor of long-term fire consequences. Thus, the
more important term for understanding ecological
effects is fire severity, which is a function of fire
intensity and duration. Fire severity refers to
immediate and longer-term ecological consequences
to vegetation (and soils) that stem from a fire event.
Fire frequency refers to the number of fires
occurring in a given period of time and area, and is
closely related to fire interval, which refers to the
time between fires in a given period of time and area.
Note that fire intensity, fire severity, and fire
frequency each can be described as low, moderate,
and high. In general, low-severity, low-intensity
fires burn on or above the forest floor; moderate-
severity, moderate-intensity fires are those that kill
a portion but not all of the forest overstory; and high-
severity, high-intensity fires are those that result in
complete or nearly complete mortality of the
overstory. Other definitions of severity may focus
more on soil effects than on vegetation. Even a low-
intensity fire can be severe if it lasts for a long time
and burns deep into duff, killing trees due to lethal
temperatures under the bark. Low-frequency fires
typically are those occurring at least a century or
more apart. Moderate-frequency fires have been
described as those burning roughly every 35–100
years. And high-frequency (or simply frequent)
fires are those burning less than 35 years apart,
although we note that some of the most fire-
dependent forests have very frequent fires (typically
every 3–15 years). We caution that moderately
severe fires and mixed-severity fires (those having
areas of low, moderate, and high severity within
their perimeter) are not the same thing.
Old-growth Patches, Stands, and Landscapes
in Forests Experiencing Frequent Fire
Definitions specifically suited for fire-adapted
forests are needed because definitions developed for
forests experiencing infrequent fire are not
appropriate. By their very nature, forests that
experience more frequent fire are less dense and
have smaller accumulations of vegetation and fuels
beneath the forest canopy than forests growing in
more moist climates and experiencing infrequent
fire.
Standard definitions of old growth generally refer
to a patch or stand condition, not individual trees.
However, old trees can occur in smaller or larger
spatial configurations that may also be termed old
growth, namely patches and forests or landscapes.
Alrhough old trees must exist for the term “old
growth” to be relevant at all, “old” is a relative term
that varies greatly among species (Swetnam and
Brown 1992). An aspen (Populus spp.) tree may be
relatively old at 100 years of age, but bristlecone
pine (Pinus longaeva) may not be considered old
until much, much later. In some species, rather
distinct changes in appearance and structural
features of individual trees occur at a fairly
consistent age (e.g., about 200 years in ponderosa
pine; Kaufmann 1996).
We define old growth in fire-adapted forests at three
spatial scales, in each case referring to classical
historical conditions as the basis for our definitions.
Historical conditions include the forest structure,
fire regime, and species composition that
characterized these forests for millennia before
grazing, fire suppression, and logging associated
with industrialized society began in the late 1800s
(Swetnam et al. 1999). Our definitions are derived
from ecological rather than cultural features, and
they focus on “central tendencies.” Although many
exceptions exist that stem from natural variability,
it is useful to define the more common ecological
conditions encountered. Features at some spatial

Ecology and Society 12(2): 15
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art15/
scales may not be useful at other scales. For
example, Long and Smith (2000) evaluated
landscape patterns in relation to goshawks
(Accipiter gentilis) and restoration in southwestern
ponderosa pine, and concluded that patches and
clusters were useful, but stands were not. In other
cases where fire creates and helps delineate rather
uniform conditions across larger areas (large patch
size in the landscape mosaic), the concept of stands
seems more helpful. Thus, we recognize the
following:
G 
Old-growth patches are groups of trees
having similar characteristics and conditions.
Such patches may include fairly similar tree
ages and sizes or combinations of ages and
sizes, limited amounts of dead and downed
material, and dead trees and spike tops, but
they are readily distinguished from adjacent
patches having different characteristics.
 
G 
Old-growth stands are areas (generally >2 ha
in size and possibly as large as 40 ha or more)
that display somewhat uniform and consistent
characteristics of old-growth patches as
described above. The term “stand” may be
more useful for management purposes than
for describing the ecology of forests.
 
G 
Old-growth forests or landscapes contain
sufficient numbers of patches and stands of
old growth to be reasonably representative of
the forest type in historical times. However,
portions of the landscape may be in various
stages of development (even temporary
openings or patches of very young trees) to
provide future old-growth patches in the
landscape. Landscapes vary in size, but are
generally considered to be at least as large as
major natural disturbances, such as fire.
 
 In some forests having frequent or moderately
frequent fire, patches of trees regenerate at the same
time and grow throughout their lifetime as a
recognizable 
unit 
or 
cohort. 
A 
common
distinguishing feature of individual patches in fire-
adapted forests, regardless of patch size, is a
maximum age (age cap) based on regeneration of
trees after a past disturbance. These patches of trees
can range from a few trees to up to 6–12 ha or more
in size, but in many instances are between about 0.1
and 4.0 ha.
The arrangement of patches—the landscape mosaic
—is not constant over time. Rather, natural
processes, such as fire, insect activity, disease, wind,
regeneration of new seedlings, and competition
among individual trees, interact to maintain a
variety of conditions across the landscape. Just as
the components of patches, stands, and landscapes
vary spatially, so do the characteristics of ecological
processes vary with time. A wind event may be as
brief as a moment or as long as hours or days, fire
an hour or a day or months, drought a season or a
year or more, regeneration a year or decades or a
century or more, and reaching an old-growth
condition a matter of centuries. Under the influence
of climate and fire, the patches in the mosaic
changed with time, and in a fully functioning
ecosystem, the old-growth forest landscape was
maintained even though the locations and
proportions of various patch types varied. And
through all the changes of fire-adapted forests, fire
remained a primary factor that, with some
regularity, shaped the spatial arrangement of
patches and stands in the landscape.
ESSENTIAL AND NON-ESSENTIAL
FEATURES OF OLD-GROWTH FORESTS
Given all the possible combinations of conditions
and processes that affect forests and the
development and maintenance of old growth, which
structural features are considered to be essential for
old growth to exist? Table 1 provides a brief
evaluation of patch and stand features necessary for
fire-adapted forests to be considered old growth.
SOURCES OF VARIABILITY AMONG
FOREST TYPES AND REGIONS
Wide variations occur among forest types, including
differences in fire interval, fire severity, patch size,
species composition, typical age and size of old
trees, and accumulation of woody debris. Table 2A
lists typical ranges of these characteristics for fire-
adapted forest types. Table 2B provides specific
estimates for case examples we describe more
thoroughly below. (Fig. 1, a diagram shown in the
case studies section below, illustrates how different
mixtures of patch types result in different conditions
at a landscape scale, even within a forest type.)

Ecology and Society 12(2): 15
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art15/
Table 1. Essential structural features of old growth in fire-adapted forests. Note that whether or not a feature
is essential may depend on scale, e.g., patch, stand, or landscape. For example, age variability is likely at
a landscape scale, and snags and large dead and downed fuels may not exist in some patches.
Structural feature
Essential Structural
Feature?
Comment
Large trees
No
Tree size depends on individual site characteristics (species,
precipitation, soils, etc.) and competition. Young trees may be large,
and old trees may be small.
Old trees
Yes
Trees develop structural characteristics that are relatively unique
when old. Examples are dead tree tops, flattened crowns, different
branch characteristics, diversity in crown form, altered bark color and
texture.
Age variability
No
This is an additional feature in some old-growth forest types. Some
forests regenerate episodically (even aged) with most trees
establishing in a few years to a decade, probably in conjunction with
wet years and large seed crops, and in concurrence with relatively
long intervals between fires. Others may regenerate over decades
(uneven aged).
Snags and large dead
and downed fuels
Yes
Snags and large downed wood are essential elements of old forests,
although frequent historical fires may have limited the accumulation
of dead wood. The density and sizes of these features vary depending
on forest type, precipitation, and other factors. Snags and large dead
and downed fuels may be unevenly distributed across the landscape.
Between-patch structural
variability
Yes
High variability is a critical feature of these forests. Within-patch
variability may be low, but variation among patches is large.
Proportions of patches with different developmental stages varies
depending on forest type, climate, etc.
Several underlying conditions affect the variables
reported for each forest type in Table 2. A thorough
interpretation of these conditions is well beyond the
scope of this article, but it is important in defining
old growth to mention a few underlying factors that
result in old-growth variability, both among and
within forest types found across the interior West.
Latitude, elevation, and climate affect seasonal
patterns of moisture and precipitation across the
geographic range of fire-adapted forests in the
western United States. In general, conditions
become more moist and cooler at higher elevations
and more northerly latitudes. However, El Niño
cycles and monsoonal moisture flow into the
Southwest do not reliably extend into the central,
interior West; mountain ranges also cause
significant rain shadows. Combined with effects on
understory vegetation, these factors introduce
considerable variability in fire regimes, and
resulting patterns of old-growth patches in the
landscape.
Understory vegetation and fuel loading vary with
physical environmental differences described
above. Grassy vegetation beneath trees is
commonly associated with frequent, low-severity
fires that generally burn every 2–15 years. These
fires 
consume 
fuels 
that 
otherwise 
might
accumulate and carry fires upward into the crowns
of trees. In other areas, low precipitation and poor
soils contribute to sparse mixtures of grasses and
forbs that do not regularly support the spread of
surface fires. Where fires are somewhat less
frequent, shrub communities and accumulation of
other fuels often result in hotter fires that kill even

Ecology and Society 12(2): 15
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art15/
Table 2. Features of typical old-growth forest types. (A) Generic features for moist and dry forest types;
(B) features found in specific geographic regions reported in the section on case studies.
 A. Generic descriptions
Fire regime1
Old-growth Characteristics
Forest type
Intervals (yrs.)
Severity
Typical
patch
(ha)2
Tree Species
Ages3
Woody debris4
Coastal, moist
200–300+
high
100s–1000s
Douglas-fir,
hemlock,
red cedar
200–300+
very extensive
Mixed conifer,
moist
35–75+
mixed
1s–100s
Douglas-fir,
white fir,
pines
150–300+
extensive
Mixed conifer,
dry
10–35
mixed
0.08–2
Douglas-fir,
white fir,
pines
150–300+
moderate to
extensive
Semi-arid/arid
woodlands,
warm
10–100s
high
10s–1000s
pinyon pine,
juniper
100–300+
low to high
productivity
Semi-arid/arid
woodlands
cold
500+
mixed
single tree
bristlecone pine,
whitebark,
foxtail
300–1000+
low extent,
scattered
Ponderosa pine,
moist
15–50+
mixed
0.08–12
ponderosa pine,
Douglas-fir
200–400+
low extent,
very scattered
Ponderosa pine,
dry
2–15
low
0.04–0.08
ponderosa pine
200–400+
low extent,
very scattered
B. Geographic specific descriptions
Fire regime
Old-growth Characteristics
Forest type
Intervals (yrs)
Severity
Typical patch
(ha)
Ages
Min. sizes5
Woody debris
accumulation
Canopy varia-
bility6
Giant sequoia/
mixed conifer
2–35
low/mixed
0.04–2
500–3000+
180+ cm
moderate, sc-
attered
high
Southwest
ponderosa pine
2–15
low
0.04–0.8
200–300+
50+ cm
low, scattered
moderate
Front Range
ponderosa pine
30–70
mixed
0.8–12
200–500+
30+ cm
moderate, sc-
attered
high
Northern Ro-
ckies
mixed conifer
25–40
low/mixed
1s–100s
200–500+
40+ cm
moderate, sc-
attered
high
(con'd)

Ecology and Society 12(2): 15
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art15/
East-side
ponderosa/
Jeffrey pine
3–25
low
0.004–1.2
200–400+
40+ cm
low, scattered
moderate
 Footnotes:
1 Fire regime characteristics are generalized to typical ranges of intervals between widespread fire events
at the stand level (i.e., 4.0–40 ha) and fire severity on a qualitative scale of low, mixed, and high. Mixed
severity refers to a combination of fire severities, including some high-severity burn areas within a
matrix of low- and moderate-severity burn areas.
2 Typical patch (or stand) sizes refer to the area occupied by even-aged or relatively even-aged groups of
trees. These may be cohorts that established within a period of time following a disturbance, such as fire
or insect outbreak.
3 Ages of trees include minimum ages of oldest trees in the patch or stand identified as old growth.
4Wood debris accumulation refers to snags, logs, and branch material in the patch or stand.
5 Minimum sizes are diameters at breast height of the largest trees in the patch or stand identified as old
growth.
6 Canopy variability refers to heterogeneity of the canopy structure on a qualitative scale (high,
moderate, low), with high variability indicating multiple canopy layers across most of the patch or
stands, moderate indicating multiple canopy layers in part of the patch (but less than half), and low
indicating typically a single canopy layer throughout a patch or stand.
widely spaced trees and often create openings.
Furthermore, survival of a portion of overstory trees
may lead to scattered old trees that are relics of
former patches. Variable spatial and temporal
patterns of tree survival during fire events and
uneven establishment of new seedlings after fires
combine to create considerable heterogeneity and
complexity in some old-growth landscapes (Fig. 1).
Historical ponderosa pine–Douglas-fir forests in the
Colorado Front Range are a good example of this
complexity.
Other disturbances associated with fire behavior
include mortality from insects and disease, drought,
and wind, each of which affect both stand density
and fuel structure of patches and stands.
Weather during fire events may be a major source
of variation in fire outcomes. Fires in historical
ponderosa pine–Douglas-fir forests typically
burned for months. During this time, weather
conditions may have varied from moist, cool, and
calm to dry, hot, and windy. Day-to-day differences
in rates of fire spread and fire intensity undoubtedly
contributed to the mixed-severity behavior of fire
and resulting complex landscape patterns in many
locations.
Each old-growth forest type in Table 2 and each
case example discussed below undoubtedly varied
in one or more of the factors discussed above.
Furthermore, the significant role fire played in
historical fire-adapted landscapes prevented many
forests from reaching a successional climax in
which the structure and composition of the forest
would have stemmed from site suitability of species
and individual-tree competition in the absence of
fire.
CASE EXAMPLES OF OLD-GROWTH
FORESTS WHERE FIRE WAS
HISTORICALLY FREQUENT
We noted earlier that old-growth forests occur in a
wide range of settings, and arriving at a simple
unifying definition of old growth is difficult. In this
section, we briefly describe old growth in several
forest types to illustrate how differences in
conditions commonly encountered in frequent-fire

Ecology and Society 12(2): 15
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art15/
Fig. 1. Comparison of historical, current, and restored ponderosa pine landscapes in the Southwest (left)
and Colorado Front Range (right).
forests of the western United States help distinguish
various kinds of old-growth forest ecosystems. Our
descriptions focus specifically on historical
conditions because they provide useful insights into
future needs for restoring ecologically sustainable
landscapes and for conserving biodiversity. For
each forest, we provide a typical geographic
location or biophysical setting, the fire regime, other
prominent natural disturbance factors, spatial
features of patches, and the processes and conditions
that produce spatial changes across the landscape
over time.
Giant Sequoia–Mixed-conifer Forests of the
Sierra Nevada
Key historical features were high- to moderate-
frequency surface fires, and variable patterns of tree
establishment, producing small-sized groups of
similar-aged giant sequoias in the overstory, and a
secondary canopy layer of sugar pine (Pinus
lambertiana), ponderosa pine, white fir (Abies
concolor), 
and 
incense 
cedar 
(Calocedrus
decurrens).

Ecology and Society 12(2): 15
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art15/
Giant sequoia–mixed-conifer forests are found
exclusively in about 75 distinct groves at mid-
elevations (1500–2300 m) on the west slope of the
Sierra Nevada in California. Although this type
occupies a relatively small area of landscape, it
looms large as archetypal old-growth forest, with
the world’s largest trees and some of its oldest. A
number of national parks and monuments (e.g.,
Sequoia, Kings Canyon, and Yosemite), California
state parks and forests, and national forests contain
giant sequoia groves, and millions of visitors enjoy
recreation in these areas each year. These are among
the most productive conifer forests in the world,
with a history of extensive timber exploitation in
the late-19th and early 20th centuries. Most of the
remaining, classic old-growth giant sequoia groves
are now in protected status, but there are a variety
of management challenges regarding forest
restoration, fire management, and silviculture in this
type on federal, state, and private lands.
These forests are characterized by the presence of
giant sequoias dominating an upper canopy layer
that is typically at heights of 45 to 75 m. Diameters
at the base of mature “monarch” sequoias can reach
9 m or more, and 3- to 6-m diameter giant sequoias
are relatively common in the variable sized groves
(0.4 to 1600 ha). It is not feasible to sample the inner
rings of the largest or oldest-appearing sequoias to
determine their age, but the oldest trees that were
felled during the logging era of late-19th century had
pith dates from 1300 BC, which means they
germinated and established about 3300 years ago!
A secondary canopy layer often exists in giant
sequoia–mixed-conifer forests at about 30 to 55 m
in height, and it is usually composed primarily of
giant sequoia, sugar pine, and white fir, with
occasional incense cedar and ponderosa pine or
Jeffrey pine (Pinus jeffreyi) on drier sites, and red
fir (Abies magnifica) at higher, cooler sites. From
tree-ring studies of fire history and tree ages, it is
evident that these forests sustained frequent, low-
intensity surface fires for millennia, and the
recruitment and mortality of sequoias and other tree
species were profoundly influenced by this fire
regime. Mean fire intervals in small areas (8–40 ha)
ranged from as short as 2 to 3 years during the
warmest and driest decades of the Medieval Warm
(Drought) Period of about 900 to 1300 AD, to as
long as 10 to 25 years during the coolest decades of
the Little Ice Age (especially mid-1400s, early
1600s, and early 1800s). These variable fire
frequencies persisted until about the 1860s, when
large numbers of sheep were brought into the Sierras
and the fine fuels (needles, forbs, and grasses) that
carried the frequent surface fires were disrupted by
grazing and livestock trails.
The frequent-fire regimes before the late-19th 
century 
maintained 
relatively 
open 
groves
dominated by the sequoias and pine species. White
fir and red fir, in particular, were maintained at
relatively low densities in the groves because true
fir seedlings and saplings were much more sensitive
to fire-induced mortality than the sequoia and pine
species. Frequent surface fires also limited the
accumulation of downed woody debris (logs,
branches, etc.) than was typical of other classic old-
growth forests with very large trees—for example,
the coastal Douglas-fir–hemlock forests of the
Pacific Northwest.
Although high to moderate frequency and relatively
low-severity surface fires were the norm in giant
sequoia–mixed conifer forests for millennia, some
fine-scale (small patch size) crown fire events
probably also occurred at longer intervals. Small,
relatively even-aged groups of sequoias tend to
recruit in openings created by group or patch
mortality events, some of which may have been
caused by localized fire “torching” of individual
trees or crowning fire behavior in small groups of
trees. It is likely that these events involved mostly
the understory pine and fir species and younger
sequoias that occasionally established in relatively
dense, small canopy groups. Sequoia germinates
and establishes best on exposed mineral soil with
abundant light, such as occurs following high-
severity burning of small groups of trees.
Occasionally, an apparently even-aged set of mature
sequoias can be observed to grow in a nearly straight
line for several hundred feet. Researchers speculate
that this was formerly a linear canopy opening
created by the fall of a monarch sequoia, followed
by intense burning of the log and broken branches,
producing a well-lighted, mineral soil seed bed.
A consequence of more than 100 years of fire
suppression in giant sequoia–mixed-conifer forests
was an extensive increase in the density of white fir
within stands, and notable lack of seedlings and
saplings of giant sequoias. Forest and fire ecologists
and managers, concerned about these changes, were
instrumental in leading to the 1963 report by the
Leopold Committee. This report stimulated one of
the earliest and most progressive prescribed burning
programs in the nation at Sequoia and Kings Canyon

Ecology and Society 12(2): 15
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art15/
national parks. Although this program has had a
number of successes and setbacks, the amount of
area treated or restored with the use of surface fires
is relatively small, and far from what would be
necessary to reintroduce fire at its historical levels.
Ponderosa Pine Forests of the Southwest
Key historical features were high-frequency, low-
severity surface fires, and variable patterns of tree
establishment, producing small-sized groups of
relatively even-aged trees in multiple cohorts per
stand.
The southwestern United States harbors the largest
expanses of pure ponderosa pine forests in the
world. A more-or-less continuous belt of ponderosa
pine-dominant stands extend about 400 miles
diagonally from northern Arizona southeastward
across the Mogollon Rim to the Gila and Black
Range Wildernesses in southwestern New Mexico.
Additional extensive ponderosa pine belts are found
in the numerous “sky island” mountains of the
Southwest, and in the southern Rocky Mountain and
Colorado Plateau extensions from southwestern
Colorado into northern and central Arizona and
New Mexico. Stands with ponderosa pine as the
dominant species (>80% and sometimes 100% of
the overstory trees) generally occur at elevations of
about 1830 to 2130 m. Ponderosa pine mixes with
pinyon pine (Colorado pinyon (Pinus edulis),
single-leaf pinyon (Pinus monophylla), and
Mexican pinyon (Pinus cembroides)), juniper
species (Juniperus spp.), and various oak species
(Quercus spp.) at the lower elevations. Ponderosa
extends upward to 2600 m, and at the higher
elevations, it grades into so-called mixed conifer,
including various combinations of Douglas-fir,
white fir, southwestern white pine (Pinus
strobiformis), or limber pine (Pinus flexilis).
Ponderosa pine may the most fire loving of conifer
species in the western United States. Some
paleoecologists have speculated that its rapid
expansion in the Southwest, beginning about 10 000
years ago, was related to development of dry spring
and wet summer cycles, which may have promoted
pine and grass vegetation, lightning, and especially
fire. (We note, though, that ponderosa pine currently
exists in the central Rocky Mountains where
monsoonal 
summer 
rains 
are 
uncommon.)
Numerous fire scar studies in the Southwest and
elsewhere have clearly demonstrated the high
frequencies of surface fires in ponderosa pine
forests before the late 1800s, and a sudden drop in
fire occurrence coinciding with livestock grazing
and subsequent 20th century fire suppression
activities by government agencies (Swetnam et al.
1999). Mean fire intervals were as low as 2–10 years
across sample areas of about 8–100 ha (and
occasionally much larger areas of 1200 or more ha).
The shortest mean fire intervals (2–5 years) were
typical of the grassy, productive stands on the
Mogollon Rim in northern Arizona, and lower
frequencies (every 6–10 years and up to 15 years)
occurred in less extensive, lower-productivity
stands in the sky islands of southern Arizona and
New Mexico. Although frequent fires were the norm
in the pre-European settlement era, occasionally 20-
year or greater intervals occurred at stand scales of
1–15 ha during the 19th century. These occasional
longer intervals were apparently quite important for
ponderosa pine recruitment dynamics, because the
establishment of trees over periods of several
decades often coincided with the longest fire
intervals (Brown and Wu 2005). The long fire
intervals (gaps in fire occurrence) and years during
which similar-aged pine tree “pulses” originated
also tended to correspond with wetter and/or cooler
climates, as indicated in reconstructions of rainfall
amounts and drought indices using tree-ring width
data.
Thus, earlier researchers’ general model of old-
growth ponderosa pine characterized as uneven-
aged stands composed of relatively even-aged
groups is still valid (White 1985). However, we now
understand that the small groups of even-aged trees
(typically occupying 0.04–0.3 ha but as much as 0.8
ha) were often cohorts of trees established during
several years or a decade or longer in favorable
periods (i.e., fire gaps and/or wetter climate).
Furthermore, there was some degree of synchrony
of these cohort establishment events within and
among ponderosa pine stands across the Southwest.
Perhaps the most notable cohort events at these
scales dated to the early 1800s (variable, but
between about 1780 and 1830), 1910s to 1930, and
the mid-1970s to 1980s. The last two regional
cohorts (1910s to 1930, mid-1970s to 1980s)
occurred during periods with a combination of
much-reduced fire frequency (relative to the pre-
European settlement era), much less intensive
livestock grazing than had occurred from the 1880s
to 1910s, and generally wetter and warmer periods
that 
were 
favorable 
for 
seed 
production,
germination, and establishment.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 15
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art15/
A consequence of 20th century changes in fire
regimes and forest dynamics in southwestern
ponderosa pine is the well-known fuel accumulation
and crown fire problem. Fire ecologists and
managers who are most familiar with this situation
have 
concluded 
that 
uncharacteristic 
fuel
accumulation and dense forest structure conditions
that have developed in the past 100 years or more
are now leading to extraordinary crown fire events.
There remains some uncertainty and debate about
the frequency and size distributions of crown fires
in pre-European settlement southwestern ponderosa
pine forests, but there are ample reasons to conclude
that the sizes of the high-severity burn patches (total
overstory mortality) in some recent crown fires in
this type are outside the historical range of variation.
There is a damaging synergy between the changes
in fuels and forest structure as well as the extreme
seasonal to multi-year droughts and earlier arrival
of spring that have occurred since the late 1980s.
Old-growth trees are most abundant in the few
forests that have remained unharvested for timber,
but the effects of fire exclusion can alter forest
structure even in the absence of tree cutting because
populations of young trees expanded after fire
exclusion and the removal of competing grasses.
For example, never-harvested ponderosa forests on
limestone soils on the North Rim of the Grand
Canyon have maintained relatively open stands in
places where at least a few large surface fires burned
in the 20th century. Examples include the Powell
Plateau and Fire Point (200–250 pines per hectare).
In contrast, near Grandview Point on the South Rim,
fires were completely excluded after 1887 and
modern pine density exceeds 625 pines per hectare
(Fulé et al. 2002). The Gus Pearson Natural Area,
an unharvested forest on basalt soils near Flagstaff,
Arizona, supported less than 65 pines per hectare at
the end of the frequent-fire regime, but now has
more than 3000 pines per hectare (Covington et al.
1997, Mast et al. 1999). These radical changes in
tree density are typically associated with increased
canopy fuels, decreased herbaceous production, and
altered wildlife habitats, which underscores the
point that, whereas the presence of old trees may be
the defining factor of old growth, even stands with
numerous old trees may have been altered in
significant ways from the characteristics of the
historic, frequently burned forest (Stephens and
Fulé 2005).
Old-growth Ponderosa Pine–Douglas-fir
Forests of the Colorado Front Range
Key historical features were mixed-severity fires
and variable patterns of tree establishment,
producing transient, moderate-sized patches, many
with old trees first established after fires centuries
ago.
Ponderosa pine is a major component of forests on
the eastern slopes of the Colorado Front Range,
generally between about 1675 and 2750 m in
elevation. It is found intermixed with prairie grasses
and shrublands at the lower ecotone, and with
higher-elevation tree species toward the upper limits
of the upper montane forests bordering on the
subalpine zone (Lewis et al. 2005, Kaufmann et al.
2006). Ponderosa pine (a fire-resistant species) and
Douglas-fir (a fire-sensitive species unless mature)
are the dominant species in the lower montane zone
(roughly 1830–2440 m in elevation). Historically,
Douglas-fir was largely confined to north slopes at
these elevations. Ponderosa pine forests in the Front
Range are less productive than in many other areas,
largely because of lower precipitation, with summer
rainfall much less correlated with El Niño cycles
than in the Southwest.
Lower overstory and understory productivity, and
often a lack of continuous fine fuels to carry surface
fires across large areas, historically resulted in less
frequent fires than typically found in ponderosa pine
forests elsewhere (Brown et al. 1999). Fuels
accumulated during periods of 3–7 or more decades
between fires, largely in the form of fuel ladders
caused by gradual growth of smaller trees, shrubs,
and combustible fuels beneath taller trees. Thus,
periodic fires often killed patches of overstory trees
(including old ones), thinned the overstory in other
areas, burned as surface fires, or missed some areas
altogether—classic features of a patchy, mixed-
severity fire regime. It is likely that some stand-
replacing fire occurred even in very sparsely
forested patches dominated by shrub communities.
Colorado Front Range ponderosa pine forests
typically were very patchy before the era of logging,
grazing, and fire suppression. Patchiness stemmed
from two processes: mixed-severity fire described
above, and uneven tree recruitment into openings
created by fire. Both processes made patch size and
shape, tree ages and densities, and species
composition transient over time. Patchiness was
further shaped by local topography. Patch sizes

Ecology and Society 12(2): 15
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art15/
varied, but generally were between 0.4 and 12 ha.
Although mistletoe (Arceuthobium spp.) and
insects, such as mountain pine beetle (Dendroctonus
ponderosae), undoubtedly were present, there is no
clear evidence they were effective disturbance
agents affecting patch size and distribution beyond
a local scale, at least at the lower elevations.
Old ponderosa pine trees were very common across
historical landscapes in the Colorado Front Range,
and a surprising number of old trees still exist after
more than a century of human activities. In the
unlogged ponderosa pine landscape at Cheesman
Lake on the South Platte River (recently burned over
and effectively destroyed during the Hayman Fire),
trees more than 200 years of age (many more than
400) were found in considerably more than half of
the patches (Huckaby et al. 2001). Reconstructions
of historical conditions suggest that about 90% of
this historical landscape had a canopy cover of 30%
or less. Furthermore, openings or savannas, with up
to 10% canopy cover provided by scattered (and
often old) trees, constituted from 10% to 50% of the
landscape, depending on fire severity and the timing
of new tree establishment (M. Kaufmann,
unpublished data). The transient, patchy openings
or savannas often persisted for decades or even a
century or more, and were a distinguishing feature
of Front Range ponderosa pine landscapes.
Current landscape characteristics for ponderosa
pine–Douglas-fir forests in the Colorado Front
Range are not very different from those in the
Southwest. Beginning about 1870, loggers removed
a large portion of the old trees, initially creating
more openings or open woodlands. Disturbance of
the soil during logging and reduced competition
from understory grasses and forbs during decades
of heavy grazing apparently contributed to the
establishment of large numbers of new seedlings.
Then fire suppression removed the primary agent
for keeping tree densities low, and the result was a
fairly uniformly dense, young forest condition
across extensive areas. These forests have almost
no openings and are highly vulnerable to insect
epidemics and uncharacteristically large crown
fires. Thus, although historical differences existed
in landscape conditions for the Southwest and
Colorado Front Range, these differences were
largely eliminated through human activities (Fig.
1). Nonetheless, very different requirements exist
for restoration of old-growth conditions at a
landscape scale in the Front Range, related primarily
to differences in patch types and occurrence across
the landscape.
Old-growth Ponderosa Pine, Jeffrey Pine,
Jeffrey Pine–Mixed-conifer Forests of Eastern
Washington, Oregon, California, and Northern
Baja California
Key historical features were frequent low-severity
fires and variable patterns of tree establishment,
producing a fine-grain mosaic of small-sized
patches, many with old trees.
Ponderosa pine and Jeffrey pine are the major tree
species in the Eastern Cascades of Washington,
Oregon, and California, the Modoc Plateau of
northeastern California, the eastern Sierra Nevada,
and portions of the Transverse and Peninsular
Mountains of southern California and northern Baja
California, Mexico. Elevations for this forest type
vary from 900–2600 m across this broad geographic
range. These forest types can be intermixed with
pinyon–juniper woodlands and shrublands at the
lower ecotone, and with moister, mixed-conifer
forests or subalpine forests at the upper ecotone.
Many of these forests are relatively dry with annual
precipitations 
varying 
between 
40–65 
cm.
Understory vegetation is a mixture of evergreen
shrubs, grasses, and forbs. Grass cover is normally
much less than in southwestern ponderosa pine
forests, probably because of lower summer
precipitation.
Forest productivity is lower than in ponderosa pine-
dominated areas on the western side of the mountain
ranges. The decrease in productivity on the eastern
side is caused by rain shadows limiting precipitation
from storms coming from the Pacific Ocean. Many
of these forests do not contain a significant shade-
tolerant tree species, although in some areas in the
northern part of the range, Douglas-fir can increase
in density if there is no disturbance. Some eastside
forests in the central and southern portion of this
range shift dominance from pine to white fir when
disturbance is removed.
Frequent fire and limited precipitation maintained
open forest structures. Fire return intervals varied
from 10–25 years until the policy of fire suppression
was initiated early in the 20th century. Western pine
beetles (Dendroctonus brevicomis) and Jeffrey pine
beetles (D. jeffreyi), along with several species of
Ips beetles, killed relatively small patches of trees
before these forests were changed by harvesting and
fire suppression. The average size of historical
regeneration patches in these forests has been
estimated at 0.26 ha in the Warm Springs
Reservation, Oregon (West 1969), 0.02–0.35 ha in

Ecology and Society 12(2): 15
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art15/
Pringle Falls, Oregon (Morrow 1985), and 0.01–
0.07 ha in forests in northern Baja California,
Mexico (Stephens and Fry 2005).
Jeffrey pine–mixed-conifer forests have been
studied in the Sierra San Pedro Martir (SSPM), an
isolated area located about 130 km southeast of
Ensenada, Mexico. The SSPM is the southern
terminus of the Peninsular Mountain Range that
begins at the intersection between the San
Bernardino and San Jacinto mountains in California
(roughly 580 km separates the SSPM from the San
Bernardino Mountains and the flora in these areas
are very similar). The forests of the SSPM have
experienced neither tree harvesting nor a policy of
large-scale fire suppression. The Jeffrey pine-
dominated forests in the SSPM are one of the very
few that have not been significantly affected by
management activities during the last 100 years and
may serve to inform us about the effects of fire,
insects, disease, and drought on a relevantly intact
eastside ecosystem. We note, however, that
livestock grazing since about 1950 may have begun
to lengthen fire intervals and have other effects. The
forests of the SSPM are not completely analogous
to other eastside forests in the United States because
past fire scars have been recorded primarily in early
wood (Stephens et al. 2003) compared with the more
common latewood or dormant ring boundary in the
United States eastside forests. However, all of these
eastside forests contain similar flora and fauna, and
have similar physical environments.
High variability has characterized all live tree,
regeneration, snag, and fuel attributes measured in
the forests of the SSPM (Stephens 2004, Stephens
and Gill 2005, Stephens and Fulé 2005, Stephens et
al. 2007). The high variability in surface fuel loads
would produce equally diverse fire behavior and
effects, and this would maintain high spatial
heterogeneity if the forest continues to burn under
a frequent-fire regime. Examples of the high
variation in forest structure are summarized from a
systematic grid of plots that covered about 1235 ha.
In this area, average diameter at breast height was
33 cm (range 2.5–112); average tree density was
23.6 trees per ha (range 5–52); and average basal
area is 3.2 m2 per ha (range 1–8). Average surface
fuel loads were 2.6 metric tons per ha (range 0.004–
28); total surface fuel load was less than the average
load in 73% of the sampled area. Average snag
density was 0.8 snags per ha (range 0–4.04), and
26% of sampled plots had no snags. Nearly half the
area sampled (45.7%) had no coarse woody debris
(CWD). Average CWD density, percent cover,
volume, and weight were 17.6 pieces per ha, 1.5%,
7.7 m3 per ha, and 2.84 metric tons per ha,
respectively. Less than average values for CWD
density, percent cover, volume, and weight were
recorded in 57%, 64%, 67%, and 69% of the plots,
respectively (Stephens et al. 2007). Average canopy
cover was 26.8%, although canopy cover varied
from 0–52%.
Most structural attributes measured in forests from
the SSPM varied by about one order of magnitude
even though the area sampled has similar aspects,
slopes, soils, and dominant tree species. Similar
variability probably occurred in many eastside
forests in the United States before fire suppression
and harvesting because they once experienced
similar disturbance regimes and had comparable
physical environments. High spatial variation in
forest structure is a critical component of any
restoration strategy concerning eastside, old-growth
forests that once experienced frequent, low-severity
fire regimes.
Old-growth Mixed-conifer Forests of the
Northern and Central Rocky Mountains
Key historical features were relatively frequent low-
to mixed-severity fires that produced a mosaic of
small- to moderate-sized patches, many with old
trees. Mixed-severity fires typically left an erratic
pattern of mortality and recruitment on the
landscape, something that is rarely observed today.
In the northern Rockies, mixed-severity fire regimes
were found across a broad range of forest types,
including some of those dominated by interior
Douglas-fir and western larch (Larix occidentalis),
western white pine (Pinus monticola), lodgepole
pine (Pinus contorta subsp. murrayana), as well as
some relatively moist ponderosa pine types (Arno
et al. 2000). Mean fire return intervals varied from
25–40 years before livestock grazing and fire
suppression altered natural fire regimes (Barrett
2004). Elevation ranges for this forest type are from
915–1980 m. In northern Rocky Mountain forests,
mixed-severity regimes occupied about 50% of the
area now in national forest lands; low-severity
regimes included about 30% of this area, and stand-
replacement regimes covered about 20% (Quigley
et al. 1996).

Ecology and Society 12(2): 15
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art15/
Mixed-severity fire regimes produced highly
diverse forest communities containing abundant
seral, fire-dependent species, including multi-aged
stands with large, old, fire-resistant trees that are of
great importance as wildlife habitat (McClelland
1979). These regimes also helped produce intricate
mosaics of even-aged tree groups and contrasting
forest communities at the landscape level (Arno et
al. 2000). Estimates of past patch sizes are rare.
Individual stands were often uneven-aged and
multi-layered. Moderately short fire intervals
allowed important shrubs and hardwoods to remain
abundant. These included aspen, Scouler willow
(Salix scouleriana), serviceberry (Amelanchier 
spp.), chokecherry (Prunus virginiana), and
redstem (Ceanothus sanguineus) and evergreen
ceanothus (Ceanothus spp.) (Arno et al. 1985).
Small meadows and grassy openings and a variety
of herbaceous plants would also have been abundant
(Stickney 1990). As a result of the moderately
frequent fires and variable fire severities, stands
often formed a complex and intricate mosaic on the
landscape.
On landscapes, such as large wilderness areas, the
effects of fire exclusion tend to include greater
uniformity in stand ages and in stand composition
and structure, together with a declining diversity of
undergrowth species (Arno et al. 2000). Basal area
and numbers of trees per hectare may increase
dramatically. This results in increased physiological
stress and the opportunity for extensive forest
mortality caused by epidemics of insects and
diseases (Monnig and Byler 1992, Biondi 1996).
Fire exclusion and related advancing succession
also bring increased canopy densities and increased
loads of dead and living (ladder) fuels across the
forest landscape, which increases the likelihood of
unusually severe and extensive wildfires.
Large stand-replacing fires have increased in recent
decades, and modeling suggests that the effects of
continued increases in forest density will be higher
proportions of large stand-replacing fires (Keane et
al. 1998). There will be a loss of multi-aged stands
of seral tree species. The intricate, fine-grained
landscape mosaic of diverse stand structures and
compositions will be replaced by a coarser pattern
of even-aged stands.
Under current conditions, a summer wildfire that
escapes suppression could easily become a large,
stand-replacing burn. Successional studies indicate
that such a fire would probably give rise to new
stands of lodgepole pine and Douglas-fir with little,
if any, ponderosa pine (Arno et al. 1985). These
post-fire stands would probably have a dense, even-
aged structure, as well as abundant fire-killed
downed trees, favoring continuance of a stand-
replacement fire regime in the future (Scott 1998).
Restoration of fire in mixed-severity regimes
requires special care because fuel and stand
structures in many areas are outside the historical
range of variability (Quigley et al. 1996). Some
naturally ignited fires burning under these altered
conditions 
might 
adversely 
affect 
natural
biodiversity (Harrington 1996).
SYNOPSIS
The case studies in the section above and features
of old growth summarized earlier attest to the
complexity of describing or defining old growth in
frequent-fire forests of the western United States.
Nonetheless, several features of fire-adapted, old-
growth forests clearly distinguish them from old
growth in other forest types in which fire is a very
infrequent visitor. For example, periodic fire
contributed to patchiness of the forest landscape,
often working in concert with other small or
moderate-sized natural disturbances, and with patch
sizes governed by a host of variables. Regeneration
was partly dependent on the creation of patchy
openings, and then by the temporal and spatial
coincidences of these openings with reduced fire
frequency and favorable climate episodes for seed
production, germination, and seedling survival. Fire
assured that fire-sensitive tree species, such as
Douglas-fir or white fir, generally failed to dominate
landscapes, although they often were capable in the
absence of fire of making forests vulnerable to
uncharacteristically large and severe fire behavior.
Patches varied in size and came with trees of many
ages, accounting for the large numbers of old trees
in the historical landscape, but also a shifting pattern
of forest structure and composition over time.
Finally, all forest landscapes adapted to frequent
fires suffered alike when subjected to logging,
grazing, and fire suppression. They became highly
vulnerable to uncharacteristic fire and damage
caused by insects and drought. Now they require
massive work to restore them to a healthy,
sustainable condition. However, many of these
forests still retain significant numbers of old trees,
hidden from view by dense, younger trees and

Ecology and Society 12(2): 15
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art15/
vulnerable to their competition. Carefully applied
treatments often provide an opportunity to save
these trees where they are in groups similar to pre-
European settlement conditions, and, in the process,
maintain old-growth conditions and begin to restore
more natural levels of fire recurrence and surface
fire behavior.
Responses to this article can be read online at:
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art15/responses/
LITERATURE CITED
Arno, S. F., D. J. Parsons, and R. E. Keane. 2000.
Mixed-severity fire regimes in the northern Rocky
Mountains: consequences of fire exclusion and
options for the future. Pages 225–232 in D. Cole, S.
F. McCool, W. T. Borrie, and J. O’Loughlin,
compilers. Wilderness science in a time of change
conference—Volume 5: Wilderness ecosystems,
threats, and management. U.S. Forest Service
Proceedings RMRS-P-15-VOL-5.
Arno, S. F., D. G. Simmerman, and R. E. Keane. 
1985. Forest succession on four habitat types in
western Montana. U.S. Forest Service General
Technical Report INT-GTR-177.
Barrett, S. W. 2004. Altered fire intervals and fire
cycles in the northern Rockies. Fire Management
Today 64:25–29.
Biondi, F. 1996. Decadal-scale dynamics at the Gus
Pearson Natural Area: evidence for inverse (a)
symmetric competition? Canadian Journal Forestry
Research 26:1397–1406.
Brown, P. M., M. R. Kaufmann, and W. D.
Shepperd. 1999. Long-term, landscape patterns of
past fire events in a montane ponderosa pine forest
of central Colorado. Landscape Ecology 14(6):513–
532.
Brown, P. M., and R. Wu. 2005. Climate and
disturbance forcing of episodic tree recruitment in
a southwestern ponderosa pine landscape. Ecology 
86:3030–3038.
Covington, W. W., P. Z. Fulé, M. M. Moore, S. C.
Hart, T. E. Kolb, J. N. Mast, S. S. Sackett, and
M. R. Wagner. 1997. Restoring ecosystem health
in ponderosa pine forests of the southwestern United
States. Journal of Forestry 95:23–29.
Frelich, L. E., and P. B. Reich. 2003. Perspectives
on development of definitions and values related to
old-growth forests. Environmental Reviews 11:S9–
S22.
Fulé, P. Z., W. W. Covington, M. M. Moore, T. A.
Heinlein, and A. E. M. Waltz. 2002. Natural
variability in forests of Grand Canyon, USA.
Journal of Biogeography 29:31–47.
Harrington, M. G. 1996. Prescribed fire
applications: restoring ecological structure and
process in ponderosa pine forests. Page 41 in C. C.
Hardy and S. F. Arno, editors. The use of fire in
forest restoration. U.S. Forest Service General
Technical Report INT-341.
.
Helms, J. 1998. The dictionary of forestry. Society
of American Foresters, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
Huckaby, L. S., M. R. Kaufmann, J. M. Stoker,
and P. J. Fornwalt. 2001. Landscape patterns of
montane forest age structure relative to fire history
at Cheesman Lake in the Colorado Front Range.
Pages 19–27 in R. K. Vance, C. B. Edminster, W.
W. Covington, and J. A. Blake, compilers.
Ponderosa pine ecosystems restoration and
conservation: steps toward stewardship. U.S. Forest
Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station
Proceedings RMRS-P-22. (online) URL: http://ww
w.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs/rmrs_p022/rmrs_p022_019_027.
pdf.
Kaufmann, M. R. 1996. To live fast or not: growth,
vigor and longevity of old-growth ponderosa pine
and lodgepole pine trees. Tree Physiology 16:139–
144.
Kaufmann, M. R., W. H. Moir, and W. W.
Covington. 1992. Pages 1–11 in Old-growth
forests: what do we know about their ecology and
management in the Southwest and Rocky Mountain
Regions? U.S. Forest Service General Technical
Report RM-213.
Kaufmann M. R., T. T. Veblen, and W. H. Romme. 
2006. Historical fire regimes in ponderosa pine
forests of the Colorado Front Range, and
recommendations for ecological restoration and
fuels management. In Front Range Fuels Treatment
Partnership Roundtable, Findings of the Ecology

Ecology and Society 12(2): 15
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art15/
Workgroup. [online] URL: http://frftp.org/roundtable/
pipo.pdf.
Keane, R. E., K. C. Ryan, and M. A. Finney. 1998.
Simulating the consequences of altered fire regimes
on a complex landscape in Glacier National Park,
USA. Pages 310–324 in T. L. Pruden and L. A.
Brennan, editors. Tall Timbers Fire Ecology
Conference No. 20. Tall Timbers Research Station,
Tallahassee, Florida, USA.
Lewis, P., M. R. Kaufmann, D. Leatherman, and
L. S. Huckaby. 2005. Report on the health of
Colorado's forests 2004: special issue on ponderosa
pine forests. Colorado State Forest Service,
Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado,
USA. [online] URL: http://www.fs.fed.us/rm/analytics/
staff/pubs/2004_Forest_Health_Report.pdf.
Long, J. N., and F. W. Smith. 2000. Restructuring
the forest: goshawks and the restoration of
southwestern ponderosa pine. Journal of Forestry 
98:25–30.
Mast, J. N., W. W. Covington, P. Z. Fulé, M. M.
Moore, and A. E. M. Waltz. 1999. Restoration of
presettlement age structure of an Arizona ponderosa
pine forest. Ecological Applications 9:228–239.
McClelland, B. R. 1979. Habitat management for
hole-nesting birds in forests of western larch and
Douglas-fir. Journal of Forestry 77:480–483.
Monnig, E., and J. Byler. 1992. Forest health and
ecological integrity in the northern Rockies. U.S.
Forest Service Forest Pest Management Report
92-7.
Morrow, R. J. 1985. Age structure and spatial
pattern of old-growth ponderosa pine in Pringle
Falls Experimental Forest, central Oregon. Thesis.
Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon, USA.
Quigley, T. M, R. W. Haynes, and R. T. Graham,
technical editors. 1996. Integrated scientific
assessment for ecosystem management in the
Interior Columbia Basin. U.S. Forest Service
General Technical Report PNW-382.
Scott, J. H. 1998. Fuel reduction in residential and
scenic forests: a comparison of three treatments in
a western Montana ponderosa pine stand. U.S.
Forest Service Research Paper RMRS-5.
Spies, T. A., and J. F. Franklin. 1989. Gap
characteristics 
and 
vegetation 
response 
in
coniferous forests of the Pacific Northwest. Ecology 
70:543–545.
Stephens, S. L. 2004. Fuel loads, snag density, and
snag recruitment in an unmanaged Jeffrey pine–
mixed conifer forest in northwestern Mexico. Forest
Ecology and Management 199:103–113.
Stephens, S. L., and D. R. Fry. 2005. Spatial
distribution of regeneration patches in an old-
growth Pinus jeffreyi–mixed conifer forest in
northwestern Mexico. Journal of Vegetation Science 
16:693–702.
Stephens, S. L., D. L. Fry, E. Franco-Vizcaino, B.
M. Collins, and J. J. Moghaddas. 2007. Coarse
woody debris and canopy cover in an old-growth
Jeffrey pine–mixed conifer forest from the Sierra
San Pedro Martir, Mexico. Forest Ecology and
Management 240:87–95.
Stephens, S. L., and P. Z. Fulé. 2005. Western pine
forests with continuing frequent fire regimes:
possible reference sites for management. Journal of
Forestry 103:357–362.
Stephens, S. L., and S. J. Gill. 2005. Forest
structure and mortality in an old-growth Jeffrey
pine–mixed conifer forest in northwestern Mexico.
Forest Ecology and Management 205:15–28.
Stephens, S. L., C. N. Skinner, and S. J. Gill. 2003. 
Dendrochronology based fire history of Jeffrey
pine–mixed conifer forests in the Sierra San Pedro
Martir, Mexico. Canadian Journal of Forest
Research 33:1090–1101.
Stickney, P. F. 1990. Early development of
vegetation following holocaustic fire in northern
Rocky Mountain forests. Northwest Science 
64:243–246.
Swetnam, T. W., and P. M. Brown. 1992. Oldest
known conifers in the southwestern United States:
temporal and spatial patterns of maximum age.
Pages 24–38 in M. R. Kaufmann, W. H. Moir, and
R. L. Bassett, technical coordinators. Old-growth
forests in the Southwest and Rocky Mountain
regions, Proceedings of a workshop. U.S. Forest
Service General Technical Report RM-213.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 15
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art15/
Swetnam, T. W., C. D. Allen, and J. L. Betancourt. 
1999. Applied historical ecology: using the past to
manage for the future. Ecological Applications 9
(4):1189–1206.
United States Department of Agriculture
(USDA). 2003. Key findings on old-growth forests. 
Science Update, Issue 4. U.S. Forest Service, Pacific
Northwest Research Station, Portland, Oregon,
USA.
Washington State Division of Natural Resources
(WSDNR). 2005. Definition and inventory of old-
growth forests on DNR-managed state lands. 
Washington 
State 
Old 
Growth 
Definition
Committee Olympia, Washington, USA. [online]
URL: http://www.dnr.wa.gov/htdocs/lm/oldgrowth/
index.html.
West, N. E. 1969. Tree patterns in central Oregon
ponderosa 
pine 
forests. 
American 
Midland
Naturalist 81:584–590.
White, A. S. 1985. Presettlement regeneration
patterns in a southwestern ponderosa pine stand.
Ecology 66:589–594.
