 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Tassel-eared Squirrel Habitat Use and Abundance in Managed Forests  
within the Wildland Urban Interface 
 
By Fenner Yarborough and Chad Loberger, Arizona Game and Fish Department Research Branch 
 
Introduction 
The tassel-eared squirrel (Sciurus aberti) is considered a ponderosa pine “obligate” species. Squirrels depend on this 
ecosystem for most of its life requirements: nest placement, food, escape cover, and movement corridors. They have a 
preference for interlocking tree canopies. They are a popular wildlife viewing and small game species and are im-
portant prey for mammalian predators and hawks, including the northern goshawk. The squirrel may reduce pondero-
sa pine growth and cone production, while also increasing nutrient availability to the pine by increasing litter fall and 
dispersing hypogeous, or underground, fungi spores that facilitate nutrient and water uptake; thus, enhancing seedling 
survival, forest regeneration, and growth. 
  
Contemporary ponderosa pine forests tend to be dominated by relatively homogeneous, dense stands of younger trees 
with a depauperate herbaceous and shrub understory, and increased vulnerability to high-intensity crown fire. Manag-
ers are implementing prescriptions designed to reduce tree density and overstory canopy, while increasing productivi-
ty and diversity of understory vegetation. Given the squirrels’ reliance on and contributions to the ponderosa pine, 
managers need to know what effects broad-scale forest restoration or other fuels reduction treatments may have on 
squirrel populations. To understand the effects of Winter Core Area (WCA’s) retention on tassel-eared squirrels, the 
Arizona Game and Fish Department studied squirrel use and abundance in areas that received forest restoration treat-
ments based on non-wildlife management 
goals (Fort Valley Experimental Forest in 
Flagstaff, Ariz.) and areas that incorpo-
rated wildlife habitat objectives (Flagstaff 
Pulliam Airport and Mountainaire, Ariz.). 
Habitat treatments included establishment 
of WCA’s, which have high basal area 
and canopy cover and are specifically set 
aside to benefit tassel-eared squirrels. The 
Airport study site enabled analysis of 
squirrel abundance and habitat use in a 
133-acre area of forest that received resto-
ration treatments and incorporated two 
WCA’s (27 acres total). The Mountainaire 
project treatment incorporated one larger 
WCA (100 acres) set aside for squirrels. 
The prescription on both sites emphasized 
mechanical thinning to re-create pre-
settlement forest conditions, plus retention 
of WCA’s.     
    
 
 
 
 Fact Sheet: Tassel-eared Squirrels in Managed Forests within the Wildland Urban Interface        February 2013     
 
Non-Winter Core Area 
Winter Core Area 
Pre-treatment 
Post-treatment 
Pre-treatment 
Post-treatment 

 
Research Findings 
 
Squirrel abundance was higher in areas with higher basal area (>80 ft2/acre), canopy closure (>50% ground-
based densiometer), and interlocking canopies (i.e., WCA’s). These patches were as small as 10 acres and as big 
as 100 acres.  
 
 
Home ranges were larger in non-winter (average=33 acres) compared to winter (average=9.6 acres). These find-
ings are consistent with Loberger et al. (2011), who reported average non-winter and winter home ranges of 
34.1 and 12.6 acres, respectively, at Fort Valley.  
 
 
During non-winter, squirrels split their time between the relatively smaller Airport WCA’s (9–17 acres) and 
treated areas, while squirrels at the Mountainaire study site mostly used the larger WCA (100 acres).  
 
 
During winter months, squirrels at both sites largely restricted their movements to the WCA’s or nearby untreat-
ed areas.  
 
 
Our results suggest that squirrels will disproportionately use small and large WCA’s during the winter months 
and travel from smaller WCA’s through treated areas to other untreated patches.  
 
Management Implications 
 
Where management objectives include maintaining squirrel populations at or near current levels, the retention of 
untreated areas or incorporation of treated areas with high canopy cover should be considered. 
 
 
Changes in population trends are difficult to attribute solely to treatment due to varying amounts of snow accumu-
lation. 
 
 
The identification of feed and nest trees for retention during treatment marking could benefit squirrels. 
 
 
WCA’s contain important habitat components (e.g., nest sites, foraging opportunities, and travel routes) that are 
vital to squirrels during winter months.    
 
 
During non-winter months, squirrel use of WCA’s is a result of WCA size. The larger the WCA, the less likely 
the squirrel will leave the WCA (e.g., Mountainaire study site).     
 
 
More research is needed to determine the optimal size, orientation, shape, and spatial arrangement of WCA’s in a 
treated landscape for maintaining squirrel populations. 
 
 
   
 
Contact 
 
Fenner Yarborough, ryarborough@azgfd.gov  
 
 
This Fact Sheet summarizes information from the following publication*: 
Loberger, C.D., T.C. Theimer, S.S. Rosenstock, and C.W. Wightman. 2011. Use of restoration-
treated ponderosa pine forest by tassel-eared squirrels. Journal of Mammalogy 92:1021-
1027. http://library.eri.nau.edu/gsdl/collect/erilibra/index/assoc/HASH3ed1.dir/doc.pdf  
 
*This Fact Sheet also includes information from unpublished data produced by the Arizona 
Game and Fish Department during research conducted at the Flagstaff Pulliam Airport and 
Mountainaire study sites.  
