 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach, and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Reference Conditions and Historical Changes in an Unharvested  
Ponderosa Pine Stand on Sedimentary Soil 
 
By Andrew Joel Sánchez Meador, Northern Arizona University School of Forestry 
Introduction 
Forest structure and tree spatial patterns are the result of a complex interplay among historical and environ-
mental mechanisms such as climate, disturbance, species life history, competition, microclimatic, soil prop-
erties, and past land uses. Analysis of tree spatial patterns provides insight into stand development and dy-
namics including tree establishment, competition, and mortality and when quantified over long temporal pe-
riods can aid in developing restoration prescriptions and predicting future stand development and manage-
ment outcomes. 
Methods 
We evaluated historical reference conditions (i.e., conditions prior to widespread fire exclusion, circa 1883, 
resulting from Euro-American settlement and land management practices) of an uncut ponderosa pine site 
(Fig. 1) known as “Barney Springs,” which characterized underrepresented forest conditions, i.e., highly pro-
ductive limestone soils. Using a forest reconstruction model, univariate and bivariate Ripley’s K functions, 
and regression analysis we described 1883 structural and spatial reference conditions, and compared those to 
the contemporary (2010) stand conditions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Fact Sheet: Reference Conditions and Historical Changes in an Unharvested Ponderosa Pine  
   Stand on Sedimentary Soil 
April 2016 
Figure 1. Example photographs from the Barney Springs study site. The forest is dominated by old pon-
derosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) with a minor component of Gambel oak (Quercus gambelii). The understory 
is dominated by bracken fern (Pteridium aquilinum; left) and while several lupine (Lupinus sp.) and grass 
species were present (right), contemporary tree cover was high and herbaceous abundance was generally 
low.  

Results 
 Historical overstory pine structure (trees >5 inches diameter at breast height (dbh)) had low density and 
contained many 13–16-inch pines and few very old trees (300+ years). The dendrochronological recon-
structed stand consisted of 31 trees ac-1, a basal area of 34.8 ft2 ac-1, and an average diameter of 14.2 
inches Compared with historical conditions, contemporary (2010) stand density has increased by 338% 
and basal area has increased by 384%, with little change in average tree diameter. 
 Historically, individual pine trees exhibited an overall random spatial pattern with just over 40% of tree 
density occurring in groups (composed of three or more trees) and many small (less than 30 feet wide) 
openings (Fig. 2a) with the overall site’s spatial pattern only exhibiting aggregation at very small scales 
(1–4 feet). The contemporary conditions (Fig. 2b), were also found to be aggregated, but now at all ex-
tents examined (1–328 feet) suggesting the contemporary site was a single large patch (>2.5 acres). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Management Implications 
 Structural and spatial reference conditions provide invaluable insights into potential stand development 
and management outcomes and should be evaluated on a site by site basis; at a minimum, managers 
should be sure to consider general factors such as soil parent material and properties, vegetation compo-
sition, disturbance regime, and local climatic variables (e.g., precipitation) when working with un-
derrepresented forest conditions. 
 For sites where the reference conditions exhibit stand-level random patterns (e.g., old trees and historical 
evidences are random at the stand-scale), managers should use caution when implementing patch or 
group-based harvesting/thinning methods and may want to favor individual-tree based selection methods 
to reduce overemphasizing aggregation and to facilitate using the historical spatial patterns as a guide. 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Contact 
Andrew Sánchez Meador, Andrew.SanchezMeador@nau.edu 
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
 
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
 
Schneider, E., Sánchez Meador, A.J. and W.W. Covington. 2016. Reference conditions and historical changes in an 
unharvested ponderosa pine stand on sedimentary soils. Restoration Ecology, 24: 212-221. DOI: 10.1111/
rec.12296 
Figure 2. Visualization for forest structure comparing reconstructed (a; 1883) and contemporary (b; 2010) condi-
tions on the 10-acre study site. Visualizations depict live ponderosa pine with diameters greater than 14.7 inches dbh 
and clearly show the increase in forest density (from 10 to 54 trees ac-1) and the shift in spatial patterns from histori-
cally aggregated (just under half the trees were in patches of three or more trees) to contemporarily one large patch. 
