 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Stand Structure and Breeding Birds:  
Implications for Restoring Ponderosa Pine Forests 
 
By Dr. Liz Kalies, ERI Research Associate 
INTRODUCTION 
Fire-adapted forests in the western United States have dramatically departed from historical reference condi-
tions over the past century due to fire suppression, logging, grazing and other management practices. As a 
result, they are now susceptible to stand-replacing crown fires and ensuing damage to watersheds, wildlife 
habitat, and communities. Restoration treatments using mechanical thinning and prescribed fire have become 
the dominant management paradigm in this forest type. While many studies have examined wildlife respons-
es to restoration treatments, single-species information is difficult for managers to synthesize and incorporate 
into management decisions made at large scales. Our specific objectives in this study were to determine asso-
ciations between forest structural attributes and occupancy rates of (1) individual bird species and (2) bird 
species richness (total number of species) in ponderosa pine forests, in order to help guide restoration treat-
ment design. 
METHODS 
We sampled breeding bird presence and forest 
structural attributes (Table 1) in 23 stands for 3 
years in northern Arizona in ponderosa pine and 
ponderosa pine-Gambel oak forest cover types 
on the Kaibab and Coconino National Forests. 
To provide information relevant to managers in 
designing treatments, we assessed different di-
ameter caps by quantifying bird associations 
with “medium-sized trees” that are 16–18 inches 
in diameter at breast height (dbh) and would re-
main on a landscape with a 16-inch diameter cap 
(i.e., all trees smaller than 16 inches dbh would 
be removed). An 18-inch diameter cap would 
retain only trees greater than 18 inches dbh, as 
represented by “large trees.” We used occupancy 
models to determine relationships between bird 
occupancy (probability that a site is occupied by 
the species) and forest structural attributes. 
 
 
          Fact Sheet: Stand Structure and Breeding Birds: Implications for Restoring Ponderosa Pine Forests 
 
 
 
 
  
 
February 2014 
Forest structural  
attribute 
Majority of indi-
vidual bird  
species1 
Species  
richness2 
Canopy cover (%) 
- (11) 
- 
Large trees/ac (trees >18” 
dbh) 
+ (11) 
+ 
Medium-sized trees/ac 
(trees 16-18” dbh) 
- (11) 
- 
Number of snags/ac 
+ (11) 
+ 
Tree grouping 
0 (8) 
+ 
Down wood 
- (12) 
- 
Herbaceous cover (%) 
- (13) 
+ 
Table 1. Relationship (positive [+], negative [-], or neutral [0]) between 
forest structural attributes and the majority of bird species (16 total) and 
species richness. 
1 The number in parentheses indicates the number of species, out of a total of 16, 
which exhibited the reported response (+, -, or 0). 
2 A total of 48 species were detected during the sampling period. 

 
RESULTS 
The majority of individual bird species’ associations with forest structural attributes were consistent with 
that of the overall community (Table 1, page 1). In all cases except for down wood, species richness had a 
positive association with aspects of historical reference conditions of ponderosa pine forests (e.g., tree 
grouping, large trees, and snags). Most species are negatively associated with canopy cover, medium-sized 
trees, and down wood, and positively associated with large trees and snags (Table 1, page 1). Bird associa-
tions with tree grouping and herbaceous cover are less consistent.  
 
MANAGEMENT IMPLICATIONS 
Our results support the implementation of forest restoration treat-
ments for restoring breeding bird community occupancy in ponder-
osa pine forests. Specific management recommendations are to: 
 
 Emulate historical reference conditions (e.g., large trees and 
snags, open canopies, aggregated spatial arrangement of 
trees, etc.) with forest restoration treatments. 
 Reduce canopy cover via thinning, and retain large trees 
(>18 inches dbh) and snags.  
 Use caution with implementing the commonly proposed 16-
inch diameter cap which retains medium-sized trees after 
thinning. 
 Use occupancy modeling as an efficient method for as-
sessing wildlife-habitat relationships at large scales. 
 Be aware that these recommendations apply to the majority 
of bird species that were detected; however, there is no one 
treatment that will benefit all bird species. See the publica-
tion (Kalies and Rosenstock 2013) for more detail on indi-
vidual bird species responses to forest structural attributes.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contact 
Liz Kalies, Liz.Kalies@nau.edu  
 
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
This Fact Sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
 
Kalies, E.L. and S.S. Rosenstock.  2013.  Stand structure and breeding birds: Implications for restoring 
ponderosa pine forests.  Journal of Wildlife Management 77(6): 1157-1165. http://
library.eri.nau.edu/gsdl/collect/erilibra/index/assoc/D2013017.dir/doc.pdf 
Author’s note: The bird species modeled in this study were pygmy nuthatch, dark-eyed junco, plumbeous vireo, 
Grace’s warbler, yellow-rumped warbler, mountain chickadee, white-breasted nuthatch, western tanager, northern 
flicker, Steller’s jay, violet-green swallow, red crossbill, western wood-pewee, hermit thrush, chipping sparrow, and 
black-headed grosbeak. 
Pygmy nuthatch (Sitta pygmaea). Photo by Tom 
Talbott. 
Grace’s warbler (Dendroica graciae). Photo by 
Dominic Sherony.  
 
