 
 
Official or unofficial, it's the point that counts 
06/08/2003 
Who speaks for an organization and how far should a newspaper go in determining what 
is the official vs. the unofficial line?  
It's a question that comes up more frequently than readers might expect as reporters go 
about talking to as many sources as possible to round out a story. At the Daily Sun, I urge 
reporters not to rely solely on official press releases but talk to teachers, nurses, 
salespeople and others working on the front lines of an organization for what is often a 
different perspective.  
For noncontroversial subjects, such as the opening of a new hospital wing or the 
introduction of a new product, such a newsgathering tactic isn't necessary. But it has paid 
dividends when attempting to sort out competing claims about the impact of school 
budget cuts on students or why some nurses were interested in forming a union, to cite 
just two recent issues covered by the Daily Sun.  
The danger of such a policy is that stories are filled with so many competing voices it is 
difficult to determine which concerns are more important than others. As a daily 
newspaper, however, we have the luxury of revisiting the debate again and again until 
some sense of truth is established in readers' minds.  
In one recent story about forest restoration, the issue was not so much who was telling the 
truth but whether the individual voices reflected the policies and attitudes of their 
respective organizations toward each other. When an employee with policy 
responsibilities for the Grand Canyon Trust criticized Wallace Covington of NAU's 
Ecological Restoration Institute for the latter's support of parts of a bill that included the 
accelerated thinning of forests without the usual procedural safeguards, the assumption 
was that each was speaking for his organization.  
Because the two groups have worked closely in the past, such frank talk was news, but 
was it significant in the sense that it represented a break between the two groups?  
As a joint letter to the editor published in Wednesday's Daily Sun explained, no such 
break exists between the Trust and ERI, despite the policy dispute. In a more robust 
atmosphere of public debate, such a cautionary letter wouldn't be necessary: Employees 
of advocacy groups, schools, hospitals and other organizations should be able to make 
constructive criticism without worrying that their bosses will accuse them of straying 
from the official line or uttering something that is subject to misinterpretation.  

Unfortunately, the leaders of too many public and non-profit organizations appear to 
employees to be sending out the message that talking to the newspaper in a critical 
fashion will have negative consequences. Whether that's true or not, it would help the 
spirit of free debate and inquiry if the leaders of those groups would remind managers 
that their organizations can only benefit from a wide-ranging public discussion of issues. 
Public policy isn't something that's arrived at by instant consensus. It relies on the give 
and take that comes from different interest groups laying out their objectives, and a 
community newspaper should be an important forum for that dialogue. Whether those 
views are official seems a distraction from the main goal, which is to present as wide a 
range of viewpoints on an issue in ways that are both insightful and representative of the 
community.  
Randy Wilson is editor of the Arizona Daily Sun. He can be reached at 556-2254 or 
rwilson@azdailysun.com.  
