16·)
How fire scars are formed: coupling a
disturbance process to its ecological effect
S.L. Gutsell and E.A. Johnson
Abstract: Using results from the field and laboratory, we give a detailed explanation of an important and
commonly observed ecological phenomenon, fire scarring of trees, Four key observations ~ssociated with the
formation of fires scars are explained using fluid dynamics and heat transfer processes. When a fire passes by a
tree, its height increases on the tree's leeward side because of the occurrence of two leeward vortices. The flame
height increases in the vortices because the turbulent mixing of fuel and air is suppressed. The flow of gaseous
fuel in the vortices becomes greater than the rate of mixing with the air, and hence there is an increased height
along which combustion can occur. Fire scars are found only on the leeward side of trees because the vortices
increase the residence time of the flame on the leeward side of the tree compared with the residence time of the
flame on the tree's windward side. This leads to differential heating around the tree bole. Small trees rarely have
fire scars because their cambium is usually completely killed by a passing fire and (or) their foliage is killed by
crown scorch. Fire scars are usually triangular in shape; wider at tho base and decreasing in width with height.
The triangular shape is a result of the temperature isotherms within the standing leeward flame, which are
triangular in shape.
,
Resume : En utilisant des resultats de terrain et du laboratoire, nous·donnons une explication detaillee de la
formation des cicatrices de feu, phenornene ecologique important et frequernment observe. Quatre observations
des associees 11 la formation des cicatrices de feu sont decrites 11 l'aide des processus de la dynamique des
fluides et de transfert de chaleur. Lorsqu' un feu parvient au pied d'un arbre, la hauteur des flammes augmente
du cote sous Ie vent de l'arbre en raison de la formation de deux tourbillons. La hauteur des flammes saccroit
lorsqu'elles s'engagent dans les tourbillons parce que Ie melange turbulent de l'air avec les combustibles est
modi fie. Le flux des combustibles gazeux dans les tourbillons devient plus grand que Ie taux de melange avec
I'air, ce qui provoque une elevation de la hauteur a laquelle la combustion peut se produire. Les cicatrices de feu
apparaissent seulement du cote sous Ie vent de l'arbre parce que les tourbillons augrnentent Ie temps de
residence des flammes dans cette region de la tige comparativement au cote expose au vent. II se produit donc
un chauffage differentiel autour de la tige de I'arbre. Les arbges de petites dimensions portent rarement des
cicatrices de feu parce que leur cambium est habituellement rue par Ie passage d'un incendie ou que leur
feuillage est brule par Ie feu. Les cicatrices de feu ont habituellement une forme triangulaire; elles sont plus
larges au pied de l'arbre et deviennent plus etroites avec la hauteur. La forme triangulaire est Ie resultat de la
distribution des isothermes 11 l'Interieur des flammes sous Ie vent, qui epousent elles-rnemes une forme
triangulaire.
[Traduit par la Redaction]
Introduction
The process-response approach to solving ecological prob-
lems couples a disturbance process to the biophysics of
an organism and this in turn to an ecological effect (Johnson
1985). The advantage of this approach is that all parts of the
causal pathway must be defined. One commonly observed
ecological effect lacking this coupling is fire scars on trees.
A fire scar is a result of partial cambial death at the base
of a tree. There are at least four observations associated
with the formation of fire scars on trees: (l) when a fire
passes by. a tree (either a head or backing fire) it increases
Received May 8, 1995. Accepted July 23, )995 .
S,L. Gutsell and E.A. Johnson. Division of Ecology.
Department of Biological Sciences and the Kananaskis
Field Stations, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB
T2N IN4, Canada.
in height on the leeward side of the tree (relative to the
wind direction); (2) fire scars are found only on the leeward
side of trees; (3) small trees rarely have fire scars: and
(4) fire scars are usually triangular in shape, becoming
narrower with height.
Past studies investigating fire-scar formation have
explained some aspects of the above four observations,
but have never offered a complete causal explanation. Gill
(1974) found that when a fire passed by a tree, it increased
in height on the leeward side of the tree. He recognized
that the presence of this standing leeward flame was related
to tree diameter, wind speed, and position of the tree rela-
tive to the flame; however, he gave no explanation of the
mechanisms that result in this increased flame height.
Fahriestock and Hare (1964), Hare (1965a), and Tunstall
et al. (1976) found, in wind blown fires, that the temperature
is significantly higher on the leeward side of a tree than on
all other sides. Fahnestock and Hare (1964) suggested that
Can. J. For . Res. 26: 166-17'; \1996). Printed in Canada I lrnprirne au Canada

Gutsell and Johnson
167
Fig. 1. Flow patterns of air around a tree bole as
characterized by the Reynolds number.
vortices form on the leeward side of the tree (Fig. Ib).
Above 40, the vortices will alternately detach. producing a
wake of vortices called a vortex street (Fig. 1c). Notice,
with a constant wind speed, that trees with a smaller diam-
eter will have lower Reynolds numbers than larger trees.
Position and flow pattern of leeward vortices
The vortices on the leeward side of a tree are located
between the two points of flow separation. Separation
occurs where the airflow in the boundary layer along the
surface of the tree bole no longer follows the contours of
the tree (see Fig. Ib). The point of separation depends on
the Reynolds number in the boundary layer along the tree.
If the Reynolds number is less than 3 X 105, then the flow
will separate at 82° (see Potter and Foss 1975 for a more
complete explanation) from the front stagnation point
(Fig. lb). When the Reynolds number is between 3 X io'
and 3.5 X 106 (Fig. Ie), the boundary layer will suddenly
undergo a transition from laminar to turbulent flow, and
the separation point will move to a greater distance down-
stream on the tree, to 110° (Fig. If). The increased turbu-
lence in the boundary layer is transported by momentum
from the free-moving air to the slow-moving air in the
boundary layer. The position of these two angles of sepa-
ration at the base of a tree corresponds to the outer edges
of the killed area on a fire scar.
Each vortex on the leeward side of a tree consists of
two zones of flow (Fig. 2): an outer zone of irrotational
flow and an inner zone of rotational flow (Chigier et aJ.
1970). In the irrotational zone, the flow is translated around
the inner zone with little rotation, that is, with no change
transition from laminar to
turbulent vortex street
lam inar unseparated
no...
laminar
vortex street
pair of
attached vortices
Cully turbulent
vortex street
re-establishment of
turbulent vortex street
R. < 5
5 sR. < 40
3.5 x 10' S Re
40! Re < 150
150 s Re < 300
300 s Re ;: 3 x 105
3 x 105 ;: Re < 3.5 x 10'
transition from laminar 10
turbulent boundary layer.
rront
,.c~r'.&Lio" po.nt c a:-
I~
;"".'
.
,...t
~
b)~
')~
')~
·)C~
o~'U'
Mechanisms of fire-scar formation
The mechanisms that lead to cambial death and the for-
mation of fire scars on the leeward side of trees (and not the
windward side) will be discussed as follows: (I) airflow
around a tree and the formation of leeward vortices; (2) the
position and flow pattern in these vortices; (3) the inter-
action of the vortices with a free-moving turbulent diffusion
flame, causing differential heating around the base of a
tree; and (4) heat transfer from the standing leeward flame
through the bark.
Airflow and the formation of leeward vortices
As air flows around the bole of a tree, a reverse flow
occurs on the leeward side of the tree thakproduces a pair
of vortices. This phenomenon (Fig. 1) is a well-described
process of separated flow behind a cylinder (von Karman
1921; Goldstein 1938). The formation of these vortices
depends on the upstream wind velocity, U (m/s), diame-
ter of the tree bole, d (m), and kinematic viscosity of the
air, \J (m2/s). These variables can be combined to form the
Reynolds number (Re)
dU
[I]
Re =-
v
The Reynolds number is a dimensionless number that is
used here to characterize airflow patterns and the formation
of leeward vortices. As a fire approaches a tree, the kine-
matic viscosity of the air around the tree increases' as the
air temperature increases. However. changes in the flow
pattern due to the increase in viscosity are small, relative
to the effects caused by changes in tree diameter and wind
velocity. Consequently, the flow pattern is governed pri-
marily by tree diameter and wind velocity. When the
Reynolds number is less than 5, the flow around a tree is
laminar (Fig. 1a). Between 5 and 40, a pair of adjacent
the increased heating on the leeward side of a tree is due to
a "chimney effect" of the convection column. but offered no
explanation for how this chimney effect occurs. Hare (1961.
1965b). Spalt and Reifsnyder (1962). Martin (1963). Gill and
Ashton (1968). Vines (1968 ). and Gill et aJ. (1986) showed
that the thermal properties and thickness of. bark are irnpor-
rant in preventing cambial death. Spalt and Reifsnyder
(1962) and Vines (1968) used a semi-infinite slab model for
the conduction of heat through bark. The model shows
that the time it takes to kiJI the cambium through the bark
is directly related to the square of bark thickness. Hare
(1965b), Gill and Ashton (1968). and Vines (1968) con-
firmed this relationship empirically and found that the time
required to raise the cambium to a lethal level of 60°C is
directly proportional to the square of bark thickness.
The ' purpose of this paper is to couple the disturbance
process. fire, to one of its commonly observed ecological
effects, fire scars on trees. We will give a complete causal
explanation, in terms of the fluid dynamics and heat trans-
fer processes, of the mechanisms that lead to cambial death
and the formation of fire scars on trees. We will present
each of the mechanisms of fire-scar formation . the methods
used .t9..t~~t the_PrQP5~sed _m.e c:"!la ni ~ m s• .and the .evidellc:e
to show that the mechanisms proposed seem to explain all
of the above four phenomena.

168
Can. J. For. Res. Vol. 26 . 1996
Fig. 3. The tangential velocity, VI' distribution in a vortex
(where V, = 2'TTj: j is frequency of rotation) . Tangential
velocity increases from the centre of the vortex to the
outer boundary of the rotational zone and then decreases
through the zone of irrotational flow, following Chigier
et al. (1970). The symbols represent different heights in
the vortex at which tangential velocities were measured.
Fig. 2. Irrotat ional and rotational zones of flow in a
vortex. Following the path of a particle, notice that the
particle's orientation changes as it moves around the zone
of rotational flow, while its orientation does not change in
the irrotational zone.
r0131;on31
Irrotational
I
I
I--~--
I
I
I
I
I
Il
I
'--_/
..
.......
,§.
:5c..
CoO
C
~
3
rotational
no..
irrotational
no..
•
10 em
•
20 em
...
30 em
'"
40 em
Radial Distance (mm)
100
200
300
in the orientation of the air particles. For this orientation to
be maintained, the air particles in the outermost region
must have a lower tangential velocity than the air parti-
cles nearer the centre (Fig. 3) . Consequently, the radius,
r, and tangential velocity, V" yield a constant. This constant
is the circulation, r =2-rrrV,. The tangential velocity and
radius in the inner zone of rotational flow have the oppo-
site relationship. The air nearer the centre has a lower tan-
gential velocity than air towards the outer edge of the zone
(Fig. 3), and angular momentum is conserved (i.e., V/r =
constant). Consequently, particles in the rotational zone
will change their orientation as they rotate (Fig. 2). These
patterns of flow play an important role in explaining the
presence of the standing leeward flame as a free-moving
flame passes a tree.
Interaction of leeward vortices with a turbulent
diffusion name
In forest fires, the free-moving flame is a turbulent diffu-
sion flame. A turbulent flame has a flame Reynolds num-
ber, Ref' greater than 3.5 X 106. For a flame, Ref =d(V(lv,
where d, is the average diameter of the flame and U, is
the vertical velocity of the gaseous fuel. A diffusion flame
is one in which the gaseous fuel and oxygen are brought
together by molecular and (or) turbulent diffusion and the
combustion occurs along the visible flame boundary. The
combustion reaction involves the chemical decomposition
of fuel by heating (called pyrolysis), followed by ignition.
Another type of flame, one not found in forest fires, is a
premixed flame. In this type of flame, the gaseous fuel
and oxygen are mixed before combustion occurs.
A fire scar will form only on the leeward side of a tree
because there is differential heating around the base of a tree
when a free-moving flame passes by the tree (Tunstall et al.
1976). Differential heating is a result of the leeward vor-
tices increasing the residence time of the free-moving
flame on the tree's leeward side compared with the resi-
dence time on the tree's windward side. The residence
time, 'Tf (s), of a free-moving flame on the windward side
of a tree is a function of the depth of the flame, w (rn),
and the fire 's rate of spread, R (m/s) , and is given by
w
(2)
Tr = -R
Figure 4 shows the passage of a free-moving flame by
a tree . Notice that the depth of the flame refers to the dis-
tance on the ground between the leading edge and the trail-
ing edge of the fire. As soon as the front of the flame
reaches the centre of the periphery of the tree (Fig. 4b ),
part of the flame is drawn into the centres of the leeward
vortices, producing a standing leeward flame . In effect,
the flame depth is increased by a distance of 0.5 tree diam-
eter. The standing leeward flame increases in height as
the free moving flame passes by the tree (Figs. 4c and 4d ).
It persists until the trailing edge of the fire leaves the
unoccupied region of the vortices on the leeward side of the
tree (Fig. 4e) . In effect, the flame depth is increased by a
distance of approximately 1.5 tree diameters. In total , the
flame depth is increased by a distance of two tree diame-
ters when a free-moving flame passes by a tree. Conse-
quently, the residence time of the standing leeward flame
is given by

Gutsell and Johnson
169
1,1
1,1
standing
)I
'"word
Jl"fU me
I
d)
I
1
I'Wgton
01
leeward
vonlcn
b)
.~ndlng
II,ward
'" l\<Im.
e)
,
region
of
I"w~ rd
vortic es
fin
tront
I
b,ck
of
r~.
a)
WIndWard IIleew ard
wind
I'
II
I
c)
time required for the stem to experience a temperature
change will be a function of both the residence time of
the flame and the thickness of the bark. After the flame
is removed, the temperature in the cambium through the
bark will decrease (Gill and Ashton 1968).
Results from this transient heating can be described by
Fourier's law of conduction (Sucec 1985 ):
Fig. 4. A diagram showing the effect of leeward vortices
on a free-moving flame. When the leading edge of a free-
moving flame (a) reaches the centre of the periphery of a
tree. the flame increases in height on the leeward side of
the tree. producing a stand ing leeward flame (b). The
standing leeward flame increases in height as the flame
passes by the tree (c) and then begins to decrease as
the trailing edge of the fire moves out of the leeward
vortices. up to 1.5 tree diameters-downstream of the
tree (d ). Once out of the vortices the stand ing leeward
flame disappears (e) .
[4]
where the rate of change of the excess temperature ratio. e.
within the bark, x (rn), is equal to the inverse of the ther-
mal diffusivity, ex (m2/s). multiplied by the rate of change
of the excess temperature ratio with respect to time, 'f (s).
The excess temperature ratio is given by
Heat .tra nsfer through bark
A fire scar is a resu lt of cambial death at the base of the
leeward side of a tree. Death in the cambium occurs when
the heat flux from the standing leeward flame penetrates the
bark and kills the cambium. It is assumed that heating of
the leeward side of the tree is unidirectional. that is. the heat
flux is from the leeward flame and not from heat pene-
tratin g the tree stem from the windward side of the tree .
Further. because heating is only for a brief period (seconds
to minutes) and the bark has low thermal conductivity, the
w
2d
[3]
1 ) = -
+
R
R
where d is diameter (m) of the tree. The increase in depth
of the free-moving flame results in an increased residence
time on the leeward side of the tree by a value of 2d/R (here-
after called the leeward value).
.
When the leading edge of a free-moving flame reaches
the centre of the periphery of a tree. it is drawn horizontally
into the tree 's leeward vort ices through the boundary layer
along the ground . This horizontal draw is a result of the
ground slowing down the rotational and irrotational motion
in each of the vortices. creating a radial pressure gradient
in each vortex core. The lower pressure in the centre of
each vortex core adds buoyancy to the core and pushes
the gaseous fuel in the boundary layer toward the axis of
each vortex. The gaseous fuel continues to add to the buoy-
ancy as it burns, while rising in the vortex core (Emmons
and Ying 1967). This appears to be the mechanism for the
"chimney effect" proposed by Fahnestock and Hare (1964).
However. this is not the primary mechanism responsible
for the standing leeward flame.
The flame increases in he ight once it is in the vortex
cores because the rotation of the gaseous fuel in and at
the boundary of the vortex cores (see Fig. 3) decreases
the turbulent mixing of fuel and air (Emmons and Ying
1967). Turbulence is reduced because the centrifugal force
in the zone of irrotational flow opposes the movement of
gaseous fuel toward the axis of the vortex core by angular
momentum. As a result. the buoyancy of the rising core
is not rapidly decreased by mixing and therefore a large
buoyant pressure difference is produced in the very high,
relatively small diameter buoyant core. The rate of mix-
ing with the air decreases in the standing leeward flame,
since the rotation restricts the entrainment of air from the
surroundings into each vortex core and results in a con-
finement of the flames within the vortex cores. The conse-
quent delay in the rate of mixing between the gaseous fuel
and surrounding air results in a considerable increase in
flame height (Chigier et al. 1970). In &ffect. the flame
height increases because the flow of gaseous fuel in the
vortex cores is now greater than the rate of mixing with
the surrounding air and hence there is a greater height
along which combustion can take place (Emmons and
Ying 1967; Chigier et al. 1970).
Differential heating around the base of a tree is also
due to a greater temperature in the standing leeward flame
than in the free-moving diffus ion flame. The rotation of
the fuel in the vortex cores appears to increase the com-
bust ion rate of fuel and air.

170
Can. J. For. Res. Vol. 26 . 1996
8=Tc-Tr
To - Tr
where T, is the lethal cambium temperature (0C). T, is the
temperature (OC) in the flame. and To is the temperature
(OC) of the cambium before heating occurs. Thermal dif-
fusivity gives the rate at which temperature changes within
the bark when its surface temperature changes. For eq. 4:
the following initial and boundary conditions were set:
(1) at x =0 and l' > O. -he = ":"k(oelox); (2) as x -7 00
and l' > O. 8 remains finite; (3) at l' =0 and 0 < x < 00.
8 = eo = To -
Tr• where h is the surface coefficient of
heat transfer (kWIm 2•0C) and k is thermal conductivity
(kW/m·°C). If we solve eq. 4 according to the above con-
ditions. we obtain the result for the excess temperature
ratio of the bark. For bark it is assumed that it has a sur-
face coefficient of heat transfer h. it is initially at tem-
perature To. and it is then exposed to a flame of tempera-
ture Tf• This leads to the following equation:
Fig. 5. Measures of the angle from the centre of the
windward side of the tree to the outer edge of the fire
scar on 242 fire-scarred P. banksiana from Prince Albert
National Park. Saskatchewan. The arrows indicate the
theoretical angles of separation in a laminar (82") and
turbulent (110°) boundary layer.
so
40
~
30
l::.,
:l
r::r.,t:
20
Methods
0.01 rn, for example, would require a residence time of
193 s to kill the cambium.
The mechanisms of partial cambial death were tested in a
scaled laboratory model. similar to that used by Gill (1974).
The laboratory model is equivalent to tree boles in the field
because the same airflow pattern can be obtained when the
Reynolds number is the saine. For example. a tree 0.2 m in
diameter and a wind speed of 0.33 mts (v is held constant at
1.5 X 10- 5 m2ts) yields an Re of 440. a flow pattern of alter-
nately shedding vortices. In the laboratory, this same flow pat-
tern (Re = 440) can be observed with a much smaller tree.
0.02 m, if the wind speed is increased to 3.3 mls.
The laboratory setup consisted of a 3 x 1 x 1 m open-
circuit. open-jet. low-speed wind tunnel. equipped with two
honeycomb screens that acted to reduce the swirl and turbu-
lence of the air created by the fan. The working section of the
wind tunnel consisted of an asbestos bench with a burner fitted
through the bench such that the burning surface and bench top
were part of the same plane . The diffusion flame. 5 ern in
diameter, was turbulent. since Re, > 3.5 X 106. The surface
was roughened by placing pea-sized gravel (roughness height =
0.02 rn) from the fan through to the working section. Metal cylin-
ders. 0.95. 1.25. and 1.9 em in diameter. were used to simulate
tree boles. The wind speed was regulated by a rheostat trans-
former and measured in the working section using a Datametrics
100 VT hot wire anemometer. Wind speed was measured at
1 em height intervals from the burner mouth. the wind tunnel
had a logarithmic wind profile similar to that found under a
forest canopy (Albini and Baughman 1979). The length of the
wind tunnel allowed a steady-state wind profile to develop. that
is, the lengthof the wind tunnel was 200 times the height of the
surface roughness element (Monteith 1975). Wind speed at I cm
above the surface was used to calculate the Reynolds number
for flows around the cylinder.
-
20S·
II.
155"
I
1051
Angle from Stagnation Point
__III
10
[5]
8
Tc - If
rf(
x
)
8
0 = To - Tr = e
2.J(;.i
+ exp( ~ + h:~T) [1 - err(2~ + h7)]
where erf is the Gaussian error function. Values of the error
function. which defines the error associated with the excess
temperature ratio. can be found in books of mathematical
tables (e.g.• Abramowitz and Stegun 1964). Once the bark
surface (x =0) reaches the flame temperature. the surface
coefficient of heat transfer approaches infinity (h -7 00).
This eliminates the terms to the right of erf[xl(2v;;:T)1. on
the right hand side of equation 5. Thus. the heat flux
required to kill the cambium can be calculated using
[6]
T, -
Tr = erf(
~)
To - Tf
2-,JCt.1'
To solve eq. 6. the value of xI(2\raT) must first be cal-
culated. By knowing the lethal cambium temperature. T,.
temperature of the cambium before heating occurs. To. ther-
mal diffusivity, n, and residence time. l' (calculated using
eq. 2 or 3). one can easily determine the flame tempera-
ture. Tr• required to kill the cambium on the windward or lee-
ward side of the tree. over a range of bark thicknesses.
Conversely. by knowing T" Tr• To. and e, one could similarly
determine the residence time. 1'. required to kill the cam-
bium over a range of bark thicknesses . For example. if T; =
100°C. T, =SOO°e. To =20
0e. Ct. = 1.35 X 10-1 m2/s (Spalt
and Reifsnyder 1962), and erf( ) =0.83. then the residence
time; l' (s), required to kill the cambium is given by
[7]
r =1.93 X 106x 2
This is the same scaling value (i.e.• x2) that was found
empirically by Hare (1965b). Gill and Ashton (1968). and
Vines (1968). By heating the bark on trees using various
methods and measuring the temperature reached on the
bark surface and in the cambium. they observed that the
time required to kill the cambium (i.e .• T, ~ 60°C (Kayll
1968)) was a function of the"square of bark thickness.
Given the above conditions. a tree with bark thickness of

Gulsell and Johnson
171
Le g e e d
II
•
tree-moving
!lame
I
•
,tendln&
I
leeward
I'
Ilerne
/.
•
•
20 r----------r.==:::===:1
15
E
~
....
10
~
..c:
bD
...
:x:
5
Fig. 7. The vertical temperature distribution in a standing
leeward flame compared with the free-moving diffusion
flame of the same height. The arrows indicate the average
height of the flames.
.. .. .
0.005 m/s
-
-
0.03 m/s
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Critical Leeward Temperature ('C)
Fig. 6. The critical temperatures for cambial kill
calculated using eq. 6 for rates of spread. R = 0.005 and
0.03 m/s (see text for explanation). Differential heating
increases with a decrease in the rate of spread. except
where tree diameter is verysmall.
1000 r------------~------.,.....-__.,.
900
P
~
600
'"...
;:l
700
....
'"...
'"e,
600
E
'"
E-
500
'0...
'"
~
400
'0c:
~
300
-;;
o
200
.....;:
u
100
To determine whether the points of flow separation corre-
spond to the outer edges of a fire scar at the base of a tree, discs
that had single fire scars were cut from 242 Pinus banksiana
Lamb. from Prince Albert National Park, Saskatchewan. The
angle was measured from the centre of the windward side of the
tree to the outer edge of the killed area. Notice that angles
were measured on discs such that the entire killed area was
visible, and not just that part which was not overgrown, as
would be the case in intact trees.
To' determine the difference in temperature between a free-
moving diffusion flame and a standing leeward flame, the ver-
tical temperature profile of each flame type was measured
using an Omega 872A digital thermometer with Omega chromel
alumel bare wire thermocouples and NMP miniature sized con-
nectors. The thermocouple wire was I min in diameter and
31 em in length and was encased in a ceramic tube for insu-
lation. The temperature of the free-moving diffusion flame was
measured at the centre, starting at the base and at I ern height
intervals. Re-radiation from the metal cylinder into the stand-
ing leeward flame was found to be negligible, since temperature
measurement was done before sufficient heating occurred. The
temperature within the standing leeward flame was measured
through the centre. 4 mm (horizontally) from centre, 8 mm
from centre. and 10 mm from centre, approximately 2 mm
from the cylinder wall.
Results and discussion
The width of a fire scar at the base of a tree should be
determined by the angle of separation of flow on the leeward
side of a tree. This was established by comparing the the-
oretical angles of flow separation (82° when Re < 3 X 105
and 110° when Re > 3.5 X lOb) with the angle from the
front and centre of a tree to the edge of the killed area on
fire-scarred trees in the field.
Figure 5 shows a frequency distribution of angles from
the centre of the windward side of the tree to the outer
edge of the killed area on fire-scarred P. banksiana. The dis-
tribution of angles appears to be bimodal, with the two
modes at 85°_95° and 115°-125° (see Fig. lb). The theo-
retical angles of separation (82° in a laminar boundary
. layer and 110° in a turbulent boundary layer) do not fall
exactly within the peaks. of the two modes: rather the peaks
are at slightly larger angles. This shift is not too surprising,
since we would expect cambial death to extend, at most, to
the position of the separation points, i.e., from the pre-
dicted angle to slightly larger angles. The spread around
these two peaks seems to be a result, at least in part, of
slight differences in the height at which angles were mea-
sured on the tree.
The occurrence of fire scars on the leeward side of a
tree is a result of the heat flux from the standing leeward
flame penetrating the bark and killing the cambium. Fire
scars form on the leeward side of a tree but not on the
windward side because (I) the residence time of the stand-
ing leeward flame is longer than the residence time of the
free-moving flame on the windward side of a tree and
(2) the temperature in the standing leeward flame is greater
than in the free-moving diffusion flame.
The increase in residence time on the leeward side of a
tree leads to differential heating around the base of a tree.
To show this differential heating the critical flame tem-
perature required to kill the cambium on the windward
and leeward sides of a tree were plotted (see axes on Fig. 6).
The critical temperature required to kill the cambium was
calculated using eq. 6, over a range of bark thicknesses
(0.004-0.03 m). For each bark thickness, the critical flame
temperature, Tf, required to kill the cambium was calcu-
lated using the thermal diffusivity, a = 1.35 X 10-7 m2/s
(Spalt and Reifsnyder 1962), the temperature of the

172
Can. J. For. Res . Vol. 26. 1996
sides of the tree (i.e., there is no differential heating). Th is
occurs when the rate of spread of the fire is very fast (res-
idence time very lo w) . regardless of the tree d iamete r.
Examination of the leewa rd value (2dlR) in eq . 3 shows
that a very high rate of spread will result in a very low
leeward value such that the increase in leeward residence
time over the windward residence time becomes negl igible,
no matter how large the tree diameter. In effect, both the
leeward and windward sides have the same residence times
when the rate of spread is very fast.
In Fig. 6 where slope> I. that is. where the rate of
spread decreases. the temperature required to kill the cam-
bium becomes higher for the windward side than for the
leeward side (i.e.• there is differential heating). Exam ina-
tion of eq. 3 shows that as the rate of spread decreases,
the leeward value increases, causing a significantly greater
leeward residence time than the windward residence time.
Notice that the slope of the curve will never be less than I,
since the win~\yard residence time will never be greater
than the leeward residence time. In other words, the wind-
ward critical temperature will always have to be the same
or higher than the leeward critical temperature in order to
kill the cambium on the windward side of a tree.
Why do the lines in Fig. 6, representing different rates
of spread. converge at lower critical temperatures? Exam-
ination of eq. 3 shows that small-diameter trees will not
significantly increase the residence time of the leeward
flame and so the critical temperature to cambial kill will be
almost the same on both the windward and leeward sides
of the tree. Thus, if the flame temperature is high enough
to kill the cambium on the leeward side of a small tree.
then the cambium on the windward side of the same small
tree will also be killed, and complete cambial mortality
around the base of the tree will result. This effect will be
cumulative. since small-diameter trees also have thinner
bark than larger diameter trees. Consequently, it appears
that we rarely encounter fire scars on small trees because
their cambium is usually completely killed around the base
of the tree, resulting in their death. In addition to these
explanations. Appendix A shows that because some species
of small trees have crowns close to the ground. tree mortal ity
from crown scorch results even after low-intensity fires.
In addition to an increased residence time of the stand-
ing leeward flame. the two-dimensional tempera ture dis-
tribution within the standing leeward flame is greater than
that of the free-moving diffus ion flame. Figure 7 shows
the one-dimensional vertical temperature, measured through
the centre of a standing leew ard flame. along the metal
cylinder surface. compared with a free- moving diffusion
flame of the sa me height. In both the leeward flam e and
free-moving diffusion flame, temperature inc reas es from
the base of the flame and rea ches a ma ximum at a height
approximately 40% of the height of the flame, and then
decreases with a further increase in heigh t. At all heights.
the standing leeward flame has a higher temperature than
the free-mov ing diffusion flame . The greater temperature
in the standing leeward flame appears to be due to an
increase in the burning rate of fuel and air in the vortex
cores (Emmons and Ying 1967). The mechanism responsible
for this increased rate of combustion has not yet been stud-
ied and is beyond the scope of this paper.
12
8
4
o
4
Radius (mm)
5
25
20
"'"E
u
'-'....
15
~
CloI
:I;
10
cambium before heating, To = 20°C, and the lethal cambium
temperature, T, = 100°C (Gill et al. 1986). The residence
time r on the windward and leeward sides were calculated
using eqs. 2 and 3, respectively, where depth of the flame
was held constant at 2 m. Since tree diameter increases with
an increase in bark thickness (e.g.• x =O.037d + 0.004 , for
P. banksiana), the effect of an increasing tree diameter on
the leeward residence time is also determined.
There has been some debate as to the validity of holding
flame depth constant to infer the duration of heating, as
in eqs. 2 and 3 (see Cheney 1981 ). Some have argued that
the residence time seems to be a very conservative variable.
whereas flame depth and rate of spread seem to vary in
concert (A.M. Gill, personal communication). If thi s were
the case, then in our eqs. 2 and 3, the residence time would
be held constant. while the depth and rate of spread would
vary in concert. This could then be done for different res -
idence times, over a range of 30-90 s. Although changing
the constant from flame depth to residence time would
change the wa y the axes of the critical temperatures (in
Fig. 6) were generated, the outcome would not change.
Differential heating would still occur, because the diam-
eter of the tree would still cause an increase in the resi-
dence time on the leeward side of the tree compared with
the tree's windward side.
In Fig. 6, where slope = I, the temperature required to
kill the cambium is the same on the windward and leeward
Fig. 8. The two-dimensional temperature (0C) distribution
of the standing leeward flame . Isotherms encompass all .
regions with the defined temperature or higher. The
outer boundary of the flame extends approximately to
the outermost isotherm. The temperature is highest at
the centre of the flame and decreases toward the sides
and top.
30 p----....;..----....,

Gulsell and Johns on
Why is the cambium often killed in a triangular shape?
Figure 8 shows the tw o-dimensional temperature distri-
bution. at the metal cyl inder su rfa ce. of the standing lee-
ward fla me in Fig . 7. Along the cyli nder surface. the tem-
perature is highest at the cen tre of the fla me, at a he ight
approxi mately 40% of the height of the flame. Temperature
decreases toward the sides and top.' with isotherms approx-
imating a triangular shape. Not ice that the temperature is
not higher along the cylinder surface at the centre of each
vortex (i.e.. ±4 mm radius). as might be expected. Rather, the
temperature is highest between the two vortices (i.e.. 0 mrn
radius) . It appears that the heat from the flame boundaries
in bot h vortices radiate towards each other. increasing the
temperature in the centre of the flame along the cylinder
surface. The outer edges of the flame do not experience
the same increase in temperature because of the cooling
effect of the surrounding air.
Conclusions
Possible causal explanations. in terms of the fluid dynam-
ics and heat transfer processes. have been proposed for
four key observations associated with fire-scar formation on
trees. It is interesting that the present explanation uses
largel y existing understandings of fluid dynamics and heat
transfer processes. Despite some excellent attempts at
determining how fire scars form on trees. there has been
some difficulty in determining how fires cause this eco-
logical effect. Critical to determining the mechanisms was
hav ing a clear understanding of the formation of vortices
on the leeward side of a tree; the rotational and irrota-
tional motion in a vortex, which suppresses the turbulent
mixing of fuel and air and produces a standing leeward
flame; and the heat transfer from the standing leeward
flame. which kills the cambium. Trees survive fire and
leeward fire scars form because the vortices result in dif-
ferential heating around the base of a tree. The cambium is
not completely killed around the tree simply because, in
most cases, the residence time and temperature of the pass-
ing flame are high enough to kill the cambium only on
the leeward side of the tree. By understanding the under-
lying mechanisms of fire-scar formation, w'e can then go on
to make more meaningful predictions about the specific
kinds of fire behaviour, fire intensity, rate of spread, and
duff consumption, which result in fire scars on trees.
Acknowledgements
A.M . Gill and two anonymous reviewers provided help-
ful suggestions on an earlier draft. This study was sup-
ported by a Natu ral Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada operating grant to E.A. Johnson.
References
Abramowitz, M.. and Ste gun, I. 1964. Handbook of mathe-
matical functions with formulas . graphs and mathematical
tables. U.S. Department of Commerce. National Bureau of
Standards, Washington. D.e.
Albini. EA.. and Baughman. R.G. 1979. Estimating wind speeds
for predicting wildland fire behaviour. USDA For. Servo
Res. Paper INT-221.
173
Cheney. N.P. 1981. Fire behavior. In Fire and the Australian
biota . Edited by A.M. Gill. R.H. Gro ves. and I.R. Noble.
Aust ralian Academ y of Science. Canberra.
Chigier. N.A.. Beer. I.M.. Grecov, D.. and Bassindale. K. 1970.
Jet flames in rotating flow fields. Combust. Flame. 14: 171- 180.
Emmons. H.W.. and Ying, S. 1967. The fire whirl. In Eleventh
Symposium (International) on Combustion. 14-20 Aug. 1966.
Berke ley. Cal if. The Combustio n Institute. Pittsb urg h.
pp. 475-488.
Fahnestock, G.R.. and Hare, R.C. 1964. Heating of tree trunks
in surface fires. J. For. 62: 799- 805.
Gill. A.M. 1974. Toward an understanding of fire-scar forma-
tion: field observation and laboratory simulation. For. Sci.
20(3): 198-205.
Gill. A.M.. and Ashton. D.H. 1968. The role of bark type in rela-
tive tolerance to fire of three central Victorian Eucalyp ts.
Aust. I . Bot. 16: 491-498.
Gill , A.M.. Cheney. N.P.. Walker. 1., and Tunstall . B.R. 1986.
Bark losses from two eucalypt species following fires of
different intensities. Aust. For. Res. 16: 1-7 .
Goldstein. S. 1938. Modern developments in fluid dynamics.
C1aredon Press. Oxford.
Hare. R.e. 1961. Heat effects on living plants. USDA For.
Ser voOccas . Pap. 183.
Hare. R.C. 1965a. Bark surface and cambium temperatures in
simulated forest fires. J. For. 63: 437-440.
Hare, R.e. 1965b. Contribution of bark to fire resistance of
sou thern trees . J. For. 63: 248-251.
Johnson. E.A. 1985. Disturbance: the process and the response.
An epilogue. Can. I. For. Res. IS: 292-293.
Kayll, AJ. 1968. Heat tolerance of tree seedlings. In Proceedings
of the 8th Annual Tall Timbers Fire Ecology Conference.
14-1 5 Mar. 1968. Tallahassee. Fla. Tall Timbers Research
Station. Tallahassee. Fla. pp. 89-105.
Martin. R.E. 1963. A basic approach to fire injury of tree
stems. In Proceedings of the 2nd Annual Tall Timbers Fire
Ecology Conference, 14-15 Mar. 1963, Tallahassee, Fla. Tall
Timbers Research Station , Tallahassee, Fla. pp. 151-162.
Monteith. J.L. 1975. Principles of environmental physics. Edward
Arnold Publishers Limited. London.
Potter. M.e.. and Foss. I.F. 1975. Fluid mechanics. Ronald
Press Company, New York.
Spalt, K.W.. and Reifsnyder. W.E. 1962. Bark characteristics and
fire resistance: a literature survey. USDA For. Servo Occas.
Pap. 193.
Sucec; 1. 1985. Heat transfer. W.M.C. Brown Publishers.
Dubuque, Iowa.
Thomas, P.H. 1963. The size of flames from natural fires.
In Ninth Symposium (International) on Combustion. 27 Aug. -
I Sept. 1962. Ithaca. N.Y. The Combustion Institute. Pinsburgh.
pp.844-859.
Tunstall, B.R., Walker, I .. and Gill, A.M. 1976. Temperature dis-
tribut ion around synthetic trees during grass fires. For. Sci.
22(3): 269-276.
Van Wagner. C.E. 1973: Height of crown scorch in forest fires.
Can. 1. For. Res. 3: 373-378.
Vines. R.G. 1968. Heat transfer through bark . and the resis-
tance of trees to fire. Aus t. J. Bot. 16: 499-514.
von Karm an. T. 192 1. Collected works . Vol. 1 ( 1902- 1913) .
Butterworths Publishing Company. Mark ham. Ont.
Appendix A
Fire scars are rarely found on small trees because their
cambium is completely killed around the base of a tree
and (or) their foliage is killed by crown scorch. since their

174
crowns are typically near the ground. A well-established
relation (cf. Thomas 1963) shows that the temperature
reached at any height, hi (m), above a fire depends on the fire
intensity, I (kW1m), and the ambient .temperature To (OC):
12/3
[AI)
11, ee
-
To
Using this relation, and empirical measures for Pinus
resinosa Ait., Pinus strobus L., P. banksiana, and Quercus
rubra L., Van Wagner (1973) found that the height of
crown scorch, where the temperature of foliage kill is T, ;:::
60°C, is given by
[A2]
hs = 0.14831 2/3
To completely kill the crown of a tree 5 m in height, for
example, would require a fire intensity of only 1= 195 kW/m;
This corresponds to a flame height of 0.9 m. As the height
of a tree increases, a greater proportion of the foliage is
likely to be above the height of lethal scorching. Clearly,
there is some interaction between cambial and canopy mor-
tality that will result in overall tree mortality; however,
at present, this interaction is poorly understood.
·Appe ndix B
Table AI. List of symbols.
Symbol
Definition
Units
Greek
a
. Thermal diffusivity
m2/s
e
Dimensionless temperature
Dimensionless
T
Residence time
s
Tr
Residence time of free moving
s
flame
T,
Residence time of standing
s
leeward flame
v
Kinematic viscosity
m2/s
Can . J . For. Res . Vol. 26 . 1996
Table Al (concluded) .
Symbol
Definition
Units
Roman
d
Tree diameter
m
d,
Diameter of the flame
m
erf
Error function
Dimensionless
h
Surface coefficient of heat
kW·m- 2.oC- 1
transfer
h,
Height of crown scorch
m
hi
Height above fire
m
I
Fire intensity
kW/m \
k
Thermal conductivity
kW·m-l .oC- 1
R
Fire rate of spread
m2/s
Re
Reynolds number around cylinder
.Dimensionless
Rer
Reynolds number of flame
Dimensionless
t;
Lethal cambium temperature
°C
r,
Temperature in the flame
°C
To
Te~erature of the cambium
°C
before heating
.
U
Upstream wind velocity
m/s
Ur
Vertical velocity of fuel in burner
m/s
w
Depth of flame
m
x
Bark thickness
m
