......,
0,
.~
MARCH I APRil 2006
Planet of Slums
Poverty's Niche in the Ecology ofthe City
Mike Davis
How Forest Fires Are Changing
the Economy ofthe West
Peter Priederici

PETER FRIEDERICI
ART BY BOBBE BESOLD
om
LCk
o
I H
-
';
.~
.
~.
u
··
.1
•
, .uce tt
~.ot,
orne Like It
Culled
In the Southwest,
moreforests are
burningthan eveI:
Some entrepreneurs
see a new economy rising
through the s1noke
54
OR ION
HIS IS HOW FIRE BEGINS : with energy-raw
potential-landing as light on the Earth's sur-
face after a quick transit from the sun. In the
uplands of the American Southwest, what the light hits are the long needles ofpon-
derosa pine trees. The trees are evergreen, efficient, all year pulling light out of the
clear blue skies and using it to build long strands of carbohydrates, one upon
another, out of water and carbon dioxide and the minerals held in the soil. TIley
build up and out, creating fractal architectures of ever-increasing complexity. TIle
trunks rise high; the branches spread. Then in late spring the wind gusts hot and
hard and the sun shines stronger and whiter in a cloudless sky.Weeks pass without
rain. The hot wind whips the sun-cured grasses and shrubs and trees, and all those
complex molecules are left rustling and waving in the air as if beseeching aid in
returning to a simpler time. Lilce as not, they get it.
MARCH I APRIL 2.006

Everylandscape interacts with the fire ofthe sun, but each one
has different moments when the spark can strike. In some it rarely
does. In some it's common. Scarcely any natural landscape has a
greater abundance ofsparks than the ponderosa pine forests ofthe
Southwest They cover millions of acres in Arizona and New
Mexico alone. You could, were you so inclined, saddle up a horse
on the outskirts of Silver City, New Mexico,and ride a long arc to
the north and then the northwest, and not lose sight of a pon-
derosa pine tree for a distance ofmore than two hundred and fifty
miles. On June 18. 2002. the largest wildfire in Arizona's
recorded history broke out in the middle ofthat arc. It was a fero-
cious inferno that created its own weather and sent embers
hurtling miles away. More than thirtythousand people, including
the entire population ofthe small city of Show Low, were evacu-
ated from their homes. When it was finally out, the Rodeo-
Chediski Fire had charred more than 465.000 acres and more
than four hundred buildings. Property damage totaled $129 mil-
lion. By 2005, the money spent attempting to suppress the fire
and then rehabilitate the burned
lands came to a total of$173 million.
The fire broke out during condi-
tions of high wind and severe
drought, but its fast spread and its
severity were widely ascribed to the
unhealthy condition of the area's
forests, especiallythe ponderosa pine
stands that made up the bulk ofthe
acreage burned. The Rodeo-Chediski
was in line with a clear trend ofever
larger and more serious fires in the
Southwest's ponderosa forests. They
are souvenirs ofmore than a century
of ecological meddling. from over-
grazing to extensive logging to-
mostespecially-the exclusion offre-
quent ground fires. Lacking small
fires, the forests grow thick with
small trees, and ripe for conflagra-
tion. These forests present a grave
danger to human communities set
within them-and a signal opportu-
nity for restoration ofboth a regional
ecosystem and regional economies.
By
TH l!
TI M E Wally Covington
arrived in . Flagstaff as
a newly
minted fOt~ professor at North-
ern Arizona University in 1975. a
few cracks were beginning to show
in the smooth facade of the U.S.
Forest Service's efficient manage-
ment ofits forests. The very basis of
that management was an aversion to
fire. FIre was the enemy and was to
be given no quarter. To waver in
opposing it would signal the defeat
of all the well-meaning ideals of
OR ION
MARCH I APRIL 2.006

If forest fires are going to occur on a scale of tens of thousands
of acres, says Wally Covington, then people need to be
planning restoration treatments on that sort of scale, too.
scientific forestry. It would mean that people were not in charge.
The strategy worked, for a while. For decades after the cre-
ation of the Forest Service, even into and after World War II,
most of the fires in the Southwest were small and easily con-
trolled by a handful of men with mattocks and shovels.
Photosynthesis did its work. The chains of carbohydrates grew,
and the pines reached up and out. A timber industry based on
cutting the venerable yellow-barked pines thrived. cattle grazed,
and cool rationality had, it appeared, prevailed. Efficiencyruled.
But Covington'S arrival coincided with an alarming increase
in the size and frequency of fires on the national forests of the
Southwest In 1971and 1974. for the first time since records had
been kept. more than two hundred thousand acres burned; in
1979. the total exceeded three hundred thousand. Yet more
alarming than any numbers were the effects of these fires. They
traveled through the tree crowns, killing young and old pines
alike, Where they burned particularly hot they devoured the
soil's organic matter and left behind bare mineral dirt that ran
off after summer thunderstorms. In many cases they were so
destructive that it was rank weeds rather than pines and native
grasses that grew back after they'd passed.. They represented a
real danger to people, too. They were fires that got attention.
What they showed was that suppressing small fires year after
year was no way to get rid of fire at all.
In the early 199os, Covington began a restoration experi-
ment on a ten-acre tract of forest at the Gus Pearson Natural
Area, near Flagstaff. It had never been logged.. Massive yellow
pines still towered high. But from ground level it was hard to
see them, so inundated were they in a sea of saplings. Where
only twenty to twenty-five trees per acre had stood in 1876,
nearly thirteen hundred per acre grew in 1992.
By then Covington and other researchers knew why this had
happened. The growth rings of the old pines showed that fire
had burned through the drying bunchgrasses and fallen pine
n~edIes every few years. likely during the dry months of early
summer, burning hot and dear. devouring those light fuels and
the great majority of the small young trees. Butit had raced, for
the most part passing by too quickly to do much harm to the
thick-barked older pines. Fire behaved in this way until 1876,
the year in which the first American settlers arrived in the area.
That was well before federal lire suppression policies were put
in place. But it was right about the time the first sheep and cat-
tle arrived. Once the livestockate awaythe grasses, ground fires
had no way to spread. Absent fire, young trees proliferated.
On two-thirds of the Gus Pearson tract, Covington's team cut
down and cleared away almost all the trees but those that had
been there in 1876. They left a few younger trees standing wher-
ever a downed log or standing dead tree showed that a pine had
once stood.. Then they burned halfof the treated tract.
The old pines in the burned area soon showed increased vigor
and health. Cutting out the abundant young trees had the same
effect as thinning the lettuce shoots in your garden: with less
competition for nutrients, they thrived. Grasses and wildflowers
teemed, too, in the thinned areas. The experiment to restore the
'forest seems to have worked. Since then, Covington has been a
prime advocate of implementing forest restoration on a large
scale. If forest fires are going to occur on a scale oftens of thou-
sands of acres, he has said, then people need to be planning
restoration treatments on that sort of scale, too.
The obstacles to doing so are political and mechanical, but
they are primarily economic. Someone has to be paid to wield
the chainsaws on many, many thousands of acres. In an era
when the federal government directs its resources elsewhere,
that is likely to happen onlyifsome market can be developed for
the material removed from the woods-that is, ifthere is some
reason to wield the saws that is integral to the human economy.
"The scale of the problem across the West is astronomical,"
said Dennis Becker, a forest economist at the University of
Minnesota who has studied the use of small trees in the
Southwest. "Ifwe can't economically remove the material from
the forest, then we can do all the research we want and it's not
going to matter because we're not going to get the work done."
THERE ARE MANY THINGS YOU CAN
DO with a piece of
wood. Youcan cut it and bum it in a campfire, on a hearth, in a
wood stove, but in that form wood is a balkyfuel, irregular and
MARCH I ArRIL 2006
0 RIO N
57

inefficient. Gas and oil and coal-which can readily be pulver-
ized into a fine powder to make a liquid slurry-are far more
practical fuels for an industrial economy. They can be trans-
ported in pipelines and fed into engines as gas or liquid.
They've been standardized. To feed a large, centralized economy
you need fuels that flow like water.
It was to make wood move a bit more like water that a man
named Rob Davis came to Show Lowin 1992. To most investors,
the idea of going into the wood-products industry in northern
Arizona in the early 1990S was roughly akin to bankrolling a
buggy manufacturer in 1920S Detroit. The logging industry was
in its death throes there, strangled by a dearth oflarge trees, by
competition from other states and other countries, by new envi-
ronmental regulations. The smart money was elsewhere. Davis
disagreed, and played his hand. He established his company,
Forest Energy Corporation, in an open woodland on the edge of
town. Fourteen years later it is still there, humming along and
bigger than before.
Forest Energy Corporation occupies a medium-sized industrial
building overwhich tower huge piles of tawnywood chips that will
be converted to standardized pellets resembling something you'd
feed a pet rabbit. TIle pellets are poured into forty-pound bags that
you can buy in Flagstafffor about three dollars-not a bad deal at
atime when prices for oil and natural gas are rising.
Davis willbe glad to tell you the following facts about turning
wood into pellets: A chunk of ponderosa pine that occupies a
cubic foot weighs sixteen to eighteen pounds. A cubic foot ofpine .
pellets weighs forty-two pounds; it contains commensurately
more energy, and produces more heat, than the unprocessed
wood. Since pellets are consistently sized and shaped, they burn
far more efficiently. A new pellet stove produces about a fifth the
emissions of a new wood stove. In most communities it can be
used even when "no-burn" days are declared to protect air quality;
wood pellets, unlike fossil fuels, are considered carbon-neutral.
Rob Davis will be happy tosell you, for about $9,000, a boiler that
automatically feeds and burns pellets and that will heat your
house very reliably and efficiently.
When Davis began pellet production in 1992, he primarily
used sawmill waste and the shavings produced at molding,
truss, and furniture manufacturers as his raw materials. His
business grew steadily, if not spectacularly. Then the Rodeo-
Chediski Fire erupted, underscoring the need to work on the
forests around Show Low and other Mogollon Rim towns.
By 2004, officials on the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests
were looking for someone to annually thin between ten and
fifteen thousand acres of primarily small-diameter ponderosa
pine around human communities. After the thinning, national
forest staffwould conduct prescribed burns in order to further
reduce the fuel load and promote the growth of herbaceous
plants. The cost to the federal government would total some-
where between $19 and $91 million over a ten-year period, and
the Forest Service was planning to pay someone to do this
"stewardship" work. Davis and Dwayne Walker, who owns a
small logging finn, put in a bid. The only rival bid carne from
Louisiana-Pacific, the giant international logging company.
The Forest Service awarded Davis and Wallcer the contract.
Walker aimed to thin eleven thousand acres in the first year, and
Davis employed twenty-eight people to convert the "excess"
wood into pellets. He was uncertain how much money the fed-
eral government would be able to pump into the project over
time, and saw his ability to produce a value-added product as
critical to its success. "The only way we can pay for thinning in
the long term is to have economically viable businesses that
function without subsidy." he said. "We're not going to be able
to rely on the government to put money in. We're going to have
to do it ourselves."
ByApril zooj, fifteen truckloads a day ofchips from the thin-
ning project were being delivered to the piles outside the Forest
Energy building. The trees cut as part of the thinning project
range considerably in size. Those over twelve inches in diame-
ter go to a sawmill. Some smaller ones can be sold as posts.
Davis takes the leftovers, mainly trees too small to be used for
any other purpose: "the most expensive to harvest, and the stuff
no one else wants: The great advantage ofturning these small
trees into pellets is that everything can be used-wood. bark,
even needles..
To have loggers cutting trees on thousands ofacres of pub.
lie land per year, and to have the resulting wood sold for profit,
might sound like the bad old days ofoverexploitation ofwest-
ern forests, but for two factors . First, the biggest trees are left
standing. Second, you can get a hard-core environmentalist-
Todd Schulke. to be specific-to praise the project. Schulke
lives near Silver City and was one of the founders, in 1989, of
the Center for Biological Diversity, a hard-litigating. take-rio-
prisoners nonprofit that was one ofthe central players in shut-
ting down the old-growth logging industry on the Southwest's
national forests in the early 199os. But Schulke is not a no-cut
activist. °I think [the Forest Energy strategy] is exactly the right
way to approach these issues," he said. "It's probably the right
scale. Had that stewardship contract gone to Louisiana-Pacific,
we would have been very concerned. When people are trying
to maximize the amount of wood they can get, then I start to
really question it. For Rob, this contract is a ten-year growth
contract. It's a huge risk for him. I'd rather have someone like
him, who can grow into something like this, than someone
who needs all the wood right away. The community-based
OR ION
M ARCH I APRIL 2006

approach gives us room to work
with people."
Schulke expresses considerable
hope that work under the steward-
ship contract can treat most of the
vulnerable acreage around Show
Low and nearby settlements. As the
worst fire danger around towns is
ameliorated. managers will be able
to prescribe fire more liberallyin the
wildlands-or even let naturally
ignited fires bum. Schulkeadvocates
treating as many acres exclusively
with fire as possible. He wants tosee
much of the forest sculpted as it
once was-by natural fire-rather
than byhuman hands. In the future,
he suggests, once the fire danger to
human
communities
has
been
reduced, it should be possible to
have fire do the bulk ofthe work.
"I suspect that there will be
some
long-term
maintenance
needs, especially near communi-
ties, but ifwe're going to maintain
these stands in the future it's going
to have to be with fire," he said.
"It's crazy to think we're going to
maintain
these
forests
with
mechanical thinning."
He's right, of course; it would
take a huge effort to continue to
suppress wildfires and to thin
huge tracts of southwestern pine
forests on a regular basis over the
long term. But from today's per-
spective, what Schulke advocates
seems equally challenging. "We're
not going to bum a million acres a year in Arizona, " Davis
said, pointing to concerns about smoke, the safety of
prescribed bums, and a lack offunding and staffin the state's
national forests . Small pine trees, he said, constitute "a
resource I don't like to see wasted ifwe don't have to. It's not
a waste product. Ifoil goes up another fiftybucks a barrel, this
'is going to be one ofour best resources. We ought to get some
yield out of these trees."
Davis knows there is disagreement here. "Some of the envi-
rorunentalists want to know how to bum a maximum number
of acres," he said. "I'd like to know what the minimum is that
we can bum. We have pretty divergent numbers about this. But
at least there is a discussion."
To burn or to thin? To let as much fire as possible run
through the forest according to its own itinerary-crawling
along the ground here, blowing up into the crowns there-or to
bag part of the forest instead and feed it into stoves to warm
people's houses? The argument will persist. But for now the
important thing is that people are going out into the woods to
work, and that they're making decent money, and that the way
MARCH I APRIL 2006
0 RIO N
59

The strategy seems simple: do good work in the woods,
sell high-quality products, make a good living, persist.
Can it succeed? Check back in a few years.
in which they're working is mo re attuned to the ecological
realities of the place than most forest work in the region has
been for a long, long time.
FOR TODD SCHULKE, itis a·factoflife that thinning and burn-
ing are needed in the region's forests. He has stopped plenty of
timber sales, but he has also marked his share of trees for
cutting, and has served as a board member ofa nonprofit group,
Gila WoodNet, that markets wood cut on national forest land. For
Schulke and a colleague named Gordon West, reconciling natu-
ral and economic processes is no hurdle: the real obstacle to
forest stewardship is the difficulty ofmarketing small trees.
West is a logger and woodworker who, a few years ago, was
looking for logs so he could build cabins near his home in Silver
City. With Schulke and a few other collaborators, West set up
Gila WoodNet to thin the nearby forest according to restoration
prescriptions, and worked to develop products from the resulting
wood. Byearly 20°5, the nonprofit's timber workers were cutting
small trees with low-impact logging equipment. and several local
woodworkers were buying the larger logs to craft such products
as furniture and vigas and latiUas-the round ceiling beams and
crossbeams popular in southwestern architecture.
Gila WoodNet originally planned to thin about five hundred
acres per year, based on a Forest Service assessment that indi-
cates that ten thousand acres ofponderosa pine near Silver City
need to be thinned to reduce fire danger. Five hundred acres a
year would spread this work out over twenty years-a practical
planning period for those trying to figure out how to structure
careers, or manufacture and market products. But there are not
yet enough markets to absorb the supply, and yearly harvests
have so far fallen short of that goal. It is easy to sell the larger
trees that can make vigas. But selling only those does not pencil
out, and West is looking to sell the other materials as wood
chips or as fuel for electricity. "That 20 percent of the material
that goes into vigas, latillas, and so on generates about 80 per-
cent of the income, and the 80 percent that goes into chips or
biomass [for energy production] generates about 20 percent,"
he said. "But you don't want just one. The ecological considera-
tions of the forests require that you deal with the mass of
material that can go into biomass, but the economic health of
the community requires the higher-value products. You can't
neglect one or the other."
Selling that 80 percent has proceeded slowly. It needs to be
sold locally because it's too expensive to truck low-value materials
like wood chips any distance, but nearby markets have been hard
to find. From a global economic perspective, Gila WoodNet has
deliberately hobbled itself West and Schulke leave a good many
of the valuable larger trees standing, and they want the project's
production to mirror only local demand. They don't want to be
selling vigas and pre-cut log cabins to customers in Santa Fe;
Santa Fe has its own forests to thin. "Big industry isn't where it's
at," West said. "I'd like to see dispersed small industries. That's
where it's at You shouldn't ignore the small solutions. They're
perfectly good, and will last, The more dispersed an industry is,
the more stable it is, and the less likelyto crash."
That has a nice ring to it, but sounds really idealistic, too, and it
is difficult not to wonder how realistic a business model it repre-
sents. West might be looking to sell products only in the Silver City
area, but the products he competes with are those that have come
out ahead in a highly competitive, global marketplace. The success
of businesses such as West and Davis's may well hinge on that
global economy. If the price of oil, and hence the cost of trans-
portation, continue to rise, then such local-or regional-scale enter-
prises will start looking like pretty good bets.
The strategy seems simple: do good work in the woods,
sell high-quality products, make.a good living, persist can it
succeed? Check back in a few years. "I see this as creating a new
culture in the woods," West said. "What we're trying to accom-
plish comes first, and making money comes second-though it
does come. But you don't care so much about making a lot of
money ifyou're already doing what you want to do."
THE AMERICAN POLITICAL SysTEM.lilceitselectorate.does
not like to be told that solutions to anything will take decades,
or perhaps generations. Yet that is exactly tile case with forest
restoration. Even if all tile thinning required to return tile den-
60
OR ION
MAIlCH I APRIL 2006

sity of southwestern ponderosa pine forests to reasonable levels
were to take place next week. it would still take many decades or
even centuries before all the remaining skinny pines could grow
to the stature of the big. old yellow pines that were cut long ago.
Given that thinning will take many years, some dense stands of
pine are no doubt going to bum in the interim as intensely as
those toasted by the Rodeo-Chediski Fire. Some areas will be
thinned and burned and willlook spectacular. Others will never
be treated after thinning, except perhaps by a lightning strike,
and will look equally spectacular. Some, thinned with as much
care. will end up looking like tree farms. Others will again grow
dense with small trees.
The result is going to be a crazy quilt of ecological circum-
stance that will likely mirror an economic patchwork. The solu-
tions to the problem are manifold. Each is incomplete, and
all can work. There is no reason why Rob Davis, processing
the wood from ten thousand acres per year, cannot thrive at the
same time as Gordon West, working on a few hundred.
The Southwest's forest-products industry is in the process
of reinventing itself practically from scratch, without a lot of
established players and vested interests. "In the Southwest we
get to have a say in what the industry will look like," Dennis
Becker, the forest economist, said. "I think we're actually in a
unique situation because of that."
When you view ecological restoration through an economic
lens it boils down to this: the ideal result is an expansion ofpos-
sibility. Rob Davis and Gordon West are stuck with lots ofsmall
trees and few big ones today. But if restoration succeeds on a
large scale-if today's ecologically minded foresters can grow
a lot fewer ponderosa pine trees,
but bigger ones-then
future generations will have an expanded set of opportunities.
They may have to choose between turning old-growth trees into
lumber or pellets-or letting them stand.
The real end result of forest restoration, then, is as much
about people as it is about trees and bunchgrasses and fire. It is
about ensuring that future generations have a generous rather
than a constrained set ofpossibilities. They'll have the ability to
do more with fire. and with the chainsaw. Maybe the new
restoration economy won't lead to anything sustainable at all. at
least not in the long run, As prices for fossil fuels rise, maybe a
hunger for wood pellets will lead to all sorts of cut-and-run
logging. Maybe a great deal of time and energy and money will
be spent on forest restoration in coming years simply so that
south~vestel11ers in eighty years, or a hundred, can cut big trees
as rapaciously as the early loggers did.
Todd Schulke, for one, views his work as culminating in such
choices. "If my descendants decide to cut old-growth trees
again," he said, "there'll be lots of them." .\'8..
Come, Aristotle
On April 4, moving
the pea fence to
another row
we unearth forty
perfect parsnips
that had spent
the coldest winter since
the seventies
condemned like leeches,
Aristotle says,
to suck up whatever
sustenance may flow
to them wherever
they are stuck.
Abandoned, overlooked.
Our good luck.
We ate them
in groups of fours
braised with a little brown sugar
(though they were sweet
enough without)
paler than cauliflower
or pearls, inverted fleshy angels
pried from the black gold
of ancient horse manure.
Pure, Aristotle.
Come, philosopher.
Come to the table.
-Maxine Kumin
MARCH I APRIL 2005
0 RIO N
51
