Evidence-based Restoration 
Systematic Review 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to reversing declines in the condition of forested communities throughout the Intermoun-
tain West, particularly those affected by severe wildfires and insect outbreaks.  Our efforts focus on science-based research of ecological 
and socio-economic matters related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach, and education. 
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928/523-7182, FAX 928/523-0296, www.eri.nau.edu 
Effects of Restoration on Wildlife Density and Populations               February 2011 
Background  
Ecological restoration treatments, including thinning and/or burning, expose wildlife species to short- and long-
term alterations to their habitat. Restoration treatments are an effort to return forest structure and composition to 
within the range of natural variability, which should benefit native wildlife species. However, these treatments 
are being planned and implemented across thousands of acres of forest in the southwestern United States with 
only limited quantitative data about wildlife responses across multiple species or taxa. 
  
Primary objective: How do thinning and burning treatments in southwestern conifer forests in the United 
States affect wildlife density and population performance?  
Secondary objective: Which wildlife species are most vulnerable to habitat alteration? How do the effects of 
thinning and burning treatments compare to those of selective harvesting, wildfire, and overstory removal?  
  
Methods 
The systematic review was conducted following the Centre for Evidence-Based Conservation guidelines at: http://
www.environmentalevidence.org/Authors.htm. 
  
Results  
Our review identified 56 relevant studies, which were dominated by avian studies and generally occurred less 
than ten years post-treatment. Although the qualitative analysis resulted in broadly neutral or positive responses 
to treatments in terms of species abundances, the meta-analysis revealed a pattern of generally positive density 
responses to the restoration-like treatments (small-diameter tree removal, burning, and thin/burn) and negative 
responses to the high-severity treatments (wildfire and overstory removal; Figure 1).  
 
Figure 1.  Mean effect size, bootstrapped confidence interval, and number of observations a) across all species 
for the six treatment types and b) for the 11 species for which data were available in each of the six treatment 
types. 

We recorded more positive responses by individual species to the high-severity treatments using the qualitative 
analysis compared to the meta-analytic approach. Additional information on species-specific responses can be 
found in the full systematic review document. Reproductive responses were generally positive in the restoration 
treatments and negative in the high-severity treatments, but were compromised by low numbers of observations 
(Table 1).  
Table 1. Species’ reproductive responses to restoration (small-diameter tree removal, burn, and thin/burn) and high-severity 
(wildfire and overstory removal) treatments, followed by the total number of observations and the overall response. 
1 Species’ scientific names provided in Appendix 4. 
2 Arizona Species of Concern 
3 US Forest Service Sensitive Species 
4 Federally threatened 
  
Management and Research Recommendations  
This review suggests that thinning and prescribed burning of southwestern ponderosa pine and dry mixed conifer 
forests will benefit passerine birds and small mammals. The existing literature indicates that small-diameter tree 
removal and/or burning does not negatively affect species’ densities compared to unmanaged forest stands, and is 
less detrimental than overstory removal or wildfire. However, no one treatment benefitted all species, at least in the 
short term. Thus, a combination of various treatments in a patchy arrangement in time and space across the land-
scape is likely to result in higher animal diversity than any one treatment.  
        The majority of studies in the analysis examined responses of birds to treatment, and we suggest that existing 
studies be carefully consulted before initiating similar research in order to eliminate duplication of effort. Other un-
der- or unrepresented taxa include reptiles and amphibians, rare birds and small mammals, medium and large mam-
mals, including both predators and ungulates, and birds of prey. However, we suggest studies use holistic, focal 
species or food web approaches representative of many trophic levels and taxa, rather than focusing on single or 
similar species. Furthermore, the lack of studies that assess reproductive responses across all species indicates a 
paucity of research about this important fitness parameter. Finally, studies need to be conducted at larger temporal 
and spatial scales in order to understand both short- and long-term implications of treatments at the landscape level.  
  
References and Links 
The full systematic review and all references can be accessed at: 
http://www.eri.nau.edu/en/evidence-based-restoration-projects 
Species1 
Positive 
Neutral 
Negative 
Total 
Overall Response 
Restoration Treatments 
Tassel-eared squirrel 
 
 
1 
1 
- 
Dark-eyed junco 
1 
 
5 
6 
- 
Wild turkey 
 
1 
 
1 
0 
Plumbeous vireo 
6 
 
1 
7 
+ 
Western bluebird 
11 
17 
3 
31 
+ 
Western tanager 
1 
 
 
1 
+ 
High-severity Treatments 
Black bear 
2 
3 
3 
8 
- 
Mexican spotted owl2,3,4 
 
 
1 
1 
- 
