A Spatially-Explicit Reconstruction
of Historical Fire Occurrence in the
Ponderosa Pine Zone of the Colorado
Front Range
Rosemary L. Sherriff,1,2,* and Thomas T. Veblen1
1Department of Geography, University of Colorado, Campus Box 260, Boulder, Colorado 80309, USA; 2Department of Geography and
Environmental Studies, University of Hawaii at Hilo, 200 W. Kawili Street, Hilo, Hawaii 96720, USA
ABSTRACT
A key issue in ecosystem management in the
western U.S. is the determination of the historic
range of variability of ﬁre and its ecological signif-
icance prior to major land-use changes associated
with Euro-American settlement. The present study
relates spatial variation in historical ﬁre occurrence
to variation in abiotic and biotic predictors of ﬁre
frequency and severity across the elevational range
of ponderosa pine in northern Colorado. Logistic
regression was used to relate ﬁre frequency to
environmental predictors and to derive a proba-
bility surface for mapping purposes. These results
indicate that less than 20% of the ponderosa pine
zone had an historic ﬁre regime (pre-1915) of rel-
atively frequent ﬁres (mean ﬁre intervals, MFI,
<30 years). More than 80% is reconstructed to
have had a lower frequency (MFI ‡ 30 years),
more variable severity ﬁre regime. High ﬁre fre-
quency is clearly associated with low elevations.
Lower and more variable ﬁre frequencies, associ-
ated with high and moderate severities, occur
across a broad range of elevation and are related to
variations in other environmental variables. Only a
small part of the ponderosa pine zone ﬁts the
widespread view that the historic ﬁre regime was
characterized mainly by frequent, low-severity that
maintained
open
conditions.
Management
at-
tempts to restore historic forest structures and/or
ﬁre conditions must recognize that infrequent se-
vere ﬁres were an important component of the
historic ﬁre regime in this cover type in northern
Colorado.
Key words: ﬁre history; ponderosa pine; Pinus
ponderosa; geographic information system; Colo-
rado Front Range; ﬁre regime.
INTRODUCTION
A key issue in ecosystem management in the wes-
tern U.S. is the determination of the historic range
of variability of ﬁre and its ecological signiﬁcance
prior to major land-use changes associated with
Euro-American settlement. Although broad gener-
alizations have been made about the effects of ﬁre
suppression on current forest structures and recent
ﬁre behavior in the West (for example, see Cov-
ington 2000; Healthy Forest Restoration Act—H-
FRA 2003), historic ﬁre regimes varied substantially
in frequency and severity across the West (Gutsell
and others 2001; Veblen 2003a). Even for different
areas of the ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) cover
type there is considerable debate about the pre-
1900 ﬁre regime and the ecological consequences of
Received 2 December 2005; accepted 5 October 2006; published online 14
March 2007.
*Corresponding author; e-mail: sherriff@hawaii.edu
Ecosystems (2007) 10: 311–323
DOI: 10.1007/s10021-007-9022-2
311

modern ﬁre exclusion (Covington and others 1997;
Shinneman and Baker 1997; Baker and Ehle 2001;
Allen and others 2002).
A widespread viewpoint is that ﬁre exclusion in
the U.S. West during the past circa 100 years has
dramatically reduced the occurrence of formerly
frequent low-severity ﬁres which in turn has pro-
moted an unnatural increase in forest density and
the risk of high-severity ﬁres (Covington 2000;
HFRA 2003). Much of the supporting information
for this ﬁre exclusion-fuels buildup model comes
from studies in the dry ponderosa pine ecosystems
of the Southwest (Swetnam and Baisan 1996; Fule
and others 1997; Mast and others 1999). In pon-
derosa pine forests in the Southwest and elsewhere
(for example, dry ponderosa pine forests in western
Montana; Gruell 1983; Arno and others 1995)
where the goals of ecological restoration and fuels
reduction have been shown to converge, manage-
ment to reduce wildﬁre risk can also restore forest
stands to historic conditions. However, geographic
variations in climate, topography, site productivity,
and land-use history across the widely distributed
ponderosa pine cover type provide ample reason
for conducting site-speciﬁc research to evaluate the
ﬁre exclusion-fuels buildup model.
In the Colorado Front Range, it is well estab-
lished that both low- and high-severity ﬁres played
signiﬁcant roles in the shaping of historic ponder-
osa pine forests (Veblen and Lorenz 1986; Brown
and others 1999; Kaufmann and others 2000; Ehle
and Baker 2003). Evidence of pre-twentieth cen-
tury (that is, prior to any effects of ﬁre exclusion)
high-severity ﬁres in the ponderosa pine zone in-
cludes historical photographs, as well as tree age
structures, and dendroecological reconstructions of
past stand conditions (Veblen and Lorenz 1986,
1991; Mast and others 1998; Kaufmann and others
2000; Ehle and Baker 2003; Sherriff and Veblen
2006). Yet, how past ﬁres varied in severity spa-
tially over the montane zone of ponderosa pine-
dominated forests (circa 1,800–3,000 m) is uncer-
tain. Recent studies in the Front Range have doc-
umented the occurrence of mixed-severity ﬁre
regimes,
including
inferences
of
the
relative
importance of low- and high-severity ﬁre, in pon-
derosa pine-dominated ecosystems over relatively
narrow gradients of elevation and topographic
variation (Brown and others 1999; Kaufmann and
others 2000; Ehle and Baker 2003). Despite these
advances towards a more spatially explicit under-
standing of historic ﬁre regimes, broad-scale pat-
terns of historic ﬁre regime type across the full
range of ponderosa pine-dominated forests have
not been examined.
The goal of this research is to map patterns in
historical ﬁre occurrence across the ponderosa pine
zone in the northern Front Range by developing an
empirical predictive model of past ﬁre frequency
classes from tree-ring ﬁre history descriptors and
spatial associations of parameters determined from
digital terrain data. Although the primary quanti-
tative criterion used in this analysis is ﬁre fre-
quency, we also have related ﬁre frequency to ﬁre
severity by examining tree population age struc-
tures to show that where ﬁre frequency is high, ﬁre
severity is low (Sherriff 2004; Sherriff and Veblen
2006). In the context of fuels management and
ecological restoration, our primary goal is to dis-
tinguish between areas formerly characterized by
relatively frequent low-severity ﬁres and those
where less frequent high- or moderate-severity
ﬁres were important. In the former areas, surface
ﬁres killed mostly juvenile trees and maintained
relatively open stands. In the latter, stands were
initially dense and higher severity ﬁres killed high
percentages of crown trees within a ﬁre perimeter.
Our working hypothesis is that broad classes of past
ﬁre frequency can be predicted from the same types
of abiotic factors successfully used in predicting
spatial variation in local vegetation patterns (for
example, see Miller and Franklin 2002). For a
60,875-ha area in the ponderosa pine zone of
Arapaho-Roosevelt National Forest (ARNF) on the
eastern slope of the Front Range (Figure 1), we
reconstruct, or ‘‘retrodict’’, the habitats character-
ized by different historic ﬁre frequency classes. The
objectives are to: (1) characterize ﬁre frequency
across the elevational range of ponderosa pine; (2)
identify environmental conditions associated with
different ﬁre frequency classes; and (3) create and
evaluate spatial models of ﬁre frequency classes
based on environmental conditions for the pon-
derosa pine zone of ARNF.
STUDY AREA
The vegetation pattern in the Front Range varies
along environmental gradients of elevation and
moisture (Peet 1981). The montane zone extends
from approximately 1,800–3,000 m; it is charac-
terized primarily by forests but also includes limited
areas of grasslands and shrublands (Marr 1961).
Forest vegetation of the montane zone varies from
open park-like stands of ponderosa pine at the
plains-grassland ecotone to dense stands mixed
with Douglas-ﬁr (Pseudotsuga menziesii) in more
mesic sites and north-facing slopes. In the upper
montane
zone,
topographic
position
becomes
increasingly important with dense stands of pon-
312
R. L. Sherriff and T. T. Veblen

derosa pine-Douglas-ﬁr on north-facing slopes and
more open ponderosa pine woodlands on south-
facing slopes. Aspen (Populus tremuloides), limber
pine (Pinus ﬂexilis) and lodgepole pine (Pinus con-
torta) often co-occur with ponderosa pine and
Douglas-ﬁr at higher elevations in the montane
zone.
To characterize environmental attributes associ-
ated with different ﬁre frequencies, we used ﬁre
history data from 37 sites previously described by
Veblen and others (2000) and 17 new sites (Sherriff
2004) extending across the full elevation range of
ponderosa pine in the northern Colorado Front
Range on lands that belong to the City of Boulder
and Boulder County Open Space, Arapaho-Roose-
velt National Forest, and Rocky Mountain National
Park (Figure 1). For the predictive habitat mapping
of ﬁre frequency classes, the study area was delin-
eated from the U.S.D.A. Forest Service Integrated
Resource Inventory (IRI) vegetation cover maps of
nine watersheds in the ARNF contained within the
larger ﬁre history sampling area. The IRI vegetation
data are cover type maps that have been ﬁeld
checked by the Forest Service and derived from the
Resource Inventory System (RIS). In the context of
this study, the ponderosa pine zone includes areas
mapped as ponderosa pine (28.7%), ponderosa
pine-Douglas-ﬁr (25.4%), Douglas-ﬁr-ponderosa
pine (9.7%), and mixed conifer (36.2%) cover
types. Within the mixed conifer cover type pon-
derosa pine dominates 20.8% of the study area,
Douglas-ﬁr 4.6%, lodgepole pine 8.0%, and aspen
2.8%. Thus, the 60,875-ha ARNF study area in-
cludes all cover types where ponderosa pine is a
dominant or co-dominant species; it is mapped as
dominant in approximately 75% of this area.
Figure 1. Location of 54
sites sampled for ﬁre history
throughout the ponderosa
pine zone of the northern
Colorado Front Range. For
the predictive habitat
mapping of ﬁre frequency
classes, the 60,875 ha study
area was delineated from the
Forest Service Integrated
Resource Inventory (IRI)
vegetation cover maps of the
Arapaho-Roosevelt National
Forest (ARNF) contained
within the larger ﬁre history
sampling area.
A Spatially-Explicit Reconstruction of Historical Fire Occurrence
313

METHODS
Response Variables: Fire Frequency
Classes
Methods for sampling ﬁre history for the 37 pre-
viously published sites are given in Veblen and
others (2000). The new sites added for this study
followed the same protocol for sampling ﬁre scars
(Sherriff 2004). General areas for sampling were
subjectively located to maximize the elevation
range of sites where ponderosa pine dominated the
vegetation and to eliminate areas that showed sig-
niﬁcant signs of logging. Relationships between
each ﬁre frequency class and ﬁre severity were
established
by
examining
tree
age
structures
(Sherriff 2004; see Figure 2 for examples), tree-ring
growth releases on remnant trees, and episodes of
ﬁre-caused mortality of mature trees (data pre-
sented in Sherriff 2004; Sherriff and Veblen 2006).
Tree establishment dates were determined by cor-
ing 38–164 trees with diameters at breast height
(dbh)
larger
than
4
cm
(median = 123;
to-
tal > 3,000 trees) in multiple transects at 24 of the
54 ﬁre history sites. Coring height was approxi-
mately
20 cm
and
establishment
dates
were
determined by adding median ages of seedlings
around 20-cm tall (n = 252 for all species) that
were destructively sampled at the same site or a
similar site (see Sherriff 2004 for details).
A total of 54 ﬁre history sites (Veblen and others
2000; Sherriff 2004) were used to deﬁne two clas-
ses of higher frequency-lower ﬁre severity and
lower frequency-variable ﬁre severity ﬁres and to
examine their relationships with environmental
variables. Forty-eight of the 54 sites had a mini-
mum of ten ﬁre-scarred trees and six sites had se-
ven to nine ﬁre-scarred trees. A total of 779 ﬁre-
scarred partial cross-sections collected from live and
dead trees were crossdated at the 54 sites (506
samples from Veblen and others 2000; 273 samples
from Sherriff 2004).
The most objective criteria for delimiting ﬁre
history classes were the total number of ﬁre events
(each recorded by ‡2 trees scarred per site) be-
tween 1700 and 1915, MFI (all ﬁres) before Euro-
American inﬂuence (1700–1860), and numbers of
trees with multiple ﬁre-scars (Table 1). Although
the number of ﬁre-scarred trees (sample depth) is
low at most sites prior to the 1800s (mean of 3.5
ﬁre dates and 4.6 samples per site before 1800),
only seven sites record no evidence of ﬁre (no ﬁre
scars) prior to 1800 (for detailed ﬁre histories by
site see Veblen and others 1996; Sherriff 2004). For
sites recording relatively few ﬁres prior to 1800 we
used stand age structure evidence to evaluate if the
scarcity of ﬁre scars was likely due to destruction of
evidence by more recent severe ﬁres which is an
inherent feature of a mixed-severity ﬁre regime.
Taking into account the many limitations of ﬁre
scars as proxies of past ﬁre occurrence (Baker and
Ehle 2001; Veblen 2003b), two broad classes of ﬁre
frequencies and ﬁre effects were recognized as an
‘index’ of different ﬁre regimes based on multi-
Establishment Date
1700
1800
1900
2000
Relative frequency
0
10
20
30
40
1700
1800
1900
2000
Relative frequency
0
10
20
30
40
LM3 
1870m
MM5
2520m
1700
1800
1900
2000
Relative frequency
0
10
20
30
40
UM2 
2550m
Pipo
Psme
a)
b)
c)
Figure 2. Examples of typical patterns of ﬁre intervals
and tree age structures for the A high frequency ﬁre
class, B variable frequency ﬁre class, and C low fre-
quency ﬁre class. In this study, the low and variable ﬁre
frequency classes are combined for analysis. The relative
frequency (%) of all aged trees (>4 cm dbh) is given in
20-year establishment classes. Numbers of tree ages are
118, 123, and 124 in A, B, and C, respectively. Species
are ponderosa pine (Pipo) and Douglas-ﬁr (Psme). Empty
triangles represent local ﬁres (single tree scarred) and
black triangles represent more widespread ﬁres (more
than one tree scarred).
314
R. L. Sherriff and T. T. Veblen

variate criteria (Table 1; Figure 2). Sites in the high
ﬁre
frequency
class
include
numerous
short
(<30 years) ﬁre return intervals as expected for
low-severity ﬁres that are not dependent on the re-
growth of woody fuels. This classiﬁcation of the
high ﬁre frequency class was chosen because of a
consistent pattern of stands sampled for age struc-
ture that historically had frequent (six or more),
low-severity ﬁres and no evidence of large post-ﬁre
cohort ages prior to the twentieth century (Fig-
ure 2A; Sherriff 2004; Sherriff and Veblen 2006).
In addition, these ﬁre history sites had less tem-
poral variability in ﬁre intervals compared to sites
with fewer ﬁre return intervals (Figure 2B; Sherriff
2004; Sherriff and Veblen 2006). In contrast, the
ﬁre-scar evidence for the lower, more variable ﬁre
frequency class exhibited four or fewer ﬁre years
(recorded by at least two trees scarred) between
1700 and 1915 with ﬁre intervals of 30 to more
than 100 years and clear evidence of post-ﬁre co-
hort ages initiating prior to the 1900s (Figure 2B,
C). The lower, more variable ﬁre frequency sites
predominantly had trees with single ﬁre scars and
ﬁre-scar evidence in clustered areas of the stand.
For predictively mapping ﬁre frequency classes,
40 of the 54 ﬁre history sites were randomly se-
lected for model development (training), and the
remaining 14 sites were used for model evaluation
(Test1). In addition to the 14 sites (Test1) originally
sampled for ﬁre history, 50 additional sites were
sampled for model evaluation (Test2) using a less
intensive procedure that did not require cutting of
ﬁre-scar samples. The criteria used to identify ﬁre
frequency classes for the 50 additional sites were
derived from the results of the more intensive
sampling of ﬁre history and forest structure con-
ducted at the 54 ﬁre history sites where ﬁre scars
were cut (Table 2). A 1-km point grid of the ARNF
study area was delineated and 50 points were
randomly selected for ﬁeld sampling in plots of
100 · 300 m. Any sites with abundant logging or
other human disturbances were rejected and an
adjacent point was sampled. At each random point,
the number of ﬁre-scarred trees and number of ﬁre
scars on each tree were counted and forest struc-
ture was documented in a 100 · 300 m plot using
criteria in Table 2. Additionally, three to ten cores
were taken for tree ages and estimation of the last
ﬁre date in each plot (Barrett and Arno 1988). The
data from these 50 less intensively sampled sites
were used independently in model evaluation
(Test2), and also were combined with the 14 ﬁre
history sites (Test1) to provide an assessment of
model accuracy based on all 64 test sites.
Predictor Variables: Environmental
Conditions
Potential predictor variables of ﬁre frequency clas-
ses were derived from two sources: (1) terrain
variables from a 30-m digital elevation model
(DEM); and (2) cover type from digital vegetation
maps of the ARNF Integrated Resource Inventory
(IRI) and of Rocky Mountain National Park. Ele-
vation, slope steepness, aspect and slope curvature
were all derived from the 30-m DEM. To transform
aspect from a circular to a linear value, an arcsine
transformation was used to create an index of )1 to
+1 (‘‘southness’’ to ‘‘northness’’). Slope curvature
(concavity to convexity) and hillslope position are
related to soil depth, texture and potential soil
moisture and represent proxy measures of soil
texture (Wilson and Gallant 2000). Ravine drain-
ages were delineated from the 30-m DEM using Arc
GRID (ESRI 2002) hydrologic terrain modeling (see
Jenson and Domingue 1988) and distance to ravine
drainage was calculated. Forested areas adjacent to
grasslands may have ﬁre regimes that are inﬂu-
enced by a different ﬁre frequency and behavior in
grasslands; thus, distance-to-grassland was also
Table 1.
Criteria used to Classify Fire Frequency Classes at 54 Fire History Sites
Fire frequency class
No. sites
Criteria (1700–1915)
High
9
Six or more ﬁre years (recorded by at least two scarred trees/ﬁre) or
MFI < 30 years for all ﬁres from 1700 to 1860
More than 50% of the ﬁre-scarred trees have multiple ﬁre scars
Three or more trees with at least three ﬁre scars
Low and variable
35
Four or fewer ﬁre years (recorded by at least two scarred trees/ﬁre) or
MFI ‡ 30 years for all ﬁres from 1700 to 1860
Fewer than 50% of the ﬁre-scarred trees have multiple ﬁre scars
Two or fewer trees with at least three ﬁre scars
Fire history from 1700 to 1915 was considered at each site because of potential effects of ﬁre suppression after approximately 1915. Mean ﬁre interval (MFI) was calculated only
for 1700–1860 because of the likely impacts of Euro-American settlement on ﬁre occurrence and preservation of ﬁre evidence.
A Spatially-Explicit Reconstruction of Historical Fire Occurrence
315

used as a predictor variable. Proximity to grassland
was calculated as the distance to the edge of
grassland areas of at least 0.1 ha. Environmental
conditions at each site were classiﬁed in terms of
the mean elevation, slope steepness, aspect, prox-
imity to grassland, distance to ravine and the
associated ﬁre frequency class. Transformations of
predictor variables were also examined (for exam-
ple, Log distance-to-grassland) to optimize predic-
tive power. Other environmental (abiotic) variables
such as geology and soils were not available at the
resolution required for analysis.
As an exploratory step in assessing the spatial
variation in ﬁre frequency classes, we used a three-
class cover type classiﬁcation as a predictor variable
(pure ponderosa pine, ponderosa pine-Douglas-ﬁr,
and mixed conifer) to identify possible cover types
associated with the two ﬁre frequency classes. The
cover types of the 54 ﬁre history sites sampled are
representative of the cover types in the ARNF study
area. Field observations delineated 32 of the 54 ﬁre
history sites in ponderosa pine stands, eight in the
ponderosa pine-Douglas-ﬁr cover type, and 14 in
the mixed conifer cover type with ponderosa pine
as the dominant or co-dominant species.
Analytical Methods
General Linear Models (GLMs) have been used
extensively in ecological modeling research (for
example, see Franklin 1995; Guisan and Zimmer-
mann 2000). Logistic regression is the suitable GLM
to use when the dependent variable is binary
(presence or absence). Logistic regression uses a
logit link to deﬁne the relationship between the
dependent and the sum of the predictor variables
(Hosmer and Lemeshow 2000). An advantage to
using a probability surface is that the probability
values can be used as an ‘index’ of habitat suit-
ability (Franklin 1995).
In this study, environmental variables were used
to predict the presence or absence of the high ﬁre
frequency class and the lower, more variable ﬁre
frequency class at the site level (n = 40 sites) using
logistic regression (SPSS for Windows 10.0 software
1999). A combination of stepwise and iterative
procedures was used to examine environmental
variables and each ﬁre frequency class. Variables
that did not contribute signiﬁcantly (P < 0.05) to
reduce variance were excluded with a backward
elimination procedure. Collinearity among predic-
tor variables can be problematic with multiple
regression, however none of the predictor variables
in this study were highly correlated. Only the
coefﬁcients of statistically signiﬁcant (P < 0.05)
predictor variables associated with the dependent
variable (ﬁre frequency class) were used for pre-
dicting the probability of two ﬁre frequency classes
across the 60,875-ha ARNF study area. In ArcGIS,
each predictor variable was multiplied by its coef-
ﬁcient and summed to produce a linear predictor
for the ﬁre frequency class (Miller and Franklin
2002). A logistic transformation was used to gen-
erate probability values between 0 and 1:
Probability ðfire frequency classÞ ¼ eFFC=ð1 þ eFFCÞ
ð1Þ
The results yielded a map depicting a probability
surface (suitability) of the presence of each ﬁre
frequency class (FFC). For predictive purposes, a
decision has to be made on the probabilities that
represent class presence. Consequently, a threshold
Table 2.
Multi-Variate Criteria used to Identify a Speciﬁc Fire Frequency Class at Each of the 50 Random
Points throughout the ARNF Study Area where Fire Scars were not Cut
Fire frequency class
Observation criteria
High
Multiple and single ﬁre scars on trees
Three or more trees with at least three ﬁre scars/tree
Multi-aged stands with a patchy spatial pattern
Abundant trees <10 cm dbh
Abundant grass and understory vegetation
Low and variable
Primarily single ﬁre scars on trees
Four or fewer trees with more than two ﬁres scars/tree
Single or multiple cohort ages
Moderate to very low numbers of trees <10 cm dbh and <1.3 m height
Self-thinning
Uniform spatial pattern
The number of ﬁre-scarred trees and number of ﬁre scars on each tree were counted and forest structure was documented in plots of 100 · 300 m.
316
R. L. Sherriff and T. T. Veblen

is needed to transform the probability map into
class presence data (Fieldling and Bell 1997; Manel
and others 2001; Liu and others 2005). Although
0.5 is a common threshold used to differentiate
between binary states, alternative threshold values
are often chosen to minimize the number of
omission and commission errors and provide the
best agreement between predicted and observed
values in the training dataset (Fieldling and Bell
1997; Franklin 1998; Guisan and Zimmerman
2000; Liu and others 2005). There has been much
discussion in the literature on how best to evaluate
the predictions of these types of models and chose
an appropriate threshold. To date, there is no uni-
form agreement on the most appropriate methods.
Two elements commonly identiﬁed as important
for deﬁning the appropriate threshold include (1)
the relative cost of false positives and false negative
errors, although assigning values to these costs is
subjective and dependent upon the context within
which the classiﬁcation rule will be used, and (2)
the prevalence of positive cases (for examples, see
Zweig and Campbell 1993; Fieldling and Bell 1997;
Manel and others 2001; Liu and others 2005). For
instance, a lower probability threshold can con-
siderably reduce omission errors, particularly when
the dependent variable may be uncommon or
when the prevalence of presence or absence is
unequal (Fieldling and Bell 1997; Franklin 1998).
Unequal prevalence of class sizes can also inﬂuence
the scores of logistic regression and many other
classiﬁers, and produce scores biased towards the
larger class (Fieldling and Bell 1997; Hosmer and
Lemeshow 2000). In the current study, the pres-
ence of high ﬁre frequency is uncommon in com-
parison to the alternative (lower and more variable
ﬁre frequency) and the prevalence of sites of high
ﬁre frequency presence is unequal in comparison
to the alternative. Our approach follows a protocol
of choosing a probability threshold to reduce
omission errors (false negatives of high ﬁre fre-
quency sites), but also to minimize the overall error
rate by representing a balance (minimum) of
omission and commission errors in the training
dataset for each ﬁre type. We used a threshold to
transform the probability map into areas delineated
as either high ﬁre frequency or the alternative, and
assess model performance using a matrix of cor-
rectly and incorrectly classiﬁed class predictions.
Thus, our approach includes several considerations
besides the ﬁt of the GLM, which allows us to ad-
dress our primary goal of producing a model that
best estimates the area that historically had a rela-
tively high frequency of ﬁre return intervals in the
range of 10–30 years. The presence/absence of a
predicted ﬁre frequency type for each site was
delineated based on the majority of cells in one of
the two ﬁre frequency classes using zonal statistics
in ArcGIS. All modeling and map compilations
were raster based and conducted at the ﬁnest res-
olution (30 · 30 m) permitted by the data. This
approach does not formally consider spatial auto-
correlation; however, the sites are widely spaced
throughout the study area and only three sites are
within one kilometer of each other (Figure 1).
Model Evaluation
Accuracy measures were derived from a matrix of
correctly and incorrectly classiﬁed ﬁre frequency
class predictions to assess omission versus com-
mission errors for the prediction of the training
dataset. The number of sites correctly predicted for
the training and test sites was the primary criterion
used to assess the accuracy of each predictive
model. Additionally, accuracy measures of both
omission and commission errors are presented for
the combined evaluation datasets of Test1 and
Test2. These measures include the correct classiﬁ-
cation rate (CCR) and the Kappa K statistic. CCR
represents the proportion of omission and com-
mission errors. The Kappa K statistic indicates the
overall agreement between the prediction and the
model evaluation dataset as opposed to random
chance. Fieldling and Bell (1997) indicate values
less than 40% have poor agreement, 40–70% have
good agreement and values greater than 70%
represent excellent agreement.
RESULTS
There were no signiﬁcant relationships of the ﬁre
frequency classes with cover type (ponderosa pine
compared to ponderosa pine-Douglas-ﬁr and mixed
conifer) for the 54 ﬁre history sample sites. Among
the nine sites classiﬁed as high ﬁre frequency sites,
seven are in ponderosa pine stands and two are in
ponderosa pine-Douglas-ﬁr stands. The sites clas-
siﬁed as lower, more variable ﬁre frequency oc-
curred across all three cover types. Consequently,
the focus of the ﬁre frequency modeling was on
abiotic predictors of ﬁre frequency classes, rather
than cover type predictors, throughout the ARNF
study area and cover type was excluded from the
stepwise regression.
Fire Frequency Model
Elevation is the only signiﬁcant predictor variable
of the high ﬁre frequency class (Table 3). High ﬁre
frequency sites tend to occur at lower elevations. A
A Spatially-Explicit Reconstruction of Historical Fire Occurrence
317

value of 0.3 was chosen as the probability threshold
to distinguish between ﬁre type classes because it
minimizes the overall error rate for the training
dataset. With a probability threshold of 0.5, the
logistic regression predicted four of the six training
sites of high ﬁre frequency correctly, but when the
threshold was adjusted to 0.3 the accuracy in-
creased to ﬁve of six sites (Table 4). Evaluation of
the 64 test sites yields similar results (Table 4; Fig-
ure 3). Only six of 64 test sites and ﬁve of 40
training sites range between the 0.3 and 0.5
thresholds, all other values fall closer to their
optimal values of 1 or 0, which also suggests a
better ﬁt of the entire dataset (particularly high ﬁre
frequency sites) by using the 0.3 threshold than the
standard 0.5 threshold (Figure 3; only the test sites
are presented). Using the 0.3 threshold, nine of the
ten high ﬁre frequency test sites were correctly
predicted (Table 4; Figure 3). The overall CCR of
omission and commission error for the combined
datasets of Test1 and Test2 is 95.3%. The Kappa
value is 82.9%, indicating excellent predictive
agreement with the test dataset. The high predic-
tion accuracy indicates that elevation by itself is a
good predictor of high ﬁre frequency areas.
The low and variable ﬁre frequency sites tend to
be at higher elevation than high ﬁre frequency
sites. Fifty-two of 54 test sites (Figure 3) and 31 of
34 training sites were predicted accurately (Ta-
ble 4). The overall CCR of omission and commis-
sion error is 95.3%. The Kappa value is 82.9%,
which demonstrates excellent prediction agree-
ment with test datasets.
In the ponderosa pine zone of the ARNF, lower
elevations below approximately 2,100 m are more
favorable to high ﬁre frequency than higher ele-
vation areas (Figure 4B, C). Using the 0.3 threshold
for deﬁning class presence, the logistic regression
model predicts 18.7% of the study area as high ﬁre
frequency (Figure 4C). In contrast to high ﬁre fre-
quency sites that are restricted to lower elevations,
low and variable ﬁre frequency sites occur across a
broad range of the study area at higher elevation
than the high ﬁre frequency sites. Most of the study
area is predicted to have a low and variable ﬁre
frequency in which 81.3% of the area is predicted
to be in this ﬁre frequency class (Figure 4C).
DISCUSSION
The main goal of our study was to roughly estimate
the area of the ponderosa pine zone of the northern
Front Range that conforms to the general view-
point that modern stand structures and fuel con-
ditions are primarily a consequence of reduction in
low-severity ﬁres during the twentieth century.
Our results indicate that less than 20% of the study
area of ponderosa pine zone historically had a rel-
atively high frequency of ﬁre return intervals in the
range of 10–30 years (Figure 4). More than 80% of
the study area was reconstructed to have had lower
and more variable ﬁre frequencies with only a few
ﬁre years (recorded by at least two scarred trees)
occurring over the last few centuries (Figure 4).
Thus, forest structure over most of the ponderosa
pine zone was molded by infrequent ﬁres (ﬁre
intervals of 30 to over 100 years) rather than fre-
quent surface ﬁres. Years of widespread ﬁre events
in association with extreme weather are recorded
by ﬁre scars on many trees dispersed throughout
the ponderosa pine zone (Veblen and others 2000).
Many
post-ﬁre
cohorts
(for
example,
see
Figure 2C) and tree-growth releases (indicating
competitive suppression in closed stands prior to
burning) date from a few years after the dates of
widespread ﬁre (Veblen and Lorenz 1986; Goldb-
lum and Veblen 1992; Sherriff 2004; Sherriff and
Veblen 2006). We interpret this evidence to mean
that over most of the ponderosa pine zone, forest
structures were shaped primarily by infrequent
severe ﬁres that killed large percentages of canopy
trees promoting dense post-ﬁre cohort ages in the
northern Front Range.
According to the logistic regression analysis ap-
plied here, the high ﬁre frequency class was clearly
delimited by elevation (below circa 2,100 m).
Highly similar results were obtained with classiﬁ-
cation tree models (CART; De’ath and Fabricius
Table 3.
Logistic Regression Model of High Fire Frequency Developed from 40 Fire History Training Sites
and the Probability Threshold for Balancing Omission and Commission Errors of the Training Dataset
Fire frequency class
Predictor
variables
Coefﬁcient
SE
P
Lower
95% CI
Upper
95% CI
Prediction
threshold
High frequency
Elevation
)0.007
0.002
0.006
)0.003
)0.011
0.3
Constant
13.396
5.298
0.011
Only signiﬁcant coefﬁcients (P < 0.05) were used in the analysis.
318
R. L. Sherriff and T. T. Veblen

2000) that were applied to the same ﬁre frequency
and environmental data sets (Sherriff 2004) but are
not redundantly presented here. Elevation may be
a proxy for other factors such as proximity to
grasslands, given that the lowest elevations are
adjacent to the plains-grassland ecotone, where the
highest ﬁre frequencies occur. Due to the overrid-
ing inﬂuence of low elevation, other factors such as
topographic position may be inconsequential for
determining ﬁre frequency in areas adjacent to the
plains-grassland ecotone. If a training dataset larger
than 40 had been used, distance-to-grasslands
would have been a statistically signiﬁcant predictor
of ﬁre frequency areas, given that there is a clear
pattern when all 54 ﬁre history sites are analyzed
(data not shown, P = 0.035, logistic regression).
Greater proximity to grassland in lower elevation
areas probably promotes more frequent ﬁre be-
cause of a greater abundance of ﬁne, herbaceous
fuels. The lower and more variable ﬁre frequency
class occurs across a broad range of elevation in
relation to other environmental conditions such as
aspect, slope steepness and distance to ravines
(Sherriff 2004). Mesic north-facing aspects are
important for the lowest ﬁre frequency class, and
these areas tend to be on steep slopes and generally
far from ravines and grassland areas (Sherriff
2004). At increasing distance from ravines and
grasslands, lower amounts of ﬁne fuel may hinder
frequent ﬁre occurrence. Across the ponderosa pine
zone, a gradient exists with increasing elevation
towards less frequent and higher severity ﬁres
(Sherriff 2004); however additional sites are nee-
ded to clarify these trends.
The ﬁre frequency criteria used in the current
analyses are subject to general limitations of tree-
ring based ﬁre history methodologies (see Swetnam
and Baisan 1996; Baker and Ehle 2001; Veblen
2003b). In the present study, we minimized limi-
tations of these methodologies by identifying two
broad classes of past ﬁre occurrence that were de-
ﬁned by a combination of ﬁre scars, tree age
structures, stand densities, tree death dates, and
growth releases (Figure 2; Sherriff 2004; Sherriff
and Veblen 2006). These converging lines of evi-
dence clearly distinguished areas of mainly fre-
quent low-severity ﬁres from areas of less frequent
and higher-severity ﬁres.
Another limitation of the current analysis is the
limited number of sites relatively undisturbed by
recent anthropogenic activities available for model
development relative to the spatial heterogeneity
within the ponderosa pine zone. In particular,
logging and residential development has greatly
reduced the number of suitable sample sites at low
elevations. These disturbances also limited sam-
pling at the upper elevation range (2,000–2,100 m)
of the high ﬁre frequency regime to only a few
sites. The distribution and prevalence of sites would
have inﬂuenced the coefﬁcient of the predictor
variable (elevation) in the logistic regression by
limiting the range for high ﬁre frequency, which is
why the 0.3 threshold better represents the overall
Table 4.
Number of Sites Classiﬁed Correctly for Each Fire Frequency Class Prediction for the Training,
Test1 and Test2 Sites
Training
Test1
Test2
HF sites correctly classiﬁed as HF
5
3
6
HF sites incorrectly classiﬁed as LF
1
0
1
LF sites correctly classiﬁed as LF
31
11
41
LF sites incorrectly classiﬁed as HF
3
0
2
Total number of sites
40
14
50
HF indicates high ﬁre frequency and LF indicates low and variable ﬁre frequency.
Elevation (m)
1700 1800 1900 2000 2100 2200 2300 2400 2500 2600 2700 2800
Predicted probability of class presence
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
High fire frequency sites (n = 10)
Low and variable fire frequency sites (n = 54)
Figure 3. Predicted probabilities of class presence versus
elevation for each of the evaluation sites. The optimal
probability is 1.0 for high ﬁre frequency and 0 for low
and variable ﬁre frequency. Sites of high (low and vari-
able) ﬁre frequency were considered to be accurately
predicted if the observed probability ranged between 0.3
and 1 (<0.3).
A Spatially-Explicit Reconstruction of Historical Fire Occurrence
319

distribution of the ﬁre history sites than the stan-
dard 0.5 threshold. Additional sites would probably
allow for a better prediction of environmental
conditions associated with different ﬁre frequency
classes. Nevertheless, this initial assessment of a
predictive ﬁre frequency model clearly identiﬁes
elevation associated with ﬁre frequency classes in
ponderosa pine forests of the northern Front
Range. Furthermore, in comparison with published
ﬁre history studies in other ponderosa pine eco-
systems, the current dataset stands out as one of
the largest in terms of numbers of sites and ﬁre-
scarred trees sampled (Baker and Ehle 2001).
A major problem in the use of tree-ring based ﬁre
history methodologies is uncertainty about the spa-
tial extent to which ﬁre-scar data may be extrapo-
lated from one or a few sample points to a larger,
spatially heterogeneous landscape (Swetnam and
Baisan 1996; Baker and Ehle 2001; Veblen 2003b).
Our results indicate that within the ponderosa pine
zone there is substantial spatial variation in historic
ﬁre regimes, and also indicate the degree of uncer-
tainty in classifying a site as having a frequent, low-
severity ﬁre regime or a lower, higher-severity ﬁre
regime. Indication of uncertainty in class member-
ship is a key advantage of using a logistic regression
model in the mapping procedure (Franklin 1995).
The current results imply that for other ponderosa
pine ecosystems, substantial research efforts based
on large numbers of ﬁre history sites across the full
range of environmental conditions in spatially het-
erogeneous environments will be required to obtain
a better understanding of the spatial variability in
historic ﬁre regimes.
Management Implications
The most important management implication of
this study is both simple and robust: only a small
fraction of the ponderosa pine zone of the northern
Front Range ﬁts the widespread notion that the
historic ﬁre regime was characterized mainly by
frequent (that is, return intervals < 30 years) low-
severity ﬁres that maintained open woodlands. This
is a critically important ﬁnding, because much of
the current fuels reduction management in this
landscape is based on the belief that thinning of
stands throughout the ponderosa pine zone would
both reduce ﬁre hazard and restore the vegetation
to an open structure formerly maintained by rela-
tively frequent ﬁres (for example, Front Range
Fuels Treatment Partnership Strategy 2003). Such a
perception is in fact valid only for the lowest ele-
vations of ponderosa pine, especially those close to
the plains-grassland ecotone such as the City of
Boulder
Open
Space
lands
(Forest
Ecosystem
Management
Plan,
Boulder
Open
Space
and
Mountain Parks 1999). Frequent ﬁres, presumably
Figure 4. Cover type map
and high ﬁre frequency
prediction of the Arapaho-
Roosevelt National Forest
study area (60,875-ha):
A cover type includes pure
ponderosa pine forest (dark
green), ponderosa pine-
Douglas-ﬁr forest (grey) and
mixed conifer forest (light
green), which includes
Douglas-ﬁr-ponderosa pine
based from the Forest
Service IRI vegetation data;
B the probability map of the
high ﬁre frequency
prediction; and C the ﬁre
frequency map shows the
18.7% (yellow) area
predicted as high ﬁre
frequency below circa
2,100 m, and the 81.3%
area predicted as low and
variable ﬁre frequency
(green).
320
R. L. Sherriff and T. T. Veblen

of low severity, would have killed mostly juvenile
trees, resulting in low densities of mature trees.
The perception that the decline in ﬁre frequency
over the past circa 80 years has led to substantial
increases in stand density at many sites is supported
in our study area only for the lowest elevations of
ponderosa pine (Veblen and Lorenz 1986; Sherriff
2004; Sherriff and Veblen 2006). Even in this low
elevation sector, however, some sites had historic
ﬁre regimes dominated by infrequent rather than
frequent ﬁres (for example, steep and north-facing
slopes; Sherriff 2004). These infrequent ﬁres, in-
ferred to be high-severity ﬁres from age structure
data, killed high percentages of trees within a ﬁre
perimeter, and promoted the establishment of
naturally dense forest patches (Veblen and Lorenz
1986; Sherriff 2004; Sherriff and Veblen 2006).
Nevertheless, at a coarse-scale for sites below
approximately 2,100 m there is a convergence be-
tween the management objectives of fuels reduc-
tion through thinning and of landscape restoration
to conditions that existed prior to ﬁre exclusion.
Across the montane zone of the Front Range,
there has been a dramatic decline in ﬁre frequency
that began in the early twentieth century (Veblen
and others 2000). In comparison with the late
nineteenth century which was a time of wide-
spread burning in association with climatic condi-
tions favorable to ﬁre (Veblen and others 2000),
the decline in ﬁre occurrence may reﬂect active
suppression of natural and human-caused ﬁres,
fewer ignitions by humans, ﬁne-fuel reduction by
livestock grazing, and/or climatic conditions less
favorable to widespread ﬁre. However, this study
suggests that, except for the low elevation areas,
widespread surface ﬁres were not the primary ﬁre
type shaping forest structures in the pre-twentieth
century in the northern Colorado Front Range. The
ﬁres that occurred in the nineteenth century and
earlier at higher elevations (but still including some
areas of relatively pure ponderosa pine forest), in-
cluded infrequent high-severity ﬁres that shaped
the relatively dense, post-ﬁre stands of the modern
landscape. The high tree densities at higher eleva-
tions are primarily a legacy of nineteenth century
severe ﬁres rather than a consequence of any
suppression of low-severity ﬁres. Thus, manage-
ment efforts to create large areas of open wood-
lands in the higher elevation areas of the ponderosa
pine zone of ARNF would not be consistent with
historic ﬁre regimes and stand structures.
We caution that the ﬁre frequency model pre-
sented in this study was empirically derived from
the speciﬁc ﬁre history and site conditions of the
northern Colorado Front Range, and that it is un-
known how well it would apply to other ponderosa
pine ecosystems. Clearly, this model indicates eco-
logically signiﬁcant variation in ﬁre regimes in
relation to topography and elevation within the
ponderosa pine zone. The research design and re-
sults of the present study, however, suggest that a
similar empirical modeling approach would im-
prove our understanding of the spatial variability of
ﬁre regimes in other ponderosa pine ecosystems.
A clear delineation of the spatial extent of past ﬁre
regime types is a major concern for ecosystem
managers in the context of wildﬁre risk and ecolog-
ical restoration in the areas wildland–urban inter-
face. At low elevations in our study area the historic
ﬁre regime of more frequent and low-severity ﬁres
implies that the goals of ecological restoration and
wildland ﬁre hazard mitigation converge. In con-
trast, in areas naturally characterized by low fre-
quencies of mixed- to high-severity ﬁres, the goals of
ecological restoration and ﬁre hazard mitigation of-
ten diverge. The potential for extreme ﬁre behavior
may largely be explained by extreme weather con-
ditions (for example, high winds and low humidity
during severe acute drought) rather than fuel con-
ditions (Schoennagel and others 2004). This is
illustrated by the 2002 Hayman ﬁre (55,915 ha) in
Colorado in which more than 24,000 ha burned at
high severity throughout ponderosa pine and
mixed-conifer forests in a single day (Finney and
others 2003). In such areas forest thinning will not
achieve restoration goals and is of questionable
effectiveness in preventing severe wildﬁres.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Research was funded by the City of Boulder
Department of Open Space, Boulder County Open
Space, the U.S.G.S Division of Biological Resources,
the National Science Foundation (awards DEB-
0314305 and BCS-0221493), the Biogeography
Specialty Group (AAG), the Colorado Mountain
Club Foundation, the SURE and UROP Programs of
CU, the G.F. White Fellowship Program, the M.
Duncan Memorial Scholarship Program, the E.B.
Sussman Environmental Internship Program, the
J.W. Marr Memorial Ecology Fund, the CU Grad-
uate School and the Herbarium. For commenting
on drafts of the manuscript we thank B. Butten-
ﬁeld, R. Platt and T. Schoennagel, J. Clark, M.
Turner and two anonymous reviewers. For ﬁeld
assistance we thank E. Brignull, M. Chatham, S.
Dykes, B. Easley, K. Eisenhart, D. Goldstein, D.
Heigele, D. Kulakowski, K. League, D. Manthorne,
T. Overton, S. Rynders, D. Seidman, J. Sibold, and
A. Whitmer.
A Spatially-Explicit Reconstruction of Historical Fire Occurrence
321

REFERENCES
Allen CD, Savage M, Falk DA, Suckling KF, Swetnam TW,
Schulke T, Stacey PB, Morgan P, Hoffman M, Klingel JT.
2002. Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine
ecosystems: A broad perspective. Ecol Appl 12:1418–33.
Arno SF, Scott JH, Hartwell MG. 1995. Age-class structure of old
growth ponderosa pine/Douglas-ﬁr stands and its relationship
to ﬁre history. USDA Forest Service, Research Paper INT-481.
Baker WL, Ehle D. 2001. Uncertainty in surface-ﬁre history: the
case of ponderosa pine forest in the Western United States.
Can J For Res 31:1205–26.
Barrett SW, Arno SE. 1988. Increment-borer methods for
determining history in coniferous forests. USDA Forest Ser-
vice, General Technical Report INT-244.
Brown PM, Kaufmann MR, Shepperd WD. 1999. Long-term,
landscape patterns of past ﬁre events in a montane ponderosa
pine forest of central Colorado. Landsc Ecol 4:513–32.
Covington WW. 2000. Helping western forests heal. Nature
408:135–6.
Covington WW, Fule PZ, Moore MM, Hart SC, Kolb TE, Mast JN,
Sackett SS, Wagner MR. 1997. Restoring ecosystem health in
ponderosa pine forests of the southwest. J For 95:23–9.
De’ath G, Fabricius KE. 2000. Classiﬁcation and regression trees:
a powerful yet simple technique for ecological data analysis.
Ecology 81:3178–92.
Ehle DS, Baker WL. 2003. Disturbance and stand dynamics in
ponderosa pine forests in Rocky Mountain National Park,
USA. Ecol Monogr 73:543–66.
Fieldling AH, Bell JF. 1997. A review of methods for assessment
of prediction errors in conservation presence/absence models.
Environ Conserv 24:38–49.
Finney MA, Bartlette R, Bradshaw L, Close K, Collins BM,
Gleason P, Hao WM, Langowski P, McGinely J, McHugh CW,
Martinson E, Omi PN, Sheppard W, Zeller K. 2003. Fire
behavior, fuel treatments, and ﬁre suppression on the Hay-
man Fire. In: Graham RT, Ed. Hayman ﬁre case study analysis.
USDA Forest Service, General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-
114. pp 59–96.
Franklin J. 1995. Predictive vegetation mapping: geographic
modeling of biospatial patterns in relation to environmental
gradients. Prog Phys Geogr 19:474–99.
Franklin J. 1998. Predicting the distribution of shrub species in
southern California from climate and terrain-derived vari-
ables. J Veg Sci 9:733–48.
Franklin J. 2002. Enhancing a regional vegetation map with
predictive models of dominant plant species in chaparral. Appl
Veg Sci 5:135–46.
Fule PZ, Covington WW, Moore MM. 1997. Determining ref-
erence conditions for ecosystem management of southwestern
ponderosa pine forests. Ecol Appl 7:895–908.
Goldblum D, Veblen TT. 1992. Fire history of a ponderosa pine/
Douglas ﬁr forest in the Colorado Front Range. Phys Geogr
13:133–48.
Gruell GE. 1983. Fire and vegetative trends in the northern
rockies: interpretations from 1871–1982 photographs. USDA
Forest Service, General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-115.
Guisan A, Zimmermann NE. 2000. Predictive habitat distribu-
tion models in ecology. Ecol Modell 135:147–86.
Gutsell SL, Johnson EA, Miyanishi K, Keeley JE, Dickinson M,
Bridges SRJ. 2001. Varied ecosystems need different ﬁre
protection. Nature 409:997 .
Healthy
Forests
Restoration
Act.
HR
1904.
2003.
http://
www.whitehouse.gov/infocus/healthyforests.
Hosmer DW, Lemeshow S. 2000. Applied logistic regression, 2nd
edn. New York: Wiley.
Jenson
SK,
Domingue
JO.
1988.
Extracting
topographic
structure from digital elevation data for geographic infor-
mation system analysis. Photogramm Eng Remote Sens
54:1593–600.
Kaufmann MR, Regan CM, Brown PM. 2000. Heterogeneity in
ponderosa pine/Douglas-ﬁr forests: age and size structure in
unlogged and logged landscapes of central Colorado. Can J For
Res 30:698–711.
Liu C, Berry PM, Dawson TP, Pearson RG. 2005. Selecting
thresholds of occurrence in the prediction of species distri-
butions. Ecography 28:385–93.
Manel S, Williams HC, Ormerod SJ. 2001. Evaluating presence-
absence models in ecology: the need to account for preva-
lence. J Appl Ecol 38:921–31.
Marr JW. 1961. Ecosystems of the east slope of the Front Range
in Colorado. University of Colorado Studies Series in Biology
8, Boulder, Colorado.
Mast JN, Fule PZ, Moore MM, Covington WW, Waltz AEM.
1999. Restoration of presettlement age structure of an Arizona
ponderosa pine forest. Ecol Appl 9:228–39.
Mast JN, Veblen TT, Linhart YB. 1998. Disturbance and climatic
inﬂuences on age structure of ponderosa pine at the pine/
grassland ecotone, Colorado Front Range. J Biogeogr 25:743–
55.
Miller J, Franklin J. 2002. Modelling the distribution of four
vegetation alliances using generalized linear models and
classiﬁcation trees with spatial dependence. Ecol Modell
157:227–47.
Peet RK. 1981. Forest vegetation of the Colorado Front Range:
composition and dynamics. Vegetatio 45:3–75.
Schoennagel T, Veblen TT, Romme WH. 2004. The interaction of
ﬁre, fuels, and climate across Rocky Mountain Forests. Bio-
science 54:661–76.
Sherriff RL. 2004. The historic range of variability of ponderosa
pine in the northern Colorado Front Range: past ﬁre types and
ﬁre effects. Ph.D. Dissertation. Boulder: University of Colorado.
Sherriff RL, Veblen TT. 2006. Ecological effects of changes in ﬁre
regimes in Pinus ponderosa ecosystems in the Colorado Front
Range. J Veg Sci 17:705–718.
Shinneman DJ, Baker WL. 1997. Nonequilibrium dynamics
between catastrophic disturbance and old-growth forests in
ponderosa pine landscapes of the Black Hills. Conserv Biol
11:1276–88.
Swetnam TW, Baisan CH. 1996. Historical ﬁre regime patterns
in the southwestern United States since AD 1700. In: Allen
CD, Ed. Proceedings of the 2nd annual La Mesa ﬁre sym-
posium. USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RM-
GTR-286.
Veblen TT. 2003a. Historic range of variability of mountain
forest ecosystems: concepts and applications. For Chron
79:223–6.
Veblen TT. 2003b. An introduction to key issues in ﬁre regime
research for fuels management and ecological restoration. In:
Omi P, Joyce L, Eds. Fire, fuel treatments and ecological res-
toration: conference proceedings 2002, 16–18 April, Fort
Collins, CO. USDA, Forest Service, RMRS-P-29.
Veblen TT, Kitzberger T, Donnegan J. 1996. A Research Report
to the City of Boulder Open Space: Fire Ecology in the
322
R. L. Sherriff and T. T. Veblen

Wildland/Urban Interface of Boulder County. Unpublished
manuscript.
Veblen TT, Kitzberger T, Donnegan J. 2000. Climatic and human
inﬂuences on ﬁre regimes in ponderosa pine forests in the
Colorado Front Range. Ecol Appl 10:1178–95.
Veblen TT, Lorenz DC. 1986. Anthropogenic disturbance and
recovery patterns in montane forests, Colorado Front Range.
Phys Geogr 7:1–24.
Veblen TT, Lorenz DC. 1991. The Colorado Front Range: a
century of ecological change. Salt Lake City (UT): University
of Utah Press.
Wilson JP, Gallant JC. 2000. Terrain analysis: principles and
applications. New York: Wiley.
Zweig MH, Campbell G. 1993. Receiver-operating characteristic
(ROC) plots: a fundamental evaluation tool in clinical medi-
cine. Clin Chem 39:561–77.
A Spatially-Explicit Reconstruction of Historical Fire Occurrence
323
