H a n d b o o k
ONE
What is multiparty monitoring?
Collaborative Forest Restoration Program
January 2005

The multiparty monitoring handbook series
This multiparty monitoring handbook is part of a series of guides to
monitoring collaborative forest restoration projects. The series was
written specifically for projects funded through the USDA Forest
Service’s Collaborative Forest Restoration Program (CFRP). The
Handbooks in the series are:
Handbook 1—What is multiparty monitoring?
Handbook 2—Developing a multiparty monitoring plan
Handbook 3—Budgeting for monitoring projects
Handbook 4—Monitoring ecological effects
Handbook 5—Monitoring social and economic effects
Handbook 6—Analyzing and interpreting monitoring data
Multiparty monitoring is required of all CFRP grantees; however, the
methods and approaches presented in these workbooks are to serve as
guides and references only. The specific methods are NOT required.
Because there is a wide diversity of projects funded through the CFRP,
many grantees will have different requirements for monitoring and/or
monitoring assistance.
The content of these handbooks was largely conceived at a series of
workshops held in 2003 that were sponsored by the following:
Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI), Forest Trust, Four Corners
Institute, National Forest Foundation, Pinchot Institute for
Conservation, USDA Forest Service—Collaborative Forest
Restoration Program.
These handbooks are updated periodically and the latest versions will
be available on the Collaborative Forest Restoration Program Web site
at www.fs.fed.us/r3/spf/cfrp/monitoring. For more information on this
series, contact the Ecological Restoration Institute, Box 15017, Flagstaff
AZ 86011-5017.
CFRP grantees are also eligible for multiparty monitoring training
workshops and technical assistance from the CFRP monitoring team. This
free service will be provided through September 2006. Call 866.614.8424
for details.
Handbook series authors/editors: Tori Derr, Ann Moote, Melissa Savage,
Martha Schumann, Jesse Abrams, Laura McCarthy, and Kimberly Lowe.
Design, copy-edit, and production Joel Viers, ERI; cover photo courtesy the
Forest Guild.
01.06.05
This Handbook series is
largely funded by the
USDA Forest Service
and is published by the
Ecological Restoration
Institute at Northern
Arizona University

Table of contents
Why multiparty monitoring.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
1
Developing a multiparty process .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
2
Step 1 –
Identifying and engaging stakeholders.  .  .  .  .  .  .
3
Step 2 –
Building a common understanding .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
4
Step 3 –
Defining project goals, indicators, and
and measures.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
5
Step 4 –
Developing and funding a monitoring plan .  .  .  .
5
Step 5 –
Learning from monitoring and assessing
the process .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
6
Outreach and communication .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
6
Credibility of the monitoring process and results .  .  .  .
8
Glossary .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
9
Acknowledgments


1
Adaptive management is a process
that allows people to review and
change a project as it is taking place
so that the project can continue to
meet project goals even as
conditions may change.
Why multiparty monitoring for forest
restoration projects?
There are many reasons for monitoring your project and using a
multiparty approach. Multiparty monitoring will increase your
understanding of the effects of restoration actions, support
adaptive management, and set a course for future management.
Multiparty monitoring also helps build trust among partners and
establish project accountability in the broader community.
Why monitor forest restoration projects?__________________________
Resource management often follows an “adaptive management”
approach, which allows people to review whether or not they are
making progress toward the goals of their project. Monitoring is
an essential part of adaptive management because it provides
reliable feedback on the effects of a project.
Monitoring involves repeated measurements over time to
determine if actions have caused expected or unexpected changes.
As opposed to casual observation, monitoring is designed to help
identify changes and determine whether or not these are due to
our actions. Monitoring allows project managers to learn more
about how their projects are working and to adapt treatments or
plans along the way so that they better meet project goals.
Reliable feedback is particularly important for pilot programs like
the Collaborative Forest Restoration Program (CFRP) because it
helps forest managers, scientists, and practitioners learn more
about new approaches to resource management like restoration
forestry and collaborative management.
What is multiparty monitoring?___________________________________
Multiparty monitoring involves a diverse group of community
members; individuals representing community-based groups;
local, regional, and national interest groups; and public agencies.
Involving people with differing backgrounds, experiences, and

2
Multiparty monitoring involves
diverse groups of
people—individuals, community
groups, agencies, and local, regional
or national organizations.
A stakeholder is anyone who has a
“stake” in the project’s
implementation or results.
perspectives helps project managers meet the interests and
objectives of many different people who care about the project.
The multiparty process is designed to promote mutual learning, as
participants work together to better understand project efforts and
impacts. Participants can expect to gain a greater understanding of
ecological health, the local community’s economic and social
well-being, and the interconnections between the environment,
the economy, and social conditions. They will also learn more
about others’ perspectives on the project and its potential
outcomes.
A diverse group is more likely to develop a comprehensive list of
issues to be monitored, can help avoid duplication of efforts and
unnecessary competition among stakeholders, may promote
greater efficiency, and could help build positive relationships and
prevent potential conflicts among those involved.
One should keep in mind, however, that this approach is not just a
way
to
promote
“buy-in”
or
reduce
conflict.
Multiparty
monitoring can also be used to identify good questions to ask,
assess how well a project is meeting desired outcomes and
responding to diverse concerns, and identify how management
can be adapted to improve results. In many ways, multiparty
monitoring reflects a national trend toward broader participation
in environmental management, especially on public lands.
Developing a multiparty process_________________________________
There are five steps to developing a multiparty monitoring
process:
1 – Identifying and engaging stakeholders,
2 – Building a common understanding,
3 – Defining project goals and indicators,
4 – Developing and implementing a monitoring plan, and
5 – Learning from monitoring and assessing the process.

3
As you proceed through the steps, it is important to be flexible.
You may already have accomplished one or more of these steps in
the development of your Collaborative Forest Restoration
Program proposal. As your project gets underway, it may be
appropriate to revisit one or more of these steps as others join the
project so they have an opportunity to help shape the process.
Step 1 – Identifying and engaging stakeholders
The first step in developing a multiparty process is to identify
stakeholders and clarify everyone’s interests and expectations. A
stakeholder is any person, group or institution that affects or is
affected by a project.
Stakeholders may be private landowners, individual citizens,
non-government
organizations
(NGOs),
businesses,
public
agencies, church and school groups, labor organizations, or others
who have a commitment to the community or the location of a
project.
Ideally, a multiparty group will have at least one individual who
represents each type of stakeholder affected by a project. A single
person may represent more than one stakeholder group, however.
Stakeholders may vary by the type of project and its location.
Stakeholders may want to participate in monitoring because the
project’s results will affect their lives or their work. Their interests
may center around aesthetics, recreation, the local economy, jobs,
government policies, the environment, worker rights, or any
number of other issues. To identify stakeholders, project
participants should ask:
w “Who is affected by project activities and outcomes?”
w “Are all relevant political or cultural groups represented?”
In some cases stakeholders may choose not to participate because
of financial or time limitations, bad past experiences with groups,
or other reasons. Engaging these stakeholders may require extra
Examples of stakeholders:
w Individual community
members and groups
w Landowners
w Local, county, state, and
federal agencies
w Tribal governments
w Neighborhood associations
w Community elders
w Mobile and in-place forest
workers
w Environmental and
conservation organizations
w Academic institutions and
researchers
w Commodity interests
w Industry and small
businesses
w Recreation and sporting
interests
w Religious leaders
w Community groups

4
efforts on the part of the project leaders to ensure that, to the
extent possible, representatives of all stakeholder groups become
involved. Project leaders and participants should ask themselves:
w “Are there stakeholders who should be involved but may
need support to participate?”
w “What support is required and how can it be provided?”
Your project should form a multiparty monitoring team, a group
of stakeholders who will be engaged in each of the steps of
multiparty monitoring. Multiparty monitoring teams need to be
creative and flexible about involvement. A thorough identification
of
stakeholders
does
not
necessarily
translate
into
active
participation by all of those interested. Individual involvement in
monitoring may vary over time due to changes in funding, time
constraints, work focus, and other factors. These changes may
affect the structure and functioning of a multiparty monitoring
team.
Step 2 – Building a common understanding
Many times when diverse groups come together to work on a
project, people assume that the words they use mean the same
thing to everyone else. Unfortunately, this is often not the case.
For example, sometimes people have different definitions or
understandings of what “restoration” means. If all participants do
not have a common understanding of the words they use, this can
lead to misunderstandings and frustrations as a project grows.
Sometimes it is useful to ask people to explain the terms they use
so that there is shared understanding among everyone in a group.
Another important factor to ensuring a broad collaborative process
is accepting that different types of data are useful and important.
Many Collaborative Forest Restoration Program projects are
managed by or in collaboration with Native American tribes or
with land grants or other Hispano communities. These groups
sometimes face difficult decisions in developing a monitoring
strategy that can address both CFRP project goals and traditional
All stakeholders should have access
to the same information about a
project and should make sure that
they understand the language that
each party uses in talking about the
project.
It is up to the stakeholders to decide
what and how to monitor.
—
Native American or Hispano
communities may want to include
elders, religious leaders, or other
traditional groups in discussing and
monitoring culturally important
effects of a project.

5
cultural ways of learning and knowing. It may be important to
include people such as elders and religious leaders who hold a
great deal of indigenous knowledge in discussing a project and
how it will be monitored. It is up to the stakeholders to decide the
types of knowledge that may be used in monitoring. Tribes and
other groups may need to be creative in how they set up a
monitoring project to include traditional forms of knowledge.
Step 3 – Defining project goals, indicators, and measures
Once a multiparty monitoring team has formed and relevant
knowledge has been shared, the next step is to define project goals
and indicators. This process, while time consuming, will ensure
that all stakeholders have similar expectations and that they remain
committed to monitoring. During this step, it is important to
develop a common definition of what “success” looks like, so that
the group can agree when it has achieved its goals.
Multiparty monitoring groups must collaboratively choose the
indicators of change they will monitor. Monitoring groups may be
faced with limitations of time and money, and they will have to
carefully consider which indicators will provide them with the
most useful information. A good place to start is by examining
project goals, as defined by the local community and others,
including project funders and managers.
Step 4 – Developing and implementing a monitoring plan
Once project goals and indicators are clear, the group must
develop a monitoring plan. The monitoring plan describes who
will collect what information and when. Special care should be
taken to ensure that the plan can be easily understood and used by
all stakeholders.
The Multiparty monitoring process
should engage all stakeholders in
deciding exactly what will be
monitored, and how it will be
monitored.
See Handbooks 4 and 5 for more information on choosing goals and indicators for project
monitoring

6
Gathering and recording monitoring data can be time-consuming.
For monitoring efforts to succeed, it may be necessary to hire a
monitoring coordinator, or to allocate a certain amount of a
project member’s salary toward this goal. While each CFRP grant
should include some funding to carry out monitoring, it may be
necessary to supplement these costs through other sources, such
as youth conservation corps programs, collaborative work with
schools or other projects, or additional fund-raising from
foundations or public funding sources.
Step 5 – Learning from monitoring and assessing the process
During data collection and analysis, it is important to remember
that multiparty monitoring is a group process. Stakeholders
should review data and results as a group, together reflecting on
what they can learn from the data and what, if anything, they will
need to change in response to what they have learned.
Outreach and communication____________________________________
Throughout a project, it is a good idea for multiparty teams to
communicate with people who are not part of the monitoring
efforts. There are several reasons for reaching out to the broader
community, including:
w to attract and engage diverse parties, including skeptics and
critics;
w to raise the visibility and openness of the monitoring
process;
w to keep everyone informed about monitoring progress and
issues that arise during implementation and monitoring;
w and, to get an outside perspective of the project’s progress.
Realistic budgets and adequate
funding are essential to a successful
monitoring program.
See Handbook 2 for more information on putting together a successful plan
See Handbook 3 for information on how to establish realistic budgets, examples of budgeting
for CFRP monitoring, and potential sources of funding to supplement monitoring efforts
Multiparty monitoring doesn’t end
when the data are collected.
—
It is important that all data be
discussed and analyzed by the
stakeholders, as a group.
See Handbook 6 for more information on analyzing and interpreting your monitoring data

7
Making information and data accessible to all stakeholders,
whether or not they are part of the monitoring team, is essential to
the success of multiparty monitoring. This means the multiparty
team must create and maintain a place to store data and reports so
that they are accessible by all. Making information available
maintains the transparency of the project, which can help to build
trust among those who may have different perspectives, interests
or backgrounds.
Some ways to provide transparency include:
w Use a variety of tools to disseminate information,
including community and town meetings, face-to-face
discussions, private consultations, field trips, newsletters,
newspaper articles or editorials, progress reports,
websites and listserves, and regional and national
meetings. Information can also be shared in
non-traditional ways, such as through art.
w Use training as an outreach method. For instance, a
project can include training workshops to help increase
stakeholders’ ability to monitor ecological and social
conditions. This could encourage shared learning among
stakeholders.
w Give special consideration to ways to reach ethnically
diverse and geographically dispersed residents of rural
areas, such as by providing information in simple, clear
terms or in multiple languages when relevant.
w Publicize where project information and data are kept
and who is responsible for maintaining them.
w Bring team members and other stakeholders to the
restoration site. Consider involving not only team
members but also the media, outside interests,
policymakers, and others.
Transparency means that anyone
can access information and
understand the goals, actions, and
accomplishments of a project.
—
Transparency helps to build trust
among people with different
perspectives or values.
See Handbook 6 for more guidance on displaying and communicating monitoring results

8
Credibility of the monitoring process and results__________________
Credibility of monitoring begins with identifying and engaging
stakeholders, and is maintained by following all the steps in the
monitoring process. Monitoring efforts are most credible when
they maintain diversity, a common understanding, openness,
flexibility, and transparency.
The more diverse the monitoring team, the greater the potential
for broader acceptance of results. Similarly, the more open and
accessible the monitoring process, the more likely people are to
trust it. When a monitoring team has considered several different
approaches and perspectives, its plan will have greater legitimacy.

9
Glossary
Adaptive management: A resource management approach that
combines
science
and
practical
experience
by
treating
management actions as experiments. Adaptive management
involves carefully observing human and ecological system
responses
to
management
actions,
and
adjusting
future
management based on what is learned.
Constraints: Problems that limit a project and may keep it
from succeeding, such as lack of time, money, trained
personnel, and social or political opportunities.
Data: A set of observations collected through monitoring.
Information is derived from data through analysis.
Ecosystem: An interacting system of living plants and
animals and the nonliving parts of their environment.
Goal: A general summary of the desired state that a project is
working to achieve. A good goal meets the criteria of being
visionary, relatively general, brief, and measurable. A goal is
typically less specific than an objective.
Implement: To put a plan or agreement into action.
Indicator: A unit of information measured over time that
documents changes in a specific condition. A good indicator
meets the criteria of being measurable, precise, consistent,
and sensitive.
Information: Knowledge that is extracted from data through
the process of analysis.
Information need: What a specific audience wants to know
about the project.

Monitoring: The periodic collection and evaluation of data
relative to stated project goals, objectives, and activities.
Implementation monitoring is important for multiparty monitoring
groups because it simply asks, ‘did we do what we said we would
do?’ Effectiveness monitoring helps determine whether or not the
project goals were attained by asking the question ‘did it work?’
Reducing the small trees that compete with old-growth
ponderosa pine, and increasing forage for deer are examples of
project goals that can be measured through effectiveness
monitoring. Validation monitoring involves checking the
assumptions upon which our restoration efforts are based. ‘Did
reducing crown cover actually reduce the threat of catastrophic
wildfire?’ is a validation monitoring question. These concepts
are discussed in Handbook 2.
Monitoring plan: An outline for the steps you will undertake
to ensure that the project is on track. It lists a project’s audience,
their information needs, the strategies that will be used for data
collection, the indicators, the methods that will be used to collect
data, and when, by whom, and where data will be collected.
Multiparty: Involving members from a variety of backgrounds
and perspectives.
Outcome: The result of an action or set of actions.
Participation: Active involvement in the design, management,
and monitoring of a project.
Resources: Items that a project needs, such as staff time,
managerial time, local knowledge, money, equipment, the
presence of trained people, and social and political opportunities.
Stakeholder: Person who has vested interest in the natural
resources or who potentially will be affected by project activities.
Transparent: Easily accessed and understood; obvious in
structure and meaning. Transparency means that all project

information, including goals, actions, and accomplishments, is
available to all and clearly understood by everyone.
Treatment: A management action intended to address a forest
health problem; often used synonymously with prescription.
Trend: Direction of change.
Variable: A particular characteristic that an observer is
interested in measuring.


Acknowledgments
Many people offered their time and expertise toward the development of
the monitoring guidelines that form the basis of these handbooks. We
gratefully acknowledge the contribution of the following individuals:
Craig Allen, U.S. Geological Survey/Midcontinent Ecological Science Center
Gregory H. Aplet, The Wilderness Society
Dennis Becker, USDA Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station
William Block, USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station
Sam Burns, Fort Lewis College
Nils Christoffersen, Wallowa Resources
Geneva Chong, U.S. Geological Survey
Max Cordova, El Greco and La Montaña de Truchas
Cecilia Danks, University of Vermont
Rick DeIaco, Village of Ruidoso
Tori Derr, Forest Trust
Carl Edminster, USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station
Don Falk, University of Arizona, Tree-Ring Research Lab
Deborah Finch, USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station
Cornelia Flora, Iowa State University, Center for Rural Development
Peter Fulé, Northern Arizona University, Ecological Restoration Institute
Peter Gaulke, USDA Forest Service, Region 3
John Gerritsma, USDA Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management
Quinn Griffin, Escalante Heritage Center
Richard Hart, Ashland, Oregon
Jan-Willem Jansens, Common Ground
Ajit Krishnaswamy, National Network of Forest Practitioners
Andrea Bedell Loucks, Pinchot Institute for Conservation
Taylor McKinnon, Grand Canyon Trust
Mary Mitsos, National Forest Foundation
Bob Moore, Catron County Citizens Group
Ann Moote, Northern Arizona University, Ecological Restoration Institute
Dan Neary, USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station
Brian Nowicki, Center for Biological Diversity
Melanie Parker, Northwest Connections
Deborah Potter, USDA Forest Service, Region 3
Michael Quintana, New Mexico Community-based Forestry Alliance
George Ramirez, Las Humanas Cooperative
William H. Romme, Colorado State University
Melissa Savage, Four Corners Institute
Todd Schulke, Center for Biological Diversity
David Seeholtz, USDA Forest Service, Region 3
Tom Stohlgren, Colorado State University
Joe Truett, Turner Endangered Species Fund
Bob Unnasch, The Nature Conservancy
Lisa Wilson, Watershed Research and Training Center
Barbara Wyckoff-Baird, The Aspen Institute

