Restoration Ecology
22
October 2000
T
hat ecological restoration is a growing ﬁeld is illustrated
by the startup of a professional association (the Society for
Ecological Restoration, created in 1987), the development of
two new journals (Restoration Ecology and Ecological Restoration,
the latter having been Restoration and Management Notes), and
the publication of 50 or more papers each year. In the
A New Forest Management Paradigm, 
or Another Merit Badge for Foresters?
Restoration Ecology
Courtesy of Michael R. Wagner

Southwest alone, several large forest
restoration projects are under way. 
The notion of “restoring” ecosys-
tems seems laudable enough. For some,
however, ecological restoration assumes
a moral imperative for a “bold new ori-
entation toward nature” (Higgs 1991).
We evaluate ecological restoration in
the larger context of other land man-
agement philosophies like multiple-use
management, ecosystem management,
and managing for speciﬁc resource ob-
jectives (e.g., wildlife, commodity pro-
duction). We ask, is ecological restora-
tion sufficiently conceptually devel-
oped, experimentally tested, and neces-
sary to warrant its adoption as a new
forest management paradigm?
Ecological Restoration, Deﬁned
The techniques, objectives, and de-
ﬁnitions of ecological restoration have
evolved over the past decade as practi-
tioners and scientists sought to deﬁne a
new, applied discipline. Between 1991
and 1997 the Society of Ecological
Restoration modified its definition of
ecological restoration five times
(Palmer et al. 1997). Restoration was
first used to describe landscaping and
replanting to reclaim stripmines and
toxic dumps. Later, restoration de-
scribed agricultural lands that were re-
vegetated to resemble native prairies,
and new wetlands that were created to
replace those lost to other uses. More
recently, and especially in southwestern
forests, the term forest restoration has
been used to describe activities in-
tended to recreate the forest structure
and ﬁre regime that prevailed just prior
to Euro-American settlement (Coving-
ton and Moore 1994; Covington et al.
1997; Stone et al. 1999). 
The purpose of restoration has been
variously described as repairing dam-
age, renewing ecosystem health, recov-
ering ecological integrity, and regener-
ating harmony between humans and
nature (SER 1994; Higgs 1997; Palmer
et al. 1997). Health and integrity refer
to desired biological diversity and sus-
tained ecosystem functioning. In terms
familiar to foresters, a recent Society of
Ecological Restoration workshop deﬁ-
nition read, “ecological restoration en-
tails negotiating the best possible out-
come for a specific site based on eco-
logical knowledge and the diverse per-
spectives of interested stakeholders.” 
Certainly, restoration generally as-
sumes a holistic perspective and a need
for active intervention, but that hardly
distinguishes it from ecosystem man-
agement or other approaches for
achieving ecosystem health (sustain-
ability, integrity, etc.). Is ecological
restoration the only way to achieve eco-
system health? If a management activ-
ity improves forest health, is it then
ecological restoration? 
What distinguishes restoration from
other land management activities is
that recovering the ecological integrity
of a site requires using the techniques
of reestablishing the composition,
structure, and disturbance regime of a
historical or indigenous reference eco-
system (Cairns 1993; Meffe and Car-
roll 1994; Bradshaw 1996). 
Choice of Reference
A reference or standard is essential
for planning and monitoring any pro-
ject that promises to produce certain
results within given speciﬁcations. De-
sired conditions and performance stan-
dards may be determined by a collabo-
rative decision process that assesses the
likely outcome of alternative manage-
ment policies. A restorationist’s ap-
proach is to define desired conditions
and standards as those exempliﬁed by a
speciﬁc historical or indigenous ecosys-
tem. For the Southwest, a preferred ref-
erence is the ponderosa pine forest that
existed just prior to European settle-
ment, produced under a disturbance
regime of frequent ground ﬁres result-
ing in open stands with groups of large
ponderosa pine trees and a sparse
woody understory but dense grassy
cover (Covington et al. 1997).
Although some dendrochronology
data support the contention that fire
occurred at a regular but variable fre-
quency prior to Euro-American settle-
ment, there is also some relatively new
information based on extensive re-
search in other ponderosa pine stands
suggesting that the severity, frequency,
and spatial occurrence of ﬁre was even
Journal of Forestry
23
Forest Restoration
Multiple-Use Management
Opposite: A stand of ponderosa pine 
as captured in this historical photo-
graph (circa 1890s) from the Coconino
National Forest, Arizona. Clumps of
large-diameter ponderosa pine and
open savannah between clumps are the
common reference condition used in
the Southwest. Note in the background
somewhat more dense pockets of
young trees.
Focusing on the Southwest but raising ques-
tions that are more broadly applicable,we
compare ecological restoration with conven-
tional management regimes—multiple-use
management,ecosystem management,and
managing for specific resource objectives.
That restoration assumes a holistic perspec-
tive and active intervention does not distin-
guish it from other approaches to achieving
ecosystem health.We find that foresters and
restorationists both use ecology,but restora-
tionists use a reference condition as a substi-
tute for specific objectives.We believe that
restorationists who advocate substituting a
reference condition for meeting a priori ob-
jectives must demonstrate the advantage of
this approach.We identify the conceptual lim-
itations to ecological restoration and ques-
tion the uses of restoration.
By Michael R.Wagner,
William M. Block, Brian W. Geils,
and Karl F. Wenger

more variable than previously thought
(Shinneman and Baker 1997; Brown et
al. 1999). Brown et al. also clearly
demonstrate the existence of stand-re-
placing fires, which had rarely been
considered a component of the south-
western reference condition. 
The Presettlement Condition
Human influence on forest condi-
tions prior to European settlement is
underappreciated. The latest estimate of
the native population of North America
at the time of discovery is 50 million.
According to DeVivo (1991), the pre-
contact New World population peaked
between 90.04 million and 112.55 mil-
lion indigenous people, equally split be-
tween North and South America. But
Europeans introduced diseases for
which the natives had no resistance. As
the inhabitants tried to ﬂee the diseases,
they apparently spread them through-
out eastern North America. DeVivo
concludes, “No doubt, the aboriginal
inhabitants of mainland North America
suffered dramatic population decline
before face-to-face contact with Euro-
peans” from the diseases introduced by
the Europeans. The population decline
apparently had not yet run its course
during the 1539–42 DeSoto expedition
through what is now the eastern United
States. In the Blue Ridge Mountains
they marched for “one day through cul-
tivated fields.” Towns in eastern Ten-
nessee had “vast quantities of maize.” In
the Coosa Valley of present-day Al-
abama they found “large and numerous
settlements and the ﬁelds were continu-
ous” (DeVivo 1992).
The European immigrants of the
early 17th century found perhaps only
small, scattered villages, still rather ex-
tensive open ﬁelds, but also “dense sec-
ond-growth forests characterized by
ﬁfty to 100 year old trees, unhindered
by human impact.” This offered the il-
lusion of “virgin forest” (DeVivo
1991). Similarly, in the Southwest
there were periods of occupation and
abandonment by native peoples. Thus,
the activities of native peoples were the
major agents determining the vegeta-
tive conditions over much of the
United States until the time of the Rev-
olutionary War. Should the reference
condition include or exclude the
human impact of indigenous people?
Transient Climate
Dendrochronology studies in the
Southwest suggest that from roughly
1800 to the present, the climate was
substantially wetter than from 1400 to
1800 (Grissino-Mayer et al. 1997) (ﬁg.
1). The common reference period in
the Southwest is the pre–European set-
tlement period of roughly 1860 to the
1880s, or 60 to 80 years after a 400-
year dry period. The climate that cre-
ated this popular reference condition
may never be repeated, so why should
we assume that a past forest structure is
better suited to the much different cli-
mate that exists today? Add uncertain
global climate change and Pacific
decadal oscillations, and recreating for-
est structure to reﬂect a unique histori-
cal climate seems of dubious value. 
From a forest management perspec-
tive, a climatic pattern that has per-
sisted for 200 years is more than ample
time to produce one or two rotations
of multiple products. It seems most
sensible to manage existing forests in
the existing climate to meet current ob-
jectives rather than managing to recre-
ate the past. Aronson et al. (1995) in-
sist that a reference ecosystem, even if
arbitrary and imperfect, is necessary for
the design and evaluation of restora-
tion projects. The question, however, is
whether any single ecosystem condi-
tion is a sufﬁcient reference if it was the
product of a unique combination of
climate and human interaction that
may never be repeated. 
Obstacles to Restoration
The evolving science and theory of
ecosystems. Ecosystems are always re-
sponding to previous disturbances: tree
fall, firestorm, volcanic eruption, ice
ages, and meteor strikes. Ecosystem de-
velopment after disturbance is greatly
influenced by chance; what remains
and what is nearby inﬂuence ecosystem
trajectory. Ecosystems endure with
change. Species evolve and are re-
placed, structures are built and decay,
process rates vary but life goes on. The
significance of these characteristics is
that every ecosystem is unique to the
place and time in which it exists. 
Ecological restoration relies on
many ecological concepts, some of
which are not clearly understood; oth-
ers are still being defined and tested.
One of the basic concepts of succession
was once viewed as a single, determin-
istic pathway to a climatic climax type.
This basic concept has been replaced by
a nonlinear model of exploitation-con-
servation-release-reorganization (Holl-
ing 1995). For example, restorationists
often cite a need for diversity to en-
sure ecosystem stability. The ecologi-
cal debate on that issue has progressed
from discussions on stability to re-
24
October 2000
An abundance of the exotic mullein (Verbascum thapsus), which was largely absent
in the untreated control,is apparent in the understory vegetation ﬁve years after a
full restoration treatment in ponderosa pine at Fort Valley Experimental Forest,
Arizona.Details of the treatments are in Stone et al.(1999).
Michael R. Wagner

Journal of Forestry
25
silience, to a recent suggestion that
overconnectedness leads to brittleness
(Holling 1995). Likewise, it is equivo-
cal whether diversity creates stability
or structure ensures function in
ecosystems. 
New ecosystem components. Another
major obstacle in restoration is dealing
with the components of the ecosystem
that are present now that didn’t exist
previously or organisms that exist in
greater numbers than before. Specifi-
cally, we are referring to exotic organ-
isms. The open vegetation structure
and reintroduction of fire as a distur-
bance agent that characterize forest
restoration in the Southwest are also
conditions that are highly suitable for
invasive species. With the exception of
Allen (1995) and Montalvo et al.
(1997), few authors have discussed the
relationship between ecological restora-
tion and increased invasion by exotic
species. Some authors have suggested
that exotic invasions can be beneﬁcial
(Hobbs and Mooney 1993). Recent
data on understory vegetation response
(Grifﬁs et al., in press) suggest that ex-
otic species respond dramatically to the
reintroduction of ﬁre as part of surro-
gate restoration treatments (fig. 2, 
p. 26). This response is also visually
dramatic in full restoration treatments.
Consequently, in forests where exotic
species become established, ecological
restoration treatments may create a for-
est health problem that is as undesir-
able as the pretreatment condition. 
Societal needs. What often distin-
guishes foresters from ecologists is that
foresters are asked to manage forests to
achieve specific societal objectives
within ecological constraints. Forestry
as an applied science has developed
alongside ecology. These sciences ma-
tured together and beneﬁted from in-
teraction. A science can be deﬁned by
the questions it asks. Forestry asks how
trees grow, respond to competition and
release, and reproduce. Foresters are
also interested in maintaining soil,
water, and species other than trees.
Tending a stand of trees is seen as a
long-term commitment, but econom-
ics dictates a minimum of interven-
tion. A forester could be satisﬁed with
an age-diverse landscape (regulated for-
est) of stocked stands of well-growing
trees that provide a diversity of habitats
(multiple use); harvest and regenera-
tion activities that protect soil and
water (sustained yield); and ﬁre, insect,
and disease within acceptable limits
from a long-term perspective (forest
health). Silvics, silviculture, mensura-
tion, and forest protection indicate that
these are realistic objectives, achievable
using tools like timber harvest. 
Foresters and restorationists use the
same ecology, but restoration ecologists
use a reference condition as a substitute
for speciﬁc objectives. Creating a refer-
ence ecosystem condition has its greatest
utility as a research tool to better under-
stand how ecosystems function (Ehren-
feld and Toth 1997; Michener 1997).
We certainly recognize understanding
ecosystems as a laudable goal of ecologi-
cal restoration. Fixing badly degraded
ecosystems—landscapes that have been
deforested or contaminated with envi-
ronmental toxins—also is an important
ecological restoration objective (Dobson
et al. 1997). Again we concur this is a
laudable use of restoration.
Compatibility with achieving other
values. To answer the question we pose
in our title—whether restoration
should be viewed as an alternative land
management paradigm for the bulk of
forest lands in the United States cur-
rently under forest management—we
want to use the example of ecological
restoration and wildlife. 
Numerous goals underlie traditional
management of wildlife, including
maintaining viable populations of all
native and desired nonnative vertebrates
(prescribed by the National Forest Man-
agement Act of 1976), recovering
threatened and endangered species
(mandated by the Endangered Species
Act of 1973), and providing consump-
tive (hunting, fishing, trapping) and
nonconsumptive (birdwatching, pho-
tography) recreational opportunities. To
achieve these goals, management is
often directed at maintaining or en-
hancing conditions for focal species. In
contrast, ecological restoration is guided
by broader goals that emphasize ecosys-
tem composition, structure, and func-
tion rather than speciﬁc ecosystem ele-
ments. Implicit in restoration is the as-
sumption that successful restoration will
provide favorable conditions for native
species of wildlife. Thus, effects of
restoration on wildlife are more appro-
priately considered an outcome rather
than a speciﬁc goal of management. 
Given that traditional approaches to
wildlife management are mandated by
law or deeply imbedded in many soci-
eties (Leopold 1933, 1949), it is un-
Figure 1. A 2,129-year  reconstruction of precipitation based on 10-year averages
for northwestern New Mexico.Unprecedented above-average precipitation charac-
terizes the most recent 200-year period,which was preceded by signiﬁcant
droughts.Which climatic period should be used as the reference condition? 
Source: Grissno-Mayer et al.1997
Below-average 
Above-average 
precipitation
precipitation
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
200 BC 1
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
Year

26
October 2000
likely that ecological restoration will
supplant those approaches. The ques-
tion then arises, Is ecological restora-
tion compatible with established ap-
proaches to wildlife management, or
even desirable? Our conclusion is that
there is no assurance that ecological
restoration can sustain populations of
all target species, nor is there assurance
that managing for target species can re-
sult in a restored ecosystem. 
Management of some target species,
particularly threatened or endangered
species, may entail a laissez-faire ap-
proach. This is often the case with
species that rely on dense, mature for-
ests, such as the threatened Mexican
spotted owl (Strix occidentalis lucida), or
species that use exotic plants like salt
cedar (Tamarix chinensis) as an impor-
tant habitat element, such as the en-
dangered southwestern willow fly-
catcher (Empidonax traillii extimus). A
restoration prescription calling for an
open forest structure would probably
not be permitted in areas occupied by
spotted owls, nor would salt cedar re-
moval be possible in ﬂycatcher nesting
areas. Such constraints would essen-
tially preclude restoration as a viable
management option. Management
practices for many game species—wild
turkey (Meleagris gallopavo), elk (Cervus
elaphus), and deer (Odocoileus)—often
require maintaining dense vegetation
structure to provide nesting, bedding,
hiding, and escape cover. Providing
dense cover may be counter to restora-
tion prescriptions that strive for an
open park-like forest. Here, goals of
game management may be incompati-
ble with those of ecological restoration. 
The assumption that restoring vege-
tation structure and composition will
lead to a “restored” wildlife community
is a ﬁeld of dreams. To our knowledge,
there is certainly no conclusive evidence
to validate this assertion. Wildlife com-
munities are dynamic and change as the
result of natural phenomena and human
influences. When the system is per-
turbed, biotic and abiotic relationships
of the system’s components change.
Changes to the wildlife community may
take the form of population changes, ex-
tirpation or extinction of species, inva-
sion by exotic species, and changing re-
lationships (such as food webs) among
the remaining species. When a system is
“restored,” extinct species will not re-
turn, exotic species often remain, popu-
lation levels may not return to “refer-
ence” levels, and community structure
and organization will likely be unique to
that place and time. Thus, will ecologi-
cal restoration result in a restored
wildlife community? Undoubtedly, it
will not in most situations.
Summary
Our article summarizes three broad
issues that should be considered before
foresters adopt an ecological restora-
tion management paradigm: 
1. Changing climate and land uses by
humans make the selection of an appro-
priate reference condition problematic. 
2. Even if as a society we could agree
that some previous condition was more
desirable, there is considerable doubt
that we have sufficient knowledge of
how ecosystems function to get there. 
3. Previous forest conditions, at
least when applied across a landscape
scale, probably do not better meet so-
cial needs and desires than other alter-
natives currently available. 
There are in addition several other
issues that relate to the feasibility of
ecological restoration—economics, in-
stitutional constraints, sustainability,
and difﬁculty in achieving societal con-
sensus—that we do not have space to
discuss. Restoration prescriptions in
the Southwest that lead to lower stand
densities and the use of prescribed ﬁre
are generally desirable. Conventional
silvicultural prescriptions can, however,
provide similar benefits while also
achieving other societal values like im-
proved game habitat, protection of spe-
ciﬁc endangered wildlife, and the pro-
duction of marketable wood products.
One’s orientation to the human role
in ecosystem management has much to
do with how one answers the question,
Should ecosystems be restored to a previ-
ous condition? A forester views a recently
cut, regenerating stand under even-age
management as a renewable resource to
meet human needs. The previous condi-
tion of the stand was part of a sustainable
forest (the ecosystem) producing ecolog-
ical services and extractable products. If
regeneration is only a phase of a contin-
uous process, is “restoration” even applic-
able? That past can never be reconsti-
tuted, but perhaps an acceptable facsim-
ile can and should be made. Other peo-
ple want an area where natural processes
of growth, reproduction, and evolution
occur without human presence. The fun-
damental difference in these perspectives
is the relative degree of human involve-
ment in ecosystems.
In recent years, three concepts have
emerged on the forest management
scene: forest health, ecosystem man-
agement, and now ecological restora-
tion. All of these concepts have initially
generated considerable debate, but we
believe all are basically fully consistent
with modern forest management activ-
ities. Some authors define ecological
restoration in terms nearly synony-
mous with what many in the Society of
American Foresters call “good forest
stewardship.” We welcome these new
Figure 2. Ratio of exotic to native understory species in ponderosa pine forests 
following four experimental stand treatments (Grifﬁs et al.,in press). Surrogate
restoration treatments of thinning and burning signiﬁcantly increased the propor-
tion of exotic species,as did stand-replacing wildﬁre.
Abundance
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Ratio of exotic to native species
Species richness
Unmanaged
Thinned
Thinned and burned
Wildﬁre

Journal of Forestry
27
ideas and techniques, but restora-
tionists who advocate substituting a
reference condition for meeting soci-
etal objectives must demonstrate the
advantage of this approach over con-
ventional silvicultural prescription.
The question is not whether ecological
restoration is good for ecosystems; but
rather, is it marginally better than the
other options available to improve eco-
system health? Professional foresters
should carefully consider how they can
use ecological restoration on badly de-
graded lands or as part of long-term re-
search where it is most appropriate,
and sew on another merit badge for a
100-year history of service as “ecologi-
cal restorationists.”
Literature Cited
ALLEN, E.B. 1995. Restoration ecology: Limits and pos-
sibilities in arid and semiarid lands. In Proceedings:
Wildland Shrub and Arid Land Restoration Symposium,
October 19–21, 1993, Las Vegas, comps. B.A.
Roundy, E.D. McArthur, J.S. Haley, and D.K. Mann.
INT-GTR-315. Ogden, UT: USDA Forest Service,
Intermountain Research Station.
ARONSON, J., S. DHILLION, and E.L. FLO’H. 1995. On
the need to select an ecosystem reference, however im-
perfect: A reply to Pickett and Parker. Restoration Ecol-
ogy 3:1–3
BRADSHAW, A.D. 1996. Underlying principles of restora-
tion. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Science
53(suppl.1):3–9.
BROWN, P.M., M.R. KAUFMANN, and W.D. SHEPPERD.
1999. Long-term, landscape patterns of past fire
events in a montane ponderosa pine forest of central
Colorado. Landscape Ecology 14:513–32.
CAIRNS, J. 1993. Ecological restoration: Replenishing
our national and global ecological capital. In Nature
conservation 3: Reconstruction of fragmented ecosystems,
global and regional perspectives, eds. D.A. Saunders,
R.J. Hobbs, and P.R. Ehrlich, 193–208.Chipping
Norton, New South Wales, Australia: Surrey Beatty &
Sons. 
COVINGTON, W.W., and M.M. MOORE. 1994. Postset-
tlement changes in natural fire regimes and forest
structure: Ecological restoration of old-growth pon-
derosa pine forests. In Assessing forest ecosystem health
in the inland West, eds. R.N. Sampson and D.L.
Adams, 153–81. New York: Haworth Press.
COVINGTON, W.W., P.Z. FULÉ, M.M. MOORE, S.C.
HART, T.E. KOLB, J.N. MAST, S.S. SACKETT, and M.R.
WAGNER. 1997. Restoring ecosystem health in pon-
derosa pine forests of the Southwest. Journal of For-
estry 95:23–29.
DEVIVO, M.S. 1991. Indian use of fire and land clear-
ance in the southern Appalachians. In Fire and the en-
vironment: Ecological and cultural perspectives, eds.
S.C. Nordview and T.A. Waldrop, 306–10. Asheville,
NC: USDA Forest Service. 
———. 1992. A landscape interpretation: Eastern
North America in 1492. Carver Interdisciplinary Jour-
nal 10(1).
DOBSON, A.P., A.D. BRADSHAW, and A.J.M. BAKER.
1997. Hopes for the future: Restoration ecology and
conservation biology. Science 277:515–22.
EHRENFELD, J.G., and L.A. TOTH. 1997. Restoration
ecology and the ecosystem perspective. Restoration
Ecology 5:307–17.
GRIFFIS, K.L., J.A. CRAWFORD, M.R. WAGNER, and
W.H. MOIR. In press. Understory response to man-
agement treatments in northern Arizona pondersoa
pine forests. Forest Ecology and Management.
GRISSINO-MAYER, H.D. 1997. The rare, old-aged
conifers of El Malpais—their role in understanding
climatic change in the American Southwest. New
Mexico Bureau of Mines and Mineral Resources Bulletin
156:155–61.
HIGGS, E.S. 1991. A quantity of engaging work to be
done. Restoration and Management Notes 9:97–104.
———. 1997. What is good ecological restoration?
Conservation Biology 11:338–48.
HOBBS, R.J., and H.A. MOONEY. 1993. Restoration ecol-
ogy and invasions. In Nature conservation 3: Recon-
struction of fragmented ecosystems, global and regional
perspectives, eds. D.A. Saunders, R.J. Hobbs, and P.R.
Ehrlich, 127–33. Chipping Norton, New South
Wales, Australia: Surrey Beatty & Sons. 
HOLLING, C.S. 1995. What barriers? What bridges? In
Barriers and bridges to renewal of ecosystems and insti-
tutions, eds. L.H. Gunderson, C.S. Holling, and S.S.
Light, 3–34. New York: Columbia University Press.
LEOPOLD, A. 1933. Game management. New York:
Charles Scribner’s Sons.
———. 1949. A Sand County almanac and sketches here
and there. New York: Oxford University Press.
MEFFE, G.K., and C.R. CARROLL. 1994. Ecological
restoration. In Principles of conservation biology, eds.
G.K. Meffe and C.R. Carroll, 409–38. Sunderland,
MA: Sinauer Associates.
MICHENER, W.K. 1997. Quantitatively evaluating
restoration experiments: Research design, statistical
analysis, and data management considerations.
Restoration Ecology 5:324–37.
MONTALVO, A.M., S.L. WILLIAMS, K.J. RICE, S.L. BUCH-
MANN, C. CORY, S.N. HANDEL, G.P. NABHAN, R.
PRIMACK, and R.H. ROBICHAUX. 1997. Restoration
biology: A population perspective. Restoration Ecology
5:277–90.
PALMER, M.A., R.F. AMBROSE, and N.L. POFF. 1997.
Ecological theory and community restoration ecology.
Restoration Ecology 5:291–300.
SHINNEMAN, D.J., and W.L. BAKER. 1997. Nonequilib-
rium dynamics between catastrophic disturbances and
old-growth forests in ponderosa pine landscapes of
the Black Hills. Conservation Biology 11:1276–88.
SOCIETY FOR ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION (SER). 1994.
Deﬁnitions, deﬁnitions, deﬁnitions. SER News 7:5.
STONE, J.E., T.E. KOLB, and W.W. COVINGTON. 1999.
Effects of restoration thinning on presettlement Pinus
ponderosa in northern Arizona. Restoration Ecology
7:172–82.
Michael R. Wagner (e-mail: mike.wagner@
nau.edu ) is Regents Professor, School of
Forestry, Northern Arizona University,
Flagstaff, AZ 86001; William M. Block
is research wildlife biologist and Brian W.
Geils is research pathologist, USDA For-
est Service, Rocky Mountain Research
Station, Flagstaff; and Karl F. Wenger is
past-president, Society of American For-
esters, Tappahannock, Virginia.
