 
1
Stacey et al., 2011 
Collaboration for 
Environmental Evidence 
Library 
 
 
CEE review 10-002 
 
HAVE ARID LAND SPRINGS RESTORATION PROJECTS 
BEEN EFFECTIVE IN RESTORING HYDROLOGY, 
GEOMORPHOLOGY, AND INVERTEBRATE AND PLANT 
SPECIES COMPOSITION COMPARABLE TO NATURAL 
SPRINGS WITH MINIMAL ANTHROPOGENIC 
DISTURBANCE? 
 
Systematic Review  
 
 
 
STACEY, C.J. (NÉE DAVIS)1, SPRINGER, A. E.1 & STEVENS, L.E.2 
 
1 School of Earth Sciences and Environmental Sustainability, Northern Arizona 
University, P.O. Box 4099, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, USA 
2. Museum of Northern Arizona, 3101 North Fort Valley Road, Flagstaff, AZ 86001-
8348, USA 
 
 
Correspondence: 
cjd48@nau.edu 
Telephone: 
00+1+928-523-9403 
Fax: 
00+1+928-523-9220 
 
 
Source of support: Northern Arizona University‟s Ecological Restoration Institute 
 
Draft protocol published on website: 15 January 2010- Final protocol published on website:13 July 2010 
Draft review published on website: 11 April 2011- Final review published on website:19 October 2011 
 
Cite as: Stacey, C.J., Springer, A.E. & Stevens, L.E. 2011. Have arid land springs 
restoration projects been effective in restoring hydrology, geomorphology, and 
invertebrate and plant species composition comparable to natural springs with minimal 
anthropogenic disturbance? CEE review 10-002 (SR87). Collaboration for Environmental 
Evidence: www.environmentalevidence.org/SR87.html. 

 
2
Summary 
 
 
1. Background 
 
Springs are places where groundwater is exposed at the earth‟s surface, often flowing 
naturally from bedrock or soil onto the land surface or into a body of surface water. There 
may be 105-106 springs in the United States, occupying a total area of 500-1000 km2 (less 
than 0.001 % of the nation‟s land area). Springs, particularly those in arid regions, are 
vastly more complex, diverse, and productive than are adjacent uplands. At a national and 
continental scale, springs are among our most threatened ecosystems; in the American 
West, more than 90 % of springs are estimated to be ecologically impaired (Stevens and 
Meretsky, 2008). Springs are important ecologically because they provide habitats for a 
diverse array of aquatic and wetland plant and animal species, many of which are 
endangered or endemic (Anderson et al., 2003; Springer and Stevens, 2009). Odum‟s 
(1957) study of Silver Springs in Florida, which laid the groundwork for much of the 
science of ecosystem ecology, remains one of the few comprehensive examples of 
springs ecosystem function. In addition, springs are culturally critical landscapes, the 
focus of profound traditional, religious and ethnoecological attention by indigenous 
cultures throughout the world (Stevens and Meretsky, 2008). 
 
While some restoration efforts have taken place in arid land springs ecosystems, few have 
been sufficiently well monitored to evaluate their success. Knowledge of the location, 
quantity, and quality of a resource is an important first step towards effective 
conservation and restoration (Thompson et al., 2002). However, the distribution, 
ecological condition, and threats facing many springs ecosystems are poorly known, and 
therefore potential restoration needs have heretofore remained unidentified, a gap this 
document begins to fill. In addition, development and adherence to a springs inventory 
and monitoring protocol has not been adopted, in part because of the many different 
jurisdictions under which researchers and land managers operate and a lack of cross-
jurisdictional coordination. As more information about springs ecosystems becomes 
available, there may be compelling evidence to improve stewardship, restoration, and 
monitoring of these ecosystems. This review examines the state of knowledge of arid 
land springs ecosystem restoration and monitoring to help springs ecosystem stewards 
better plan and prioritize management and restoration actions. 
 
2. Objectives 
 
The objectives of this review are to 1) summarize the state of knowledge about arid land 
springs restoration, and 2) determine whether springs ecosystem restoration projects in 
arid regions have been effective in restoring hydrology, geomorphology, and biological 
assemblage composition and structure in relation to those at natural springs with minimal 
anthropogenic disturbances 
 
 

 
3
3. Methods 
 
A list of search criteria was created to include specific search terms, as well as inclusion 
and exclusion criteria to help in eliminating irrelevant studies. After relevant literature 
was found and reviewed, information on study characteristics, methods, and results were 
summarized in a master spreadsheet. These studies were then analyzed for quality 
determined from Pullin and Knight‟s (2003) hierarchy of evidence and filtered based on 
the quality rating. Data from studies considered to be sufficiently robust to meet data 
quality standards were analyzed as to restoration criteria and success using the Society 
for Ecological Restoration (SER) International Science & Policy Working Group (2004) 
criteria for successful restoration.  
 
 
4. Main results 
 
Search results and elimination processes returned 15 studies analyzed for this review. The 
great inconsistency in the rationale for and in the implementation, monitoring, and 
reporting of springs restoration efforts precluded a meta-statistical analyses of the results. 
Individual studies were reviewed and results were summarized and analyzed for quality. 
Restoration success was difficult to assess in most projects because of limited monitoring 
and follow-up reporting. When restoration success was judged by whether identified 
restoration objectives were accomplished, most of the studies were rated as successful.   
 
 
5. Conclusions 
 
Standardized ecosystem condition and restoration assessment protocols are needed to 
more clearly understand the success of springs restoration projects, and could be 
developed through the collaboration of springs restoration stewards. Such a contribution 
would be highly beneficial to from a conservation perspective and to land resource 
managers and restoration practitioners. Improved understanding to how specific attributes 
or characteristics of springs ecosystems respond to specific restoration activities provided 
in this review will help managers develop rationales, estimate costs, prioritize projects, 
select appropriate treatments, improve monitoring, and incorporate feedback into future 
management and restoration activities.  

 
4
1. 
Background 
 
1.1 Introduction 
 
Springs are places where groundwater is exposed at the earth‟s surface, often flowing 
naturally from bedrock or soil onto the land surface or into a body of surface water. A 
comparison of the density of named springs in the United States (Stevens and Meretsky, 
2008) with several intensive surveys of springs in Texas (Brune, 1981), Wisconsin 
(Macholl, 2007), Arizona (Ledbetter et al., 2010), and other states indicates that fewer 
than 10 percent of springs have been named or mapped. Therefore, we estimate that 105-
106 springs may exist in the United States. Our observations and surveys of springs in the 
south-western United States, Alberta, Pennsylvania, and Florida indicate that the habitat 
area of most springs is relatively small (0.01-0.1 ha), and therefore springs likely occupy 
a total area of only 500-1000 km2 (less than 0.001 % of the nation‟s land area). Springs, 
particularly those in arid regions, are vastly more complex, diverse, and productive than 
are adjacent uplands (Grand Canyon Wildlands Council, 2003; Perla and Stevens, 2008), 
and provide essential ecological goods and services to surrounding landscapes and 
cultures. Unfortunately, springs have been widely exploited by humans for domestic and 
livestock water supplies and habitat. Estimates of the number of springs sustaining 
ecological impairment in the American West exceed 90 % (Stevens and Meretsky, 2008), 
and at national and global scales, springs are among the most threatened ecosystems 
(Hendrickson and Minckley, 1984; Kresic and Stevanovic, 2010; Cantonati et al., 2011).  
 
Although Odum‟s (1957) studies of Silver Springs in Florida laid the groundwork for 
much of the science of ecosystem ecology, his study remains one of only a few 
comprehensive efforts to describe springs ecosystem structure, pattern of energy flow, 
and trophic interactions. Among the only other comprehensive descriptions of a springs 
ecosystem are those of Blinn (2008) and his colleagues at Montezuma Well (a large 
limnocrene 
(

 
5
Table 1) in central Arizona) and the ecology of hot springs in Yellowstone National Park, 
Wyoming (e.g., Brock, 1994).  Limnocrene and hot springs are only two of at least a 
dozen 
different 
types 
of 
springs 
(

 
6
Table 1; Springer et al., 2008), and while detailed description of hanging gardens springs 
has been undertaken (e.g., Welsh, 1989), little systematic ecosystem science attention has 
been paid to the other types of springs. Springs are important because they are provide 
habitat for a diverse array of aquatic and wetland plant and animal species, many which 
are rare, endangered, or endemic (Anderson et al., 2003; Springer and Stevens, 2009).  
 
While some arid land springs ecosystem restoration efforts have taken place, there has 
been little synthesis of monitoring or other project information through which to assess 
restoration success. Basic information on springs ecosystem ecology and evaluation of 
restoration potential remains unidentified. In addition, the development and use of 
comprehensive springs inventory and monitoring protocols has only recently begun, in 
part because of the many different springs types, the cross-disciplinary nature of springs 
research, and the multiple, uncoordinated administrative contexts under which 
researchers and land managers operate. Limited scientific study and conservation 
attention has limited the knowledge available to develop and implement appropriate 
springs restoration theory and restoration protocols. Knowledge of the location, quantity, 
and quality of a resource is the first step in effective conservation and restoration, and 
such information is generally lacking  (Thompson et al., 2002). More in-depth 
information about springs ecosystems status will likely promote greater efforts to protect, 
restore, and monitor these ecosystems.  
 
This review contributes to the state of knowledge of arid land springs ecosystems 
restoration, and improves the relevance and consistency of monitoring approaches for 
springs ecosystems. Such efforts are needed to improve springs ecosystem stewardship, 
and that of all natural water resources in arid regions. This review also will benefit the 
future improvement and efficiency of springs restoration and monitoring projects by 
summarizing and reviewing the state of knowledge and methods used in past restoration 
and monitoring efforts. 
1.2 Distribution of Springs 
The distribution of springs at a global scale is difficult to determine due to the lack of 
mapping and inventory data. Many springs have not been documented, and therefore are 
not found in any databases. Many databases do not differentiate between springs and 
small bodies of water, such as tanks, ponds, or even wells. Also, it seems likely that many 
springs remain to be officially mapped, particularly those in topographically diverse 
landscapes. Thus, it is difficult to draw clear conclusions about the distribution of 
springs; however, springs occur in much greater density than has previously been 
recognized. In the United States, there is an abundance of springs in the Rocky Mountain 
and Intermountain West states: the density of named springs density in Oregon and 
Arizona exceeds 0.016 springs/km2, while springs density in Kansas and other Great 
Plains states is less than 0.002 springs/km2 (Stevens and Meretsky, 2008).    
 
1.2.1 Springs definition 
Springs are found in a wide array of unique geological and geomorphic settings. Springer 
and Stevens (2009) describe 12 spheres of discharge, or 12 different forms of 

 
7
groundwater emergence at the Earth‟s surface, including: 1) springs that emerge in caves, 
2) exposure springs, 3) artesian fountains, 4) geysers, 5) gushets, 6) contact hanging 
gardens, 7) helocrene wet meadows, 8) hillslope springs, 9) hypocrene buried springs, 10) 
limnocrene surficial lentic pools, 11) mound forms, and 12) rheocrene lotic channel 
floors 
(

 
8
Table 1). 
 

 
9
Table 1. Descriptions of springs sphere of discharge, or emergence environments (Modified 
from Springer and Stevens, 2009). 
 
Sphere of 
Discharge 
Emergence setting and hydrogeology 
Example 
Reference 
Cave 
Emergence in a cave in mature to extreme karst 
with sufficiently large conduits 
Kartchner 
Caverns, AZ 
Springer et al. 
(2008) 
Exposure springs 
Cave, rock shelter fractures, or sinkholes 
where unconfined aquifer is exposed near 
the land surface 
Devils Hole, Ash 
Meadows, 
NV 
Springer et al. 
(2008) 
Fountain 
Artesian fountain with pressurized CO2 in a 
confined aquifer 
Crystal Geyer, 
UT 
Springer et al. 
(2008) 
Geyser 
Explosive flow of hot water from confined 
aquifer 
Riverside Geyser, 
WY 
Springer et al. 
(2008) 
Gushet 
Discrete source flow gushes from a cliff wall of 
a perched, unconfined aquifer 
Thunder River, 
Grand Canyon, 
AZ 
Springer et al. 
(2008) 
Hanging garden 
Dripping flow emerges usually horizontally 
along a geologic contact along a cliff wall of a 
perched, unconfined aquifer 
Poison Ivy 
Spring, Arches, 
NP, UT 
Springer and 
Stevens 2009 
Helocrene (marsh) 
or cienega (wet 
meadow) 
Emerges from low gradient wetlands; often 
indistinct or multiple sources seeping from 
shallow, unconfined aquifers 
Soap Holes, Elk 
Island, NP, AB, 
Canada 
Modified from 
Meinzer 1923; 
Hynes 1970; 
Grand Canyon 
Wildlands 
Council (2002) 
Hillslope spring 
Emerges from a hillslope (15-60o slope); often 
indistinct or multiple sources  
Ram Creek Hot 
Springs, BC, 
Canada 
Springer et al. 
(2008) 
Hypocrene 
A buried spring where flow does not reach the 
surface, typically because of low discharge or 
high evaporation or transpiration 
Mile 70L 
Springs, Grand 
Canyon, AZ 
Springer et al. 
(2008) 
Limnocrene - 
emerges from 
lentic pool(s) 
Emergence of confined or unconfined aquifers  
in pool(s) 
Grassi Lakes, 
AB, Canada 
Modified from 
Meinzer 1923, 
Hynes 1970 
(Carbonate) 
Mound-form 
Emerges from a mineralized mound 
Montezuma 
Well, AZ; 
Dalhousie 
Springs, 
Australia 
Springer and 
Stevens 2009 
Rheocrene - lotic 
channel floor 
Flowing spring, emerges directly into one or 
more stream channels 
Pheasant Branch, 
WI, US 
Modified from 
Meinzer 1923, 
Hynes 1970 
 

 
10
1.3 Ecological Roles of Springs Ecosystems 
 
Springs provide numerous ecological resources and services, not only to humans, but also 
to other species and adjacent ecosystems (Perla and Stevens, 2008). Although individual 
springs are generally small in spatial area and sometimes rare at landscape scale, they are 
highly sensitive to anthropogenic activities.  Landscape and regional water resource 
assessments and large-scale forest management planning have sparked interest in springs 
restoration, especially in arid regions because of their resource values, the extent of 
threats, and the very evident impacts. It is important to gain a more complete 
understanding of their ecological condition and threat profiles within groundwater basins 
to develop a sound understanding of baseline conditions before restoration activities 
proceed.  
 
The ecology of springs ecosystems is poorly understood due to limited research; 
however, springs research has expanded in recent decades. The growing awareness of 
climate change has not yet extended to understanding the impacts on springs. Springs 
ecosystem ecology presently is a combination of many other disciplines including 
historical and structural geology, microclimatology, cave biology, lentic and lotic 
limnology, water law, and conservation science (Stevens and Meretsky, 2008).  
 
Many species use or rely on springs as critical sources of water, forage, and habitat, and 
springs commonly support rare and endemic species. Some endemic species are entirely 
dependent on one or a few springs [e.g., MacDougall‟s flaveria (Asteraceae: Flaveria 
macdougallii), Ash Meadows Amargosa Pupfish (Cyprinodontidae: Cyprinodon 
nevadensis mionectes) and the Banff Springs Snail (Physidae: Physella johnsoni). Loss or 
severe dysfunction of the spring spells doom for such springs-obligate taxa. 
1.4 Cultural Importance 
Springs are considered as sacred places for many cultures. Humans have relied on springs 
for water, habitation, and hunting locations throughout our evolutionary existence 
(Stevens and Meretsky, 2008). Native Americans from western North America (e.g., 
Klamath Indians of southern Oregon, Nez Perce Indians of Rocky Mountains south of 
Missoula, Montana) believed hot springs had healing powers and were a place where the 
“Great Spirit” lived (Lund, 1995). Hot springs were also considered neutral ground, 
where warriors could travel to and rest without attack by other tribes (Lund, 1995). In 
North America and Australia, springs are of great cultural importance to indigenous 
peoples, and were essential to European exploration of arid regions during the early 
periods of colonization (Ponder, 2002). The cultural importance of springs is further 
indicated by the extent of their use and alteration (see section 1.5). Springs are widely 
used for bathing, water sources, rare mineral extraction, and in the case of geothermal 
springs, for heating (Stevens and Meretsky, 2008). Countries such as Iceland, Chile, New 
Zealand, and Japan are renowned for their hot springs, which are natural resources for 
tourism (Lin et al., 2010). Springs restoration planning and implementation efforts must 
take socio-cultural and economic compliance and issues into consideration. 

 
11
1.5 Alterations of Springs Ecosystems 
Human alteration of springs has occurred for millennia. Springs have been prominent 
sources of high quality water, and often have been used as a foundation resource for 
human settlement. Prominent anthropogenic threats to springs include groundwater 
withdrawal, geomorphic alteration of springs sources, diversion and capture of springs 
outflow, and modification of springs for livestock watering, and recreation, including 
swimming pools or thermal baths. Humans also have altered the natural disturbance 
regime at springs, through geomorphic alteration, focused livestock use, construction of 
spring boxes, and climate change. Innumerable springs and their associated biota 
throughout the world are imperilled by groundwater drawdown and other human impacts  
(Unmack and Minckley, 2008). Overgrazing, deforestation, urbanization, and other land 
and water uses have reduced springs ecosystem integrity directly, and indirectly by 
reducing watershed infiltration capacity and aquifer recharge, ultimately influencing the 
sustainability of aquifers that feed springs (Pringle and Triska, 2000; Stevens and 
Meretsky, 2008). 
 
Human exploitation of springs, which began with hand-dug irrigation ditches, wells, and 
windmills, became prominent in the western United States during European colonization 
(Unmack and Minckley, 2008). Groundwater extraction rates commonly exceed recharge 
rates, and become unsustainable with agricultural practices (Pringle and Triska, 2000), 
and continue to expand with urbanization from population growth. Examples include 
Australian spring sites in the Great Artesian Basin that dried or nearly dried soon after 
water extraction began (Habermehl, 1983; Ponder, 2002), and springs in the Owens 
Valley of California that were dewatered by excessive groundwater pumping (Otis Bay 
Inc. and Stevens Ecological Consulting LLC, 2005).  
 
Changes in flow volume or patterns of a spring or spring system can have a „domino 
effect,‟ involving numerous, diverse, and intertwined biotic and physicochemical shifts 
(Unmack and Minckley, 2008). The three major factors determining the severity of 
impact of reduction in flow or spring diversion are shown in  
TABLE 2.   
 
Table 2. Factors that determine the severity of reduced water flow. 
 
 
Major factors determining the severity of impact of reduction in flow or spring 
diversion (Unmack and Minckley, 2008): 
1 
Proportion of flow lost. 
2 
Reduction in downstream extent of the system as a result of less water or distance 
between nearby spring outflows 
3 
New connections made by diversions between nearby spring outflows  
 
In addition, reduction of flow and concomitant slowing of the rate of water movement 
through the runout channel may increase water temperature during the warm season, ion 
concentration through evaporation, pH through increased interaction with benthic or 

 
12
macrophytic vegetation, and chemical precipitation rates. Such changes may take place 
abruptly if the water table is suddenly lowered, with increasing seasonal extremes as 
aquatic and riparian vegetation cover responds, or over longer time frames as regional 
climate changes.  
1.6 Restoration of Springs Ecosystems 
Many different types of restoration methods are utilized at springs ecosystems, including, 
but not limited to: 1) rehabilitation of springs orifice; 2) restoration to discharge channel 
and floodplain morphology; 3) removal of non-native species; 4) revegetation and 
reintroduction of native species; and, 5) reintroduction of periodic fires by prescribed 
burning. The type of restorative action is strongly dependant on the particular interests of 
the restoration management. Restoration projects may be focused on one particular aspect 
of the springs ecosystem (partial restoration), or are interested in restoring the full 
ecosystem (full restoration).  
 
1.6.1   Rehabilitation and Protection of Springs Orifice and Discharge 
 
Rehabilitation of springs sources may be completed by: 1) removal of diversion and 
capture structures (Muehlbauer et al., 2008); 2) reduction of groundwater pumping (Katz, 
2010); 3) large ungulate exclusion from the springs source by fence installation 
(Anderson et al., 2003; AWPF, 2001; Brunson et al., 2001, GCWC, 2010, Long et al., 
2004, Natural Channel Design, Inc., 2008); and 4) removal of overgrown vegetation 
(Kodric-Brown and Kodric, 2007). Restrictions of recreational activities (e.g., off-road 
vehicle use, camping) have also been utilized to protect springs and their watersheds 
(e.g., Brunson et al., 2001; Fossil Springs, Arizona). Flow reintroduction by removal of 
diversion and capture structures (i.e., berms, roads, etc.; Springer et al., 1999, GCWC, 
2010, Natural Channel Design Inc., 2008), or by reducing surrounding groundwater 
pumping rates (Katz, 2010) can help improve the overall ecosystem health (Kresic and 
Stevanovic, 2010).  
 
1.6.2  Geomorphological Restoration  
 
Geomorphic restoration methods are frequently used in springs ecosystem rehabilitation. 
Channel stabilization structures are sometimes constructed to reduce erosion, slow flow 
rate, increase water level, reduce headcutting, and recreate the natural grade features 
(Long et al., 2004). Discharge channel stabilization structures include: log structures, 
riffle formations, and check dams. Examples of significant earth moving exist (e.g. 
Hoxworth Springs and Pakoon Springs, Arizona) in which large equipment was use to 
reform geomorphology and reconstruct channel geometry by creating appropriate 
meanders patterns and to re-attach channels to abandoned floodplains (Springer et al., 
1999; Grand Canyon Wildlands Council, 2010). Along with these methods, revegetation 
techniques are also usually incorporated (Section 1.6.4). Negative impact of earth moving 
can be avoided or reduced by re-seeding with native grass, planting vegetation plugs, 
pole planting native phreatophytes, and covering bare soil with netting, straw, or wire 
fencing. These methods help reduce erosion of disturbed areas and increase site stability.  

 
13
 
1.6.3  Non-native Species Control and Elimination 
 
Non-native species control and elimination include vegetation, invertebrate, and 
vertebrate populations. Non-native species can be manually removed from the site, or less 
frequently, eliminated with herbicide or pesticide (Arizona Water Protection Fund, 2001; 
Weissenfluh, 2007). The use of herbicides and pesticides is not common because damage 
to native and desired species may occur. Installation of ungulate-proof fencing (Natural 
Channel Design, Inc., 2008) helps exclude livestock and undesirable grazing from elk or 
deer. Bullfrog (Rana catesbiana) fences also have been used to restrict bullfrog 
movement among springs (Grand Canyon Wildlands Council, Inc., 2010). If fencing is 
constructed, continued maintenance is usually required.  
 
1.6.4  Revegetation 
 
Revegetation and reintroduction of native plant species occurs through seeding and 
planting transplants. Recolonization may occur naturally if native species still occur in 
the area (e.g., at Pakoon Springs; Grand Canyon Wildlands Council, Inc., 2010). 
Irrigation systems may sometimes be necessary to help transplanted vegetation survive 
initial planting (AWPF, 2001). Transplanted stock is often best selected from areas near 
the springs ecosystem to ensure adaptation to the local environment.   
 
1.6.6  Fire Reintroduction  
 
Fire has been a common ecological disturbance in some springs ecosystems (e.g., 
Weisberg et al., 2010). Few springs restoration projects have yet utilized prescribed 
burning as a rehabilitation technique for springs ecosystems (e.g. Brunson et al., 2001). 
The goal of this restoration method is to reintroduce a more natural fire regime to upland 
watershed areas. Restoration projects that incorporated prescribed burning have reported 
positive effects (Brunson et al., 2001; Natural Channel Design, 2008). Prescribed burning 
can be used to control non-native vegetation or overgrown vegetation: the Muleshoe 
Ranch restoration project used prescribed fire to reduce shrub cover in the upland by 50 
% (Brunson et al., 2003). Restoration treatments at Hart Prairie, Arizona also included 
using prescribed burning to thin ponderosa pine trees that were encroaching on the wet 
meadow area (Natural Channel Design, 2008).  
  
 
2. 
Objectives 
 
The objectives of this review were to examine springs ecosystem restoration in arid 
regions and to summarize restoration efforts and effectiveness. With this review, we hope 
to identify and resolve deficiencies in the state of springs restoration and monitoring 
knowledge in arid regions, and thus advance springs restoration ecology. Without such an 
undertaking, the challenges faced by those approaching springs restoration will continue 
to be addressed on a case-by-case basis. Continued repetition of mistakes and failure to 
communicate the lessons learned from restoration efforts may retard the momentum of 

 
14
springs conservation and regional water resources management. The qualitative review 
undertaken here will help clarify the scope of existing restoration activities, identify 
useful monitoring strategies, and improve the likelihood of success of strategies and 
projects. This review also provides information to help managers prioritize management 
or restoration actions, a necessary practice where financial resources are limited. While 
we provide qualitative review here, the great diversity of springs types, levels of human 
impact, and different approaches to environmental problem-solving makes restoration 
planning and implementation highly site-specific. Flexibility, creativity, and careful 
monitoring are needed to ensure the success of springs restoration projects, and 
systematic quantitative advice on springs restoration practices will require more data on 
projects, methods, and the resolution of major challenges. 
  
2.1 
Primary question 
 
Have springs restoration projects in arid lands been effective in restoring springs 
ecosystem hydrology, geomorphology, and plant and invertebrate species composition 
comparable to conditions of natural springs with minimal anthropogenic disturbances? 
 
 
3. 
Methods 
 
3.1 
Question formulation 
 
We hypothesized that a critical mass of existing publications on springs restoration 
existed to undertake this analysis. We used collaborations with Northern Arizona 
University, the Museum of Northern Arizona, the University of Lethbridge, the 
Ecological Restoration Institute, and other research institutions and scientists as the 
source of information for this report.   
 
3.2 
Search strategy 
 
Our goal was to identify springs restoration projects worldwide. Searches took place 
between December 2009 and January 2010, and in August 2010 (Appendix B). We 
searched the following electronic databases for studies using our search terms, and 
recorded the number of titles returned per database, and number of titles that were 
returned as duplicates (Appendix B).  
 
Our search included all combinations of the following keywords: 
 Springs (used interchangeably with natural springs, riparian springs, arid land 
springs, watersheds, and catchments); and, 
 Restoration, prescribed burns (interchangeably with natural fire or wildfire), 
management, hydrology (interchangeably with hydrogeology), geomorphology 
(interchangeably with stabilization), conservation, fencing (interchangeably with 
enclosure), diversion. 
 
 

 
15
 
Electronic databases available through Northern Arizona University‟s Cline Library were 
a primary source, and included: 
 Academic Search Premier 
 Environmental Science and Pollution Management 
 Forest Science Database (Ovid)  
 JSTOR  
 ProQuest: Dissertations and Theses Full Text 
 Science Direct 
 Wilson OmniFile 
 GeoRef (CAS Illumina) 
 GeoScienceWorld GSW 
 SpringerLink 
 
Additional sources of information were sought and included: 
 ISI Web of Science 
 Google Scholar 
 Government (i.e. United States, Canada, and Australia) and university websites 
and libraries (e.g., Arizona Water Protection Fund annual reports and grant 
reports, Australian Museum Scientific Publications, United State Forest Service 
publications, USDA Forest Service‟s TreeSearch) 
 Published and unpublished reports (e.g., project monitoring reports, interviews, 
and agency report) were sought directly from individuals and organizations 
responsible for restoration projects (e.g., Ash Meadows National Wildlife Refuge, 
Grand Canyon Wildlands Council, the Museum of Northern Arizona, the National 
Park Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Southern Colorado Plateau I&M 
Network, USDA Forest Service, U.S. Geological Survey). 
 
3.3 
Study inclusion criteria  
 
Criteria for inclusion of studies for this analysis involved relevance to the topic, 
interventions, and types of comparator, outcome, and study, as listed below:  
 
 Relevant subject(s):  
Natural occurrences where aquifers meet the ground surface through seepage or 
fractures, classified as natural springs, in arid regions globally, including:  
 Riparian environments sourced from springs 
 Lakes/pools sourced from springs 
 Catchments 
 Watersheds 
 Types of intervention:  
Hydrologic restoration techniques: 
 Check dams  
 Weirs 
 Weather stations 

 
16
 Watershed gauges 
      Geomorphological and/or soil restoration techniques: 
 Channel relocation 
 Site re-contouring 
 Topsoil placement or removal 
      Vegetation restoration techniques: 
 Seeding 
 Planting 
 Herbivore exclusion 
 Excavation of non-native species, such as Tamarisk and Russian Olive 
      Historic fish distribution restoration: 
 Eradication of non-native fish species, including crayfish 
 Re-introduction of native fish species 
      Modifications of adjacent areas:  
 Thinning or prescribed burning of adjacent forests to increase water yields 
 Reduction in groundwater withdrawals 
 Fencing enclosures to reduce access 
 Natural or anthropogenic erosion 
 Types of comparator:  
 Experiments with controls (no intervention) and treatments (restoration)  
 Before-after studies 
 Before-after control-impact (BACI) studies 
 Interpretive models 
 Types of outcome:  
Hydrologic outcomes such as changes in: 
 Water table level 
 Flow from springs 
 Duration and/or timing of flow  
 Natural or anthropogenic induced erosion 
      Geomorphological and soil outcomes such as:  
 Channel presence and/or stability 
 Rockfall & slope processes 
 Integrity and restoration of soils 
      Vegetation outcomes such as:  
 Species composition 
 Percent cover and architectural structure, biomass 
 Survival of planted material 
      Invertebrate outcomes such as:  
 Species composition 
 Presence percentage 
      Vertebrate outcomes for: 
 Fish, herpetofaunal, avifaunal, mammalian populations and habitat use 
 Types of study:  

 
17
Primary, peer-reviewed studies were considered to be the most dependable form of 
information. However, much of the available information exists in unpublished sources, 
such as theses and dissertations, monitoring reports, observational studies, and other 
types of literature.  
 
Studies were initially considered by the title: if the title appeared to contain relevant 
inclusion criteria (i.e., relevant subjects and types of interventions) it was saved for 
further review. During this process, a count was maintained of how many titles were 
retrieved from each database, how many titles returned were duplicates, and how many 
met the inclusion criteria for further examination. This process identified 165 potentially 
relevant references.  
 
Abstracts of studies considered relevant were read to determine if the studies met 
inclusion criteria and whether further examination would be useful. Reviewer bias was 
tested by kappa analysis by randomly selecting seventeen (10 %) of the potentially 
relevant studies for review by a second reviewer. The number of accepted and rejected 
studies, and discrepancies are summarized in Table 3. The kappa statistic was calculated 
using an online calculator (http://www.graphpad.com/quickcalcs/kappa1.cfm?K=2) to 
test for reviewer agreement (Table 3). The kappa score was calculated at 0.866, which is 
considered „almost perfect‟ agreement between reviewers (Landis and Koch, 1977).   
 
After papers with relevant abstracts were selected, the entire report was reviewed to 
verify the project‟s was relevance to the review. If the study was relevant, the study‟s 
data were retained for evaluation.  
 
Table 3. Number of accepted and rejected studies by reviewers 1 and 2, and discrepancies 
for kappa analysis. 
 
 
 
Reviewer 2 
 
Accept 
Reject 
Total 
Reviewer 1 
Accept 
5 
1 
6 
Reject 
0 
11 
11 
Total 
5 
12 
17 
 
3.4 
Potential effect modifiers and reasons for heterogeneity:  
 
Much heterogeneity exists across elevation and topography among arid regions, and 
under differing disturbance and land-use histories. Extensive heterogeneity within 
geomorphic microhabitats within springs  (i.e., sloping bedrock surfaces, backwalls, 
channel terraces, and colluvial slopes). The manner(s) in which springs were restored also 
varied due to the extent of disturbance and management goals.  
 
3.5 
Study quality assessment 
 
Pullin and Knight‟s (2003) hierarchy of evidence quality (HEQ) was used to determine 
whether studies will be included in the review, and all studies were assigned to one of the 

 
18
categories in Table 4. Evidence from Categories I through II-3 were included, while 
evidence that fell under Categories III was considered with caution. Evidence from 
Category IV was excluded, due to the lack of strong evidence.  
 
 
Table 4. Hierarchy of Evidence Quality (modified by Pullin and Knight, 2003) 
 
Category 
Quality of Evidence 
I 
Strong evidence obtained from at least one properly designed; randomized controlled trial of 
appropriate size. 
II-1 
Evidence from well designed controlled trials without randomization. 
II-2 
Evidence from a comparison of differences between sites with and without (controls) a desired 
species or community. 
II-3 
Evidence obtained from multiple time series or from dramatic results in uncontrolled 
experiments. 
III 
Opinions of respected authorities based on qualitative field evidence, descriptive studies or 
reports of expert committees. 
IV 
Evidence inadequate owing to problems of methodology (e.g., sample size, length or 
comprehensiveness of monitoring) or conflicts of evidence. 
  
3.6 
Data extraction 
 
Information of interest and data relevant to the question were summarized in a master 
spreadsheet (APPENDIX A) by one of the primary reviewers. Such information included 
the study‟s objectives, methods, and conditions of the study site pre- and post-restoration. 
This information was used to then determine quality of evidence, and ultimately 
restoration success. Once the data were summarized in the master spreadsheet, the studies 
were assigned to category of evidence quality (see section 3.5). Studies that were 
assigned to category IV were excluded for further examination. All other studies were 
then analyzed for restoration success.  
 
3.7 
Data synthesis 
 
After compiling relevant information from each study and eliminating those assigned to a 
category IV quality of evidence, the reviewers completed a qualitative assessment of each 
project‟s restoration success based on the reported outcomes using the Society of 
Ecological Restoration (SER) International Science & Policy Working Group (2004) 
criteria for successful restoration ( 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
19
TABLE 5). The reviewers determined if each criterion was met or not, and whether pre-
stated objectives were accomplished or not for each of the studies analyzed. Studies were 
assigned a score based on how many criteria they met out of the nine total criteria.  
However, these scores may be misleading: not all criteria were the focus of restoration in 
all projects, and not all criteria could be assessed in all projects. Formal statistical meta-
analysis was not used due to heterogeneity and variation in restoration designs and 
outcomes monitored.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 5. Attributes of a restored ecosystem, modified from the Society of Ecological 
Restoration International Primer on Ecological Restoration (Society for Ecological 
Restoration International Science & Policy Working Group, 2004). 
 
Attribute 
Criteria for Successful Restoration 
1 
Characteristic species assemblage similar to reference sites and provides suitable 
community structure. 
2 
Native species present to the greatest feasible extent. 
3 
Necessary functional groups for continued development and/or stability of restored 
ecosystem are represented, or have the potential to colonize naturally.  
4 
Sustainable physical environment for reproduction of species populations for desired 
conditions. 
5 
Normal functioning condition at stage of development with no signs of dysfunction.  
6 
Restoration is integrated into surrounding landscape.  
7 
No or limited threats from surrounding landscape to health and integrity of restored 
ecosystem. 
8 
Resilient to endure natural disturbances. 
9 
Self-sustaining to same degree as reference ecosystem.  
 
 
4. 
Results 
 
4.1 
Review statistics 
 
 
The literature search took place between September 3, 2009 and August 13, 2010, and 
gray literature reports were accepted until October 2010. Searches returned 433,299 titles, 
which were reviewed to locate relevant studies that addressed our main question. This 
review was limited to restored springs in arid regions. The full search results can be 

 
20
found in Appendix B. There were multiple steps in finding relevant articles, and the 
elimination process is shown in Table 6.  
 
Table 6. Details of study elimination step process. 
 
Elimination 
No of studies 
Studies captured from electronic databases (excluding duplicates) 
433,299 
Studies captured by other sources 
21 
Studies remaining after title elimination 
165 
Studies remaining after abstract elimination 
35 
Studies remaining after full text elimination 
18 
Studies remaining after Quality of Evidence elimination 
15 
 
 
4.2 
Description of studies  
 
Our investigation was designed to determine the outcomes from restoration treatments on 
hydrology, geomorphology, vegetation, and invertebrate/vertebrate species in arid 
regions. Except for one study, all of the springs restorations took place in the south-
western United States. All of the sites had undergone some sort of disturbance, from 
alteration of the springs source(s) to general geomorphic degradation from grazing or 
other agricultural activities (Error! Reference source not found.). Restoration methods 
were tailored to each individual study‟s objectives and goals. The array of restoration 
methods is shown in Error! Reference source not found.. Hydrology was addressed by 
eight papers which reported on water quality and field parameters, such as discharge rate 
(Error! Reference source not found.). Invertebrate and vertebrate species were included 
as a focus in six papers. Nine papers, whose treatments varied from removal of structures 
to channel realignment, addressed geomorphology. Vegetation was addressed in all 15 
papers. Of the 12 springs types classified by Springer and Stevens (2009), helocrene fens 
or wet meadow, hillslope, limnocrene, and rheocrene springs were the types found in the 
reference restoration reports (Error! Reference source not found.). Rheocrene springs 
were the most common.  
 
4.3 
Study quality assessment  
 
All studies were categorized based on their quality of evidence. This eliminated studies 
that did not meet evidence quality standards outlined by Pullin and Knight (2003). One 
study was type II-1, seven were type II-2, one was type II-3, six were type III, and three 
were type IV (Table 7). Most of the studies did not include before-after impact studies or 
replicated restoration treatments. The studies that were classified as type IV were not 
considered for further examination (Appendix C).  
 
4.4 
Qualitative synthesis 
 

 
21
Qualitative assessments produced varied results. Two studies included for analysis did 
not meet any of the criteria discussed by the SER International Science & Policy 
Working Group (2004). Two studies met two criteria out of nine, which were normal 
functioning and integrated, and integrated with limited or no threats. One study met three 
criteria, which included functional, sustainable, and integrated conditions. Three studies 
met four criteria out of the nine. Four met five criteria. Two studies met six criteria, and 
one study met eight total criteria. On average, the most criteria met were five out of nine. 
These results can be seen in Appendix D. We were unable to determine if all the criteria 
were met in some reports. Inclusion of additional information may have helped improve 
the accuracy of rating these studies.  
 
Integration with the surrounding area was the criterion that was most often fulfilled for 
springs restoration projects. Sustainable reproduction and reduced or eliminated threats 
were the second most-often met criteria. The least-often met criteria included 
achievement of a characteristic assemblage, native species occurring to the greatest extent 
feasible, and restoration of normal ecological functioning.  
 
 
Figure 1. Frequency of disturbance types discovered at reviewed springs restoration studies. 
 

 
22
 
Figure 2. Frequency of restoration methods used in springs restoration studies. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Frequency of attributes measured and monitored after springs restoration 
completion. 

 
23
 
 
Figure 4. Frequency of springs sphere of discharge from restoration study references. 
 

 
24
Table 7. Summary of study’s restoration success. 
 
Study 
Study 
Category 
Objectives 
met (yes or 
no)? 
Scores 
Percentage 
out of 9 
criteria 
Percentage 
of criteria 
able to 
evaluate 
Anderson et al (2003), 
Clover Springs 
II-2 
Y 
6 
67% 
67% 
AWPF (2001), Bingham 
Cienega 
II-2 
Y 
4 
44% 
80% 
Brunson et al (2000), 
Muleshoe 
II-2 
Y 
4 
44% 
57% 
GCWC (2010) Pakoon 
Springs Rehabilitation 
Final Report 
II-2 
Y 
8 
89% 
89% 
Katz (2010), San Pedro 
Riparian Areas 
II-2 
Y 
4 
44% 
57% 
Kodric-Brown and Brown 
(2007), Ash Meadows 
Springs, NV and Dalhousie 
Spring, Australia 
II-3 
Y 
0 
0% 
0% 
Long and Endfield (2000), 
White Springs 
III 
Y 
5 
56% 
100% 
Long et al (2004), Soldier 
Springs 
II-2 
Y 
6 
67% 
100% 
Muelbauer et al (2009), 
Fossil Creek 
II-2 
Y 
5 
56% 
100% 
Natural Channel Design, 
Inc (2008), Brown Springs 
III 
N 
0 
0% 
0% 
Natural Channel Design, 
Inc (2008), Clover Springs 
III 
Y 
5 
56% 
83% 
Natural Channel Design, 
Inc (2008), Hart Prairie 
III 
Y 
3 
33% 
50% 
Natural Channel Design, 
Inc. (2008), Hoxworth 
Springs 
III 
Y 
2 
22% 
40% 
Springer et al (1999), 
Hoxworth Springs 
II-1 
Y 
2 
22% 
100% 
Weissenfluh (2007), 
Jackrabbit Springs 
III 
Y 
4 
44% 
57% 
 
 

 
25
Whether the studies met initial objectives also was considered in this assessment. To be 
achieved, objectives had to be stated a priori in the study. Results of this analysis were 
the most telling metric of project success among the restoration projects. From the 15 
studies evaluated, only one did not meet the initially stated objectives (Table 7).  
 
Because none of the studies accepted were based on either the HEQ or SER criteria, it 
was not surprising that their results did not precisely conform to those criteria. 
Nonetheless, finding this high rate of success is compelling evidence of general success 
of springs restoration efforts, and we regard this as the most revealing practical element 
of this study. 
 
4.4.1  Evaluation of Evidence Quality  
All studies were categorized based on their quality of evidence as described by Pullin and 
Knight (2003), but we found that their assessment approach underestimated project 
success. Several factors that limit the applicability of the quality of evidence approach 
include: 1) springs are highly individualistic ecosystems, each with a distinctive array of 
microhabitats, species, and ecological processes, such as disturbance regime; 2) pre-
degradation information is often limited, and in the case of large springs prehistoric 
human use may have occurred over millennial time scales; 3) many springs are small (1-
1000 m2), with insufficient area for replication of treatment methods; 4) selected 
characteristics (e.g., a single species, or flow quantity) were often the target of restoration 
actions, rather than overall ecosystem health; and, 5) different microhabitats within 
springs require different restoration methods, sometimes limiting comparison of 
restoration methods. Therefore, springs restoration projects are rarely likely to fall into 
quality of evidence categories I or II-1, and most often fall into categories II-2 to III, in 
which the methods and outcomes rely upon the experience and opinions of respected 
professionals and the springs stewards (Figure 5). Relegation of springs restoration 
studies to lower levels of quality of information may generate greater likelihood of Type I 
statistical error, precluding the rating of assessment efforts as successful when they have 
been successful. 

 
26
 
Figure 5. Frequency of Pullin and Knight’s (2003) hierarchy of evidence quality rating for 
springs restoration projects. 
 
4.4.2  Effectiveness in Restoring Springs Ecosystems 
Determining the effectiveness of restoration efforts for hydrology, geomorphology, and 
plant and invertebrate/vertebrate species of springs ecosystems was difficult because not 
every springs restoration project reported all the outcomes of interest (Table 8). This 
distorted success ratings when using the SER (2004) criteria for successful restoration. 
Not every criterion was the focus of restoration effort, and the restoration success of each 
criterion could not necessarily be determined. Therefore, some studies may have received 
lower success ratings than the project actually achieved. When rating the successfulness 
of each restoration project by only the criteria that could be determined, the resulting 
scores were on average much higher (Table 7). As noted above, if restoration success was 
evaluated on the basis of whether the project achieved its objectives, 93 % of the projects 
were successful, which is a very high level of success. The success of meeting the project 
objectives were determined by whether the outcomes of the restoration indicated in the 
report matched a priori objectives, or if the report stated the objectives were successfully 
met.  
 
 

 
27
Table 8. Outcomes monitored for each study. 
 
 
Outcomes monitored (yes or no) 
Study 
Hydrology 
Geomor-       
phology 
Invert/Vert 
Species 
Vegetation 
Anderson et al (2003), Clover 
Springs 
Y 
Y 
N 
Y 
AWPF (2001), Bingham 
Cienega 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
Brunson et al (2001), Muleshoe 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
GCWC (2010) Pakoon Springs 
Rehabilitation Final Report 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Katz (2010), San Pedro Riparian 
Areas 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
Kodric-Brown and Brown 
(2007), Ash Meadows Springs, 
NV and Dalhousie Spring, 
Australia 
Y 
N 
Y 
Y 
Long and Endfield (2000), 
White Springs 
Y 
Y 
N 
Y 
Long et al (2004), Soldier 
Springs 
N 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Muelbauer et al (2008), Fossil 
Creek 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Natural Channel Design, Inc 
(2008), Brown Springs 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
Natural Channel Design, Inc 
(2008), Clover Springs 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
Natural Channel Design, Inc 
(2008), Hart Prairie 
Y 
Y 
N 
Y 
Natural Channel Design, Inc 
(2008), Hoxworth Springs 
Y 
Y 
N 
Y 
Springer et al (1999), Hoxworth 
Springs 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
Weissenfluh (2007), Jackrabbit 
Springs 
N 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Frequency: 
8 
9 
6 
15 
 
 

 
28
4.5 
Outcome of the review  
 
4.5.1  Study Evidence Quality 
Results of springs restoration projects were assessed either quantitatively, qualitatively, 
or both quantitatively and qualitatively (Table 9 9). Data analyzed quantitatively was 
considered to be more reliable than data assessed qualitatively. 
 
Table 9. Data classification for studies reviewed. 
Author(s): 
Data 
Qualitative 
or 
Quantitative? 
Explanation 
Anderson 
et 
al., 
2003 
Qualitative and Quantitative 
Used paired plots; Data were collected before (to 
establish 
baseline 
comparisons) 
and 
after 
restoration; 
Conducted 
geomorphic 
history 
analysis by historic photograph comparison; 
Profiles surveyed by total station; Percent aerial 
cover of plant species and abiotic material 
surveyed in rectangular plots. 
Arizona 
Water 
Protection 
Fund, 
2001 
Qualitative and Quantitative 
Conducted many statistical tests (X2 and t-tests) 
calculating standard deviations and level of 
significance 
Brunson et al., 2001 
Quantitative 
Conducted statistical tests (two-tailed probability 
level) pre- and post-restoration and over time; 
Significance level set at p=0.05. 
Grand 
Canyon 
Wildland 
Council, 
Inc., 2010 
Qualitative and Quantitative 
Percent cover of each plant species in each 
polygon in four strata was determined in the field 
over time; water quality and flow were 
determined before and after; plant species 
richness, native cover, non-native plant species 
richness and cover, and vertebrate presence was 
noted. 
Katz, 2010 
Quantitative 
Baseline data collected; Six restoration sites and 
six reference sites were used; Several vegetation 
metrics were compared between (1) perennial 
reference sites, (2) non-perennial reference sites, 
(3) Three Links Farm restoration sites, and (4) 
H&E Farm restoration sites; Differences were 
analyzed with t-tests using the Bonferroni 
adjustment for pair‐wise comparisons. 
Kodric-Brown 
and 
Brown, 2007 
Qualitative 
Authors indicate "surveys", but no details about 
the surveys; possibly fish counts. 
Long and Delbin 
Endfield, 2000 
Qualitative 
Visual observations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
29
Author(s): 
Data 
Qualitative 
or 
Quantitative? 
Explanation 
Long et al., 2004 
Quantitative 
Field surveys: Channel measurements before and 
after treatment; longitudinal profile throughout 
the entire stream reach prior to placement of riffle 
formations; Pebble counts; Estimated number of 
trout per meter at the lower end of the treated 
reach by electro-shocking. 
Muehlbauer et al., 
2008 
Quantitative 
Leaf litter decomposition, macroinvertebrate 
community attributes, fungal biomass, and water 
quality and chemistry were compared before and 
after restoration above and below the dam; 
Experimental leaf decomposition rates were 
determined and compared using an equality of 
slopes test; A type I error rate of 0.05 was used 
for tests for effects of restoration on water quality 
and chemistry, leaf litter decomposition (P = 
0.0181), fungal biomass (P = 0.0053), and 
macroinvertebrate community attributes (P = 
0.0533 for abundance and P = 0.0546 for 
richness). 
Natural 
Channel 
Design, Inc., 2008 
Qualitative 
Visible observations 
Springer et al., 1999 
Qualitative and Quantitative 
Vegetation surveys before and after treatment; 
Channel geomorphology surveys before and after 
treatment 
Weissenfluh, 2007 
Qualitative 
Visible observations 
 
 
4.5.2  Hydrology  
Hydrology was addressed in eight of the fifteen studies (Table 8). Rehabilitation of 
riparian and terrestrial vegetation affects the hydrology of springs ecosystems. Prescribed 
burns in the Muleshoe Ranch Watershed caused the percent cover of riparian tree 
overstory to increase, which presumably resulted in cooler water temperatures and great 
concentrations of dissolved oxygen, thus improving the aquatic habitat and watershed 
condition (Brunson et al., 2001). Rehabilitation of geomorphology (particularly the 
restoration of deeply incised channels) and the vigorous growth and expansion of riparian 
vegetation at Pakoon Springs have transformed that former ostrich ranch into a rich stand 
of creneoriparian habitat. Slightly reduced discharge reported in July 2009 and August 
2010 at Pakoon Springs reflected vigorous vegetation growth, which was interpreted as 
success in native vegetation rehabilitation (Appendix E; Grand Canyon Wildlands 
Council, Inc., 2010).  Reduced groundwater uptake in the San Pedro River was 
considered as a direct, beneficial effect, shaping streamside plant communities and 
increasing cover and species richness (Katz, 2010).  
 
Kodric-Brown and Brown (2007) hypothesized that the removal of disturbance by large 
mammals detrimentally affected springs ecosystems because such disturbance helps 
maintain open-water habitats required by native fish and other species. After livestock 
exclusion, springs in Ash Meadows Wildlife Refuge sustained reduction in open-water 

 
30
habitat and fish populations, and Dalhousie Springs source pools became heavily 
overgrown with large quantities of dead and decomposing vegetation, creating anoxic 
water (Kodric-Brown and Brown, 2007). The large limnocrenes of Ash Meadows are 
almost all anthropogenic, and the natural configuration of the springs there was likely far 
more helocrenic than Kodric-Brown and Brown (2007) recognized. Nonetheless, springs 
in Grand Wash, north-western Arizona, that were fenced to exclude cattle, also sustained 
loss of surface water and endemic populations of the aquatic springsnail, Pyrgulopsis 
bacchae springsnails (Hydrobiidae; Grand Canyon Wildlands Council, Inc., 2002). From 
lessons learned at Ash Meadows (Otis Bay, Inc. and Stevens Ecological Consulting, 
LLC., 2005), we recommend that springs restoration projects should include 
consideration of the natural configuration of the springs, maintaining the natural 
disturbance regime (native animal grazing, flooding, rockfall/landslides, etc.), and 
monitoring microhabitat status and distribution. 
 
Geomorphic restoration often requires reconfiguration of channels, terraces, and spring 
mound habitats. Re-development of a larger runoff channel outside of the low-flow 
channel, with meanders and banks, was reported to improve hydrological function at 
Hoxworth Springs in northern Arizona (Natural Channel Design, Inc., 2008). However, a 
log revetment structure along the slightly entrenched base-flow channel failed to stabilize 
the banks and, apparently because of the smooth nature of the wood, the structure may 
have resulted in increased flow velocity, producing localized channel scour. Monitoring 
and subsequent adjustment of structures (re-alignment of the channel and increasing the 
meander, instead of armouring a sharp turn) at Hoxworth Springs revealed that 
appropriate gradient and channel morphology could be used to restore springs outflow 
channels (AWPF, 2008). 
 
The Fossil Springs watershed underwent major changes in geochemistry and 
hydrogeology after flow diversion removal, including: 1) increased water temperature 
below the dam; 2) total dissolved solids and specific conductance concentrations in the 
water below the dam became proportional to above-dam values; and 3) decreased pH 
values (Muehlbauer et al., 2009). These conditions better reflect the natural state of the 
creek‟s headwaters. Since the decommissioning of the Fossil Springs Diversion Dam and 
the reintroduction of stream flow to the natural channel, Fossil Springs has successfully 
begun to redevelop travertine dams, a natural stream formation that had deteriorated due 
to flow diversion. 
 
4.5.3 Geomorphology 
Geomorphologic restoration was addressed in nine of the studies, many of which reported 
increased channel stability after restoration [i.e., Hoxworth Springs (Natural Channel 
Design, Inc., 2008), Hart Prairie (Natural Channel Design, Inc., 2008), White Springs 
(Long and Endfield, 2000), Soldier Springs (Long et al., 2004), and Pakoon Springs 
(Grand Canyon Wildlands Council, Inc., 2010)]. These changes were in keeping with 
predefined project objectives and are reported as successful elements of springs 
restoration.  
 

 
31
Creek channels at Muleshoe Ranch increased in maximum depth of pools, which are of 
interest for monitoring since they provide habitat of the Gila chub (Gila intermedia; 
Brunson et al., 2001). The increased depth of the pools was not attributed to increased 
stream flow (which actually decreased following restoration actions), but to changing 
channel morphology resulting from improvements to riparian vegetation as a result of the 
prescribed burning treatments (Brunson et al., 2001).  
 
Channel stabilization positively influenced habitat quality at White Springs, the 
headwaters of Cibecue Creek, Arizona: check-dams built above and below the springs 
reversed channel downcutting, protecting the springs from large monsoon floods in July 
1999 (Long and Endfield, 2000). Soldier Springs, also located on the White Mountain 
Apache Reservation in eastern Arizona, demonstrated significant improvement in channel 
morphology following the construction of riffle forming structures (Long et al., 2004); 
long pools have been maintained above the riffles and short pools below. The percentage 
of fine gravels, the preferred substrate for Apache trout (Oncorhynchus apache), doubled 
following those restoration efforts (Long et al., 2004).     
 
Channel reconstruction by reshaping and redirecting the channel, and the use of low 
impact structures to encourage natural channel dynamics and stability, had little to no 
impact at Clover Springs in northern Arizona: Anderson et al. (2003) reported that 
longitudinal and cross-sectional profiles remained relatively similar there following 
geomorphic rehabilitation. However, maintaining the stream gradient was one of the 
project goals, and therefore the channel redesign was considered successful (Anderson et 
al., 2003). 
 
4.5.4 Invertebrate and Vertebrate Species 
Invertebrate and vertebrate species restoration was addressed in six studies. Positive 
changes were reported as increased population size, diversity, and density.  
 
Gila chub (Gila intermedia) responded positively to the changes at the Hot Springs 
watershed in Muleshoe Ranch CMA. The Gila chub increased in density (chub 
capture/100 m haul), area, length of springs, and relative (percent) abundance in the fish 
community in comparison with pretreatment conditions (Brunson et al., 2001). These 
changes were dramatic considering the restoration consisted of only two types of 
treatments (reintroduction of periodic fires by prescribed burning and resting from animal 
grazing by construction of exclosures).  
 
Kodric-Brown and Brown (2007) attributed the exclusion of feral livestock, implemented 
to restore habitats and stabilize populations of endangered species, caused vegetation 
overgrowth leading to 18 fish extinctions, mostly in smaller springs of Dalhousie Springs. 
Feral livestock had been excluded from Dalhousie Springs since 1995 (Kodric-Brown 
and Brown, 2007). Kodric-Brown and Brown (2007) also reported negative effects of 
excluding livestock in Ash Meadows, with many springs becoming heavily overgrown, 
causing the extinction of Cyprinodon pupfish. However, continuing restoration and 
maintenance efforts of Ash Meadows springs has led to increases in several native fish 
populations. Ash Meadows speckled dace (Rhinichthys osculus nevadensis) populations 

 
32
greatly increased, and Amargosa pupfish (Cyprinodon nevadensis mionectes) moved 
further downstream due to increased water temperatures after cattail removal and 
rechannelization of Jackrabbit Springs restoration efforts (Weissenfluh, 2007). 
 
Flow reintroduction after diversion removal rapidly restored macroinvertebrate 
assemblage composition and structure at Fossil Springs and the homogeneity of the 
headwaters macroinvertebrate assemblage increased following restoration (Muehlbauer et 
al., 2009). However, the assemblage downstream from the dam in 2005 was still more 
dispersed than that above the dam (Muehlbauer et al., 2009). Muehlbauer et al. (2009) 
concluded that this suggests a time-lag between restoration and complete recovery, 
emphasizing the need for long-term monitoring of springs and runout channel restoration 
efforts. 
 
Pakoon Springs restoration involved extensive geomorphic reworking, including removal 
of existing ostrich and cattle ranching structures, reconstruction of outflow channels, 
revegetation, removal of non-native species, and fencing to exclude undesired ungulates. 
Since this restoration effort, at least18 bird species have been detected, Gambel‟s quail 
(Callipepla gambelii) densities increased, and native aquatic macroinvertebrates, 
including dryopid beetles, colonized the restored channel (Grand Canyon Wildlands 
Council, Inc., 2010). Channel reconstruction, revegetation, and excluding livestock also 
improved Apache trout (Oncorhynchus apache) abundance at Soldier Springs in the 
White Mountains of Arizona (Long et al., 2004).  
 
4.5.5 Plant Species 
Restoration of native vegetation was an objective of all 15 studies, and all studies 
reported clear evidence of success.  
 
Two reports addressed vegetation responses at the Clover Springs restoration site. 
Anderson et al. (2003) reported positive short-term changes in cover and biomass of 
native riparian and terrestrial species in study plots. Two months after channel restoration 
was completed in 2001, the restored riparian and terrestrial areas showed extensive 
increases in cover and biomass. However, revegetetation progress declined and percent 
cover of exposed mineral soil increased after a drought in 2002. Overall, proportion of 
riparian and terrestrial species improved, compared to pre-restoration conditions, but 
there was little change in species composition and non-native species still outnumbered 
native species. An ungulate exclosure constructed at Clover Springs helped protect the 
meadow, increasing natural recruitment and plant growth (Natural Channel Design, Inc., 
2008).  
 
Prescribed burn treatments in the Muleshoe Ranch Watershed were aimed at improving 
the overall watershed condition by reintroducing periodic fires. Increased instream cover, 
an important component of aquatic habitat that provides structural complexity and 
protective cover for fish, improved channel conditions at Muleshoe Ranch (Brunson et 
al., 2001). Total instream cover, which includes emergent, floating and overhanging 
vegetation, increased by 3.6-fold (p = 0.05) along monitoring transects (Brunson et al., 
2001). In burned areas of the watershed, perennial grass experienced an increase in the 

 
33
total cover over pre-burn conditions after only two growing seasons suggesting that 
watershed condition had improved. In areas left unburned, perennial grass cover 
decreased. Brunson et al. (2001) hypothesized that when precipitation was average or 
above-average, burning would result in increased perennial grass cover after two growing 
seasons; whereas, when precipitation was below-average, perennial grass cover and 
abundance would be maintained after burning. Annual grasses increased after prescribed 
burns in both average and below-average rainfall years (Brunson et al., 2001). Though 
the results at the Muleshoe Ranch study are encouraging, the role of fire frequency and 
intensity in springs wetlands ecosystems is still generally poorly understood. 
 
Recovery from intensive overgrazing by cattle, ostriches, and feral asses was rapid at 
Pakoon Springs, with recovery of damaged vegetation and rapid growth of planted native 
phreatophytes (Grand Canyon Wildlands Council, Inc., 2010). Monitoring there 
demonstrated considerable natural recruitment, vigorous growth of pre-existing 
vegetation, and low mortality of natural and planted vegetation in all five springs arenas. 
Continued removal of non-native tamarisk (Tamarix spp.), mosquitofish (Gambusia 
affinis), and bullfrogs (Rana catesbeiana) is on-going in that restoration project.  
 
The effects of grazing on the restored riparian corridor of Hoxworth Springs were 
evaluated, and vegetation there was compared with that in three different types of 
exclosures: “total exclosure” (no grazing ungulates), “cattle exclosure” (exclosed to cattle 
but open to elk), and “total grazing” (open to both cattle and elk grazing; Godwin, 2004; 
Springer et al., 1999). There were no significant differences detected in the mean percent 
vegetative cover, plant species diversity, or native plant population structure between 
treatment types; however, qualitative observations indicated a positive correlation 
between the degree of exclosure and biomass produced (Godwin, 2004; Springer et al., 
1999). Godwin (2004) concluded that potential positive changes were not detectable in 
the brief duration of analysis, and that continued monitoring was needed to reveal long-
term success. Climate variability in the Southwest makes it difficult to understand short-
term population dynamics. Springer et al. (1999) also observed that inconsistent 
vegetation monitoring methods affected perceived outcomes of the restoration over the 
short period of monitoring after the restoration treatments.  
 
Protective fencing, and elevated water levels from rock and gravel riffle formation 
construction improved vegetation at Soldier Springs. Transplanted sedges along the 
streambed of the Soldier Springs outflow channel were reported to begin to spread along 
the edges of the banks and became interwoven with aquatic vegetation (Long et al., 
2004).  
 
 
5. 
Discussion 
 
Although this review was meant to prevent bias in the search methods, few springs 
restoration studies were found outside of the United States. Two papers were found in 
regards to springs in China, but these reports did not fit our inclusion criteria and were 

 
34
eliminated during the „abstract elimination‟ stage. It appears that the majority of springs 
restoration projects have been carried out in United States.  
 
This review also revealed that many studies did not incorporate before-after impact 
studies or replicated restoration treatments. This is likely due to the general absence of 
information on the pre-exploitation condition of most springs, many of which have been 
used by humans for centuries or millennia. In addition, the limited size and unique nature 
of springs ecosystems often prevents adequate within-site replication. The lack of before-
after impact studies and replicated restorations make it difficult to ultimately determine if 
disturbed springs have been restored to conditions comparable to that of non-disturbed 
springs.   
 
Finally, this review demonstrated that many different restoration methods are used, 
depending on conditions at individual springs. Projects included in the study involved 
both partial and full ecosystem restoration. However, in both cases, restoration efforts 
produced desired changes in springs ecosystem conditions.  
 
Development and use of comprehensive springs inventory and monitoring protocols are 
beginning to be standardized, a process that has been delayed by the lack of a lexicon 
about springs types, inadequate mapping, and insufficient comprehensive inventory and 
assessment data (Stevens and Meretsky, 2008; Springs Stewardship Institute, 2011). 
These problems are exacerbated by the great diversity of springs types, the cross-
disciplinary nature of springs research, and the multiple, uncoordinated administrative 
contexts under which researchers and land managers operate. Lack of scientific study and 
conservation has limited the knowledge available to develop and implement appropriate 
springs restoration theory and restoration protocols. 
 
5.1 
Hydrology and Geomorphology 
 
Geomorphic restoration, as discussed previously, involves many different and site-
specific approaches. Many of the studies reviewed reported positive changes occurring at 
restored springs site as a result of geomorphic rehabilitation. For example, geomorphic 
restoration methods at Pakoon Springs included: 1) recreating spring mounds/hillside 
seeps and outflow channels; 2) removal or reduction of berms constructed by previous 
owners; and 3) eliminated roads and reshaping the landscape around spring sources. 
These activities at Pakoon Springs revealed that when the regional aquifer is intact, 
springs ecosystem geomorphology and habitat rehabilitation can be achieved (Grand 
Canyon Wildlands Council, Inc., 2010). Restructuring riffles at Soldier Springs provided 
rehabilitated channel habitat, forms that achieved habitat recovery better than did log 
structures (Long et al., 2004). Restoration stewards at Soldier Springs also observed that 
multiple treatments practiced together (i.e., riffle formations, protective fencing, and 
vegetation transplanting) contributed to overall project success. Check dam construction 
in White Springs outflow channel increased bank stabilization and reversed downcutting 
(Long and Endfield, 2000). In addition, natural geomorphic processes were restored 
following removal of diversion structures: natural travertine channel forms began to 

 
35
rebuild after removal of diversion from Fossil Springs. Therefore, geomorphologic 
restoration can substantially improve the hydrology of altered springs ecosystems.  
 
5.2 
Invertebrate and Vertebrates Species 
 
Many of the restoration methods, such as geomorphic rehabilitation, diversion removal, 
and revegetation, directly and indirectly contributed to population rehabilitation of target 
and non-target invertebrate and vertebrate springs species. For example: 1) Recontouring 
eliminated non-native bullfrogs from several restoration arenas at Pakoon Springs (Grand 
Canyon Wildlands Council, 2010); 2) Native chub (Gila spp.) and other fish populations 
increased at Muleshoe Ranch after prescribed burning of upland areas (Brunson et al., 
2001); 3) Native Apache Trout (Oncorhynchus apache) abundance rebounded at Soldier 
Springs as a result of the preferred substrate reforming (Long et al., 2004). Finally, 
removal of diversion structures enhanced macroinvertebrate populations at Fossil Springs 
(Muehlbauer et al., 2008). 
 
5.3 
Vegetation 
 
Vegetation restoration treatments included: 1) planting native seeds and transplants; 2) 
removing non-native species; 3) excluding large ungulates to promote vegetation 
recovery; and, 4) reducing vegetation abundance by prescribed burning. 
 
Lessons learned during the restoration of Kings, Point of Rocks, and Upper Jackrabbit 
Springs in Ash Meadows National Wildlife Refuge helped guide additional restoration 
projects in Ash Meadows. Restoration at Jackrabbit Springs involved construction of the 
largest native vegetation planting and drip irrigation system ever created for the survival 
of transplanted vegetation in the arid area (Weissenfluh, 2007). Hot and windy climates 
are highly stressful for transporting and planting native vegetation. It is advantageous to 
acclimate transplanted plants prior to planting. The Jackrabbit Springs restoration project 
also demonstrated the importance and cost effectiveness of regular monitoring, and 
though such activity was to detect downturns in the recovery process, fixing problems 
before they jeopardized project success.  
 
Excluding livestock proved beneficial to vegetation at Pakoon Springs (Grand Canyon 
Wildlands Council, Inc., 2010) and at Hoxworth Springs (Natural Channel Design, Inc., 
2008): at the latter site, wetland vegetation cover rebounded after elk and cattle exclosure 
fence was installed. Brown Creek riparian restoration managers observed that restricting 
mammal access reduced further springs ecosystem degradation from trampling and 
browsing. Buck and pole fencing was discovered to not hold up well, and was therefore 
not effective in restricting feral livestock, cattle, non-native elk, and recreational access to 
Hoxworth Springs (Natural Channel Design, Inc., 2008).  
 
Prescribed burning treatments within the Muleshoe Ranch CMA demonstrated that 
periodic burns kept shrub cover at desired levels, while a single prescribed burn killed 
only a portion of the undesirable vegetation and surviving shrubs recovered quickly 
(Brunson et al., 2001). Burning effects varied among vegetation types: junipers were less 

 
36
affected than other common shrubs (i.e., shindagger, acacia, mesquite, and snakeweed; 
Brunson et al., 2001). Brunson et al. (2001) further demonstrated that even during 
droughts, burning resulted in increased grass abundance and cover. However, they 
recommended allowing time for grasses to recover before livestock were re-introduced 
and also recommended monitoring regrowth closely.  The benefits of resting the 
landscape from grazing and using prescribed burning led to overall watershed 
improvement and recovery of native fish populations at Muleshoe Ranch.  
 
 
6. 
Conclusions 
 
We encountered several challenges in addressing whether projects in arid lands have been 
effective in restoring hydrology, geomorphology, and plant and invertebrates species 
composition comparable to conditions of natural springs with minimal anthropogenic 
disturbances: 1) The scope of restoration efforts varied from “fixing” specific problems to 
“whole ecosystem” restoration. Some restoration efforts focused solely or primarily on 
native vegetation restoration or on non-native species removal, rather than on ecosystem-
level restoration of flow, geomorphology, flora, and fauna. In such cases, the restoration 
project may achieve its objectives, but fall short of full restoration. 2) Restoration 
reference conditions and goals may not be unambiguously defined – in some cases 
human impacts to springs may have taken place over centuries or millennia. This may 
restrict the comparative approach and use of controls to evaluate restoration success. This 
restriction may be alleviated by careful study of the pre-treatment condition, though 
comparison of the restoration site with similar springs in the region, and by careful 
selection of appropriate monitoring elements that span the scope of the restoration goals. 
3) Springs are uniquely individualistic ecosystems, sometimes containing multiple 
microhabitats, and no two springs are precisely alike. Insufficient ecological analyses 
have been accomplished on many springs types to fully understand them as ecosystems. 
The expectations, strategies, and outcomes of restoration is likely to vary within and 
among springs types, influencing the costs and scheduling of interventions. 4) Ecosystem 
response variables varied among projects: not all variables were monitored at all 
restoration sites, limiting comparison among projects. 5) Qualitative tools used for 
evaluating project success (e.g., the SER criteria for successful restoration) were of 
limited use in broad-scope evaluation of springs restoration because most projects were 
small, single-site restoration efforts at different types of springs. This caused us to rely on 
evaluation of success in relation to stated project goals. While levels of success were 
reportedly high, 6) such reporting was not systematic, and often depended more on policy 
requirements of the funding entity rather than on ecosystem characteristics. Overall, both 
the science of springs ecosystem ecology and assessment of restoration success will 
benefit from more systematic analysis. 
 
Fortunately, restoration practitioners are beginning to recognize these issues and 
limitations, and a broader perspective of springs ecosystem ecology is being incorporated 
into all aspects of springs inventory, assessment, restoration planning, and 
implementation (Springs Stewardship Institute, 2011). We hope this review increases 

 
37
general awareness of the challenges facing evaluation of project success, and contributes 
to increased consistency of springs ecosystem restoration and monitoring.  
 
 
6.1 
Implications for Management  
 
Additional basic and applied research in the ecology and restoration of arid land springs 
will help improve understanding of these productive, diverse, and highly threatened 
habitats. How and to what extent different types of springs and associated microhabitats 
can be restored will vary based on project starting conditions, but an insufficient number 
of restoration projects of individual springs types exists from which to extract such 
insights. When more restorations have been conducted, springs stewards will be better 
able to predict appropriate treatments, costs, challenges, and outcome benefits among 
different types of microhabitats within springs and among different types of springs 
ecosystems.   
 
Post-restoration monitoring and long-term information management are essential for 
understanding the cost, duration, extent, and effectiveness of ecosystem recovery. 
Development of more codified monitoring protocols, such as those under development by 
Springer et al. (2008) and those currently under development by the U.S. Forest Service 
will be useful for comparison of restoration success among projects.   
 
Few regions have sufficient basic information on the distribution of springs types (

 
38
Table 1) to formulate prioritized conservation recommendations, particularly for rare 
types of springs. We recommend that basic inventories be conducted within land units 
and states to identify rare springs types, and focus restoration on the most threatened 
types. This is both a management and a research issue. If performed systematically, such 
an effort can yield consistent, comparable results across broad geographic areas and 
provide highly useful data on the restoration of various springs types.   
 
6.2 
Implications for Research 
 
Unlike large river, lake, or landscape restoration programs, springs restoration efforts 
usually involve relatively well-defined efforts by small groups of stakeholders to achieve 
one or a few focused goals. Springs restoration is a newly developing area of 
conservation action, and the tools for evaluating project success are still under 
development (Springs Stewardship Institute, 2011). Development of a systematic quality 
assessment protocols and a restoration success rating system, specifically for small and 
individualistic ecosystems, will enhance quality and success assessments of studies like 
those examined in this review.  
 
Better documentation of springs restoration projects and more systematic methods for 
reporting outcomes also will improve analysis of springs restoration projects. Until this 
type of documentation becomes available, we recommend using the qualitative 
sociological approach of rating springs ecosystem restoration success in relation to stated 
goals. Improved mathematical tools for evaluation of non-replicated, single-site 
restoration are outstanding and will develop through more extensive statistical analyses; 
however, such efforts will require a far larger sample size than presently exists. 
Nonetheless, guidance on restoration assessment protocols and trend assessment 
following treatment should be widely available to springs stewards interested in planning 
and implementing springs restoration and monitoring (e.g., Springs Stewardship Institute, 
2011). We encourage springs stewards to consider these issues and how results of their 
restoration and monitoring projects can be compared with other similar efforts, thereby 
contributing to the growth of this field and expansion of the science of springs ecosystem 
ecology. 
 
 
7. 
Acknowledgements 
 
We thank the Ecological Restoration Institute of Northern Arizona University for funding 
this project, and the Museum of Northern Arizona for supporting L.E. Stevens work. We 
also like to thank the numerous individuals and agencies that helped supplement our 
review with unpublished literature, and who include but are not limited to: Kelly Burke 
of the Grand Canyon Wildlands Council, Inc. in Flagstaff; Dick Flieshman of the United 
States Forest Service, Coconino National Forest Supervisor‟s Office; Julia Fonseca from 
Pima County, Arizona; Gerald J. Gottfried, Research Forester at the Rocky Mountain 
Research Station; Stephen Tighe of the Arizona Water Protection Fund; and Darrick 
Weissenfluh from Ash Meadows National Wildlife Refuge; and We also thank Peter Z. 
Fulé from the School of Forestry and the Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern 

 
39
Arizona University for suggesting analytical techniques, and to Jeri Ledbetter of the 
Springs Stewardship Institute in Flagstaff for insight into restoration information 
management. We also thank Elizabeth L. Kalies from the Ecological Restoration Institute 
for her review of this work. Finally, we recognize and laud the many hard-working 
springs restoration practitioners whose dedicated work made this review possible.  
 
 
8.  
Potential Conflicts of Interest and Sources of Support 
 
The Ecological Restoration Institute of Northern Arizona University supported this 
project, with assistance from the Museum of Northern Arizona. The reviewers know of 
no conflicts of interest.  
 
 
9.  
References 
 
Anderson, D., Springer, A., Kennedy, J., Odem, W., DeWald, L., Fleishman, D., 
2003.Verde River Headwaters Restoration Demonstration Project: Final Report, Arizona 
Department of Water Resources Water Protection Fund, Grant No. 98-059. 
 
Arizona Water Protection Fund, 2001. Bingham Cienega Riparian Restoration Project, 
Final Report, Grant # 97-040WPF, Pima County, AZ.  
 
Arizona Water Protection Fund, 2008. Hoxworth Springs Stream Channel Restoration 
Project: Executive Summary, AWPF Grant #08-159WPF, Retrieved March 7, 2011 from: 
www.adwr.state.az.us/awpf/pubs/FY2008/WPF0364.pdf.  
 
Blinn, D.W., 2008. The extreme environment, trophic structure, and ecosystem dynamics 
of a large, fishless desert spring. In Aridland Springs in North America: Ecology and 
Conservation, ed. L.E. Stevens, V.J. Meretsky, pp. 98-126. University of Arizona Press, 
Tucson. 
 
Brock, T.D., 1994. Life at High Temperatures. Yellowstone Association, Yellowstone 
National Park, Wyoming. 
 
Brune, G., 1981, Springs of Texas, Volume 1, Fort Worth, TX, Branch-Smith, Inc., 566 . 
 
Brunson, E., Gori, D., Backer, D., 2001. Watershed improvement to restore riparian and 
aquatic habitat on the Muleshoe Ranch CMS, Final Report, The Nature Conservancy, 
AWPF Project Number 97-035.  
 
Cantonati, M., Gerecke, R., Jüttner, I., Cox, E.J. (eds.), 2011. Springs: neglected key 
habitats for biodiversity conservation. Journal of Limnology 70, 1-87. 
 
Godwin, T.N., 2004. Evaluation of Streambed Restoration and Occurrence of Hoxworth 
Springs, Coconino County, Arizona [Master‟s thesis]: Northern Arizona University, 191. 

 
40
 
Grand Canyon Wildlands Council, Inc., 2002. A hydrological and biological inventory of 
springs, seeps and ponds of the Arizona Strip, Final Report, Arizona Department of 
Water Resources, Water Protection Fund, Phoenix, AZ. 
 
Grand Canyon Wildlands Council, 2003. Biological inventory and assessment of ten 
south rim springs in Grand Canyon National Park: final report. Grand Canyon 
Science Center, National Park Service Contract WPF-230. 
 
Grand Canyon Wildlands Council, Inc., 2010. Pakoon Springs Rehabilitation, Final 
Report, Task #9, AWPF Grant Contract #06-137WPF, Flagstaff, AZ.  
 
Habermehl, M.A., 1983. Hydrogeology and hydrochemistry of the Great Artesian Basin, 
Australia. In Proceedings, International Conference Groundwater and Man, Sydney, 
1983, Australia Water Resource Council Conference Series 8(3), 83-98. Australia 
Government Publication Service, Canberra. 
 
Hendrickson, D.A., Minckley, W.L., 1984. Cienegas: Vanishing climax communities of 
the American Southwest, Desert Plants 6(3), 130-175.  
 
Huntoon, P., 1974. The karstic ground water basins of the Kaibab Plateau, Arizona. 
Water Resources Research 10, 579-590. 
 
Hynes, H.B.N., 1970. The ecology of running waters. University of Toronto Press, 
Toronto 
 
Katz, G., 2010. Revised Final Report: Test of Riparian Recovery Following Reduced 
Groundwater Pumping, Lower San Pedro River, AWPF Grant #08-151WPF, 
Appalachian State University, Boone, NC.  
 
Kodric-Brown, A., Brown, J.H., 2007. Native fishes, exotic mammals, and the 
conservation of desert springs, Frontiers in Ecology 5(10), 549-553. 
 
Kresic, N., Stevanovic, Z., 2010. Groundwater Hydrology of Springs. Elsevier, 
Burlington. 
 
Landis, J.R., Koch, G. G., 1977. The measurement of observer agreement for categorical 
data. Biometrics 33, 159-174.  
 
Ledbetter, J.D., Stevens L.E., Springer A.E., 2010. In press. Springs Inventory Database.  
 
Lin, J.Y., Chen, C. F., Lei, F. R., Hsieh, C. D., 2010. Field observations and management 
strategy for hot spring wastewater in Wulai area, Taiwan, Water Science and Technology 
61.9. 
 

 
41
Long, J.W., Burnette, B.M., Medina, A.L., Parker, J.L., 2004. Restoration of Soldier 
Spring: and isolated habitat for native Apache trout. In Proceedings, International 
Conference, 16th, Victoria, Canada, Society for Ecological Restoration, 1-5.  
 
Long, J.W., Endfield, D., 2000. Restoration of White Spring. In Proceedings, USDA 
Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station-P-13, 359-360.  
 
Lund, J.W., 1995. Historical Impacts of Geothermal Resources on the People of North 
America, Geo-Heat Center Bulletin, 7-14. 
 
Macholl, J.A., 2007. Inventory of Wisconsin‟s springs. Wisconsin Geological and 
Natural History Survey, Madison. 
 
Meinzer, O.E., 1923. Outline of ground-water hydrology, with definitions. US Geol 
Survey Water Supply Paper 494. 
 
Monroe, S.A., Antweiler, R.C., Hart, R.J., Taylor, H.E., Truini, M., Rihs, J.R., Felger, 
T.J., 2005. Chemical characteristics of ground-water discharge along the south rim of 
Grand Canyon in Grand Canyon National Park, Arizona, 2000-2001. U.S. Department of 
the Interior Scientific Investigations Report, 2004-5146. 
 
Muehlbauer, J.D., LeRoy, C.J., Lovett, J.M., Flaccus, K.K., Vlieg, J.K., Marks, J.C., 
2009. Short-term responses of decomposers to flow restoration in Fossil Creek, Arizona, 
USA. Hydrobiologia 618, 35–45. 
 
Natural Channel Design, Inc., 2008. AWPF Grant Projects Evaluation, Phase II: Case 
Studies, Final Report. Arizona Water Protection Fund, Phoenix, AZ.  
 
Odum, H.T., 1957. Trophic structure and productivity of Silver Springs, Florida, 
Ecological Monographs 27, 55-112. 
 
Otis Bay, Inc. and Stevens Ecological Consulting, LLC., 2005. Hines Springs Mitigation 
Draft Phase I Report. Los Angeles Water and Power and Inyo County Water District, 
California. 
 
Perla, B.S., Stevens, L.E., 2008. Biodiversity and productivity at an undisturbed spring in 
comparison with adjacent grazed riparian and upland habitats. In Aridland Springs in 
North America: Ecology and Conservation, ed. L.E. Stevens, V.J. Meretsky, pp. 230-243. 
University of Arizona Press, Tucson. 
 
Ponder, W.F., 2002. Desert Springs of the Australian Great Artesian Basin. In 
Proceedings, Spring-fed Wetlands: Important Scientific and Cultural Resources of the 
Intermountain Region, 1-13. 
 
Pringle, C.M., Triska, F.J., 2000. Emergent biological patterns and surface-subsurface 
interactions at landscape scales. In Streams and Ground Waters, ed. J.B. Jones, P.J. 
Mulholland, Academic Press, San Diego.  

 
42
 
Pullin, A.S., Knight, T.M., 2003. Support for decision making in conservation practice: 
An evidence-based approach. Journal for Nature Conservation 11, 83-90. 
 
Society for Ecological Restoration International Science & Policy Working Group, 2004. 
The SER International Primer on Ecological Restoration, www.ser.org & Tucson: 
Society for Ecological Restoration International. 
 
Springer, A., Godwin, T., DeWald, L., Hink, J., 1999. Final Project Progress Report 
Arizona Water Protection Fund Grant No: 96-0003WPF. Arizona Department of Water 
Resources, Water Protection Fund. 
 
Springer A.E., Stevens, L.E., Anderson, D.E., Parnell, R.A., Kreamer, D.K., Levin, L., 
Flora, S., 2008. A comprehensive springs classification system: integrating geomorphic, 
hydrogeochemical, and ecological criteria. In Aridland Springs in North America: 
Ecology and Conservation, ed. L.E. Stevens, V.J. Meretsky, pp. 49-75. University of 
Arizona Press, Tucson. 
 
Springer, A.E., Stevens, L.E., 2009. Spheres of discharge of springs. Hydrogeology 
Journal 17, 83-93.  
 
Springs Stewardship Institute, 2011. Springs Stewardship. Flagstaff, AZ. Retrieved 
August 28, 2011 from: www.springstewardship.org. 
 
Stevens, L.E., Meretsky, V.J., 2008, Aridland Springs in North America: Ecology and 
Conservation. University of Arizona Press, Tucson. 
 
 
Thompson, B.C., Matuski-Rowan, P.L., Boykin, K.G., 2002. Prioritizing conservation 
potential of arid-land montane natural springs and associated riparian areas. Journal of 
Arid Environments 5, 527-547.  
 
Unmack, P.J., Minckley, W.L., 2008. The Demise of Desert Springs, In Aridland Springs 
in North America: Ecology and Conservation, ed. L.E. Stevens, V.J. Meretsky, pp.11-34. 
University of Arizona Press, Tucson. 
 
Weisberg, P.J., Sunderman, S.O., Karam, S.L., 2010, Fire Patterns and Fire Effects on the 
Plant Community, Ash Meadows National Wildlife Refuge. U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service Ash Meadows National Wildlife Refuge, Amargosa Valley. 
 
Weissenfluh, D., 2007. The Upper Jackrabbit Restoration (Phase 1) Site Step-by-Step 
Report Ash Meadows National Wildlife Refuge Nye County, Nevada, Compiled By: 
Quantell, Inc. for the U.S. Department of Interior, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Ash 
Meadows National Wildlife Refuge. 
 

 
43
Welsh, S.L., 1989. On the distribution of Utah‟s hanging gardens. Great Basin Naturalist 
49, 1-30. 

 
44
Appendix A. Master spreadsheet used in summarizing restoration projects.  
 
Author(s): 
  
Publication Year: 
  
Restoration Project Name: 
  
Prepared For: 
  
Involved Agencies: 
  
Study Objective: 
  
Springs Descriptions: 
  
Name(s): 
  
Type(s): 
  
Location(s): 
Restoration Methods: 
  
Focused Site Measurements: 
  
Target Species: 
  
Pre-Intervention Impacts/Disturbances 
(yes/no): 
Roads w/in 100 m?  
 Flow diversion or culvert? 
 Alteration to springs source? 
 Agriculture? 
Grazing? 
Recreation? 
Intervention(s) (i.e., Restoration 
Recommendations/Actions): 
  
Replication or Previous restoration 
actions/recommendations: 
  
Baseline comparison (yes/no)? 
  
Intra-treatment variation: 
Positive Changes: 
Negative Changes: 
Measured impacts of restoration: 
  
Successful restoration measurements: 
  
Year Restoration Complete: 
  
Year Monitoring/follow-up 
completed: 
  
Duration of Monitoring: 
  
Number of times monitored: 
  
Post-restoration actions/assessments: 
  
Objectives Met (yes/no)? 
  
Quality Assurance measures (quality 
control methods/protocols used): 
 
Study Evidence Quality Category 
(Pullin & Knight 2003) 
  
 

 
45
Appendix B. Search results displaying databases utilized, dates searches took place, 
and total titles returned and number of duplications before elimination process.   
 
Search terms to include all combinations of the following: 
 
 
Springs* and 
 
Restoration, hydrology, prescribed burns§, management, geomorphology (or 
erosion, or sedimentation, or channel), conservation, fencing†, diversion, stabilization. 
 
* -OR- Natural Springs -OR- Riparian Springs -OR- Watersheds -OR- Catchments 
 -OR- Hydrogeology 
§ -OR- Natural Fire -OR- Wildfire 
 -OR- Erosion -OR- Sedimentation -OR- Channel 
† -OR- Enclosures 
 
 
 
 
Summary: 
Search databases utilized 
Date(s) Searched 
Total number of titles 
retained for further 
examination (abstract/full-
text elimination) 
(excluding duplicates) 
Science Direct 
9/3/2009-9/16/2009, 12/23/2009, 
8/13/2010 
39 
NAU Cline Library (generic 
search resulted in papers from 
GeoRef and SpringerLink) 
9/15/2009 
8 
GeoRef (CAS Illumina) 
9/15/2009, 12/23/2009-12/29/2009, 
8/13/2010 
46 
GeoScience World 
9/13/2009, 12/29/2009 
1 
SpringerLink 
12/29/2009 
1 
JSTOR 
9/13/2009, 12/30/2009, 1/5/2010, 
1/6/2010, 8/13/2010  
21 
ProQuest 
1/6/2010, 8/13/2010 
3 
Academic Search Complete 
1/11/2010, 8/13/2010 
3 
ISI Web of Science 
1/11/2010, 8/13/2010 
2 
Google Scholar 
1/11/2010, 1/12/2010, 8/13/2010 
14 
Arizona Water Protection 
Fund Online Documents and 
Reports 
1/27/2010 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
46
1) ScienceDirect 
Search  
Total  
Chosen by 
Title  
Dups  Titles not 
returned 
before   
Total for 
Possible Use  
Sept 3rd, 2009 
Springs* AND Restoration AND Riparian 1232 
6 
0 
0 
6 
Sept 8th, 2009 
Springs* AND Wildfire AND Restoration  
(returned many papers relating to 
restoration of trees/ponderosas, plants & 
wildlife, but not our topic) 
502 
9 
2 
7 
7 
Sept 16th, 2009 
Fire AND Ponderosa AND Forests 
94 
5 
1 
4 
4 
Fire AND debris flow AND watershed 
897 
10 
3 
7 
7 
Dec. 23rd, 2009 
Springs* AND Restoration AND 
Conservation (limited search to journals: 
Forest Ecology and Management, Journal 
of Arid Environments, Geomorphology, 
Journal of Hydrology, Journal of 
Environmental Management, which 
eliminated books) 
6007/reduced to 
721 after 
refined. 
14 
0 
14 
14 
Springs* AND Restoration AND 
Hydrology 
1955 
4 
4 
0 
0 
Springs* AND Prescribed burns§ 
494 
1 
0 
1 
1 
Springs* AND Restoration AND erosion 
AND sedimentation AND channel AND 
stabilization AND geomorphology 
131 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Springs* AND Restoration AND 
hydrogeology 
278 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Springs* AND management AND fencing 
AND conservation 
577 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Aug. 13th, 2010 
Springs* AND management AND 
restoration 
1625 
4 
1 
3 
3 
Springs* AND riparian AND restoration 
(was important to hyphenate 'arid-land' 
springs; „arid land‟ did not return any 
results) 
404 
1 
1 
0 
0 
 
2) GeoRef (CAS Illumina)  
 
Search  
Total  
Chosen by 
Title  
Dups  
Titles 
not 
returned 
before 
Total for 
Possible Use  
Sept 15th, 2009 
Springs* AND restoration AND Prescribed 
burns§ 
0  
- 
- 
- 
- 

 
47
Search  
Total  
Chosen by 
Title  
Dups  
Titles 
not 
returned 
before 
Total for 
Possible Use  
Springs* AND climate change AND 
Prescribed burns§ 
1 
0 
0 
1 
0 
Dec. 23rd, 2009 
Springs* AND restoration OR conservation 
OR management 
3392 
13 
0 
13 
13 
Dec. 27th/28th, 2009 
Springs* AND restoration OR conservation 
OR management AND Hydrology OR 
Erosion OR Sedimentation 
1815 
24 
6 
 18 
18 
Dec. 28th, 2009 
Springs* AND Prescribed burns§ AND 
Fencing† 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Springs* AND Channel AND 
Geomorphology 
446 
4 
3 
1 
1 
Springs* AND Restoration AND 
Stabilization  
27 
2 
0 
2 
2 
Springs* AND Restoration AND Hydrology 165 
16 
11 
5 
5 
Dec. 29th, 2009 
Springs* AND Conservation AND 
Stabilization 
17 
1 
1 
0 
0 
Springs* AND Management AND 
Geomorphology 
329 
7 
3 
4 
4 
Springs* AND Restoration AND 
Conservation OR Management 
316 
14 
11 
3 
3 
Springs* AND Restoration AND 
Hydrogeology 
101 
6 
6 
0 
0 
Aug. 13th, 2010 
Arid-land Springs AND Riparian AND 
Restoration 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Arid-land Springs AND Riparian AND 
Restoration AND Management 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
 
3) GeoScienceWorld GSW 
Search  
Total  
Chosen by 
Title  
Dups  
Titles not 
returned 
before 
Total for Use  
Dec. 29th, 2009 
Springs* AND Restoration  
822 
5 
3 
0 
0  
 
 
 
 

 
48
4) SpringerLink 
Search  
Total  
Chosen by 
Title  
Dups  
Titles 
not 
returned 
before 
Total for 
Possible Use  
Dec. 29th, 2009 
Springs* AND Restoration AND 
Conservation  
959 
3 
2 
1 
1 
Springs* AND Restoration AND 
Hydrogeology 
239 
2 
2 
0 
0 
 
5) JSTOR  
Search  
Total  
Chosen by 
Title  
Dups  
Titles 
not 
returned 
before 
Total for 
Possible Use  
Sept 15th, 2009 
Springs* AND restoration AND Prescribed 
burns** 
83 
2 
0 
2 
2 
Dec. 30th, 2009 
Springs* AND Restoration AND 
Conservation  
2268 
2 
2 
0 
0 
Jan. 5th, 2010 
Natural Springs AND Restoration AND 
Conservation  
1866 
5 
0 
5 
5 
Natural Springs OR Riparian Springs OR 
Catchments AND Restoration  
2359 
18 
7 
11 
11 
Jan. 6th, 2010 
Springs* OR Watershed AND Management 
AND Hydrology 
2798 
6 
3 
3 
3 
Springs* OR Riparian Springs AND 
Stabilization AND Geomorphology 
116 
1 
1 
0 
0 
Springs* AND Restoration AND Fencing 
AND Diversion 
11 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Aug. 13th, 2010 
Arid-land AND Springs AND Riparian AND 
Restoration 
32 
1 
1 
0 
0 
 
6) ProQuest-Thesis and Dissertations  
Search  
Total  
Chosen by 
Title  
Dups  
Titles not 
returned 
before 
Total for Use  
Jan. 6th, 2010 
Springs* AND Restoration 
137 
1 
0 
1 
1 

 
49
Search  
Total  
Chosen by 
Title  
Dups  
Titles not 
returned 
before 
Total for Use  
Springs* AND Conservation 
299 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Springs* AND Management 
1621 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Springs* AND Restoration AND 
Hydrology 
60 
1 
0 
1 
1 
Springs* AND Restoration AND 
Stabilization AND Geomorphology 
0 – no 
documents 
found 
Springs* AND Stabilization AND 
Geomorphology 
0 – no 
documents 
found 
Springs* AND Restoration AND 
Stabilization 
0 – no 
documents 
found 
Springs* AND Restoration AND 
Geomorphology 
0 – no 
documents 
found 
Springs* AND Fencing AND Diversion 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Springs* AND Restoration AND Fencing 
AND Diversion 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
Springs* AND Prescribed Burns§  
58 
1 
0 
1 
1 
Springs* AND Restoration AND 
Prescribed Burns§  
167 
1 
1 
0 
0 
Springs* AND Restoration 
137 
1 
1 
0 
0 
Aug. 13th, 2010 
Springs* (OR Riparian Springs OR Natural 
Springs) AND Arid-land OR Arid land 
AND Restoration 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
 
7) Academic Search Complete 
Search  
Total  
Chosen by 
Title  
Dups  
Titles not 
returned 
before  
Total for Use  
Jan 11th, 2010 
Springs* AND Restoration AND 
Conservation 
102 
1 
0 
1 
1 
Springs* AND Restoration AND 
Management 
132 
1 
1 
0 
0 
Springs*  AND Watershed AND 
Restoration AND Management 
22 
3 
1 
2 
2 
Springs* AND Restoration AND Prescribed 
burns  
16 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Springs* AND Restoration AND Wildfire 
OR Natural Fire 
9 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Springs* AND Restoration AND Hydrology 24 
1 
1 
0 
0 
Springs* AND Restoration AND 
Stabilization AND Geomorphology 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 

 
50
Search  
Total  
Chosen by 
Title  
Dups  
Titles not 
returned 
before  
Total for Use  
Springs* AND Restoration AND Fencing 
OR Enclosure 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Springs* AND Restoration AND Diversion 6 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Aug. 13th, 2010 
Springs* AND Arid-land OR Arid land 
AND Restoration  
54 (came 
back with 
over 1million 
titles, so 
refined to 
Academic 
Journals and 
Invertebrate 
communities) 
1 
1 
0 
0 
 
8) Forest Science Database (Ovid) 
Search  
Total  
Chosen by 
Title  
Dups  
Titles not 
returned 
before  
Total for Use  
Sept 15th, 2009 
Springs* AND restoration AND Prescribed 
burns** 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Jan 11th, 2010 
Springs* (OR Natural Springs) AND 
Restoration 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
 
9) ISI Web of Science  
Search  
Total  
Chosen by 
Title  
Dups  
Titles not 
returned 
before 
Total for Use  
Jan 11th, 2010 
Springs* AND Restoration  
70 
2 
2 
0 
0 
Riparian AND Restoration AND 
Conservation 
244 
2 
2 
1 
1 
Natural Springs AND Restoration AND 
Conservation AND Management 
6 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Catchment AND Restoration AND 
Conservation AND Management 
72 
1 
1 
0 
0 
Watershed AND Restoration AND 
Conservation AND Management 
97 
2 
1 
1 
1 
Springs AND Restoration AND Prescribed 
burns 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Springs AND Restoration AND wildfire 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Springs AND Restoration AND natural fire 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Springs AND Restoration AND Enclosure 
OR Fencing 
996 
1 
1 
0 
0 
Jan 12th, 2010 
Springs AND Restoration AND 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 

 
51
Search  
Total  
Chosen by 
Title  
Dups  
Titles not 
returned 
before 
Total for Use  
Geomorphology 
Springs AND Restoration AND Stabilization 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Springs AND Restoration AND Hydrology 4 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Aug 13th, 2010 
Springs* AND Arid land OR Arid-land 
AND Restoration AND Monitoring 
360 
1 
1 
0 
0 
 
10) Google Scholar search   
(Restricted search in Biology, Life Sciences, and Environmental Science) 
Search  
Total  
Chosen by 
Title  
Dups  
Titles not 
returned 
before  
Total for Use  
Jan 12th, 2010 
Springs* (AND Riparian AND Watershed 
AND Catchment) AND Restoration AND 
Conservation AND Management 
1470 
7 
1 
7 
7 
Springs* (AND natural springs) AND 
Restoration AND Hydrology AND 
Geomorphology AND Stabilization 
1030 
7 
5 
2 
2 
Jan 13th, 2010 
Springs* AND Restoration AND Prescribed 
burns AND Natural fire AND Wildfire 
2090 (only 
displayed 
first 1000) 
6 
1 
5 
5 
Springs* AND Restoration AND Diversion 
AND Fencing AND Enclosure 
290 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Aug 13th, 2010 
Springs* AND Arid-land AND Restoration 
AND Riparian 
407 
3 
3 
0 
0 
 
11) USDA Forest Service's TreeSearch  
Search  
Total  
Chosen by 
Title  
Dups  
Titles not 
returned 
before  
Total for Use  
Jan 13th, 2010 
Springs AND Riparian AND Restoration 
1305 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Springs AND Watershed AND Restoration 1816 
0 
0 
0 
0 
   
13) Wilson OmniFile Search  
Search  
Total  
Chosen by 
Title  
Dups  
Titles not 
returned 
before  
Total for Use  
Jan 13th, 2010 
Springs* AND Restoration AND 
97 
0 
0 
0 
0 

 
52
Search  
Total  
Chosen by 
Title  
Dups  
Titles not 
returned 
before  
Total for Use  
Conservation 
Riparian Springs AND Restoration AND 
Management 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Springs AND Watershed AND Restoration 8 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Springs AND Catchment AND Restoration 0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Natural Springs AND Restoration AND 
Hydrology 
0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Springs AND Restoration AND 
Geomorphology 
0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Natural Springs AND Restoration AND 
Stabilization 
0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
12) ERI Electronic Library Search  
Search  
Total  
Chosen by 
Title  
Dups  
Titles not 
returned 
before  
Total for Use  
Jan 27th, 2010 
Springs* AND Restoration AND 
Conservation 
42 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Riparian Springs AND Restoration AND 
Management 
26 
3 
3 
0 
0 
Natural Springs AND Watershed AND 
Restoration  
25 
1 
1 
0 
0 
Springs AND Catchment AND Restoration 4 
1 
1 
0 
0 
Springs* AND Restoration AND Prescribed 
burns§ 
21 
1 
1 
0 
0 
 
13) NAU School of Forestry Publication Library 
Search  
Total  
Chosen by 
Title  
Dups  
Titles not 
returned 
before 
Total for Use  
Jan 27th, 2010 
Springs* AND Restoration AND 
Conservation AND Management 
0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Springs* AND Restoration AND Prescribed 
burns 
0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
14) Arizona Water Protection Fund Online Documents and reports 
Search  
Total  
Chosen by 
Title  
Dups  
Titles not 
returned 
before  
Total for Use  
Jan 27th, 2010 
No search terms, just looked at what was 
available 
6 
6 
3 
3 
3 
 

 
53
15) Rocky Mountain Research Station online publications 
Search  
Total  
Chosen by 
Title  
Dups  
Titles not 
returned 
before  
Total for Use  
Jan 27th, 2010 
No search terms, just looked at  
what was available 
1 
1 
0 
1 
1 
 

 
54
Appendix C. Listing of unevaluated studies with IV category Quality of Evidence 
Classification (Pullin & Knight 2003). 
 
Study 
Evidence 
Quality 
Category  
Author(s): 
Publication 
Year: 
Restoration Project Name: 
Reasoning for Evidence 
Category Rating: 
IV 
Natural 
Channel 
Design, Inc. 
2008 
AWPF Grant Projects 
Evaluation Final Report, Phase 
II: Case Studies, Case Study: 
Lynx Creek Restoration at 
Sediment Trap #2 Grant No: 
03-117WPF 
This report did not provide 
details about restoration and 
monitoring; unable to make 
full assessment. 
IV 
Natural 
Channel 
Design, Inc. 
2008 
AWPF Grant Projects 
Evaluation Final Report, Phase 
II: Case Studies, Case Study: 
Riparian and Watershed 
Enhancement on the A7 
Ranch-Lower San Pedro River 
Grant No.: 99-069WPF 
This project assessment report 
did not provide detail about the 
initial restoration methods and 
monitoring; not enough 
information to determine 
restoration success. 
IV 
Natural 
Channel 
Design, Inc. 
2008 
AWPF Grant Projects 
Evaluation Final Report, Phase 
II: Case Studies, Case Study: 
Watershed Improvements to 
Restore Riparian and Aquatic 
Habitat at Muleshoe Ranch 
Grant No.: 97-035WPF 
Unable to make full 
assessment because report was 
missing information. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
55
Appendix D. Summary of criteria for successful restoration met and left undetermined.  
 
 
Criteria for successful restoration met  
 
 
 
Study 
Character-
istic 
Assemblage 
Native 
species 
present in 
greatest 
feasible 
extent 
Functional 
groups for 
continued 
development/         
stability 
Sustain-able 
for 
reproduct-
ion 
Normal 
function-
ing 
condition 
Integrated 
into 
surround-
ing 
landscape 
No or 
limited 
threats 
Resilient  
to natural 
disturb-
ances 
Self-
sustain-
ing 
Number 
of met 
criteria 
Number 
of failed 
criteria 
Number 
of 
undeter-
mined 
criteria 
Anderson et al 
(2003), Clover 
Springs 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
6 
3 
0 
AWPF (2001), 
Bingham 
Cienega 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
 
 
 
 
Yes 
4 
1 
4 
Brunson et al 
(2001), 
Muleshoe 
No 
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
5 
2 
2 
GCWC (2010) 
Pakoon Springs 
Rehabilitation 
Final Report 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
8 
1 
0 
Katz (2010), San 
Pedro Riparian 
Areas 
No 
No 
Yes 
 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
 
4 
3 
2 
Kodric-Brown 
and Brown 
(2007), Ash 
Meadows 
Springs, NV and 
Dalhousie 
Spring, Australia 
 
No 
 
No 
No 
 
 
 
No 
0 
4 
5 
Long and 
Endfield (2000), 
White Springs 
 
 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
5 
0 
4 
Long et al 
(2004), Soldier 
Springs 
 
 
Yes 
Yes 
 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
6 
0 
3 

 
56
 
Criteria for successful restoration met  
 
 
 
Study 
Character-
istic 
Assemblage 
Native 
species 
present in 
greatest 
feasible 
extent 
Functional 
groups for 
continued 
development/         
stability 
Sustain-able 
for 
reproduct-
ion 
Normal 
function-
ing 
condition 
Integrated 
into 
surround-
ing 
landscape 
No or 
limited 
threats 
Resilient  
to natural 
disturb-
ances 
Self-
sustain-
ing 
Number 
of met 
criteria 
Number 
of failed 
criteria 
Number 
of 
undeter-
mined 
criteria 
Muelbauer et al 
(2008), Fossil 
Creek 
Yes 
 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
Yes 
 
Yes 
5 
0 
4 
Natural Channel 
Design, Inc 
(2008), Brown 
Springs 
 
No 
 
 
No 
No 
No 
 
 
0 
4 
5 
Natural Channel 
Design, Inc 
(2008), Clover 
Springs 
 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
 
Yes 
Yes 
 
Yes 
5 
1 
3 
Natural Channel 
Design, Inc 
(2008), Hart 
Prairie 
 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
No 
 
 
3 
3 
3 
Natural Channel 
Design, Inc 
(2008), 
Hoxworth 
Springs 
 
 
 
 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
2 
3 
4 
Springer et al 
(1999), 
Hoxworth 
Springs 
 
 
 
 
 
Yes 
Yes 
 
 
2 
0 
7 
Weissenfluh 
(2007), 
Jackrabbit 
Springs 
No 
 
Yes 
Yes 
 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
No 
4 
3 
2 

 
57
Appendix E. Springs restorations project summaries (*ND indicated no data): 
 
Author(s): 
Anderson, Diana, Abe Springer, Jeff Kennedy, Willie Odem, Laura DeWald, and Dick Fleishman 
Restoration Project Name: 
Verde River Headwaters Restoration Demonstration Project: Final Report, Arizona Water Protection Fund Grant 
No.98-059, 2003 
Study Category (Pullin & 
Knight 2003) 
II-2 
Study Objective: 
1) Develop and implement a channel stabilization and wetland protection plan for the Clover Springs reach of Forty-
four Canyon. 2) Determine the cause of the valley incision and develop an understanding of the local 
geomorphology in order to contribute to a long-term mitigation plan. 3) Develop outreach and public information 
products to transfer the results of the demonstration project to the public. 4) Revitalize the wet meadow, and to 
investigate the long-term geomorphic history of the channel 
Springs Descriptions: 
Name(s) 
Clover Springs 
Type(s): 
Ephemeral Rheocrene 
Location(s): 
Downstream from the State Highway 87 crossing to approx. 0.5 miles downstream, in Forty-four Canyon; NAD83 
UTM: N 3818313.75, E 466715.48 
Pre-Intervention 
Impacts/Disturbances: 
Roads w/in 100 
m?  
Flow diversion 
or culvert? 
Alteration to 
springs source? 
Agriculture? 
Grazing? 
Recreation? 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Year Restoration 
Completed 
2003 
Intervention(s) (i.e., 
Restoration Actions): 
1) Removal of existing structures, reshaping and redirecting of the channel, and the use of low impact structures to 
encourage natural channel stability; 2) The springs protected by maintaining or improving the channel grade; 3) 
Stream stabilization by construction of sinuous bankfull channel and connection to the original floodplain; 4) Re-
vegetation of disturbed uplands and in the newly created channel with the overall objective of revitalizing the plant 
community of the meadow and to improve surface stability. 
Focused Site 
Measurements: 
1) Spring discharge, 2) high flow, 3) Water temperature, 4) Runoff discharge in Dirtyneck and Fourtyfour Canyons, 
5) Channel stability, 6) Percent aerial cover of plant species and abiotic material. 
Target Species: 
Plant community of the wet-meadow, i.e., riparian areas and terrestrial areas  
Measured impacts of 
restoration: 
Hydrology 
 
Geomorphology 
No to little change along restored longitudinal profiles 
Invertebrate/Vertebrate Species 
 
Vegetation 
1) Improvement in proportion of riparian and terrestrial species; 2) Not much change in species; 3) Slightly more 
species in terrestrial plots; 4) Slightly greater grass cover in terrestrial plots; 5) Greater exotic grass and forb species 
cover than native; 6) More native species than exotic in terrestrial plots compared to riparian; 7) Decrease in popr  
Monitoring duration: 
Every four to six weeks for surface water and once every 3 years for channel stability for a total of 4 years 
Post-restoration 
actions/assessments: 
Outreach products include two kiosks at the site, describing the stabilization activities as well as a 25-minute 
education video available through NAU's Bilby Research Center (ISBN 0-9718786-4-1) 
Objectives Met (yes/no)? 
Yes 
Quality Assurance 
measures: 
Yes 
Criteria for successful 
restoration met (yes/no)? 
Characteristic 
Assemblage 
Native species 
present in 
greatest 
feasible extent 
Functional 
groups for 
continued 
development/  
stability of 
restored 
ecosystem 
Sustainable for 
reproduction 
Normal 
functioning 
condition 
Integrated 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
No or limited 
threats 
Resilient to 
natural 
disturbances 
Self-sustaining 
 
 
  
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
 
 
  
Total criteria for successful 
restoration met: 
6 - 6/9 = .67 = 67% 
Evaluation of Project 
Monitoring does not address long-term changes vegetation. Overall, project was successful in restoring channel 
stability, but no attention was made to invertebrate species or changes in hydrogeology; Overall score =6/9 = 67% 
successful based on criteria.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
58
Author(s): 
Arizona Water Protection Fund 
Restoration Project 
Name: 
Bingham Cienega Riparian Restoration Project, Grant No: 97-040WPF 
Study Category (Pullin & 
Knight 2003) 
II-2 
Study Objective: 
1) Promote long term re-establishment of deciduous riparian woodland, sacaton grassland and mesquite woodland 
in abandoned agricultural fields; and 2) Develop practical techniques for promoting establishment of native plants 
that either does not require irrigation or that require only infrequent irrigation. 
Springs Descriptions: 
Name(s) 
Bingham Cienega 
Type(s): 
Perennial spring-fed marsh, local aquifer 
Location(s): 
Central basin of San Pedro River, between Benson and Pomerence, and San Manuel and Mammoth, AZ, 2000 feet 
west of lower San Pedro River and 1/4 mile north of Reddington; Township 11 south, Range 18 east, sections 22, 23, 26 
and 27. 
Pre-Intervention 
Impacts/Disturbances: 
Roads w/in 100 
m?  
Flow diversion 
or culvert? 
Alteration to springs 
source? 
Agriculture? 
Grazing? 
Recreation? 
Yes 
Yes 
N/A 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Year Restoration 
Completed 
2001 
Intervention(s) (i.e., 
Restoration Actions): 
1) Install irrigation system; 2) Re-vegetation – native grasses, trees, and shrubs; 3) Mowed fields and used Round Up 
to spot spray (mostly Johnson grass) to control exotic species competition; 4) Livestock exclosures with electrical 
fencing. 
Focused Site 
Measurements: 
1) Ground water depth; 2) precipitation; 3) stream flow; 4) re-vegetation success: presence of flowering, height, and 
basal diameter; 5) Bird use 
Target Species: 
Giant sacaton (Sporobolis wrightii); Sand dropseed (Sporobolis crytandrus); Sideoats gramma (Bouteloua 
curtipendula); Ash (Frazinus velutina); Walnut (Juglans major); Mesquite (Prosopis velutina); Hackberry (Celtus 
reticulata) 
Measured impacts of 
restoration: 
Hydrology 
None reported 
Geomorphology 
None reported 
Invertebrate/Vertebrate Species 
None reported 
Vegetation 
High survivorship and flowering frequency of target species in first growing season; Survivorship decreased (average 
69.8%) in second growing season 
Monitoring duration: 
4 times per year over 3 years 
Post-restoration 
actions/assessments: 
None reported 
Objectives Met (yes/no)? 
Yes 
Quality Assurance 
measures: 
 
Criteria for successful 
restoration met (yes/no)? 
Characteristic 
Assemblage 
Native species 
present in 
greatest 
feasible 
extent 
Functional groups for 
continued development/  
stability of restored 
ecosystem 
Sustainable for 
reproduction 
Normal 
functioning 
condition 
Integrated 
  
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
 
 
  
No or limited 
threats 
Resilient to 
natural 
disturbances 
Self-sustaining 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Yes 
 
 
 
Total criteria for 
successful restoration 
met: 
4 
Evaluation of Project 
All criteria could not be determined.  
 
 
 

 
59
Author(s): 
Brunson, Ed., Dave Gori, and Dana Backer  
Restoration Project 
Name: 
AWPF Project Number 97-035 Watershed improvement to restore riparian and aquatic habitat on the Muleshoe 
Ranch CMS, Final Report 
Study Category (Pullin & 
Knight 2003) 
II-2 
Study Objective: 
1) Conduct prescribed burns to improve watershed condition (2200 acres/year for a total of 6600 acres); change the 
composition and structure of watershed vegetation by increasing the frequency and cover of perennial grasses, 
especially mid- to tall-statured species and by decreasing the cover of shrubs. 2) Construct additional perimeter 
fencing to exclude trespass livestock from Bass Creek and its watershed. 3) Continue to expand ongoing monitoring 
program for watershed vegetation, riparian vegetation, streamflow, floodplain geomorphology, native fish and 
aquatic habitat. 4) Post signs at the downstream boundary of Muleshoe CMA in Hot Springs wash to discourage off-
road vehicle (ROV) access into lower Hot Springs riparian area. 5) Demonstrate how watershed management 
techniques can improve both riparian habitats and associated rangeland. 
Springs Descriptions: 
Name(s) 
Hot Springs Watershed 
Type(s): 
 
Location(s): 
Galiuro Mountains, northern Cochise County and southern Graham County, southeastern AZ 
Pre-Intervention 
Impacts/Disturbances: 
Roads w/in 100 
m? 
Flow diversion 
or culvert? 
Alteration to springs 
source? 
Agriculture? 
Grazing? 
Recreation? 
Yes 
 
 
 
Yes 
Yes 
Year Restoration 
Completed 
2000 
Intervention(s) (i.e., 
Restoration Actions): 
1) Prescribed burns to upland vegetation through use for aerial ignition; 2) Construct 3 miles of fence on the 
southeast side of the CMA to keep neighboring livestock from entering upper Bass Canyon riparian area; 3) Install 
signs at 10 locations where ORV access has been a problem. 
Focused Site 
Measurements: 
Upland and riparian vegetation (canopy cover by species, abundance, stream flow, floodplain and channel 
geomorphology, aquatic habitat and native fish populations. 
Target Species: 
Gila chub (Gila intermedia) 
Measured impacts of 
restoration: 
Hydrology 
No change in water quality. Perennial stream flow decreased due to lack of precipitation. 
Geomorphology 
Undercut bank increased 
Invertebrate/Vertebrate Species 
Overall increase in chub and native fish populations (captured/year and density); Negative trend in fish density 
however in Double R, and may have decreased since 1998 or 1999 in Hot Springs and Wildcat Creeks. 
Vegetation 
Shrubs: Single burn reduced cover by average of 77% to 83, but surviving shrubs increased immediately; Repeated 
burns reduced cover 40.8%; Mesquite and snakeweed appears easily killed by fire. Grasses and herbs:  Increase in 
abundance and cover of annual and perennial grasses and herbs; Double R burn grasses recovered to pre-burn 
levels one growing season and increased by 25% two growing seasons; annual grasses increased in both average and 
below average rainfall years. Ground cover: Total ground cover (little and live basal cover) increased; Litter failed to 
recover completely in both burns to pre-burn levels after two growing seasons; Basal cover increased after two 
growing seasons. Riparian Forest Structure: Target sapling and sapling plus tree densities were met and exceeded 
by 1998; Adult sapling densities increased. Aquatic Habitat: Total instream cover, and emergent, floating and 
overhanging vegetation, riparian tree overstory coverage, and maximum depth of all aquatic macrohabitats 
increased from 1994 to 1999; woody debris declined; undercut bank increased. 
Number of times 
monitored: 
3 years; where baseflow was monthly and 2 times per year for fence restoration 
Post-restoration 
actions/assessments: 
Continuing monitoring; Plan modified based on results to re-burn units once every 8-10 years to decrease shrubs 
Objectives Met (yes/no)? 
Yes 
Quality Assurance 
measures: 
Yes 
Criteria for successful 
restoration met (yes/no)? 
Characteristic 
Assemblage 
Native species 
present in 
greatest 
feasible extent 
Functional groups 
for continued 
development/   
stability of restored 
ecosystem 
Sustainable for 
reproduction 
Normal 
functioning 
condition 
Integrated 
No 
Yes* 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
  
No or limited 
threats 
Resilient to 
natural 
disturbances 
Self-sustaining 
 
 
 
  
Yes 
Yes 
No** 
 
 
 
Total criteria for 
successful restoration 
met: 
4 
Evaluation of Project 
*In 2000, Chub density and relative (%) abundance increased in the highest numbers and greatest relative 
abundance since monitoring began. **Not self-sustaining because prescribe burns are recommended to continue to 
maintain vegetation balance. 
 
 
 

 
60
 
 

 
61
Author(s): 
Grand Canyon Wildlands Council, Inc. 
Restoration Project 
Name: 
Pakoon Springs Rehabilitation Final Report 
Study Category (Pullin & 
Knight 2003) 
II-2 
Study Objective: 
1) Create initial hydrologic, soil and vegetation survey; 2) Develop rehabilitation plan; 3) Complete ~10-acre pilot 
rehabilitation; 4) Monitor rehabilitation progress with rephotography and vegetation surveys; 5) Inform public and 
partners through volunteer activities, presentations, and site visits. 
Springs Descriptions: 
Name(s) 
Pakoon Springs 
Type(s): 
Hillslope and Limnocrene 
Location(s): 
Mojave Desert, Arizona Strip, Grand Canyon Parashant National Monument 
Pre-Intervention 
Impacts/Disturbances: 
Roads w/in 100 
m? 
Flow 
diversion or 
culvert? 
Alteration to springs 
source? 
Agriculture? 
Grazing? 
Recreation? 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Year Restoration 
Completed 
2010 
Intervention(s) 
(Restoration Actions): 
1) Recreate spring mounds/hillside seeps and outflow channels; 2) Removal or reduction of berms constructed from 
previous owners; 3) Landscape re-shapped around spring sources; 4) Topographic profile recontoured; 5) Non-native 
plant and animal species eradicated; 6) Areas were revegetated by translocation local native plant stock; 7) Entire 
area was fenced to exclude feral burros and cattle; 8) Undesired road was removed; 9) Agricultural fields 
recontoured. 
Focused Site 
Measurements: 
Hydrologic: discharge, field water-quality (electrical conductivity, pH, and temp), inorganic lab analyses, and air temp 
at springs outflow points and Vegetation. 
Target Species: 
 
Measured impacts of 
restoration: 
Hydrology 
 
Geomorphology 
Recontouring eliminated large bullfrog population and buried large cattail stand 
Invertebrate/Vertebrate Species 
High avian species richness and densities 
Vegetation 
Low mortality, vigorous growth, and natural vegetation recolonization in all areas; natural recolonization of native 
species 
Duration of monitoring: 
 
Post-restoration 
actions/assessments: 
3 years 
Objectives Met (yes/no)? 
Yes 
Quality Assurance 
measures: 
Yes  
Criteria for successful 
restoration met (yes/no)? 
Characteristic 
Assemblage 
Native species 
present in 
greatest 
feasible 
extent 
Functional groups for 
continued development/   
stability of restored 
ecosystem 
Sustainable 
for 
reproduction 
Normal 
functioning 
condition 
Integrated 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No or limited 
threats 
Resilient to 
natural 
disturbances 
Self-sustaining 
 
 
  
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
 
 
  
Total criteria for 
successful restoration 
met: 
8 
Evaluation of Project 
Very successful project with included recommendations for continued monitoring and maintenance. Definitely high-
quality example. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
62
Author(s): 
Katz, Dr. Gabriell 
Restoration Project 
Name: 
Revised Final Report: Test of Riparian Recovery Following Reduced Groundwater Pumping, Lower San Pedro River, 
AWPF Grant #08-151WPF 
Study Category (Pullin & 
Knight 2003) 
II-2 
Study Objective: 
Overall: Test the effectiveness of a hydrologic-based approach to riparian ecosystem restoration on the lower San 
Pedro River through, 1) Document trends in controlling variables; 2) Document short-term indicators of riparian 
ecosystem change; 3) Document long-term indicators of riparian ecosystem change; and 4) Assess patterns of 
change and vegetation-hydrology relationships. Restoration target was not defined as a return to pre‐entrenchment 
conditions, but as attainment of wetter conditions on the post‐entrenchment river and floodplain. 
Springs Descriptions: 
Name(s) 
 
Type(s): 
 
Location(s): 
San Pedro River, Sonora, Mexico to Gila River, Winkelman, AZ 
Pre-Intervention 
Impacts/Disturbances: 
Roads w/in 100 
m? 
Flow 
diversion or 
culvert? 
Alteration to springs 
source? 
Agriculture? 
Grazing? 
Recreation? 
 
 
 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Year Restoration 
Completed 
2007 
Intervention(s) 
(Restoration Actions): 
Reduced pumping rates to negligible levels 
Focused Site 
Measurements: 
Vegetation and water table level 
Target Species: 
 
Measured impacts of 
restoration: 
Hydrology 
 
Geomorphology 
 
Invertebrate/Vertebrate Species 
 
Vegetation 
Perennial‐flow reference sites had higher herbaceous cover, higher species richness, lower weighted wetland 
indicator scores, and higher relative cover of hydric perennials and hydric annuals than non‐perennial sites; 
non‐perennial sites had higher relative cover of mesic perennials and xeric annuals; average relative cover of 
non‐native species was high, on the order of 70%, and did not differ between perennial and non‐perennial reference 
sites; increased floodplain proportion of forest and woodland, and increased basal area of cottonwood and willow; 
declines in total floodplain woody stem density, basal area, and vegetation volume were generally more pronounced 
at reference sites than at restoration sites. 
Duration of monitoring: 
7 years 
Post-restoration 
actions/assessments: 
Continued monitoring is needed to determine whether hydric annuals will be replaced by hydric perennials at H&E 
Farm in response to the shift towards more permanent water availability. 
Objectives Met (yes/no)? 
Yes 
Quality Assurance 
measures: 
 
Criteria for successful 
restoration met (yes/no)? 
Characteristic 
Assemblage 
Native species 
present in 
greatest 
feasible 
extent 
Functional groups for 
continued development/     
stability of restored 
ecosystem 
Sustainable 
for 
reproduction 
Normal 
functioning 
condition 
Integrated 
No 
No 
Yes 
 
No 
Yes 
No or limited 
threats 
Resilient to 
natural 
disturbances 
Self-sustaining 
 
 
  
Yes 
Yes 
 
 
 
  
Total criteria for 
successful restoration 
met: 
4 
Evaluation of Project 
Project data indicate that restoration goals for the streamside herbaceous community have largely been achieved at 
Three Links Farm, but not at H&E Farm. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
63
Author(s): 
Kodric-Brown, Astrid, and James H Brown 
Restoration Project 
Name: 
Native fishes, exotic mammals, and the conservation of desert springs 
Study Category (Pullin & 
Knight 2003) 
II-3 
Study Objective: 
Document the history and current conservation status of spring systems in some detail and then draw some general 
lessons for the conservation and management of desert spring ecosystems. 
Springs Descriptions: 
Name(s) 
Ash Meadows Springs (AMS) = Devils Hole Spring, School Spring, and Mexican Spring; Dalhousie Springs (DHS) 
Type(s): 
 
Location(s): 
Amargosa River basin of western Nevada, USA; Northern South Australia 
Pre-Intervention 
Impacts/Disturbances: 
Roads w/in 100 
m? 
Flow 
diversion or 
culvert? 
Alteration to springs 
source? 
Agriculture? 
Grazing? 
Recreation? 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Year Restoration 
Completed 
AMS: 1984; DHS: 1995 
Intervention(s) (i.e., 
Restoration Actions): 
Ash Meadows: 1) Fencing of entire area to exclude all feral and domestic livestock; 2) Removal of exotic plant and 
animal species. Dalhousie: 1) Removal of feral livestock; 2) Fence major springs; 3) Removal of exotic plant and animal 
species; 4) Limit tourist traffic.  
Focused Site 
Measurements: 
1) Aquatic and riparian vegetation production; 2) Native fish species. 
Target Species: 
AMS: Pupfish and Amargosa toad (Bufo nelsoni).  
Measured impacts of 
restoration: 
Hydrology 
Ash Meadows: Reduction in open-water habitat and fish populations.                                                                                                  
Dalhousie: 1) Source pools and out-flows heavily overgrown; 2) Anoxic water due to large quantities of dead and 
decomposing vegetation; 3) Open-water only in source pools and major outflows of largest springs. 
Geomorphology 
Ash Meadows: Reduction in open-water habitat and fish populations.                                                                                                  
Dalhousie: Open-water only in source pools and major outflows of largest springs. 
Invertebrate/Vertebrate Species 
Dalhousie: In the largest springs, fish assemblages exhibited a near-perfect nested subset structure with five species; 
18 extinctions and two colonization’s recorded in 2003-majority of extinctions in small springs. 
Vegetation 
Ash Meadows: Increase in aquatic and riparian vegetation                                                                                                                        
Dalhousie: 1) Source pools and out-flows heavily overgrown; 2) Anoxic water due to large quantities of dead and 
decomposing vegetation. 
Monitoring duration: 
AMS: On-going; DHS: one time surveys on 1991 and 2003 
Post-restoration 
actions/assessments: 
AMS: Desire to remove emergent plants and preserve open water 
Objectives Met (yes/no)? 
Kodric-Brown and Borwn’s study objectives were met. Objectives of restoration projects not known.  
Quality Assurance 
measures: 
No 
Criteria for successful 
restoration met (yes/no)? 
Characteristic 
Assemblage 
Native species 
present in 
greatest 
feasible 
extent 
Functional groups for 
continued development/   
stability of restored 
ecosystem 
Sustainable 
for 
reproduction 
Normal 
functioning 
condition 
Integrated 
 
No 
 
No 
No 
  
No or limited 
threats 
Resilient to 
natural 
disturbances 
Self-sustaining 
 
 
  
 
 
No 
 
 
  
Total criteria for 
successful restoration 
met: 
0 
Evaluation of Project 
This report was an evaluation on the restoration of these sites by a third party. Total exclusion of livestock appears to 
have led to the demise of these restorations. However, restoration has continued at Ash Meadows since this 
publication. Was only able to determine 4 out of 9 criteria. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
64
Author(s): 
Long, Jonathan W., B. Mae Burnette, Alvin L. Medina, and Joshua L. Parker 
Restoration Project 
Name: 
Restoration of Soldier Spring: and isolated habitat for native Apache trout 
Study Category (Pullin & 
Knight 2003) 
II-2 
Study Objective: 
Repair degradated channels through reforming riffle features 
Springs Descriptions: 
Name(s) 
Soldier Spring 
Type(s): 
Hillslope 
Location(s): 
White Mountain Apache Reservation, eastern Arizona 
Pre-Intervention 
Impacts/Disturbances: 
Roads w/in 100 
m? 
Flow 
diversion or 
culvert? 
Alteration to springs 
source? 
Agriculture? 
Grazing? 
Recreation? 
 
 
 
 
Yes 
  
Year Restoration 
Completed 
2000 
Intervention(s) 
(Restoration Actions): 
Fencing exclosures, sedge transplanting , placement of rock riffle formations 
Focused Site 
Measurements: 
 
Target Species: 
Apache trout (Oncorhynchus apache) 
Measured impacts of 
restoration: 
Hydrology 
 
Geomorphology 
Channel bed refilled, water depth and width increased, percent fine gravels doubled and size class represents 
preferred substrate for Apache trout; long pools maintained above riffle formations and short pools below. 
Invertebrate/Vertebrate Species 
Trout abundance rebounded 
Vegetation 
Streamside vegetation growth vigorous, with transplanted sedges bounding to streambed and climbing higher along 
banks; riffle structures interwoven with aquatic veg including butterbup (Ranunculus aquatilis), mannagrass (Glyceria 
spp.), and sedges (Carex spp.); flow concentrated by aquatic plants making gravel substrates 
Duration of monitoring: 
4 years 
Post-restoration 
actions/assessments: 
Deepening pools could improve conditions for trout; Fish surveying methods were different in 2002 
Objectives Met (yes/no)? 
Yes 
Quality Assurance 
measures: 
 
Criteria for successful 
restoration met (yes/no)? 
Characteristic 
Assemblage 
Native species 
present in 
greatest 
feasible 
extent 
Functional groups for 
continued development/     
stability  
Sustainable 
for 
reproduction 
Normal 
functioning 
condition 
Integrated 
 
 
Yes 
Yes 
 
Yes 
No or limited 
threats 
Resilient to 
natural 
disturbances 
Self-sustaining 
 
 
  
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
 
 
  
Total criteria for 
successful restoration 
met: 
6 
Evaluation of Project 
Restoration met 6 out of 9 criteria for successful restoration and also met it's originally stated objectives. Three out 
of the 9 criteria could not be determined. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
65
Author(s): 
Long, Jonathan W. and Delbin Endfield 
Restoration Project 
Name: 
Restoration of White Springs 
Study Category (Pullin & 
Knight 2003) 
III 
Study Objective: 
Restore a culturally and ecologically important spring that had been damaged in the aftermath of a wildfire 
Springs Descriptions: 
Name(s) 
White Springs 
Type(s): 
Limnocrene or rheocrene 
Location(s): 
Cibecue Canyon, White Mountain Apache Reservation 
Pre-Intervention 
Impacts/Disturbances: 
Roads w/in 100 
m? 
Flow 
diversion or 
culvert? 
Alteration to springs 
source? 
Agriculture? 
Grazing? 
Recreation? 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Year Restoration 
Completed 
2000 
Intervention(s) 
(Restoration Actions): 
Rock structures, road closures, fencing and revegetation 
Focused Site 
Measurements: 
 
Target Species: 
 
Measured impacts of 
restoration: 
Hydrology 
Water quality improved - based from visual observation 
Geomorphology 
Channel stabilized and downcutting was reversed; rocks and litter fill the rock structures; pools and riffles reformed 
upstream of rock structures 
Invertebrate/Vertebrate Species 
 
Vegetation 
Spring area became lush with plants including watercress, yellow monkey flower (Mimulus guttatus) and various 
grasses. 
Duration of monitoring: 
 
Post-restoration 
actions/assessments: 
Continued restoration required upstream until watershed conditions stabilize 
Objectives Met (yes/no)? 
Yes 
Quality Assurance 
measures: 
 
Criteria for successful 
restoration met (yes/no)? 
Characteristic 
Assemblage 
Native species 
present in 
greatest 
feasible 
extent 
Functional groups for 
continued 
development/stability of 
restored ecosystem 
Sustainable 
for 
reproduction 
Normal 
functioning 
condition 
Integrated 
 
 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
No or limited 
threats 
Resilient to 
natural 
disturbances 
Self-sustaining 
 
 
  
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
 
 
  
Total criteria for 
successful restoration 
met: 
5 
Evaluation of Project 
Overall successful project however continued restoration is recommended on riffle structures. Was not able to 
determine four of the nine criteria for successful restoration. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
66
Author(s): 
Muehlbauer, Jeffrey D., Carri J LeRoy, Jacqueline M Lovett, Kathleen K Flaccus, Julie K Vlieg, and Jane C Marks 
Restoration Project 
Name: 
Short-term responses of decomposers to flow restoration in Fossil Creek, Arizona, USA 
Study Category (Pullin & 
Knight 2003) 
II-2 
Study Objective: 
To quantify some short-term effects of returning full flow below the Fossil Creek Dam 
Springs Descriptions: 
Name(s) 
Fossil Springs/Fossil Creek 
Type(s): 
Rheocrene 
Location(s): 
West of Strawberry, AZ. Lat 342524.10 Long 1113426.52 
Pre-Intervention 
Impacts/Disturbances: 
Roads w/in 100 
m? 
Flow 
diversion or 
culvert? 
Alteration to springs 
source? 
Agriculture? 
Grazing? 
Recreation? 
No  
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
 Yes 
Year Restoration 
Completed 
2005 
Intervention(s) 
(Restoration Actions): 
Dam decommissioned 
Focused Site 
Measurements: 
Leaf litter decomposition, Macroinvertebrate community attributes fungal biomass, and water quality and chemistry.  
Target Species: 
Populus fremontii and Alnus oblongifolia leaves 
Measured impacts of 
restoration: 
Hydrology 
1) Water below the dam warmed by 9ºC, from 11.6ºC in 2003 to 20.6ºC in 2005; 2) TdS and SpC concentrations below 
the dam in 2005 increased relative to their concentrations in 2003 and in proportion to the above-dam values; 3) pH 
above and below the dam in 2005 both decreased relative to 2003 values, and pH remained lower above in 
comparison to below the dam. 
Geomorphology 
“Below-dam” monitoring site was shallower and narrower before flow restoration 
Invertebrate/Vertebrate Species 
1) Below-dam macroinvertebrate community began to resemble the above-dam species structure- Macroinvertebrate 
assemblages on litterbags exhibited a greater degree of homogeneity and had similar diversity; 2) Ordination of 
macroinvertebrates collected below the dam was still more dispersed than the above-dam community.  
Vegetation 
Fungal biomass at the two sites was nearly equal, and both values were approximately 30% greater than the average 
fungal biomass on leaves located above the dam in 2003 
Monitoring duration: 
18 months in 2003 and 6 months in 2005 
Post-restoration 
actions/assessments: 
 
Objectives Met (yes/no)? 
Yes 
Quality Assurance 
measures: 
 
Criteria for successful 
restoration met (yes/no)? 
Characteristic 
Assemblage 
Native species 
present in 
greatest 
feasible 
extent 
Functional groups for 
continued development/   
stability of restored 
ecosystem 
Sustainable 
for 
reproduction 
Normal 
functioning 
condition 
Integrated 
Yes 
 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
No or limited 
threats 
Resilient to 
natural 
disturbances 
Self-sustaining 
 
 
  
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
 
  
Total criteria for 
successful restoration 
met: 
5 
Evaluation of Project 
This article does not directly report on the restoration efforts; However, these researchers conclude that the 
restoration was successful. Could determine 5 out of the 9 criteria as successful; the other 4 could not determine. 
From the criteria that could be determined, this restoration was 56% successful. This article was considered because 
it is a spring-fed stream. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
67
Author(s): 
Natural Channel Design, Inc. 
Restoration Project 
Name: 
AWPF Grant Projects Evaluation Final Report, Phase II: Case Studies, Case Study: Hoxworth Springs Riparian 
Restoration, Grant No: 96-003WPF 
Study Category (Pullin & 
Knight 2003) 
III 
Study Objective: 
1) Reduce accelerated streambank erosion and soil movement out of the riparian area and to re-establish adequate 
vegetative characteristics to provide channel stability; 2) Monitor changes in the riparian vegetation associated with 
the restoration of the perennial stream; 3) Quantify the amount of spring discharge and surface runoff in the 
proposed restoration area. 
Springs Descriptions: 
Name(s) 
Hoxworth Springs 
Type(s): 
Rheocrene 
Location(s): 
Lake Mary watershed, Coconino National Forest, ~15 miles south of Flagstaff, AZ; Lat 35022495 Long 111342954 
Pre-Intervention 
Impacts/Disturbances: 
Roads w/in 100 
m?  
Flow 
diversion or 
culvert? 
Alteration to springs 
source? 
Agriculture? 
Grazing? 
Recreation? 
 
Yes 
 
 
 
  
Year Restoration 
Completed 
ND 
Intervention(s) (i.e., 
Restoration Actions): 
Re-shaped the channel to increase meanders and create banks with 3:1 slope that is connected to floodplain; Seeding 
and riparian plantings growth. 
Focused Site 
Measurements: 
None reported 
Target Species: 
None reported 
Measured impacts of 
restoration: 
Hydrology 
Functioning hydrological conditions. 
Geomorphology 
Re-shaped the channels are a stable with functioning hydrological conditions. 
Invertebrate/Vertebrate Species 
ND 
Vegetation 
Seeding and riparian plantings growth 
Monitoring duration: 
Not reported 
Post-restoration 
actions/assessments: 
The project objectives were successfully completed. 
Objectives Met (yes/no)? 
Yes 
Quality Assurance 
measures: 
None reported 
Criteria for successful 
restoration met (yes/no)? 
Characteristic 
Assemblage 
Native species 
present in 
greatest 
feasible 
extent 
Functional groups for 
continued development/  
stability of restored 
ecosystem 
Sustainable 
for 
reproduction 
Normal 
functioning 
condition 
Integrated 
 
 
 
 
Yes 
Yes 
  
No or limited 
threats 
Resilient to 
natural 
disturbances 
Self-sustaining 
 
 
  
  
No 
No 
No 
 
 
  
Total criteria for 
successful restoration 
met: 
2 
Evaluation of Project 
Initial objectives met, but exclosure was removed and some items are starting to fail. Could be said that the project 
was initially successful.  No reporting on many categories for the criteria for successful restoration, therefore unable 
to make solid analysis of success. From the criteria reported, this project only met 2 out of 9 of the criteria = 22% 
successful. However, only 5 out of 9 criteria could be determined. Therefore, from 5, 2 out of 5 were met = 67% 
successful. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
68
Author(s): 
Natural Channel Design, Inc. 
Restoration Project 
Name: 
AWPF Grant Projects Evaluation Final Report, Phase II: Case Studies, Case Study: Watershed Restoration on a High-
Elevation Riparian Community, Grant No: 98-050WPF 
Study Category (Pullin & 
Knight 2003) 
III 
Study Objective: 
1) Modify watershed conditions to increase and sustain water flows into the riparian community through prescribed 
burning and reducing the density of pines encroaching the wet meadow toward the riparian community; 2) 
Reduce/eliminate stock tanks and an artificial dam in the watershed followed by stream channel restoration; 3) 
Continue and expand the ongoing monitoring of watershed and riparian vegetation, stream flow, and fluvial 
geomorphology; 4) Fence to control grazing of large ungulates to expedite recovery of vegetation composition and 
quality and surface hydrology; 5) Conduct public outreach activities on the concepts of watershed and riparian 
restoration in order to improve public awareness and support for these types of riparian restoration activities. 
Springs Descriptions: 
Name(s) 
Hart Prairie springs 
Type(s): 
Seeps 
Location(s): 
Hart Prairie; Coconino National Forest, Forest Service Road 151, 13 miles north of Flagstaff, AZ, near Nature 
Conservancy 
Pre-Intervention 
Impacts/Disturbances: 
Roads w/in 100 
m?  
Flow 
diversion or 
culvert? 
Alteration to springs 
source? 
Agriculture? 
Grazing? 
Recreation? 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Year Restoration 
Completed 
 
Intervention(s) (i.e., 
Restoration Actions): 
1) Remove stock tanks; 2) Fence sensitive areas with elk exclosures; 3) Thin Ponderosa Pine trees by prescribed fires; 
4) Remove diversion structures. 
Focused Site 
Measurements: 
1) Water quality; 2) understory percent cover; 3) Bebb Willow regeneration 
Target Species: 
Bebb Willow, Sedges and rushes 
Measured impacts of 
restoration: 
Hydrology 
Increased flow and riparian water quantities increased 
Geomorphology 
Flow reconnected to stream from removal of unnamed tank; channel stabilizing 
Invertebrate/Vertebrate Species 
 
Vegetation 
Elk exclosure beneficial in maintaining vegetation; vegetation covering old headcuts to stream are contributing to 
channel stabilization; vegetation rebounding. 
Monitoring duration: 
Monthly (plus 14 years of independent, unfunded monitoring) 
Post-restoration 
actions/assessments: 
Continued work, projects, monitoring, and maintenance contribute immensely to the success of this project. 
Objectives Met (yes/no)? 
Yes 
Quality Assurance 
measures: 
None reported 
Criteria for successful 
restoration met (yes/no)? 
Characteristic 
Assemblage 
Native species 
present in 
greatest 
feasible 
extent 
Functional groups for 
continued development/  
stability of restored 
ecosystem 
Sustainable 
for 
reproduction 
Normal 
functioning 
condition 
Integrated 
 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
  
No or limited 
threats 
Resilient to 
natural 
disturbances 
Self-sustaining 
 
 
  
  
No 
 
 
 
 
  
Total criteria for 
successful restoration 
met: 
3 
Evaluation of Project 
Unable to make full analysis of success; details about criteria for successful restoration is lacking. From what was 
reported, this project scored 3 out of 9 = 33% success. However, this does not adequately represent the project's 
success. If evaluated from the criteria that were reported, project was 50% successful. Objectives of the project were 
met, so that is a success in its own.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
69
Author(s): 
Natural Channel Design, Inc. 
Restoration Project 
Name: 
AWPF Grant Projects Evaluation Final Report, Phase II: Case Studies, Case Study: Verde River Headwaters Riparian 
Restoration Project Grant No.: 98-059WPF 
Study Category (Pullin & 
Knight 2003) 
III 
Study Objective: 
1) Develop and implement channel stabilization and wetland protection plan for Clover Springs/Clover Creek; 2) 
Protect rare upland riparian wetland meadow, stabilize degrading stream channel, and control downstream 
headcuts; 3) Protect springs, improve moisture storage, vegetation, and habitat; 4) Gain knowledge to apply to other 
headcut sites; 5) Determine causes and timing of reach incision to develop long-term restoration strategy; 6)  
Educate public about ecosystem, disturbance, and restoration. 
Springs Descriptions: 
Name(s) 
Clover Springs 
Type(s): 
Ephemeral Rheocrene 
Location(s): 
Downstream from the State Highway 87 crossing to approx. 0.5 miles downstream, in Forty-four Canyon; NAD83 
UTM: N 3818313.75, E 466715.48 
Pre-Intervention 
Impacts/Disturbances: 
Roads w/in 100 
m?  
Flow 
diversion or 
culvert? 
Alteration to springs 
source? 
Agriculture? 
Grazing? 
Recreation? 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Year Restoration 
Completed 
 
Intervention(s) (i.e., 
Restoration Actions): 
1) Fabric seeding; 2) Bank stabilization: bank reshaping on right (5:1) and left bank (3:1); 3) Grade stabilization: large 
rock drop (~5 feet) structure (cross-vane weir); 4) Channel modification: existing channel filled and meander 
increased where possible & road closure. 
Focused Site 
Measurements: 
Vegetation and channel stability 
Target Species: 
Plant community of the wet-meadow, i.e., riparian areas and terrestrial areas  
Measured impacts of 
restoration: 
Hydrology 
 
Geomorphology 
 
Invertebrate/Vertebrate Species 
 
Vegetation 
1) Some species of rushes are harder to establish than others; 2) Hydro-mulching and/or fabric for seed establishment 
worked well; 3) Elk exclosure has protected meadow and allowed vegetation to become vigorous; 4) Sedges and 
rushes recruitment high. 
Monitoring duration: 
Not reported 
Post-restoration 
actions/assessments: 
Vegetation of old road is not as robust as it could be, possibly from compaction over the years. 
Objectives Met (yes/no)? 
Yes  
Quality Assurance 
measures: 
Not reported 
Criteria for successful 
restoration met (yes/no)? 
Characteristic 
Assemblage 
Native species 
present in 
greatest 
feasible 
extent 
Functional groups for 
continued development/  
stability of restored 
ecosystem 
Sustainable 
for 
reproduction 
Normal 
functioning 
condition 
Integrated 
 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
 
Yes 
  
No or limited 
threats 
Resilient to 
natural 
disturbances 
Self-sustaining 
 
 
  
  
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
 
  
Total criteria for 
successful restoration 
met: 
5 
Evaluation of Project 
This project assessment report did not provide detail about the initial restoration methods and monitoring. Project 
objectives were stated as met in the report, therefore successful in that sense. Scored 5 out of 9 = 56% successful; 
However, unable to assign scores to 3 out of 9 criteria. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
70
Author(s): 
Natural Channel Design, Inc. 
Restoration Project 
Name: 
AWPF Grant Projects Evaluation Final Report, Phase II: Case Studies, Case Study: Brown Creek Riparian Restoration 
Grant No: 99-095WPF 
Study Category (Pullin & 
Knight 2003) 
III 
Study Objective: 
1) Improve riparian and aquatic habitat at Brown Spring and along Brown Creek by excluding livestock grazing in the 
area 2) Implement a monitoring program to measure the improvements of vegetative cover and stream bank 
stabilization along Brown Creed riparian corridor. 
Springs Descriptions: 
Name(s) 
Brown Spring 
Type(s): 
 
Location(s): 
Lakeside Ranger District, Fort Apache Reservation, Lat 34025515 Long 109411536 
Pre-Intervention 
Impacts/Disturbances: 
Roads w/in 100 
m?  
Flow 
diversion or 
culvert? 
Alteration to springs 
source? 
Agriculture? 
Grazing? 
Recreation? 
Yes 
 
 
 
Yes 
Yes 
Year Restoration 
Completed 
Not reported 
Intervention(s) 
(Restoration Actions): 
1) Livestock exclosure; 2) Manage native riparian and aquatic communities 
Focused Site 
Measurements: 
 
Target Species: 
 
Measured impacts of 
restoration: 
Hydrology 
 
Geomorphology 
 
Invertebrate/Vertebrate Species 
 
Vegetation 
Exclosure effective in inhibiting use which allows for riparian corridor to heal 
Monitoring duration: 
Not reported 
Post-restoration 
actions/assessments: 
1) Buck and pole fencing is not very effective, does not hold up well; 2) Not enough OHV restrictions, signage is not 
enough; 3) Native riparian vegetation planting would have been useful in replenishing the area; 4) Seeding uplands 
while grazing is taking place is ineffective; 5) Relocation of unofficial campsite may be useful to limit OHV use.  
Objectives Met (yes/no)? 
No 
Quality Assurance 
measures: 
Not reported 
Criteria for successful 
restoration met (yes/no)? 
Characteristic 
Assemblage 
Native species 
present in 
greatest 
feasible 
extent 
Functional groups for 
continued development/  
stability of restored 
ecosystem 
Sustainable 
for 
reproduction 
Normal 
functioning 
condition 
Integrated 
 
No 
 
 
No 
No 
No or limited 
threats 
Resilient to 
natural 
disturbances 
Self-sustaining 
 
 
  
No 
 
 
 
 
  
Total criteria for 
successful restoration 
met: 
0 
Evaluation of Project 
Project was very limited in its success. Initial success what that the exclosure was effective in enabling the riparian 
corridor to heal. However, many interventions were not successful and grazing continues to degrade vegetation. 
Recreation also dampers the effectiveness of restoration actions. Much more would have to be implemented to 
promote a successful restoration.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
71
Author(s): 
Springer, Abe, Tim Godwin, Laura DeWald, and Jeff Hink 
Restoration Project 
Name: 
Final Project Progress Report Arizona Water Protection Fun Grant No:96-0003WPF 
Study Category (Pullin & 
Knight 2003) 
II-1 
Study Objective: 
Restore pre-disturbance channel morphology and riparian ecosystem of channelized portion of a perennial stream that is 
supplied water from Hoxworth Springs. 
Springs Descriptions: 
Name(s) 
Hoxworth Springs 
Type(s): 
Rheocrene 
Location(s): 
Mogollon Rim of SW Colorado Plateau, approx. 16 km southeast of Flagstaff, AZ. Lat 350225, Lon 1113427 
Pre-Intervention 
Impacts/Disturbances: 
Roads w/in 100 
m? 
Flow diversion 
or culvert? 
Alteration to springs 
source? 
Agriculture? 
Grazing? 
Recreation? 
Yes 
Yes 
No  
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Year Restoration 
Completed 
1999 
Intervention(s) 
(Restoration Actions): 
1) Channel banks reshaped increasing depth to width ratio; 2) Log structures placed in channel banks and reinforced with 
steel posts; 3) Head-cut drop structures constructed with local basalt and limestone, reinforced with concrete; 4) 
Channel stabilized below and above head-cut drop structures with local bedrock; 5) Erosion control netting and re-
seeding with native grass over disturbed areas; 6) Vegetation plugs transplanted in exposed soil areas in April 1999 and 
re-seeded in late June/July 1999; 7) Plugs and bare soil were covered with straw and wire fencing to deter grazing; 8) 
Vegetation transects in restored and grazing exclosure for monitoring including photopoints, with 27 permanent 
transects representing different degrees of exclosure to grazing. 
Focused Site 
Measurements: 
Spring discharge, runoff, and water level and vegetation  
Target Species: 
 
Measured impacts of 
restoration: 
Hydrology 
 
Geomorphology 
 
Invertebrate/Vertebrate Species 
 
Vegetation 
Total exclosure overall: More litter, bentgrass (native), less black medick (introduced forb), and slightly less Kentucky 
bluegrass (introduced, most common). Upland, total exclosure: less bare ground, more wester wheatgrass and Arizona 
fescuew (native), same amount blue gramma (native) and Kentucky bluegrass (dominant). Riparian, total exclosure: 
More litter, more spike-rush (introduced), less Kentucky bluegrass and Juncus ensifolius (native rush). Cattle exclosure 
(elk grazing only): Less litter, more rock and water, much less Kentucky bluegrass, more black medick and bentgrass, and 
mixed area with Kentucky bluegrass, black medick, blue grammea, meadow fescue, and bentgrass. Upland, cattle ex 
only: less litter and slightly less bare ground, much less rattlesnake weed, less Kent. bg, more black medick, and 
dominated by blue gramma. Riparian, cattle ex only: Less bare ground and litter, less Kent. bg. more black medick and 
Cares spp., meadow fescue dominates. No exclosure, total grazing: Less bare ground and litter, more water, less 
rattlesnake weed and Kent. bg., more western wheatgrass and black medick and mixed Feel, Melu Bogr, and Agsm 
rather than Kent. bg. dominated. Upland, total grazing: More bare ground, less rattlesnake weed, more western 
wheatgrass and black medic, and ~equal mix of Kentucky bg and western wheatgrass, with more blue gramma and black 
medick. Riparian, total grazing: Less bare ground, less Kent. bg., more meadow fescue and western wheatgrass.  
Duration of monitoring: 
1 year 
Post-restoration 
actions/assessments: 
The aquifer was more saturated related to high snowmelt and caused peak spring discharge. Spring discharge is 
relatively constant except during large snowmelts. Runoff that is beyond perennial reach usually only occurs for a few 
weeks and is intermittent. There is no significant variation in water quality, except for temperature dependent reactions. 
Objectives Met (yes/no)? 
Yes 
Quality Assurance 
measures: 
 
Criteria for successful 
restoration met (yes/no)? 
Characteristic 
Assemblage 
Native species 
present in 
greatest 
feasible extent 
Functional groups for 
continued 
development/stability of 
restored ecosystem 
Sustainable for 
reproduction 
Normal 
functioning 
condition 
Integrated 
 
 
 
 
 
Yes 
No or limited 
threats 
Resilient to 
natural 
disturbances 
Self-sustaining 
 
 
 
Yes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total criteria for 
successful restoration 
met: 
2 
Evaluation of Project 
Project didn’t address many of the criteria for successful restoration. Overall, the restoration was successful in that the 
project met its original stated objectives. It is important to note though that the missing criteria couldn't be evaluated 

 
72
Author(s): 
Springer, Abe, Tim Godwin, Laura DeWald, and Jeff Hink 
because that information was not available. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
73
Author(s): 
Weissenfluh, Darrick (prepared by), Quantell, Inc. (compiled) 
Restoration Project 
Name: 
The Upper Jackrabbit Restoration (Phase 1) Site, A Step-by-Step Report, Ash Meadows National Wildlife Refuge, Nye 
County, Nevada 
Study Category (Pullin & 
Knight 2003) 
III 
Study Objective: 
1) Utilize integrated management activities to improve lands unlikely to recover naturally from severe wildland fire 
damage by emulating historic ecosystem structure, function, diversity, and dynamics according to approved land 
management plans; 2) Restore or establish healthy, functioning ecosystems, even if these ecosystems cannot fully 
emulate historic or pre-fire conditions as specified in approved land management plans; 3) Control monotypic salt 
cedar (Tamarix ramosissima), Russian knapweed (Acroptilon repens), common reed (Phragmites australis) and 
southern cattail (Typha domingensis) to approved land management plan standards.  
Springs Descriptions: 
Name(s) 
Jackrabbit spring 
Type(s): 
Rheocrene 
Location(s): 
Ash Meadows National Wildlife Refuge, Amargosa Valley, Nye County 
Pre-Intervention 
Impacts/Disturbances: 
Roads w/in 100 
m? 
Flow 
diversion or 
culvert? 
Alteration to springs 
source? 
Agriculture? 
Grazing? 
Recreation? 
Yes  
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Year Restoration 
Completed 
2006 
Intervention(s) 
(Restoration Actions): 
1) Modification of stream channels and deep water marshes, which will significantly decrease invasive species 
establishment; 2) Control non-native invasive species populations to establish healthy, functioning ecosystems as 
outlined in approved land management plans; 3) Adaptive planting of native species in disturbed areas to prevent the 
re-establishment of non-native invasive species and stabilize the soil.  
Focused Site 
Measurements: 
1) Native plants for health and prosperity (visually); 2) Detection/control of the non-native invasive plants; 3) Native 
fish populations, and non-native invasive aquatic species. 
Target Species: 
1) Ash Meadows Amargosa pupfish (Cyprinidon nevadensis mionectes); 2) Ash Meadows speckled dace (Rhinichthys 
osculus nevadensis); 3) Ash Meadows milkvetch (Astragalus phoenix); 4) spring-loving centaury (Centaurium 
namophilum); 5) Ash Meadows gumplant (Grindelia fraxino-pratensis); 6) Ash Meadows ivesia (Ivesia eremica). 
Measured impacts of 
restoration: 
Hydrology 
 
Geomorphology 
Rechannelized 
Invertebrate/Vertebrate Species 
Increased Ash Meadows Amargosa pupfish downstream after rechannelization 
Vegetation 
1) Princess plume (Stanleya pinnata) and inland saltgrass (Distichlis spicata) earliest successional species upland. Both 
are desirable natives; 2) 65% success from replantings; 3) Mesquite germination from used mesquite woodchips. 
Duration of monitoring: 
On-going 
Post-restoration 
actions/assessments: 
1) Non-native/invasive plant species are removed when detected; 2) Effective monitoring plan is being devised. 
Objectives Met (yes/no)? 
Yes 
Quality Assurance 
measures: 
None reported 
Criteria for successful 
restoration met (yes/no)? 
Characteristic 
Assemblage 
Native species 
present in 
greatest 
feasible 
extent 
Functional groups for 
continued development/   
stability of restored 
ecosystem 
Sustainable 
for 
reproduction 
Normal 
functioning 
condition 
Integrated 
No*  
 
Yes 
Yes 
 
Yes 
No or limited 
threats 
Resilient to 
natural 
disturbances 
Self-sustaining 
 
 
 
Yes 
No 
No** 
 
 
 
Total criteria for 
successful restoration 
met: 
4 
Evaluation of Project 
*Non-native and invasive *Drip irrigation system is being used, and recommended to continue monitoring to 
determine future maintenance. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
74
Appendix F. Reference list providing full citations of all included studies: 
 
Anderson, D., Springer, A., Kennedy, J., Odem, W., DeWald, L., Fleishman, D., 
2003.Verde River Headwaters Restoration Demonstration Project: Final Report, Arizona 
Department of Water Resources Water Protection Fund, Grant No. 98-059. 
 
Arizona Water Protection Fund, 2001. Bingham Cienega Riparian Restoration Project, 
Final Report, Grant # 97-040WPF, Pima County, AZ.  
 
 
Brunson, E., Gori, D., Backer, D., 2001. Watershed improvement to restore riparian and 
aquatic habitat on the Muleshoe Ranch CMS, Final Report, The Nature Conservancy, 
AWPF Project Number 97-035.  
 
Grand Canyon Wildlands Council, Inc., 2010. Pakoon Springs Rehabilitation, Final 
Report, Task #9, AWPF Grant Contract #06-137WPF, Flagstaff, AZ. 
 
 
Katz, G., 2010. Revised Final Report: Test of Riparian Recovery Following Reduced 
Groundwater Pumping, Lower San Pedro River, AWPF Grant #08-151WPF, 
Appalachian State University, Boone, NC.  
 
Kodric-Brown, A., Brown, J.H., 2007. Native fishes, exotic mammals, and the 
conservation of desert springs, Frontiers in Ecology 5(10), 549-553. 
 
Long, J.W., Burnette, B.M., Medina, A.L., Parker, J.L., 2004. Restoration of Soldier 
Spring: and isolated habitat for native Apache trout. In Proceedings, International 
Conference, 16th, Victoria, Canada, Society for Ecological Restoration, 1-5. 
 
Long, J.W., Endfield, D., 2000. Restoration of White Spring. In Proceedings, USDA 
Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station-P-13, 359-360.  
 
Muehlbauer, J.D., LeRoy, C.J., Lovett, J.M., Flaccus, K.K., Vlieg, J.K., Marks, J.C., 
2009. Short-term responses of decomposers to flow restoration in Fossil Creek, Arizona, 
USA. Hydrobiologia 618, 35–45. 
 
Natural Channel Design, Inc., 2008. AWPF Grant Projects Evaluation, Phase II: Case 
Studies, Final Report. Arizona Water Protection Fund, Phoenix, AZ.  
 
Springer, A., Godwin, T., DeWald, L., Hink, J., 1999. Final Project Progress Report 
Arizona Water Protection Fund Grant No: 96-0003WPF. Arizona Department of Water 
Resources, Water Protection Fund. 
 
Weissenfluh, D., 2007. The Upper Jackrabbit Restoration (Phase 1) Site Step-by-Step 
Report Ash Meadows National Wildlife Refuge Nye County, Nevada, Compiled By: 
Quantell, Inc. for the U.S. Department of Interior, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Ash 
Meadows National Wildlife Refuge. 
 
 
 
 
