 
 
Piecing together a Southwestern story 
By BONNIE STEVENS 
Ecological Restoration Institute 
01/25/2004 
Kim Howell-Costion taps Native American wisdom to plant corn. Barbara Kerr harnesses 
the sun's energy to cook meals from her garden. And Tim Udall is known worldwide as a 
modern day Johnny Appleseed.  
For all three, sustainable living in White Mountain communities is a challenge and the 
way of life.  
Northern Arizona University Ecological Restoration Institute research assistant and 
graduate student Patty Kohany has unearthed the secrets of these successful farmers, 
secrets that help growers defy arid and harsh conditions in the high desert of the 
southwest.  
The information she's obtained has been transcribed into narratives about sustainable 
practices of land and water us on the Colorado Plateau. However, it's also been captured 
in the unusual medium of the quilt.  
After visiting with those who have become known as "the innovators and treasure-
keepers" of communities such as St. John, Snowflake and Concho, Kohany said she was 
filled with ideas and images.  
"I was so inspired by the way they were living, the choices they were making, and the 
sustainable way they were doing things. I knew I wanted to tell their story in a more 
visual way."  
With the same devotion and care that Udall buds fruit trees, Kohany sewed the seeds of 
creativity under the guidance of local quilt artist Darcy Falk. Her colorful quilt blocks 
now hang in room #035 of NAU's School of Forestry building to honor the successful 
practices of farmers in the region, farmers who save seeds, conserve water, extend the 
growing season with greenhouses and use devises called hoophouses to protect plants.  
Bright images of fruit and vegetables, tools and techniques, the land and the people 
themselves document the struggle and joy of sustainable living and fill the rectangular 
fabric collages roughly the size of placemats.  
Kohany arrived in the White Mountains two days before the Rodeo-Chediski fire began 
in June 2002. As if heavy clay soils, whipping winds and lack of rainfall weren't enough, 

the record-setting wildfire added yet another element of adversity facing these resilient 
rural growers.  
"The experience has built my thesis," she said. "I'll be facilitating collaborative quilts in 
the White Mountains that tell the fire story."  
Kohany has discovered the thread that ties this tough crop of farmers together is 
perseverance.  
Kim Howell-Costion has been growing more than 20,000 seedlings annually and a 
variety of open-pollinated/heirloom vegetables, herbs and flowers for the Community 
Supported Agriculture Program for 12 years. Her gardens and solar greenhouses are 
tucked between two mesas in a remote home site near Snowflake.  
Howell-Costion is keenly aware that the health of her bounty is closely stitched together 
with the health of the land and the health of her lifestyle, yet she advises against 
disappointment. When a plant fails, she'll ask what she can learn from it and look for the 
opportunity to try different methods.  
Meantime, Barbara Kerr, founder and director of the Kerr-Cole Sustainable Living 
Center in Taylor, has an organic garden large enough to feed two people and many 
visitors most of the year. Kerr uses a composting system of kitchen and garden residue 
along with human waste. It's called humanure.  
"We have to be ready for when the world changes a great deal and by having the working 
knowledge of very simple, satisfying, comfortable systems, we can ease that transition," 
she said.  
Elsewhere, in St. John, school teacher Tim Udall shares his orchard and gardening skills 
with his students. Udall drinks from the well of knowledge that his pioneering relatives 
developed in the late 1800s.  
"A lot of the heirloom trees around here are from pits or seeds that the early pioneers 
brought," he said.  
Udall has become a master at budding and grafting a variety of apple trees. On one tree 
alone, he has produced 40 different kinds of apples.  
Kohany's research project to document these sustainable practices has been funded 
through a Ford Foundation grant obtained by NAU's Center for Sustainable 
Environments Director Gary Nabhan. She expects this experience will aid her in future 
work with community building. Her quilt blocks will remain on display through 
February.  
 
