 
August 6, 2003  
 
Contact: Bonnie Stevens at 928-523-9570 or 928-527-3344 
Forest Service Awards Ecological Restoration Institute $1 Million 
For Forest Restoration Work 
Flagstaff, Ariz.--The Forest Service has awarded $1 million to the Ecological Restoration 
Institute at Northern Arizona University to continue building upon the scientific knowledge of 
ponderosa pine ecosystems in the effort to restore millions of acres of degraded forests. 
"The work of the ERI brings solid research to help solve a major issue confronting our 
community and the state of Arizona," said NAU President John Haeger. "This unique 
opportunity to continue and expand the important work of the ERI is because of the hard work 
of Senator Jon Kyl and Representative Rick Renzi."  
Rodger Zanotto, Coconino National Forest stewardship staff officer, said there is potential for 
some of the money to be used to identify important places in the forest for management on a 
landscape scale, places that include endangered species habitat, watersheds and old growth. 
"We recognize and support the need for processes that get at large, landscape-scale 
assessments, and this is one of those," said Zanotto. "We really look forward to continuing 
our relationship with the ERI in this endeavor." 
ERI director W. Wallace Covington also credited Kyl and Renzi for their leadership in bringing 
attention to the forest health crisis and attracting resources to help save ecosystems on the 
brink of collapse.  
"We have an opportunity to do restoration right, and the ERI provides the science to get us 
there," said Kyl. 
"The work of Wally Covington and his talented team at the Ecological Restoration Institute is 
a source of pride for northern Arizona.  I am pleased to assist and particularly promote the 
work of the Ecological Restoration Institute on restoration-based fuel treatments," said Renzi.  
"This work is critical to protecting our communities and watersheds by reducing the risk of 
catastrophic wildfire."      
ERI researchers are studying the many parts of the ponderosa pine ecosystem and how they 
respond to thinning and prescribed burning.  
"We don’t know everything and we’re never going to know everything, but we’ve got enough 
knowledge to know that we’ve got to get to work with restoration projects now. With adaptive 
management, we can monitor and study the effects of restoration efforts and continue to 
improve our treatments," said Covington. 
# # # 
