 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Long-term Responses of Penstemon Clutei (Sunset Crater beardtongue) to Root  
Trenching and Prescribed Fire: Clues for Population Persistence 
 
By Judith Springer, ERI Research Specialist, Sr. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Penstemon clutei (Sunset Crater beardtongue) is a rare plant species that 
grows on volcanic soils northeast of Flagstaff in northern Arizona. It is 
primarily restricted to tephra deposits from the Sunset Crater eruption at 
an elevation of approximately 7,000 feet and is typically found in open 
ponderosa pine forests and pinyon-juniper woodlands in areas containing 
a sparse understory. Its conservation status is ranked “imperiled” (G2) by 
NatureServe, a non-profit conservation organization, and it is on the U.S. 
Forest Service sensitive species list for Region 3 (Southwestern Region). 
Observations in the field suggest a positive link between disturbances 
(events that disrupt the ecosystem such as fire, logging, tornadoes, and 
death of trees by bark beetles) and reproduction and colonization. Pub-
lished information on the ecology of this species is limited to about a half
-dozen studies.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREVIOUS RESEARCH 
We initiated a study in 1992 to test the hypothesis that restoration of historic ecosystem conditions may 
enhance the sustainability of this species. We initiated a prescribed burning component in 1994 to test the 
hypothesis that prescribed fire would increase P. clutei density by removing litter and competing vegeta-
tion. After evaluating results from the prescribed burning experiment, we investigated the possibility that 
vigorous responses following fires were a result of mortality of overstory trees and removal of root compe-
tition. We then initiated a study in 1998 to test the hypothesis that cutting root competition through trench-
ing (digging trenches in the soil approximately 1 yard deep and lining it with heavy plastic) would increase 
P. clutei density. In 1999, one year following the trenching, there was a significant difference in density 
between trenched and control plots, mostly in the form of P. clutei seedlings. Two preliminary conclusions 
were drawn from the trenching study: 1) trenching had a positive effect on P. clutei reproduction, and this 
trend was still evident a year later, and 2) increases in P. clutei were likely due to reduced root competition 
with overstory trees. In an effort to gain additional information on long-term dynamics, we revisited the 
study area 10 years after root trenching, and 13–14 years following prescribed burning. Our objectives 
were to assess the long-term effects of the prescribed burning and trenching treatments and to evaluate the 
importance of a persistent seed bank in population dynamics. 
        Fact Sheet: Long-term Responses of Penstemon clutei (Sunset Crater beardtongue) to Root Trenching  
 
              and Prescribed Fire: Clues for Population Persistence 
February 2014 
Penstemon Clutei (Sunset Crater 
beardtongue). Photo by Judith Springer, ERI 

 
RESEARCH FINDINGS 
 
 In 2008, 13 and 14 years after spring and fall burning, respectively, there was no significant differ-
ence in P. clutei density between burned and unburned plots.  
 Over the course of this study, there has been a general decline in P. clutei in both burned and control 
plots. 
 However, there was still a significant difference in mean density between trenched and control plots 
10 years after the first re-measurement. Mean density in trenched plots was significantly higher.  
 Nearly all of the seedlings that emerged from the soil seed bank came from the samples taken in con-
trol (unburned) plots.  
 
MANAGEMENT IMPLICATIONS 
Our results indicate that prescribed burning alone 
may kill reproductively mature individuals, leading 
to potential decreases in available seeds for future 
recruitment. However, patchy tree mortality does ap-
pear to benefit P. clutei through increased reproduc-
tion, possibly facilitated by reduced root competition 
and/or other factors. Determining the long-term pop-
ulation dynamics of this species is integral to future 
conservation management planning and points out 
the direct need for long-term monitoring, particularly 
in the face of potential climate change and unman-
aged off-highway vehicle (OHV) activity. Other po-
tential threats include hybridization with other pen-
stemon species, herbivory, and urban expansion. 
Teasing out whether P. clutei population declines 
occur from disturbance (fire, logging, tornadoes, 
etc.), absence of disturbance, senescence (biological 
aging), competition, drought, climate change, inter-
active effects, or other as-yet-undetermined factors 
will be critical for understanding future conservation 
and management needs.  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Contact 
Judith Springer, Judy.Springer@nau.edu 
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
This Fact Sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
 
Springer, J.D., P.Z. Fulé, and D.W. Huffman. 2012. Long-term responses of Penstemon clu-
tei (Sunset Crater beardtongue) to root trenching and prescribed fire: Clues for popula-
tion persistence. Calochortiana, 1:164-171. http://library.eri.nau.edu/gsdl/collect/
erilibra/index/assoc/HASH0174/9a708f30.dir/doc.pdf 
Determining the long-term population dynamics of P. clutei is inte-
gral to future conservation management planning and points out the 
direct need for long-term monitoring. Photo by Judith Springer, ERI 
