 
 
Institute pegged for permanent funding 
By GARY GHIOTO 
Sun Staff Reporter 
01/08/2003 
Under legislation introduced Tuesday in the 
U.S. Senate, Northern Arizona University's 
Ecological Restoration Institute will be 
funded each year by Congress and expand 
its research programs and wildfire 
prevention and forest thinning projects.  
 
 
If passed, the bill will provide a consistent 
source of funding, estimated at between $5 
million and $6 million annually, for NAU, 
said Wally Covington, president of the 
Ecological Restoration Institute.  
"This is a major, major deal for Northern Arizona University and for the state of 
Arizona," said Covington, "Arizona is being asked to lead the way nationally in getting 
science-based forest restoration on the ground rapidly."  
U.S. Sen. Jon Kyl, R-Ariz., filed the "Southwest Forest Health and Wildfire Prevention 
Act of 2003" Tuesday as one of the first pieces of legislation to be taken up by the 108th 
Congress.  
The bill authorizes $15 million annually for the "establishment of ecological restoration 
institutes in Arizona, New Mexico and Colorado."  
"The institutes will work with land managers, environmental scientists and local 
governments to implement forest-protection treatments, such as thinning and controlled 
burnings, to reduce the number of wildfire outbreaks and lessen their severity should fires 
break out," said a statement from Kyl's office.  
Covington said ERI will work cooperatively on forest research and other projects with 
the Colorado and New Mexico institutes. NAU's institute will be a model for the other 
university-based institutes.  
Kyl's bill ensures that each year ERI's budget will be reviewed by Congress, said Diane 
Vosick, associate director for policy and administration at the institute.  

"This way we are an actual item in the federal budget and so it makes it easier each year 
to get an appropriation, but that's not to say it's guaranteed. But we want to be in the 
budget for long-term security," said Vosick.  
Covington said if the bill is passed, ERI will see its budget increase significantly.  
"This will enhance our funding by about 30 to 40 percent. I would like to emphasize, too, 
that the funding doesn't just come to the university. We send a lot of the money out to 
collaborators to get treatments done on the ground," said Covington.  
Covington said the extra funding and ERI's prominence will make a difference in the 
pace of restoration projects in the Flagstaff-area.  
"What we hope to see is an acceleration of work around Flagstaff and building a similar 
capacity around the state -- the White Mountains and the sky islands we have around 
Arizona," he said.  
Kyl, who has been working on forest thinning issues since 1994, said the bill is on the 
fast-track for passage in the Senate and House.  
"Arizona simply cannot afford another catastrophic fire season, and we must take prompt 
action to protect our fragile ecosystem habitats and national forests," said Kyl in a 
prepared statement. "The federal government must give a higher priority to preventive 
efforts that will reduce the risk of uncontrolled wildfires. This bipartisan legislation is a 
step in that direction."  
The legislation is also sponsored by Sens. Jeff Bingaman, D-N.M. and Pete Domenici, R-
N.M  
 
