 
The Ecological RestoraƟon InsƟtute is dedicated to the restoraƟon of ﬁre‐adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communiƟes that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our eﬀorts focus on science
‐based research of ecological and socio‐economic issues related to restoraƟon as well as support for on‐the‐ground treatments, outreach and educaƟon.  
Ecological RestoraƟon InsƟtute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaﬀ, AZ 86011, 928/523‐7182, FAX 928/523‐0296, www.nau.edu/ERI 
Interpretive Model of Regional Semi-arid Aquifer Responses to Large-scale  
Forest Restoration Treatments and Climate Change 
 
By Clinton Wyatt 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI) is a collaborative effort to restore ponderosa pine ecosystems 
and reduce the threat of catastrophic wildfires throughout four National Forests along the Mogollon Rim in 
northern Arizona. To assess how this landscape-scale forest restoration project and future climate projections 
will affect groundwater recharge to regional aquifer systems that impact springs and streams along the 
Mogollon Rim, an adaptation of the Northern Arizona Regional Groundwater-Flow Model (NARGFM) was 
used. The modeling objectives were to: 
 
Simulate changes in groundwater recharge from landscape change and changing climatic conditions;  
 
Assess the impacts that these changes may have on the groundwater budget (recharge, discharge, and 
storage) of northern Arizona, with a focus on the Verde Valley groundwater catchment area and asso-
ciated tributaries; 
 
Deliver the results to regional water users, managers, and stakeholders so the results may be used to 
inform water management strategies in the study area. 
 
METHODS 
 
A set of relatively novel methods were used for estimating changes in recharge from forest restoration treat-
ments and climate change. The NARGFM groundwater model is not able to model variations in surface veg-
etation or precipitation. Therefore, a change in groundwater recharge was the model input data used to repre-
sent these changes. Changes in groundwater recharge were estimated as proportionately similar to changes in 
surface water discharge for given changes in tree basal area, which are known from findings the Beaver 
Creek Experimental Watersheds. All other NARGFM parameters, including pumping and evapotranspiration 
(ET), were kept at the same values used for the last NARGFM stress-period (a period of time during which 
all model stresses, such as groundwater pumping or variations in recharge, remain constant) of the published 
model, or the years 2000–2005. Scenarios were created to estimate recharge and discharge conditions into 
the future. These scenarios included: 
 
A baseline scenario from the period of record 1971–2000, which due to the lack of restoration treat-
ments simulates future recharge conditions absent forest restoration treatments and climate change; 
 
Three scenarios that simulate 4FRI treatments effects combined with precipitation estimated from the 
mean, mean +1 standard deviation, and mean -1 standard deviation of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC) emission scenarios A1B (some increase in renewable energy), A2 (continued 
current level of fossil fuel use), and B1 (dramatic increase in renewable energy and decrease in fossil 
fuel use). 
 
Changes in recharge from 4FRI treatments and precipitation projections were simulated by applying recharge
-change factors to the recharge parameters built into the published NARGFM.  
    
Fact Sheet: Modeling Aquifer Response to Large‐scale RestoraƟon  
  
Treatments and Climate Change   
June 2013 

RESEARCH FINDINGS 
Over a 10-year period of forest restoration treatments, a 2.8% increase (23,000 acre-feet) in recharge to one 
adjacent groundwater basin (the Verde Valley sub-basin) was estimated compared to conditions that existed 
from 2000–2005. However, this increase in recharge was assumed to quickly decline after treatment due to 
regrowth of vegetation and forest underbrush and their associated increased evapotranspiration. Further-
more, predicted groundwater recharge increases were masked by decreases in water levels, stream baseflow, 
and groundwater storage (see Figures 1 and 2 below) resulting from surface water diversions and groundwa-
ter pumping. These results show that there is an imbalance between water supply and demand in this region-
al, semi-arid aquifer. They also reveal that current groundwater pumping practices may not be sustainable 
into the far future and that comprehensive action should be taken to minimize this water budget imbalance.  
MANAGEMENT IMPLICATIONS 
If groundwater outflow exceeds groundwater inflow, a decrease in well water levels, stream baseflow, and 
groundwater storage may occur. Because both natural and human communities depend on these resources to 
survive, a reduction in these supplies will present a problem for both communities. Some problems may in-
clude decreased discharge at springs, change of streams from perennial to ephemeral conditions, increased 
depth to and fluctuations of the water table, and increased average annual depth to saturated soils. These im-
pacts may reduce native vegetative diversity and abundance and increase the abundance of non-native 
“weedy” species such as tamarisk. These changes in vegetation may change the structure and resiliency of 
native fish, bird, mammal, herpetofauna, and invertebrate populations along the Verde River. These poten-
tial problems can also impact human communities that depend on groundwater and surface water in the area. 
The consequences of unsustainable groundwater pumping rates are that there will be an imbalance between 
water supply and demand, which may result in a significant amount of unmet demands for water users 
across the region. While landscape-scale forest restoration treatments are expected to cause a temporary in-
crease in groundwater recharge, depending on climate conditions, this will do little to offset the long-term 
trend of regional groundwater depletion.  
 
 
 
Contact 
Dr. Abe Springer, abe.springer@nau.edu 
Sharon Masek Lopez, sharon.masek_lopez@nau.edu 
 
 
Figure 1. Changes in groundwater recharge in the Verde 
Valley sub-basin by scenario. Values are clipped to the 
years 2000–2100 to highlight differences between cli-
mate scenarios, baseline and historical scenarios, and 
4FRI treatment effects. 
 
2000
2020
2040
2060
2080
2100
YEAR
-3500000
-3000000
-2500000
-2000000
-1500000
-1000000
CUMULATIVE CHANGE IN STORAGE, ACRE-FEET
EXPLANATION
Baseline
Scenario A
Scenario B
Scenario C
Figure 2. Changes in groundwater storage, by IPCC cli-
mate scenario, for the Verde Valley sub-basin clipped to 
the years 2000–2100. 
 
2000
2020
2040
2060
2080
2100
YEAR
50000
60000
70000
80000
90000
100000
110000
RECHARGE, ACRE-FEET PER YEAR
EXPLANATION
Annual Average
Baseline
Scenario A
Scenario B
Scenario C
