Going to extremes? 
By GARY GHIOTO 
Sun Staff Reporter 
09/23/2000 
 
As wildfires burned million of acres across the West this summer, Interior Secretary 
Bruce Babbitt and Arizona congressmen touted the so-called "Flagstaff plan" and its 
program of thinning and prescribed burns as the solution to treat dense, fire-prone forests.  
Back in Flagstaff, the national focus on local restoration efforts has caused a public 
relation problem for the Forest Service and the Grand Canyon Forests Partnership and 
their stalled Fort Valley Ecosystem Restoration Project.  
The Forest Service's latest Fort Valley plan released Thursday calls for "treating" some 
1,700 acres of ponderosa pine forest northwest of the city using various thinning 
prescriptions, controlled burns, road closures and restoration of meadow and riparian 
areas.  
Some environmental groups have attacked one of the tree-thinning treatments being 
studied at Fort Valley. It reflects presettlement conditions when ponderosa pine forests in 
northern Arizona had as few as 65 trees per acre and featured huge old growth trees and 
open, park-like expanses.  
Photos of one presettlement test block at Fort Valley showing large, empty spaces where 
a dense forest once stood have been featured prominently on environmental activist Web 
sites and in appeals to the Clinton administration condemning the "Flagstaff model".  
Coconino National Forest and Grand Canyon Forests Partnership officials say this is a 
blatant misrepresentation of their restoration efforts and that the news media is buying 
into a "misinformation" campaign launched by opponents.  
They point out that the photos don't reflect the thinning actually being proposed at Fort 
Valley. The Partnership, which includes Grand Canyon Trust and the city of Flagstaff, is 
an alliance of 15 environmental and governmental organizations.  
"Some are trying to use the 'Flagstaff Model' to spark a debate over which tree thinning 
prescription is the 'right one' for the Southwest. We think this is a dangerous debate that 
totally misses the point," said Taylor McKinnon, a program officer for Grand Canyon 
Trust.  

"No one prescription will be singly right or wrong across the entire landscape - it's just 
not that simple. The Flagstaff Model is about testing and adapting a variety of approaches 
to find the ones that work best in different situations," McKinnon added.  
Coconino National Forest Supervisor Jim Golden recently said that the Flagstaff model 
has little to do with thinning prescriptions. Instead, Golden said it is a process 
encouraging collaboration between local officials, conservation groups, residents, 
academia and the federal government to find a solution to dense, wildfire-prone forests. 
 The approach taken with the Fort Valley project is based on collaboration and a strong 
scientific base, he added.  
But environmentalists such as Brian Nowicki of the Flagstaff-based Southwest Forest 
Alliance contend that the presettlement model, with its "extreme approach to restoration," 
is favored in the new Fort Valley decision issued Thursday by the Forest Service.  
To Nowicki, that specific thinning prescription is the "Flagstaff Model" and that's why 
Secretary Babbitt and members of Congress such as Sen. Jon Kyl, R-Ariz., have held it 
up as the "silver bullet that will save us from catastrophic fire in the Southwest."  
"I can't help, when hearing that, but get the impression that they are not talking about a 
collaborative process that is going to bring together proponents in the community, but 
they are talking about an actual way of thinning the forest. They're talking about actual 
treatments," he said.  
The presettlement model is the centerpiece of the Ecological Restoration Institute and its 
director, NAU Profefssor Wallace Covington. As a primary source of research and a 
funnel for millions of dollars in federal funds, the Institute is the backbone of the Grand 
Canyon Forests Partnership.  
That relationship has alarmed Southwest Forest Alliance, the Forest Conservation 
Council, Forest Guardians and the Flagstaff Activist Network, which have been critical of 
Covington's presettlement prescription for congested ponderosa pine forests.  
Forest Conservation Council executive director Bryan Bird flatly accused the Forest 
Service and the Clinton administration of using the Fort Valley project as a "poster child" 
for a "massive thinning project for 40 million acres of National Forest lands using $12 
billion of taxpayer money over the next 15 years."  
Recently, Southwest Forest Alliance executive director Martos Hoffman wrote Jim 
Lyons, undersecretary of the Agriculture Department, and urged him to take a hard look 
at the "so-called Flagstaff Model."  
Hoffman enclosed pictures of a Fort Valley test block that was treated using the pre-
settlement model proposed by Covington.  

He noted that 88 percent of the trees were removed, resulting in "an unnaturally open 
condition" that failed to contain "suitable tree density or canopy closure for many forest 
dependent creatures," such as the threatened northern goshawk, endangered Mexican 
spotted own and forest health indicator species such as the Abert's squirrel.  
The Partnership is fighting back at what it calls the "misrepresentation of the Flagstaff 
plan" and its link with "radical thinning," according to a memo sent by John Gerritsma, 
the Forest Service liaison to the group.  
Gerritsma advised the Partnership to actively draw distinctions between its approach to 
restoration and the Covington plan.  
There is a false impression being exploited by environmentalist critics that the 
presettlement prescription and the collaborative model of the Partnership are one and the 
same, said Gerritsma's memo.  
"This is leading to conclusions about the Partnership's efforts that are simply untrue -- 
that the Partnership is simply a ruse to provide timber for the industry," the memo added.  
Finally, Gerritsma stressed that the Partnership make it clear to the public and the news 
media that: "We are not a poster child for what thinning in the West ought to look like."  
He said the cooperation between environmental and governmental agencies and scientific 
study fostered by the Partnership should be stressed, not the presettlement prescription.  
Gary Ghioto can be reached at gghioto@azdailysun.com or 556-2251.  
 
