 
 
John McCain jumps into forest debate 
By ANNE MINARD 
Sun Staff Reporter 
05/31/2002 
He survived 6½ years in a North 
Vietnamese POW camp and spent a half-
decade lobbying Congress before finally 
winning passage of campaign finance 
reform.  
Now, U.S. Sen. John McCain is ready to 
personally lobby environmental groups he 
was told oppose forest thinning around 
Flagstaff.  
But at least one of the groups said later that 
McCain was misinformed -- at least 
regarding the current projects in the region.  
McCain's offer came after one of the country's leading forest experts told him Thursday 
that hundreds of lives in Flagstaff are at risk from wildfire.  
"It's always darkest just before it goes completely black," McCain said, using a quotation 
from Chairman Mao that has become his trademark when faced with difficult situations.  
The comment came during a meeting between McCain, U.S. Forest Service officials and 
forest researchers as part of an all-day listening tour of Flagstaff. It ended with McCain 
offering to contact holdout environmental groups and ask them to support forest thinning, 
even if the timber is put to commercial uses.  
McCain said he expected to hear that ponderosa pine forests and wildlife are imperiled by 
the extreme fire danger. But he was shocked when Wally Covington, a researcher with 
Northern Arizona University's Ecological Restoration Institute, said the risks are much 
more dire.  
"It's something I've been worried about for 30 years: If the Pumpkin Fire (at Kendrick 
Mountain) had occurred in Flagstaff in 2000, we would have lost hundreds of lives," 
Covington said.  
This year, he added, drought conditions are worse than they were in 2000.  
The solution, researchers have agreed, involves aggressively clearing the forests of brush 
and small-diameter trees before they fuel catastrophic crown fires that could threaten 
cities and towns.  
But Coconino National Forest Supervisor Jim Golden put the cost to adequately thin trees 
in the state's six national forests at $20 million a year for 15 to 20 years -- a bill the 
Greg Bryan/Arizona Daily Sun Sen. John McCain, R-
Ariz., listens during a discussion of issues affecting the 
Grand Canyon with members of the Grand Canyon 
Trust during his visit to Flagstaff Thursday.  

taxpayers would be reticent to foot, he guessed.  
Instead, groups like the Grand Canyon Forests Partnership in Flagstaff have tried to find 
private markets for small-diameter wood and thus underwrite the thinning projects.  
But Golden and Covington told McCain the obstacle has been a consortium of local 
"extremist" environmental groups that oppose any commercial logging on public lands. 
Potential entrepreneurs who would otherwise start small timber businesses, they said, 
balk at the prospect of having their supply limited by sale appeals.  
"If there was a guaranteed supply, people would be putting mills up," Covington said.  
"Couldn't we contact them, given the circumstances?" McCain asked, referring to the 
environmental groups. He concluded the meeting by asking Covington for a list of the 
groups that are opposed to thinning, and he offered to contact the Sierra Club and others 
himself.  
But Sharon Galbreath, executive director of the Southwest Forest Alliance -- one of the 
groups that will show up on McCain's list -- said after the meeting that the apprehension 
is misplaced.  
"I don't think any local environmental group is a 'zero cut' group," she said. "The 
Southwest Forest Alliance has taken a great many trees off our study site in Williams. 
The issue is making sure that wildland-urban interface projects limit themselves to taking 
only small-diameter trees and stay limited the locations to what will be most effective, 
near homes and communities."  
Galbreath said her group has appealed no thinning projects on the South Kaibab, the 
Tonto or the Prescott national forests. The group did appeal one phase of the restoration 
work at Fort Valley -- which employs Covington's research in its prescriptions -- in 1999. 
"It's sort of an urban forest legend that every timber sale gets appealed," she said. "That's 
simply not the case."  
Galbreath added her group is not opposed to the sale of small-diameter timber extracted 
for fire prevention work.  
Other groups such as the Santa Fe-based Forest Guardians, however, have opposed nearly 
every project involving the commercial use of timber from the national forest.  
Anne Minard can be reached at aminard@azdailysun.com or 556-2253  
 
 
 
