 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928/523-7182, FAX 928/523-0296, www.eri.nau.edu 
Assessing Restoration Objectives Following a Second-entry Prescribed Fire 
in an Unharvested Mixed Conifer Forest 
 
By John Paul Roccaforte 
 
Introduction 
Efforts to restore degraded forest ecosystems often involve thinning small-diameter trees and reintroducing surface 
fire; however, in some areas, such as national parks, mechanical tree thinning is kept to a minimum. In these situa-
tions, prescribed fire is the best tool available to restore historical fire regimes and forest structure over broad spatial 
scales. Multiple prescribed fires are often needed to achieve long-term management objectives, but little information 
is available about the effects of second-entry burns in mixed conifer forests. 
 
In 1993, a prescribed fire in a dense, unharvested mixed conifer forest in Grand Canyon National Park (GCNP) es-
caped prescription and burned with greater intensity than anticipated. ERI researchers initially measured the site in 
1999 and concluded that the ecological outcome of the Northwest 3 fire was not inconsistent with ecological restora-
tion goals for this ecosystem type (Fulé et al. 2004). In this study, ERI researchers assessed if GCNP restoration and 
management objectives — including minimizing mortality of large trees, maintaining low seedling and sapling den-
sities, and further reducing surface fuel loadings — were achieved following a second prescribed burn, which oc-
curred in 2007. 
 
Research Findings 
 
The surface fire had little effect on 
large 
overstory 
ponderosa 
pine, 
Douglas-fir, and white fir trees and 
did not change total tree density or 
basal area. 
 
 
The fire reduced the overall density 
of conifer seedlings <12 inches tall 
by 87%, but had a smaller effect on 
conifer seedlings >12 inches tall and 
on sapling density. 
 
 
Aspen was the only species with re-
generation >12 inches tall that exhib-
ited significant mortality. 
 
 
The fire reduced litter depths by 
33%, duff depths by 23%, fine 
woody debris by 21%, and course 
woody debris by 44%. 
 
 Fact Sheet: Effects of Second-entry Prescribed Fire in Unharvested Mixed Conifer Forest     November 2012     
 
Figure 1. This unharvested mixed conifer forest on the north rim of Grand Canyon 
National Park was burned with prescribed fire twice (1993 and 2007) after nearly 114 
years of fire exclusion. This resulted in a more resilient ecosystem — one with the 
ability to resist damage and recover quickly following a disturbance — with relatively 
open forest conditions. Photo by John Paul Roccaforte.  

 
Management Implications 
 GCNP’s post-burn objectives were met for limiting tree mortality and for reducing conifer seedling 
density, litter and duff depth, and coarse woody debris loadings. 
 
 Management objectives were not met for reducing conifer sapling density and fine woody debris 
loadings.  
 
 Although aspen recruitment was significantly reduced, it is expected that aspen will continue to 
flourish, given aspen’s tendency to sprout vigorously after a fire. 
 
 Despite the fact that a few specific objectives were not met, GCNP managers feel that these fires 
achieved overall restoration goals and now consider this forest to be in “maintenance burning,” 
meaning they plan to allow natural ignitions to maintain forest structure in the future (Figure 1). 
 
 This example illustrates that use of prescribed fire in a ponderosa-pine dominated mixed conifer for-
est can be consistent with restoring historical conditions (i.e., relatively open forest structure with 
frequent surface fires) and with managing for resilience under current and future conditions. 
 
References 
Fulé, P.Z., A.E. Cocke, T.A. Heinlein, and W.W. Covington. 2004. Effects of an intense prescribed forest 
fire: Is it ecological restoration? Restoration Ecology 12(2): 220-230. 
 
 
Visit http://eri.nau.edu/en/arizona/grand-canyon-northwest-3-burn-only-treatment-study to view a slide 
show and video of the Grand Canyon National Park Northwest 3 study site. 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Contact 
 
John Paul Roccaforte, John.Roccaforte@nau.edu  
 
 
This Fact Sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
Laughlin, D.L., J.P. Roccaforte, and P.Z. Fulé. 2011. Effects of a second-entry pre-
scribed fire in a mixed conifer forest. Western North American Naturalist 71
(4):557-562. http://library.eri.nau.edu/gsdl/collect/erilibra/index/assoc/
HASH0167.dir/doc.pdf   
 
