1  6
Working Papers in Southwestern 
Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration 
Snags and Forest Restoration
December 2006
Ecological Restoration Institute
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
www.eri.nau.edu
Ecological Restoration Institute
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
2ERT34DT

Working Papers in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native species, 
structural characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological Restoration International 
defines ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of 
an ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability….Restoration attempts to return an 
ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration International Science & Policy 
Working Group 2004).
In the southwestern United States, most ponderosa pine forests have been degraded during the last 150 
years. Many ponderosa pine areas are now dominated by dense thickets of small trees, and lack their once 
diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, 
stand-replacing fires and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers on 
reintroducing frequent, low-intensity surface fires—often after thinning dense stands—and reestablishing 
productive understory plant communities. 
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, implementing, 
and monitoring ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. By allowing natural processes, 
such as fire, to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem 
services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The ERI Working Papers series presents findings and management recommendations from research and 
observations by the ERI and its partner organizations. While the ERI staff recognizes that every restoration 
project needs to be site specific, we feel that the information provided in the Working Papers may help 
restoration practitioners elsewhere.
	
This publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Service. The views and 
conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing 
the opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products 
does not constitute their endorsement by the United States Government.
Working Papers in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forest Ecosystem Restoration
1: Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons and Adaptive Management 
	
Practices
2: Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3: Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
4: Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits
5: Limiting Damage to Forest Soils during Restoration
6: Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
7: Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
8: Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
9: Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
10: The Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Model
11: Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration
12: Restoring Forest Roads
13: Treating Slash after Restoration Thinning
14: Integrating Forest Restoration Treatments with Mexican Spotted Owl Habitat Needs
15: Effects of Forest Thinning Treatments on Fire Behavior
Written by Kimberly Lowe
Reviewed by Charlie Denton, Dave Egan, Joe Ganey, Dennis Lund, Ann Moote, 
Don Normandin, John Paul Roccaforte, Diane Vosick, and Catherine Wightman
Photos: David Ostergren, Charlie Denton 
Series Editor:  Dave Egan
For More Information
For more information about forest restoration, contact the ERI at 928-523-7182 or
www.eri.nau.edu
Ecological Restoration Institute                         Snags and Forest Restoration 

Ecological Restoration Institute                         Snags and Forest Restoration    1
 Snags and Forest Restoration                 Ecological Restoration Institute
Introduction
Standing dead trees, also known as snags, are an important component of a thriving forest 
ecosystem. They are an essential part of the nutrient cycling process and provide crucial wildlife 
habitat for many species of animals. Although some may consider snags unsightly, they are a 
natural part of the decomposition process and may be one of the most important legacies of 
a forest (Tinker and Knight 2004). This publication presents an overview of snags and their 
relationship to ecosystem health and wildlife habitat, guidelines for maintaining snags in 
restoration areas, and additional information about how snags affect the level of fire hazard.
Snags Promote Biodiversity and Ecosystem Health
Snags provide nesting and feeding sites for more than 75 species of animals in southwestern 
forests, making them a crucial component of wildlife habitat (Chambers and Mast 2005). Many 
of these animal species play important roles in promoting and maintaining ecosystem health by 
controlling insect populations, dispersing seeds, or serving as prey for other species (Chambers 
et al. 2002).
Standing snags and downed logs are classified according to their characteristics and level of 
decomposition (Figure 1). At each stage in the decomposition process, snags play dynamic and 
important ecological roles. For instance, while standing snags serve as good roosting, perching, 
and nesting sites for many species of birds, downed snags often become habitat for small 
mammals. Highly decomposed snags contribute to overall nutrient cycling and aid in the growth 
of mycorrhizal fungi that help enhance plant diversity and reproduction. For these reasons, it is a 
good idea to maintain a mixture of snags at various stages in the decomposition process.
Figure 1.  The classification of standing snags and decomposing logs. Reproduced with 
permission (Thomas et al. 1979).

2    Snags and Forest Restoration                 Ecological Restoration Institute
Ecological Restoration Institute                         Snags and Forest Restoration    7
Maintaining Snags in Restoration Treatment Areas
Managers need to actively maintain existing snags because thinning and fire can inadvertently 
remove snags that are important for wildlife (Bull 1983). Current USDA Forest Service 
standards in Arizona and New Mexico call for retaining about 2 snags per acre in ponderosa pine 
forests and 3 snags per acre in mixed conifer forests (USDA Forest Service 1996). These snags 
should have a minimum diameter at breast height (dbh) of 18 inches and be at least 30 feet tall 
(USDA Forest Service 1996).  
However, research suggests that the quality of a snag may be more important than the number of 
snags per acre in determining whether cavity nesting wildlife will use a snag (Bull et al. 1997, 
George and Zack 2001). For instance, in a study of pine-white fir forests on the eastside of the 
Cascades in northern California, Zack et al. (2002) found that after surveying 1,812 snags there 
were 6.4 snags per acre but only 2.4 snags with nesting cavities per acre. It appears that the size, 
age, and spacing of snags as well as their relationship to other habitat elements and the landscape 
plays a major influence on the selection process of snag-dwelling animals (George and Zack 
2001). 
When selecting snags, it is important to consider the context of the snag in the landscape as well 
as the unique attributes of the snag-dependent animal species. In general, the best solution is 
to leave snags with diverse characteristics in order to accommodate a wide variety of animals. 
This may be especially important in the Southwest where the majority of the existing snags 
in ponderosa pine and mixed-conifer forests are small in diameter, which makes them less 
appealing to many wildlife species (Ganey 1999). 
Guidelines for Deciding Snag Longevity and Whether Wildlife Will Use a Snag
Successful retention and recruitment of snags in a restoration treatment requires an 
understanding of the characteristics that influence snag longevity and the likelihood that wildlife 
will use a snag (Cunningham et al. 1980, Bull 1983, Smith 1999, Ganey and Vojta 2004).
Diameter at breast height. Priority should be given to maintaining the largest snags. 
Ponderosa pine snags with a minimum dbh of 18 inches and Gambel oak snags with a 
minimum dbh of 11 inches are stronger, can better withstand stress from the elements, and 
tend to attract more wildlife species than smaller-diameter snags.
Age. Snags that have been dead between 5 and 29 years are most frequently used by 
wildlife and should be maintained during restoration. However, younger and older snags 
are also vital part of the ecosystem. Younger snags, especially if they are large, can be 
good replacement snags for other well-established snags that are lost to fire or thinning. 
Older snags that are highly decomposed or have fallen are essential to nutrient recycling 
and can serve as habitat for many small mammal species.
Height. Snags that have broken tops generally appeal to wildlife for nesting and roosting. 
Taller snags serve as good perches for avian species seeking prey. Maintaining a mixture 
of both in the landscape should be a consideration.
Tree species. In ponderosa pine forests, consideration should be given to ponderosa pine 
and Gambel oak snags. In mixed conifer forests, value should be placed on white fir, 
ponderosa pine, and Gambel oak snags. If thinning is necessary, hard snags should be 
retained because they are good perching posts.
•
•
•
•

6    Snags and Forest Restoration                 Ecological Restoration Institute
Ecological Restoration Institute                         Snags and Forest Restoration    3
Snag creation. Snags created by fire or insects generally do not stand as long as snags 
created by other means, such as drought, lightning, or disease. From a wildlife perspective, 
researchers have found that different wildlife species tend to be attracted to different 
types of snags. For example, the white-breasted nuthatch will use dead strips created by 
lightning strikes, while the hairy woodpecker prefers snags created by fire. In general, 
woodpeckers like snags created by bark beetles because they contain both food and cavity 
nesting sites (Shea et al. 2002).
Loose bark.  Snags with loose bark are often used by bats and small birds for roosting.  
These snags can take years to create and provide unique habitat.
Decayed wood. Snags with decayed wood are preferred by cavity nesting birds, especially 
woodpeckers (Bull et al. 1997, Jackson and Jackson 2004).  
On occasion a snag will be a “living snag” because one or more of the tree limbs are still alive 
(Stage 2 standing). They are often created by lightning, but also by dwarf mistletoe, bark beetles 
or stress from competition or drought. While there has been little research on the longevity of 
these snags compared to traditional snags, they are more likely to survive a fire because they tend 
to retain their insulating bark at the base (Waskiewicz 2003). Forest ecologists suspect that living 
snags, like traditional snags, contribute to the diversity of the ecosystem by providing habitat, 
foraging, and roosting sites for wildlife species (Miller and Miller 1980, Ganey 1999, Shea et al. 
2002). They also serve as a living legacy when determining reference conditions.
Fire and its Effects on Snags 
Fires affect how snags are formed, their density, and their rate of decay (Chambers and Mast 
2005). Existing snags are extremely 
susceptible to fire and may be scorched or 
even incinerated by low-intensity burns that 
normally have little effect on mature, live 
trees. To maintain a continuous assortment 
of snags within a forest, an inventory of the 
number and type of snags should be done 
prior to undertaking restoration activities 
that include prescribed fire so as to preserve 
snags that meet appropriate restoration 
objectives. In many cases, it may be 
necessary to rake debris away from the 
bases of desirable snag trees before burning 
(see ERI Working Paper 3: Protecting Old 
Trees from Prescribed Fire).
For snags that were created by fire, burn 
condition and spatial distribution have 
significant effects on the longevity of a 
snag and its appeal to wildlife. Ponderosa 
pine snags that are created by high-intensity 
fires generally stand for four to seven years 
before breaking or falling, 
•
•
•
Tinker, D. B. and D. H. Knight. 2004. Snags and coarse woody debris: An important legacy 
of forests in the greater Yellowstone ecosystem. Chapter 12 in L.L. Wallace, ed., After 
the fires: The ecology of change in Yellowstone National Park. New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press.
USDA Forest Service. 1996. Record of decision for amendment of forest plans: Arizona and 
New Mexico. Albuquerque, NM: USDA Forest Service Southwestern Region.
Waskiewicz, J.D. 2003. Snags and partial snags in managed, relict, and restored ponderosa pine 
forests of the Southwest. M.S. thesis, Forestry Dept., University of Northern Arizona.
Zack, S., T.L. George, and W.F. Laudenslayer, Jr. 2002. Are there snags in the systems? 
Comparing cavity use among birds in “snag-rich” and “snag-poor” eastside pine forest. 
Pp 179-191 in W.F. Laudenslayer, Jr., P.J. Shea, B. Valentine, C.P. Weatherspoon, 
and T.E. Lisle (tech. cords.), Proceedings of the Symposium on the Ecology and 
Management of Dead Wood in Western Forests. USDA Forest Service, Pacific Southwest 
Research Station, General Technical Report PSW GTR-181.
What kind of snags do 
cavity nesting birds prefer?
Reseachers at the Rocky Mountain Research 
Station in Flagstaff, Arizona determined that 
cavity nesting birds tend to select snags with the 
following characteristics (Ganey and Vojta 2004):
n	 Ponderosa pine, Gambel oak, or aspen
n 	Large diameter at breast height
n 	Broken tops or in the advanced stages of 
decomposition (stages 3-5)
n 	At least 40-percent bark cover
n 	Existing cavities
Snags are fairly abundant in many forested 
landscapes, yet few share all of these traits. 
Those that do, warrant special attention from land 
managers during restoration.

4    Snags and Forest Restoration                 Ecological Restoration Institute
Ecological Restoration Institute                         Snags and Forest Restoration    5
while snags created by low-intensity fires may stand for 12 years or more with large-diameter 
trees standing longer than smaller ones (Chambers and Mast 2005). Like unburned snags, those 
that are created by fire tend to stand longer if they are surrounded by live or other dead trees that 
provide protection from the wind. Charred snags may be more difficult for cavity nesting birds to 
excavate than uncharred snags (Chambers and Mast 2005). However, both burned and unburned 
snags can be beneficial to wildlife. Some species, including several woodpecker species, seem to 
prefer burned snags for nesting and foraging (Chambers and Mast 2005). 
Replacement snags can be created if a snag is inadvertently destroyed by prescribed fire. 
However, live trees that are likely to be killed by fire are generally smaller in diameter than 
most existing snags, and may not form adequate replacement snags for wildlife (Chambers et al. 
2002).
Snags and Increased Fire Hazard
Although snags are essential for healthy ecosystems, their presence during any type of fire 
increases the likelihood of torching and spot fires, and the associated crowning of nearby healthy 
trees. Both standing snags and downed wood generate a great amount of heat and they increase 
the length of time a fire burns and the level of suppression required. Standing snags present a 
physical danger to firefighters due to their tendency to fall as they lose their structural integrity 
during a fire (Stephens and Moghaddas 2005). These potential hazards should be weighed 
against the ecological and economic services provided by snags.
References
Bull, E.L. 1983. Longevity of snags and their use by woodpeckers. Pp. 64-67 in Snag habitat 
management: Proceedings of the symposium. General Technical Report RM-99. Fort 
Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service.
Bull, E.L., C.G. Parks, and T.R. Torgersen. 1997. Trees and logs important to wildlife in the interior 
Columbia River Basin. USDA Forest Service General Technical Bulletin PNW GTR-391.
Chambers, C.L., V. Alm, M. Siders, and M.J. Rabe. 2002. Use of artificial roosts by forest-dwelling 
bats in northern Arizona. Wildlife Society Bulletin 30(4):1085-1091.
Chambers, C.L. and J.N. Mast. 2005. Ponderosa pine snag dynamics and cavity excavation 
following wildfire in northern Arizona. Forest Ecology and Management 216:227-240.
Cunningham, J.B., R.P. Balda, and W.S. Gaud. 1980. Selection and use of snags by secondary 
cavity-nesting birds of the ponderosa pine forest. Research Paper RM-222. Fort Collins, CO: 
USDA Forest Service.
Ganey, J.L. 1999. Snag density and composition of snag populations on two national forests in 
northern Arizona. Forest Ecology and Management 117:169-178.
Ganey, J.L. and S. C. Vojta. 2004. Characteristics of snags containing excavated cavities in northern 
Arizona mixed-conifer and ponderosa pine forests. Forest Ecology and Management 
199:323-332.
George, T.L. and S. Zack. 2001. Spatial and temporal considerations in restoring habitat for wildlife. 
Restoration Ecology 9:272-279.
Jackson, J.A. and J.S. Jackson. 2004. Ecological relationships between fungi and woodpecker cavity 
sites. Condor 106:37-49.
Miller, E. and D.R. Miller. 1980. Snag use by birds. Pp. 337-356 in R.M. DeGraaf (tech. cord.), 
Proceedings of the workshop on management of western forests and grasslands for nongame 
birds. Salt Lake City, UT. USDA General Technical Report INT-86. Intermountain Forest 
and Range Experiment Station, Ogden, UT.
Shea, P.J., W.F. Laudenslayer, Jr., G. Ferrell, and R. Boyrs. 2002. Girdled versus bark beetle-created 
ponderosa pine snags: Utilization by cavity dependent species and differences in decay 
rate and insect diversity. Pp. 145-153 in W.F. Laudenslayer, Jr., P.J. Shea, B. Valentine, 
C.P. Weatherspoon, and T.E. Lisle (tech. cords.), Proceedings of the Symposium on the 
Ecology and Management of Dead Wood in Western Forests. USDA Forest Service, Pacific 
Southwest Research Station, General Technical Report PSW GTR-181.
Smith, H.Y. 1999. Factors affecting ponderosa pine snag longevity. Pp. 223-229 in Proceedings 
of the Society of American Foresters 1999 National Convention. SAF publication 00-1. 
Bethesda, Md.: Society of American Foresters.
Society for Ecological Restoration International Science & Policy Working Group. 2004. The SER 
International primer on ecological restoration. www.ser.org/pdf/primer3.pdf.
Stephens, S.L. and J.J. Moghaddas. 2005. Fuel treatment effects on snags and coarse woody debris 
in a Sierra Nevada mixed conifer forest. Forest Ecology and Management 214:53-64.
Thomas, J.W., R.G. Anderson, C. Maser, and E.L. Bull. 1979. Snags. Pages 60-77 in Wildlife 
habitats in managed forests--the Blue Mountains of Oregon and Washington. USDA 
