4
Ecological Restoration Institute
Northern Arizona University
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
www.eri.nau.edu
Working Papers in Southwestern 
Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
Fuels Treatments and 
Forest Restoration: 
An Analysis of Benefits
May 2003 

Working Papers in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in
researching, implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of southwestern
ponderosa pine forests. These forests have been significantly altered through more than a
century of fire suppression, livestock grazing, logging, and other ecosystem changes. As a
result, ecological and recreational values of these forests have decreased, while the threat
of large-scale fires has increased dramatically. The ERI is helping to restore these forests
in collaboration with numerous public agencies. By allowing natural processes such as
fire to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide
ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
Every restoration project needs to be site-specific, but the detailed experience of field
practitioners may help guide practitioners elsewhere. The Working Papers series presents
findings and management recommendations from research and observations by the ERI
and its partner organizations.
This publication would not have been possible without significant staff contributions and
funding from the Bureau of Land Management. The views and conclusions contained in
this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the
opinions or policies of the U.S. Government. Mention of trade names or commercial
products does not constitute their endorsement by the U.S. Government.
1: Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons and Adaptive Management
Practices
2: Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3: Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire

Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits a
Introduction
In contemporary ponderosa pine forests throughout the Southwest the need to thin
dense stands in order to reduce the risk of catastrophic fires has become evident.
Numerous thinning prescriptions have been implemented. While many prescriptions
focus solely on lowering fire risk by removing ladder fuels and reducing crown
connectivity, others explicitly aim to alter both forest structure and functioning. This
publication examines the benefits of restoration treatments that can lower fire danger—
while also increasing the overall biological diversity and long-term health of treatment
areas.
Restoration Treatments versus Fuels Treatments: What’s the
Difference?
Mechanical fuels treatments remove ladder fuels in order to reduce the likelihood that a
surface fire will become a crown fire. They also reduce the connectivity of tree crowns in
order to make it more difficult for a crown fire to spread throughout the canopy. This is
usually accomplished by using mechanical devices, such as chainsaws, to remove lower
branches or entire trees. The cut wood is either harvested for fuel or other uses, or
burned on site.
Restoration treatments also remove ladder fuels and reduce crown connectivity; indeed,
fuels treatments can be an important step toward restoration. But rather than focusing
only on altering forest structure, restoration treatments also aim to alter forest
functioning. For that reason, they have the potential to provide a long-term solution to
the current wildfire problem, which is really only a symptom of a larger problem—
namely, an unhealthy ecosystem (Covington 2003).
It is well documented that frequent surface fires played a primary role in maintaining the
structure of southwestern ponderosa pine forests before fire regimes were interrupted by
Euro-American livestock grazing and fire suppression (Weaver 1951; Swetnam and
Baisan 1996). Forest restoration focuses on reintroducing frequent, low-intensity fires,
which provide a number of benefits:
•
Promoting the growth of herbaceous understory vegetation
•
Cycling nutrients from needle litter into the soil, where it can be used by plants
•
Maintaining forest structure by removing most pine seedlings or saplings
•
Reducing long-term crown fire danger
•
Enhancing the health of remaining trees by reducing competitive pressures
Restoration treatments, in other words, provide fire protection and additional benefits.
Fuels treatments do reduce fire danger, but only temporarily (see box), and they do not
emphasize these other benefits. In the long term, restoration treatments are likely to be a
far more cost-effective and ecologically sustainable solution to the current wildfire
problem than fuels treatments alone.
1

Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits
a
What Is a Restoration Treatment?
Like fuels treatments, restoration thinning treatments remove ladder fuels from the forest
and reduce the connectivity of crowns. But restoration treatments are focused on long-
term rather than short-term ecosystem health. Restoration treatments vary with location,
funding, and management goals, but they generally share these qualities:
They are informed by reference conditions. “Reference conditions” are those that
existed before forest structure and function were altered by Euro-American settlers. They
were not unchanging, but they sustained themselves. Southwestern ponderosa pine
ecosystems were subject to frequent surface fires, some no doubt ignited by indigenous
peoples and some by lightning. Both types of fires had the same effect: they sustained
forest structure by removing tree seedlings and cycling nutrients to plants. These
conditions apparently were stable for a long time: soil analyses have shown that some
grassy openings have existed in the same places for centuries, and perhaps much longer,
while areas with clumps of pines were wooded for equally long periods (Kerns et al.
2001).
After Euro-American settlement, that sustainable cycle was broken by livestock grazing,
lumbering, and active fire suppression (Allen et al. 2002; Covington 2003). Grazing
removed the fine fuels that carry fire, while timber harvesting removed larger trees and
made way for dense stands of younger trees. Fire suppression created fuel accumulations
and increases in fire intensity. Forests have grown much denser, and understory
productivity has declined. Today ecosystem conditions in many places are unsustainable.
Reference conditions are useful tools because they show what a site’s potential can be
under self-sustaining conditions (Egan and Howell 2001). They can be determined by
locating trees or tree remains that were present before Euro-American settlement, which
generally include living pines or snags with yellowed bark, as well as large downed logs,
stumps, and stump holes. Tree-ring records can help document past forest structure and
fire history, as can historic photographs, Forest Service records, and other written
records. Relatively undisturbed sites nearby can also aid in understanding what reference
conditions may have existed on a site to be treated, though the great differences in stand
density and structure that can exist on even adjacent sites must be taken into account.
Reference conditions are not necessarily the same as restoration goals (Allen et al. 2002).
Social, economic, or other management considerations may make it impossible or
undesirable to attempt to recreate reference conditions. But knowing what a site once
looked like is an important tool in deciding management goals and strategies.
2

Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits a
3
They retain old trees. Decades of logging in southwestern forests that emphasized
cutting of large trees has resulted in a scarcity of old, yellow-barked ponderosa pines.
These trees tend to be resistant to fire and often provide valuable wildlife habitat, as well
as aesthetic benefits, but many of those that remain are in declining health due to
increased competition with younger trees (Mast et al. 1999; Covington 2003).
Restoration treatments preserve old, yellow-barked pines by cutting only younger pines,
by lowering competitive pressures around old trees, and by protecting these trees from
fire (see Working Paper 3: Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire).
They emphasize understory restoration. The grasses, forbs, shrubs, and other plants of
the herbaceous understory comprise most of the diversity in ponderosa pine forests
(Alcoze and Hurteau 2001), and are important for wildlife food and cover, as well as for
aesthetics. In addition, the understory provides fuel for the needed frequent low-
intensity fires that maintain forest structure. For these reasons, restoration treatments
emphasize restoring the diversity and productivity of these plants. In some cases, this
may require reseeding with native species or removal of invasive species (Korb and
Springer 2003; also see Working Paper 2: Understory Plant Community Restoration in the
Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona).
Why Just Thinning Is Not Enough
A recent study (Covington et al. 2001) used the FIRESUM model to project forest densities over
decades following actual restoration treatments at the Gus Pearson Natural Area near Flagstaff.
Treatment areas were thinned in 1994 to a density that mimicked the presettlement forest density.
One treatment area has been burned at 4-year intervals following thinning, while another has not
been burned. The FIRESUM model projected that the thinned-only area (the middle, dotted line)
would rapidly increase in tree density in the absence of fire, increasing fuel loads and decreasing
herbaceous production. After 65
years, its tree density would equal
that of the control area (the
upper, dashed line). The thinned
area treated with prescribed fire
at 4- to 10-year intervals (the
lower, solid line), meanwhile,
would continue to have a low tree
density and abundant understory
vegetation. Figure 4 from
Covington et al. 2001. Reprinted
by permission of Blackwell
Publishing.

Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits
a
4
They often emphasize clumps and openings. Soils analysis has shown that some grassy
openings in southwestern ponderosa pine forests were apparently in place for very long
periods before young pines encroached on them in the twentieth century (Kerns et al.
2001). Re-creating such openings provides habitat for many wildlife species, and can also
reduce the risk of crown fires.
Ponderosa pines frequently grow in small clumps, often with interlocking crowns, that
provide habitat for species that utilize tree trunks and crowns (White 1985). The size,
density, number, and location of such clumps profoundly affect both wildlife habitat and
the future risk of crown fire. Finding a balance between wildlife habitat considerations,
individual tree health, and future fire risk is a vital part of planning restoration
treatments.
Because they are based on averages across an area, basal area measurements are often not
very useful in quantifying the extent to which forested areas are made up of clumps and
openings.
They incorporate fire in the long term. Fire is crucial in cycling nutrients and in
maintaining forest structure. Without fire, thinned forests will quickly become dense
again (Covington et al. 2001). Future fires, whether prescribed or lightning-ignited,
should be part of the restoration planning process. Though initial fires after thinning are
often hot and/or smoky, due to the large quantities of needles and woody fuel on the
ground, future fires should burn mainly herbaceous vegetation and tree saplings,
producing less heat and less smoke (Barkmann 2003).
They incorporate monitoring programs and adaptive management practices.
Restoration is a new science, and we have much to learn about it. For that reason,
monitoring of treatments and of their effects is urgently needed to improve treatment
planning and implementation, modify future treatments, and communicate progress to
practitioners and stakeholders (Fulé 2003). The results of monitoring programs should
be fed back into the planning of future treatments through a flexible adaptive
management process. With careful monitoring, the lessons we learn from current
treatments will improve both our restoration practice and our overall management of
these forests.

For More Information
A number of different thinning prescriptions have been proposed for southwestern
ponderosa pine forests. Read about some on the ERI website at www.eri.nau.edu, or call us
at 928-523-7182.
Written by Peter Friederici
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution   
NAU Creative Communications/A49866/1M/11-02
References
Alcoze, T., and M. Hurteau. 2001. Implementing the archaeo-environmental reconstruction technique:
Rediscovering the historic ground layer of three plant communities in the greater Grand Canyon region.
Pp. 413–424 in The historical ecology handbook: A restorationist’s guide to reference ecosystems, ed. D. Egan
and E. A. Howell. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Allen, C. D., D. A. Falk, M. Hoffman, J. Klingel, P. Morgan, M. Savage, T. Schulke, P. Stacey, K. Suckling, and
T. W. Swetnam. 2002. Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems: A broad
perspective. Ecological Applications 12:1418–1433.
Barkmann, G. 2003. Air quality and smoke management. Pp. 371–386 in Ecological restoration of
southwestern ponderosa pine forests, ed. P. Friederici. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Covington, W. W., P. Z. Fulé, S. C. Hart, and R. P. Weaver. 2001. Modeling ecological restoration effects on
ponderosa pine forest structure. Restoration Ecology 9:421–431.
Covington, W. W. 2003. The evolutionary and historical context. Pp. 26–47 in Ecological restoration of
southwestern ponderosa pine forests, ed. P. Friederici. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Egan, D., and E. A. Howell. 2001. The historical ecology handbook: A restorationist’s guide to reference
ecosystems. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Fulé, P. Z. 2003. Monitoring. Pp. 402–416 in Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests, ed.
P. Friederici. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Kerns, B. K., M. M. Moore, and S. C. Hart. 2001. Estimating forest–grassland dynamics using soil phytolith
assemblages and 13C of soil organic matter. Ecoscience 8:478–488.
Korb, J. E., and J. D. Springer. 2003. Understory vegetation. Pp. 233–250 in Ecological restoration of
southwestern ponderosa pine forests, ed. P. Friederici. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Mast, J. N., P. Z. Fulé, M. M. Moore, W. W. Covington, and A. Waltz. 1999. Restoration of presettlement age
structure of an Arizona ponderosa pine forest. Ecological Applications 9:228–239.
Swetnam, T. W., and C. H. Baisan. 1996. Historical fire regime patterns in the southwestern United States
since AD 1700. Pp. 11–32 in Fire effects in southwestern forests: Proceedings of the Second La Mesa Fire
Symposium, ed. C. D. Allen. General technical report RM-286. Fort Collins, Colo.: USDA Forest Service.
Weaver, H. 1951. Fire as an ecological factor in the southwestern pine forests. Journal of Forestry 49:93–98.
White, A. S. 1985. Presettlement regeneration patterns in a southwestern ponderosa pine stand. Ecology
66:589–594.

Ecological Restoration Institute
Northern Arizona University
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
www.eri.nau.edu
2ERI 35AE
NON-PROFIT ORG.
U.S. POSTAGE
PAID
NORTHERN
ARIZONA
UNIVERSITY
