103 
MANAGEMENT & MONITORING  
Team Assists Community Groups in Monitoring Forest 
Restoration Projects (New Mexico) 
Margaret A. Moote , Coordinator, Ecological Restoration Institute, 
Northern Arizona University, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 
86011-5017, 928/523-7254, ann.moote@nau.edu; Martha Schu­
mann, Research Coordinator, Forest Guild , P.O . Box519, SantaFe, 
NM &7504; and Victoria Derr, Community Forestry Consultant, 
535 B NW 3rdSi., Gainesville, FL 32601 
Since 2001, the Collaborative Forest Restoration Program 
(CFRP), a USDA Forest Service pilot program, has granted $5 
million annually to community groups in New Mexico to con­
duct forest restoration and improve the use of small-diameter 
trees removed from restoration sites. This funding emerged from 
legislation that requires each grant recipient to conduct a "mul­
tiparty assessment" of the "positive or negative impact and effec­
tiveness of the project, including improvements in local 
management skills and on the ground results." However, the first 
group of grantees found themselves overwhelmed by the lack of 
a more detailed definition of "multiparty assessment." 
In 2002, a group of researchers and forestry practitioners 
collaborated to develop a clearer definition of the multiparty mon­
itoring requirement. The legacy of this effort is the CFRP Mult­
iparty Monitoring Team-s-composed of staff from the Ecological 
Restoration Institute, the Forest Guild, and the Four Comers 
Institute of Santa Fe, New Mexico-who provide technical assis­
tance and training in multiparry monitoring to CFRP grantees. 
The Multiparty Monitoring Team has developed a series of 
six handbooks, derived from guidelines developed by the larger 
group in 2002. The handbooks define multiparty monitoring as 
a way to assess how well a project is meeting desired outcomes 
and responding to diverse concerns. The handbooks further 
explain how to develop a monitoring plan and budget, and how 
to gather and analyze ecological and socioeconomic monitoring 
data. The team also offers technical assistance to grantees 
through workshops, individual meetings, site visits and in-the­
field training. Technical assistance frequently requires initial 
meetings to help groups solidify their goals and establish a mon­
itoring plan, and is often followed by more specific training in 
establishing monitoring sites and collecting data. 
Our first challenge is showing grantees what they can moni­
tor and how monitoring can provide them with useful feedback. 
The second challenge is helping them develop a monitoring plan 
and budget that provides a balance between what is desired and 
what is feasible. Because many grantees did not include monitor­
ing costs in their original project budgets, we encourage them to 
work with in-kind partners or youth from schools or conservation 
corps as a way to minimize costs. In some cases, agency partners 
donate time or equipment to assist with data collection. In many 
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION 
23:2 - lUNE 2005 
cases communities have trained local youth to do the monitoring 
as a way to introduce them to biological and social science and to 
connect them to their local environment. 
Grantees are encouraged to use their CFRP project goals as 
the first step toward developing project-specific monitoring goals 
and indicators. Goals of the various projects often overlap, since 
most CFRP projects involve thinning the forest to reduce the 
threat of wildfires. Many communities choose indicators, such as 
the size and density of trees, canopy closure, and surface fuels. 
This has allowed some projects to use standardized indicators and 
methods so that their monitoring results could be compared. 
Field tests have found the ecological monitoring methods to 
be easy-to-use and affordable for many of the projects. For 
example, we helped staff of the Zuni Department of Conserva­
tion develop a monitoring plan, collect pre- and post-treatment 
data in a 35-acre (lO-ha) ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) 
stand, and analyze the collected data. One of the project goals 
was to change the fire regime. Four indicators were chosen to 
assess whether th is goal was met: the size and dens ity of live 
trees, seedling density, extent of canopy closure, and understory 
cover. Post-treatment data shows statistically significant changes 
in these variables . Youth from Zuni Pueblo assisted with the data 
collection, and the tribe plans to involve youth more exten­
sively in monitoring its next CFRP project. 
In other cases, however, the scale and intensity of data col­
lection differs substantially according to what is appropriate and 
affordable for a given community. In particular, monitoring 
methods for social and economic goals are less standardized than 
the ecological methods. Some projects are using surveys or focus 
groups to track community attitudes toward forest restoration 
and their projects in particular, while others have chosen to sim­
ply track employment rates . 
The example of Las Humanas, a community organization in 
central New Mexico, illustrates how monitoring plans are tai­
lored to the project. When Las Humanas received a CFRP grant 
for a forest restoration project, they incorporated existing Forest 
Service photo points by using them as the end points of transects 
where additional data was collected. Then, because one aspect 
of Las Humanas's organizational mission is to reconnect youth in 
rural villages to the surrounding forest, their multiparty moni ­
toring team adapted the CFRP's data collection methods to sur­
vey plants traditionally important to the community. Local 
youth used these methods to gather baseline ecological data on 
these plants that the community can moni tor in future years. 
While these tools and techniques were developed specifi­
cally for CFRP projects, some of the appl ications may benefit 
other restoration and community-based efforts. The complete 
multiparty monitoring handbook series is available online at 
www.fs.fed.us/r3/spf/cfrp/monitoring/index.shtml. 
133 
