 
 
Forest restoration appeal reversed 
By GARY GHIOTO 
Sun Staff Reporter 
 
09/16/1999 
An appeal that had stalled the first phase of a 10-year plan to reduce wildfire risk and 
improve forest health on 100,000 acres of the Coconino National Forest and other lands 
near Flagstaff has been reversed.  
If the ambitious and controversial project is not challenged again by the seven regional 
environmental groups or other parties during another 45-day appeal period, selected 
logging and restoration activities on 1,700 acres of land off North Fort Valley Road could 
begin in early November.  
Coconino National Forest Supervisor Jim Golden said yesterday that numerous 
objections raised by Forest Guardians of Santa Fe, N.M., and other groups such as the 
Flagstaff Activist Network were not significant enough to delay the Fort Valley 
Restoration Project.  
But the regional forester in Albuquerque did find that two points raised by opponents 
involving the project's impact on archaeological and cultural resources and the 
"cumulative effects on future projects in the 180,000 acres" surrounding Flagstaff had 
merit.  
But Golden said information and studies provided in response to the appeal have resolved 
the two issues raised by opponents and that he has signed a new decision to proceed with 
the project.  
The project, supported by the Grand Canyon Forests Partnership -- a coalition of 18 
environmental, business and academic groups -- involves thinning 1,700 acres on the 
flanks of the San Francisco Peaks with an eye toward reducing fire danger and restoring 
the forest to a more natural and healthy state.  
The project also called for fencing and meadow restoration, relocation and construction 
of eight miles of recreation trails and closing 19 miles of roads to reduce disturbance to 
wildlife.  
"This is the outcome we expected because the science is clearly on the side of restoration, 
" said Brett KenCairn, executive director of the Grand Canyon Forests Foundation.  

KenCairn added: "To continue to delay the implementation of these restoration 
treatments places in jeopardy the very ecological values the Guardians and other groups 
purport to protect."  
The Forest Guardians and other opponents of the first-phase restoration plan argued that 
instead of limiting fire risk, the thinning operation will jeopardize wildlife habitat, 
destroy recreation sites, threaten cultural resources and exacerbate flash flooding.  
Sam Hitt, executive director of Forest Guardians, said the 3,000-member group would 
likely appeal the decision because it justifies forest management and fire protection by 
unprecedented logging in the Flagstaff area.  
"What's key here is the cumulative impact of logging on some 200,000 acres," Hitt said, 
"This is the largest logging project every contemplated in the Southwest."  
KenCairn said he fully expects another appeal from Hitt's group. Still, he is "pleased that 
the project is back under way."  
"We have been disappointed by the efforts to misrepresent the facts and the science 
associated with this project. Claims, for example that there are no studies verifying the 
effectiveness or validity of the restoration treatments were are using. Those claims are 
patently untrue," KenCairn said.  
 
