Copyright © 2007 by the author(s). Published here under license by the Resilience Alliance.
Binkley, D., T. Sisk, C. Chambers, J. Springer, and W. Block. 2007. The role of old-growth forests in
frequent-fire landscapes. Ecology and Society 12(2): 18. [online] URL: http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/
iss2/art18/
Synthesis, part of a Special Feature on The Conservation and Restoration of Old Growth in Frequent-fire
Forests of the American West
The Role of Old-growth Forests in Frequent-fire Landscapes
Daniel Binkley 1, Tom Sisk 2,3, Carol Chambers 4, Judy Springer 5, and William Block 6
ABSTRACT. Classic ecological concepts and forestry language regarding old growth are not well suited
to frequent-fire landscapes. In frequent-fire, old-growth landscapes, there is a symbiotic relationship
between the trees, the understory graminoids, and fire that results in a healthy ecosystem. Patches of old
growth interspersed with younger growth and open, grassy areas provide a wide variety of habitats for
animals, and have a higher level of biodiversity. Fire suppression is detrimental to these forests, and
eventually destroys all old growth. The reintroduction of fire into degraded frequent-fire, old-growth forests,
accompanied by appropriate thinning, can restore a balance to these ecosystems. Several areas require
further research and study: 1) the ability of the understory to respond to restoration treatments, 2) the rate
of ecosystem recovery following wildfires whose level of severity is beyond the historic or natural range
of variation, 3) the effects of climate change, and 4) the role of the microbial community. In addition, it is
important to recognize that much of our knowledge about these old-growth systems comes from a few
frequent-fire forest types.
Key Words: ecological processes; evolutionary adaptations; historic range of variation (HRV); human
values; knowledge gaps; resilience; understory vegetation
INTRODUCTION
Traditional forestry took decades to understand the
unique features of frequent-fire forests. Early
foresters in the Southwest were very concerned
about the near-absence of young trees in forests
dominated by older, widely spaced ponderosa pine
(Pinus ponderosa) trees, and they realized that
frequent fires prevented the development of closed-
canopy, high-wood-producing forests. A young
Aldo Leopold (1920) wrote:
...the prevention of light burning during the
past 10 years... has brought in growth on
large areas where reproduction was
hitherto largely lacking. Actual counts show
that the 1919 seedling crop runs as high as
100 000 per acre. It does not require any
very elaborate argument to show that these
tiny trees, averaging only 2 inches high,
would be completely destroyed by even a
light ground fire. 
Leopold did not yet have the insight to understand
the profound consequences of 100 000 seedlings per
acre, although he later came to see the more subtle
argument that fire prevention thwarted the processes
necessary for the long-term health of the forest
ecosystem.
Frequent fires challenge the survival of new tree
seedlings and strongly shape the long-term
development of all the components of a forest.
Young trees often establish in clumps, as a legacy
of patchy fuels and fire behavior; and this structural
legacy may last for centuries. Gaps between clumps
may result from a combination of competition with
grasses and shrubs, from uneven distribution of
seeds, and also the pattern of fire that interacts with
the pattern of soils, vegetation, and fine fuels. The
intimate mixture of shady clumps of trees and small
open meadows provides a local-scale diversity that
would be found only at much larger scales in
landscapes without frequent fire. Indeed, some
classic vocabulary in forestry is not well suited for
frequent-fire forests. As noted by Kaufmann et al.
1Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, 
2Northern Arizona University, Environmental Sciences, 
3ForestERA, 
4Northern Arizona University, School of
Forestry, 
5Ecological Restoration Institute, 
6U.S. Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station

Ecology and Society 12(2): 18
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art18/
in this issue, old-growth characteristics in dry,
frequent-fire forests are remarkably different from
the old-growth images developed in wetter areas.
Even the concept of the forest “stand” as a part of a
forest landscape with relatively uniform conditions
and somewhat distinct boundaries may not be
suitable for frequent-fire forests (Long and Smith
2000). The important details about the spatial
arrangement of trees in the landscape relate to the
clumping of trees into small groups, and to clusters
of these groups, rather than to extensive, uniform
areas of similar-size trees stretching across
hundreds or thousands of hectares (Fig. 1).
The frequent recurrence of fires reinforces a spatial
heterogeneity, promoting a forest with high, small-
scale variety in plant species composition, animal
habitat, and ecological processes. This pattern of
local variety is a key defining feature of old-growth
forests in frequent-fire landscapes. In this chapter,
we consider some of the crucial ecological roles that
might depend partially on the spatial arrangements
of trees, and those that relate to the fully developed
old-growth conditions.
EVOLUTIONARY ADAPTATIONS TO FIRE
The adaptations of large trees to surviving fire are
fundamental in the ecology of old-growth forests in
frequent-fire landscapes. Depending on the species,
trees in these forests have developed a number of
characteristics to withstand and survive fire.
Although fire typically kills small conifers with thin
bark by overheating or destroying the cambium
layer (van Mantgem and Schwartz 2003), most
coniferous tree species in the mature state have
thick, insulating bark that is relatively nonflammable,
long needles, self-pruning lower branches, and deep
roots. Giant sequoia (Sequoiadendron giganteum)
also experiences rapid growth that raises canopies
off the ground quickly, as well as latent buds and
serotinous cones (Stephenson 1999). Jeffrey pine
(Pinus jeffreyi) develops buds with thick scales that
help withstand heat. Sugar pine (Pinus lambertiana)
has thick, fire-resistant bark and an open canopy
that retards the spread of fire through the canopy.
Gray pine (Pinus sabiniana) has thick bark and is
self pruning. Arizona pine (Pinus arizonica) has
insulated buds, a high capacity to recover from
crown scorch and an open crown. Ponderosa pine
has thick bud scales; tight needle bunches that
enclose and protect the meristems, then open into a
loose arrangement that does not favor combustion
or propagation of flames; high foliar moisture; and
a deep rooting habit. The foliage and buds are also
usually elevated away from the flame zone. With
its high foliar moisture content, ponderosa pine can
withstand extensive scorching as long as the buds
and twigs, which tolerate higher temperatures than
needles, are not badly scorched.
USING PAST CONDITIONS AS A GUIDE
Historic range of variability (HRV) or natural range
of variability are interchangeable terms along with
natural variability, historical variation, and natural
range of variability. These terms suggest that past
conditions and processes can be used as guidance
for managing present-day ecosystems, and that
disturbance (and resultant variety) is a vital attribute
of nearly every ecosystem (Landres et al. 1999). The
HRV approach is just a first step in pondering
possible future forests and landscapes, because it is
difficult to deduce details about HRV (especially
across large areas and long times), and because
future climate conditions may not track historical
trends. Because of changes in fire regimes,
particularly caused by grazing and fire suppression,
many frequent-fire forests now function well
outside the HRV (see Moore et al. 1999, Veblen et
al. 2000, Allen et al. 2002, Arno and Fiedler 2005,
Zier and Baker 2006). For example, Sierra Nevada
forests currently are undergoing fire-free periods
that are much longer than at any time in the past two
centuries (Keeley and Stephenson 2000).
Determining the Historic Structure and
Function of Old-growth Forests
Almost all of the frequent-fire landscapes of the
western United States have changed dramatically as
a result of livestock grazing, timber harvesting, and
fire suppression. Given the near absence of fully
functioning, old-growth forests in frequent-fire
landscapes, scientists have to use a variety of
approaches to determine the structure and processes
that characterize these forests (Swetnam et al. 1999,
Egan and Howell 2001, Friederici 2003). Historical
journals, photographs, and records provide
information from some forests on the number and
sizes of trees before major changes in land use, and
the most detailed records even provide information
on other features, such as downed logs and
bunchgrass locations (Moore et al. 2004). In the
absence of historical records, detailed characterizations

Ecology and Society 12(2): 18
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art18/
Fig. 1. A cartoon description of the key features of old-growth forests in frequent-fire landscapes (left),
in contrast to younger forests lacking fire (right).
of tree ages, stump ages, and other field evidence
can provide solid descriptions of previous
conditions. A very few sites, such as the Powell
Plateau in the Grand Canyon and some regions of
northern Mexico, may have experienced so little
change in land use and fire regimes that
contemporary measurements are possible (Fulé et
al. 2005). Some of the most detailed insights about
the structure and function of old-growth forests
come from intensive experiments that have
reestablished historic forest structure. These
treatments include harvesting (and removing) the
excessive young trees, retaining most old trees, and
reintroducing fire at intervals that match the
frequency of historical fires (Bailey and Covington
2002, Fulé et al. 2002, 2006). Forest restoration
treatments may not redevelop historical old-growth
conditions perfectly for a variety of reasons: 1) the
seedbanks of native species may be depleted after
decades without fire, 2) exotic species may invade,
and 3) the animal communities may not be the same
as in past centuries.
We know that historic frequent-fire, old-growth
forests were not all alike. For example, Moore and
her colleagues (2004), after studying a set of 11
research plots established in the early 1900s in
Arizona and New Mexico, found that basal area
ranged from 9 to 27 m2/ha, with an average of 15
m2/ha. By the end of the century, basal area had
doubled on average, although some sites had
changed little and others had tripled. Similarly,

Ecology and Society 12(2): 18
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art18/
Arno et al. (1995), using dendrochronological
reconstructions of six old-growth ponderosa–
Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii) stands in
Montana, found basal densities in 1900 ranging
from 15 to 35 m2/ha. The variety of old-growth
forest structures probably varied with environmental
factors that influence tree establishment, growth,
and mortality, including the interacting effects of
fires. We also know that the return intervals for fires
were longer for most of the ponderosa pine forests
in eastern Montana (Morgan et al. 2002) and the
Front Range of Colorado—and modestly longer for
forests in western Montana (Arno 1980), eastern
Oregon (Youngblood et al. 2004), and eastern
Washington (Everett et al. 2000)—than for similar
forests in Arizona and New Mexico. However, we
don’t know how this difference in fire regime led to
differences in stand structure and function (for
example, see Kaufmann et al. 2006)
PROCESSES
The most essential process in the development of
old-growth conditions is time. Frequent-fire forests
occur under relatively dry conditions, and the lack
of abundant water limits the growth rates of trees.
Forests with slow-growing trees take 100–200 years
to begin to show the full spectrum of old-growth
structure and processes.
However, time alone is not sufficient to encourage
old growth in frequent-fire forests. Fundamental to
the development of old-growth conditions is the
interaction of forest processes with repeated fires.
In the absence of repeated fire, tree density tends to
remain high, and the fuel structure develops to the
point where a very intense fire kills most of the trees.
As a result, old-growth conditions are never
reached.
Frequent surface fires allow larger trees to persist,
limit the success of new trees, and foster the spatial
pattern of open meadows mixed with tree clumps.
Surface fires that recur every few years or decades
kill most of the small trees that managed to establish
during years with favorable precipitation and seed
crops. The trees that survive the fires experience
less competition for light and soil moisture, leading
to higher rates of individual growth, thicker bark,
and higher canopy base heights—all of which
makes these trees more resistant to subsequent
surface fires. The grasses, forbs, and shrubs that
thrive between clumps of trees are typically burned
by surface fires, but these plants often resprout from
surviving roots or reseed.
Without the recurring cultivation of the forest by
fire, old-growth conditions may not develop. Fire
suppression allows tree seedlings to recruit in large
numbers, forming denser stands. Wildfire spreads
more easily into the canopies of smaller trees with
low branches, and from smaller trees into the crowns
of previously fire-resistant old trees. With abundant
small trees established among the more scattered
old growth, fire may spread rapidly across large
areas, with high mortality in all age and size classes.
Productivity, Hydrology, and Nutrient Cycling
One of the most distinctive features of frequent-fire,
old-growth forests is the major contribution that the
understory vegetation (grasses, forbs, shrubs)
makes to ecosystem diversity and productivity. In
the absence of fire, the density of overstory trees
increases, which reduces the diversity of understory
vegetation 10–30% (Fig. 2, Laughlin and Grace
2006). This relationship between the density of trees
and understory diversity is further influenced by the
number of years between fires (the fire return
interval). For example, a ponderosa pine forest on
the Kaibab Plateau that burned in the past 10 years
might have 35 species in the understory,
compared with 28 species after 70 years without a
fire, and 22 species after 120 years without a fire
(Laughlin et al. 2005).
Restoration treatments reduce tree density and
lower the total growth of trees in a forest, but
increase the growth of residual (retained) trees and
the biomass and productivity of the understory. In
Montana, understory plant diversity declined the
first year after a thinning and burning restoration
treatment in a ponderosa pine–Douglas-fir forest,
but increased significantly 2 years after treatment
(Metlen and Fiedler 2006). Experiments around
northern Arizona typically show understory
biomass and growth increases of more than two-fold
in response to thinning and prescribed burning (Fig.
3; Abella 2004, Gildar et al. 2004, Moore et al.
2004). Restoration treatments appear to have little
effect on the total productivity of the forests, but
they shift how the growth is allocated between the
overstory and understory. A restoration experiment
at Fort Valley near Flagstaff, Arizona showed that
total production did not change, but the proportion
accounted for by the understory rose from 10% to

Ecology and Society 12(2): 18
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art18/
Fig. 2. The richness of understory plant species declines with increasing density of overstory pine trees,
on the Kaibab Plateau in northern Arizona (after Laughlin and Grace 2006). Typical historic conditions
would have had about 35 species per 0.1-ha plot, but with changing land use and fire regimes, the most
common species richness has declined to 25 to 30 species per 0.1-ha plot.
about 25%. The benefit of restoration treatments
also differs among plant types. For example, the
restoration responses at Fort Valley were greater for
grasses than forbs (Moore et al. 2006), greater for
leguminous forbs than other types, and greater for
C3 grasses (e.g., bottlebrush squirreltail (Elymus
elymoides subsp. elymoides)) than C4 grasses (e.g.,
mountain muhly (Muhlenbergia montana)). All of
these trends might differ in response to major or
minor differences in restoration prescriptions, site
history, and current weather.
The higher productivity of understory plants in old-
growth (and restored) forests in frequent-fire
landscapes results in part from the low canopy leaf
area of the overstory trees. Tree canopies cover less
than half of the ground area (and commonly as little
as 25%). Despite this patchy distribution of trees,
the total amount of leaves in the tree canopy on 1
ha would still provide 2 or 3 ha of leaf surface area
to intercept light. Forests in landscapes with higher
supplies of water commonly have canopy surface
areas of 4 to 6 ha displayed for each hectare of
ground area.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 18
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art18/
Fig. 3. Understory biomass and growth were much higher in forests with restoration treatments than in
control forests (from summary of Abella 2004, Gildar et al. 2004, Moore et al. 2006). The greatest
proportional increases occur when the biomass in the unrestored forests is particularly low.
The amount of tree leaf area in a forest may have
important effects on the supply of water in the soil
that is available for both trees and understory
vegetation. Precipitation falling on tree canopies
may be intercepted, accumulating briefly on the
needles before evaporating back to the atmosphere,
never reaching the soil. Forests with high leaf area
not only lose more precipitation from this
interception loss, but they also have higher rates of
water use by trees, with lower amounts of soil water
available for use by understory plants. In wetter
landscapes, changes in the amount of tree leaf area
influence the amount of water reaching streams. For
example, reducing tree cover in higher-elevation
forests in the Rocky Mountains commonly increases
stream flow by 15 to 30% (MacDonald and Stednick
2003). The amount of water flowing in streams in
frequent-fire landscapes depends less on the density
and size of trees (and canopies) than in wetter areas,
because drier conditions mean that water not used
by trees will be used by understory plants. Restoring
old-growth structure to forests in frequent-fire
landscapes may lead to increased streamflow during
wet periods and, perhaps, to some recharge of
subsurface aquifers.
Forest restoration treatments generally improve the
water status of large trees, reducing water stress,
and increasing the volume of resin in stems (Wallin
et al. 2004, Zausen et al. 2005). Improved water

Ecology and Society 12(2): 18
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art18/
status may enhance the overall vigor of trees,
leading to lower rates of mortality from bark beetles
and other insects and diseases.
Nutrient cycles in forests are influenced directly by
fire, including losses (such as nitrogen converted to
gas as biomass is consumed) and probably short-
term increases in availability of some nutrients
(including nitrogen). In the longer run, differences
between old-growth and non-old-growth conditions
may derive from the indirect effects of changes in
vegetation composition than from the direct,
cumulative effects of fires (Hart et al. 2005a).
EVOLUTION AND ADAPTATION
The biotic processes in forests develop from
interactions between genes, organisms, and
environmental factors. The genetics of a forest
include those of trees, understory plants, wildlife,
and the unimaginably diverse organisms in the soil.
Although the interactions among genes, organisms,
and environmental factors in a ponderosa pine forest
are beyond the scope of this article (and indeed,
beyond human comprehension!), we provide a few
examples to illustrate the complexity and resilience
of this system.
Bark Beetles
Bark beetles are an important, natural component
of many conifer ecosystems. Bark beetles (and their
fungal symbionts) routinely kill small numbers of
pine trees and, occasionally, extremely high beetle
populations lead to massive pine mortality across
very large areas. A number of factors—drought,
lightning strikes, root pathogens, large fire scars,
severe defoliation, tree senescence, excessive
competition—make an individual old tree or stand
more susceptible to bark beetle outbreaks. Recent
thinning may also contribute to increased wind
turbulence in a stand, leading to root damage and,
perhaps, making individual trees susceptible to
attack (Christiansen et al. 1987).
Coniferous trees have developed two main
mechanisms to counter beetle attacks. First, they
have a system of resin ducts in the phloem and xylem
that can pitch-out invading beetles. Second, they
have developed a hypersensitive reaction to
invasion by microorganisms (including fungi,
bacteria, and viruses) that enter the tree along with
the beetles. A necrotic area, impregnated with
resinous and phenolic compounds that prevent
beetle gallery construction and fungal proliferation,
then forms around the point of infection. This wound
resin is highly toxic to beetle eggs and larvae and
also inhibits fungal growth (Christiansen et al.
1987).
The ability of a large, old tree to resist an attack
depends on its genetic makeup and physiological
status (Franceschi et al. 2005). Independent of age,
ponderosa pine trees grow slowly when stressed by
competition. However, because most old trees are
large in size and stature, they may have higher
maintenance respiration demands because of the
amount of living, non-photosynthetic tissue they
maintain compared with younger trees (Skov et al.
2004). Another factor that may limit photosynthetic
rate is that these large trees also tend to have more
branch junctions and a longer root-leaf hydraulic
path 
length 
that 
may 
decrease 
hydraulic
conductance (Skov et al. 2004). Together, these
factors may all contribute to slow growth of old
ponderosa pine trees.
Bark beetles are only one of many potential threats
to ponderosa pine trees, and the susceptibility to
each threat differs among trees. For example,
ponderosa pine trees may be attacked by bark
beetles 
and 
infected 
by 
dwarf 
mistletoe
(Arceuthobium spp.), but the success of each of these
varies among individual ponderosa pines (Fig. 4).
Trees that appear susceptible to beetles appear to be
resistant to dwarf mistletoe, and vice versa. The
continued survival, growth, and seed production of
individual pine trees may depend in part on the local
prevalence of parasites, which depends in turn on
the local genotypes of pines and local environmental
conditions.
Abert’s Squirrels
Abert’s squirrels (Sciurus aberti) are also highly
dependent on ponderosa pine trees. Ponderosa pines
provide them with places to live, nest, rest, and hide
from predators as well as food in the form of bark,
buds, flowers, and seeds (Hoffmeister 1986).
Squirrels choose individual trees based on the
(heritable) chemistry of tree phloem. As a result,
different populations of Abert’s squirrels are
adapted to different populations of ponderosa pine
(Snyder 1992, 1993; Snyder and Linhart 1994).

Ecology and Society 12(2): 18
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art18/
Fig. 4. Some ponderosa pine trees were heavily attacked by bark beetles, some heavily infected by
dwarf mistletoe parasites, and some were unaffected—but no trees were heavily attacked by both bark
beetles and dwarf mistletoe (after Linhart et al. 1994).
Yet another ecological interaction connects
ponderosa pines and Abert’s squirrels. Squirrels eat
mycorrhizal fungi and help disperse it through their
fecal pellets. Mycorrhizal fungi are very important
to plant productivity, so if the fungi were rare, then
squirrels could, perhaps, enhance forest productivity
(Vireday 1982, Kotter and Farentinos 1984a, b).
Mooney and Linhart (2006) have recently
developed an even more interwoven story about
pines, growth, birds, ants, spiders, aphids, wasps,
and dwarf mistletoe.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 18
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art18/
Genetics and Old Trees
The genotypes of pine trees are influenced by both
selective pressures (Abert’s squirrels, beetles, and
dwarf mistletoes), and by the flow of genes in the
neighborhood. The genes of paternal trees flood the
local landscape as pollen drifts on the wind, but
maternal genes disperse only as far as seeds can fall
from a tree or be carried by animals (Latta et al.
1998). Old trees may be particularly important in a
forest, as they have (by definition) survived
centuries of changing environmental and biotic
challenges. The presence of these trees in a
landscape is critical for contributing both seeds and
pollen to later generations of trees.
Resilience and Fire at the Landscape Scale
Just as individual trees have mechanisms that make
them resistant to bark beetles and fire, a healthy,
functioning forest will exhibit resilience on a large
scale. Persistence, resilience, and resistance are all
terms applied to the stability of an ecosystem
(Holling 1973, Gunderson et al. 1995, Gunderson
and Holling 2002). Ecosystem fragility is the
opposite of stability and is expediently defined as
“...the degree of change in species abundances and
in species composition, following disturbance”
(Nilsson and Grelsson 1995). Frequent-fire forests
are highly stable in the long term, as long as fire is
maintained in the system. However, they may be
considered fragile in the short term following a fire.
Moreover, many of these forests are now considered
fragile in the long term, particularly following the
catastrophic fires that result from long periods of
fire suppression.
OLD-GROWTH FOREST COMPOSITION
Although processes are the driving forces behind
any ecosystem, those processes are reflected and
supported by the composition of the ecosystem, that
is by the living and non-living entities that exist in
the ecosystem. Old-growth forests, by definition,
have old trees, but the presence of old trees is just
the beginning of a description of the composition of
an old-growth forest. The frequent return of fires
provides the opportunity for a great range of plants,
animals, and microbes to coexist in the same
landscape.
Plant Composition and Structure
In frequent-fire landscapes, the diversity of plant
species in the forest understory is much greater than
the diversity of overstory species. Moreover,
frequent fires strongly influence the composition of
understory plant communities. The most striking
feature of old-growth patches of ponderosa pine
may be the towering “yellow-bellies”—the large-
diameter giants with the yellowish, fire-resistant
bark. However, these forests are characterized as
much by the understory that develops in the diverse
range of habitat conditions: near clumps of big trees,
in small openings between clumps, and in the open
meadows between groups of large trees. Native
perennial graminoids, including several species of
fescue (Festuca spp.) and sedges (Carex spp.),
dropseed (Blepharoneuron tricholepsis, Sporobolus 
spp.), Indian ricegrass (Oryzopsis spp.), and galleta
(Pleuraphis spp.), as well as grazing-tolerant
squirreltail and western wheatgrass (Pascopyrum
smithii) and the ubiquitous grama grasses
(Bouteloua 
spp.), 
form 
diverse 
understory
communities that account for a large portion (more
than half) of the net annual primary production in
many old-growth ponderosa pine stands (Moore et
al. 2004).
In addition to the native grasses, many annual and
perennial forbs occur, usually as subdominants or
rare 
components 
of 
the 
understory 
plant
community. Native penstemon (Penstemon spp.),
evening primrose (Oenothera spp.), and low-
growing sages (Artemesia spp.) are complemented
by diverse composites that flower throughout the
growing season. Fire-resilient or -adapted shrubs,
such as kinnikinnick (Arctostaphylos uva-ursi) and
serviceberry (Amelanchier spp.) in the Inland
Northwest, and cliffrose (Purshia spp.) and
ceanothus in the Southwest, are characteristic of
open-growing, old-growth pine forests. In many
Southwest locations, Gambel oak (Quercus
gambelii), which can be found from a low-growing
shrub to subdominant tree, is the second most
abundant woody plant.
This heterogeneity in species composition and
structural types is characteristic of most types of
old-growth forests that develop in frequent-fire
landscapes. Large overstory trees typically occur in
scattered clumps of several to several dozen
individuals sometimes in a dense matrix of younger
trees, and other times intermixed with grassland
openings of several acres. In terms of species

Ecology and Society 12(2): 18
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art18/
composition, structural diversity, and ecological
function, such old-growth forests contrast sharply
with the dense stands that commonly develop when
fires are suppressed. For example, Gambel oak and
ceanothus are common shrubs in most Southwest
ponderosa pine forests, but they typically are more
common, and individual plants are larger and more
developed, in open forests dominated by large pines.
This diversity in the woody plant community has
far-reaching implications, in part because these
species support insect communities that are more
diverse and abundant than those found in pure stands
of ponderosa pine. Insect abundance, in turn,
influences bird and bat populations, pollination
rates, and the amount of wildlife forage. In this way,
the composition and structural attributes of the
ponderosa pine trees set the template for a
potentially diverse plant community whose
composition and function vary widely.
Animal Communities
Wildlife species respond in a host of ways to the
structure of forests, and to boundaries between
forests with different structures. Old-growth forests
provide habitat for many wildlife species, but the
critical habitat characteristics vary tremendously
among species in both time and space. Some species
are year-round residents, and others use old-growth
forests only for breeding, wintering, or migration.
Similarly, some species (e.g., pygmy nuthatch (Sitta
pygmaea)) rely on specific old-growth structural
components, such as large trees, whereas others (e.
g., Abert’s squirrel) need the structure of a whole
patch of old-growth trees to facilitate their
movements and provide food. Some species (e.g.,
northern goshawk (Accipiter gentilis)) require old-
growth forest conditions within an entire landscape
matrix that contains non-old-growth forests to meet
all their ecological needs.
Starting at the small end of the scale, standing dead
trees (snags) and partially dead trees (living snags)
are an important part of a living forest ecosystem
(Waskiewicz 2003, Chambers and Mast 2005).
Dozens of species of birds and bats rely on living
and dead trees for habitat, and many of these species
in turn may influence the success (or failure) of other
organisms (e.g., defoliating caterpillars). Resource
managers are commonly required to provide a
minimum number of snags, but more recent insights
have indicated snags alone may not be the key to
providing habitat for species such as bats,
nuthatches, and bluebirds because the longevity and
number of dead snags is limited in frequent-fire
forest. For instance, Saab et al. (2006) tested
prescribed fire on more than 130 plots in the
southwestern United States, and found an average
loss of 35% of the downed wood and half of the
standing snags (Saab et al. 2006). Boucher et al.
(2000) pointed out that snags may not last long in
frequent-fire forests because surface fires either
ignite snags or topple them by burning the roots.
The best long-term habitat may be provided by
living snags, which are live trees with large dead
limbs or tops. These living snags often develop after
lightning strikes, beetle infestations, pathogen
attack, or a combination of these factors.
Moving up to the scale of patches or stands, forest
structure influences survival and population
persistence of a variety of wildlife species. Very
uniform spacing of trees, which is the typical result
of traditional silvicultural thinning treatments,
degrades habitats for Abert’s squirrels (Dodd et al.
2003). Information on characteristics and sizes of
patches needed by the squirrel and the spatial
arrangement of these patches are necessary parts of
silvicultural prescriptions that ensure viable
populations of these squirrels. Similar silvicultural
and management decisions are required for other
old-growth-dependent species, including spotted
owls (Strix occidentalis).
At the scale of entire landscapes, old-growth forests
will likely be part of a landscape mosaic that
includes forests that lack old-growth characteristics.
These non-old-growth habitats (ranging from
meadows to dense young stands to maturing second-
growth stands) might support some aspect of an
animal species’ needs. For example, northern
goshawks are habitat generalists and their
populations are often limited by the availability of
food, which causes them to move between different
habitat types. Reynolds et al. (1992) developed a
landscape model of goshawk habitat that identifies
a landscape-scale mosaic of six vegetation structural
stages, which provide habitat for a suite of northern
goshawk prey species. These vegetation structural
stages 
range 
from 
grass-forb 
regeneration
conditions to old-growth forest. Although northern
goshawks need old-growth forests, particularly for
nesting, they also benefit from a diverse mosaic
across the landscape.
There are also symbiotic, co-evoluntionary
relationships that animals have throughout old-

Ecology and Society 12(2): 18
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art18/
growth forests. As noted in the discussion above
about Abert’s squirrels, there is almost no limit to
the nature of interactions in forests, and we are far
from having a clear understanding of which
interactions have major, cascading effects. Some
wildlife species are considered keystone species in
that other species depend on them to provide
necessary conditions. For example, populations of
hairy woodpeckers (Picoides villosus) increase after
fire, just as populations of beetles increase (Covert-
Bratland et al. 2006). In ponderosa pine forests in
the Southwest, half of the species that nest in tree
cavities cannot excavate cavities (secondary cavity-
nesting species), so hairy woodpeckers may be
critical in supporting a diversity of animals. The
feedback cycle turns yet again because, without
fires, the population of hairy woodpeckers may be
low, reducing the habitat opportunities for other
species, further changing the complex forest
ecosystem.
Management activities that move a forest away from
old-growth conditions change the opportunities for
many species. For example, Szaro and Balda (1979)
compared four treatments with an uncut control plot
that had some characteristics of old-growth forests.
Pygmy nuthatches, red-faced warblers (Cardellina
rubrifrons), hermit thrushes (Catharus guttatus),
cordilleran flycatchers (Empidonax occidentalis),
and violet-green swallows (Tachycineta thalassina)
lost habitat with treatments that moved the forests
away from old-growth forest conditions.
Grazing alters herbaceous plant composition and
structure, affecting habitat for species such as
Mogollon voles (Microtus mogollonensis) (Chambers
and Doucett 2008). Using a stable-isotope approach,
these scientists found that herbivorous voles rely on
grass and herbs for food, and that C3 plants (e.g.,
yarrow (Achillea millefolium), lupine (Lupinus 
spp.), 
fescue, 
mulleins 
(Verbascum 
spp.),
snakeweed (Gutierrezia spp.)) were a more
important food source than C4 plants (e.g., species
of muhly (Muhlenbergia spp.) and grama grasses).
Excessive ungulate grazing and introduction of
invasive plant species that lead to changes in plant
species composition or reductions in C3 plants in
montane grasslands and forests would reduce
habitat quality for Mogollon voles. Mogollon voles
are also important food for the threatened Mexican
spotted owl (Strix occidentalis lucida) (Ward 2001).
Recent research indicates that vole populations are
reduced in pine–oak forests as the result of past
logging and grazing practices (Block et al. 2005).
As noted throughout this special issue, the loss of
old-growth structure in frequent-fire landscapes
commonly leads to uncharacteristically severe
wildfires, which, in turn, benefit some animal
species and harm others. Bock and Block (2005),
for instance, compared the bird communities in
unburned and moderately and severely burned
forests. Three years after the fires, the unburned
forest had 31 species in the breeding season and 26
in the non-breeding season. Both levels of burn
intensity increased the diversity of birds, with more
than 40 species of breeding birds and 33 species of
non-breeders. Species groups that increased in
response to fire included woodpeckers, flycatchers,
and thrushes.
Restoration treatments that move forests toward
old-growth structure and composition appear to be
effective in restoring bird habitat. Germaine and
Germaine (2002) found that the fledgling rate (i.e.,
number of young to leave the nest) for western
bluebirds (Sialia mexicana) in restored stands was
1.6 times greater than in dense, untreated stands.
Converse et al. (2006a, b) evaluated effects of fuel-
reduction treatments on small mammals and found
that total biomass and population sizes of small
mammals generally increased following thinning
and fire. The most thorough assessments of post-
restoration animal responses come from landscape-
scale treatments near Mt. Trumball in the Grand
Canyon–Parashant National Monument in northern
Arizona (Covington et al. 2005). Various aspects of
wildlife habitat and populations were examined for
up to 9 years, and demonstrated that restoring old-
growth forest structure generally favored species or
had much lower negative effects than stand-
replacing fire. Mule deer (Odocoileus hemionus)
tended to use restored portions of the landscape at
night, although they used restored and control areas
about equally during the day. Abert’s squirrel
populations declined in response to the lower
density of pine trees, but the squirrels did continue
living in trees in the restored areas. Breeding pairs
of northern goshawks were found in control and
restored areas, and fledglings were successful in
both forest types. The densities of butterflies
doubled in restored areas.
Microbial Communities
Given that microbial interactions and processes are
the foundation of much of the forest ecosystem,
surprisingly little is known about the differences in

Ecology and Society 12(2): 18
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art18/
microbial communities between old-growth forests
and post-fire-cessation forests. The two microbial
communities that we know the most about are wood-
decaying fungi and mycorrhizal fungi.
A number of wood-decaying fungi infect primarily
old trees, roots, and large branches. Several species
of wood-decaying fungi found in unmanaged older
forests are rare in younger stands (Romme et al.
1992). Aging trees tend to become increasingly
vulnerable to wood-decaying fungi because fungi
can enter through dead branch stubs, knots, broken
tops, fire scars, and wounds such as those caused by
bark beetles or woodpeckers (Farris et al. 2004). In
addition to the vital role these pathogens play in the
carbon cycle and in recycling nutrients for plants,
they also create valuable habitat for numerous
wildlife species (Marcot 2002).
Mycorrhizal fungi form symbiotic associations with
tree roots, providing water and nutrients to roots in
exchange for sugar. Experiments by various
researchers have shown that fire may substantially
affect these fungal associations, particularly near
the soil surface. For example, a study by Pattinson
et al. (1999) that simulated the effect of fire showed
a decline in numbers of mycorrhizal propagules and
a reduction in the hyphal network (the tiny,
networked strands of fungus). Korb et al. (2003)
found a rapid increase in arbuscular mycorrhizae
following restoration treatments in northern
Arizona, whereas Smith et al. (2005) reported a
short-term reduction in ectomycorrhizal fungi
(EMF) following prescribed fire in Oregon.
Researchers have also studied the effects of seasonal
burning on the mycorrhizal community. Smith et al.
(2004) detected that fall burning in dry ponderosa
pine stands significantly reduced duff depth, live
root biomass, and EMF species richness compared
with spring burning. The probability of mature tree
mortality was also greater after fall burning. Meyer
et al. (2005) found that burning reduced litter depth
and log volume as well as the frequency, biomass,
and species richness of mycorrhizal truffles in an
area of the Sierra Nevada. The authors posit that
decaying woody debris forms an important reservoir
of moisture and nutrients, especially in dry forests,
for fruiting fungi. It also appears that mycorrhizal
fungi are more likely to survive when the duff layer
is thin or moist.
Hart et al. (2005a) report that repeated burning
(every 2 years during a 20-year period) reduced fine
root length, fine root biomass, and mycorrhizal root
biomass, as well as the amount of nitrogen and
phosphorous stored in the belowground pools. The
authors speculate that the change in these pools most
likely occurred during the first few prescribed burns
when the fuel loads and fire intensities would have
been highest. Their results suggest that such
frequent burning may have negative long-term
effects on belowground biomass pools and nutrient
cycling. They also postulate that these negative
effects may be avoided by mechanically removing
some of the accumulated fuel before prescribed
burning.
Despite these descriptive studies and experiments,
we essentially know very little about the critical
changes that may (or may not) follow the loss of
old-growth characteristics in a forest. A recent study
(Hart et al. 2005b) found that a fire following a long,
fire-free period reduced the diversity of the bacterial
community by more than half, yet more than
doubled the diversity of the fungal community. We
do not know if these dramatic changes have
important cascading effects in the forest.
HUMAN VALUES
Although this is covered in more depth by other
authors in this special issue, we also want to say that
old-growth forests in frequent-fire landscapes
provide a host of human values that go beyond the
list of species present, or economic and ecological
functions. For instance, old-growth forests carry a
legacy of information from earlier times. They can
tell us a great deal about how climates have varied
in past epochs, and how the forests (and fires)
responded. Without the information held in tree
rings, we would not know how the landscapes of
the southwestern United States were influenced by
patterns of El Niño/Southern Oscillation precipitation
(Grissino-Mayer and Swetnam 2000) or to what
degree the rise and fall of dryland civilizations
related (or not) to climate (Dean 1988). We also
recognize that many people see an inherent beauty
in old-growth forests (Huckaby et al. 2003), and find
personal sustenance from these “wilderness” or wild
landscapes.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 18
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art18/
KNOWLEDGE GAPS
All forests are complicated ecosystems, making the
potential list of gaps in our knowledge almost
unbounded. Nevertheless, we can identify several
key areas where studies and experiments are needed
to fill major gaps that hinder restoration efforts of
old growth in the frequent-fire forests of the
American West.
Ability of Understory Vegetation to Respond to
Restoration Treatments
How well can we recover the historical understory
(and 
related 
animal 
habitat 
features) 
that
characterized old-growth conditions? The absence
of fire for a century has been coupled in many forests
with a host of other land-use impacts, including
intensive livestock grazing and logging. Long-term
plots from northern Arizona have shown not only
declines in total understory production and species
diversity, but also shifts among vegetation types
(such as greater losses of C4 grasses than C3 grasses).
How well can the understory recover its former
productivity and species composition in response to
thinning or thinning plus fire? Does the season and/
or frequency of burning have an effect on the
understory? Will adding native seed from nearby
areas be critical? How did use by Native Americans
affect the understory of pre-European-settlement,
old-growth forest understories? More experiments
across a variety of landscape conditions are needed
to answer these and other questions related to
understory vegetation.
Ability of Frequent-fire Forests to Recover
Following Catastrophic Wildfires
How does ecosystem recovery progress after severe
wildfires that exceed the historical range of fire
behavior in frequent-fire landscapes? We expect
that recovery will be slow, but will recovery
eventually occur or will the forests be converted to
other vegetation types (grasslands or shrublands)?
What restoration treatments would be most effective
for recovering natural forest composition, structure,
and function after large, severe fires? Which
treatments can move forests toward old-growth
conditions and also reduce risks of severe fires?
Ability to Extrapolate Knowledge of Certain
Forests to Other Places and Forest Types
Much of our knowledge about old-growth
conditions in frequent-fire landscapes comes from
a very limited range of forest types, and detailed
information comes from an even more restricted set
of intensive study sites. How representative are the
ponderosa pine landscapes of northern Arizona for
ponderosa pine in other areas? How different are
dry mixed-conifer forests from ponderosa pine
forests, and how do they vary with landscape
position locally and throughout the West? We have
a good general understanding the key questions and
the important processes, but restoration of old-
growth conditions in any local forest will depend
on locally appropriate details.
The Uncertainty of Climate Change and its
Effects on Forested Ecosystems
Climates have changed dramatically in the past 10
000 years, and the 21st century will likely differ from
the 19th century. What do we need to know to foster
old-growth forest conditions under various climate
scenarios? If managers can only afford to restore a
portion of a landscape (which is almost always the
case), should restoration focus on lower-elevation
sites (with the risk that climate changes would shift
the ecotone upward)? This knowledge gap will
probably not be filled by data collection or
experimentation, but the potential effects of climate
change need to be kept in mind.
Responses to this article can be read online at:
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art18/responses/
LITERATURE CITED
Abella, S. R. 2004. Tree thinning and prescribed
burning effects on ground flora in Arizona
ponderosa pine forests: a review. Journal of the
Arizona-Nevada Academy of Science 36:68–76.
Allen, C. D., M. Savage, D. A. Falk, K. F. Suckling,
T. W. Swetnam, T. Schulke, P. B. Stacey, P.
Morgan, M. Hoffman, and J. T. Klingel. 2002.
Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa
pine ecosystems: a broad perspective. Ecological
Applications 12:1418–1433.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 18
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art18/
Arno, S. F. 1980. Forest fire history in the northern
Rockies. Journal of Forestry 78:460–465.
Arno, S. F., and C. E. Fiedler. 2005. Mimicking
nature’s fire: restoring fire-prone forests in the West. 
Island Press, Washington, D.C., USA.
Arno, S. F., J. Scott, and M. Hartwell. 1995. Age-
class structure of old growth ponderosa pine/
Douglas-fir stands and its relationship to fire
history. U.S. Forest Service Research Paper 481.
Bailey, J. D., and W. W. Covington. 2002.
Evaluating ponderosa pine regeneration rates
following ecological restoration treatments in
northern Arizona, USA. Forest Ecology and
Management 155:271–278.
Block, W. M., J. L. Ganey, P. E. Scott, and R.
King. 2005. Prey ecology of Mexican spotted owls
in pine-oak forests of northern Arizona. Journal of
Wildlife Management 69:618–629.
Bock, C. E., and W. M. Block. 2005. Response of
birds to fire in the American southwest. Pages 1093–
1099 in C. J. Ralph and T. D. Rich, editors. Bird
conservation implementation and integration in the
Americas: Proceedings of the third international
Partners in Flight conference. Volume 2. U.S. Forest
Service General Technical Report PSW-GTR-191.
Boucher, P. F., W. M. Block, G. V. Benavidez, and
L. W. Wiebe. 2000. Implementing the expanded
prescribed fire program on the Gila National Forest,
New Mexico: implications for snag management.
Proceedings of the Tall Timbers Fire Ecology
Conference 21:104–113.
Chambers, C. L., and R. R. Doucett. 2008. Diet
of the Mogollon vole as indicated by stable isotope
analysis (13 C and 15 N). Western North American
Naturalist (In press).
Chambers, C. L., and J. N. Mast. 2005. Ponderosa
pine snag dynamics and cavity excavation following
wildfire in northern Arizona. Forest Ecology and
Management 216:227–240.
Christiansen, E., R. H. Waring, and A. A.
Berryman. 1987. Resistance of conifers to bark
beetle attack: searching for general relationships.
Forest Ecology and Management 22:89–106.
Converse, S. J., W. M. Block, and D. C. White. 
2006a. Small mammal population and habitat
responses to forest thinning and prescribed fire.
Forest Ecology and Management 228:263–273.
Converse, S. J., G. C. White, and W. M. Block. 
2006b. Small mammal response to thinning and
wildfire in ponderosa pine-dominated forests of the
southwestern USA. Journal of Wildlife Management 
70(6):1711–1722.
Covert-Bratland, K. A., W. M. Block, and T.
Theimer. 2006. Hairy woodpecker winter ecology
in ponderosa pine forests representing different ages
since wildfire. Journal of Wildlife Management 70
(5):1379–1392.
Covington, W. W., D. Vosick, and K. A. Lowe. 
2005. Southwest fire initiative final report. 
Submitted to the Bureau of Land Management by
the Ecological Restoration Institute, Flagstaff,
Arizona, USA.
Dean, J. S. 1988. Dendrochronology and
paleoenvironmental reconstruction on the Colorado
Plateaus. Pages 119–167 in G.J. Gumerman, editor.
The Anasazi in a changing environment. School of
American Research Book, Cambridge University
Press, New York, New York, USA.
Dodd, N. L., J. S. States, and S. S. Rosenstock. 
2003. Tassel-eared squirrel population, habitat
condition, and dietary relationships in north-central
Arizona. Journal of Wildlife Management 67:622–
633.
Egan, D. and E. A. Howell, editors. 2001. The
historical ecology handbook: a restorationist’s
guide to reference ecosystems. Island Press,
Washington, D.C., USA.
Everett, R. L., R. Schellhaas, D. Keenum, D.
Spurbeck, and P. Ohlson. 2000. Fire history in the
ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir forests on the east slope
of the Washington Cascades. Fire Ecology and
Management 129:207–225.
Farris, K. L., M. J. Huss, and S. Zack. 2004. The
role of foraging woodpeckers in the decomposition
of ponderosa pine snags. The Condor 106:50–59.
Franceschi, V. R., P. Krokene, E. Christiansen,
and T. Krekling. 2005. Anatomical and chemical
defenses of conifer bark against bark beetles and
other pests. The New Phytologist 167:353–376.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 18
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art18/
Friederici, P., editor. 2003. Ecological restoration
of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Island
Press, Washington, D.C., USA.
Fulé, P. Z., W. W. Covington, H. B. Smith, J. D.
Springer, T. A. Heinlein, K. D. Huisinga, and M.
M. Moore. 2002. Comparing ecological restoration
alternatives at Grand Canyon, Arizona. Forest
Ecology and Management 170:19–41.
Fulé, P. Z., W. W. Covington, M. T. Stoddard, and
D. Bertolette. 2006. Minimal impact restoration
treatments have limited effects on forest structure
and fuels at Grand Canyon, USA. Restoration
Ecology 14(3):357–368.
Fulé, P. Z., J. Villanueva-Díaz, and M. Ramos-
Gómez. 2005. Fire regime in a conservation reserve
in Chihuahua, Mexico. Canadian Journal of Forest
Research 35:320–330.
Germaine, H. L., and S. S. Germaine. 2002. Forest
restoration treatment effects on the nesting success
of western bluebirds. Restoration Ecology 10:362–
367.
Gildar, C. N., P. Z. Fulé, and W. W. Covington. 
2004. Plant community variability in ponderosa
pine forest has implications for reference
conditions. Natural Areas Journal 24(2):101–111.
Grissino-Mayer, H. D., and T. W. Swetnam. 2000.
Century-scale climate forcing of fire regimes in the
American Southwest. Holocene 10:213–220.
Gunderson, L., and C. S. Holling, editors. 2002. 
Panarchy: understanding transformations in human
and natural systems. Island Press, Washington, D.
C, USA.
Gunderson, L., C. S. Holling, and S. Light,
editors. 1995. Barriers and bridges to the renewal
of ecosystems and institutions. Columbia University
Press, New York, New York, USA.
Hart, S. C., A. T. Classen, and R. J. Wright. 2005a.
Long-term interval burning alters fine root and
mycorrhizal dynamics in a ponderosa pine forest.
Journal of Applied Ecology 42:752–761.
Hart, S. C., T. H. DeLuca, G. S. Newman, M. D.
MacKenzie, and S. I. Boyle. 2005b. Post-fire
vegetative dynamics as drivers of microbial
community structure and function in forest soils.
Forest Ecology and Management 220:166–184.
Hoffmeister, D. F. 1986. Mammals of Arizona. 
University of Arizona Press and Arizona Game and
Fish Department, Tucson and Phoenix, Arizona,
USA.
Holling, C. S. 1973. Resilience and stability of
ecological systems. Annual Review of Ecology and
Systematics 4:1–23.
Huckaby, L. S., M. R. Kaufmann, P. J. Fornwalt,
J. M. Stoker, and C. Dennis. 2003. Identification
and ecology of old ponderosa pine trees in the
Colorado Front Range. U.S. Forest Service General
Technical Report RMRS-GTR-110.
Kaufmann, M. R., T. T. Veblen, and W. H.
Romme. 2006. Historical fire regimes in ponderosa
pine forests of the Colorado Front Range, and
recommendations for ecological restoration and
fuels management. Colorado Forest Restoration
Institute, Colorado State University, and The Nature
Conservancy, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA.
Keeley, J. E., and N. L. Stephenson. 2000.
Restoring natural fire regimes to the Sierra Nevada
in an era of global change. Pages 255–265 in D. N.
Cole, S. F. McCool, W. T. Borrie, and J.
O’Loughlin, compilers. Wilderness science in a time
of change conference–Volume 5: Wilderness
ecosystems, threats, and management. U.S. Forest
Service Proceedings RMRS-P-15-VOL-5.
Korb, J. E., N. C. Johnson, and W. W. Covington. 
2003. Arbuscular mycorrhizal propagule densities
respond rapidly to ponderosa pine restoration
treatments. Journal of Applied Ecology 40:101–
110.
Kotter, M. M., and R. C. Farentinos. 1984a.
Formation of ponderosa pine ectomychorrhizae
after inoculation with feces of tassel-eared squirrels.
Mycologia 76:758–760.
———. 1984b. Tassel-eared squirrels as spore
dispersal agents of hypogeous mycorrhizal fungi.
Journal of Mammalogy 65:684–667.
Landres, P. B., P. M. Morgan, and F. J. Swanson. 
1999. Overview of the use of natural variability
concepts 
in 
managing 
ecological 
systems.
Ecological Applications 9(4):1179–1188.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 18
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art18/
Latta, R. G., Y. B. Linhart, D. Fleck, and M.
Elliot. 1998. Direct and indirect estimates of seed
versus pollen movement within a population of
ponderosa pine. Evolution 52:61–67.
Laughlin, D. C., J. D. Bakker, and P. Z. Fulé. 2005.
Understory plant community structure in lower
montane and subalpine forests, Grand Canyon
National Park, USA. Journal of Biogeography 
32:2083–2102.
Laughlin, D. C., and J. B. Grace. 2006. A
multivariate model of plant species richness in
forested systems: old-growth montane forests with
a long history of fire. Oikos 114:60–70.
Leopold, A. 1920. Piute forestry vs. forest fire
prevention. Southwestern Magazine 2:12–13.
(Reprinted as: Paiute forestry. 1990. Pages 139–142
in D.E. Brown and N.B. Carmony, editors. Aldo
Leopold’s southwest. University of New Mexico
Press, Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA.
Long, J. N., and F. W. Smith. 2000. Restructuring
the forest: goshawks and the restoration of
southwestern ponderosa pine. Journal of Forestry 
98:25–30.
MacDonald, L. H., and J. D. Stednick. 2003.
Forests and water: a state-of-the-art review for
Colorado. Colorado Water Resources Research
Institute Report No. 196.
Marcot, B. G. 2002. An ecological functional basis
for managing decaying wood for wildlife. Pages
895–910 in W. F. Laudenslayer, Jr., P. J. Shea, B.
E. Valentine, C. P. Weatherspoon, and T. E. Lisle,
editors. Proceedings of the symposium on the
ecology and management of dead wood in western
forests. U.S. Forest Service General Technical
Report PSW-GTR-181.
Metlen, K. L., and C. E. Fiedler. 2006. Restoration
treatment effects on understory of ponderosa pine/
Douglas-fir forests in western Montana. Forest
Ecology and Management 222:355–369.
Meyer, M. D., M. P. North, and D. A. Kelt. 2005.
Short-term effects of fire and forest thinning on
truffle abundance and consumption by Neotamias
speciosus in the Sierra Nevada of California.
Canadian Journal of Forest Research 35:1061–
1070.
Mooney, K. A., and Y. B. Linhart. 2006.
Contrasting cascades: insectivorous birds increase
pine but not parasitic mistletoe growth. Journal of
Animal Ecology 75:350–357.
Moore, M. M., C. A. Casey, J. D. Bakker, J. D.
Springer, P. Z. Fulé, W. W. Covington, and D. C.
Laughlin. 2006. Herbaceous vegetation responses
(1992–2004) to restoration treatments in a
ponderosa pine forest. Rangeland Ecology and
Management 59:135–144.
Moore, M. M., W. W. Covington, and P. Z. Fulé. 
1999. 
Reference 
conditions 
and 
ecological
restoration: a southwestern ponderosa pine
perspective. Ecological Applications 9(4):1266–
1277.
Moore, M. M., D. W. Huffman, P. Z. Fulé, W. W.
Covington, and J. E. Crouse. 2004. Comparison
of historical and contemporary forest structure and
composition of permanent plots in southwestern
ponderosa pine forests. Forest Science 50:162–176.
Morgan, T. A., C. E. Fiedler, and C. W. Woodall. 
2002. Characteristics of dry site old-growth
ponderosa pine in the Bull Mountains of Montana,
USA. Natural Areas Journal 22(1):11–19.
Nilsson, C., and G. Grelsson. 1995. The fragility
of ecosystems: a review. Journal of Applied Ecology 
32: 677–692.
Pattinson, G. S., K. A. Hammill, B. G. Sutton,
and P. A. McGee. 1999. Simulated fire reduces the
density of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi at the soil
surface. Mycological Research 103(4):491–496.
Reynolds, R. T., T. G. Russel, M. H. Reiser, R. L.
Bassett, P. L. Kennedy, D. A. Boyce, Jr., G.
Goodwin, R. Smith, and E. L. Fisher. 1992.
Management recommendations for the northern
goshawk in the southwestern United States. U.S.
Forest Service General Technical Report RM-217.
Romme, W. H., D. W. Jamieson, J. S. Redder, G.
Bigsby, J. P. Lindsey, D. Kendall, R. Cowen, T.
Kreykes, A. W. Spencer, and J. C. Ortega. 1992.
Old-growth forests of the San Juan National Forest
in southwestern Colorado. Pages 154–165 in M. R.
Kaufmann, W. H. Moir, and R. L. Bassett, editors.
Old-growth forests in the southwest and Rocky
Mountain regions: Proceedings of a workshop. U.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 18
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art18/
S. Forest Service General Technical Report
RM-213.
Saab, V., L. Bate, J. Lehmkuhl, B. Dickson, S.
Story, S. Jentsch, and W. Block. 2006. Changes in
downed wood and forest structure after prescribed
fire in ponderosa pine forests. U.S. Forest Service
Proceedings RMRS-P-41.
Skov, K. R., T. E. Kolb, and K. F. Wallin. 2004.
Tree size and drought affect ponderosa pine
physiological response to thinning and burning
treatments. Forest Science 50(1):81–91.
Smith, J. E., D. McKay, G. Brenner, J. McIvers,
and J. W. Spatafora. 2005. Early impacts of forest
restoration treatments on the ectomycorrhizal
fungal community and fine root biomass in a mixed
conifer forest. Journal of Applied Ecology 42:526–
535.
Smith, J. E., D. McKay, C. G. Niwa, W. G. Thies,
G. Brenner, and J. W. Spatafora. 2004. Short-term
effects of seasonal prescribed burning on the
ectomycorrhizal fungal community and fine root
biomass in ponderosa pine stands in the Blue
Mountains of Oregon. Canadian Journal of Forest
Research 34:2477–2491.
Snyder, M. A. 1992. Selective herbivory by Abert’s
squirrel mediated by chemical variability in
ponderosa pine. Ecology 73:1730–1741.
———. 1993. Interactions between Abert’s squirrel
and ponderosa pine: the relationship between
selective herbivory and host plant fitness. American
Naturalist 141:866–879.
Snyder, M. A., and Y. B. Linhart. 1994. Nest-site
selection by Abert’s squirrel: chemical characteristics
of nest trees. Journal of Mammalogy 75:136–141.
Stephenson, N. L. 1999. Reference conditions for
giant sequoia forest restoration: structure, process,
and precision. Ecological Applications 9:1253–
1265.
Swetnam, T. W, C. D. Allen, and J. L. Betancourt. 
1999. Applied historical ecology: using the past to
manage for the future. Ecological Applications 9
(4):1189–1206.
Szaro, R. C., and R. P. Balda. 1979. Bird
community dynamics in a ponderosa pine forest.
Studies in Avian Biology 3.
van Mantgem, P., and M. Schwartz. 2003. Bark
heat resistance of small trees in Californian mixed
conifer forests: testing some model assumptions.
Forest Ecology and Management 178: 341–352.
Veblen, T. T., T. Kitzberger, and J. Donnegan. 
2000. Climatic and human influences on fire
regimes in ponderosa pine forests in the Colorado
Front Range. Ecological Applications 10(4):1178–
1195.
Vireday, C. C. 1982. Mycophagy in tassel-eared
squirrels (Sciurus aberti aberti and S. a.
kaibabensis) in northern Arizona. Thesis. Northern
Arizona University, Flagstaff, Arizona, USA.
Wallin, K. F., T. E. Kolb, K. R. Skov, and M. R.
Wagner. 2004. Seven-year results of thinning and
burning restoration treatments on old growth
ponderosa pines at the Gus Pearson Natural Area.
Restoration Ecology 12:239–247.
Ward, J. P., Jr. 2001. Ecological responses by
Mexican spotted owls to environmental variation in
the 
Sacramento 
Mountains, 
New 
Mexico. 
Dissertation. Colorado State University, Fort
Collins, Colorado, USA.
Waskiewicz, J.D. 2003. Snags and partial snags in
managed, relict, and restored ponderosa pine
forests of the Southwest. Thesis. Northern Arizona
University, Flagstaff, Arizona, USA .
Youngblood, A., T. Max, and K. Coe. 2004. Stand
structure in eastside old-growth ponderosa pine
forests of Oregon and northern California. Forest
Ecology and Management 228:191–217.
Zausen, G. L, T. E. Kolb, J. D. Bailey, and M. R.
Wagner. 2005. Long-term impacts of stand
management on ponderosa pine physiology and
bark beetle abundance in northern Arizona: a
replicated landscape study. Forest Ecology and
Management 218:291–305.
Zier, J. L., and W. L. Baker. 2006. A century of
vegetation change in the San Juan Mountains,
Colorado: an analysis using repeat photography.
Forest Ecology and Management 228:251–262.
