uninformed ‘tree-whacking’ and forest burn-
ing that will only exacerbate the problem. 
I am not so naïve as to believe that science
will drive the entire debate. But, having spent
25 years trying to advance the need for ecosys-
tem restoration, I know that debate descends
to paralysis when it begins with ideology. In the
little time left, it is imperative that fuels treat-
ments should be driven by ecological restora-
tion principles; that scientists should actively
inform the debate; that scientists, managers
and the public should not be afraid to use what
we currently know to identify restoration
treatments; that all restoration should be con-
ducted in an explicitly formal adaptive man-
agement context; and that multiple approach-
es should be tested and carefully monitored. 
Restoration principles
Ecological restoration offers a practical
approach for developing scientifically and
ethically sound fuel-reduction treatments
which not only treat wildfire symptoms, but
also attack the underlying causes of ecosystem
health decline. Restoration is mandated for
degraded areas set aside as natural areas or
wilderness, but it is also a desirable goal in the
management of lands where ecosystem health
and resource use are shared goals. Finally, sci-
entifically rigorous and adaptively designed
restoration plans can offer a common ground
to resolve preservation/use conflicts.
What is needed urgently is solid scientific
evidence. Researchers, conservation profes-
sionals and other knowledgeable people
concerned about western forest ecosystem
health must agree and publicize an objective
standard for information to counter the ten-
dency for propaganda and ideological ‘spin-
ning’ of research results used in developing
treatments or to drive policy discussions. 
Some of the stakeholders in forest man-
agement — the forestry industry, environ-
mental groups and other resource users —
use misrepresentation and pseudo-science
to justify their positions and undermine the
credibility of others. I have seen our restora-
tion treatments at Flagstaff intentionally
misrepresented on the one hand by some
environmental activists as monolithic in
approach and scientifically unsound, and on
the other by some representatives of the
wood- and grazing-industry as a justifica-
tion for returning to old-time commodity
resource production from federal lands. The
reality is that ecosystem health comes first:
we test multiple hypotheses operationally
and vary treatments depending on site con-
ditions. We see resource utilization as a vehi-
cle for accomplishing restoration, not a goal. 
Because I believe strongly that restora-
tion must begin immediately I have been
criticized by colleagues who argue that more
information is needed first. I strongly dis-
agree with this because the current crisis in
commentary
NATURE|VOL 408|9 NOVEMBER  2000| www.nature.com
135
William Wallace Covington 
The dry forest ecosystems of the American
West, especially those once dominated by
open ponderosa pine forests, are in wide-
spread collapse. We are now witnessing sud-
den leaps in aberrant ecosystem behaviour
long predicted by ecologists and conserva-
tion professionals (see Nature 407, 5; 2000).
Trends over the past half-century show that
the frequency, intensity and size of wildfires
will increase — by orders of magnitude —
the loss of biological diversity, property and
human lives for many generations to come.
Population crashes
Forest ecosystem health has declined patho-
logically ever since European settlement.
Populations of native species have crashed
while those of exotic species have irrupted.
Indigenous cultural regimes and low-inten-
sity disturbance regimes, such as surface
fires, have been lost. Meanwhile, novel cul-
tural practices — including overgrazing and
fire suppression — and unprecedented dis-
turbance regimes (such as crown fires) have
become increasingly dominant. 
How can we help these ecosystems recover
in a way consistent with their evolutionary
environment, while enhancing opportunities
for continued human use? Secretary of the
Interior Bruce Babbitt and Agriculture Secre-
tary Dan Glickman recommend extensive pre-
ventive fuel treatments such as thinning and
prescribed burning. In their report to Presi-
dent Bill Clinton in September they requested
substantial budget increases over the next
10–15 years to accomplish these. Congress
responded by adopting many of the recom-
mendations and increasing funding exponen-
tially for fiscal year 2001; the president signed
the legislation for that funding in October. 
This new policy attention is critically
needed. But focusing on abating crown fires
without focusing on the general ecological
degradation of western forests is akin to treat-
ing a symptom and not the disease. The disas-
trous wildfire season of 2000 can be looked at
in the framework my colleagues and I have
developed for forest-fuel treatment. We have
revised the current single-crop agriculture
strategy to create an ecosystem-oriented
approach that does not deviate too far from
natural conditions (see Box). The debate on
forests must be driven not by ideology but by
all agreeing to the goal of coexistence with
wildland ecosystems. The starting point must
be good science. To approach the problem any
other way will open the door for management
decisions that may lead to short-sighted,
Helping western forests heal
The prognosis is poor for US forest ecosystems.
Old growth ponderosa pine in a restoration site
(top) and post ecological restoration treatment.
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION  INSTITUTE

western forests demands action now; there is
sufficient information to design and imple-
ment scientifically valid approaches that will
help determine how best to proceed. 
Sound knowledge about restoration is
available, based on the abundant scientific
research that began in the 1890s and contin-
ues today. We have solid information about
forest conditions before European settlement,
changes in fire regimes, deterioration of over-
all ecosystem health, and ecological responses
to thinning and prescribed burning — the key
elements of any attempt to restore ecosystem
health in ponderosa pine and related ecosys-
tems. Both early naturalists’ data and contem-
porary research show that today’s overcrowd-
ed stands of trees do not sustain the diversity
of wildlife and plants that existed a century
ago. Open, park-like stands that have not been
severely disrupted by fire exclusion have
greater plant, insect and bird diversity than
stands that have become overstocked during
decades of fire exclusion. These open, park-
like stands also show greater old-growth tree
vigour and resistance to insect attack. 
Stopping ecologically based forest restora-
tion because of an ideological opposition to
tree cutting is not saving forest ecosystems, as
some would like to believe, but only contribut-
ing to their demise and causing severe losses to
the wealth of species that depend on them. It
also places ecosystem health practitioners in a
situation similar to eliminating surgery from
the options for treating human diseases.
Various ecosystem restoration options are
being investigated at research sites across the
American West. Most apply and test treat-
ments developed locally by scientists, man-
agers, environmental activists, resource users
and members of the public. But it is also
imperative that we accept the responsibility to
apply the extensive knowledge we already
have, before more forests are lost. Ecosystems
have been highly fragmented and degraded by
decades of overuse. Restoration is not neces-
sarily simple, nor is success always guaranteed.
But restoration-management approaches are
superior to the destructive effects of unnatu-
rally intense fires. The risks of inaction far out-
weigh the risks of such treatments.
I do not advocate a ‘one size fits all’
approach to restoring the ecological integrity
of ponderosa pine forests. Management
approaches should suit the place that needs
restoring, its pre-European settlement refer-
ence condition and its relationship to the
broader ecosystem and the communities that
live within it. In this sense, ecological restora-
tion is neither a strict recipe nor a rigid set of
prescriptions, but is an adaptive process for
restoring and enhancing ecosystem health
and sustainable human uses of the land.
We must change our approach to fuel and
forest management. The shocking fire season
of 2000 and the environmental and economic
damage left in its wake are tragic consequences
of management and interest groups that have
failed to understand natural ecosystem struc-
ture and function. Virtually all our scientific
knowledge is based on studies of degraded
ecosystems — those that have been extensively
altered by fire exclusion, industrial exploita-
tion and other exotic cultural practices. 
As the new US government takes shape,
now is the time for land-management agen-
cies, policy-makers and stakeholders to identi-
fy what is needed to achieve ecologically
healthy forest ecosystems. The discussion
should start with solid science, embrace a
long-term ecological perspective and then
incorporate social and ideological issues. Sci-
entists must make this happen by actively pro-
moting what we know and the ways this
knowledge should be applied. The current cri-
sis requires that we act immediately, using an
adaptive environmental assessment approach. 
Today’s wildfires are so extreme in their
behaviour and effects that they are in many
ways worse than clearcutting. Critical habi-
tat for threatened and endangered species is
destroyed, watershed function is disrupted
and human habitat value reduced for cen-
turies to come. And such wildfires are a
threat to human lives and property. To act
now is to save the patient. To act now means a
healthy, biologically diverse forest that is an
asset, not a threat, to future generations. Is
there really an alternative?
I
William Wallace Covington is at the Ecological
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University,
PO Box 15018, Flagstaff, Arizona 86011, USA.
➧http://www.for.nau.edu/ecorest
commentary
136
NATURE|VOL 408|9 NOVEMBER  2000| www.nature.com
Ecological restoration
Ten years ago, Carl Walters and Crawford Holling
memorably recommended “large-scale management
experiments and learning by doing” (Walters, C. J. &
Holling, C. S. Ecology 71, 2060–2068; 1990). We
have pursued this approach in the ‘Flagstaff Plan’. In
collaboration with partners in the environmental
community, conservation practitioners and interested
parties from government and a range of
organizations, my colleagues and I at the Ecological
Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University
have developed a general framework for ecologically
based restoration treatments. 
Scientific framework
Ecological restoration is the restoration of
natural ecosystem structures and processes.
Treatments are based on reference conditions
(the evolutionary environment context) and
cover evolutionary and conservation biology,
and ecosystem ecology principles.
Social and political framework
In an ecosystem ecology approach, social and
political concerns play a major part in defining
treatments. So stakeholders must be engaged,
especially community-based partnerships
linked to regional and national agencies and
interest groups, with policy-makers, natural
resource specialists and resource managers.
Operational framework
Financial and personnel constraints place
geographical limits on treatments. So emphasis is
placed on strategically located restoration fuel breaks
that are anchor points for large, landscape-scale
treatments. These breaks can protect key landscape
ecosystem components such as human communities,
critical habitat for threatened or endangered species,
and core areas of greater ecosystems such as
wilderness areas and national parks.
Ecosystem management framework
Restoration and fuel reduction goals should be
integrated with overall ecosystem conservation and
management goals. Reference conditions serve as
a starting point to the goal of scientifically based
land-management objectives.
Economic framework
Economic analyses should consider all costs and
savings. Restoration-based fuel treatments save
money by avoiding the costs of firefighting,
rehabilitation and compensation for property damage.
They are also an investment in protecting lives. They
present new opportunities for rural economic
development through restoration-related jobs and
products. Ecological economic analysis will probably
indicate that benefits greatly outweigh costs.
Ethical framework
We have a responsibility to future generations to solve
ecosystem health problems. Ecological restoration
speaks to the land ethic — the humans should be
good stewards and show a caring concern for nature.
Under control: a prescribed burn at Flagstaff.
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION  INSTITUTE
