Breaking Barriers 
Building Bridges:
Collaborative Forest Landscape 
Restoration Handbook
Foreword by W. Wallace Covington
Edited by Dave Egan and Tayloe Dubay

Edited by Dave Egan and Tayloe Dubay
Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University 
Foreword by W. Wallace Covington
Breaking Barriers, Building Bridges:
Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Handbook

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
FOREWORD
        W. Wallace Covington
INTRODUCTION
        Dave Egan
Chapter 1. Collaboration
        Windy Selig
Chapter 2. Ecological Economics
        Evan E. Hjerpe
Chapter 3. Planning and NEPA
        Dave Brewer
Chapter 4. Multi-party Monitoring
        Dave Egan
Chapter 5. Contracting and Implementation
        Dave Egan
Chapter 6. Adaptive Management
        Dana Coelho, Zachary Wurtzebach, Courtney Schultz
CONCLUSION
        Amy E.M. Waltz
ABOUT THE CONTRIBUTORS
RESOURCES
GLOSSARY
4
5
9
36
57
82
108
142
163
191
195
198
 
201
Contents

4
Guides: 
Dan Binkley, Tony Cheng, Jessica Clement, 
W. Wallace “Wally” Covington, Joe Crouse, Andrew Eagan,  
John Flatberg, Steve Gatewood, Tim Garvey, Yeon-Su Kim,  
Carmine Lockwood, Anne Mottek Lucas, Tammy Randall Parker,  
Sarah Reif, Ed Smith, Bonnie Stevens, Matt Tuten, Diane Vosick
Reviewers: 
M. Kat Anderson, Tony Cheng, Krista Gebert, Ann Moote, 
Wayne Robbie, Judy Springer, Keith Stockmann, Matt Tuten,  
Diane Vosick, Amy Waltz, Matt Williamson
Support:
Linsey Baker, Anastasia Begley, Krista Coquia, Scott Curran,  
Karen Gilbreath, Kathy Mitchell, Shanyn Money 
Design/Layout:
Ralph Schmid, Tird i Design
Illustrations:
Adriel Begay
Acknowledgments

5
T
he dry forest ecosystems of the American West, especially those 
once dominated by open ponderosa pine forests, are in wide-spread 
collapse. We are now witnessing sudden leaps in aberrant ecosystem 
behavior long predicted by ecologists and conservation professionals. 
Trends over the past half-century show that the frequency, intensity, 
and size of wildﬁres will increase by orders of magnitude. Along with 
this increase, we will experience the loss of biological diversity, prop-
erty, and human lives for many generations to come.
In 2012, we saw a near record-breaking nine million acres 
burned. While the actual number of wildﬁres was the lowest in a 
decade, the total acres burned was the second-highest on record. Te 
ﬁres may have been fewer, but they were a lot bigger, burning homes 
and infrastructure and charring entire landscapes. Te accelerating 
increase in the severity and size of wildﬁres in the West indicates 
that average annual losses over the next two decades will be in excess 
of ﬁve to ten million acres. Te pace and scale of our current forest 
health restoration treatments is woefully inadequate given the scope 
of the problem. Using the reasonable assumption that preventative 
restoration treatments should at least be within the same scope and 
size of losses to severe stand replacing ﬁre, one would conclude that 
we should be treating ﬁve to ten million acres per year. 
Besides the inextricable link of people to the forest, there are 
many important environmental and resource beneﬁts provided by 
forests, such as water, wildlife, recreation, and wood ﬁber. To protect 
these values will require landscape-scale treatments in the greater for-
est. Research across the West has shown that ecologically based resto-
ration treatments substantially reduce ﬁre hazard by thinning trees to 
decrease tree canopy density, break up interconnected canopy fuels, 
raise the crown base height, and then reduce accumulated forest 
W. Wallace Covington
Foreword

6
ﬂoor fuels and debris with prescribed ﬁre. Ecological, evidence-based 
restoration oﬀers a practical approach for developing scientiﬁcally 
and ethically sound fuel-reduction treatments—which not only treat 
wildﬁre symptoms, but also attack the underlying causes of ecosystem 
health decline. Restoration is mandated for degraded areas set aside as 
natural areas or wilderness, but it is also a desirable goal in the man-
agement of lands where ecosystem health and resource use are shared 
goals. Scientiﬁcally rigorous and adaptively designed restoration plans 
can oﬀer common ground to resolve preservation/use conﬂicts.
Knowing what we know now through cumulative evidence, it 
is critical we move forward with large-scale, restoration-based fuel 
treatments using an adaptive management framework. We have a 
solid body of scientiﬁc information to support a systematic scientiﬁc 
approach for implementing forest restoration that will protect people, 
communities, and the forest. Such an ecosystem ecology approach 
should be based on attempts to objectively discover the truth about 
how best to improve treatments during the course of ongoing large-
scale restoration of the landscape. 
Te combination of scientiﬁcally supported restoration approach-
es, political will, and popular support—not to mention dedicated 
advocates—has contributed to the creation of federally appropriated 
collaborative landscape restoration programs like the Collaborative 
Forest Landscape Restoration Program (CFLRP). Trough the emer-
gence of pioneering CFLRP projects, we have a chance to expand 
and apply evidence-based restoration principles at unprecedented 
landscape scales. In these new collaborative settings, stakeholders 
must be engaged—especially community-based partnerships linked 
to regional and national agencies and interest groups—with policy-
makers, natural resource specialists, and resource managers. 
In the “2012 Report on the Collaborative Forest Landscape 
Restoration Program” released by the USDA Forest Service in De-
cember 2012, the 23 landscape restoration projects awarded since 
2010 (three of which are High Priority Restoration Projects) have 
collectively:

7
 
f Created and maintained an estimated 3,375 part and full-time 
jobs during 2011 and 4,574 part and full-time jobs during 
FY2012
 
f Sold 94.1 million cubic feet of timber and produced 1,158,000 
green tons of biomass
 
f Generated nearly $320 million of labor income
 
f Removed fuel for destructive mega-ﬁres on 383,000 acres near 
communities
 
f Reduced mega-ﬁre on an additional 229,000 acres
 
f Improved 537,000 acres of wildlife habitat
 
f Restored 394 miles of ﬁsh habitat
 
f Enhanced clean water supplies by remediating or decommis-
sioning 6,000 miles of eroding roads.
While multiple barriers remain to restoring the millions of acres 
needed to ensure the resilience of our forests to future ﬁres and chang-
ing climates, the groundbreaking CFLRP projects are teaching us how 
to forge meaningful partnerships and construct bridges to success. 
Guided by the best available evidence, strong monitoring and adap-
tive management frameworks, the numbers of acres restored and jobs 
created through the CFLRP will continue to grow. Te purpose of this 
handbook is to capture the lessons learned from these emergent proj-
ects and other landscape-scale restoration eﬀorts and to provide clear, 
navigable guideposts for collaboration, planning, implementation, 
monitoring, and adaptive management. Te handbook is meant to be 
a guide for those working collaboratively under one goal: to restore 
Western dry forests for communities and nature. 
As a nation, we have relied on our forests for a wealth of resources 
— from recreation opportunities to clean water, ﬁsh and wildlife habi-
tat, native biodiversity, carbon storage, and more. Reinvesting in them 
makes sense. However, we cannot be complacent and we cannot pause 
even for a moment. Research shows that climate change is already 
inﬂuencing the frequency and size of ﬁre. By acting quickly and acting 
now, we can restore forest health and build resilience that will prepare 
forests for whatever changes may occur. 

8
We are in an ecological reawakening with respect to restoration 
and conservation. Restoration is a recent science, but it is the approach 
of the future, the approach of now. It is about people working together 
in good faith to learn about ecological functions and conservation 
principles, including sharing the land with current and future genera-
tions. I can say that after 40 years of working in the forests of the West, 
restoring them is ﬁnally within our grasp. If you had asked me if I was 
hopeful for the future of our forests 20 years ago, I would have said no. 
But today I have never been more optimistic. We have a cumulative 
and rigorous body of scientiﬁc information to implement preventative 
restoration treatments that will protect people, communities, and the 
forest. If we continue to work together to restore these lands, and do 
our jobs as stewards of the land, there will be plenty of resources for all 
of us and plenty to share with the rest of nature.
— W. Wallace “Wally” Covington, PhD, Executive Director of 
the Ecological Restoration Institute and Regents’ Professor, 
School of Forestry, Northern Arizona University

9
C
ollaborative landscape-scale forest restoration on federally managed 
lands is an exciting, new public process designed to rescue dry, 
frequent-ﬁre forest ecosystems through land management actions 
supported by science and social agreements. Such a complex, 
multi-perspective undertaking involves individuals, communities, 
organizations, federal and state agencies, and tribes. It calls upon social 
scientists, ecologists, foresters, environmental activists, interested 
citizens, and many others to share their expertise and perspectives 
for the common good. Te stakeholders of a landscape-scale forest 
restoration project seek to increase the forested ecosystem’s resilience 
and biodiversity while supporting local economies and decreasing 
the threat of wildﬁres. By encouraging community-wide agreements, 
such collaborative eﬀorts strive to create a more socially inclusive, 
scientiﬁcally based course of action for solving land management 
issues.
Te need for scientiﬁcally and socially guided restoration of forests 
on public lands comes at a time when western coniferous forests, 
the human communities that interface with them and the public 
agencies that manage them, are in crisis. Each year millions of acres of 
forested land across the American West are consumed by large-scale 
wildﬁres. In some of these ecosystems, such as those dominated by 
lodgepole pine or high-elevation conifers, these ﬁres are natural stand-
replacement events. However, the mid- to low-elevation, dry forests of 
ponderosa pine/Jeﬀrey pine, or dry mixed conifer, which historically 
were shaped by low-severity or mixed-severity ﬁre regimes and small-
scale die-oﬀs due to insects, are now experiencing unprecedented levels 
of insect infestations as well as uncharacteristically large, destructive 
crown ﬁres. Te ecological eﬀects of these large-scale wildﬁres 
and insect disturbances often cause these relatively high-diversity 
ecosystems to collapse into low-diversity states that require long 
Introduction
Dave Egan

10
periods of time to recover naturally. Moreover, these wildﬁres often 
cause signiﬁcant losses to human communities and infrastructure, 
and weigh heavily on the public treasuries for ﬁre suppression and 
rehabilitation activities. Action to solve these problems is needed and 
recognized locally, regionally and nationally, but ﬁnding the common 
ground to do so has only just begun. 
Fortunately, recent federal and state government actions, 
particularly the federal Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration 
Program (CFLRP) and the recently adopted National Forest System 
Land Management Planning Rule, are now in place to support 
collaborative forest restoration activities. Tese programs provide 
collaborative groups with the institutional framework and, in the case 
of the CFLRP, the ﬁnancial support they need to undertake such large-
scale, long-term projects. 
Tis ERI handbook is designed to help those involved in such 
projects understand and navigate the various aspects of this new 
enterprise in collaborative land management—including planning, 
collaboration, developing NEPA documents, implementation, 
monitoring, economic considerations, and more. While exciting 
and groundbreaking, this new venture is not without its problems 
and pitfalls. Tis handbook aims to serve as a bridge to the many 
individual and institutional barriers that collaborative groups may 
encounter in the process. 

11
Tis handbook is designed to help those in collaborative land 
management understand and navigate various aspects of 
this new enterprise. While exciting and groundbreaking,  
this new venture is not without its pitfalls.

12
Collaborative Forest Landscape  
Restoration Program
Te U.S. Congress established the Collaborative Forest Landscape 
Restoration Program when it passed Title IV of the Omnibus 
Public Land Management Act of 2009. Te CFLRP is intended to:
 
f encourage ecological, economic, and social sustainability 
 
f leverage local resources with national and private resources 
 
f facilitate the reduction of wildﬁre management costs, 
including through re-establishing natural ﬁre regimes and 
reducing the risk of uncharacteristic wildﬁre 
 
f demonstrate the degree to which various ecological restora-
tion techniques achieve ecological and watershed health 
objectives 
 
f encourage utilization of forest restoration by-products to 
oﬀset treatment costs, beneﬁt local rural economies, and 
improve forest health. 
Title IV establishes the Collaborative Forest Landscape 
Restoration Fund to provide funding authority for:
 
f requests by the Secretary of Agriculture of up to $40 mil-
lion annually for ﬁscal years 2009 through 2019 or until the 
entire $40 million has been expended
 
f up to 50% of the cost of carrying out and monitoring 
ecological restoration treatments on National Forest System 
(NFS) land for each proposal selected 
 
f up to $4 million annually for any one project 
 
f up to two projects per year in any one Forest Service region 
 
f up to 10 projects per year nationally. 
Te general limitations and uses of the CFLRP funding 
include:

13
 
f funds must primarily be used on NSF lands, although the 
project may include land under the jurisdiction of the Bureau 
of Land Management and/or the Bureau of Indian Aﬀairs, or 
other federal, state, tribal, or private land
 
f funds may not be used to cover planning costs 
 
f funds may include cancellation and termination costs that 
may be required under the Federal Acquisition Regulation for 
contracts used to carry out ecological restoration treatments on 
NFS land 
 
f funding for any one proposal may be expended for no more 
than 10 ﬁscal years. 
As of 2012, 20 projects have been awarded CFLRP status; the vast 
majority on NFS lands in the western United States. According to the 
CFLRP 2012 Annual Report, some of the ﬁrst projects are already 
making good progress. For example, in 2012:
 
f Te Southwestern Crown of the Continent Collaborative treated 
about 2,500 acres of hazardous fuels on the Flathead, Lolo, and 
Helena national forests in western Montana, and produced 1,627 
CCF (100 cubic feet) of saleable timber. Te project also leveraged 
$6.7 million in funds, created or maintained 156 jobs, restored 52 
miles of ﬁsh habitat, and improved or maintained 88 miles of roads. 
 
f Te Selway-Clearwater Middle Fork Project treated more than 
14,000 acres of hazardous fuels on the Nez Perce Clearwater and 
Bitteroot national forests in Idaho, yielding 9,673 CCF of timber 
for sale. Te project also created or maintained 127 jobs, improved 
or maintained 256 miles of roads, improved 32 miles of ﬁsh habitat, 
restored 13,166 acres of wildlife habitat, and decommissioned 27 
miles of roads.
 
f Te Uncompahgre Plateau Project in southwestern Colorado’s 
Grand Mesa, Uncompahgre, and Gunnison national forests treated 
720 acres using prescribed burns and mechanical thinning, and 
sold just over 5,000 CCF of timber. Te project also created or 
maintained 97 jobs producing an estimated $2.7 million in total 

14
labor income, restored 8,202 acres of wildlife habitat, improved or 
maintained 329 miles of roads, and decommissioned 30 miles of 
roads. 
 
f Te Front Range Landscape Restoration Initiative on the Pike and 
Isabel, Arapaho, and Roosevelt national forests in north-central 
Colorado reduced wildﬁre threats on 5,500 acres in the wildland-
urban interface and restored 6,600 acres of wildlife habit. Te 
project also created or maintained 391 jobs, leveraged $3 million in 
funds, sold nearly 11,900 CCF of timber, and improved or main-
tained 85 miles of roads. 
 
f Zuni Mountain Collaborative Landscape Restoration Project in 
western New Mexico’s Cibola National Forest in its ﬁrst year of 
operation reduced hazardous fuels on 1,700 acres, sold nearly 9,000 
CCF of timber, created or maintained 43 jobs, and maintained or 
improved 66 miles of eroding roads. 
 
f In Oregon, the Deschutes Collaborative Forest Project sold roughly 
15,600 CCF of timber and reduced hazardous fuels on 5,440 
acres. Te project also restored 2.5 million acres of wildlife habitat, 
maintained or improved 49 miles of roads, created or maintained 
91 jobs, and removed 1,422 acres of invasive plants. 
 
f Te Tapash Sustainable Forest Collaborative was able to secure 
$870,000 in leveraged funds and restore 746 acres of wildlife 
habitat on the Okanogan-Wenatchee National Forest in central 
Washington. Te project also sold nearly 13,500 CCF of timber, 
maintained or improved 13 miles of roads, and removed 1,300 
acres of invasive plants. 
 
f Te Dinkey Landscape Restoration Project, located in California’s 
southern Sierra Nevada Mountains on the Sierra National Forest, 
treated nearly 4,000 acres of hazardous fuels and sold almost 15,000 
CCF of timber. In addition, the project created or maintained 137 
jobs worth an estimated $6 million in total labor income. 
Tese projects and others are demonstrating that progress is 
being made both restoring the nation’s forests and learning from 
the experience (see this 2012 U.S. Forest Service press release for 
information about 2011 CFLRP accomplishments).

15
Ecological Restoration
As the criteria for a CFLRP project clearly demonstrate, ecological 
restoration plays a key role in the process as a land management 
Indian paintbrush (Castilleja kaibabensis) grows in a ponderosa pine forest on the Powell Plateau in Grand 
Canyon National Park-North Rim. Photo by Daniel Laughlin, courtesy of ERI

16
strategy. However, Title IV of the Omnibus Public Land Management 
Act of 2009 does not provide a deﬁnition of ecological restoration. 
For that, one might look to the U.S. Forest Service, which deﬁnes 
ecological restoration as: Te process of assisting the recovery of resilience 
and adaptive capacity of ecosystems that have been degraded, damaged, or 
destroyed. Restoration focuses on establishing the composition, structure, 
pattern, and ecological processes necessary to make terrestrial and aquatic 
ecosystems sustainable, resilient, and healthy under current and future 
conditions (U.S. Forest Service, 2011, p. 12).
Tis rather broad deﬁnition is further deﬁned from a scientiﬁc 
perspective in the Society for Ecological Restoration Primer (Society 
for Ecological Restoration Science and Policy Working Group 2004), 
which identiﬁes the following attributes of a restored ecosystem: 
 
f Te restored ecosystem contains a characteristic assemblage of 
the species that occur in the reference ecosystem and that provide 
appropriate community structure.
 
f Te restored ecosystem consists of indigenous species to the 
greatest practicable extent. In restored cultural ecosystems, allow-
ances can be made for exotic domesticated species and for non-
invasive ruderal and segetal species that presumably co-evolved 
with them. 
 
f All functional groups necessary for the continued development 
and/or stability of the restored ecosystem are represented or, if 
they are not, the missing groups have the potential to colonize by 
natural means.
 
f Te physical environment of the restored ecosystem is capable of 
sustaining reproducing populations of the species necessary for 
its continued stability or development along the desired trajec-
tory.
 
f Te restored ecosystem apparently functions normally for its eco-
logical stage of development, and signs of dysfunction are absent.
f Te restored ecosystem is suitably integrated into a larger ecologi-
cal matrix or landscape, with which it interacts through abiotic 
and biotic ﬂows and exchanges. 

17
 
f Potential threats to the health and integrity of the restored eco-
system from the surrounding landscape have been eliminated 
or reduced as much as possible.
 
f Te restored ecosystem is suﬃciently resilient to endure the 
normal periodic stress events in the local environment that 
serve to maintain the integrity of the ecosystem.
 
f Te restored ecosystem is self-sustaining to the same degree as 
its reference ecosystem, and has the potential to persist indeﬁ-
nitely under existing environmental conditions. Neverthe-
less, aspects of its biodiversity, structure and functioning may 
change as part of normal ecosystem development, and may 
ﬂuctuate in response to normal periodic stress and occasional 
disturbance events of greater consequence. As in any intact 
ecosystem, the species composition and other attributes of a 
restored ecosystem may evolve as environmental conditions 
change.
In the past decade, insect infestation reached epidemic levels in many forests across the West. Trees weakened 
by drought, overcrowding, disease or ﬁre are more susceptible to beetle attack. The potential for high fuel 
loading from dead and dying trees due to drought stress and beetle infestation greatly increases the risk of 
high-severity ﬁres. Photo courtesy of ERI

18
In describing the attributes of restored ecosystem, the authors 
of the SER Primer use the term, “reference ecosystems.” Tis term 
describes a model that is based on scientiﬁc and other observations 
of ecosystem conditions and processes in the historic past and/or in 
relatively undisturbed contemporary ecosystems similar to the one 
being restored (Swetnam et al. 1999, Egan and Howell 2001). Such 
a historical ecology model can be used to make decisions about what 
processes and/or species need to be restored, and to assess the progress 
or success of a restoration project. Te idea of reference ecosystems is 
closely linked to the concepts of evolutionary environment and range of 
historic or natural variability—the evolutionary environment developing 
over a long time span (typically thousands of years) during which species 
evolve and co-evolve with other species and various natural processes 
(e.g., ﬁre, insects, diseases) under variable environmental conditions. 
Tis evolutionary pathway produced resilient evolutionary habitats that 
allow the species and processes to exist at varying, but relatively stable 
Fire ﬁghters hold a defensive ﬁre line as the Rodeo-Chediski ﬁre burns at night. The Rodeo-Chediski Fire burned 
468,638 acres in east-central Arizona in 2002. It was the largest wildﬁre in Arizona’s recorded history until the 
Wallow Fire (538,049 acres burned) in 2011. Photo courtesy of the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest

19
levels (i.e., within the historic/natural range of variability). Many of 
these evolutionary habitats and interactions have since been disrupted 
by humans who have degraded or eliminated key components and/or 
processes (i.e., grazing removed ﬁre-carrying understory grasses, federal 
ﬁre suppression policy allowed overstocking of forests) (Covington et al. 
1999, Moore et al. 1999). Restoration of such evolutionary habitats and 
processes is vital to halting the loss of biological diversity (Covington 
2003). 
Whether reference ecosystems are still valid models has been called 
into question, especially in the recognition of ongoing or anticipated 
changes in climate (Millar and Woolfenden 1999, Peterson et al. 
2011). Tese critics of reference ecosystems suggest that realigning 
ecosystems to present and anticipated future conditions, with the goals 
of resilience and adaptive capacity, is more realistic than restoring to 
historic conditions (Millar and Brubaker 2006). Tis idea is reﬂected 
in the U.S. Forest Service deﬁnition of ecological restoration. Critics 
also suggest that, in general, restoration eﬀorts should focus on 
processes and structure, and signiﬁcantly less on species composition 
and populations which they expect will shift in response to climate 
change (although “assisted migration” may be necessary in some cases). 
Tat said, these same scientists and researchers (Millar et al. 2007) 
think that restorative thinning and prescribed burning, as suggested by 
the ERI and others, oﬀer immediate solutions to forest environments 
that will likely become drier and even more susceptible to frequent, 
larger wildﬁres and structural losses due to insects and diseases. Tus, 
studying past ecological conditions as well as past indigenous practices 
of land management (Anderson 2006, Kimmerer 2011) should not be 
abandoned, but used to understand how ecological and eco-cultural 
processes worked over time and in various environmental conditions.
Te attributes of what might be described as “strict restoration” 
become even more nuanced (i.e., more relaxed, expanded) in large-scale, 
collaborative restoration forest restoration projects where scientiﬁc fact 
encounters individuals, organizations, and communities with multiple 
perspectives of the environment, economic objectives, common 

20
aspirations, and issues of social justice (Egan et al. 2011). As a result, 
while remaining science-based, the collaborative format of these large-
scale, multi-year projects is not a straightforward, fact-based process but 
is, in reality, also value-laden and context driven, arising from multiple 
perspectives of the stakeholders.
Four Perspectives
Anyone involved in a collaborative landscape-scale forest restoration 
project will quickly discover that it is a multi-perspective experience; 
that is, there are many ways to look at the total project and nearly 
everyone has their own ideas about collaboration forest restoration 
and any number of other subjects that become part of the discussions 
about planning, implementing, and monitoring such a project. Tis can 
present problems and cause frustrations for newcomers and veterans 
alike, especially when/if discussions become stalled due to competing 
ideas or points of view (Esbjörn-Hargens and Zimmerman 2009). 
One way to take a larger, holistic view this process and the potential 
diﬃculties that may arise is to look at them from the four general 
perspectives that emerge in a collaborative landscape-scale forest 
restoration project: 1) scientiﬁc, 2) systems, 3) cultural, and 4) personal.
Scientific Perspective
By design, all CFLR projects involve discussions and activities that have a 
strong scientiﬁc perspective. As PL 111-11 states: “A collaborative forest 
landscape restoration proposal shall be based on a landscape restoration 
strategy that incorporates the best available science and scientiﬁc 
application tools in ecological restoration strategies.” Te scientiﬁc 
perspective derives its authority from the objective and empirical study 
of behaviors. In the case of forest restoration, these studies include the 
behaviors of individual beings (e.g., trees, animals, people), phenomena 
(e.g., wildﬁres, insect outbreaks), and patterns of behavioral relationships 
(e.g., predator-prey, succession, cooperation, social interactions) across 
space and time. Such scientiﬁc eﬀort produces knowledge (or “fact-

21
based reality”) that can be used to support and inform land management 
decisions (see Chapter 5) as well as proving useful and decisive in legal 
disputes (i.e., as in the testimonies of expert witnesses and in NEPA 
documentation; see Chapter 3). Te scientiﬁc perspective is also useful 
in monitoring ongoing work (see Chapter 4), addressing economic 
and social issues (see Chapters 1 and 2), and for providing insights that 
inform adaptive management decisions (see Chapter 6).
While the power and inﬂuence of the scientiﬁc perspective is 
undeniable, there are certain limitations to the scientiﬁc process and its 
application that represent potential barriers for successful landscape-scale 
forest restoration: 
 
f Knowledge depends on solid, high-quality evidence; scientists 
and others may disagree about the quality and/or quantity of 
the scientiﬁc evidence, thus creating uncertainty
 
f Knowledge is never complete; knowledge “gaps” often exist 
(e.g., wildlife population responses, diameter caps, economic 
uncertainties, public reactions in terms of ongoing landscape-
scale forest restoration projects)
 
f Scientiﬁc pursuit of knowledge may be hampered by logistical 
and/or ﬁscal constraints
 
f In general, the nature of science and experimentation is a rela-
tively slow, methodical process; large breakthroughs (paradigm 
shifts) occur only occasionally 
 
f Te scientiﬁc perspective often overlooks or dismisses values 
and subjective meanings as unimportant in terms of ﬁnding 
solutions 
 
f Scientiﬁc work is generally focused on ecological studies with 
signiﬁcantly less emphasis on economic and social issues 
 
f Te translation and transmission of science-based knowledge 
may by hampered by the need to “scale-up” from information 
derived from small-scale experiments to large-scale applications, 
the specialization inherent in scientiﬁc training and inquiry, the 
use of language particular to scientiﬁc research, and the insular 
tendencies of the scientiﬁc community. 

22
With these bridges and barriers in mind, the scientiﬁc 
perspective remains a fundamental approach for advancing 
the ideas and plans of collaboratives and stakeholders. Indeed, 
scientists involved in forest restoration-related research have 
provided the answers to many questions about the various 
behaviors of trees, plants, ﬁre, animals, and humans—arguably 
enough reliable knowledge and information to reasonably begin to 
restore forested ecosystems that have been damaged or neglected. 
Yet, and despite its inﬂuential and vital place within the process, 
the scientiﬁc viewpoint provides only one perspective of the larger 
issue. As a result, to rely solely or largely on a scientiﬁc perspective 
may result in a poorly developed project because science alone is 
not equipped methodologically to address many of the personal, 
cultural, and systems-related issues that arise in a highly social, 
collaborative undertaking such as landscape-scale forest restoration 
(Egan et al. 2011). 
Systems Perspective
Collaborative landscape-scale forest restoration projects are 
situated within a milieu of large and small systems (e.g., political, 
bureaucratic, economic, legal, cultural, ecological) that have their 
own processes and relationships that drive them through space 
and time. Tese recognizable collective structural entities are 
self-interactive as well as interacting with other systems in both 
complementary and competitive ways (Gunderson and Holling 
2002). Systems are studied and analyzed by objective means in 
terms of their patterns, trends, dynamics, processes, and structures. 
Such analyses and meta-analyses reveal the long-term behavior of 
systems. Tey may also provide predictions or suggest necessary 
actions to forestall or avert any negative consequences of the trends 
or patterns found. 
Two basic and inextricably interrelated systems aﬀect any 
collaborative forest restoration process: 1) the social system and 
2) the ecological system. Te social system is identiﬁable by the 

23
structural components and procedural mechanisms people create to 
help organize their various patterns of human relationships as well 
as the relationship between humans and resources. Tese typically 
consist of several sub-systems including a) political/bureaucratic, b) 
economic, c) legal, and d) cultural (religious, art, music, literature, 
entertainment, media). Te ecological system is a vital counterpart 
to the human social system and, like it, is identiﬁable by the 
structures and processes of a particular ecosystem. 
Te following are some characteristics of systems encountered 
in a collaborative landscape-scale forest restoration project:
Political/Bureaucratic Systems 
f Scales: National, regional, local; connection between scales 
often incomplete and/or competitive; insular, parochial 
tendencies
 
f Structures: Generally rigid, slow-to-respond hierarchical 
organization; heterarchical networks and webs of individuals 
with common interests and/or speciﬁc areas of knowledge or 
expertise 
 
f Drivers: Crisis/fear, elections, budgets, legislations, legal deci-
sions, powerful individuals, political coalitions/collaborations, 
public opinion, technology
 
f Cycles/Patterns: Fast, slow, random events; include election 
cycles, economic cycles, budgetary cycles, retirements and 
relocations of personnel
 
f Cultural: Competitive, dualistic (i.e., winners/losers) envi-
ronment; may seek short-term compromises/collaboration to 
solve common problems; inﬂuenced by economic, cultural, 
and legal systems; bureaucrats often have little incentive for 
innovation and are generally risk adverse due to system’s  
hierarchical structure.

24
Economic Systems 
f Scales: Global, national, regional, local; decisions, workforce 
capacity, and technological advancement at global and national 
levels can have dramatic inﬂuence on local economies 
 
f Structures: Hierarchical (corporations and other business orga-
nizations); heterarchical networks and webs of individuals with 
common interests and/or speciﬁc areas of knowledge or expertise 
 
f Drivers: Market demands, stockholders, key individuals, available 
capital, workforce capacity, technology, existing infrastructure, 
government regulations, government support 
 
f Cycles/Patterns: Fast, steady, random events; include economic 
cycles, political cycles; cycles of emerging technologies, patterns of 
consumer needs/wants; can move quickly in response to market 
demands when capital, infrastructure, and workforce capacity are 
available, but slowed when inadequate
 
f Cultural: Competitive, dualistic (i.e., winners/losers) environ-
ment, but may seek collaboration to solve common or individual, 
short-term problems; frequently interact with political and 
bureaucratic systems, especially in terms of natural resource devel-
opment, providing employment, and increasing local, regional, 
and national wealth (see Chapter 2). 
Legal Systems
f Scales: National, regional, local; Supreme Court, federal 
appellate courts, federal and state legislators, executives, and 
land management agencies, general public
 
f Structures: Constitutional law, common law (judicial 
branch oversight), statutes and ordinances (legislative branch 
oversight), administrative law (executive branch oversight), 
federal and state agency rules and regulations, contracts, 
memorandums-of-understanding, rules of conduct in a col-
laborative, consensus agreements
 
f Drivers: Desire for order/stability, public opinion, key indi-
viduals, politics, economic exchange, ethics/values 

25
 
f Cycles/Patterns: Generally slow; activism often required for 
change; judicial decisions and administrative rules tend to 
have long-term consequences; contracts generally faster cycle 
and typically have shorter-term eﬀects
 
f Cultural: Competitive, dualistic (i.e., winners/losers) envi-
ronment, although contracts, memorandums-of-agreement, 
and consensus agreements purport to be win-win situations; 
provide culturally derived processes to resolve disputes and 
review new legislation as well as the agency decisions about 
environmental issues, using legal formats, such as NEPA (see 
Chapter 3).
Forested Ecosystems
f Scales: Spatial scales—regional, landscape, stand; scales of 
complexity—very complex (i.e., high levels of biodiversity) to 
more simpliﬁed
 
f Structures: Various age classes of trees, understory plants, 
soil, bare rock, animals, insects, fungi; exist as dynamic 
assemblage of biotic and abiotic components linked together 
by energy ﬂows, interactive functions, food webs, genetic 
information, and structural hierarchies
 
f Drivers: Climatic factors, competition, ﬁre, wind distur-
bances, insects, diseases, animals, humans
 
f Cycles/Patterns: Fast, steady, slow, random; include various 
disturbance cycles (e.g., ﬁre return intervals); climatic and 
seasonal changes; reproductive cycles; chance events; energy 
ﬂows of nutrients, water, sunlight; evolutionary cycles of 
stability, change, adaptation, and modiﬁcation/variation in 
response to changing environmental conditions
 
f Cultural: Humans make decisions about forested ecosystems 
to satisfy social and personal needs; society derives “free” 
ecosystem products (e.g., water, air, food, building materials, 
medicines) and ecosystem services (e.g., recreation, crop pol-
lination, aesthetics, transportation) (see Chapter 2).

26
While few people will have a complete understanding of all 
the systems within which a forest restoration project operates, 
a collaborative is in a unique position of having experts from 
many disciplines/practices, either in the collaborative or available 
to them, for consultation about systems-related issues. As 
they develop their plans, monitoring protocols and adaptive 
management strategies, collaborative groups might find it 
productive to focus on the scales, structures, drivers, cycles/
patterns, and cultural aspects of the various systems involved in 
their particular collaborative landscape-scale forest restoration 
project.
Cultural Perspective
The cultural perspective looks at reality from a group/collective 
level and emphasizes the way groups establish meanings, values, 
rules, agreements, and take action based on their collective sense 
of reality. While all cultural perspectives are subjective, there are 
certain aspects of culture, such as language, music, art, religious 
beliefs and traditions, means of exchange, and others that have 
long legacies of use and adaptation. These cultural stalwarts 
provide any group of people with the stability and pragmatic tools 
needed to meet their personal and collective goals. When such 
long-lived cultural supports are destroyed, a culture tends to be lost 
or fade into obscurity.
A collaborative also follows this model. It obtains solidarity 
and strength as its members determine and understand their 
shared meanings and values. Once this process is underway, the 
collaborative is better able to forge written as well as unspoken 
rules of conduct, find agreement about various issues of common 
concern, and finalize action plans designed to alleviate commonly 
perceived problems. Thus, participating in a collaborative working 
group requires an ability to recognize cultural value sets and 
worldviews, discover their underlying meanings, and learn how 
to merge these values and ideas into a working structure that will 

27
make the project sustainable for the long term. Chapter 1 provides 
an excellent overview of this process.
Landscape-scale forest restoration collaboratives often bring 
together people from various cultures or sub-cultures: academic, 
environmental, Native American Tribes, business, government, 
recreation, communities, and media. Each of these sub-cultures has 
its own goals, attitudes, values, and ways of expressing the reality 
they see (e.g., media generally transmits reality in terms of crises, 
sensational stories, and personalities). The cultural norms of these 
sub-cultures are often deeply embedded and institutionalized; 
sometimes they are represented by a single individual or a small 
number of individuals, in other cases they represent significant 
numbers of people. Integrating these sub-cultural values into a 
new group can be a challenging effort. Nevertheless, all cultural 
perspectives need to be heard in order to find the common cultural 
narratives from which the collaborative can begin to work. 
For example, as a sub-culture, restorationists have a worldview 
that sees the environment as “degraded, damaged, or destroyed” 
and a corollary view that humans are capable of repairing such 
environments as well as our connection to nature and our own 
communities through restorative activities (i.e., they have a 
“hands-on” approach to resource management). Other cultures or 
sub-cultures may hold a similar view when confronted with the 
reality of wildfires and/or declining local economies; other may not 
(i.e., they may have a “hands-off” management approach). As a 
result, there can be alliances and antagonists within a collaborative 
group. Depending on motivations, leadership abilities, access to 
political and/or economic power and other factors, cultural groups 
within the collaborative may actively seek to support or derail 
certain aspects of the collaborative and/or restoration process. 
Thus, the key work of collaborative leaders is to meld multiple 
perspectives into a relatively short-lived culture of “mutual 
resonance” in order to reach the common goals of ecosystem health 
and human safety and well-being. 

28
Moving to the point of “mutual resonance” may involve 
negotiation between the sub-cultures involved in the collaborative 
process. However, before sitting down to negotiate it is important 
to ask several questions:
 
f What does your culture/sub-culture have to offer? 
 
f What is your culture’s basic philosophy and how might it 
provide support for the process?
 
f What are your culture’s myths/stories/narratives and how 
could they be applied to push the process forward and/or to 
provide insights during difficult situations?
 
f What are your culture’s structural and workforce capacity, 
and how might these assets be used to advance the goals of 
the collaborative? 
 
f What facilities or equipment can your culture provide to 
advance the process?
 
f What are the philosophies, backgrounds, and experiences of 
other cultures in the process?
 
f What positive attributes do the other cultures have to offer?
 
f Who can help you understand the perspectives of the other 
cultures in the process; what possible social bridges exist to 
understanding other cultures?
 
f What are the cultural barriers that will have to be bridged 
in order to reach a “mutual resonance” or zone of agree-
ment?
Working with various cultural (or sub-cultural) 
perspectives requires good information, insight, and purposeful 
communication. When discussing issues, pay close attention to 
the cultural perspectives you hear, then frame and reframe your 
questions and discussion to get through whatever barriers to 
communication and understanding may exist. Cultural differences 
may remain, but by attempting to honestly discover cultural 
perspectives is the first step toward collaboration. 

29
Personal Perspective
As individuals, it is important to remember that we live in a multi-
perspective world in which the hiker, when looking at a stand of 
mature trees, sees their majestic beauty; the logger counts the number 
of board feet; the environmentalist sees the need for protection; and 
the ecologist calculates the amount of carbon dioxide transpired. 
Similarly, every person involved in a collaborative landscape-scale 
forest restoration eﬀort brings their own set of subjective values and 
ethics to the process. Tese values and ethics may or may not reﬂect 
cultural standards of society, but are most certainly aﬀected by an 
individual’s own experiences with other people, the environment, their 
employment situation, and, perhaps, other collaborative experiences. 
Tese individual values and ethics will aﬀect how an individual thinks 
about the process and how they act as a member of the collaborative; 
creating what some may describe as a person’s “agenda.” Tus, knowing 
your “self,” as strange as it may seem to some, is an integral part of 
the collaborative process. Moreover, being part of a collaborative is a 
potential learning process, providing participants with the opportunity 
to learn about their personal perspectives within the context of a larger 
group and situation. 
Tere are a variety of ways to encounter or discover one’s personal 
perspective. Asking yourself hard questions about your feelings or 
attitudes is a good ﬁrst step (e.g., Why do I dislike participating in 
this collaborative process? What am I good at and what role might I 
play? Why do I think this fact will persuade people to change? Why 
did I volunteer when I know I’m already overloaded? Why do I get 
so upset when he talks? What am I going to do about my feeling and 
thoughts? Where do they come from?). Other means of self-discovery 
might include talking with others about their values, desires, and fears; 
exploring your feelings and thoughts through art, meditation, and other 
cultural practices aimed at self-exploration. 
Tese self-questioning exercises can be supported by other more 
scientiﬁc means, including: 1) taking and carefully examining the 
results of personality tests, 2) taking part in tests that identify and 

30
explain diﬀerences within a group of people, and 3) identifying and 
examining your individual problem-solving and/or thinking approach 
as well as those of others. Tese experiences can help each person better 
see how they typically work in situations like a collaborative landscape-
scale forest restoration process. 
Personality tests such as the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator, the 
NEO Personality Inventory-Revised, the 16 PF Instrument, and the 
Keirsey Temperament Sorter are reliable tools for personal discovery. 
Such tests can not only provide insights into a person’s personality but 
help them learn how best to eﬀectively communicate and interact with 
other personality types. Te Johari Window is another test that can be 
especially useful for improving understanding between individuals in a 
group setting. 
Personality types are naturally interrelated with problem-solving 
and thinking approaches. Below are some archetypical problem-solving/
thinking approaches and their general characteristics as developed by 
Harrison and Bramson (1984) and described in the  
InQ or Inquiry Mode Questionnaire:
Analyst: Seeks “one best way;” uses formal logic and 
deduction; interested in scientiﬁc solutions; works well with 
data and details, best in structured, quantiﬁable situations; 
may screen out values and subjective meanings; may try too 
hard for predictable outcomes; may be inﬂexible
Idealist: Takes a broad view of matters, good at articulating 
goals but may overlook details, focuses on values and 
aspirations, best in unstructured, value-laden situations, 
may screen out “hard” data, may try too hard for “perfect” 
solutions 
Pragmatist: Seeks shortest route to payoﬀ, interested 
in innovation and any data or theory that solves the 
problem, focuses on tactics and strategies, best in complex, 
incremental situations, may screen-out long-term solutions, 
may try too hard for expediency, can be over compromising

31
Realist: Uses empiricism and induction (from details 
to generalizations), relies on “facts” and expert opinion, 
interested in concrete results, points out realities and 
resources, good at “cutting through” and getting to the 
problem/point, best in well-deﬁned, objective situations, 
may screen out disagreement, may rush to simplify, may 
overemphasize “facts”
Synthesist: Integrative, process-oriented, sees data as 
meaningless w/o interpretation, best in controversial/
conﬂict-laden situations, provides debate and creativity, may 
theorize excessively, may screen out agreement, may try too 
hard for change/newness
Identifying and examining your approach to solving problems can 
help anyone better understand their role in a collaborative, problem-
solving process. Doing so can also help people gain insights into others 
in the process and how they think and react to problems. Be aware, 
however, that while all these tests and types can raise personal and group 
self-awareness, they are only guideposts, and not necessarily predictors, 
of how one might behave in any given setting. 
While learning about yourself and others is an important part of 
the collaborative process, such learning is often a slow and sometimes 
diﬃcult. Te collaborative process, in fact, will likely move forward 
faster than most advances in individual and group awareness. With 
this in mind, and because the collaborative process can be intensely 
personal and because there often appears to be so much at stake from 
any number of perspectives, it is vital to ﬁnd ways to relax, re-focus, and 
restore your personal energy. Active, regular practices of many kinds—
riding your horse, meeting friends for dinner or a cup of coﬀee, playing 
tennis, doing yoga, running alone or with friends, being with children, 
meditation, dancing with friends, staring at the stars—will help ground 
the soul and chill the emotions. Find one that suits you, and if you can 
share it with someone all the better; sharing it across cultures within the 
collaborative is even better still. 

32
Conclusion
As this Introduction and the other chapters in this handbook 
demonstrate, there are numerous barriers to successful collaborative, 
landscape-scale forest restoration. Fortunately, the work has already begun 
to overcome these scientiﬁc, systemic, cultural, and personal barriers. To 
build the necessary bridges will require investing in and accepting new 
ways of doing business at every level while honoring and recognizing those 
relationships, methods, and ways of thinking that have brought us this far. 
We will have to rise above our cultural and personal tendencies, and learn 
to become more cooperative rather than competitive, more interested 
in the common good than the bottom line, and more in tune with a 
reciprocal relationship to the environment rather a consumptive one. 
Te Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program is a 
visionary eﬀort to restore damaged eco-social systems, build partnerships, 
increase individual and collective well-being, and do right by the resources 
(e.g., air, water, wildlife, forests, grasslands) we have the personal and 
collective responsibility to manage. It is an extraordinary example of 
federal-local cooperation aimed at solving a regional/national problem. 
While recognizing each collaborative group will address their speciﬁc 
CFLRP project according to local conditions, needs and desires, the 
authors and editors of this book have worked to provide a general 
overview of the process from planning through implementation to 
monitoring and adaptive management. In addition, the chapters of the 
book include detailed information that may be useful to CFLRP and 
other landscape-level forest restoration projects. More will need to be 
written as this process moves forward, and we learn from our successes 
and mistakes.
To readers from all perspectives—these collaborative landscape-
scale forest restoration projects are real work, needed work, the work of 
a lifetime, the work of consequence to future generations as well as our 
own. We’re all in this together and if we can ﬁnd the common ground 
necessary to achieve our collective goals, we will make ecological and 
cultural history. 

33
References
Anderson, M.K. 2006. Tending the wild: Native American knowledge  
and the management of California’s natural resources. Berkeley:  
University of California Press.
Covington, W.W. 2003. Te evolutionary and historical context. 
Pages 26-47 in P. Friederici, ed., Ecological restoration of 
southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Washington, DC: 
Island Press. 
Covington, W.W., W.A. Niering, E. Starkey, and J. Walker. 1999. 
Ecosystem restoration and management: Scientiﬁc principles
and concepts. Pages 599–617 in Ecological stewardship: A
common reference for ecosystem management. Oxford, UK: 
Elsevier Scientiﬁc, Ltd.
Egan, D. and E.A. Howell, eds. 2001. Te historical ecology handbook: 
A restorationist’s guide to reference ecosystems. Washington, DC: 
Island Press.
Egan, D., E.E. Hjerpe, and J. Abrams. 2011. Why people matter in 
ecological restoration. Pages 2-20 in D. Egan, E.E. Hjerpe, 
and J. Abrams, eds., Human dimensions of  ecological 
restoration: Integrating science, nature, and culture. 
Washington, DC: Island Press.
Esbjörn-Hargens, S. and M.E. Zimmerman, eds. Integral ecology: 
Uniting multiple perspectives on the natural world. Boston and 
London: Integral Books.
Gunderson, L.H. and C.S. Holling, eds. 2002. Panarchy: 
Understanding transformations in human and natural 
systems. Washington, DC: Island Press.
Harrison, A.F. and R.M. Bramson. 1984. Te art of thinking. New 
York: Berkley Books.

34
Kimmerer, R. 2011. Restoration and reciprocity: Te contributions 
of traditional ecological knowledge. Pages 257-276 in
D. Egan, E.E. Hjerpe, and J. Abrams, eds., Human 
dimensions of ecological restoration: Integrating science, 
nature, and culture. Washington, DC: Island Press.
Millar, C.I. and W.B. Woolfenden. 1999b. Te role of climate change
in interpreting historical variability. Ecological Applications 9 
(4):1207–1216.
Millar, C.I. and L.B. Brubaker. 2006. Climate change and
paleoecology: New contexts for restoration ecology.
Pages 315-340 in D. Falk, M. Palmer, and J. Zedler, eds., 
Foundations of restoration ecology. Washington, DC: 
Island Press.
Millar, C.I., N.L. Stephenson, and S.L. Stephens. 2007. Climate
change and forests of the future: Managing in the face of
uncertainty. Ecological Applications 17(8):2145-2151.
Moore, M.M., W.W. Covington, and P.Z. Fule. 1999. Reference 
conditions and ecological restoration: A southwestern
ponderosa pine perspective. Ecological Applications 9(4):1266-
1277.
Peterson, D.L., C.L. Millar, L.A. Joyce, M.J. Furniss, J.E. Halofsky, 
R.P. Neilson, and T.L. Morelli. 2011. Responding to climate
change in national forests: A guidebook for developing
adaptation options. Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-GTR-855. 
Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Paciﬁc Northwest Research Station.
Society for Ecological Restoration Science and Policy Working Group. 
2004. Te Society for Ecological Restoration primer. Washington, 
DC: Society for Ecological Restoration.
Swetnam, T.W., C.D. Allen, and J. Betancourt. 1999. Applied 
historical ecology: Using the past to manage for the future.
Ecological Applications 9(4):1189-1206.

35
U.S. Forest Service. 2011. U.S. Forest Service Manual, National
Forest Resource Management, Chapter 2020 Ecological 
Restoration and Resilience. Washington, DC: U.S. Forest 
Service National Headquarters. 
___. 2012. US Forest Service restoration projects reduced ﬁre danger, 
provided jobs in 2011. Washington, DC: U.S. Forest Service 
National Headquarters. 

D
uring the last 20 years, many policy makers, stakeholders, and land 
management agencies have embraced collaborative approaches as a 
means of guiding forest management on public lands (Lowe and Moote 
2005). Working collaboratively on forest management projects began 
in the 1990s due to public demand for increased participation in federal 
land management and the application of alternative dispute resolution 
methods to environmental conﬂicts. Pressure to increase public involve-
ment gathered speed as the scale of natural disasters, such as wildﬁres, 
ﬂooding, insect infestations and tree disease, and the complexity of 
ﬁnding social, ecological, and political solutions began to increase 
exponentially. Public engagement in forest management planning also 
evolved as reactionary coalitions. Tese coalitions often used extreme 
methods to change the existing situation and became highly functional 
social networks that pro-actively emphasized science-informed, restora-
tion-oriented management of public lands (Cheng and Mattor 2006). 
Collaboration
Windy Selig
Chapter
1

37
Tese eﬀorts 
found support in a 
number of federal 
policies established 
to aid “cooperative 
conservation.” Te 
Healthy Forests Res-
toration Act of 2003 
and the “Facilitation 
of Cooperative Con-
servation” Execu-
tive Order of 2004 
encouraged federal 
agencies to work col-
laboratively with 
multiple stakeholders 
on natural resource 
management issues (Cheng and Mattor 2006). 
Collaboration was also mandated under the 
Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration 
Act (CFLRA) of 2009 and is an integral part 
of planning under the proposed Revised Na-
tional Forest Planning Rule. 
Collaboration refers to a process where 
individuals and groups with diﬀerent interests 
come together to address management issues 
and create agreements. Collaborative forest 
restoration is a process through which multiple 
stakeholders jointly explore diverse values and 
interests and attempt to come to some level 
of agreement about appropriate land man-
agement. Collaboration implies stakeholder 
involvement that goes beyond the usual pro-
cesses of public comment on agency proposals, 
Collaborative 
forest restoration 
is a process 
through which 
multiple 
stakeholders 
jointly explore 
diverse values 
and interests, and 
attempt to come 
to some level of 
agreement about 
appropriate land 
management.

38
Collaboration
typical of public meetings and comment periods. Te goal of a collabora-
tive is to develop new approaches to restoration that are both scientiﬁcally 
credible and socially acceptable. Te collaborative process provides the 
framework for creating a constructive dialogue. In a collaborative process, 
stakeholders participate directly in identifying issues of concern, devel-
oping proposed actions, and reviewing alternatives. A key aspiration of 
collaboration work is building a vision and plan for land management that 
will address and overcome objections that would otherwise lead to litiga-
tion and project delays. 
Te Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) Collaboration in 
NEPA: A Handbook for NEPA Practitioners (CEQ 2007) states, “By 
engaging relevant expertise, including scientiﬁc and technical expertise, 
and knowledge of a local resource, a collaborative body can reach a more 
informed agreement and advise decision-makers accordingly.” Te CEQ 
handbook further states that beneﬁts of collaboration include a fairer 
process, improved fact-ﬁnding, increased social capital, enhanced envi-
ronmental stewardship, and reduced litigation. To be productive in such a 
high level of engagement, collaborative eﬀorts often formalize the struc-
ture and framework in which they operate. 
The Structure and Framework 
for Collaboration
Collaborative eﬀorts generally move from an under-organized state, 
where individual stakeholders act independently, toward a more tightly 
organized relationship, characterized by concerted decision-informing 
recommendations (Bouwen and Taillieu 2004). Because collaborative 
groups typically involve diverse and sometimes competing interests, 
established organizational structures (e.g., charter, decision rules, 
participation and operating rules, memorandum of understanding) 
guide the collaborative process more eﬀectively through all forms of 
engagement, such as meetings, document development and planning. 
Landscape restoration collaboratives also involve stakeholders from 

39
across large geographic areas, which can create logistical barriers. For 
example, travel to meet face-to-face may not be an option or may 
only occur intermittently because of the distances, time, and expenses 
involved. Using appropriate tools between meetings can enhance dis-
tance communication, project management, and maintain momentum 
toward the desired outcome. 
Structure and Organization 
Collaborative forest restoration eﬀorts can take many forms because 
groups vary considerably in the number of participants, scope of 
goals and activities, land ownership represented, interest groups 
involved, and the decision-making processes used. It is helpful to 
learn from speciﬁc examples of both successful and unsuccessful 
eﬀorts by looking at how they formed, who was involved, and how 
they governed themselves. Tere are a variety of ways to collaborate, 
including planning committees and advisory councils, networks, co-
management groups, and partnerships. While they are all diﬀerent, 
what they have in common is the active involvement of multiple 
stakeholders. 
Planning committees and advisory councils provide advice and/
or help develop guidelines and plans for other organizations, such as 
government agencies. Group members are usually invited or appointed 
based on their expertise. Te group typically has no decision-making 
authority, but its suggestions are used by authorities to guide the de-
tails of restoration projects. Tese groups may last for months or years, 
or may dissolve once the task at hand has been accomplished. One 
example is the Arizona Forest Health Oversight and Advisory Coun-
cils, which were instrumental in developing the Statewide Strategy for 
Restoring Arizona’s Forests. 
Networks are loosely deﬁned groups of individuals with overlapping 
interests or responsibilities, who engage in informal communication over 
extended periods of time. Te goal is information exchange and resource 
sharing, not decision making or project implementation. Te National 
Network of Forest Practitioners is an example of a network. 

40
Collaboration
Co-management is a formal process with a focus on shared power 
among government authorities or between an agency and one or more 
user groups. Participation is limited to people with legal authority 
and decision-making capacity. Co-management groups may develop 
and analyze restoration proposals, develop and ratify legally binding 
agreements, and share the decision-making process among a hand-
ful of key stakeholders. Co-management can operate permanently or 
may be developed to work for a speciﬁed length of time. Te Grand 
Canyon-Parashant National Monument (GCPNM), for example, is 
co-managed by the Bureau of Land Management and the National 
Park Service. 
Partnerships are generally long-standing and place-based groups 
that serve to identify issues, gather information, generate management 
options, and develop recommendations for restoration projects within 
a speciﬁed geographic area. Participants usually represent an agency 
or special interest group, but non-aligned citizens may also partici-
pate. As with planning committees, partnerships usually do not have 
decision-making authority, but their suggestions are inﬂuential and 
are often adopted by agency personnel and government authorities. 
Te Parashant Partnership is an example. Te BLM and NPS, who as 
mentioned before co-manage the GCPNM, have invited the Parashant 
Partnership to collaboratively develop management recommendations 
for areas within the GCPNM. 
Each type of collaborative group may decide to formalize a 
framework for governance to guide planning eﬀorts. Initial steps can 
include identifying additional participants, establishing ground rules 
for interaction, clarifying areas in need of agreement, determining 
resource and funding sources, choosing appropriate meeting times and 
venues, entering into memoranda of understanding, identifying needs 
for information and technical expertise, and selecting independent 
facilitators or mediators as appropriate. Tere may be subcommittees 
for each of these steps or the group may act as a whole. 

41
Federal Government in Collaboration
Federal agencies are authorized to collaborate with the public under 
a variety of laws and directives. Under these laws, the boundaries of 
collaborative inﬂuence and the extent of federal agency authority are 
sometimes areas of confusion or contention. As agencies rely more and 
more on public involvement, participants continue to push the bound-
aries to their preferred level of inﬂuence. Nevertheless, while collabo-
rating with others, lead agencies retain decision-making authority and 
responsibility. Understanding the current structures for government 
involvement and how those structures can be creatively used may oﬀer 
more innovative insight into the full range of collaborative potential. 
Te CEQ Collaboration in NEPA: A Handbook for NEPA Practitio-
ners discusses four levels of government involvement in collaboration 
along a spectrum that includes inform, consult, involve and collaborate. 
Members of the stakeholder group for the Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI) meet to craft a Memorandum 
of Understanding. Photo courtesy of ERI

42
Collaboration
Each level describes how the government 
may involve public input in the deci-
sion making process, agency goals for 
that input, case examples, and processes 
followed to obtain input. Te primary 
focus includes the collaborate level, in 
which the authors of the handbook 
encourage agency leads by suggesting 
that the agency will ﬁnd itself in a more 
justiﬁable position when adopting a 
consensus-based recommendation. Addi-
tionally, the lead agency can draw on the 
increased capacity for cooperation that 
has developed through the collaboration 
to expedite implementation. Te authors 
of the handbook are careful, however, to remind participants that the 
agency remains the sole decision-making authority, regardless of how 
much collaboration went into making the decisions.
Understanding the agency and becoming familiar with its culture 
of collaboration, and its internal policy for collaborating with the public 
are key steps for any collaborative. For instance, the BLM’s Appropri-
ate Dispute Resolution program is used in natural resource manage-
ment to broaden the spectrum of processes for preventing, managing, 
or resolving conﬂict outside the conventional arenas of administra-
tive adjudication, litigation, or legislation. Tese activities range from 
direct negotiation and mediation through stakeholder working groups, 
joint fact-ﬁnding, ombudsman services, and many other processes and 
strategies for managing conﬂict and fostering agreement. 
It is important to understand that involved and engaged collabora-
tion between government agencies and the public enhances the collab-
orative potential for eﬀectiveness and improves the quality of decisions. 
Participant familiarity and full understanding of the constraints of 
agency involvement can lead to innovative solutions for involvement. 
Because collaborative 
groups typically 
involve diverse and 
sometimes competing 
interests, established 
organizational 
structures guide the 
collaborative process 
more eﬀectively through 
all forms of engagement, 
such as meetings, 
document development 
and planning.

43
Barriers to Successful Collaboration 
In ideal collaboration, visions are shared and goals are unambigu-
ous and uncontested. However, natural resource planning situations 
can be typiﬁed by competing interests, a lack of scientiﬁc agreement, 
limited time, imbalance in resources, and structural inequities in the 
access to information and the distribution of political power (Lacha-
pelle et al. 2003). Collaboration requires a high level of interaction 
and engagement that may tax the ability to communicate competently, 
debate constructively, and explore thoroughly (Daniels and Walker 
2001). Collaboration can be further complicated by stakeholder histo-
ries that may involve conﬂict, cultural barriers, and by working with 
agencies unaccustomed to collaborating. 
Conflict
Anyone who has been involved in a collaborative process knows that a 
conﬂict within the group typically involves multiple participants, can 
be complex, and can intensify dramatically if left unresolved. When 
multiple parties are involved, the complexity of the problem increases 
dramatically and may minimize desired outcomes by redirecting 
group and individual energies from the intended goal. Moreover, as 
the conﬂict increases, reasonable people may demonstrate irrational or 
unwarranted behaviors. Unmanaged conﬂict can escalate in intensity 
over time, resulting in counterproductive behaviors (Greer 2012). 
Conﬂict-causing behavior can be managed by dealing successfully 
with underlying motivations. Fear, distrust, or a lack of awareness of 
other options for open communication and problem-solving may lie 
behind rigid positions. When conﬂict is strategically managed, the 
results can be beneﬁcial and lead to cohesive decision-making and 
positive social interactions as well as increased morale and greater in-
novation toward achieving the overall common goals (Greer 2012).

44
Collaboration
Stakeholder Histories
It is not uncommon for a “history of conﬂict” to exist among 
stakeholders, especially in groups where stakeholders have had previous 
interactions. Parties engaged in a collaborative process may also be 
engaged in a litigious battle over property rights or access in land uses. 
In such situations, perceptions and behaviors may carry over from the 
litigious battle into the collaborative group. Even when the litigious 
battle is over for decades, members may maintain a deep emotional 
memory that inﬂuences their interactions. Natural adversaries and 
natural allies often exist due to past histories of conﬂict. Being aware 
of such relationships is important. 
Cultural Barriers 
Ways of thinking, using language, what we pay attention to, and how 
we convey our ideas are forms of cultural orientations that inﬂuence 
our interaction with others and the land. Parties who have diﬀerent 
cultural orientations may experience barriers that can cause frustration 
and lead to misunderstandings. Beyond communication, there may be 
conﬂicting uses of the land from one culture to another. For instance, 
snow-making from reclaimed water has caused a dispute among 
members of the Hopi and Navajo tribes and the owners of the Arizona 
Snowbowl ski resort in Flagstaﬀ, Arizona. Both tribal councils view 
the entire San Francisco Peaks mountain region as a spiritual place 
and, as a result, have expressed their opposition to using reclaimed 
water in snow-making operations. Te owners of the ski resort want 
to pursue snow-making because they believe that reclaimed water 
is harmless and will enhance skiing opportunities for mountain 
recreationists. Such cultural diﬀerences may not have a venue for 
collaborative resolution. However, in many collaborative eﬀorts 
diﬀerences in cultural foundations provide a rich blend of values and 
perceptions. Combined cultural orientations can, also, oﬀer land 
management agencies a better understanding of the total value of the 
landscape restoration process.  

45
Conflicting Science and Interpretations of Science
Collaborative eﬀorts in landscape-scale restoration increasingly rely 
on science to inform management planning. Te nature of science, 
especially ecology and forestry-based science, is to produce analyses 
and results to inﬂuence outcomes in land management. Conﬂict 
may arise over accuracy of results, interpretations of the science, how 
to transfer results from an analysis to results on the land, and who 
gets credit for the work. Additionally, research and analyses have 
historically focused at the project and program level. Attempts are 
now focused toward simultaneously understanding resources and 
landscapes at several scales during assessment and analysis to improve 
understanding of linkages and relationships within and between 
scales, and provide improved relational context. Such a change in 
thinking about, observing, and analyzing a situation is new and 
requires adjustment, but is likely one of the most fundamental hurdles 
to overcome to eﬀectively implement ecosystem management (Tomas 
1996).
Challenges within a Changing Agency
Natural resource policy, planning, and decision-making has 
historically addressed the ecological and recreational characteristics of 
resource management, while social processes have not been adequately 
understood or addressed in management frameworks (Van Riper 
2003). In “Exploring Barriers to Collaborative Forestry,” authors Ann 
Moote and Dennis Becker examine national policies and other factors 
that may be hampering project implementation and oﬀer suggestions 
to aid collaborative forestry groups in moving forward: 
Acceptance of collaboration in land management planning 
varies among diﬀerent land and resource management agen-
cies as well as among departments and individuals within 
the same agency. Many agency employees see collaboration 
as an inappropriate or ineﬃcient use of their time, and in 
some cases agency staﬀers are suspected of using existing 

46
Collaboration
procedures as an excuse to justify non-participation in col-
laborative partnerships. On the other hand, many agency 
employees eﬀectively collaborate despite agency cultures 
and policies. Collaborative groups perceive barriers when 
agencies limit the discretion of local ﬁeld staﬀers or dis-
courage innovation. Under these circumstances, collabo-
ration is a “hard sell” to agency personnel who foresee a 
considerable increase in work load for limited beneﬁts or 
suspect they may lose control of the planning and imple-
mentation process (Moote and Becker 2003). 
Legal Requirements as a Barrier to Collaboration
Some environmental legislation may create barriers to the collaborative 
process due to misunderstandings or a lack of clarity about how such 
legislation and regulations aﬀect decision-making and operations. Te 
NEPA and the Forest Advisory Committee Act (FACA) are two such 
pieces of legislations. 
Under NEPA regulations, agencies are required to engage in forms of 
public participation, such as notice and comment procedures, and public 
outreach. Agencies are also required to involve the public to the extent 
practicable in developing Environmental Assessments and Environmen-
tal Impact Statements. Challenges in the NEPA process can occur when 
agencies follow minimum requirements for engaging the public. Tey also 
occur when members of the public have higher expectations of how their 
input will be used in the agency process than is realistic. 
Te FACA governs advisory committees within the Executive 
Branch of the federal government. Advisory committees are formally 
chartered committees developed to provide collective advice to the 
managing agency. Te FACA provides many of the best practice 
recommendations for collaborative problem-solving and can be eﬀec-
tive for carrying out a collaborative process. However, the FACA can 
present challenges to agencies wishing to collaborate with groups that 
include non-federal organizations or private citizens because incorpo-
rating advice and recommendations from groups involving non-federal 

47
organizations or members of the public can lead to a FACA violation. 
Bridging such legal barriers is important to garnering public support 
and, ultimately, implementing the project (see below as well as Chap-
ter 5 for more information about ways to achieve this goal).
Tere are more barriers to collaboration than those described here. 
However, whatever the barriers may be for a given collaborative group, 
they likely can be overcome through constructive measures that may 
simply involve open and transparent communication or more struc-
tured facilitated negotiations. While barriers are likely to exist in any 
collaborative process, the beneﬁts of collaborating far exceed the costs. 
Barriers, also, often serve as catalysts to strengthen a collaborative 
process and collective resolve to achieve the greater goal of landscape 
scale restoration. 
ERI’s Doc Smith guides a field trip to the Fort Valley Experimental Forest, north of Flagstaff, Arizona.  
Photo courtesy of ERI

48
Collaboration
Trips into the ﬁeld are good team building exercises. Photo courtesy of ERI
Federal Government  
Support for Collaboration
Environmental policies have evolved during recent decades and 
now offer legal guidelines that support collaborative efforts by 
identifying how to secure funding and work with government 
agencies. Programs developed around these policies also offer sup-
port in various forms. 
The CFLR Program, in particular, provides selected projects 
with benefits that, in addition to funding, can enhance the collab-
orative process. The CFLR Program offers a suite of resources that 
draw from experiences of past and ongoing projects to assist newly 
forming projects in terms of education and training. For instance, 
the U.S. Forest Service (USFS) and National Forest Foundation 
co-host a series of Peer Learning Sessions that includes mem-
bers from projects nationwide in webinar, or online presentation, 
format. These sessions serve as an opportunity for cross-learning, 

49
When conﬂict 
is strategically 
managed, the 
results can be 
beneﬁcial and 
lead to cohesive 
decision-
making and 
positive social 
interactions as 
well as increased 
morale and 
greater 
innovation 
toward 
achieving the 
overall common 
goals.
informal discussion, and sharing of in-
formation among collaborators and USFS 
personnel. 
As noted above, bridging the barriers 
created by NEPA and FACA is a key step in 
the collaborative forest restoration process. 
Fortunately, there are a variety of processes 
and tools available to agency and public 
members about how to collaborate more 
fully within and across the different phases 
of the NEPA process. One key tool is the 
CEQ Collaboration in NEPA: A Handbook 
for NEPA Practitioners (2007). This hand-
book introduces the NEPA practitioner 
and other interested parties to the issue of 
collaboration, outlines general principles, 
presents useful steps, and provides informa-
tion about methods of collaboration. The 
insight offered in this handbook can pro-
vide innovative methods for collaborating 
in the NEPA. This handbook also addresses 
challenges from FACA regulations. 
To avoid a FACA violation, the managing agency must show 
that collective advice was chartered from public input and col-
laborative groups, meetings were noticed in advance and open to 
the public, the membership was balanced in the points of view 
represented, and the public had an opportunity to submit com-
ments. In the collaborative process, if a group is not a federally 
appointed advisory committee, the managing agency can be inno-
vative in designing a collaborative process that meets the interests 
of all members of a group and satisfies FACA. In addition to the 
CEQ Collaboration in NEPA: A Handbook for NEPA Practitioners 
(2007), the USFS Partnership Resource Center is another useful 
resource to learn ways to navigate FACA requirements. 

50
Collaboration
Resources for Successful Collaboration 
Eﬀective collaborative resources, typically provided by credible, 
experienced sources (e.g., government agencies, foundations, non-
proﬁts), oﬀer a range of tools to guide each aspect of the collabora-
tive process. For instance, the USFS Partnership Resource Center 
oﬀers a full range of tools designed to assist in developing an 
understanding of each phase of the collaborative process, including 
understanding the art of collaboration, developing strong partner-
ships, ﬁnding funding, and developing monitoring strategies and 
joint learning. Tis is an informative resource that can serve as a 
template for gauging quality among the plethora of collaborative 
resources available. 
Credibility is an important consideration when seeking qual-
ity resources. Te collaborative process can be complex and should 
be informed by resources that demonstrate experience and exper-
tise. Te U.S. Institute for Environmental Conﬂict Resolution of 
the Udall Foundation, for example, serves as a good example of a 
credible resource for informed, experienced, and expert use of col-
laboration in natural resource management. Tey oﬀer services in 
facilitation and training in conﬂict resolution to anyone involved 
in an environmental conﬂict involving the United States govern-
ment. Tey have  trained various staﬀ and the leadership of profes-
sional organizations, universities and federal agencies including the 
Department of Interior, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the 
USFS. 
Resources to help determine which type of collaborative struc-
ture may be appropriate for a project and how best to organize the 
social framework of that project come in a variety of forms. In an 
ongoing eﬀort to explore the human dimension side of ecological 
restoration, the Ecological Restoration Institute has published a 
series of papers that identify collaboration as a tool as well as barri-
ers and policy challenges to diﬀerent types of collaborative eﬀorts. 

51
Another useful resource is Te 
Collaboration Handbook pub-
lished by the Red Lodge Clear-
inghouse, which provides com-
mon sense and practical advice 
about putting a collaborative 
eﬀort together and making it 
work. Among many good books 
available on the topic of collabo-
ration in ecological restoration 
are two that are truly insightful 
and in depth. Working through 
Environmental Conﬂict: Te 
Collaborative Learning Approach 
(2001) by Steven Daniels and 
Gregg Walker discusses both the 
theory and technique of col-
laborative learning and presents 
cases where it has been applied. 
Tis is a professional and teach-
ing tool for scholars, students, 
and researchers involved with 
environmental issues as well as 
dispute resolution. Human Di-
mensions of Ecological Restoration: 
Integrating Science, Nature, and 
Culture (Egan et al. 2011) dis-
cusses the social, political, eco-
nomic, and cultural dimensions 
of successfully implementing 
ecological restoration projects. Tis book takes an interdisciplinary 
look at human aspects of ecological restoration and provides practi-
cal and theoretical information, analysis, models, and guidelines for 
optimizing human involvement in restoration projects.
The following agencies and 
organizations provide tools and 
resources for conflict resolution 
and bridges to successful 
collaboration: 
BLM Collaborative Stakeholder 
Engagement and Appropriate 
Dispute Resolution (ADR) 
Program
CEQ Collaboration in NEPA: 
A Handbook for NEPA 
Practitioners
USFS Partnership Resource 
Center
U.S. Institute for 
Environmental Conﬂict 
Resolution
Red Lodge Clearinghouse 
Collaboration Resources
Quick Links

52
Collaboration
Connectivity
Tere are many tools available for distance communication and project 
management that help create the level of connectivity that spatially 
distant collaborative members often need. While one should never 
discount the eﬀectiveness of phone or video-conferencing commu-
nication, some government leaders, scientists and academics, non-
governmental organization (NGO) advocates, and practitioners are 
discovering how new computer-assisted, decision-informing tools and 
emerging forms of electronic communication can be useful in resolv-
ing controversial decision-making processes. Examples include web-
based project and information management tools, computer-assisted 
decision support systems, visualization, modeling, and simulation 
tools, and a range of survey tools and electronic methods for content 
analysis. Tese tools represent opportunities in ﬁnding appropriate ap-
plications to foster collaboration and dispute resolution. 
For example, any Ware Polling was designed as an ecosystem based 
stakeholder engagement and outreach tool for use in public meet-
ings to obtain anonymous feedback from participants at key decision 
points. Tis tool allows the group to conﬁrm whether consensus is 
reached or it may inform the process facilitator that additional infor-
mation or discussion is required. Another useful tool is Google Docs, 
which is a web-based real-time collaboration tool for editing docu-
ments, spreadsheets, presentations, and more. Basecamp and Team box 
are web-based project collaboration and management tools that in-
clude messaging, ﬁle sharing, timeline management, and goal setting. 
Some collaborative eﬀorts will need only a tool to enable distance 
communication. Some will require a more project management ori-
ented tool. Whichever the need may be, a variety of tools are available 
both at cost and for free. Tese tools can enhance the collaborative 
momentum and keep stakeholders actively engaged across distances.
Case Studies as Resources
Among the various resources available, case studies may oﬀer 
the most useful representation of how the phases and nuances of 

53
collaboration can be managed and may lead to successes or failures. 
Tere are a multitude of resources available to share the stories of other 
collaborative eﬀorts. We oﬀer a brief list here as a starting point.  
 
f Forest Communities, Community Forests (Kusel 2003) is a 
collection of case studies that document twelve communities in 
the United States and their eﬀorts to protect and restore their 
community forests. It explores the struggles and opportunities 
faced by people as they work to invest in natural capital, reverse 
decades of poor forest practices, tackle policy gridlock, and 
address community as well as ecological health. 
 
f RedLodge Clearing House oﬀers a list of links to collaborative 
project summaries. Each summary includes the project’s objec-
tives, participants, lessons learned, accomplishments, and more. 
Each resource that oﬀers information on collaboration is likely to 
have case studies as supporting documentation. Case studies are pow-
erful examples of the complexity of the collaborative process and how 
the management of nuances can lead to a success or failure regardless 
of the volume or amount of eﬀort put into the support and develop-
ment of a project. 
For any newly forming collaborative eﬀort, the challenge of taking 
an idea and turning it into a functioning system with a set of managed 
outputs and beneﬁts can be overwhelming.  Becoming familiar with 
the available resources to assist in each step of the collaborative eﬀort 
can be the most eﬀective step along the evolution from idea to estab-
lished collaborative project and ﬁnally to success. 
Alternatives to Collaboration 
Although the goal of collaborative groups is to build and promote 
a collective vision for how to manage the land, collaboration may 
not be the ﬁrst step in all cases. Some situations, for example, may 
require facilitated negotiation or other methods to help groups work 
through controversial or divisive problems before collaboration 
can occur. Tere may be other instances when collaboration is not 

54
Collaboration
appropriate because key stakeholders are not 
interested in resolving an issue, one or more key 
parties have other avenues to better achieve their 
interests, or not everyone involved agrees that 
there is conﬂict or an issue that needs resolution. 
Whether a forest restoration project is ready for 
the collaborative process or requires a negotiation 
approach or resolution through other means, 
every collaborative eﬀort needs to become 
familiar with the expert resources available that 
can help them translate theoretical ideas into 
action on the ground. 
Conclusion
Collaboration in landscape restoration is a complex, challenging and 
imminently rewarding undertaking. Interweaving the complexity 
of social and ecological issues at the size and scale necessary for 
landscape scale restoration challenges dimensions of our human 
ability, and forces an evolution in our approach and understanding 
of the land we inhabit and the communities in which we live. Te 
challenge to ﬁnd innovative processes and methods to honor local, 
regional, and national interests in landscape restoration is continual. 
Still, as this evolution occurs, many strong collaborative eﬀorts are 
forging through associated challenges to return the health of the 
natural landscape. 
Case studies 
are powerful 
examples of the 
complexity of 
the collaborative 
process and how 
the management 
of nuances 
can lead to the 
success or failure 
of a project.

55
References
Bouwen, R. and T. Taillieu. 2004. Multi-party collaboration as social 
learning for interdependence: Developing relational knowing 
for sustainable natural resource management. Journal of 
Community & Applied Social Psychology 14:137–153. 
Cheng, A.S. and K. Mattor. 2006. Why won’t they come? Stakeholder 
perspectives on collaborative national forest planning by 
participation level. Environmental Management 38:545–56. 
Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ). 2007. Collaboration in
NEPA: A handbook for NEPA practitioners.
Washington, DC: Council on Environmental Quality.
Daniels, S.E. and G.B. Walker. 2001. Working through environmental 
conﬂict: Te Collaborative Learning Approach. Westport, CT: 
Praeger Publishers.
Egan, D., E.E. Hjerpe, and J. Abrams, eds. 2011. Human dimensions 
of ecological restoration: Integrating science, nature, and culture. 
Washington, DC: Island Press.
Greer, W.J. 2012. Managing sources of conﬂict in collaborative settings. 
ERI Fact Sheet. Flagstaﬀ, AZ: Northern Arizona University, 
Ecological Restoration Institute.
Kusel, J. and E. Adler. 2003. Forest communities, community forests. 
Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littleﬁeld Publishers. 
Lachapelle, P.R., S.F. McCool, and M.E. Patterson. 2003. Barriers 
to eﬀective natural resource planning in a “messy” world. 
Society and Natural Resources 16(6)473-490.
Lowe, K. and M.A. Moote. 2005. Collaboration as a tool in forest 
restoration. ERI Working Paper 11. Flagstaﬀ, AZ: Northern 
Arizona University, Ecological Restoration Institute. 
Moote, M.A. and D. Becker. 2003. Exploring barriers to collaborative 
forestry. Report from a workshop held at Hart Prairie, 
Flagstaﬀ, Arizona, September 17–19, 2003. Flagstaﬀ, AZ: 
Northern Arizona University, Ecological Restoration Institute. 

56
Collaboration
Tomas, J.C. 1995. Public participation in public decisions: New 
skills and strategies for public managers. San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass Publishers. 
Van Riper, L. 2003. Can agency-led initiatives conform to collaborative 
principles? Evaluating and reshaping an interagency program 
through participatory research. Ph.D. Dissertation for Doctor of 
Philosophy, University of Montana. 

F
requent-ﬁre forests in the western United States burn more in-
tensely and at a greater spatial scale than during any other recent 
time. Te increase in ﬁre intensity is symptomatic of unnatural forest 
structure spurred by more than a century of grazing, ﬁre exclusion, 
logging, and road building in these forests (Covington and Moore 
1994, Brown et al. 2004) combined with warming climates (Wester-
ling et al. 2006). Tis loss of ecological integrity in western, fre-
quent-ﬁre forests has numerous political and economic ramiﬁcations 
for communities, management agencies, and taxpayers. Moreover, it 
has caused a reduction in the ﬂow of ecosystem services—the suite of 
beneﬁts provided by nature to mankind, such as water puriﬁcation, 
recreational opportunities, wildlife habitat, and biodiversity (Benayas 
et al. 2009). 
To address increasing ﬁre management challenges and decreasing 
ecosystem service beneﬁts, politicians, researchers, land managers, 
Ecological Economics
Evan E. Hjerpe
Chapter
2

58
Ecological Economics
and the public have called for large-scale, forest restoration treatments. 
Te intent of restoration is to return greater naturalness and resilience 
to forest structure, function, and processes primarily by thinning, 
prescribed burning, and wildland ﬁre use. Forest restoration is often 
coupled with watershed restoration to improve degraded streams, 
decommission old roads, and remove invasive plants. Forest restoration 
prescriptions are often informed by historical reference conditions, 
while anticipating future, altered successional trajectories (Allen et al. 
2002). 
Ample evidence-based research illustrates that forest restoration 
can eﬀectively change wildﬁre behavior and help return natural ﬁre 
regimes to degraded western forests (Cram et al. 2006, Murphy et al. 
2010, Fulé et al. 2012). Likewise, research shows that restoration is 
also eﬀective at increasing the quality and quantity of critical ecosys-
tem services (Benayas et al. 2009). Te combination of restored natural 
ﬁre regimes and increased ecosystem services make forest restoration 
a powerful economic vehicle for rural communities and the nation. 
Translating these ecological changes into economic values is para-
mount for understanding the total value and potential of large-scale 
forest restoration. Moreover, the ecologically oriented primary intent 
of landscape-scale forest restoration requires novel social and economic 
valuation methods to illustrate its associated costs and beneﬁts.
Tis chapter explores the economics of landscape-level restoration 
treatments in degraded western forests by focusing on the ﬁrst large-
scale forest restoration program of the U.S. Forest Service (USFS), the 
Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program (CFLRP). It is 
important that collaborative stakeholders understand the economics of 
the CFLRP because the value placed on ﬁscal returns and responsibili-
ties represent signiﬁcant aspects of the legislation. In addition, there is 
signiﬁcant, vested interest on behalf of the tax-paying public. 

59
CFLRP Economics
Title IV of the Omnibus Public Land Management Act of 2009, 
known as the Forest Landscape Restoration Act (FLRA), established 
the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program in large part 
to deal with wildﬁre-related issues. Te purpose of the Act is to “en-
courage the collaborative, science-based ecosystem restoration of prior-
ity forest landscapes.” Te legislation emphasizes that forest restoration 
should be done eﬃciently so as to maximize regional economic im-
pacts and beneﬁts while achieving signiﬁcant social and policy objec-
tives. 
CFLRP: The Economic Rationale 
While the primary intent of the CFLRP is to restore degraded forests, 
The San Francisco Peaks jut out behind a line of yellow aspen trees in the Inner Basin north of Flagstaﬀ, Arizona. 
In the foreground is a City of Flagstaﬀ well. Every fall, thousands of tourists visit Flagstaﬀ to see the changing 
aspen leaves. In June 2010, the Inner Basin was threatened by the 15,075-acre Schultz Fire. Subsequent ﬂooding 
from the ﬁre destroyed a major waterline for the city and shut down the road to the Inner Basin for a year. Photo 
by Brienne Magee, USFS Coconino National Forest

60
Ecological Economics
the most important drivers of this legislation were the escalating costs 
and frequency of ﬁre (Schultz et al. 2012). Section 4001(1–4) of the 
Act promotes restoration through a process that: “encourages eco-
logical, economic, and social sustainability; leverages local resources 
with national and private resources; facilitates the reduction of wild-
ﬁre management costs, including through reestablishing natural ﬁre 
regimes and reducing the risk of uncharacteristic wildﬁre; and demon-
strates the degree to which—
(A) various ecological restoration techniques—
(i)  achieve ecological and watershed health ob
      jectives; and
(ii) aﬀect wildﬁre activity and management 
costs; and
(B) the use of forest restoration byproducts can oﬀset 
                   treatment costs while beneﬁtting local rural
       economies and improving forest health.”
Te legislation received widespread support because a restored 
forest was viewed as additionally enhancing numerous economic val-
ues, such as better ﬁsh and wildlife habitat, improved water quality, 
more jobs in-the-woods, and useful woody byproducts.
CFLRP: Leveraging Funds and Economic Monitoring 
Te CFLRP is a competitive program within the USFS designed to 
incentivize broad stakeholder agreement about project goals while 
leveraging local and private resources with federal funding. Te 
competitive nature of the CFLRP theoretically directs funding to the 
projects and collaborative groups that best illustrate a structure and 
strategy most capable of successfully implementing landscape-scale 
restoration. Project selection and continued funding depends signiﬁ-
cantly on the ability of the designated CFLRP project to create and 
maintain regional economic impacts, particularly those associated 
with job creation. 

61
Incentives for leveraging additional funds for CFLRP projects are an 
important component of the Act because CFLRP funds are not used for 
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) planning, and they only pay 
for up to 50% of project monitoring. Additionally, an “all lands” ap-
proach was employed, leading to project proposals being partially judged 
by the amount of non-federal investment that would be leveraged. Tese 
stipulations force collaborative groups and the USFS to build a founda-
tion of matching funds for many parts of the CFLRP process, and to use 
additional appropriations for NEPA planning. Tey also incentivize the 
regional stakeholders and collaboratives to expose projects to potential out-
side investors, such as commercial interests, non-proﬁts, tribes, and states. 
Te economic monitoring of CFLRP projects is extensive. Collab-
oratives, in conjunction with the USFS, must track various economic 
metrics—costs of treatments, matching and in-kind resources, leveraged 
restoration resources adjacent to CFLRP projects, timber and woody 
biomass sold, and economic impacts. Economic monitoring is critical to 
determine whether projected economic impacts are realized, if treatment 
costs decrease over time, and if ﬁre management costs are reduced in the 
long run. 
To streamline and standardize project proposals and economic 
monitoring, the USFS developed the Treatments for Restoration Eco-
nomic Analysis Tool (TREAT) to estimate the economic impacts of each 
proposed CFLRP project. Te TREAT provides teams with a standard in-
terface to estimate employment and labor income impacts from proposed 
restoration activities (Box 1).  
CFLRP: Tracking the Flow of Money
Annual congressional appropriations fund CFLRP projects and, while 
funding is currently only authorized through 2019, there is widespread 
congressional support for the CFLRP at this time. Initially $10 million 
were appropriated for the CFLRP in Fiscal Year 2010, $25 million in 
2011, and $40 million in 2012. Nevertheless, future appropriations re-
main uncertain given the concerns about the federal debt and the desire 
for “smaller” government. 

62
Ecological Economics
Box 1. The Treatments for Restoration  
 
 
 
 Economic Analysis Tool
Te Treatments for Restoration Economic Analysis Tool (TREAT) model is used 
to help estimate the economic impacts for proposed and ongoing CLFRP projects, 
speciﬁcally employment and labor income. Te standardized inputs in TREAT al-
low for simple aggregations and comparisons among CFLRP projects. Te uniform 
templates also allow USFS economists to calculate ﬁnal economic impacts based on 
data entered by CFLRP-associated stakeholders and project managers. USFS econo-
mists also work with project managers to ensure accurate data entry. 
Te ﬁrst version of the TREAT model was developed speciﬁcally for the CFLRP 
and the 2010 project proposals. Tat version provided a comprehensive, easy-to-use 
economic platform for estimating the economic impacts of implementing ten-year 
strategies. A new version of the TREAT model is now available for the CFLRP 
projects. Tree recent updates to the TREAT model represent advances in terms of 
capturing more accurate CFLRP economic data:
f County-level economic data is used, which means economic impacts are 
isolated from out-of-region or national impacts. Te original TREAT 
model used state-level economic linkages that matched USFS regions. 
Tat model overestimated the multiplier eﬀects, or the indirect and 
induced eﬀects, of CFLRP project expenditures. Te current TREAT 
model uses localized economic data for the speciﬁc counties where proj-
ects occur, producing more reliable estimates of economic impacts. 
 
f Economic impacts are now monitored by speciﬁc year. Te initial 
TREAT versions had users enter ten-year total estimates to produce 
annual averages.  
 
f Local estimates for direct eﬀects of timber harvest and processing are 
now incorporated. Te latest version incorporates local commercial 
forest product response coeﬃcients as determined through site-speciﬁc 
economic surveying from the University of Montana’s Bureau of Busi-
ness and Economic Research. Tis allows for more precise estimates of 
the economic impacts associated with commercial forest products from 
CFLRP projects. 

63
Appropriations for CFLRP projects are made available at the 
discretion of the Secretary of Agriculture, acting through the Chief 
of the USFS. Funds are dispersed to regional USFS oﬃces and indi-
vidual national forests that are sites of proposed or ongoing CFLRP 
projects. Te funds are then expended on contracts and agreements 
developed in collaboration with regional forest stakeholders (for 
more about contracts, see Chapter 5). Contracts and agreements for 
implementation and monitoring activities are signed with businesses, 
non-proﬁt organizations, and academic institutions. Expenditures are 
tracked in annual reports by budget line items for the USFS and by 
matching funds (Box 2).  
Costs and Benefits of Landscape-level 
Forest Restoration
Landscape-scale forest restoration is designed to protect human lives, 
communities, and infrastructure as well as return resilience to for-
est ecosystems. To achieve these goals, CFLRP projects, like all for-
est management activities, produce costs and beneﬁts. While costs 
may be more-or-less immediately known, many beneﬁts may not be 
recognized for quite some time. Tis can make landscape-scale restora-
tion more diﬃcult to achieve given our culture’s desire for immediate 
gratiﬁcation. However, if the goals of social and ecological sustainabil-
ity are to be truly embraced, the current generation must begin to pay 
oﬀ the high-interest, natural capital loans that are the result of logging, 
development, and ﬁre suppression practices. Te following section 
examines the costs and beneﬁts of forest restoration and summarizes 
some emerging concepts, such as payments for ecosystem services, 
which may help oﬀset the costs of landscape-scale forest restoration. 

64
Ecological Economics
Box 2: Regional Economic Impact of the CFLRP
Te ten original CFLRP projects designated in 2010 have already generated tremen-
dous ecological, economic, and social impacts. Initial CFLRP project selections were 
made near the end of the FY2010, making FY2011 the ﬁrst full year of project ac-
tivities. Annual reports for FY2011 were submitted in 2012 by all ten initial CFLRP 
selections. Te cumulative annual impacts for all ten initial projects are impressive. 
As a result of direct CFLRP funding and matching funds in FY2011, these ten 
projects accomplished the following restoration objectives: 
f Approximately 159,000 forested acres received restoration treatments, and 
moved those acres from high risk to lower risk for catastrophic wildﬁre 
f Of these restoration treatments, about 31,000 acres were treated by 
mechanical thinning; 53,000 acres were treated with prescribed ﬁre; and 
75,000 acres experienced wildﬁre managed for resource beneﬁts 
f Roughly 43 miles of degraded streams were restored 
f Numerous other watershed and forest restoration activities were con-
ducted including: miles of road decommissioning, removal of invasive 
plants and noxious weeds, culvert replacements, and reforestation.  
Te ecological accomplishments of CFLRP projects and the associated project 
monitoring spurred substantial regional economic impacts in FY2011: 
f Approximately 2,240 direct full and part-time jobs were created or main-
tained
f Including indirect and induced eﬀects, about 3,375 total full and part-
time jobs were created or maintained
f Nearly $82 million of direct labor income was generated (Labor income is 
the sum of wages, beneﬁts, and sole proprietor income.)  
f Including indirect and induced eﬀects, approximately $125 million of 
total labor income was generated in the regions

65
f Much of the labor income and employment came from woody byproduct 
utilization and commercial forest product activities 
f Some 320,000 green tons of small-diameter and low-value trees were 
made available for bioenergy
f Roughly 240,000 hundred cubic feet of timber was sold within CFLRP 
project boundaries
f Numerous other values were enhanced by ecosystem service improve-
ments. Many of these increases in value take decades to accrue and/or are 
non-market in nature. 
Tese results represent signiﬁcant success for the CFLRP in its ﬁrst full year of 
restoration activities, and were achieved even though direct funding was well below 
the authorized level. Te regional economic impacts created by the CFLRP are criti-
cal as most of the designated projects occur in rural areas that typically have some of 
the highest unemployment rates and lowest per capita incomes in the nation. Given 
that CFLRP appropriations reached the authorized annual funding level of $40 
million in FY2012, and that ten additional projects have been chosen, even greater 
impacts should occur as the CFLRP matures. 
Te ten projects include the Selway-Middle Fork Clearwater, Southwestern 
Crown Collaborative, Colorado Front Range, Uncompahgre Plateau, Four Forest 
Restoration Initiative, Southwest Jemez Mountains, Dinkey Landscape Restora-
tion Project, Deschutes Collaborative Forest, Tapash Collaborative, and Accelerated 
Longleaf Pine Restoration.
Costs of Forest Restoration
Fighting wildﬁres is a means to protect lives, property, and structures. Te 
costs of ﬁre management are immense and rapidly increasing as both ﬁre 
risk and human settlement continue to increase throughout forests in the 
western United States. Fire management costs for the Forest Service now 
regularly exceed two billion dollars annually. Some of the most costly 
wildﬁres are in frequent-ﬁre forests that have seen per-acre tree densities 
dramatically increase from historical reference conditions. To wit, the costs 

66
Ecological Economics
of the Rodeo-Chediski and Hayman ﬁres in Arizona and Colorado in 2002 
exceeded one-half billion dollars when including suppression, rehabilita-
tion, structural, and tax losses (WFLC 2010). 
Many of the costs of uncharacteristic wildﬁres can be lessened, or 
avoided, with preventive forest restoration treatments. Te direct costs of 
forest restoration are the result of implementing thinning and burning 
prescriptions. Te cost of these treatments has been the focus of much 
research. In general, prescribed ﬁre is considered to have the lowest costs per 
acre for treatment type, although wildland ﬁre use (allowing natural wild-
ﬁres to burn for resource beneﬁt) can often be the cheapest per acre method 
of restoring natural ﬁre regimes for larger ﬁres. Te cost of thinning-based 
treatments, including hand-thinning and mechanical treatments, varies 
signiﬁcantly. For example, Hartsough et al. (2008) found a range of thin-
ning costs from $500 to $2,000 per acre. In almost all cases, economies of 
scale exist in both prescribed burning and mechanical treatments, rendering 
larger treatments less expensive per acre. 
Planning costs for forest restoration are substantial, but are likely 
similar to planning costs for any type of forest management. Additionally, 
all management actions come with opportunity costs. Tat is, for whatever 
action was chosen, other actions could have been implemented but were 
not undertaken. For example, instead of implementing landscape-level 
forest restoration, the USFS could pursue a bigger program of traditional 
timber production. While this could also reduce uncharacteristic wildﬁre in 
places, it would come at the cost of virtually all other ecosystem services (see 
Hjerpe 2011) and could continue the cycle of leaving future generations 
with greater forest management problems. 
Finally, there are other potential costs, or risks, associated with forest 
restoration. For prescribed ﬁres, these risks include the potential for escaped 
ﬁres as well as safety and health concerns due to smoke. For thinning, as-
sociated risks include erosion from ground disturbance, introduction of in-
vasive weeds, and wildlife disturbance. Additionally, many business costs are 
necessary to incur if byproduct utilization is able to play a substantial role 
in oﬀsetting overall restoration costs. Transporting woody material from the 
forest as well as investing in wood processing equipment and facilities are 

67
major initial costs that are incurred prior to the ﬁnal sale of wood products. 
Ultimately, potential environmental, social, and commercial costs are risks 
that will only receive attention when the risk of inaction becomes too great. 
Economic Benefits of Forest Restoration
As landscape-scale forest restoration moves forward, there are several ways 
of examining the beneﬁts that restoration provides. Te ﬁrst valuation 
method is to examine costs that would have likely accrued without restora-
tion intervention (i.e., avoided costs) and measure the diﬀerence of these 
costs with and without treatment. Te second metric involves examining 
improvements in market values resulting from restored forests. Finally, 
many beneﬁts spurred by forest restoration can be considered as improve-
ments in the quantity and quality of non-market ecosystem services. 
Avoided costs are realized, for example, when restoration treatments 
help reduce or eliminate the management and societal costs created by 
catastrophic wildﬁres or other destructive forces. Such a list of avoided 
costs might include:
 
f Avoided ﬁre suppression costs
 
f Avoided post-ﬁre rehabilitation costs
 
f Avoided property and structural damages
 
f Avoided fatalities and injuries 
 
f Avoided ﬂooding and erosion damages
 
f Avoided tourism and recreation expenditure losses
 
f Avoided timber losses.
Researchers have investigated and substantiated these avoided costs 
(Loomis et al. 2003, Mason et al. 2006, Snider et al. 2006, and Mercer et 
al. 2007). For example, Mason and his colleagues (2006) found that the 
present value of many of these avoided costs (beneﬁts) was much greater 
than the present value of treatment costs. Recently, USFS economists 
and researchers developed the Risk and Cost Analysis Tool (R-CAT) to 
determine avoided ﬁre suppression costs for CFLRP projects for compari-
son to the treatment costs (Box 3). Tis powerful tool should help CLFRP 

68
Ecological Economics
collaboratives estimate potential savings for the federal government and 
taxpayers from their project.
It is important to note that costs and damages from wildﬁre or other 
destructive forces will not be eliminated by applying restoration treat-
ments. However, landscape-scale forest restoration can substantially reduce 
these costs and damages, and validating long-term savings and avoided 
costs is critical to understanding the beneﬁts of restoration. 
Similarly, numerous research studies have documented market im-
provements resulting from forest restoration (Loomis et al. 2002, Kim and 
Wells 2005, Hjerpe and Kim 2008). A partial list of market improvements 
derived from these studies includes: 
 
f Increased use values for ﬁshing and hunting by improving habitat 
 
f Increased property values 
 
f Increased woody byproducts available for utilization 
 
f Increased production of non-timber forest products.
Recently, disciplines, such as ecological economics, have focused 
attention on increases in non-market ecosystem services due to restora-
tion treatments or similar conservation eﬀorts (Loomis and Gonzalez-
Caban 1998, Winter and Fried 2001, Loomis et al. 2003, Garber-
Yonts et al. 2004, Benayas et al. 2009, Hurteau and North 2009, 
Meyerhoﬀ et al. 2009, North and Hurteau 2011). Tese include:
 
f Increased native biodiversity 
 
f Increased water quality and quantity 
 
f Increased long-term carbon storage 
 
f Increased consumer surplus for reduced ﬁre risk
 
f Increased existence, option, and bequest values.
Te reader will note that there are areas of overlap in all the ben-
eﬁts provided by forest restoration. In accounting for the beneﬁts of 
forest restoration, a clear distinction between beneﬁts will be necessary 
to reduce the potential for double-counting and exaggerating beneﬁts.

69
Paying for Restoration
Given the substantial costs and beneﬁts of landscape restoration, who 
should pay to repair environmental damages and how? While appropria-
tions funded by taxes are the primary payment mechanism for restora-
tion, alternate payment concepts are bridging the gap, including: 
 
f Payments from state, county, or municipality taxes and/or bonds 
(e.g., the recently approved Flagstaﬀ, AZ bond measure)
 
f Payments from wood products businesses for access to wood 
byproducts
 
f Payments from ﬁshing and hunting organizations for improved 
habitat (e.g., Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation)
 
f Payments from private individuals and foundations, typically 
through non-proﬁt, conservation organizations (e.g., Te Nature 
Conservancy)
 
f Volunteer labor and management
 
f In-kind payments for labor from tribal organizations, academic 
institutions, and others.
As forest restoration yields numerous beneﬁts, new economic strate-
gies are also being developed to capture some of the lesser known, non-
market ecosystem services generated by restoration eﬀorts. Tese include 
eﬀorts to “marketize” and internalize restoration beneﬁts and are known 
as Payments for Ecosystem Services (PES; see Forest Trends and oth-
ers 2008, Greiber 2009). To incorporate PES into a restoration project 
involves four primary steps:  
 
f Identify ecosystem service prospects and potential buyers
 
f Assess institutional and technical capacity as well as access
 
f Structure agreements
 
f Implement agreements. 
While taking such steps can be complicated and diﬃcult, especially 
on public lands, examples from New York City and Denver illustrate how 
PES can be captured and used to oﬀset treatment costs. Te forested areas 

70
Ecological Economics
Box 3: The Risk and Cost Analysis Tool (R-CAT)   
 
  and Avoided Fire Suppression Costs
National Forest System economists and other researchers recently developed 
the Risk and Cost Analysis Tool (R-CAT). Tis modeling tool provides a 
framework for CFLRP projects to estimate avoided suppression costs due 
to forest restoration and compare avoided costs to fuel treatment costs. Te 
R-CAT model combines spatially explicit ﬁre occurrence and spread models 
with a statistical ﬁre cost model to predict future suppression cost savings. Te 
R-CAT is currently being operationalized for CFLRP project use, and is now a 
mandated part of the economic monitoring for the projects. 
To use the R-CAT, project teams are asked to help create spatially explicit 
baseline fuel model and ﬁre behavior maps for their project areas. Next, teams 
construct a spatially explicit fuel treatment schedule and covert their modeled 
landscape using this schedule. To determine avoided suppression costs, teams 
enter information about: 1) fuel treatment acreages over time; 2) fuel treatment 
eﬀectiveness; 3) fuel treatment costs and revenues; and 4) pre- and post-treat-
ment suppression costs.
Total post-treatment suppression costs, for an assumed duration, can be 
subtracted from the expected suppression costs associated with no treatment 
to estimate potential wildﬁre management cost savings—avoided costs.  Tese 
savings are then compared to fuel treatment costs to determine impacts of 
treatments on expected ﬁre program management costs.  
However, not all forest restoration will necessarily result in avoided sup-
pression costs. Wildland ﬁre use and less aggressive suppression strategies may 
reduce per acre costs for ﬁre management, although they can also increase over-
all costs due to larger, longer-lasting ﬁres (Gebert and Black 2012). Similarly, 
the economic theory of avoided suppression costs, in general, has been called 
into question (e.g., Rideout and Ziesler 2008) because ﬁre suppression and 
restoration treatments are both inputs of ﬁre management, having a range of 
impacts on fuel levels, ﬁre risk and ﬁre behavior, along with interaction eﬀects. 
Given the complex nature of new management directions, forest restora-
tion should be examined by considering a broad suite of values as opposed to 
a simple ﬁnancial return on investment. Avoided suppression costs are one 
important economic variable among many when considering the economic 
beneﬁts and impacts of forest restoration.

71
for both cities were degraded resulting in diminished water quality and 
supply (Chichilnisky and Heal 2002, Kaufmann et al. 2005). Municipal 
utilities often construct expensive man-made puriﬁcation and treatment 
facilities in such cases, but New York City and Denver decided to invest 
in upstream forest restoration and preservation for their water supply and 
puriﬁcation needs, saving billions of dollars that would have otherwise had 
to be expended on water treatment plants. Water and utility companies 
and their customers now pay for restoration and preservation to produce 
ecosystem services such as water collection, puriﬁcation, and delivery. 
Clean, plentiful water is just one example of the ecosystem services 
that can be enhanced by forest restoration. Others include carbon stor-
age, nutrient cycling, water temperatures, ﬁsh and wildlife habitat, native 
biodiversity, recreation opportunities, cultural services, and many more. 
By bundling multiple ecosystem services, payments for restoration can be 
increased and management is less likely to focus on singular objectives.  
Economic Barriers and Bridges
Economically speaking, landscape-level restoration projects, such as those 
supported by the CFLRP, represent a new way of doing business in the 
nation’s forests. However, innovation and inventiveness are not always 
rewarded in a timely manner, and this presents barriers for most CFLRP 
projects. Tese barriers are reﬂections of long-held values, systemic tradi-
tions, and out-dated means of accounting for resource goods and services. 
Te major barriers (see Table 1) include: 
 
f Misalignment in term of incentives, information, and practices 
between ecological restoration and the market economy
 
f Nascent development of ecological restoration, especially at the 
landscape scale
 
f Massive number of acres that need restoration treatment and 
the relatively short time frame before uncharacteristic wildﬁres 
occur throughout degraded forests 

72
Ecological Economics
Clean, plentiful water is just one example of the ecosystem 
services that can be enhanced by forest restoration. 
Others include carbon storage, nutrient cycling, water 
temperatures, ﬁsh and wildlife habitat, native biodiversity, 
recreation opportunities, cultural services, and many more.

73
 
f Lack of complete social acceptance of treatment alternatives
 
f Continued belief in logging-only treatments as the solution 
to economic troubles
 
f A belief that forest management should pay for itself; no 
new taxes
 
f Inability to account for non-market ﬂows between the 
nation’s forests and the greater economy.
Te barriers to achieving landscape-level forest restoration are 
signiﬁcant, requiring innovative bridges to overcome these hurdles. 
Te development of bridges can be viewed as ongoing experiments in 
the fertile learning grounds of CFLRP projects. Speciﬁcally, bridges 
to greater restoration can be found in the practices of collaboration, 
sustainability, diversity, education, research, ecosystem services, and 
community forestry (see Table 1). Continuing to emphasize and ex-
pand these practices within a CFLRP project is as important as thin-
ning trees or making wood products. Tis is why from an economic 
perspective:
 
f Collaboration provides the necessary degree of certainty 
for business interests by providing confidence that the fed-
eral agencies, county, municipalities, conservation groups, 
academic institutions, and tribal organizations all have a 
level of commitment to completing these projects. 
 
f Collaborative restoration is pro-active in treating forest 
health symptoms and has a greater and more consistent 
regional economic impact on rural communities than fire 
control and suppression practices while providing more 
ecosystem services than traditional logging practices.
 
f Comprehensive restoration requires a number of dif-
ferent activities on the landscape (e.g., thinning, burn-
ing, removal of invasive plants, road de-commissioning, 
monitoring, and wildlife habitat improvement) requiring 
varied workforces (Combrink et al. 2012). It is also labor 
intensive. In places, landscape restoration has been shown 
to produce more jobs per million dollars of expenditures 

74
Ecological Economics
The Horse Pine Stewardship Contract is an ongoing project that will eventually commercially thin 2,334 acres 
and, using the value of the timber removed, treat at least 1,400 acres non-commercially in order to enhance 
wildlife habitat. Photo courtesy of U.S. Forest Service, Southwestern Region, Kaibab National Forest
Wildlife viewing is an ecosystem service enhanced by healthy forests. Birders and hunters alike bring money 
into local economies. Photo by George Andreijko, Arizona Game and Fish Department 

75
 
Economic 
Barrier to 
Restoration
 
Contributing Factors
 
Manifestations
 
Economic Bridges
Misalignment 
between 
restoration 
and  market 
economy
Lack of holistic accounting
Discounting the future
Lack of understanding 
restoration benefits
Cumbersome and expensive 
valuation methods
Rigid economic system
Incentives for resource 
development and extraction
Lower-valued byproducts
Restoration is 
undervalued and 
underfunded
Resource 
legislation, policy, 
and management 
that hinders 
restoration
Difficulty in 
obtaining business 
grants and loans
Capture positive and 
negative externalities
Promote research, 
education, and 
awareness of 
restoration
Seek payments for 
ecosystem services
Embrace 
sustainability and 
inter-generational 
equity concepts
Table 1. Economic Barriers and Bridges to Restoration
in affected rural communities than traditional timber 
management, despite creating fewer “marketed” goods for 
immediate sale (Hjerpe 2011). 
 
f Collaborative restoration emphasizes woody byproduct uti-
lization that involves local workforces as much as possible, 
which tends to result in fewer exports of final products 
than traditional timber management. This, in effect, sup-
ports USDA and USFS policy goals aimed at supporting 
and developing rural economies.
 
f Collaborative restoration embraces the concept of ecosys-
tem services and payments for these services. Deriving pay-
ments for bundles of non-market ecosystem services may 
be the greatest hope for replacing taxation as the primary 
funding mechanism for landscape-scale forest restoration.

76
Ecological Economics
Novelty of 
restoration
Blueprints are lacking
Incentives and metrics are 
lacking or not appropriate
The public has limited 
awareness of restoration  
Projects take 
years to develop 
and achieve 
social license 
New skill sets 
and workforce 
needed
Experiment and 
manage adaptively 
Engage 
communities and 
local champions
Maximize local    
economic impact
Scale of lands 
needing 
restoration
Millions of national forest 
acres in need of restoration
Billions of dollars needed for 
treatments
Reactive fire protection funds 
takes priority over pro-active 
restoration funds
Incomplete 
funding 
Problems outpace 
agency resources
Continued 
suppress-and- 
control fire mgmt.
Maximize restoration 
impact in treatment 
location and type
Employ cost 
effectiveness
Engage adjacent land 
owners and diverse 
constituents
Leverage resources 
from non-traditional 
sources
Social 
acceptability
Fire is perceived as bad
Treatments involve disturbing 
the land, creating smoke, and 
cutting trees
Compliance with other laws 
and codes
Confusion between 
traditional logging and 
restoration thinning
Lack of 
understanding 
the natural role 
of fire
Projects stopped 
via legal 
challenges
Distrust of 
industry
Distrust of 
agency
Compliance 
expenses
Promote education 
and outreach
Conduct thorough, 
collaborative 
planning 
Conduct authentic 
restoration
Engage 
communities and 
stakeholders
Promote 
transparency
 
Economic 
Barrier to 
Restoration
 
Contributing Factors
 
Manifestations
 
Economic Bridges

77
Conclusion
Collaborative landscape-scale forest restoration is a new, hopeful investment 
in both landscapes and communities. It values a reciprocal attitude to land 
as opposed to one that only takes from the land. Collaborative landscape-
scale forest restoration also seeks to economically reward the community 
for its ongoing participation in the process. Te CFLRP is an excellent 
example, and model, of a federal agency and regional stakeholders leading 
in a direction that will yield vast landscape improvements, while providing 
economic assistance to the rural communities most aﬀected by wildﬁre and 
adverse economic conditions.
Despite this progress, stakeholders and policymakers should not expect 
forest restoration to be an economic silver bullet without some signiﬁcant 
evolution in the marketplace for ecosystem services. Tis is a challenge for 
all involved and will take considerable time, will, and eﬀort. Collaboratives 
should also consider monitoring economic activities not only to provide 
information to reﬁne restoration activities but to also ensure that unin-
tended economic consequences do not happen, such as timber produc-
tion masquerading as “restoration” in areas that need little, if any, logging. 
Ultimately, the challenge in achieving collaborative forest restoration may 
be maintaining the authenticity of restoration projects and adhering to both 
the ecological and economic principles that have set ecological restoration 
apart from other forest management practices. 

78
Ecological Economics
References
Allen, C.D., M. Savage, D. Falk, K. Suckling, T. Swetnam, T. Schulke, 
P. Stacey, P. Morgan, M. Hoﬀman, and J. Klingel. 2002. 
Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine 
ecosystems: A broad perspective. Ecological Applications
12(5):1418-1433.
Benayas, J.M., A.C. Newton, A. Diaz, and J.M. Bullock. 2009. 
Enhancement of biodiversity and ecosystem services 
by ecological restoration: A meta-analysis. Science
325(28):1121-1124.
Brown, R. T., J.K. Agee, and J.F. Franklin. 2004. Forest restoration 
and ﬁre: Principles in the context of place. Conservation 
Biology 18(4):903-912.
Chichilnisky, G. and G. Heal. 1998. Economic returns from the bio
sphere. Nature—London:629-630.
Combrink, T., W. Fox, J. Petersen. 2012. Workforce needs of the Four 
Forest Restoration Initiative Project: An analysis. Ecological 
Restoration Institute White Paper. Flagstaﬀ, AZ: Northern 
Arizona University, Ecological Restoration Institute.
Covington, W.W. and M.M. Moore. 1994a. Southwestern ponderosa
forest structure: Changes since Euro-American settlement. 
Journal of Forestry 92(1):39-47. 
Cram, D. S., T. T. Baker, and J. C. Boren. 2006. Wildland ﬁre eﬀects 
in silviculturally treated vs. untreated stands in New Mexico 
and Arizona. RMRS-RP-55, U.S. Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, CO.
Forest Trends, Te Katoomba Group, and United Nations 
Environmental Program. 2008. Payments for ecosystem 
services, getting started: A primer. Nairobi, Kenya: UNON/
Publishing Services Section. 

79
Fulé, P. Z., J. E. Crouse, J. P. Roccaforte, and E. L. Kalies. 2012. Do  
thinning and/or burning treatments in western USA  
 
ponderosa or jeﬀrey pine‐dominated forests help restore
natural ﬁre behavior? Forest Ecology and Management  
 
269:68‐81.
Garber-Yonts, B., J. Kerkvliet, and R. Johnson. 2004. Public values for 
biodiversity conservation policies in the Oregon coast range. 
Forest Science 50(5):589-602.
Gebert, K.A. and A. Block. 2012. Eﬀect of suppression strategies on  
federal wildland ﬁre. Journal of Forestry 110(2):65-73.
Greiber, T., ed. 2009. Payments for ecosystem services: Legal and   
institutional frameworks. Gland, Switzerland and Bonn,   
Germany: IUCN Environmental Policy and Law Paper No. 78.
Hartsough, B.R., S. Abrams, R. J. Barbour, E.S. Drews, J.D.  
 
McIver, J.J. Moghaddas, D.W. Schwilk, and S.L. Stephens.  
2008. Te economics of alternative fuel reduction treatments  
in western United States dry forests: Financial and policy 
implications from the National Fire and Fire Surrogate Study. 
Forest Policy and Economics 10(6):344-354. 
Hjerpe, E.E. 2011. Seeing the Tongass for the trees: Te economics of 
transitioning to sustainable forest management. Wilderness 
Society Science Report. Washington, DC:Te Wilderness Society.
Hjerpe, E.E. and Y. Kim. 2008. Economic impacts of national forest 
fuels reduction programs in the Southwest. Journal of Forestry
106(6):311-316.
Hurteau, M.D. and M.P. North. 2009. Fuel treatment eﬀects on 
tree-based forest carbon storage and emissions under modeled 
wildﬁre scenarios. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment
7:409-414.
Kaufmann, M.R., P.Z. Fulé, W.H. Romme, and K.C. Ryan. 2005. 
Restoration of ponderosa pine forests in the interior 
western US after logging, grazing, and ﬁre suppression. Pages 
481-500 in J.A. Stanturf and P. Madsen, eds., Restoration of 
boreal and temperate forests. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.

80
Ecological Economics
Kim, Y. and A. Wells. 2005. Te impact of forest density on property 
values. Journal of Forestry 103(3):146-151.
Loomis, J.B. and A. González-Cabán. 1998. A willingness-to-pay 
function for protecting acres of spotted owl habitat 
from ﬁre. Ecological Economics 25:315-322.
Loomis, J.B., D. Griﬃn, E. Wu, and A. González-Cabán. 2002. 
Estimating the economic value of big game habitat production 
from prescribed ﬁre using a time series approach. Journal of 
Forest Economics 8(2):119-129.
Loomis, J.B., P. Wohlgemuth, A. Gonzalez-Caban, and D. English.  
2003. Economic beneﬁts of reducing ﬁre-related sediment in 
southwestern ﬁre-prone ecosystems. Water Resources Research
39(9):1260-1267.
Mason, C.L., B.R. Lippke, K.W. Zobrist, T.D. Bloxton Jr., K.R. 
Ceder, J.M. Comnick, J.B. McCarter, and H.K. Rogers. 2006. 
Investments in fuel removals to avoid forest ﬁres result in 
substantial beneﬁts. Journal of Forestry 104(1):27-31.
Mercer, D.E., J.P. Prestemon, D.T. Butry, D.T., and J.M Pye. 2007. 
Evaluating alternative prescribed burning policies to reduce 
net economic damages from wildﬁre. American Journal of 
Agricultural Economics 89(1):63-77.
Meyerhoﬀ, J., T. Liebe, and V. Hartje. 2009. Beneﬁts of biodiversity 
enhancement of nature-oriented silviculture: Evidence from 
two choice experiments. Journal of Forest Economics 15:37-58.
Murphy, K., P. Duncan, and C. Dilingham. 2010. A summary of fuel
treatment eﬀectiveness in the Herger‐Feinstein Quincy Library
Group Pilot Project Area. Quincy, CA: USDA Forest Service 
R5‐TP‐031.
North, M.P. and M.D. Hurteau. 2011. High-severity wildﬁre eﬀects
on carbon stocks and emissions in fuels treated and untreated
forest. Forest Ecology and Management 261:1115-1120.

81
Rideout, D.B. and P.S. Ziesler. 2008. Tree great myths of wildland
ﬁre management. Pages 319-325 in A. González-Cabán, 
tech. coordinator, Proceedings of the second international 
symposium on ﬁre economics, planning, and policy: a global 
view. PSW-GTR-208. Albany, CA: USDA Forest Service, 
Paciﬁc Southwest Research Station.
Snider, G., P.J. Daugherty, and D. Wood. 2006. Te irrationality of 
continued ﬁre suppression: An avoided cost analysis of ﬁre 
hazard reduction treatments versus no treatment. Journal of 
Forestry 104(8):431-437.
Westerling, A.L., H.G. Hidalgo, D.R. Cayan, and T.W. Swetnam. 
2006. Warming and earlier spring increases western U.S. forest 
wildﬁre activity. Science 313(5789): 940‐943.
WFLC (Western Forest Leadership Coalition). 2010. Te true
cost of wildﬁre in the western U.S. Lakewood, CO: Western 
Forest Leadership Coalition.
Winter, G.J. and J.S. Fried. 2001. Estimating contingent values for 
protection from wildland ﬁre using a two-stage decision 
framework. Forest Science 47(3):349-360.
Resources
Schultz, C.A., T. Jedd, and R.D. Beam. 2012. Te Collaborative 
Forest Landscape Restoration Program: A history and overview 
of the ﬁrst projects. Journal of Forestry 110(7):381-391.
U.S. Wildﬁre Cost-Plus-Loss Economics Project Reference Library 

P
assage of the Omnibus Public Lands Management Act of 
2009 (P.L. 111–11) signaled a significant shift in how the 
federal government wanted federal public land management 
agencies to interact with interested publics and environmental 
organizations. This legislation directs federal land manage-
ment agencies to develop proposals that restore “the structure of 
old-growth stands according to pre-fire suppression old growth 
conditions characteristic of the forest type” using “a collaborative 
process that includes multiple interested persons representing 
diverse interests and is transparent and nonexclusive.” It does 
not, however, absolve the agencies from meeting the planning 
requirements of the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) 
and other federal laws (e.g., Clean Air Act, Clean Water Act, 
Threatened and Endangered Species Act, National Forest Man-
agement Act, and Antiquities Act). 
Planning and NEPA
Dave Brewer
Chapter
3

83
Tese requirements create a formidable task for collaborative 
groups and agency planners in terms of meeting the requirements 
of site-speciﬁcity and other legal components of NEPA within proj-
ect areas at least 50,000 acres in size or larger within a ten-year time 
horizon. Tis scale of documentation and planning is especially peril-
ous given the successful appeals and litigation of smaller-scale forest 
projects. Typically, such successful appeals are due to lack of site-speci-
ﬁcity, insuﬃcient environmental eﬀects analysis, and poorly developed 
proposed action and issues statements that have led to an inadequate 
range of alternatives. 
Probably the greatest challenge facing planners at all levels of 
environmental analysis, especially as it relates to projects at the larger 
landscape scale, is to demonstrate that a “hard-look” at the environ-
mental consequences was undertaken as decided in Natural Resources 
Defense Council v. Morton, 458 F.2d 827, 838 (D.C. Cir., 1972). In 
this landmark environmental case, the court ruled a federal agency is 
required to make a substantial, good faith eﬀort in terms of studying, 
analyzing, and expressing the environmental eﬀects in the document 
and decision making process. As a result, the courts carefully check en-
vironmental documents, like environmental impact statements (EIS), 
for completeness of information and detail, soundness of analysis, 
thorough discussion of alternatives, and disclosure of sources. How-
ever, courts have also recognized that the rule of reason must prevail, 
meaning that if the analysis provides suﬃcient information to allow a 
ﬁrm basis for weighing the risks and beneﬁts of a proposed action and 
alternatives, the courts will ﬁnd the analysis to be suﬃcient (County 
of Suﬀolk v. Secretary of Interior, 562 F.2d 1368 (2nd Cir. 1977)). 
In order for planners to achieve this “hard-look” at the environ-
mental consequences of a project, they must build the analysis from 
the smaller scale and then aggregate those site-speciﬁc treatments and 
eﬀects upwards to a landscape level (i.e., tiering). Tis will ensure that 
the planners are able to discuss speciﬁc treatments and eﬀects at the 
larger scale and remain on ﬁrm ground with respect to site-speciﬁcity 
since the analysis was built-up from the smaller level. 

84
Planning and NEPA
Te Omnibus Public Lands Management Act of 2009 also calls 
for the use of the “best available science” in planning and implement-
ing landscape-scale forest restoration projects. Freeman (2007) con-
cluded there are ﬁve steps for integrating the best science in a NEPA 
analysis:
 
f Survey published reports and studies, and record ﬁndings 
about which ones are the most current and relevant to the 
resource questions being asked
 
f Explain how cited studies apply to the site-speciﬁc resource 
conditions in the project area
 
f Cite internal agency reports and studies, including prior NEPA 
documents, that are relevant to the site-speciﬁc conditions in 
the project area
 
f Address questions and concerns from the public or from other 
governmental agencies and explain what the cited information 
does and does not show
 
f Make impact projections even when cited information and 
other relevant sources are sketchy or missing.
Planners invariably will need to make some assumptions concern-
ing resource conditions, however, as long as this is documented and 
they can establish the “best available science” has been included in 
their analysis, then the legal responsibility as it relates to NEPA, will 
be met (CFR 1500 to 1508, Section 1502.24).
Tis chapter will investigate a potential methodology for planning 
and developing large-scale proposals to restore the former structure, 
composition, and function of frequent-ﬁre ecosystems while at the 
same time meeting the intent of the regulations for implementing the 
procedural provisions of NEPA and other environmental laws (Box 1). 
Its purpose is to demonstrate to stakeholders and planning profes-
sionals a reliable way to formulate a Collaborative Forest Landscape 
Restoration Program (CFLRP) implementation proposal to attain the 
site-speciﬁcity needed so a “hard-look” at environmental eﬀects at the 
landscape level can be achieved. 

85
One Possible Solution  
Professionals and stakeholders involved in planning a CFLRP project 
have a signiﬁcant barrier to overcome when gathering information and 
developing a NEPA document. Te procedure outlined in this chapter 
is one suggested way to bridge that barrier and ensure legally defen-
sible compliance with the country’s environmental laws. Moreover, 
this procedure will result in better management decisions and NEPA 
documentation. Tese steps involved are sequential and include:
 
f Develop a logical stratiﬁcation system that will allow discussion 
of resource conditions at both the small and landscape scale 
 
f Collect site-speciﬁc information, conduct analysis, and interpo-
late from the small scale to the landscape level
 
f Identify desired conditions and compare to existing conditions; 
Develop resource objectives and management practices that, if 
implemented, will move resource attributes to desired condi-
tions
 
f Develop a site-speciﬁc proposed action/ purpose and need
 
f Develop signiﬁcant issues and alternatives to the proposed 
action
 
f Disclosure of environmental eﬀects
 
f Other considerations. 
Develop a Logical Stratification System
Developing a logical stratiﬁcation system requires a dependable, accu-
rate base layer of data. Published data sets that work well as a base layer 
can often be found in soil survey reports develop by the U.S. Forest 
Service (USFS), Bureau of Land Management (BLM), or the National 
Resource Conservation Service (NRCS). Landscape-scale restoration 
planners should consider the use of this type of survey because 1) there 
is generally enough similarity between mapping units that substan-
tial combinations can be made, thus simplifying discussions about 

86
Planning and NEPA
Box 1. NEPA Documents
 
Environmental Assessment (EA): A smaller, shorter document than an En-
vironmental Impact Statement (EIS); prepared by a federal agency when there 
is uncertainty about whether or not there will be a signiﬁcant environmental 
impact due to a proposed action. If the agency ﬁnds no signiﬁcant impact, it 
may move forward with the proposed action. If signiﬁcant impacts are likely, 
then a full EIS is required. EAs do not need to be circulated but they must be 
made available to the public through notices of availability in local, state, or 
regional clearinghouses, newspapers and other means.
Environmental Impact Statement (EIS): NEPA requires Federal agencies to 
prepare to prepare an EIS for major Federal actions that signiﬁcantly aﬀect the 
quality of the environment. An EIS is a full disclosure document that details 
the process through which a project was developed, includes consideration of 
a range of reasonable alternatives, analyzes the potential impacts resulting from 
the alternatives, and demonstrates compliance with other applicable environ-
mental laws and executive orders. Te EIS process in completed in the follow-
ing ordered steps: Notice of Intent (NOI), draft EIS, ﬁnal EIS, and record of 
decision (ROD). 
Categorical Exclusion (CE): “Actions which meet the deﬁnition contained in 
40 CFR 1508.4, and, based on past experience with similar actions, do not in-
volve signiﬁcant environmental impacts. Tey are actions which: do not induce 
signiﬁcant impacts to planned growth or land use for the area, do not require 
the relocation of signiﬁcant numbers of people; do not have a signiﬁcant 
impact on any natural, cultural, recreational, historic or other resource; do not 
involve signiﬁcant air, noise, or water quality impacts; do not have signiﬁcant 
impacts on travel patterns; and do not otherwise, either individually or cumu-
latively, have any signiﬁcant environmental impacts.” 23 CFR 771.117(a)
Programmatic Environmental Impact Statement (PEIS): An environmental 
impact statement that addresses a proposal to implement a speciﬁc policy, to 
adopt a plan for a group of related actions, or to implement a speciﬁc statutory 
program.

87
resource conditions; 2) the information associated with soil survey 
reports can help prioritize treatment areas (e.g., treatments on shallow 
versus deep soils); and 3) it will assist in building the eﬀects analysis. 
Te NRCS Soil Survey website can be a valuable resource to check the 
status of soil survey work for individual project areas and the availabil-
ity of publications. 
A recent assessment conducted for the Four Forest Restoration 
Initiative (4FRI) CFLRP project on the Coconino and South Kaibab 
national forests is an example of using a soil survey to create a base 
layer. After a thorough analysis, my colleagues and I determined that 
out of the 160 Terrestrial Ecosystem Mapping Units (TESU) on more 
than 900,000 acres, 50 individual strata accounted for most of the 
variability found within the individual TESU (Brewer et al. 2012). 
Within the 50 individual strata, we found that 22 strata, encompass-
ing 579,635 acres or 60% of the project area, represented soils that 
have high production potentials, low restrictions for management 
activities, and moderate to high reforestation/revegetation suitabil-
ity. Conversely, the remaining 40%, or 346,065 acres, have generally 
severe limitations with respects to timber harvest and reforestation/re-
vegetation suitability. Analyses such as this enables the planners to not 
only discuss existing resource at the landscape scale but allows them to 
begin framing the pre-NEPA analysis since the combination of TESU 
found within each speciﬁc stratum will respond in a relatively similar 
fashion to management actions. Te stratiﬁcation system also reduces 
the time spent describing existing conditions and other components of 
the analysis because planners only need to work with 50 strata and not 
160 individual TESU.
Table 1 and Table 2 are examples of how the data can be structured. In 
Table 1, each strata and sub-strata are identiﬁed in terms of: 
 
f percent slope
 
f TESU unit number(s) in overall area 
 
f total number of acres
 
f ﬁnal strata combination number(s)

88
Planning and NEPA
 
f total acres of TESU in project area
 
f climatic class (High Sun Mild [HSM], High Sun Cold [HSC], 
Low Sun Mild [LSM], and Low Sun Cold [LSC])
 
f potential plant community (PPC)
 
f habitat types
 
f erosion hazard
 
f natural tree regeneration potential
 
f level of plant competition, especially the likelihood of invasive 
plant establishment
 
f site index
 
f timber harvest limitations
 
f potential and maximum herbage/forage production. 
Table 1 indicates which individual TESU were combined in the 
stratiﬁcation process with interpretations relative to such items as erosion 
hazard, site  index, and forage responses.
Table 2 builds on the information found in Table 1. Te indicators for 
each strata and sub-strata include: 
 
f percent slope
 
f total number of acres
 
f ﬁnal strata combination number(s)
 
f number of acres in strata or sub-strata
 
f soil taxonomic classiﬁcation
 
f climatic class
 
f existing plant cover (dominant species types, e.g., Popr/Fear, Fear/
Mumo)
 
f sheet-and-rill erosion levels (potential, tolerable, current, and natural)
 
f percent current surface cover (rock, vegetation, litter, bare soil)
 
f percent vegetation cover levels (potential, tolerable, current, and 
natural)
f soil condition (saturated, unsaturated)
 
f acres of unsaturated soil condition.

89
Former ERI Outreach Coordinator Charlie Denton leads an ERI ﬁeld event explaining stand structure, historic 
range of variability, and proposed thinning strategies. Members of the ﬁeld trip, including USFS staﬀ, examine 
a tree stump to determine how old the tree was at the time it was cut. Photo courtesy of ERI

90
Planning and NEPA
Two important aspect of this analysis are: 1) site-speciﬁcity is being 
built into the analysis, although at this stage it will not meet the stan-
dards required for NEPA documentation because it is still too general; 2) 
important watershed, range, and silviculture attributes that might be used 
in describing existing conditions are identiﬁed; and 3) units of measure to 
disclose environmental eﬀects are being recognized and documented. 
Collect Site-specific Information, 
Conduct Analysis, and Extrapolate to 
the Landscape Level
In addition to soil surveys, stakeholders and planners should con-
sider other available sources of information about resource conditions 
within the project area. Tese sources include publications completed 
by the USFS or other land management agencies as well as research 
publications and graduate thesis work. As with in-house resource sur-
veys, publications completed within the project area will be the most 
valuable. Te planning team needs to spend ample time to research the 
documents and bring the science forward from them into the descrip-
tions of the strata identiﬁed within the proposed project area. Tis 
review is extremely important because it will be used in just about ev-
ery phase of the project from the pre-NEPA assessment to developing 
the proposed action, describing the aﬀected environment section in 
the environmental document, and building the eﬀects analysis (Free-
man 2007). Various methodologies for conducting systematic reviews 
of scientiﬁc literature are available for this part of the process (e.g., 
Evidence-based Conservation Protocol, the Cochrane Handbook for 
Systematic Reviews).
Examples of useful information for planning include range al-
lotment analysis surveys, which if consistently repeated over a period 
of time, will yield information regarding changes in plant diversity, 
ground cover, and rangeland health based on changes in stock density, 

91
 
In order for planners to achieve a “hard-look” at the 
environmental consequences of a project, they must 
build the analysis from the smaller scale and then 
aggregate those site-speciﬁc treatments and eﬀects 
upwards to a landscape level. Tis ensures that the 
planners are able to discuss speciﬁc treatments and 
eﬀects at the larger scale and remain on ﬁrm ground 
with respect to site-speciﬁcity.

92
Planning and NEPA
silvicultural treatments applied, grazing systems employed, and range-
land improvement projects that were completed on the allotment. 
Likewise, surveys of sensitive, threatened and endangered plant and 
animal species, population surveys of big game within the project area, 
and habitat assessments will assist the biologist in determining current 
conditions. Forest Inventory Plots and standard compartment exams 
enable the silviculturalist to describe dominant VSS classes, trees per 
acre, basal areas, and other important characteristics of stands within 
the identiﬁed strata. Tis information along with range surveys can 
assist the biologist and other specialists in deﬁning forested conditions 
and understory plant diversity, which can be used to describe habitat 
conditions for the species that will be tracked through the analysis. 
Since most CFLRP projects are working in degraded former frequent-
ﬁre ecosystems, the resource attributes highlighted need to include 
those that inﬂuence ﬁre behavior. 
In some cases the data used to establish existing conditions and 
build the eﬀects analysis might be ﬁve to ten years old or older. Re-
gardless, this information and other sources are the best information 
the planners may have to properly build their eﬀects analysis and as 
such will normally meet the test for NEPA suﬃciency.
Te data obtained in the literature can be analyzed in a variety of 
ways, although it is best used if it is linked to the stratiﬁcation system. 
For example, in order to analyze data from many decades of Parker 
3-Step plots (Ruyle and Dyess 2010), my colleagues and I developed 
a database that contained the recorded information by survey year for 
each data point located in 121 Parker 3-Step plots within the proposed 
project area. We also scanned all the photos taken for a particular 
plot and placed them in the database as well. Next, we used the pivot 
table function in Microsoft Excel to summarize changes by to plant 
frequency and eﬀective ground cover during the survey period. We 
summarized data by strata developed from combinations of similar 
TESU units found in the project area. By using TES as a basis for 
stratiﬁcation, the data could have been mapped using GIS technology 
for individual TESU. However, since we desired landscape level trends 

93
for the project area, all data points for a speciﬁc stratum were pooled.
Site-speciﬁcity is developed by adding additional layers to the base 
stratiﬁcation map. Depending on the complexity of the analysis, size of 
the area, resource objectives and how specialists want to disclose envi-
ronmental impacts, adding the watershed boundaries may be enough 
to complete the task. In most cases, watershed boundaries work well 
for most resource areas including timber, ﬁre and roads, since proposed 
fuels reduction (live and dead), timber sale activities, road construc-
tion/reconstruction, and prescribed ﬁre will inﬂuence soil and water 
variables (e.g., soil erosion, water yield, water quality). Tese attributes 
need to be tracked and their eﬀects disclosed at a watershed level. 
However, it may be the case that additional site-speciﬁcity needs have 
to be built into the process by adding the borders of herd unit bound-
aries, grazing allotments, threatened or endangered species territories, 
northern goshawk home ranges, and, possibly, forest plan management 
areas (see Box 2). Again, how the landscape is broken into discrete 
areas to gain site-speciﬁcity depends on what questions the individual 
specialist wants to answer and the important direct, indirect, and cu-
mulative impacts that will be addressed. 
Te key is to build the analysis (i.e., existing and desired condi-
tions, existing and desired values, potential management practices) 
from the smaller to larger scale and have a process in-place that is 
reasonable and based on resource information speciﬁc to the proj-
ect area. What this means under this recommended methodology is 
the planners look at speciﬁc stratums within a 5th code watershed 
(40,000–250,000 acres) or 6th code sub-watershed (10,000–40,000 
acres) and build the proposed action and other components of the 
analysis based on the stratiﬁcation system. With the large size of most 
CFLRP projects, discussions of the aﬀected environment and other 
components of the analysis will more than likely be, for brevity sake, at 
the larger landscape scale. As long as the record demonstrates the team 
started at the smaller scale and progressively built up to the larger one, 
then site-speciﬁcity will have been demonstrated and a “hard-look” of 
environmental eﬀects can be completed. 

94
Planning and NEPA
Box 2. Working with Cross-boundary Resources
Some resource areas, including wildlife and domestic livestock grazing, do not con-
form well to watershed boundaries for the disclosure of eﬀects. In the case of wildlife 
species that are harvested, such as deer, elk and antelope, herd unit boundaries are 
probably more appropriate since game and ﬁsh agencies and others are interested in 
projected population trends at this level. By taking this approach, the wildlife specialist 
is actually beginning to deﬁne their cumulative eﬀects area for these species, which is 
an important aspect of the eﬀects analysis. 
Federally managed grazing allotments are another case where management units 
rarely, if ever, conform to watershed boundaries. As a result, allotments are one of the 
layers that the range conservationist may use in describing current resource conditions. 
Past and present activities including stocking changes, water developments, alterations 
in management (rest-rotation to deferred rotation), and forage improvement projects 
will ultimately inﬂuence understory diversity, and these changes are tied to speciﬁc 
allotments. Although CFLRP projects normally will not include any decisions about 
changes in livestock grazing per se, it is a cumulative impact that needs to be disclosed 
in the environmental documentation. Another important consideration is the eﬀect of 
restoration activities on changes in carrying capacity and overall rangeland health. 
For small mammals, birds, and reptiles where homes ranges can vary consider-
ably, the wildlife biologist might need to assess the silvicultural information, their own 
surveys, and, possibly, the range understory information. To the best degree possible, a 
determination needs to be made of the current habitat conditions (e.g., low, moderate, 
high) for each species that will be tracked in the analysis and the number of acres of 
the appropriate condition class. Tis eﬀort needs to have the layers of site-speciﬁcity 
attached (e.g., watershed boundaries, stratum, and northern goshawk territory). By 
determining the area of high, moderate, and low habitat quality for the species that are 
going to be part of the analysis, planners begin to develop the baseline they will use to 
compare to desired conditions and eventually the disclosure of environmental eﬀects. 
When documenting resources attributes that cross watershed boundaries, 
planners might consider ﬁrst using smaller sub-watersheds, building up to the larger 
watershed level, and then combining the various watersheds that comprise a speciﬁc 
herd unit boundary, grazing allotment, or wildlife home range.

95
Identify Desired Conditions, Compare 
to Existing Conditions, Develop Desired 
Management Practices
In the next phase of the process, planners undertake a plan-to-project 
or pre-NEPA analysis that identiﬁes desired conditions and compares 
this information to the existing conditions. If there is a signiﬁcant 
diﬀerence between existing and desired conditions then there is likely 
a need for change. Management practices are then designed that, once 
implemented, move the area of interest toward these desired values. 
Other components of this process include identifying speciﬁc mitiga-
tion practices, possible monitoring requirements, maintaining con-
sistency in programmatic planning documents, and, if amendments 
are necessary, implementing speciﬁc management practices. Tis step 
allows members of the team and the collaborative group to commu-
nicate with other interested publics about resource conditions (both 
existing and desired) at both the site-speciﬁc and landscape scale. In 
addition, any departure these resources have from reference conditions 
can be highlighted and disclosed.
Te desired conditions assessment needs to focus on those re-
source attributes that will eventually be part of the environment eﬀects 
analysis. For the timber and ﬁre specialist, those attributes will be 
qualities that inﬂuence ﬁre behavior (e.g., trees per acre, basal area, 
and mean crown base height) whereas for the range specialist it will 
be current stocking levels, animal units months produced, and un-
derstory diversity. Tis is not an all-inclusive list and care needs to be 
exercised to determine what aspects the specialist is going to use to 
disclose both direct/indirect and cumulative impacts. If the analysis is 
well referenced, especially with research and resource inventories that 
were completed within the project area, the proposed action will have 
the site-speciﬁcity as required and the side boards of the eﬀects analysis 
will be established. 

96
Planning and NEPA
Photos 3-4. Government Mountain C2T1 3X3 Plot 1953. An examination of the plot data shows the frequency of 
mountain muhly decline from nearly 60% of the composition in 1953 to less than 30% by 2010.           
Photos 1-2. The Government Mountain allotment in 1953 shows a very open stand with young presettlement 
trees. This same view from 2010 has dramatically changed with the growth and expansion of trees.
Information from previous and ongoing research as well as research 
publications and repeat photographs can help establish the existing 
conditions in the project area. For example, photos 1–4 were taken 
within the Government Mountain Allotment, west of Flagstaﬀ, Arizona. 
Photo 1, taken in 1953, shows an open stand with young post-European 
settlement trees. By 2010, this same view dramatically changed with the 
growth and expansion of ponderosa pine trees (photo 2). Declines in un-
derstory plant density can also be seen in framed plot photos from 1953 
and 2010 (photos 3 and 4). Conﬁrming the evidence in this photo-
pair, the data from these plots indicates that the frequency of mountain 
muhly declined from nearly 60% in 1953 to less than 30% by 2010. 

97
Once the resource surveys and other data are summarized, plan-
ners can begin to build the pre-NEPA analysis. For USFS propos-
als, land management plans and their corresponding Environmental 
Impact Statement (EIS) and Record of Decision will help establish 
desired conditions. With most federal agencies (e.g., BLM, U.S. Fish 
and Wildlife Service, National Park Service) there will be either policy 
direction or a programmatic land management decision (PEIS) that 
will guide the establishment of desired conditions.
All planners need to do at this point is compare these existing con-
ditions for the individual stratums to desired conditions from the for-
est plans and other documents and the team will be able to develop the 
need for change as well as those practices that will accomplish this task. 
Tis eﬀort needs to have the layers of site-speciﬁcity applied and the 
team needs to identify those individual polygons for speciﬁc stratums 
that will be treated. Tis will assure that site-speciﬁcity is achieved and 
the appropriate level of environmental eﬀects analysis is designed. 
Develop Site-specific Proposed Action 
and Purpose and Need Documents
Next, the planners compile a site-speciﬁc proposed action and pur-
pose and need documentation. If the previous steps are completed in 
a comprehensive manner, this will be a relatively easy process since 
the proposed action as well as the purpose and need fall out of this 
pre-NEPA analysis and are simply a list of management practices 
(proposed action) and analysis between existing and desired conditions 
(purpose and need). 
Proposed Action
Te proposed action answer four key questions: 1) who takes the ac-
tion?; 2) what action is taken?; 3) when is the action taken?; and 4) 
where is the action taken? For example, to answer the “what” ques-
tion requires taking an interdisciplinary approach working through 

98
Planning and NEPA
the project area. Each specialist has previously established the mean 
and desired values for their resource areas for the stratums identiﬁed 
within the project area. For instance, the wildlife specialist might look 
at understory diversity and mean production, VSS classiﬁcations, and 
snags per acre whereas the watershed specialist would be concerned in 
unsatisfactory watershed condition acres, water and sediment yield, 
and location of springs and seeps. Prescriptions to achieve desired 
conditions are developed for individual polygons of speciﬁc stratums 
for the watershed. In the case of CFLRP proposals, by far the most 
pressing underlying need is reduction of ﬁre hazard and wildﬁre 
suppression costs. Terefore, prescriptions should, to the best degree 
possible, meet this need while considering other multiple use goals and 
objectives. Mitigation measures and monitoring requirements must 
also be recognized. Other implementation actions, such as road con-
struction/reconstruction, acres of prescribed ﬁre, and frequency and/
or acres of reforestation are also identiﬁed and documented during this 
step. As the team continues to merge the various layers that have been 
developed with the stratiﬁcation map, the analysis they develop, as it 
progresses from one watershed to the next, will be able to demonstrate 
site-speciﬁcity. 
As the team works through the individual watersheds and the vari-
ous polygons therein, they will identify speciﬁcally where the impacts 
will likely occur, and, thus be able to prove that they took a “hard 
look” at the environmental eﬀects. Otherwise, what the planners are 
likely to develop is more of a programmatic environmental document, 
much like a forest plan, which lacks enough site-speciﬁcity to imple-
ment projects.   
Planners might provide a concise overview by simply listing the 
5th code watershed, total acres of each stratum, and acres of each 
prescription to be applied within the stratum. However, if the CFLRP 
team wants to ensure that they produce a well-documented, legally 
defensible document, they set their goal higher and create a record that 
demonstrates a logical progression down to the site-speciﬁc level.

99
Purpose and Need Statement   
Te purpose and need statement is simply a comparison between 
existing conditions and desired conditions. Planners need to develop 
an adequate list of unit of measures that can be used to describe 1) 
diﬀerences between existing and desired conditions, and 2) assist in 
identifying those attributes that eventually will be used to disclose 
environmental eﬀects as well as how the alternative(s) are able to meet 
the purpose and need of the project. Normally, units of measure will 
vary between resource areas, although in some cases they may not. 
For example, growing stock level, trees per acre, canopy bulk density, 
and basal area are all important attributes that will assist in describing 
current forest conditions and ﬁre hazard. Tey also can be used by the 
range and wildlife specialists to denote changes in conditions related 
to understory forage production and diversity. With respect to such 
aspects as growing stock levels and trees per acre within frequent-ﬁre 
ecosystems there are threshold values established for these parameters 
that once exceeded indicate a decline in forest resiliency and health 
(and may serve as a trigger for adaptive management action; see be-
low). Knowing these values will assist in deﬁning desired conditions 
and enable discussing this in the purpose and need statement. With 
CFLRP proposals, the purpose and need statement, like the proposed 
action, may be summarized at a more landscape level.
Te purpose and need assessment will drive development of man-
agement practices that ultimately are listed in the proposed action. Te 
purpose and need statement, as with all the attributes of the analysis, 
will be built up from the smaller scale since there might be diﬀer-
ent desired conditions developed depending on the watershed being 
examined. For instance, watersheds that contain important springs or 
perennial stream courses may have practices developed and designed 
speciﬁcally to improve water yield and quality. Likewise, areas of im-
portant threatened and endangered or sensitive plant or animal species 
might have diﬀerent prescriptions developed to improve or protect 
resource conditions for these species. 

100
Planning and NEPA
Determine Significant Issues and Develop 
Alternatives to Proposed Action
Determining Significant Issues
Tis step brings the general public into the process by giving them 
the opportunity to provide comments and raise issues that concern 
them about the proposed action and purpose and need statement. Te 
planning team’s identiﬁcation and documentation of preliminary and 
signiﬁcant issues are a key process point since these comments will 
drive the development of alternatives. Te key in developing good 
issue statements is to release a proposed action that is not general or 
vague and has site-speciﬁcity so that the public and others can readily 
understand what the agency is trying to accomplish and where. It is 
also important to write issue statements in a cause-and-eﬀect manner 
and establish units of measure in order to show trade-oﬀs between the 
alternatives. 
Once the proposed action is released, people who are interested 
in the project can submit their concerns to the responsible oﬃcial. 
Planners need to catalog all letters and conduct content analysis to 
identify preliminary issues. Comments regarding the decision itself or 
appropriateness of the proposal are not considered issues. Issue state-
ments from the public, other governmental agencies, or internally need 
to contain the same level of site-speciﬁcity as the proposed action as 
well to be of value within the process. For example, issue statements to 
identify the wildlife species and/or what aspect of the species’ habitat 
is of concern and where it is located in the project area. To elevate a 
preliminary issue to a signiﬁcant issue, the comment needs to have 
some basis in science and research, although the responsible oﬃcial 
always has the discretion to elevate an apparent non-signiﬁcant issue to 
a signiﬁcant one and develop an alternative for it, and even abandon it 
at a later date.
Designating an issue as signiﬁcant typically occurs when it is 
evident that the public and/or federal or state agencies are aware of a 

101
resource condition or eﬀects that likely will be of interest for a consid-
erable length of time, the eﬀects of the proposed action will last for a 
long time, or the eﬀects are potentially severe. 
Developing Alternatives
Once the list of signiﬁcant issues is developed and approved by the 
responsible oﬃcial, the team is ready to develop alternatives to the pro-
posed action. A reasonable alternative needs to meet both the purpose 
and need statement, and address a signiﬁcant issue, although there might 
be cases where an alternative is fully disclosed that is not, by deﬁnition, 
reasonable. For instance, if the purpose and need statement has some 
discussion about doing the project for the least cost, there could be an 
instance where the team might come forward with an alternative with 
costs far and above what the proposed action stated. What the planners 
are trying to demonstrate in such a case are the trade-oﬀs of increasing 
the cost and what the diﬀerences are in terms of the eﬀects.
To develop sound alternatives, the planning team needs to: 
 
f Discuss all possible combinations of issues to limit the total 
number of alternatives the team needs to develop 
 
f Identify a no-action alternative ﬁrst as a baseline for compari-
son to other alternatives
 
f Combine parts of alternatives in a logical manner, if possible 
 
f Provide an alternative for each signiﬁcant issue, although there 
may be enough common themes in the issue statements to 
allow planners to reduce the number of alternatives by combin-
ing potential scenarios. 
A range of reasonable alternatives should demonstrate a variety of 
outputs, eﬀects, and an ability to meet the purpose and need state-
ment. Having a range of reasonable alternatives reﬂects well on the 
overall process (i.e., original proposed action was clearly articulated, 
the public comments led to meaningful issue statements) and gives the 
responsible NEPA oﬃcial the full range of choices from which to make 
an informed decision. Another important aspect of an alternative is the 

102
Planning and NEPA
need for substantial treatment of each action. In addition, the descrip-
tion of each alternative should be as equal and site-speciﬁc as possible 
so reviewers may evaluate the comparative merits of each scenario. Tis 
means that the units of measure developed to show attainment or non-
attainment of the purpose and need statement or of any signiﬁcant 
issues are essentially the same for all actions considered in the docu-
ment. Te discussion of no-action should be given about the same 
amount of space as any other alternative. Alternatives and virtually all 
components of the analysis should be described objectively with no 
bias. It is also important to determine whether or not the alternative is 
consistent with the Forest Plan. 
As with issues, knowing the reasons to eliminate an alternative 
from consideration or selection can help the team manage the NEPA 
process. Some of the reasons for dismissal of alternatives include: 
 
f Illegal action required 
 
f Fails to meet the purpose and need statement 
 
f Unreasonable, remote, and/or speculative 
 
f Cannot be implemented.        
    
Disclose Environmental Effects
Direct, indirect, and cumulative eﬀects will be a comparatively easy 
process to complete if the previous steps have been thoroughly completed 
and documented. Other than developing quantitative measures that 
are understandable to the public, the most important work is building 
cause-and-eﬀect relationships. Direct and indirect eﬀects are the result of 
the proposed action alternatives. For example, the cause may be the total 
acres of treatments with a speciﬁc prescription applied, miles of roads 
constructed/reconstructed, and, possibly, the acres of activity fuels burned 
or prescribed ﬁre used to maintain certain timber stand conditions. Te ef-
fect will be speciﬁc to a resource area and could include acres of declining 
insect and disease problems (silviculture), anticipated water yield increase 

103
in acre-feet (watershed), changes in erosion rate in tons/acre/year (water-
shed), and acres of improved understory habitat for ground nesting birds 
(wildlife). Tese are all direct and indirect impacts of the proposed action 
and alternatives.
Cumulative impacts, which are invariably one of the most complicat-
ed sections for planners to write as well as the most likely sections to be ap-
pealed and litigated, are the incremental impacts of other actions occurring 
within or adjacent to the project area that inﬂuence the same resources 
the planners are dealing with in their analysis. For example, once the ﬁre 
specialist has determined how much of the project area has a reduced the 
ﬁre hazard and to what degree, along with the anticipated costs savings for 
the alternatives, the planning team needs to determine what other ac-
tions are occurring within or adjacent to this project area that essentially 
do the same thing. A review of past NEPA documents that have been 
implemented, current proposals that have or have not been implemented, 
and reasonably foreseeable activities all need to be part of the assessment. 
Generally, the Schedule of Proposed Actions is an excellent place to start in 
determining reasonably foreseeable actions. Planners need to make some 
assumptions and make their best estimate of the cumulative impacts for 
their resource area.
Planners also should recognize that other federal, state, and private 
lands could all be bounded into one cumulative eﬀects area. For instance, 
if antelope move oﬀ of the project area and spend two months on state 
and private lands and then move onto other federal lands, the activities 
in the project area that add to or detract from antelope habitat need to be 
assessed and documented.
 
Other Considerations
Te Omnibus Public Lands Management Act of 2009 as well as current 
and predicted environmental conditions creates other concerns for CLFRP 
planners and collaborators. Tree signiﬁcant and interrelated consider-
ations include collaboration, climate change, and adaptive management. 

104
Planning and NEPA
Collaboration 
Te Omnibus Public Lands Management Act of 2009 calls for in-
tensive dialogue with interested publics, state and local governments, 
environmental organizations, and others. Planners and stakeholders 
can refer to the Council on Environmental Quality Collaboration in 
NEPA: A Handbook for NEPA Practitioners for guidance on this issue 
(see Chapter 1 for more discussion).
Climate Change 
Climate change signals another important consideration for CFLRP 
collaboratives and NEPA planners as they decide about implementa-
tion strategies and other related issues. Te USFS has published two 
important documents about climate change and NEPA analysis that 
provide guidance in such matters. Te ﬁrst, Climate Change Consid-
erations in Project Level NEPA Analysis, is designed to help NEPA 
planners include climate change-related issues in the documentation. It 
is based on the following four principles:
 
f Climate change eﬀects include the eﬀects of agency action on 
global climate change and the eﬀects of climate change on a 
proposed project. 
 
f Te Agency may propose projects to increase the adaptive 
capacity of ecosystems it manages, mitigate climate change 
eﬀects on those ecosystems, or to sequester carbon. 
 
f It is not currently feasible to quantify the indirect eﬀects of 
individual or multiple projects on global climate change and 
therefore determining signiﬁcant eﬀects of those projects or 
project alternatives on global climate change cannot be made at 
any scale. 
 
f Some project proposals may present choices based on quantiﬁ-
able diﬀerences in carbon storage and greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions between alternatives (see Squillace and Hood 2012 
for further discussion).

105
Another USFS directive, Climate Change Considerations in Land 
Management Plan Revisions, while aimed at land management plan 
revisions, nevertheless provides helpful information about climate 
change-related questions to ask when planning (e.g., How is climate 
change likely to modify conditions on the planning unit? How will 
management of the planning unit inﬂuence levels of global green-
house gases and thus climate change?). It also contains discussions 
about the role of Historic Range of Variability, how to identify 
potential risks to desired conditions, and examples of hypothetical 
planning decisions. 
Adaptive Management 
Adaptive management (AM) was developed in the 1990s to help 
land managers work through the inevitable uncertainties produced 
by unforeseen treatment outcomes and/or unanticipated natural 
and social events (Stankey et al. 2005, Fleischman 2008). However, 
including AM in a process that also requires NEPA planning and 
documentation can be tricky. Generally, this is best accomplished 
in an EIS rather than an EA, or Finding of No Signiﬁcant Impact 
(FONSI), because an EA is insuﬃcient when there is signiﬁcant 
uncertainty about how treatments will aﬀect a resource while an EIS 
provides greater latitude to acknowledge uncertainty in the eﬀects 
analysis. To do so eﬀectively and with less risk of legal entanglement 
may require including identiﬁed (and often quantitative) thresholds 
and triggers that are defensible, enforceable, capable of being imple-
mented when required, and, in the case of triggers, explicitly and 
transparently developed. Policy researchers Nie and Schultz (2011) 
report: “We ﬁnd that courts have allowed agencies to proceed with 
adaptive management plans as long as they demonstrate compliance 
with substantive standards and comply with key NEPA require-
ments. If triggers are employed, agencies should explain what they 
indicate, demonstrate that they are enforceable if legal requirements 
are implicated, and show that the plan as a whole will ensure that 
substantive legal requirements will be met.” 

106
Planning and NEPA
If monitoring indicates that substantive changes are deemed neces-
sary during the course of a project, the courts may require new analy-
sis, generally in the form of plan amendments and a supplemental EIS. 
Planners in such situations will be required to re-analyze the situation 
taking into account the new information and/or circumstances even if 
the original NEPA document discussed possible future actions. Courts 
are less likely to require additional NEPA analysis when changes in 
actions and predicted eﬀects are within the range of what was analyzed 
in the original NEPA document (see Chapter 6 for more discussion 
about adaptive management).
Project Record 
Finally, given the complexity and longevity of CFLRP projects, plan-
ners will need to keep a well-documented project record to demon-
strate how they built the analysis from the smaller scale and summa-
rized it at the larger landscape level. Without a project record, there is 
a greater likelihood of successful appeals and litigation. 

107
References
Fleischman, F. 2008. Bureaucracy, collaboration and coproduction:
A case study of the implementation of adaptive management
in the U.S.D.A. Forest Service. 
Freeman, L. 2007. NEPA analysis and the “best science.” Farmington, 
UT: Te Shipley Group. 
Nie, M. and C. Schultz. 2011. Decision-making triggers in adaptive 
management: A report to USDA Paciﬁc Northwest Research 
Station, NEPA for the 21st Century. 
Ruyle, G. and J. Dyess. 2010. Rangeland monitoring and the Parker
3-Step Method: Overview, perspectives, and current 
applications. Tucson: University of Arizona, Arizona 
Cooperative Extension Publication AZ1525.
Squillace, M. and A. Hood. 2012. NEPA, Climate change, and public 
lands decision making. Environmental Law 42:469-526. 
Stankey, G.H., R.N. Clark, and B.T. Bormann. 2005.  
Adapive management of natural resources: theory, concepts,
and management institutions. Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-
GTR-654. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Paciﬁc Northwest Research Station. 
U.S. Forest Service. 2009. Climate change considerations in project
level NEPA analysis. 
___. 2010. Climate change considerations in land management plan
revisions. 

A
s of 2012, nineteen Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration 
(CFLR) projects were funded across the western United States 
under Title IV—Forest Landscape Restoration (FLR) of the Omni-
bus Public Land Management Act of 2009 (P.L. 111-11). Congress 
not only funded these projects, they mandated that the collabora-
tive stakeholder groups that received the monies comply with the 
legal requirements of the legislation, which includes establishing a 
multi-party monitoring program to measure and record the project’s 
eﬀectiveness in terms of meeting the intent of the act, and improv-
ing forest health and socio-economic conditions. 
Monitoring of any sort involves taking repeated measurements 
(usually quantitative, but also qualitative) in project locations over 
time to determine whether stated project goals and objectives are 
being met. Multi-party monitoring is part of the entire collaborative 
process in that the design and actual monitoring of a CFLR project 
Multi-party Monitoring
Dave Egan
Chapter
4

109
is overseen, if not actually undertaken, by members of the collabora-
tive. In other words, there is an important social dimension to multi-party 
monitoring—one that brings people with diﬀerent 
perspectives together to help oversee and implement 
the project. Te results of such eﬀorts not only supply 
information that can be used to adaptively manage 
the project, they build support for the project through 
active involvement. Tis chapter will examine what it 
takes to develop an operational multi-party monitor-
ing program for a CFLR project.
Why is Multi-party Monitoring 
Necessary?
Te legal guidelines for multi-party monitoring a 
CFLR project can be found in Section 4003 (g) (4) 
of the FLR, which states “Te Secretary [of Agricul-
ture, acting through the Chief of the Forest Service] 
Monitoring of 
any sort involves 
taking repeated 
measurements 
(usually 
quantitative, 
but also 
qualitative) in 
project locations 
over time to 
determine 
whether stated 
project goals and 
objectives are 
being met.
Members of the Uncompahgre Plateau Project Group meet for a trip into the ﬁeld. Photo courtesy of ERI

110
Multi-party Monitoring
shall, in collaboration with the Secretary of the Interior and interested per-
sons, use a multi-party monitoring, evaluation, and accountability process 
to assess the positive and negative ecological, social, and economic eﬀects 
of projects implementing a selected proposal for not less than 15 years after 
the project implementation commences.” Tis section is part of the FLR 
that includes language describing requirements for a work plan, project 
implementation, annual reports, and multi-party monitoring. In doing 
so, Congress sought assurances that it would maintain oversight over the 
CFLR projects and the funding that supports them. Tere are other rea-
sons, however, for assessing these projects with a multi-party monitoring 
process. Tese include:
 
f It examines the results and eﬀectiveness of restoration eﬀorts
 
f It looks at not only ecological results, but economic and social 
outcomes as well
 
f It supports an adaptive management approach
 
f It serves as an “early warning” system against dramatic/unex-
pected changes
 
f It helps determine whether actions/thinking/assumptions were 
correct or need to be modiﬁed
f It provides support from a number of agencies and 
groups, thereby potentially spreading the cost of monitoring 
among multiple stakeholders
 
f It helps maintain and develop trust within the collaborative 
and the community by involving a variety of stakeholders and 
by providing a transparent process
 
f Its ﬁndings support outreach and education
 
f It serves as a reference for other CFLR projects.
Types of Monitoring
Tere are three basic types of monitoring—compliance, eﬀectiveness, and 
validation. Of these, compliance monitoring and eﬀectiveness monitoring 
are the most important for CFLR projects. 

111
Compliance monitoring (also known as implementation monitoring) 
documents whether or not practices were applied in such a way as to meet 
the requirements of the supporting legislation, funding agency, or some 
identiﬁable best management practice. Tis type of monitoring answers 
the basic question: Did we do what we proposed we would do in order to 
meet the general goals and objectives of the legislation and the collaborative? 
Te answers to this question will be important in complying with Sec-
tion 4003 (h), which requires CFLR reports to Congress every ﬁve years, 
and for other reports by project and contract administrators. Compli-
ance monitoring reports tend to be an accounting of project progress. For 
example, compliance monitoring performance measures would include 
such items as: number of acres of “improved” forest, number of miles of 
stream habitat restored or enhanced, volume of timber or biomass sold, 
and the number of jobs created or maintained. Information from eﬀective-
ness monitoring may also be used in developing the report.  
Eﬀectiveness monitoring answers the basic question: Did the actions taken 
have the desired result on the condition(s) of concern? In other words, this 
type of monitoring evaluates whether collaborative management activities 
have been eﬀective in moving a set of existing conditions toward a set of 
desired future conditions; that is, it involves measuring condition change 
over time relative to management actions. Eﬀectiveness monitoring is 
essential because it supplies the quantitative and qualitative information 
needed by land managers, scientists, policymakers, and other collaborators 
to assess progress and make adjustments to management practices under 
an adaptive management protocol. Te results of eﬀectiveness monitoring 
can also supply much of the information and data needed for the other 
two types of monitoring, as noted above. Establishing an eﬀectiveness 
monitoring protocol will likely be one of the major early eﬀorts for any 
collaborative forest restoration group.  
Validation monitoring is a longer-term process that seeks to answer 
the questions: Did our assumptions prove true? What caused the changes we 
identiﬁed during eﬀectiveness monitoring to occur? Tis type of monitor-

112
Multi-party Monitoring
ing is more research oriented and requires rigorous sampling designs, 
and extensive data collection and analysis—in many cases much more 
so than any eﬀectiveness monitoring protocol. As such, most validation 
monitoring is often done by researchers from universities aﬃliated with 
a collaborative or by U.S. Forest Service (USFS) research station person-
nel. While it may take some time before information from validation 
monitoring is completed, the results from this type of monitoring will 
help the agencies and Congress determine whether the basic thinking 
for supporting the programs was sound and whether future changes 
need to be considered.
National Multi-party Monitoring Indicators 
Tere is an eﬀort under way to develop a national set of monitoring 
indicators that will relate directly to the purpose and goals of the Act. Te 
USFS expects to approve these indicators sometime in FY 2012. Broadly 
deﬁned, these national indicators include: 1) ﬁre costs, 2) jobs/economics, 
3) ecological, 4) leveraged funds, and 5) collaboration. Tis set of national 
indicators should provide consistent data from all CFLR project sites. Tis 
database can then be used to communicate the results of the entire CFLR 
eﬀort to Congress and national audiences. (Te current version of the 
national multiparty monitoring indicators is available at  
http://nationalforests.org/conserve/learning/cﬂrp.) 
Tis document will focus on what it will take to organize a landscape-
scale, multi-party eﬀectiveness monitoring protocol for a CFLR project. 
Such a process will assess many of the same issues as the national indica-
tor monitoring protocol, but with a greater speciﬁcity and more project-
speciﬁc detail. And, as mentioned previously, the data obtained through a 
successful eﬀectiveness monitoring program will complement and inform 
the reports and monitoring indicators that are required under the FLR 
legislation. 

The same measurement is taken soon after thinning and prescribed burning operations, or post-cut.
As part of any long-term monitoring eﬀort, measurements, such as understory cover, tree diameter and tree 
height, must be taken at various stages of restoration. In this illustration, the measurement of a tree within a 
plot is taken at breast height, before thinning operations.
Data is taken again on the same plot six years after thinning. At this time, it is hoped that indigenous forbs and 
grasses dominate the understory and the remaining trees have grown without competition for resources.

114
Multi-party Monitoring
Issues to Address When Organizing 
a Landscape-scale, 
Multi-party Monitoring Protocol
Establishing and implementing a landscape-scale, multi-party eﬀec-
tiveness monitoring program will require addressing numerous issues 
that will be basic to all CFLR projects (Figure 1). Tese basic issues 
include:
 
f Organizing and coordinating the multi-party monitoring group
 
f Identifying key concerns and establishing desirable conditions
 
f Identifying measurable indicators and their metrics
 
f Identifying monitoring and administrative costs, and  
 
addressing budget issues
 
f Identifying and gathering existing data and  
 
 
background information
 
f Selecting the appropriate level of monitoring 
 
f Identifying means of data recording, storage, and  
 
administration
 
f Prioritizing key questions based on ecological and  
 
socio-economic issues, existing data, and budget  constraints
 
f Testing and implementation of monitoring indicators
 
f Adaptive management
 
f Use of monitoring information for outreach.
Te following sections will address each of these issues. 
Organizing and Coordinating the Multi-party 
Monitoring Group
By its very nature, a CFLR project will involve many individuals and 
organizations, each having their own motivations, values, knowledge, and 
technical and ﬁnancial resources to bring to the multi-party monitoring 
eﬀort. In general, this is an asset because having knowledgeable, hard-

115
Managing 
and 
coordinating 
a multi-
dimensional 
group and its 
resources is 
no easy task, 
so leadership 
is of critical 
importance.  
working people in the proper positions is vital to a 
successful and eﬀective monitoring program. Because 
of the multi-party nature of the CFLR projects, 
collaborative groups may have access to people with 
expertise in the various areas of ecology, economics, 
sociology, and other areas of interest. Tese stakehold-
ers are often involved in the decision-making activities 
of the collaborative and will be familiar with the goals, 
objectives, and indicators that have been proposed and 
approved for the monitoring program. Typically, their 
assignments will sort out according to their areas of 
expertise. In addition to this group, federal and state 
agencies as well as educational institutions may have 
experts who may either be currently employed doing monitoring work (e.g., 
range conservationists, endangered plant specialists, invasive species special-
ists) or who may be available to do so. In some cases, however, there may be 
positions within the monitoring team that require expertise (e.g., resource 
specialist, ﬁnancial, administrative, legal) outside of the collaborative group. 
Managing and coordinating a multi-dimensional group and its re-
sources is no easy task, so leadership is of critical importance. Te desig-
nated lead must possess the credibility to function as a convener, facilitator, 
and coordinator of multi-party monitoring group. Tis means having the 
necessary human, technical, and knowledge capacity to identify the right 
people, organize meetings, coordinate communication, elicit knowledge, 
and facilitate the entire process. Te designated lead must also possess 
current scientiﬁc and technical knowledge about monitoring measures 
and protocols. Te leader will also be familiar with the policies and proce-
dures of the federal land management agencies and be able to eﬀectively 
cross-walk between the collaborative and the agency. Because multi-party 
monitoring is a novel approach in resource management, the designated 
lead must be at once strategic and nimble – strategic in the sense of advanc-
ing a clear vision for the multi-party monitoring process and nimble in 
terms of being ﬂexible to changing social dynamics within the multi-party 
monitoring group.

Propose Broad Goals
Deﬁne Personnel & Budgetary Constraints
Check costs associated with setting objectives
Review Existing Data
Identify Measurable Objectives
Deﬁne Monitoring Attributes, Sampling Frequency,  
Sampling Location & Analytic Procedures
Check costs associated with design optimization
Deﬁne Personnel & Budgetary Constraints
Conducting Monitoring
Analyze and Report Data
Revise Monitoring  
Plan as Needed
DESIGN
TESTING
IMPLEMENTATION
Will the data meet the proposed
 Monitoring objectives?
Deﬁne Monitoring Attributes, Sampling Frequency, 
Sampling Location & Analytic Procedures
Check costs associated with design optimization
Check costs associated with design optimization
Deﬁne Monitoring Attributes, Sampling Frequency, 
Sampling Location & Analytic Procedures
Check costs associated with design optimization
Check costs associated with design optimization
Deﬁne Monitoring Attributes, Sampling Frequency, 
Sampling Location & Analytic Procedures
Check costs associated with design optimization
Check costs associated with design optimization
No
No
No
No
Initiate Monitoring activities on 
a pilot basis
Yes
Yes
Yes
Revise
Monitoring
Methods?
Yes
No
Does Monitoring Meet the Objectives?
Analyze and Evaluate Data
Figure  1.  Monitoring program development process (Caughley and Oakley 2001)
Is the proposed monitoring program 
compatible with available resources?
Re-check costs for program feasibility
Is the proposed monitoring program 
compatible with available resources?
Check costs for program feasibility

117
In addition to the lead person, the collaborative may want to consider 
hiring someone (i.e., a monitoring coordinator) to manage monitoring ac-
tivities, take care of ﬁnancial issues, and work on administrative issues and 
reports. Many collaboratives (see case studies that follow) have established 
monitoring committees. Such groups provide a chance for stakeholders to 
work together, gather information, solve problems, and provide feedback 
that can be used in adaptive management decisions. In other situations, 
collaboratives have found that their members do not have the time and/or 
skills needed to conduct the multi-party monitoring eﬀort. In such cases, 
stakeholder groups, if they have the ﬁnancial resources, are hiring inde-
pendent contractors to gather and analyze the monitoring data. 
Identify Key Concerns and Establish 
Desirable Conditions
Each CFLR collaborative will have already identiﬁed the key issues 
they hope to address in their project proposal. Tese concerns typically 
focus on ecological and economic issues that are undesirable and require 
improvement in the project area (e.g., the threat of catastrophic ﬁre to 
forests, communities and infrastructure; loss of wildlife habitat; too many 
invasive plants; poor economic growth). Social concerns are also impor-
tant and may include such things as public concerns with smoke from 
ﬁres and related health issues, loss of recreational opportunities, and loss 
of biodiversity. 
To establish monitoring indicators, a collaborative goes through a 
process of reviewing their original key concerns and restating them as 
desirable conditions or goals. For example, a collaborative’s key concerns 
might be: 
 
f Conserve and restore the biological diversity of the ponderosa 
pine/dry mixed conifer ecosystem,  
including wildlife
 
f Maintain and enhance regional and local water and air resources
 
f Maintain and enhance the regional and local socio-economic  
situation

118
Multi-party Monitoring
 
f Reduce the potential for catastrophic wildﬁres
 
f Restore historic ﬁre regimes and the resilience of the  
 
forest system to unforeseen disturbances
 
f Maintain and increase the level of trust within the collaborative
 
f Reduce or control invasive species populations. 
Working with this list, the collaborative can then begin to 
assemble a list of key questions for each desirable condition. Tese 
questions (e.g., What is the percentage of grass cover following the 
thinning and burning treatment? What eﬀect have cattle had on 
aspen regeneration compared to deer and elk? Did we create as many 
jobs/full-time equivalents (FTEs) as expected?) provide the basis for 
answering how well restoration and rehabilitation actions have helped 
move the current conditions toward the expressed desired conditions. 
 
Identify Measurable Indicators 
With the desired conditions and their complementary questions in 
place, the collaborative can move forward to identify measurable in-
dicators. Tese monitoring indicators can be measures of both quan-
titative and qualitative information, although it is essential that all 
partners use consistent monitoring methodologies (including common 
indicator deﬁnitions). 
Selecting the correct monitoring indicators is essential and can be 
a diﬃcult process, if only because there is a tendency within a col-
laborative to want to collect too much data. Te Nature Conservancy 
recommends selecting indicators that are SMART; that is, the indica-
tors are Speciﬁc, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Timed. 
Speciﬁc: Being speciﬁc means that the collaborative knows and agrees 
upon exactly what will be measured for each of the desired condition, 
in which geographical area(s) the measurements will take place, by 
what unit(s) or metric(s), and by whom. Complementary to this guide-
line is advice from monitoring experts to keep it simple, recognize 
what is critical to know based on the desired conditions, and obtain 
only what you need and no more.

119
Measurable: Since monitoring is all about measuring change, it is 
vital that baseline information is available and that monitoring metrics 
used for the project, be they quantitative or qualitative, “ﬁt” well with 
the initial baseline data so as to avoid uneven (apples and oranges) 
comparisons. Care should also be taken to minimize variation in the 
data and to control for sampling errors, both Type I (concluding there 
is a change when none occurred) and Type II (concluding there is no 
change even though one has occurred). Tis no small task and people 
will often spend more time discussing what to monitor and lose sight 
of how diﬃcult it really is to measure meaningful change.
Achievable: Te collaborative will have to determine not only what 
changes they expect from the project, but whether they can detect 
those changes given their human, institutional and ﬁnancial resources, 
and the amount of time they have to measure the change (i.e., Are 
they monitoring short-term or long-term changes?). 
Relevant: Troughout the process, the collaborative will have to 
revisit its goals to ensure that monitoring is focused on what is critical 
to know and, thus, what is critical to monitor. When considering the 
relevancy of a proposed indicator, the collaborative should ask: If we 
know this information, how would we change our management? Or 
would a manager ﬁnd this information important 15 years from now? 
Te collaborative will also need to ask: What is minimum change and 
how important is it? Te key, again, is to keep it simple and recognize 
what is critical to know. 
Timed: Monitoring indicators must be identiﬁed in terms of how 
often the measurements will be taken and during which time 
period(s). Tis will likely be diﬀerent and dependent on the nature of 
the indicator. For example, monitoring of vegetation change might be 
done several times during the ﬁrst year following treatment and for 
years 3, 5, and 10 thereafter. Meanwhile, data about jobs may be taken 
once every year.
Monitoring indicators require metrics that are consistent in terms 
of application and meaningful in terms of their ability to measure 
change. Te following is a table of potential indicators and possible 
metrics used to measure them. 

120
Multi-party Monitoring
Table 1. Potential Monitoring Indicators and Metrics
Desired Condition
Monitoring Indicator
Unit(s) of Measure
Data Source
Reduce the 
potential for 
catastrophic 
wildfires
Density and spatial 
pattern of trees across 
the landscape
Trees per acre, 
crown cover
Remote sensing 
information 
verified by 
ground sampling
Increased 
understory 
productivity
Vitality of the 
vegetative understory
% cover of native 
grasses and forbs
Ground sampling
Increased habitat 
for northern 
goshawks
Number of northern 
goshawks, including 
young
Occupancy rates, 
births per goshawk 
pair
Visual 
observations, 
sampling of nests
Increased level 
of trust among 
collaborators
Active and ongoing 
participation in the 
collaborative
Positive responses 
to survey 
regarding trust 
issues
Survey of 
collaborators
Increased 
economic growth
Number of FTEs 
created over time
FTEs created/year
Survey of 
businesses
Increased public 
appreciation for 
restoration efforts
Amount of public 
awareness
Letters to govt. 
officials in support, 
positive responses 
to survey/focus 
group
Responses from 
govt. officials, 
survey of general 
public or focus 
groups
Increased water 
quantity/quality 
after restoration 
treatments
Water levels in streams 
and lakes, quality in 
same
Cf/sec flow rate, 
timing of flows,      
% volatiles and 
contaminants
In-stream 
sampling and 
stream gauge 
readouts

121
(Top) Plot data is collected by measuring oﬀ the transect line. (Bottom) Understory data is collected by measuring 
within a quadrant on a transect line. Photos courtesy of ERI

122
Multi-party Monitoring
Identify Monitoring and Administrative Costs 
During the process of identifying monitoring indicators, members of 
the collaborative will also need to determine how much it will cost to 
execute the measurement of each proposed monitoring indicator over 
the course of the project. Tese costs should be appraised in whatever 
metric makes the most sense for the indicator (e.g., dollars, FTEs, 
hours). Once the costs are determined and a draft budget is complete, 
a further prioritizing of the indicators will likely be needed. When 
prioritizing monitoring indicators it is best to work out several funding 
scenarios in order to maintain, if only on paper, all available options. 
For example, collaboratives can use a budgetary approach that identi-
ﬁes monitoring indicators that will be used at minimal, medium, and 
maximum expected funding levels. 
Identify and Gather Existing Data and 
Background Information
In most cases, the project funded by the CFLR Program will have access 
to existing data and background information about the project area. 
Tis information should be tapped since it can provide good baseline 
data, maps, databases and other information, and may be relatively 
inexpensive to obtain. It will likely correspond well with data needed for 
environmental planning for the project. In addition to the federal land 
manager, sources for such information include state agencies, NGOs, 
academic institutions, and interest groups. Remote sensing and GIS data 
as well as Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA) and LANDFIRE data, 
census data, and economic inventories and analyses (e.g., Headwaters 
Economics) are just a few examples of existing data sources. 
Tere can be drawbacks, however, since most existing data was not 
gathered for the same purposes as those needed by a collaborative. Tis 
can result in metrics that do not align with the metrics the collaborative 
has agreed to use. In addition, there can be concerns about the validity 
of the data, especially in cases where non-professionals may have gath-
ered it. Furthermore, it may take considerable time and eﬀort to “mine” 
usable data from reports, scientiﬁc articles, and even some databases. 

123
Nevertheless, a collaborative should make the eﬀort to explore what 
may be already available so that they do not go out and expend scarce 
resources to capture information that already exists.
Finally, a collaborative will need leaders with past experience or at 
least good insight into, and partnerships with, federal land agencies to 
assist with cross-walking multi-party monitoring data to land manage-
ment corporate datasets. Tese external datasets can only inﬂuence 
adaptive management when appropriately and continuously cross-
walked to the federal partner’s datasets.
Selecting the Appropriate Amount of 
Effectiveness Monitoring
Determining the scale of monitoring eﬀorts and how frequently moni-
toring will occur during the course of the project is a critical step. Tese 
One method of data collection is measuring the diameter of a tree. Photo courtesy of ERI

124
Multi-party Monitoring
decisions will translate into further decisions about monitoring costs and 
the appropriate level of monitoring needed to detect meaningful changes 
in the socio-ecological environment. Perhaps the most important issue is 
ﬁnding a balance between limits of the monitoring budget and having 
enough replicated measurements to avoid sampling errors. Performing a 
statistical power analysis using the questions developed by the collabora-
tive or monitoring board as the null hypothesis (i.e., a hypothesis that is 
presumed true until statistical evidence in the form of a hypothesis test 
indicates otherwise) can provide both a statistical check and some level 
of budgetary balance to the process of determining how many measure-
ments are needed and how often they should be measured. Tis process 
can apply to economic and social as well as ecological indicators.
Selecting the appropriate level of monitoring aﬀects data quality 
not only in terms of how many measurements are taken but in terms of 
how accurately or precisely the data is collected. For instance, given the 
spatial extent of a landscape-scale project, monitoring at the regional or 
landscape scale will require remote sensing technology. However, at least 
in some instances, that data will have to be ground-truthed in order to be 
certiﬁed as accurate (Fraser and others 2005). Likewise, concerns some-
times arise about the data collected by non-professionals (e.g., students, 
citizen scientists). If non-professionals are part of a monitoring team, they 
should be trained, given appropriate jobs for their skill level, and have 
their work checked regularly by professional staﬀ. Having non-profes-
sionals on a monitoring team is an excellent idea from the perspectives of 
building community support, job training, and getting more work done 
but maintaining the highest level of data quality is always important.
Te appropriate amount of monitoring will also take into account 
how soon changes can be expected or how long is the lag time between 
the cause (treatment) and the eﬀect (measurable/observable change). 
Collaboratives and monitoring boards can assess the likelihood of change 
in ecological, economic, and social areas and develop short-, mid-, and 
long-term indicators. For example, on the Deschutes Collaborative Forest 
Project, the collaborative identiﬁed the outcomes in this manner: “Long 
term: Te forest achieves desired condition (healthy, resilient, wildﬁre 

125
does not pose a threat to communities).Tis will take decades in many 
places. Midterm: Te forest is moving towards desired conditions. De-
sired condition can be deﬁned as: composition, structure and function 
progresses from departed from the natural range of variability (NRV) 
to within the range of NRV.”
Te Uncompaghre Plateau CLFR collaborative was more con-
cerned about measuring broad ecological trends over time rather than 
statistically comparing diﬀerent treatment eﬀects for any one time 
period. In each of the six vegetation types of interest, three 0.5-acre 
plots—one control and two treatments—were established to measure 
indicators pertaining to trees, shrubs, understory plants, fuel, and wild-
life. Tese will be re-measured in years 1, 2, 5, and 10 after treatment. 
Te primary interest of the collaborative is to reliably measure and 
evaluate eﬀects over time rather than statistically account for variability 
over geographic space. Tis example illustrates not only the diﬀerence 
between eﬀectiveness monitoring and more research-oriented validation 
monitoring, but how collaboratives might feasibly develop reliable, if 
not entirely complete, monitoring information. 
Identifying Means of Data Recording, Storage, 
and Administration
A collaborative will also need to agree on standardized protocols to collect 
and record their data (e.g., Excel ﬁle, .jpg photo ﬁle, data form, survey), 
and then store it in new or existing databases. Standardizing the data will 
permit easier and better use of the information both in terms of analysis 
and for writing reports.
It is important to have federal partners participating in multi-party 
monitoring to more eﬃciently collect data that can be easily cross-walked 
or directly inputed to USDA corporate datasets. However, multi-party 
monitoring provides the opportunity to go above and beyond existing 
or mandatory federal monitoring. Diﬀerent partners may have diﬀerent 
capacities to store data which may create overlap or ineﬃcient data collec-
tion and analysis. Most collaboratives will likely need some administra-
tive support to maintain a database. Collaboratives may have academic 

126
Multi-party Monitoring
partners who are willing to manage data storage and make data available 
to partners. In addition, some third party services are available for data 
storage and data mining. For example, the Great Northern Landscape 
Conservation Cooperative has developed Landscape Conservation Man-
agement and Analysis Portal (LCMAP), a data storage and mining service 
with GIS capability that can be shared across multiple partners through 
the internet (see resources section for more information). 
Prioritize Key Questions Based on Ecological and Socio-
economic Issues, Existing Data, and Budget Constraints
In all cases, the monitoring of CFLR projects should be ecologically and 
socio-economically relevant, statistically sound, and cost eﬀective (Hinds 
1984, Caughlan and Oakley 2001). Getting there is not easy, however. It 
requires giving up any notion of a “wish-list” approach to monitoring, and 
instead obliges the collaborative to work diligently and strategically, often 
with the guidance of the designated lead, to reﬁne its monitoring indica-
tors by taking into consideration which changes are most important to 
know and what changes are statistically possible to know given the avail-
able personnel, information, and ﬁscal resources. To do this, a collabora-
tive will have to identify its key concerns, establish desirable conditions, 
and decide which questions are most important to answer. Beyond that, a 
collaborative will need to decide on the techniques and metrics it will use 
to measure change, and come to terms with the costs and beneﬁts of the 
various sampling techniques. 
Testing and Implementing Monitoring Indicators 
Testing how well the monitoring indicators record change on an experi-
mental basis can begin once the collaborative or the monitoring team has 
gone through the process of selecting, prioritizing, and budgeting for the 
monitoring indicators. If the indicator works well on a trial basis it can be 
implemented; if not, then adjustments to the indicator and/or metric are 
required. Using adaptive management at this stage, while lengthening the 
process, will help insure that the collaborative obtains meaningful, quality 
data.

127
Adaptive Management
Adaptive management should 
play an integral part in link-
ing monitoring information to 
ongoing management decision 
making (see Chapter 6). Adaptive 
management is the “regulator” in 
the system because it provides an 
opportunity for the collaborative, 
land managers, contractors, and 
others involved in the project to 
review the information received 
from the monitoring eﬀort and 
make necessary adjustments to 
the project’s initial objectives 
and/or treatments in order to 
obtain the desired results. Since 
it’s unlikely that everything will 
go exactly as planned, employ-
ing adaptive management as part 
of the process provides a point 
where the collaborative and oth-
ers can step back and ask: Should 
we do something diﬀerent to 
either change the objective or 
change our treatment(s) to better 
meet the objective?
While adaptive management 
is a valuable step, it often needs to 
be accompanied by ﬁeld activities 
where members of the collab-
orative, land managers, contrac-
tors, and others meet to see, 
experience, and discuss what has 
Te following organizations 
provide tools and resources 
for the development and 
implementation of a successful 
monitoring protocol.
National Forest Foundation 
CFLR Program National 
Indicators
Headwaters Economics
University of Oregon Institute 
for a Sustainable Environment, 
Quick Guide to Monitoring 
Economic Impacts of 
Ecosystem Restoration and 
Stewardship
USDA Forest Service, 
Southwestern Region 
Multiparty Monitoring and 
Assessment Guidelines
USDA Forest Service 
Inventory and Analysis 
National Program
White Mountain Stewardship 
Monitoring Board
Quick Links

128
Multi-party Monitoring
actually taken place on the land. Tese events provide the context for the 
monitoring data and are often essential in helping build conﬁdence and 
trust within the collaborative as well as to help people better understand 
why one course of action or another might be taken. 
Use of Monitoring Information for Outreach
Developing and maintaining public support is an essential part of a 
collaborative forest restoration project—and knowing how to share 
key monitoring information with various groups can be integral in 
such an eﬀort. In order to use its monitoring information eﬀec-
tively, a collaborative, typically through its communication and/or 
outreach committee, should identify all the interested parties with 
which they want to share the monitoring data. A typical list might 
include: agency personnel, general public, local/regional govern-
ment oﬃcials, non-participating stakeholders, and local/regional 
interest groups. Te collaborative will then have to decide how and 
who will share the information to these diﬀerent groups. Infor-
mation sharing may be accomplished by developing brochures, 
through e-newsletters, by making presentations, through the local 
media, or by other means. 
When developing a communication plan that includes moni-
toring information, a collaborative should consider the following 
(Moote 2011):
 
f Who are the potential audiences?
 
f What outreach mechanisms will be used?
 
f When and how often will information be shared?
 
f Who is responsible for organizing and disseminating  
information?
 
f What are the key messages?
One word of caution: A communication message should be tested 
internally and externally (e.g., with a focus group) before its release 
to the public. Small, but critical, mistakes in publications and/or 

129
uneven presentations may lead to unwanted negative publicity. It is 
much better to “dry run” a media eﬀort than spend time 
explaining or apologizing for an error or poor performance. 
Case Studies
Tree case studies help illus-
trate the basics of developing 
and implementing a monitor-
ing program for a landscape-
scale forest restoration project. 
Tey include: White Moun-
tain Stewardship Contract 
Multi-party Monitoring eﬀort 
in east-central Arizona; the 
Deschutes Collaborative Forest 
Project near the cities of Bend 
and Sisters, Oregon; and the 
Uncompaghre Plateau CFLR 
in southwestern Colorado. See
Table 2 for a comparison of 
each of these landscape-scale, 
multi-party monitoring eﬀorts. 
White Mountain Stewardship Contract 
Multi-party Monitoring
Te White Mountain Stewardship Contract (WMSC), the largest and 
ﬁrst ten-year stewardship contract in the United States, is designed to 
reduce tree density on 150,000 acres of ponderosa pine forest in the 
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests (A-S) and help support a local 
wood products industry. When the contract began in 2004, the A-S 
convened a multi-party monitoring board whose purpose was to recom-
mend monitoring activities that would assess the ecological, economic, 
Researcher Aviana Acid examines a tree core sample. 
Photo courtesy of ERI

130
Multi-party Monitoring
and social impacts of the contract. Te monitoring board is composed 
of more than a dozen members from across the geographic area of the 
forests, and includes representation or interests in local, county, and state 
government as well as various resource and business individuals and 
organizations. To accomplish their mission, the monitoring board went 
through a process like that outlined in this chapter—listing general 
concerns, reiterating those concerns in the form of questions, working 
with specialists to identify ways to measure and answer the questions 
raised, and then, working within a budget, agreeing on which ques-
tions to answer and how, when, and where to have measurements taken. 
While the actual work of measuring change has been left to experts 
(ecological studies by employees of the USFS, Te Nature Conservancy, 
and Arizona Game and Fish Department; a small business development 
center and the primary contractor provide economic information; a 
private consultant assesses social aspects), the monitoring board main-
tains oversight of the monitoring activities, allocates money for speciﬁc 
monitoring projects, and provides feedback to the USFS.
A recent summary of the ﬁrst ﬁve years of monitoring various 
aspects of the WMSC (Sitko and Hurteau 2010) reported ﬁndings, 
lessons learned, and recommendations in the following areas: project 
administration, ecological eﬀects, economic impacts, and social support. 
Along with these, the overall lesson learned was the continuing need to 
improve and evolve the monitoring process: “In the next ﬁve years, the 
Multi-Party Monitoring Board will evaluate and reﬁne its monitoring 
program and tailor data collection to meet speciﬁc information needs 
and to ﬁll data gaps. We will continue to build on the use of monitor-
ing data to improve planning and treatment designs and project layout” 
(First Five Years of the White Mountain Stewardship Contract, Execu-
tive Summary, p. 4). If the experiences of this pioneering landscape-scale 
restoration project are any indication, other CFLR project monitoring 
groups should be prepared to continually improve and tweak their 
monitoring processes as new values and new data emerge.

131
Deschutes Collaborative Forest Project
Te Deschutes Collaborative Forest Project is located on 145,000 acres in 
the Deschutes National Forest near the cities of Bend and Sisters, Or-
egon. Te majority (73%) of the landscape is frequent-ﬁre ponderosa pine 
and dry mixed conifer forest types with the remainder consisting of wet 
meadows and riparian areas throughout and wet mixed conifer, true ﬁr, 
and hemlock forests at higher elevations and on north-facing slopes. Te 
goals of the project include restoring forest ecosystems resilience, creating 
jobs, reducing the risk of high-severity ﬁre in Wildland Urban Interface 
residential areas, protecting drinking water source watersheds, preserving 
high-use recreational areas, re-introducing anadromous ﬁsh into the Up-
per Deschutes River, and providing wood ﬁber to local industries.
Tere are ﬁve collaborative groups, representing numerous organiza-
tions and businesses, working together on the Deschutes Collaborative 
Forest Project. Tey are the Deschutes Fire Learning Network, Central 
Oregon Partnership for Wildﬁre Risk Reduction, Project Wildﬁre, the 
Deschutes Provincial Advisory Committee, and Upper Deschutes Water-
shed Council. Members of these groups held meetings to discuss values 
they wanted to see or protect on the Deschutes landscape. Tese values 
were then translated into goals and treatment projects, which various 
members of the collaborative agreed to monitor. For instance, the Central 
Oregon Partnership for Wildﬁre Risk Reduction Ecosystem Monitoring 
Committee will undertake qualitative, ﬁeld-based, post-implementation 
multi-party reviews of 30 to 45 implemented units across the landscape 
to assess treatment implementation and eﬀectiveness. Te inter-agency 
Central Oregon Fire Management Services will collect quantitative data to 
evaluate the eﬀectiveness of treatments in reducing fuel loads and restor-
ing natural vegetation communities and ﬁre regimes. Te Deschutes Fire 
Learning Network will evaluate changes in ecological departure modeled 
with treatments through time. Te Upper Deschutes Watershed Council 
and Deschutes National Forest will collect data on streamﬂow, tempera-
ture, macroinvertebrate and ﬁsh populations, ﬁsh passage and screening, 
and other habitat parameters to evaluate the eﬀectiveness of their watershed 
restoration activities. Te City of Bend will collect water quality data at the 

132
Multi-party Monitoring
intake for its municipal water supply diversion at the outlet of the Bridge 
Creek Watershed/Drink NEPA planning area during the seven-year period 
that restoration activities are occurring in that project area. Meanwhile, 
USFS contract administrators and contracting oﬃcer representatives will 
conduct standard implementation monitoring (Deschutes Skyline Collab-
orative 2010).
Te Deschutes Collaborative Forest Project proposal calls for about 
$65,000 annually for monitoring, with each of the partner organiza-
tions promising to ﬁnancially support the monitoring eﬀort. Te speciﬁc 
amounts each partner organization promised were based on their indi-
vidual monitoring interests and operating budgets. Te USFS is currently 
not supplying any funding for post-treatment eﬀectiveness monitoring, 
although they may be using appropriated funds for compliance monitor-
ing and annual reporting. Te collaborative calls for increasing wood ﬁber 
for industry and creating jobs and in 2012 is developing a socio-economic 
monitoring plan to assess these desired conditions. 
Uncompahgre Plateau CFLR
Te Uncompahgre Plateau (UP) CFLR is a landscape-scale project in 
southwestern Colorado on the Grand Mesa, Uncompahgre and Gunnison 
(GMUG) national forests. Like the Deschutes CFLR, it is one of the ten 
recognized CFLR projects that received federal support in 2010 and 2011. 
Te UP CFLR will include active restoration projects on 160,000 acres of 
USFS land from 2010 through 2020. Te goals for the project build on 
previous work in the area. Tese goals are largely ecological (e.g., reduce 
threats from wildﬁre and invasive species, restore the resiliency and pro-
ductivity of several native ecosystems) but include the economic goals of 
supporting local wood products industry, increasing employment oppor-
tunities, and retaining a natural resource management-based workforce 
instead of relying on outside short-term contractors. Project treatments in-
clude prescribed burns, mechanical treatments, timber harvesting, invasive 
species treatments, re-vegetation with native seed, trail and road relocations 
to reduce sediment, riparian restoration, and improvements for Colorado 
River cutthroat trout. Multi-party monitoring eﬀorts are proposed for 

133
68,000 acres of the project and the collaborative expects to have an annual 
average budget of about $109,000 for monitoring purposes (Uncompahgre 
Plateau Collaborative 2011, p. 3). To that end, the Colorado Forest Restora-
tion Institute (CFRI) received $98,000 for FY11 to lead and coordinate the 
multi-party monitoring.
Tis collaborative employs a unique “citizen science” approach for 
monitoring that involves professional scientists/researchers, stakeholders, 
citizens, students, and young adults who are receiving training through 
various jobs programs. A long-term citizen scientist, multi-party ecological 
monitoring program and workgroup already exist and provide a core group 
for monitoring. Te collaborative uses a monitoring protocol developed 
by the Grand Mesa workgroup and the CFRI as part of a demonstra-
tion project in the area. For the larger project, CFRI has conducted an 
initial assessment with support of forest specialists, research scientists, 
the GMUG, and project collaborators. Tis assessment establishes which 
vegetation types and mixes will be monitored, the terrain of the candidate 
areas, candidate areas for treatment, and types of treatments considered. 
With input from multi-party monitoring meetings, the CFRI has created a 
plan that includes measurement protocols to be used for the duration of the 
monitoring project. Data will be analyzed and reported to the multi-party 
group to allow it to be used for adaptive management purposes. Te CFRI 
will compile, analyze and store the monitoring data (Uncompahgre Plateau 
CFLR Proposal, p. 4).

134
Multi-party Monitoring
 Table 2. Comparison of Three Landscape-scale 
   Monitoring Programs
White Mountain 
Stewardship Contract
Deschutes 
Collaborative Forest 
Project
Uncompahgre Plateau 
CFLR
Project Size 
150,000 acres; after 
five years, 56,810 
acres treated with an 
additional acres in 
progress
145,000 acres
160,000 treated acres 
proposed; (multi-
party monitoring on 
68,000 acres)
Concerns/
Values
Wildfire; forest 
health; wildlife 
habitat; soil 
compaction; local/
regional economy; 
social acceptance of 
restoration.
Wildfire; old 
growth; public 
safety; recreation; 
riparian areas; 
wildlife habitat; 
local/regional 
economy.
Wildfire; native 
ecosystem resiliency, 
diversity, productivity; 
ecosystem structure, 
composition, and 
function; old growth; 
meadows; understory; 
riparian.
Goals: 
Ecological
Improve forest stand 
structure; improve 
fire behavior; 
improve wildlife 
habitat connectivity; 
enhance avian 
community; 
improve black 
bear habitat; avoid 
soil compacting; 
encourage local/
regional wood 
industry.
Restore resiliency 
throughout the 
landscape; use 
historic range of 
variation in forest 
structure and fire 
return intervals 
to identify areas 
needing restoration 
treatment; decrease 
the risk of wildfire; 
restore and enhance 
riparian areas and 
fish populations; 
establish and 
enhance wetlands; 
control invasive 
plants; return 
prescribed burning 
were possible; 
decommission and/
or close logging 
roads.
Restore ponderosa 
pine and mixed 
conifer; restore 
historic fire regimes; 
study effects of 
herbivory on 
aspen and recent 
patterns of aspen 
regeneration; monitor 
salvage logging 
and vegetation 
recovery following 
wildfire; asses 
treatment effects on 
weed populations; 
riparian (vegetation 
composition and 
structure, streambank 
stability, residual 
pool depth and 
frequency); old/large 
trees; understory 
re-establishment; 
landscape-scale 
issues.

135
White Mountain 
Stewardship Contract
Deschutes 
Collaborative Forest 
Project
Uncompahgre Plateau 
CFLR
Goals: 
Economic
Help existing wood 
products industry 
run at full capacity 
and encourage new 
utilization facility 
development; reduce 
restoration treatment 
costs; increase 
employment.
Help existing wood 
products industry 
run at full capacity 
and encourage new 
utilization facility 
development; 
reduce restoration 
treatment 
costs; increase 
employment.
Help existing wood 
products industry 
run at full capacity 
and encourage new 
utilization facility 
development; reduce 
restoration treatment 
costs; increase 
employment.
Goals: Social
Social acceptance 
of and increased 
knowledge 
about restoration 
treatments.
Yes, but not moni-
tored.
No stated goals, 
although the charter 
document for the 
project includes goals 
about collaboration 
and conflict 
management.
Goals: Project 
Administration
Track acres treated, 
jobs created; 
treatment costs; 
economic benefits.
No stated goals.
No stated goals. 
Treatments
Thinning w/biomass 
removal.
Thinning w/
biomass removal; 
non-commercial 
thinning; 
prescribed burning; 
stream channel 
restoration; wetland 
enhancement/
creation; riparian 
thinning; road 
decommissioning; 
invasive plant 
treatments.
Thinning of both 
ponderosa pine and 
mixed conifer to 
specified BAs; aspen 
exclosures.

136
Multi-party Monitoring
Metrics
Ecological: Forest 
vegetation changes: 
vegetation plot 
data (fire behavior 
extrapolated from 
this data as well 
some animal habitat 
info); soil and water 
quality; 
“long-established 
and widely accepted 
methods” (e.g., 
Daubenmire plots, 
stand exams, 
Ripley’s K, patch 
morph connectivity, 
songbird surveys, 
soil compaction) as 
well as modeling 
tools. Also had a 
demonstration site 
(Eager South).
Economics: Annual 
survey by contractor 
to determine local 
business capacity 
and employment 
levels; economic 
analysis by 
small business 
development center.
Social: Surveys 
of citizens to 
determine awareness 
and support 
of restoration, 
perceived threat of 
wildfire, knowledge 
of forest and fire 
ecology.
Ecological: Qualita-
tive, field-based, 
post-implementa-
tion multi-party re-
views of sampling; 
quantitative data 
collection to assess 
effectiveness of fuel 
reduction treat-
ments and restoring 
natural vegetation; 
quantitative data 
about streamflow, 
fish populations, 
and related riparian 
issues; water qual-
ity data; stats for 
acres treated, miles 
of road decom-
missioned, trails 
maintained, miles of 
streams restored.
Ecological: Data 
collected in forest 
treatment areas 
(overstory, tree regen-
eration, understory, 
fuel characteristics) 
using plot informa-
tion and photo points; 
Daubenmire plots 
used to collect data 
about forbs, grami-
noids, and shrubs 
in treatment areas; 
aspen exclosures 
measured using pho-
to points and tallies 
of aspen height and 
number in plots w/i 
exclosures; salvage 
logging assessment 
will measure canopy 
cover of understory 
species along perma-
nent transects using 
Daubenmire frame 
plots, also percent 
cover of litter, bare 
soil, downed wood; 
weed population 
monitored by visual 
inspection while driv-
ing roadways and 
from observations by 
livestock permitees 
and others; riparian 
values assessed using 
Multiple Indicator 
Monitoring (MIM) 
protocol.
Economic: Biomass-
for-energy as-
sessment (supply, 
transportation, 
sustainability).
White Mountain 
Stewardship Contract
Deschutes 
Collaborative Forest 
Project
Uncompahgre Plateau 
CFLR

137
White Mountain 
Stewardship Contract
Deschutes 
Collaborative Forest 
Project
Uncompahgre Plateau 
CFLR
Monitoring 
Board
13-member, multi-
party monitoring 
board. However, 
the board does not 
collect the data; 
data collected by the 
USFS mainly, also by 
AZGFD, TNC, U of AZ, 
private consultants. 
The monitoring 
board developed 
monitoring 
objectives and 
related questions, 
while meeting once 
monthly; now meet 
quarterly.
Multi-party 
committee with 
USFS contract 
administrators 
and contracting 
officers conducting 
standard 
implementation 
monitoring.
Monitoring Guidance 
Committee for 
“operational details.” 
Includes agency 
personnel, Colorado 
Forest Restoration 
Institute, university 
researchers, and 
others.
Annual Avg. 
Budget (est.)
3% of annual overall 
project budget
$65,000 avg. 
(proposed)
$108,640 avg. over 
ten-year life of project

138
Multi-party Monitoring
Conclusion
Multi-party monitoring is one of the crucial “bridges” to successful collab-
orative landscape-scale forest restoration because it provides much needed 
information for managers while allowing a greater level of participation 
and transparency for stakeholders.  However, developing and maintaining 
a quality multi-party monitoring program is not without its challenges. 
Tese “barriers” include adequate, long-term ﬁnancial, personal, and orga-
nizational resources as well as the means to develop rigorous, directed strat-
egies for obtaining and analyzing key data about meeting project objectives. 
 
f Te CFLR projects present a unique opportunity to actual-
ize what many citizens and stakeholders have been calling for 
– multi-party monitoring that is rigorous and able to inform 
management decisions through adaptive management.
 
f Multi-party monitoring is a new form of social organiza-
tion and coordination. It is a new social process for everyone 
involved, so it is necessarily iterative and adaptive.
 
f Eﬀectiveness monitoring has the opportunity to contribute new 
knowledge about ecological and social-economic systems.
 
f Monitoring, in and of itself, does not result in adaptive man-
agement; a collaborative has to decide to include adaptive 
management in the overall process.
 
f Multi-party monitoring groups will have greater success when 
they coordinate their eﬀorts with federal land management 
agencies. Tis means making a serious eﬀort to understand and 
use the language and approaches of the agencies when estab-
lishing and coordinating multi-party monitoring eﬀorts.  

139
References
Caughlan, L. and K.L. Oakley. 2001. Cost considerations for long-
term ecological monitoring. Ecological Indicators 1:123-134.
Deschutes Skyline Collaborative. 2010. Deschutes Skyline Landscape:  
A proposal from the Deschutes National Forest and their
collaborators for the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration 
Program. Bend, OR: Deschutes Skyline Collaborative. 
Fraser, R.H., A. Abuelgasim, and R. Latifovic. 2005. A method for 
detecting large-scale forest cover change using coarse spatial 
resolution imagery. Remote Sensing of Environment 95:414-427.
Hinds, W.T. 1984. Towards monitoring of long-term trends in 
terrestrial ecosystems. Environmental Conservation 11:11-18.
Moote, A. 2011. Multiparty monitoring and stewardship contracting: 
A tool for adaptive management. Portland, OR: Sustainable 
Northwest. 
Sitko, S. and S. Hurteau. 2010. Evaluating the impacts of forest
treatments: Te ﬁrst ﬁve years of the White Mountain
Stewardship Project. Phoenix, AZ: Te Nature Conservancy. 
Uncompahgre Plateau Collaborative. 2010. Uncompahgre 
Collaborative proposal to the Collaborative Forest Landscape 
Restoration Program..
___. 2011. Multi-party monitoring for the Uncompahgre Plateau 
Collaborative Restoration Project. 
Resources
Block, W. M., A.B. Franklin, J.P. Ward, J.L. Ganey, and G.C. White. 
2001. Design and implementation of monitoring studies to 
evaluate the success of ecological restoration on wildlife. 
Restoration Ecology 9:293–303. 
Buyantuyev, A. and Jianguo Wu. 2007. Eﬀects of thematic resolution 
on landscape pattern analysis. Landscape Ecology 22:7–13.

140
Multi-party Monitoring
Churchill, D., A. Larson, and P. Nelson. 2005. A Multi-party  
 
monitoring protocol for the Cat Creek Stewardship Project.   
Pinchot Partnership, Giﬀord Pinchot National Forest. 
Ecosystem Management Initiative. Measuring progress: An evaluation  
guide for ecosystem and community-based projects. University of 
Michigan School of Natural Resources and Environment. 
Forest Guild. Bluewater Multiparty Monitoring Plan. 
Great Northern Landscape Conservation Cooperation (LCC). 
Landscape Conservation Mapping and Analysis Portal.
Greater Flagstaﬀ Forest Partnership Monitoring Protocol
Herrick, J., G. Schuman, and A. Rango. 2006. Monitoring ecological 
processes for restoration projects. Journal for Nature 
Conservation 14(3-4):161-171. 
Kennedy, P.A., J. Townsend, W.B. Cohen, P. Bolstad, Y.Q. Wang, 
and P. Adams. 2009. Remote sensing change detection tools 
for natural resource managers: Understanding concepts and 
tradeoﬀs in the design of landscape monitoring projects. 
Remote Sensing of Environment 113(7):1382-1396. 
Kennedy, R.E., W.B. Cohen, A.A. Kirschbaum, and E. Haunreiter. 
2007. Protocol for Landsat-based monitoring of landscape 
dynamics at North Coast and Cascades Network Parks: U.S. 
Geological Survey Techniques and Methods 2-G1. Reston, 
VA: USGS Publishing Network.
Lausch, A. and A.L. Herzong. 2002. Applicability 
of landscape metrics for the monitoring of landscape change: 
Issues of scale, resolution and interpretability. Ecological 
Indicators 2(2):3-15. 
Margoluis, R.A. and N. Salafsky. 1998. Measures of success: Designing, 
managing, and monitoring conservation and development 
projects. Washington, DC: Island Press.
Moseley, C. and L.J. Wilson. 2002. Multiparty monitoring for 
sustainable natural resource management. Eugene, OR: 
Ecosystem Workforce Program and Hayfork, CA: Watershed 
Research & Training Center. 

141
National Forest Foundation. CFLRP National Indicators. http://
nationalforests.org/conserve/learning/cﬂrp
Noss, R.F. 1990. Indicators for monitoring biodiversity: A hierarchical 
approach. Conservation Biology 4:355–364. 
Pitlz, D., H.L. Ballard, and E.T. Jones. 2006. Broadening
participation in biological monitoring: Handbook for scientists 
and managers. USDA Forest Service, Paciﬁc Northwest 
Research Station, Portland, OR. PNW-GTR-680. 
Reynolds, K. M. and P.F. Hessburg. 2005. Decision support for inte
grated landscape evaluation and restoration planning. Forest 
Ecology and Management 207:263-278. 
Roccaforte, J.P., P. Fulé, and W.W. Covington. 2010. 
Monitoring landscape-scale ponderosa pine restoration 
treatment implementation and eﬀectiveness. Restoration 
Ecology 18(6):820-833. 
Roni, P., M. C. Liermann, C. Jordan, and E. A. Steel. 2004. Design 
considerations for monitoring restoration eﬀectiveness. Pages 
13-34 in P. Roni, editor. Monitoring stream and watershed 
restoration. Bethesda, MD: American Fisheries Society.
Siuslaw National Forest Stewardship Contracting Multiparty Monitoring 
Report Fiscal Year 2010. 2012. Philomath, OR: Integrated 
Resource Management. 
Sundstrom, S., C. Moseley, M. Nielsen-Pincus, and E.J. Davis. 2011. 
Quick guide to monitoring economic impacts of ecosystem
restoration and stewardship. Eugene, OR: University 
of Oregon Institute for a Sustainable Environment, 
Ecosystem Workforce Program.
USDA Forest Service, Southwestern Region. Multiparty monitoring
and assessment guidelines. 
USDA Forest Service, Inventory and Analysis National Program. 
Forest inventory and analysis ﬁeld guides, methods, and
procedures. 

A
ll landscape-scale forest projects reach a crucial stage with the 
letting of contracts and the subsequent implementation of the 
restoration treatments. At this point in the process, the ideas and 
discussions of the previous steps meets the reality of the actual work 
on the land. Tis chapter reviews the procedures used by the United 
States Forest Service (USFS) when implementing a landscape-scale 
forest restoration project using stewardship contracts for complex, 
large timber sales. Understanding these procedures is vital to collab-
orative groups and individuals who hope to work successfully with 
the USFS on landscape-scale, collaborative forest restoration eﬀorts, 
such as those authorized by the Collaborative Forest Landscape Res-
toration Program.
Contracting and 
Implementation
Dave Egan
Chapter
5

143
Planning: Initiating the 
Implementation Process
Te contracting and implementation process begins long before any 
restoration activities take place in the ﬁeld. Prior to developing the contract 
and on-the-ground action, various USFS personnel assess the situation at-
hand, prepare cumulative eﬀects analyses, conduct public scoping, prepare 
requests for proposals or contract bids, and ﬁnalize the silvicultural pre-
scriptions, NEPA documents (see Chapter 3), and ﬁnancing plans. Tis is 
typically an extremely involved and somewhat lengthy process that requires 
signiﬁcant coordination between the national, regional, forest, and district 
USFS oﬃces as well as stakeholder and collaborative groups. All of these 
various elements are critical to the implementation and success of a project, 
especially one at the landscape scale. Te choice of contracting option typi-
cally reﬂects the work that took place in these other activities.
Collaborative groups of stakeholders are often intensely involved in the 
planning process, inﬂuencing and advising the federal land management 
agency about the issues that concern the collaborative and/or providing 
technical expertise that the agency needs to make their assessments and 
complete the necessary NEPA documentation. Support from the collabora-
tive gives the land management agency the backing they need to help avoid 
lawsuits and to gain the political currency needed for funding landscape-
scale eﬀorts.  
Contracts: The Bridge between 
Planning and Implementation
Contracts for landscape-scale forest restoration projects are legal documents 
that spell out the rights and responsibilities of the land management agency 
and the approved bidder(s). Tey serve as a “bridge” between the ideas of 
the planners and the reality of on-the-ground implementation. If done 

144
Contracting and Implementation
Existing collaborative groups continue to favor stewardship 
contracts and agreements as a main vehicle for accomplishing 
collectively deﬁned desired outcomes. In some locations, 
stewardship contracting has become the preferred way of doing 
business and has allowed more work to be accomplished  
on-the-ground. 
— 2011 Pinchot Institute for Conservation

145
correctly, the contract brings together the goals of the agency and the 
collaborative, and packages them into objectives that are realistic and 
attainable for timber workers and the wood products industry. 
In the past, the USFS had basically one tool for complex, large timber 
sales—a contract account identiﬁed in Chapter 53 of the USFS Handbook 
2409.18 as either a pre-harvest (FS-2400-6T) or post-harvest (FS-2400-
6) contract. In 2003, Congress granted both the USFS and the BLM the 
authority to use what are known as stewardship contracts (Section 323 of 
Public Law 108-7). Stewardship contracting provides the agencies with 
two basic options—either an Integrated Resource Timber Contract (IRTC, 
FS-2400-13 or 13T) or an Integrated Resource Service Contract (IRSC). 
Tese two stewardship contract types have greatly increased the ﬂexibility 
of contracting options and, although in some ways still experimental, they 
are the contracts that will now most likely be used on landscape-scale forest 
restoration projects on federal lands. Te following section explains how 
they work. 
Stewardship Contracting
Although stewardship contracts may be the “new kid on the block,” a 2011 
Pinchot Institute for Conservation report indicates that, “Te use of stew-
ardship contracting has increased dramatically over the last year with a 65% 
increase in the number of contracts and a 73% increase in acres awarded. 
Existing collaborative groups continue to favor stewardship contracts and 
agreements as a main vehicle for accomplishing collectively deﬁned desired 
outcomes. In some locations, stewardship contracting has become the 
preferred way of doing business and has allowed more work to be accom-
plished on-the-ground” (p. 1).  
      Tere are many reasons for this upsurge in stewardship contracts or 
agreements, not the least of which are the diﬀerent features they provide 
compared to the traditional timber contract. Tese features include:
f Contract awards can be based on “best value” considerations rather 
than simply awarding the contract to the highest qualiﬁed bidder. 
Tis allows the agency to consider factors other than price (e.g., past 

146
Contracting and Implementation
performance, experience of ﬁrm/personnel, use of local work forces, 
technical approach, understanding of government procedures) 
when awarding the contract. Less than full-and-open competition 
(i.e., accepting the lowest bid is not necessary) is also allowed under 
stewardship contracting.
f Stewardship contracts allow a contractor to perform needed services 
and obtain “stewardship credits” that they can then use to obtain 
removed products (e.g., timber, non-timber products, grazing access). 
f While receipts from traditional timber sales are sent to the U.S. 
Treasury, receipts from stewardship contracts can be retained by the 
agency for use in the same or other stewardship projects. Likewise, 
stewardship contracts or agreements are exempt from making timber 
payments to counties, which is a requirement of traditional timber 
contracts.
f Stewardship contracting sanctions “designation by description” 
(DxD) silvicultural treatments. Tis allows land managers to 
describe an end result rather than actually marking timber for 
removal or as leave trees. Tis is a signiﬁcant beneﬁt to large-scale 
projects where marking trees would be a time-consuming and 
expensive endeavor.
f Performance bonds are optional when using an IRTC unlike tradi-
tional timber contracts, which require performance bonds. Tey are 
required, however, when employing an IRSC where product will be 
removed.
f Non-proﬁt groups can enter into stewardship agreements to fund 
and implement stewardship projects.
f Under an IRSC indeﬁnite-delivery, indeﬁnite-quantity contract, 
the USFS is not required to provide a cancellation ceiling, which 
is a ﬁnancial obligation that is escrowed at the time of the contract 
award to pay a contractor should the agency decide to cancel the 
contract. Relief from this additional expense makes the project con-
siderably less costly for the agency and, thus, easier to operationalize.
f It is possible to run multiple contracts that can each be up to ten 
years in length. 

147
Stewardship contracting does, however, require multiparty moni-
toring to identify the contracting status, accomplishments, and level of 
collaboration (see Chapter 4). 
Federal land management agency contract specialists, after consid-
ering the ideas and suggestions of stakeholders as well as the needs of 
the agency, will determine what aspects of a stewardship contract are 
most appropriate for the project from the following list (see Figure 1 
for complete details):
f Type of contract(s) 
f
Integrated Resource Service Contract
f
Integrated Resource Timber Contract
f Multi-year contracting
f Multiple-year contracting
f Best-value contracting
f Trading goods-for-services
f Designation by Description (DxD) or Prescription (DxP)
f Retention of receipts
f Use of retained receipts from another approved stewardship 
project
f Retention of KV (Kneutson-Vandenberg Act) or BD (brush 
disposal) from receipts
f Other than full and open contract competition (requires 
approval of Regional Forester)
Once these decisions have been made, the agency issues a request 
for proposals (RFP) from any interested contractors and, after a given 
period of time, makes their selection according to selection criteria 
identiﬁed in the RFP.
Main Provisions of a Stewardship Contract for a 
Landscape-scale Project
Due to the scope and scale a landscape-scale forest restoration project, 
the provisions of the contract typically employ a mix of stewardship 

148
Contracting and Implementation
Trading Goods for Services
Designation by Description or Prescription 1/s
Retention of Receipts
Use of Retained Receipts from Another Approved Stewardship Project
Retention of KV or BD Funds from Receipts (not applicable to an IRSC)
Best Value Contracting
Multi-Year Contracting (cancellation payment to be obligated with award)
Multiple Year Contracting
Other than Full and Open Competition 2/
Non-advertisement with product value exceeding $10,000
Non-USDA Administration of stewardship contracts or agreements
Use of an Agreement
Type of Contract(s) to be used
Integrated Resource Contract(s) - Service
Integrated Resource Contract (s) - Timber
Standard Service Contract(s)
Authorities and Procedures
Figure 1. Authorities and Procedures Form 
for Stewardship Contracts
1/ Will require use of Washington Office or regional special provisions. Designation by 
Prescription is applicable to scaled agreements or contracts only.
2/ Will require special Regional Forester approval - summarize the need for this authority.

149
contracting and traditional timber contract requirements. Te basic 
outline of such a contract includes:
f Information about the overall project (e.g., location, size, length 
of the performance period), the intent of the contract (e.g., return 
the forest to conditions less prone to wildﬁre and insect outbreaks), 
type of forest vegetation (e.g., ponderosa pine, mixed conifer), and 
how the work will be assigned (e.g., task orders, other contractual 
agreements)
f Information about the work/treatment areas (e.g., size, location) 
and the types of work expected to occur (e.g., timber removal, road 
maintenance/decommissioning, treatment of “danger trees”)
f Provisions deﬁning Desired Conditions for vegetation types within 
the project area (e.g., number and diameter size of remaining trees 
and their spatial arrangement, percentage of openings, the amount 
of coarse woody debris to be left, percentage of basal area northern 
goshawk foraging and post-ﬂedgling areas). 
Tis type of contract also describes how the USFS will coordinate 
with the contractor about all aspects of the contract, with both parties 
providing lists of their key project personnel. It also provides informa-
tion about appropriate tree removal methods, road work, slash treat-
ment, and taking preventative measures to protect wetland/riparian areas, 
survey monuments, meadows, rare plant and animal habitat, and cultural 
resources. Other provisions require the contractor to detail how they will 
maintain/guide road access for the general public during the project as well 
as their plans to clean their equipment and prevent ﬁres, oil/hazardous 
waste spills, and other possible pollution. 
Te contract also speciﬁes whether the sale is a Sale by Area or a Sale 
by Amount. In a Sale by Area, the sale volume is estimated but not guar-
anteed to the buyer. In most situations, the timber purchaser has the obliga-
tion to cut and remove excess volume and pay the current contract fees. 
Meanwhile, the USFS has no obligation to make up deﬁcits in volume. 
A Sale by Amount identiﬁes a speciﬁc quantity of timber for cutting and 

150
Contracting and Implementation
obligates the USFS to mark or designate the full quantity speciﬁed. When 
oﬀering a stewardship contract, goods-for-services can be an option.
Finally, the contract describes the various obligations of the USFS and 
the contractor in terms of marking trees, inspections and acceptance of 
work, payments including stewardship credits, minimum and maximum 
order limit obligations, ensuring proper wage payments, and other federal 
labor obligations.
Te method for paying the contractor or purchaser is determined prior 
to the contract being advertised. Tere are two basic sales types: 1) scaled 
sales and 2) pre-measurement sales. A scaled sale is a direct measurement 
method whereby the felled logs (i.e. green trees) are measured by volume 
(i.e, CCF or 100 cubic feet) and the purchaser is paid for the volume taken 
out of the forest. In pre-measurement sales the volume has been determined 
by the USFS prior to the advertisement of the contract. Tere are two types 
of pre-measurement sales: 1) payment unit sales and 2) lump sum sales. 
Payment unit sales occur when the USFS decides, for ﬁnancial or adminis-
trative reasons, to subdivide the total sale into two or more payment units 
A chipper reduces limbs into biomass chips during a White Mountain Stewardship restoration project in eastern 
Arizona. This staging area, where cut logs and other small material are taken for loading onto trucks, is called a 
“landing.” Often, these landings become disturbed by machinery and activity and need to be rehabilitated to 
avoid invasion by unwanted weedy plant species. Photo courtesy of ERI

151
and pay the purchaser when the work in that unit is complete. A lump sum 
sale provides one payment to the purchaser either at the beginning of the 
work or after all the work has been completed.
Typical Implementation Activities
Tere are at least six activities that may occur in a large-scale forest restora-
tion project. Tey are:
f Mechanical removal of trees
f Biomass removal
f Road maintenance/road decommissioning
f Treatment and disposal of “danger” trees
f Control soil erosion and water pollution
f Goods-for-services activities (e.g., invasive plant control/
removal, infrastructure repair, meadow restoration, restocking 
burned-over areas).
(Prescribed burning/broadcast burning, either as a separate treatment or 
following mechanical thinning, is not included in this list because it is typi-
cally done by USFS personnel.)
Mechanical Removal of Trees
Te mechanical removal of trees involves four phases of work: 1) identifying 
trees for removal, 2) developing a site-speciﬁc removal strategy, 3) cutting 
trees, and 4) moving cut trees to a landing for removal by truck to a wood 
products mill or other type of processing plant (see Box 1 and Box 2). 
Identifying Trees for Removal
Te contract identiﬁes the silvicultural prescription and may be oﬀered as 
1) designation by description, 2) designation by prescription, 3) leave tree 
mark, or 4) cut tree mark. Designation by description (DxD) is a method 
used to designate commercial leave or take trees without painting or mark-

152
Contracting and Implementation
Box 1. Mechanical Thinning Strategies 
 
Tinning from below (or low thinning): Remove smaller, weaker trees to favor the 
larger dominant and co-dominant trees, and reduce the potential for severe ﬁre eﬀects, 
decrease the susceptibility to mortality from insects and diseases, and increase the abil-
ity of larger-size trees to survive low-intensity, ground ﬁres. 
Tinning from above (or crown thinning): Remove competing trees in the same 
crown class to favor desirable dominant and co-dominant trees by reducing crowding 
within the main canopy. 
Conversion thinning: Tinning from below and above to open even-aged stands, 
allow regeneration to establish and grow, and create subsequent age classes over time. 
Selective thinning: Remove large, dominant trees, often those over a speciﬁed diam-
eter, to release vigorous, smaller-diameter trees. Stand structures and species composi-
tions created by selective thinning may be limited and, in general, favor shade-tolerant 
species or trees occupying the intermediate and suppressed crown classes. 
Improvement and salvage cutting: Remove speciﬁc, undesirable trees from a stand, 
in particular damaged trees (e.g., from wildﬁres or storms), snags, or trees susceptible 
to a certain disease or insect. 
Uneven-aged management: Remove some trees in all size classes either singly or in 
small groups, leaving at least three diﬀerent age/size classes; typical strategies employed 
include single-tree selection, group selection, and free selection.
Single-tree selection: Remove individual trees of all size classes, more or 
less uniformly throughout the stand, to promote growth of remaining 
trees and to provide space for regeneration, especially of shade-tolerant tree 
species.
Group selection: Remove groups of trees in all size classes with regenera-
tion occurring in the resulting gaps. Smaller openings provide environ-
ments suitable for shade-tolerant tree species, while larger openings 
provide conditions suitable for the regeneration of more shade-intolerant 
species. 
Free selection: Use a combination of group and single tree selection strate-
gies with reserve trees left in all structural stages. Graham and Jain (2004) 
recommend it for creating clumpy and irregular stand structure preferred 
by bird species, such as the northern goshawk.
Even-aged management: Remove most or all trees in all sizes classes either singly or as 
a group; typical strategies include clearcut, seedtree cut, and shelterwood cut.
Clearcut: Harvest essentially all trees, create open soil, and then re-plant 
and/or allow natural reestablishment.
Seedtree cut: Remove most of the trees in a forest except for selected, seed-
producing trees to foster reestablishment of seedlings.
Shelterwood cut: Use multiple-entry harvest that removes many trees on 
initial entry but leaves other trees to provide seeds and shade for reestab-
lishment; useful for shade-tolerant tree species. Re-enter to harvest older 
trees once younger trees have begun to mature.

153
ing individual trees. Te description must include speciﬁc information 
that allows the designation of each tree to be replicated by all parties before 
and after cutting. Various designation possibilities include: designation by 
species, by diameter, by spacing, by tree health, or by damage class. Te 
best situation to use DxD is on uniform, green stands of timber of limited 
species and similar size. Te USFS likes to use DxD because it requires 
less preparation time and little to no paint and is, therefore, less costly for 
presale than cut or leave tree marking. However, while it may also be the 
only cost-eﬀective option for landscape-scale treatment projects, DxD re-
quires more sale administration time and greater coordination between the 
sales administrator, silviculturalist, contracting oﬃcer, and the contractor 
to maintain quality control, especially in multi-species forests. Area-based 
cruise methods must also be undertaken to establish the parameters for the 
designation. Loggers often don’t like DxD because they feel the prescrip-
tion is too rigid and makes modifying the contract diﬃcult. Designation by 
description works in either Sale by Area or Sale by Amount situations.
Designation by prescription (DxP) is a method of designating trees for 
removal by describing the desired end result of the treatment; for example, 
retain 40% basal area. It is used to designate commercial timber on scaled 
sales (i.e., Sale by Amount). In such cases, the purchaser marks the timber 
at their expense for USFS inspection and approval prior to cutting. Te 
DxP method works well in situations where a more nuanced approach is 
needed due to the sale having a variety of tree species, tree sizes, and/or tree 
diameters. It requires administrative time in terms of inspecting the mark-
ing prior to cutting and, thus, coordination between the contracting oﬃcer 
and the silviculturalist. However, it also oﬀers greater ﬂexibility in terms of 
meeting an end result and takes advantage of the contractor’s professional 
skill and knowledge.
A leave tree mark (LTM) is used when the number of trees to cut out-
numbers the trees to leave, and, thus, the leave trees are marked since there 
are fewer of them. A cut tree mark (CTM) is just the opposite, the cut trees 
are marked because there are fewer of them. Tere are various ways to de-
cide which trees are leave or cut trees—by species, by diameter, by damage 
class, number of trees, for example. Either marking method can be used for 

154
Contracting and Implementation
maintaining groups and/or individual trees, free thinning, and even space 
thinning. Both require hand-marking individual trees and, therefore, can be 
fairly time consuming. 
Developing a Site-specific Strategy
Across a broad landscape there are various changes in the land that require 
the contractor to strategize how best to eﬀectively fell and remove the iden-
tiﬁed trees from the site. A variety of factors come into play when develop-
ing this strategy. Tey include: 
f Goals and objectives of the land management agency, as identiﬁed 
in the contract. 
f Size of the treatment area: large areas typically require larger equip-
ment and operations to be eﬃcient and productive.
f Average tree diameter: equipment must ﬁt diameter size in order to 
make operation eﬀective.
f Terrain/slope: ﬂat, non-rocky terrain is the best both in terms of 
cost-eﬀectiveness (cable yarding and aerial logging are expensive) 
and for controlling erosion. Steep slopes also pose safety issues for 
operators.
f Stand density: heavily stocked areas can inﬂuence the load size 
carried to a land, while understocked areas may mean going greater 
distances to get to cut trees out of the forest.
f Type of cut/marking prescription: Selective cutting takes longer 
than clearcutting; prescriptions that are unclear to the logger 
require more time as well. 
Cutting Trees
Logging contractors use three basic types of mechanical felling machines to 
cut trees—1) single-function machines that are only capable of directionally 
felling a tree, 2) dual-function machines (i.e., feller-bunchers) that can fell a 
tree and move the cut stem to a pile, and 3) multi-function machines (i.e., 
harvesters) that can fell, delimb, buck, and place the processed pieces. Tey 
may also use chainsaws as the need arises. In such cases, the logger must 

155
evaluate a number of factors 
including tree lean, desired 
direction of fall, distribution 
of the crown weight, and 
the presence of any defects 
in the stem before felling 
the tree. Mechanized felling, 
however, is faster and safer 
than manual felling. For ex-
ample, a feller-buncher can 
fell a tree in 3 to 6 seconds 
compared to 30 and 90 
seconds for a person with a 
chainsaw. Moreover, feller-
bunchers are capable of 
felling and bunching up to 
200 trees per hour in favor-
able conditions. Mechanical 
fellers can also delimb a 
tree at the stump, especially 
small-diameter trees; larger 
diameter trees may require 
the use of a gate, pull-thru, 
or strokeboom delimber.
In speciﬁc cases (i.e., in designated Wilderness Areas or areas where 
noise is a concern), the contract may specify that trees will be cut with 
handsaws. Te contract may also specify the height of left stumps.
Moving Cut Trees
Cut trees are moved from the cutting area to landings using skidders when-
ever the terrain allows. Cable yarding systems or helicopters are used when 
logging with chainsaws in areas of steep topography. 
Te ideal skidding pattern will locate skid trails from the cutting area as 
directly as possible to the landings to minimize the lengths of trails. How-
Northern Arizona University School of Forestry student paints 
a leave tree mark (LTM) on a designation by prescription (DxP) 
restoration treatments at Rogers Lake County Natural Area, 
southwest of Flagstaﬀ. Photo courtesy of the School of Forestry, 
Northern Arizona University

156
Contracting and Implementation
ever, slope limitations may require a more indirect path to avoid crossing 
hillsides and other uneven topography. Steep skid trails should include wa-
ter diversions to keep water from channeling downhill. If the prescription 
is a partial cut, the skidding pattern should be designed to avoid damage to 
the residual stand. “Rub trees,” which will later be removed, may be left on 
the inside of corners on trails to protect the remaining stand. Te skidding 
pattern must be deﬁned prior to felling so that fallers will know which di-
rection to drop the trees. Such a plan will signiﬁcantly reduce the costs and 
impacts of the whole operation.
Once the skidder reaches the landing, the logs are sorted by species and 
processed as required. Loading the processed logs onto a truck is typically 
done using either a front-end or knuckleboom loader.
Biomass Removal
Tinning treatments produce slash that must be removed or treated in or-
der to reduce the likelihood of ﬁre and/or ﬁre mortality to leave trees. Typi-
cally the USFS pays for such work using stand improvement or KV funds. 
Tere are three common methods of working with slash: 1) lop and 
scatter, 2) pile and burn, 3) chipping, and 4) broadcast burning. Lopping 
involves cutting the slash to speciﬁed height above the ground in order to 
accelerate slash decay and then scattering it to help prevent erosion. Piling 
can be done by hand or machine. Slash piles should be located out from the 
dripline and away from the boles of leave trees to avoid damage from pile 
burning. Minimum and maximum pile sizes and the minimum distance 
from the pile to closest leave tree are typically speciﬁed. Skid trails should 
avoid groups and clumps, and use the created openings as passageways for 
moving material to burn areas or landings. Burning slash piles typically 
leaves the soil either bare or open and often become a site for weedy species, 
such as mullein (Verbascum spp.). Chipping involves the use of mechanized 
equipment and needs a relatively large, accessible area in which to operate. 
Slash is fed through a chipper, which then blows the chips onto the forest 
ﬂoor. Whole-tree chippers are available in a wide range of sizes and designs 
including small, towed, hand-fed models as well as large, self-propelled 
machines with their own loaders. A whole-tree chipper combined with a 

157
delimber-debarker can produce clean quality chips for pulp production. 
Without debarking, chipping whole trees produces “dirty chips” that are 
generally a lower-valued energy product. Grinding or mastication is similar 
to chipping except the tree is reduced through a shredding action into a 
coarser, irregular-sized fraction biomass. Tub grinders and horizontal grind-
ers cannot produce pulp chips, but may be better suited for economical 
conversion of logging residues into hog fuel for biomass burning or other 
purposes (e.g., animal feed and/or bedding, surfacing paths). 
Leaving some slash brings beneﬁts to wildlife and the soil. Wildlife, 
especially small mammals and birds, use slash piles for shelter and other 
habitat purposes. Slash also helps the soil by providing a mulch that thwarts 
erosion, provides microsites for seedling establishment, and adds nutrients 
to the soil as it decays.
Road Maintenance/Road Decommissioning
Most, if not all, landscape-scale 
forest restoration contracts will 
have speciﬁcations that detail 
the role of the contractor in 
maintaining or improving 
existing road conditions during 
and at the termination of log-
ging and other operations. 
Some contracts, however, 
may include provisions for 
decommissioning roads that 
the agency no longer deems 
necessary. Tese roads are 
often old and often built in 
poor locations. Tey may 
also be abandoned sections of 
former roads. Te main goals 
of road closure and restora-
tion are to eliminate surface 
erosion, create a more natural 
This decommissioned road has been gated to prevent future 
vehicular travel and facilitate ecosystem restoration. Photo 
by Joseph Trudeau

158
Contracting and Implementation
Box 2. Ecological Restoration and Fuels 
Treatment Strategies
 
Ecological Restoration Strategies
Ecological Restoration Institute Presettlement Model Restoration Treatment 
Guidelines
Goals: 1) Emulate the uneven-aged forest structure characteristic of the period im-
mediately preceding Euro-American settlement in order to return forest conditions 
to their natural range of variability; 2) Reduce the risks of stand-replacing, crown ﬁre; 
3) Allow the reintroduction of frequent, low-intensity ground ﬁre in order to regulate 
forest structure; and 4) Promote the growth of understory plants that provide fuel for 
ground ﬁres and support wildlife.
USFS Goshhawk Guidelines  
Goals: 1) Create forest structure to provide nesting, post-ﬂedgling (PFA), and 
foraging (FA) habitat for the northern goshawk; 2) Reduce the threat of crown ﬁres, 
3) Re-establish the structure, patterns and species composition of natural forest 
conditions within the historic range of variability; and 4) Provide sustainability within 
a management framework that recognizes multiple resource objectives, includ-
ing scheduled cutting cycles for the removal of trees of all ages. See Implementing 
Northern Goshawk Habitat Management in Southwestern Forests: A Template for 
Restoring Fire-adapted Forest Systems. 
Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Model
Goals: 1) Promote forest sustainability by creating a balanced distribution of tree size 
classes in a clumpy spatial arrangement that emulates historic forest conditions; 2) 
Reduce the continuity of surface and ladder fuels; 3) Create positive changes in un-
derstory cover, wildlife habitat, and hydrological functions, and 4) Develop aestheti-
cally pleasing uneven-aged, multi-species forests.
A Clumpy 40 strategy follows the basic STIFH procedure with the goal of creating a 
target BA of 40 and a clumpy distribution of uneven-aged trees.
 
Fuels Treatment Strategies
Goal: Prevent ﬁre from spreading from the ground into the crowns of trees; no 
restoration goals.
 
Strategies: 
Mechanical thinning to increase crown base height, reduce crown fuel load and 
bulk density, and remove ladder fuels.
Prescribed or broadcast burning to reduce ground-level fuels such as grasses and 
coarse woody debris.
Wildland ﬁre use or resource ﬁres to reduce ground-level fuels, such as grasses and 
coarse woody debris; sometimes more diﬃcult to manage than prescribed burns.

159
site hydrology, and restore the native vegetation (see ERI Working Paper 
12). Although only portions of such a road may be causing problems, the 
entire road should be treated before closure while its full length is accessible. 
Restoration also includes placing any streamﬂow that presently crosses the 
road back in its natural channel. 
Treatment and Disposal of “Danger” Trees 
“Danger” trees are live or dead trees that have the potential to fall across 
roads or onto other infrastructure that may be used by the contractor. 
Some contracts for landscape-scale forest restoration will include provi-
sions to have these trees cut and removed by the contractor. For example, 
Appendix C of the RFP for the Four Forest Restoration Initiative Project 
includes this language concerning “danger trees”: 
Danger trees to be felled will be designated in advance 
by the contracting oﬃcer. Trees to be removed will be 
marked … Use controlled felling to ensure the direc-
tion of fall and prevent damage to property, structures, 
roadway, residual trees, and traﬃc. Stump heights, 
measured on the side adjacent to the highest ground, 
must not exceed 12 inches or 1/3 of the stump diameter, 
whichever is greater. Higher stump heights are permit-
ted when necessary for safety. Felled snags and trees, 
which are not marked for removal, will be left in a stable 
condition such that they will not roll or slide. Position 
logs away from standing trees so they will not roll, are 
not on top of one another, and are located out of road-
way and drainage structures. Fell, limb, and remove trees, 
which are marked for removal, that equal or exceed the 
utilization standards as listed in the contract or Supple-
mental Speciﬁcations. Dispose of merchantable timber 
designated for removal in accordance with B/BT2.32 
Construction Clearing, of the Contract, or as described 
in Supplemental Speciﬁcations (p. 21).
Control Soil Erosion and Water Pollution
Provisions of landscape-scale forest restoration projects typically 

160
Contracting and Implementation
indicate that the contractor must take all necessary precautions to 
minimize soil erosion and subsequent sedimentation of nearby water 
bodies. Such provisions generally discuss the proper use of equipment 
and the installation of erosion control devices (e.g., fencing, sand 
bags). Tere may also be provisions that allow the USFS to install 
such devices if the contractor fails to do so. Tis work would then be 
charged back to the contractor.
Goods-for-Services Tasks
A stewardship contract may also include tasks other than those discussed 
above. Typical tasks include invasive plant control, wildlife habitat im-
provement, planting riparian and other vegetation, infrastructure repair, 
meadow restoration, and restocking burned-over areas. 
Te work beneﬁts the agency and the land by completing work that 
is necessary for a healthy, sustainable forest environment. For their part, 
the contractor not only receives needed work but the agency will deduct 
the value of the services received from the amount the contractor owes the 
agency for timber and other forest products.  
Conclusion
Collaborative landscape-scale forest restoration projects have been 
helped immensely by the ﬂexibility and social acceptance of stewardship 
contracting. In fact, it’s unlikely these large-scale projects could be ef-
fectively implemented without this new contracting process. Along with 
changes in silvicultural practices (e.g., emergence of free selection) as 
well as innovative forestry equipment designed to handle small-diameter 
logs, this new way of treating overstocked, wildﬁre-prone forests repre-
sents a paradigm shift in federal forest land management. While each 
collaborative will implement restoration treatments diﬀerently according 
to the situation at-hand (i.e., “no one size ﬁts all”), this triad of inventive 
contracting and implementation strategies/tools will likely serve as the 
general framework for all forest restoration projects across the western 
United States.  

161
References
Lowe, K. 2005. Restoring forest roads. Ecological Restoration Institute  
Working Paper 12. Flagstaﬀ, AZ: Northern Arizona Univer 
sity, Ecological Restoration Institute. 
Pinchot Institute for Conservation. 2011. Te role of communities in  
stewardship contracting: FY2010 programmatic monitoring  
report to the USDA Forest Service. Washington, DC: Pinchot  
Institute. 
USFS. 2011. Phase 1 of Four Forest Restoration Initiative Project,  
Request for Proposals, RFP AG-8371-S-11-0031, Appendix  
C, Road Maintenance Speciﬁcations. Albuquerque, NM: U.S.  
Forest Service, Region 3.
Resources
Daly, C., C. Moseley, M.A. Moote, and M. Enzer. 2008. Forest  
Service contracting: A basic guide for restoration practitioners.  
Ecological Restoration Institute White Paper. Flagstaﬀ, AZ:  
Northern Arizona University, Ecological Restoration Institute.
Fitzgerald, S. Using Uneven-aged Management as a Restoration   
Strategy in Ponderosa and Dry Mixed Conifer Forests. Corval 
lis, OR: Oregon State University. 
Graham, R.T.; Jain, T.B. 2004. Past, present, and future role of silvi- 
culture in forest management. Pages 1-14 in W.D.  
Shepperd and L.G. Eskew, compilers. Silviculture in special  
places: Proceedings of the national silviculture workshop;  
September 8-11, 2003; Granby, CO. Proceedings RMRS- 
P-34. Fort Collins, CO: Rocky Mountain Research Station,  
Forest Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture. 
Moseley, C. and E.J. Davis. 2010. Stewardship contracting for  
landscape-scale projects. Ecological Restoration Institute  
White Paper. Flagstaﬀ, AZ: Northern Arizona University, Eco 
logical Restoration Institute. 

162
Contracting and Implementation
Red Lodge Clearinghouse. Stewardship Contracting. 
USFS. Stewardship End Result Contracting.  
Youngblood, A. 2005. Silvicultural systems for managing ponderosa  
pine. Pages 49-58 in M.W. Ritchie, D.A. Maguire, A. Young 
blood, tech. coordinators, Proceedings of the symposium on  
ponderosa pine: Issues, trends, and management.  
October 18-21, 2004; Klamath Falls, OR. Gen. Tech. Rep.  
PSW-GTR-198. Albany CA: Paciﬁc Southwest Research  
Station, Forest Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture. 

A
daptive management (AM) is an administrative framework designed 
to support taking action in the face of uncertainty, while incorpo-
rating learning and knowledge generation into an iterative process of 
planning and decision-making. Within the context of landscape-scale 
ecological restoration, AM is a necessary approach because of the uncer-
tainties inherent in undertaking restoration at large scales; for providing 
a structured process for monitoring potentially negative impacts of man-
agement actions; and increasing accountability to the general public, 
land managers, and others investing in restoration projects. 
Tis chapter seeks to provide a clear and actionable guide for 
implementing AM in collaborative landscape-scale restoration projects. 
It begins with a discussion of AM in theory and in practice, explores case 
studies from the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program 
(CFLRP), and concludes with a discussion of barriers and bridges to 
AM in practice. 
Adaptive Management
Dana Coelho, Zachary Wurtzebach, and Courtney Schultz
Chapter
6

164
Adaptive Management
Key Concepts of Adaptive Management
Researchers and scientists in ecology and conservation biology at the Uni-
versity of British Columbia ﬁrst advanced the theoretical basis for AM dur-
ing the 1970s and 1980s (Holling 1978, Walters 1986). Tey developed 
the concept because of a perception that the predominant approaches to 
environmental policy and planning were ineﬀective at addressing complex 
and highly uncertain natural resource management challenges. Academics 
and practitioners from the United States and abroad have since expanded 
the concept of AM, highlighting ﬁve essential components: modeling, 
experimentation, monitoring, feedback mechanisms, and collaboration. 
Modeling
Modeling is essential to AM for several reasons: 1) clarifying what is known 
about a resource system, 2) generating and testing hypotheses about 
expected outcomes, and 3) helping decision-makers evaluate the utility of 
diﬀerent options (Walters 1986, Walters and Holling 1990). Conceptual 
models articulate causal relationships among system variables and identify 
key assumptions; they can also help deﬁne objectives and goals (Jakeman et 
al. 2009). Once this qualitative picture is established, a quantitative model 
can be developed and used to predict and represent the eﬀects of manage-
ment actions through assignment of probabilities to diﬀerent expected out-
comes. Tis can help managers and decision-makers articulate and quantify 
how much is known and with what degree of certainty. When outcomes 
are observed on the ground, they can be compared with expectations and 
contribute to improving both the model and future management practices. 
Modeling should be an ongoing and iterative process of development, 
validation, use, and evaluation (Nichols et al. 1995, Nyberg 1998, Williams 
2012). 
Experimentation
In their earliest publications about AM, Holling and Walters made the case 
that it is a rigorous, iterative process that essentially treats management poli-

165
cies as experiments (Holling 1978, Walters 1986). Others have maintained 
that experimentation is the most eﬀective means of reducing uncertainty 
when working with natural resource systems (Lee 1994, Gunderson 2000). 
Experimentation can take many forms but is deﬁned by the use of con-
trols, replication, and randomization. Controls are necessary to eliminate 
the “noise” created by environmental variation. Without them, there are 
few means of distinguishing the eﬀects of natural variables from the eﬀects 
of management (Walters and Holling 1990). Replication across a landscape 
is also important, as it can increase the statistical power of statements about 
observed eﬀects. It can also mitigate localized or contextual inﬂuences (e.g., 
microclimates, soil structure, aspect, slope, elevation) on detected eﬀects 
(Lindenmayer et al. 2001). Randomized selection of locations for treat-
ments and/or monitoring within treatment areas also reduces the bias any 
researcher or manager may bring to the experiment. 
Monitoring
Monitoring provides the means for learning and reducing uncertainty 
over time within an AM framework (McLain and Lee 1996, Ringold et al. 
1996). As outlined in Chapter 4, monitoring is the systematic collection of 
information to measure progress toward desired outcomes. In the context 
of landscape-scale restoration, project goals and monitoring objectives may 
be ecological, social, and/or economic. Multi-party monitoring may be an 
eﬀective way to meet project goals while strengthening social support for 
restoration, building trust, and reducing conﬂict (Fernandez-Gimenez et al. 
2008, DeLuca et al. 2010). While ﬂexibility is desired in AM, monitoring 
questions and methods must be measurable, consistent, and comparable 
over time in order to provide a clear picture of trends and long-term chang-
es in resource conditions. Tis is especially important when monitoring 
landscape-scale variables and eﬀects on slower ecosystem processes that may 
take decades to discern with any statistical signiﬁcance (Moir and Block 
2001, Lindenmayer and Likens 2009). Good monitoring is also expensive, 
and a system for prioritizing questions is essential in order to eﬀectively use 
limited funds and maximize beneﬁts over time. 

166
Adaptive Management
Successful AM requires that data be collected and 
interpreted in a usable way … Some collaborative 
groups employ monitoring coordinators or consultants to 
aggregate and analyze data from various sources, as well 
as make suggestions for improving collection and storage 
methods.

167
Feedback Mechanisms
Monitoring must be linked to decision-making through a deﬁned feed-
back process that includes trigger points that identify a need to change 
management activities or direction (Lyons et al. 2008, Nie and Schultz 
2012, Williams 2012). Deﬁning trigger points prior to the implementa-
tion of restoration treatments allows for transparent discussions about 
the amount of data and funding that will be required to detect eﬀects, 
the amount of risk or precaution that stakeholders and managers are 
willing to tolerate, and when changes in management actions should be 
required before having to make potentially diﬃcult decisions. Without 
a deﬁned feedback process, projects may embrace AM but fail to appro-
priately balance ﬂexibility with the accountability and rigor necessary to 
ensure that legal standards are upheld and monitoring data are used to 
inform management actions. Ultimately, these factors can be critical to 
maintaining stakeholders’ trust.
Collaboration
Adaptive management was initially thought of as a process involving only 
scientists, policy specialists, and land managers (Kusel et al. 1996). However, 
researchers and practitioners are now highlighting the importance of broader 
collaboration with stakeholders. In the context of AM, a more inclusive 
process helps: 1) deﬁne appropriate goals and objectives for the AM process, 
2) develop and prioritize monitoring indicators and trigger points, 3) build 
and maintain institutional support and capacity, and 4) provide oversight 
and accountability for implementing monitoring and AM over time (Lee 
1994, Brunner and Clark 1997, Failing et al. 2004, Schultz and Nie 2012). 
Collaboration may also allow managers to leverage resources and share 
responsibility for monitoring with supportive citizens and organizations or 
create innovative governance structures to support project implementation 
across legal jurisdictions. It also contributes to a greater shared understand-
ing of resource systems through social learning and the co-production of 
knowledge (Gunderson et al. 1995, Folke et al. 2005, Cheng and Sturtevant 
2012). Terefore, although collaboration is not necessary to implement AM, 
it is central to building an eﬀective AM framework in practice. 

168
Adaptive Management
Various Approaches to Adaptive Management
Land managers and policymakers deﬁne AM in a multitude of ways, 
making it necessary to understand each of several diﬀerent approaches: 
trial-and-error, adaptive mitigation, passive AM, and active AM (Table 1; 
Halbert 1993, Lee 1999, Schultz and Nie 2012). Some approaches (i.e., 
trial-and-error, adaptive mitigation) are characterized by an emphasis on 
ﬂexibility in meeting goals or avoiding detrimental impacts, while others 
(i.e., passive and active AM) promote learning about ecological processes 
and responses to management action through some combination of model-
ing, experimentation, monitoring, feedback mechanisms, and/or collabora-
tion (Karkkainen 2003, Ruhl and Fischman 2010, Nie and Schultz 2012). 
Much of this variation can be attributed to the challenges and incentives 
faced by land managers.
Tese approaches have diﬀerent inherent levels of ﬂexibility and ac-
countability. Flexibility and discretion allow managers to be innovative 
in achieving objectives and avoiding negative eﬀects, especially in light of 
rapidly changing environmental, social, and budgetary conditions. Flexibil-
ity may also increase trust and reduce conﬂict with stakeholders as manag-
ers are better able to respond to their concerns (Lachapelle et al. 2003). 
However, managers must be aware that without mechanisms to ensure 
accountability, AM may be perceived as a smokescreen for open-ended and 
discretionary decision-making, particularly where levels of mistrust are high 
(Doremus 2001, Schultz and Nie 2012). 
Te myriad approaches to AM taken by federal agencies can also lead 
to miscommunication and unmet expectations. For these reasons, agen-
cies must work toward transparency and stakeholder involvement, be clear 
about what kind of process they are using, build in scientiﬁc rigor to the 
extent possible, and generally build in measures that add accountability and 
stakeholder oversight in any adaptive decision-making process. 
Trial-and-Error
At one end of the AM spectrum is “trial-and-error” management (Walters 

169
Botanists collect understory data. Photo courtesy of ERI
and Holling 1990). Using this method, managers adjust actions incremen-
tally and in an ad hoc manner in response to detected eﬀects. However, 
this approach lacks a clear monitoring framework, structured feedback 
loops, modeling, and experimentation. In other words, there are no formal 
mechanisms for learning or incorporating learning into future decisions. 
While it provides ﬂexibility, trial-and-error management has the potential 
to be a waste of time and resources in that it leads to the implementation of 
a series of mitigation measures without necessarily improving management 
outcomes (Schultz and Nie 2012). In fact, it may prove to be “maladap-
tive,” moving a project farther from desired outcomes rather than closer to 
them (DOI 2009). 
Adaptive Mitigation
Adaptive mitigation (or contingency planning) involves monitoring 
whether resources reach pre-determined thresholds that trigger a change 

170
Adaptive Management
in management (Ruhl and Fischman 2010, Schultz and Nie 2012). It 
allows managers ﬂexibility and discretion in determining the best way 
to meet goals and avoid or recover from negative impacts. Triggers have 
the potential to drive politically unpopular but necessary actions, such 
as costly mitigation measures or reductions in extractive use. However, 
triggers also can be used in ways that lack transparency and account-
ability, particularly when planners fail to link triggers to statistically valid 
thresholds and/or fail to include enforceable requirements that particular 
mitigation measures be taken or include speciﬁc language about the 
combination of measures that might be triggered (BLM 2008, Nie and 
Schultz 2012, Schultz and Nie 2012). 
Passive Adaptive Management
Passive AM is distinguished from adaptive mitigation by its use of modeling 
and the integration of monitoring into an iterative decision-making frame-
work. Models are typically generated from historical data and used to deter-
mine an optimal management strategy, which is then improved by incor-
porating monitoring information. Passive AM can inform project planning 
and implementation but often lacks ﬁeld-based experiments and may lack 
collaboration (Walters 1986, Williams 2011). Compared to active AM, it is 
more focused on determining whether projects are achieving desired man-
agement outcomes than on reducing system uncertainty or evaluating the 
eﬀectiveness of various treatment types (Walters 1986, Williams 2011). To 
be done eﬀectively, passive AM requires extensive historical data and a high 
degree of conﬁdence in ecological responses to management. It works best 
in situations where there is less environmental variation and where system 
dynamics are well understood (Gregory et al. 2006). Despite its emphasis 
on improving management, passive AM still must be scientiﬁcally robust to 
advance learning and inform future decisions.
Active Adaptive Management
Active AM is the only model that fully incorporates modeling, experi-
mentation, monitoring, and feedback mechanisms into an iterative 
decision-making process. Instead of presupposing the optimal manage-

171
ment strategy, active AM uses models to generate multiple hypotheses 
about ecological responses to management and tests these hypotheses 
by applying diﬀerent prescriptions across a landscape as controlled 
experiments (Walters 1986, Gunderson 2000). Monitoring is used to 
determine which alternatives oﬀer the best means of achieving desired 
conditions and how closely outcomes conform to modeling predic-
tions and hypotheses. By updating models with monitoring results at 
deﬁned decision points, managers can increase their conﬁdence in the 
predicted eﬀects of each alternative, reducing uncertainty over time 
(Nyberg 1998, Williams 2011). Designing an active AM approach 
to produce statistically signiﬁcant results is especially important if a 
collaborative group hopes to apply lessons learned in one area to other 
areas.
For example, the Five Rivers Management Plan in coastal Oregon 
used an active AM approach. In the face of uncertainty about how best 
to convert plantation stands of Douglas ﬁr into late-successional habi-
tat, land managers selected and tested three prescriptions: two treat-
ments hypothesized diﬀerent ways to achieve desired conditions and 
one “passive” prescription was used as a control. Tese prescriptions 
were each replicated randomly in four locations across the landscape 
to ensure that the observed results from the diﬀerent treatments were 
statistically signiﬁcant. In addition to providing a foundation for ex-
tensive future research, the project illustrates that institutional struc-
tures—such as new roles for researchers, specialists and managers—can 
be readily developed to facilitate AM on a landscape scale (Bormann 
and Kiester 2004).

172
Adaptive Management
 
 
Trial-and-Error
 
Adaptive 
Mitigation
 
Passive AM
 
Active AM
Modeling
No
Maybe
Usually
Yes
Experimentation
No
Usually not
Usually not
Yes
Monitoring
Informal
Yes, but quality 
varies
Rigorous
Rigorous
Feedback
Informal
Toolbox of 
Options
Rigorous
Rigorous
Collaboration
Maybe
Maybe
Maybe
Maybe
Flexibility
Yes
Yes, but extent 
depends on legal 
context (see 
Schultz and Nie 
2012)
Relatively less, 
but depends on 
legal context
Relatively 
less, but 
depends 
on the 
legal 
context
Learning
Minimal, if 
any
Often minimal, 
due to lack 
of controls/
experimentation
Some learning, 
but limited 
due to lack of 
experimentation
Yes
Accountability
Minimal, if 
any
Depends on legal 
context (see 
Schultz and Nie 
2012)
Relatively more, 
but depends on 
legal context
Relatively 
more, but 
depends 
on legal 
context
Table 1. Approaches to Adaptive Management

173
Examples in the Collaborative Forest 
Landscape Restoration Program
Landscape-scale forest restoration is a management experiment be-
ing undertaken across the United States in the context of signiﬁcant 
uncertainty. Te Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program 
(CFLRP) has invested more than $100 million to support this experi-
ment and provides a national structure within the U.S. Forest Service 
(USFS) to monitor and facilitate learning across projects (see www.
fs.fed.us/restoration/CFLRP; also Schultz et al. 2012 for a history and 
overview of the program). Tis section highlights examples of how a 
few of the ﬁrst ten projects funded under the CFRLP are approaching 
AM (see Schultz and Coelho 2012). No one project presents a perfect 
approach that is immediately transferable to other locations, but each 
builds on the concepts and examples presented to paint a more com-
plete picture of how AM can be applied to landscape-scale restoration 
and the challenges that lie therein.
Four Forest Restoration Initiative
Te Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI) is an eﬀort to restore eco-
system structure, composition, and processes across 2.4 million acres of 
ponderosa pine forest in northern Arizona. Four national forests (Coconi-
no, Kaibab, Tonto, Apache-Sitgreaves) are working together with an active 
stakeholder group to develop a restoration program that will mechanically 
thin and/or prescribe burn about one million acres over the next 20 years. 
Te ﬁrst NEPA document covers an area of roughly 750,000 acres and 
will identify enough areas for treatment to support a ten-year stewardship 
contract that guarantees 30,000 acres/year of mechanical thinning. 
Te 4FRI stakeholders have developed biophysical, social, and 
economic monitoring plans with input from the USFS. Te biophysical 
monitoring plan focuses on measuring treatment eﬀectiveness and speciﬁes 
indicators based on desired conditions developed by stakeholders and the 
USFS. Te plan identiﬁes the time interval for monitoring each indica-

174
Adaptive Management
tor, the appropriate spatial scale, and the range of observed values that 
would trigger an adaptive management response. Monitoring goals are 
organized into tiers to indicate their priority. 
Te 4FRI collaborative is developing a multi-party monitoring 
board with a committed liaison from the USFS. Tis governance 
structure has the potential to provide eﬀective oversight of monitoring 
in a way that is transparent and collaborative. Te board will discuss 
monitoring priorities, funding, and trigger points for adaptive changes; 
establish clear roles, responsibilities, and expectations; and document 
decisions in NEPA and other documents.
Te 4FRI collaborative is faced with several barriers to fully imple-
menting AM. One issue identiﬁed through interviews with partici-
pants is confusion as to where the line is drawn between research and 
monitoring. Some agency personnel shared that they would not invest 
in control plots as a part of treatment or monitoring because it would 
constitute “research” and, therefore, could not be funded through 
CFLRP or related accounts. However, monitoring without controls 
precludes any enhanced understanding of causality. A member of the 
4FRI stakeholder group added that “the more scientiﬁc rigor that 
you can bring on the front end to what you decided you are going to 
monitor, the better oﬀ you are,” and that, ultimately, what matters is 
whether monitoring is directly supporting the project’s AM goals. 
Tere are also a variety of perceptions about what will constitute 
AM for the 4FRI project. Some USFS staﬀ indicated that simply hav-
ing a variety of treatment options to use across the landscape is a kind 
of AM. However, some stakeholders expect a more active approach 
that involves robust monitoring, controlled and replicated experi-
ments, and changes in management based on monitoring information 
applied at deﬁned decision or trigger points. 
Southwestern Crown of the Continent
Te Southwest Crown of the Continent (SWCC) project is located 
in northwestern Montana. It is a 1.5-million-acre landscape across 
the Lolo, Flathead, and Helena national forests and is part of the 

175
broader Crown of the Continent ecosystem. Project goals are to 
restore forested lands in a way that improves ecological, social, and 
economic conditions. 
Te approach the SWCC has taken to monitoring and AM 
emphasizes stakeholder engagement throughout project planning 
and implementation. It is question-based, meaning that monitoring 
projects and methods are chosen to shed light on areas of uncertainty 
including ﬁre and fuels dynamics, biodiversity, soil and water quality, 
economic eﬀects, and social issues. Diﬀerent methods are used for 
data collection and analysis based on geographic and temporal scale 
as well as expectations for its use (e.g., communication, scientiﬁc 
publication, updating management actions) and statistical validity.
Governance of the SWCC includes a steering committee and several 
topical sub-committees, including one focused on monitoring. Proj-
ect design criteria and desired conditions are informed by restoration 
principles developed by the Montana Forest Restoration Committee, a 
collaborative group that formed to help guide restoration of Mon-
tana’s national forests. Tese principles indicate a broad acceptance 
of AM, commitment to collaboration, and agreement that ecological 
restoration is tightly linked with social and economic sustainability.
Te SWCC collaborative sees monitoring as a parallel and ongo-
ing process that works alongside project planning and implementa-
tion, rather than an after-the-fact component or single step in a man-
agement cycle. As stated in their CFLRP proposal: “Monitoring will 
be used in an adaptive management framework to ensure that forest 
restoration treatments meet ecological, social, and economic objec-
tives” (USFS 2009). To implement this approach, the collaborative 
group ﬁrst identiﬁed monitoring questions, which were then used to 
develop the monitoring plan. As the project moves through the im-
plementation, evaluation and adjustment phases, monitoring follows 
a path of pre-treatment and post-treatment monitoring, analysis, and 
recommendations to inform future action (Figure 1, Davis 2012). 
From here the cycle begins again, allowing for a continuous ﬂow of 
information collected at various points in time and across the project 

176
Adaptive Management
landscape. Tis kind of iterative and parallel approach to monitoring 
can assist active AM by clarifying the decision-making structure and 
key points where monitoring information will be fed back into plan-
ning to most eﬀectively achieve desired conditions. 
Implementation
Monitoring
Identify  
questions
Pre-treatment
Post-treatment
Analysis
Recommend
Implement
Evaluate
Plan
Assess
Adjust
Design
Figure 1. SWCC Adaptive Management Cycle

177
Te SWCC also has one of the only experimental treatment designs 
within the CFLRP that has been written into a NEPA document. It is 
a response to one of the project’s key areas of uncertainty: management 
within mixed conifer habitat types. In the Dalton Mountain Project on 
the Lincoln Distrct of the Helena National Forest, the USFS and the 
collaborative are developing an experimental design that includes mul-
tiple replicated and randomized treatments as well as untreated controls 
to explore how to best meet the project’s stated purpose and need (USFS 
2012). Te project scoping document states that: “Using this approach 
will also strengthen the learning and collaborative adaptive management 
of restoration in the mixed severity ﬁre regime” (USFS 2012). 
Te open communication, trust, and clear organization of collab-
oratives in the project landscapes and the region are contributing to the 
project’s success under the CFLRP and inﬂuence how they deal with 
uncertainty and conﬂict. As one stakeholder shared: “We’ve come a 
long way toward trust and a common understanding … we respect one 
another’s perspectives, even though they may be totally diﬀerent.”
Colorado Front Range
Te Colorado Front Range CFLRP project was born out of the Front 
Range Roundtable (FRRT), a group convened after the Hayman Fire in 
2002, to discuss and deﬁne a way forward to restore a landscape that is 
important for local and regional drinking water supply, recreation, and pri-
vate residences. Te project landscape is 1.5 million acres within the lower 
montane zone along the eastern slope of the Rocky Mountains. Extensive 
historical reconstruction data are being used, and more are being collected 
to inform restoration objectives and treatment methods. 
Te approach to monitoring is driven by major points of uncertainty 
and a commitment to AM and collaborative learning. According to partici-
pants in the collaborative, some of the challenges this project faces are un-
certainty about funding (long-term and year-to-year); where treatments will 
occur on the landscape and, therefore, where to set up monitoring plots; 
how to approach social and economic monitoring; interacting inﬂuences of 
climate change and bark beetles; and how to articulate desired future condi-

178
Adaptive Management
tions in a quantitative manner. 
Te FRRT is taking steps toward a proactive AM approach by devel-
oping a framework to guide the use of implementation and eﬀectiveness 
monitoring information at diﬀerent points in the planning and implemen-
tation process (Schultz and Coelho 2012). Depending on the questions 
asked, monitoring results will inform site-speciﬁc prescriptions, NEPA 
planning, or larger questions of desired conditions and project objectives. 
To this end, a landscape-scale NEPA process is being undertaken for proj-
ects within the Upper Monument Creek watershed on the Pike National 
Forest. Te goal of this “adaptive NEPA” is to construct an EIS and deci-
sion document in a way that allows for adaptation to new information 
and approves alternative management approaches within a single “agency 
action.” As one stakeholder explained, doing this involves a number of 
challenges:
How do you write a NEPA document that accommodates the 
kind of change that you intend to implement as a result of 
monitoring? How do you write those [desired future condi-
tions]… so they’re suﬃciently detailed to meet the NEPA re-
quirements and inform the public of your intentions, but don’t 
box you into a situation where you have to reenter a NEPA 
process every time you want to make a change?
To develop this “adaptive NEPA,” the group is exploring Landscape 
Conservation Forecasting to model ecological systems and their 
departure from historic ranges of variability, model outcomes of vari-
ous restoration strategies, and project return on investment for each 
strategy (Low et al. 2010). Tey are also discussing, but have yet to 
design, management experiments to test diﬀerent ideas about how 
best to achieve restoration across diﬀerent forest types. Tis discussion 
is occurring within a collaborative space convened by Te Nature Con-
servancy. 
As the Colorado Front Range CFLRP project continues to grow 
and become more complex, the group is running into challenges 

179
related to the collection, analysis, and use of monitoring data. Multiple 
projects are being carried out by the USFS, Colorado Forest Restoration 
Institute, and FRRT members. 
Barriers to Effective Adaptive Management
Tere are a number of challenges that agencies and stakeholders face when 
approaching AM. Te most prominent of these barriers include: insuﬃcient 
capacity, problems with organizational culture and structure, inadequate or 
uncoordinated data collection, and challenges associated with conforming to 
existing legal requirements.
Capacity
Many of the most signiﬁcant barriers to AM are related to the ability of 
agencies and stakeholder groups to provide the time, personnel, and fund-
ing needed to determine appropriate restoration objectives and monitoring 
questions, develop a rigorous monitoring program that includes feedback 
mechanisms, and coordinate among many diﬀerent stakeholders (Walters 
1997, Lee 1999). Monitoring is especially vulnerable to a lack of resources 
and is often the ﬁrst program cut when budgets shrink (Doremus 2008). 
Tis is especially problematic for the long-term monitoring needed to track 
changes and trends at the landscape scale (Moir and Block 2001, Nichols 
and Williams 2006). Legislation, like the Forest Landscape Restoration Act 
provides an avenue to correct this bias by explicitly requiring monitoring as 
a condition of receiving funding. 
Organizational Culture and Structure
Adaptive management represents a new way of conceptualizing manage-
ment and decision-making (Stankey et al. 2003). AM requires managers to 
openly acknowledge the uncertainty inherent in management objectives, 
prescriptions, and the systems being restored (Smith 2009). However, if an 
agency’s culture is more focused on outputs than providing the time and 
resources necessary to evaluate and improve management actions, agency 

180
Adaptive Management
personnel may ﬁnd it diﬃcult to justify allocating resources to a project 
where the outcomes are acknowledged to be uncertain (Allan and Curtis 
2005). It may also be challenging to justify the short-term risk inherent in 
an active AM strategy, despite its long-term beneﬁts (Stankey et al. 2003). 
Institutional structures also present challenges to applying AM at the 
landscape scale. Since most natural resource agencies, including the USFS, 
are characterized by a hierarchical chain of command, there is a strong 
tendency for top-down decisions that can limit ﬂexibility, participation, and 
innovation at the local level (Johnson 1999, Allan and Curtis 2005, Jacob-
son et al. 2006). In light of these challenges, managers should be clear and 
transparent about the uncertainties and risks to be balanced in any deci-
sion. Managers at higher levels can also oﬀer clear guidance, support, and 
incentives for AM in the ﬁeld to encourage experimentation and long-term 
learning.
Inadequate or Uncoordinated Data Collection
Data collection systems that are deﬁcient or lack organization create added 
challenges for otherwise sound AM programs. For example, if the USFS 
collects diﬀerent data across ranger districts, if resource specialists collect data 
using diﬀerent methods and if corporate databases are incompatible with 
certain types of data or collection methods, then the design and imple-
mentation of a robust and cost-eﬀective monitoring program are limited. 
Moreover, the learning and adaptation that could come from using that 
information are compromised. Successful AM requires that data be collected 
and interpreted in a way that they are useable, often by multiple parties 
(Doremus 2008).
Various database solutions are being proposed to create a home for 
data collected under multi-party monitoring programs. For example, the 
Uncompahgre Plateau CFLRP project in southwestern Colorado is employ-
ing CitSci, which is a support system for citizen science-based monitoring. 
Other groups (e.g., 4FRI, SWCC, and FRRT) employ monitoring coordi-
nators or consultants to aggregate and analyze data from various sources, as 
well as make suggestions for improving collection and storage methods. 

181
Conforming to Existing Legal Requirements
Guaranteeing that AM conforms to substantive and procedural legal stan-
dards, such as those found in the Endangered Species Act (ESA), NEPA, 
and Federal Advisory Committee Act (FACA), is a signiﬁcant barrier to 
AM. Under the ESA, AM may, or may be perceived to, impose risks that 
violate the precautionary standards of the law (i.e., not placing a listed 
species in jeopardy; Volkman and McConnaha 1993, Doremus 2001, 
Stankey et al. 2003). However, AM has been successful in cases involving 
the ESA, such as the Northwest Forest Plan and in Biological Opinions 
for operation of the Sacramento and San Joaquin River System (Ruhl and 
Fischman 2010, Schultz and Nie 2012). 
Under NEPA, managers must describe in an EIS (or Environmental 
Assessment for less complex actions) all possible adaptive measures they 
may undertake and ensure that any future eﬀects are within predicted 
ranges. Tis may be challenging given uncertainties, and agencies may 
A high school student takes tree height measurements for the Uncompahgre Plateau project. The UP project 
incorporates citizen science-based monitoring into its AM plan. Photo courtesy of ERI

182
Adaptive Management
be reluctant to undertake AM if future management adjustments might 
require supplemental analysis (see Chapter 3, also Schultz and Nie 2012). 
However, management changes will not always require NEPA supplemen-
tation. It is possible to write NEPA documents with monitoring commit-
ments that are enforceable over time, not only by requiring supplementa-
tion, but also by requiring monitoring data to be available before new 
actions are taken (Blumm and Bosse 2007, Schultz and Nie 2012). 
Finally, the requirements of the FACA may pose barriers to the formal 
participation of collaborative groups in federal agency decision-making, es-
pecially in the early stages of the NEPA process (Benson 2009). Likewise, 
FACA may, or may be perceived to, limit agency representation on com-
mittees, such as those discussing monitoring and desired conditions under 
the CFLRP. However, there is ample room for stakeholders and agencies 
to work together on developing and implementing AM frameworks and 
monitoring plans, as long as federal land managers retain their formal 
decision-making authority and facilitate an inclusive public involvement 
process (see Chapter 1).
Data is collected for a wetland restoration project. Photo courtesy of ERI

183
Bridges to Effective Adaptive Management
Tere are several ways to overcome the barriers to eﬀective use of 
adaptive management in landscape-scale forest restoration projects. 
Tese suggested bridges, which are supported by ﬁndings in the AM 
literature and by the experiences of participants in CFLRP projects, 
include: incorporating key components of active AM, embracing and 
employing collaborative AM, and developing eﬀective channels of 
communication.  
Incorporating Key Components of Active 
Adaptive Management
If a project plans to use an AM approach, such an approach will be 
most eﬀective if it is implemented in a scientiﬁcally robust manner and 
in accordance with the key components of active AM. Tis means us-
ing models, conducting experiments; developing a sound monitoring 
program; pre-deﬁning how monitoring information will be used; iden-
tifying trigger points that will cause a change in management actions, 
including mechanisms to ensure monitoring information actually feeds 
back into decision-making; and making decisions in a collaborative 
manner. Tese elements are especially important considering the high 
degree of stakeholder involvement in forest restoration programs such 
as CFLRP. 
Develop Collaborative Governance for 
Adaptive Management
Successful AM approaches are increasingly being characterized as col-
laborative AM, a process whereby stakeholders play a critical role in 
deﬁning objectives, interpreting data, and feeding information back 
into decision-making (Susskind et al. 2012). Inclusive and collabora-
tive processes can encourage social learning, build political support, 
foster eﬀective communication, and develop appropriate and scientiﬁ-
cally rigorous monitoring and management approaches. In practicing 
collaborative AM, it is important to:

184
Adaptive Management
 
f be inclusive and encourage active participation in as many 
steps of the process as possible, especially deﬁning shared 
goals and objectives.
 
f encourage partnerships with third parties (universities, non-
governmental organizations, local industry, etc.) and engage a 
diverse and representative group of citizens and stakeholders.
 
f deﬁne a collaborative structure (e.g., roles and responsibilities, 
decision-making processes, funding) before beginning a proj-
ect. It does not necessarily have to be formal (e.g., an inde-
pendent monitoring board), but it should be explicit. Many 
groups have found it useful to have a monitoring coordinator 
who works to coordinate the monitoring and AM process 
across jurisdictions and among participants.
 
f cultivate champions who will sustain the energy, investment, 
and atmosphere of honesty and openness within and across 
organizations that is needed to be successful.
Develop Effective Channels for Communication 
and Adapting Management Actions
Transmitting what is learned through AM between diﬀerent levels of 
management, across jurisdictions, and among stakeholders is both 
challenging and absolutely necessary. For instance, if there are prob-
lems or surprising results observed through multi-party monitoring, 
there need to be clear mechanisms by which managers can under-
stand this information and adapt their approaches. Some suggestions 
from real projects include:
 
f Build a scientiﬁcally sound monitoring program based on 
clear and measurable questions. It may also include elements 
such as collaborative oversight of project planning and imple-
mentation, as well as annual reporting of actions, outcomes, 
and eﬀects. 
 
f Make sure monitoring occurs and information is used by 
linking monitoring to speciﬁc decisions and legally enforce-

185
able documents (e.g., a Record of Decision, Finding of No 
Signiﬁcant Impact, or Incidental Take Permit under the 
ESA), deﬁning clear triggers and timelines, and developing 
implementable mitigation measures or action alternatives. It 
is also important to identify funding needs early and plan for 
them in annual budget cycles.
 
f Develop and agree to an AM framework that deﬁnes trig-
gers early in the planning process, links monitoring and 
implementation, and clariﬁes when, how, and at what scale 
monitoring information will be used to inform management 
actions.
 
f Maintain forums and means for eﬀective communication 
and oversight, such as hiring a professional facilitator and/or 
monitoring coordinator to manage and provide consistency 
for group interactions. 

186
Adaptive Management
References 
Allan, C. and A. Curtis. 2005. Nipped in the bud: Why regional scale 
adaptive management is not blooming. Environmental 
Management 36(3):414-425.
Benson, M. 2009. Integrating adaptive management and oil and gas 
development: Existing obstacles and opportunities for reform. 
Environmental Law Reporter 39(10).
BLM (Bureau of Land Management). 2008. Pinedale Anticline 
Project Area Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement 
and Record of Decision. Washington, DC: Bureau of Land 
Management.
Blumm, M.C. and S.L. Bosse. 2007. Norton v. SUWA and the 
unraveling of federal public land planning. Duke 
Environmental Law and Policy Forum 18:105-160. 
Bormann B.T. and A.R. Kiester. 2004. Options forestry: Acting on 
uncertainty. Journal of Forestry 102:22-27.
Brunner, R.D. and T.W. Clark. 1997. A practice-based approach to 
ecosystem management. Conservation Biology
11:48-58. 
Cheng, T. and V.E. Sturtevant. 2012. A framework for assessing 
collaborative capacity in community-based public forest 
management. Environmental Management 49:675-689.
Davis, C. 2012. Developing Monitoring Questions for the South
western Crown Collaborative. Power Point Presentation. 
DeLuca, T.H., G.H. Aplet, B. Wilmer, and J. Burchﬁeld. 2010. 
Te unknown trajectory of forest restoration: A call for 
ecosystem monitoring. Journal of Forestry 108(6):288-295.
DOI (Department of the Interior). 2009. Adaptive Management: 
Te U.S. Department of the Interior Technical Guide. 
Washington, D.C.: Department of the Interior.
Doremus, H. 2001. Adaptive management, the Endangered 
Species Act, and the institutional challenges of “new age” 
environmental protection. Washburn Law Journal 41:50-89.

187
___. 2008. Data gaps in natural resource management: Sniﬃng  
for leaks along the information pipeline. Indiana Law Journal  
83:407-461.
Failing, L., G. Horn, and P. Higgins. 2004. Using expert judgment  
and stakeholder values to evaluate adaptive management 
options. Ecology and Society 9:13.
Fernandez-Gimenez, M., H.L. Ballard, and V.E. Sturtevant. 2008. 
Adaptive management and social learning in collaborative 
and community-based monitoring: A study of ﬁve  
community-based forestry organizations in the western USA.  
Ecology and Society 13(2):4.
Folke, C., T. Hahn, P. Olsson, and J. Norberg. 2005. Adaptive   
governance of social-ecological systems. Annual Review of  
Environmental Resources 30:441-473.
Gunderson, L.H. 2000. Ecological resilience: In theory and  
application. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics  
31:425-439.
Gunderson, L.H., C.S. Holling, and S.S. Light, eds. 1995. Barriers 
and bridges to the renewal of ecosystems and institutions. New 
York: Columbia University Press.
Gregory, R., D. Ohlson, and J. Arvai. 2006. Deconstructing 
adaptive management: Criteria for applications to 
environmental management. Ecological Applications
16:2411-2425.
Halbert, C.L. 1993. How adaptive is adaptive management? 
Implementing adaptive management in Washington State and 
British Columbia. Reviews in Fisheries Science 1:261-283.
Holling, C.S., ed. 1978. Adaptive environmental assessment and 
management. London: John Wiley & Sons.
Jacobson, S.K., J.K Morris, J.S. Sanders, E.N. Wiley, M. 
Brooks, R.E. Bennetts, H.F. Percival, and S. Marynowski. 
2006. Understanding barriers to implementation of an 
adaptive land management program. Conservation Biology
20(5):1516-1527.

188
Adaptive Management
Jakeman, T., S. Chen, L. Newham, and C. Pollino. 2009. 
Modeling and adaptive environmental management. 
Pages 173-187 in C. Allan and G.H. Stankey, eds., Adaptive 
environmental management: A practitioner’s guide. Dordrecht, 
Netherlands: Springer. 
Johnson, B.L. 1999. Te role of adaptive management as an 
operational approach for resource management agencies. 
Conservation Ecology 3:8.
Karkkainen, B. 2003. Whither NEPA? NYU Environmental Law 
Journal 12:333-363.
Kusel, J., S.C. Doak, S. Carpenter, and V.E. Sturtevant. 1996. Te 
role of the public in adaptive ecosystem management. Pages 
611-624 in Sierra Nevada Ecosystem Project: Final Report 
to Congress, Volume II. Davis, CA: Center for Water 
and Wildland Resources, University of California.
Lachapelle, P.R., S.F. McCool, and M.E. Patterson. 2003. Barriers 
to eﬀective natural resource planning in a “messy” world. 
Society & Natural Resources 16(6):473-490.
Lee, K.N. 1994. Compass and gyroscope: Integrating science and 
politics for the environment. Washington, DC: Island Press.
___. 1999. Appraising adaptive management. Conservation  
Ecology 3:3.
Lindenmayer, D.B., C.R Margules, and D.B. Botkin. 2001. 
Indicators of biodiversity for ecologically sustainable forest 
management. Conservation biology 14(4):941-950.
Lindenmayer, D.B. and G.E. Likens. 2009. Adaptive monitoring: 
A new paradigm for long term research and monitoring. 
Trends in Ecology & Evolution 24(9):482-486.
Low, G., L. Provencher, and S. Abele. 2010. Enhanced 
conservation action planning: Assessing landscape condition 
and predicting beneﬁts of conservation strategies. Journal of 
Conservation Planning 6:36-60.

189
Lyons, J.E., M.C. Runge, H.P. Laskowski, and W.L. Kendall. 
2008. Monitoring in the context of structured decision-
making and adaptive management. Te Journal of Wildlife 
Management 72:1683-1692.
McLain, R.J. and R.G. Lee. 1996. Adaptive management: 
Promises and pitfalls. Environmental Management 20:437-448.
Moir, W.H. and W.M. Block. 2001. Adaptive management 
on public lands in the United States: Commitment or 
rhetoric? Environmental Management 28:141-148. 
Nichols, J. D., F.A. Johnson, and B.K. Williams. 1995. Managing 
North American waterfowl in the face of uncertainty. Annual 
Review of Ecology and Systematics 26:177-199.
Nichols, J.D. and B.K. Williams. 2006. Monitoring for 
conservation. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 21:668-673.
Nie, M. and C. Schultz. 2012. Decision-making triggers in 
adaptive management. Conservation Biology 26:1137-1144.
Nyberg, J.B. 1998. Statistics and the practice of adaptive 
management. Pages 1-7 in V. Sit and B. Taylor, eds., 
Statistical methods for adaptive management studies. Victoria, 
BC: British Columbia Ministry of Forests, Research Branch. 
Land Management Handbook 42.
Ringold, P.L., J. Alegria, R.L. Czaplewski, B.S. Mulder, T. Tolle, 
and K. Burnett. 1996. Adaptive monitoring design for 
ecosystem management. Ecological Applications 6:745-747.
Ruhl, J.B. and R.L. Fischman. 2010. Adaptive management in the 
courts. Minnesota Law Review 95:424-484.
Schultz, C. and D. Coelho. 2012. Preliminary report: Te 
design and governance of multi-party monitoring under the 
Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program. Fort 
Collins, CO: Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, Colorado 
State University.
Schultz, C., T. Jedd, and R. Beam. 2012. Te Collaborative Forest 
Landscape Restoration Program: A history and overview of the 
ﬁrst projects. Journal of Forestry 110:381-391.

190
Adaptive Management
Schultz, C. and M. Nie. 2012. Decision-making triggers, adaptive 
management, and natural resources law and planning. Natural 
Resources Journal 52: 443-521.
Smith, A.C. 2009. Lessons learned from adaptive management 
practitioners in British Columbia, Canada. Pages 39-57 in 
C. Allan and G.H. Stankey, eds., Adaptive environmental 
management. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer. 
Stankey, G.H., B.T. Bormann, C. Ryan, B. Shindler, V.E. 
Sturtevant, R.N. Clark, and C. Philpot. 2003. Adaptive 
management and the Northwest Forest Plan: Rhetoric and 
reality. Journal of Forestry 101:40-46.
Susskind, L., A.E. Camacho, and T. Schenk. 2012. A critical 
assessment of collaborative adaptive management in practice. 
Journal of Applied Ecology 49(1):47-51. 
USFS (United States Forest Service). 2009. Southwestern Crown
of the Continent Collaborative CFLRP Proposal. 
___. USFS. 2012. Dalton Mountain forest restoration and fuels
reduction project scoping document. Lincoln, MT: Helena 
National Forest, Lincoln Ranger District. 
Volkman, J.M. and W.E. McConnaha. 1993. Trough a glass, 
darkly: Columbia River salmon, the Endangered Species Act, 
and adaptive management. Environmental Law 23:1249-1272.
Walters, C. 1986. Adaptive management of renewable resource. New 
York: Macmillan Publishing.
___. 1997. Challenges in adaptive management of riparian and
coastal ecosystems. Conservation Ecology [online]1(2):1. 
Walters, C.J. and C.S. Holling. 1990. Large-scale management 
experiments and learning by doing. Ecology 71:2060-2068.
Williams, B.K. 2011. Adaptive management of natural resources: 
Framework and issues. Journal of Environmental Management
92:1346-1353.
___. 2012. Reducing uncertainty about objective functions in 
adaptive management. Ecological Modeling 225:61-65. 

191
T
his handbook was created to explore current opportunities for 
landscape management on federal lands, as well as the barriers 
and some of the innovative bridges being developed. Landscape-
level planning has been the focus of research, modeling, and land 
management for decades. However, recent large disturbance events, 
including wildﬁre and insect-caused mortality, occurring at scales of 
100,000s of contiguous acres have raised awareness and support for 
more active management across entire landscapes to restore ecosystem 
resilience and sustainability. 
Te concept for this handbook was developed largely in response 
to the passage of the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration 
Act (CFLRA) in 2009. Landscape level management, collaborative 
partnerships, and innovative contracting and implementation on 
federal landscapes over the last two decades contributed greatly to 
the initiation of this legislation and the bi-partisan funding support. 
Tis act and the funded program, known as the Collaborative 
Forest Landscape Restoration Program (CFLRP), provide the largest 
supported national eﬀort for landscape restoration. More importantly, 
the program sets the stage for management changes that do not require 
special funding authority.
Themes of Barriers and Bridges 
Re-occurring themes of barriers and bridges emerge from this collection 
of chapters. Many of the barriers listed in these chapters are related 
to scale. Over time, humans have modiﬁed what are now current 
federal forested landscapes at large scales. Most recently (within the 
last century), these modiﬁcations include the removal of ﬁre from ﬁre-
adapted systems, the reduction of old-growth trees, unevern-aged stands, 
and changed tree composition due to logging in many of our current-
day national forests. In addition to scale, new tools and collaborative 
partnerships create changing paradigms for federal land management.
Conclusion
Amy E.M. Waltz

192
Each preceding chapter provides some bridges to these barriers.
f Collaborative partnerships can create strange bedfellows 
(Chapter 1). In many cases, collaboration brings together people 
and organizations that have often been at odds, if not out-right 
conﬂict, with each other. Innovation, and now some experience, 
has shown that when multiple stakeholders can communicate 
values and ﬁnd common ground, projects have a higher chance 
of success. However, it can be challenging to move past a history 
of mistrust. Bridges for this barrier include innovative authori-
ties, like the CFLRP, which help the U.S. Forest Service (USFS), 
as well as stakeholders and citizens, re-interpret their traditional 
roles in federal land management. Te results from examples in 
Chapter 1 are increased ﬂexibility in project planning, imple-
mentation, monitoring, and increased trust. 
 
f Tis is further elaborated in Chapter 3, “Planning and NEPA,” 
where the collaborative process in landscape planning and 
management is identiﬁed as the major innovative component 
of the CFLRP. However, it is not meant to replace current legal 
standards and guidelines. Tis chapter discusses potential meth-
ods to plan at landscape scales. Key to success is the integra-
tion of collaborative engagement at more than just the legally 
designated “public scoping and comment period.” Tis results in 
increased trust as stakeholders and resource professionals work 
to describe landscape management goals and the implementa-
tion needed to meet goals.
 
f While all chapters in this book are closely linked, Chapter 2 
“Ecologi cal Economics” and Chapter 5 “Contracting and 
Implementing” may be more co-dependent than any of the 
other topics.  A barrier common to restoration projects across 
the nation is lack of complete funding. Te CFLRP, for exam-
ple, funds only implementation of the project, including some 
monitoring, but no project planning. However, planning at 
landscape scales with multiple stakeholders or partner agencies 
as collaborative partners can signiﬁcantly increase planning 

193
time. Tese planning costs for projects are covered by the USFS 
administrative unit. However, the CFLRP requires leveraged 
funds and provides innovative indicators and tools to show cost 
beneﬁts of landscape-scale restoration work (Chapter 2). Imple-
mentation of restoration treatments will not produce commer-
cially viable products on every acre; however, use of stewardship 
contracting (Chapter 5) is an innovative bridge to maximize the 
value of goods available in a landscape project to pay for services 
on other acres and to meet landscape restoration goals. Most 
importantly, the stewardship contract authority changes the 
perspective of how we look at contracts on our forests: instead of 
basing contracts on what is leaving the forest, contracts empha-
size what is left and our desired end result.
 
f Chapter 4 “Adaptive Management” and Chapter 6 “Multi-
party Monitoring” are also closely linked. We cannot achieve 
adaptive management without strategic and SMART monitor-
ing. Eﬀectiveness monitoring of forest treatments on federal 
landscapes has been challenging to assess in the past. Federal 
funding cuts to land management and a lack of eﬀectiveness 
metrics for accomplishments have led to a de-emphasis of 
eﬀectiveness monitoring. Tis handbook illustrates how the 
legislation creating the CFLRP and the collaborative multi-
party monitoring mandated by both this program and steward-
ship contracting create a bridge for this barrier. Te ability to 
prioritize appropriate indicators and select quantiﬁable metrics 
to assess those indicators will be key to measuring success or 
failure for today’s landscape-level projects. Appropriate adaptive 
management relies on these monitoring components. However, 
the speciﬁc AM approach can be determined by assessing how 
a speciﬁc collaboration works—who are the partners, what are 
the monitoring gaps and the levels of uncertainty? Adaptive 
management is not a boiler-plate plan easily adopted by land-
scape eﬀorts. Chapter 6 develops the idea that there are diﬀerent 
approaches to adaptive management that can be determined 
by understanding both the ecological and social components 
of a landscape. A challenge for many landscape-level eﬀorts is 
“closing the adaptive management loop” with a deﬁned feed-

194
back process and appropriate decision-maker “buy-in” to impact 
future project implementation. Suggested bridges include collab-
orative participation in the adaptive management governance, as 
well as established lines of communication (Chapter 6).  
Future Work and Applications
Te chapters in this handbook relate speciﬁcally to how the funded 
CFLRP sites are addressing challenges. Te examples presented share 
the diversity of landscapes, collaborative partners, and restoration 
strategies currently in play. Tese projects will continue to provide 
“lessons learned,” including successes and failures, for years to come. 
Te continuing challenge will be to recognize change as innovative 
opportunity and to continue to revise the ways we collaborate, plan, 
fund and implement projects, monitor, and adapt. Tis handbook takes 
a much-needed step to compile these innovations and will be revised.
In addition to the guidelines in this handbook, additional 
networking tools are now available to encourage learning across 
administrative units and across multi-stakeholder collaborative 
partnerships. Eﬀorts to restore landscape-level resiliency are diverse and 
occur across the country, although the obstacles each eﬀort faces have 
remarkable similarities. Te ability to connect and learn from other 
sites can increase eﬃciency and will make each project stronger. Te 
National Forest Foundation along with the National Oﬃce of the U.S. 
Forest Service hosts web-based Peer Learning Sessions for the CFLRP as 
well as other topics related to CFLRP, including landscape restoration 
approaches, collaboration and multi-party monitoring (http://www.
nationalforests.org/conserve/peer). An oﬀ-shoot of these webinars is a 
National Monitoring Network that provides landscape examples for 
setting desired conditions, selecting indicators, developing metrics and 
triggers and thresholds. Collectively, these peer-learning platforms, along 
with growing stakeholder networks, will provide future projects with 
guideposts to collaboration, planning, monitoring, implementation, and 
adaptive management for landscape-scale restoration projects. Future 
handbooks will also highlight these examples and provide an even deeper 
set of lessons to share. 

195
About the Contributors
DAVE BREWER worked as a ﬁeld soil scientist, range conservationist, 
and range and watershed program manager during his multi-decade 
career with the U.S. Forest Service in Arizona and New Mexico. Dur-
ing that time, he was also involved in writing numerous environmental 
assessments and impact statements for Forest Service projects. From 
2006-2012, Dave served as a program coordinator with the ERI 
Agency Outreach Team. In that capacity, he advised the Four Forest 
Restoration Initiative Team on various aspects related to developing 
environmental impact statements for that landscape-scale restoration 
project. Dave also teaches a class about writing environmental impact 
statements for the Northern Arizona University School of Forestry.
DANA COELHO is a PhD student at Colorado State University 
studying collaborative natural resource management, particularly the 
new U.S. Forest Service Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration 
Program (CFLRP). She has worked for the Forest Service since 2007, 
serving as Program Manager for the Western Forestry Leadership Co-
alition and a Presidential Management Fellow. She holds a Master of 
Science in Sustainable Development and Conservation Biology and a 
Master of Public Policy from the University of Maryland. Her bach-
elor’s degree is in Urban and Environmental Planning from the Uni-
versity of Virginia.
W. WALLACE “WALLY” COVINGTON is the executive director of 
the Ecological Restoration Institute and Regents’ Professor of Forestry 
for Northern Arizona University. He has received national and interna-
tional recognition for his work in forest ecosystem health, restoration 
ecology, and ﬁre eﬀects on forest ecosystems. Dr. Covington presents 
invited testimony before congressional and state natural resources 
committees and provides continuing education at all levels from the 
Washington Oﬃces of conservation agencies (e.g., the U.S. Forest 

196
Service, the Bureau of Land Management, and the National Park Ser-
vice) to the ﬁeld level. His work on restoration of ecosystem health and 
natural resource conservation is cited often in scientiﬁc journals and 
national news media. 
DAVE EGAN has been involved in ecological restoration since the 
mid-1980s as both practitioner and writer/editor. He formerly worked 
on the journal Ecological Restoration, and has co-edited several books, 
including Te Human Dimensions of Ecological Restoration and Te His-
torical Ecology Handbook. Dave currently resides in the southwestern 
United States and serves as a consultant writer/editor for the Ecological 
Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University.
EVAN E. HJERPE is an ecological economist for Te Wilderness 
Society in Boise, Idaho. He has taught forest economics and forest 
management at Northern Arizona University and maintains a research 
focus on the economics of ecological restoration. Evan is a co-editor of 
Human Dimensions of Ecological Restoration and author of the recent 
Wilderness Society report, Seeing the Tongass for the trees: Te economics 
of transitioning to sustainable forest management. 
COURTNEY SCHULTZ is an assistant professor of natural resource 
policy in the Department of Forest and Rangeland Stewardship at 
Colorado State University. She has conducted research on the intersec-
tion of science, policy and law in several major areas, including large-
scale wildlife conservation planning and the development of monitor-
ing and adaptive management plans by federal agencies in various 
contexts. She is currently investigating how learning, innovation, and 
policy change take place in the context of developing and implement-
ing large-scale, collaborative, and adaptive forest restoration projects.
WINDY SELIG has a M.S. degree in Forestry, with special focus on 
collaboration in forest restoration. Windy’s research topics include 
ecological restoration collaboration in southwestern forest ecosystems, 

197
power dynamics in collaborative forest restoration, and analyzing and 
identifying barriers to conducting successful collaborative processes. 
Windy is currently completing a Case History of the Four Forest 
Restoration Initiative (4FRI). She worked closely with 4FRI provid-
ing collaborative support to leadership and the stakeholder group and 
provided facilitation in smaller working groups. Windy also facilitated 
and co-led the Parashant Partnership on the Grand Canyon Parashant 
National Monument.
AMY E.M. WALTZ is a research ecologist with a background in eco-
logical restoration in ponderosa pine ecosystems. She received her PhD 
in biology from Northern Arizona University. From 2005 to 2011, 
Amy worked with Deschutes National Forest staﬀ to augment moni-
toring eﬀorts on federal fuel reduction projects and to assess landscape 
conditions. In that position, she also coordinated the Deschutes Fire 
Learning Network and co-led the successful proposal for the Deschutes 
Collaborative Forest Project. In her current position as the program di-
rector of science outreach at the Ecological Restoration Institute, Amy 
works with stakeholder groups and land management agencies to assess 
research gaps, accomplish research through the Institute, and develop 
outreach products. 
ZACHARY WURTZEBACH is an M.A. student in political science at 
Colorado State University, where he is currently researching the use of 
adaptive management and collaboration in natural resource manage-
ment. He holds a B.S. in Resource Conservation and a B.A. in History 
from the University of Montana. 

198
Resources
Articles, Article Series, and Legislation
Egan, D., ed. 2007. Te conservation and restoration of old growth
in frequent-ﬁre forests of the American West. 2007. 
Ecology and Society.
Ellenwood, M.S., L. Dilling, and J.B. Milford. 2012. Managing
United States public lands in response to climate change:
A view from the ground up. Environmental Management, 
published online March 22, 2012.
Feurt. C.B. 2009. Collaborative learning strategies to overcome 
barriers to science translation in Coastal Watershed
Management: A Final Report Submitted to Te NOAA/UNH 
Cooperative Institute for Coastal and Estuarine
Environmental Technology (CICEET).
Fleischman, F. 2008. Bureaucracy, collaboration and coproduction:
A case study of the implementation of adaptive management
in the U.S.D.A. Forest Service.
Fulé, P.Z., J.E. Crouse, J.P. Roccaforte, and E.L. Kalies. 2012.  
Do thinning and/or burning treatments in western USA
ponderosa or Jeﬀrey pine-dominated forests help restore
natural ﬁre behavior? Forest Ecology and Management 
269:68-81.
Kerr, A. 2012. Ecologically appropriate restoration thinning in the
Northwest Forest Plan Area: A policy and technical analysis.
Published by Conservation Northwest, Geos Institute, 
Klamath-Siskiyou Wildlands Center, and Oregon Wild. 
Stephens, S.L., J.D. McIver, R.E.J. Boerner, C.J. Fettig, J.B. Fontaine, 
B.R. Hartsough, P.L. Kennedy, and D.W. Schwilk. 2012. 
Te eﬀects of forest fuel-reduction treatments in the United
States. Bioscience 62(6):549-560.
Title IV of the Omnibus Public Land Management Act of 2009.

199
Books, Book Chapters, and Reports
Arno, S. and C. Fiedler. 2005. Mimicking nature’s ﬁre: Restoring ﬁre-
prone forests in the West. Washington, DC: Island Press.
Climate Central. 2012. Te age of western wildﬁres. Princeton, NJ 
and Palo Alto, CA: Climate Central.
Graham, R.T., A.E. Harvey, T.B. Jain, and J.R.Tonn. 1999.
Te eﬀects of thinning and similar stand treatments on
ﬁre behavior in Western forests. Gen. Tech. Rep.
PNW-GTR-463. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Forest Service, Paciﬁc Northwest Research 
Station.
Polinko, A. and K. Waring. 2011. Forest monitoring: Current
conditions and future predictions. Flagstaﬀ, AZ: 
Northern Arizona School of Forestry.
Stankey, G.H., R.N. Clark, and B.T. Bormann. 2005.
Adaptive management of natural resources: theory, concepts,
and management institutions. Gen. Tech. Rep. 
PNW-GTR-654. Portland, OR: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Paciﬁc Northwest Research 
Station. 
USFS. 2007. Wood biomass utilization desk guide. United States 
Department of Agriculture Forest Service National Technology 
& Development Program 2400—Forest Management.
USFS. 2008. Forest Service Handbook. FSH 2409.19
Renewable resources handbook, Chapter 60-Stewardship
Contracting.
USFS. 2002. Forest Service Handbook. FSH 2409.18. Timber  
sale preparation handbook, Chapter 10-Sale Program 
Development-Gate System
USFS. 2002. Forest Service Handbook. FSH 2409.17.
Silvicultural practices handbook, Chapter 8-Silvicultural 
examinations, prescriptions, and evaluations

200
USFS. 2012. Increasing the Pace of Restoration and Job Creation
on Our National Forests. Washington, DC: United States 
Department of Agriculture Forest Service.
USFS. 2012. People restoring America’s forests: 2012 report on the
Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program.
Westley, F., S.R. Carpenter, W.A. Brock, C.S. Holling, and L.H. 
Gunderson. 2002. Why systems of people and nature are 
not just social and ecological systems. Pages 103-119
in L.H. Gunderson and C.S. Holling, ed., Panarchy: 
Understanding transformations in human and natural 
systems. Washington, DC: Island Press.
Executive Summary: Te First Five Years of the White Mountain
Stewardship Project
Websites
Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program (CFLRP)
Ecological Restoration Institute e-Library
Forest Guild: Woody Biomass Removal Case Studies
FY 2011 CFLRP Annual Reports
Landscape Conservation Management and Analysis Portal (LCMAP)s
National Forest Foundation
Red Lodge Clearinghouse
Stewardship End Result Contracting
Tools for the Restoration Economy
USFS NEPA Procedures and Guidance
USFS Partnership Resource Center
U.S. Institute for Environmental Conﬂict Resolution

201
Glossary
Adaptive management: An approach to natural resource manage-
ment that studies and monitors the eﬀects of policies, plans, and ac-
tions for the purpose of learning and adjusting future management 
actions. 
Assessment or analysis area: Te geographic area included within the 
scope of a broad-scale assessment or local analysis.
Avoided costs: In economics, an expense that will not be incurred if a 
particular activity is not performed.
Biodiversity: Te variety of life and its processes. Biodiversity in-
cludes the diversity of landscapes, communities, and populations (ge-
netic variation). Also called biological diversity or biotic diversity.
CCF: A measure of wood volume; 100 cubic feet equals 1 CCF.
Collaboration: A process where individuals and groups with diﬀer-
ent interests come together to address management issues and create 
agreements.
Co-management: A formal process with a focus on shared power 
among government authorities or between an agency and one or more 
user groups. Participation is limited to people with legal authority and 
decision-making capacity.
Community of interest: A social group that shares common perspec-
tives, vulnerabilities, and preferences with respect to resource manage-
ment issues (e.g., hunters, anglers, permittees, and environmentalists). 
Community of place: A social group bounded by geographic locality.

202
Compliance monitoring: A process that documents whether or not 
treatments or practices were applied in such a way as to meet the require-
ments of the supporting legislation, funding agency, or some identiﬁable 
best management practice; also known as implementation monitoring.
Consensus: Point at which competing interest groups reach agreement 
on, for example, policy matters or environmental conﬂicts.
Cooperative Conservation: As deﬁned in Executive Order 13352 as 
“Actions that relate to use, enhancement, and enjoyment of natural 
resources, protection of the environment, or both, and that involve col-
laborative activity among federal, state, local, and tribal governments, 
private for-proﬁt and nonproﬁt institutions, other nongovernmental 
entities, and individuals.”
Contingency planning: Monitoring whether resources reach pre-deter-
mined thresholds that trigger a change in management actions; does not 
fully investigate the causal relationships between management actions 
and environmental eﬀects, however.
Crown cover: Te ground area covered by the crowns of trees or woody 
vegetation as delineated by the vertical projection of crown perimeters. It 
is commonly expressed as a percent of total ground area. 
Closed tree canopy: A class of vegetation that is dominated by trees 
with interlocking crowns (generally forming 60 to 100% crown cover).
Desired future condition: A statement describing a common vision for 
a speciﬁc area of land or type of land within the plan area. Statements of 
desired conditions should include the estimated time required for their 
achievement.
DBH: Diameter at breast height, a measure of tree diameter determined 
at the standard height of 4.5 feet.

203
Disturbance: A discrete event or process that aﬀects or inﬂuences the struc-
ture, composition, or function of a system. Natural disturbances include 
drought, ﬂoods, wind, ﬁres, insects, and pathogens. Human-caused distur-
bances include actions such as recreational use, livestock grazing, mining, 
road construction, timber harvest, and the introduction of exotic species.
Disturbance regime: A disturbance that occurs with some regularity with-
in a system; maybe co-evolved with the system components, for example, a 
frequent ﬁre regime.
Ecosystem: A complex of interacting plants and animals (including hu-
mans) with their physical surroundings. Ecosystems are isolated from each 
other by boundaries that conﬁne and restrict the movement of energy and 
matter. For example, an ecosystem could be recognized at a watershed scale 
by designating an area of common drainage (i.e., topography determines 
movement of water). 
Ecosystem function: Te processes by which the constituent living and 
nonliving elements of ecosystems change and interact. Te term ecological 
function is often used in reference to the role or speciﬁc contribution of an 
entity to system behavior.
Ecosystem management: A concept of natural resources management 
wherein human activities are considered in the context of economic, eco-
logical, and social interactions within a deﬁned area or region over both the 
short and long term. Its purpose is to meet human needs while maintaining 
the health, diversity, and productivity of ecosystems.
Ecosystem processes: Ecological functions such as photosynthesis, energy 
ﬂow, nutrient cycling, water movement, disturbance, and succession.
Ecosystem restoration: Actions taken to modify an ecosystem for the pur-
pose of re-establishing and maintaining desired ecological structures and 
processes.

204
Ecosystem goods and services: Te suite of direct beneﬁts (i.e., with-
out any other input) provided by nature to humankind, including 
fresh air, water puriﬁcation, recreational opportunities, wildlife habitat, 
and biodiversity.
Ecosystem structure: Te physical and biological attributes as well as 
the spatial arrangement of the living and nonliving elements within an 
ecosystem. 
Eﬀectiveness monitoring: A type of monitoring that evaluates 
whether management activities have been successful in moving a set of 
existing conditions toward a set of desired future conditions; that is, it 
involves measuring condition change over time relative to management 
actions. It answers the basic question: Did the actions taken have the 
desired result on the condition(s) of concern? Establishing an eﬀective-
ness monitoring protocol will likely be one of the major eﬀorts for any 
collaborative forest restoration group.
Facilitation: Te process in which an independent facilitator assists a 
group to constructively discuss a number of complex, potentially con-
troversial or contentious issues. 
Facilitator: A third-party, neutral person who helps collaborative 
groups eﬀectively engage to reach speciﬁc goals.
Fire hazard: Te level of ignition threat posed by the kind, arrange-
ment, volume, condition, and location of a forest or other ecosystem; 
can also be used to assess the diﬃculty of wildﬁre suppression.
Forest health: A condition wherein a forest has the capacity across the 
landscape for renewal, for recovery from a wide range of disturbances, 
and for retention of its ecological resiliency, while meeting current and 
future needs of people for desired levels of values, uses, products, and 
services. 

205
Forest: In general, an area or biotic community dominated by trees 
of any size (usually, at least 10 percent of the area is covered by 
trees). If distinction is made to woodlands, forests are composed of 
taller, more closely-spaced trees.
Fuels: Te organic materials that support ignition and spread of a 
ﬁre (duﬀ, litter, grass, weeds, forbs, brush, trees, snags, and logs).
Fuel treatment: Te re-arrangement or disposal of fuels to reduce 
the ﬁre hazard by mechanical thinning, mastication, or prescribed 
burning.
Ground rules: Rules that establish open and fair procedures for 
parties to follow when working together in a collaborative setting.
Heterarchy: A social arrangement in which the organizational 
structure is only partially ordered, and where power is inclusive 
and information ﬂows more or less openly; networks or webs with 
nodes are examples of heterarchies.
Hierarchy: A social arrangement in which the organizational struc-
ture is clearly deﬁned (top-down), and there are a deﬁned chain of 
command, identiﬁable roles and responsibilities, and diﬀerential 
access to decision-making and information based on position with-
in the organization; bureaucracies, corporations, military organiza-
tions are examples of hierarchies.
Historic Range of Variability (HRV): Te variation in spatial, 
structural, compositional, and temporal characteristics of an eco-
system during a reference period prior to intensive resource use and 
management. Often used with Natural Range of Variability.
Human dimension: An integral component of ecosystem manage-
ment that recognizes people are part of ecosystems; that people’s 

206
pursuits of past, present, and future desires, needs, and values (in-
cluding perceptions, beliefs, attitudes, and behaviors) have and will 
continue to inﬂuence ecosystems; and that ecosystem management 
must include consideration of the physical, emotional, mental, 
spiritual, social, cultural, and economic well-being of people and 
communities.
Implementation monitoring: See compliance monitoring
Issue: A point of discussion, debate, or dispute regarding an envi-
ronmental eﬀect in a proposed action under the National Environ-
mental Policy Act.
Landscape: A heterogeneous area composed of a cluster of inter-
acting ecosystems that are repeated in similar form throughout the 
area. Forest landscapes usually range from hundreds to thousands 
of acres and are the result of geologic, edaphic, climatic, biotic, and 
human inﬂuences.
Major vegetation types: Plant communities that are characteristic 
of the macroclimate and geology of the region or sub-region; typi-
cally named after the dominant plant species.
Management scenario: A description of future conditions expected 
to result from the general implementation of a broad resource man-
agement strategy. Management scenarios are developed to explore 
the biological and social implications, tradeoﬀs, and uncertainties 
of ecosystem management rather than present a range of options 
for site speciﬁc adoption (management alternatives).
Monitoring: A component of adaptive management in which in-
formation is collected to track system behavior and its response to 
management. 

207
Multi-party monitoring: A process for assessing the eﬀectiveness of stew-
ardship contracting in meeting the goals of Title 16, United States Code, 
section 2104 Note that involves the Forest Service, cooperating Federal, 
State, and local agencies, tribal governments, local communities, non-
governmental organizations, and any interested groups or individuals.
Multiple year contract: A contract for procurement of supplies or services 
over several designated program years that requires establishment of a re-
newal option for each program year after the ﬁrst year. Te renewal option 
must be exercised to continue the contract for each designated program 
year after the initial year. An integrated resource service contract may be a 
multiple-year contract.
Multi-year contract: A contract for the procurement of supplies or ser-
vices over several designated program years that does not require establish-
ing and exercising an option for each program year after the ﬁrst year. A 
multi-year contract may provide that performance under the contract 
during the second and subsequent years of the contract is contingent upon 
the appropriation of funds and may provide for a cancellation payment 
to be made to the contractor if appropriations are not made. For the pur-
poses of stewardship contracting, a multi-year contract may be extended 
up to ten years. Multi-year contracts should not be confused with multiple 
year contracts. An integrated resource service contract may be a multi-year 
contract.
Native species: Species of plants and animals that are indigenous to the 
plan area or assessment area.
NEPA: National Environmental Protection Act; U.S. Forest Service policy 
and procedures for implementing NEPA and the Council on Environ-
mental Quality regulations (40 CFR chapter V) are described in Chapter 
1950 of the Forest Service Manual and Forest Service Handbook 1909.15, 
Environmental Policy and Procedures Handbook (See 36 CFR 200.4 for 
availability).

208
Networks: Loosely deﬁned, heterarchically structured groups of in-
dividuals with overlapping interests or responsibilities, who engage in 
informal communication over extended periods of time.
Partnerships: Generally long-standing and place-based groups, who 
serve to identify issues, gather information, generate management op-
tions, and develop recommendations for restoration projects within a 
speciﬁed geographic area.
Plan area: Te geographic area of National Forest System lands cov-
ered by an individual land and resource management plan. Te area 
may include one or more administrative units. 
Productive capacity of ecological systems: Te ability of an ecosys-
tem to maintain primary productivity including its ability to sustain 
desirable conditions such as clean water, fertile soil, riparian habitat, 
and the diversity of plant and animal species; to sustain desirable hu-
man uses; and to renew itself following disturbance.
Old growth: A late stage of forest succession in which trees have 
reached a mature condition. Although the speciﬁc characteristics of 
old-growth stands vary with species composition and history, some 
commonly expected attributes on productive sites include–an abun-
dance of large trees at least 180 to 200 years old; a multi-layered can-
opy dominated by large overstory trees with moderate to high canopy 
closure; numerous trees with broken tops, also numerous snags and 
large logs (i.e., coarse wood debris).
Outcomes: Identiﬁed end results; consequences that may aﬀect envi-
ronment, economy, stakeholders, and aﬀected groups.
Plan area: Te geographic area of National Forest System lands cov-
ered by an individual land and resource management plan. Te area 
may include one or more administrative units. 

209
Planning committees and advisory councils: Groups of invited experts 
who provide advice and/or help developing guidelines and plans for other 
organizations, such as government agencies. 
Prescribed ﬁre (or burning): Te intentional burning of forest fuels under 
conditions speciﬁed in an approved plan to meet management objectives 
and conﬁned to a predetermined area; ignition may be either the result of a 
scheduled management activity or from other sources (e.g., lightning).
Productive capacity of ecological systems: Te ability of an ecosystem 
to maintain primary productivity, including its ability to sustain desirable 
conditions such as clean water, fertile soil, riparian habitat, and a diversity 
of plant and animal species; to sustain desirable human uses; and to renew 
itself following disturbance.
Reference landscapes: Places identiﬁed in the plan area where the condi-
tions and trends of ecosystem composition, structure, and processes are 
deemed useful for setting objectives for desired conditions and for judging 
the eﬀectiveness of plan decisions. 
Resilience: Te ability of an ecosystem to maintain or restore biodiversity, 
biotic integrity, and ecological structure and processes following distur-
bance.
Responsible oﬃcial: Te agency oﬃcer with the authority and respon-
sibility to oversee the planning process and make decisions on proposed 
actions.
Restoration forestry: Te application of treatments to approximate his-
torical [stand] structure and ecological process in forest communities that 
for centuries were shaped by distinctive patterns of ﬁre. 
Reviewing oﬃcer: Te supervisor of the responsible oﬃcial; prepares the 
Record of Decision.

210
Scale: Te degree of resolution from a spatial or temporal perspective at 
which ecological and social processes, structures, and changes across space 
and time are observed and measured.
Silvicultural prescription: A silvicultural prescription is a written docu-
ment that describes management activities needed to implement treatments 
or treatment sequences. Te prescription documents the results of an analy-
sis of present and anticipated site conditions and management direction. It 
also describes the desired future vegetation conditions in measurable terms. 
Te desired condition is a basis for treatment, monitoring, and evaluation. 
Site speciﬁcity: A goal to establish plans that are derived from data speciﬁc 
to a give site or area.
Social and economic sustainability: Meeting the economic, social, aes-
thetic, and cultural needs and desires of current generations without reduc-
ing the capacity of the environment to provide for the needs and desires of 
future generations, at local, regional, and national levels. 
Species: Any member of the animal or plant kingdom that is described as a 
species in a peer-reviewed scientiﬁc publication and is identiﬁed as a species 
by the responsible oﬃcial pursuant to a plan decision, and must include all 
species listed under the Endangered Species Act as threatened, endangered, 
candidate, or proposed for listing by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service or 
National Marine Fisheries Service.
Stakeholders: A person or group with a direct interest, involvement, invest-
ment, or perspective about a particular issue or activity (e.g., forest restora-
tion). 
Stand basal area (BA): A measure of forest density that is equal to the sum 
of the cross sectional area of trees at breast height on an acre of land. It is 
also equal to the BA of a tree of average diameter multiplied by the number 
of trees per acre. 

211
Stratiﬁcation system: A methodology of site analysis that structures 
data into appropriate layers or strata of information (e.g., Geographic 
Information Systems).
Stratum/Strata: Stratum indicates a single layer of data within a strati-
ﬁcation system or Geographic Information System; strata indicate two 
or more layers of data within such a system.
Tinning: Te silvicultural practice of removing selected trees in a 
stand to reduce competition for light, water, and nutrients in order to 
promote the growth and survival of the remaining trees.
Treshold: Te point at which there is an abrupt change in an ecosys-
tem quality, property or phenomenon, or where small changes in an 
environmental driver produce large responses in the ecosystem. 
Tiering: A process used by federal agencies when developing an EIS 
that focuses on issues which are ready for a decision, and places those 
that have already been decided or are not ready for a decision in a 
lower level of consideration (see CEQ NEPA Regulations 40 CFR 
1508.28).
Treatment: Tis term describes any of a set of management activities 
that can assist the prompt recovery of forestlands. Management actions 
include any combination of live, dead, and dying wood removal, or 
disposal (with or without commercial value) by any feasible method, 
including but not limited to logging, piling, masticating, and burning, 
for site preparation. In addition, planting, seeding, and monitoring for 
natural regeneration without site preparation are appropriate manage-
ment activities designed to foster the prompt recovery following wild-
ﬁre. Treatments also include follow-up activities to control vegetation 
that competes with desired trees during the early establishment period, 
usually 1 to 5 years after establishment using any viable method that 
meets Land and Resource Management Plan direction.

212
Trial-and-Error management: A strategy wherein agencies adjust 
management decisions incrementally and in an ad hoc manner based 
on monitoring results. However, this strategy does not employ any 
clear monitoring framework or schedule, or structured feedback loops.
Trigger: A type of pre-negotiated commitment made by an agency 
within an adaptive management or mitigation framework specifying 
what actions will be taken if monitoring information shows x or y. 
Tey are predetermined decision points that are built into the deci-
sion-making framework (i.e., NEPA documents) at the outset (i.e., if 
this, then what).
Validation monitoring: A research-oriented form of monitoring that 
requires rigorous sampling designs, and extensive data collection and 
analysis, and serves as a follow up to eﬀectiveness monitoring. It seeks 
to answer the questions: Did our basic assumptions prove true? What 
caused the changes we identiﬁed during eﬀectiveness monitoring to 
occur? Designed to help the agencies and Congress determine whether 
the basic thinking for supporting the programs was sound and whether 
future changes need to be considered. 
VSS class: A classiﬁcation scheme that indicates a forest community’s 
structural stage with VSS1 being the earliest structural stage and VSS 6 
being the oldest stage with the largest trees.
Sources
Helms, J.A., ed. 1998. Te dictionary of forestry. Bethesda, MD: Society 
of American Foresters. 
USFS. Title 36: Parks, Forests, and Public Property CHAPTER II: 
FOREST SERVICE, DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, 
PART 219: PLANNING, Subpart A: National Forest System 
Land and Resource Management Planning: Deﬁnitions, 
219.36 - Deﬁnitions.
