Pricing ecosystem resilience in frequent-ﬁre ponderosa pine forests
Tong Wu a,⁎, Yeon-Su Kim b
a Center for Forestry and Center for Fire Research and Outreach, College of Natural Resources, 163 Mulford Hall, University of California-Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, United States
b School of Forestry, Northern Arizona University, 200 East Pine Knoll Drive, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, United States
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 25 October 2011
Received in revised form 1 November 2012
Accepted 1 November 2012
Available online 4 December 2012
Keywords:
Resilience
Ecosystem services
Forest management
Ecological restoration
Dry forests across the United States have become subject to declining resilience and, consequently, increased
vulnerability to catastrophic wildﬁres. These disturbances cause severe environmental and social damages
and may dislodge the forest into a different ecological regime. Forests provide many valuable services, such
as the provisioning of timber and the sequestering of carbon that would otherwise contribute to climate
change. The high-severity conﬂagrations that have become regular occurrences in many dry forests impinge
the delivery of such beneﬁts, particularly in the event of a regime shift. Sustainable forest management
should take these risks into account. This article analyzes the economics of resilience in dry forests with re-
spect to catastrophic ﬁres and ecological thresholds. We illustrate how to price ecosystem resilience for the
ﬁre-prone ponderosa pine forests of the western United States. This analysis demonstrates that pricing forest
resilience also establishes the economic value of ecological restoration with respect to ecosystem services,
thereby operationalizing forest management as an investment in natural capital.
© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Forests provide numerous ecosystem services, including timber,
nutrient cycling, water supply, and carbon sequestration. These
services project across different spatial scales, from local to national
to global. However, communities that exist in the adjacency of
forests are particularly interwoven with local ecological conditions,
depending on many ecosystem services for socioeconomic well-
being. This relationship is evident in the ponderosa pine region of
the southwestern United States. In this area, high-severity wildﬁres
have the potential to precipitate ecological regime shifts (Savage
and Mast, 2005; Vankat, 2005), undermining the delivery of desired
beneﬁts. A lack of resilience increases the probability of such transi-
tions. Given non-linear ecosystem dynamics, particularly with re-
spect to the role of ﬁre, greater attention should be paid to the
costs and beneﬁts of different management approaches (Perrings
and Walker, 1997).
This paper ﬁrst presents a brief overview of the concept of ecolog-
ical resilience and regime shifts and their relationship to ecosystem
services. Following, we use a capital-theoretic framework to quantify-
ing declining resilience in southwestern ponderosa pine forests and
the associated economic implications of restoration. In this view, re-
silience is another capital stock whose movements impact the value
of an ecosystem. In particular, if a catastrophic ﬁre moves a forest sys-
tem into an alternative regime of semi-permanent shrub-/grass-land,
the valued services it provides diminish sharply. Changes in the stock
of ecological resilience are captured by the surrogate indicator of tree
density, which provides an approximation of the forest system's vul-
nerability to stand-replacing wildﬁres. After pricing forest resilience
with this rubric, the contribution to “natural capital” of ecological res-
toration is assessed.
2. Study background
2.1. An overview of ecosystem resilience and services
In recent decades, ecological theory has moved from the traditional
“balance of nature” thesis toward a view of ecosystems as having mul-
tiple equilibria (Walker et al., 2004; Wu and Loucks, 1995), in which
qualitatively different regimes are possible (e.g., clear water lake vs. tur-
bid lake (Carpenter et al., 1999; Scheffer et al., 2000)). C.S. Holling de-
ﬁned ecological resilience as the largest shock a system can absorb
before transitioning to a different regime (Holling, 1973). In nature,
continual changes in “slow” variables can accumulate, often without
much visible indication, until a threshold is passed, at which point a re-
gime shift occurs. In forest ecosystems, a slow variable may be the grat-
ing effect of climate change or the accumulation of biomass over time.
As the pattern continues unabated, the ecosystem becomes increasingly
“brittle” and a small disturbance can set off a transition.
There are broadly two kinds of ecological resilience. Speciﬁed re-
silience is the measure of an ecosystem's vulnerability to a particular
kind of perturbation, and general resilience refers to robustness
against any potentially disturbing force. In quantifying the dynamics
of a particular ecosystem, the former is often more tractable to
Forest Policy and Economics 27 (2013) 8–12
⁎ Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 510 643 5429; fax: +1 510 643 3490.
E-mail addresses: tongwu@berkeley.edu (T. Wu), yeon-su.kim@nau.edu (Y.-S. Kim).
1389-9341/$ – see front matter © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.forpol.2012.11.002
Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect
Forest Policy and Economics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/forpol

analysis than the latter (Walker and Pearson, 2007). In either case, re-
silience can be difﬁcult to quantify — as a function of underlying pro-
cesses, there may not be obvious systemic change. However, using
comparative studies, a robust collection of data (if the system has
shown pronounced non-linear behavior before), and careful monitor-
ing of variables of interest, an approximation of relative location to
thresholds can be attained for many ecosystems (Muradian, 2001).
In modeling speciﬁed resilience, it is often useful to capture non-
linear behavior using an observable, surrogate indicator. An indicator
should be selected based on the ecological as well as the socioeco-
nomic characteristics of the system. For instance, Walker et al.
(2010) use changes in the water table as a measure of resilience in
their analysis of an agricultural system. In the study presented in
this paper, tree density is used as the surrogate indicator for the resil-
ience of ponderosa pine forests.
Closely allied to considerations of resilience are the services generat-
ed by ecosystems and the value given to them by society. Forests are
economically important, even if accounting for the full range of their
value with traditional measures can be difﬁcult (Vincent, 1999). Some
of the beneﬁts forests provide include “insurance policies” (e.g., a
healthy forest lowers the potential for costly erosion and ﬁres), regula-
tion of local and global habitats (e.g., microclimate control and the se-
questration of carbon emissions), cultural and esthetic enjoyment
(e.g., the sense of place offered by a scenic vista), and direct and indirect
inputs in production and consumption (e.g., extraction of timber for use
as fuel or construction material). (For a more extensive overview of eco-
system services associated with U.S. forests, see Krieger (2001).) Re-
gime shifts often impact both the quality and quantity of ecosystem
services provided. A clear-water lake, for instance, is likely to have a
broader array of beneﬁts, and is thus more economically desirable,
than its turbid alternative. As will be discussed subsequently, this
tradeoff also applies to a ponderosa pine forest and its potential,
post-ﬁre regime of a grass-/shrub-dominated landscape.
Regime shifts in a natural capital stock are often practically irre-
versible or prohibitively expensive to reverse. Additionally, ecological
transitions that occur over long time scales can have persisting im-
pacts even if they are reversible. For instance, reestablishing a forest
to maturity after a high-severity conﬂagration can take decades or
even generations. In the meanwhile, valuable services associated
with a standing forest are not produced. In a regional context, an un-
desirable regime shift can also be costly. This is especially true if the
regional economy is heavily dependent upon natural resources. In
the American West, previous forest management policies have,
often unwittingly, advanced the degradation of long-term ecological
health and thus undermined the productive base for rural economies.
Communities that have emerged around forests depend upon them
for many ecosystem services. Even in regions where logging has be-
come a minor source of income, other environmental beneﬁts such
as recreation, nature-based tourism, and scenic appreciation of real
estate have signiﬁcant economic value. Thus, it is of great relevance
to regional environmental management to identify, quantify, and
price local ecological resilience (or lack thereof).
2.2. Ecological resilience and the role of restoration in southwestern
ponderosa pine forests
The suppression of surface ﬁres (a historical disturbance regime),
overgrazing, and the logging of old-growth trees have dramatically al-
tered the ecological character of forests across the western United
States. This decline is acutely illustrated by a historical fact: for the wild-
ﬁres that burned 1.25 million ha in the northern Rocky Mountains in
1910, every responsible ignition burned on average 735 ha; for the
Rodeo–Chediski and Hayman ﬁres that razed 245,000 ha in Arizona
and Colorado less than a century later, every ignition accounted for an
average of 87,667 ha (Graham, 2003; Snider et al., 2003; USDA, 1978).
Today, it has been estimated that up to 32% of all forests in the U.S. suffer
high risk of wildﬁres (General Accounting Ofﬁce, 2005). Southwestern
ponderosa pine forests are now characterized by conditions that deviate
dramatically from those that existed prior to the implementation of ﬁre
exclusion and other recent practices (see Table 1). For instance, con-
temporary forests have markedly higher tree density and understory
fuel loads, while at the same time exhibiting much lower understory
productivity and biodiversity (Allen et al., 2002; Moore et al., 1999).
Most importantly, whereas frequent, low-severity surface ﬁres distin-
guished “pre-settlement” forests, infrequent but high-severity crown
ﬁres typify current ponderosa pine ecosystems.
In the schema of the adaptive cycle of ecosystem dynamics
(Gunderson and Holling, 2002; Walker et al., 2004), southwestern
ponderosa pine forests have entered the phase of accumulated “brit-
tleness,” becoming increasingly vulnerable to catastrophic distur-
bance. Studies suggest that there is potential for vegetation-type
conversion in the wake of a high-severity wildﬁre, resulting in a tran-
sition from forest to a grass-/shrub-dominated landscape (Dore et al.,
2010; Savage and Mast, 2005; Vankat, 2005). On timescales relevant
to policy considerations, this outcome would represent a regime
shift that is practically irreversible. The precipitous decline of forest
resilience and its socioeconomic consequences have drawn increased
attention and resources to restoration efforts — most notably the Col-
laborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program passed by the U.S.
Congress in 2009. Restoration treatments such as thinning and con-
trolled burns decrease tree density and fuel loads, thereby lowering
the severity of potential ﬁres while improving the structure, composi-
tion, and functioning of the forest ecosystem (Fulé, 2008). Thus, re-
stored forests more closely approximate the resilient ecological
conditions that prevailed before large-scale human settlement, and
are also less vulnerable to regime shifts.
It has also been shown that restoration may improve the ability of
ponderosa pine forests to provide ecosystem services. For instance,
restoration improves microclimate regulation, and the scenic quality
of restored forests is generally preferred to the dense stands that cur-
rently dominate (Brown and Daniel, 1984). Ecological impacts on real
estate value is suggested by a study by Kim and Wells (2005), which
showed that reducing forest density around residential housing in
northern Arizona produced an average increase of $800 for every
acre treated. Although these studies are instructive in understanding
the value of ponderosa pine ecosystem services, there remains a
dearth of local economic studies in the southwestern U.S. (e.g., see
Krieger, 2001). As will be discussed subsequently, this often requires
the use of valuations at coarser geographic scales to analyze the con-
tribution to natural capital of ecological restoration.
3. Methods
3.1. Pricing ecosystem resilience in a capital-theoretic framework
Our study utilizes a framework that was put forth as an extension
of
the
“Inclusive
Wealth”
(IW)
approach,
which
assesses
an
Table 1
Current vs. historical ecological conditions of southwestern ponderosa pine forests
(Allen et al., 2002; Moore et al., 1999).
Historical conditions
Current conditions
Disturbance regime
High-frequency, low-severity
surface ﬁres
Low-frequency,
high-severity
crown ﬁres
Forest structure
Open park-like spaces with
50–150 mature trees per hectare
High tree density,
with upwards of 2500
trees per hectare
Forest understory
Productive understory with diverse
vegetation and many openings and
lightly-forested places
Lower understory
productivity and
species diversity
and few openings
9
T. Wu, Y.-S. Kim / Forest Policy and Economics 27 (2013) 8–12

economy's sustainability by evaluating the changes – termed Genuine
Investment – in its productive base of capital assets (including natural
capital) (e.g., Arrow et al., 2004; Lange, 2004). Unlike “ﬂow” measure-
ments such as Green NNP (i.e., a country's total annual product after
adjusting for the depreciation of natural capital and other physical as-
sets), IW is a stock-based approach to sustainability assessment. Pro-
duction and consumption patterns during any period are necessarily
contingent upon the availability and conﬁguration of the productive
base at that time. Thus, intertemporal transfers of economic opportu-
nity are captured by the value of capital stocks (for a more detailed
overview of IW, see Arrow et al., 2003; Dasgupta, 2009).
The analyses offered in Arrow et al. (2004) and Lange (2004),
among other papers, have been on broad spatial scales. Spatial disag-
gregation to a local level can make for better estimations of a natural
capital stock's “shadow price,” or accounting value. A freshwater lake
in a remote rural region, for instance, is likely to have a markedly dif-
ferent value than a similar ecosystem near a metropolitan area. A
more “ﬁne-grained” perspective also allows for more accurate assess-
ments of ecological characteristics such as resilience. Additionally,
natural resource management decisions are often made below the
national level. Walker and colleagues conducted an IW analysis of
resilience in an agricultural system in Australia's Goulburn–Broken
Catchment (Walker et al., 2010; Walker and Pearson, 2007). We use
the conceptual framework of their case study – the principles of
which were ﬁrst proposed in Mäler et al. (2006) and Mäler (2008) –
as a guide for our analysis of resilience in southwestern ponderosa
pine forests.
Mäler et al. (2006) proposed treating ecosystem resilience as a
capital stock. By calculating the probability distribution (contingent
upon the initial level of resilience) of alternate stability regimes, one
can derive the expected value of social welfare. Then, measuring the
marginal product of a perturbation, the accounting price of the resil-
ience stock can be calculated (Mäler, 2008; Mäler et al., 2006). As-
suming a given ecosystem has two alternate stable regimes, one
“productive” and the other “unproductive” (as in a collapsed forest
that can no longer yield a stream of desired services). We can state
the probability that the system will ﬂip to the unproductive regime
as a function of the current stock of resilience R0 and time t: F(R0,t).
Correspondingly, the probability that the system will remain in the
current, productive regime is 1−F(R0,t)=S(R0,t). Let the beneﬁts ac-
cruing from the productive ecological regime at a future time t be
Up(t), the beneﬁts (or lack thereof) stemming from the alternate re-
gime be Ua(t), and δ be the pure rate of social discount, or the rate
at which future utility is translated into present-day terms (the
higher the rate, the more “impatient” we are, and thus the lower
the weight given to future utility today). From these assumptions,
we can then calculate the expected welfare of the system, given its
current level of resilience R0:
E W R0
ð
Þ
ð
Þ ¼ ∫
∞
0
S R0; t
ð
ÞUp tð Þ þ F R0; t
ð
ÞUa tð Þ
h
i
e−δt:
ð1Þ
3.2. Quantifying the resilience of southwestern ponderosa pine forests to
wildﬁre
As noted by Scheffer (2009), ecosystems do not often display the
clean dynamical changes between multiple stable states captured
within simpliﬁed models. Factors such as environmental heterogene-
ity and spatial exchanges complicate ecosystem behavior, and there is
a plausible continuum of changes from dramatic bifurcations to more
gradual transitions along an ecological gradient. It is often more use-
ful to think of non-linear ecological transitions as changes between
dynamic regimes than between stable states. The historical and con-
temporary characteristics of ponderosa pine forests, as well as the
potential for transition to a semi-permanent shrub-/grass-dominated
ecosystem, ﬁt into the framework of alternative regimes. The kind of
slow variable that often underlies ecological regime shifts – and that
can be adequately used as a surrogate measure for the stock of eco-
system resilience – is aptly represented by forest biomass. The
ﬁre-ecological dynamics of southwestern ponderosa pine have been
studied extensively, thus providing an instructive empirical back-
ground against which to analyze resilience.
In particular, tree density has proven to be a reliable predicator of
wildﬁre hazard. Poff (2002), analyzing data from Fulé et al. (2001a,b),
found that basal area-per-hectare was a good predictor of crown fuel
load and also serviceably anticipates the heat generated and the
amount of forest crown burnt. Accounting for the dynamics of these
variables, Poff (2002) produced a compromise response function
that predicates ﬁre hazard in relation to basal area-per-hectare. The
resulting measure of ﬁre hazard ranges between 0.00 and 1.00, and
has a positive correspondence to changes in tree density. For the fol-
lowing analysis, we use this index to extrapolate a probability distri-
bution of ecosystem behavior. This is a simpliﬁcation of the
underlying ﬁre ecology of dry forests. Such dynamics yield an exten-
sive literature, but can be conceptually and semantically difﬁcult to
simplify for the purpose of economic/policy analysis (for instance,
see Hardy (2005) for a discussion regarding the difﬁculties regarding
the usage of the term “hazard” and “risk”). We have made sacriﬁced
some biophysical complexity for economic lucidity to more clearly
present the logic of the model — the primary purpose of this paper.
A ﬁre hazard value of 1.00 represents a 100% probability of shift
into the less desirable regime of grass-/shrub-land (i.e., a stand-
replacing ﬁre of sufﬁcient intensity to induce vegetation type conver-
sion) after 1 year (t=1), a value of 0.75 represents a 75% probability,
and so on. Thus, it is possible to interpret a regime shift probability
distribution as a function of tree density (see Fig. 1). The current
stock of forest resilience is deﬁned as a function of the basal area mea-
sured in m2 per hectare. If X0 represents current tree density, then the
current stock of resilience is R0=X0
−1. This reﬂects the fact that an in-
crease in tree density results in a corresponding decline in the stock of
resilience. The cumulative probability distribution that the forest will
ﬂip into its unproductive regime up to a point in time t, as adapted
from the ﬁre hazard model developed by Poff (2002), is expressed
in Fig. 1. The survival probability function is S(R0,t)=1−F(R0,t).
Thus, the lower the tree density, the larger the stock of forest resil-
ience and the higher the probability of the ecosystem remaining in
the productive state Up at some point t in the future.1
To monetize the alternative ecological states in a stand of south-
western ponderosa pine, we used the values from Costanza et al.'s
(1997) survey of global ecosystem valuation. Costanza et al. (1997),
reviewing an exhaustive range of studies, estimates the annual eco-
nomic value of the world's “temperate/boreal forests” to be US$302/
ha. The annual per-hectare value for “grass/rangelands” is imputed
to be $232. Although these estimates are at a very coarse scale
(i.e., there being wide diversity of ecosystem types within “temperate/
boreal forests”), they are serviceable for the purposes of our model
the following reasons: (1) there are few local studies examining the
economic value, market or non-market, of ponderosa pine forests;
(2) those local studies that exist focus on a single or a narrow set of eco-
system values and/or are denominated in a way that cannot be translat-
ed to per-hectare terms (e.g., economic value given per-household);
and (3) the review covers 17 categories of ecosystem services (see
Costanza et al. (1997) for list), all of which are present in ponderosa
pine forests, and thus provides a relatively robust approximation of
the economic value of the ecosystem under study.
1 Of course, below a certain level of density, the ecosystem ceases to be a forest.
According to the FAO, an ecosystem with a basal area less than 10% is no longer a forest.
We abstract for this technical deﬁnition for simplicity.
10
T. Wu, Y.-S. Kim / Forest Policy and Economics 27 (2013) 8–12

3.3. The shadow price of forest resilience
From the model presented above, forest restoration (e.g., mechanical
thinning) is a form of investment in the resilience stock. Through de-
creasing tree density, treatments lower the probability of a ﬂip to the al-
ternative, economically less-desirable regime of shrub-/grass-land.
Thus, the value of forest restoration is linked to the lower risk of regime
shift due to stand-replacing wildﬁre. More speciﬁcally, the economic
value of an act of forest restoration is equivalent to the resulting amount
of increase in the resilience stock. From Eq. (1), the shadow price of re-
silience is the change in the expected value brought about by a change in
the stock of resilience. Again following Walker et al. (2010), this can be
expressed as:
p 0
ð Þ ¼ ∂E W 0
ð
Þ
∂R0
:
ð2Þ
Eq. (2) can be further summarized as:
p 0
ð Þ ¼
Up−Ua

X
N
t¼0
ΔS R0; t
ð
Þ
ΔR0
1
1 þ δ
ð
Þt


:
ð3Þ
4. Results
4.1. The value of restoration in southwestern ponderosa pine
To illustrate the economic value of ecological restoration, suppose
landscape-level treatments are applied to a forest area of 190,000 ha —
an area roughly equivalent to the territory burned by the Rodeo–
Chediski Fire in 2002. Let the prevailing average basal area of the forest
stand, X0, be 40 m2/ha, approximating the high tree density prevailing
in current southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Following Eq. (2), the
probability of a ﬂip after 1 year is 0.82, and the corresponding survival
probability is 0.18. Suppose that restoration treatments consequently
applied to the forest stand reduce the tree density to 15 m2/ha, resulting
in an increase in the survival probability to 0.77.
Using the per-hectare estimates from Costanza et al. (1997)
enumerated in Section 3.2, we calculate the economic values of the
productive forest regime (Up) and the alternate grass-/shrub-land
regime
(Ua)
to
be
$57,380,000
and
$44,080,000
respectively.
Adopting an annual discount rate (∂) of 4%, and with reference to
Eq. (3), the price of the resilience stock after a decrease in tree density
of 25 m2/ha is $7,545,192.30. As we can see from this calculation, the
economic gains in ecosystem services from a more resilient forest can
be signiﬁcant.
4.2. Sensitivity analysis
Our analysis has made abstractions due to the relatively novel
conceptual framework and the availability of certain kinds of data,
particularly socioeconomic data. To get a better feel of these limita-
tions, we have conducted a sensitivity analysis (please see Table 2)
with respect to the social discount rate (∂) and the target tree density
of restoration (X1). We tested two alternate input values of +/−50%
for each variable. The sensitivity to changes in the discount rate is
expected. The lower the rate, the higher the resilience price per hect-
are, and the greater the discount rate, the lesser the value of p(0).
Changes to the discount rate by +/−2 percentage points did not sig-
niﬁcantly alter the value of p(0). The relationship between changes in
X1, the target tree density, and the p(0) is also anticipated: the less
dense the forest stand, the higher the economic value of the system's
resilience. Adjustments to X1 by +/−5 m2 created larger changes in
the value of p(0) than the +/−50% variation tested for ∂.
5. Discussion
The aim of this paper has been to explicate the economic relation-
ship between a forest's resilience and its provisioning of ecosystem ser-
vices. In spite of the abstractions we have had to make, we believe the
logic of the model is sound and will be instructive for the analysis of for-
est restoration policies. Pricing resilience can make a more compelling
case for the implementation of ecological restoration as an investment
in natural capital. This may prove useful for the management of dry
forests in which high-severity ﬁres have become a normal disturbance
regime. In places where ecological data are limited, it is essential to
develop a set of surrogate indicators that can be used to track resilience.
There is also a need for more systematic reviews and meta-studies of
previous, case-speciﬁc literature to develop ecological models to
characterize the potential and presence of non-linear behavior
(e.g., Ecological Restoration Institute, 2011).
In many parts of the U.S., environmental management is becoming
increasingly constrained by ﬁnancial and political considerations. In
such a context, the demand for ecological restoration by researchers
and managers could be strengthened by an appeal to its economic
value (Wu et al., 2011a). For southwestern ponderosa pine, Snider
et al. (2003) estimate the per-hectare costs of treatments to be be-
tween $500 and $2000. For cash-strapped states, which despite suf-
fering growing numbers of increasingly severe wildﬁres in recent
years, landscape-level restoration is often prohibitively expensive.
Mobilizing the public resources necessary to restore forest resilience
invites invidious comparisons with other, more “tangibly” economic
objectives such as man-made infrastructure investment. Further-
more, stakeholders may not be aware of the ecological changes that
have occurred to their forest ecosystems, and can underrate the im-
portance of restoration as a result (Wu et al., 2011b). Tying the provi-
sioning of recognizably valuable ecosystem services, monetized
wherever possible, to forest resilience is a way to bridge the gap in
the public understanding and appreciation of forest restoration.
Being able to provide an actual price for incremental increases in re-
silience, as a function of restoration treatments, is likely to make the
policy argument more tractable.
Table 2
Sensitivity analysis with different input variable values, assuming constant per-hectare
value of ecosystem services and starting tree density.
Input variable
Original value
New value
p(0)
∂
4%
2% (−50%)
$7,693,137.25
6% (+50%)
$7,402,830.18
X1
15 m2
20 m2
$6,394,230.76
10 m2
$8,568,269.23
Fig. 1. Probability distribution of system ﬂip as a function of tree density.
Adapted from: Poff (2002).
11
T. Wu, Y.-S. Kim / Forest Policy and Economics 27 (2013) 8–12

Finally, as interdisciplinary research on ecological–economic sys-
tems expands, we expect the progressive relaxation of some of the
empirical and conceptual limitations encountered in our study, par-
ticularly for ecosystems with many biophysical processes such as for-
ests. When valuations of ecosystem resilience are non-existent, the
implication for policy is often that resilience has no economic value
at all. Resilience pricing thus represents a step in the proper direction
of understanding and sustainably managing ecosystems.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Dr. W. Wallace Covington, Dr. Julie
Mueller, Dr. Dave Egan, Dr. Brian Walker, and an anonymous referee
for their comments on previous drafts of this manuscript. We would
also like to thank the Ecological Restoration Institute for providing
the funding for Tong Wu's research activities.
References
Allen, C.D., Savage, M., Falk, D.A., Suckling, K.F., Swetnam, T.W., Schulke, T., Stacey, P.B.,
Morgan, P., Hoffman, M., Klingel, J.T., 2002. Ecological restoration of southwestern
ponderosa pine ecosystems: a broad perspective. Ecological Applications 12,
1418–1433.
Arrow, K., Dasgupta, P., Mäler, K.-G., 2003. The genuine savings criterion and the value
of population. Economic Theory 21, 217–255.
Arrow, K., Dasgupta, P., Goulder, L., Daily, G., Ehrlich, P., Heal, G., Levin, S., Mäler, K.-G.,
Schneider, S., Starrett, D., Walker, B., 2004. Are we consuming too much? Journal of
Economic Perspectives 18, 147–172.
Brown, T.C., Daniel, T.C., 1984. Modeling Forest Scenic Beauty: Concepts and Applica-
tion to Ponderosa Pine. USDA Forest Service.
Carpenter, S.R., Ludwig, D., Brock, W.A., 1999. Management of eutrophication for lakes
subject to potentially irreversible change. Ecological Applications 9, 751–771.
Costanza, R., d'Arge, R., de Groot, R., Farber, S., Grasso, M., Hannon, B., Limburg, K.,
Naeem, S., O'Neill, R.V., Paruelo, J., Raskin, R.G., Sutton, P., van den Belt, M., 1997.
The value of the world's ecosystem services and natural capital. Nature 387,
253–260.
Dasgupta, P., 2009. The welfare economic theory of green national accounts. Environ-
mental and Resource Economics 42, 3–38.
Dore, S., Kolb, T.E., Montes-Helu, M., Eckert, S.E., Sullivan, B.W., Hungate, B.A., Kaye, J.P.,
Hart, S.C., Koch, G.W., Finkral, A.J., 2010. Carbon and water ﬂuxes from ponderosa
pine forests disturbed by wildﬁre and thinning. Ecological Applications 20,
663–683.
Ecological Restoration Institute, 2011. Evidence-based conservation projects. http://
www.eri.nau.edu/en/evidence-based-restoration-projects.
Fulé, P.Z., 2008. Does it make sense to restore wildland ﬁre in changing climate? Resto-
ration Ecology 16, 526–531.
Fulé, P.Z., McHugh, C., Heinlein, T.A., Covington, W.W., 2001a. Potential ﬁre behavior is
reduced following restoration treatments. In: Vance, R.K., Covington, W.W.,
Edminster, C.D. (Eds.), Ponderosa Pine Ecosystems Restoration and Conservation:
Steps Toward Stewardship. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station,
Ogden, UT, pp. 28–35.
Fulé, P.Z., Waltz, A.E.M., Covington, W.W., Heinlein, T.A., 2001b. Measuring forest resto-
ration effectiveness in reducing hazardous fuels. Journal of Forestry 99, 24–29.
General Accounting Ofﬁce, 2005. Wildland Fire Management: Additional Actions
Required to Better Identify and Prioritize Lands Needing Fuels Reduction. General
Accounting Ofﬁce, Washington, D. C.
Graham, R.T.e, 2003. Hayman Fire Case Study, General Technical Report. U.S. Depart-
ment of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Ogden,
Utah.
Gunderson, L.H., Holling, C.S., 2002. Panarchy: Understanding Transformations in
Human and Natural Systems. Island Press.
Hardy, C.C., 2005. Wildland ﬁre hazard and risk: problems, deﬁnitions, and context.
Forest Ecology and Management 211, 73–82.
Holling, C.S., 1973. Resilience and stability of ecosystems. Annual Review of Ecology
and Systematics 4, 1–23.
Kim, Y.-S., Wells, A., 2005. The impacts of forest density on property values. Journal of
Forestry 103, 146–151.
Krieger, D.J., 2001. The Economic Value of Forest Ecosystem Services: A Review. The
Wilderness Society, Washington D.C.
Lange, G.M., 2004. Wealth, natural capital, and sustainable development: contrasting
examples from Botswana and Namibia. Environmental and Resource Economics
1, 1–28.
Mäler, K.-G., 2008. Sustainable development and resilience in ecosystems. Environ-
mental and Resource Economics 39, 17–24.
Mäler, K.-G., Li, C.-Z., Destouni, G., 2006. Pricing Resilience in Dynamic Economy–
Environment System: A Capital Theoretic Approach. Beijer Discussion Papers.
Moore, M.M., Covington, W.W., Fulé, P.Z., 1999. Reference conditions and ecological
restoration: a southwestern ponderosa pine perspective. Ecological Applications
9, 1266–1277.
Muradian, R., 2001. Ecological thresholds: a survey. Ecological Economics 38, 7–24.
Perrings, C., Walker, B., 1997. Biodiversity, resilience, and the control of ecological–
economic systems: the case of ﬁre-driven rangelands. Ecological Economics 22,
73–83.
Poff, B., 2002. Modeling Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forest Ecosystem Management
in a Multi-Objective Decision-Making Framework. School of Forestry. Northern
Arizona University, Flagstaff.
Savage, M., Mast, J.N., 2005. How resilient are southwestern ponderosa pine forests
after crown ﬁres? Canadian Journal of Forest Research 35, 967–977.
Scheffer, M., 2009. Alternative stable states and regime shifts in ecosystems. In: Levin,
S. (Ed.), Princeton Guide to Ecology. Princet University Press, pp. 395–406.
Scheffer, M., Brock, W., Westley, F., 2000. Mechanisms preventing optimum use of eco-
system services: an interdisciplinary theoretical analysis. Ecosystems 3, 451–471.
Snider, G.B., Wood, D.B., Daugherty, P.J., 2003. Analysis of Costs and Beneﬁts of
Restoration-based Hazardous Fuel Reduction: Treatments vs No Treatment. School
of Forestry, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, Arizona.
USDA, 1978. When the Mountains Roared. Forest Service, U. S. Department of Agricul-
ture, Coeur d'Alene, ID.
Vankat, J.L., 2005. Montane and Subalpine Terrestrial Ecosystems of the Southern
Colorado Plateau — Literature Review and Conceptual Models, Vital Signs Monitor-
ing Plan for the Southern Colorado Plateau Network: Phase III Report. National
Park Service, Flagstaff.
Vincent, J.R., 1999. A framework for forest accounting. Forest Science 45, 552–561.
Walker, B.H., Pearson, L., 2007. A resilience perspective of the SEEA. Ecological Economics
61, 708–715.
Walker, B., Holling, C.S., Carpenter, S.R., Kinzig, A., 2004. Resilience, adaptability and
transformability in social–ecological systems. Ecology and Society 9 (5) (http://
www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol9/iss2/art5/).
Walker, B., Pearson, L., Harris, M., Mäler, K.-G., Li, C.-Z., Biggs, R., Baynes, T., 2010. Incor-
porating resilience in the assessment of inclusive wealth: an example from South
East Australia. Environmental and Resource Economics 45, 183–202.
Wu, J., Loucks, O.L., 1995. From balance of nature to hierarchical patch dynamics: a
paradigm shift in ecology. The Quarterly Review of Biology 70, 439–466.
Wu, T., Kim, Y.-S., Hurteau, M.D., 2011a. Investing in natural capital: using economic
incentives to overcome barriers to forest restoration. Restoration Ecology 19,
441–445.
Wu, T., Petriello, M.A., Kim, Y.-S., 2011b. Shifting baseline syndrome as a barrier to eco-
logical restoration in the American Southwest. Ecological Restoration 29, 213–215.
12
T. Wu, Y.-S. Kim / Forest Policy and Economics 27 (2013) 8–12
