Why the Flagstaff Restoration Model
Should Not Be Applied To
Public Forest Lands
SOUTHWEST FOREST ALLIANCE
September 2000


Cover
Result of a Forest Logged According to the Flagstaff Restoration Model
Only 12% of the Trees Where Left Standing In This Specific Site
Fort Valley Project, Coconino National Forest Near Flagstaff, Arizona
Photo by Martos Hoffman

SOUTHWEST FOREST ALLIANCE
Flagstaff Office q PO Box 1948 q Flagstaff, AZ q 86002 q 520-774-6514/6846 (fax) q mhoffman@swfa.org
Silver City Office q PO Box 102 q Pinos Altos, NM q 88053 q 505-388-8799/0666 (fax) q tschulke@biologicaldiversity.org
Grand Canyon Office q PO Box 1033 q Grand Canyon, AZ q 86023 q 520-638-2304 q kcrumbo@swfa.org
September 1, 2000
This summer’s severe fires have prompted a national discussion regarding their underlying causes and the
actions that should be taken to reduce the potential for extensive fires in the future.  In the search for
solutions the “Flagstaff model” has been held up by some as the silver bullet that will solve the West’s
forest fire problems.  Instead of being a solution, the Flagstaff model has the potential to cause the same
kind of damage that we fear from the high intensity fires that are currently raging.  While it is clear that
some proactive measures need to be taken to cure the problems created over the last century by
overgrazing, old growth logging, and fire suppression, it would be a grave mistake to resort to extreme
measures like the Flagstaff model.
Like the outdated commodity extraction model of forest use that caused the fire problems that we face
today, the Flagstaff model is an experiment that threatens to deepen many of the wounds already inflicted
on our forests.  As the enclosed briefing packet shows, the Flagstaff model not only fails to restore the
beauty and ecological integrity of the forest but, in many cases, is more extreme and damaging than the
industrial logging that has caused so much controversy in the past.
The timber industry has seized upon this summer’s intense fires as an opportunity to return to the
unfettered policies and practices that brought us to the very position that we find ourselves in today.
Ironically, under the guise of forest restoration, the proponents of the Flagstaff model are in effect
following the same path.  The practices that characterize the Flagstaff model have prompted an outcry by
those who are concerned about wildlife, ecosystem function, and aesthetics.  Even more significantly,
many scientist have come to deeply question the basis of the Flagstaff model and its impact on forest
dependent wildlife species.
The environmental community recognizes the need to address the problems at hand.  Proposed solutions
include the use of prescribed fire and judicious thinning where appropriate.  The Southwest Forest
Alliance, in conjunction with a working group of forest and fire ecologists from around the intermountain
west, has initiated a program to develop ecologically sensible forest restoration guidelines.  We are also
working in rural communities to develop the broad-based agreements necessary to implement these
guidelines in a manner that addresses the ecological concerns of the environmental community as well as
many of the economic needs of rural communities.  These two issues need not be at odds.
We believe that clear ecological criteria must be fully integrated into the solutions.  These criteria need to
address the ecological aspects of forest structure, function, and composition.  We are encouraged by a
proposal offered by Forest Service Chief Dombeck to focus thinning efforts on the removal of small trees
from high priority urban-interface areas.  Focusing on community protection is the best first step toward
developing the capacity and the wisdom to address the larger ecological issues of forest restoration.
It is clear that the high potential for continued controversy could impede efforts to deal with these
problems.  The Flagstaff model is at one extreme of the spectrum of possible answers.  It has already
spawned opposition in the Southwest, and across the nation, with no end in sight.  We therefore urge
decision makers to recognize the problems inherent in the Flagstaff model and the controversy and
ecological problems it would create if adopted.
For more information please contact Martos Hoffman, Southwest Forest Alliance Executive
Director or Todd Schulke, Southwest Forest Alliance Restoration Coordinator at the addresses
listed above.
Publication quality digital images of all photographs included in this briefing packet are available
upon request.

SUMMARY OF PROBLEMS WITH THE
FLAGSTAFF MODEL
¤ It represents the most extreme treatment in the spectrum of forest restoration models
available today.  It removes up to 80-90% of the trees in the areas where it is applied.
¤ It leaves no room for error.  The extreme reduction in trees and forest structure
eliminates any possibility for adaptive management in the near future.
¤ Its overly aggressive thinning leads to serious ecological problems at both the stand
and landscape level.
¤ It removes large trees, the very ones that will develop into mature forest structures the
fastest.
¤ It has unknown and potentially severe impacts on forest-dependent wildlife, like the
northern goshawk, that require interlocking and mature tree canopy structures.
¤ It drastically decreases the structural and age diversity of trees within the forest.
¤ It tends to produces an evenly spaced, tree farm like structure.
¤ It fails to acknowledge any uncertainties in determining the state of the forests in the
1870s, and our ability to recreate it today.
¤ It cannot be applied to other forest types such as mixed conifer, conifer, pinyon-
juniper, etc.
¤ It assumes that ponderosa forests are static and fails to account for climatically
induced regeneration pulses of the 1910s and 1920s, as well as others, which would
have naturally altered the forest structure.
¤ It attempts to re-create the approximate number of presettlement trees and their
locations, however this is not the same as re-creating a presettlement forest.
¤ In the designation of the trees which are left standing, it fails to sufficiently take into
account the mortality of trees due to: 1) the logging operation itself; 2) prescribed
fire; or 3) natural mortality over time.  It also fails to account for the inability to find
all of the presettlement evidences and the effect of climatically induced tree
population dynamics.  The net result is that the model the leaves far to few trees
standing after its treatment.
¤ Extreme thinning produces tremendous amounts of logging slash, drier soils, and
results in higher wind speeds within thinned forests, all of which cause extreme
behavior.


FIGURE 1
Aerial View of a Flagstaff Restoration Model Logging Area
Fort Valley Project, Coconino National Forest near Flagstaff, Arizona
Aerial photograph of Flagstaff restoration demonstration blocks #1 and #2 on the south
side of the San Francisco Peaks, Coconino National Forest near Flagstaff, Arizona.
Area was thinned in the late fall of 1998 and was burned using a prescribed fire in the
spring of 2000.
The large open area with scattered trees in the lower left side of the photograph resulted
from a fire in the mid 1900s.
¤ Diamond shaped area (80 acres) of thinned trees near center of photograph illustrates
the extreme reduction in forest density that results from the application of the
presettlement restoration methodology that characterizes the so-called “Flagstaff
model.”
¤ The lower half of the diamond shaped area was thinned using the same logging
prescription (the Flagstaff model) that is being recommended by the Forest Service
for use across the majority of the Fort Valley treatment area.


FIGURE 2
Removing 88% of Trees Results In An Unnaturally Sparse Forest
Fort Valley Project, Coconino National Forest near Flagstaff, Arizona
Flagstaff model demonstration block #1 which used a “full” presettlement restoration
prescription that retained either 1.5 or 3 trees for each presettlement tree evidence,
depending upon the size of the replacement trees (a 1.5/3 replacement rate).  The cover
photograph illustrates another example from this same demonstration block.
¤ 88% of the trees from this site were removed.
¤ Low number of retained trees results in an unnaturally open forest condition.
¤ Area fails to replicate the random groupiness that is typical of southwestern
ponderosa pine forests.
¤ Site no longer contains suitable tree density or canopy closure for many forest canopy
dependent species (e.g. northern goshawk, Mexican spotted owl, Abert squirrel).


FIGURE 3
Flagstaff Model Removes Some of the Largest Trees
Fort Valley Project, Coconino National Forest near Flagstaff, Arizona
Flagstaff model demonstration block #2 which used a “modified” presettlement
restoration prescription that retained trees at the rate of 2 or 4 trees per identified
presettlement tree evidence (a 2/4 replacement rate).
The 2/4 replacement rate prescription is the thinning prescription that the Forest Service
is calling for as their preferred method for the Flagstaff model.
Stump in center foreground is approximately 20” diameter at its base (the lens cap on the
center of the stump is 2” in diameter).
¤ 83% of the trees from this site were removed.
¤ 75% of the largest trees (those in 16” to 21” diameter at breast height size range) that
were established after 1870 were removed because these large trees were growing in
the “wrong” place according to the Flagstaff model.  Such trees were more than 60
feet from a presettlement evidence.
¤ The result of logging these trees is a loss of the biggest existing trees, which are the
ones most likely to quickly develop into the large trees that were the most prevalent
component of natural forests.
¤ Ecological restoration of this site is thus further delayed than if these large trees were
retained.
¤ Other restoration scientists emphasize that thinning the small trees, while
simultaneously retaining the large trees, is the best means to reduce the potential for
high intensity fires and is the most ecologically prudent means to restore forests.


FIGURE 4
Extremely Open Forest and Log Decks Created by the Flagstaff Model
                      Fort Valley Project, Coconino National Forest near Flagstaff, Arizona
Log decks and the extremely open forest resulting from the application of the Flagstaff
model.
The 2/4 restoration prescription used in this area is the Flagstaff model thinning
prescription that the Forest Service is calling for as their preferred method for the
majority of the Fort Valley Project.
¤ Openings of two or more acres such as this are common results of this model.


FIGURE 5
Large Trees Are Logged While Leaving Small Trees
Mt. Trumbull Restoration Site, Grand Canyon-Parashant Nat. Mon., AZ
The Flagstaff model (also called the presettlement reconstruction model) often results in
the cutting of the largest trees because of its cookbook prescription which calls for
finding replacement trees for presettlement tree evidences within only a set search radius
(30 or 60 feet depending upon the specific prescription being used) from the
presettlement evidences.  The net result is the removal of some of the largest trees from a
site because these large trees are outside of the rigidly applied search radius.
The Flagstaff presettlement restoration model being used in the Fort Valley area has been
applied by Dr. Wallace Covington across more than 1,000 acres of ponderosa pine forest
at Mount Trumbull, within the newly designated Grand Canyon-Parashant National
Monument.  Restoration treatments in this area utilize nearly the same prescription as that
used in the Fort Valley area near Flagstaff and thus serve as examples of what these
treatments will look like when applied in different places around the southwest.


FIGURE 6
Logging Slash Compacted by Bulldozers Causes Significant Soil Damage
Mt. Trumbull Restoration Site, Grand Canyon-Parashant Nat. Mon., AZ
Photograph taken of a restoration unit at Mt. Trumbull where cutting was completed in
the fall of 1999. (Unit #96-3)
¤ Large amount of logging slash created as a result of removing up to 90% of the trees
from a site creates significant problems in controlling the intensity of the first
prescribed fire following the logging treatment. (See Figures 7 and 8 which show the
effects of these post-logging prescribed fires.)
¤ In an attempt to reduce the intensity of the first burn following the logging a
bulldozer was run over this entire site to compact the logging slash.
¤ Significant soil disturbance resulting from this bulldozer compaction operation begs
the question of whether or not this can be considered ecological restoration.  Exotic
plant species are likely to become the dominant herbaceous plants in areas of such
extreme disturbance.
¤ Multi-acre openings, with only a few leave trees typically result from the application
of the presettlement restoration model.


FIGURE 7
Tree Mortality From the Prescribed Burn Following Restoration Logging
Mt. Trumbull Restoration Site, Grand Canyon-Parashant Nat. Mon., AZ
First restoration treatment unit at Mt. Trumbull that was burned in the fall of 1997. (Unit
#96-1)
¤ Majority of trees left to replace the previously logged presettlement trees were killed
in the first prescribed fire following the restoration logging operation.  This
demonstrates one reason why the presettlement model’s cookbook replacement
system is flawed because it leaves far to few trees.
¤ Area was seeded with herbaceous and shrub seeds two times during the first year
following the prescribed burn.
¤ All of the restoration demonstration projects completed by Dr. Covington, except for
the Flagstaff Fort Valley Project, have been reseeded as part of the treatment.
Therefore, conclusions drawn about the amount of herbaceous growth that results
from these demonstration units cannot be extrapolated to other restoration treatments
that do not receive similar reseeding.


FIGURE 8
Tree Mortality From Prescribed Burn Following Restoration Logging
Grandview Point, Kaibab National Forest Near Grand Canyon Nat. Park
Presettlement restoration project adjacent to Grand Canyon National Park’s southern
boundary burned in December 1999.  The same model has been proposed for use within
Grand Canyon National Park.
¤ The small diameter trees left standing to replace the previously logged old growth
trees have been killed by the prescribed fire following the restoration logging.
¤ Multi-acre openings typically result from the application of the presettlement
restoration model.
¤ Cutting of the majority of the trees at a location and burning results in fire intensities
and an end result that is no better than high intensity crown fires.


FIGURE 9
Relict Natural Old Growth Ponderosa Pine Forest
Powell Plateau, Grand Canyon National Park
This represents the premiere example of what ponderosa pine forests were like across the
southwest prior to fire suppression and logging.  Powell Plateau is an isolated plateau off
the North Rim that has had the least amount of natural process disruption over the past
century and a half than any other place in the southwest.  It therefore serves as an
exemplar for successful forest restorations.
¤ Compare the number, size, groupiness, and canopies of the trees in this photograph
with the end result of the presettlement restoration logging as shown in Figures 1
through 8.


FIGURE 10
Southwest Forest Alliance’s Restoration Mimics Natural Forest Structures
Kaibab National Forest between Flagstaff and Williams, AZ
The Southwest Forest Alliance has developed and applied its “Natural Processes
Restoration Model” on the Williams Restoration Demonstration site.  A summary of
this restoration model is attached at the end of this briefing packet.
The Southwest Forest Alliance’s Natural Process Restoration Model involves
conservative thinning of small diameter trees with the of goal of altering the fuel
conditions enough that natural fire can once again assume its keystone ecological role in
shaping forest structure and function.
Note the similarity in tree density and pattern between this figure and the intact old
growth forest illustrated in Figure 9.


FIGURE 11
Southwest Forest Alliance’s Restoration Mimics Natural Forest Structures
Gila National Forest near Silver City, New Mexico
This Southwest Forest Alliance restoration demonstration site was thinned in the fall of
1998 and was successfully burned by a natural lightening caused fire in the summer of
1999 without mortality of the trees left following the thinning.
Again, note the similarity in the tree density and pattern between this figure and the old
growth forest shown in Figure 9.

Southwest Forest Alliance
28
SOUTHWEST FOREST ALLIANCE
Flagstaff Office q POB 1948 q Flagstaff, AZ q 86002 q 520-774-6514/6846 (fax) q mhoffman@swfa.org
Grand Canyon Office q POB 1033 q Grand Canyon, AZ q 86023 q 520-638-2304 q kcrumbo@swfa.org
Silver City Office q POB 102 q Pinos Altos, NM q 88053 q 505-388-8799/0666 (fax) q tschulke@sw-center.org
Natural Processes Restoration Principles
February 2000
Natural Process Restoration Model Overview
The overall goal of the Southwest Forest Alliance’s Natural Processes Restoration (NPR) model is to
reintroduce or enhance natural processes such as frequent fire, hydrological cycles, nutrient cycles,
and competition that shaped forests prior to European settlement.  High priority objectives include
significant reduction of the potential for large crown fires, decreasing competition among trees that
results from excessive tree densities, as well as protecting and enhancing habitat for imperiled and
sensitive species. The NPR model seeks to increase the diversity and quantity of the understory
vegetation component through the definition of a network of well-defined openings between tree
groups and a variety of thinning intensities within tree groups.
The NPR model is a conservative, light touch, restoration approach that is based upon the concept
that structural manipulation should consist of only that minimally needed to allow natural ecological
processes (particularly low intensity fire) to function again in shaping the structure of ponderosa pine
forests.  The comparatively conservative approach of the NPR model strives to reverse the downward
trend in ecological health while explicitly incorporating the habitat needs of imperiled and indicator
wildlife species.
The NPR’s minimal structural manipulation approach recognizes that restoration is not a single
event, but a process that occurs over time.  Beginning the restoration process with minimal structural
manipulation does not direct the forest to look a certain way, but instead creates conditions that
enable natural ecological processes to become shaping agents of the forest over time.  Minimal
structural manipulation at the outset of the restoration process leaves options open for the future as
more is learned about the practice and effectiveness of ecological restoration.
Natural Processes Restoration incorporates a variety of treatment options across a restoration area
including a non-treatment option for some parts of an area, treatments that involve no removal of
material from the site, minimal thinning prescriptions, as well as burn only options.  It also considers
landscape patterns and scale issues, as well as wildlife habitat requirements in determining the
pattern and intensity of all types of treatment.

Southwest Forest Alliance
29
Goals
The Natural Processes Restoration model works to achieve the following suite of goals:
¤ Restore forest structures, processes, and composition so they are within their natural range of
variability.
¤ Increase resilience of the ecosystem to disturbance events, including fire, drought, insects, and
regional climate fluctuations.
¤  Prepare the forest for, and reintroduce the fire process at appropriate frequency, extent,
seasonality, and intensity.
¤ Reduce the risk of large high intensity fires and associated soil and watershed damage.
¤ Reduce anomalous densities of small-sized trees.
¤ Restore the natural range of trees ages, sizes, and spatial patterns.
¤ Restore habitat conditions for sensitive and declining species.
¤ Incorporate restoration strategies that protect interim habitats for imperiled species.
¤ Protect and invigorate the remaining old-growth trees.
General Restoration Strategy
Natural Processes Restoration is an integrated approach that includes: prescribed fire, conservative
thinning, grazing deferment, erosion control, road closures, native seed planting, and intensive
ecological monitoring.  Some specific strategies include:
¤ Retain all large or old conifer trees (16” dbh or greater) and snags.
¤ Retain all oaks and aspen.
¤ Retain representatives of 20th century regeneration pulses.
¤ Incorporate best currently existing forest structures.
¤ Ensure interim and long-term habitat for sensitive plants and animals.
¤ Introduce frequent low intensity fire.
¤ Monitor the effects of restoration treatments.
Implementation Principles
¤ In order to maintain habitat structures currently important to plants and wildlife, and to ensure
that forests develop quickly toward their natural range of variability, restoration efforts will take
advantage of valuable existing forest structures such as large trees, group structures, and canopies.
¤ Restoration of the natural clumpiness typical of ponderosa pine forests will be accomplished by
identifying and retaining the larger, more vigorous trees currently on the landscape.  Groups
created around these trees will retain full canopies that will function, as best as possible, like pre-
disturbance groups.

Southwest Forest Alliance
30
¤ Natural Processes Restoration works to restore ecological as well visual diversity to homogenous
and degraded forests.  Ponderosa pine forests historically contained a percentage of trees that
were saplings, poles, and blackjack sized trees.  To account for this, a diversity of tree sizes will be
retained both within tree groups as well as across the restoration treatment area.  Removing all of
the smaller trees would result in oversimplification of the forest’s structure and distribution of
trees by age class.  However, the majority of the trees thinned are under 9” dbh.
¤ Horizontal and vertical diversity similar to pristine forests will be retained where possible. The
range of natural variability will be incorporated into the marking guide, allowing for a range of
stems/acre, basal areas, and canopy covers.
¤ All yellow and yellowing pines will be retained regardless of size. Trees established before 1900
will be retained as well.
¤ Most of the trees immediately surrounding yellow pines will be aggressively thinned to reduce
the risk of crown fire and competition from overstocking.  Some blackjack or younger trees may
be retained in these groups to replace old trees removed by logging and to provide a diversity of
trees at various ages that will serve to perpetuate the yellow pine tree groups over time.
¤  Significant effort will be made to enhance existing oak groups as well as encourage oak
regeneration by thinning overstory pines that are shading oak groups.  No thinning within oak
groups will occur.  The 16” dbh diameter cap for ponderosa pine applies even when thinning for
oak enhancement.
¤ All dead standing snags will be preserved.  All downed logs greater than 10” diameter will be
preserved.  Efforts to protect these snags and downed material will be made during the initial
prescribed fire treatments.
¤ All slash will be lopped, scattered, and left onsite to provide material for nutrient cycling and fuel
for initial fire treatments.  Excessive duff will be raked away from the boles of yellow pines prior
to the introduction of prescribed fire.
¤ Wildlife cover areas adjacent to drainages, roads, and water sources will be identified and will be
marked as non-treatment zones.  Attention will also be paid to travel corridors between cover
areas as well as small patches of cover between the larger designated cover areas.
¤  Livestock grazing deferment should occur following the initial fire treatment to allow for
understory recovery.  Long-term or permanent deferral is most desirable.
¤  No new roads will be constructed.  Over time there will be a reduction in road densities,
allowing for more natural fire regimes, less habitat fragmentation, and larger roadless areas.

Southwest Forest Alliance
31
SOUTHWEST FOREST ALLIANCE
Flagstaff Office q PO Box 1948 q Flagstaff, Arizona q 86002 q 520-774-6514/6846 (fax) q mhoffman@swfa.org
Silver City Office q PO Box 102 q Pinos Altos, New Mexico q 88053 q 505-388-8799/0666 (fax) q tschulke@biologicaldiversity.org
Grand Canyon Office q PO Box 1033 q Grand Canyon, Arizona q 86023 q 520-638-2304 q kcrumbo@swfa.org
Founded in 1994, the Southwest Forest Alliance is a coalition of environmental and
sportsman organizations—with over 50,000 members—in Arizona and New Mexico
charting a new course for the Southwest’s public lands.  The Alliance is dedicated to
restoring a natural balance to our public lands by promoting solutions that preserve the
remaining mature and old-growth forests and restoring degraded watersheds and forest
ecosystems.  This vision includes working for positive changes in forest management while
helping forest-dependent communities become self-sustaining.  The Alliance seeks to create
the need for large-scale change in the Bureau of Land Management’s and the Forest Service’s
land management practices by highlighting problems at the local level.  The Alliance, in
concert with its member organizations, also works to protect regional biodiversity and
natural ecosystem integrity by seeking legal protection of candidate species under the
Endangered Species Act and by advocating permanent protection of lands as Congressionally
designated Wilderness.
Southwest Forest Alliance Member Organizations
Amigos Bravos Friends of the Wild Rivers; Ancient Forest Rescue, San Luis; Arcosanti;
Audubon Council, Arizona; Audubon Society, Central New Mexico; Audubon Society, El Paso;
Audubon Society, Huachuca; Audubon Society, Maricopa; Audubon Society, Mesilla Valley;
Audubon Society, Northern Arizona; Audubon Society, Prescott; Audubon Society, Sangre de
Cristo; Audubon Society, Southwest New Mexico; Audubon Society, Tucson; Arizona League of
Conservation Voters; Black Mesa Permaculture Project; Carson Forest Watch; Center for
Biological Diversity; Coalition for Justice and Peace; Columbia River Bioregion Campaign;
Committee of Wilderness Supporters; Desert Fly Casters; Earthlaw; Forest Trust; Flagstaff
Activist Network; Friends of the Gila River; Friends of the Owls; HA:SAN; Lifenet; National
Audubon Society; National Parks and Conservation Assoc.; New Mexico Wilderness Alliance;
New Mexico Wilderness Study Committee; Prescott National Forest Friends; Public Forestry
Foundation; Rio Grande Bioregions Project; Rio Grande Restoration; Santa Fe Forest Watch;
Sierra Club, El Paso; Sierra Club, Colorado Plateau; Sierra Club, Grand Canyon Chapter; Sierra
Club, Palo Verde; Sierra Club, Prescott; Sierra Club, Rincon; Sierra Club, Rio Grande Chapter;
Sierra Club, Sedona/Verde Valley; Sierra Club, Southern New Mexico; Sierra Club, Southwest
Region; Sky Island Alliance; Sky Island Watch; Sonoran Biodiversity Project; Southern Rocky
Mountain. Service Corps; Southwest EnviroNew Mexicoental Center; Southwest Trout; Student
Environmental Action Coalition; T & E Inc.; Trout Unlimited, Zane Grey Chapter; Upper Gila
Watershed Alliance; Western Game Bird Alliance; White Mountains Conservation League; The
Wilderness Society; The Wildlands Project; Wildlife Damage Review; Zuni Conservation Project
