USDA Forest Service Research Note RMRS-RN-37. 2008 
1 
United States
Department
of Agriculture
Forest Service
Rocky Mountain
Research Station
Research Note 
RMRS-RN-37
September 2008
Abella, Scott R. 2008. Gambel oak growth forms: management 
opportunities for increasing ecosystem diversity. Res. Note 
RMRS-RN-37. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 6 p.
 Scott R. Abella is Research Specialist, Sr., Ecological Restoration 
Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ. Present address: 
Assistant Research Professor, Public Lands Institute and School of Life 
Sciences, University of Nevada Las Vegas, Las Vegas, NV. 
Gambel Oak Growth Forms: 
Management Opportunities for 
Increasing Ecosystem Diversity
Scott R. Abella 
Introduction
 Gambel oak (Quercus gambelii) is one of only a 
few deciduous trees in southwestern ponderosa pine 
 (Pinus ponderosa) forests. Oak is important for wildlife 
 (Reynolds and others 1970), plant habitat (Brown 1958), 
soil fertility (Klemmedson 1987), and human values 
including aesthetics and fuelwood (Harper and others 
1985). Recent reports reviewing Gambel oak literature 
have highlighted several principles of oak ecology in 
ponderosa pine forests. First, densities of small-diameter 
oaks have sharply increased in the past 140 years dur-
ing a period of fire exclusion following Euro-American 
settlement (Abella and Fulé 2008b). For example, Fulé 
and others (1997) found that Gambel oak densities on 
a northern Arizona landscape increased from 32/acre 
(80/ha) in 1883, to 191/acre (471/ha) in 1994. Second, 
fires burned presettlement pine-oak forests on average at 
least once every 10 years, which is similar to pure pon-
derosa pine forests (Abella and Fulé 2008a). Fire is part 
of Gambel oak’s evolutionary environment, and multiple 
growth forms of the species persisted in frequently burned 
Abstract––Gambel oak (Quercus gambelii) clones have several different growth forms in southwestern 
ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) forests, and these growth forms each provide unique wildlife habitat and 
resource values. The purposes of this note are to review published growth-form classifications for Gambel 
oak, provide examples of ecological effects of different growth forms, and summarize management strate-
gies for promoting desired growth forms. Four different growth-form classifications have been published, 
which generally recognize variants of three basic forms: shrubby thickets of small-diameter stems, pole-sized 
clumps, and large trees. These growth forms exemplify ecological and management tradeoffs. For example, 
shrubby forms provide browse and cover yet produce few acorns, while larger oaks supply more acorns but 
offer little accessible browse or cover near the ground. Large oaks can be encouraged by thinning competing 
trees and protecting existing large stems from damage by prescribed fire or unauthorized fuelwood harvest. 
Pole-sized clumps may develop from thickets through time by self-thinning. Mechanically thinning within 
clumps may accelerate growth of remaining stems, depending on resource allocation within clones. Burning 
or cutting to stimulate sprouting sustains shrub-thicket forms.
forests. Third, there is no general ecological basis for 
not actively managing pine-oak sites (Abella and Fulé 
2008b), although passive management (in other words, 
no management) may be the most practical or appropriate 
depending on specific management objectives.
 Gambel oak’s biological characteristics, including its 
clonal habit and resprouting ability, result in the species 
having several different growth forms (Tiedemann and 
others 1987). These growth forms range from large, 
individual trees to multi-stemmed, shrubby thickets. 
Each form provides unique wildlife habitat and resource 
values (Kruse 1992). By managing the proportions and 
characteristics of these growth forms, great opportunities 
exist to enhance multiple resource values in pine-oak 
forests (Clary and Tiedemann 1992).
 The purposes of this note are to: (1) review existing 
classifications of Gambel oak growth forms, (2) provide 
examples of the influences of different growth forms on 
ecosystem components, and (3) summarize management 
strategies for promoting specific growth forms. This note 
focuses on ponderosa pine forests where oak’s tree form 
occurs, but a growth-form classification (Brown 1958) 
potentially applicable to ponderosa pine forests is included 
from the northern part of Gambel oak’s range in Utah 
and Colorado where the species forms shrublands.
Growth Form Classifications
 Four classifications of Gambel oak growth forms 
have been published (table 1). Each classification distin-
guishes growth forms based on different tree and clump 
characteristics. It should be recognized that some oaks 

2 
USDA Forest Service Research Note RMRS-RN-37. 2008
encountered in the field may not readily fit into  categories, 
as the classifications are an attempt to categorize continu-
ous variability. These classifications are useful for site 
inventories, monitoring oak condition, understanding 
oak ecology, and developing management prescriptions 
and evaluating their effects. The four classifications are 
reviewed in the following sections.
Brown (1958) Clump Area
 Brown (1958) developed the earliest Gambel oak 
 classification, which he based on the ground area occupied 
by oak (table 1). He developed this classification for 
west-central Colorado where Gambel oak forms shrub-
lands. The classification probably has limited utility in 
most ponderosa pine forests because oak develops smaller 
clumps in these forests than in shrublands. However, 
Brown’s (1958) classification could be useful in pine 
forests as a canopy-area classification if it was modified 
to include smaller areas of oak canopy cover.
Kruse (1992) Successional Status
 Kruse (1992) classified Gambel oak growth forms 
based on their anticipated ages and successional sta-
tus. Growth forms ranged from young, brushy forms 
to old, post-mature forms (table 1). He defined poles 
as stems > 15 ft (4.5 m) tall and > 3 inches [8 cm] in 
diameter at breast height. Kruse’s (1992) interpretation 
was that oak clumps begin in the young, brushy form, 
then self thin and develop into pole stands and mature 
trees through time. Age-diameter relationships do show 
that the largest oaks tend to be the oldest (Brotherson 
and others 1983). There also is evidence that oak 
clumps self thin through time (Clary and Tiedemann 
1992). A limitation of Kruse’s (1992) classification, 
however, is that a given oak clump may contain stems 
of widely different ages. For example, the same clump 
could contain both young, re-sprout stems and older, 
pole-sized stems, making it unclear where this mixed-
age clump fits in Kruse’s (1992) classification. This 
classification was designed to categorize oak’s utility 
as wildlife habitat.
Rosenstock (1998) Stem Diameter
 Rosenstock (1998) differentiated growth forms based on 
stem diameters, ranging from shrub-like forms  (diameters 
< 1 inch) to large, old trees (> 15 inches; table 1). While 
not explicitly noted, Rosenstock (1998) also assumes 
that larger stems are the oldest. His classification focuses 
on individual stems and is less useful for classifying 
clumps that often contain stems of varying diameters. 
However, this classification could be used to categorize 
stem diameters primarily characterizing Kruse (1992) 
and Abella and Springer’s (2008) classifications of whole 
clumps. Rosenstock (1998) constructed this classification 
to measure avian habitat. For example, large-diameter 
stems may contain more cavities than smaller stems.
Abella and Springer (2008) Patch 
Structure
 Abella and Springer (2008) used stem density and 
spacing to distinguish oak growth forms in a structural 
classification making no assumptions about successional 
status (table 1). Single stems can be of any size or age in 
this classification. Thickets have high densities of three 
or more closely spaced stems, which are usually smaller 
in diameter than stems in dispersed clumps (fig. 1). Dis-
persed clumps are intermediate between single stems and 
thickets and contain two or more widely spaced stems. 
Each growth form can contain stems of various sizes and 
ages since the growth forms are distinguished based only 
on stem density and spacing. Therefore, this classification 
has little utility for users desiring information on stem 
size or age because stems of different size and age can be 
classified into the same growth form. Another limitation 
is that any stem-stem distance or density cutoff between 
dispersed clumps and thickets would be arbitrary. The 
classification was made to support research of oak influ-
ences on soils and understory vegetation.
Table 1—Comparison of Gambel oak growth form classifications.
 
Brown 1958a 
Kruse 1992 
Rosenstock 1998 
Abella and Springer 2008
Area occupied by oak 
Successional stage 
Stem diameter (inches) 
Stem density, spacing
1. Clump (< 100 ft across) 
1. Brushy (youngest) 
1. Shrub like (< 1) 
1. Single stem 
2. Intermediate 
2. Young pole stand 
2. Small tree (1 to 8) 
2. Dispersed clump (low-high, wide)
3. Thicket (stand > 5 acres) 
3. Mature 
3. Mature tree (8 to 15) 
3. Thicket (high, close)
 
4. Post mature (oldest) 
4. Large, old tree (> 15) 
 
a This classification was developed in west-central Colorado for Gambel oak shrublands. The other classifications were developed for 
 ponderosa pine-oak forests.

USDA Forest Service Research Note RMRS-RN-37. 2008 
3 
Figure 1—Examples of Gambel oak growth forms on a 
basalt site north of Mormon Lake, Coconino National Forest, 
northern Arizona (35°11’48”N, 111°33’23”W). Following 
Abella and Springer’s (2008) growth form classification, (a) is 
a single stem, (b) is a dispersed clump, and (c) is a thicket. 
Photos by S.R. Abella, 9 October 2005.
a
b
c
Ecological Effects of Oak Growth 
Forms: Examples
Bird Habitat
 Lesh (1999) measured Gambel oak characteristics of 
foraging areas for seven breeding bird species in northern 
Arizona pine-oak forests. At a 0.1-acre (0.04-ha) plot 
scale, she found that Virginia’s warblers (Vermivora vir-
giniae) preferentially foraged in areas containing two to 
three times greater oak densities than were preferred by 
the other six bird species (fig. 2). Virginia’s warblers also 
preferred oak clumps, on average, exceeding 1,500 ft2 
(139 m2) in area. Brushy growth forms containing high 
densities of small-diameter stems, such as Rosenstock’s 
(1998) shrub-like form, appear critical as foraging habitat 
for Virginia’s warblers. In another example, May and 
others (2004) reported that 40 percent of all Mexican 
spotted owl (Strix occidentalis lucida) nests in northern 
Arizona pine-oak forests were in Gambel oak trees (which 
contained cavities) greater than 17 inches (44 cm) in 
diameter. Different oak growth forms may provide dif-
ferent benefits (for example, foraging versus nest sites) 
to different species.
Understory Vegetation
 Plant species richness and composition differed among 
oak growth forms following Abella and Springer’s (2008) 
growth form classification in a study of northern Arizona 
pine-oak forests (fig. 3). Richness was greatest below 
single stems, intermediate below dispersed clumps, and 
least below thickets. Light-demanding, warm-season 
(C4) pine dropseed (Blepharoneuron tricholepis) was 
most frequent below single stems, whereas aspen pea 
(Lathyrus laetivirens) was most frequent below thickets. 
Growth forms presumably created unique environments 
below their canopies that were favorable for different 
species (Schuhardt 1991).
Acorn Production
 McCulloch and others (1965) found that 10- to 15-inch 
(25- to 38-cm) diameter Gambel oaks with 80 to 100 
percent live crown produced the most plentiful acorn 
crops in northern Arizona (fig. 4). Oaks less than 5 inches 
(13 cm) or greater than 18 inches (46 cm) in diameter 
yielded few acorns. This study illustrates several tradeoffs 
with oak ecology and management. Small, shrubby oaks 
provide browse but few acorns for wildlife; larger oaks 
provide little accessible browse but copious acorns. In 
size/density tradeoffs, three times as many 6-inch (15-cm) 
diameter trees are needed to generate as many acorns as 
one 12-inch (30-cm) tree.

4 
USDA Forest Service Research Note RMRS-RN-37. 2008
Figure 2—Gambel oak characteristics of foraging areas at a 0.01-acre (0.04-ha) plot scale 
for seven breeding bird species in ponderosa pine-Gambel oak forests at Camp Navajo, 
northern Arizona. Available plots represent average conditions in the study area. Virginia’s 
warblers selected foraging areas containing greater oak densities and clump areas than 
other bird species and as compared to available plots. Data from Lesh (1999).  
Figure 3—Understory plant (a) species 
richness and (b) composition among 
three Gambel oak growth forms following 
Abella and Springer’s (2008) growth 
form classification. Error bars in (a) 
are 1 standard deviation, and percent 
frequencies in (b) are based on 43-ft2 
(4-m2) plots. Scientific names for species: 
aspen pea = Lathyrus laetivirens, dwarf 
lousewort = Pedicularis centranthera, 
and pine dropseed = Blepharoneuron 
tricholepis. Data from Abella and Springer 
(2008) averaged from 10 sites in ponderosa 
pine-Gambel oak forests within the Coconino 
National Forest, northern Arizona. 

USDA Forest Service Research Note RMRS-RN-37. 2008 
5 
Managing Oak Growth Forms
 Management prescriptions for maintaining different 
proportions of Gambel oak’s growth forms can potentially 
enhance diversity of wildlife habitat, plant communities, 
and human resource values. Existing research suggests 
that large oaks can be promoted by thinning ponderosa 
pine or other competing trees to accelerate growth of 
smaller oaks (table 2; Onkonburi 1999). During prescribed 
burning, keeping pine slash and fuels away from oak 
boles may help protect existing large trees from damage 
(Abella and Fulé 2008a). Pole-sized clumps can possibly 
develop with time by natural self-thinning of brushy thick-
ets (Clary and Tiedemann 1992). Mechanically thinning 
oak within clumps may hasten this process, but effects 
of thinning Gambel oak are not well known (Onkonburi 
1999). Growth rates of residual stems may depend on 
how much energy clones allocate to resprouting of the 
cut stems (Harrington 1989).
 Following the logic underlying Kruse’s (1992) growth-
form classification, young, brushy thickets can be 
promoted by reversing succession in older, pole-sized 
clumps. Stems could be cut or burned within pole-
sized clumps to stimulate resprouting to form brushy 
 thickets (table 2). Pole-sized clumps may be particularly 
 amenable to management for fuelwood by thinning 
stems to  potentially encourage large-tree growth forms 
or sprouting to maintain brushy thicket forms. Cutting 
live oak stems would represent a policy shift in some 
areas (Brischler 2002). However, cutting should not be 
overlooked as a possibility for manipulating growth forms 
and increasing diameter increment. A landscape-scale 
perspective is useful for identifying areas where active 
oak management would be appropriate or inappropriate 
and has few or no conflicts with other management priori-
ties or mandates (Prather and others 2008). Because of 
their value to wildlife (Kruse 1992, Reynolds and others 
1970), protection of existing large oaks from fire dam-
age, unauthorized cutting, and intense competition from 
other trees (even possibly from smaller oaks themselves, 
within a clone or from other clones) should be a priority. 
Ensuring that sufficient pole-sized stems survive to grow 
into new cohorts of large trees (Brischler 2002) is also an 
important consideration, although forest reconstruction 
data suggest that pole-sized stems are more abundant in 
current than historical forests (Abella and Fulé 2008b).
Summary
 • In southwestern ponderosa pine forests, Gambel 
oak has several growth forms distinguished by stem 
sizes and the density and spacing of stems within 
clumps.
 • Four Gambel oak growth-form classifications have 
been published, each with different focuses that 
classify growth forms using different criteria.
Figure 4— Gambel oak acorn production as a function of 
stem diameter and crown vigor, measured for six years on 
the Coconino National Forest, northern Arizona. Oaks 10 to 
15 inches (25 to 38 cm) in diameter and possessing 80 to 
100 percent live crown yielded the most acorns.  Data from 
McCulloch and others (1965).
Table 2—Summary of potential management prescriptions to promote three basic growth forms of Gambel oak in south-
western ponderosa pine-oak forests.
Growth form 
Prescriptionsa
Large tree 
Thin ponderosa pine; thin within oak clumpsb; protect large stems from damage 
Pole/dispersed clump 
Allow natural self-thinning; thin dense clumps then possibly burn; fuelwood managementc
Brushy thicket 
Burn and cut stems to facilitate sprouting; fuelwood management
 
a Prescriptions summarized primarily from Abella and Fulé (2008b), Brischler (2002), Clary and Tiedemann (1992), Harrington (1989), 
and Onkonburi (1999). The magnitudes of the effects of the suggested prescriptions may vary with site conditions and prescription-
implementation. Additional research is needed to quantify effects of these variables. 
 
b A particularly important area for future research is to more clearly elucidate effects of oak thinning on the growth of remaining stems.
 
c Fuelwood harvests should be carefully planned or regulated to ensure that only prescribed stem diameters and densities are cut.

6 
USDA Forest Service Research Note RMRS-RN-37. 2008
 • Oak’s growth forms afford flexibility in managing 
oak for different wildlife habitat and resource values. 
For example, large-tree growth forms often contain 
cavities for wildlife, while smaller, shrubby forms 
supply accessible browse and ground cover.
 • Thinning competing trees (pine, but also possibly 
oak itself) likely encourages growth of large oaks. 
Preventing pine slash and fuels from accumulating 
near oak boles might help protect existing large oaks 
during prescribed fire.
 • Pole-sized growth forms can develop through time, 
possibly by self-thinning in younger clumps. Me-
chanically thinning within clumps may accelerate 
this process, but effects of thinning on the growth 
of remaining stems are poorly understood.
 • Cutting or burning to stimulate sprouting maintains 
brushy thicket forms.
 • Existing research suggests that actively managing 
Gambel oak and pine-oak sites through prescribed 
burning, thinning of small- or medium-sized oaks, or 
thinning of competing trees (for example, ponderosa 
pine) can sustain desired proportions of oak growth 
forms. Maintaining an assortment of oak growth 
forms, within or across sites, will likely enhance 
ecological diversity and human resource values.
Acknowledgments
 Funding was provided by the U.S. Forest Service and the 
Ecological Restoration Institute. I thank Wally Covington 
for suggesting and supporting literature synthesis work and 
Catherine Wightman (Arizona Game and Fish Department), 
Charlie Denton (Ecological Restoration Institute), Alex Fink-
ral (Northern Arizona University), Jill Craig (University of 
Nevada Las Vegas), and Kristi Coughlon (Rocky Mountain 
Research Station) for providing perceptive comments on 
earlier drafts of the manuscript.
References
Abella, Scott R.; Fulé, Peter Z. 2008a. Fire effects on Gambel oak in 
southwestern ponderosa pine-oak forests. Res. Note RMRS-RN-34. 
Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Research Station. 6 p.
Abella, Scott R.; Fulé, Peter Z. 2008b. Changes in Gambel oak 
densities in southwestern ponderosa pine forests since Euro-
American settlement. Res. Note RMRS-RN-36. Fort Collins, CO: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station. 6 p. 
Abella, Scott R.; Springer, Judith D. 2008. Canopy-tree influences 
along a soil parent material gradient in Pinus-ponderosa-Quercus 
gambelii forests, northern Arizona. Journal of the Torrey Botanical 
Society. 135:26-36.
Brischler, Erik J. 2002. Size structure and spatial arrangement of 
Gambel oak in northern Arizona. Flagstaff, AZ: Northern Arizona 
University. 128 p. Thesis.
Brotherson, J.D.; Rushforth, S.R.; Evenson, W.E.; Johansen, J.R.; 
Morden, C. 1983. Population dynamics and age relationships of 
8 tree species in Navajo National Monument, Arizona. Journal of 
Range Management. 36:250-256.
Brown, Harry E. 1958. Gambel oak in west-central Colorado. Ecol-
ogy. 39:317-327.  
Clary, Warren P.; Tiedemann, Arthur R. 1992. Ecology and values of 
Gambel oak woodlands. In: Ffolliott, Peter F.; Gottfried, Gerald J.; 
Bennett, Duane A.; Hernandez, C., Victor Manuel; Ortega-Rubio, 
Alfredo; Hamre, R.H., tech. coords. Ecology and management of 
oaks and associated woodlands: perspectives in the southwestern 
United States and northern Mexico; 1992 April 27-30; Sierra Vista, 
AZ. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-218. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station: 87-95.
Fulé, Peter Z.; Covington, W. Wallace; Moore, Margaret M. 1997. 
Determining reference conditions for ecosystem management of 
southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Ecological Applications. 
7:895-908.
Harper, Kimball T.; Wagstaff, Fred J.; Kunzler, Lynn M. 1985. Biology 
and management of the Gambel oak vegetative type: a literature 
review. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-179. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station. 31 p. 
Harrington, Michael G. 1989. Gambel oak root carbohydrate response 
to spring, summer, and fall prescribed burning. Journal of Range 
Management. 42:504-507.
Klemmedson, James O. 1987. Influence of oak in pine forests of 
central Arizona on selected nutrients of forest floor and soil. Soil 
Science Society of America Journal. 51:1623-1628. 
Kruse, William H. 1992. Quantifying wildlife habitats within Gam-
bel oak/forest/woodland vegetation associations in Arizona. In: 
Ffolliott, Peter F.; Gottfried, Gerald J.; Bennett, Duane A.; Her-
nandez, C., Victor Manuel; Ortega-Rubio, Alfredo; Hamre, R.H., 
tech. coords. Ecology and management of oaks and associated 
woodlands: perspectives in the southwestern United States and 
northern Mexico; 1992 April 27-30; Sierra Vista, AZ. Gen. Tech. 
Rep. RM-218. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station: 182-186.
Lesh, Tamara D. 1999. Habitat selection by selected breeding pas-
serine birds in pine-oak forests of northern Arizona. Flagstaff, AZ: 
Northern Arizona University. 44 p. Thesis.
May, Christoper A.; Petersburg, Mylea L.; Gutiérrez, R.J. 2004. Mexi-
can spotted owl nest- and roost-site habitat in northern Arizona. 
Journal of Wildlife Management. 68:1054-1064.
McCulloch, C.Y.; Wallmo, O.C.; Ffolliott, P.F. 1965. Acorn yield 
of Gambel oak in northern Arizona. Res. Note RM-48. Fort Col-
lins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 2 p.
Onkonburi, Jeanmarie. 1999. Growth response of Gambel oak to thin-
ning and burning: implications for ecological restoration. Flagstaff, 
AZ: Northern Arizona University. 129 p. Dissertation.
Prather, John W.; Noss, Reed F.; Sisk, Thomas D. 2008. Real versus 
perceived conflicts between restoration of ponderosa pine forests 
and conservation of the Mexican spotted owl. Forest Policy and 
Economics. 10:140-150.
Reynolds, Hudson G.; Clary, Warren P.; Ffolliott, Peter F. 1970. Gambel 
oak for southwestern wildlife. Journal of Forestry. 68:545-547. 
Rosenstock, S.S. 1998. Influence of Gambel oak on breeding birds in 
ponderosa pine forests of northern Arizona. Condor. 100:485-492.
Schuhardt, Susan. 1991. Structure, productivity, and competition in 
a ponderosa pine/Arizona white oak community. Flagstaff, AZ: 
Northern Arizona University. 119 p. Thesis.
Tiedemann, A.R.; Clary, W.P.; Barbour, R.J. 1987. Underground sys-
tems of Gambel oak (Quercus gambelii) in central Utah. American 
Journal of Botany. 74:1065-1071.

Federal Recycling Program 
 Printed on Recycled Paper
You may order additional copies of this publication by 
sending your  mailing information in label form through one 
of the following media. Please specify the publication title and 
number.
Publishing Services
 
Telephone (970) 498-1392
 
FAX (970) 498-1122
 
E-mail rschneider@fs.fed.us
 
Web site http://www.fs.fed.us/rmrs
 
Mailing Address Publications Distribution 
 
 Rocky Mountain Research Station
 
 240 West Prospect Road
 
 Fort Collins, CO 80526

The Rocky Mountain Research Station develops scientific information 
and technology to improve management, protection, and use of the 
forests and rangelands. Research is designed to meet the needs of 
the National Forest managers, Federal and State agencies, public and 
private organizations, academic institutions, industry, and individuals. 
Studies accelerate solutions to problems involving ecosystems, range, 
forests, water, recreation, fire, resource inventory, land reclamation, 
community sustainability, forest engineering technology, multiple use 
economics, wildlife and fish habitat, and forest insects and diseases. 
Studies are conducted cooperatively, and applications may be found 
worldwide.
Station Headquarters 
Natural Resources Research Center 
2150 Centre Avenue, Building A, Fort Collins, CO 80526 
(970) 295-5923
Research Locations
 
 
 
Flagstaff, Arizona 
Reno, Nevada
 
Fort Collins, Colorado 
Albuquerque, New Mexico
 
Boise, Idaho 
Rapid City, South Dakota
 
Moscow, Idaho 
Logan, Utah
 
Bozeman, Montana 
Ogden, Utah
 
Missoula, Montana 
Provo, Utah
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its 
programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, 
and where applicable, sex, marital status, familial status, parental status, religion, 
sexual orientation, genetic information, political beliefs, reprisal, or because all 
or part of an individual’s income is derived from any public assistance program. 
(Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who 
require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, 
large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA’s TARGET Center at (202) 
720-2600 (voice and TDD). To file a complaint of discrimination, write to USDA, 
Director, Office of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, 
DC 20250-9410, or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or (202) 720-6382 (TDD). USDA 
is an equal opportunity provider and employer.
Rocky
   Mountain
       Research Station
