The SER International Primer
o n Ecological Restoration
Society for Ecological Restoration International 
Science & Policy Working Group (Version 2: October, 2004)*
Section 1: Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Section 2: Definition of Ecological Restoration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Section 3: Attributes of Restored Ecosystems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Section 4: Explanations of Terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Section 5: Reference Ecosystems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Section 6: Exotic Species . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Section 7: Monitoring and Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 
Section 8: Restoration Planning. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 
Section 9: Relationship Between Restoration Practice 
and Restoration Ecology. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 
Section 10: Relationship of Restoration to Other Activities . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 
Section 11: Integration of Ecological Restoration into a Larger Program. . 13
This document should be cited as: Society for Ecological Restoration International Science & Policy Working Group. 2004. The SER
International Primer on Ecological Restoration. www.ser.org & Tucson: Society for Ecological Restoration International. 
The principal authors of this Primer were André Clewell (Quincy, FL USA), James Aronson (Montpellier, France), and Keith Winterhalder
(Sudbury, ON Canada). Clewell initially proposed the Primer and wrote its first draft. Aronson and Winterhalder, in collaboration with
Clewell, revised the Primer into its present form. Winterhalder, in his capacity as Chairperson of SER’s Science & Policy Working Group,
coordinated this effort and invited other Working Group members to participate. Eric Higgs (Victoria, BC Canada) crafted the Overview sec-
tion. Dennis Martinez (Douglas City, CA USA) contributed a position paper that became the basis for text pertaining to cultural ecosystems.
Other Working Group members provided critiques and suggestions as the work progressed, including Richard Hobbs (Murdoch, WA
Australia), James Harris (London, UK), Carolina Murcia (Cali, Colombia), and John Rieger (San Diego, CA USA). The SPWG acknowledges
Eric Higgs, former Chairperson of SER International’s Board of Directors, for his encouragement and for bringing the Primer before SER
International’s Directors for its official adoption as an SER International document on 6 April, 2002, by unanimous vote.
This document supercedes SER In t e r n a t i o n a l’s Project Policies that we re initially published in Re s t o ration Ec o l o gy 2(2):132-133, 1994, and that
we re later posted on SER In t e r n a t i o n a l’s website. This document also supercedes the policy on Project Evaluation that was posted on the SER
International website. SER International environmental policies, initially published in Restoration Ecology 1(3):206-207, 1993, remain in effect.
*The content of the second version is exactly the same as the first version published in 2002, except that International has been appended to
SER's name, photos have been added, and the graphics re d e s i g n e d . Version 2 was published simultaneously in print and on the internet at
w w w. s e r. o r g .

Overview
E
cological restoration is an intentional activity
that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an
ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity and
sustainability. Frequently, the ecosystem that requires
restoration has been degraded, damaged, trans-
formed or entirely destroyed as the direct or indirect
result of human activities. In some cases, these
impacts to ecosystems have been caused or aggravat-
ed by natural agencies such as wildfire, floods,
storms, or volcanic eruption, to the point at which
the ecosystem cannot recover its predisturbance state
or its historic developmental trajectory.
Restoration attempts to return an
ecosystem to its historic trajec-
t o ry. Historic conditions are
t h e re f o re the ideal start i n g
point for re s t o r a t i o n
design. The re s t o re d
ecosystem will not nec-
essarily re c over its for-
mer state, since contem-
p o r a ry constraints and
conditions may cause it
to develop along an
a l t e red trajectory. The his-
toric trajectory of a seve re l y
impacted ecosystem may be dif-
ficult or impossible to determine
with accuracy. Ne ve rtheless, the general
d i rection and boundaries of that trajectory can
be established through a combination of know l e d g e
of the damaged ecosystem’s pre-existing stru c t u re ,
composition and functioning, studies on compara-
ble intact ecosystems, information about re g i o n a l
e n v i ronmental conditions, and analysis of other
ecological, cultural and historical re f e rence infor-
mation. These combined sources allow the historic
t r a j e c t o ry or re f e rence conditions to be chart e d
f rom baseline ecological data and pre d i c t i ve mod-
els, and its emulation in the restoration pro c e s s
should aid in piloting the ecosystem tow a rd s
i m p roved health and integrity. 
Restoration represents an indefinitely long-term
commitment of land and resources, and a proposal
to restore an ecosystem requires thoughtful delibera-
tion. Collective decisions are more likely to be hon-
ored and implemented than are those that are made
unilaterally. For that reason, it behooves all stake-
holders to arrive at the decision to initiate a restora-
tion project by consensus. Once the decision to
restore is made, the project requires careful and sys-
tematic planning and a monitored approach towards
ecosystem recovery. The need for planning intensifies
when the unit of restoration is a complex land-
scape of contiguous ecosystems.
Interventions employed in
restoration vary widely
among projects, depending
on the extent and dura-
tion of past disturbances,
cultural conditions that
have shaped the land-
scape, and contemporary
constraints and opportu-
nities. In the simplest cir-
cumstances, restoration
consists of removing or
modifying a specific distur-
bance, thereby allowing ecolog-
ical processes to bring about an
independent recovery. For example,
removing a dam allows the return of an
historical flooding regime. In more complex circum-
stances, restoration may also require the deliberate
reintroduction of native species that have been lost,
and the elimination or control of harmful, invasive
exotic species to the greatest practicable extent.
Often, ecosystem degradation or transformation has
multiple, protracted sources, and the historical con-
stituents of an ecosystem are substantially lost.
Sometimes the developmental trajectory of a degrad-
ed ecosystem is blocked altogether, and its recovery
through natural processes appears to be delayed
indefinitely. In all of these cases, however, ecological
restoration aims to initiate or facilitate the resump-
www.ser.org
SER International Primer on Ecological Restoration 1
Section 1:

tion of those processes which will return the ecosys-
tem to its intended trajectory.
When the desired trajectory is realized, the ecosys-
tem under manipulation may no longer require
external assistance to ensure its future health and
integrity, in which case restoration can be considered
complete. Nevertheless, the restored ecosystem often
requires continuing management to counteract the
invasion of opportunist species, the impacts of vari-
ous human activities, climate change, and other
unforeseeable events. In this respect, a restored
ecosystem is no different from an undamaged
ecosystem of the same kind, and both are likely to
require some level of ecosystem management.
Although ecosystem restoration and ecosys-
tem management form a continuum
and often employ similar sorts of
intervention, ecological restora-
tion aims at assisting or initi-
ating recovery, whereas
ecosystem management is
intended to guarantee the
continued well-being of
the restored ecosystem
thereafter.
Some ecosystems, partic-
ularly in developing coun-
tries, are still managed by
traditional, sustainable cultur-
al practices. Reciprocity exists in
these cultural ecosystems between
cultural activities and ecological
processes, such that human actions reinforce
ecosystem health and sustainability. Many cultural
ecosystems have suffered from demographic growth
and external pressures of various kinds, and are in
need of restoration. The restoration of such ecosys-
tems normally includes the concomitant recovery of
indigenous ecological management practices, includ-
ing support for the cultural survival of indigenous
peoples and their languages as living libraries of tra-
ditional ecological knowledge. Ecological restoration
encourages and may indeed be dependent upon
long-term participation of local people. Cultural
conditions in traditional cultures are currently
undergoing unprecedented global change. To accom-
modate this change, ecological restoration may
accept and even encourage new culturally appropri-
ate and sustainable practices that take into account
contemporary conditions and constraints. In this
regard, the North American focus on restoring pris-
tine landscapes makes little or no sense in places like
Europe where cultural landscapes are the norm, or in
large parts of Africa, Asia and Latin America, where
ecological restoration is untenable unless it manifest-
ly bolsters the ecological base for human survival.
What makes ecological restoration especially inspir-
ing is that cultural practices and ecological processes
can be mutually reinforcing. Accordingly, it is not
surprising that interest in ecological restoration is
growing rapidly worldwide and that, in most cases,
cultural beliefs and practices are drawn upon
to help determine and shape of what is
to be performed under the rubric
of restoration.
The definition presented on
the next page, the one offi-
cially endorsed by the
Society for Ec o l o g i c a l
Restoration In t e r n a t i o n a l ,
is sufficiently general to
a l l ow a wide variety of
a p p roaches to re s t o r a t i o n ,
while giving prominence to
the historically rich idea of
“re c ove ry.” T
2 SER International Primer on Ecological Restoration 
www.ser.org

Definition of
Ecological
Restoration
E
cological restoration is the process of assisting
the recovery of an ecosystem that has been
degraded, damaged, or destroyed. T
Attributes of
Restored
Ecosystems
T
his section addresses the question of what is
meant by “recovery” in ecological restoration.
An ecosystem has recovered - and is restored - when
it contains sufficient biotic and abiotic resources to
continue its development without further assistance
or subsidy. It will sustain itself structurally and func-
tionally. It will demonstrate resilience to normal
ranges of environmental stress and disturbance. It
will interact with contiguous ecosystems in terms of
biotic and abiotic flows and cultural interactions.
The nine attributes listed below provide a basis for
determining when restoration has been accom-
plished. The full expression of all of these attributes
is not essential to demonstrate restoration. Instead, it
is only necessary for these attributes to demonstrate
an appropriate trajectory of ecosystem development
towards the intended goals or reference. Some attrib-
utes are readily measured. Others must be assessed
indirectly, including most ecosystem functions,
which cannot be ascertained without research efforts
that exceed the capabilities and budgets of most
restoration projects.
1. The restored ecosystem contains a characteristic
assemblage of the species that occur in the refer-
ence ecosystem and that provide appropriate
community structure.
2 . The re s t o red ecosystem consists of indigenous
species to the greatest practicable extent. In
re s t o red cultural ecosystems, allowances can
be made for exotic domesticated species and
for non-inva s i ve ruderal and segetal species
that presumably co-evo l ved with them.
Ruderals are plants that colonize disturbed
sites, whereas segetals typically grow inter-
m i xed with crop species.
3. All functional groups necessary for the contin-
ued development and/or stability of the restored
ecosystem are represented or, if they are not, the
missing groups have the potential to colonize by
natural means.
4. The physical environment of the restored
ecosystem is capable of sustaining reproducing
populations of the species necessary for its con-
tinued stability or development along the
desired trajectory.
5. The restored ecosystem apparently functions
normally for its ecological stage of development,
and signs of dysfunction are absent.
6. The restored ecosystem is suitably integrated
into a larger ecological matrix or landscape,
with which it interacts through abiotic and
biotic flows and exchanges.
7. Potential threats to the health and integrity of
the restored ecosystem from the surrounding
landscape have been eliminated or reduced as
much as possible.
8. The restored ecosystem is sufficiently resilient to
endure the normal periodic stress events in the
local environment that serve to maintain the
integrity of the ecosystem.
www.ser.org
SER International Primer on Ecological Restoration 3
Section 2:
Section 3:

9. The restored ecosystem is self-sustaining to the
same degree as its reference ecosystem, and has
the potential to persist indefinitely under exist-
ing environmental conditions. Nevertheless,
aspects of its biodiversity, structure and func-
tioning may change as part of normal ecosystem
development, and may fluctuate in response to
normal periodic stress and occasional distur-
bance events of greater consequence. As in any
intact ecosystem, the species composition and
other attributes of a restored ecosystem may
evolve as environmental conditions change.
Other attributes gain relevance and should be added
to this list if they are identified as goals of the
restoration project. For example, one of
the goals of restoration might be to
provide specified natural goods
and services for social benefit
in a sustainable manner. In
this respect, the restored
ecosystem serves as natu-
ral capital for the accrual
of these goods and serv-
ices. Another goal might
be for the restored
ecosystem to provide
habitat for rare species or
to harbor a diverse
genepool for selected
species. Other possible goals
of restoration might include the
provision of aesthetic amenities or
the accommodation of activities of social
consequence, such as the strengthening of a commu-
nity through the participation of individuals in a
restoration project. T
Explanations 
of Terms
V
arious technical terms are introduced through-
out this document. Some of these terms may
be unfamiliar to readers who are not ecologists,
while others have multiple connotations from differ-
ential usage. To reduce the potential for misunder-
standings, key terms are explained in the manner in
which they are used in this document.
An ecosystem consists of the biota (plants,
animals, microorganisms) within a
given area, the environment that
sustains it, and their interac-
tions. Populations of species
that comprise the biota are
collectively identified as
the biotic community.
This community is fre-
quently segregated on the
basis of taxonomic status
(e.g., the insect commu-
nity) or life form (e.g.,
the tree community).
Assemblages of organisms
can also be recognized by
their functional roles in the
ecosystem (e.g. primary producers,
herbivores, carnivores, decomposers,
nitrogen fixers, pollinators), in which case
they are known as functional groups. The physical
or abiotic environment that sustains the biota of an
ecosystem includes the soil or substrate, the atmos-
pheric or aqueous medium, hydrology, weather and
climate, topographic relief and aspect, the nutrient
regime, and the salinity regime. Habitat refers to the
dwelling place of an organism or community that
provides the requisite conditions for its life processes.
An ecosystem can be recognized in a spatial unit of
any size, from a microsite containing only a few
individuals to an area showing some degree of struc-
tural and taxonomic homogeneity such as a small-
scale and community-based “wetland ecosystem,” or
4 SER International Primer on Ecological Restoration 
www.ser.org
Section 4:

a large-scale and biome-based “tropical rainforest
ecosystem.” Ecological restoration can be conducted
at a wide variety of scales, but in practice all ecosys-
tem restoration should be approached with a spatial-
ly explicit landscape perspective, in order to ensure
the suitability of flows, interactions and exchanges
with contiguous ecosystems. A landscape consists of
a mosaic of two or more ecosystems that exchange
organisms, energy, water and nutrients. A legitimate
and indeed important object of much ecological
restoration is the reintegration of fragmented ecosys-
tems and landscapes, rather than focusing on just a
single ecosystem. 
A natural landscape or ecosystem is one that devel-
oped by natural processes and that is self-
organizing and self-maintaining. A
cultural landscape or ecosystem
is one that has developed
under the joint influence of
natural processes and
human-imposed organiza-
tion. Many grasslands
and savannas are main-
tained in large part by
the human activities
such as the regular igni-
tion of surface fires for
hunting, gathering or ani-
mal husbandry. In Europe,
many of the species-rich
meadows are cultural ecosys-
tems that arose following forest
removal in the Bronze Age, and have
been maintained through mowing and seasonal
grazing by livestock. The repair of a damaged mead-
ow qualifies as ecological restoration, even though
the meadow ecosystem that is selected as the land-
scape of reference derives from human activities. In
another example, a dense coniferous forest currently
occupies large parts of western North America. In
the 19th century, much of this forest was open and
park-like with copious herbaceous cover, owing to
the frequent use of fire and plant species utilization
by indigenous tribal people. This woodland seemed
natural and its condition was sustainable under the
regime of tribal land usage. The return of this
ecosystem to an open, park-like woodland, occupied
and utilized in the traditional tribal manner, quali-
fies as ecological restoration. Sustainable cultural
practices are traditional human land uses that main-
tain biodiversity and productivity. In this context,
the biota is valued as much for its importance to
ecosystem stability as it is for its shortterm worth as
commodities. Perhaps all natural ecosystems are cul-
turally influenced in at least some small manner, and
this reality merits acknowledgement in the conduct
of restoration.
The terms degradation, damage, destruction and
transformation all re p resent deviations from the nor-
mal or desired state of an intact ecosystem. The mean-
ings of these terms ove r l a p, and their application is
not always clear. De g r a d a t i o n p e rtains to subtle or
gradual changes that reduce ecological integrity
and health. Da m a g e refers to acute and
o bvious changes in an ecosystem.
An ecosystem is d e s t roye d w h e n
degradation or damage
re m oves all macroscopic life,
and commonly ruins the
physical environment as
well. Tr a n s f o rm a t i o n i s
the conversion of an
ecosystem to a differe n t
kind of ecosystem or land
use type.
A reference ecosystem can
serve as the model for plan-
ning an ecological restoration
project, and later serve in the evalu-
ation of that project. In instances where
the object of restoration consists of two or
more kinds of ecosystems, the reference can be called
the reference landscape or, if only a portion of a
local landscape is to be restored, the reference land-
scape unit. The designated ecosystem, landscape or
unit can simply be called the reference. Typically,
the reference represents a point of advanced develop-
ment that lies somewhere along the intended trajec-
tory of the restoration. In other words, the restored
ecosystem is eventually expected to emulate the
attributes of the reference, and project goals and
strategies are developed in light of that expectation.
The reference can consist of one or several specified
locations that contain model ecosystems, a written
description, or a combination of both. Information
www.ser.org
SER International Primer on Ecological Restoration 5

collected on the reference includes both biotic and
abiotic components. A more comprehensive discus-
sion of the reference ecosystem appears in Section 5.
An ecological trajectory is one that describes the
developmental pathway of an ecosystem through
time. In restoration, the trajectory begins with the
unrestored ecosystem and progresses towards the
desired state of recovery that is expressed in the goals
of a restoration project and embodied in the refer-
ence ecosystem. The trajectory embraces all ecologi-
cal attributes - biotic and abiotic - of an ecosystem,
and in theory can be monitored by the sequential
measurement of coherent suites of ecological param-
eters. Any given trajectory is not narrow and specif-
ic. Instead, a trajectory embraces a broad yet
confined range of potential ecological
expressions through time, as
might be described mathemat-
ically by chaos theory, or
predicted by various eco-
logical models. A fully
empirical description of
a trajectory is impeded
in two ways. First, the
number of ecosystem
traits that can be meas-
ured far exceeds those
that can be reasonably
monitored, and the
description of the trajectory
over time is necessarily incom-
plete. Second, the monitoring
data lend themselves to the plotting
of trajectories for individual parameters, but
their combination into a single trajectory represent-
ing the entire ecosystem requires highly complex
multivariate analysis of a kind that has yet to be
developed. This represents a critical research chal-
lenge for the future.
Biodiversity refers to biota in terms of taxonomic
and genetic diversity, the variety of life forms present
and the community structure thereby created, and
the ecological roles performed. The biota is organ-
ized hierarchically from the level of the genome up
to individual organisms, species, populations, and
communities. Two related aspects of biodiversity are
species composition, i.e. the taxonomic array of
species present, and species richness, i.e. the number
of different species present. The importance of an
ample recovery in species composition cannot be
overstated in restoration. All functional species-
groups must be represented if a restored ecosystem is
to maintain itself. Species redundancy, i.e. the pres-
ence of multiple species that play similar roles in
ecosystem dynamics, provides assurance that ecosys-
tem health is maintained in response to stress, dis-
turbance or other environmental changes.
In order for an ecosystem to be well adapted to local
site conditions and to display resilience in response
to a stressful or changing environment, the species-
populations that comprise it must possess genetic
fitness. An ecosystem containing genetically
fit populations is one that is not only
adapted to the current environmen-
tal regime, but possesses some
“genetic redundancy”, whereby
the gene pool contains a
diversity of alleles that may
be selected in response to
environmental change.
Under normal circum-
stances, the reintroduction
of local ecotypes is suffi-
cient to maintain genetic
fitness. Nevertheless, in
sites that have suffered sub-
stantial damage and conse-
quent alteration to their physical
environment, the introduction of
diverse genetic stock may be the pre-
ferred strategy, thereby allowing recombina-
tion and the eventual development of novel, more
adaptive ecotypes.
By community structure is meant the physiognomy
or architecture of the community with respect to the
density, horizontal stratification, and frequency dis-
tribution of species-populations, and the sizes and
life forms of the organisms that comprise those com-
munities.
Ecological processes or ecosystem functions are
the dynamic attributes of ecosystems, including
interactions among organisms and interactions
between organisms and their environment.
6 SER International Primer on Ecological Restoration 
www.ser.org

Ecological processes are the basis for self-mainte-
nance in an ecosystem. Some restoration ecologists
limit the use of the term “ecosystem functions” to
those dynamic attributes which most directly affect
metabolism, principally the sequestering and trans-
formation of energy, nutrients, and moisture.
Examples are carbon fixation by photosynthesis,
trophic interactions, decomposition, and mineral
nutrient cycling. When ecosystem functions are
strictly defined in this manner, other dynamic attrib-
utes are distinguished as “ecosystem processes” such
as substrate stabilization, microclimatic control, dif-
ferentiation of habitat for specialized species, pollina-
tion and seed dispersal. Functioning at larger spatial
scales is generally conceived in more general terms,
such as the long-term retention of nutrients and
moisture and overall ecosystem sustainability.
Ecosystem functions and processes, along with the
reproduction and growth of organisms, are what
cause an ecosystem to be self-renewing or autogenic.
A common goal for the restoration of any natural
ecosystem is to recover autogenic processes to the
point where assistance from restorationists is no
longer needed. In this regard, the central role of a
restoration practitioner is to initiate autogenic
processes. Restoration practitioners commonly
assume that autogenic processes will commence once
the appropriate species composition and structure
have been re-established. This is not always a valid
assumption, but it is a reasonable starting point for
ecosystem restoration.
Some dynamic processes are external in origin, such
as fires, floods, damaging wind, salinity shock from
incoming tides and storms, freezes, and droughts.
These external processes stress the biota and are
sometimes designated as stressors. The biota of any
given ecosystem must be resistant or resilient to the
normal stress events that periodically occur in the
local environment. These events serve to maintain
ecosystem integrity, by preventing the establishment
of other species that are not adapted to those stress
conditions. For example, the tidal influx of saline
water is essential to maintain a salt marsh ecosystem
and prevent its conversion to a freshwater ecosystem.
In cultural ecosystems, human-mediated activities
such as burning or grazing qualify as stressors. The
terms disturbance or perturbation are sometimes
used interchangeably for “stressor” or “stress event”.
However, the term “disturbance” is restricted herein
to impacts on ecosystems that are more severe or
acute than normal stress events.
Resistance is the term describing an ecosystem’s abil-
ity to maintain its structural and functional attrib-
utes in the face of stress and disturbances. Resilience
is the ability of an ecosystem to regain structural and
functional attributes that have suffered harm from
stress or disturbance. Ecosystem stability is the abil-
ity of an ecosystem to maintain its given trajectory
in spite of stress; it denotes dynamic equilibrium
rather than stasis. Stability is achieved in part on the
basis of an ecosystem’s capacity for resistance and
resilience.
The terms ecosystem integrity and ecosystem health
are commonly used to describe the desired state of a
restored ecosystem. Although some authors use the
terms interchangeably, they are distinct in meaning.
Ecosystem integrity is the state or condition of an
ecosystem that displays the biodiversity characteristic
of the reference, such as species composition and
community structure, and is fully capable of sustain-
ing normal ecosystem functioning.
Ecosystem health is the state or condition of an
ecosystem in which its dynamic attributes are
expressed within ‘normal’ranges of activity relative to
its ecological stage of development. A restored
ecosystem expresses health if it functions normally
relative to its reference ecosystem, or to an appropri-
ate set of restored ecosystem attributes such as those
that are listed above in Section 3. A state of ecosys-
tem integrity suggests, but does not necessarily con-
firm, a concurrent state of ecosystem health and a
suitable abiotic environment. T
www.ser.org
SER International Primer on Ecological Restoration 7

Reference
Ecosystems
A
reference ecosystem or reference serves as a
model for planning a restoration project, and
later for its evaluation. In its simplest form, the ref-
erence is an actual site, its written description, or
both. The problem with a simple reference is that it
represents a single state or expression of ecosystem
attributes. The reference that is selected could have
been manifested as any one of many potential states
that fall within the historic range of variation
of that ecosystem. The reference
reflects a particular combination of
stochastic events that occurred
during ecosystem develop-
ment.
In the same manner, an
ecosystem that undergoes
restoration can develop
into any of a potentially
large array of states. Any
state that is expressed is
acceptable as restoration,
as long as it is comparable
to any of the potential states
into which its reference could
have developed. Thus, a simple ref-
erence inadequately expresses the con-
stellation of potential states and the historic range of
variation expressed by the restored ecosystem.
Therefore, a reference is best assembled from multi-
ple reference sites and, if necessary, other sources.
This composite description gives a more realistic basis
for restoration planning.
Sources of information that can be used in describ-
ing the reference include:
I ecological descriptions, species lists and maps of
the project site prior to damage;
I historical and recent aerial and ground-level pho-
tographs; remnants of the site to be restored, indi-
cating previous physical conditions and biota;
I remnants of the site to be restored, indicating pre-
vious physical conditions and biota;
I ecological descriptions and species lists of similar
intact ecosystems;
I herbarium and museum specimens;
I historical accounts and oral histories by persons
familiar with the project site prior to damage;
I paleoecological evidence, e.g. fossil pollen,
charcoal, tree ring history, rodent mid-
dens.
The value of the re f e re n c e
i n c reases with the amount
of information it contains,
but eve ry inve n t o ry is
c o m p romised by limita-
tions of time and fund-
ing. Mi n i m a l l y, a baseline
ecological inve n t o ry
describes the salient attrib-
utes of the abiotic enviro n-
ment and important aspects
of biodiversity such as species
composition and community
s t ru c t u re. In addition, it identifies
the normal periodic stress events that
maintain ecosystem integrity. Descriptions of
the re f e rence for cultural ecosystems should identify
the cultural practices that are critical in restoring and
later in managing that ecosystem.
The description of a reference is complicated by two
factors that should be reconciled to assure its quality
and usefulness. First, a reference site is normally
selected for its well-developed expression of biodiver-
sity, whereas a site in the process of restoration typi-
cally exhibits an earlier ecological stage. In such a
case, the reference requires interpolation back to a
prior developmental phase for purposes of both proj-
ect planning and evaluation. The need for interpre-
tation diminishes where the developmental stage at
8 SER International Primer on Ecological Restoration 
www.ser.org
Section 5:

the restoration project site is sufficiently advanced
for direct comparison with the reference. Second,
where the goal of restoration is a natural ecosystem,
nearly all available references will have suffered some
adverse human-mediated impacts that should not be
emulated. Therefore, the reference may require inter-
pretation to remove these sources of artifice. For
these reasons, the preparation of the description of
the reference requires experience and sophisticated
ecological judgement.
Written restoration project goals are critical for
determining the detail that is needed in the descrip-
tion of the reference. For large, landscape-scale
restoration for which only general goals are pre-
scribed, the description of the reference can
be equally general. In such instances,
aerial photographs may represent
the most important source of
information for the prepara-
tion of the reference.
Restoration at a finer
scale may require much
more detailed reference
information, such as
data that are collected
on-site in small plots.
T
Exotic Species
A
n exotic species of plant or animal is one that
was introduced into an area where it did not
previously occur through relatively recent human
activities. Since ecological restoration of natural
ecosystems attempts to recover as much historical
authenticity as can be reasonably accommodated, the
reduction or elimination of exotic species at restora-
tion project sites is highly desirable. Nonetheless,
financial and logistical constraints often exist, and it
is important to be realistic and pragmatic in
approaching exotic species control. In cultural land-
scapes, exotic species are frequently an
integral part of the ecosystem, partic-
ularly as crops and livestock, and
even as ruderals or segetals that
have presumably co-evolved
with these domesticated
species. Such exotic species
are acceptable for cultural
restoration.
In natural ecosystems,
invasive exotic species
commonly compete with
and replace native species.
However, not all exotic
species are harmful. Indeed,
some even fulfill ecological roles
formerly played by the native species
that have become rare or extirpated. In
such instances, the rationale for their removal may
be tenuous. Some exotic species were introduced
centuries ago by human or non-human agents and
have become naturalized, so that their status as an
exotic is debatable. Other species have migrated in
and out of the region in response to climatic fluctua-
tions during the Holocene, and can scarcely be
regarded as exotics. Even if all exotic species are
removed from a restoration site, the opportunity for
reinvasion may remain high. Therefore it becomes
essential for a policy to be developed for each exotic
species present, based upon biological, economic and
logistical realities. Highest priority is best reserved
for the control or extirpation of those species which
www.ser.org
SER International Primer on Ecological Restoration 9
Section 6:

pose the greatest threats. These include invasive
plant species that are particularly mobile and pose an
ecological threat at landscape and regional levels, and
animals that consume or displace native species.
Care should be taken to cause the least possible dis-
turbance to indigenous species and soils as exotics
are removed.
In some instances, non-indigenous plants are used
for a specific purpose in the restoration project, for
example as cover crops, nurse crops or nitrogen fix-
ers. Unless these are relatively short-lived, non-per-
sistent species that will be replaced in the course of
succession, their eventual removal should be includ-
ed in restoration plans. T
Monitoring and
Evaluation
A
properly planned restoration project attempts
to fulfill clearly stated goals that reflect impor-
tant attributes of the reference ecosystem. Goals are
attained by pursuing specific objectives. The goals
are ideals, and the objectives are concrete measures
taken to attain these goals. Two fundamental ques-
tions should be asked with respect to the evaluation
of a restored ecosystem. Were the objectives accom-
plished? Were the goals fulfilled? Answers to both
questions gain validity only if the goals and objec-
tives were stated prior to implementation of restora-
tion project work.
Ecosystems are complex, and no two intact ecosys-
tems are ever identical, at least not when examined
in fine resolution. For that reason, no restored
ecosystem at a project site can ever be identical to
any single reference. The number of ecosystem vari-
ables that can be used in an evaluation is too great
for all to be measured within a reasonable period of
time. The selection of which variables to assess and
which to ignore requires pragmatism and value judg-
ment by the evaluator.
Objectives are evaluated on the basis of perform-
ance Standards, also known as design criteria or
success criteria. These standards or criteria are con-
ceived in large part from an understanding of the
reference ecosystem. Performance standards provide
an empirical basis for determining whether or not
project objectives have been attained. Objectives,
performance standards, and protocols for monitoring
and for data assessment should be incorporated into
restoration plans prior to the start of a project. If
interpretation of the data collected during monitor-
ing shows that performance standards have been
met, there can be no doubt that project objectives
were achieved, and the restored ecosystem is likely to
be sufficiently resilient to require little or no further
assistance from the restoration practitioner.
It is assumed that project goals are, or soon will be,
fulfilled once the objectives are attained. The validity
of this assumption is not guaranteed, since the
objectives and performance standards that were des-
ignated may prove to be inadequate, and unantici-
pated environmental vicissitudes can deflect the
restoration trajectory. For that reason, and since
goals are ideals that resist strict empirical measure-
ment, an element of professional judgment and sub-
jectivity is inevitable in the evaluation of goals.
Three strategies exist for conducting an evaluation:
direct comparison, attribute analysis and trajectory
analysis. In direct comparison, selected parameters
are determined or measured in the reference and
restoration sites. If the reference description is thor-
ough, as many as 20 or 30 parameters can be com-
pared that include aspects of both the biota and the
abiotic environment. This can lead to ambiguity of
interpretation when the results of some comparisons
are close and others are not. The question arises -
how many parameters must have similar values and
how close must the values be before restoration goals
are satisfied? The most satisfactory approach may be
to carefully select a coherent suite of traits that col-
lectively describe an ecosystem fully yet succinctly.
In attribute analysis, attributes are assessed in rela-
tion to the list provided in Section 3. In this strategy,
quantitative and semi-quantitative data from sched-
uled monitoring and other inventories are useful in
judging the degree to which each goal has been
achieved.
10 SER International Primer on Ecological Restoration 
www.ser.org
Section 7:

Tr a j e c t o ry analysis is a promising strategy, still
under development, for interpreting large sets of
c o m p a r a t i ve data. In this strategy, data collected peri-
odically at the restoration site are plotted to establish
t rends. Trends that lead tow a rds the re f e rence condi-
tion confirm that the restoration is following its
intended trajectory. 
Evaluations include the assessment of any stated goals
and objectives that pertain to cultural, economic and
other societal concerns. For these, the techniques of
e valuation may include those of the social sciences.
The evaluation of socio-economic goals is import a n t
to stakeholders and ultimately to policy-makers who
decide whether or not to authorize and finance
restoration projects. T
Restoration
Planning
P
lans for restoration projects include, at a mini-
mum, the following:
I a clear rationale as to why restoration is needed;
an ecological description of the site designated for
restoration;
I an ecological description of the site designated for
restoration;
I a statement of the goals and objectives of the
restoration project;
I a designation and description of the reference; 
I an explanation of how the proposed restoration
will integrate with the landscape and its flows of
organisms and materials;
I explicit plans, schedules and budgets for site
preparation, installation and post-installation
activities, including a strategy for making prompt
mid-course corrections; 
I well-developed and explicitly stated performance
standards, with monitoring protocols by which
the project can be evaluated;
I strategies for long-term protection and mainte-
nance of the restored ecosystem.
Where feasible, at least one untreated control plot
should be included at the project site, for purposes
of comparison with the restored ecosystem. T
Relationship
Between
Restoration
Practice and
Restoration
Ecology
E
cological re s t o r a t i o n is the practice of re s t o r i n g
ecosystems as performed by practitioners at spe-
cific project sites, whereas  restoration ecology is the
science upon which the practice is based. Re s t o r a t i o n
e c o l o g y ideally provides clear concepts, models,
methodologies and tools for practitioners in support
of their practice. Sometimes the practitioner and the
restoration ecologist are the same person-the nexus of
practice and theory. The field of restoration ecology is
not limited to the direct service of restoration practice.
Restoration ecologists can advance ecological theory
by using restoration project sites as experimental are a s .
For example, information derived from project sites
could be useful in resolving questions pertaining to
assembly rules of biotic communities. Fu rt h e r,
re s t o red ecosystems can serve as re f e rences for set-
aside areas designated for nature conservation. T
www.ser.org
SER International Primer on Ecological Restoration 11
Section 8:
Section 9:

Relationship of
Restoration
to Other
Activities
E
cological restoration is one of several activities
that strive to alter the biota and physical condi-
tions at a site, and are frequently confused with
restoration. These activities include reclamation,
rehabilitation, mitigation, ecological engineering and
various kinds of resource management, including
wildlife, fisheries and range management, agro-
forestry, and forestry. All of these activities can over-
lap with and may even qualify as ecological restora-
tion if they satisfy all criteria expressed in Section 3
of this document. Relative to other kinds of activi-
ties, restoration generally requires more postinstalla-
tion aftercare to satisfy all these criteria.
Rehabilitation shares with restoration a fundamen-
tal focus on historical or pre-existing ecosystems as
models or references, but the two activities differ in
their goals and strategies. Rehabilitation emphasizes
the reparation of ecosystem processes, productivity
and services, whereas the goals of restoration also
include the re-establishment of the pre-existing biot-
ic integrity in terms of species composition and
community structure. Nonetheless, restoration, as
broadly conceived herein, probably encompasses a
large majority of project work that has previously
been identified as rehabilitation.
The term reclamation, as commonly used in the
context of mined lands in North America and the
UK, has an even broader application than rehabilita-
tion. The main objectives of reclamation include the
stabilization of the terrain, assurance of public safety,
aesthetic improvement, and usually a return of the
land to what, within the regional context, is consid-
ered to be a useful purpose. Revegetation, which is
normally a component of land reclamation, may
entail the establishment of only one or few species.
Reclamation projects that are more ecologically
based can qualify as rehabilitation or even restora-
tion.
Mitigation is an action that is intended to compen-
sate environmental damage. Mitigation is commonly
required in the USA as a condition for the issuance
of permits for private development and public works
projects that cause damage to wetlands. Some, but
perhaps relatively few, mitigation projects satisfy the
attributes of restored ecosystems listed in Section 3,
and thus qualify as restoration.
The term creation has enjoyed recent usage, particu-
larly with respect to projects that are conducted as
mitigation on terrain that is entirely devoid of vege-
tation. The alternate term fabrication is sometimes
employed. Frequently, the process of voiding a site
causes sufficient change in the environment to
require the installation of a different kind of ecosys-
tem from that which occurred historically. Creation
that is conducted as supervised engineering or land-
scape architecture cannot qualify as restoration
because restoration initiates ecosystem development
along a preferred trajectory, and thereafter allows
autogenic processes to guide subsequent develop-
ment with little or no human interference.
Ecological engineering involves manipulation of
natural materials, living organisms and the physical-
chemical environment to achieve specific human
goals and solve technical problems. It thus differs
from civil engineering, which relies on human-made
materials such as steel and concrete. Predictability is
a primary consideration in all engineering design,
whereas restoration recognizes and accepts unpre-
dictable development and addresses goals that reach
beyond strict pragmatism and encompass biodiversi-
ty and ecosystem integrity and health. When pre-
dictability is not at issue, the scope of many ecologi-
cal engineering projects could be expanded until
they qualify as restoration. T
12 SER International Primer on Ecological Restoration 
www.ser.org
Section 10:

Integration of
Ecological
Restoration
into a Larger
Program
E
cological restoration is sometimes only one of
many elements within a larger public or private
sector enterprise, such as development projects and
programs for watershed management, ecosystem
management and nature conservation. Project man-
agers of these larger undertakings should be aware of
the complexities and costs involved in planning and
implementing ecological restoration. Cost savings
can be realized by careful coordination of restoration
activities with other aspects of a large program. For
this reason, project managers will benefit by recog-
nizing ecological restoration as an integral compo-
nent of a program. If this is done, the restorationist
can contribute substantively to all aspects of the pro-
gram that impinge on restoration. Moreover, the
restorationist will be in a position to ensure that all
ecological restoration is well conceived and fully real-
ized. In this manner, the public good is served. T
www.ser.org
SER International Primer on Ecological Restoration 13
Section 11:

Our mission is to promote ecological restoration as a means of sustaining the diversity of life on Earth and
reestablishing an ecologically healthy relationship between nature and culture.
SER International is a non-profit organization infused with the energy of involved members — individuals and
organizations — who are actively engaged in ecologically sensitive repair and management of ecosystems.
Our members live and work all over the planet and draw on an unprecedented breadth of experience, knowledge
sets and cultural perspectives.
We are scientists, planners, administrators, ecological consultants, First Peoples,
landscape architects, philosophers, teachers, engineers, natural areas managers, writers, growers, community
activists, and volunteers.
SER International serves the growing field of ecological restoration by facilitating dialogue among restorationists;
encouraging research; promoting awareness of, and public support for, restoration and restorative management;
contributing to public policy discussions; recognizing those who have made outstanding contributions to the field
of restoration; and promoting ecological restoration around the globe.
Founded in 1987, SER International now has members in 37 countries, with 14 chapters worldwide.
Recognized by public and private organizations as the source for expertise on restoration science, practice and pol-
icy, SER International achieves its objectives through cooperation with partner organizations and the work of its
global membership.
We're a growing world community of practitioners dedicated to restoring damaged and disturbed ecosystems ...
shouldn't you be a member of SER International? You can join online by visiting www.ser.org or call, write, email
or fax us for a membership application.
Society for Ecological Restoration International
285 West 18th Street, Suite 1
Tucson, Arizona
85701 USA
Phone: 520-622-5485
Fax:
520-622-5491
E-mail: info@ser.org I www.ser.org
