ERI–Issues in Forest Restoration
Administrative and Legal Review Opportunities for Collaborative Groups

The Ecological Restoration Institute 
 
Te Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, 
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of dry, frequent-ﬁre forests in the Intermountain 
West. Tese forests have been signiﬁcantly altered during the last century, with decreased ecological and 
recreational values, near-elimination of natural low-intensity ﬁre regimes, and greatly increased risk of 
large-scale ﬁres. Te ERI is working with public agencies and other partners to restore these forests to 
a more ecologically healthy condition and trajectory—in the process helping to signiﬁcantly reduce the 
threat of catastrophic wildﬁre and its eﬀects on human, animal, and plant communities.
Cover photo: 
The Dinkey Collaborative in California was created in 2010 when the Sierra National Forest was awarded a Collaborative 
Forest Landscape Restoration Program project. Collaborative groups like the Dinkey increasingly have become engaged 
in forest restoration projects on national forest lands across the West. Photo by Dorian Fougères
Northern Arizona University
Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
(928) 523-5088
nau.edu/eri
Publication date: January 2015
Authors: Susan Jane Brown, Western Environmental Law Center
Reviewers: Mike Anderson, the Wilderness Society; Emily Jane Davis, Oregon State University; and Emily 
Platt, U.S. Forest Service
Series Editor: Tayloe Dubay
Please use the following citation when referring to this paper:
Brown, S.J. 2015. Administrative and Legal Review Opportunities for Collaborative Groups. ERI White 
Paper—Issues in Forest Restoration. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University and 
the Western Environmental Law Center. 12 p. 
All material copyright © 2015 ERI, NAU
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Afﬁrmative Action Institution.
This report was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service. 

1
Table of Contents
Introduction .................................................................................................................................... 2
Forest Service Administrative Review Process ........................................................................... 2
Judicial Review ............................................................................................................................... 5
Intervention.............................................................................................................................. 6
Amicus Curiae ......................................................................................................................... 8
Injunctions ..............................................................................................................................10
Settlements .............................................................................................................................10
Considerations When Seeking Legal Advice ............................................................................. 10
Conclusion ..................................................................................................................................... 12
Appendix A: Brief of Amici Curiae Nathan J. Poage, Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation,  
and Jeff Gerwing in Support of Defendant-Intervenor-Appellee Interfor U.S., Inc. ................ 13

2
Introduction 
With the enactment of the Healthy Forests Restoration Act, Forest Landscape Restoration Act, and similar laws 
and policies, collaboration — an open and inclusive process through which two or more individuals or organizations 
work together to address a problem/issue that concerns them all and that no one of them is likely to be able to 
resolve alone1 — has gained increasing popularity as a way to resolve natural resource management challenges. 
As collaboration has become more common, collaborative groups such as the Blue Mountains Forest Partners, 
Four Forests Restoration Initiative, Southwest Crown of the Continent, and Selway-Middle Fork Clearwater 
Collaborative have become increasingly engaged in forest restoration project development on national forests across 
the West. With this increased engagement in the project development process, collaborative groups are beginning 
to see the fruits of their work from start to ﬁnish: landscape prioritization, project area identiﬁcation, ﬁeld trips, 
prescription development, proposals for action, project implementation, and monitoring of results are all now part of 
the work of collaborative groups.
Still, active forest management and collaboration remains controversial with some segments of the population. As 
part of the democratic process associated with the management of public lands owned by all Americans, all citizens 
have the fundamental right to disagree with federal land managers and their collaborative partners about whether 
a particular project should be implemented. Consequently, Congress created administrative and judicial review 
processes to allow dissatisﬁed stakeholders an opportunity to be heard, and to advocate for a diﬀerent course of 
action than that proposed by federal land managers.
Te purpose of this memo is to provide collaborative organizations or groups with information about the Forest 
Service’s administrative review process, as well as the judicial review process, and opportunities for engagement at 
both levels. Tis memo is not legal advice, and no attorney/client relationship is created or implied by the information 
contained herein. Instead, this memo is a resource for collaborative groups to educate themselves on the laws and 
procedures surrounding administrative and judicial reviews of Forest Service projects. 
Forest Service Administrative Review Process
First, a brief primer on a citizen’s right to petition her government. Te First Amendment to the United States 
Constitution prohibits Congress from abridging “the right of the people ... to petition the Government for a redress 
of grievances.” To provide an avenue for the public to petition its government, Congress has enacted several laws 
that provide statutory authority for administrative and judicial review of decisions made by federal agencies such as 
the Forest Service. Finally, the Forest Service has enacted regulations in the Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) 
that guide how the public may seek review of a decision made by that agency.
In general, seeking administrative review of (or, “challenging” or “contesting”) a federal agency decision is required 
in order to exhaust administrative remedies and establish standing, which is the capacity of an individual or 
organization to seek judicial review of a ﬁnal agency action.2 Tere are limited exceptions to this general rule, 
discussed in the section “Judicial Review.”
After decades of using a post-decisional administrative appeal process, the Forest Service now utilizes a pre-
1. See generally, RED LODGE CLEARINGHOUSE, http://rlch.org/content/collaboration-handbook (last visited Dec. 2, 2014).
2. Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555 (1992).

3
decisional objection process to conduct administrative review of project-level agency decisions (Figure 1).3 
Tose procedures, found at 36 C.F.R. Part 218, outline what steps an interested party must take in order to seek 
administrative review of a project-level decision. Te administrative review process occurs after the close of the 
environmental review process, and is governed by a separate law, the National Forest Management Act. Notably, 
the administrative review occurs before the Forest Service makes a ﬁnal decision to implement a project, and 
takes the form of an objection to the proposed decision. In order to have standing to object to a project, an 
individual must have commented on the project during the environmental review (also known as the National 
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) process),4 and the objection must be based on issues previously raised before 
the agency during the NEPA process. 
As opposed to the Forest Service’s post-decisional administrative appeal procedures (which are no longer in 
eﬀect), these relatively new pre-decisional objection procedures do not speciﬁcally provide an avenue for interested 
parties to participate in the administrative review process. Interested parties are typically those parties who do not 
involve themselves in the notice and comment process provided by NEPA and therefore do not have standing 
to participate in the administrative review process, but may have some interest in the project such as being an 
adjacent private landowner, permitee, or, for the purposes of this memo, a collaborative group.
Figure 1. Predecisional administrative and judicial review process for project-level agency decisions.
3 Under the 2012 National Forest Management Act Planning Rule, the Forest Service also utilizes a predecisional objection process for decisions implementing 
new, revised, or amended forest plans.  36 C.F.R. §§ 219.50 – 219.62.
4 36 C.F.R. § 218.8(c); 5 U.S.C. § 704; see also, Native Ecosystems Council v. Dombeck, 304 F.3d 886, 900 (9th Cir. 2002) (requiring issue exhaustion). If new 
information comes to light between the comment period and objection period that gives rise to another issue (which could not have been raised earlier), then 
it is likely that an objector can raise this issue as well. See generally, 40 C.F.R. §1502.9(c)(1)(ii) (“signiﬁcant new information”).
Public Comment Period –
Comments on Draft EIS
(40 CFR 1506.10)*
Have 45 days from notice of
availability in Federal Register
Public Comment Period –
Scoping*
Notice of Intent &
Scoping
Drafts
Final EIS and
Draft ROD
End of Objection Filing Period
Must submit objection in order to
have standing to litigate
Filing period is 45 days for non-
HFRA** projects and 30 days for 
HFRA projects
Response to Objections
Reviewing officer responds to all
objections in writing
Filing period is 45 days for non-
HFRA** projects and 30 days for 
HFRA projects
Agency Decision –
Final EIS and Signed Record
of Decision
If decision is litigated:
• Civil lawsuit brought against USFS
• Complaint and/or injunction filed
• Motion to dismiss or respond
• Case proceeds
Notice of Objection Period
Notice is published in newspaper of 
record. Reviewing officer determines 
specifics of objections process.
• Validity of each objection
• Whether or how resolution 
meetings with objectors will occur 
(all meetings will be open to the 
public)
Project-Level Predecisional Administrative and Judicial Review Process
*36 CFR 218.5 Who May File An Objection. Individuals and entities as defined in 218.2 who have submitted timely, specific written comments regarding a proposed project or activity that is 
subject to these regulations during any designated opportunity for public comment may file an objection. Opportunity for public comment on a draft EIS includes request for comment 
during scoping, the 40 CFR 1506.10 comment period or other public involvement opportunity where written comments are requested by the responsible official. Opportunity for public comment 
on an EA includes during scoping or any other instance where the responsible official seeks written comments.
** HFRA-Healthy Forest Restoration Act

4
Of course, if a collaborative group does formally participate 
in the environmental analysis and review process (a.k.a. “the 
NEPA process”) by submitting comments on a collaboratively-
developed project, it would have standing to participate in the 
objection resolution process as an Objector, provided it actually 
objects to the project. 5 36 C.F.R. § 218.5. Collaborative groups 
that provide formal comments on a project do not need to have 
any “oﬃcial” status under local, state, or federal law: they do not 
need to be a tax-exempt (Section 501(c)(3) in the United States 
tax code) organization, chartered under state law, governance 
agreements, or any other imprimatur of formality. Just as with 
any other community group that decides to gather together 
to work towards some cause, a collaborative group needs only 
to decide to work together and to self-identify as a particular 
collaborative. 36 C.F.R. § 218.2  (“Objector”).
36 C.F.R. § 218.11 outlines the authority of the Forest 
Service to engage parties who have not participated in the 
environmental review and comment process, but who wish to be involved in the agency’s decision-making process:
36 C.F.R. § 218.11 Resolution of Objections
a) Meetings. Prior to the issuance of the reviewing oﬃcer’s written response, either the reviewing oﬃcer 
or the objector may request to meet to discuss issues raised in the objection and potential resolution. 
Te reviewing oﬃcer has the discretion to determine whether adequate time remains in the review 
period to make a meeting with the objector practical, the appropriate date, duration, agenda, and 
location for any meeting, and how the meeting will be conducted to facilitate the most beneﬁcial 
dialogue; e.g., face-to-face oﬃce meeting, project site visit, teleconference, video conference, etc. Te 
responsible oﬃcial should be a participant along with the reviewing oﬃcer in any objection resolution 
meeting. Meetings are not required to be noticed but are open to attendance by the public, and the 
reviewing oﬃcer will determine whether those other than objectors may participate.
 
36 C.F.R. § 218.11(a) (emphasis added). Tis regulation clearly states that while objection resolution meetings 
do not require formal public notice, they are open to the public. More importantly, the reviewing oﬃcer — the 
Forest Service oﬃcial one level above the line oﬃcer who issued the proposed decision6 — is vested with complete 
discretion to determine whether anyone other than an objector may participate in the objection resolution meeting. 
Additionally, the regulations do not deﬁne “participate,” so what involvement in an objection resolution meeting 
as a non-objector looks like follows no standard format: the reviewing oﬃcer can decide whether non-objectors 
may speak, attend in person (versus telephonically or by video conference), or otherwise impose restrictions on 
involvement. Moreover, the reviewing oﬃcer may change these conditions of participation depending on the project 
or even the identity of the non-objector, so even if a non-objecting party is permitted to speak in one objection 
resolution meeting, there is no guarantee that the same party will be similarly allowed to even attend by phone 
another resolution meeting on a diﬀerent project.
5. An objection must include the Objector’s name, address, telephone number, name of the proposed project, speciﬁc issues objected to, and citations to previous 
comments where the issue was raised, among several other items. 36 C.F.R. § 218.8.     
6. 36 C.F.R. § 218.3(a).
The Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI) in 
Arizona consists of more than 30 stakeholders 
and includes forest supervisors and staff of the 
Coconino, Kaibab, Tonto, and Apache-Sitgreaves 
National Forests. Photo courtesy of the ERI

5
Given that the reviewing oﬃcer is vested with complete discretion to determine the format, content, and 
participants in an objection resolution meeting, it is possible that the reviewing oﬃcer could permit interested 
stakeholders such as collaborative groups to attend and be actively involved in the resolution meeting. However, 
there is no requirement that the reviewing oﬃcer do so. 
It is also important to note that even if a reviewing oﬃcer permits a collaborative group to participate in an 
objection resolution meeting, this participation does not confer standing on the group to later involve itself in legal 
proceedings should the project be challenged in court. 
As collaboratively-developed projects have become more common, some collaborative groups have begun to seek 
permission from the Forest Service to participate in objection resolution meetings. Groups that have pursued this 
option have simply sent a letter to the reviewing and/or responsible oﬃcial seeking participation in the resolution 
meeting; these requests have been met with varying degrees of success. Regardless, participation (however that 
word is interpreted and implemented) in objection resolution meetings is one way that collaborative groups can 
continue to inﬂuence the development and implementation of collaborative restoration projects. 
Of course, if a collaborative group does formally participate in the environmental analysis and review process 
(a.k.a. “the NEPA process”) by submitting comments on a collaboratively-developed project, it would have 
standing to participate in the objection resolution process as an Objector, provided it actually objects to the 
project.7 36 C.F.R. § 218.5. Collaborative groups that provide formal comments on a project do not need to have 
any “oﬃcial” status under local, state, or federal law: they do not need to be a tax-exempt (Section 501(c)(3) in the 
United States tax code) organization, chartered under state law, governance agreements, or any other imprimatur 
of formality. Just as with any other community group that decides to gather together to work towards some cause, 
a collaborative group needs only to decide to work together and to self-identify as a particular collaborative. 36 
C.F.R. § 218.2 (“Objector”).
Obviously, another way for collaborative groups to participate in the objection resolution process is to ﬁle 
an objection to the project. Providing formal comments during the NEPA comment process, followed by an 
objection, would provide a collaborative group with standing to participate in the objection resolution process, 
and to litigate the project in its own name. However, given that the fundamental nature of collaborative groups is 
to overcome disagreement through diverse stakeholder engagement, objecting to a project that was developed by 
such an organization is somewhat antithetical to the spirit of collaboration.
Judicial Review
Once the Forest Service makes a ﬁnal decision to implement a project, the decision is ready for judicial review. 
36 C.F.R. § 218.14. A party challenging the decision must have standing, which in this case means that the party 
has participated in the comment and administrative review process. Id. In the typical case in which a collaborative 
group has not provided formal comments through the NEPA process, and also has not objected to the project, the 
collaborative group would not have standing (nor the desire) to challenge the decision. However, if another party 
does seek judicial review of the Forest Service’s decision to implement a collaborative project, collaborative groups 
have two options to engage in the judicial review process: intervention or appearance as amicus curiae.
7. An objection must include the Objector’s name, address, telephone number, name of the proposed project, speciﬁc issues objected to, and citations to previous 
comments where the issue was raised, among several other items.  36 C.F.R. § 218.8. 

6
Intervention
In litigation, there are typically two parties: the Plaintiﬀ and the Defendant. A Plaintiﬀ is the party who has 
standing to challenge an action in court, and a Defendant is the party who supports that action. In this case, the 
Plaintiﬀ can be a private individual or organization, and the Defendant is the Forest Service. Te Plaintiﬀ and 
Defendant are full parties to the litigation and can ﬁle motions and briefs and participate in oral argument.
Te ﬁrst, and most common, way for a party to engage in litigation who is not either a Plaintiﬀ or Defendant 
is as an Intervenor, a party who has a demonstrable interest in the subject matter of the litigation, but does not 
necessarily have standing to bring or defend a lawsuit. Te Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, the “rules” that govern 
litigation in federal court, allow a party to intervene in litigation as an Intervenor under two circumstances: either “as 
of right,” or “permissively.”
Intervention as of right is granted by the court under the following circumstances:
Upon timely application anyone shall be permitted to intervene in an action...when the applicant claims an 
interest relating to the property or transaction which is the subject of the action and the applicant is so situated 
that the disposition may as a practical matter impair or impede the applicant’s ability to protect that interest, 
unless the applicant’s interest is adequately represented by existing parties.
FED. R. CIV. P. 24(a). Te court will evaluate a motion to intervene as of right using a four-part test: 1) the 
application to intervene must be timely; 2) the applicant must demonstrate a legally protected interest in the action; 
3) the action must threaten to impair that interest; and 4) no party to the action can be an adequate representative 
of the applicant’s interests.8 A party seeking to intervene as of right must be able to demonstrate all four elements to 
the court’s satisfaction, which is a highly fact-speciﬁc inquiry. Essentially, a party must demonstrate that they have 
“the right” to be a party to the litigation.
If a party cannot (or seeks not to) demonstrate that they meet the test for intervention as of right, a party may seek 
to gain participation in the litigation by seeking permissive intervention. Te Federal Rules of Civil Procedure state 
that permissive intervention is appropriate when a party can demonstrate that its interest “shares a question of law 
or fact in common with the underlying action and if the intervention will not unduly delay or prejudice the rights of 
the original parties.” FED. R. CIV. P. 24(b).9 Permissive intervention is a much more lenient standard, and relies on 
equitable concepts: the court may grant permissive intervention when the principle of fairness indicates that a party 
should be part of the litigation, even if they do not have the right to participate: this is a decision that the judge will 
make based on her discretion, and there is no “test” to determine whether permissive intervention will be granted by 
the court. So, this inquiry, too, is highly fact-speciﬁc.
 
It is likely that a collaborative group seeking to intervene in a judicial action would be admitted as a permissive 
Intervenor. Regardless of the type of intervention, once the court grants a motion to intervene, the Intervenor 
participates as a full party in the litigation: an Intervenor may ﬁle motions and briefs and participate in oral 
argument. To this extent, an Intervenor has the same “rights” as a Plaintiﬀ or Defendant, but the court does have 
discretion to structure the involvement of Intervenors in the litigation, including setting page limits for briefs and 
time limits on oral argument. 
8. SEC v. Prudential Sec. Inc., 136 F.3d 153, 156 (D.C. Cir. 1998).
9. Acree v. Republic of Iraq, 370 F.3d 41, 49 (D.C. Cir. 2004).

7
Given that collaborative groups generally support the 
restoration project at issue in litigation, such parties would 
be intervening on behalf of the Forest Service, making 
the collaborative group a Defendant-Intervenor. As such, 
the collaborative group would essentially step into the 
shoes of the Forest Service, and oﬀer rebuttal arguments 
as to why the project complies with the law and should be 
implemented. In particular, the collaborative group would 
oﬀer arguments that speciﬁcally implicate the interests of 
the collaborative group, for example, about the important 
beneﬁts to wildlife, ﬁre risk reduction, community well-
being, and social agreement conferred by the project. Tese 
interests are unique to the collaborative group: while also 
important to the Forest Service, they aﬀect members of 
the collaborative — and the collaborative process more 
generally — diﬀerently than they aﬀect a federal agency.
Often, although not always, Intervenors will coordinate 
with the party on whose behalf they have intervened: in this 
case, the Forest Service. Tis coordination may take the form of responding to particular arguments or claims that 
each party is better suited to addressing, providing declarations in support of an issue, or sharing oral argument time. 
In other situations, there may be little or no coordination. Tis is an issue typically addressed by legal counsel shortly 
after the court grants intervention.
Cost
When a Plaintiﬀ initiates a legal action in federal court, they are required to pay a “ﬁling fee,” which is currently 
$400. Intervenors are not required to pay a ﬁling fee. 
Instead, the primary cost associated with intervention is paying for an attorney. Most private attorneys charge their 
clients based on an hourly rate that reﬂects the attorney’s experience and expertise, but other private attorneys 
will charge a ﬂat rate for their representation.10 Tese rates vary drastically across jurisdictions (urban/metro/rural, 
district court vs. appellate, etc.).
On the other hand, pro bono attorneys will undertake representation of a party at a much reduced or even free rate. 
When representing Plaintiﬀs, many attorneys will undertake pro bono representation with the hopes of prevailing 
in the litigation and obtaining compensation for their work based on numerous federal fee-shifting statutes11 such 
as the Equal Access to Justice Act, Civil Rights Act of 1964, Fair Labor Standards Act, Age Discrimination in 
Employment Act of 1967, Equal Credit Opportunity Act, or Voting Rights Act of 1965, among many others. If 
these pro bono attorneys do not win their case, they will not be paid for their work under this approach. 
Blue Mountains Forest Partners is a diverse group  
of stakeholders in eastern Oregon who collaborate  
to improve the resilience and well-being of forests 
and communities in the Blue Mountains.  
Photo by Vernita Ediger
10. For example, the Oregon State Bar publishes economic information about Oregon attorneys: https://www.osbar.org/_docs/resources/
Econsurveys/12EconomicSurvey.pdf. 
11. In the United States, we have what is known as “the American rule,” which states that each party in litigation bears their own costs of bringing or 
defending against suit. Most other countries follow the English Rule, under which the losing party pays the costs of litigation, including the attorneys’ 
fees of the winning party. American “fee shifting” statutes impose the English Rule on federal agencies, such that if a Plaintiﬀ prevails in litigation 
against a federal agency and demonstrates several prerequisites, the Plaintiﬀ is entitled to collect the costs of litigation from the federal government. Te 
concept behind fee shifting statutes is to encourage “private attorneys general” to defend important public or unpopular interests that otherwise would 
not be vindicated by private interests.

8
When representing Intervenors, however, attorneys are generally not eligible for attorneys’ fees under these and 
other fee-shifting statutes. Terefore, as an Intervenor, a collaborative group will likely need to compensate their 
attorney out of their own pocket, if the attorney is not willing to take the case for free or reduced rates.
Parties may also seek to represent themselves in the litigation propria persona or pro se, which means that they do not 
have legal counsel who draft motions, ﬁle briefs, and appear in court but rather do all of these things themselves. 
Court procedures are more lenient for pro se parties, but given that collaborative groups are groups of people by 
deﬁnition, and given the complexity of federal law and practice, it is unlikely that a collaborative group would 
represent itself pro se in litigation.
Other costs associated with intervention include costs of copying and printing documents, postage, legal database 
access for research, travel, telephone, and other associated incidental expenses. Typically these costs are not 
signiﬁcant and usually cost less than $1,000. If an Intervenor chooses to hire an expert, expert fees can range from 
free to quite expensive (hundreds to multiple thousands of dollars), depending on the expert.
Time Commitment 
Te time commitment on behalf of Intervenors is largely what the party makes it. Some Intervenors want to be 
highly engaged in the litigation: reviewing briefs, drafting declarations, discussing strategy with their attorneys, 
attending oral argument, and engaging in other aspects of the litigation. Other Intervenors do not want to be 
actively engaged in the litigation and leave the vast majority of the work to their attorneys. Given the cooperative 
nature of collaborative groups,12 these parties may be particularly engaged in some aspects of the litigation, for 
example, crafting arguments about the nature of the collaborative process used to develop the project at issue in the 
litigation. Because collaborative conservation is something with which most attorneys will not be familiar, the active 
participation of the collaborative group may be very important to accurately advocating for the group’s position.
Amicus Curiae
In what is perhaps the most mispronounced Latin phrase used in litigation, amicus curiae (pronounced uh-mahy-
kahy kyoo r-ee-ee) — or “friend of the court” — were traditionally nonparties to litigation whose chief function was 
to prevent an uninformed legal or factual error from prejudicing the litigation. Today, however, amicus (plural: amici) 
parties are nonparties who have a strong interest in the outcome of the litigation that is not represented by parties 
already before the court. Collaborative groups ﬁt nicely within this concept.
Amicus appear most often in the federal Courts of Appeals and the Supreme Court, but do sometimes — though much 
more rarely — appear in federal District Courts. Te Federal Rules of Civil Procedure do not have any rules relating to 
amicus participation in federal district court, but the Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure (and the Supreme Court’s rules 
of practice) do have several rules regulating the participation of amicus, including the timing and format of amicus briefs. 
An attorney can help make sure the appropriate procedures are followed in the courts of higher review.
 
In general, parties seeking amicus status must seek the written permission of the existing parties to the litigation to 
participate. If this is not granted by the existing parties, the amicus must seek permission from the court by motion, 
but usually leave to appear as an amicus is freely granted. Typically, amicus ﬁle one brief outlining their interest in the 
litigation, and may ﬁle a responsive brief if the existing parties to the litigation address any of the amicus’ arguments 
in their briefs. Typically amicus do not ﬁle declarations as do full parties to the litigation, but in some circumstances 
a declaration from an amicus may be appropriate. Courts have the discretion to determine whether amici may 
participate in oral argument.
12.  In litigation with several parties (and a collaborative group is essentially a grouping of multiple parties), it is prudent for the multiple interests to 
designate a single representative that will be the contact person for the attorney.  Tis allows the attorney to engage directly with one person who has the 
authority to speak for the group.

9
Given that an additional party to the litigation means more paperwork, the courts have been clear that participation 
as amicus should be a relatively rare occurrence. Amicus briefs should be short and to the point. Duplication of 
existing arguments is much disfavored, as is amicus participation in “ordinary” cases. On the other hand, if important 
policy considerations are at stake, then amici can provide important context for the court to consider as it evaluates 
the merits of the case. Indeed, the following reasons may be provided in seeking amicus status: to examine policy 
issues; to supplement a party’s brief; to endorse a particular position; to provide a historical perspective; to provide 
technical assistance; to apply political pressure; to provide socioeconomic information; or to explain the real-world 
ramiﬁcations of the litigation.
In choosing this route to participation in the judicial review process, collaborative groups should consider the 
following things:
• 
Interest. Why do you want to participate in 
the litigation? How is your interest diﬀerent 
than that espoused by the exiting parties? 
What context can you provide that the 
Defendants and Plaintiﬀs cannot? What 
are the broader policy interests at play in the 
litigation, about which the court should be 
aware? Is there “history” associated with the 
project or the broader context that is outside 
of the record for the case but nonetheless 
important to the resolution of the litigation? 
Does the collaborative group possess scientiﬁc 
knowledge that can be shared with the court? 
Can the collaborative group provide “technical” 
advice or information — perhaps about the 
collaborative process or reasons for place-based 
collaborative conservation in the ﬁrst place — 
that would be useful to the court? 
• 
Arguments. Courts have been very clear that amicus who only raise claims or issues already represented by 
the existing parties to the litigation are disfavored. Furthermore, amicus may not raise issues that are novel 
or not advanced by the existing parties. Treading this needle can be diﬃcult, but given that collaborative 
groups may have a diﬀerent perspective than either the agency advancing the project, or a party challenging 
the decision to implement that project, collaborative partners may be able to strike the right balance.
Cost
As with participation as an Intervenor, there is no ﬁling fee to appear as an amicus, so the main cost associated with 
amicus participation is the cost of hiring an attorney. Other costs can include travel, copying and printing, and legal 
research. 
Time Commitment
Again similar to participation in litigation as an Intervenor, the time commitment associated with appearance 
as an amicus is largely what the party makes it. Given that amicus typically address broad policy issues and real-
world implications of the litigation, there may be less legal research associated with this type of involvement, but 
The 4FRI landscape spans 2.4 million acres and is the largest 
landscape-scale restoration project selected by the CFLR 
Program. The Final EIS and Draft ROD for the ﬁrst phase of 
the project was released in November 2014. Photo courtesy 
of the U.S. Forest Service

10
10
developing cogent arguments about how and why a particular case “matters” to amicus can be just as time consuming. 
Te particular facts and a group’s appetite for engagement will shape the time commitment associated with 
appearing as amicus curiae.
Injunctions
Often in litigation, a Plaintiﬀ will seek an injunction, which is an equitable remedy provided by a court that either 
orders someone to do something, or orders them not to do something. Typically, a Plaintiﬀ will seek an injunction 
— either a “temporary restraining order” lasting no more than 14 days, or a “preliminary injunction” lasting longer 
than 14 days — to stop the implementation of a land management project. Injunctions are available for collaborative 
projects, just like any for other federal action under judicial review.
As an equitable remedy, a court has the discretion to grant or deny a request for an injunction. Te court will look 
at four factors when evaluating a request for an injunction: whether a party seeking an injunction 1) is likely to 
succeed on the merits (i.e., that the Plaintiﬀ can prove a violation of law); 2) is likely to suﬀer irreparable harm in 
the absence of preliminary relief; 3) the balance of equities tips in their favors; and 4) an injunction is in the public 
interest. Winter v. NRDC, 555 U.S. 7, 20 (2008). Tere is substantial case law that interprets each of these four 
factors, and whether a Plaintiﬀ will be able to meet this test is highly fact-speciﬁc.
If a party ﬁles a motion for an injunction, and a collaborative group is admitted to participate in the litigation as 
either an Intervenor or amicus, the group will have the opportunity to respond to the motion and be heard by the 
judge on the motion. As part of responding to the motion for an injunction, the collaborative group can supply its 
own information about how a delay in the implementation of the project would aﬀect their interests, whether they 
are ecological, social, or economic in nature.
Only if a motion for an injunction is granted by the court may the implementation of a project be halted: simply ﬁling a 
motion does not aﬀect project implementation. Moreover, even if a court ﬁnds that a violation of law is probable, the court 
is not required to halt implementation: the judge will balance the interests of allowing a project to go forward against those 
seeking to halt implementation, and may allow a project to go forward if “the equities” favor it.  
Settlements
Should the Plaintiﬀs and Defendants decide to resolve the litigation without a judge deciding the merits of the 
challenge, the parties may seek to settle the lawsuit on terms favorable to them. Intervenors are sometimes involved 
in this process, but not always: it is up to the Defendants and Plaintiﬀs to decide whether to involve Intervenors in 
the settlement process. Intervenors may object to a settlement agreement between Plaintiﬀs and Defendants, but 
it will be up to the judge to determine whether such an objection has merit. Amici are not involved in settlement 
negotiations.
Considerations When Seeking Legal Advice
Most people hope to never need a lawyer and therefore view the process of seeking out and retaining legal advice to 
be rather daunting. Plus, all those lawyer jokes –! Nonetheless, obtaining legal representation does not need to be a 
diﬃcult process, but it is one that you should undertake with the same degree of care that you would seek out in any 
other kind of professional: in short, it pays to do your homework.13
13. Te Oregon State Bar is an excellent resource for members of the public seeking to hire an attorney (http://www.osbar.org/public/legalinfo/1175_
HiringALawyer.htm), and provides several services to help you ﬁnd the right attorney (http://www.osbar.org/public/ris/). Other State Bars oﬀer similar 
information.

11
11
Many lawyers have specialties, including practicing environmental, natural resources, or land use law. In the 
event that your collaborative group doesn’t have one of these specialists on speed dial, your State Bar Association 
maintains a list of attorneys who practice various areas of law, as well as attorneys who will undertake representation 
pro bono. Your State Bar will also have tips on contacting and retaining legal counsel.
• 
Arizona State Bar
• 
California State Bar
• 
Idaho State Bar
• 
Montana State Bar
• 
New Mexico State Bar
• 
Oregon State Bar
• 
Washington State Bar
In general, some things collaborative groups may want to consider when retaining a lawyer include:
• 
Cost. Pro bono and reduced cost attorneys are not the norm, and most lawyers will want to be paid for their 
representation. As mentioned previously, most private attorneys charge their clients based on hourly rates, 
and will vary based on experience, expertise, and location (for example, an attorney in John Day, Oregon 
who does not specialize in environmental litigation and recently graduated from law school will charge a 
much diﬀerent rate than a Washington, DC lawyer who has been practicing natural resources law before the 
Supreme Court for 40 years). You should always ask prospective attorneys about their hourly rates.
 
• 
Expertise. Experience with federal environmental law is extremely useful in litigation of the type 
discussed in this memo, but not necessary. Simply because a prospective attorney has little experience with 
environmental or natural resources law does not mean they will not be able to competently and zealously 
represent a collaborative group in litigation. Nevertheless, familiarity with the issues common to this type of 
litigation is a relevant consideration.
 
• 
Scope of representation. When engaging an attorney, it is critical to know what you are getting for your 
money and time. Will the attorney represent the collaborative group in just the district court, or on appeal 
if the Forest Service loses the case? Will the attorney engage in any post-litigation work, such as review of 
settlement agreements? What happens if the attorney puts in more work than expected: is the collaborative 
group responsible for paying the attorney for that additional work? Must the collaborative group pay 
for any time the attorney’s clerk spends writing a brief? Tese are some of the questions you should ask 
prospective attorneys about what they will be doing for your collaborative group. After these discussions, 
your attorney will prepare an attorney-client representation agreement that will set out in writing the rights 
and responsibilities of both the client and the attorney.
 
• 
Personality. As collaborative groups know, it is all about relationships. Whether you like and can get 
along with a prospective attorney is an extremely important consideration, given that you may be spending 
substantial time with that person, not to mention paying them for an important service: representing you on 
an issue in which you are heavily invested. Someone may be an excellent attorney but an impossible person.

12
12
Conclusion
The purpose of this memorandum is to inform collaborative partners and organizations that may be interested in 
engaging in the administrative and judicial review processes that sometimes follow after the collaborative process. 
Whether and how to engage in these adversarial procedures can feel antithetical to the collaborative process, but 
engaging in them can be important to adequate representation of the collaborative conservation vision.

13
Case Nos. 14-35398 & 14-35548
_____________________
IN THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
____________________
BARK,
Plaintiff-Appellant
v.
LISA NORTHROP, Forest Supervisor Mt. Hood National Forest and U.S. FOREST SERVICE, a 
federal agency,
Defendants-Appellees,
and
INTERFOR U.S., INC.,
Defendant-Intervenor-Appellee.
_____________________
On Appeal from The United States District Court for the
District of Oregon, Case No. 3:13-cv-1267-HZ
____________________
BRIEF OF AMICI CURIAE NATHAN J. POAGE, ROCKY MOUNTAIN ELK  
FOUNDATION, and JEFF GERWING IN SUPPORT OF DEFENDANT- 
INTERVENOR-APPELLEE INTERFOR U.S., INC.
___________________
Caroline Lobdell, OSB #021236
Western Resources Legal Center
5100 SW Macadam, Suite 350
Portland, OR 97239
(503) 222-0628
clobdell@wrlegal.org
Attorney for Amici Curiae Case
Appendix A

14
CORPORATE DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
Pursuant to Fed. R. App. P. 26.1, proposed amici curiae state that Rocky 
Mountain Elk Foundation is a nonprofit corporation that does not issue shares to 
the public or own subsidiaries that issue shares to the public. Nathan J. Poage and 
Jeff Gerwing are individuals acting in non-corporate capacity.
DATED this 20th day of November, 2014.
/s/ Caroline Lobdell, OSB #021236
Attorney for Proposed Amici Curiae

15
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. 	
INTEREST OF AMICI CURIAE .................................................................... 16
II. 	
INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................. 17
	
A.    Community-based Collaborative Groups and Stewardship Contracting....... 17
	
B.    CSP’s Background, Structure, and Decisionmaking Process.......................... 18
	
C.   CSP’s Role in the Jazz Environmental Assessment and the Jazz 
	
       Thinning Project............................................................................................. 19
III. 	 SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT.......................................................................... 20
IV. 	 ARGUMENT....................................................................................................... 20
V. 	
CONCLUSION................................................................................................... 21

16
I.     INTEREST OF AMICI CURIAE
Proposed amici curiae are members of Clackamas Stewardship Partners (CSP or “the collaborative”), a group 
of diverse local stakeholders concerned with achieving restoration objectives in the Clackamas River Basin while 
also benefiting the local economy. CSP has been actively involved in a collaborative role with the Forest Service 
on the Jazz Thinning Project from the outset, and has offered comments at the various stages of environmental 
review under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). The undersigned individual members of CSP wish 
to describe and emphasize the benefits of this collaborative process, and offer support of the final Jazz Thinning 
Environmental Assessment (EA) and the resulting Jazz Thin Stewardship Project.
Nathan J. Poage, Ph.D is a research forester formerly employed by the U.S. Forest Service’s Forestry Sciences 
Laboratory who served as CSP’s lead facilitator from 2008 to 2013. Dr. Poage was extensively involved in working 
with CSP’s members and with the Forest Service to identify and address forest health issues in the Mt. Hood 
National Forest, including with the Jazz Project. Dr. Poage continues to be involved as a member of CSP and 
remains interested personally in Mt. Hood National Forest and the Forest Service’s use of stewardship contracting.
Jeff Gerwing, Ph.D, is an Associate Professor of Environmental Sciences and Management at Portland State 
University. Dr. Gerwing has studied the impacts of logging on forest ecosystems and investigated the ways those 
impacts can be mitigated through improved management practices. He is a member of CSP and has helped CSP to 
develop and monitor stewardship contract projects in the Mt. Hood National Forest.
Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation (RMEF) is a national conservation organization whose mission is to “ensure 
the future of elk, other wildlife, their habitat, and our hunting heritage.” During the past 30 years, RMEF has helped 
protect and enhance more than 6.4 million acres of wildlife habitat, much of it forestland managed by the Forest 
Service. Maintaining and enhancing deer and elk habitat benefits a wide variety of big game, upland game birds, 
song birds, raptors, fur bearers and aquatic species.
As members of CSP, proposed amici curiae share an interest in promoting the use of stewardship contracts as a 
way to achieve restoration objectives. Plaintiff-appellant Bark, who does not support the Jazz Thinning Project, has 
been a member of CSP for several years, with the exception of the three and a half year period between April 2009 
and October 2012. During that time, largely due to its objections to the Jazz EA, Bark initiated the lawsuit from 
which they now appeal.
CSP, including Bark, has been engaged in the stewardship contract planning process for Clackamas County 
area projects since 2004. Their involvement stems from the NEPA environmental review process and collaborative 
guidelines pertaining to the Forest Service’s use of stewardship contracts. See U.S. FOREST SERVICE, 
RENEWABLE RESOURCES HANDBOOK, FSH 2409.19. CSP is one of many “collaboratives” that utilize 
the stewardship contracting process outlined in the Handbook to help the Forest Service identify and evaluate 
restoration projects. As explained more fully below, stewardship contracts have a unique ability to achieve restoration 
objectives that may not otherwise be within the Forest Service’s budget. Stewardship contracts also tend to benefit 
from the broad-based support that collaboratives can realize.
CSP has used this collaborative process to make recommendations specific to the Jazz Thinning Project during 
the “pre-scoping” period, on scoping documents issued by the Forest Service, and after the EA was released. 
Of significance, in a 2009 letter, CSP initially recommended that the Collawash watershed, where the Jazz 
Project is located, be the next area that the Forest Service address with thinning and restoration treatments. That 
recommendation and CSP’s subsequent collaboration with the Forest Service had the consensus support of all CSP 
members during the period when Bark excused itself from participation.
In short, CSP has spent much time on and, with the exception of Bark, has supported the Forest Service in its 
environmental review of Jazz and its implementation of the Jazz Thin. 

17
II.  INTRODUCTION
A. Community-based Collaborative Groups and Stewardship Contracting.
A collaborative is a place-based stakeholder group that shares the dual concerns of achieving resource 
restoration objectives in the national forests and benefiting local, rural economies. Collaboratives vary in makeup, 
size, level of involvement, and decisionmaking processes. But they typically involve federal, state, and local 
agencies; tribal and local governments; and other interested groups, including non-governmental organizations, 
resource advisory committees, and conservation districts. In Oregon, as of 2014, there are at least 23 collaboratives 
operating—almost two for each one of the state’s 13 national forests. See Lee Van Der Voo, Timber Town, 
OREGON BUSINESS JOURNAL (May 29, 2014), https://www.oregonbusiness.com/articles/162-june-
2014/13039-timber-town.
Stewardship contracts are the driving force behind these collaboratives. Initially authorized as limited “goods 
for services” contracts in FY1992 and FY1993, Congress expanded the stewardship program beginning with the 
FY1999 Interior Appropriations Act in order to test its potential to address forest health issues. ROSS W. GORTE, 
CONG. RESEARCH SERV., RS20985, STEWARDSHIP CONTRACTING IN FEDERAL FORESTS 5 
(2003); see P.L. 105-277, § 347 (1998). Because of the stewardship contract program’s success in filling this void, 
Congress re-authorized the authority several times before finally making it permanent via the 2014 Farm Bill. See 
Agricultural Act of 2014, P.L. 133-79, § 8205 (amending Title VI of the Healthy Forests Restoration Act of 2003).
Specifically, stewardship contracting has been successful because it allows the Forest Service (and Bureau of 
Land Management) to achieve necessary restoration work—e.g., clearing overcrowded dead and dying trees, actively 
managing dense undergrowth, and thinning dense stands of small trees. GORTE at 1, 4. Despite disagreement 
among interest groups over what constitutes a healthy forest, national forests in the west “are widely thought to be 
in poor health.” Id. at 1 (“Interest groups disagree over what constitutes a healthy forest, what has caused the current 
problems, and what the solutions should be. Nonetheless, most accept that high biomass accumulations . . . can 
contribute to catastrophic wildfires, pest problems, and lower biological diversity.”).
Stewardship contracts offer additional flexibility and unique benefits to both the government and the public. 
Fiscally, the Forest Service can take advantage of two primary benefits: (1) accepting restoration work performed 
by contractors as compensation for wood removed from the forest, and (2) retaining receipts from certain sorts 
of restoration projects in order to accomplish further restoration work within the forest. See, e.g., Forest Service 
Renewable Resources Handbook (FSH) 2409.19 at § 61(f) (“Monies received from the sale of forest products . . . 
removed under a stewardship contract or agreement may be applied . . . without further appropriation.”). By contrast, 
receipts from standard timber contracts cannot be retained by individual forests. Rather, receipts are deposited in 
national U.S. Forest Service funds and to the U.S. Treasury’s General Fund.
Collaboratives derive their agency and efficacy from Forest Service policy regarding the use of stewardship 
contracts. The Forest Service’s Renewable Resources Handbook directs the Forest Service to “[d]evelop 
projects collaboratively” with these agencies, governments, groups, and individuals. FSH 2409.19 at § 61(1)(a). 
“Collaboratively” refers to the institutionalized process that provides for increased stakeholder involvement in forest 
management projects conceived as stewardship contracts.
In practice, this means that the Forest Service identifies and involves relevant stakeholders from the outset 
when developing a stewardship project. Id. § 61.12a(1). Then, the collaborative group designs “an open, inclusive, 
and transparent” decisionmaking process, often involving a “skilled facilitator” to foster constructive dialog among 
members and with the Forest Service. Id. § 61.12a(2). Once a dialog and level of trust exists among members, the 
decisionmaking process often becomes streamlined. Typically, collaboratives elect to use a consensus or “modified-
consensus” approach so as to present to the Forest Service a unified recommendation—whether it be a proposed new 
project or a series of common issues that the stakeholders agree must be addressed.
The ability to utilize goods for services contracts and retain receipts incentivizes the Forest Service to actively 

18
engage in this collaborative process to achieve restoration work that needs to be done, but which might otherwise go 
unfunded via the standard congressional appropriation process.
Other incentives for collaboration exist. For example, the Forest Service is subject to fewer restrictions when 
it uses stewardship contracts, it may engage in multi-year contracts (up to 10 years), use performance-based 
remuneration schemes, and award projects to the contractors who offer the best value rather than those with the 
highest bid, among other benefits. Id. §§ 61(2)(a)-(c). These long-term contracts assist local contractors in qualifying 
for loans and making capital-intensive purchases, which in turn helps sustain local timber economies and also 
provides value to the Forest Service. Together, these powers allow the Forest Service to do more restoration work 
and adapt contracts to better suit different sorts of project needs and timelines.
Relying on the collaborative process does not exempt the Forest Service from complying with NEPA or the 
forest planning process under the National Forest Management Act. Yet there is great value for the parties who 
choose to participate and, sometimes, compromise to achieve mutually agreeable restoration goals in the forest. 
Achieving those goals in a non-traditional, collaborative manner that transcends partisan issues often associated with 
environmental law and forest management in the Northwest is the very purpose that Congress sought to achieve 
when it began experimenting with stewardship contracts.
Using the support and input of varied members, collaboratives help build trust and understanding between the 
community, businesses, local government, and the Forest Service. At the same time, the structure of collaboratives is 
designed to air out issues before a project goes through the environmental review process and, in many cases, has helped 
resolve conflicts over forest thinning projects that would otherwise have been litigated. Seeing the program’s success in 
creating mutually beneficial, durable solutions to forest management, Congress in 2014 reaffirmed that authority.
B.    CSP’s Background, Structure, and Decisionmaking Process.
Clackamas Stewardship Partners was initially conceived in 2004 when members of Clackamas Ranger 
District in Mt. Hood National Forest, the Clackamas River Basin Council, and members of the Clackamas 
County Economic Development Commission met to discuss the possibilities of the Forest Service’s newly granted 
“stewardship contracting” authority. It was quickly apparent to the wide range of stakeholders that stewardship 
contracts could both drive restoration and create jobs in Clackamas County. Since then, CSP has been very active 
with projects similar to the Jazz Thinning Project.
From 2006–2010, CSP has promoted about $6 million of job-creating restoration projects in the Clackamas 
River Basin. Clackamas Stewardship Partners, About Us, http://clackamasstewardshippartners.org/wp/?page_
id=249 (last visited Nov. 10, 2014). From 2009–2011, CSP recommended funding over $825,000 of additional 
restoration projects using income generated by stewardship contracts for the harvest of second-growth stands 
in the Mt. Hood area. Projects have included improvement and expansion of aquatic habitat, road repair and 
decommissioning, repair of sites damaged by off-highway vehicles, enhancement of peregrine falcon nest sites, and 
vegetation treatments to increase production of culturally valuable huckleberries. For these successes, in 2008 CSP 
was one of five groups awarded the “Two Chiefs’ Partnership Award” by the Forest Service and Natural Resources 
Conservation Service. U.S. FOREST SERVICE, MT. HOOD NATIONAL FOREST: IMPLEMENTING THE 
STRATEGIC STEWARDSHIP PROGRAM iii (2008), http://www.fs.usda.gov/Internet/FSE_DOCUMENTS/
fsbdev3_036394.pdf.
CSP furthers its goals by identifying areas where forest health is lacking, recommending projects to the Forest 
Service that fulfill restoration and economic aims, and commenting on proposed projects. CSP’s stated vision is to:
Enhance ecosystem health and economic viability of local communities within the Clackamas River 
Watershed. The Clackamas Stewardship Partners are committed to a collaborative process that employs 
stewardship contracting and other innovative tools to meet restoration goals. 

19
The group—comprising voting members, non-voting members, and a Coordinator—utilizes a modified 
consensus approach. Consensus means that all voting members must support or, at minimum, “live with” a decision 
and not publicly oppose it. If consensus cannot be reached, voting members adopt a majority report, or set of 
recommendations to the Forest Service in which areas of agreement and disagreement are clearly recorded. Those 
members who disagree may develop a minority report that is also included in the recommendation. To be considered 
an active voting member, groups and individuals must agree to abide by CSP’s vision; commit to active, long-term 
involvement; participate in a committee; and attend general meetings. Non-voting members (such as the Forest 
Service) and inactive voting members can participate in meetings, but do not participate in decisionmaking and are 
not bound by CSP decisions.
The Coordinator holds a part-time contract position and plays a lead role in setting meeting agendas; facilitating 
discussion and recording minutes; developing grant proposals; tracking retained receipts and goods-for-services 
projects; managing a multi-stakeholder field monitoring and training program; acting as a liaison between members, 
media, and other groups; and coordinating with CSP committees. During summer, the Coordinator also facilitates 
several field trips, led by one or more members, to visit potential and monitor past restoration sites.
Committees fulfill various roles, including creation of monitoring protocols and in-depth reviews of project 
proposals before they are submitted to the full group.
At bottom, the collaborative’s recognized success relies on its commitments to open dialog, common ground, 
and creative solutions. At the heart of this process are the retained receipts and goods-for-services contracts that the 
Forest Service can utilize to achieve more restoration work in the Mt. Hood area. The collaborative’s role is to aid in 
vetting these projects which might otherwise go unfunded.
C.   CSP’s Role in the Jazz Thinning Environmental Assessment and the Jazz Stewardship Project.
As a multi-stakeholder “collaborative,” CSP’s goal is to foster use of stewardship contracts to benefit local forests 
and rural economies. To that end, in November 2009 the collaborative recommended to the Mt. Hood National 
Forest’s Clackamas River Ranger District that the Collawash watershed be the focus of the next round of restoration 
thinning activities in the area. Since the Forest Service began work on the EA and review process in 2010, CSP has 
also been active in offering comments regarding a number of areas of concern, including: unstable slopes, aquatic 
resources, roads, late-seral habitat, and early-seral habitat.
The Forest Service has long been aware of these issues and has continued to address concerns identified through 
the public comment process. For instance, when several CSP members expressed concerns about unstable slopes, a 
Forest Service geologist led a CSP fieldtrip to Collawash watershed and discussed potential impacts of restoration 
thinning in the area. As a result, CSP’s 2009 letter identifying the Collawash area asked the Forest Service to, among 
other things, avoid areas susceptible to landslides. In brief, CSP’s recommendations were:
If the CRRD accepts CSP’s recommendation to focus on the Collawash Watershed for the next round of 
restoration thinning activities, we urge the CRRD to 1) utilize the best available science, 2) focus on areas 
with planned road decommissioning, 3) avoid areas that are susceptible to landslides and debris flows, and 
4) work with CSP throughout the process.
CSP’s role continued in this vein as the environmental review progressed, by identifying aspects for careful 
consideration—such as impacts of stream crossings, silvicultural activities in aquatic reserves, road length and 
fortification issues—and by recommending ways to mitigate those issues. A major recommendation identified 
certain types of thinning (e.g., variable density with gaps or opening) that would best achieve desired habitat on 
particular units within the Jazz project area. As noted above, because Bark was not a member of CSP during this 
time, these recommendations were consensus-based.

20
Upon Bark’s return to CSP, Bark authored a minority opinion regarding commercial thinning projects resulting 
from the Jazz EA, which argued that the negative ecological impacts of the Jazz Stewardship Project outweighed 
the restoration value. Bark appeals the Jazz Project raising a number of procedural issues under NEPA and NFMA: 
whether the agency considered sufficient alternatives; whether technical decisions by the agency are justified; 
whether a higher level of environmental review was required; and whether the agency complied with the letter and 
spirit of the forest planning process.
CSP’s role in the collaborative process does not directly decide these issues. However, many of the issues 
identified by Bark have long been cognizable and were among the issues that stakeholders involved in the 
collaborative addressed in consensus recommendations and in subsequent discussions with the Forest Service.
III.  SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT
Proposed amici curiae urge the Court to consider the extensive collaborative process preceding and the many 
conservation and forest health benefits associated with the Jazz Stewardship Project. CSP has been active in offering 
comments throughout the environmental review process on a number of areas of concern, including: unstable slopes, 
aquatic resources, roads, late-seral habitat, and early-seral habitat.
As a multi-stakeholder “collaborative,” it is the CSP’s goal to utilize stewardship contracts to further restoration 
goals through projects that also benefit the local economy. CSP has supported the Project on a majority basis 
because it believes the Project will help achieve those objectives, while also benefitting long-term forest health 
through accelerating the conversion of overstocked plantations into early- and late-seral forest. As CSP members 
who have heretofore supported the Project, proposed amici curiae urge the court to find that the Project is consistent 
with the mandates of NEPA and the Northwest Forest Plan.
IV.  ARGUMENT
Restoration projects provide many forest health benefits. They are used to transform forests into more valuable 
habitat for certain types of wildlife, to protect clean water sources, and to make forests more resilient to natural 
disturbances such as wind, flood, fire, insects, and disease. Stewardship contracts—in the form of goods-for-services 
contracts and retained receipts projects—are particularly suited to achieving those goals. These projects share three 
main facets: cooperation, funding, and restoration.
First, the collaborative process that stewardship contracts require fosters cooperation among stakeholders and 
with the Forest Service, in pursuit of balanced outcomes that all or most stakeholders can support. Second, retained 
receipts and goods-for-services contracts provide a direct source of funding for local projects that may otherwise go 
unfunded. Third, these stewardship projects accomplish restoration objectives set by the Forest Service through the 
forest planning and National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) processes. These three characteristics are designed 
to ensure the usefulness and stability of stewardship contracts as a way to bridge the gap between uncertain or 
meagre agency budgets and the backlog of needed restoration work. 
Realizing their flexibility and utility, the Forest Service has increasingly relied on stewardship contracts to 
accomplish system-wide goals since Congress granted the authority in the late 1990s. CASSANDRA MOSELY 
& EMILY JANE DAVIS, STEWARDSHIP CONTRACTING FOR LANDSCAPE-SCALE PROJECTS 3 
(2010). Congress has also recognized the success of stewardship contracts by continually renewing, and now making 
permanent this authority. See P.L. 133-79, § 8205.
Congress specifically tailored stewardship contracts to provide this flexibility in achieving conservation goals. 
MOSELY & DAVIS, supra, at 3–4. In addition to providing added certainty for federal land managers and 
contractors through long-term contracts, stewardship contracts have led to lower costs in agency contracting, 
increased trust among stakeholders, and increased support of local forestry-related jobs. Id. Most importantly, 
restoration goals are the primary driving force behind these contracts.

21
The Jazz Thinning EA is designed to accomplish a number of restoration goals, including: (1) conversion of 
overgrown mid-aged stands to create healthier forest with greater average tree diameter sizes; (2) increased vertical 
and horizontal variability of stand structures in order to increase biodiversity and return the forest to historical 
conditions; and (3) greater forest productivity. These goals are in tune with both the Mt. Hood Forest Plan and the 
Northwest Forest Plan. 
For example, a primary purpose of the Jazz Stewardship Project is the conversion of overstocked plantations 
into early- and late-seral diverse habitat that is more valuable for old-growth and old-growth dependent wildlife. 
ER at 212. The Mt. Hood Land and Resource Management Plan articulates the ecological principles for active 
management of late-successional forests in kind:
These standards and guidelines encourage the use of silvicultural practices to accelerate the development 
of overstocked young plantations into stands with late-successional and old-growth forest characteristics, 
and to reduce the risk to Late-Successional Reserves from severe impacts resulting from large-scale 
disturbances and unacceptable loss of habitat. Both the contracting process and the end result of reduced 
biomass have numerous benefits for forest health and fire risk.
SER 68.
The Jazz Thin Project was designed to achieve these exact restoration goals—which are echoed in the Northwest 
Forest Plan—by prioritizing Late-Successional Reserves as desired late-successional and old-growth species habitat. 
See Northwest Forest Plan, ER at 207. The Project also utilizes skips and gaps to maintain sufficient canopy cover; 
maintains density in riparian reserves using buffers; uses mostly existing roads; and seeks to improve wildlife habitat, 
including for elk, by creating three- to five-acre forage areas. ER at 212–13.
CSP and the Forest Service have been grappling with these issues since 2009. While the Jazz Stewardship 
Project will undoubtedly result in short-term human impacts to the area, each of the environmental variables and the 
long-term health of the forest have been considered. CSP members have supported the Project because it will help 
the Mt. Hood National Forest achieve a long-term transition from overstocked young plantations into healthier, 
more mature forest that is more biologically diverse and can support a larger range of flora and fauna.
V.   CONCLUSION
Proposed amici curiae urge the Court to consider the extensive collaborative process involved and the many 
forest health benefits associated with the Jazz Stewardship Project, and to find that the Project is consistent with 
long-term forest objectives and affirm the district court’s decisions.
DATED this 20th day of November, 2014.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Caroline Lobdell
Caroline Lobdell, OSB #021236
Western Resources Legal Center
5100 SW Macadam, Suite 350
Portland, OR 97239
(503) 222-0628
Attorney for Proposed Amici Curiae 

22
CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE
I hereby certify that for Case Nos. 14-35548 and 14-35398, I electronically 
filed the foregoing with the Clerk of the Court for the United States Court of 
Appeals for the Ninth Circuit using the appellate CM/ECF on November 20, 2014. 
I further certify that all participants in the case are registered CM/ECF users and 
that service will be accomplished by the appellate CM/ECF system.
DATED this 20th day of November, 2014
/s/ Caroline Lobdell, OSB #021236
Attorney for Proposed Amici Curiae

23
CERTIFICATION OF COMPLIANCE PURSUANT TO
FED. R. APP. P. 32(a)(7)(C) AND CIRCUIT RULE 32-1
FOR CASE NUMBERS 14-3548 AND 14-35398
I certify that, pursuant to Fed. R. App. P. 29(c)(5)(7), (d), and 9th Cir. R.  
32(a)(7), the attached amici curiae brief is proportionately spaced, has a typeface  
of 14 points or more, and contains 7,000 words or less.
DATED this 20th day of November, 2014
/s/ Caroline Lobdell, OSB #021236
Attorney for Proposed Amici Curiae

24
STATEMENT OF RELATED CASES
Counsel for Amici Curiae is not aware of any other cases currently pending 
before this Court with substantially similar issues to those in case Nos. 14-35548 
and 14-35398.
DATED this 20th day of November, 2014
/s/ Caroline Lobdell, OSB #021236
Attorney for Proposed Amici Curiae

25
ERI Issues in Forest Restoration Series 
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native species, structural characteristics, 
and ecological processes. Te Society for Ecological Restoration International deﬁnes ecological restoration as “an intentional activity 
that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability… Restoration attempts to 
return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration International 2004).
Troughout the dry forests of the western United States, most ponderosa pine forests have been degraded during the last 150 years. 
Many ponderosa pine areas are now dominated by dense thickets of small trees, and lack their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, 
and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing ﬁres and increased insect and disease epidemics. 
Restoration of these forests centers on reintroducing frequent, low-intensity surface ﬁres—often after thinning dense stands—and 
reestablishing productive understory plant communities.
Te Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, implementing, and monitoring 
ecological restoration of dry, frequent-ﬁre forests in the Intermountain West. By allowing natural processes, such as ﬁre, to resume self-
sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
Te ERI Issues in Forest Restoration series provides overviews and policy recommendations derived from research and observations 
by the ERI and its partner organizations. While the ERI staﬀ recognizes that every forest restoration is site speciﬁc, we feel that the 
information provided in the series may help decision-makers elsewhere.
Tis publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Service. Te views and conclusions contained 
in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the opinions or policies of the United States 
Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products does not constitute their endorsement by the United States Government 
or the ERI.
ERI—Issues in Forest Restoration
1.  
Forestlands Health and Carbon Sequestration: Strengthening the Case for Western Forest Restoration
2.  
Smoke from Prescribed Burning: Issues on Public Forestlands of the Western United States
3.  
Public Perceptions of Forest Restoration in the Southwest: A Synthesis of Selected Literature and Surveys
4.  
Integrating Ecological Restoration and Conservation Biology: A Case Study from Southwestern Ponderosa 
Pine Forests
5.  
Communications between Forest Managers and Property Owners in Pine Flat, Arizona: A Case Study of 
Community Interactions in a High Fire Hazard Area
6.  
Wilderness Management and the Restoration of Fire: An Analysis of Laws and Regulations in Northern Ari-
zona
7.  
Navigating the Motives and Mandates of Multiparty Monitoring
8.  
Forest Service Contracting: A Basic Guide for Restoration Practitioners
9.  
Case Study of Community Stewardship Success: The White Mountain Stewardship Contract
10.  What to Expect from Collaboration in Natural Resource Management: A Research Synthesis for Practitioners
11.  Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI) Biophysical Monitoring Workshop Report
12.  Carbon Credits for Restored Western Forests?
13.  Ecological Restoration as Economic Stimulus: A Regional Analysis
14.  Exploring the Potential of Obtaining Carbon Credits for Restoration Activities on Navajo Tribal Forest Lands
15.  Integrating Domestic and Wild Ungulate Grazing into Forest Restoration Plans at the Landscape Level 
16.  Workforce Needs of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative Project: An Analysis
17.  A Full Cost Accounting of the 2010 Schultz Fire
18.  Forest Restoration Treatments: Their Effect on Wildland Fire Suppression Costs
19.  The History of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative: 1980s–2010

Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
G1002446
Return Service 
Requested
Non-Proﬁt Org
U.S. Postage 
PAID
Northern Arizona 
University
