 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
Collaboration for Environmental Evidence 
 
 
 
 
Systematic Review CEE08-023 
(previously SR 60) 
 
 
DOES SEEDING AFTER SEVERE FOREST FIRES IN  
WESTERN USA MITIGATE IMPACTS ON SOILS  
AND PLANT COMMUNITIES? 
 
 
 
Completed review 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lead Reviewers: 
Donna Peppin, Peter Fulé, Jan Beyers, Carolyn Sieg, Molly 
Hunter 
 
 
 
 
 
Postal Address: 
Northern Arizona University 
 
P.O. Box 15018 
 
Flagstaff, AZ 86011 USA 
 
E-mail Address: 
Pete.Fule@nau.edu 
Telephone: 
00+1+928-523-6906 
Fax: 
00+1+928-523-0296 
 
 

 
 
2 
Cover Sheet 
 
Title 
Does seeding after severe forest fires in western USA 
mitigate negative impacts on soils and plant communities 
Systematic review  
CEE08-023 (SR.60) 
Reviewer(s) 
Peter Fulé, Jan Beyers, Carolyn Sieg, Molly Hunter, 
Donna Peppin 
Date draft protocol 
published on website 
 
Date final protocol 
published on website 
6 January 2009 
Date draft review 
published on website 
3 August 2010 
Date final review 
published on website 
16 February 2011 
Date of most recent 
amendment 
23 December 2008(1) 
Date of most recent 
SUBSTANTIVE 
amendment 
December 2010 
Details of most recent 
changes 
(1)Review was changed to reflect western USA focus and 
those seeding activities occurring after “severe” forest 
fires 
Contact address 
Northern Arizona University, PO Box 15018, Flagstaff AZ 
86011 USA, Pete.Fule@nau.edu 
Sources of support 
Joint Fire Sciences Program (USA) 
Conflicts of interest 
The review is led by researchers from Northern Arizona 
University and the USDA Forest Service who have 
contributed to the literature on this topic. We will address 
the possibility of conflict of interest by following the 
review process through CEBE and additional reviews 
solicited from scientists who are not on the review panel 
and not affiliated with the lead institutions. 
 

 
 
3 
Summary 
 
 
1. Background 
 
 
Broadcast seeding is one of the most widely used post-wildfire emergency 
response treatments intended to reduce soil erosion, increase vegetative ground cover, 
and minimize establishment and spread of non-native plant species.  However, 
seeding treatments can also have negative effects such as competition with recovering 
native plant communities and inadvertent introduction of invasive species.  Despite 
ongoing debates over the efficacy of post-fire seeding and potential negative impacts 
on natural plant community recovery, seeding remains a widely used stabilization 
treatment in forested ecosystems throughout the western U.S. In 2000, Robichaud et 
al. reviewed the effectiveness and impacts of the entire suite of burned area 
rehabilitation treatments used on U.S. Forest Service land, including post-fire seeding.  
Beyers (2004) published a review specific to post-wildfire seeding, but a good part of 
the conclusions were drawn from studies occurring in chaparral. Since publication of 
Robichaud et al. (2000) and Beyers (2004), several developments have altered the 
context of post-fire seeding.  These include: 1) increasing size and severity of 
wildfires across the western U.S., 2) increased research and quantitative monitoring 
on post-fire seeding and plant community interactions, 3) increased use, availability, 
and allocation of funds for native seed mixes, and 4) stronger policy direction for the 
use of locally-adapted and genetically-appropriate seed sources (seed sources adapted 
to local site conditions and genetically compatible with existing plant populations).  
With the last review occurring in 2004 there is a need to re-examine what is known 
about the effectiveness and ecological impacts of post-fire seeding specific to forested 
ecosystems across the western U.S. 
 
 
2. Objectives 
 
Primary objective: To systematically collect and synthesize the available published 
and unpublished evidence in order to answer the question “Does seeding after severe 
forest fires mitigate negative impacts on soils and plant communities?” 
 
Secondary objective(s): Summarize the evidence available to address three questions 
pertaining to post-wildfire seeding treatment effectiveness and effects: (1) Does 
seeding after severe forest fires reduce soil erosion? (2) Is seeding effective at 
reducing non-native plant invasion into burned areas? and (3) Does post-wildfire 
seeding affect native plant community recovery?  
 
 
3. Methods 
 
 
To identify studies relevant to our review, we searched databases supported by 
Northern Arizona University during July-November 2008, using a defined 
combination of search terms.  We then eliminated papers, first based on title, then 
abstract, then full text, based on a set of criteria that specified the review subjects 

 
 
4 
(seeding in western USA forests burned by severe wildfire), intervention (seeding 
herbaceous plant or shrub seed alone or in combination with other post-fire 
rehabilitation activities), and outcome (soil stabilization attributes and changes to 
plant community attributes).  We assessed study quality based on study design and 
statistical robustness, and applied a weight ((highest, high, medium, low, lowest) to 
each study design category (replicated randomized experiment, observational 
(multiple location case study), observational (single location case study), monitoring 
report with quantitative data, monitoring report with qualitative data, BACI, review 
paper, and expert opinion)) with the greatest weight given to replicated randomized 
experiments and less to observational and opinion studies.  We evaluated post-fire 
seeding effectiveness based on seeding treatment effectiveness in reducing erosion, 
non-native species invasions, and effects on native plant community recovery. When 
available, quantitative data from seeded and unseeded treatments were compared.  
Each study or individual study unit was given an effectiveness rating (effective, 
minimal effectiveness, ineffective, negative effect). We used descriptive statistics to 
explore relationships between post-fire seeding treatments and associated variables. 
 
 
4. Main Results 
 
 
Our review produced 94 relevant studies. Considering the entire dataset (n = 
94), replicated and randomized experiments made up the largest study design 
category. Using quality of evidence criteria, the number of studies of quantitative 
experimental nature increased from the time period 2000-2009 compared to those 
studies in 1970-1999.  Twenty-three 1studies provided evidence regarding post-fire 
seeding effects on soil erosion. As sampling designs have become more rigorous in 
recent years, evidence that seeding is effective in reducing erosion has decreased.   
Of highest and high quality studies evaluating soil erosion, 89% (8 of 9) were 
published since 2000, only one of which showed an effective result as a result of 
additional treatments. Before 2000, the majority of the studies (70%) fell into the 
lowest quality categories, of which, 71% showed seeding to be effective. A main goal 
of post-wildfire stabilization treatments is to reduce soil erosion in the year 
immediately following a fire; however, the majority of studies (7 of 11, 64%2) 
evaluating soil erosion in seeded versus unseeded controls showed that seeding did 
not reduce erosion relative to unseeded controls.  Comparing cover measurements 
between seeded and unseeded plots from 20 studies containing a total of 29 study 
sites, we found that even when study results showed that seeding significantly 
increased vegetative cover, seeded sites rarely supported sufficient plant cover to 
stabilize soils within the first and second year post-fire. Of the 11 papers providing 
direct evidence regarding the role of seeding in reducing non-native species 
abundance, an almost equal percentage found seeding treatments to be effective (54%, 
6 studies) or having a negative effect (45%, 5 studies). However, the majority of 
effective treatments and those which had a negative effect (83% and 80%, 
respectively) used non-native species.  A majority of studies reported that seeding 
suppressed recovery of native plants (16 studies, 62%). However, data on long-term 
impacts of this reduction are limited.  Cover data from 15 studies containing 57 
different study sites showed decreased seeded cover relative to control plot cover with 
                                                 
1 The value of 23 was erroneously given as 27 in Peppin et al. 2010. 
2 The value of 64% was erroneously given as 78% in Peppin et al. 2010. 

 
 
5 
increasing time since fire. Based on cover data from all 57 sites, total plant cover in 
seeded sites and controls was nearly identical by years 4 and 5 post-wildfire. A 
seeding treatment‟s ability to reduce soil erosion and/or affect native plant community 
recovery appears to be strongly driven by amount and timing of precipitation. 
 
 
5. Conclusions 
 
 
This review suggests that post-fire seeding does little to protect soil in the 
short-term, has equivocal effect on invasion of non-native species, and can have 
negative effects on native vegetation recovery with possible long-term ecological 
consequences.  Erosion may be better reduced by mulching, but care must be taken to 
ensure that mulch is free of non-native seed.  Seeding has proven to be equivocal at 
best for reducing non-native species spread after fire.  Early detection of new 
undesirable species invasions through monitoring post-fire environments, in 
combination with rapid response methods to quickly contain, deny reproduction, and 
eliminate these invasions, may allow better control of non-native species 
establishment than is typically obtained through seeding.  Plant community recovery 
may be improved with the use of locally-adapted, genetically appropriate plant 
materials, although more research regarding the effects and effectiveness of these 
species is critical.   
 
A version of the systematic review has been published:  Peppin, D., P.Z. Fulé, C.H. 
Sieg, J.L. Beyers, and M.E. Hunter. 2010. Post-wildfire seeding in forests of the 
western United States: An evidence-based review. Forest Ecology and Management 
260:573–586. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
6 
Main Text 
 
 
1.Background 
 
By consuming protective vegetation and litter cover, high-intensity wildfires 
frequently result in greatly increased erosion, runoff, and sediment transport that can 
threaten downstream resources and infrastructure (Debano et al., 1998; Neary et al., 
2005). The increased availability of light and nutrients after wildfire also creates 
conditions favourable for invasion of non-native plant species (DeBano et al., 1998; 
Crawford et al., 2001; Keeley et al., 2003; Wang and Kemball, 2005; Freeman et al., 
2007).  Land management agencies in the United States such as the USDA Forest 
Service, National Park Service, and Bureau of Land Management are required by 
federal burned area emergency rehabilitation policy to prescribe emergency 
watershed-rehabilitation measures when and where deemed necessary to minimize 
threats to life or property or to stabilize and prevent further unacceptable degradation 
to natural and cultural resources resulting from the effects of a fire (USDA, 2004; 
USDI, 2006).  Historically, aerial broadcast seeding of grasses, typically non-native 
annuals or short-lived perennials, has been the most commonly used post-fire 
stabilization treatment (Robichaud et al., 2000; Beyers, 2004).  Rapid vegetation 
establishment has been regarded as the most cost-effective method to mitigate the 
risks of increased runoff and soil erosion and establishment of non-native species over 
large areas (Beyers, 2004).  
 
Federal policy in the U.S. currently mandates use of seed from native species 
for post-fire rehabilitation when available and economically feasible (Richards et al., 
1998).  Although the use and availability of many native species has increased 
(Beyers, 2004; Smith et al., 2007; Wolfson and Sieg, in press), high costs and 
inadequate availability often limit inclusion locally-adapted, regionally-appropriate 
plant materials in post-fire seedings (Wolfson and Sieg, in press).  Furthermore, a 
vague definition of the term “native” has led to inconsistent interpretations regarding 
the types and origins of native species used (Richards et al., 1998).  Despite ongoing 
debates over the efficacy of post-fire seeding and potential negative impacts on 
natural plant community recovery, seeding remains a widely used stabilization 
treatment in forested ecosystems throughout the western U.S.  (Robichaud et al., 
2000, Beyers, 2004).  
 
 
In 2000, Robichaud et al. reviewed the effectiveness and impacts of the entire 
suite of burned area rehabilitation treatments used on U.S. Forest Service land, 
including post-fire seeding.  Beyers (2004) published a review specific to post-
wildfire seeding, but a good part of the conclusions were drawn from studies 
occurring in chaparral.  Almost all of the seeding projects reviewed in these two 
publications used non-native species.  Since these reviews appeared, several 
developments have altered the context of post-wildfire seeding in the western U.S.  .  
These include increasing size and severity of wildfires across the western U.S. 
(McKenzie et al., 2004; Westerling et al., 2006; Littell et al., 2009), increased 
research and quantitative monitoring on post-fire seeding and plant community 
interactions, increased use, availability, and allocation of funds for native seed mixes 
(Smith et al., 2007; Wolfson and Sieg, in press), and stronger policy direction for the 

 
 
7 
use of locally-adapted and genetically-appropriate seed sources (seed sources adapted 
to local site conditions and genetically compatible with existing plant populations 
(GAO, 2003; Rogers and Montalvo, 2004; USDA, 2006)).  The time is ripe to re-
examine what is known about the effectiveness and ecological impacts of post-fire 
seeding. 
 
 
We conducted a systematic review of the scientific literature, theses, and 
burned area rehabilitation monitoring reports about post-fire seeding in forested 
ecosystems across the western U.S.  We addressed three questions pertaining to post-
fire seeding relative to overall treatment effectiveness and effects on soils and plant 
communities: 1) Does seeding after severe forest fires reduce soil erosion? 2) Is 
seeding effective at reducing non-native plant invasion into burned areas? and 3) Does 
post-fire seeding affect native plant community recovery? 
 
 
 
2. 
Objectives 
 
2.1 
Primary objective:  
 
Systematically collect and synthesize the available published and unpublished 
evidence in order to answer the primary question: 
 
 “Does seeding after severe forest fires mitigate negative impacts on soils 
and plant communities?” 
  
2.2 
Secondary objective(s):  
Summarize the evidence available to address three questions pertaining to post-
wildfire seeding treatment effectiveness and effects:  
 
 Does seeding after severe forest fires reduce soil erosion?  
 Is seeding effective at reducing non-native plant invasion into burned 
areas?   
 Does post-wildfire seeding affect native plant community recovery?  
 
 
 
 
3. 
Methods 
 
3.1 
Question formulation 
 
The review team developed primary and secondary study questions, which were 
further refined by managers, scientists, and outside experts in the field. We defined 
“forests” as those dominated by tall-stature coniferous and/or deciduous trees 
occurring at elevations above grasslands, pinyon-juniper woodlands, or chaparral 
vegetation in the western U.S.   
 
 

 
 
8 
3.2 
Search strategy 
 
We searched databases supported by Northern Arizona University during July 2008 
through May 2009 (using a defined combination of search terms) which included:  
 
IngentaConnect 
 
Forest Science Database (Ovid) 
 
JSTOR 
 
ISI Web of Science 
 
Agricola 
 
Google Scholar 
 
U.S. government database (USDA Forest Service TreeSearch, 
 
Ecological Restoration Institute library, National Park Service library) 
 
University libraries (M.S. theses and Ph.D. dissertations) 
 
All the following combinations of search terms were used in each database search: 
 
seeding AND fire 
 
seeding AND wildfire 
 
seeding AND burn 
 
seeding AND native species 
 
seeding AND erosion 
 
 
 
 
3.3 
Study inclusion criteria  
 
Potential studies were then evaluated for inclusion using the following specific 
criteria: 
 Relevant subject(s): forests of the USA, predominantly coniferous forests of the 
West but information from any burned forests will be included. Experimental data 
from less severe burns, such as prescribed fires, will be assessed for relevance. 
Non-wildfire seeding data were summarized separately from wildfire data. 
 Timeframe: All relevant studies from 1970-present will be included as 
appropriate. However, there are multiple timeframes to consider. First, studies 
since the review by Robichaud et al. (2000) will be exhaustively assessed for 
inclusion (2000-present). Second, any relevant studies from 1970-1999 will be 
included as appropriate, regardless of being previously reviewed.  References that 
appear in the literature to relevant earlier research will be tracked down. 
 Types of intervention: 
o Seeding of herbaceous plants 
o Seeding of shrubs 
o Combinations of seeding in conjunction with other post-fire 
rehabilitation activities such as mulching, water-bars, tree-felling on 
terrain contours, etc. 
o Methods and timing of seed delivery 
 Types of comparator: 
o Replicated randomized experiments 
o Before-after control-impact (BACI) studies 
o Observational studies 
o Expert opinion 

 
 
9 
 Types of outcome: 
o Cover and biomass of herbaceous plants 
o Cover and biomass of shrubs 
o Cover and biomass of invasive non-native plants 
o Plant community composition: nativity, richness, diversity 
o Species selected for seeding (non-native and native) 
o Soil stabilization variables 
 Types of study: 
o Studies investigating effects of seeding after severe forest fires 
 
 
There is substantial heterogeneity in the forests of the USA, even among the 
western forests where the greatest amount of information is likely to be found. This 
heterogeneity is associated with the latitudinal and elevational gradients where these 
forests occur and ecotones with adjacent ecosystems. Wildfires burn heterogeneously 
as well and important post-fire effects can have a stochastic component (e.g., erosion 
is not a simple function of terrain and fire severity, but also of the chance of a strong 
rainstorm occurring soon after the fire). There is heterogeneity in pre-existing 
propagule sources (seed bank) and nearby sources. Finally, management interventions 
vary widely in terms of the species selected for seeding and the timing and methods of 
seed delivery. 
 
 
We considered all types of studies, including replicated randomized 
experiment, observational (multiple location case study), observational (single 
location case study), monitoring report with quantitative data, monitoring report with 
qualitative data, BACI, review papers, and expert opinions. All potentially relevant 
publications were imported into a RefWorks reference manager database 
(www.refworks.com).  Those publications listed as “possibly relevant” were 
examined by the senior author for final inclusion decisions.   
 
 
3.4 
Study quality assessment 
 
We assigned “quality of evidence” ratings for each study based on design and 
statistical robustness (Table 1).  Statistically robust data (statistical results that are not 
affected by (small) changes in the assumptions used to obtain those results) from 
replicated randomized and controlled experiments were judged to be of “highest” 
quality evidence; whereas unreplicated, uncontrolled, qualitative data had “lowest” 
quality of evidence.  
 
 
 

 
 
10 
Table 1. Criteria for rating the quality of evidence presented in the papers reviewed and 
their respective categories. 
 
 
aMajor study design categories included: replicated randomized experiment, observational (multiple 
location case study), observational (single location case study), monitoring report with quantitative 
data, monitoring report with qualitative data, BACI, review paper, and expert opinion. 
 
 
We evaluated post-wildfire seeding effectiveness based on the treatment‟s 
effectiveness in reducing: 1) erosion and sedimentation, 2) non-native species 
invasion, and 3) effects on native plant community recovery.  Studies were examined 
for overall seeding treatment effectiveness or ecosystem impacts in each category 
(Table 2).  Only papers providing direct data in each category were evaluated (ie., 
review papers were excluded) 
 
 
Table 2.  Measurements reported in papers that were used to judge overall seeding 
treatment effectiveness or ecosystem impacts. 
 
 
 
 
When available, quantitative data from seeded and unseeded treatments were 
compared. All data were taken from original publications. Some studies had multiple 
sites; we made comparisons based on the number of sites rather than the total number 
of publications.  Each study or individual site within a study was given an 
effectiveness rating (Table 3).  Studies/sites rated as “ineffective” were not 
statistically different or stated by the author as having no  difference in their 
Study designa and statistical robustness 
Quality of Evidence 
Statistically robust evidence obtained from replicated randomized and 
controlled experiments with sampling occurring after seeding treatments 
in areas burned by wildfire, prescribed burn, or slash pile burning 
Highest 
Unreplicated (one monitoring location), controlled experiments; 
observational or monitoring report (multiple fires or plots stratified 
within a single fire by vegetation type, fire severity, drainage, or 
treatment); Before After Control Impact study (BACI) with reliable 
quantitative data from sampling occurring after seeding treatments in 
areas burned by wildfire, prescribed burn, or slash pile burning;  peer-
reviewed reviews on post-wildfire seeding  
High 
Unreplicated (one monitoring location), controlled, observational or 
monitoring report (single location) with quantitative data 
Medium 
Unreplicated, uncontrolled, observational or monitoring report; 
quantitative data 
Low 
Unreplicated, uncontrolled, qualitative data; anecdotal observation; 
expert opinion; or review of post-wildfire seeding (not peer-reviewed) 
Lowest 
 
Category 
Measures of Effectiveness/Impacts 
Erosion Control 
Decreased sediment yield, surface erosion, or 
runoff 
Non-Native Species  
Decreased cover, frequency, density, or 
species richness of non-native invasive plants  
Effects on Plant Communities  
Negative changes to plant community 
attributes such as cover, biomass, composition, 
frequency, species richness, and density  

 
 
11 
effectiveness, whereas those showing a  “negative effect” were counter-productive in 
their effectiveness to a specified impact category (e.g., effect was opposite of that 
intended). 
 
Table 3. Criteria for rating seeding treatment effectiveness and their respective 
categories. 
 
 
 
3.5 
Data extraction 
 
Qualitative data extracted from the reviewed papers included study design, 
land and fire attributes, types of treatments, study results, and conclusions.  We 
characterized plant species seeded as non-native or native, in most cases following the 
author‟s classifications from the paper.  However, lack of a widely accepted definition 
of “native” (Jones, 2003) caused definitions to differ between papers.  Quantitative 
data included soil and/or plant community attributes.  In cases where authors reported 
results from the same fire in different papers, data from each paper were extracted 
independently.  
 
 
For consistency, each paper was reviewed by two members of the review 
panel.  Reviewers did not evaluate papers they authored.  After all publications were 
reviewed twice we formed a master list of all publications and reviews; this list was 
then reviewed by the senior author to locate any inconsistencies in recorded data, 
which were discussed with panel members and resolved. 
 
 
3.6 
Data synthesis 
 
For this review, we used descriptive statistics to explore relationships between 
post-wildfire seeding treatments and associated variables as well as the influence of 
time since fire.  We divided relevant papers into ecoregions (Bailey, 1983; Fig. 1) for 
analysis of climatic influences. 
 
Criteria for rating seeding treatment effectiveness 
Effectiveness Rating 
Sufficient evidence exists to conclude that seeding was 
statistically or stated by the author to be effective in decreasing 
erosion, increasing cover, or reducing non-native species 
invasions without negative effects  
Effective  
Sufficient evidence exists to conclude that seeding was effective 
under some but not all circumstances or seeding was effective, 
but with potentially negative ecosystem impacts  
Minimal effectiveness  
Sufficient information exists to conclude that seeding treatments 
in treated and untreated controls were not statistically or stated 
by the author to be different in their effectiveness for increasing 
cover, reducing erosion, and/or reducing non-native species 
invasions  
Ineffective  
Sufficient evidence exists to conclude that seeding was 
statistically or stated by the author to be different in 
effectiveness, where treatments were counter-productive in their 
effectiveness (e.g. effect was opposite of what was intended); 
potentially negative ecosystem impacts exist 
Negative effect 
 

 
 
12 
 
Figure 1. Map of ecoregions (Bailey 1983) containing published studies reporting 
measures of seeding “success” during the first 2 years following fire (Table 5). 
 
 
For each review question, we drew conclusions (when possible) based on data 
from 1970 to 1999, including papers previously reviewed by Robichaud et al. (2000), 
and on data published since 2000.  The latter group of papers was expected to include 
more studies using native species in seed mixes and addressing invasive plant control 
in burned forests.  For papers falling under the “review paper” category, assessment 
was completed independently and noted directly in the text.  
 
 
 
4. 
Results 
 
4.1 
Review statistics 
 
Approximately 19,455 studies were identified through the literature search.  
The primary reviewer and search assistants narrowed down the number of relevant 
papers using specified inclusion criteria (Section 3.3), which produced 143 studies 
(Table 4). Studies were imported into RefWorks and ranked based on overall 
relevancy (1 = relevant, 2 = possibly relevant). Those publications listed as “possibly 
relevant” were examined by the review coordinator for further inclusion decisions.  
We identified 120 studies after the review coordinator examination.   
 
 
 
 

 
 
13 
 
 
Table 4. Number of papers included at each of the systematic review stages. 
* Approximate figure only 
 
We then read the remaining full text articles, and used our data extraction 
database to determine if the studies were appropriate for the qualitative or quantitative 
analysis.  A total of 26 studies were removed at this stage as being inappropriate or 
duplicative.  
 
 
4.2 
Description of studies  
 
Our review produced 94 relevant papers. Considering the entire dataset (n = 
94) and specified study design categories, replicated and randomized experiments 
made up the largest category (19%, Fig. 2).  In the more recent period, 2000-2009 (n 
= 57), there was a greater proportion of replicated randomized experiments (46%), 
review papers (29%), and expert opinions (27%) compared to 1970-1999 (n = 37).   
 
 
 
Figure 2. The number of papers by study design category for studies reviewed from 
1970 to 1999 (37 papers) and those since 2000 (57 papers). 
Systematic review stage 
No. of Articles 
Studies captured using search terms in electronic databases (excluding 
duplicates) and gray literature searches 
*19,455 
References remaining from electronic database and unpublished 
search after inclusion criteria assessment 
143 
Relevant studies remaining following further examination by the 
review coordinator 
120 
Relevant studies remaining subsequent to the first full review meeting 
search term and/or relevancy requirements 
94 

 
 
14 
 
 
Of the 94 relevant papers, 233 papers provided primary evidence regarding 
post-fire seeding effects on soil erosion, 12 papers provided direct evidence regarding 
the role of seeding in reducing non-native species, and 26 papers included data 
addressing post-fire seeding effects on native plant recovery.  The remaining 334  
papers were considered review papers or expert opinions. 
 
 
 
4.3 
Study quality assessment  
 
Using quality of evidence criteria, during the time period between 1970 and 
1999 (n = 37), 6 papers (16%) were of highest quality, 5 papers (14%) were high 
quality, 4 papers (11%) were medium quality, and the majority (60%) were in the low 
and lowest quality category (Fig. 3).  The proportion of papers in these categories 
changed slightly for the 2000-2009 papers, with the greatest increase in the high 
quality of evidence category (28%); 19% were of highest quality, 11% medium, 9% 
low, and one-third (33%) fell into the lowest quality category (Fig. 3). 
  
 
 
Figure 3. The number of papers by quality of evidence for studies reviewed from 1970 to 
1999 (37 papers) and since 2000 (57 papers). 
 
 
In the overall set of papers, a majority of information on seeding comes from 
well designed experimental studies. However, in more recent years there has been 
greater emphasis on study designs of quantitative experimental nature (Fig. 4). 
 
                                                 
3 The value of 23 was erroneously given as 27 in Peppin et al. 2010. 
4 The value of 33 was erroneously given as 29 in Peppin et al. 2010. 

 
 
15 
 
Figure 4. Number of studies reviewed with quantitative data (including controls) by 
publication year. The insert shows the number of quantitative studies by decade as a 
percent of the total.  
 
 
 
4.4 
Qualitative synthesis  
 
4.4.1 Does seeding after severe forest fires in the western USA reduce soil erosion? 
 
 
Using effectiveness ratings (Table 3), 9 of the 23studies (39%) 5showed 
seeding to be effective, an equal number of papers (5, 22% each)6 showed minimal 
effectiveness or  a negative effect, and 4 (17%7) were ineffective in reducing erosion.  
However, the evidence for seeding effectiveness drops substantially when quality of 
evidence criteria (Table 1) are considered: two of the four studies with highest quality 
evidence found seeding to have a negative effect while the other half were ineffective 
in reducing soil erosion when compared to unseeded control plots.  For example, 
Robichaud et al. (2006), in a study conducted in north-central Washington, used a 
randomized block design of four plots with controls, replicated eight times, to 
compare the effects of seeding with winter wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) and 
fertilizing on post-fire erosion rates.  They found no reduction in erosion rates for 
seeding or fertilization treatments, alone or in combination, at any time during the 
four-year study.  Three of the five8 studies with high quality evidence found seeding 
to have a negative effect, while one9 reported minimal effectiveness.  The remaining 
                                                 
5 The value of “9 of the 23 studies (39%)” was erroneously given as “33% of the 27 studies” in Peppin 
et al. 2010. 
6 The statement “an equal amount of papers (5, 22% each)” was erroneously given as 26% in Peppin et 
al. 2010. 
7 The value of 17% was erroneously given as 15% in Peppin et al. 2010. 
8 The value of “Three out of five” was erroneously given as “Five out of eight” in Peppin et al. 2010. 
9 The value of one was erroneously given as two in Peppin et al. 2010. 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
No. of Papers
Publication Year
12%
12%
15%
61%
Quantitative Studies (w/ controls)
1970
1980
1990
2000

 
 
16 
study reported that seeding (seeded species unknown) was effective for erosion 
reduction only in combination with mulching and log erosion barriers on a fire in 
southwestern Colorado (DeWolfe et al., 2008). 
 
 
More evidence for seeding effectiveness was reported in studies with lower 
quality evidence.  One of three medium quality studies, three of four low quality 
studies, and all seven10 lowest quality studies found seeding to be effective or 
minimally effective in reducing erosion.  For example, in a publication considered to 
have lowest quality evidence, two subjectively-chosen study areas were set up within 
a single burned area in the Black Hills, South Dakota, each with eight plots to assess 
sedimentation and runoff (Orr, 1970). The study found that a mixture of seeded non-
native and legume species dominated the cover at both sites throughout the study and 
suggested that neither site would have reached a 60% ground-cover requirement for 
minimum soil stability within four years without seeding; however, no unseeded sites 
were evaluated (Orr, 1970). 
 
 
None of the 1311 papers published since 2000 concluded that seeding was 
effective or minimally effective in reducing erosion compared to controls, whereas 
seven of 10 papers (70%)12 published before 2000 found seeding to be in those 
categories. Only one (1%13) of the earlier papers met the criteria for highest or high 
quality evidence, while 8 papers (61%14) since 2000 did.   
 
 
Several studies provide evidence that seeding for erosion control may be more 
effective when done in concert with other treatments (Maloney and Thornton, 1995; 
Meyer et al., 2001; Earles et al., 2005; DeWolfe et al., 2008), although other studies 
showed no reduction in erosion rates (e.g. Robichaud et al., 2006).  Some studies 
suggest that mulch treatments alone are more effective than seeding in reducing 
erosion.  For example, in a study conducted in northwestern Montana, Groen and 
Woods (2008) found straw mulch application at a rate of 2.24 Mg/ha resulted in 100% 
ground cover and reduced rainsplash erosion by 87% in small test plots; whereas an 
aerially seeded mixture of native grasses failed to provide enough ground cover to 
reduce the erosion rate relative to untreated plots.  In studies conducted in Colorado‟s 
Front Range, MacDonald and Larson (2009) and Wagenbrenner et al. (2006) also 
found straw mulch to be more effective than other treatments (seeding alone, seeding 
and mulching, contour-felled logs, hydromulch, and polyacrylamide) for reducing soil 
erosion following wildfires. Seeded species in MacDonald and Larson (2009) 
included native cultivars and sterile cereal grains, whereas Wagenbrenner et al. (2006) 
tested a mixture of non-natives plus sterile and non-sterile cereal grains. 
 
 
 
                                                 
10 The value of seven was erroneously given as eight in Peppin et al. 2010. 
11 The value of 13 was erroneously given as 16 in Peppin et al. 2010. 
12 The statement “seven of 10 papers (70%)” was erroneously given as “64% of 11 papers” in Peppin et 
al. 2010. 
13 The value of 1% was erroneously given as 9% in Peppin et al. 2010. 
14 The value of 61% was erroneously given as 71% in Peppin et al. 2010. 

 
 
17 
4.4.2 Does seeding reduce non-native species invasions in severely burned forest 
land?  
 
 
Eleven papers provided direct evidence regarding the role of seeding in 
reducing non-native species abundance. Out of the 11 papers, 56% (6 papers) showed 
seeding to be effective, whereas 45% (5 papers) showed seeding to have a negative 
effect.  Considering quality of evidence (Table 1), three of five papers (60%) of 
highest quality showed seeding to be effective for reducing non-natives.  However, 
two of those were conducted in prescribed burn or slash pile burned areas. Only one 
of three papers 15of high quality showed seeding to be effective for reducing non-
native species.   
 
 
Of the six studies showing seeding to be effective, 83% (5 papers) included 
non-native annual species in the seeding treatments.  Eighty percent treatments 
showing a negative effect (4 papers) seeded non-native species, of which 60% seeded 
non-persistent species which persisted beyond the 1st year post-fire and 40% (2 
papers) found that seed mixes were contaminated with undesirable non-native species 
(Sexton, 1998; Hunter et al., 2006).  These same papers and others showed that 
successful seeded species also displaced native species (Sexton, 1998; Schoennagel 
and Waller, 1999; Barclay et al., 2004; Keeley, 2004; Logar, 2006).   
 
 
Few studies have investigated the use of native species for reducing non-
native species invasion, and only one of the three using native seed was conducted 
after a wildfire.  Stella (in press) found that non-native species richness and 
abundance did not differ among seeding treatments incorporating non-native and 
native species mixes on three high-severity wildfires in Arizona.  The other studies 
were conducted following a prescribed burn in northwestern Arizona (Springer et al., 
2001) and following slash pile burning in northern Arizona (Korb et al., 2004).  
Springer et al. (2001) found that seeding certified “weed-free” native seeds was 
ineffective in reducing non-natives, whereas Korb et al. (2004) noted that seeding 
native species was effective only with the addition of soil amendments.   
 
 
4.5.3 Does seeding after severe forest fires in the western USA affect native plant 
community recovery? 
 
 
Twenty-six papers included data addressing post-fire seeding effects on native 
plant recovery.  The majority (62%, 16 papers) showed decreased cover of native 
species on seeded plots compared to unseeded, while 19% (5 papers) showing greater 
native species cover on seeded plots.  Considering quality of evidence, 50% of the 
highest quality papers (3 of 6) found that seeding reduced native cover, and the 
remaining papers showed seeding to have no effect, minimal effect, or positive effect 
on native cover.  Two out of 5 papers with high quality evidence found seeding 
reduced native cover, while two stated seeding increased native cover and the other 
showed minimal effect.  Six of seven papers (86%) rated as medium quality evidence 
found that seeding reduced native cover, and 63% of the eight low and lowest quality 
of evidence studies determined that seeding inhibited the return of native species.  
                                                 
15 The value of  “one of three papers” was erroneously given as “two of three papers” in Peppin et al. 
2010. 

 
 
18 
  
 
Of the highest and high quality evidence studies finding a reduction of native 
plant cover with seeding (5 papers), three suggested that seeding could have persistent 
effects on post-fire vegetation recovery.  For example, Stella (2009) found that annual 
and biennial native forbs were significantly reduced in seeded treatments compared to 
unseeded treatments the first year after fire; this reduction persisted into the second 
year even though the cover of seeded species declined.  Another southwestern U.S. 
study found a similar effect of seeding annual ryegrass (Lolium perenne ssp. 
Multiflorum (Lam.) Husnot) on native forbs (Barclay et al., 2004): cover of native 
forbs in unseeded areas increased from year one to year two, but native forb cover in 
seeded areas remained constant even though ryegrass cover declined.  The third study, 
conducted in the eastern Cascades, showed a reduction of native early-successional 
species and fire-dependent colonizers as a result of high frequency and cover of 
seeded non-natives.  The researchers suggested that seeding effects could therefore 
alter native plant communities well beyond the life of the seeded species 
(Schoennagel and Waller, 1999).   
 
 
Two studies with highest and high quality evidence found that seeding 
enhanced native plant cover (Springer et al., 2001; Hunter and Omi, 2006).  Hunter 
and Omi (2006) examined how seeded species (a mixture of native cultivars and non-
native annual grasses) and native grasses responded to increased availability of soil 
nitrogen and light after the Cerro Grande Fire in New Mexico.  They found that cover 
of native species (those not seeded during post-fire rehabilitation efforts) increased 
over a four-year period in seeded areas of low fire severity and did not differ between 
seeded and unseeded areas of high fire severity, although seeded grass cover remained 
high.  However, seeding treatments did reduce native species richness, at least at 
small scales (Hunter and Omi, 2006).   
 
 
Both seeded species and native plant cover are highly influenced by post-fire 
precipitation.  When unfavorable conditions (e.g., low precipitation) occur, seeding 
often has no effect on native species cover and/or recovery (Robichaud et al., 2006; 
Wagenbrenner et al., 2006; Peterson et al., 2007).  In contrast, under favorable 
conditions seeded species can rapidly dominate the post-fire environment, which in 
turn may lead to low first-year native plant recruitment and subsequent reductions in 
native species over time.  However, one long-term study revealed that 31 years after a 
fire in north-central Washington, non-native cultivars which dominated seeded sites 
initially were completely replaced by a diverse mixture of native graminoids, forbs, 
shrubs and trees (Roche et al., 2008).  This study suggests that non-native grasses 
seeded after wildfires do not always have persistent effects on native plant 
communities, but long-term datasets like this one are rare.     
 
 
Seven of nine papers (78%) assessing the effect of seeding on native species 
richness reported negative effects, while the remaining two showed no difference in 
native species richness on seeded versus unseeded controls. Six studies (86%) 
providing highest and high quality evidence reported that seeding decreased native 
species richness.  Two-thirds of these papers were published since 2000.   
 
 
Reduced native species richness is often a function of high dominance by 
seeded species (Conard et al., 1991; Amaranthus et al., 1993; Sexton, 1998; 
Schoennagel and Waller, 1999; Keeley, 2004).  In five cases, studies reported high 

 
 
19 
seeded species dominance coincident with reduced native species richness.  
Conversely, Kruse et al. (2004) reported cereal barley (Hordeum vulgare L.) cover 
had no effect on native richness on a fire in northern California.  Instead, this study 
linked reduced native species richness with cover of straw mulch, showing that direct 
competition for water or nutrients with actively growing seeded species was not the 
only way for a suppressive effect to occur (Kruse et al., 2004).   Barclay et al. (2004) 
noted a reduction in native forb richness in the second year following fire in north-
central New Mexico.  However, this reduction coincided with low seeded annual 
ryegrass cover.  The authors suggested that dominant ryegrass cover may have led to 
the suppression of native species in the first year, causing subsequent lack of 
reproduction of native forbs in the second year after ryegrass disappeared.  However, 
total cover was also reported to be low; thus, the relative abundance of seeded 
ryegrass compared to other species may have remained high. In the two studies 
reporting no difference in native species richness between seeded and unseeded plots, 
one showed minimal cover of seeded annual species in both the first and second year 
post-fire in the Southwest (Stella, 2009).  The other found that although seeded non-
native annual and perennial grass and legume species had high dominance (cover and 
frequency) in seeded plots in the eastern Cascades, a native plant, pinegrass 
(Calamagrostis rubescens Buckley), also dominated the site, which may have 
counteracted any effects of seeded species abundance (Schoennagel, 1997).  
 
 
A number of studies examined competitive effects of seeded grasses on woody 
plant establishment.  Of 14 papers investigating post-fire seeding effects on tree 
seedling growth and shrub cover, the majority (79%, 11 papers) found seeding to 
negatively affect woody plant establishment.  All of these studies seeded only grasses 
in treated plots.  Three of the five 16 papers providing highest and high quality 
evidence (60%) found that seeding negatively affected tree seedling and/or shrub 
growth and survival.  One of the three studies seeded include planting of native tree 
and shrub seedlings, the rest seeded strictly grasses. One paper reported seeding 
annual non-native grasses had no effect on the growth and survival of woody species. 
The remaining paper showed seeding improved establishment, but stated that seeding 
with shrub species appeared to be effective for increased shrub establishment. Eight 
out of nine (89%) studies in the lower quality of evidence categories found reduced 
conifer seedlings and/or shrub growth and survival on sites dominated by seeded 
annual non-native species (Griffin, 1982; Conard et al., 1991; Schoennagel and 
Waller, 1999; Barclay et al., 2004; Keeley, 2004; Kruse et al., 2004). The remaining 
study showed seeding to be ineffective as a result of seeding cereal barley (Hanes and 
Callahan, 1995). 
 
 
4.5 
Quantitative synthesis 
 
4.5.1 Does seeding after severe forest fires in the western USA reduce soil erosion? 
 
 
Only nine of the 2317 studies used direct measures of sediment yield used to 
assess post-wildfire seeding effectiveness. These studies provided measurements from 
12 seeded and unseeded sites in the first year, 10 seeded and unseeded sites in the 
                                                 
16 The value of “Three of the five” was erroneously given as “(2 out of 4)” in Peppin et al. 2010. 
17 The value of 23 was erroneously given as 27 in Peppin et al. 2010. 

 
 
20 
second year, 3 seeded and unseeded sites in the third year, 3 seeded and unseeded 
sites in the fourth year, and 2 seeded and unseeded sites in the fifth year (30 sites 
total)While seeded sites tended to produce less sediment than unseeded sites the first 
year after fire (Fig. 5), only 22% (7 sites) of the sites showed a statistically significant 
decrease in erosion on seeded relative to unseeded sites.  This trend toward sediment 
yield reduction was less apparent in measurements from the second year post-fire and 
essentially disappeared by the third and subsequent years. However, by the third year 
post-fire most studies showed little sediment movement in either seeded or unseeded 
sites (Fig. 5), indicating that slopes had largely stabilized.   
 
 
 
Figure 5. Amount of sediment yield versus time since fire in seeded plots and unseeded 
plots (data from 30 sites).  
 
 
Sediment movement is strongly related to the amount of cover on a hillslope 
(Robichaud et al. 2006; Rough 2007).  Because so few studies reported actual erosion 
measurements, we also used vegetation cover as an indicator of seeding “success” for 
potential erosion control effectiveness (Dadkhah and Gifford 1980; Bruggink 2007). 
We included studies from the first and second year after fire that compared seeded 
treatments to unseeded plots in this analysis.  As was done in Robichaud et al. (2000) 
and Beyers (2004), we used two levels of cover to indicate the potential for seeding to 
effective or partly effective reduce erosion.  Based on previous work, we regarded 
cover between 30 and 60% as partially effective at reducing erosion, and > 60% cover 
to be effective at reducing sediment movement to negligible amounts (Noble 1965; 
Orr 1970).  
 
  
Comparing cover measurements between seeded and unseeded plots from 20 
studies containing a total of 29 study sites, we found that 12 sites (41%) had 
significantly greater total plant cover on seeded plots by the end of the first year after 
fire.  Sixteen seeded sites (55%) had between 30 and 60%% total plant cover in the 
first year after fire, compared to only nine unseeded sites (31%; Table 5).  Another 
four seeded sites (14%) had > 60% total plant cover after the first year post-fire 

 
 
21 
compared to none of the unseeded sites.  However, of the 12 sites where erosion was 
measured, none showed that seeding significantly reduced erosion in the first year 
after fire.   
 
 
Table 5 – Number of sites in published studies reporting measures of seeding “success” 
by ecoregion (Bailey 1983) during the first 2 years following fire. 
 
 
 
 
 
In the second year after fire, seeded sites were nearly four times more likely to be 
stabilized than untreated sites based on cover percentage of greater than 60% (Table 
5).  Second-year seeded sites had greater total cover than did unseeded sites 39% of 
the cases.  Fifteen seeded sites (83%) had between 30 and 60% cover, compared to 
only half (9 sites).  Five seeded sties (28%) had adequate cover (>60%) to reduce soil 
erosion to negligible amounts, compared to only one unseeded site (6%) (.  Despite 
these cover findings, only one of the 10 studies measuring erosion in the second year 
showed that seeding significantly reduced erosion.  Authors of all review papers (4) 
agreed that research to date has failed to show any notable relationship between 
establishment of vegetative cover and reduction of erosion within the first year after 
fire (MacDonald, 1989; Beschta et al., 2004; Beyers, 2004; Wolfson and Sieg, in 
press).   
 
 
 
Sites Showing  
Cover Measure- 
ments 
Those Showing  
Seeding Significantly 
Increased Cover 
% of Sites Showing  
30-60% Cover 
(No. of Sites) 
% of Sites Showing  
> 60% Cover 
(No. of Sites) 
Sites Showing  
Erosion Measure- 
ments 
Those Showing  
Seeding Significantly 
Reduced Erosion 
 
 
Seeded 
Unseeded 
Seeded 
Unseeded 
 
 
――――――――No. ――――――――― 
―――――――――Percent――――――――― 
――――――――No. ――――――――― 
Post-wildfire Year One 
Marine Regime 
Mountains 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
3 
33 (2) 
17 (1) 
0 
0 
5 
0 
Temperate Steppe 
Regime Mountains 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
0 
50 (4) 
50 (4) 
0 
0 
4 
0 
Tropical/Subtropical 
Regime Mountains 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
0 
100 (3) 
100 (3) 
0 
0 
0 
― 
Mediterranean 
Regime Mountains 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
9 
58 (7) 
8 (1) 
33 (4) 
0 
3 
0 
Combined 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 
12 
55 (16) 
31 (9) 
14 (4) 
0 
12 
0 
Post-wildfire Year Two 
Marine Regime 
Mountains 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
1 
100 (4) 
75 (3) 
0 
0 
5 
0 
Temperate Steppe 
Regime Mountains 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
0 
71 (5) 
71 (5) 
0 
14 (1) 
5 
1 
Mediterranean 
Regime Mountains 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
6 
86 (6) 
14 (1) 
71 (5) 
0 
0 
0 
Combined 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 
7 
83 (15) 
50 (9) 
28 (5) 
6 (1) 
10 
1 

 
 
22 
4.5.2  Does seeding reduce non-native species invasions in severely burned forest 
land? 
 
 
Quantitative analysis was not completed for this question due to limited and 
variable quantitative data available. 
 
 
4.5.3 Does seeding after severe forest fires in the western USA affect native plant 
community recovery? 
 
 
Cover data from 15 studies containing a total of 57 study sites (19 sites in the 
first year, 14 sites in year two, 13 sites in year three, 7 sites in year four, and 4 sites in 
year five) showed decreased seeded cover relative to control plot cover with 
increasing time since fire (Fig. 6).  Total cover on seeded plots was more variable but 
only slightly higher on average than total cover on control sites for two years post-
fire; after two years, control cover was consistently greater than seeded cover.  Of the 
13 sites with greater cover on seeded than unseeded sites in the first and/or second 
year post-fire, the majority (77%, 10 sites) occurred in ecoregions characterized by 
favorable rainfall intensity, amounts, and timing.  In addition, in all of these sites 
annual cereal grains or non-native perennial grass species were either seeded alone 
(62%, 8 sites) or as a predominant proportion of a mix with natives cultivars and 
legumes (38%, 5 sites) (Anderson and Brooks, 1975; Griffin, 1982; Amaranthus, 
1989; Amaranthus et al., 1993; Holzworth, 2003; Keeley, 2004; Logar, 2006; Roche 
et al., 2008).   
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Ratio between seeded and control cover estimates versus time since fire in 
years (data from 57 sites).  Ratios greater than one have greater seeded cover than 
control cover. 
 

 
 
23 
 
Based on data from a total of 57 sites, by four years after fire both seeded and 
unseeded sites supported approximately 45% total plant cover (seeded + unseeded 
species)and only 40% total plant cover after five years (Fig. 7).  Seeded cover (seeded 
species only) was relatively high for the first three years after fire (about the same as 
control cover during the first two years) but declined substantially to 13% and 14% in 
years four and five, respectively. 

 
 
24 
 
Figure 7. Average (a) seeded cover (seeded species only), (b) total cover (seeded + 
unseeded species), and (c) total control cover (unseeded) versus time since fire (data 
from 57 sites contained in 15 studies assessing post-wildfire seeding treatment 
performance in forested ecosystems in the western U.S.)   

 
 
25 
 
Of five studies quantifying shrub cover in sites seeded with non-native species 
versus unseeded controls (16 sites: 6 in year 1, 5 in year 2, 3 in year 3, and 2 in year 
4)), shrub cover in unseeded plots was higher than in seeded plots 94% of the time 
(Fig. 8).   
 
 
Figure 8. Percent shrub cover in seeded and unseeded sites versus time since fire in 
years (data from 16 sites). 
 
 
 
4.6  
Outcome of the review 
 
 
Our qualitative assessment revealed that seeding is largely ineffective in 
reducing soil erosion.  Quantitative analysis elucidated that seeding has the ability to 
decrease sediment yield on seeded sites compared to unseeded sites in the first year, 
although few sites showed a statistically significant decrease in erosion on seeded 
relative to unseeded sites.However, this decrease diminished with time since fire.  In 
addition, seeding has the ability to increase cover but this increase does not ensure 
reduced erosion. 
 
Regarding seeding effects on native plant communities, qualitative and 
quantitative analysis each revealed unique information.  Qualitatively, papers showed 
a decreased in cover of native species on seeded plots compared to unseeded plots.  
Seeding treatments also showed decreased native species richness, negative effects on 
woody plant establishment, and persistent effects on native plant community 
recovery, although long-term data is lacking.  Quantitatively, like soil erosion data, 
data regarding seeding effects on native plant communities revealed that seeded cover 
decreased significantly relative to control plots with increasing time since fire.  
However, seeded and unseeded sites supported essentially the same percent cover 
after five years.  Seeded species increased in the first couple of years after fire but 
declined in subsequent years. 
 
 
Only qualitative evidence was gathered regarding seeding effectiveness in 
curtailing non-native species invasion. This analysis showed that seeding has 

 
 
26 
equivocal effectiveness in mitigating non-natives species.  However, of effective 
treatments and those showing a negative effect, the majority included non-native 
annual species in the seeding, many of which are seeded non-persistent species that 
actually persisted beyond the first-year after fire or were contaminated with 
undesirable species.  
 
 
 
5. 
Discussion 
 
 
5.1 
Evidence of effectiveness  
 
 
The systematic review approaches used worked well for summarizing both 
qualitative and quantitative data while reducing review bias. Qualitative and 
quantitative analysis elucidated differing but equally important information regarding 
each review question and the soil and plant community attributes assessed.  
Conclusions draw across qualitative and quantitative analysis were similar. 
 
 
5.1.1 Does seeding after severe forest fires in the western USA reduce soil erosion? 
 
 
Qualitative analysis of soil erosion papers revealed that as sampling designs 
have become more rigorous in recent years, evidence that seeding is effective in 
reducing erosion has decreased.  In addition, seeding may be more effective when 
used with other erosion control measures, but mulching alone can provide as much or 
more cover then all other treatment combined.  Quantitatively, it appears that greater 
cover does not always produce less erosion. Rather, the ability of seeding to 
effectively reduce erosion within the first and even second year post-wildfire depends 
largely of amount and timing of precipitation, not percent cover, as shown by minimal 
support for the cover thresholds currently used.  Our data suggest that seeding was 
more likely to increase plant cover and therefore potentially reduce soil erosion in the 
Marine and Mediterranean Regime Mountain ecoregions than in Temperate Steppe 
Regime Mountains ecoregion (Table 5; see Fig. 1 for ecoregion boundaries).  In the 
Intermountain West and Rocky Mountains (Temperate Steppe Regime Mountains), 
high-intensity short-duration rainfall events often occur shortly after severe wildfires 
(Robichaud et al., 2000).  Watersheds within this region are therefore vulnerable to 
heavy erosion immediately following fire (Wagenbrenner et al., 2006; Kunze et al., 
2006; Rough, 2007).  In contrast, forests of the Mediterranean and Marine Regimes 
(California and the Pacific Northwest) receive most precipitation during the winter 
months as snow or are subjected to prolonged periods of rainfall, allowing seeded 
species to germinate under better conditions (Anderson and Brooks, 1975; Roby, 
1989; Amaranthus et al., 1993; Robichaud et al., 2006; Peterson et al., 2007).  A main 
goal of post-wildfire stabilization treatments is to reduce soil erosion in the year 
immediately following a fire (Robichaud et al., 2000).  However, seeding appears to 
have a low probability of effectively reducing erosion within the first year and even 
the second year.   
 
 
 

 
 
27 
 
5.1.2  Does seeding reduce non-native species invasions in severely burned forest 
land?  
 
 
Qualitatively, it appears that seeding has an equivocal record for reducing non-
native species invasion.  Successful exclusion of non-natives was generally reported 
when seeded species produced high cover (Barclay et al., 2004; Keeley, 2004), while 
studies where seeding was ineffective usually showed no difference in total cover on 
seeded and unseeded sites (Sexton, 1998; Hunter and Omi, 2006; Stella et al., in 
press).  Successful suppression of non-seeded invaders appears to result from the 
competitive advantage of other (seeded) non-native species (Schoennagel and Waller, 
1999; Barclay et al., 2004; Keeley, 2004). 
 
 
Although the non-native annual species in seed mixes are generally selected 
because they are expected to disappear in one year (e.g., winter wheat, annual 
ryegrass), they can persist beyond the first and second years post-fire (VanZuuk, 
1997; Sexton, 1998; Barclay et al., 2004, Hunter et al., 2006). In addition, it appears 
that seeding to reduce the negative impacts of invading non-native species on post-fire 
vegetation recovery may end up replacing one (or more) competitive non-native 
species with another.   
 
 
Concerns over use of native species for post-fire seeding include the fact that 
some native grasses have been shown to suppress growth of conifer seedlings (Larson 
and Schubert, 1969; Pearson, 1972), and using non-local native seed sources may 
contaminate local gene pools (Huenneke, 1991; Schmid, 1994; Linhart, 1995; Hufford 
and Mazer, 2003; Rogers and Montalvo, 2004).  Conserving local genotypes of plant 
populations is considered a vital mechanism by which plant communities can adapt 
and evolve to survive in a changing climate (Huenneke, 1991, Rogers and Montalvo, 
2004).  
 
 
All of the papers on the effectiveness of seeding for reducing non-native 
species invasion in forested ecosystems were published since 1998.  This likely 
reflects the increased interest in this kind of treatment by land management agencies. 
Additional and longer-term quantitative monitoring is needed to more thoroughly 
assess the effectiveness of seeding to prevent non-native species invasion after fire. 
 
 
 
5.1.3 Does seeding after severe forest fires in the western USA affect native plant 
community recovery?  
 
 
Seeding treatment performance and effects are related to length of time since 
fire (Robichaud and Elliot, 2006; Rough, 2007).  Quantitative analysis of cover data 
from 15 studies containing 57 different study sites suggests that seeded species, in 
particular annual cereal grains, may exit the system quickly (Kuenzi et al. 2008) or be 
outcompeted by native or naturalized species after two years.  However, data beyond 
two years from areas seeded with annual cereal grains are rare, so studies quantifying 
their ability for rapid die-off are limited.   
 

 
 
28 
 
The higher initial seeded cover in the analysis of cover data from 57 sites 
suggests that one of the major goals of post-fire rehabilitation was being effectively 
met: seeded species established quickly and lasted for a few years, then decreased 
relative to other species.  However, total cover in seeded sites and controls was nearly 
identical by years four and five, suggesting that the remaining seeded species were 
offsetting local plant species that would otherwise occupy the site.  Regardless of 
species seeded, total cover values converged at four to five years post-fire, suggesting 
that ecosystems may only support a threshold level of plant cover (Connell and 
Slatyer, 1977; Noble and Slatyer, 1977) and post-fire seeding actually suppresses the 
establishment of local species after fires (Anderson and Brooks, 1975; Schoennagel 
and Waller, 1999; Sexton, 1998; Barclay et al., 2004; Keeley, 2004).  Data from this 
review cannot assess the differences in vegetation composition between seeded and 
non-seeded sites.  Longer-term monitoring results (e.g., > 5 years) are needed to 
assess lasting impacts of seeded species.  Assessment of soil seed banks is also 
needed to determine whether seed of non-persistent seeded species can remain viable 
within the seed bank (Griffin 1982). 
 
 
Overall, both qualitative and quantitative data from the literature suggests that 
seeded species‟ dominance plays a critical role in determining species richness in the 
first and/or second year after fire.  Our review further suggests that in cases where 
seeding is successful, reduced native species richness is likely.  Mulching may also 
inhibit native species recovery as much as seeding (Schuman et al., 1991; Bakker et 
al., 2003; Kruse et al., 2004), as well having the potential to introduce non-species if 
the mulch used is not free of weeds (Kruse et al., 2004). 
 
 
Overall, both qualitative and quantitative results on seeding effects on woody 
plant establishment suggest that seeding non-native annual species may negatively 
affect woody plant seedlings through competition for available resources (specifically 
soil moisture), space, and light during the first two years after fire (Beyers, 2004).Soil 
moisture likely influences establishment and survival of trees and shrubs, and soil 
moisture can be depleted more rapidly on seeded sites yielding high plant production, 
thus limiting water availability to woody plant species (Elliott and White, 1987).  For 
example, Amaranthus et al. (1993) found that seeded annual ryegrass suppressed first-
year pine seedling growth in southwestern Oregon by lowering soil moisture 
availability and reducing root-tip and mycorrhiza formation.  In contrast, Sexton 
(1998) noted no difference in tree and shrub seedling establishment on plots seeded 
with annual ryegrass versus controls in south-central Oregon, in spite of similar soil 
moisture levels on seeded and control plots.  A prescribed burn study in northwestern 
Arizona found increased shrub cover on seeded plots, but shrubs were included in the 
seeding treatment (Springer et al., 2001).  
 
 
 
5.2 
Reasons for variation in effectiveness  
 
 
Results obtained from qualitative and quantitative analysis did not vary so 
much as provided unique information which we used to make overall conclusions 
regarding each review question.  The qualitative analysis used less rigorous statistical 
methods; thus the quantitative analysis produced more reliable conclusions.  
However, we feel that both analyses were equally important in determining the 

 
 
29 
overall effects and effectiveness of post-fire seeding practices on soils and plant 
communities in forested ecosystems in the western USA. 
 
 
5.3 
Review limitations  
 
 
A systematic review may become a statistically rigorous „„meta-analysis‟‟ if 
data can be analyzed as „„effect sizes‟‟ (Gates, 2002).  However, measurements taken 
across studies relevant to soil and/or plant community attributes varied widely 
therefore a meta-analyses for the data obtained was not possible with the questions we 
addressed. In addition, due to the variation in data measures across papers, data 
gathered often yielded small sample sizes.  Thus, conclusions drawn from both 
qualitative and quantitative analyses, in these cases, must be considered cautiously.  
 
 
Finally, we did not complete a „kappa‟ analysis of agreement between 
reviewers as to the inclusion of studies within the review. Two persons were involved 
in this process and worked to an agreed set of papers. The inability to quote a kappa 
statistic weakens the review as the selection of studies for inclusion is a potential 
source of unquantifiable bias. 
 
 
 
6. 
Reviewers’ Conclusions 
 
6.1 
Implications for management / policy / conservation 
 
 
The scientific literature and monitoring data show that post-fire seeding is not 
reliably effective in protecting soil in the short term and can have negative 
consequences for native plant recovery, particularly woody species.  Seeding with 
annual non-native species can be effective in curtailing invasive non-natives.  
However, seeding with these species is often associated with slower native plant 
recovery. Land managers should weigh the cost/benefit of seeding treatments and 
consider using alternative rehabilitation methods shown to be more effective (e.g., 
various types of mulch, but care must be taken to ensure that mulch is free of non-
native seed).  Early detection of new undesirable species invasions through 
monitoring post-fire environments, in combination with rapid response methods to 
quickly contain, deny reproduction, and eliminate these invasions, may allow better 
control of non-native species establishment than is typically obtained through seeding.  
Plant community recovery may be improved with the use of locally-adapted, 
genetically appropriate plant materials, although more research regarding the effects 
and effectiveness of these species is critical.   
 
 
6.2 
Implications for research 
 
 
The effectiveness and long-term effects of post-fire seeding deserve further 
study, particularly well-designed research experiments and rigorous quantitative 
monitoring to evaluate seeding success. Studies assessing the use of native species to 
combat non-native species invasions in burned areas are almost non-existent. Taking a 
closer look at the use of native species to reduce non-natives would be valuable. 

 
 
30 
Further quantitative research on the effects of mulching after wildfire is also essential. 
Although seeding with non-local genotypes of native plants has been identified as a 
concern, we found no studies that addressed genetic consequences of post-wildfire 
native seeding.  Given ongoing debates about seeding, additional research on the 
long-term effects of seeding with both native and non-native species on natural 
vegetation recovery and the genetic integrity of native populations is essential.   
 
 
7. 
Acknowledgements 
 
 
We thank the students of the Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern 
Arizona University who helped establish the publication database of relevant post-fire 
seeding publications to synthesize.   
 
 
8.  
Potential Conflicts of Interest and Sources of Support 
 
 
The review is led by researchers from Northern Arizona University and the 
USDA Forest Service who have contributed to the literature on this topic. We will 
address the possibility of conflict of interest by following the review process through 
CEBC and additional reviews solicited from scientists who are not on the review 
panel and not affiliated with the lead institutions.This research was supported by a 
grant from Joint Fire Science Program (JFSP Project # 08-2-1-11).  
 
 
9. 
References 
 
Amaranthus, M. P., 1989. Effect of grass seeding and fertilizing on surface erosion in 
two intensely burned sites in southwest Oregon. In: Berg, Neil H., tech. coord. 
Proceedings of the symposium on fire and watershed management, October 
26-28, 1988, Sacramento, California. Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-109. U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Forest and 
Range Experiment Station, Berkeley, CA, pp. 148-149. 
 
Amaranthus, M. P., Trappe, J. M., Perry, D. A., 1993. Soil moisture, native 
revegetation, and Pinus lambertiana seedling survival, growth, and 
mycorrhiza formation following wildfire and grass seeding. Restor. Ecol. 1, 
188-195.  
 
Anderson, W.E., Brooks, L.E., 1975. Reducing erosion hazard on a burned forest in 
Oregon by seeding.  J. Range Manage. 28, 394-398. 
 
Bailey, R. G., 1983. Delineation of ecosystem regions. Environ. Manage. 7, 365-373. 
 
Bakker, J.B., Wilson, S.D., Christian, J.M., Xingdong, L., Ambrose, L.G., 
Waddington, J., 2003.  Contingency of grassland restoration on year, site, and 
competition from introduced grasses. Ecol. Appl. 10, 1400-1413. 
 

 
 
31 
Barclay, A.D., Betancourt, J.L., Allen, C.D., 2004. Effects of seeding ryegrass 
(Lolium multiflorum) on vegetation recovery following fire in a ponderosa 
pine (Pinus ponderosa) forest. Int. J. Wildland Fire 13, 183-194. 
 
Beschta, R.L., Rhodes, J.J., Kauffman, J.B., Gresswell, R.E., Minshall, G.W., Karr, 
J.R., Perry D.A. , Hauer F.R., Frissell C.A., 2004. Postfire management of 
forested public lands of the western United States. Conserv. Biol. 18, 957-967. 
 
Beyers, J.L., 2004. Post-fire seeding for erosion control: effectiveness and impacts on 
native plant communities. Conserv. Biol. 18, 947-956. 
 
Bruggink, J., 2007. Long term ecological changes with post-fire emergency seeding. 
In: Furniss, M., Clifton, C., Ronnenberg, K. (Eds.), Advancing the 
Fundamental Sciences: Proceedings of the Forest Service National Earth 
Sciences Conference, San Diego, CA, 18-22 October 2004. Gen. Tech. Rep. 
PNW-GTR-689. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific 
Northwest Research Station, Portland, OR, pp. 20-26.  
  
Conard, S. G., Regelbrugge, J. C., Wills R.D., 1991. Preliminary effects of ryegrass 
seeding on postfire establishment of natural vegetation in two California 
ecosystems. Proceedings of the 11th conference on fire and forest 
meteorology. Society of American Foresters, Missoula MT, pp. 16-19.  
 
Connell, J.H., Slatyer, R.O., 1977. Mechanisms of succession in natural communities 
and their role in community stability and organization. Am. Nat. 111, 1119-
1144. 
 
Dadkhah, M., Gifford, G.F., 1980. Influence of vegetation, rock cover and trampling 
on infiltration rates and sediment production. Water Resour. Bul. 16, 979-986. 
 
DeWolfe, V.G., Santi, P.M., Ey, J., Gartner, J.E., 2008. Effective mitigation of debris 
flows at Lemon Dam, La Plata County, Colorado. Geomorphology 96, 366-
377.  
 
Earles, T.A., Foster, P., Ey, J., Wright, K.R., 2005. Missionary Ridge wildfire 
rehabilitation.  Proceedings of the 2005 Watershed Management Conference, 
Williamsburg, VA.  pp. 1-14.  
 
Elliott, K.J., White A.S., 1987. Competitive effects of various grasses and forbs on 
ponderosa pine seedlings.  For. Sci. 33, 356-366. 
 
GAO (General Accounting Office), 2003. Wildland fires: Better information needed 
on effectiveness of emergency stabilization and rehabilitation treatments. 
GAO-03-430. 
 
Gates, S., 2002. Review of methodology of quantitative reviews using meta-analysis 
 
in ecology. J. Anim. Ecol. 71, 547–557. 
 
Griffin, J. R., 1982. Pine seedling, native ground cover and Lolium multiflorum on the 
Marble-Cone Burn, Santa Lucia Range, California. Madroño 29, 177-188.  

 
 
32 
 
Groen, A.H., Woods, S.W., 2008. Effectiveness of aerial seeding and straw mulch for 
reducing post-wildfire erosion, north-western Montana, USA. Int. J. Wildland 
Fire 17, 559-571.  
 
Holzworth, L. K., Hunter, H.E., Winslow, S.R., 2003. Disturbed forestland 
revegetation effectiveness monitoring: Results of 30 years. 2003 National 
Meeting of the American  Society of Mining and Reclamation and the 9th 
Billings Land Reclamation Symposium,  Billings, MT, June 3-6.  
 
Hanes, R., Callahan, K., 1996. Crystal burn analysis. post-fire succession and 
seeding monitoring: Year two. Unpublished Report on File at: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Tahoe National Forest, CA.  
 
Huenneke, L.F., 1991. Ecological implications of genetic variation in plant 
populations. In: Falk, D.A., Holsinger, K.E. [eds.], Genetics and conservation 
of rare plants.  Oxford University Press, New York, NY, pp. 31-44. 
 
Hufford, K.M., Mazer, S.J., 2003. Plant ecotypes: genetic differentiation in the age of 
ecological restoration. Trends Ecol. Evol. 18, 147-155. 
 
Hunter, M.E., Omi, P.N., 2006. Response of native and exotic grasses to increased 
soil nitrogen and recovery in a postfire environment. Restor. Ecol. 14, 587-
594. 
 
Hunter, M.E., Omi, P.N., Martinson, E.J., Chong, G.W., 2006. Establishment of non-
native plant species after wildfires: Effects of fuel treatments, abiotic and 
biotic factors, and post- fire grass seeding treatment.  Int. J. Wildland Fire 15, 
271-281. 
 
Jones, T.A., 2003. The restoration gene pool concept: Beyond the native versus non-
native debate. Restor. Ecol. 11, 281-290. 
 
JMP, Version 8. 2008. SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC. 
 
Keeley, J.E., 2004. Ecological impacts of wheat seeding after a Sierra Nevada 
wildfire.  Int. J. Wildland Fire 13, 73-78. 
 
Korb, J. E., Johnson, N.C., Covington, W.W., 2004. Slash pile burning effects on soil 
biotic and chemical properties and plant establishment: Recommendations for 
amelioration.  Restor. Ecol. 12, 52-62.  
 
Kruse, R., Bend, E., Bierzychudek P., 2004. Native plant regeneration and 
introduction of non- natives following post-fire rehabilitation with straw 
mulch and barley seeding. Forest Ecol. Manage. 196, 299-310. 
 
Kuenzi, A.M., Fulé, P.Z., Sieg, C.H. 2008. Effects of fire severity and pre-fire stand 
treatment on plant community recovery after a large wildfire. Forest Ecol. 
Manage. 255, 855-865. 
 

 
 
33 
Larson, M.M., Schubert, G.H., 1969. Root competition between ponderosa pine 
seedlings and grass. General Technical Report RM-54. USDA Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, 
Colorado. 
 
Linhart, Y. B., 1995. Restoration, revegetation, and the importance of genetic and 
evolutionary perspectives. In Roundy, B.A., McArthur, E.D., Haley, J.S., 
Mann, D.K. (Eds.), Proceedings of the Wildland Shrub and Arid Land 
Restoration Symposium; 19–21 October 1993, Las Vegas, Nevada. Gen. Tech. 
Rep. INT-GTR-315. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Ogden, Utah, pp. 271–
287. 
 
Littell, J.S., McKenzie D., Peterson, D.L., Westerling, A.L., 2009. Climate and 
wildfire area burned in western U.S. ecoprovinces, 1916–2003. Ecol. Appl. 
19, 1003-1021. 
 
Logar, R., 2006. Results of reseeding a fire impacted watershed in south central 
Montana.  USDA NRCS Forestry Technical Note no. MT-28.  
 
 
MacDonald, L.H., Larsen, I.J., 2009. Effects of forest fires and post-fire 
rehabilitation: A Colorado, USA case study. In Cerdà, A., Robichaud, P.R. 
(Eds.), Fire Effects on Soils and Restoration Strategies. Science Publishers, 
Enfield, NH, 589 p. 
 
Maloney, P.C., Thornton, J.L., John, L., 1995. Implementation and effectiveness 
monitoring of best management practices and soil and water protection 
measures within the Foothills fire salvage logging area 1992-1995. 
Unpublished Report on File at: USDA Forest Service, Boise National Forest. 
51 p.  
 
Meyer, V., Redente, E., Barbarick, K., Brobst, R., 2001. Biosolids applications affect 
runoff water quality following forest fire. J. Environ. Qual. 30, 1528-1532.  
 
McKenzie, D., Gedalof, Z., Peterson, D.L., Mote, P., 2004. Climatic change, wildfire, 
and conservation. Conserv. Biol. 18, 890-902. 
 
Noble, E.L., 1965. Sediment reduction through watershed rehabilitation. In: 
Proceedings of the federal inter-agency sedimentation conference 1963. U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Misc. Publ. 970, Washington, DC, pp. 114-123. 
 
Noble, I.R., Slatyer, R.O., 1977. Post fire succession of plants in Mediterranean 
ecosystems. In:  Mooney, H.A., Conrad, C.E. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 
Symposium on Environmental Consequences of Fire and Fuel Management in 
Mediterranean Ecosystems. Gen. Tech. Rep. WO-3. U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Washington, DC, pp. 27-36.  
 
Orr, H.K., 1970. Runoff and erosion control by seeded and native vegetation on a 
forest burn:  Black Hills, South Dakota. Research Paper RM-60. U.S. 

 
 
34 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station, Fort Collins, CO. 12 p. 
 
Pearson, H.A., Davis, J.R., Schubert, G.H., 1972. Effects of wildfire on timber and 
forage production in Arizona. J. Range Manage. 25, 250-253.  
 
Peppin, D.L., Fulé, P.Z., Sieg, C.H., Beyers, J.L., Hunter, M.E., 2010. Post-wildfire 
seeding in forests of the western United States: An evidence-based review. 
Forest Ecol. Manage. 260, 573-586. 
 
Peterson, D.W., Dodson, E.K., Harrod, R.J., 2007. Assessing the effectiveness of 
seeding and fertilization treatments for reducing erosion potential following 
severe wildfires. In: Butler, B.W., Cook, W. (Comps.), The fire environment – 
innovations, management, and policy; Conference proceedings 26-30 March 
2007, Destin, FL. Proceedings RMRS-P-46CD. U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, 
CO. 662 p.  
 
Richards, R.T., Chambers, J.C., Ross, C., 1998. Use of native plants on federal lands: 
policy and practice. J. Range Manage. 51, 625-632. 
 
Robichaud, P.R., Beyers, J.L., Neary, D.G., 2000. Evaluating the effectiveness of 
post-fire rehabilitation treatments. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-63. U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, 
Fort Collins, CO. 
 
Robichaud, P.R., Brown, R.E., 2005. Postfire rehabilitation treatments: Are we 
learning what works? In: Moglen, Glenn E., Ed. Managing Watersheds for Human 
and Natural Impacts: Engineering, Ecological, and Economic Challenges: 
Proceedings of the 2005 Watershed Management Conference, July 19-22, 2005, 
Williamsburg, VA, 12 p.  
Robichaud, P.R., Lillybridge, T.R., Wagenbrenner, J.W., 2006. Effects of postfire 
seeding and fertilizing on hillslope erosion in north-central Washington, USA. 
Catena 67, 56-67.  
 
Robichaud, P.R., Elliot W.J., 2006. Protection from erosion following wildfire. 
Report.  Paper No. 068009. ASABE. MI, US. 
 
Roche, C.T., Sheley, R.L., Korfhage, R.C., 2008. Native species replace introduced 
grass cultivars seeded following wildfire. Ecol. Restor. 26, 321-330.  
 
Rogers, D.L., Montalvo, A.M., 2004. Genetically appropriate choices for plant 
materials to maintain biological diversity. Report to the USDA Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Region, Lakewood, CO. University of California. Davis, CA. 
 
Rough, D., 2007. Effectiveness of rehabilitation treatments in reducing post-fire 
erosion after the Hayman and Schoonover fires, Colorado Front Range.  M.S. 
Thesis, Colorado State University. 
 

 
 
35 
Schmid, B., 1994. Effects of genetic diversity in experimental stands of Solidago 
altissima:  evidence for the potential role of pathogens as selective agents in 
plant populations. J. Ecol. 82, 165-175. 
 
Schoennagel, T., 1997. Native plant response to high intensity fire and seeding of 
non-native grasses in an Abies grandis forest on the Leavenworth district of 
the Wenatchee National Forest. M.S. Thesis, University of Wisconsin-
Madison.  
 
Schoennagel, T.L., Waller, D.M., 1999. Understory responses to fire and artificial 
seeding in an eastern Cascades Abies grandis forest, U.S.A. Can. J. Forest 
Res. 29, 1390-1401. 
 
Schuman, G.E., Tayor, E.M, Rauzi, F., 1991. Forage production of reclaimed mined 
lands as influenced by nitrogen fertilization and mulching practice. J. Range 
Manage. 44, 382-384. 
 
Sexton, T.O., 1998. Ecological effect of post-wildfire management activities (salvage-
logging and grass-seeding) on vegetation composition, diversity, biomass, and 
growth and survival of Pinus ponderosa and Purshia tridentata. M.S. Thesis, 
Oregon State University.  
 
Smith, S.A., Sher, A., Grant, T.A., 2007. Genetic diversity in restoration materials and 
the impacts of seed collection in Colorado‟s restoration plant production 
industry. Restor. Ecol. 15, 369–374 
Springer, J. D., Waltz, A.E.M., Fulè, P.Z., Moore, M.M., Covington, W.W., 2001. 
Seeding versus natural regeneration: A comparison of vegetation change 
following thinning and burning in ponderosa pine. USDA Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Research Station Proceedings RMRS-P-22.  
 
Stella, K.A., 2009. Effects and effectiveness of seeding following high-severity 
wildfires in northern Arizona ponderosa pine forests. M.S. Thesis, Northern 
Arizona University. 
 
Stella, K.A., Sieg, C.H., Fulé, P.Z., In press. Minimal effectiveness of native and non-
native seeding following three high severity wildfires. Int. J. Wildland Fire. 
  
U.S. Department of the Interior, 2006. Interagency Burn Area Rehabilitation 
Guidebook. Interpretation of Department of the Interior 620 DM 3. For the 
Burned Area Rehabilitation of Federal and Tribal Trust Lands. Version 1.3. 
October 2006. Washington, D.C. 
 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 2006. Notice of Proposed Native 
Plant Material Policy, Forest Service Manual (FSM) 2070. 26 May 2006. 71 
Federal Register 102: 30375. 
 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2004. Burned Area Emergency 
Rehabilitation handbook. FSH 2509.13. 
 

 
 
36 
VanZuuk, K. 1997. Memo, Crystal Burn monitoring. Unpublished Report on File at: 
U.S.  Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Tahoe National Forest, 
Nevada City, CA.  
 
Wagenbrenner, J.W., MacDonald, L.H., Rough, D., 2006. Effectiveness of three post-
fire rehabilitation treatments in the Colorado Front Range. Hydrol. Process. 
20, 2989-3006.  
 
Westerling, A.L., Hidalgo, H.G., Cayan, D.R., Swetnam, T.W., 2006. Warming and 
earlier spring increase western U.S. forest wildfire activity. Science 313, 940-
943. 
 
Wolfson, B.A.S., Sieg, C.H., In Press. 40-year post fire seeding trends in Arizona and 
New Mexico. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, CO. 
 
 
 

 
 
37 
10. 
Appendices 
 
Appendix 1. References included in the review (w/ quality of evidence ratings) 
Amaranthus, M.P., 1989. Effect of grass seeding and fertilizing on surface erosion in 
two intensely burned sites in southwest Oregon. In: Berg, Neil H., tech. coord. 
Proceedings of the symposium on fire and watershed management, October 
26-28, 1988, Sacramento, California. Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-109. U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Forest and 
Range Experiment Station, Berkeley, CA, pp. 148-149. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Highest 
 
Amaranthus, M. P., Trappe, J. M., Perry, D. A., 1993. Soil moisture, native 
revegetation, and Pinus lambertiana seedling survival, growth, and 
mycorrhiza formation following wildfire and grass seeding. Restor. Ecol. 1, 
188-195.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Highest 
 
Anderson, W.E., Brooks, L.E., 1975. Reducing erosion hazard on a burned forest in 
Oregon by seeding.  J. Range Manage. 28, 394-398. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Medium 
 
Barclay, A.D., Betancourt, J.L., Allen, C.D., 2004. Effects of seeding ryegrass 
(Lolium multiflorum) on vegetation recovery following fire in a ponderosa 
pine (Pinus ponderosa) forest. Int. J. Wildland Fire 13, 183-194. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Highest 
 
Becker, R., 2001. Effective aerial reseeding methods: Market search report. USDA 
Forest Service 5100 - Fire Management, 0151 1204 - San Dimas Technology 
& Development Center, San Dimas, CA. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest 
  
Beschta, R.L., Rhodes, J.J., Kauffman, J.B., Gresswell, R.E., Minshall, G.W., Karr, 
J.R., Perry D.A., Hauer F.R., Frissell C.A., 2003. Postfire management of 
forested public lands of the western United States. Conserv. Biol. 18, 957-967. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: High 
 
Beyers, J.L., 2004. Post-fire seeding for erosion control: effectiveness and impacts on 
native plant communities. Conserv. Biol. 18, 947-956. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: High 
 
Bruggink, J., 2007. Long term ecological changes with post-fire emergency seeding. 
In: Furniss, M., Clifton, C., Ronnenberg, K. (Eds.), Advancing the 
Fundamental Sciences: Proceedings of the Forest Service National Earth 
Sciences Conference, San Diego, CA, 18-22 October 2004. Gen. Tech. Rep. 
PNW-GTR-689. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific 
Northwest Research Station, Portland, OR, pp. 20-26.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Low 
 
 

 
 
38 
Buckley, K.J., Walterscheid, J., Loftin, S., Kuyumjian, G., 2002. Progress report on 
Los Alamos National Laboratory Cerro Grande fire rehabilitation activities 
one year after burned area rehabilitation. Los Alamos National Laboratory 
Report LA-UR-02-4921, Los Alamos, NM.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Low 
 
Buckley, K.J., Walterscheid, J., Loftin, S., Kuyumjian, G., 2003. Progress report on 
Los Alamos National Laboratory Cerro Grande fire rehabilitation activities: 
Status of burned area rehabilitation two years postfire. Los Alamos National 
Laboratory Report LA-UR-03-5196, Los Alamos, NM.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Low 
 
Callahan, K., Baker, B., 1997. Crystal burn analysis. Postfire succession and seeding 
monitoring: year three. Unpublished report on file at: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture,  Forst Service, Tahoe National Forest, CA. 23 p. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Low 
 
Christensen, M.D., Young, J.A., Evans, R.A., 1974. Control of annual grasses and 
revegetation in ponderosa pine woodlands. J. Range Manage. 27, 143-145.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Highest 
 
 
Clark, J.T, Kuyumjian, G.A., 2006. Landscape-scale postfire vegetative condition 
monitoring using multi-temporal landsat imagery on the Cerro Grande fire. 
Online at: http://www.fws.gov/fire/ifcc/esr/Library/Library.htm. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Medium 
 
Cline, G.G., Brooks, W.M., 1979. Effect of light seed and fertilizer application 
in  
 
steep landscapes with infertile soils after fire. Northern Region Soil, Air, 
Water Notes 72, 6 p.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Highest 
 
Conard, S.G., Regelbrugge, J.C., Wills, R.D., 1991. Preliminary effects of ryegrass 
seeding on postfire establishment of natural vegetation in two California 
ecosystems. Proceedings of the 11th conference on fire and forest 
meteorology. Society of American Foresters,Missoula Montana. 16-19.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Low 
 
Dellasala, D.A., Williams, J.E., Williams, C.D., Franklin, J.F., 2004. Beyond smoke 
and mirrors: A synthesis of fire policy and science. Conserv. Biol. 18, 976-
986.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest 
 
DeWolfe, V.G., Santi, P.M., Ey, J., Gartner, J.E., 2008. Effective mitigation of 
debris flows at Lemon Dam, La Plata County, Colorado. Geomorphology 96, 
366-377.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: High 
 

 
 
39 
Earles, T.A., Foster, P., Ey, J., Wright, K.R., 2005. Missionary Ridge wildfire 
rehabilitation. Proceedings of the 2005 Watershed Management 
Conference,Williamsburg,VA.1-14.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest 
 
Elliott, K.J., White, A.S., 1987. Competitive effects of various grasses and forbs on 
ponderosa pine seedlings. For. Sci. 33, 356-366. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Highest 
 
Field, D., 1991. Grass seeding for wildfire rehabilitation: Science and policy. M.S. 
Thesis. University of Montana.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Low 
 
GAO (General Accounting Office), 2003. Wildland fires: Better information needed 
on effectiveness of emergency stabilization and rehabilitation treatments. 
GAO-03-430. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest 
 
Griffin, J.R., 1982. Pine seedling, native ground cover and lolium multifolium on the 
Marble-Cone Burn, Santa Lucia Range, California. Madroño 29, 177-188. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Medium 
 
Griffith, R.W, 1998. Burned area emergency rehabilitation. Proceedings, Nineteenth 
Annual Forest Vegetation Management Conference: Wildfire Rehabilitation: 
January 20-22, 1998, Redding, CA. 4-7.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Low 
 
Groen, A.H., Woods, S.W., 2008. Effectiveness of aerial seeding and straw mulch 
for reducing post-wildfire erosion, north-western Montana, USA. Int. J. 
Wildland Fire 17, 559-571.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Highest 
 
Gross, E., Steinblums, I., Ralston, C., Jubas, H., 1989. Emergency watershed 
treatments on burned lands in southwestern Oregon. Proceedings of the 
Symposium on Fire and  
Watershed Management: October 26-28, 1988, 
Sacramento, California. Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-109. 109-114.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Low 
 
Habitats, A., 2006. Fire, watershed resources, and aquatic ecosystems. Fire 
inCalifornia's Ecosystems. University of California Press.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest 
 
Haire, S.L., McGarigal, K., 2008. Inhabitants of landscape scars: Succession of 
woody  plants after large, severe forest fires in Arizona and New Mexico. 
Southwestern Nat. 53, 146-161.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest 
 
 

 
 
40 
Hanes, R., Callahan, K., 1995. Crystal burn analysis: Summary of first monitoring. 
Unpublished Report on File at: US Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Tahoe National Forest, CA.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Low 
 
Hanes, R., Callahan, K., 1996. Crystal burn analysis. post-fire succession and 
seeding monitoring: Year two. Unpublished Report on File at: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Tahoe National Forest, CA.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Low 
 
Helvey, J.D., 1980. Effects of north central Washington wildfire on runoff and 
sediment production. J. Am. Water Resour. As. 16, 627-634.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Low 
 
Holzworth, L.K., Hunter, H.E., Winslow, S.R., 2003. Disturbed forestland 
revegetation effectiveness monitoring: Results of 30 years. 2003 National 
Meeting of the American Society of Mining and Reclamation and the 9th 
Billings Land Reclamation Symposium, Billings, MT, June 3-6.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: High 
 
Hughes, L.E., 2004. Ponderosa pine undergrowth restoration on the Arizona Strip. 
Rangelands 26, 23-27.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: High 
 
Hunter, M.E., 2004. Post-fire grass seeding for rehabilitation and erosion control: 
Implications for native plant recovery and exotic species establishment. 
Ph.D. Dissertation Colorado State University 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Highest 
 
Hunter, M.E., Omi, P.N., 2006. Response of native and exotic grasses to increased 
soil nitrogen and recovery in a postfire environment. Restor. Ecol. 14, 587-
594. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Highest 
 
Hunter, M.E., Omi, P.N., 2006. Seed supply of native and cultivated grasses in pine 
forests of the southwestern United States and the potential for vegetation 
recovery following wildfire. Plant Ecol. 183, 1-8.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: High 
 
Hunter, M.E., Omi, P.N., Martinson, E.J., Chong, G.W., 2006. Establishment of 
non-native plant species after wildfires: Effects of fuel treatments, abiotic 
and biotic factors, and post-fire grass seeding treatment.  Int. J. Wildland 
Fire 15, 271-281. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: High 
 
Johnson, M., Rew, L.J., Maxwell, B.D., Sutherland, S., 2006. The role of wildfire in 
the establishment and range expansion of nonnative plant species into natural 
areas. Bozeman, MT: Montana State University Center for Invasive Plant 
Management. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest 

 
 
41 
 
Keeley, J.E., 2004. Ecological impacts of wheat seeding after a Sierra Nevada 
wildfire. Int. J. Wildland Fire 13, 73-78. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Medium 
 
Keeley, J. E., Allen, C.D., Betancourt, J., Chong, G.W., Fotheringham, C.J., Safford, 
H.D., 2006. A 21st century perspective on postfire seeding. J. Forest. 104, 1-
2. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest 
 
Keeley, J.E., 2006. Fire management impacts on invasive plants in the western 
United States. Conserv. Biol. 20, 375-384.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: High 
 
Klock, G.O., Tiedemann, A.R., Lopushinsk, W., 1975. Seeding recommendations 
for disturbed mountain slopes in north central Washington. USDA Forest 
Service Research Note PNW-244 8 p.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest 
 
Korb, J. E., Johnson, N.C., Covington, W.W., 2004. Slash pile burning effects on 
soil biotic and chemical properties and plant establishment: 
Recommendations for amelioration.  Restor. Ecol. 12, 52-62.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Highest 
 
Kruse, R., Bend, E., Bierzychudek, P., 2004. Native plant regeneration and 
introduction of non-natives following post-fire rehabilitation with straw 
mulch and barley seeding. Forest Ecol. Manage. 196, 299-310. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Medium 
 
Kuenzi, A.M., 2006. Pre-fire treatment effects and understory plant community 
response on the  
Rodeo-Chediski fire, Arizona. M.S. Thesis Northern 
Arizona University.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: High 
 
Kuenzi, A.M., Fulé, P.Z., Sieg, C.H., 2008. Effects of fire severity and pre-fire stand 
treatment  
on plant community recovery after a large wildfire. Forest 
Ecol. Manage. 255, 855-865. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Medium 
 
Kunze, M.D., Stednick, J.D., 2006. Streamflow and suspended sediment yield 
following the 2000 Bobcat fire, Colorado. Hydrol. Process. 20, 1661-1681.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: High 
 
Law, D.J., Kolb, P.F., 2007. The effects of forest residual debris disposal on 
perennial grass emergence, growth, and survival in a ponderosa pine 
ecotone. Rangeland Ecol. Manage. 60, 632-643.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Highest 
 
 

 
 
42 
Leege, T., Godbolt, G., 1985. Herbaceous response following prescribed burning 
and seeding of elk range in Idaho. Northwest Sci. 59,134-143.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: High 
 
Loftin, S., Fletcher, R., Luehring, P., 1998. Disturbed area rehabilitation review 
report. Unpublished Report on File at: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Southwestern Region, Albuquerque, NM. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest 
 
Loftin, S.R., 2004. Post-fire seeding for hydrologic recovery. Southwest Hydrol. 3, 
26-27.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest 
 
Logar, R., 2006. Results of reseeding a fire impacted watershed in south central 
Montana. USDA NRCS Forestry Technical Note No. MT-28  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Low 
 
MacDonald, L.H, Robichaud, P.R., 2007. Postfire erosion and the effectiveness of 
  
emergency rehabilitation treatments over time. Joint Fire Science Project 
Final Report No. 03-2-3-22. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: High 
 
MacDonald, L.H., 1989. Rehabilitation and recovery following wildfires: A 
synthesis. In: Berg, Neil H., tech. coords. Proceedings of the symposium on 
fire and watershed management, October 26-28, 1988, Sacramento, 
California. Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-109. Berkeley, CA: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Forest and Range Experiment 
Station: 141-144.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest 
 
MacDonald, L.H., Larsen, I.J., 2009. Effects of forest fires and post-fire 
rehabilitation: A Colorado, USA case study. In Cerdà, A., Robichaud, P.R. 
(Eds.), Fire Effects on Soils and Restoration Strategies. Science Publishers, 
Enfield, NH, 589 p. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: High 
 
Maloney, P.C., Thornton, J.L., John L., 1995. Implementation and effectiveness 
monitoring of best management practices and soil and water protection 
measures within the Foothills fire salvage logging area 1992-1995. 
Unpublished Report on File at: U.S. Forest Service, Boise National Forest. 
51 p.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest 
 
 
Meyer, V., Redente, E., Barbarick, K., Brobst, R.. 2001. Biosolids applications 
affect runoff water quality following forest fire. J. Environ. Qual. 30, 1528-
1532.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Highest 
 

 
 
43 
Meyer, V., Redente, E., Barbarick, K., Brobst, R., Paschke, M., Miller, A., 2004. 
Plant and soil responses to biosolids application following forest fire. . J. 
Environ. Qual. 33, 799-804.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: High 
 
Miles, S.R., Haskins, D.M., Ranken, D.W., 1989. Emergency burn rehabilitation: 
Cost, risk, and effectiveness. In: Berg, Neil H., tech. coords. Proceedings of 
the symposium on fire and watershed management, October 26-28,1988, 
Sacramento,California. Gen.Tech. Rep. PSW-109. Berkeley, CA: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Forest and 
Range Experiment Station, 97-102.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Low 
 
Minard, A.E., 2003. Limiting damage to forest soils during restoration. Ecological 
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University: Working Paper 05, 5p. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest 
 
Monsen, S.B., Shaw, N.L., 2000. Development and use of plant resources for 
western wildlands. McArthur, E. Durant; Fairbanks, Daniel J., comps. 
Shrubland Ecosystem Genetics and Biodiversity: Proceedings. RMRS-P-21, 
13-15.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest 
 
Noss, R.F., Franklin, J.F., Baker, W.L., 2006. Ecology and management of fire-
prone forests of the western United States. Society for Conservation Biology 
Scientific Panel on Fire in Western US Forests.Society for Conservation 
Biology, North American Section, Arlington, Virginia. Online at: 
http://www.conbio.org/sections/namerica/napolicy.cfm.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest 
 
Orr, H.K., 1970. Runoff and erosion control by seeded and native vegetation on a 
forest burn: Black Hills, South Dakota. Research Paper RM-60. U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station, Fort Collins, CO.12 p.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest 
 
Pearson, H.A., Davis, J.R., Schubert, G.H., 1972. Effects of wildfire on timber and 
forage production in Arizona. J. Range Manage. 25, 250-253.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: High 
 
Peterson, D.W., Dodson, E.K., Harrod, R.J., 2007. Assessing the effectiveness of 
seeding and fertilization treatments for reducing erosion potential following 
severe wildfires. In: Butler, B.W., Cook, W. (Comps.), The fire environment 
– innovations, management, and policy; Conference proceedings 26-30 
March 2007, Destin, FL. Proceedings RMRS-P-46CD. U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, 
CO. 662p. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Highest 
 

 
 
44 
Ratliff, R.D., McDonald, P.M., 1987. Postfire grass and legume seeding: What to 
seed and potential impacts on reforestation. Proceedings, Ninth Annual 
Forest Vegetation Management Conference. November 3-5, 1987, Redding, 
California. 3-5.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest 
 
Regelbrugge, J.C., 1990. Effects of fire intensity, rock type and seeding on 
vegetation recovery following the 1987 Stanslaus Complex fires in 
California, USA. Bull. Ecol. Soc. Am.71, 297.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest 
 
Richards, R.T., Chambers, J.C., Ross, C., 1998. Use of native plants on federal lands: 
policy and practice. J. Range Manage. 51, 625-632. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest 
 
Robichaud, P.R., Brown, R.E., 2005. Postfire rehabilitation treatments: Are we 
learning what works? In: Moglen, Glenn E., Ed. Managing Watersheds for 
Human and Natural Impacts: Engineering, Ecological, and Economic 
Challenges: Proceedings of the 2005 Watershed Management Conference, 
July 19-22, 2005, Williamsburg, VA, 12 p.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest 
 
Robichaud, P.R., 2005. Measurement of post-fire hillslope erosion to evaluate and 
model rehabilitation treatment effectiveness and recovery. Int. J. Wildland 
Fire 14, 475-485.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest 
 
Robichaud,P., MacDonald, L., Freeouf, J., Neary, D., Martin, D., Ashmun, L., 2003. 
Postfire rehabilitation of the Hayman fire. USDA Forest Service  Gen Tech 
Rep RMRS-GTR-114, US Department of Agriculture Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, Colorado. 293-313. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest 
 
 
Robichaud, P.R., Beyers, J.L., Neary, D.G., 2000. Evaluating the effectiveness of 
post-fire rehabilitation treatments. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-63. U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, 
Fort Collins, CO. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: High 
 
Robichaud, P. R., T.R. Lillybridge, and J.W. Wagenbrenner. 2006. Effects of 
postfire seeding and fertilizing on hillslope erosion in north-central 
Washington, USA. Catena 67, 56-67.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Highest 
 
Robichaud, P.R., Elliot, W.J. 2006. Protection from erosion following wildfire. 
Report. Paper No. 068009. ASABE. MI, US. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest 
 

 
 
45 
Roby, K.B., 1989. Watershed response and recovery from the will fire: Ten years of 
observation. In Berg, N.H. (tech. coord.), Proceedings of the Symposium on 
Fire and Watershed Management, Sacramento, CA.  Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-
109.  U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Southwest 
Forest and Range Experiment Station, Berkeley, CA, pp. 131-136.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Medium 
 
Roche, C.T., Sheley, R.L., Korfhage, R.C., 2008. Native species replace introduced 
grass cultivars seeded following wildfire. Ecol. Restor. 26, 321-330.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Medium 
 
Rough, D., 2007. Effectiveness of rehabilitation treatments in reducing post-fire 
erosion after the Hayman and Schoonover fires, Colorado Front Range.  
M.S. Thesis Colorado State University. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Highest 
 
Ruby, E.C., 1989. Rationale for seeding grass on the Stanislaus Complex burnt. In: 
Berg, Neil H., tech. coords. Proceedings of the symposium on fire and 
watershed management, October 26-28,1988, Sacramento, California. Gen. 
Tech. Rep. PSW-109. Berkeley, CA: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Pacific Southwest Forest and Range Experiment Station, 125-130. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest 
 
Schoennagel, T., 1997. Native plant response to high intensity fire and seeding of 
non-native grasses in an Abies grandis forest on the Leavenworth district of 
the Wenatchee National Forest. M.S. Thesis Univeristy of Wisconsin-
Madison.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: High 
 
Schoennagel, T.L., Waller, D.M., 1999. Understory responses to fire and artificial 
seeding in an eastern Cascades Abies grandis forest, U.S.A. Can. J. Forest 
Res. 29, 1390-1401. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: High 
 
 
Sexton, T.O., 1998. Ecological effect of post-wildfire management activities 
(salvage-logging and grass-seeding) on vegetation composition, diversity, 
biomass, and growth and survival of Pinus ponderosa and Purshia 
tridentata. M.S. Thesis Oregon State University.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Highest 
 
Sirucek, D., 1987. The north hills fire-erosion event. Proceedings of XVIII 
International Erosion Control Conference, February 26-27, 1987, Reno, NV. 
199-202. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest 
 
Springer, J.D., 2007. Understory seeding in southwestern forests following wildfire 
and ecological restoration treatments. Northern Arizona University: Working 
Paper 19, 8p. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest 

 
 
46 
 
Springer, J.D., Waltz, A.E.M., Fulè, P.Z., Moore, M.M., Covington, W.W., 2001. 
Seeding versus natural regeneration: A comparison of vegetation change 
following thinning and burning in ponderosa pine. USDA Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Research Station 
  
Proceedings RMRS-P-22.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: High 
 
Stella, K.A., 2009. Effects and effectiveness of seeding following high-severity 
wildfires in northern Arizona ponderosa pine forests. M.S. Thesis. Northern 
Arizona University. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Highest 
 
Stewart, W.L., 1973. Emergency rehabilitation of watersheds denuded by wildfire in 
the ponderosa pine and douglas-fir zones of north-central Washington. M.S. 
Thesis. Washington State University.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Medium 
 
Story, M.T., Kracht, R., 1989. Memo: Emergency watershed stabilization, BMP 
implementation review storm creek fire. Unpublished Report on File at: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Gallatin National Forest, MT.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest 
 
Sullivan, J., Omi, P.N., Dyer, A.A., Gonzales-Caben, A., 1987. Evaluating the 
economics efficiency of wildfire rehabilitation treatments. West. J. Appl. 
For. 2, 58-61.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Low 
 
Tiedmann, A.R., Klock, G.O., 1973. First-year vegetation after fire, reseeding, and 
  
fertilization on the Entiat Experimental Forest. Research Note PNW-195, 23 
p.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: High 
 
U.S. Department of the Interior and U.S. Department of Agriculture. 
2006.Interagency Burn Area Emergency Response Guidebook. Interpretation 
of Department of the Interior 620 DM 3 and USDA Forest Service Manual 
2523. Version 4.0. February 2006. Washington, D.C. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest 
 
VanZuuk, K., 1997. Memo, Crystal Burn monitoring. Unpublished Report on File 
at: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Tahoe National Forest, 
Nevada City, CA.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest 
 
Wagenbrenner, J.W., MacDonald, L.H., Rough, D., 2006. Effectiveness of three 
post-fire rehabilitation treatments in the Colorado Front Range. Hydrol. 
Process. 20, 2989-3006.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: High 
 

 
 
47 
Weigel, T.J., 2007. Assessing post-fire reseeding potential using Bureau of Land 
Management criteria in northeastern Nevada: A spatial modelling appoarch. 
M.S. Thesis University of Nevada, Reno.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: Low 
 
Wolfson, B.A.S., Sieg, C.H., In Press. 40-year post fire seeding trends in Arizona and 
New Mexico. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, CO. 
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: High 
 
Woodsmith, R.D., Vache, K.B., McDonnell, J.J., Helvey, J.D., 2004. Entiat 
experimental forest: Catchment-scale runoff data before and after a 1970 
wildfire. Water Resour. Res. 40, 5p.  
 
Quality of Evidence Rating: High 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
48 
Appendix 2. Data extraction form 
 
Data Type 
Values 
Refworks ID 
# 
Reviewer 
Name 
Paper 
Authors, title of Publication, year 
Study location 
Place name 
Length of study 
dd/mm/yy-dd/mm/yy (year minimum) 
Fire 
Name(s) 
Fire acreage/hectares 
# 
Date of fire 
dd/mm/yy-dd/mm/yy (ignition to time of 
control) 
Fire severity 
High, moderate, low (where treatments 
occurred 
Plant community type 
Type name (e.g. Ponderosa pine, pinion-
juniper, chaparral, grassland, mixed-
conifer, etc.) 
Elevation (range) 
# 
Slope (range) 
% 
Aspect  
Degrees 
Precipitation 
Amount measured during study  
Hypothesis 
As stated by the author 
Major study design category 
Replicated randomized experiment, 
observational (multiple location case 
study), observational (single location case 
study), monitoring report with 
quantitative data, monitoring report with 
qualitative data, BACI, review paper, or 
expert opinion 
Experimental design 
Major design category used (e.g. BACI, 
stratified, etc.) 
Plot design 
Layout (number of plots, plot size, length 
apart, etc.) 
Number of replicated 
# 
Number of plots per replicate 
# 
Seeding treatment 
Method of delivery, location seeded, 
acres seeded, type of seed applied (e.g. 
native, non-native, perennial, annual, 
grass, forbs, shrubs, etc.) 
Seeding rate 
# per unit 
Species seeded 
Common and scientific 
Seeding treatment results 
Major results related to this study, as 
stated by author 
Additional Treatments 
Details and results 
Cost of treatment(s) 
$ (per unit if possible) 
Monitoring 
Yes, no (if yes, state methods) 
Overall conclusions 
As stated by author 
Expert opinion 
Additional opinions not based from data 
 
