 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.eri.nau/eri 
Lessons Learned from the 2011 Wallow Fire 
 
The fires we face today continue to be bigger and more severe than those that occurred historically. In the 
Southwest the situation is predicted to get worse. 
 
The size of unnatural crown fires has increased exponentially in the 
last 50 years. In the 1960s, a fire of several thousand acres was 
considered large. During the last two decades, fire size has in-
creased to 100s of thousands of acres in extent. The Wallow Fire 
was reported in both acres and square miles.  
Twenty years ago, logging was the biggest threat to the habitat of the Mexican 
Spotted Owl — in 2013, it is uncharacteristic crown fire. Estimates vary, but 
somewhere between 60 and 80 Mexican Spotted Owl PACs (Protected Activity 
Centers) are estimated to have been degraded or destroyed by the three major 
fires in Arizona in 2011. 
 
 
Fire behavior and heat generated by such “mega-fires” create fire-
fighting situations that are difficult to manage despite WUI treat-
ments. Treatments around the community of Greer could not prevent 
fire from destroying homes in the face of such an intense fire.  
 
 
 
 
 
      Fact Sheet: Lessons Learned from the Wallow Fire 
     
 
 
November 2013     
Lesson #1:  We need to act at the pace and scale of the 
problem NOW — or be prepared to bear the cost of fires at 
the scale of 100,000 acres and larger.  
Lesson #2:  Unnatural crown fire is destroying critical wildlife habitat such as old growth. The 
Wallow fire reinforces the conclusion of the Mexican Spotted Owl Recovery Plan that fire is 
the biggest threat to their long term survival.  
Lesson #3:  Towns are not fully protected by wildland-urban interface treatments alone.  
The Wallow Fire ignited May 29, 2011 and burned 
more than 538,000 acres, or 732 square miles, in 
eastern Arizona and western New Mexico. 
Photo by Aaron Maizlish 
Residents in Greer, Ariz., despite forest treat-
ments in the wildland-urban interface, lost 
homes, property and infrastructure due to the 
fire’s intensity.  

 
 
 
The ERI implemented a 150-acre treatment called Eagar 
South in cooperation with the White Mountain Steward-
ship Contract in the town of Eagar, Arizona, in the 
wildland-urban interface. Anecdotal accounts indicate that 
when the crown fire hit the treatment, the fire behavior 
changed and the fire dropped to the ground. However, the 
heat of the surrounding fire scorched vegetation within the 
treatment and will likely result in high tree mortality. The 
lesson? The treatment worked to change fire behavior but 
was insufficiently large to protect the trees. The answer? 
Fuel loads in the Southwest require immediate attention at 
the landscape scale. Contiguous treatments that are larger 
and implemented more quickly are crucial to reducing fire 
risk.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Continuous, unnatural fuel loads across the Mogollon Rim are cre-
ating stand-replacing fire conditions in all forest types. This is a 
critical problem in less common forest types such as both dry and 
wet mixed conifer. We need to experiment with treatments that will 
restore these systems and return fire to its natural role.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Based on analyses of recent mega-fires the full cost accounting for the Wallow Fire will approach $1 bil-
lion dollars. According to an analysis prepared by the Forest Guild, the average cost of treatment for the 
White Mountain Stewardship Contract is $538 per acre. We could have treated every acre in the fire pe-
rimeter at a total cost of $282,450,000 and saved ourselves $700 million! We would have saved even 
more if the wood was utilized and treatments were strategically placed to maximize effectiveness.  
 
   
 
Contact 
Diane Vosick, Diane.Vosick@nau.edu 
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
Lesson #5:  Comprehensive restoration requires action in mixed conifer forests. 
Lesson #4:  Small treatments embedded in an over-
stocked landscape won’t survive the kind of fire we 
are experiencing today. We need to implement treat-
ments that are large enough to make a difference.  
Lesson #6:  Mega-fires are expensive to suppress and astronomically expensive to society 
and the environment when all costs are calculated.  
Two burn areas — previously treated (top) and untreated 
(bottom) — from the Wallow Fire experienced drastically 
different fire intensities. Photos courtesy of the ERI 
A dry mixed-conifer forest in the Apache-Sitgreaves 
National Forests. Photo courtesy of the ERI 
