1666
Ecological Applications, 10(6), 2000, pp. 1666–1680
q 2000 by the Ecological Society of America
FIRE HISTORY AND VEGETATION PATTERN IN MESA VERDE
NATIONAL PARK, COLORADO, USA
M. LISA FLOYD,1 WILLIAM H. ROMME,2 AND DAVID D. HANNA1
1Environmental Studies Program, Prescott College, Prescott, Arizona 86301
2Biology Department, Fort Lewis College, Durango, Colorado 81301
Abstract.
Pin˜on–juniper woodlands (Pinus edulis, Juniperus osteosperma, and J. sco-
pulorum) and petran chaparral communities (Quercus gambelii, Amelanchier utahensis,
Cercocarpus montanus, and other tall shrub species) cover much of the Colorado Plateau
in the southwestern United States. Long-term ﬁre history and successional dynamics are
poorly understood in these vegetation types. Therefore, we lack a suitable historical context
for interpreting the ecological signiﬁcance of large ﬁres and dramatic vegetative changes
that have occurred recently in these ecosystems. For example, in Mesa Verde National
Park, located in southwestern Colorado, four large intense ﬁres in the last 50 years have
threatened signiﬁcant cultural and natural resources and have caused debate over whether
Mesa Verde’s ﬁre regime has been signiﬁcantly altered by human activities in the last
century.
In this study, we dated prehistoric ﬁres in shrublands dominated by Gambel oak (Quercus
gambelii) by aging stems that resprouted after ﬁre. We mapped the spatial extent of all
ﬁres .10 ha that occurred during the last 150 years within a 6600-ha, shrub-dominated
portion of Mesa Verde National Park. The turnover time (years required to burn an area
equal to the entire shrubland zone) was ;100 years under the ‘‘natural’’ ﬁre regime of the
mid- to late 19th century. Fire occurrence was reduced substantially during the ﬁrst half
of the 20th century, but the current ﬁre regime (since about 1950) appears to be similar to
that of the 19th century—despite a continuing policy of total ﬁre suppression.
The ‘‘natural’’ ﬁre turnover time in pin˜on–juniper woodlands of Mesa Verde is about
400 years. A sharp boundary exists between pin˜on–juniper woodlands at slightly lower
elevations in the southern portion of the park and petran chaparral at slightly higher ele-
vations in the north. This pattern is explained, in part, by more extensive ﬁres in the northern
area, which favor resprouting shrubs and eliminate the ﬁre-sensitive pin˜on and juniper. The
less frequent occurrence of large ﬁres, and resulting persistence of woodland in the southern
portion of the park, may be due in part to natural barriers to ﬁre spread (cliffs and sparsely
vegetated slopes) to the south and west of the pin˜on–juniper woodlands.
Our ﬁndings demonstrate that ﬁre frequency and extent in Mesa Verde during the last
50 years have not been greatly different from the ‘‘natural’’ ﬁre regime of the late 1800s.
Therefore, the recent large ﬁres in the park, and the vegetative responses to those ﬁres,
appear to be within the historic range of variation for this ecosystem.
Key words:
disturbance; ﬁre history; ﬁre interval; ﬁre turnover time; Mesa Verde National Park,
USA; petran chaparral; pin˜on–juniper woodlands; Quercus gambelii; vegetation pattern.
INTRODUCTION
Pin˜on–juniper woodlands and petran chaparral com-
munities cover thousands of square kilometers in the
northern portion of the Colorado Plateau in western
North America. The woodlands are dominated by Pinus
edulis, Juniperus osteosperma, and J. scopulorum. The
chaparral communities are shrublands that may be
dominated by Quercus gambelii, Amelanchier utah-
ensis, Cercocarpus montanus, or other tall shrub spe-
cies, depending on elevation, aspect, substrate, and
geographic area (Spence et al. 1995). This vegetation
provides forage, ﬁrewood, wildlife habitat, watershed
protection, and beauty within a generally semiarid re-
Manuscript received 4 January 1999; revised 5 August 1999;
accepted 16 August 1999; ﬁnal version received 5 November
1999.
gion. Yet, despite the ecological, aesthetic, and eco-
nomic importance of these plant communities, we know
very little about their disturbance history and succes-
sional dynamics, primarily because of limited research,
inadequate written records, and the fact that none of
the major woody species commonly form ﬁre scars.
Because we have so little data on prehistoric ﬁre
history and successional patterns in pin˜on–juniper
woodlands and petran chaparral communities, we lack
a suitable historical context for interpreting the eco-
logical signiﬁcance of recent large ﬁres and dramatic
vegetative changes in these ecosystems and for pre-
dicting and managing future disturbance events (Swet-
nam et al., 1999). This problem is especially acute in
national parks and other areas that are managed for
natural ecological processes and conditions. The pres-
ent study focuses on Mesa Verde National Park in

December 2000
1667
FIRE HISTORY IN MESA VERDE NATIONAL PARK
southwestern Colorado, which has experienced ﬁve
large (800–2000 ha), intense ﬁres since 1930, including
two in the last decade (Fig. 1). These ﬁres burned
through both pin˜on–juniper and chaparral vegetation
and were uncontrollable even with modern ﬁre-ﬁghting
technologies. They destroyed several irreplaceable cul-
tural resources, including an ancient rock art panel, and
threatened numerous other cultural features (Romme
et al. 1993, BAER 1996). Where chaparral was burned,
the vegetation has recovered rapidly. However, where
pin˜on–juniper woodlands burned, the trees have not
become reestablished, for reasons not yet understood.
Indeed, a survey of 30 randomly selected stands within
woodland areas that burned during the last 70 yr re-
vealed no pin˜on or juniper seedlings or saplings (Berry
and M. L. Floyd, unpublished data). Instead, these for-
mer woodlands are now dominated by shrub species
typical of petran chaparral. These recent ﬁres have
raised two key questions that can be answered only
from an historical perspective: (1) Are large, intense
ﬁres a part of the natural ﬁre regime in Mesa Verde,
or are they an unnatural result of human activities dur-
ing the 20th century, e.g., livestock grazing or ﬁre sup-
pression efforts? (2) Does the lack of tree regeneration
in recently burned pin˜on–juniper woodlands reﬂect just
a naturally slow rate of succession in this type of com-
munity, or is an unnatural conversion from woodland
to shrubland (petran chaparral) taking place?
There have been no detailed studies of prehistoric
ﬁre frequency and extent within pin˜on–juniper wood-
lands and petran chaparral communities on the Colo-
rado Plateau. However, we do know something about
ﬁre effects on the major species of these vegetation
types. Pinus edulis and the two Juniperus species are
very ﬁre sensitive and are easily killed even by low
intensity burns; reestablishment is solely by seed (Le-
opold 1924, Jameson 1966, Barney and Frischknecht
1974, Lloyd 1982, 1986, Fischer and Clayton 1983,
Everett and Ward 1984, Koniak 1985). Many of the
major shrub species, including Quercus gambelii, Ame-
lanchier utahensis, Symphoricarpos oreophilus, Fen-
dlera rupicola, and Rhus trilobata, resprout proliﬁcally
from roots, rhizomes, or lignotubers after ﬁre kills
aboveground portions of the plants (Brown 1958,
Wright et al. 1979, Kunzler and Harper 1980, Fischer
and Clayton 1983, Koniak 1985, Clary and Tiedemann
1986, Noste and Bushey 1987, Tiedemann et al. 1987).
Other shrub species usually are killed by ﬁre and re-
establish by seed, including Artemisia nova and Arte-
misia tridentata (Wright et al. 1979, Blaisdell et al.
1982, West and Hassan 1985). Purshia tridentata and
Cercocarpus montanus either may resprout or may be
killed by ﬁre and reestablish by seed (Rice 1983, Bun-
ting et al. 1985, Bradley et al. 1991).
Reconstructing long-term ﬁre history in petran chap-
arral and pin˜on–juniper woodland is challenging, be-
cause written ﬁre records generally are available only
for the last several decades, and the major species rarely
form ﬁre scars. In this study, we based our reconstruc-
tion of prehistoric ﬁre history in petran chaparral com-
munities on the current age structure of Gambel oak
(Quercus gambelii) that resprouted after past ﬁres. We
mapped stands of similar age and used this information
to estimate ﬁre turnover time—an approach similar to
that employed by Heinselman (1973) and others in bo-
real forests, but applied here to shrubland vegetation.
We also used age structure of pin˜on and juniper to
estimate the minimum time since ﬁre in woodland
stands, and 20th-century ﬁre records to estimate recent
turnover time for the pin˜on–juniper woodland type in
Mesa Verde. Although this analysis was speciﬁc to
Mesa Verde National Park, we suggest that the method
and the general results are applicable to many other
areas in the western USA where shrubland or woodland
is a major vegetation type and Quercus gambelii or
other long-lived, resprouting shrub species are present.
STUDY AREA
Mesa Verde National Park is located in the extreme
southwestern corner of Colorado, USA (Fig. 1). The
Park encompasses most of a prominent mesa, the top
of which gently slopes from 2060 m in the south to
;2485 m in the north. The cuesta is composed of Cre-
taceous sandstone and shale substrates (Grifﬁts 1990),
and its top consists of numerous north–south trending,
gently sloping ridgetops, separated by rugged canyons.
The south end of the cuesta drops abruptly into deep
canyons tributary to the Mancos River, while the north
end terminates in a steep, highly eroded escarpment.
Mean annual precipitation (1923–1994) is 47 cm, with
a prominent dry period in May and June and a wet
period in July and August. Annual growing season is
140–170 d (Oliverius 1996).
Pin˜on–juniper woodlands and petran chaparral are
the predominant vegetation types in the Park, although
a number of less common associations are found in
specialized habitats (Floyd-Hanna et al. 1994). The
most striking vegetation pattern is a relatively sharp
break between dense pin˜on–juniper woodlands in the
south end of the park, where elevation is slightly lower,
and extensive shrublands (chaparral) in the north end,
where elevation is slightly higher (Fig. 1). These two
areas have similar ﬂoristic composition, but very dif-
ferent physiognomy and relative species abundance,
i.e., chaparral may contain scattered pin˜on or juniper
trees, and many of the chaparral’s shrub species also
grow in the understory of the woodlands (Floyd-Hanna
et al. 1994). Erdman (1970), in a pioneering study of
postﬁre succession in Mesa Verde, hypothesized that
frequent ﬁres in the northern portion of the park pre-
vented development of mature pin˜on–juniper wood-
lands and maintained early successional shrub com-
munities. However, Erdman did not have sufﬁcient ﬁre
history data to test this hypothesis.
Since its establishment in 1906, the principal goal
in Mesa Verde National Park has been preservation of

1668
M. LISA FLOYD ET AL.
Ecological Applications
Vol. 10, No. 6
FIG. 1.
Mesa Verde National Park in southwestern Colorado, USA, showing the locations of major roads and large 20th-
century ﬁres within the Park boundaries. The dashed line depicts the approximate boundary between the two major vegetation
types in the Park: predominantly pin˜on–juniper woodlands at slightly lower elevations in the southern portion and predom-
inantly shrublands (petran chaparral) at slightly higher elevations in the northern portion. This boundary is shown as it existed
before the major ﬁres of the 20th century; woodland areas that burned in this century are now shrublands. The double-loop
road near the south end of the park is located on Chapin Mesa, near the ‘‘Glades’’ burn, the fuel reduction area in park
headquarters, and an old pin˜on–juniper stand that was sampled for age structure. The single-loop road to the west is on
Wetherill Mesa, near the second old pin˜on–juniper stand that was sampled for age structure.
archaeological and other cultural resources. Therefore,
the Park has a policy of complete ﬁre suppression
(Romme et al. 1993). Records of ﬁre occurrence have
been kept since 1926 (Omi and Emrick 1980; T. Oliv-
erius, unpublished data). From 1926 to 1977, the num-
ber of ﬁre starts per year ranged from 0 to 36, with an
average of eight ﬁres per year. Ninety percent of ﬁre
starts were caused by lightning, 10% by humans, and

December 2000
1669
FIRE HISTORY IN MESA VERDE NATIONAL PARK
90% of all ﬁres burned ,0.1 ha. Only 2% of the ﬁres
burned .4 ha, but these larger ﬁres (Fig. 1) have ac-
counted for .95% of the total area burned in the 20th
century (see Johnson 1992 and Moritz 1997 for similar
ﬁndings in other systems). All of the large ﬁres oc-
curred during the dry period of late June and early July,
except for the 1996 ﬁre which occurred in August, and
all occurred under conditions of high winds and pro-
longed drought. The large ﬁres all were lethal ﬁres that
burned through the crowns of trees and shrubs, and
killed all or most aboveground vegetation. Nonlethal
ﬁres, as reported in some other pin˜on–juniper systems
(e.g., Segura and Snook [1992] in Chihuahua, Mexico),
have been of very limited extent in this area and are
seen primarily on the margins of lethal ﬁres.
METHODS
Fire history in petran chaparral
Pilot studies.—The idea for dating prehistoric ﬁres
using current age structure of Gambel oak came from
our observations following a large ﬁre that occurred in
Mesa Verde in July of 1989 (Fig. 1). This high-intensity
ﬁre killed most of the aboveground biomass of the
shrubs, but the underground portions survived and re-
sprouted proliﬁcally in late summer of 1989 and spring
of 1990. By 1991, 2 yr after the ﬁre, there was no
signiﬁcant difference in shrub cover between burned
and unburned areas, although the resprouting shrubs
were not yet as tall as the unburned individuals (M. L.
Floyd, W. H. Romme, and D. D. Hanna, unpublished
data). We hypothesized that high-intensity ﬁres stim-
ulate a large cohort of similar-aged stems that remains
recognizable for many decades.
We tested this hypothesis by sampling age structure
of several shrub species in three areas known from
historical records to have burned intensely in 1972,
1959, and 1934, respectively. In 1992 we collected 125
cross sections at a height of ;20 cm from a selection
of stems representing different size classes and shrub
species in these three areas. Cross sections were taken
to the laboratory, sanded, and rings were counted under
a dissecting microscope. Each sample was aged by two
different people to verify the accuracy of the ring
counts. We did not formally cross-date the specimens,
but we looked for key signature drought periods to
detect possible false or missing rings and to ascertain
whether apparent rings in the wood were actually pro-
duced annually (Yamaguchi 1991).
Development of a stand age map.—The initial sam-
pling just described revealed that the largest oak stems
in a stand generally were also the oldest stems, and
that these oldest individuals represented the cohort of
stems that had sprouted following the last severe ﬁre
(see Results). Therefore, the next phase of our research
was to determine stand ages (the time since the last
severe ﬁre) throughout the petran chaparral vegetation
in Mesa Verde. A systematic grid of 330 sampling
points was laid out on the U.S. Geological Survey
(USGS) 7.5 min map series, starting along the western
park boundary and moving eastward to encompass all
of the shrub-dominated vegetation (6600 ha; Fig. 2).
Sample points on the map were 200 m apart in the east
to west direction, and 1000 m apart from south to north.
The reason for shorter distances between points in one
direction was because the ﬁres of the 20th century have
generally had longer north–south than east–west di-
mensions, and we suspected that prehistoric ﬁres had
similar shapes. From a statistical standpoint, a random
distribution of sample points is generally preferable to
a systematic sampling design in ﬁre history studies
(Johnson and Gutsell 1994), although either method
can produce unbiased sampling of the landscape
(Mueller-Dombois and Ellenberg 1974). We employed
the systematic grid because we were interested in map-
ping the approximate spatial patterns of past ﬁres, and
this was more efﬁciently done with a grid than with a
random distribution of points. Moreover, there were no
apparent regular patterns in the topography or vege-
tation that would produce systematic bias in a grid-
based sampling design.
Each point on the map was located in the ﬁeld,
whereupon the samplers moved to the closest clones
of Gambel oak in the vicinity. Because of natural var-
iability in oak distribution and abundance, it sometimes
was necessary to move as much as 100 m from the
point on the map to locate suitable oaks for sampling.
At two points, no oaks were present within 100 m, and
those points were skipped. Each actual sampling lo-
cation was marked on the topographic maps and dig-
itized to create a geographic information system (GIS)
layer. Most of the 328 sampled points contained suit-
able oak within a few meters, so the ﬁnal sampling grid
had a nearly regular structure. At each point, the sam-
plers collected one or two cross sections of represen-
tative stems from each of ;10 discrete clumps of oak,
for a total of 10–20 stem samples at each point. The
sampled stems were the largest, oldest appearing stems
in the centers of the clumps, and the cross sections
were taken as low as possible, usually at a height of
,20 cm. Cross sections were returned to the laboratory
and aged as described previously (see Pilot studies).
This sampling was conducted in 1993 and 1994.
We estimated stand age (time since the last severe,
stand-destroying ﬁre) from current age structure at each
sample point as follows. Because the postﬁre stem co-
hort may span several years immediately after a severe
ﬁre (see Results: Fire history in shrublands . . . ), it
was not possible to pinpoint exact years of past ﬁres
from the oak stem ages alone. To resolve this problem,
we assumed that extensive prehistoric ﬁres in Mesa
Verde occurred under the same kinds of weather con-
ditions in which all ﬁve extensive ﬁres of the 20th
century have occurred, viz., severe early summer
drought and high winds (Omi and Emrick 1980). Tree-
ring indices in this region are not strongly inﬂuenced

1670
M. LISA FLOYD ET AL.
Ecological Applications
Vol. 10, No. 6
FIG. 2.
Locations of sample points within a grid system established throughout the shrubland-dominated portion of Mesa
Verde National Park. Locations of major roads and of 20th century ﬁres also are shown.
by early summer drought or wind (Fritts et al. 1965),
and so are not reliable proxies of weather conditions
during the ﬁre season. However, we do have an exten-
sive, high-resolution ﬁre history data set from ﬁve pon-
derosa pine and mixed conifer stands located in the
western San Juan Mountains, all within 35 km of Mesa
Verde (W. H. Romme, H. Grissino-Mayer, M. L. Floyd,
and D. D. Hanna, unpublished data). We compiled the
years of ﬁre occurrence in these ﬁve stands and iden-
tiﬁed years when extensive ﬁres (i.e., .10% of recorder
trees scarred) were documented in two or more of the
ﬁve ponderosa pine and mixed conifer sites. We then
assumed that these years represented times when sum-
mer weather conditions were suitable for extensive ﬁres
to have occurred also in Mesa Verde. These interpre-
tations were supplemented by information on major ﬁre
years throughout the southwest (Swetnam and Baisan
1996) and from unpublished ﬁre history data from the
eastern San Juan Mountains (;100 km from Mesa
Verde; R. Wu, personal communication).
For each sampled stand within the Mesa Verde shrub-
land grid, we compared the dates of origin of the oldest
oak stems with the dates of major ﬁre years in the
region and identiﬁed the ﬁre year that had occurred
within 1–8 yr prior to the origin of its oldest stems.
Major ﬁre years sometimes occurred at such short in-
tervals, e.g., in 1842 and 1847, that it was impossible
to determine from oak ages alone which ﬁre had stim-
ulated the postﬁre stem cohort that we detected. There-
fore, we determined the decade in which each stand

December 2000
1671
FIRE HISTORY IN MESA VERDE NATIONAL PARK
had last burned, but did not attempt to say precisely in
which year the ﬁre occurred. This decadal scale of res-
olution was adequate for producing a stand age map
and calculating ﬁre turnover time (see Results: Fire
history in shrublands), but we did not map the actual
spatial extent of individual prehistoric ﬁres. In some
stands the oldest oak stems did not correspond with
any major ﬁre years in the region, and the history of
these stands was interpreted differently.
We emphasize that our focus in this study was on
detecting only the large, severe ﬁres that have occurred
in the past, i.e., the ﬁres that killed all aboveground
vegetation and stimulated a strong resprouting re-
sponse. We have undoubtedly overlooked many small
ﬁres and ﬁres that killed only a few plants. However,
we believe that this emphasis on large severe ﬁres is
justiﬁed by the fact that these disturbance events have
had the greatest inﬂuence on landscape structure and
ecosystem function, and they are also the focus of cur-
rent management concerns about disturbance in Mesa
Verde and elsewhere (Moritz 1997, Dale et al. 1998,
Foster et al. 1998).
Accuracy assessment.—To evaluate the accuracy of
our estimated ﬁre dates based on oak ages, we com-
pared the points that we identiﬁed as having burned in
the historically documented large ﬁres of 1934, 1959,
and 1972 with the perimeters of these ﬁres as recorded
in the Park’s GIS ﬁre atlas. The 1934 burn is the oldest
ﬁre documented in the Park’s historical records. We
overlaid our ﬁeld sampling grid with the ﬁre atlas to
identify the points that were expected to fall within
each historic burn. Then we compared this list of ex-
pected points with the ﬁre dates that we had developed
for each point on the basis of the age distribution of
dominant oak stems. Note that this was a ‘‘blind test’’:
we made all of our ﬁeld estimates of ﬁre date without
reference to the ﬁre atlas and then compared these es-
timates with the written documentation.
Fire history in pin˜on–juniper woodlands
We reconstructed ﬁre history and previous ﬁre re-
gimes in pin˜on–juniper woodlands by means of three
indirect approaches. Most of the pin˜on–juniper wood-
lands in Mesa Verde contain no apparent evidence of
past ﬁre, either in the form of ﬁre-scarred trees or
charred wood. One area where past ﬁre is evident is in
a portion of Chapin Mesa (Fig. 1), referred to locally
as ‘‘the Glades’’, where a relatively open stand of pin˜on
and juniper contains a prominent scattering of charred
standing snags. However, the ﬁre that created these
snags occurred prior to Park establishment in 1906, and
its actual date is unknown. Therefore, our ﬁrst approach
was to estimate the date of the ﬁre that created the
charred snags in the Glades area. We observed living
pin˜on and juniper trees growing directly underneath or
adjacent to many of the charred snags. These living
trees must have become established after the ﬁre, be-
cause both species are very ﬁre sensitive and a ﬁre that
killed a canopy tree would surely also kill any other
trees lying directly beneath or adjacent to that canopy
tree. We collected increment cores near the base of 60
pin˜on trees growing directly beneath charred snags,
counted their annual rings, and summarized the age
distribution of the sample. The oldest ages indicated
the minimum time that must have elapsed since the
ﬁre. We did not sample any of the trees growing .1
m from a charred snag, because such trees possibly
could be individuals that had survived the ﬁre.
Our second approach involved estimating the time
since ﬁre within other pin˜on–juniper stands that contain
no charred snags. Because all documented 20th-century
ﬁres in pin˜on–juniper woodlands have left juniper
snags, which decay slowly and remain standing for
many decades, we assumed that the last ﬁre within
dense pin˜on–juniper stands that lack snags must have
occurred prior to the ﬁre in the Glades area where
charred snags are still conspicuous. To estimate the
minimum amount of time that may have elapsed since
the last ﬁre, we sampled the age structure of two rep-
resentative stands and assumed that the last ﬁre oc-
curred prior to the dates of establishment of the oldest
extant trees. This assumption is reasonable given that
pin˜on and juniper are both very ﬁre sensitive. Also, as
in the shrubland component of our study, we focused
only on severe ﬁres that killed all or most of the above-
ground vegetation and did not attempt to document any
very small or low-intensity ﬁres that may have oc-
curred.
We sampled the age structure in two dense woodland
stands, one on Chapin Mesa and one on Wetherill Mesa
(Fig. 1), as follows. In 1995 and 1996 a fuel reduction
program was conducted in the Park headquarters area
on Chapin Mesa, in which a large number of mature
trees of all sizes were felled and removed to reduce
canopy continuity. Cross sections were obtained from
the bases of a sample of the felled trees. These sections
were sanded and aged by counting annual growth rings.
From this sample, we developed separate regressions
of stem age as a function of stem diameter for pin˜on
and for juniper. We then measured the diameters of all
stems within 225-m2 plots located in the two undis-
turbed woodland stands on Chapin and Wetherill Mesas
(six plots in each stand) and estimated the age structure
of these stands from the regression. Pin˜on ,1 m tall
were aged by counting whorls on the stem. Sample
sizes were 1086 at the Chapin site and 655 at the Weth-
erill site. The maximum ages of the trees in these stands
indicated the minimum time that may have elapsed
since the last stand-replacing ﬁre (though other, low-
severity disturbances may have occurred but are now
undetectable).
Our third approach to reconstructing ﬁre history in
pin˜on–juniper woodlands involved mapping the area
burned by 20th-century ﬁres. In the Park archives we
located a vegetation map made around 1950, showing
the distribution of woodland vs. shrubland at that time.

1672
M. LISA FLOYD ET AL.
Ecological Applications
Vol. 10, No. 6
FIG. 3.
Ages of large Quercus gambelii
stems growing in areas that burned at known
times during the 20th century (1972, 1959, and
1934) in Mesa Verde National Park. The large
ﬁres of 1989 and 1996 were not sampled.
We digitized this map and then with the GIS Idrisi
(Eastman 1992) overlaid the perimeters of the large
ﬁres of 1959, 1972, 1989, and 1996 (which burned in
both woodlands and shrublands) to determine how
much of the woodland vegetation has burned in the
latter half of the 20th century. We also estimated the
portion of the 1934 ﬁre that was woodland at the time
of the ﬁre, by making a ﬁeld survey of the area and
mapping the locations where juniper snags are still con-
spicuous among the shrubs that now dominate all of
the burned area; we assumed that places where the
snags are absent today were already shrubland in 1934.
From this information, we estimated turnover time dur-
ing the 20th century for the pin˜on–juniper woodlands.
RESULTS
Fire history in shrublands of Mesa Verde
Of all the shrub species tested, only Gambel oak
produced clear annual rings and had ages that corre-
sponded to historically documented ﬁres. We also de-
termined from this pilot sample that the oldest oak
stems were usually found within the larger size classes;
hence a sample of large stems was more likely to in-
clude the oldest individuals in a stand than a purely
random sample of all size classes. Fig. 3 shows the age
distribution of 94 oak stems collected from areas
burned by each of three historically documented ﬁres.
In all of these historic burns, we found a prominent
cohort of stems dating from one or a few years after
the known ﬁre date (Fig. 3). However, the results also
showed a spread of stem ages, especially in the oldest
(1934) burn, indicating continued recruitment of stems
for several years after the ﬁre. A few stems also ap-
peared to have survived the ﬁre, as they were substan-
tially older than all of the others, but these relict in-
dividuals were uncommon. We therefore concluded that
we could detect past ﬁres in stands containing oak and
could determine the decade, though not the precise
year, in which the ﬁre had occurred.
The earliest, clearly recognizable postﬁre oak co-
horts that we detected within our extensive sampling
grid were from the 1840s. Fires undoubtedly occurred
in Mesa Verde prior to 1840, but the postﬁre cohort
either is no longer recognizable in older stands or they
have been reburned by later ﬁres. We also detected
extensive ﬁres in the 1860s and 1870s (Fig. 4). After
1880, there were no large ﬁres in Mesa Verde until the
historically documented ﬁre in 1934. This lack of large
ﬁres around the turn of the 20th century was substan-
tiated both by our dendrochronological data and by
Park superintendents’ annual reports and local news-
papers (Mancos Times in Mancos, Colorado, and Mon-
tezuma Journal in Cortez, Colorado) which did not
report any ﬁres during this period.
We were able to determine the decade of the last
stand-destroying ﬁre in 257 of our 328 sampled stands.
The remaining stands that lacked a recognizable post-
ﬁre cohort were classiﬁed in one of two ways:
1) Thirty-ﬁve stands contained no recognizable post-
ﬁre cohort, but they did contain one or more very old
stems (115–.200 yr). We interpreted these stands as
having burned so long ago that the original postﬁre
cohort was no longer recognizable, i.e., most of the
postﬁre sprouts had died and been replaced by younger
stems through the continual stem recruitment process
that characterizes these long-lived clonal plants. Be-
cause the oldest, distinct postﬁre cohorts that we could
identify were from the 1840s, we assumed that all of
the old stands that lacked a recognizable postﬁre cohort
had last burned at some time earlier than the 1840s.

December 2000
1673
FIRE HISTORY IN MESA VERDE NATIONAL PARK
FIG. 4.
Stand age map (approximate date of last severe, stand-destroying ﬁre) for the petran chaparral vegetation in Mesa
Verde National Park in 1998.
We could not determine a precise stand age for these
old stands, but treated them as .150 yr old in our
statistical analyses.
2) Seventy-one stands had no recognizable postﬁre
cohort and no old stems. It was not possible to assign
a year or decade of the last stand-destroying ﬁre to
these stands, nor could we conﬁdently determine
whether they had last burned prior to 1840 (but all of
the oldest stems had died), or had last burned in the
late 1800s (but the postﬁre cohort had been lost to
browsing, disease, or local low-intensity ﬁres). These
stands were designated as ‘‘unknown’’ and were not
used in computing ﬁre history statistics.
Fig. 5 shows the cumulative time-since-ﬁre curve

1674
M. LISA FLOYD ET AL.
Ecological Applications
Vol. 10, No. 6
FIG. 5.
Cumulative time-since-ﬁre distri-
bution for petran chaparral stands in Mesa Verde
National Park. The last point (between 1840 and
1820 on the horizontal axis) represents the pro-
portion of stands that last burned at an unde-
termined date prior to 1840. Regression equa-
tion for 1840–1890 5 137 2 0.8(time), R2 5
0.92, n 5 6. Regression equation for 1940–1990
5 103 2 0.9(time), R2 5 0.87, n 5 6.
for the 257 points in which the decade of the last stand-
destroying ﬁre could be determined (including pre-
1840). Dramatic changes in slope indicate a change in
ﬁre frequency or extent (Johnson and Gutsell 1994),
and Fig. 5 reveals three distinctive periods of ﬁre his-
tory. First is the late 19th century (1840s–1890s),
where the curve drops steeply, indicating relatively fre-
quent and/or extensive ﬁres. The line shown in the
ﬁgure was ﬁt to these six points by a least squares
regression. The second period is the early 20th century
(1890s-1940s), where the slope of the line (not shown)
is close to zero, indicating little ﬁre activity. Indeed,
during this period there was only one extensive ﬁre in
Mesa Verde, the 1934 ﬁre. The third period is the late
20th century (1940s–1990s), where the line again be-
comes steep, reﬂecting the extensive ﬁres of 1959,
1972, 1989, and 1996. The slope of the line during this
late 20th century period is steeper than the slope of the
line during the late 19th century. However, because our
estimates of ﬁre size for the prehistoric period are prob-
ably underestimates, the actual frequencies and extents
of ﬁres during these two periods may be more similar
than they appear in the ﬁgure.
Accuracy assessment.—Most of the points that fell
within the perimeters of historically documented burns
were also correctly dated to the appropriate ﬁre year
on the basis of oak age distributions (Table 1). How-
ever, there were two kinds of classiﬁcation errors. The
ﬁrst kind involved points that we dated to a particular
burn but which were not included within that burn in
the ﬁre atlas. For example, we determined from our
oak age samples that 36 points had burned in 1934,
but 4 of these were located outside the ﬁre perimeter
shown in the atlas (Table 1). However, all such stands
were adjacent to the mapped ﬁre perimeter, and this
kind of error probably reﬂects only minor errors in
mapping boundaries in the ﬁre atlas.
The second kind of error involved points contained
within a ﬁre perimeter according to the atlas, but in
which we did not detect the ﬁre in our oak age data.
We classiﬁed most such points as unknown ﬁre date
because they contained no clearly recognizable postﬁre
cohort (Table 1). The main reason for this kind of error
probably is related to the fact that the large ﬁres of the
20th century all created a mosaic of varying ﬁre se-
verity, whereas the ﬁre atlas contains only the broad
perimeters of historic burns, with no distinction be-
tween severely burned (stand-destroying) and lightly
burned areas. Light burns apparently kill many of the
oak stems in a stand, partially removing the previous
postﬁre cohort (hence most of our points that failed to
detect a historically documented ﬁre were classiﬁed as
unknown ﬁre date, Table 1), but do not kill enough of
the older stems to initiate a clearly detectable new post-
ﬁre cohort.
We had more points representing the second kind of
error than the ﬁrst, i.e., more points failed to detect a
ﬁre within its documented perimeter than detected a
ﬁre outside its documented perimeter (Table 1). In our
ﬁre history analyses, we used the ﬁre perimeters from
the park’s ﬁre atlas for ﬁres of the 20th century (1934,
1959, 1972, 1989, 1996), even for points in which the
ﬁre was not apparent from current oak ages. However,
our estimates of the spatial extent of ﬁres in the 1800s
are based solely on oak ages. Therefore, we probably
have underestimated the area burned in those prehis-
toric ﬁres. Note, however, that most of our points lo-
cated within documented 20th century ﬁre perimeters
did accurately detect those ﬁres, so our estimates of
19th century ﬁre extent are reasonably accurate.
Fire history in pin˜on–juniper woodlands
Ages of pin˜on trees growing under or adjacent to
charred standing snags in the Glades burn area ranged

December 2000
1675
FIRE HISTORY IN MESA VERDE NATIONAL PARK
TABLE 1.
Accuracy assessment of ﬁre dates identiﬁed in petran chaparral vegetation in Mesa Verde National Park, Colorado,
USA.
Fire
year
Accuracy category
Number
of points
Details of the
misclassiﬁed ﬁeld samples
1934
Identiﬁed in ﬁeld samples and in the ﬁre atlas
32
…
1934
Identiﬁed in ﬁeld samples but not in the ﬁre
atlas
4
All located adjacent to the
mapped ﬁre perimeter
1934
Identiﬁed in the ﬁre atlas but not in ﬁeld
samples
9
Field samples classiﬁed as
unknown (6 points), pre-1840
(2 points), and 1860s (1 point)
1959
Identiﬁed in ﬁeld samples and in the ﬁre atlas
13
…
1959
Identiﬁed in ﬁeld samples but not in the ﬁre
atlas
4
All located adjacent to the
mapped ﬁre perimeter
1959
Identiﬁed in the ﬁre atlas but not in ﬁeld
samples
6
Field samples classiﬁed as
unknown (3 points), pre-1840
(2 points), and 1870s (1 point)
1972
Identiﬁed in ﬁeld samples and in the ﬁre atlas
10
…
1972
Identiﬁed in ﬁeld samples but not in the ﬁre
atlas
1
Point located adjacent to the
mapped ﬁre perimeter
1972
Identiﬁed in the ﬁre atlas but not in ﬁeld
samples
5
Field samples classiﬁed as
unknown (3 points) and
pre-1840 (2 points)
Notes: The ﬁre atlas is a GIS-based set of ﬁre perimeters that were estimated visually (in the earliest ﬁres) or recorded
with a global positioning system. Large ﬁres also occurred in 1989 and 1996, but we did not attempt to date or map these
recent ﬁres with ﬁeld samples.
from 41 to 266 yr old at coring height (20–50 cm).
Therefore, the severe prehistoric ﬁre that created these
prominent charred snags must have occurred at least
270 yr ago, i.e., in the 1720s or earlier (see M. L. Floyd,
M. Colyer, D. D. Hanna, and W. H. Romme, unpub-
lished manuscript for more details).
The best ﬁt regressions between tree age and basal
diameter at breast height (dbh) from the fuel-reduction
samples collected on Chapin Mesa, were as follows:
pin˜on, age 5 44.2 1 7.2(dbh), r2 5 0.61, standard error
of beta (slope) 5 0.51, F 5 220.0, P , 0.05; Utah
juniper, age 5 125.3 1 12.7(dbh) 2 0.08(dbh)2, r2 5
0.37, standard error 5 6.2 (ﬁrst-order slope) and 0.7
(second-order slope), F 5 19.8, P , 0.05.
The oldest pin˜on trees in the fuel reduction samples,
as determined by counting rings on cross sections, were
;380 yr old, and the oldest junipers were ;500 yr old.
The age distribution of trees sampled in the two ex-
tensive undisturbed stands on Chapin and Wetherill
Mesas, as estimated from the age/dbh regressions, ex-
hibited a negative exponential decrease in density as
tree age increased, suggesting a more or less stable age
class structure (see M. L. Floyd, M. Colyer, D. D. Han-
na, and W. H. Romme, unpublished manuscript for de-
tails). The oldest pin˜ons in these two stands, with basal
diameters of 50 cm, were estimated from the regression
to be .400 yr old. The oldest junipers, with basal di-
ameters of 90 cm, were estimated to be .600 yr old.
Although these data do not allow us to pinpoint the
date of the last stand-destroying ﬁre, they do indicate
that much of the pin˜on–juniper woodland has not been
subjected to a severe ﬁre for many centuries—perhaps
for .600 yr.
From our digitized version of the vegetation map
made around 1950, we determined with the GIS that
woodland (mostly pin˜on and juniper) covered 10 960
ha within the Park. There was an additional 393 ha of
woodland prior to the 1934 ﬁres, and ﬁres since 1950
have burned a total of 1336 ha of woodland (Table 2).
All of the woodland that burned in the 20th century is
now dominated by shrubs and herbs, with little or no
conifer reestablishment. Because there were no exten-
sive ﬁres in Mesa Verde between the 1880s and 1934,
we assumed that the amount of woodland that existed
just prior to the 1934 ﬁre was also about the amount
that existed at the turn of the century.
DISCUSSION
A method for determining prehistoric ﬁre history in
petran chaparral
We were able to successfully reconstruct prehistoric
ﬁre history in a type of vegetation where ﬁre history
research has been difﬁcult because of the lack of ﬁre-
scarred trees or long-term written records. The dating
of postﬁre oak stem cohorts permits detection of past
ﬁres up to ;150 yr ago, with a temporal resolution of
about a decade. While more precise ﬁre dates would
be desirable, this resolution is useful for many purposes
of interpretation and management of the vegetation of
Mesa Verde and similar areas. The method probably
could be applied in other areas of the Colorado Plateau
where Gambel oak is common, although it would not
be suitable in regions where annual cessation of growth
does not occur (Keeley 1993). It may be applicable
also in vegetation types dominated by other shrub spe-
cies, following initial testing of shrub ages in areas of
known ﬁre history.
It is important to stress that the oak populations we
sampled, especially the older ones, were not strictly

1676
M. LISA FLOYD ET AL.
Ecological Applications
Vol. 10, No. 6
TABLE 2.
Total area of woodland (mostly pin˜on and juniper)
in Mesa Verde National Park, and amount of woodland
burned in 20th century ﬁres. Woodlands burned in this
century have been converted to shrublands.
Year
Area
burned (ha)
Woodland area
remaining
after ﬁre (ha)
pre-1934
1934
1951
1959
1972
1989
1996
…
393
11
35
459
90
741
10 563
10 170
10 159
10 124
9 665
9 575
8 834
Note: Information was derived from a vegetation map made
around 1950 plus the ﬁre atlas and ﬁeld surveys (available
in archive ﬁres, Mesa Verde National Park Research Center).
even aged (see also Keeley 1992). At most of the sam-
ple points there were many small stems as well as the
largest stems, and it was only the latter that we sampled
to detect the date of the last ﬁre. Among the large stems
were many that had sprouted many years or decades
after the last major ﬁre. Thus, Gambel oak in Mesa
Verde apparently recruit new stems more or less con-
tinuously, in a manner similar to many shrub species
in southern California chaparral (Keeley 1993). Despite
the continual mortality and recruitment of stems in
these populations, however, a prominent cohort of sim-
ilar-aged stems is produced via sprouting after ﬁres
intense enough to kill all of the aboveground vegeta-
tion. This postﬁre cohort persists and can be detected
for as long as 150 yr after the ﬁre, even though younger
age classes also are present.
Fire turnover times in petran chaparral and pin˜on–
juniper woodlands
Johnson and Gutsell (1994) recommend ﬁtting cu-
mulative time-since-ﬁre data of the kind we present in
Fig. 5 to a statistical model such as the Weibull dis-
tribution, from which useful ﬁre history parameters can
be computed. However, when we attempted to ﬁt the
data in Fig. 5 to the Weibull distribution, using the
program ‘‘Best Fit’’ (Palisade, 1994), we obtained a
very poor ﬁt because of the large proportion of points
that had not burned since before 1840. In fact, our Mesa
Verde time-since-ﬁre data did not ﬁt any of the statis-
tical distributions provided by ‘‘Best Fit’’. Therefore,
rather than deriving parameters from a poorly ﬁt model,
we estimated the time required to burn an area equal
to the entire shrubland or woodland zone within the
Park on the basis of a simple statistical interpretation
of the raw data, as follows.
Petran chaparral.—It can be seen from Fig. 5 that
approximately half of the petran chaparral has burned
during the last 50 yr. If this rate of burning continues,
it will take ;100 yr for an area equal to the entire
petran chaparral zone to burn (i.e., turnover time). The
slope of the curve in Fig. 5 is comparable for the late
20th and late 19th-century periods, so the turnover time
for the ﬁre regime of the late 19th century also was
about a century. However, during the ﬁrst half of the
20th century, there was only one large ﬁre, which
burned ;25% of the shrubland zone—giving a turnover
time of ;200 yr.
Pin˜on–juniper woodlands.—In the last half-century
(1949–1999), 1336 ha of woodland have burned out of
10 170 ha that existed in 1949, i.e., 13% in 50 yr (Table
2). At this rate, ;400 yr would be required to burn an
area equal to the area of woodland in 1949. However,
from 1899 to 1949, only ;4% of the woodland area
burned (in the one large ﬁre in 1934), giving a turnover
time for this period of 1200 yr.
Synthesis and interpretation.—The late 19th century
period shown in Fig. 5 may represent a more or less
‘‘natural’’ ﬁre regime in Mesa Verde. The indigenous
Ute people are known to have done some intentional
burning in the general region, but their speciﬁc uses of
ﬁre are poorly understood, and we have no direct ev-
idence that they had a signﬁcant inﬂuence on overall
ﬁre regimes (Callaway et al. 1986, Duke 1995, Ellis
1996; M. Colyer, personal communications regarding
interviews with long-time residents of the nearby Man-
cos Valley). Even if the Utes did ignite some ﬁres, the
high frequency of lightning ignitions in Mesa Verde
and the strong relationship between weather conditions
and ﬁre size during the recent period of accurate ﬁre
records (Omi and Emrick 1980) suggest that lightning
ignitions alone may be sufﬁcient to account for the
extensive ﬁres of the late 19th century. Therefore, we
conclude that our best estimates for ‘‘natural’’ ﬁre turn-
over times in Mesa Verde are ;100 yr for shrubland
vegetation and ;400 yr for pin˜on–juniper woodland
vegetation.
The much longer ﬁre turnover time in both major
vegetation types during the early 20th century may
have resulted in part from two European inﬂuences.
First, livestock grazing, which began in the 1870s in
southwestern Colorado (Dishman 1982), may have re-
moved ﬁne herbaceous fuels that formerly promoted
ﬁre spread (Swetnam and Baisan 1996). Reports and
photos from the period 1906–1935 in the Park archives
indicate that, by the early 20th century, cattle were
numerous in the Park and heavy grazing was occurring
in at least some areas. The second important inﬂuence
may have been active ﬁre detection and suppression
following Park establishment in 1906. However, the
generally moist conditions that prevailed throughout
the southwest during the early 20th century (Swetnam
and Betancourt 1998) also probably contributed to the
lack of large ﬁres during this period. In fact, climatic
conditions may be the principal reason for reduced ﬁre
occurrence in the early 20th century: ﬁre-ﬁghting ca-
pabilities at that time were very limited, and the recent
large ﬁres in Mesa Verde have spread mainly through
the crowns of trees and shrubs rather than through her-
baceous fuels.

December 2000
1677
FIRE HISTORY IN MESA VERDE NATIONAL PARK
During the last 50 yr, the ﬁre regime has again shifted
to something much like that of the late 1800s (Fig. 5).
Although the Park still has a policy of complete ﬁre
exclusion, it has not been successful in preventing ex-
tensive ﬁres during the second half of the 20th century.
As shown in Fig. 5, the ﬁre history of this current half-
century has not been much different from the ﬁre his-
tory of the late 19th century, when there was no ﬁre
suppression at all. There may be two reasons for the
dramatic increase in ﬁre activity during the last 50 yr.
First, livestock grazing was phased out in the Park from
the teens through the early 1930s (Park records), and
subsequent plant growth may have produced fuel mass
and continuity sufﬁcient to carry the large ﬁres of the
late 20th century. Second, and perhaps more impor-
tantly, there have been several summers during this last
half-century in which ignitions occurred under severe
ﬁre weather conditions, when it was impossible to con-
trol the ﬁres even with modern ﬁre-ﬁghting technology
(Omi and Emrick 1980).
Fire turnover times and vegetation pattern
Our ﬁndings support Erdman’s (1970) hypothesis
that the relatively sharp transition between woodland
and shrubland in Mesa Verde results in part from more
frequent ﬁres in the the shrubland zone. Recurrent ﬁre
favors the clonal, resprouting shrub species and grad-
ually eliminates the ﬁre-sensitive pin˜on and juniper.
Dense pin˜on–juniper woodlands apparently are not ex-
cluded by microclimate, soils, or biotic factors within
the petran chaparral zone, because one can ﬁnd small
patches of woodland within the shrubland matrix. How-
ever, these patches are rare. Fishbein et al. (1995) sim-
ilarly hypothesized that recurrent ﬁres maintained
meadows and chaparral on sites that are climatically
suitable for forest in the Sierra de los Ajos Mountains
of northern Mexico.
Why are ﬁre turnover times so much shorter in the
shrublands than in the pin˜on–juniper woodlands of
Mesa Verde? Lightning ignitions actually are more fre-
quent in the woodlands than in the shrublands (Omi
and Emrick 1980). However, most ﬁres, regardless of
where they start, extinguish naturally before burning
more than an individual tree or several square meters
of ground. The large ﬁres observed in the 20th century
generally have started in pin˜on–juniper woodlands then
spread into the shrublands.
We suggest two possible reasons for the shorter ﬁre
turnover time in shrublands as compared with wood-
lands in Mesa Verde. First, there are differences in the
fuel complexes of the two vegetation types (Bruner and
Klebenow 1979, Floyd-Hanna et al. 1996; D. D. Hanna,
W. H. Romme, M. L. Floyd, and T. Zimmerman, un-
published manuscript). Even though pin˜on–juniper
woodlands have very heavy fuel loads, capable of tre-
mendous heat release under certain weather conditions,
the horizontal continuity of fuels in this vegetation type
is low. Fine fuels and herbaceous cover are generally
sparse, and there are many patches of rock or bare soil
up to several meters in width, containing little or no
fuel, interspersed between the comparably sized patch-
es of thick trees, brush, and heavy downed woody ma-
terial (Omi and Emrick 1980; D. D. Hanna, W. H. Rom-
me, M. L. Floyd, and T. Zimmerman, unpublished man-
uscript). Thus ﬁres in pin˜on–juniper woodlands tend
to be limited to individual patches of fuel and fail to
spread over a large area except under conditions of
extreme drought and sustained high winds—conditions
that allow the ﬁre to spread through the tree crowns
(Bruner and Klebenow 1979, Omi and Emrick 1980).
In contrast, the shrublands contain dense patches of
shrubs, underlain by leaf litter, and the spaces between
the shrub patches are ﬁlled with forbs and grasses that
create a nearly continuous, light fuel layer. Heat release
in the shrublands generally is lower than in the pin˜on–
juniper woodlands (D. D. Hanna, W. H. Romme, M.
L. Floyd, and T. Zimmerman, unpublished manuscript),
but extensive ﬁre spread can occur under dry conditions
without the requirement of high wind.
The second reason is related to the landscape posi-
tion of the two vegetation types in Mesa Verde. The
woodlands are largely restricted to the southern portion
of the top of the cuesta, with cliffs and sparsely veg-
etated slopes to the south and west. Fires that started
to the west and south would be unlikely to spread into
the woodlands because the cliffs create barriers to ﬁre
spread, and ﬁres ignited to the north or east would not
tend to move into the woodlands against the prevailing
winds. Thus, only ﬁres that started within the woodland
itself would be likely to burn the woodland, and then
only under high wind conditions. In contrast, the shrub-
lands are located in the higher northern and eastern
portions of the cuesta, with natural ﬁre barriers only
on the north. Hence, ﬁres starting almost anywhere on
the cuesta (especially in the southern or western por-
tions) could spread over a large portion of the shrub-
lands. The importance of natural barriers to ﬁre spread
is further suggested by our observation that many of
the small patches of pin˜on–juniper woodland within
the extensive shrubland portion of Mesa Verde are lo-
cated just north or east of a small cliff or steep south-
facing slope having little vegetative cover.
Management implications
We return now to the two management-related ques-
tions posed in the Introduction. First, are the large,
intense ﬁres experienced during the last half-century
within the historic ﬁre regime for Mesa Verde, or are
they an anomalous result of recent human activities?
Our ﬁndings indicate that extensive lethal ﬁres did in-
deed occur in this area prior to Park establishment in
1906, and that during the ‘‘natural’’ reference period
of the late 1800s the ﬁre turnover time was ;100 yr
in shrubland and ;400 yr in woodland vegetation.
Therefore, the large ﬁres of the late 20th century should
not be regarded as unprecedented catastrophes, but as

1678
M. LISA FLOYD ET AL.
Ecological Applications
Vol. 10, No. 6
events falling within the historic range of variability
that reﬂect a key ecological process within petran chap-
arral and pin˜on–juniper woodland vegetation. Fire fre-
quency and extent during the last half-century actually
appear similar to what occurred during the 19th-century
reference period (Fig. 5) when a ‘‘natural’’ ﬁre regime
prevailed. A combination of suppression, grazing, and
wet weather may have reduced overall ﬁre frequency
during the ﬁrst half of the 20th century. However, ﬁre
suppression during the middle to late 20th century ap-
pears to have been effective mainly in putting out ﬁres
that would have been small anyway; recent suppression
apparently has not effectively reduced the sizes or fre-
quencies of large ﬁres—the ﬁres that account for most
of the area burned each century. Johnson (1992) and
Moritz (1997) found similar patterns in boreal forest
and in southern California, respectively.
Given a lack of effective ﬁre control capability under
the weather conditions that favor large ﬁres, and a ﬁre
turnover time of ;100 yr in chaparral and 400 yr in
woodlands, managers can expect additional large ﬁres
in coming years. Sensitive cultural resources located
in the shrubland areas have a higher probability of be-
ing burned in the near future than do resources located
in the woodlands. However, when the woodlands do
burn, they may burn at very high intensity (D. Hanna,
W. H. Romme, M. L. Floyd, and T. Zimmerman, un-
published manuscript), so sensitive resources in forest
areas are at risk of ﬁre damage as well (Romme et al.
1993).
The second question posed in the Introduction is
whether the lack of conifer regeneration in recently
burned pin˜on–juniper woodlands reﬂects just a natu-
rally slow rate of succession in this type of community
or a conversion from woodland to shrubland (BAER
1996). We suspect that succession is merely slow, be-
cause the frequency, extent, and severity of ﬁres do not
appear to be signiﬁcantly different from the 19th-cen-
tury reference period. Unfortunately, ﬁre history data
alone cannot answer this question, so additional re-
search is needed. Nevertheless, our ﬁndings do have
relevance to the issue of manager-ignited prescribed
burning. Although intentional burning is a valuable
management tool in other kinds of vegetation (e.g.,
ponderosa pine—Covington et al. 1997), and may be
appropriate on a limited scale for fuel reduction around
buildings and other high-value cultural resources in
Mesa Verde, we believe that broad-scale prescribed
burning is inappropriate in the petran chaparral and
pin˜on–juniper woodland vegetation of Mesa Verde.
First, we ﬁnd no evidence that ecological structure or
function have been signiﬁcantly altered by past ﬁre
suppression in this system. On the contrary, the ﬁre
regime of the last half century has been not much dif-
ferent from the ‘‘natural’’ ﬁre regime of the late 1800s
(Fig. 5). Second, although shrubland vegetation recov-
ers quickly from ﬁre, the lack of prompt recovery of
burned woodland vegetation calls for a better under-
standing of successional processes before we increase
the frequency, extent, or kinds of disturbance. Finally,
at least some of the pin˜on–juniper woodlands in Mesa
Verde are ancient stands that apparently have not been
subjected to any severe disturbance since pre-Puebloan
people abandoned the region around 1300 AD. These
ancient woodlands, among the oldest in the Four Cor-
ners region, contain distinctive structural characteris-
tics and a suite of species that are of conservation sig-
niﬁcance in their current condition (M. L. Floyd, M.
Colyer, D. D. Hanna, and W. H. Romme, unpublished
manuscript).
We emphasize that the pin˜on–juniper woodlands of
Mesa Verde are fundamentally different in some re-
spects from other pin˜on–juniper woodlands elsewhere
in
the
American
southwest.
Therefore, managers
should not uncritically apply ﬁre management or res-
toration techniques being developed in these other ar-
eas to the ecosystems of Mesa Verde. For example, in
Bandelier National Monument in northern New Mex-
ico, pin˜on and juniper have increased in density and
encroached into former grasslands during the 20th cen-
tury (C. Allen, personal communication). Previously,
periodic surface ﬁres killed the trees and maintained a
savanna-like system; therefore, current restoration ef-
forts involve tree thinning and prescribed burning. In
pin˜on–juniper woodlands of Mesa Verde, however, we
believe that low-severity surface ﬁres were never ex-
tensive. They have not been observed in the 20th cen-
tury, except around the margins of crown ﬁres, and we
have not seen any ﬁre-scarred trees within the wood-
land zone of the Park—even among 100–200-yr-old
ponderosa pine and Douglas-ﬁr trees that can be found
occasionally on moist microsites and are excellent re-
corders of low-severity surface ﬁres. Moreover, we be-
lieve that tree densities have not increased substantially
in Mesa Verde during the 20th century, nor has en-
croachment into formerly nonwoodland vegetation oc-
curred extensively. Most woodland stands contain
many very old individuals, with no obvious pulses of
accelerated recruitment during the last century (M. L.
Floyd, M. Colyer, D. D. Hanna, and W. H. Romme,
unpublished manuscript). Although early photographs
of the vegetation in Mesa Verde are rare, the few we
have located indicate comparable woodland densities
to what we see today. Two photos from the 1930s depict
a stand-destroying crown ﬁre that occurred at some
unspeciﬁed time prior to Park establishment in 1906,
a scene much like what we see after recent ﬁres in the
woodland zone. These photos indicate that severe
crown ﬁres were occurring in the 19th century and are
not an anomaly of the late 20th century. It appears,
therefore, that Mesa Verde has long been characterized
by a crown ﬁre regime dominated by infrequent but
large, high-severity ﬁres—more similar to boreal and
high-elevation forest ecosystems than to many other
low-elevation forests and woodlands in the American
southwest. Woodlands and shrublands elsewhere in the

December 2000
1679
FIRE HISTORY IN MESA VERDE NATIONAL PARK
northern Colorado Plateau may have a natural ﬁre re-
gime similar to that in Mesa Verde, but additional re-
search is needed to verify this hypothesis. Mesa Verde’s
distinctive, and perhaps unusual, ﬁre regime should be
acknowledged in ﬁre management policies.
The ﬁre history research presented here has helped
to provide a long-term, historical context for inter-
preting and managing the effects of recent large ﬁres
within two important vegetation types for which such
information was previously lacking. Additional re-
search can further improve managers’ ability to deal
with future ﬁres and their potential effects on natural
resources in Mesa Verde National Park.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This project was funded in part by the Fire Initiative Grant
MEVE-R-91-0160, Rocky Mountain Region of the National
Park Service and in part by Prescott College, Prescott, Ari-
zona. We wish to thank the staff at Mesa Verde National Park,
especially Steve Budd-Jack, Howard Dimont, Marilyn Colyer,
Allan Loy, and Linda Towle for their support throughout this
project. We also acknowledge Dr. Bob Schiller of the National
Park Service, who provided initial support and encouraged
us to pursue this research. This work was accomplished with
the ﬁeld assistance of Lana Jo Chapin, Billy Koons, Marc
Clausen, Sue Simone, David Lund, Chris Bergh, Kerstin Al-
icki, Taylor McKinnon, Ginger Bigsby, and many Prescott
College students. Craig Allen, Brian Jacobs, David Parsons,
and two anonymous reviewers reviewed an earlier draft of
the manuscript. We thank Marilyn Colyer, Albert Spencer,
Craig Allen, and Brian Jacobs for insightful discussions and
observations on the vegetation ecology of Mesa Verde.
LITERATURE CITED
BAER. 1996. Burned area emergency rehabilitation plan for
the Chapin #5 ﬁre in Mesa Verde National Park. Unpub-
lished report available from Mesa Verde National Park,
Colorado, USA.
Barney, M. A., and N. C. Frischknecht. 1974. Vegetation
changes following ﬁre in the pinyon–juniper type of west-
central Utah. Journal of Range Management 27:91–96.
Blaisdell, J. P., R. B. Murray, and E. D. McArthur. 1982.
Managing
intermountain
rangelands—sagebrush–grass
ranges. USDA Forest Service General Technical Report
INT-134.
Bradley, A. F., N. V. Noste, and W. C. Fischer. 1991. Fire
ecology of forests and woodlands in Utah. USDA Forest
Service General Technical Report INT-287.
Brown, H. F. 1958. Gambel oak in west-central Colorado.
Ecology 39:317–327.
Bruner, A. D., and D. A. Klebenow. 1979. Predicting success
of prescribed ﬁres in pinyon–juniper woodland in Nevada.
USDA Forest Service Research Paper INT-219.
Bunting, S. C., L. F. Neuenschwander, and G. E. Gruell. 1985.
Fire ecology of antelope bitterbrush in the northern Rocky
Mountains. Pages 48–57 in J. E. Lotan and J. K. Brown,
(compilers). Fire’s effects on wildlife habitat—symposium
proceedings. USDA Forest Service General Technical Re-
port INT-186.
Callaway, D., J. Janetski, and O. C. Stewart. 1986. Ute. Pages
336–367 in W. L. D’Azevedo, editor.Handbook of North
American Indians. Volume 11. Great Basin. Smithsonian
Institution, Washington, D.C., USA.
Clary, W. P., and A. R. Tiedemann. 1986. Distribution of
biomass within small tree and shrub form Quercus gambelii
stands. Forest Science 32:234–242.
Covington, W. W., P. Z. Fule, M. M. Moore, S. C. Hart, T.
E. Kolb, J. N. Mast, S. S. Sackett, and M. R. Wagner. 1997.
Restoring ecosystem health in ponderosa pine forests of
the southwest. Journal of Forestry 95:23–29.
Dale, V. H., A. E. Lugo, J. A. MacMahon, and S. T. A. Pickett.
1998. Ecosystem management in the context of large, in-
frequent disturbances. Ecosystems 1:546–557.
Dishman, L. 1982. Ranching and farming in the lower Do-
lores River Valley. Pages 23–41 in G. D. Kendrick, editor.
The river of sorrows: the history of the lower Dolores River
valley. U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Ser-
vice and Bureau of Reclamation, U.S. Government Printing
Ofﬁce, Denver, Colorado, USA.
Duke, P. 1995. Working through theoretical tensions in con-
temporary archaeology: a practical attempt from south-
western Colorado. Journal of Archaeological Method and
Theory 2:201–229.
Eastman, J. R. 1992. Idrisi user’s guide. Clark Labs for Car-
tographic Technology and Geographic Analysis, Clark Uni-
versity, Worcester, Massachusetts, USA.
Ellis, R. N. 1996. The Utes. Pages 225–233 in R. Blair, editor.
The western San Juan Mountains: their geology, ecology,
and human history. University Press of Colorado, Niwot,
Colorado, USA.
Erdman, J. A. 1970. Pin˜on–juniper succession after natural
ﬁres on residual soils of Mesa Verde, Colorado. Brigham
Young University Science Bulletin Biological Series. Vol-
ume XI.
Everett, R. L., and K. Ward. 1984. Early plant succession on
pinyon–juniper controlled burns. Northwest Science 58:
57–68.
Fischer, W. C., and B. D. Clayton. 1983. Fire ecology of
Montana forest habitat types east of the Continental Divide.
USDA Forest Service General Technical Report INT-141.
Fishbein, M., R. Felger, and F. Garza. 1995. Another jewel
in the crown: a report on the ﬂora of the Sierra de los Ajos,
Sonora, Mexico. Pages 126–134 in L. F. DeBano, G. J.
Gottfried, R. H. Hamre, C. B. Edminster, P. F. Ffolliott, and
A. Ortega-Rubio, technical coordinators. Biodiversity and
management of the Madrean archipelago: the sky islands
of southwestern United States and northwestern Mexico.
USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RM-GTR-
264.
Floyd, M. E. 1982. Interaction of pin˜on pine and Quercus
gambelii in succession near Dolores, Colorado. South-
western Naturalist 27:143–147.
Floyd, M. E. 1986. Inter and intra speciﬁc variations in pin˜on
pine reproduction. Botanical Gazette 147:180–188.
Floyd-Hanna, M. L., W. H. Romme, and D. D. Hanna. 1994.
Vegetation of Mesa Verde National Park. Unpublished re-
port on ﬁle at Mesa Verde National Park, Colorado, USA.
Floyd-Hanna, L., A. W. Spencer, and W. H. Romme. 1996.
Biotic communities of the semiarid foothills and valleys.
Pages 143–158 in R. Blair, editor. The western San Juan
Mountains: their geology, ecology, and human history. Uni-
versity Press of Colorado, Niwot, Colorado, USA.
Foster, D. R., D. H. Knight, and J. F. Franklin. 1998. Land-
scape patterns and legacies resulting from large, infrequent
forest disturbances. Ecosystems 1:497–510.
Fritts, H. C., D. G. Smith, and M. A. Stokes. 1965. The
biological model for paleoclimatic interpretation of Mesa
Verde tree-ring series. American Antiquity 31:101–121.
Grifﬁts, M. O. 1990. Guide to the geology of Mesa Verde
National Park. Mesa Verde Museum Association, Lorraine
Press, Utah, USA.
Heinselman, M. L. 1973. Fire in the boreal forests of the
Boundary Waters Canoe Area. Quaternary Research 3:329–
382.
Jameson, D. A. 1966. Juniper control by individual tree burn-
ing. USDA Forest Service Research Note RM-71.
Johnson, E. A. 1992. Fire and vegetation dynamics: studies

1680
M. LISA FLOYD ET AL.
Ecological Applications
Vol. 10, No. 6
from the North American boreal forest. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge, UK.
Johnson, E. A., and S. L. Gutsell. 1994. Fire frequency mod-
els, methods and interpretations. Advances in Ecological
Research 25:239–287.
Keeley, J. E. 1992. Recruitment of seedlings and vegetative
sprouts in unburned chaparral. Ecology 73:1194–1208.
Keeley, J. E. 1993. Utility of growth rings in the age deter-
mination of chaparral shrubs. Madron˜o 40:1–14.
Koniak, S. 1985. Succession in pinyon–juniper woodlands
following wildﬁre in the Great Basin. Great Basin Natu-
ralist 45:556–566.
Kunzler, L. M., and K. T. Harper. 1980. Recovery of Gambel
oak after ﬁre in central Utah. Great Basin Naturalist 40:
127–130.
Leopold, A. 1924. Grass, brush, timber, and ﬁre in southern
Arizona. Journal of Forestry 22:1–10.
Moritz, M. A. 1997. Analyzing extreme disturbance events:
ﬁre in Los Padres National Forest. Ecological Applications
7:1252–1262.
Mueller–Dombois, D., and H. Ellenberg. 1974. Aims and
methods in vegetation ecology. John Wiley & Sons, New
York, New York, USA.
Noste, N. V., and C. L. Bushey. 1987. Fire response of shrubs
of dry forest habitat types in Montana and Idaho. USDA
Forest Service General Technical Report INT-239.
Oliverius, T. 1996. Fire management plan. On ﬁle at Mesa
Verde National Park, Colorado, USA.
Omi, P., and L. Emrick. 1980. Fire and resource management
in Mesa Verde National Park. Contract CS-1200-9-B015.
Unpublished report on ﬁle at Mesa Verde National Park,
Colorado, USA.
Palisade. 1996. BestFit probability distribution ﬁtting for
Windows: user’s guide. Palisade, Newﬁeld, New Jersey,
USA.
Rice, C. L. 1983. A literature review of the ﬁre relationships
of antelope bitterbrush. Pages 256–265 in A. R. Tiedemann
and K. L. Johnson, editors. Proceedings—research and
management of bitterbrush and cliffrose in western North
America. USDA Forest Service General Technical Report
INT-152.
Romme, W. H., L. Floyd-Hanna, and M. Conner. 1993. Ef-
fects of ﬁre on cultural resources at Mesa Verde National
Park. Park Science 13:28–30.
Segura, G., and L. C. Snook. 1992. Stand dynamics and
regeneration patterns of a pin˜on pine forest in east central
Mexico. Forest Ecology and Management 47:175–194.
Spence, J. R., W. H. Romme, L. Floyd-Hanna, and P. G.
Rowlands. 1995. A preliminary vegetation classiﬁcation
for the Colorado Plateau. Pages 193–213 in C. van Riper
III, editor. Proceedings for the second biennial conference
on research in Colorado Plateau National Parks. National
Park Service Transactions and Proceedings Series NPS/
NRNAU/NRTP-95/11.
Swetnam, T. W., C. D. Allen, and J. L. Betancourt. 1999.
Applied historical ecology: using the past to manage for
the future. Ecological Applications 9:1189–1206.
Swetnam, T. W., and C. H. Baisan. 1996. Historical ﬁre re-
gime patterns in the southwestern United States since AD
1700. Pages 11–32 in C. D. Allen, editor. 1996 Fire effects
in southwestern forests: proceedings of the second La Mesa
ﬁre symposium, Los Alamos, 1994 USDA Forest Service
General Technical Report RM-GTR-286.
Swetnam, T. W., and J. L. Betancourt. 1998. Mesoscale dis-
turbance and ecological response to decadal climatic var-
iability in the American southwest. Journal of Climate 11:
3128–3147.
Tiedemann, A. R., W. P. Clary, and R. J. Barbour. 1987.
Underground systems of Gambel oak (Quercus gambelii)
in central Utah. American Journal of Botany 74:1065–
1071.
West, N. E., and M. A. Hassan. 1985. Recovery of sagebrush–
grass vegetation following wildﬁre. Journal of Range Man-
agement 38:131–134.
Wright, H. A., L. F. Neuenschwander, and C. M. Carlton.
1979. The role and use of ﬁre in the sagebrush and pin˜on–
juniper plant communities. USDA Forest Service General
Technical Report INT-58.
Yamaguchi, D. K. 1991. A simple method for cross-dating
increment cores from living trees. Canadian Journal of For-
est Research 21:414–416.
