nau.edu/eri
Strategic Plan 2015-2020
Strategic Plan 2015-2020
Strategic Plan 2015-2020
January 2015

2
3
Introduction
5     Vision
5     Mission
6
Strategic Plan 2015–2020
7
Goal  One: Developing Science
7
Objectives for 2015–2020
7
Past Accomplishments
8    Goal  Two: Science Delivery
8
Objectives for 2015–2020
8
Past Accomplishments 
10    Goal Tree: Restoration Funding
10
Objectives for 2015–2020
10
Past Accomplishments
11     Goal Four: Meeting ABOR Goals
11
Objectives for 2015–2020
11
Past Accomplishments
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.
Table of
    Contents

3
Introduction
The Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI) at Northern Arizona Univer­
sity (NAU) is nationally and internationally recognized for expertise and 
leadership in science-based forest restoration and fire. The ERI is a mission 
driven research program bridging the gap between research and applica­
tion. When fires burn catastrophically, the resulting economic and natural 
resource damage cascades through all sectors of society. The consequences 
are both immediate and long-term — challenging the very well-being of 
rural communities, water supplies, and the recreational assets on which rural 
communities and economies depend. The ERI mobilizes the unique abilities 
of the university to research, translate, transfer, and apply solutions to this 
critical problem facing the West. 
ERI faculty, staff, and students possess the diverse skills that are necessary to 
tackle all facets of the forest health problem. For example, faculty, undergrad­
uate, and graduate students conduct field work, primary research, and moni­
toring to test forest restoration approaches. ERI research staff and affiliated 
faculty design research in order to provide emerging, best available science 
to land management professionals and key stakeholders. Finally, professional 
staff translate and transfer new knowledge using communication tools and 
services targeted to strategic audiences. 
Schultz Fire on the San Francisco Peaks north 
of Flagstaff in 2010. Photo by Brady Smith, 
Coconino National Forest, USDA Forest Service
Post-fire flooding from the Schultz Fire. 
Photo courtesy of the ERI

4
The ERI is authorized by the United States Congress 
Congress authorized the ERI in 2004 to be one of three ecological in  stitutes (referred 
to as the Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes, or SWERI) serving the South-
west. In 2005, the ERI and its sister institutes were chartered by the Western Governors’ 
Association. In 2009–2010, the Meridian Institute conducted a congressionally mandated 
third-party review of the Institutes to determine if they were meeting the purposes of their 
enabling legislation. Referring to the ERI, the report states that “no other existing entity 
has the capacity or mandate to carry out landscape-scale forest restoration.” Individuals 
interviewed for the report expressed accolades for the work of the ERI. According to one 
individual, “it is impossible to have a conversation with any U.S. Forest Service employee 
about restoration without some reference to ERI’s work.”  Te opportunity to see diﬀerent 
prescriptions tested by ERI (including the changes in ecological and resource conditions 
over time), is widely perceived by interviewees as one of the most tangible contributions of 
the ERI. Several interviewees cited ERI’s wealth of useful publications as “an outstanding 
resource for forestry professionals everywhere.” 
In addition to federal appropriations, the ERI receives: NAU base funding, state Technol-
ogy, Research and Innovation Funding (TRIF) appropriations, federal project dollars, and 
various competitive grants. In 2014, the ERI received funding from the Salt River Project 
(SRP) and the 2015 NFL Super Bowl Host Committee to study hydrologic responses to 
forest thinning. 

5
The ERI contributes to achieving the 
goals established by the Arizona Board 
of Regents (ABOR)
Te ERI contributes to goals established for 
NAU by ABOR in their 2014–2018 Stra-
tegic Plan in the areas of educational excel-
lence, research excellence, and workforce 
and community. When it comes to providing 
science support for restoring the ecologic and 
economic health of forested landscapes and solv-
ing the mega-ﬁre crisis, the research and service of 
ERI and NAU are unique among the three Arizona 
universities. Te ERI is recognized by the state legislature, 
local and county governments, and businesses as a bright example 
of exceptional university performance in service to the citizens of Arizona. 
Vision
Te Ecological Restoration Institute will provide science-based services that directly 
contribute to the comprehensive restoration and conservation of forested and woodland 
landscapes in the West.
Mission
Te ERI will serve as an objective leader in primary and secondary ecological and social 
science, scholarship, information transfer, collaborative eﬀorts, policy analysis, and work-
force education to support landscape-scale restoration of forests and woodlands in 
the West.
E
univer
local and cou
f
ti
l
i
it
f
State TRIF
State
Sponsored
Federal
56%
19%
18%
7%
ERI Supports Watershed Restoration Research
ERI  in partnership with NAU’s School of Earth Sciences 
and Environmental Sustainability, the Salt River Project 
(SRP), and others has been developing critical research 
in watersheds to support watershed restoration, resiliency, 
and function.

6
Before Restoration
After Restoration
Strategic Plan
2015–2020
Te last 15 years of restoration and research demonstrate that science-based treatments 
in ponderosa pine forests are achieving ecological restoration goals while simultaneously 
reducing the risk of unnatural wildﬁre to communities. However, restoration is in a race 
against time and the anticipated eﬀects of climate change. 
More research is needed in previously understudied forest types to identify appropri-
ate restoration approaches in a changing climate. Post-ﬁre rehabilitation will require new 
management actions in response to hotter conditions. To be successful, more research and 
application is needed at the landscape scale to conﬁgure treatments to reduce the probabil-
ity of mega-ﬁre and to identify monitoring frameworks that will detect change and enable 
adaptive management. From the human dimension angle the ERI, in partnership with aﬃl-
iated faculty, will continue to analyze the economics of restoration, public attitudes, and 
facilitate innovative policy approaches to accelerate restoration. 
Te 2015–2020 Strategic Plan has four goals that build from the ERI core strengths of 
ecological and social science, land management agency experience, and science translation 
and transfer capacity. However, the ERI will be ﬂexible in order to shift direction when 
changing circumstances demand a new focus on emerging discoveries and critical audiences 
to accomplish landscape scale forest restoration.  

7
Objectives for 2015–2020
•  Conduct research to address critical knowledge gaps in restoration of western forest ecosystems.
•  Conduct research to address long-term restoration needs of post-ﬁre landscapes.
•  Compile and synthesize existing research using systematic reviews, literature reviews, and other 
methods to answer management questions.
•  Contribute to the understanding and implementation of landscape-scale assessments and monitor-
ing methods and goals. 
•  Conduct rapid assessments (RAPs) designed to understand the natural range of variability at proposed 
treatment locations in order to inform environmental review documents and prescription design. 
•  Monitor watershed and other natural resource responses to landscape-scale restoration.
•  Analyze market and nonmarket economic consequences of restoration and ﬁre.
•  Examine and report on the inﬂuence of laws and policy towards achieving landscape-scale restoration.
Past Accomplishments
•  Implementation and re-measurement of ten Long-term Ecological Assessment and Restoration 
Network (LEARN) sites throughout the West. LEARN allows researchers and land managers to 
compare the eﬀects of forest restoration treatments on all aspects of ecosystem dynamics across a 
variety of forest types from pinyon-juniper and ponderosa pine to warm-dry mixed conifer. 
•  Establishment of the ﬁrst landscape-scale ecological restoration project at Mount Trumbull on the 
Arizona Strip. Tis research, which began in 1995 in partnership with the Arizona Game and Fish 
Department and Bureau of Land Management, measured wildlife responses to restoration treat-
ments. Te results were instrumental to building support for restoration among wildlife professionals 
and interested citizens. 
•  In 2013, the ERI in cooperation with Dr. Yeon-Su Kim, produced “Te eﬃcacy of hazardous fuel 
treatments: A rapid assessment of the economic and ecologic consequences of alternative hazardous 
fuel treatments: A document for policy makers.” Te results were presented during a Congressional 
Hearing, to the Oﬃce of Management and Budget and to the Congressional Research Service. Te 
ﬁndings were instrumental in compelling the Oﬃce of Management and Budget to restore funding 
for restoration treatments. 
•  More than 350 articles published in peer-reviewed journals.
Te ERI will contribute to the body of ecological and social 
science required to advance restoration of western forests and 
woodlands.
Goal One

8
Objectives for 2015–2020
•  Interpret scientiﬁc ﬁndings for speciﬁc audiences including land managers, citizens, 
businesses, and policy makers using publications, presentations, workshops, social 
media, websites, and one-on-one consultation.
•  Test emerging communication tools with key audiences.
•  Expand outreach to include underserved populations, including Native American tribes.
Past Accomplishments 
•  Te ERI has produced 32 Working Papers that are designed to provide interpretation 
and guidance for using best available science; 66 Fact Sheets with short synopses of 
scientiﬁc papers and their management outcomes; and 20 White Papers exploring the 
intersection of policy, economics, and the human dimensions of restoration. 
•  Each year, the ERI presents scientiﬁc information at workshops, on ﬁeld trips, and 
in other forums designed to educate diverse audiences. On average, the ERI provides 
more than two dozen ﬁeld trips and presentations.
Te ERI will seek to improve the quality of science-based 
ecological restoration treatments through the translation and 
transfer of best available science to key audiences.
Goal Two
•  ERI completed “Te Eﬃcacy of Hazardous Fuel Treatments” for the U.S. 
Department of Interior, Oﬃce of Wildland Fire. Te study determined 
the ecological and economic eﬀectiveness of forest restoration treatments.
•  ERI published “A Full Cost Accounting of the 2010 Schultz Fire” in 
partnership with the NAU W.A. Franke College of Business’ Rural 
Policy Institute and Coconino County. Te study was a sobering anal-
ysis of the full cost of ﬁre and post-ﬁre ﬂooding, and how the cost 
impacts the public and private sectors.
ERI Publishes Groundbreaking Economic Analyses

9
ERI Gives Students the Tools They Need to Succeed
Working as an Undergraduate Research Assistant for the Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI) was 
definitely one of the highlights of my college experience. To this day, I get excited about dendrochronology 
samples in museums and universities. I worked two full field seasons and about four years in the dendro 
lab, which gave me invaluable experience and helped me get a position on the Fire Effects Crew at 
Grand Canyon National Park. I earned my Bachelor of Science degree in Forestry in 2013 with two 
certificates: Ecological Restoration and Wildland Fire Ecology and Management. My interests in 
fire ecology and restoration were fostered by my work with ERI and Grand Canyon National Park. 
I completed a senior research project on the effects of jackstrawing burned aspen stands to protect 
aspen regeneration, and after college went on to work in primary firefighting/prescribed burning 
positions in North Carolina and Grand Teton National Park. Next summer I hope to work on an 
engine in western Montana and return to graduate school within two years to continue studying 
forest restoration and fire ecology.
—Katelynn Jenkins, Wildland Firefighter and Ecologist
NAU School of Forestry grad and former ERI student Katelynn Jenkins has since worked with The Nature Conservancy in North 
Carolina using her knowledge of fire ecology to help restore longleaf pine forests. Photo courtesy of Katelynn Jenkins

10
	
It is impossible to have a conversation with any U.S. Forest 	
Service employee about restoration without some reference 
to ERI’s work.”– SWERI 5-Year Assessment Report by the Meridian Institute, 
U.S. Institute for Environmental Conflict Resolution, and USDA Forest Service 
Southwestern Region   
The ERI will help identify, experiment with, and facilitate 
novel approaches for funding landscape-scale restoration.
Objectives for 2015–2020
•  Facilitate the development of novel funding approaches to pay for ecological restoration.
•  Provide assistance and guidance for exploring methods for the utilization of biomass.
•  Facilitate landscape-scale assessments and restoration beyond the borders of 
National Forests.
•  Advise new efforts to create restoration-based forest carbon offsets.
Past Accomplishments
•  The ERI is playing a supporting role to the City of Flagstaff as it implements the 
Flagstaff Watershed Protection Program. This program is the result of passage of a 
$10 million bond for the sole purpose of restoring Flagstaff-area critical watersheds. 
The ERI provides technical support, facilitation, and monitoring. 
•  The ERI is a campus champion for locating a biomass-based energy facility on the 
NAU campus. Though still in the exploratory phase, this biomass plant can provide 
multiple benefits including: energy generation on campus, reduction of the NAU 
carbon footprint, and a destination for restoration by-products. By burning biomass 
in a power plant, as opposed to the forest, the community is spared the negative 
impacts of smoke. 
Goal Three
“

11
Objectives for 2015–2020
•  The ERI will continue to attract research and program funding in excess of $1 million annually from 
diverse sources.
•  The ERI will provide quality, paid research experience for undergraduates and graduates to prepare 
them as contemporary land managers or to pursue further education.
•  The ERI will continue to maintain a national profile of excellence in the field of forest restoration and 
fire through scholarly activities, media, testimony, and participation at national meetings and other 
venues.
•  The ERI will assist other faculty by funding relevant contributions to resource management and 
human dimension research.
Past Accomplishments
•  The ERI has brought more than $35,000,000 in federal appropriations, federal subcontracts, compet­
itive grants, and other sources to NAU. 
•  Dr. Wally Covington and the ERI staff are nationally recognized experts by the media. Since 2012, 
the ERI/NAU has appeared in more than 70 news articles, many of which were subsequently syndi­
cated. This represents important free advertising for NAU. 
•  The ERI has supported more than 300 undergraduate and graduate students, 67 of whom transitioned 
to professional employment or graduate student programs during the seven years this was reported 
to ABOR. At least 600 working professionals have attended continuing or professional education 
programs led by the ERI. 
•  The ERI has shared funding with faculty across campus at the School of Forestry, W.A. Franke 
College of Business, Department of Politics and International Affairs in the College of Social and 
Behavioral Sciences, School of Earth Sciences and Env ironmental Sustainability, and the Landscape 
Conservation Initiative (Formerly ForestERA), among others. 
•  More than 200 partnerships with governments, organizations, and others in Arizona, the West, and 
the nation. 
The ERI will contribute to achieving the goals established for 
NAU by the Arizona Board of Regents.
Goal Four

12
12
