 
 
Governor: Forest health a top priority 
By SETH MULLER 
Sun Staff Reporter 
01/14/2004 
Gov. Janet Napolitano identified forest health and water conservation as key 
environmental issues the state must tackle in 2004 during her State of the State -- and said 
she wants to promote more community efforts for fire prevention such as the measures 
taken by a Flagstaff region partnership.  
Napolitano visited Flagstaff Tuesday, the day after delivering her annual address to the 
state legislature, to speak about her initiatives laid out in her speech. Her prime focus is 
on early education, which led her to South Beaver Elementary School to read to first 
graders and talk to educators (see related, Page A1).  
While Napolitano continues to carve her niche as a governor backing education, she 
includes environmental issues in her list of priorities. And in a Tuesday interview she 
said her top environmental concern is healthy forests.  
"We're moving as fast as we can on forested state trust land," Napolitano said of restoring 
forests to a healthier, less fire-prone condition. "We've had inmate crews working around 
Flagstaff, Strawberry and Pine."  
The inmate crews come from the state prisons, and they work to clear out forest debris in 
order to prevent catastrophic wildfire. The governor said she plans to commit more 
inmate crew hours to such work this year.  
Napolitano said that she was disappointed in the federal government's Healthy Forest 
Restoration Act, signed into law late last year, because it did not provide much in the way 
of funding for states.  
"The big stumbling block is federal lands and the federal funding," the governor said. 
"We're definitely not out of the woods, so to speak."  
Napolitano said her office will remain the "bully pulpit" for pushing the federal 
government to free up money for forest restoration. She said she is also taking 
recommendations from a forest health council she convened, which includes Wally 
Covington of Northern Arizona University's Ecological Restoration Institute and council 
co-chair Taylor McKinnon of the Grand Canyon Trust.  
Further, the governor plans to encourage community organization and partnership for 
Arizona cities and towns bordered by forests. She commended Flagstaff's group, the 

Greater Flagstaff Forests Partnership, along with a similar effort in Prescott. She said she 
would like to have more communities work toward forest protection.  
The second environmental issue the governor wants to tackle is water conservation. She 
has put together a committee of experts that is developing a long-term water conservation 
plan, which she hopes will be drafted by September.  
She said because the state is so diverse in it water supply and needs, the plan will explore 
a number of complexities.  
She hesitated to comment on particulars before work on the plan started, but noted the 
initiative would address technologies that aid aquifer recharge, would look at the 
problems of drought and would study how water availability ties into growth.  
Along with education and the environment, Napolitano included preservation of military 
bases, in the light of the Department of Defense's plan to shut down 25 percent of them. 
She also wants to revitalize the high technology industry through tax incentives and 
provide more prescription drug discounts to seniors.  
Reporter Seth Muller can be reached at 913-8607 or by e-mailing him at 
smuller@azdailsyun.com  
 
