 
 
Forest project leader quits 
12/25/1999 
After only a year as executive director of the Grand Canyon Forests Foundation, Brett 
KenCairn has left the post just as the Forest Service has given final approval for the first 
stage of an ambitious project to restore 100,000 acres of dense ponderosa pine forests in 
the Coconino National Forest near Flagstaff over the next 10 years.  
In KenCairn's absence, the Foundation will be administered by its three-member board.  
KenCairn was hired by the Foundation last year to lead its landmark program to thin 
congested stands of trees, restore meadows and eliminate unnecessary roads to promote 
forest health and reduce the risk of catastrophic fires.  
KenCairn holds a degree from Princeton University in cultural anthropology, spent a 
decade working with groups involved in ecological restoration and was the founding 
director of the Rogue Institute for Ecology.  
The initial steps of the restoration effort, a 10,000-acre parcel near Fort Valley, was 
stalled this year after Forest Guardians, a New Mexico environmental group, appealed the 
project to the U.S. Forest Service.  
The delay upset KenCairn who insisted the appeals were not based on sound science, but 
on a total aversion to logging by the activist group.  
KenCairn was also the leader of the 18-member Grand Canyon Forests Partnership, a 
coalition of industry, government and conservation officials advising the Foundation's 
restoration project.  
According to Partnership officials, KenCairn's recent departure was explained in an e-
mail they received from Grand Canyon Trust president Geoff Barnard.  
The Trust provides most of the funding for the Foundation and essentially was 
KenCairn's employer, said Partnership officials.  
"Brett did a lot of great work for the Foundation and put in a tremendous amount of 
effort. He just felt that given the direction he saw the Foundation going, that his skills 
would be better used elsewhere," said the Trust's Bradley Ack.  
KenCairn could not be reached for comment.  

John Gerritsma, U.S. Forest Service liaison to the Partnership, said that "Brett and the 
Trust had a different point of view" regarding employer-employee issues, but agreed on 
the goals of the restoration effort.  
Ack said now that Forest Guardians' appeals have been rejected by Forest Service 
Regional Forester Eleanor Towns, work will begin on Fort Valley.  
"The Partnership is going to be reinvigorating itself. This administrative appeals process 
has been trying for all involved. There has been a lot of anxiety ... now that we are free to 
move forward, I think things will move along," said Ack.  
--Gary Ghioto  
