HABITAT SELECTION BY SELECTED BREEDING PASSERINE BIRDS IN  
PINE-OAK FORESTS OF NORTHERN ARIZONA 
By Tamara D. Lesh 
A Thesis  
Submitted in Partial Fulfillment  
of the Requirements for the Degree of  
Master of Science in Forestry  
Northern Arizona University  
August. 1999  
1Beier, Ph.D., Chair 
M(,~~-
Ste 
n Rosenstock, ~tS. 

ABSTRACT  
HABITAT SELECTION BY SELECTED BREEDING PASSERINE BIRDS IN  
PINE-OAK FORESTS OF NORTHERN ARIZONA 
TAMARA D. LESH 
Forest treatments proposed to restore pre-settlement conditions for northern 
Arizona ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) forests will dramatically alter forest structure 
by reducing densities of smaller diameter trees. Baseline information on habitat selection 
is needed to understand responses of passerine birds to these treatments. During the 1997 
and 1998 breeding seasons, I examined foraging-habitat selection by 5 permanent resident 
species ~ hairy woodpeckers (Picoides villosus), mountain chickadees (Poecile gambeli), 
white-breasted nuthatches (SUra carolinensis), pygmy nuthatches (S. pygmaea), and dark­
eyed juncos (Junco hyemalis) - and 3 neotropical migrants, Virginia's warblers 
(Vennivora virginiaey, p1umbeus vireos (Vireo plumbeus), and western tanagers (Piranga 
ludoviciana}, I measured and analyzed habitat selection at 2 scales, the foraging tree 
(third-order selection sensu Johnson 1980) and within a 0.04-ha plot centered on each 
foraging location (Johnson's second-order selection). 
I analyzed microhabitat selection for all species with> 41 observations. I detected 
third-order selection by pygmy nuthatches and Virginia's warblers at Camp Navajo and 
by white-breasted nuthatches, dark-eyed juncos, and hairy woodpeckers at Mt. Trumbull. 
CART models indicated second-order selection by white-breasted nuthatches, pygmy 
nuthatches, Virginia's warblers, plumbeus vireos, and western tanagers at Camp Navajo 

11 
and by pygmy nuthatches, dark-eyed juncos, and plumbeus vireos at Mt. Trumbull. 
Ponderosa pines> 45.5 ern dbh and Gambel oaks (Quercus gambelii) > 30.5 ern dbh were 
selected by resident species, plumbeus vireos, and western tanagers, whereas Gambel oak 
densities of all size classes were selected by Virginia's warblers. 
If individual oak trees >23.0 em dbh and oak clumps with a crown area 2139 m" 
') 
are retained at Camp Navajo, I believe that the foraging habitat of the 8 focal bird species 
that I studied will not be significantly affected by proposed forest restoration treatments. 
.Because the Mt.Trumbull thinning treatments will decrease tree densities more than 
treatments at Camp Navajo, abundance and reproductive productivity may decline for 
bird species that primarily use foliage as a foraging substrate. This productivity most 
likely depends on the impacts of restoration treatments to the arthropod community. In 
addition, despite efforts to protect some pine and oak trees and snags from fire, 
significant habitat components used for foraging and nesting will initially be lost. 
However, if restoration treatments do ultimately change the structure and function of 
these ponderosa pine ecosystems such that primary production increases and 
consequently enhances arthropod biomass, habitat quality may improve for these 8 
passerine birds. 

III 
ACKNOWLEDGlVIENTS 
I have many people to thank for their generous help and advice during the course 
of this research. I would like to start by thanking my committee members, Paul Beier, 
Bill Block, Carol Chambers, and Steve Rosenstock: Paul Beier, my major professor, for 
his willing and cheerful manner when answering the variety of questions I presented to 
him and for his seemingly tireless ability to conduct many tasks at once which is an 
inspiration; Bill Block for always "having a minute" when I asked for one; Carol 
Chambers for her practical approach to any problem; and Steve Rosenstock for his 
constant and persistent support throughout all aspects of this project which kept me going 
during tough times. 
This project was funded in part by the U.S. Army National Guard. I am grateful 
to the many people at Camp Navajo who allowed me to conduct this research on their 
base. lowe special thanks to Sargent Don Hack for making this project possible through 
his cooperation. I also thank the BLM, the Native American Forestry Program, and 
Stanford University for additional funding and personnel. 
I could not have collected all the data without the help from several people who 
assisted me in the field. I thank Carmen Austin, Debbie Brown, Laura Doll, Tammy 
Hinesley, Tricia Hurley, Vicki Lesh, Lisa Miller, Jennifer Monks, Dan Nance, Ben Saenz, 
Rebecca Wozniak, and Lisa Yellow-Eagle for their long days of work starting before 
sunrise. 
I also thank Rick Miller for his part in initiating this project. Jeff Jenness was a 
great help in map making. And, thanks to Amy Waltz, Pete Fule, and Doc Smith from 
.the ecology lab at NAU for sharing information. 
Finally, thanks to my parents for their support throughout my life that gives me 
strength to finish what I start and for teaching me the importance of knowledge. 

IV 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
~ LIST OF TABLES 
. 
v 
": 
. 
LIST OF FIGURES  
vii 
INTRODUCTION 
1  
METHODS 
~ 
3  
STUDY AREAS 
3  
FORAGING SURVEyS 
5  
HABITAT MEASUREMENTS 
6  
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS 
7  
RES ULTS 
10  
THIRD-ORDER SELECTION 
10  
SECOND-ORDER SELECTION 
12  
Patch scale 
12  
Study site scale 
12  
DISCUSSION 
13  
HABITAT SELECTION 
13  
POTENTIAL EFFECTS OF RESTORATION TREATMENTS 
18  
Thinnin g 
18  
Prescribed fire 
20  
LITERATURE CITED 
23  

v 
LIST OF TABLES 
1. Habitat variables from Used Plots that were differed (t-tests, P < 0.10) between years at 
Camp Navajo and Mt. Trumbull, Arizona 
29 
2. Mean values for vegetation and physical characteristics on Available Plots and Used 
Plots (each 20x20-m) on the Camp Navajo study area during the 1997 and 1998 breeding 
seasons 
30 
3. Mean values for vegetation and physical characteristics on Available Plots and Used 
Plots (each 20x20-m) on the Mt. Trumbull study area during the 1997 and 1998 breeding 
seasons. 
31 
4. Percent use of 6 different substrates used by 5 permanent resident and 3 neotropical 
migrants during the breeding seasons of 1997 and 1998 in ponderosa pine forests of 
northern Arizona, compared to trees available on each study area. "+"indicates selection 
for and "_II indicates selection against that diameter class, based on the 90% Bonferroni 
confidence interval for the proportion used not overlapping the available proportion. 
(Note: Ground observations are listed here for reference, but were excluded from these 
analyses) 
32 
5. Proportion of ponderosa pine and Gambel oak size classes selected by 7 passerine birds 
at Camp Navajo, Arizona during breeding seasons of 1997 and 1Y98 compared to the size 
J distribution of live pines and oaks available. All omnibus Chi-squared tests for 
homogeneity between used and available diameter distributions were significant at P < 
0.0005 for each bird and tree species except where sample sizes were insufficient. 
"+"indicates selection for and "_II indicates selection against that diameter class, based on 
the 90% Bonferroni confidence interval for the proportion used not overlapping the 
available proportion 
33 
6. Proportion of ponderosa pine and Gambel oak size classes selected by 6 passerine birds 
at Mt. Trumbull, Arizona during breeding seasons of 1997 and 1998 compared to the size 
distribution of live pines and oaks available. All omnibus Chi-squared tests for 
homogeneity between used and available diameter distributions were significant at P < 
0.0005 for each bird and tree species except where sample sizes were insufficient. 
"+"indicates selection for and "_" indicates selection against that diameter class, based on 
the 90% Bonferroni confidence interval for the proportion used not overlapping the 
available proportion 
34 
7. Foraging behaviors of 8 passerine birds at Camp Navajo and Mt. Trumbull, Arizona 
during the breeding seasons of 1997 and 1998 
35 

vi 
8. Foraging zones used by 8 passerine birds at Camp Navajo and Mt. Trumbull, Arizona  
during the breeding seasons of 1997 and 1998 
~ 
36  
9. Habitat variables that differed significantly (paired samples r-test, P < 0.10 after a .  
Bonferroni correction) between used and available plots at Camp Navajo and Mt.  
Trumbull, Arizona during the breeding seasons of 1997 and 1998 
: 
37  
10. Habitat variable associations chosen by classification tree models for 6 passerine 
birds during the breeding seasons of 1997 and 1998 in a pine-oak forest, Camp Navajo  
and Mt. Trumbull, Arizona 
38  

vii 
LIST OF FIGURES  
1. Map of Mt. Trumbull and Camp Navajo study areas 
39 
2. Classification tree model of macrohabitat selection by pygmy nuthatches (n=36) 
during breeding seasons of 1997 and 1998 in a pine-oak forest, Mt. Trumbull, Arizona. 
The overall classification accuracy was 55%. Values in parentheses represent proportion 
of observations correctly assigned to each outcome 
41 
3. Figure 3. Classification tree model of macrohabitat selection by solitary vireos (n=36) 
during breeding seasons of 1997 and 1998 in a pine-oak forest, Mt. Trumbull, Arizona. 
The overall classification accuracy was 61%. Values in parentheses represent proportion 
of observations correctly assigned to each outcome 
43 

INTRODUCTION 
Since Euro-American settlement (circa 1870), logging, livestock grazing, and fire 
suppression have altered the composition,structure and function of ponderosa pine (Pinus . 
ponderosa) forests in the southwestern U.S. (Southwest) (Cooper 1960, White 1985, 
Covington and Moore 1994a). The effects of these land-use practices include dramatic 
changes in tree density and forest structure, diminished tree vigor, loss of herbaceous 
vegetation, "epidemic" outbreaks of insects and tree diseases, and increased size and 
frequency of stand-replacing crown fires (Cooper 1960, Covington and Moore 1994a, 
Covington and Moore 1994b, Kolb et al. 1994). Because of these changes, large-scale 
forest restoration treatments may soon occur in ponderosa pine forest in northern Arizona. 
Forest restoration experiments have already been initiated in northern Arizona at 2 
study sites. Camp Navajo and Mt. Trumbull. The Arizona Army National Guard, Camp 
Navajo, in cooperation with Northern Arizona University (NAU) researchers, is 
conducting a forest restoration experiment following the recommendations of Covington 
and Moore (1992). Restoration experiments initiated in 1996 at the Mt.Trumbull 
Resource Conservation Area (MTRCA) are a cooperative effort between NAU and the 
Bureau of Land Management (BLM). The idea behind these treatments is to restore the 
ponderosa pine ecosystem to a condition that existed before Euro-American settlers 
began altering the landscape; a condition to-which this ecosystem evolved and can 
maintain. 
These forest restoration treatments involve thinning most "post-settlement trees" 
(trees originating after 1870), followed by fuels manipulation (removal of heavy fuel 
build up around old-growth trees) and prescribed broadcast burning (initial fall bum 

2 
followed by spring bums every 4-7 years) . Anticipated effects of these treatments are 
decreased overstory foliage volume, tree density, and down woody debris, and increased 
herbaceous vegetation and tree vigor (Covington and Moore 1992). Because these 
treatments are still in the experimental stages, effects on associated wildlife populations 
are unknown. 
Habitat selection by birds depends on a combination of factors such as bird 
structural morphology, landscape features, habitat structure, foraging and nesting 
opportunities, edge area, microclimate, and the presence of other species and conspecifics 
(Hilden 1965, Cody 1985, Wiens 1992). While proximate factors such as landscape 
features and habitat structure have no biological significance to birds, they serve as 
reliable cues leading a bird to specific sites that provide ultimate factors (e.g., food, 
shelter) needed to survive (Hilden 1965). 
Most small birds appear to select among habitats based on specific structural 
characteristics (Cody 1985). In ponderosa pine forests of northern Arizona, alterations in 
forest structure from land management practices such as logging have affected breeding 
bird communities (Overturf 1979; Balda 1975a,b; Szaro and Balda 1979a,b; 
Cunningham et al. 1980; Brawn and Balda 1988a,b; Rosenstock 1996). Restoration 
treatments also modify the forest structure and hence affect certain habitat elements used 
for foraging and nesting by passerine birds. While some -infonnation on breeding bird 
communities in northern Arizona exists, additional data on specific micro- and 
macrohabitats used for foraging and nesting are needed (Rosenstock 1996, Rich and 
Mehlhop 1997). 
This study was part of a larger study to examine the effects of large-scale 

3 
restoration efforts on the passerine bird community. I studied selection of foraging 
habitat by 5 permanent resident species - hairy woodpeckers (Picoides villosusi, 
mountain chickadees iPoecile gambeli), white-breasted nuthatches (Sitta carolinensis), 
pygmy nuthatches (S. pygmaea), and dark-eyed juncos (Junco hyemalis) - and 3 
neotropical migrants, Virginia's warblers (Vermivora virginiaei, plumbeus vireo (Vireo 
plumbeus), and western tanager tPiranga ludo viciana). I chose these 8 focal species 
because their foraging and nesting ecology (not part of this thesis) represented a variety of 
microhabitat conditions that may be affected by restoration. For example, the 3 
neotropical migrants and the mountain chickadee are primarily foliage gleaners, hairy 
woodpeckers and nuthatches mainly bark glean, and juncos are primarily ground gleaners. 
Further, nuthatches, chickadees, and hairy woodpeckers are cavity nesters, western 
tanagers and plumbeous vireos build cup nests in the canopy, and juncos and Virginia's 
warblers are ground nesters. In addition, I found these 8 species in abundance during a 
1996 pilot year, indicating I would have adequate sample sizes for statistical analysis. 
My objectives were to collect pre-treatment data for subsequent evaluations of restoration 
treatment effects on passerine bird communities, and to quantify foraging habitat 
selection. My research hypothesis was that each focal species nonrandomly selected 
foraging locations. 
METHODS 
STUDY AREAS 
I collected data at 2 study sites, Camp Navajo and Mt. Trumbull Resource 
Conservation Area (MTRCA). Both study sites were divided into treatment and control 
areas based on proposed forest restoration treatment designs . Restoration treatments at 

4 
Camp Navajo will be conducted on 700 ha during 1999-2002, treating 80 - 200 ha per 
year. Treatments at Mt. Trumbull were initiated in 1996 and will continue through 2000. 
Camp Navajo is located 16 krn west of Flagstaff, Arizona (Fig. 1). The 800-ha 
bird study site (400 ha treatment and 400 ha control) is located along the western 
boundary of the facility. The bird treatment area overlays the proposed forest restoration 
treatment area, and the control area is approximately 1.5 ha south of the treatment area. 
The forest canopy is dominated by ponderosa pine and Gambel oak (Quercus gambelii). 
Alligator bark juniper (Juniperus deppeana) is scattered on more xeric sites. In addition, 
patches of New Mexican locust (Robinia neomexicana) occur throughout the study site. 
Topography at Camp Navajo consists of gently rolling hills with a large hill (Volunteer 
Mountain) between the control and treatment areas. Elevations range from 2,134 - 2,453 
m. Soils are mainly of volcanic origin, but limestone and sandstone soils may be found at 
lower elevations (Soil Conservation Service 1970, in Fule 1996). For more detailed 
information on climate and land-use see Fule (1996). 
The MTRCA lies on the Arizona Strip approximately 80 kilometers southwest of 
Fredonia, Arizona (Fig. 1). The surrounding landscape is predominately desert, with 
ponderosa pine forest restricted to about 2,000 hectares, mostly above 2,100 m on the 
slopes of Mt. Trumbull and Mt. Logan. The Mt.Trumbul1 area also was divided into 
treatment and control areas, both approximately 400 ha blocks. 
Like Camp Navajo, the Mt. Trumbull forest canopy is dominated by ponderosa 
pine and Gambel oak. Alligator juniper, pinon pine (Pinus edulis) and patches of New 
Mexican locust and big sagebrush (Artemesia tridentata) are scattered throughout control 
and treatment sites . Mt. Trumbull has comparatively more pines> 30.5 em dbh, pinyon 

5 
and juniper trees, and New Mexican locust and fewer oak trees than the Camp Navajo 
site. 
FORAGING SURVEYS 
With the help of several assistants that had at least 10 days of training on bird 
identification and observation techniques, I conducted foraging surveys on control and 
treatment areas at both study sites (Camp Navajo and Mt. Trumbull) during the 1997 and 
1998 breeding seasons (June through early July). Surveys were performed along 12 
randomly located belt transects (Hejl et a1. 1990) 2700-3300 m long placed parallel to 
each other with center lines 220 m apart. Almost all foraging surveys were conducted 
between 0530 and 1300. 
While conducting a foraging survey, an observer slowly walked along a transect 
searching for individuals of the focal species. Once a foraging bird was encountered, the 
observer made sure the bird was either searching or procuring food and waited 
approximately 5 seconds to avoid bias toward more visually conspicuous locations. On 
the 5th second, the observer recorded the bird species, sex (determined only for hairy 
woodpeckers, Virginia's warblers, and western tanagers), foraging activity, and presence 
of other birds. I combined foraging activities into 4 categories based on behaviors 
described by Ehrlich et a1. (1988): ground glean, bark glean, foliage glean (foliage glean 
or hover and glean), and flycatch (hawk or swoop ). The foraging location was marked 
with a numbered metal tag, and directions to the site were recorded for subsequent habitat 
measurements. Then the observer resumed searching for a foraging bird. To ensure 
independence of individual bird observations, I recorded data for only the first bird seen 
in a pair or flock, and observations of conspecifics were at least 10 minutes (Hejl et a1. 

6 
1990) and 100 m apart within the same year. 
HABITAT MEASUREMENTS 
I measured habitat characteristics at 2 microhabitat scales (as defined by Block 
and Brennan 1993), the foraging tree (third-order selection sensu Johnson 1980) and 
within 20 x 20 m (0.04-ha) Used Plots centered on each foraging location (Johnson's 
second-order selection) . Similarly, habitat availability was measured on 0.04-ha 
Available Plots (193 at Camp Navajo and 170 at Mt. Trumbull) located 300 m apart on 
north-south transect lines. Adjacent transects were 150 m apart and even-numbered 
transects had start points offset north or south so that no Available Plot was more than 
150 m away from a Used Plot. I assumed that these Available Plots were indeed 
available to all focal species (Morrison et al. 1986). 
When a foraging bird was observed in a tree or shrub (woody plants < 1.4 m 
high), the following measurements were recorded: foraging location (tree or shrub 
species), plant diameter at breast height (dbh), plant class (alive, declining or dead 
portion, or snag at a specific level of decay), foraging zone (understory or on ground, 
below crown,lower crown, mid crown, or upper crown), substrate (trunk, branch, foliage, 
log or ground), and, if the foraging observation was in a large ~ 38.0 ern) ponderosa 
pine, the distance to the nearest large ponderosa pine (to determine tree clumpiness). If 
the foraging observation was on the ground, only data on the 0.04-ha plot were collected. 
In each 0.04-ha Used and Available Plot, we measured slope with a clinometer 
and aspect with a hand-held compass. We tallied trees and snags in 6 diameter classes 
corresponding to the U.S. Forest Service's Vegetation Structural Stages (YSS): < 2.5 em 
dbh (VSS 1),2.5-12.5 ern dbh (YSS 2) , 12.5-30.0 em dbh (YSS 3),30.5-45.0 em dbh 

7 
(YSS 4), 45.5-61.0 em dbh (YSS 5), > 61.0 ern dbh (YSS 6). We determined canopy 
closure by point intercept at 49 points, using a vertical projection scope (Rosenstock 
1996) every 2 m around the perimeter of the plot and on a transect through the middle of 
the plot. In addition, we recorded the presence and area (length x width of the vertical 
projection of the crown within the plot and in toto) of each oak clump, and, for each of 4 
randomly chosen large ~ 38.0 ern) ponderosa pines, the distance to the nearest large pine. 
At each of the 49 points where we measured canopy, we used point intercepts to 
classify the Understory as woody debris (branches, stumps or logs), herbs (root crowns of 
grasses and forbs), shrubs (woody plants < 1.4 m high), litter, rock (> 3 ern at longest 
axis), and soil (including rocks < 3 ern). All logs (> 15 em at midpoint and> 1 m long) 
within the plot also were recorded. 
We quantified dwarf mistletoe infection in ponderosa pines , using Hawksworth's 
(1977) 6-point scale, in 10 trees representative of the size class distribution present within 
each plot. These 10 trees were chosen by selecting a random compass bearing and 
measuring the first tree in the appropriate size class. An overall mistletoe rating for each 
plot was calculated by averaging ratings of the 10 sampled trees. 
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS 
To achieve adequate sample sizes each year (Brennan and Morrison 1990), and 
because sexes were difficult to determine for 5 of the 8 bird species , I pooled sexes for all 
species. I also pooled across years to increase my sample size. Because foraging patterns 
may vary annually (Szaro et al. 1990), I used r-tests to test for differences between habitat 
values at Used Plots between years before I pooled data (P < 0.10). 
At the third-order level (foraging site), I compared the proportion of tree species 
~-----------~~~~~~

8 
and tree size classes used by a given species to the proportions present on Available Plots 
using a X"
") test of homogeneity (Zar 1998). Chi-square values were considered only if 
the average expected observations within a category were 2: 6 for ex ~ 0.01 level of 
significance (Roscoe and Byars 1971). Because I estimated availability, a i goodness of 
fit test was not appropriate (Thomas and Taylor 1990). Because the i test only 
determines differences between 2 distributions (used versus available trees in this case) 
but does not determine selection or avoidance of specific habitat components, I used 
Bonferroni confidenceintervals to ascertain direction of selection (Neu et al. 1974, Byers 
and Steinhurst 1984). Use of a given size class was considered significant if the 
proportion of the availability component fell outside the calculated 90% confidence 
interval around the observed proportion of use. Because the Bonferroni confidence 
interval cannot be determined when observed use is 0, I calculated the binomial 
probability of that event (no observations for that tree type or size class) occurring (Ott 
1993). I protected against Type I errors with the Bonferroni procedure (Neter et al. 1990). 
At the second-order level (0.04 ha plot around the foraging tree), I examined 
habitat selection at 2 scales, the patch scale and the study site scale. Second-order 
selection at the patch scale asks how foraging sites differ from nearby paired sites and is 
relevant to patch features such as tree clumpiness. I used paired samples t-tests to 
examine selection at the patch scale, pairing-each Used Plot with the nearest Available 
Plot (never more than 150 m away). I reported values that were < 0.10 after a Bonferonni 
correction for multiple comparisons (Neter, Wasserman, and Kutner 1990). 
Second-order selection at the study site scale asks the question "How does a 
foraging site differ from average conditions on the study area (Camp Navajo or Mt. 

9 
Trumbull)?" and is most relevant to questions about how an animal selects a home range 
within a broad vegetation type. 
To examine second-order selection at the study site scale, I developed separate 
classification and regression trees (CART) models for each species and study site. CART 
is a nonparametric, stepwise procedure that builds a decision tree to classify data (in this 
case Used Plots versus Available Plots) using 2: 1 binary splits that reflect values of 
independent variables (Steinberg and Colla 1995). Each split in the tree is tested against 
other possible splits using goodness of fit measures or significance tests. CART chooses 
the best model based on predictive accuracies and penalties applied to large 
(unparsimonious) trees. In setting the tradeoff between the predictive accuracy and 
parsimony, I chose the smallest tree within 1 standard error of the tree with the lowest 
cross-validation relative error rate. The cross-validation relative error rate was calculated 
using a 10-fold jackknife procedure (Steinberg and Colla 1995). In this procedure the 
data were divided into 10 equal subsets; 9 subsets were used as learning data and one as a 
test subset. The overall error rate was the average classification success from the 10 test 
subsets. To avoid confounding of predictor variables, if 2 or more predictor variables 
were correlated (Spearman r 2:0.700), I chose the more biological meaningful variable to 
load into the CART model. I used the Spearman instead of Pearson's correlation 
coefficient because I wanted to test for linear and nonlinear-relationships. I only reported 
CART model results that had > 50% overall classification success. I used a binomial test 
to determine the probability that overall classification successes 2: 55% was significantly 
> 50%. CART was not used to examine second-order selection at the patch scale because 
it cannot analyze paired samples. I chose CART over other predictive models (e.g., 

10 
logistic regression, discriminant function analysis) because it identifies specific cut points 
of independent variables that best discriminate between Used and Available Plots. These 
cut points are easier to interpret for management purposes. 
RESULTS 
I obtained 29-86 foraging observations per species per study area (Tables 2 and 3). 
I found selection at the third-order level for all species with> 41 observations. I detected 
second-order selection at the patch scale by pygmy nuthatches and Virginia's warblers at 
Camp Navajo and by white-breasted nuthatches, dark-eyed juncos, and hairy 
woodpeckers at Mt. Trumbull. CART models indicated second-order selection (study­
site scale) by white-breasted nuthatches, pygmy nuthatches, Virginia's warblers , 
plumbeus vireos, and western tanagers at Camp Navajo and by pygmy nuthatches, dark­
eyed juncos, and plumbeus vireos at Mt. Trumbull. None of the habitat variables that 
differed between years appeared as significant characteristics for habitat selection (Table . 
I). 
THIRD-ORDER SELECTION 
All focal birds usually used live trees for foraging substrates (Table 4). Mountain 
chickadees foraged mainly in live ponderosa pines, but used all substrates available 
(except locust) to some extent. This species selected pines in VSS classes ~ 4 (> 30.5 ern 
dbh) and large oaks (> 30.5 em dbh) (Camp Navajo site only), and avoidedpines in VSS 
classes 1 and 2 «12.5 em dbh) and small oaks «12.5 cm dbh) at both study sites (Tables 
5 and 6). When foraging on live trees, chickadees mainly foliage gleaned in the mid and 
upper crowns (Tables 7 and 8). 
Pygmy nuthatches foliage and bark gleaned (Table 7) almost exclusively in 

11 
middle and upper crowns of live pines (Tables 4 and 8). Like mountain chickadees, they 
selected pines in VSS classes ~ 4 and avoided pines in VSS classes I and 2 (Tables 5 and 
6). White-breasted nuthatches used both live oaks and pines as foraging substrates (Table 
4). They selected similar foraging locations as mountain chickadees (Tables 5, 6 and 8), 
although their primary foraging technique was bark gleaning (Table 7). 
Although dark-eyed juncos mainly ground gleaned (Table 7), we did observe them 
foliage gleaning and, less often, bark gleaning in live pines and oaks (Tables 4 and 7). At 
Camp Navajo they selected against small-diameter oaks and selected for medium­
diameter oaks (12.5-30.5 em dbh) (Table 5). 
Few Virginia's warblers were found at Mt. Trumbull. At the Camp Navajo site, 
almost all Virginia's warbler observations consisted of foliage gleaning in the upper 
crowns of Gambel oaks (Tables 4, 7, and 8). These warblers selected medium- and large­
diameter oaks and avoided small-diameter oaks (Table 5). 
Hairy woodpeckers primarily bark gleaned in the mid and upper crowns of live 
pines (Tables 4, 7, and 8). Although these woodpeckers often used VSS classes ~ 4 pines 
and large-diameter oaks, the sample size was insufficient to meet l analysis 
requirements (Table 6). 
Plumbeus vireos and western tanagers tended to use VSS classes 5 and 6 (> 45.5 
ern dbh) pines and large oaks more than smaller diameter trees for foraging sites, 
although I only had adequate sample sizes for plumbeus vireos at Mt. Trumbull (Tables 5 
and 6). I observed vireos primarily foliage gleaning mostly in the middle of the crown, 
whereas tanagers tended to foliage glean in the upper crown (Tables 7 and 8). 

12 
SECOND-ORDER SELECTION 
Patch scale 
Although I measured many habitat variables (Tables 2 and 3), ponderosa pine and 
Gambel oak density and size class were the only variables that appeared significant for 
foraging habitat selection . Compared to nearby paired Available Plots, white-breasted 
nuthatches at Mt. Trumbull and pygmy nuthatches at Camp Navajo foraged in plots with 
relatively high densities of VSS classes 5 and 6 pines (Table 9). Virginia's warblers at 
Camp Navajo selected sites with high densities of small « 2.5 em dbh) locust and oak 
trees of all sizes. At Mt. Trumbull, dark-eyed juncos selected areas with significantly 
fewer medium-sized (12.5-30.5 em dbh) oak treeslha, whereas hairy woodpeckers foraged 
in areas that had significantly more medium-sized oak treeslha. 
Study site scale 
Habitat use by focal species was most often predicted from a single variable (6 of 
8 models). CART models successfully discriminated Used from Available Plots for 
white-breasted nuthatch, pygmy nuthatch, Virginia's warbler, plumbeus vireo, western 
tanager at Camp Navajo and for pygmy nuthatch, dark-eyed junco and plumbeus vireo at 
Mt. Trumbull (Table 10 and Fig.s 2 and 3). Overall classification accuracies ranged from 
55-79%. The CART model that had the lowest reported classification accuracy (55% for 
pygmy nuthatches at the Mt. Trumbull site) was significantly greater than 50% (P = 0.01) 
using a binomial test. 
At Camp Navajo, both pygmy and white-breasted nuthatches were associated with 
plots that had>12.5 VSS class 5 and 6 pine trees/ha, and Virginia's warblers occupied 
plots with >263 medium-sized (12.5-30.5 ern dbh) oaks (Table 10). Pygmy nuthatches at 

13 
Mt. Trumbull were associated with plots that had <137.5 oak saplings « 12.5 em dbh)/ha 
which had a spacing of large (> 38 em dbh) pines 6.75-14.75 m (Fig. 2). At Mt. 
Trumbull, Dark-eyed juncos were found most often in plots with large pines spaced> 
6.25 m apart (Table 10). 
I obtained similar models for plumbeus vireos and western tanagers at both study 
sites. Vireos selected areas with fewer « 287.5 trees/ha) VSS class 1 and 2 pines at Mt. 
Trumbull and VSS 3 (12.5-30.0 ern dbh) pines « 37.5 trees/ha) at Camp Navajo than 
expected. They also were associated with a relatively high total basal area (16.15 m2/ha) 
at Mt. Trumbull (Table 10 and Fig. 3). Similarly, western tanagers occupied areas with < 
37.5 VSS 3 pines/ha at Camp Navajo (Table 10). Although the CART model for tanagers 
at Mt. Trumbull had a poor overall classification accuracy (42%) because it poorly 
predicted Available Plots, results followed the same trend found at the Camp Navajo site 
« 287.5 trees/ha small pines in used plots), correctly classifying 87% of Used Plots. 
DISCUSSION 
HABITAT SELECTION 
I detected habitat selection at both second- and third-order levels of selection. 
Densities of large ponderosa pines and large Gambel oaks were the most important 
habitat components for permanent resident species, plumbeus vireos, and western 
tanagers, while oak densities of all size-classes were selected by Virginia's warblers. 
Each species exhibited consistent preferences for the same habitat components at all 
levels of selection. However, selection appeared strongest at the third-order selection 
(individual tree) and progressively weaker at second-order levels. This result may have 
been a result of my sampling design . In addition, because I pooled data across years to 

14 
achieve adequate sample sizes for X2 analysis , annual variation in foraging tree and 
substrate selection may have been masked. 
Overall classification accuracies for CART models which measured second-order 
selection at the study-site scale ranged from 55-79%. Although I found that 55% was 
significantly more than 50% , correctly predicting the occurrence of a species in a certain 
habitat only 55% of the time is not that accurate in terms of management. Indeed, Hurley 
(1986) noted that because accuracy of predictive models are affected by stochastic events, 
detectability of species, and sampling error, managers prefer models with accuracy levels 
of 75-80%. The CART models for the three neotropical migrants (Virginia's warbler, 
plumbeous warbler, and western tanager) at Camp Navajo were the only models that 
achieved accuracy levels ~ 75%. Although CART model results for permanent residents 
were consistent with third-order selection, classification accuracies were lower indicating 
that permanent residents tended to be more general in their habitat selection than 
neotropical migrants at a larger habitat scale. 
At all habitat scales that I examined, pines> 45.5 em dbh were selected by 
permanent resident species for foraging. White-breasted and pygmy nuthatches selected 
for this habitat feature at all habitat scales at one or both study sites. Mountain 
chickadees selected pines> 45.5 em dbh at the third-order level, but not at the second­
order level. Rosenstock (1996)found that pygmy nuthatches in northern Arizona were 
associated with stands in which pines> 61 em dbh comprised 30-50% of basal area, 
whereas mountain chickadees and white-breasted nuthatches tended to be more 
opportunistic (sensu Rosenweig 1985), using habitat in their encountered proportions. 
Similarly, O'Brien (1990) noted that mountain chickadees and white-breasted nuthatches 

15 
just south of Mt. Trumbull were more general in their habitat use than pygmy nuthatches, 
responding to density of pinon pines, juniper and Gambel oak trees in addition to 
ponderosa pine density. 
Spacing of pines ~38.0 em dbh, which is inversely related to large pine density, 
was a significant at the study site scale for dark-eyed juncos and pygmy nuthatches at the 
Mt. Trumbull study site. Dark-eyed juncos were more likely to forage in plots that had> 
6.25 m spacing between large pines. Since this species is primarily a ground forager , an 
open forest that has a more developed herbaceous component and less pine needle ground 
cover may provide a greater abundance of arthropods. In other studies in ponderosa pine 
forests, juncos have occupied various stand conditions (Szaro and Balda 1979a, Siegel 
1989, Rosenstock 1996), indicating that they are habitat generalists (sensu Rosenweig 
1985). Similarly, at the Camp Navajo study site, juncos used habitat as it was available at 
the second-order level of habitat selection. 
The variable that best differentiated Used and Available plots in the CART model 
for pygmy nuthatches at Mt. Trumbull split was large pine spacing at the second and third 
splits. According to the model, pygmy nuthatches were found in plots with < 137.5 oak 
saplings/ha and large pine spacing of 6.75-14.75 m apart. These results were consistent 
with Camp Navajo CART results which associated pygmy nuthatches with plots that had 
> 12.5 VSS 5 (45.5-61.0 em dbh) and 6 (>61.0 em dbh) pine trees/ha - a density 
consistent with a spacing of < 28 m between pines ~ 38.0 em dbh. 
Plumbeus vireos and western tanagers also frequently used pines> 45.5 em dbh at 
the third-order level. At the second-order level, both species selected lower densities of 
VSS classes 1 and 2 pines indicating that areas with some large pines rather than many 

16 
r  
small ones was preferred. Szaro and Balda (1979a) found similar results in pine-oak 
forests in northern Arizona. They reported more p1umbeus vireos in strip cut plots that 
had approximately 181 trees/ha and a basal area of 12.4 m2/ha than on control plots that 
2/ha.
had 647 treeslha and a basal area of26.7 m
Similarly, more tanager occupied 
silviculturally-thinned plots with approximately 236 trees/ha and a basal area of 15.0 
m2/ha than in control plots. 
Although ultimately, insectivorous bird species may respond to available 
I 
arthropod biomass (Brush and Stiles 1986), selection for large-diameter pines by foliage 
and bark gleaners may reflect proximate factors (sensu Hilden 1965) such as foliage 
volume and bark surface. I observed pygmy nuthatches and mountain chickadees foliage 
gleaning more than half the time, while I observed white-breasted nuthatches primarily 
bark gleaning. Larger diameter pines contribute more foliage volume and bole and 
branch surface area than do smaller diameter trees (Balda 1969, Biging and Wensel 1990, 
O'Brien 1990). Though I found no information on insect biomass in relation to canopy 
zone or size of ponderosa pine trees, Franzreb (1983) and Weikel and Hayes (1999) 
suggested that a more complex structure created from the increased surface area of the 
crown, bole and branches in conifers may provide higher insect densities. Similarly, 
Szaro and Balda (l979a) reported a positive correlation between foliage gleaners and 
ponderosa pine foliage volume. In addition, large-diameter.conifers have deeper furrows 
in the bark than smaller trees of the same species (Jackson 1979, Mariani and Manuwal 
1990). Adams and Morrison (1993) found that ponderosa pines which had rougher bark 
surfaces even at small diameter size classes had a higher abundance of insects than tree 
species with smoother surfaces. 

17 
At the third-order level , mountain chickadees, white-breasted nuthatches, dark­
eyed juncos, and Virginia's warblers selected large- (> 30.5 em dbh) and medium­
diameter (12.5-30.5 em dbh, except white-breasted nuthatches) oaks for foraging 
locations. Although I did detect significant use of oaks by plumbeus vireos and western 
tanagers, I did often observe both species foraging in the 2 larger size classes of oak. 
As in pine trees, these insectivorous birds are most likely responding to arthropod 
biomass. Oaks tend to have more insect species than do coniferous trees (Southwood 
1961, Saure and Kielhorn 1993), however, Brush and Stiles (1986) reported that 
insectivorous bird abundance in a mixed coniferous-deciduous forest in New Jersey 
peaked at times and places of highest arthropod biomass regardless of tree species 
present. They found that both bird and arthropod abundance in pine-dominated stands 
peaked from mid-June through July, whereas peak abundance in oak-dominated stands 
occurred from May to mid-June. Others (e.g., Hejl and Verner 1990, Sakai and Noon 
1990) also found changes in foraging substrates (primarily plant species) used at different 
times during the breeding cycle. As I pooled across breeding cycle, I could not document 
differential use of pines and oaks throughout the breeding season. However, I observed 
several species of passerines including the focal species of this study foraging heavily on 
Gambel oak flower buds early in the breeding season. 
Used Plots for hairy woodpeckers had higher densities of medium-sized oaks than 
paired Available Plots. These woodpeckers used Gambel oak trees for nesting substrates 
25% of the time at Mt. Trumbull (P. Beier, Associate Professor, School of Forestry, 
Northern Arizona University, unpublished data), perhaps due to a shortage of pine snags 
(Table 4) that are preferred nest trees in ponderosa pine forests of Arizona and New 

18 
Mexico (Scott and Patton 1989). Similarly, Rosenstock (1998) found greater abundance 
of resident birds, including hairy woodpeckers, in ponderosa pine stands that had higher 
densities of Gambel oak. 
At the second-order level , Virginia's warblers selected plots with higher densities 
of small and medium-sized oaks. Of the foraging observations where sex of Virginia's 
warblers was determined, 88% were males. Correspondingly, Rosenstock (1998) 
detected Virginia's warblers only in ponderosa pine forest stands that.contained Gambel 
oak, and Fischer (1978) reported that Virginia's warbler territories in Coconino County, 
Arizona, were dominated by Gambel oak thickets. Fischer (1978) suggested that these 
warblers may actually be selecting the shrubby growth form rather than the actual plant 
species. In addition, Fischer and I observed Virginia's warblers nests in dense oak 
patches. Nest-site selection may affect foraging location as foraging parents would travel 
a limited from the nest to forage (i.e., Central Place Foraging sensu Orians and Pearson 
1979). 
POTENTIAL EFFECTS OF RESTORAnON TREATMENTS 
Thinning 
Several forest restoration projects, leaving approximately 13-70 ponderosa pine 
trees/ha, ranging from approximately 5 - 40,000 ha are either underway or in the planning 
stages in northern Arizona and New Mexico (A. E. Waltz, Research Specialist and H. R. 
Smith, Program Coordinator, Ecology Lab, NAU, pers. commun.). Large pines were an 
important habitat component for mountain chickadees, white-breasted nuthatches, 
p1umbeus vireos, and western tanagers on both study sites. At Camp Navajo, estimated 
post-treatment densities of pines> 51.0 em dbh are approximately 20 trees/ha and no 

19 
oaks over 23.0 cm will be cut (Hack et al. 1998). Proposed and completed thinning 
treatments at Mt. Trumbull are more intensive and only 15 pines> 51.0 em dbh/ha will be 
retained at this site. 
Although restoration treatments will probably increase vigor of the remaining 
large trees, and this in turn may increase foliage volume per tree, overall stand foliage 
volume will decrease (Covington and Moore 1992). Severe decreases in foliage volume 
may negatively affect abundance and productivity of foliage gleaning species (mountain 
chickadees, pygmy nuthatches, solitary vireo, and western tanager) especially at the Mt. 
Trumbull site which has a more intensive thinning regime. Similarly, because white­
breasted nuthatches selected patches with a high density (30.75 trees/ha) of large pines 
(higher than the average pre-treatment density), the thinning of pine trees over 45.5 ern 
dbh may have a negative impact on this species at Mt Trumbull. At the time of this 
writing, no pines over 40.5 ern and 56.0 ern dbh will be cut on Camp Navajo and Mt. 
Trumbull, respectively (P. Fule, Senior Research Specialist, Ecology Lab, NAU, pers. 
commun.). 
Gambel oak was also an important foraging substrate for focal species and is the 
only deciduous overstory tree (except for the occasional aspen stand) patchily distributed 
in ponderosa pine forests in northern Arizona (Kruse 1992). Gambel oak has 3 basic life 
-
forms: brushy thickets, characterized as a patch of oak stems < 4.5 m tall and < 7.5 ern 
dbh; clones of pole size stands, patches of oak stems> 4.5 m tall and > 7.5 em dbh; and 
large individual trees (Kruse 1992). At both study sites, all 3 growth forms were present 
and used by focal bird species. With the exception of Virginia's warblers, none of the 
focal species selected the brushy thicket form. 

20 
Virginia's warblers depend on Gambel oak brush patches for foraging and nesting 
habitat. These patches, which had an average crown area of 139 m
2 in warbler Used 
Plots, were scattered throughout the forest, often occurring on dry slopes. According to 
the biological assessment conducted at Camp Navajo (Hack et al. 1998), this size class of 
Gambel oak would be thinned to 35 stems/ha. However, the current prescription is to 
thin oaks only after burning (H. R. Smith, Program Coordinator, Ecology Lab, NAU, 
pers. cornmun.). 
On Mt. Trumbull, thinning treatments (437 ha) conducted in 1996 and 1997 
retained approximately 58.0 oak trees/ha prior to burning (Ecological Restoration 
Program 1998 Annual Report). Specific size class density estimates for Gambel oak trees 
were not available. Assuming that no oak trees over 23 ern dbh will be cut and that some 
smaller diameter oaks will be retained as recruitment trees, mountain chickadees, dark­
eyed juncos, white-breasted nuthatches probably would not be significantly affected by 
thinning of oak. Hairy woodpeckers used plots that had significantly more (65.75 vs. 
23.78 stems/ha) medium-sized (12.5-30.5 cm dbh) oaks on average than paired 
availability plots. Significant reductions in oak density at the medium-diameter size 
classes may reduce foraging and nesting habitat for this species. 
Prescribed fire 
The other major component of forest restoration treatments described in this study 
is prescribed burning. Covington and Moore (1992) predict that reintroduction of periodic 
fires (every 4-7 years) in conjunction with thinning will increase herbaceous and shrub 
production and tree vigor. To protect "presettlement" pines, pine snags and, at some sites, 
large-diameter oaks, fuels are being raked 0.6 m from the bases of these stems. Gambel 

21 
oak is more susceptible to fire than ponderosa pine, and prescribed fires may consume 
many, perhaps most, oak thickets. With the reduction of these thickets, Virginia's 
warbler abundance will likely decrease initially, as this is their primary habitat in the 
ponderosa pine ecosystem. However, Gambel oak readily resprouts after fire (Clary and 
Tiedemann 1992), thus, prescribed burning may enhance Virginia's warbler habitat in the 
long-term depending on the time it takes a thicket at a given site to develop. If larger oak 
trees are not protected, other foliage gleaning species also may decrease in abundance. 
With the exception of pygmy nuthatches at Mt. Trumbull, all species at both study sites 
were observed foraging in oak trees 10-93% of the time. 
In other studies, foliage-gleaning insectivores were more abundant in unburned 
sites in western mixed conifer forests than in stands that had experienced fires of severe 
intensity 7 years earlier (Bock and Lynch 1970) and moderate fires 3 years earlier (Taylor 
and Barmore 1980) and in partially logged or clearcut ponderosa pine forests in northern 
Arizona that had burned (intensity not mentioned) the previous year (Blake 1982). In 
addition, Taylor and Barmore (1980) reported fewer foliage gleaners in severely burned 
areas than in moderately burned areas 1-3 years after fires. 
Other researchers reported mixed results for non-foliage gleaning guilds. For 
example, while breeding (Taylor and Barmore 1980) and nonbreeding (Blake 1982) hairy 
woodpeckers appeared to be-attracted to wood boring insects in burned sites, nonbreeding 
white-breasted and pygmy nuthatches, which tend to search for insects in bark crevices, 
were more abundant on unburned sites (Blake 1982). Dark-eyed juncos were equally 
common in burned and unburned plots (Bock and Lynch 1970, Taylor and Barmore 
1980). 

22 
If individual oak trees over 23.0 ern and some oak clumps with a crown area of 
approximately 139 m2 or more are retained at Camp Navajo, I believe that the foraging 
habitat of the 8 focal bird species that I studied will not besignificantly affected by 
proposed forest restoration treatments. Because Mt.Trumbull has a more rigorous 
thinning regime, species that depend on foliage for a foraging substrate may decline. In 
addition, it is likely that despite efforts to protect some trees and snags from fire, 
significant habitat components used for foraging and nesting will be destroyed. However, 
if restoration treatments do improve the structure and function of these ponderosa pine 
ecosystems over what currently exists, increases in primary production and consequently 
insect biomass may eventually improve habitat conditions for these passerine birds. 

23 
LITERATURE CITED 
Adams, E. and M. L. Morrison. 1993. Effects of forest stand structure and composition 
on red-breasted nuthatches and brown creepers. J. Wildl. Manage. 57:616­
628. 
Balda, R. P. 1969. Foliage use by birds of the oak-juniper woodland and ponderosa pine 
forest in southeastern Arizona. Condor 71: 399-412. 
Ba1da, R. P. 1975a. Vegetation structure and breeding bird diversity, p. 59-81 In D. R. 
Smith, [tech. coord.], Proceedings of the symposium on management of forest 
and range habitats for nongame birds, USDA For. Servo GTR WO-l. 
Washington D.C. 
Balda, R. P. 1975b. The relationship of secondary cavity nesters to snag densities in 
western coniferous forests. USDA For. Serv. Southwest. Region Wildl. Hab. 
Tech. Bull. No.1, Albuquerque, N. M. 37pp. 
Biging, G. S., and L. C. Wensel. 1990. Estimation of crown form for six conifers of 
northern California. Can. J. For. Res. 20:1137-1142. 
Blake, J. G. 1982. Influence of fire and logging on nonbreeding bird communities of 
ponderosa pine forests. J. Wildl. Manag. 46:404-415. 
Block, W. M., and L. A. Brennan. 1993. The habitat concept in ornithology. Current 
Ornithol. 11:35-91. 
Bock, C. E., and J. F. Lynch. 1970. Breeding bird populations of burned and unburned 
conifer forest in the Sierra Nevada. Condor 72: 182-189. 
Brawn, J. D., and R. P. Balda. 1988a. The influence of silvicultural activity on 
ponderosa pine forest bird communities in the southwestern United States, p. 
3-21. In J. A. Jackson, [ed.], Bird Conservation 3, Univ. of Wise. Press , Madison. 
Brawn, J. D., and R. P. Balda. 1988b. Population biology of cavity nesters in northern 
Arizona: do nest sites limit breeding densities? Condor 90:61-71. 
Brennan, L. A., and M. L. Morrison. 1990. Influence of sample size on interrpretations 
of foraging patterns by chestnut-backed chickadees. Stud. Avian Biol. 13:187­
193. 
Brush, T., and E. W. Stiles. 1986. Using food abundance to predict habitat use by birds, 
p.57-63. In J. Verner, M. M. Morrison, and C. J. Ralph [eds.), Wildlife 2000: 
modeling habitat relationships of terrestrial vertebrates. Univ. ofWisc. Press., 
Madison. 

24 
Byers, C. R., and R. K. Steinhorst. 1984. Clarification of a technique for analysis of 
utilization-availability data. J. WildI. Manage. 48: 1050-1053. 
Clary, W. P., and A. R. Tiedemann. 1992. Ecology and values of Gambel oak 
woodlands. USDA For. Servo Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-2l8, Fort Collins, Colo. 
Cody, M. L. 1985. An introduction to habitat selection in birds, p. 4-46. In M. L. 
Cody [ed.], Habitat selection in birds . Academic Press, San Diego, Cali. 
Conner, R. N. 1981. Seasonal changes in woodpecker foraging patterns. Auk 98:562­
570. 
Cooper, C. F. 1960. Changes in vegetation, structure and growth of southwestern pine 
forests since white settlement. Ecol. Monogr. 30: 129-164. 
Covington, W. W., and M. M. Moore. 1992. Presettlement changes in natural fire 
regimes: implications for restoration of old-growth ponderosa pine forests. 
USDA For. Servo Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-2l3, Fort Collins, Colo. 
Covington, W. W., and M. M. Moore. 1994a. Southwestern ponderosa forest structure 
and resource conditions: changes since Euro-American settlement. J. For. 
92:39-47. 
Covington, W. W., and M. M. Moore. 1994b. Post-settlement changes in natural fire 
regimes and forest structure: ecological restoration of old-growth ponderosa pine 
forests. J. Sustain. For. 2:153-181. 
Cunningham, J. B., R. P. Balda, and W. S. Gaud. 1980. Selection and use of snags by 
cavity- nesting birds of the ponderosa pine forest. USDA For. Servo Res. Pap. 
RM-222, Fort Collins, Colo. 
DeGraff, R. M. and J. H. Rappole. 1995. Neotropical migratory birds: natural history, 
distribution, and population changes. Comstock Publishing Assoc., Ithaca. 
" -
Ehrlich, P. R., D. S. Dobkin, D. Darryl Wheye. 1988. The birders handbook: a field 
guide to the natural history of North American Birds. Simon and Shuster Inc., 
New York. 
Fischer, J. M. 1978. A natural history study of the Virginia's warbler (Vermivora 
virginiaei in the ponderosa pine community. M. Sc. thesis, Northern Ariz. 
Univ., Flagstaff. 
Franzreb, K. E. 1983. A comparison of foliage use and tree height selection by birds in 
unlogged and logged mixed-coniferous forest. Biol, Cons. 27:259-275. 
Fule, P. Z. 1996 . Fire regimes and forest structure in pine ecosystems of Arizona, 

25 
U.S.A., and Durango, Mexico. Ph.D. Dissertation, Northern Ariz. Univ., 
Flagstaff. 
Hack, D. K., Jr., M. M. Moore, and W. W. Covington. 1998. Biological assessment and 
evaluation for Camp Navajo forest ecosystem restoration project. Final Report, 
April 14, submitted to U.S . Fish and Wildl. Servo 
Hawksworth, F. G. 1977. The 6-class dwarf mistletoe rating system. USDA For. Servo 
Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-48, Fort Collins, Colo. 
Hejl, S. J., and J. Verner. 1990. Within-season and yearly variations in avian foraging 
locations. Stud. Avian Biol. 13:202-209. 
Hejl, S. 1., 1. Verner, and G. W. Bell. 1990. Sequential versus initial observations in 
studies of avian foraging. Stud. in Avian BioI. 13: 166-173. 
Hilden, O. 1965. Habitat selection in birds. Ann. Zool. Fenn. 2:53-75. 
Hurley, 1. F. 1986. Development, testing, and application of wildlife-habitat models ­
the manager's viewpoint. p. 151-153. In J. Verner, M. M. Morrison, and C. J. 
Ralph [eds.]' Wildlife 2000: modeling habitat relationships of terrestrial 
vertebrates. Univ. of Wise. Press., Madison. 
Jackson, 1. A. 1979. Tree surfaces as foraging substrates for insectivorous birds, p. 69­
93. In J. G. Dickson, R. N. Conner, R. A. Fleet, J. C. Kroll and J. A. Jackson 
[eds.]' The role of insectivorous birds in forest ecosystems. Academic Press, New 
York. 
Johnson, D. H. 1980. The comparison of usage and availability measurements for 
evaluating resource preference. Ecology 61:65-71. 
, 
Kolb, T. E., M. R. Wagner, W. W . Covington. 1994. Concepts of forest health. J. For. 
92: 10-15. 
Kruse, W. H. 1992. Quantifying wildlife habitats within Gambel oak/forest/woodland 
vegetation associations in Arizona, p. 182-186. In USDA For. ServoGen. Tech. 
Rep. RM-2l8, Fort Collins, CO. 
Lundquist, R. W., and D. A. Manuwal. 1990. Seasonal differences in foraging habitat of 
cavity- nesting birds in the southern Washington Cascades. Stud. Avian Biol. 
13:218-225. 
Mariani, P., and D. A. Manuwal. 1990. Factors influencing Brown Creeper (Certhia 
americana) abundance patterns in the southern Washington Cascade Range. Stud. 
Avian BioI. 13:53-57. 

26 
Morrison, M. L., K. A. With, and 1. C. Timossi. 1986. The structure of a forest bird 
community during winter and summer. Wilson Bull. 98:214-230. 
Morrison, M. L., and K. A. With. 1987. Interseasonal and intersexual resource 
partitioning in hairy and white-headed woodpeckers. Auk 104:225-233. 
Neter, J., W. Wasserman, and M. H. Kutner. 1990. Applied linear statistical models: 
regression, analysis of variance, and experimental designs. Irwin , Inc., Boston. 
Neu, C. W., C. R. Byers, and J. M. Peek. 1974. A technique for analysis of utilization­
availability data. J. Wildl. Manage. 38:541-545. 
O'Brien, R. A. 1990. Assessment of nongame bird habitat using forest survey data. 
USDA For. Serv oRes. Pap. INT-431, Ogden, Utah. 
Orians, G. H., and N. E. Pearson. 1979. On the theory of central place foraging, p. 155­
177 In D. J. Hom, G. R. Stairs, R. D. Mitchell [eds.], Analysis of ecological 
systems. Ohio State Univ. , Columbus. 
Ott, R. L. An introduction to statistical methods and data analysis. Fourth ed. Duxbury 
Press, Belmont, Cali. 
Overturf, J. H. 1979. The effect of forest fire on breeding bird populations of ponderosa 
pine forests of northern Arizona. M. Sc. Thesis, Northern Ariz. Univ., Flagstaff. 
Rich, K. M., and P. Mehlhop. 1997. Landscape dynamics and considerations. p. 137-144 
In W. M. Block and D. M. Finch [eds.], Songbird ecology in southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests: a literature review. USDA For. Servo Gen. Tech. Rep. 
RM-292, Fort Collins, Colo. 
Roscoe, J. T., and J. A. Byars. 1971-. An investigation of the restraints with respect to 
sample size commonly imposed on the use of the chi-square statistic. J. Am. Stat. 
Assoc. 66:755-759. 
Rosenstock, S. S. 1996. Habitat relationships of breeding birds in northern Arizona 
ponderosa pine and pine-oak forests. Ariz. Game and Fish Dep. Tech. Rep. 23, 
Phoenix. 53pp. 
Rosenstock, S. S. 1998. Influence of Gambel oak on breeding birds in ponderosa pine 
forests of northern Arizona. Condor 100:485-492. 
Rosenweig, M. L. 1985. Some theoretical aspects of habitat selection, p. 517-540 In M. 
L. Cody [ed.], Habitat selection in birds. Academic Press, Inc., San Diego. 
Sakai, H. E, and B. R. Noon. 1990. Variation in the foraging behaviors of two 
flycatchers: associations with stage of the breeding cycle. Stud. Avian BioI. 

27 
13:237-244. 
Saure, C; and K. H. Kielhorn. 1993. Lacewings in the tree canopy of oak and Scots pine 
(Neuroptera: Coniopterygidae, Hemerobiidae, Chrysopidae). Faun. Oekol. 6:391­
402. . 
Schimpf, D. J., and J. A. MacMahon. 1985. Insect communities and faunas of a Rocky 
Mountain subalpine sere. Great Basin Nat. 45:37-60. 
Scott, V. A., and D. R. Patton. 1989. Cavity nesting birds of Arizona and New Mexico 
forests. USDA For. Servo Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-10, Fort Collins, CO. 
Siegel, J. J. 1989. An evaluation of the minimum habitat quality standards for birds in 
old-growth ponderosa pine forests. M. Sc. Thesis, Univ. of Ariz., Tucson. 94pp. 
Southwood, T. R. E. 1961. The number of insect species associated with various trees. 
J. Anim. EcoI. 30: 1-8. 
Stallcup, P. L. 1968. Spatio-temporal relationships of nuthatches and woodpeckers in 
pine forests in Colorado. Ecology 49:831-843. 
Steinberg, D., and P. Colla. 1995.' CART: tree-structured non-parametric data analysis. 
Salford Systems, Inc., San Diego, Cali. 
Szaro, R. c., and R. P. Balda. 1979a. Bird community dynamics in a ponderosa pine 
forest. Stud. Avian BioI. 3: 1-66. 
Szaro, R. c., and R. P. Balda. 1979b. Effects of harvesting ponderosa pine on nongame 
bird populations. USDA Res. Pap. RM-212, Fort Collins, Colo. 
Szaro, R. C. ,J. D. Brawn, and R. P. Balda. 1990. Yearly variation in resource-use 
behavior by ponderosa pine forest birds. Stud. Avian BioI. 13:226-236. 
Taylor, D. L., and W. J. Barmore. 1980. Post-fire succession of avifauna in coniferous 
forests of Yellowstone and Grand Teton National Parks, Wyoming, p. 130-140. 
In R. M. DeGraaf and N. G. Tilghman, [tech coords.], Workshop Proc., 
Management of western forests and grasslands for nongame birds. USDA Forest 
Servo Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-86, Ogden, Utah. 
Thomas, D. L. and E. J. Taylor. 1990. Study designs and tests for comparing resource 
use and availability. J. Wildl. Manage. 54:322-330. 
Travis, J. 1977. Seasonal foraging by downy woodpeckers. Condor 79:371-375. 
Weikel, J. M., and J. P. Hayes. 1999. The foraging ecology of cavity-nesting birds in  
young forests of the northern coast range of Oregon. Condor 101:58-66.  

28 
White, A. S. 1985. Presettlement regeneration patterns in a southwestern ponderosa pine 
stand. Ecol. 66:589-594. 
Wiens, J. A. 1992. The ecology of bird communities: Vol. 1, foundations and patterns. 
Cambridge University Press. 
Zar, J. H. 1998. Biostatistical analysis. Fourth Ed. Prentice Hall , Engelwood Cliffs, 
N.J. 

29 
Table 1. Habitat variables from Used Plots that differed (r-tests, P < 0.10) between years 
at Camp Navajo and Mt. Trumbull, Arizona. 
Bird species 
Camp Navajo 
Habitat variable 
Means (S.D.) 
1997 
1998 
P 
Mountain 
chickadee (n=86) 
% herb cover a 
0.24 (0.16) 
0.31 (0.15) 
0.036 
Distance (m) 
between large pines" 
9.35 (5.41) 
6.59 (3.97) 
0.040 
White-breasted 
nuthatch (n=77) 
% herb cover a 
Oak snags> 30.5 
cmdbh 
0.26 (0.14) 
0.17 (0.45) 
0.33 (0.15) 
0.000 
0.025 
0.032 
Pygmy 
nuthatch (n=64) 
% herb cover a 
% shrub cover a 
0.22 (0.12) 
0.02 (0.05) 
0.41 (0.17) 
0.08 (0.14) 
0.000 
0.023 
Dark-eyed 
junco (n=78) 
% shrub cover a 
Mistletoe rating 
0.00 (0.01) 
0.64 (0.77) 
0.11 (0.17) 
2.05 (1.28) 
0.020 
0.060 
Mt. Trumbull 
Mountain 
Total basal area 
chickadee (n=63) 
m2/ha 
a Variable was arcsine transformed, 
b Pines ~ 38.0 cm dbh 
64.20 (49.64) 
90.50 (57.05) 
0.059 

30 
Table 2. Mean values for vegetation and physical characteristics on Available Plots and 
Used Plots (each 20x20-m) on the Camp Navajo study area during the 1997 and 1998 
breeding seasons. 
Available 
MOCHa 
WBNU 
PYNU 
DEJU 
VrwA 
PLVI 
WETA 
Characteristic 
n =193 
n =86 
n =77 
n =64 
n =78 
n =53 
n =29 
n =35 
% ground cover 
Woody debris 
4.12 
4.32 
3.04 
4.19 
4.18 
3.01 
3.77 
2.88 
Shrub 
2.38 
1.43 
1.58 
1.31 
2.23 
10.07 
2.75 
3.18 
Grass or forb 
11.98 
10.13 
10.49 
12.59 
12.04 
7.52 
17.32 
12 
Litter 
61.74 
66 .9 
68.14 
65.53 
61.39 
61.9 
63 
69.46 
Rock 
9.06 
7.74 
8 
7.87 
8.48 
9.67 
4.41 
5.43 
Soil 
10.72 
9.48 
8.75 
8.51 
1l.68 
7.83 
8.75 
7.05 
Aspect (% of plots) 
316-45° 
19.17 
19.77 
19.48 
14.63 
17.95 
22.64 
21.43 
14.28 
46-135° 
8.29 
9.30 
15.58 
18.75 
10.26 
7.55 
3.57 
1l.43 
136-225 ° 
29.53 
45 .35 
36.36 
29.69 
30.77 
16.98 
46 .43 
31.43 
226-315° 
48.44 
25 .58 
29.27 
37.50 
39.73 
50.94 
28.57 
37. 14 
% slope 
13.67 
10.59 
10.43 
10.55 
1l.22 
18.06 
10.63 
13.55 
% Canopy closure 
44.42 
46.40 
43.37 
46.83 
43.42 
52 .10 
44.73 
46.98 
Total logs 
2.83 
2.51 
1.96 
1.81 
2.47 
1.98 
1.64 
1.88 
Ponderosa pines 
> 12.5 ern dbh 
9.78 
7.70 
5.82 
6.50 
5.47 
10.21 
8.07 
6.21 
12.5-30.0 em dbh 
8.49 
7.92 
5.36 
4.72 
5.26 
4.12 
4.64 
5.06 
30 .5-45.5 em dbh 
1.35 
1.72 
1.17 
1.41 
1.35 
0.67 
1.25 
0.88 
> 45 .5 ern dbh 
0.42 
0.72 
0.79 
1.42 
0.60 
0.19 
0.89 
0.70 
Gambel oaks 
< 12.5 ern dbh 
10.37 
9.94 
6.49 
7.63 
9.99 
20.00 
7.39 
6.45 
12.5-30.5 ern dbh 
5.47 
4.60 
5.22 
4.17 
5.71 
15.19 
G36 
6.73 
>30.5 ern dbh 
0.61 
0.45 
0.88 
0.50 
0.85 
1.52 
0.82 
0.97 
Locust stems 
< 2.5 cmdbh 
3.10 
1.19 
1.48 
0.97 
4.33 
34.54 
3.54 
3.58 
2.5-12.5 ern dbh 
0.13 
0.55 
0.00 
0.16 
0.89 
2.37 
0.00 
0.00 
Pine snags 
< 12.5 cm dbh 
0.23 
0.22 
0.13 
0.14 
0.22 
0.23 
0.25 
0.45 
12.5-30.0 ern dbh 
0.04 
0.07 
0.01 
0.03 
0.03 
0.00 
0.00 
0.03 
30 .5-45 .5 cm dbh 
0.02 
0.03 
0.78 
0.02 
0.05 
0.02 
0.04 
0.03 
> 45.5 ern dbh 
0.01 
0.05 
0.01 
0.08 
0.05 
0.04 
0.04 
0.12 
Oak snags 
0-12.5 ern dbh 
2.76 
2.22 
1.49 
1.81 
1.82 
3.69 
2.50 
U8 
12.5-30.5 cm dbh 
0.30 
0.33 
0.14 
0.19 
0.23 
0.60 
0.18 
0.21 
>30.5 cmdbh 
0.04 
0.08 
0.08 
0.05 
0.05 
0.08 
0.00 
0.06 
Pine BA (m1/ha) 
14.35 
15.85 
12.05 
14.77 
11 .64 
7.59 
12.29 
10.61 
Total BA (m1/ha) 
21.53 
21.98 
19.12 
20.33 
19.49 
26.39 
20.38 
19.20 
Oak clump area 
(m
2 in 0,04-ha plot) 
44.57 
43.13 
39.22 
36.36 
62.03 
139.94 
89.28 
83.73 
Mean large pine 
9.79 
7.73 
10.91 
8.91 
11.04 
17.32 
8.86 
9.81 
spacing (m) 
Mean dwarf 
0.12 
0.19 
0.23 
0.09 
0.20 
0.20 
0.03 
0.20 
mistletoe rating 
aMaCH =mountain chickadee, WBNU =white-breasted nuthatch, PYNU =pygmy nuthatch, DEJU = 
dark-eyed junco, vrwA =Virginia's warbler, PLVI =plumbeus vireo, WETA =western tanager. 

31 
Table 3. Mean values for vegetation and physical characteristics on Available Plots and 
Used Plots (each 20x20-m) on the Mt. Trumbull study area during the 1997 and 1998 
breeding seasons. 
Available 
MOCHa 
WBNU 
PYNU 
DEJU 
HAWO 
PLYI 
WETA 
Characteristic 
n = 170 
n =63 
n =64 
n =36 
n =39 
n =41 
n =36 
n =38 
% ground cover 
Woody debris 
2.45 
2.01 
2.75 
2.82 
2.14 
2.71 
2.08 
2.24 
Shrub 
4.27 
4.46 
2.45 
3.26 
7.8 
3 
2.83 
4.72 
Grass or forb 
3.78 
3.45 
4.69 
3.48 
11.53 
5.45 
5.54 
4.13 
Litter 
72.27 
75.82 
78.69 
79.65 
59.53 
75.34 
75.99 
74.85 
Rock 
6.47 
6.18 
4.08 
2.31 
4.54 
4.93 
4.67 
3.27 
Soil 
10.76 
8.08 
7.34 
8.48 
14.46 
8.57 
8.89 
10.79 
Aspect 
Flat 
12.12 
17.74 
12.5 
36.11 
23 .08 
12.20 
22.86 
25.00 
316-45 ° 
32.72 
24.19 
26.56 
38.89 
25.64 
26.83 
31.43 
11.11 
46-135 ° 
26.67 
38.71 
40.63 
36.11 
28.21 
31.70 
20.00 
33.33 
136-225° 
18.18 
11.29 
14.06 
11.11 
17.95 
26.83 
22.86 
22.22 
226-315° 
10.30 
8.06 
6.25 
5.56 
5.13 
4.88 
5.71 
8.33 
% slope 
9.55 
7.89 
9.41 
4.75 
6.45 
8.06 
6.31 
7.08 
% Canopy closure 
48.68 
51.30 
53.89 
49 .81 
39.62 
50.10 
4lJ.25 
47.76 
Logs 
1.79 
1.86 
1.91 
2.03 
1.82 
2.07 
2.42 
1.92 
Ponderosa pines 
> 12.5 em dbh 
10.69 
11.38 
9.27 
7.94 
6.36 
10.54 
5.53 
4 .32 
12.5-30.0 em dbh 
9.49 
9.49 
9.11 
9.28 
4.69 
9.02 
7.92 
4.76 
30.5 - 45.5 em 
3.15 
2.90 
3.33 
3.53 
1.97 
2.93 
3.81 
3.47 
dbh 
> 45.5 em dbh 
0.82 
1.54 
1.23 
1.36 
0.72 
1.29 
1.19 
1.16 
Oaks 
< 12.5 em dbh 
3.65 
1.87 
4.13 
0.56 
2.33 
3.61 
2.61 
2.87 
12.5-30 .5 em dbh 
2.24 
2.46 
3.02 
0.83 
3.62 
2.63 
2.86 
2.46 
>30.5 emdbh 
0.06 
0.11 
0.09 
0.11 
0.26 
0.22 
0.39 
0.24 
Locust stems 
< 2.5 emdbh 
1.81 
1.54 
0.89 
1.06 
0.82 
0.90 
0.44 
0.79 
2.5-12.5 em dbh 
.52 
.17 
0.13 
0.00 
0.05 
0.00 
0.19 
0.29 
Ponderosa pine 
snags 
<12 .5 em dbh 
0.52 
0.49 
0.25 
0.28 
0.03 
0.59 
0.03 
0.05 
12.5-30.0 em dbh 
0.08 
0.11 
0.11 
0.00 
0.05 
0.10 
0.00 
0.03 
30.5-45.5 emdbh 
0.03 
0.11 
0.02 
0.03 
0.03 
2.93 
0.00 
0.03 
> 45.5 em dbh 
0.01 
0.05 
0.08 
0.03 
0.13 
1.29 
0.00 
0.00 
Oak snags 
0-12.5 em dbh 
1.99 
1.16 
1.23 
0.69 
0.77 
2.00 
1.33 
1.08 
12.5-30.5 em dbh 
0.72 
0.65 
0.77 
0.22 
0.49 
0.61 
0.69 
0.16 
>30.5 em dbh 
0.02 
0.02 
0.06 
0.00 
0.00 
0.02 
0.00 
0.00 
Pine BA (m2/ha) 
13.52 
15.87 
15.57 
16.40 
9.27 
14.81 
16.18 
14.57 
Total BA (m2/ha) 
16.20 
18.51 
18.95 
16.96 
13.28 
18.01 
19.83 
17.96 
Oak clump area 
(m
2 in 0.04-ha plot) 
26.77 
15.50 
23.95 
5.04 
38.72 
35.38 
16.36 
22.86 
Mean large pine 
12.42 
11.97 
11.51 
11.48 
6.99 
14.58 
13.52 
13.95 
spacing (m) 
a Abbreviations are same as on Table 2. 

_.
_
32 
Table 4. Percent use of 6 different substrates used by 5 permanent resident and 3 
neotropical migrants during the breeding seasons of 1997 and 1998 in ponderosa pine 
forests of northern Arizona compared to trees available on each study area. "+"indicates 
selection for and "-" indicates selection against that diameter class, based on the 90% 
Bonferroni confidence interval for the proportion used not overlapping the available 
proportion. (Note: Ground observations are listed here for reference, but were excluded 
from t analyses). 
Live 
Pine 
Live 
Oak 
Live pinon  
Study site and bird species 
Ground 
pine
d 
snag 
oak" 
snag
and juniperr  
.. 
Camp Navajo  
Mountain chickadee (n =87) b 
2 
69 + 
28 -
0-
0  
White-breasted nuthatch (n =78) b 
63 + 
4 
30 -
2 -
0  
Pygmy nuthatch (n =66) b 
0 
85 + 
3 
12 -
0-
0  
Dark-eyed junco (n =82) c 
46
21 
0
33 
0  
Virginia's warbler (n =54) b 
2 
5 -
0-
93 + 
0-
0­
Plumbeus vireo (n =29) c 
0
69 
0
31 
0 
0  
Western tanager (n =35) c 
0
51 
3
46 
0 
0 
Available" 
44 
46 
7 
2 
Mt. Trumbull  
Mountain chickadee (n =63) c 
10
71 
0 
6
2 
11  
White-breasted nuthatch (n =64) c 
6 
69 
16
3 
5  
Pygmy nuthatch (n =35) 
b 
0 
100+
0 
0-
0 
0­
Dark-eyed junco (n =39) c 
80 
10
0 
10
0 
0  
Hairy woodpecker (n =42) b 
3 
51
7
29
3 
7 ­
Plumbeus vireo (n =37) c 
0 
73
5
11
0 
8  
Western tanager (n =39) c 
26
59
0
15
0 
0  
Available 
58 
17 
6 
17  
a Percentage of6864 trees on 193 Available Plots at Camp Navajo, or 6153 trees on 170 Available Plots 
at Mt. Trumbull. 
b Overall t tests for homogeneity between used and available trees were significant at P < 0.001 . 
c Overall t tests for homogeneity between used and available trees were not significant; no further tests 
conducted. 
d Pine =Pinus ponderosa 
e Oak =Quercus gambelii 
r pinon =Pinus edt/lis, juniper =Juniperus deppeana. 

34 
Table 6. Proportion of ponderosa pine and Gambel oak size classes selected by 6 
passerine birds at Mt. Trumbull, Arizona during breeding seasons of 1997 and 1998 
compared to the size distribution of live pines and oaks available. All omnibus Chi­
squared tests for homogeneity between used and available diameter distributions were 
significant at P < 0.0005 for each bird and tree species except where sample sizes were 
insufficient. "+"indicates selection for and "_" indicates selection against that diameter 
class, based on the 90% Bonferroni confidence interval for the proportion used not 
overlapping the available proportion. 
Proportion used by a 
Tree species 
Available 
MOCH 
WBNU 
PYNU 
HAWO 
PLVI 
WETA 
and dbh class 
proportion 
(ern) 
Ponderosa pine 
< 12.5 
0044 
0.02· 
0.02· 
0.00· 
O.OOb 
0.04 ­
0.09 b 
12.5-30.0 
0.39 
0.37 
0.34 
0.29 
0.19 b 
0040 
OA3 b 
30.5-45.5 
0.13 
0.28 
0.26 
0.34 + 
0.24 b 
0040+ 
0.13 b 
>45.5 
0.04 
0.33 + 
0.37 + 
0.37 + 
0.57 b 
0.20 + 
0.35 b 
Gambeloak 
< 12.5 
0.61 
0.09 b 
0.20 b 
0.00 
0.17 b 
0.25 b 
O.OOb 
12.5-30.5 
0.38 
0.64 b 
0.60 b 
0.00 
0.50 b 
0.50 b 
0.67 b 
> 30.5 
0.01 
0.27 b 
0.20 b 
0.00 
0.13 b 
0.25 b 
0.33 b 
• MOCH =mountain chickadees (n =43 pines, 10 oaks), WBNU =white-breasted nuthatches (n =35 
pines, 10 oaks) , PYNU =pygmy nuthatches (n =35 pines, 0 oaks), HAWO =hairy woodpeckers (n =21 
pines, 12 oaks) , PLVI =plumbeus vireos (n =29 pines, 4 oaks), and WETA =western tanagers (n =23 
rines, 6 o.aks) 
Insufficient sample size (average expected observations over all categories ~ 6 for the 0.01 level of 
significance) for i analysis. 

35 
Table 7. Foraging behaviors of 8 passerine birds at Camp Navajo and Mt. Trumbull, 
Arizona during the breeding seasons of 1997 and 1998. 
Study site and 
Foraging behavior used (%) 
bird species 
Ground glean 
Bark glean 
Foliage glean 
Flycatch 
Camp Navajo 
Mountain chickadee (n =87) 
2 
17 
81 
0 
While-breasted nuthatch (n =78) 
2 
90 
8 
0 
Pygmy nuthatch (n =66) 
42 
57 
0 
'Dark-eyed junco (n =82) 
48 
14 
38 
0 
Virginia's warbler (n =54) 
2 
4 
93 
Plumbeus vireo (n =29) 
0 
31 
62 
7 
Western tanager (n =35) 
0 
14 
83 
3 
Mt. Trumbull 
Mountain chickadee (n =63) 
10 
35 
55 
0 
White-breasted nuthatch (n =64) 
93 
6 
0 
Pygmy nuthatch (n =35) 
0 
32 
68 
0 
Dark-eyed junco (n =39) 
80 
0 
20 
0 
Hairy woodpecker (n =42) 
3 
94 
3 
0 
Plumbeus vireo (n =37) 
0 
19 
76 
5 
Western tanager (n =39) 
26 
5 
49 
20 

36 
Table 8. Foraging zones used by 8 passerine birds at Camp Navajo and Mt. Trumbull, 
Arizona during the breeding seasons of 1997 and 1998. 
Study site and 
Foraging zone used (%) 
bird species 
Understory 
Below 
Lower 
Mid 
Upper 
crown 
crown 
crown 
crown 
Camp Navajo 
Mountain chickadee (n =87) 
2 
0 
13 
48 
37 
White-breasted nuthatch (n =78) 
2 
5 
19 
39 
35 
Pygmy nuthatch (n =66) 
6 
39 
53 
Dark-eyed junco (n =82) 
45 
0 
15 
25 
15 
Virginia's warbler (n =54) 
2 
0 
8 
14 
76 
Plumbeus vireo (n =29) 
0 
3 
10 
52 
35 
Western tanager (n =35) 
0 
0 
12 
31 
57 
Mt. Trumbull 
Mountain chickadee (n =63) 
10 
0 
28 
29 
33 
White-breasted nuthatch (n =64) 
6 
13 
28 
36 
17 
Pygmy nuthatch (n =35) 
0 
3 
6 
37 
54 
Dark-eyed junco (n =39) 
77 
0 
13 
10 
0 
Hairy woodpecker (n =42) 
3 
7 
7 
45 
38 
Plumbeus vireo (n =37) 
0 
0 
32 
49 
19 
Western tanager (n =39) 
28 
8 
8 
28 
28 

37 
Table 9. Habitat variables that differed significantly (paired samples r-test, P < 0.10 after 
a Bonferroni correction) between Used and Available Plots at Camp Navajo and Mt. 
Trumbull, Arizona during the breeding seasons of 1997 and 1998. 
Used 
Available 
Habitat variable 
Mean (std. dev.) 
Mean (std. dev.)  
Study site and species 
(ern dbh) 
(trees/ha) 
(trees/ha) 
P  
Camp Navajo  
Pygmy Nuthatch  
Ponderosa pines 
35.55 (33.88) 
19.53 (29.38) 
0.012 
> 45.5
(n = 64) 
Virginia's warbler  
Gambel oaks < 
500 .00 (549.00) 
291.18 (486 .50) 
0.072 
12.5
(n = 53) 
Gambeloaks 
379 .75 (292.50) 
179.75 (217.50) 
< 0.010 
12.5-30.5 
New Mexican 
863.50 (1583.25) 
291.18(587.75) 
0.024 
locust < 2.5 
Mt. Trumbull  
White-breasted 
Ponderosa pines 
30.75 (38.25) 
15.63 (21.60) 
0.039  
nuthatch (n = 64) 
> 45.5  
Dark-eyed junco  
Gambeloaks 
117.25 (155.00) 
248 .08 (273.95) 
0.070 
12.5-30.5 
(n = 39) 
Hairy woodpecker  
Gambeloaks 
65.75 (100.50) 
23.78 (52.73) 
0.065 
12.5-30.5
(n = 41) 

Table 10. Habitat variable associations chosen by classification tree models for 6 passerine birds during the breeding seasons of 1997 
and 1998, Camp Navajo and Mt. Trumbull, Arizona. 
Cut point values" 
Study site and 
Overall c1assification 
bird species 
Habitat variable 
Used plots 
Available plots" 
accuracies" 
Camp Navajo 
White-breasted nuthatch 
(n=77) 
Pygmy nuthatch 
(n=64) 
Virginia's warbler 
(n=52) 
Plumbeous vireo  
(n =28)  
Western tanager  
(n =33)  
Mt. Trumbull 
Dark-eyed junco 
(n =39) 
Pines> 45.5 
cmdbh 
Pines> 45.5 
cmdbh 
Oaks 12.5-30.5 
cmdbh 
Pines 12.5-30.0 
cmdbh 
Pines 12.5-30.0 
ern dbh 
'Pines ~ 38.0 spacing 
> 12.5 treeslha 
(.69) 
> 12.5 trees/ha 
(.73) 
> 262.5 trees/ha 
(.80) 
< 37.5 trees/ha 
(.78) 
< 37.5 trees/ha 
(.78) 
> 6.25 m apart 
(.65) 
< 12.5 trees/ha 
(.63) 
< 12.5 trees/ha 
(.70) 
< 262.5 trees/ha 
(.69) 
> 37.5 treeslha 
(.68) 
> 37.5 trees/ha 
(.68) 
< 6.25 m apart 
(.75) 
69% 
73% 
75% 
79% 
79% 
74% 
a Values in parentheses represent proportion of observations correctly assigned to each outcome. 
b Determined by jacknife cross-validation procedure. 
C n =193 Available Plots Camp Navajo and n =170 for Mt. Trumbull. 
LV 
oo 

Figure 1. Map of Mt. Trumbull and Camp Navajo study areas. 

40 
r 
Fredonia 
Mt. Trumbull 
Camp Navajo 
Flagstaff 

41 
Figure 2. Classification tree model of macrohabitat selection by pygmy nuthatches 
(n=36) during breeding seasons of 1997 and 1998 in a pine-oak forest, Mt. Trumbull, 
Arizona. The overall classification accuracy was 55%. Values in parentheses represent 
proportion of observations correctly assigned to each outcome. 

- - ----- - --- --- - - - - - - --- - - - - - - - - - -
> 137.5 trees/ha 
< 137.5 trees/ha 
> 14.75 m apart 
< 14.75 m apart 
Availability plot 
( 1.0) 
< 6.75 m apart 
> 6.75 m apart 
Availability plot 
(.67) 
Used plot 
(.65) 
Availability plot 
(.74) 
~ 
N 

Figure 3. Classification tree model of macrohabitat selection by plumbeus vireos (n=36) 
during breeding seasons of 1997 and 1998 in a pine-oak forest, Mt. Trumbull, Arizona. 
The overall classification accuracy was 61%. Values in parentheses represent proportion 
of observations correctly assigned to each outcome. 

> 287.5 trees/ha
< 287.5 trees/ha 
< 70.26 m
2lha 
> 70.26 m2/ha 
Availability plot 
(.76) 
Used plot 
(.70) 
Availability plot 
(.62) 
~ 
~ 
