 
San Juan Fire Fuel Treatment Effectiveness Report 
Page 1 
San Juan Fire 
Fuel Treatment Effectiveness Report 
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest 
Arizona 
 
 
 
 
 
Incident Dates: June 26-July 2, 2014 
 
 

 
San Juan Fire Fuel Treatment Effectiveness Report 
Page 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents 
 
1. Introduction……………………………………………………….……………………..…….…  3 
 
2. Fire Environment…………………………………………………………………………………  5 
 
3. Narrative/Chronology…………………………………………………………………………..  6 
 
4. Potential Consequences………………………………………..……...........................................  9 
 
5. Fuel Treatment Effectiveness…………………………………………………………………… 10 
 
6. Lessons Learned……………………………………………………............................................ 14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1                                                                                                                                    Figure 2 
 
Photos show burnout operations on the San Juan Fire being conducted on June 30 (Figure 1) and on June 29 (Figure 2). 
 
 
  
“The prior fuel treatments allowed for safe firefighting.” 
 
Buck Wickham 
Operations Section Chief 

 
San Juan Fire Fuel Treatment Effectiveness Report 
Page 3 
 
 
VIDEO 
 
See Jeremy Human, Forest Fuels Specialist, Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest, 
describe the actions taken on the fire’s first day. On the San Juan Fire, Human 
served as the Incident Commander on the Type 3 Incident Management Team 
and was the Operations Section Chief Trainee for the Type 2 Incident 
Management Team. 
 
 
SJHumanDay1 
(https://youtu.be/_lcr_st1Hzk) 
 
Overall, the fuel treatments that were encountered by this fire performed as 
designed by reducing fire intensities. This allowed firefighters to work in a 
safer environment where their suppression efforts could be successful. 
 
1. Introduction 
 
 
 
 
The San Juan Fire started June 
26, 2014 on the White Mountain 
Apache Reservation and entered 
the Apache-Sitgreaves National 
Forest soon after detection. The fire 
is suspected to be person-caused. 
 
Fire behavior on the incident’s 
first two days was influenced by 
strong southwest winds of 15 mph 
with gusts to 25 mph and 
extremely dry fuel conditions 
resulting from long-term drought. 
 
Evacuations were issued on the 
fire’s first evening by Apache 
County for the subdivisions of Red 
Cabin Ranch, with seven homes, 
and Whiting Homestead, with 12 
homes and a total of 27 structures. 
 
The next day, the Carlock 
Ranch, with one home and several 
outbuildings, was also evacuated. 
 
Containment efforts were largely successful with the last day of significant fire spread on July 1. Monsoon 
rains arrived on July 2 which prompted the lifting of evacuation orders. Final fire size was 6,975 acres. 
 
Fuel Treatments Reduce Fire Intensities 
Overall, the fuel treatments that were encountered by this fire performed as designed by reducing fire 
intensities. This allowed firefighters to work in a safer environment where their suppression efforts could be 
successful. 
 
The fire’s forward spread was largely halted by the end of the second day—despite continued high 
winds—in large part due to the success of burnout operations in areas where previous thinning and prescribed 
burning had occurred.  
 
Figure 3 – The wind-driven San Juan Fire on its first day. 
 
 

 
San Juan Fire Fuel Treatment Effectiveness Report 
Page 4 
 
 
VIDEO 
 
See Jeremy Human, Forest Fuels Specialist, 
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest, describe 
how fuel treatment areas helped 
suppression actions on the San Juan Fire. 
Human served as the fire’s IMT3 IC and the 
IMT2 Operations Section Chief Trainee. 
 
SJHumanTreatments 
 
(http://youtu.be/7ykq2eII7mg) 
The San Juan Fire’s negative impacts on 
Forest resources were greatly reduced due to 
these previous fuel treatments—coupled 
with the conscientious efforts on the part of 
firefighters to conduct fire suppression 
activities aimed at reducing fire intensities. 
The overall, cumulative outcome of these 
actions became a final fire footprint that 
experienced some high-severity fire, but with 
the majority of the fire burning at low to 
moderate severity that resulted in the 
protection of forest stand conditions. 
 
 
The impacts of the San Juan Fire on the Forest resources were greatly 
reduced as a result of the previous fuel treatments, in addition to the 
conscientious effort on the part of firefighters to conduct fire 
suppression activities in a way that reduced fire intensities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5 – Fire Progression Map of the San Juan Fire—from June 26 through July 1, 2014. 
Figure 4 – The San Juan 
Fire experienced some 
high-severity burning, 
but, for the most part, 
previous fuel treatments 
greatly reduced the 
fire’s intensity/effects. 

 
San Juan Fire Fuel Treatment Effectiveness Report 
Page 5 
 
2. Fire Environment 
A. Fire Weather 
A low pressure system that dominated the weather pattern for the first two days of the San Juan Fire 
brought strong, gusty southwest winds on June 26-27. By June 28 an upper level ridge formed which reduced 
wind speeds but also brought warmer temperatures and drier relative humidity. Beginning on June 29, the 
fire’s fourth day, the first signs of the annual monsoons were observed with increased cloud cover and higher 
relative humidity. Rainfall began on July 2 and continued for the next several weeks. 
Observations taken from the Lakeside RAWS for June 26 
(This RAWS is located approximately 15 miles east of the San Juan Fire.) 
 
 
Maximum Temperature: 85 degrees 
 
Minimum Relative Humidity: 6 percent 
 
Wind Speed and Direction: South-Southwest at 11 mph, with gusts to 23 mph 
 
B. Fuel Conditions 
Two primary vegetative communities were impacted by the San Juan Fire. First, the area immediately 
impacted at the higher elevations around Juan Garcia Mountain is generally a mixed-conifer community 
dominated by a mix of spruce, white fir, Douglas fir, and aspen. The remainder of the fire area below these 
higher elevations is primarily ponderosa pine with some oak and brush components. When looking at the fuel 
profile of the fire, multiple fire regimes are represented. The mixed conifer ecosystems are adapted to mixed-
severity fire on a 35-100 year interval; while the ponderosa pine ecosystem is adapted to low-severity fire on a 
0-35 year interval.  
Live fuel moistures taken southeast of the fire’s origin were 87 percent for ponderosa pine, which is 
typically dry for pre-monsoon conditions in this area. For the dead fuels, the Fire Behavior Analyst estimated 
the following: 1-hour fuel moisture: 2 percent; 10-hour fuel moisture: 3 percent; 100-hour fuel moisture: 5 
percent; and 1000-hour fuel moisture: 6 percent. The computed National Fire Danger Rating System (NFDRS) 
1000-hour fuels were also estimated below 7 percent which is in agreement with the Fire Behavior Analyst’s 
estimates and indicates critically dry conditions. The Energy Release Component (ERC) from the Lakeside 
RAWS indicates 97th percentile conditions which approached all-time worst conditions for that station (Figure
6). 
 
 
Figure 6 – ERC from Lakeside RAWS. 
Figure 7 – Observed 100-hour fuel moisture 
for June 26, 2014. 

 
San Juan Fire Fuel Treatment Effectiveness Report 
Page 6 
 
 
VIDEO 
 
 
 
See Jerry Drury, Natural Resources Staff 
Officer, Apache-Sitgreaves National 
Forest, provide an overview of the White 
Mountain Stewardship Project: 
 
 
 
http://bit.ly/SJDruryWhiteMt  
 
 
 
Fuel treatments have occurred over a significant proportion of the area, primarily in ponderosa pine 
dominated stands to reduce the risk of damage or loss associated with wildfire and to restore the health and 
function of these fire-dependent ecosystems.   
 
3. Narrative/Chronology 
 
June 26 
The San Juan Fire starts in grass on San Juan Flat at 1145 hours. In the afternoon, high temperatures range 
from the upper-70s to mid-80s. Relative humidity reaches 10-20 percent. The fire is being pushed to the 
northeast by southwest 20-25 mph winds, with gusts of 32 mph. 
 
As the fire moves into ponderosa pine it starts to exhibit single/group tree torching and spotting. Once the 
fire burns into a mixed conifer stand it becomes a running crown fire burning northeast along Pulcifer Creek 
and the Forest Road 96 corridor until it crosses Forest Road 61 to the northeast. A Type 2 Incident Management 
Team is ordered. An in-brief is scheduled for the next morning at 0900.   
 
June 27 
The fire continues burning to the northeast, northwest and southeast as the strong southwest winds 
continue to affect fire behavior. In the afternoon, high temperatures range from the upper-70s to lower-80s. 
Relative humidity ranges from 15-20 percent. 
 
Where the fire burns into established fuel treatments, fire behavior dramatically changes from a crown fire 
with spotting to a ground fire with 8- to 10-foot flame lengths. An in-briefing is conducted by the Fort Apache 
Bureau of Indian Affairs, White Mountain Apache Tribe, and Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest. Transition 
from the Type 3 Incident Management Team occurs at 2000. The fire is 5,000 acres and is 0 percent contained. 
 
June 28 
A ridge of high pressure begins to build from the southwest. Afternoon temperature ranges in the 80s, with 
lower relative humidity (12-20 percent). The wind event of the last two days has ended. The fire becomes more 
terrain and fuel driven. Fire behavior also moderates with the decrease in winds. 
 
The fire burns to the south toward Gillespie Flat and east toward Mineral Creek. The fire is divided into six 
divisions: A,D,G,V, W, and Z. In addition, a Structure Protection Group is created to address the private 
inholdings at Red Ranch Cabin, Carlock Ranch, and Whiting Homestead. 
 
Figure 8 – Ponderosa pine burnout 
operation on the San Juan Fire. 
“Treatments allowed us to go direct versus indirect on the fire’s first day, in part 
because we were able to hold easier and spots were easier to catch.”  
 
Ben Plumb 
Division Z Supervisor 
Figure 9 – High-severity fire effects 
shown on the mixed conifer stands on 
the San Juan Fire. 

 
San Juan Fire Fuel Treatment Effectiveness Report 
Page 7 
 
 
Fuel Treatments Factored 
into Suppression Strategy 
On June 28, the higher 
elevation and mixed conifer 
areas of the fire’s containment 
lines do not hold through the 
burn period. This prompts a 
reassessment of that strategy 
in favor of a more indirect 
approach that uses existing 
roads and fuel treatments to 
support burnout operations in 
Divisions A and D.  
Control features are 
located adjacent to vegetation 
treatments accomplished 
under White Mountain 
Stewardship and wildlife 
habitat improvement projects. 
These wildlife habitat 
projects were funded, in part, 
by the Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation. 
 
From the Type 2 Incident Management Team’s perspective, the treatments were strategic in aiding 
suppression efforts, thus providing for safe and effective control of the fire and minimizing undesirable effects 
to the natural resources. Most importantly, these treatment areas increased the margin of safety for firefighting 
personnel. 
 
Night shift is established to hold and patrol burning operations. 
 
 
 
From the Type 2 Incident Management Team’s perspective, the treatments were 
strategic in aiding suppression efforts, thus minimizing fire size and 
undesirable effects to the natural resources. Most importantly, these treatment 
areas increased the margin of safety for firefighting personnel. 
 
 
 
June 29 
The first signs of monsoonal moisture are observed with scattered afternoon cumulus. Afternoon 
temperature is in the 80s, with relative humidity at 15-25 percent. Division G initiates a burnout operation 
along Forest Road 2, taking advantage of a favorable northwest wind. 
 
In the late afternoon, an aerial ignition operation is initiated in the mixed conifer vegetation types on three 
knobs east of Drop Point 10 to allow the fire to back downslope toward Divisions A/D/G. The objective of this 
aerial ignition operation is to moderate fire behavior in these areas to reduce the fire’s negative effects and aid 
suppression efforts. 
 
Fire behavior on the other areas of the incident consists of smoldering and creeping in the duff and stump 
holes. The fire is now 5,700 acres and is 5 percent contained. 
 
Figure 10 – July 5 operational map of the San Juan Fire. 

 
San Juan Fire Fuel Treatment Effectiveness Report 
Page 8 
 
June 30 
 
The afternoon cumulus field becomes more extensive as the monsoonal 
flow continues to increase—but no thunderstorms develop. Afternoon 
temperatures range from the mid-80s to lower-90s. Relative humidity is in the 
teens in the afternoon. Divisions A/D/G continue burnout operations—
staying even with the backing fire from the previous night’s aerial ignitions. 
The Structure Protection Group remains in place. The night shift is staffed. 
The fire is 6,300 acres and is 5 percent contained. 
 
July 1 
 
This is the first day of monsoonal thunderstorm activity across the area, with temperatures ranging from 
the mid-80s to the low-90s and relative humidity in the low to mid-teens. The storm activity moved primarily 
south of the fire and did not impact the fire area. Division A and D completed burnout operations. Some 
single/group tree torching is observed in concentrations of ponderosa pine reproduction with mostly low-fire 
behavior activity. All other divisions are in mop-up phase. Today’s night shift is the last one for this incident. 
Demobilization of resources begins. The fire is 6,975 acres and is 15 percent contained. 
 
July 2 
 
July 2 is the second day of the monsoonal push. The fire area is impacted 
with thunderstorms and showers. Any further fire behavior is minimal, 
consisting mostly of smoldering and creeping in the duff layers. There is no 
change in fire acreage. On July 2, containment is increased to 70 percent. (From 
July 3-6, fire behavior is minimal. All divisions are in the rehabilitation phase. 
On July 5, the fire is 95 percent contained. It is contained/controlled on July 17 
and is pronounced officially out on July 31.)  
 
  
“Without the treatment, 
we wouldn’t 
have been 
there.” 
 
Barry Green 
Division V Supervisor 
 
“Treatments allowed for 
buffer. We could go pick up 
spots. Without those 
treatments there would have 
been no way to hold our 
burnout.” 
 
 
David Raney 
Division A Supervisor 
Figure 11 – Burn-out operations on 
June 30 on the San Juan Fire. 
 
VIDEO 
 
HumanSJBurnouts 
 
(http://youtu.be/hWOqDas_BUE) 
 
 
 
Jeremy Human, Forest Fuels 
Specialist for the Apache-
Sitgreaves National Forest, points 
out how prior fuel treatments 
helped suppression strategies and 
successful firefighting efforts on 
the San Juan Fire. Human served 
as the fire’s IMT3 IC and the IMT2 
Operations Section Chief Trainee. 

 
San Juan Fire Fuel Treatment Effectiveness Report 
Page 9 
 
 
4. Potential Consequences 
 
 
The potential negative consequences that could have resulted from the further spread of the San Juan Fire 
are worth noting. 
 
Several private ranches are located within one-day’s perimeter growth of where the fire was eventually 
stopped. Moreover, if the fire’s progression had not been stopped, it could have potentially impacted the 
community of Vernon (Figure 12) as well as the Red Cabin Ranch and Whiting Homestead subdivisions, and 
Carlock Ranch.  
 
In addition, the negative impact to vegetative communities and wildlife habitat could have been 
substantially greater than what was actually experienced. Mexican Spotted Owl, Northern Goshawk and 
Apache (Arizona) Trout are some of the species of concern known to inhabit the area. In addition, a number of 
“highly desirable” game species inhabit the fire area, including deer, elk, and antelope. 
 
Therefore, if the San Juan Fire had burned under higher severity over a larger portion of the landscape, its 
consequences could have been much more severe. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“Basically, the treatment areas helped stop the fire’s spread so it didn’t impact the Red 
Cabin Ranch private subdivision. It is super obvious that—without those treatments—
the fire would have spread into Red Cabin.” 
 
Barry Green 
Division V Supervisor 
Figure 12 – General location of the San Juan 
Fire and the surrounding, at-risk 
communities. 
Carlock Ranch 
Red Cabin Ranch 
Whiting Ranch 

 
San Juan Fire Fuel Treatment Effectiveness Report 
Page 10 
 
 
 
5. Fuel Treatment Effectiveness 
 
Generally speaking, the fuel treatments encountered by the San Juan Fire were effective at modifying fire 
behavior. Furthermore, these fuel treatment areas proved to be instrumental in providing fire managers with 
opportunities to contain the fire in a safe and effective manner while simultaneously limiting the fire’s 
potential negative effects on natural resources, the surrounding communities and their infrastructure. 
 
Fire behavior observed by firefighters at the scene—as well as estimates of fire severity taken after the fire 
(Figure 13; Table 1)—confirm that the treated areas performed as designed by not supporting sustained crown-
fire even under extreme burning conditions. 
 
As the San Juan Fire transitioned from untreated mixed conifer to treated ponderosa pine, fire behavior 
also transitioned from intermittent and sustained high-intensity crown fire in the untreated stands to a low-
moderate intensity surface fire in the treated stands. 
 
Thus, firefighters were able to utilize the road system within the treated stands to implement their 
burnouts. These burnout operations limited the forward progress at the head of the fire the day after the fire 
started.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VIDEO 
 
See Tessa Nicolet, Regional Fire Ecologist 
with the U.S. Forest Service’s 
Southwestern Region, explain what this 
map tells us about the San Juan Fire’s 
behavior—and how this affected fire 
suppression actions: 
 
http://bit.ly/SJTessaSeverityMap  
Figure 13 – Map of the 
San Juan Fire “Rapid 
Assessment of 
Vegetation Condition 
after Wildfire” 
(RAVG). RAVG 
products are generated 
to provide information 
that can assist post-fire 
vegetation management 
planning designed to 
address a number of 
management 
objectives. 
 

 
San Juan Fire Fuel Treatment Effectiveness Report 
Page 11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
% of San Juan fire areas in each RAVG severity class 
RAVG (% BA Loss) 
% of Entire Fire 
Area 
% of San Juan 
Fire Perimeter 
with NO 
Treatments 
% of San Juan Fire 
Perimeter with 
Treatments 
Low  0-25% 
14 
16 
11 
Moderate   26-50% 
35 
29 
45 
Mod/High  51-75% 
21 
16 
31 
High  >76% 
29 
38 
13 
% of Ponderosa Pine vegetation types in each RAVG Severity class 
RAVG (% BA Loss) 
% of all Ponderosa 
Pine 
% of Ponderosa 
Pine Areas with 
NO Treatments 
% of Ponderosa 
Pine Areas with 
Treatments 
Low  0-25% 
13 
17 
11 
Moderate   26-50% 
47 
44 
49 
Mod/High  51-75% 
28 
22 
31 
High  >76% 
12 
18 
9 
 
 
Table 1– This table presents a comparison of preliminary RAVG (Rapid Assessment of Vegetation Condition 
after Wildfire) results for the entire San Juan Fire area by treatment type, as well as for the ponderosa pine-
dominated vegetation types where the majority (82%) of all fuel treatments took place.  Overall, much less of 
the areas that had received fuel treatments burned with high severity than those that did not receive fuel 
treatments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
San Juan Fire Fuel Treatment Effectiveness Report 
Page 12 
 
 
 
A. Research Study Sites 
One fortunate aspect of the San Juan Fire is that it 
burned through a series of experimental study sites 
established by the Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI) 
at Northern Arizona University. 
 
As a result, we now have a much more precise side-
by-side comparison of fuel treatment effectiveness of 
two different approaches to fuel treatments as 
compared to a control or untreated site. These study 
sites were initially established to facilitate long-term 
monitoring of these types of treatments. It is therefore 
especially informative to observe and study the impacts 
of an actual wildfire under peak burning conditions on 
such intensively monitored sites.  
 
The key objectives of this long-term study are to: 
 
 Quantify site-specific reference conditions 
using dendro-ecological reconstruction 
methods. 
 
 Analyze effects of elevation on historical 
changes in forest structure and fire 
behavior. 
 
 Compare the effects of alternative 
restoration treatments. 
 
Known as the “A-S Mineral Study Site”, the study 
design consists of:  
 
 Four study blocks located in ponderosa pine 
dominated sites.  
 
 Each block contains three side-by-side treatment 
units (each unit approximately 32 acres in size): 
 
Control (no treatment) Unit 
 
Burn Only (broadcast burn with no 
mechanical thinning) Unit 
 
Full Restoration (mechanical 
thinning, piling, and burning) Unit 
 
 Elevation gradient ranging from 7,800 to 8,200 
feet. 
 
 Initially measured in 2002.  
 
 Treatments completed in fall 2008. 
 
 Re-measured in 2009 and again in 2013. 
 
 
 
Figure 14 – A-S Mineral Study Site’s thin and burn treatment (aka 
“Full Restoration”) shown after the passage of the San Juan Fire. 
This photo, taken within weeks of the fire, shows how very little 
overstory damage has occurred and ground cover vegetation is 
recovering. (Ecological Restoration Institute) 
Figure 15 – A-S Mineral Study Site’s burn-only treatment area after 
the passage of the San Juan Fire. Notice more tree stems in this 
photo than in the “Full Restoration” treatment photo above (Figure 
14). While fire behavior was moderated here, it appears there was 
more mortality due to scorch than experienced on the “Full 
Restoration” treatment area. (Ecological Restoration Institute) 
Figure 16 – A-S Mineral Study Site’s control (no treatment) site 
after the passage of the San Juan Fire. Almost complete mortality 
occurred with most of the trees onsite being either consumed or 
completely scorched. (Ecological Restoration Institute) 

 
San Juan Fire Fuel Treatment Effectiveness Report 
Page 13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Combination of Thinning and Burning Treatments Proved Most Effective 
 
Inside one of the A-S Mineral Study Site study blocks, the San Juan Fire impacted all three treatments types 
(control; thin and burn; and burn only). From the visual indicators at this study site, it appears that the 
combination of thinning and burning was the most effective for reducing fire intensities and protecting 
forested tree cover (Figure 14). 
 
The burn-only treatment moderated fire behavior as compared to the no treatment-control unit (Figure 16), 
but not as effectively as the mechanical and burn unit. Considerable tree mortality due to severe scorch is still 
evident in the burn-only treatment area (Figure 15). 
 
ERI investigators speculate that the 2008 prescribed fire treatment was effective at scorching the lower 
portion of the trees and raising the base of the tree crowns. However, this treatment was not as effective at 
removing individual trees to reduce overall tree densities. Hence, the result of the burn-only treatment was a 
closed canopy stand with the canopy base height raised. Even so, this burn-only treatment area became a 
much denser stand than what was produced by the combination treatment of mechanical thinning and 
burning. 
 
Both treatments were superior to the control (no treatment) unit in which high-severity fire prevailed, 
causing almost complete mortality throughout the stand. 
 
For a more complete discussion of the A-S Mineral Study Site, see:  
 
 
http://nau.edu/ERI/Research/Ecological-Research/Arizona/Apache-Sitgreaves/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VIDEO 
 
http://bit.ly/SJGrecoRestoration 
 
The ERI’s 
Three Side-By-Side Treatment Units 
 
 
 
Standing on site in the 
aftermath of the San Juan 
Fire, Bruce Greco, Director 
of Outreach for the 
Ecological Research 
Institute, describes the 
significance of ERI’s three 
“Long-Term Ecological 
Restoration Plots”. 
 
 
 
Bruce Greco 

 
San Juan Fire Fuel Treatment Effectiveness Report 
Page 14 
 
 
 
 
 
 “The San Juan Fire provided lessons about how treated areas did what they 
were designed to do: slow a fire's advance and restore a forest’s natural ability 
to self-regulate. How a wildfire behaves when it reaches a treatment area is a 
good test of how those treatments work. Fire crews and incident management 
teams reported that when the fire burned into areas that had been thinned, it 
burned with low severity and on the ground, not in treetops. The dry, 
frequent-fire forests of the West evolved with this type of fire, a slow-moving, 
low-severity surface fire that would remove young trees and revitalize 
understory grasses and forbs. Anecdotal evidence from the San Juan Fire also 
suggests that the previously treated areas allowed fire crews to safely conduct 
burn-out operations, thus enabling them to manage and control the fire.” 
 
Wally Covington, Director 
Ecological Restoration Institute; 
Regents’ Professor of Forest Ecology, 
Northern Arizona University 
 
From his Aug. 22, 2014 article in LiveScience’s “Expert Voices – Op-Ed and Insights” 
http://www.livescience.com/47510-wildfire-prevention-is-science-not-art.html  
 
 
 
 
6. Lessons Learned 
 
 
Facilitated Learning Analysis 
 
In September 2014—three months after the San Juan Fire—resource specialists and fire managers from the 
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest along with researchers from the Ecological Restoration Institute at 
Northern Arizona University met for a Facilitated Learning Analysis. 
 
Prior to this Facilitated Learning Analysis, all participants had visited the San Juan Fire site on numerous 
occasions. Thus, all participants had time to formulate opinions from their observations of how their resource 
area was affected by the San Juan Fire. 
 
During the Facilitated Learning Analysis, each participant was asked what they learned from the San Juan 
Fire and associated fuel treatment projects, both in terms of actions and activities they would do again because 
they worked well, as well as actions and activities they would do differently because they believe there is room 
for improvement based on what they observed. 
 
The following section highlights the observations and wisdom shared by these participants.  
Figure 17 – Nighttime burn-out 
operations on the San Juan Fire.  

 
San Juan Fire Fuel Treatment Effectiveness Report 
Page 15 
 
 
A. Fisheries 
 
1. Lesson 
No treatment also has consequences. 
Don’t think that by not treating something 
means it will not undergo change. Doing 
nothing is still a decision with its own 
consequences. 
 
 
Across the country, resource managers often 
implement “Do Not Treat” buffers as a means of 
protecting streams and riparian areas from the impacts of 
treatments such as thinning or prescribed burning. But in 
a fire-prone landscape where an encounter with a 
wildfire is practically inevitable, these buffers can act like 
a fuel corridor, potentially putting aquatics at even more 
risk when wildfires eventually occur. 
 
This negative effect was apparent on Arizona’s 2011 
Wallow Fire in which entire reaches of some streams and 
tributaries were lost as the buffered area burned with 
higher intensity and severity than the surrounding treated area.   
 
 
In contrast, on the San Juan Fire where 
slope and existing vegetation allowed 
treatments to extend to the banks of Mineral 
Creek (that hosts the Apache Trout, a 
“Threatened” species under the Endangered 
Species Act), low-severity fire resulted that 
actually invigorated riparian vegetation and 
left residual trees for shading and future large-
woody debris. These conditions will now 
improve the habitat for aquatics in the long 
term. 
 
 
 
 
2. Lesson 
Implement treatments as close to streams as possible. 
If riparian conditions and terrain/topography allow, managers should treat as close to the 
stream as possible to offer protection to aquatic and riparian habitats and break-up those fuel 
corridors that can threaten the entire stream if a wildfire occurs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VIDEO 
 
http://bit.ly/SJStephStreams 
 
Lessons Learned on Stream Buffers 
Extending Treatments to Stream Banks can 
Improve Aquatic Habitat for the Long Term 
 
 
positive results when the San Juan Fire burned 
through this area.  
 
Stephanie also discusses how the overall 
combination of thinning and prescribed fire 
benefited Mineral Creek’s riparian areas. 
Figure 18 – The Apache Trout, listed as a “Threatened” species under the 
Endangered Species Act, resides in Mineral Creek. Prior thinning and 
prescribed fire along Mineral Creek will benefit habitat for this species. 
Listen to and see, on site, 
Stephanie Coleman, Aquatics 
Program Manager for the 
Apache-Sitgreaves National 
Forest, describe how prior fuel 
treatments that extended to the 
banks of Mineral Creek reaped 

 
San Juan Fire Fuel Treatment Effectiveness Report 
Page 16 
 
 
B. Wildlife 
 
  
“Overall, the effects of the San Juan Fire will be a net 
energy gain back into the system. From a wildlife 
perspective, that’s important.” 
 
Mike Godwin  
Field Supervisor 
Arizona Game and Fish Department 
 
Lesson 
Tilting the odds in our favor. 
Treating the vegetation doesn’t guarantee 
wildlife habitat will improve, but it sets the 
stage for improvement and tilts the odds in our 
favor. The amount and duration of moisture is 
the most critical component in the Southwest—
and only Mother Nature controls this function.   
 
 
 
 
 
C. Soils-Hydrology 
 
Lesson 
Design criteria for future projects. 
Keeping a viable overstory canopy and reducing 
surface fuels to help ensure that a passing 
wildfire does not burn exceedingly hot should be 
design criteria for future projects. 
 
The treated areas  that were intersected by the San 
Juan Fire were effective in reducing soil loss from the 
San Juan Fire because: 
 
 There were still living trees left after the fire, 
and 
 
 There was still some residual ground cover 
after the fire’s passage, thus 
 
 Both of these conditions help to intercept precipitation and minimize soil loss. 
 
On the San Juan Fire, some treated sites favored low-severity wildfire which is favorable for long-term 
soil productivity. This is clearly illustrated in the Burned Area Reflectance Classification (BARC) maps 
(Figure 19) and Table 2 (both on next page). 
 
From a soil productivity standpoint, when the San Juan Fire burned into the treated stands it returned 
nutrients to the soil without heating the soil in excess. This is a significant, positive outcome. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VIDEO 
 
http://bit.ly/SJMikeEffects 
 
Lessons Learned 
on Wildlife Habitat Improvement 
 
 
Mike Godwin, Field Supervisor with 
the Arizona Game and Fish 
Department, discusses how we are 
setting the stage for the key phases 
that will provide the recruitment of 
the vital browse, forbs, and grass 
 
 species that will benefit wildlife habitat. 
 
Godwin also points out the observed effects of the 
San Juan Fire, including the return of some browse 
species that have been absent here for several years.  
 
VIDEO 
 
http://bit.ly/SJEricSoils 
 
Lessons Learned 
on Soils and Hydrology 
 
Eric Robertson, Soil Scientist with the 
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest, 
discusses how fire effects above the 
ground are important considerations 
for determining potential soil loss. 
 
 
In this on-site interview, Robertson also points out 
the new grasses that are establishing post-fire, as 
well as the stands that received 100 percent 
mortality. He explains the ramifications of both of 
these conditions. 

 
San Juan Fire Fuel Treatment Effectiveness Report 
Page 17 
 
 
 
Figure 19 – Map of the San Juan Fire Burned Area Reflectance Classification (BARC). BARC is a 
satellite-derived data layer of post-fire vegetation condition. The BARC has four classes: High, 
Moderate, Low, and Unburned. A majority of the high-severity areas on the map are coincident 
with the areas that did not have a vegetation treatment applied. Conversely, in the areas in which 
vegetation treatments were applied, the burn severity is classed as Moderate, Low, or Unburned.  
 
 
Percent of San Juan Fire Area 
in each BARC Fire Severity Type by Treatment Type 
BARC Severity 
% of Entire Fire 
Area 
% of Areas with 
NO Treatment 
% of Areas with 
Treatment  
Unburned 
11 
12 
10 
Low 
61 
48 
83 
Moderate 
21 
30 
7 
High 
6 
10 
0 
 
Table 2 – Comparison of preliminary BARC (Burned Area Reflectance Classification) results 
for the San Juan Fire. Burned area soil severity drops off significantly in treated areas. 
Less Fuel = Less residence time = Less negative soil effects. 
 
 

 
San Juan Fire Fuel Treatment Effectiveness Report 
Page 18 
 
D. Timber 
 
1. Lesson 
Plan on Possible Re-Mark after First Cut as You May Be Surprised 
How Much Material Needs to Come Out. 
 
 “There’s no sense in trying to get it perfect the first time. Just factor in 
that you will need some practice to get the feel for marking. Therefore, 
plan to re-mark some units as needed—especially when you are first 
getting started.” 
Raymond Rugg, Zone Timber Staff 
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest 
 
Raymond Rugg, Zone Timber Staff, Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest, explains how when they 
started marking these treatment units, their first entries tended to not take out as much as needed. He 
said that when you paint each cut tree, the visual impact to the eye is that everything looks painted—
and you therefore think that you’ve gone too far. 
 
“But after the cut, a lot is still left,” Rugg points out. “Often times it was way more than we 
wanted to be left.” 
 
2. Lesson 
If a Higher Basal Area (More Trees) is Desired, a Groupy/Clumpy Prescription 
May Help Reduce Crown Fire Spread Better than a Uniform Prescription. 
 
In some cases, the treatment called for more trees to be left than what was thought ideal to reduce 
the crown fire threat. Raymond Rugg, Zone Timber Staff, Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest, 
explained how they discovered that they could help mitigate this by using a groupy/clumpy 
prescription—leaving patches of tighter-spaced trees isolated by greater distances to neighboring 
groups or patches. 
 
Many people believe this becomes a more aesthetically pleasing landscape than a more uniform 
forest cover. While effective, it can be more difficult to implement a groupy/clumpy prescription due 
to the higher training needed to layout these more complex arrangements. 
 
3. Lesson 
In these Forest Types, Diameter Caps Less than 12 Inches 
Make for Ineffective Fuel Treatments. 
 
Raymond Rugg, Zone Timber Staff, Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest, said that 12-inch cap 
limits didn’t take enough trees out. The result was often a mostly closed canopy with little space 
between trees. Besides stressing out the competing trees, this also reduced understory grass/forb 
production. 
 
“By not taking out enough, these forested areas were less likely to burn in a low-intensity surface 
fire and more disposed to burn in a higher-intensity crown fire,” Rugg explains. 
 
While the intention of retaining the forested appearance of the landscape is the primary reason 
we impose these caps, Rugg cautions that we need to be careful in the future that we don’t make the 
cap too small—less than 12 inches. This can place the entire stand at risk. 
 
Rugg says that a larger cap and a more varied marking scheme can be the answer as there is 
significant value in creating diversity of age classes to perpetuate the stand over time while still 
creating separation between tree canopies to allow more light to reach the forest floor and improve 
understory conditions. 
 

 
San Juan Fire Fuel Treatment Effectiveness Report 
Page 19 
 
 
E. Fire Ecology 
 
 
  Prescribed Fire Treatments Need to Follow 
  Mechanical Treatments 
 
1. Lesson 
Treatments that approximate historical conditions and include evidence-based 
thinning treatments plus repeated surface fire can be an effective way to 
restore ecosystem structure and function while reducing crown fire hazard. 
 
Generally speaking, areas where we used prescribed fire as a follow-up treatment to thinning 
experienced less burn severity from the San Juan Fire than those areas where we only used thinning or 
only used prescribed fire. 
 
When we only thinned, we didn’t get rid of the fine fuels (needles/twigs) that make up so much of the 
fuel bed. Intensities, therefore, tended to be higher. When we only prescribe burned, the overgrown 
condition of the stand forced us to burn at very low burning conditions to avoid damaging the entire 
stand. Thus, we burned the small material but didn’t really get rid of the excess trees in these overstocked 
stands. The San Juan Fire may have done some of that work for us.   
 
Goal: Modify Ecosystem Function 
The lesson here is that when we say the intent of our treatment is “Full Restoration” in dry-site 
ponderosa pine in the Southwest, we need to be clear that our goal is to modify not just the structure, but 
also the function of the ecosystem to accept wildfire events like the San Juan Fire. 
 
Mechanical thinning can help us restore the structure sooner by removing excess vegetation. However, 
that system is not restored until it is maintained by regular, recurring fire episodes. On future projects, 
managers need to ensure that they factor this fire regime principle into their design. They need to realize 
that the desired end-state is not just getting the thinning done to change the structure, but also includes 
getting fire back into the landscape on a regular basis. 
 
A forest that can accept fire on regular, recurring basis is really what defines the success of a restoration 
treatment in the ponderosa pine regions of the Southwest. 
 
  Correct Perspective: How Fire Affects 
  Long-Term Ecosystem Health 
 
2. Lesson 
Don’t let the immediate visual impact of the 
burned area trick you into believing that the 
impacts of a fire are worse than they really 
are. Focus on what the fire leaves behind—
not what it takes. 
 
If the desired condition for an area is to have 75 
percent fewer trees and a fire comes through removing all 
but 25 percent of the trees, the immediate visual impact 
may lead you to believe that the results are negative 
because your initial impression is: “everything is burned”. 
 
In the future, expect that once the shock wears off from seeing a lot of burned area and you realize 
there’s still 25 percent of the trees that are going to survive, you might eventually conclude that the fire’s 
outcome wasn’t all that bad. In fact, this result may have been a positive influence for long-term ecosystem 
health.  
 
VIDEO 
 
http://bit.ly/SJTessaHighSeverity 
 
The Benefits of High-Severity Fire 
 
 
Tessa Nicolet, Fire Ecologist for 
the U.S. Forest Service’s 
Southwestern Region, discusses 
how high-severity fire can serve as 
a positive influence for long-term 
ecosystem health. 
 

 
San Juan Fire Fuel Treatment Effectiveness Report 
Page 20 
 
 
 
F. NEPA Planning 
 
 
Lesson 
 
Each project is individual. Thus, the 
plan/prescription should be flexible enough 
to allow for selecting the appropriate “tool” for 
the site-specific conditions. 
 
There are no “one-size-fits-all” treatment 
prescriptions. 
 
That’s why resource specialists need to utilize all 
the available “tools” and customize the treatment to 
the needs of each specific area. In doing so, resource 
specialists need to communicate with other specialists, 
discuss options related to equipment, contracting, timing constraints, fire effects, and various other 
considerations in conjunction with the project’s objectives and priorities. 
 
Above all, during their current planning, managers and resource specialists must be prepared to 
deviate from what has been done in the past, be diligent in monitoring as implementation occurs, and be 
flexible as the project is implemented to ensure adaptations can occur as necessary—according to the 
monitoring.  
 
 
 
 
G. Collaborative Relationships and Communications 
 
1. Lesson 
 
Ensuring positive effects on the land requires 
common interests among many stakeholders, a 
source of funding, and—even more 
importantly—a willingness to take calculated 
risks for the benefit of the resource. 
 
Treatment design begins with finding the 
intersection of common interests or goals among 
various collaborators. 
 
Subsequently, and most importantly, there must be 
trust in the fire managers to implement the treatments 
in a manner that provides this collaboration with the 
most efficient and effective use of their resources that 
achieves those common goals. 
 
 
 
 
VIDEO 
 
http://bit.ly/SJStephTool 
 
The Most Important Message: 
Using the Flexibility in NEPA 
to Choose the Correct “Tool” 
from Your Toolbox 
 
Stephanie Coleman, Aquatics 
Program Manager for the 
Apache-Sitgreaves National 
Forest, points out the importance of determining 
the appropriate treatment tool. 
 
 
VIDEO 
 
http://bit.ly/SJMikePartners 
 
Partnerships Help Accomplish 
Management Objectives on the Ground 
 
 
Mike Godwin, Field Supervisor 
with the Arizona Game and Fish 
Department, discusses how his 
agency’s “Habitat Partnership 
Committee Process” is helping to 
implement wildlife habitat 
improvement projects on the 
ground. 
 
Godwin praises the Apache-Sitgreaves National 
Forest fire managers for their willingness to take 
calculated risks to ensure that wildlife habitat 
objectives are achieved.  

 
San Juan Fire Fuel Treatment Effectiveness Report 
Page 21 
 
 
2. Lesson 
 
As line officers and program managers, we still have room to improve how we 
communicate the key messages regarding our fire management programs. We 
must continue to emphasize that: 1) wildfires can be beneficial as well as 
destructive; 2) cutting trees alone does not necessarily protect the forest from 
wildfire, it takes follow-up treatment with fire to complete the job; and 3) if we 
are to maintain the investment that we’ve made over the past decade, we must 
increase our prescribed burning program.  
 
To garner support for our fire management programs, we must dispel these three 
commonly held myths: 
 
1. All wildfires are bad. 
 
2. Cutting trees alone restores landscapes and reduces fire potential, thus 
prescribed fire isn’t necessary. 
 
3. Safe prescribed burning can only happen in the early spring and late fall. 
 
To counter these myths, our communications—both internally and externally—need to emphasize: 
 
1. The positive effects that can result from wildfires, not just the negative effects. 
 
2. The importance of prescribed fire in finishing the job after cutting to create the most 
effective fuel treatments possible. 
 
3. The feasibility of conducting prescribed burning in late spring or even summer, 
especially in previously treated areas that have light fuel loadings and are less likely 
to cause control problems even with hotter/drier conditions (as was witnessed with 
fire behavior in treated areas on the San Juan Fire).  
 
Beware of the Tendency to Emphasize Mechanical Thinning Over Prescribed Fire 
When Using Stewardship Contracting as a Funding Tool 
 
Too often we hear our message repeated back to us that our goal on the Apache-Sitgreaves 
National Forest is removing trees. 
 
In the future, we should emphasize that returning fire to the landscape is our goal and that 
removing trees is one way we can help make that happen. 
 
Programs with heavy dependence on stewardship contracting—such as the program that we 
have—tend to focus our message on the mechanical thinning aspects of the program. However, 
there is a hazard in this. As a result, we tend to lose the prescribed burning message. 
 
When stewardship contracting is your main vehicle for funding your projects, be aware that 
you need to spend more time communicating about your end-goal—creating forested areas that can 
and do regularly accept fire. Furthermore, always remember that stewardship contracting is simply 
a means for helping us use the value of the timber products to do this work in a more economical 
and cost effective way. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
San Juan Fire Fuel Treatment Effectiveness Report 
Page 22 
 
 
H. Prescribed Fire 
 
1. Lesson 
Fuel treatments that recently experienced 
broadcast prescribed fire were the most 
effective.  
 
  2012 Coon Mountain Prescribed Fire Enabled 
  Immediate Containment of the San Juan Fire 
One of the most notable outcomes of the San Juan 
Fire was the fact that—even under extreme burning 
conditions—because the head of the fire ran into an area 
that had been thinned and recently burned as part of a 
wildlife and fuel reduction project, the fire was able to 
be contained almost immediately. This specific fuel 
treatment project was the 2012 Coon Mountain 
Prescribed Fire that had reduced hazardous fuels and 
removed decadent brush. 
 
While such a dramatic effect is highly unusual, it 
does illustrate the effectiveness of frequently 
recurring prescribed fire and the management of 
wildfires to encourage low- or moderate-intensity 
fire on a regular basis as opposed to a program of 
fire exclusion—which will eventually encourage 
high-intensity fire to occur. 
 
2. Lesson 
Broadcast burning is an effective means to 
mitigate control problems associated with 
pile burning. 
  
Many of the treatment units associated with 
the San Juan Fire resulted in slash piles scattered 
throughout the unit. The traditional burning 
techniques were then implemented—to wait for 
snow or significant rain and then light these 
individual piles. 
 
Often times, Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest managers found that considerable effort was 
invested trying to maintain control of these piles days or weeks after they were ignited as drier 
conditions sometimes caused these fires to creep into the areas between piles. 
 
To mitigate this, they discovered that it was more effective to simply broadcast burn the area—
including burning the fuels in-between the piles. By doing this, they reduced the amount of time and 
effort required to monitor and patrol the treatment area as piles could continue burning for weeks 
but the chance of escape was minimal. Furthermore, patrol and monitoring could be concentrated 
around a perimeter instead of throughout the entire unit—as they had previously been doing. 
 
 
 
 
 
VIDEO 
 
http://bit.ly/SJRobRxEffects 
 
Rob Lever, District Fire 
Management Officer for 
the Apache-Sitgreaves 
National Forest, 
discusses how the head 
of the San Juan Fire 
burned into the site of 
the 2012 Coon Mountain 
Prescribed Fire. 
 
Lever explains how areas treated by thinning, pile 
burning, and broadcast burning were the most 
effective in knocking down the San Juan Fire. This 
suite of treatments also helped the firefighters with 
their suppression tactics and strategies. 
Figure 20 – Final phase of treatment-broadcast burn in 2012 on the 
Coon Mountain Prescribed Fire. 

 
San Juan Fire Fuel Treatment Effectiveness Report 
Page 23 
 
 
3. Lesson 
Recently burned areas—whether by prescribed fire or other 
wildfires—present fire control opportunities.   
 
The areas where prescribed fire had recently been implemented were very effective barriers to 
fire spread. Where the San Juan Fire entered the Coon Mountain Prescribed Fire area, the fire 
stopped on its own in many places and was very easy to control. 
 
The lesson here is that we should think of recently burned areas—whether by prescribed fire or 
wildfire—as potential opportunities for anchor points for future prescribed fires or control features 
for wildfire response. 
 
While fuel loads are recovering and will limit the risk of escape and increase the safety margin 
for firefighters, the San Juan Fire area presents a great opportunity for the initiation of prescribed 
fires for the next few years. 
 
It also represents a great opportunity to possibly allow a naturally ignited fire to burn into the 
San Juan Fire area. This would remove excess fuel and perform fire’s essential role in this ecosystem 
while also allowing for safe and effective fire control—even for a fire that is allowed to grow to 
achieve desirable resource benefits. 
 
4. Lesson 
The San Juan Fire taught us that that there might be opportunities to be 
successful at prescribed burning in mixed conifer fuels if we’re willing 
to accept mixed severity results.   
 
Tactics on the San Juan Fire were very similar to how a prescribed fire would be conducted. 
Ridge tops were ignited in the evening, or at night, allowing fire to back-down with lower intensity. 
In addition, the road system in surrounding open ponderosa pine was relied upon as the primary 
control feature. This allowed the fire in mixed conifer to back down to those more open stands 
where it was easier and safer to control. 
 
The patchy nature of the San Juan Fire in those previously untreated mixed conifer stands was 
to be expected: both a few areas of high-severity crown fire along with areas of moderate to low-
severity fire.  
 
5. Lesson 
The San Juan Fire also taught us that our window of opportunity for 
conducting prescribed fire may be larger than we previously thought.  
 
Treated stands that do not have the kind of heavier fuel loadings that have traditionally 
caused problems will most likely burn under hotter and drier conditions. 
 
The San Juan Fire burned during some of the most critical fire weather conditions this area 
has ever experienced, yet the fuel conditions allowed fire managers to control the fire using 
burnout techniques much the same way we would use if we were igniting this as a prescribed 
fire. 
 
In addition, there is better smoke dispersion in the summer, so folks have yet to reconcile prescribed 
fire and restrictions occurring concurrently.  
 

 
San Juan Fire Fuel Treatment Effectiveness Report 
Page 24 
 
 
6. Lesson 
It is vitally important to treat with prescribed fire 
soon after mechanical treatment and then continue 
frequent prescribed fire to maintain the 
investment you just made to thin the stand in the 
first place. 
 
“It is far more economical to treat with fire early and 
often than to wait too long and find out you now have a 
fuel bed that is going to require another mechanical 
entry.” 
Rob Lever, District Fire Management Officer 
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest 
 
If implementing prescribed fire is postponed too 
long, it becomes increasingly difficult to remove the target trees. 
 
Once these trees get to about head-height, a fire that is mostly fueled by grass 
and needle cast probably won’t kill the trees. 
 
Therefore, even though you may not have a critical wildfire condition for 
several more years, you already have a condition in which you will need to come 
back in with expensive mechanical treatment to remove the excess trees. 
 
 
 
 
I. Wildfire Response 
 
1. Lesson 
 
The presence of numerous fuel treatment areas 
allowed fire managers to respond to the San Juan 
Fire in a way that resulted in lessening the 
severity of the effects on the land, a safe 
environment for firefighters, and proved to be—
both in terms of potential damages and 
firefighting expenditures—far less costly. 
 
Some of the specific outcomes observed on the San 
Juan Fire included:  
 
1. Treatments allowed for increased firefighter and 
public safety. Firefighters engaged a fire that was 
at lower intensity than if treatment had not 
occurred. The fire was controlled before it 
encountered private property.  
 
2. Due to the presence of thinned areas and the 
recent Coon Mountain Prescribed Fire, the head 
(or forward spread) of the San Juan Fire was 
caught before either the east or west flanks were 
contained.  
 
 
VIDEO 
 
http://bit.ly/SJRobMaintain 
 
Rob Lever, District Fire 
Management Officer for 
the Apache-Sitgreaves 
National Forest, explains 
why it’s important to 
maintain fuel 
treatments—especially 
fire— to preserve their 
effectiveness. 
 
 
 
 
 
VIDEO 
 
http://bit.ly/SJLessons 
 
Three Key Lessons 
 
Tessa Nicolet, Fire Ecologist for 
the U.S. Forest Service’s 
Southwestern Region, explains 
three key lessons we learned 
from the San Juan Fire’s burn 
effects and how treatments 
enabled specific suppression 
actions. 
 
Rob Lever, District Fire 
Manager Officer on the 
Apache-Sitgreaves National 
Forest, also discusses how the 
suite of prior fuel treatments 
allowed firefighters on the San 
Juan Fire to focus on 
controlling  the fire—rather 
than having to also protect 
homes. 
 

 
San Juan Fire Fuel Treatment Effectiveness Report 
Page 25 
 
 
 
3. Because the firefighting ground forces and engines could hold the head of the San Juan Fire, less 
aerial-applied retardant was necessary on this incident. 
 
4. Treatments allowed for both direct attack fire suppression tactics—in which suppression forces 
could safely engage the fire as necessary—as well the ability to utilize indirect tactics to stop the fire 
in pre-identified strategic locations. This allowed firefighters more options to go on the offensive 
and control the fire, rather than having to implement point protection strategies in a more defensive 
mode.  
 
5. These prior treatment areas also made it easier for firefighters to find and pick up spots. 
 
 
2. Lesson 
 
While firefighters on the San Juan Fire had to employ more patience than “normal”, 
the end result was well worth it.  
 
Because of the condition of the treated areas, fire managers were not concerned with the fire making a 
substantial run. This allowed these managers time to plan and conduct a slow, methodical burn-out operation 
which brought the main fire out to control lines slowly, under moderate burning conditions, over the course of 
several days in order to fully contain the fire. 
 
The temptation for firefighters is to fire-off the containment lines quickly to enable the fire to be controlled 
as soon as possible. If this tactic would have occurred on the San Juan Fire, the result would have been a far 
more damaging, higher-intensity fire. 
 
In conclusion, if weather conditions and the situation allow for it, it is a good practice to manipulate the 
timing and techniques used during firing operations to improve fire outcomes rather than causing more 
damage because we were in a rush to suppress the fire as rapidly as possible.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
San Juan Fire Fuel Treatment Effectiveness Report 
Page 26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To learn more 
about the San Juan Fire or fuel treatments on the  
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest, please contact: 
 
Jeremy Human, Forest Fuels Specialist, 
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest 
Telephone – 928-333-6320 
 
 
 
 
This fuel treatment effectiveness assessment was conducted by: 
 
Tara Umphries 
Fuels Specialist, Detailed 
U.S. Forest Service, Southwestern Region; Albuquerque, New Mexico 
 
Tessa Nicolet 
 
Fire Ecologist 
 
U.S. Forest Service, Southwestern Region; Payson, Arizona 
 
Frankie Romero 
Fire Use and Fuels Management Specialist 
U.S. Forest Service, National Interagency Fire Center; Boise, Idaho 
 
Report edited and designed by: 
Paul Keller, Technical Writer-Editor, Wildland Fire Lessons Learned Center 
Videos recorded and edited by: 
Josh McDaniel, Fire Science Editor, Wildland Fire Lessons Learned Center 
with support from the Southwest Fire Science Consortium – http://swfireconsortium.org/ 
 
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
 
We wish to thank the following people for their help and support 
in producing this assessment: 
 
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest 
Paul Brown, Ed Collins, Stephanie Coleman, Jerry Drury, Mark Empey, Jeremy Human, 
Rob Lever, Marcia Pfleiderer, Eric Robertson, Raymond Rugg 
 
Incident Responders 
Ben Plumb, Dave Raney, Dave Reisner, Buck Wickham 
 
Ecological Restoration Institute 
Bruce Greco, John Paul Roccaforte 
 
Arizona Game and Fish Department 
Mike Godwin 
