POLITICAL CHALLENGES FACING ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION 
IN PROTECTED AREAS IN THE UNITED STATES 
H.J. Cortner, J. Legg, M.A. Moote & J. Vaughn 
Northern.Arizona University. Flagstaff. AZ. USA 
Abstract 
Forest ecosystem restoration often becomes engulfed in controversy. This paper discusses 
the political challenges that face ecological restoration projects. in general, and in 
protectedforested areas in the south-western United States. in particular. These 
challenges involve fundamental core issues of hU111.an relationships with nature and of 
democratic governance. Meeting these challenges will require that both restoration 
scientists and agencies become more actively engaged with a diverse set of publics, and 
that, in many cases, they accept significantly revised power structures. 
Introduction 
For the past century in the United States, forest lands in various categories of pro­
tected status have significantly changed in ecological structure, function, and com­
position due to high-grade logging, fire suppression, domestic livestock grazing, 
and some forms of recreation. Ecologically the number and variety of grasses, wild­
flowers, and wildlife have decreased. Underbrush and small trees now clog the for­
est, encouraging insect infestations, increasing the mortality of old-growth trees, 
and building up plentiful woody material for fuelling extreme, high-temperature, 
stand-replacing fires. Because of the increase in development adjacent to such pro­
tected areas (the wildland-urban interface), these fires also present a significant haz­
ard to life and property. Combined with drought conditions, the summers of 2000 
and 2002 were particularly damaging and expensive fire seasons in the United 
States. To deal with the problem of catastrophic fire, scientists, resource managers, 
and policy makers have called for more attention to fuel reduction (eliminating the 
hazardous buildup of flammable vegetation) and ecological restoration to restore 
forests and watersheds to conditions that existed before the landscapes were so 
adversely impacted. 
This paper discusses the political challenges currently facing implementation of eco­
logical restoration projects in protected areas in the United States. Protected forested 
areas of particular concern include those lands retained in ownership by the national 
government and managed as national parks, national forests, public lands, wildlife 
refuges, and wilderness areas. The paper begins with a discussion of the issues that 
face ecological restoration in general. Then, we use the work of our own organization, 
the Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University, as a case exam­
ple to more specifically focus on the issues facing forest restoration in particular. 
Issues facing ecological restoration 
, The whole idea of restoring degraded] andscapes seems attracti ve on its face. And 
173 

when restoration efforts are backed up by considerable scientific evidence of his­ 
torical ecological conditions, the env ironmental degradation associated with the  
altered landscape, and ecosystem responses to alternative restoration treatments , it  
would seem that science-based restoration would hardly be contentious. Why then  
does it become engulfed in a storm of controversy? Because restoration is not just  
about the science, it's also about politics and values. Concerns about ecological  
restoration in general center on arguments about whether humans should further  
interfere with nature, whether restoration science is developed enough to proceed,  
and who should be entrusted to make restoration decisions. Indeed, the social com­ 
plexity of restoration rivals the technical and ecological complexity (Findley et al.,  
2001; Cortner, 2003).  
First, the very assumption that ecosystems can be restored is sometimes criticized  
as just another display of humanity's hubris. According to this argument, humans  
can never restore what took eons to evol ve based on an infinitely complex web of  
naturally occurring interactions . The human re-creation of nature is of significantly  
reduced value, especiall y if it is believed that nature has any intrinsic values outside  
of human utility (Katz, 2000). What is restored is reall y a non-natural human arti­ 
fact and a poor substitute for the original. In add ition, it is argued, condoning  
restoration allows those who would destroy the environment an excuse to do so  
under the guise that they can always restore the landsca pe after it has been degrad­ 
ed (Katz, 2000).  
Second, it is questioned whether restoration science is developed enough to pro­ 
ceed. The language of rest oration speaks of ecosystem integrity, natural ec osystem  
states, sustaina bility, resiliency, and ecosystem health. These terms ha ve been criti­ 
cized as valu e- laden terms masquerading as science (Lackey, 200 1; Fitzsimmons,  
1996). Th e tool s of res toration are also sometimes questioned, when, for ex ample,  
prescribed fire is used in ecosystems where there may have never been n aturally  
OCCUlTing fires, when toxic herbicides are applied to eliminate "exotic" or invasive  
species, or when viable ecosystems, albeit not pre-disturbance, are targeted for  
restoration (Mendelson et al., 1992).  
Moreover, it is questioned whether it is ever possible to restore landscape-scale ecosys­ 
tems, especially if restoration relies on uncertain, risky, or expensive (and ongoing)  
human intervention (Scherer, 1994). Social as well as technical choices must also be  
made where to direct restoration efforts: at the most degraded ecosystems or the ones  
that can most easily be restored without constant bandaging? What makes "nature"  
something that is "natural" rather than a human engineering project?  
T here may be broad, conceptual support for restoration, but there are also vast dif­ 
ferences about how to ac hieve it. Some environmental groups, for example, favor  
passive over active restoration . In this view, eliminating the human activities that  
degrade ecosys tems, e.g., road and dam building, livestock grazing, fire suppres­ 
sion, fish stockin g, commercial logg ing, and the introduction of non-native species, 
is a superior and more efficient use of time and money than active restorations that 
requ ire furt her ecosystem manipu lations . Actively re-engineering a stream to its 
original co nditio n, it is argued, is useless if land management activities continue to 
increase sediment load s (Bayles, 2002).  
Moreover, there are many value-laden decisions in "scientific" approaches to restora­
174 

tion, including the reference points that are chosen to guide restoration efforts and the 
inevitable tradeoffs that must be made when returning immensely complex physical 
and socio-economic modern landscapes to a prior state. Establishing the commonly 
used pre-European-settlement reference point can be dependent on data that may have 
significant limitations (Shulte & Mladenoff, 2001). 
Moreover, this reference is also criticized as ignoring the role that indigenous peo­
ple had in effecting ecosystem change (Wagner et al., 2000; Kimmerer & Lake, 
2001). Which objective is then more desirable: a vision of wilderness prior to any 
human settlement or a more contemporary view that some believe ignores histori­
cal realities? In addition, because numerous natural variations and anthropogenic 
influences since pre-settlement may not be adequately accounted for, it is even 
questioned to what extent ecosystems can ever, or should, approximate that previ­
ous condition. 
So finally, who should decide? While ecological scientists typically advocate restor­
ing to a state of maximum feasible vitality and biodiversity, many people do not 
accept that ecological science should determine what should be restored, and to 
what condition. The public, for example, has rejected restoration that required the 
elimination of highly-prized neighborhood forests in order to recapture the original 
pre-settlement savannah prairies, and it preferred a stream naturalization project 
that established a new wedge sedge meadow on the floodplain rather than a pre-set­
tlement lowland deciduous woodland (Gobster & Hull, 2000; Wade et al., 2002). 
In addition, the limits of science and human abilities imply that only some ecolog­
ical conditions and functions can be restored (Gore & Shields, 1995; Schmidt et al., 
1998), and the choice must then be made as to which ones are crucial and to whom . 
What if restoring annual flooding regimes on highly-regulated rivers, for example, 
involves the elimination of fish species that didn't exist before the riverine system 
was altered, but which are now highly valued by sport fishers? When restoration 
objectives clash with existing economic uses (wolf reintroductions that threaten 
livestock production, or stream restorations that threaten irrigation or energy sup­
plies), decidedly non-scientific adjustments are made to restoration goals, desired 
end states, and techniques. 
Because of the value-laden nature of the goals and objectives of restoration, and 
debates over reference conditions, restoration techniques and desired futures, some 
restorationists have called for a more public ecology. This means that restoration 
directly confronts its normative context, is highly participatory, and is explicitly 
accountable politically (Hull & Robertson, 2000; Higgs, 1997; Light & Higgs, 
1996; Havinga, 1999). Yet while many restoration efforts have galvanized volun­
teers and created collaborative groups that encourage citizens to discuss and debate 
restoration goals and techniques, in most of these cases social power dynamics 
remain unchanged. Agencies retain sole decisionmaking authority and the most 
powerful interests are the only ones with much influence over agency decision­
makers. 
When restoration efforts set democratic as well as ecological objectives, involve polit­
ical processes with broad, lay participation, and acknowledge the importance and rel­
evance of non-scientific forms of knowledge, the roles of scientists, agency person­
nel, and other participants are altered. Restoration then becomes an experimental 
175 

transaction carried out not only by scientists and resource managers, but also by many 
members of a community (Gross, 2002; Jordan, 2000). As the controversy over plans 
to restore the prairie savannahs near Chicago has shown, a central political challenge 
of restoration is not how to educate the public to the experts' point of view and restora­
tion prescriptions, but how to effectively and equitably balance out the competing 
visions and values of any number of stakeholders, including those of the experts and 
scientists themselves (Gobster and Hull, 2000; Helford, 2000). 
Ecological Restoration in Protected Forested Areas 
The work of ecologists at the Ecological Restoration Institute (BRl) at Northern 
Arizona University is most readily identified with the pre-European-settlement model 
of ecological restoration, which aims to return the ponderosa pine forests of the south­
western United States to ecological conditions that characterized the forests for hun­
dreds of years prior to European settlement in the late 1800s (Co vington et al., 1997). 
In some of ERI's prescriptions, old-growth trees that existed before such settlement are 
protected, while physical evidence of missing pre-settlement trees IS used to determine 
the number and spacing of replacement trees. Additional trees are retained as a hedge 
against the risk of mortality. Then, the dense thickets of small-diameter trees are 
thinned to create the open, park-like stands of trees that existed in pre-settlement con­
ditions, in order to favor tree growth and a more diverse understory of plants and ani­
mals. This also reduces the volume of hazardous fuels. 
Prescribed fire is used to bring the forest slowly back to a state where natural 
eco system disturbances such as low intensity fire can begin to playa beneficial role 
in forest maintenance and nutrient recycling. Thinning goals are set by the number 
of trees that need to be removed to achieve the desired forest condition. These 
restoration treatments embrace adaptive management practices, which involve 
extensive monitoring so that adjustments can be made on the feedback obtained. 
Such pre scriptions are based on data reaching back to 1909 and on over 25 years of 
experimental research. In cooperation with the USDA Forest Service and the 
Department of the Interior's Nation al Park Service and Bureau of Land 
Management, ERl is conducting applied operational field tests of restoration treat­
ments on protected lands managed by those agencies. 
What are some of the specific criticisms that have been directed to this restoration 
approach? First, ERI's work has been criticized for paying too much attention to 
trees - their spatial patterns and mortality (Bird, 2000). The focus on forest struc­
ture, it is argued, assumes that by restoring structure the ecosystem will begin to 
function as it once did, which neglects other factors that affect ecological function s. 
There have been concerns expressed that ERI focuses on removing too many big 
trees and in too short a time, which will be harmful to the habitat needs of species 
such as the endangered northern goshawk that seem to like dense stands of trees. In 
ord er to aim at a pre-settlement tree density of 20-60 trees per acre (greater than 4 
inches dbh), ERrs thinning prescriptions can remove up to 80-95 percent of exist­
ing trees. This is simply unacceptable to some groups, who are concerned about the 
scientific uncertainty associated with these massive treatments. 
Second, ERI's work has been criticized as an effort to revive the Jogging industry. 
There are fears that any restoration involving economic transactions, e.g., the sale of 
J76 

thinned timber, will inevitably lead down the slippery slope to re-instituting the large­
scale industrial logging (with the roads, clearcuts, and devastating impacts on wildlife 
habitats and watersheds) those lands experienced in the past. 
There is little trust in the management agencies, which have historically been aligned 
with timber interests.There is suspicion that the Forest Service, for example, will sim­
ply reclassify its commercial timber sales as fuel reduction or restoration to escape 
accountability and clothe projects with a cloak of scientific acceptability. The result, 
it is argued, will be the removal of big rather than small-diameter trees, and the build­
ing of logging roads in currently roadless areas. Mixing commercial benefits into the 
restoration picture, it is alleged, will always mean compromises will be settled on the 
side of economics and the lure of revenues from log sales (Bird, 2000). 
For national parks and wilderness areas, which currently don't have timber programs, 
there 'are concerns that restoration thinning could be a subterfuge to introduce such 
programs. These fears are fed by the reality that no one has come up with the funds 
needed to conduct large-scale forest restoration. Because restoration is so costly and 
the small trees removed during restoration projects are of such low value, it appears 
the only options for financing restoration are vastly increased federal spending or 
industry incentives. Some agency officials and researchers maintain loggers can only 
afford to do restoration work if they can cut and sell some larger trees. 
It is important to note, however, that not all environmental groups oppose commercial 
use of restoration byproducts, especially if limited to small-diameter trees. Many 
believe fair and economicaJly viable utilization plans are essential to the emergence of 
restoration as a social movement that has mass political appeal, and to address ques­
tions of environmental justice for communities, workers, the poor, and minorities. 
Third, when the idea of cutting trees is acceptable (some environmental groups have 
taken a zero-cut approach to national forests, and for some it is almost a sacred 
belief), then the argument centers on diameter caps. Diameter caps put limits on the 
size of trees that can be cut, e.g., 16 inches', 12 inches, or even less. Agencies and 
ERr ecologists respond that there is no ecological basis for a diameter cap, and that 
applying one will not allow enough trees to be thinned to truly restore the fore st to 
pre-settlement conditions or to prevent crown fires (Covington, 2002). 
Diameter caps can even have perverse results - such as requiring that diseased trees 
be left and healthy ones removed. But the issue of diameter caps is really not about 
scientific rationality, it's about political rationality. Just as with the issue of com­
mercial uses, the issue of diameter caps is, in large part, about public acceptability, 
trust, and limiting agency discretion. For many groups, diameter caps are the only 
way to restrain agency procli vities to go for bigger and more economically valuable 
trees. Without diameter caps there is a risk that projects will not gain public support. 
Fourth and assuming the discussion is mostly about removing small-diameter trees, 
there are then significant institutional and market barri ers to overcome. What will 
be done with the massive amounts of smaJl diameter trees when currently the mar­
kets and infrastructure to handle them aren 't sufficiently developed? Small-diame­
ter ponderosa pine, for example, has certain properties (e.g., flexibility) that limit its 
l one inch =2.540 em. 
177 

use as building material. New and innovative uses that are technologically and eco­
nomically feasible must be developed, and then prototype uses expanded to a larg­
er scale. Mills and other processing infrastructure, which closed during the past 
twenty years as federal timber harvests declined, must be reopened. Once geared to 
the processing of large Jogs, such facilities must be retooled to handle smaller diam­
eter products. A different kind of workforce will also need to be activated. Loggers 
must be trained in restoration principles and applications; new workers with new 
skills will also be needed on the wood products utilization side. 
The aesthetic impacts of restoration are a fifth concern. The fairly significant reduc­
tion in tree densities in the pre-settlement approach is criticized as giving the forest 
the appearance of a heavily logged forest (Harrington, 2002). ERr recognizes that 
restoration activities can be ugly, even though the long-term goal is the open, grassy 
ponderosa forests that existed before settlement, which studies have shown the pub­
lic prefers in terms of scenic beauty (Daniel and Boster, 1976). But nonetheless, to 
get there, the forest will pass through a short-term period of stumps, invasive plants, 
slash piles, etc . Asking the public to accept short-term inconveniences for long-term 
benefits is often politically difficult, especially when the debate over the desirabil­
ity of restoration treatments continues. 
Sixth, it has been questioned whether enough is known to move from research 
experiments on a few hundred to a few thousand acres to operational-scale restora­
tion applications across the broad landscape, e.g., 100,000 to 1,000,000 acres. Not 
enough, it is argued, is known about cumulative effects; perhaps, alternatively, the 
precautionary principle would dictate taking a cautious approach until further 
experimental plot research is done. This issue is further complicated by the question 
of what areas should have priority for restoration efforts. 
On the one hand, it is argued that thinning and fuel reduction efforts and dollars 
should be focused on the wildland-urban interface where the greatest fire risk to 
lives and property exist; i.e., in backcountry areas far removed from structures, let 
nature take its course. On the other hand, it is argued that focusing just on the wild­
land-urban interface is insufficient, because this strategy fails to adequately address 
protection of endangered species. 
The interface-only strategy, ERI scientists have argued, ignores the intimate connec­
tions at the landscape scale between healthy forests and the physical and spiritual 
health and livelihoods of communities (Covington, 2002). It may also create restored 
"islands" that are still at risk when wildland fires erupt in non-restored forests. Even if 
agreement can be obtained that priorities should be directed toward the interface, the 
difficulty then becomes defining the interface and determining how far into protected 
areas treatments need to be undertaken to protect interface values. 
These issues become even further complicated when the prospects of expanding 
restoration treatments to legally-designated wilderness areas are considered because 
of the Wilderness Act's restrictions against building roads and using mechanized 
logging equipment. While not all environmental groups oppose forest wilderness 
restoration, some wilderness advocates have argued that restoration in wilderness 
means intensive human management, which will leave wilderness neither wild nor 
natural (Nickas and Macfarlane, 2001). What kinds of treatment tools would be 
acceptable, and how would the argument about the need to offset restoration costs 
J78 

play out in a wilderness context? Applying restoration strategies in such previously 
"protected" areas, it is further argued, also runs the risk of exacerbating controver­
sy. 
Finally, the 2002 fire season was characterized by enormous fires, particularly in the 
states of Arizona, Colorado, and Oregon, which saw some of the biggest fires in 
their state histories. The national response appears to have opened a policy window 
for more political support and dollars for restoration. But the issue has also become 
politically embroiled in another highly charged question: to what extent are the 
nation's extensive set of environmental laws and regulations, legally-mandated 
opportunities for public review, and provisions for judicial review to blame for stop­
ping active forest management and projects designed to reduce hazardous fuel accu­
mulation? The Forest Service has argued that the plethora of laws and the high rate 
of use (or misuse) of citizen appeals and litigation options have resulted in a 
"process predicament" and "paralysis by analysis" (USDA Forest Service, 2002a; 
USDA Forest Service, 2002b). President Bush has proposed regulatory reform to 
speed up the process of getting fuel reduction activities in place, in part by limiting 
public comment and environmental review (Bush, 2002), and legislation to imple­
ment these policy recommendations has been introduced in Congress. Not surpris­
ingly, the Bush proposals have created a political firestorm. These efforts have been 
labeled by opponents as politically opportunistic efforts to weaken environmental 
protections, reduce public oversight, and provide timber sale favors to timber com­
pames. 
Conclusions 
The current series of debates about ecological restoration in general, and forest 
restoration in particular, is yet another in a long line of debates about what kind of 
nature we want, the severity of the environmental and social damage caused by 
human activities, how much human manipulation and of what kind will be needed 
in tum to correct the problems, and who should decide. The issues are just a micro­
cosm of overall restoration challenges in a variety of arenas, whether it is prairie 
restoration, riparian restoration, or dam removal. The fires of 2002 have intensified 
the debate over restoration on forested protected lands. As ERI and others (Findley 
et al., 2001) have discovered, forest restoration is just as conflicted as convention­
al timber management. The policy and political challenges of restoration are funda­
mentally core issues of human relationships with nature and of democratic gover­
nance that must be openly addressed, analyzed, and integrated into any array of 
restoration alternatives. In a democratic context this means both restoration scien­
tists and agencies will need to be actively engaged with a diverse set of publics. and 
that, in many cases, they must accept significantly revised power structures. 
Because restoration is so value-laden, it must reach to critics as well as supporters 
and build an effective case for a commonly agreed-upon trajectory of change in 
terms of both ecological and democratic components. 
References 
Bayles, D. 2002 . Roads, watersheds and stream restoration. Paper presented at the restoring 
public lands conference: reclaiming the concept of forest restoration, Boulder, CO, April 
179 

18-20. 
Bird, B. 2000. Restoration of public forests: getting the work done. Society of Ecological 
Restoration News, 13(2): 17-18. 
Bush, G. 2002. Healthy forests: an initiative for wildfire prevention and stronger communi­
ties. Washington, D.C.: White House. 
Cortner, H.J. 2003. The governance environment: linking science, citizens, and politics. In: 
Friederici, P. (ed.). Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. 
Washington, D.C., Island Press. 
Covington, W.W. 2002. Testimony before the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources, 
U.S. Senate, hearing to receive testimony on additional funds for wildland firefigbting 
and forest restoration and ongoing implementation of the National Fire Plan. 
Covington, w.w., Fule, P, Moore, M.M., Hart, S.C., Kolb, J.N., Sackett, S.S. & Wagner, 
M.R. 1997. Restoring ecosystem health in ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest. 
Journal of Forestry, 95(4): 13-19. 
Daniel, TC. & Boster, R.S. 1976. Measuring landscape aesthetics: the scenic beauty esti­
mation method. USDA Forest Service Research Report 167. Fort Collins, CO: USDA 
Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station. 
Findley, AJ., Carroll, M.S. & Blatner, K.A. 2001. Social complexity and the management 
of small-diameter stands. Journal of Forestry, 99(12), J8-27. 
Fitzsimmons, A.K. 1996. Sound policy or smoke and mirror: does ecosystem management 
make sense? Water Resources Bulletin, 32(2), 217-227. 
Gobster, P.H. & Hull, R.B . (eds.) 2000. Restoring nature: perspectives from the social sci­
ences and humanities. Washington, D.C. : Island Press. 
Gore, J. & Shields, D. ] 995. Can large rivers be restored? BioScience, 45(3): 142-152. 
Gross, M. 2002. Classical sociology and the restoration of nature: the relevance of Emile 
Durkheirn and Georg Simmel. Organization and Environment, 13(3): 277-291 . 
Harrington, S. 2002. Restoration rhetoric: thinning or balding? Forest Trust Quarterly 
Report, 26: 4-6. 
Havinga, D. 1999. Beyond repair. Alternatives, 25(2): 14- J7. 
Helford, R.M. 2000. Constructing nature as constructing science: expertise, activist science, 
and public conflict in the Chicago wilderness. In: Gobster, P.H. & Hull, R.B. (eds .) 
Restoring nature: perspectives from the social sciences and humanities, pp.l J9- I 42, 
Washington, D.C., Island Press. 
Higgs, E. 1997. What is good ecological restoration? Conservation Biology, 11(2): 338-348. 
Hull, R.B. & Robertson, D.P. 2000. The language of nature matters: we need a more public 
ecology, In: Gobster, P.H. & Hull, R.B. (eds .) Restoring nature: perspectives from the 
social sciences and humanities, pp .97-118, Washington, D.C., Island Press. 
Jordan, W.R. III. 2000. Restoration, community, and wilderness. In: Gobster, P.H. & Hull , 
R.B . (eds.) Restoring nature: perspectives from the social sciences and humanities, 
pp.23-26, Washington, D.C., Island Press. 
Katz, E. 2000. Another look at restoration: technology and artificial. In: Gobster, P.H. & 
Hull , R.B. (eds.) Restoring nature: perspectives from the social sciences and humanities, 
pp.37-48, Washington, D.C., Island Press. 
Kimmerer, R.W. & Lake, EK. 2001. The role of indigenous burning in land management. 
Journal of Forestry, 99(11): 36-41. 
Lackey, R.T. 2001. Values, policy, and ecosystem health. BioScience, 51 (6) : 437-444. 
Light, A. & Higgs, E. 1996. The politics of ecological restoration. Environmental Ethics, 
180 

18(2): 228-247. 
Mendelson, J., Aultz, S. & Mendelson, lD. 1992. Carving up the woods: savanna restora­
tion in northeastern Illinois. Restoration & Management Notes, J0(2): 127-13 J. 
Nichas, G. & Macfarlane, G. 2001. Wilderness. Keep it Wild! Wild Earth Forum, pp. 62-65. 
Scherer, D. 1994. Between theory and practice: some thoughts on motivations behind 
restoration, Restoration & Management Notes, 12: 184-188. 
Schmidt, lC., Webb, R.H ., Valdez, R.A., Marzolf, G.R. & Stevens, L.W 1998. Science and 
values in liver restoration in the Grand Canyon, Bioscience, 48(9): 735-747. 
Shulte, L. & Mladenoff, D. 2001. The original US public land survey records: their use and 
limitations in reconstructing presettlement vegetation, Journal of Forestry, 99( 10): 5-10. 
USDA Forest Service. 2002a. Factors affecting timely mechanical fuel treatment decisions. 
Washington, D.C., USDA Forest Service. 
USDA Forest Service. 2002b. The process predicament: how statutory, regulatory, and 
administrative factors affect national forest management. Washington, D.C., USDA 
Forest Service. 
Wade, R.J., Rhoads, B.L., Rodriquez, J, Daniels, M., Wilson, D., Herricks, B.B., 
Bombardelli, E, Garcia, M. & Schwartz, J. 2002. Integrating science and technology to 
support stream naturalization near Chicago, Illinois. Journal of the American Water 
Resources Association, 38(4): 931-944. 
Wagner, M.R., Block, WM., Geils , B.W & Wenger, K.E 2000 . Restoration ecology: a new 
forest management paradigm, or another merit badge for foresters? Journal of Forestry, 
98(10): 22-27. 
181 
