Like mother, like son 
By Betsey Bruner 
Sun Staff Reporter 
01/11/2006 
 
When he was born, his mother was already 
painting day and night.  
Now Brandon Oberhardt, 27, like his 
mother, watercolorist Roberta Rogers, is 
pursuing a career as a fine arts landscape 
and documentary photographer.  
"She was always painting," he said in a 
phone interview Monday. "Ever since I was 
a little kid, I've looked up to her. I've gotten 
to watch her business grow. She usually 
gets up at 6 in the morning and gets right to 
work and also paints into the night."  
Rogers, 60, is well-known in Flagstaff as a 
homegrown watercolor painter whose work 
has graced countless walls in local galleries, 
postcards and publications for 30 years.  
After 35 years here, she moved one year 
ago to Tubac with her husband, Gary 
Fahrenz. The artist colony south of Tucson 
has given her a chance to paint new 
landscapes and Mexico-inspired subject 
matter such as Talavera pottery, cactus and 
missions.  
A FAMILY TRADITION  
Oberhardt collaborated with his mother over the holidays, participating in her annual 
exhibit to raise money to fight hunger at Brandy's Restaurant & Bakery on East Cedar 
Avenue. He showed a collection of color photos of the North Rim of the Grand Canyon, 
Flagstaff, Organ Pipe National Monument and Mexico.  
They each raffled one of their pieces and raised a combined total of $460 to benefit the 
Care & Share Food Bank and Northern Arizona Food Bank. That amount was matched 
Jill Torrance/Arizona Daily Sun Brandon Oberhardt, a 
local photographer, is reflected in one of photographs 
that was inspired by five years of fighting fires on the 
Kaibab Plateau. Oberhardt currently has an exhibit at 
the Environmental Restoration Institute in the NAU 
forestry building. To order this photo, go to 
http://photos.azdailysun.com  
Buy this photo online!  

by the restaurant.  
A 2003 graduate of NAU in photography, Oberhardt's artist statement said his primary 
aim is to share the beauty of light and color that he's been luck to witness.  
"Brandon, he is so visually observant," Rogers said in a phone interview Monday, before 
driving back to Tubac with paintings from the Brandy's show. "He loved being outdoors 
from a very young age. His step-grandfather took him hunting, and my husband took him 
hiking and camping, so, he was so in tune with a more natural environment."  
Rogers has three sons: Brandon, and Blaine Oberhardt, 31, from a first marriage, and 
Jesse Fahrenz, 19, from her second marriage.  
Blaine is a marketing researcher for the Hallmark Channel in Hollywood and Jesse 
attends Pima College in Tucson.  
A CLOSE VIEW OF NATURE  
All three boys helped their mother in her work.  
"They were very helpful in saying if something doesn't look right," she said. "Your kids 
will be the first to know. They helped with matting and framing. Now, I'm thrilled to be 
able to help Brandon with his matting and framing."  
Although Oberhardt was no expert at painting or drawing when young, he did have some 
special visual talents at an early age, his mother said.  
"He just did the normal things that kids do, but I can tell you, he can spot a deer or coyote 
or natural thing before we hardly get focused," she said. 
She also recalled her middle son had snatched her old Pentax SLR camera when he 
joined a photography club in college.  
Oberhardt has been practicing photography for the last six years, working for the past 
three years with a digital SLR, which allows him to be mobile with his constantly moving 
lifestyle.  
He is following one exhibit with another, synthesizing his experiences fighting fires 
during five summers on the Kaibab Plateau in a new photographic exhibit, "Fire and the 
Kaibab Plateau," in the Ecological Restoration Institute in the Forestry Building at NAU. 
Oberhardt is currently working in South Dakota on the Black Hills Fire Use Module with 
the National Park Service. He is home for the winter on furlough, living with his father, 
Flagstaff resident Bob Oberhardt. 
  

VISITING IN BOTH DIRECTIONS  
Although he's visited his family several times including Christmas, he has no plans to 
move to Tubac.  
"Flagstaff is where my heart is," he said. "I can see from my mom that she's ready for a 
new challenge. Going to southern Arizona is like a whole new wealth of things to paint, 
with Mexico and the artwork down there. I like being up here with the pines and the 
Grand Canyon. It's good to have a base in southern Arizona, though."  
Rogers has returned to Flagstaff several times during the year.  
"We miss all our friends," she said. "It's just such a wonderful community. People are 
trickling down to visit."  
Her watercolors are selling well in the Tubac area, but she still exhibits at The Artists 
Gallery in downtown Flagstaff.  
"I still paint lots of Flagstaff things, from memory and photographs," she said.  
The art of both mother and son was well received at the Brandy's show.  
"They are definitely exhibiting and donating again next holiday season," said Brandy 
Wojciak, co-owner of Brandy's. "They are just these wonderful people. Brandon had this 
horse silhouette photo up, which was just amazing. When people realized the connection, 
that he was her son, they just loved it, and they loved the talent."  
 
 
 
