 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Characterizing Spatial Reference Conditions in Southwestern  
Warm/Dry Mixed-Conifer Forests 
By Kyle Rodman and Dr. Andrew Sánchez Meador 
INTRODUCTION 
Reference conditions describe attributes of ecosystem 
structure, composition, and function and are used to inform 
ecological restoration efforts. Reference condition infor-
mation on tree spatial patterns that occurred prior to wide-
spread fire exclusion is limited for warm/dry mixed-conifer 
forests of the western U.S. (Romme et al. 2009), particular-
ly those in the Southwest (see Table 1). Spatial patterns of 
trees, and groups of trees, are important because they are 
known to influence understory biodiversity and productivi-
ty, fire behavior, distribution of surface fuels, wildlife habi-
tat value, and regeneration (North et al. 2007, Sánchez 
Meador et al. 2009, Fry and Stephens 2010), yet this infor-
mation is rarely quantified. The purpose of this fact sheet is 
to provide an overview of the existing research on spatial 
patterns in warm/dry mixed-conifer forests, and provide 
recommendations of future research. 
STATE OF KNOWLEDGE 
 
While commonly dominated by ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) and Douglas-fir (Psuedotsuga men-
ziesii), reported species composition for warm/dry mixed-conifer forests in the western United States also 
include Jeffrey pine (Pinus jeffreyi), sugar pine (Pinus lambertiana), white fir (Abies concolor), western 
larch (Larix occidentalis), Engelmann spruce (Picea engelmanii), aspen (Populus tremuloides), oak 
(Quercus spp.) and other species as sub-dominate. 
 
Contemporarily, tree density has increased, spatial patterns have become less variable (spatial heterogenei-
ty is often lacking) and forest gap or opening size has decreased (Reynolds et al. 2013, Churchill et al. 
2013, Larson et al. 2012, Lydersen et al. 2013). 
 
Spatial heterogeneity results from interactions of fine- to mid-scale processes such as fire-induced mortali-
ty and regeneration patterns, and inherent site variability (Larson and Churchill 2012).  
 
Frequent, low-severity surface fire played an integral role by reducing surface fuel loading, thinning regen-
eration patches and maintaining lower tree densities by killing individuals or small groups of trees.  
 
Patchy, or mixed-severity, fire is believed to have also played an important role on wetter, cooler sites 
(Romme et al. 2009) by killing small groups of trees, thus potentially creating relatively larger areas of 
growing space and contributing to variability in patch size, within patch age structure, and general spatial 
heterogeneity. These fires were likely rare in warm/dry mixed conifer forests (Reynolds et al. 2013). 
    Fact Sheet: Characterizing Spatial Reference Conditions in Southwestern Warm/Dry Mixed-Conifer Forests 
 
 
 
 
  
 
May 2014 
Photo courtesy the Ecological Restoration Institute 

 
 
 
FUTURE RESEARCH NEEDS 
 
Spatially explicit reconstructions of warm/dry mixed-conifer forests, over a wide variety of soil types, spe-
cies composition, stand histories, and climatic conditions are necessary to understand reference conditions 
more holistically. 
 
Studies directly linking forest structure (e.g., size, age and spatial distributions) and disturbance history 
(e.g., fire scar studies) are needed to better explore the spatial pattern-process integration. 
 
Future studies should provide quantitative information on attributes of interest to managers such as spatial 
patterns (e.g., tree group sizes, numbers of groups, sizes of openings) and changes in structure (e.g., size 
and density) and species composition. 
 
Kyle Rodman, an M.S. student with the School of Forestry and the Ecological Restoration Institute, is cur-
rently working on a project to quantify reference conditions (including spatial patterns) in two warm/dry 
mixed-conifer forests located on the San Francisco Peaks and the Mogollon Rim of northern Arizona.  
Table 1. Summary of location, method used to designate tree/stand age, sample information, patch size, and main research 
findings for studies which examined historical spatial patterns of warm/dry mixed-conifer forests in the western US.  
A Patch size (area in ac) derived using peaks in aggregation report in Ripley’s K analysis as estimate of patch radius  

Contact 
Dr. Andrew Sánchez Meador, Andrew.SanchezMeador@nau.edu 
 
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
 
CONCLUSIONS 
 
Treatments based solely on density (basal area and/or trees per acre) may result in homogeneous spatial 
patterns and structural conditions with a high degree of canopy continuity that does not resemble reference 
conditions.  
 
Conditions resulting from treatment which ignore spatial reference conditions and site-specific variation or 
heterogeneity may have little effect on mitigating fire hazard or restoring ecosystem function.  
 
Information managers might use to guide implementation include evidences of past structure, composition 
and spatial patterns (e.g., location and species of snags, stumps, logs), soil surveys and habitat type maps, 
or silvicultural prescriptions and marking guides which explicitly incorporate spatial patterns such as the 
ICO (individuals-clumps-openings) method proposed by Churchill et al. (2013). 
REFERENCES 
Binkley, D., Romme, B., and T. Cheng. 2008. Historical forest structure on the Uncompahgre Plateau: Informing 
restoration prescriptions for mountainside stewardship. Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, Colorado 
State University. Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, Colorado State University. 
Churchill, D.J., Larson, A.J., Dahlgreen, M.C., Franklin, J.F., Hessburg, P.F., and J.A. Lutz. 2013. Restoring forest 
resilience: From reference spatial patterns to silvicultural prescriptions and monitoring. Forest Ecology and 
Management, 291: 442-457.  
Fry, D.L., and S.L Stephens. 2010. Stand-level spatial dependence in an old-growth Jeffrey pine-mixed-conifer 
forest, Sierra San Pedro Martir, Mexico. Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 40(9): 1803-1814.  
Larson, A.J., and D. Churchill. 2012. Tree spatial patterns in fire-frequent forests of western North America, in-
cluding mechanisms of pattern formation and implications for designing fuel reduction and restoration 
treatments. Forest Ecology and Management, 267(0): 74-92. 
Larson, A.J., Keyes, C.R., and K.C. Stover. 2012. Effects of restoration thinning on spatial heterogeneity in mixed-
conifer forest. Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 42: 1505-1517. 
Lutz, J.A., A.J. Larson, M.E. Swanson, and J.A. Freund. 2012. Ecological importance of large-diameter trees in a 
temperate mixed-conifer forest. PLOS One, 7(5): 1-15 
Lydersen, J.M., North, M.P., Knapp, E.E., and B.M. Collins. 2013. Quantifying spatial patterns of tree groups and 
gaps in mixed-conifer forests: Reference conditions and long-term changes following fire suppression and 
logging. Forest Ecology and Management, 304(15): 370-382. 
Mast, J.N., and J. Wolf. 2004. Ecotonal changes and altered tree spatial patterns in lower mixed-conifer forests, 
Grand Canyon National Park, Arizona, USA. Landscape Ecology, 19(2): 167-180.  
Mast, J.N., and J. Wolf. 2006. Spatial patch patterns and altered forest structure in middle elevation versus upper 
ecotonal mixed-conifer forests, Grand Canyon National Park, Arizona, USA. Forest Ecology and Manage-
ment, 236(2-3): 241-250.  
North, M., Innes, J., and H. Zald. 2007. Comparison of thinning and prescribed fire restoration treatments to Sier-
ran mixed-conifer historic conditions. Canadian Journal of Forest Research-Revue Canadienne De Re-
cherche Forestiere, 37(2): 331-342.  
Reynolds, R.T., Sánchez Meador, A.J., Youtz, J.A., Nicolet, T., Matonis, M.S., Jackson, P.L., DeLorenzo, D.G., 
and A.D. Graves. 2013. Restoring composition and structure in southwestern frequent-fire forests: a sci-
ence-based framework for improving ecosystem resiliency. United States Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station, Fort Collins, Colorado, United States.  
Romme, W.H., Floyd, M.L., and D. Hanna. 2009. Historical range of variability and current landscape condition 
analysis: South Central Highlands Section, southwestern Colorado and northwestern New Mexico. Fort 
Collins, CO: Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, Colorado State University. 
Sánchez Meador, A.J., Moore, M.M., Bakker, J.D. and P.F. Parysow. 2009. 108 years of change in spatial pattern 
following selective harvest of a ponderosa pine stand in northern Arizona, USA. Journal of Vegetation Sci-
ence. 20(1): 79-90.   
 
 
 
