Evidence-based Conservation 
Systematic Review 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to reversing declines in the condition of forested communities throughout the Intermoun-
tain West, particularly those affected by severe wildfires and insect outbreaks.  Our efforts focus on science-based research of ecological 
and socio-economic matters related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach, and education. 
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928/523-7182, FAX 928/523-0296, www.eri.nau.edu 
Effectiveness of Wet Meadow Restoration Projects          May 2012 
Introduction 
High-elevation streamside or spring-fed wet meadows (i.e., montane meadows, riparian meadows, sedge 
meadows) occur in numerous locations in forests throughout the Southwest. Wet meadows are exceptional-
ly valuable ecosystems because they provide biodiversity, critical hydrologic connectivity with adjacent 
upland forests, and a range of other ecosystem services.  
 
Despite their ecological and social value, wet meadows are one of the most degraded ecosystems in the 
Southwest. They have been used extensively for grazing livestock, have become the sites of many small 
dams and stock tanks, and have had roads built through or adjacent to them. Many of these meadows occur 
in watersheds that have been rated as having impaired function or as functioning at risk, according to the 
U.S. Forest Service’s Watershed Condition Framework (http://www.fs.fed.us/publications/watershed/).  
 
Fortunately, there is considerable interest in the restoration of wet meadows. Several restoration projects 
have been completed recently or are underway in the region, sometimes at considerable expense and with 
minimal monitoring. Before many new projects are initiated, we felt it was important to review what has 
been done to date, as well as related hydrological and ecological research that has been published in order 
to help inform future wet meadow restoration efforts. 
 
Systematic Review 
A systematic review was carried out following the Centre for Evidence-based Conservation guidelines 
(http://www.environmentalevidence.org/Authors.htm). The primary goal was to evaluate the effects of wet 
meadow restoration projects on geomorpholo-
gy, hydrology, soils, and plant species compo-
sition. A secondary goal was to determine the 
effects of wet meadow restoration projects on 
biodiversity.  
 
Results 
The literature search yielded 48 published 
studies directly about wet meadow restoration 
(i.e., investigating an operational-scale resto-
ration project) or indirectly (i.e., investigating 
the recovery of soils or vegetation following 
grazing on small research plots). Of the 48 
studies, only 25 were published in peer-
reviewed journals and most of those evaluated 
restoration indirectly.                                                                    
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
        Figure 1: Wet meadow restoration sites 

Twenty-seven operational-scale wet meadow restoration projects were identified, with the majority in Arizona 
and California (Figure 1). A wide range of restoration techniques were used, ranging from small-scale manip-
ulations of stream channels (e.g., riffle structures) to large-scale projects that create an alternating series of 
ponds and earthen dams (“ponds-and-plugs”) within a degraded gully. Water flows from the pond-and-plug 
structures onto the meadow surface, and then into a remnant or created stream channel. Other common resto-
ration techniques included fencing to exclude livestock (and sometimes native ungulates), other forms of graz-
ing management, and revegetation approaches, such as seeding and transplanting seedlings. 
 
Most of the studies reported that restoration was fully or partially effective, at least in the short-term. Howev-
er, the lack of quantitative data, especially data extending more than a year or two after project implementa-
tion, greatly limits the ability to determine how effective restoration has truly been in practice.  
 
Conclusions 
While much of the evidence about the effectiveness of wet meadow restoration projects is not of the highest 
quality and considerable caution is warranted, it is nevertheless apparent that good progress has been made 
during the past 10 to 20 years in wet meadow restoration in the Intermountain West. In particular, significant 
contributions have been made in restoring highly degraded wet meadow systems that are characterized by 
deep, wide, and relatively straight gullies. There is also substantial evidence that the pond-and-plug approach 
is an effective technique for restoring many aspects of these systems, albeit at the cost of creating new struc-
tural elements (ponds) that are not necessarily natural features of wet meadows.  
 
While it is understood there are serious constraints on managers’ time and resources, there is a clear need to 
allocate additional effort to project documentation, including more formal, longer, and better-designed moni-
toring programs. One way to improve project outcomes and documentation is for practitioners to work with 
scientists from government agencies, local universities and colleges, and other organizations. Many important 
lessons could have been learned, and mistakes avoided, if more effort had been put into documenting both 
successes and failures of past projects. 
 
 
Images from the Pacheta Creek wet meadow restoration project in south-central Arizona on White Mountain Apache 
lands. The photo on the left shows tribal members and Forest Service researchers assessing the site in July 1995 prior to 
implementing treatments to decrease stream downcutting and bank erosion. The photo on the right shows the improved 
condition of the creek and meadow in August 2007. Photos courtesy of Jonathan Long, Sierra Nevada Research Center, 
Pacific Southwest Research Station, U.S. Forest Service  
 
 
For more information about this systematic review, contact Dr. Jim Allen,  
Northern Arizona School of Forestry, James.Allen@nau.edu 
