Ecological Restoration: AMajor Component
ofSustainable Use of the Planet
John Cairns, Jr.
SUNIMARY
At some point in the next century,
ecological damage and repair must be
balanced to achieve sustainable use of
the planet. If ecological damage has ex-
ceeded the threshold needed for reliable
delivery of ecosystem services. it will
be necessary for repair to exceed dam-
age until adequate ecological integrity
has been restored. including a margin
for safety to protect against unex-
pected loss of services due to natural
or anthropogenic episodic events. Ar-
guably. ecological restoration has not
been given the attention it deserves in
the quest for sustainable use of the
planet. The purpose of this discussion
is to provide a rationale for ecological
restoration in a sustainability context.
INTRODUCTION
The inevitable intensification of the
contlict for Earth's resources as the hu-
man population increases to 9-15 bil-
lion in the next century could be dimin-
ished by increasing ecological capital
through restoration. This scenario will
only happen if society endorses three
John Cairns. Jn, Ph.D. is a University
Distinguished Professor Emeritus ofThe
Department ofBiology at Virginia Pol......-
Technic Institute and STaTe University in
Blacksburg.
6
RENEWABLE RESOURCES JOURNAL
inter-related guiding beliefs: (I) a sense
of social responsibility beyond oneself
and one's immediate family. (2) a com-
mitment to leave a habitable planet for
future generations, and (3) an ethical
responsibility to share Earth's re-
sources with other species. Science
and technology are not enough to de-
velop a societal ethos regarding the
environment. but science can provide
insights into how the world works. A
"green" technology can reduce an-
thropogenic effects upon the planet's
ecological life support system.
In the United States, the sport of foot-
ball has complex and elaborate rules.
Although officials make sure that these
rules are followed, most fans are quite
literate about these rules and become
exceedingly vocal when an official
makes a decision not approved by the
spectators. However, the level of en-
vironmental literacy about how the
natural world works is not high. Eco-
systems are being degraded world-
wide, and the rate of species extinc-
tion is unprecedented in human his-
tory. As Goethe remarked: "Nothing
is more frightening than ignorance in
action!" And a Kashmiri proverb as-
serts : "We ha.....e not inherited the Earth
from our ancestors, we have borrowed
it from our children." Ecological resto-
ration only makes sense if human soci-
ety wishes to leave a habitable planet
for future generations.
SUSTAINABLE USE
OF THE PLANET
A simple definition of sustainable is
"capable of being kept going on an in-
definite basis"-not until the end of the
week or the end of the next century but
indefinitely! A balance must occur be-
tween damage and repair before so many
species have been driven to extinction
that the "building blocks" essential to
the process are no longer available. Ex-
ponential growth in human population
and affluence cannot continue forever
on a finiteplanet. At some point in time,
almost certainly in the 21st century, so-
ciety should seriously consider what sort
of planet it should leave for its descen-
dants. Surely. future generations should
have the same opportunities as past gen-
erations to experience natural systems
that are not so overcrowded with hu-
mans that other creatures cannot behave
normally. Limiting human access might
accomplish this. but would not result in
the profound understanding of natural
systems that is made possible by long
and frequent association.
Since prevention is more effective
than a cure, society must use all possible
means to avoid or dramatically slow the
on-going ecological destruction to pre-
serve those remaining ecosystems that
are still in reasonably good shape. Sim-
ply repairing ecological damage more
rapidly is neither a desirable nor effec-
SPRING 1999

rive way to achieve balance. This neces-
sity is particularly true while ecological
restoration still is a developing field .
Doing so has numerous and diffe rent
social. legal, and institutional ramifica-
tions. but the probable consequences of
further degradati on of the ecological
support system are more daunting.
Preventing ecological damage is pref-
erable to ecological restoration for an-
othe r reason as well. Species almost al-
ways are lost from stressed ecosystems,
and no comparable sources may be
available elsewhere . Even when other
sources are present. the individuals may
not be as wellsuitedforspecificlocal con-
ditions as were the original inhabitants.
DAMAGED VERSUS
UNDAMAGED ECOSYSTEMS
Arguably, no places remain on the
surface of the planet that are entirely free
from evidence of human activities (e.g..
litter on Mt. Everest).Almost every area
is accessible to those with cash and an
interest in making the journey. Still. in-
cremental changes collectively over a
modest time span are almost always star-
tling. In all likelihood. the use of water
resources will be a major focus of con-
cern and contention in the 21st centurv,
as is already the situation in the Middie
East and other areas of water scarcity.
The Na tional Research Counci l
(NRC. 1992) has summarized the chal-
lenge of wetlands restoration for the U.S.
The report committee relates that. over
the past 200 years. approximately 117
million acres of wetlands have been lost
in the U.S. The report committee sug-
gested that consideration be given to
restoring island and coastal wetlands to
contribute to an overall gain of 10 mil-
lion wetland acres by the year 2010.This
restorati on cou ld be accomplished
largely through the reconversion of crop
and pastureland and modification of
existing water control structures.
Ten million acres of wetlands repre-
sents less than 10 percent of the acreage
lost in the last 200 years but it is an im-
SPRING 1999
pre ssi ve number. How should it be
reached? Californi a had five million
acres of wet lands in the l780s and
454.000 acres in the I980s-a 91 per-
cent loss. Californi a leads the nation in
wetland loss. New Hampshire has lost
only about nine percent and Virginia 42
percent (NRC. 1992). Should the largest
restoration effort occur where the wet-
land loss was the greatest? Science can-
The ultimate question is
"Is a world without
ecological restoration a
sustainable world?"
not provide an answer to this question
because it is a societal value judgment.
The situation for rivers and streams
is quite comparable. The National Re-
search Council (1992) recommended
that a total of 400.000 miles of streams
and rivers be restored over a 20-year
period. This figure represents approxi-
mately 12 percent of the 3.2 million
miles of streams and rivers in the U.S.
The number is comparable to the miles
affected by point source pollution and
urban runoff (EPA. 1990).Akey recom-
mendation from the NRC was the des-
ignation and protection of reference
reaches in each of the 76 ecoregions of
the U.S. This undertaking is extremely
important since it provides reference
sites for establishing restoration goals
and models. Excluding the Great Lakes.
as well as flood control and water sup-
ply reservoirs. one million acres oflakes
should have been restored in association
with wetland and river restoration by the
year 2000. increasing to two million
acres over the long term (NRC. 1992).
THE ETHICAL DILE~1MA
An ecological footprint measures the
human impact on nature by focusing on
what is consumed (Wackernagel. 1998).
The average Canadian needs 17 acres
of productive land and water to support
his/her current Iifestvle. The average
U.S. citizen leaves a footprint that is 30
percent larger; the average Italian. less
than two-thirds this size. The average
Swede depends on nearly 15 acres. Na-
ture now provides an average of 5.7
acres of productive land and water per
person. At a human population of 10
billion. the available space will be re-
duced to roughly three acres per person .
Will this permit a habitable planet for
future generations? If the U.S. cannot
restore even 10 percent of the wetlands
damaged in the last 200 years by 20 IO.
why assume it will be done when the
population is larger?
How much space and other resources
should be allotted to other species? Is
that percentage adequate to maintain the
integrity of Earth's ecological life sup-
port system and the services it provides ?
Ecological restoration not only is a
newly emerging field but it also is forc-
ing a reexamination of society's relation-
ship with nature. The ultimate question
is "Is a world without ecological resto-
ration a sustainable world?"
THE EXEMPTIONALISTS
Most ecologists accept that all spe-
cies are limited by the resources avail-
able to them. Some economists (e.g..
Simon. 1981) believe that human inge-
nuity. technology, and creativity free
human society from the grip of the bio-
physical laws of nature that restrain other
species-they are "exemptionalists."
Wilson (1998) proposes a new name for
the committed exemptionalist (Homo
proteus or "shapechanger man"). Cul-
tural attributes of H proteus include:
indeterminately flexible with vast po-
tential: wired and information driven:
can travel almost anywhere; adapt to
any environment; restless, getting too
crowded; thinking about the coloniza-
tion of space: regrets the current loss of
nature and all those vanishing species
RENEWABLE RESOURCES JOURNAL
7

but it is the price of progress and has
little to do with the future anyway.
Wilson's (1998) contrary belief isthat
Homo sapiens are biologically con-
structed and dependent in body and
mind on other earthbound organisms.
So. arguably, do most restoration ecolo-
gists. However, the dominant global
paradigm is the exponential growth
model that is responsible for most eco-
logical destruction and the begrudging
of funds for ecological restoration.
Those who doubt the threat of
exemptionalism to both ecological res-
toration and ecological integrity would
do well to read the obituaries of Julian
Simon (e.g., Anon, 1998; Sowell. 1998)
or the debate at Columbia University
(Myers and Simon. 1994) or Myers'
(1997) update on one aspect of this de-
bate. Some illustrative examples of se-
rious problems with exemptionalism
follow.
(I) Does the exemptionalist para-
digm excessively discount or
ignore socially imposed long-
term risks?
(2) Is there some way to validate the
exemptionalist paradigm other
than using historical evidence.
primarily from the last 200
years?
Why
shouldn t
exemptionalist predictions be
given the same systematic and
orderly scrutiny that is given to
predictions of ozone depletion.
global warming. and the like?
(3) Even if the exemptionalist view
is correct and humans no longer
need other species, is it an ethi-
cally sound position to destroy
them because they are no longer
needed? After all. they did con-
stitute the life support system for
most of mankind's existence.
(4) Is society so confident that its
technological parachute will
work that it is willing to depend
on it even when there are alter-
native and proven ways of liv-
ing in harmony with natural sys-
tems?
8
RENEWABLE RESOURCESJOURNAL
(5) If other intelligent species are
someday found in the universe
and humans are not found nec-
essary to the survival of that spe-
cies but are occupying space that
the other species would find use-
ful. have humans any right to
complain if they are driven to
extinction?
Is human society so
confident that its
technical parachute will
work that it is willing
to depend on it even
when there are alterna-
tives and proven ways
ofliving in harmony
with natural systems?
(6) Do humans really believe that
they can control all species on
earth. even those now able to
elude control (i.e.. pests) ?
(7)
Is it possible to produce pesti-
cides so selective that they will
affect only the target species and
not humans or the species upon
which humans depend?
(8) Would it be prudent to develop
a fail-safe position until more ro-
bust evidence is gathered for the
exemptionalist position?
(9) How should predominantly
exemptionalist cultures treat
other cultures and ethnic groups
that consider all life to be sa-
cred?
In addition to the problems of exemp-
tionalism. other considerations deserve
attention before further damage occurs
to the ecological life support system!
I. Despite past successes. such as the
green revolution. there is no assurance
that accomplishments will continue at a
rate of development that will free soci-
ety from the biophysical laws of nature.
2. Absence of evidence about risks
does not mean that the risks are not
present.
3. Multigenerational equity and fair-
ness (the core component of sustainable
use ofthe planet's resources) require that
future generations have as much ability
to use a resource. such as water. as
present generations.
4. Continuation of the delivery of eco-
system services requires that the natu-
ral systems that provide these services
have resources (e.g.. land and water )
allocated to them. Technological substi-
tutes that satisfy human needs may not
be adequate for natural systems.
5. Many of the technologies designed
to replace ecosystem services do not
appear to be cost effective (e.g., Avise.
1994; Costanza et al.. 1997). Some po-
tential options do not appear technically
feasible.
6. World population growth and in-
creased per capita consumption may
outstrip the rate of development of tech-
nological alternati ves. For example. the
United Nations (1996) concluded that
freshwater use has been growing at more
than twice the rate of population increase
during this century. and already a num-
ber of regions are chronically water short.
The report also concludes that about
one-third of the world 's population lives
in countries that are experiencing mod-
erate to high water stress. This results
in part from increasing demands that are
fueled by population growth and human
activity. The report estimates that. by the
year 2025. as much as two-thirds of the
world's population will be experiencing
water stress conditions. Thus. a bad situ-
ation may worsen rapidly and increase
the risk that technological developments
will be too slow and that natural sys-
tems will be deprived of both the qual-
ity and quantity of water needed to pre-
serve their integrity.
A focus on water is illustrative be-
cause it seems unlikely that a cost-ef-
SPRING 1999

fective substitute will be developed and
because the hydrological cycle is so
important to both humans and natural
systems. Moreover. the quantity of wa-
ter on Earth is fixed. so preservation of
quality becomes very important.
7. Even if society were entirely inde-
pendent of natural systems. it is morally
and ethically responsible for preserva-
tion of natural systems.
Human societies have had a major
effect upon natural systems. even dur-
ing the long hunter/gatherer stage . The
impact increased significantly with the
development of agriculture. roughly
10.500years ago (e.g.•Diamond. 1997).
Unquestionably, species that are suscep-
tible to anthropogenic effects have de-
clined or have become extinct (e.g.. Wil-
son. 1988) while resistant species have
increased (i.e., pests). Just how long this
ecological adjustment can continue
without resulting in major disequilib-
rium is uncertain.
ILLUSTRATIVE FUTURE
SCENARIOS
Although human carrying capacity is
a useful theoretical concept. it varies
with the level of technology. which
changes with time. Carrying capacity
also varies with the standard of afflu-
ence. which varies dramatically even
between developed countries and even
more so between developed and devel-
opingcountries. Ecological preservation
andrestoration to maintain essential eco-
system services would be an obviously
pragmatic approach if one could accu-
rately predict the relationship between
the ecosystem health and delivery of
these services. Unquestionably. the
planet is finite and emigration to outer
space is unlikely to become sufficiently
cost effective to solve Earth's popula-
tion problems in the next century.
However, when the consequences of
continuing present practices (e.g., expo-
nential economic growth and ecologi-
cal destruction) are likelv to be severe
taking precautionary ac~ion to reduc~
SPRING 1999
ecological damage and increase repair
isjustified.The three "Rs" for leaving a
habitable and ecologically attractive
planet are:
(I) Reservation-protect ecosys-
tems before damage occurs by
providing sanctuaries in each
ecoregion where anthropogenic
stress is absent or minimal.
One ofthe major op-
portunities in ecologi-
cal restoration is to
develop a new relation-
ship between human
society and natural
systems.
(2) Restoration-repair ecological
damage at a rate that offsets eco-
logical damage: this strategy
would increase the likelihood of
future generations having an
approximation of past environ-
mental amenities.
(3) Reform-modify behavior to
protect the integrity of the
planet's ecological life support
system through acknowledging
human society's dependence
upon natural systems.
The following illustrative scenarios
suggest quite different ways in which a
paradigm shift might occur.
Worst case scenario--A global re-
cession that would provide an excuse to
damage ecological capital further (e.g.,
old growth forests. riparian zones. etc.).
This destruction. coupled with exponen-
tialgrowth in some developing countries
and a quest for increased per capita ma-
terial affluence. would pose a major
threat to both ecological preservation
and restoration.
Dangerous also is the diversion of
limited financial resources to offset eco-
logical mismanagement. As Cockburn
(1998)notes. many of Nicaragua's peas-
ant families have been forced off the
good land and moved into shanty towns
along riverbanks on the floodplain. At
the same time, steep deforested hillsides
were present so that any major storm
would create mudslides and floods. No
vegetationwas available to absorb mois-
ture and hold the soil in place. Abuse of
nature is the basic problem; floods are
among the symptoms.
When a child is abused, society
should address both cause and symp-
toms-this strategy makes sense for
nature as well. Until these problems are
addressed. ecological destruction likely
will continue until natural forces take
over and produce a new ecological bal-
ance.
Even if the worst case scenario ap-
pears highly probable, ecological resto-
ration still is worthwhile in the event that
a major paradigm shift occurs in
society's relationship with natural sys-
tems. Assuming that biotic impoverish-
ment continues at its present rate well
into the nextcentury, naturalistic assem-
blages of plants and animals still can be
established on damaged ecosystems
with whateverspecies are left.They may
bear only modest correspondence to the
predisturbance condition but surely will
be substantivelysuperior to the damaged
condition.
Depressing as this scenario might ini-
tially appear. every opportunity should
be seized with alacrity! One of the ma-
jor opportunities in ecological restora-
tion is to develop a new relationship
between society and natural systems
(e.g.. Cairns. 1994).This restoration can
be achieved anywhere with any dam-
aged ecosystem, and the prospects for
sustainable use of the planet will be en-
hanced!
Major catastrophe scenario-
Society's dependence upon natural sys-
tems will become abundantly clear as a
result of some major ecological catas-
RENEWABLE RESOURCES JOURNAl
9

trophe that has serious, but not fatal. ef-
fects on human society. If there were no
uncertainty about this scenario, steps
would be taken to avoid it. The number
of possible catastrophes is enormous,
but the one that occurs will doubtless
surprise everyone (except the inevitable
20120 hindsight prophets who will claim
to have predicted it).
Both opportunities and dangers are
present in this catastrophe scenario. The
opportunity is to educate policymakers
and the public that preservation is both
more desirable and less costly than res-
toration. The restoration process also
implies that some valuable ecosystem
services are lost or diminished.The dan-
ger is that restoration ecology will be
viewed as the ecological equivalent of
an automotive body and fender repair
shop-no need to be prudent in safe-
guarding ecosystems because restora-
tion ecologists will make them as "good
as pre-disturbance condition."
Precautionary action principle see-
narlo--The precautionary action prin-
ciple (PAP) is based on the assumption
that, if the consequences of a particular
course of action are particularly severe
but there is considerable uncertainty
about when or even if the undesirable
events will occur, precautionary action
to prevent them is desirable. The PAP is
really a re-statement of some well-es-
tablished folk sayings such as "better
safe than sorry," "a stitch in time saves
nine," "an ounce of prevention is worth
a pound of cure," etc. The PAP would
justify preserving undamaged ecosys-
tems and repairing damaged ones since
a life support system should have a sub-
stantial margin of safety. History has
many regrettable examples of civiliza-
tions and societies that collapsed as a
result of ecological mismanagement
(Diamond, 1994, 1997).
In the face of highly uncertain out-
comes and in the absence of firm eco-
logical knowledge, philosophers should
develop altemative systems of ethics
that promote environmental quality and
10
RENEWABLE RESOURCES JOURNAL
are ethically sensitive. A recent discus-
sion of the wide range of interpretations
of the PAP may be found in the Ency-
clopedia of Applied Ethics (Parker.
1998). There also are promising signs
of a new trend in industry in which so-
cieties depend upon as a central theme .
Hawken (993). Weston (1995), Na-
tional Academy of Engineering (1996) ,
McDonough and Braungart (1998) and
Hitachi (undated) all are illustrative, but
in different ways, of a developing para-
digm focused on society's relationship
with nature. Ecological restoration will
be a major beneficiary if this new para-
digm becomes widely accepted.
Those nationsincreasing natural capi-
tal through restoration would be able to
access more resources (using ecologi-
cal interest rather than ecological capi-
tal) and. thus. be economically stronger
than those thatcannot. The U.S. became
the top economic power in the world in
the last 200 years because of the vast
stores of ecological capital that were
available and utilized. To a significant
degree. technology can make a substi-
tution for increasingly scarce resources
(e.g., plastic for wood fiber). However.
technological capital has been based on
cheap . readily available energy, mostly
from a finite supply of fossil fuels .
Nuclear power presently is not an ac-
ceptable substitute because it generates
persistent hazardous wastes. Natural
capital is generated by solar energy
through the process of photosynthesis.
which has proven effective and benign
during the entire existence of Homo sa-
piens.
HOW MUCH RESTORATION
IS NEEDED?
Ecological destruction clearly cannot
exceed restoration indefinitely without
ecosystems disappearing entirely. At
present rates of destruction, a point may
be reached in the 21st century when
many ecosystems no longer are self-
maintaining because of anthropogenic
stresses such as fragmentation and pol-
lution. If future generations are to enjoy
a habitable planet, ecological repair and
destruction must be in balance. There
are three important decisions that should
influence selecting this balance: (1)
What minimum delivery of ecosystem
services does society require? (2) To
what extent should compassion for fu-
ture generations affect both ecological
restoration and preservation? and (3)
How much of the planet should one spe-
cies, Homo sapiens, co-opt for its own
use and how much should be allocated
to the other 25 million species?
Science can provide useful informa-
tion to help with the first question but
value judgments will strongly affect the
final decision. Do we really want to see
how many people can be packed on the
planet or is quality of life a primary
goal?
To what extent should the pre-
cautionary action principle govern de-
cisions? How do Earth's many diverse
cultures reach a consensus on these and
other crucial value judgments? The an-
swer to questions two and three are al-
most entirely valuejudgments, but once
made. the newly emerging field of eco-
logical restoration should play a major
role in implementation.«
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am indebted to Amy Ostroth for
putting the handwritten draft on the
word processor and for processing sub-
sequent revisions and to Darla Donald
for preparing the manuscript for publi-
cation.
Alan
Heath
and
B.
R.
Niederlehner made useful comments
and suggestions on an early draft.
LITERATURE CITED
Anon. (1998). Obituary: Julian Simon. The
Economist, Feb21, 87.
Avise. J.e. (1994). The real message from
Biosphere 2. Conservation Biology. 8
327-329.
Cairns. 1..Jr. (1994). Ecological restoration:
re-examining human society's relation-
ship with natural systems. The Abel
Wolman Distinguished Lecture . Wash-
SPRING 1999

ington, D.C. : Water Science and Tech-
nology Board. National Research
Council. 20 pp.
Cockburn, A. (1998). Government is 10
blame, not Mitch. Los Angeles Times.
Nov. 12, B13.
Costanza, R, d' Arge, R., de Groot. R..
Farber, S., Grasso. M., Hannon. B.,
Limburg, K., Naeem. S.. O'Neill, R.V..
Paruelo, J., Raskin. R.G.. Sunon. P.and
van der Belt, M. (1997). The value of
the world's ecosystem services and
natural capital. Nature , 387. 253-260.
Diamond, J. (1994). Ecological collapses of
ancient civilizations: the golden age
that never was . The Bullerin ofAmeri-
can Academy of Arts and Sciences.
XLV1l(5),37-59.
Diamond, J. (1997). Paradises lost. Discover.
18,68-78.
EPA. (1990).Water Resources Development
Act of 1986. P.L. 99-662. Nov. 17,
1985, 100 Stat. 4082
Hawken, P. (1993). The Ecology of Com-
merce. New York: Harper Collins Pub-
lishers. 250 pp.
SPRING 1999
Hitachi (undated video). Harmonization:
Aiming for harmony with the Environ-
ment. Hitachi. Ltd .. 4026 Kiyi-cho.
Hitachi-shi. Ibaraki-ken 319-12. Japan.
McDonough. W. and Braungart. M. (J 998).
The next industrial revolution. The Ar-
lanric Monthly. October. 82-92
Myers. N. (1997). Consumption: Challenge
to sustainable development. Science,
276. 253-::!57.
Myers. N. and Simon. J.L. (1994). Scarcity
or Abundance? A Debate on the Envi-
ronment. New York: W. W. Norton.
National Academy of Engineering. (1996).
Engineering Within Ecological Con-
srrainrs. Washington, D.C.: National
Academy Press.
National Research Council. (1992) . Resto-
ration ofAquaric Ecosystems: Science.
Technology. and Public Policy. Wash-
ington. D.C.: National Academy Press.
552 pp.
Parker. J. (1998), Precautionary principle in
Encyclopedia ofApplied Ethics. Vol. 3.
pp. 633-641. New York : Academic
Press.
Simon. J. (1981 ). The Ulrimare Resource.
Princeton. NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Sowell. T. (1998). Let's praise Julian Simon.
who debunked nonsense of our age. The
Detroit News. Feb15. 98.
United Nations. (1996). Comprehensive As-
sessment ofthe Freshwater Resources
of the World. New York: The United
Nations Press.
Wackernagel. M. (1998). Interview: Leav-
ing smaller footprints. The Natural Step
Newsletter. 1(7), 1,8.
Weston. R.F. (Ed.). (1995). Sustainable De-
velopment: The Rules of the Game.
West Chester. PA: Roy F. Weston. Inc.
49 pp.
Wilson. E.O. (1998). Consilience: The Unity
of Knowledge. New York: Alfred A.
Knopf. Inc. 332 pp.
RENEWABLE RESOURCES JOURNAL
11
