R
esidents of Flagstaff live in a 
beautiful area of the county—a 
region of volcanic mountains, 
deep canyons, crimson deserts, pines and 
ﬁ rs, oaks and aspens, and wide variety of 
native shrubs and wildﬂ owers. This natural 
palette presents us with a remarkable guide 
that we can use to create beautiful, natu-
ral landscapes around our homes that will 
provide habitat for a stunning variety of 
native plants and animals as well as protect 
our dwellings from the dangers of wildﬁ re. 
Gardening and landscaping with native 
plants offers us a way to use our creativity 
and energy while at the same time learning 
about and caring for northern Arizona’s 
native plants—plants that exhibit a combi-
nation of beauty and function formed over 
thousands of years. We should recognize 
how lucky we are to have the opportunity 
to enjoy these plants and the many beneﬁ ts 
they bring to us and the other beings that 
share our environment in Flagstaff.
This booklet describes how to design our 
backyards and larger properties to promote 
wildlife habitat, reduce water use, and 
minimize risk to property from unnatural 
wildﬁ re. It also provides information about 
local and state resources that can be useful 
in such efforts.
CREATING A NATURAL LANDSCAPE
Creating areas for plants and animals be-
gins with an assessment of what you want 
and/or hope to achieve (a retreat for birds, 
a butterﬂ y garden, a model of a nearby 
natural plant community) and what barriers 
there may be to achieve those goals (lack 
of time or funds, incompatible adjacent 
property uses, buried utilities). Although 
fostering diversity and building wildlife-
friendly habitat while reducing wildﬁ re 
risks and weed invasions sounds great, it 
can be a lot of work. It’s wise to make your 
plans according to realistic time commit-
ments and funds. Remember: Start small 
and expand as your project progresses.
Backyard
Wildlife Habitat 
and Fire Safety
A Guide for Residents of Flagstaff
Native trees, shrubs, and wildflowers can provide a beautiful, safe 
setting for homes and business properties in and around Flagstaff.

Planning your project also requires a site analysis of your property—a task that is relatively easy 
and one in which you will often learn more about your property than you knew before. The idea 
is to look closely at several landscape elements that influence habitat development and planting 
success. These include soils, sun/shade, topography, and water availability. Each of these items 
needs to be studied and considered when developing a planting plan for a property. Using a ma-
trix of these elements often helps in making decisions about what plants to purchase and where 
to place a particular species or group of species.
Site Analysis
Soils
Soils are fundamental to achieving success when growing plants. Soils hold nutrients and water 
that plants require for their survival and growth. Matching plants to compatible soils is often key 
to their establishment and long-term success. Taking soil samples to the Flagstaff Natural Re-
sources Conservation Service office, or other soil sampling labs, can help you determine the type 
of soil(s) that you have.
Sun/Shade 
It’s important to take time during the growing season to note which parts of your backyard or 
property receive sunlight and for how long during the daylight hours. This activity is important 
because matching plants to sunny and shady areas is another key to their survival and growth. 
Some plants do well in the sun, others do not, and still others can live quite happily in partial or 
dappled shade. 
Topography 
Even the smallest yard has changes in topography that create a variety of microclimates, which 
will each support very different plants. Amazingly, some of these microclimates exist within a 
few feet of one another. South-facing, treeless areas typically support sun-loving plants, while 
north-facing areas are better for plants that prefer shade and more moisture. Even small depres-
sions will support plants that like more water. Microclimates can also be built using rocks or 
other structural material.
Water Availability
Water is a key element in the Flagstaff environment, and its availability, especially to germinat-
ing seeds and young plants, is critical. That’s why it’s important to seed and/or plant at times 
when the water availability in the soil is relatively high or the chance of obtaining moisture is 
good (just prior to winter snows or summer monsoonal rains). Watering with a hose or drip ir-
rigation system (see below) is another alternative.
Inventory
Finally, you’ll need to inventory what already exists on the property to determine what will stay,              
    be removed or reduced, and what needs to be added. Check the Natural Landscaping Resources  
    section of this guide for books that help identify native and non-native plants.
1                                                              Backyard Wildlife Habitat and Fire Safety

Give Invaders the Boot 
Invasive plant species, such as dalmation toadflax, cheatgrass and 
knapweed, spread rapidly, are undesirable food for wildlife, and pre-
vent the establishment of native plants. Cheatgrass, in particular, cre-
ates volatile fuel that helps spread wildfires. Keep invasive plants at 
bay by mulching, maintaining healthy populations of native plants, and 
minimizing soil disturbance (areas where most weeds prefer to locate). 
If invasive plants do appear, hand weeding and selective herbicide use 
can often control them.
Where Feasible Go Native 
Native plants have many desirable characteristics, including using less 
water and providing more wildlife habitat than imported varieties. Native plants have adapted 
over thousands of years to northern Arizona’s dry and windy conditions. In turn, native animals 
have co-adapted to use these plants. Native plants can help create a beautiful yard that is in 
harmony with its surroundings. In the long run, native plants can be easy to care for, although it’s 
not always easy to get them established.
Xeriscaping 
Xeriscaping minimizes water use by landscaping with drought-tolerant plants. Many native and 
nonnative plants alike are able to thrive with minimal supplemental watering. Landscaping with 
these plants can save time and money, and precious water supplies. Flagstaff is an especially 
good place to minimize water use because the city government has enacted permanent watering 
restrictions. However, a permit can be obtained to water new landscaping to facilitate the suc-
cessful establishment of new plants. 
Use Drip Irrigation 
Drip irrigation reduces water use and weed growth, and saves time and money. Drip irrigation 
eliminates the high evaporation rates of sprinklers by sending water straight to plants instead of 
to sidewalks, gutters, and bare ground. Drip irrigation systems vary between expensive, profes-
sionally installed systems to strategically located, punctured hoses. 
Collect Water 
Many Flagstaff residents collect runoff from their roof for later use in the garden. Many garden-
ers prefer rainwater or snowmelt because it hasn’t been purified with chemicals. Rain barrels that 
catch water from rain gutters are available at a number of retailers and from the City of Flagstaff. 
Reduce Flammability through Plant Selection and Spacing 
Landscaping that is compatible with fire protection doesn’t mean surrounding a home with bare 
ground or rock. Smart planning and appropriate plant selection will create a beautiful yard that 
supports wildlife and minimizes fire danger.
To provide fuel breaks in the event of a fire, plant small, irregular clusters of trees and shrubs 
with space between them. Plants close to a house should be widely spaced and low to the ground. 
Keep them well watered and free of dead leaves so they don’t become fuel. Use deciduous trees, 
Backyard Wildlife Habitat and Fire Safety                                                                 2

such as Gambel oak, because they are not as flammable as conifers. Many native southwestern 
plants, especially succulents, resist fire. If landscaping is intended to increase privacy, create “is-
lands” of trees at a distance from a home or use deciduous trees to produce a visual screen.
Decorative rock, gravel, and stepping stones provide excellent protection from creeping ground 
fire. Mulch can conserve water and inhibit weed growth, but should not be touching any flam-
mable surfaces leading up to or next to a house. Cinders and gravel also work well to conserve 
moisture without becoming a fuel source in the event of fire.
NATURAL LANDSCAPING RESOURCES
Plant Identification Books and Web Sites 
Plants of Arizona (Falcon Press 1995) 
Native Plants for High-Elevation Western Gardens (Fulcrum Press 2003)
Beyond the Ponderosa: Successful Landscape Trees for Higher Elevations in the Southwest 
(Flagstaff Community Tree Board 1998)
River and Desert Plants of the Grand Canyon (Mountain Press Publishing 2006)
Southwest Exotic Plant Information Clearinghouse, http://www.usgs.nau.edu/swepic/
Invasive Weeds of the Southwest, http://www.invasiveweeds.com/canido/welcome.html
Places to Visit for Natural Landscaping Ideas 
Willow Bend Environmental Education Center, 703 E. Sawmill, 779-1745, 
www.willowbendcenter.org
The Arboretum at Flagstaff, 4001 Woody Mountain Road, 774-1442, www.thearb.org
Places to Purchase Plants in the Flagstaff Area 
Flagstaff Native Plant and Seed, 409 West Pine Avenue, 773-9406, www.nativeplantandseed.com
Nature’s Rewards, corner of Postal Boulevard and East Route 66, 714-9492
Warner’s Nursery and Landscaping, 1101 East Butler Avenue, 774-1983
Flagstaff Native Plant Nursery, 1107 North Navajo Drive, 774-3584
The Arboretum at Flagstaff holds a native plant sale each June.
Contacts and Web Sites for Help Identifying and Managing Invasive Plants 
Center for Invasive Plant Management, www.weedcenter.org
Southwest Exotic Plant Information Clearinghouse, www.usgs.nau.edu/SWEPIC. 
Laura Moser, plant ecologist with the Coconino National Forest, 527-3423
Wade Albrecht, Coconino County Extension Service, 774-1868
Programs that Promote Xeriscaping 
The City of Flagstaff offers a Turf Removal Rebate Program for local homeowners and businesses 
who replace a minimum of 1,500 square feet of established, water-consuming turf grass with native 
plants or an alternative low-water landscape. To check eligibility, contact Flagstaff’s Water Conser-
vation Office at 779-7685 ext. 4827.
Saving Water 
The City of Flagstaff has a watering ordinance limiting even-numbered addresses to watering on 
Wednesdays, Fridays, and Sundays. Odd-numbered addressed can water on Tuesdays, Thursdays, 
and Saturdays. Watering is not allowed on Mondays or between 9 a.m. and 5 p.m. on any day of the 
week. 
 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
3                                                              Backyard Wildlife Habitat and Fire Safety

The City orders rain barrels annually for distribution to residents at cost. Rain barrels are typically 
ordered in May and are available for pick-up in early July. Contact the Water Conservation Office 
at 779-7685 ext. 4827 or www.flagstaff.az.gov. County residents can call 526-2735 for rain barrel 
information.
Information about drip irrigation is available from The Arboretum at Flagstaff or local nurseries and 
hardware stores. The Master Gardener Program, through the University of Arizona-Coconino County 
Cooperative Extension, can help with other watering ideas. Call 774-1868 ext. 19, 
April through September.
Native Landscaping Design and Consultation
Contact Patrick Pynes for personalized, organic landscaping through his Flagstaff-based business, 
Earth Gardner at 527-4578 or pinewood@npgcable.com.
Flagstaff Native Plant and Seed, 409 West Pine Avenue, 773-9406, www.nativeplantandseed.com 
Flagstaff Native Plant and Seed designs and installs landscaping using natives and/or plants compat-
ible with a high-altitude environment.
BACKYARD HABITAT
Backyards aren’t separate from their surroundings–they’re part of a landscape that has the poten-
tial to provide habitat for many wildlife species. Migratory birds, for example, stop in droves in 
Flagstaff’s shade trees and flower gardens during spring and fall. Through careful design, a yard 
can become a safe haven to wildlife–and a desirable human habitat as well!
Water
Well-designed, small water features that do not consume an excessive amount of water will at-
tract many wildlife species, from birds to dragonflies. Whether it’s a birdbath, a small fountain 
or pond, water features are particularly important during dry weather. Water must be changed 
frequently to prevent the growth of algae and mosquito larvae.
Plants as Food for Wildlife 
Many plants provide food for animals. Leafy trees, shrubs, and wildflowers support populations 
of small insects that attract birds and other animals. Showy wildflowers produce nectar for hum-
mingbirds, butterflies, and moths. Shrubs and trees that bear fruits or nuts create buffet lines for 
many animals, often into the winter. To ensure a variety of food sources, planting many different 
types of plants.
Flowers
There are many flowers that attract wildlife. Penstemons are one widely used group of native 
flowers because they attract hummingbirds, bees, and butterflies. There are many different spe-
cies of penstemons with showy flowers–red, blue, or purple–and they grow at a range of eleva-
tions. Another option is to establish a perennial wildflower meadow using a variety of species. 
This approach ensures that some flowers will bloom every year since precipitation can vary and 
different species have evolved to respond to a range of moisture conditions. Native wildflowers, 
such as yellow coneflower (Ratibida columnaris), many flowered viguiera (Viguiera multiflora), 
and blue flax (Linum lewisii), are a few plants to consider. A perennial wildflower meadow will 
take effort to get started, but, once established, requires less of a gardening commitment. 
•
•
•
•
Backyard Wildlife Habitat and Fire Safety                                                                 4

Berries
Currants, gooseberries, serviceberries, 
chokecherries, and barberries are all native 
bushes with abundant, sweet fruits eagerly 
sought by birds and other wildlife. 
Grasses 
It is expensive and difficult to maintain a classic 
bluegrass lawn in Flagstaff. A more economical 
and environmentally compatible alternative is to 
use native grasses that are drought tolerant. The 
grass usually suggested is blue grama (Bouteloua 
gracilis), a native grass. Many people mix this grass 
with Western yarrow (Achillea lanulosa), a flowering plant. The 
aesthetics of a yard using native grass may take some getting used to for people 
accustomed to turf. Native lawns can be mowed, but in many neighborhoods they can be al-
lowed to grow long and develop seed heads (doing so increases their value as wildlife cover and 
food). A natural yard can present a managed or tidy look if they include neat borders and plants 
are clipped around fences, sidewalks, and walkways. 
Artificial Feeding of Birds and Other Animals
Many people enjoy feeding birds. Providing a variety of foods–including suet and seeds--will 
attract many different bird species. Once a commitment is made to feeding, it is important to 
maintain it through the winter. Feeders should be cleaned periodically with a solution of one part 
bleach to ten parts water in order to kill disease-spreading organisms.
Feeding small wild animals, however, can have unintended consequences, such as attracting ro-
dents, skunks, or larger predators. There are also certain animals that should never be fed, such as 
bears, coyotes and javelinas, because they can become a nuisance or threaten human safety. More 
information about backyard wildlife is available from the Arizona Game and Fish Department.
Shelter
Animals find shelter in all sorts of places. Provide cover for wildlife by establishing an “island” 
or two of dense vegetation, such as shrubby junipers, away from the house. Brush piles and dis-
carded Christmas trees also provide shelter from harsh winter winds, but place them well away 
from the house or dispose of them before fire season.
Rock piles rather than brush piles can also be used as cover for wildlife. They can be made to 
look beautiful, provide microclimates for plants, and don’t contribute to fire danger. 
    To avoid wildlife conflicts seal crawl spaces, attics, and garages to keep out skunks, squirrels,     
     rodents, and other unwanted animals.
    Artificial shelters, such as bird and bat houses, are attractive and beneficial to wildlife. Visit a     
    birding supply store or nursery or consult Backyard Wildlife Habitat Resources for information.
5                                                              Backyard Wildlife Habitat and Fire Safety

Where there is enough space and distance between a house or other building, dead trees or snags 
should be left because they are a preferred shelter for many species of wildlife—especially 
woodpeckers. Once they fall down, these snags become valuable habitat to mice, chipmunks, 
and all other small animals. 
Controlling Cats
Cats are popular pets, but they’re hard on birds. Domestic cats kill 
millions of birds and small mammals every year, including many 
endangered and threatened species. Cats hunt even when they’re 
well fed. They can outcompete native predators for food and trans-
mit disease to wildlife. Keep cats indoors whenever possible or 
put audible bells on their collars as a warning to birds. Keep dogs 
indoors or fenced in a yard, and keep them on a leash when hiking. 
BACKYARD WILDLIFE HABITAT RESOURCES
Sources of Information about Backyard Wildlife Habitat 
The National Wildlife Federation’s Backyard Habitat Program, www.nwf.org/backyardwildlifehabitat 
The Arbor Day Foundation, www.arborday.org/backyardwoods
Coexisting with Urban Wildlife by Robert L. Hoffa is a practical guide for encouraging or discouraging animal 
visits. It is available through the Sharlot Hall Museum, 928-445-3122, www.sharlot.org. 
The Arizona Association of Conservation Districts distributes a Backyard Conservation for Arid Lands Starter 
Kit that includes an 11-minute video or DVD showing conservation practices, ten fact sheets, and children’s 
activity books. Call 1-800-729-0694 x 85012 or purchase a kit from Willow Bend Environmental Education 
Center, 779-1745.
The Arizona Game and Fish Department, www.azgfd.gov/w_c/urban_wildlife.shtml or call the Flagstaff 
regional office at 774-5045. 
Sources for Information about Birds
Northern Arizona Audubon Society, www.nazas.org
Cornell University Lab of Ornithology, www.birds.cornell.edu/AllAboutBirds/attracting for information about 
bird-friendly plants, birdhouses and water features.
Information about Bats and Bat Houses
Bat Conservation International, www.batcon.org/home/index.asp?idPage=47
Bat Conservation and Management, http://www.batmanagement.com/
PROTECTING HOMES AGAINST WILDFIRE
Fires in the wildland-urban interface are fed by two general types of fuels: building materials 
and vegetation. Through conscience action, an individual can go a long way to reduce fuels and 
improve a building’s resistance to fire.
Landscaping and landscape management play a critical role in minimizing the risk of property 
and homes to wildfire. Ensuring that dry vegetation and needles are minimized is not only pru-
dent, it’s neighborly because wildfire can spread easily from one property to another. In recent 
years the market for fire-resistant building materials has expanded astronomically. Using fire-re-
sistant building materials is scientifically proven to improve the survivability of structures in the 
event of a fire. 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Backyard Wildlife Habitat and Fire Safety                                                                 6

The actions highlighted below are some of the most important things a landowner can do to help 
reduce damage to structures and property in the event of fire. Additional information can be 
found in the Wildfire Protection Resources section. 
Home Protection 
Research shows that fire-resistant roofing is the first line of defense against burning embers cre-
ated by fire. Replace wooden roof shingles and siding with fire-resistant materials. Removing 
flammable materials, such as pine needles, from the roof and gutters and around the foundation 
of houses following needle drop and before fire season in May and June is also a great way to 
protect your home. Propane tanks, wood piles, and gas grills should be placed away from the 
house as well. 
Create Defensible and Accessible Space 
Trim, rake, and mow vegetation within 100 feet of any structure. In particular, make sure no 
flammable materials touch the base of a house. Ignitions can occur when fire creeps along the 
ground and touches the foundation, decks or walkways leading to a house. Diligently remove 
piles of leaves and branches in close proximity to structures. In order to help firefighters make a 
quick response in the event of a fire, house numbers should be visible and any access routes free 
of clutter. Dangling branches and tall grasses around tree trunks located more than 100 feet of 
any structure should be cut. These are referred to as ladder fuels and, as the name implies, they 
can enable fire to climb into tree crowns. 
Thinning Trees 
Thinning overly dense pine trees will not only curb the risk of damage to homes and surround-
ing areas from wildfire, it will enhance the health and appearance of your property. Where trees 
grow too close together, they compete for nutrients, water, and sunlight. Thinning will increase 
the amount of nutrients and precipitation for remaining trees. They typically respond by growing 
larger, healthier, and more resistant to insect and disease outbreaks. 
Thinning treatments can also be used to create grassy openings that act as a fire break between 
trees and tree clumps. Reducing the number of trees makes sunshine and precipitation avail-
able to understory plants such as wildflowers, grasses, and shrubs. Understory vegetation is very 
attractive to many species of wildlife. Balance, however, is a good thing–maintain some tree 
clumps, and even isolated dead branches and wood piles, away from the house for wildlife cover 
and aesthetics.
Be Safe 
If you choose to thin trees or brush by yourself, be safe. The chainsaw is probably the most dan-
gerous and easily abused of all restoration tools. If you’re going to use one, follow these 
guidelines:
Read all instructions thoroughly, and have an established work plan. 
Work while well rested and sober, and be alert.
Use the correct safety gear (protective chaps, safety goggles, gloves, helmet), no matter what.
Keep your tools well maintained.
•
•
•
•
7                                                              Backyard Wildlife Habitat and Fire Safety

Know the Rules 
Flagstaff city codes and some codes, covenants, and restrictions developed by home owner as-
sociations prohibit the removal of some trees. Information on restrictions can be obtained by 
contacting the city.
Prescribed Burns 
Prescribed burns (fires that are set) remove accumulated tree litter and prevent the growth of 
saplings that can contribute to an overly dense forest. Prescribed burning returns nutrients to the 
soil and supports development of a diversity of wildflowers, grasses, and shrubs. It is illegal for 
a landowner to burn within the Flagstaff city limits without a permit from the fire department. 
Permits can be obtained for burning woodpiles. However, the city will not allow landowners to 
conduct prescribed burns intended to move across the entire property. Fortunately, the fire de-
partment will do this for homeowners free of charge when crews are available.
WILDFIRE PROTECTION RESOURCES
Assistance with Forest Thinning and Property Protection
The Flagstaff Fire Department conducts free home assessments to identify what a homeowner needs to do to 
protect their home and property. In addition, the fire department does thinning and burning for property own-
ers. For more information, call 779-7688, http://www.flagstaff.az.gov/index.asp?NID=160.
Highlands Fire Department, 525-1717 (Kachina) or 525-9144 (Mountainaire)
Summit Fire Department, 526-9537 (Doney Park)
The State Land Department assists private landowners with developing and implementing forest management 
and hazardous fuel reduction plans. These plans improve forest health and reduce the risk to their homes and 
property. Contact the State Land Department in Flagstaff for more information on this program at 774-1425.
The Greater Flagstaff Forests Partnership (GFFP) Forest treatments designed to reduce the risk of destructive 
wildfire can be expensive. The Greater Flagstaff Forests Partnership now offers a program whereby eligible 
landowners can receive financial assistance to treat their property. Property owners must own more than 2 
acres, but less than 10. Those who wish to treat their entire property receive first priority. Those who own less 
than 2 acres can join together with adjacent neighbors to meet the minimum acreage requirement. Those who 
own more than 10 acres are encouraged to contact the Arizona State Land Department at 774-1425 for other 
cost share options,  http://www.gffp.org/about_gffp/cost_share.htm or call 226-0644
The Natural Resources Conservation Service’s Environmental Quality Incentive Program offers a 50-percent 
cost share on thinning for landowners who claim at least $1,000 a year in agricultural income. Applications are 
accepted each fall. For more information, contact Gary Parrott, range conservationist for NRCS, 774-2401 ext. 
112. 
The following web sites list homeowner activities to reduce fire risk. The include: 
National FireWise: www.firewise.org
Arizona Firewise: cals.arizona.edu/firewise
National Interagency Fire Center: www.nifc.gov/preved/protecthome.html
Information on Flagstaff Building and Property Codes 
Contact the City Clerk, at 779-7607 
Information on Fire-resistant Backyard Habitat Ideas
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University, www.eri.nau.edu/cms/files/General/ERI-
homeowners.pdf or call 523-7182
Information on Chainsaw Safety 
www.oregonchain.com/precautions.htm
www.ncstormsurge.com/chnsaw.htm
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
฀
฀
฀
•
•
•
•
      
Backyard Wildlife Habitat and Fire Safety                                                                 8
O 
O
O

WILDFLOWERS
NATIVE PLANTS FOR FLAGSTAFF BACKYARD HABITATS
Little golden zinnia (Zinnia grandiflora)
Flowers: Orange-yellow, blooms May to October
Height: 6 to 12 inches  Width: 6 to 12 inches
Exposure: Full sun  
Soil: Warm, well-drained
Prairie smoke (Geum triflorum)
Flowers: pinkish red, blooms early spring
Height: 4 inches  Width: Spreading
Exposure: Sun to partial shade  
Soil: Any type
Showy goldeneye (Heliomeris multiflora)
Flowers: Yellow petals w/dark centers, blooms late 
summer to autumn
Height: 3 feet  Width: 3 feet
Exposure: Full sun   
Soil: Any type
Blue flax (Linun lewisii var. lewisii)
Flowers: Blue, blooms early spring into summer
Height: 2 feet  Width: 3 feet
Exposure: Full sun  
Soil: Well-drained
Butterflyweed (Asclepias tuberosa)
Flowers: Orange to yellow in mid-summer
Height: 8 inches Width: 20 inches
Exposure: Full sun  
Soil: Well-drained
Hopi blanketflower (Gaillardia pinnatifida)
Flowers: Yellow w/red centers in early summer
Height: 1.5 feet  
Exposure: Full sun  
Soil: Any type
      
9                                                              Backyard Wildlife Habitat and Fire Safety

Wild strawberry (Fragaria virginiana subsp. glauca)
Flowers: white, blooms early spring
Height: 3-6 inches  Width: Spreading groundcover
Exposure: Sun to shade   
Soil: Any, but add organic matter
Silvery lupine (Lupinus argenteus)
Flowers: Lavender, blooms early summer to late 
summer
Height: 3 feet  Width: 2.5 feet
Exposure: Sun to light shade  
Soil: Any type
Yellow coneflower (Ratibida columnifera)
Flowers: Yellow petals w/elongated, purplish centers, 
blooms summer
Height: 1 to 3 feet  Width: 3 feet
Exposure: Full sun   
Soil: Any, tolerates heavy clays
Cutleaf coneflower (Rudbeckia laciniata)
Flowers: Yellow petals w/yellow centers, blooms 
summer
Height: 3 feet with long flower stalks  Width: 3 feet
Exposure: Full sun to light shade  
Soil: Any; moist
Banana yucca (Yucca baccata)
Flowers: Creamy white in upright stalk, blooms 
early summer
Height: 2 to 2.5 feet  Width: 3 feet
Exposure: Sun   
Soil:  Warm, well-drained
Western blue flag (Iris missouriensis)
Flowers: Lilac-blue; blooms late spring, early 
summer
Height: 2 to 3 feet  Width: Clumping
Exposure: Full sun to light shade  
Soil: Seasonally moist
Backyard Wildlife Habitat and Fire Safety                                                                 10

GRASSES
SHRUBS/VINES
Serviceberry (Amelanchier alnifolia)
Flowers: White, blooms late spring; edible berries
Height: 6 to 10 feet  Width: 6 to 8 feet
Exposure: Sun to light shade  
Soil: Adaptable, tolerates clay
Blue grama (Bouteloua gracilis)
Infloresence: Resembles an eyelash, curling as it 
matures
Height: 6 to 20 inches  
Exposure: Sun to light shade   
Soil: Tolerates sand or clay
Mountain muhly (Muhlenbergia montana)
Infloresence: Large, open panicles, straw-colored
Height: 2.5 feet
Exposure: Sun to moderate shade 
Soil: Well-drained or seasonally dry
Little bluestem (Schizachyrium scoparium)
Inflorence: Many, small wispy white seed heads
Height: 2 to 4 feet
Exposure: Sun to light shade  
Soil: Adaptable, needs good drainage
Apache plume (Fallugia paradoxa)
Flowers: White w/yellow centers, blooms in summer
Height: 3 to 6 feet  Width: Spreading
Exposure: Full sun  
Soil: Well-drained
Arizona honeysuckle (Lonicera arizonica)
Flowers: Red, trumpet-shaped; blooms in early summer
Height: 18 feet, vine-like
Exposure: Sun to shade 
Soils: Moist
11                                                              Backyard Wildlife Habitat and Fire Safety

GENERAL RESOURCES
Willow Bend Environmental Education Center, 703 E. Sawmill Rd., 779-1745, www.wil-
lowbendcenter.org, offers a variety of resources and classes about environmentally friendly 
living.
The Greater Flagstaff Forests Partnership, 226-0644 or www.gffp.org, is an organization 
dedicated to restoring and conserving local ponderosa pine forests.
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University, 523-7182 or www.eri.
nau.edu, conducts research and provides public outreach to improve the health of ponderosa 
pine forests.
The Nature Conservancy, 2601 N. Ft. Valley Rd., 774-8892, or www.nature.org/arizona
Coconino National Forest Supervisor’s Office, 1824 S. Thompson Street, Flagstaff, AZ 
86001, 527-3600, www.fs.fed.us/r3/coconino
The Natural Resources Conservation Service, 1611 S Plaza Way, Flagstaff, AZ 86001, 214-
0459, www.nrcs.usda.gov
The Coconino Natural Resource Conservation District, 703 E. Sawmill Road, Flagstaff, AZ 
86001, 779-1745
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Backyard Wildlife Habitat and Fire Safety                                                                 12

13                                                              Backyard Wildlife Habitat and Fire Safety

Writer: Anne Minard with contributions by Chance Peterson, Diane Vosick, Dave Egan
Editors: Peter Friederici and Dave Egan
Cover photo: Courtesy of the City of Flagstaff
Plant photos: Mark Daniels, Ecological Restoration Institute
All drawings: © 1999 Zackery Zdinak
Produced by the Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University in collaboration 
with Willow Bend Environmental Education Center and the Greater Flagstaff Forests Partnership 
with support from The Arizona State Land Department--Urban and Community Forestry and the 
USDA Forest Service.
For More Information
For more information about forest restoration, contact the ERI at 928-523-7182 or
www.eri.nau.edu
Backyard Wildlife Habitat and Fire Safety                                                                 14

Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
ERITA44
Non-Profit Org.
U.S. Postage
PAID
Northern
Arizona
University
16                                                              Backyard Wildlife Habitat and Fire Safety
