74
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-22. 2001
In: Vance, Regina K.; Edminster, Carleton B.; Covington, W. Wallace;
Blake, Julie A. comps. 2001. Ponderosa pine ecosystems restoration and
conservation: steps toward stewardship; 2000 April 25–27; Flagstaff, AZ.
Proceedings RMRS-P-22. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station.
Julie Korb is a Ph.D. candidate with the Ecological Restoration Institute
at Northern Arizona University. Julie received her B.A. and M.S. degrees at
the University of Colorado, Boulder. Her research interests include plant
community ecology and ecological restoration. Nancy C. Johnson is a profes-
sor at Northern Arizona University, Center for Environmental Sciences and
Education and Department of Biological Sciences. Her research interests
include mycorrhizal ecology and ecological restoration. W. W. Covington is a
Regents’ Professor at Northern Arizona University, School of Forestry, and
Director of the Ecological Restoration Institute. His research interests in-
clude forest ecology and applied ecosystem analysis.
Effect of Restoration Thinning on
Mycorrhizal Fungal Propagules in a
Northern Arizona Ponderosa Pine Forest:
Preliminary Results
Julie E. Korb
Nancy C. Johnson
W. W. Covington
Abstract—The inoculum potential for arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM)
and ectomycorrhizal (EM) fungi were investigated in thinned and
uncut control stands in a northern Arizona ponderosa pine forest. A
corn bioassay was used to determine the relative amount of infective
propagules of AM fungi, and a ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa)
bioassay was used to determine the relative amount of infective
propagules of EM fungi. Three stands of each treatment were
sampled by collecting soil cores along 10 randomly chosen transects
within each stand. The relative amount of infective propagules of
AM fungi was significantly higher in samples collected from the
thinned stands than controls. Conversely, there was a slight de-
crease in the relative amount of infective propagules of EM fungi in
samples collected from thinned stands in comparison to the con-
trols; however, this difference was not significant. These prelimi-
nary results indicate that population densities of AM fungi can
rapidly increase following restoration thinning in northern Arizona
ponderosa pine forests. This may have important implications for
restoring the herbaceous understory of these forests because most
understory plants depend upon AM associations for normal growth.
Introduction ____________________
Low intensity fires carried by grassy understories were
prevalent every 2–20 years in southwestern ponderosa pine
(Pinus ponderosa) ecosystems prior to Euro-American settle-
ment and played a major role in determining the structure,
composition, and stability of these ecosystems (Cooper 1960).
Current alterations to the structure and function of south-
western ponderosa pine forests are the result of heavy
grazing, intensive logging of old-growth trees, and fire sup-
pression by Euro-American settlement around the turn of
the 20th century (Covington and others 1997). This has
resulted in a large number of small trees with closed cano-
pies and little herbaceous understory production. The cur-
rent reduction in herbaceous understory diversity and pro-
duction in ponderosa pine forests has contributed to the
alteration of the natural fire regime, loss of habitat for
numerous animal species, and overall reduction of species
diversity. As a result, a major objective of restoring South-
western ponderosa pine forests is to increase herbaceous
understory diversity and production by reestablishing com-
munity structure and function within a range of natural
variability.
Mycorrhizae are a major component of soil ecosystems,
playing an important role in plant nutrition, nutrient cy-
cling, food webs, and the development of soil structure
(Johnson and others 1999). A mycorrhiza is generally a
“mutualistic relation between plant and fungus localized in
a root or root-like structure in which energy moves primarily
from plant to fungus and inorganic resources move from
fungus to plant” (Allen 1991). Forest tree species, particu-
larly those within Pinaceae, Fagaceae, Betulaceae, and
Dipterocarpaceae form ectomycorrhizal (EM) relationships
with basidiomycetes and ascomycetes (Harley and Smith
1983). Over 80 percent of all plants form arbuscular mycor-
rhizal (AM) relationships with Glomalean fungi, a single
order of Zygomycetes. A few exceptional plant families
(Cyperaceae, Juncaceae, Caryophyllaceae, Chenopodiaceae,
and Brassicaceae) typically do not form any mycorrhizal
relationship (nonmycotrophic) (Pendleton and Smith 1983).
Numerous researchers have suggested a relationship be-
tween the recovery time of disturbed ecosystems and the
abundance of infective propagules of fungi (Allen and Allen
1980; Bentwenga and Hetrick 1991; Noyd and others 1995;
Reeves and others 1979). Therefore, quantifying the effect of
restoration thinning on densities of mycorrhizal fungal
propagules may provide insight to the recovery rate of
herbaceous understory communities to restoration treat-
ments in ponderosa pine forests.
This is the first known study looking at AM fungal
propagule densities in Southwestern ponderosa pine for-
ests. We hypothesized that AM fungal propagule densities
would increase and EM fungal propagule densities would
decrease in response to restoration thinning in ponderosa
pine forests, and that these changes would be correlated to
host plant abundance. The specific objectives of this study
were to: (1) quantify the effect of restoration thinning on AM
and EM fungal propagule densities; and (2) assess the

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-22. 2001
75
Effect of Restoration Thinning on Mycorrhizal Fungal Propagules in a Northern Arizona Ponderosa Pine Forest…
Korb, Johnson, and Covington
relationships between mycorrhizal fungal propagule densi-
ties and soil and plant community properties.
Methods _______________________
Experimental Design
Three blocks of four restoration treatments were estab-
lished during the summer of 1998 within approximately
1,700 acres of the Fort Valley Experimental Forest and
adjacent areas near Flagstaff, AZ (fig. 1). Treatment units
within each block were randomly assigned one of four treat-
ments: (1) no thinning or burning (control); (2) thinning to a
low level of replacement trees and burning; (3) thinning to an
intermediate level of replacement trees and burning; (4)
thinning to a high level of replacement trees and burning.
Specific details of thinning treatment guidelines are out-
lined in Covington and others 1998. Soils for this study were
collected before any of the treatment units had been burned,
and therefore these results only reflect the effect of restora-
tion thinning on mycorrhizal fungal propagules. Continua-
tion of this study will investigate the effects of full restora-
tion treatments (thinning and prescribed burning) after all
treatment units have been burned.
Field Sampling
Soil samples for “bait-plant bioassays” and soil and veg-
etation analyses were taken in mid-May, 6 months after
thinning, along 10 randomly placed transects within each of
the three blocks in the controls (1-1, 2-1, 3-1) and low level
of replacement trees thinning treatment units (1-2, 2-2, 3-2)
(fig. 1). Soil samples were taken to a depth of 15 cm using a
hand trowel. Samples were taken to this depth because AM
fungal propagule densities are generally highest in the
surface 15 cm (Johnson and others 1991). Two samples from
each transect were immediately placed into 4 cm diameter x
20 cm diameter deep Conetainers (Stuewe and Sons, Inc.,
Corvallis, OR) for “bait-plant bioassays.” The other sample
for soil analysis was placed in a ziploc bag and stored in a
freezer until analysis. A 0.5 x 2 m (1 m2) plot was located
adjacent to each soil sample, and the percent cover of each
herbaceous and woody species present along with substrates
(litter, soil, and rock) were estimated using cardboard cut-
outs as visual guides. The soil seed bank, soil disturbance,
bulk density, fuel loads, fire behavior, herbaceous biomass
production and abundance, overstory tree structure, and
understory tree regeneration were also assessed along these
50 m transects.
Figure 1—Study area near Flagstaff, AZ.

76
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-22. 2001
Korb, Johnson, and Covington
Effect of Restoration Thinning on Mycorrhizal Fungal Propagules in a Northern Arizona Ponderosa Pine Forest…
Ectomycorrhizal (EM) inoculum 
potential
0
10
20
30
40
50
Treatment
Treatment
Percent of root length
colonized by EM
Percent of root length
colonized by AM
 
Arbuscular Mycorrhizae (AM) 
inoculum potential
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Control
Thinned
Control
Thinned
*
*
Lab Analysis
A corn (Zea mays) bioassay was used to determine the
relative amount of infective propagules of AM fungi, and a
ponderosa pine bioassay was used to determine the relative
amount of infective propagules of EM fungi. Corn is a
strongly mycotrophic plant and grows rapidly and uni-
formly, and its advantages outweigh the disadvantage of not
using native host plants (Johnson and others 1999). “Bait-
plant bioassays” are designed to detect all types of viable
mycorrhizal fungal propagules including spores, fragments
of mycorrhizal roots and extraradical hyphae and therefore
may more accurately quantify total mycorrhizal fungi than
direct counts of sporocarps, spores, or colonized root lengths
(Brundrett and others 1994; Johnson and others 1999).
Plants were placed in a greenhouse and watered every 3
days until corn plants were harvested at 6 weeks and pine
plants were harvested at 12 weeks. Roots were carefully
washed free from the soil and were measured for length and
weighed. Following mycorrhizal analysis, roots were dried
in an oven at 70 ∞C for 24 hours and then were weighed again.
Shoot lengths and dry weights were also measured. Corn
roots were prepared for fungal propagule density measure-
ments by taking a random subsample of roots of a known
mass, clearing roots in 5 percent KOH, and then staining
roots with trypan blue (Johnson and others 1999). The
gridline intersect method using a dissecting microscope was
used to measure the proportion of root length containing AM
fungal structures: arbuscules, vesicles, coils, internal myc-
orrhizal hyphae and external mycorrhizal hyphae (Givanetti
and Mosse 1980). Pine roots were measured for fungal
propagule density through direct examination using a dis-
secting microscope to quantify the proportion of root tips
colonized with EM fungi (Gehring and Whitham 1991). Root
tips were also classified as dead or living.
Soil Analysis
Soil samples from each transect were analyzed for pH,
total N, total P and organic C at the Bilby Research Soil
Analysis Laboratory, Flagstaff, AZ. Soil pH was determined
in a 1:1 slurry by pH meter. The general method used for N
and P was a Kjeldahl digestion of the soil material followed
with the analysis of N and P by automated colorimetry using
a Technicon auto-analyzer (Parkinson and others 1975).
Organic matter was determined by loss on ignition. Samples
were heated in crucibles in a muffle furnace at 450 ∞C and net
weight loss was estimated as organic matter.
Statistical Analysis
Analysis of variance for a randomized complete block
design was conducted using SAS JMPIN version 3.2.1 (SAS
Institute 1997) to determine the effect of thinning on mycor-
rhizal propagule densities. Root infection data were log (x + 1)
transformed prior to analysis, and bait plant length and
weight, herbaceous plant abundance, and soil properties
were ln transformed. Simple correlation analyses were con-
ducted to assess the relationship between infectivity, soil
and plant community properties, and bait plant character-
istics (length and weight) using SAS JMPIN. Significance of
Figure 2—The inoculum potential for EM fungi (top
graph) and AM fungi (bottom graph) from “bait-plant
bioassays” in the thinned and control units.  Differ-
ences between the thinned and control units were
determined by analysis of variance for a random block
design on log (x + 1) transformed data (F = 2.1601,
P > 0.05, F =  5.4437, P < 0.005, respectively).
correlations and analysis of variances were accepted at
alpha £ 0.05.
Results ________________________
Mycorrhizal fungi colonized all “bait-plant” roots grown in
soil from the thinned and control units. Bioassay results
indicated that infective propagule densities of AM fungi
were significantly higher in the samples collected from the
thinned units than controls (F = 5.4437, P < 0.005) (fig. 2).
Also, corn grown in thinned soils had relatively more vesicles
and less hyphae than corn grown in control soils (fig. 3).
Conversely, there was a slight decrease in the relative
amount of infective propagules of EM fungi in samples
collected from thinned stands in comparison to the controls
(F = 2.1601 P > 0.05); however, this difference was not
significant (fig. 2). Sparsely branched bifurcated tips were
the dominant EM morphotype with tuberoid mycorrhiza
also dominant.
AM fungal infectivity was not correlated with corn shoot
weight, corn root weight or percent herbaceous cover (r =
–0.037, r = 0.031, and r = 0.035 respectively, N = 60, P ≥ 0.05).
EM fungal infectivity was not correlated with pine shoot
weight (r = 0.11) but was positively correlated with pine root
weight (r =  0.28, N = 60, P ≥ 0.05). The only soil property that
was correlated with AM fungal infectivity was pH (r = 0.27,

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-22. 2001
77
Effect of Restoration Thinning on Mycorrhizal Fungal Propagules in a Northern Arizona Ponderosa Pine Forest…
Korb, Johnson, and Covington
Percentage of different types of Arbuscular 
Mycorrhizae (AM) within colonized roots
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Control
Thinned
Treatment
Percentage
External hyphae
Arbuscules
Vesicles
Internal hyphae
*
*
*
*
N = 60, P ≥ 0.05). There were no significant differences
between soil properties in the thinned and control stands
(table 1). However, pH levels were higher in the thinned
units than the controls, which is congruent with the findings
that thinned units had greater propagule densities of AM
fungi than the controls.
Both the thinned and control units were dominated by
graminoids followed by nonlegume forbs, legumes, and woody
shrubs. Unidentified sedges, Carex sp., dominated the her-
baceous cover for both units followed by C3 grasses including
Elymus elymoides (squirreltail), Poa fendleriana (mutton-
grass) and Festuca arizonica (Arizona fescue). Muhlenbergia
montana (mountain muhley) was the only dominant C4
grass in both units; however, its presence was less than the
dominant C3 grasses. The dominant forbs in both the thinned
and control units were Cirsium wheeleri (thistle) and Sol-
idago sp. (goldenrod). There were slightly higher species
richness, Simpson’s diversity, and herbaceous cover in the
thinned units in comparison with the control units; however,
these differences were not significant (table 2).
Discussion _____________________
Restoration thinning increased the cover of herbaceous,
AM hosts and decreased the cover of ponderosa pine, EM
hosts. These aboveground changes were accompanied by the
expected belowground changes: propagule densities of AM
fungi increased by 23 percent while those of EM fungi
decreased by 6 percent. These preliminary results indicate
that mycorrhizal fungal population densities respond rap-
idly to restoration thinning in northern Arizona ponderosa
pine forests. Two main processes control population densi-
ties of mycorrhizal fungi following disturbance: immigration
of new propagules from nearby areas and survival and
spread of residual propagules (Warner and others 1987).
Rapid colonization of AM fungi has been illustrated in other
studies. For example, Johnson and McGraw (1988) found
that unreclaimed taconite tailings devoid of AM fungi were
colonized within weeks of reclamation. It was hypothesized
that spores were transferred to the reclaimed tailings by
biotic (animals) and abiotic (wind and water) vectors (Johnson
and McGraw 1988). In the present study it is likely that AM
fungi spread from preexisting mycorrhizal hyphae in living
and dead roots.
Soil disturbance has been reported to generally reduce AM
propagule densities due to the destruction of the hyphal
network during the break-up of the soil macrostructure
(Reeves and others 1979; Fairchild and Miller 1988). Conse-
quently, one may predict that propagule densities should
decrease following thinning due to soil disturbance from
mechanized logging equipment. This effect was not observed
in our study, which may indicate that soil disturbance was
not severe enough to have destroyed AM fungal propagules,
or that the sites were rapidly colonized by AM fungal spores
and residual hyphae. Another study, conducted by Rives and
others (1980), showed that there was no reduction in popu-
lation densities of AM fungi following soil disturbance. It has
been suggested that environments with a high proportion of
grasses are more tolerant of disturbance because their
fiberous root systems generate high densities of infective
propagules (Jasper and others 1991). A successional study of
AM propagule densities across a grassland to forest
chronosequence showed AM inoculum potential increased
with increasing grass cover and decreased in later succes-
sional sites with EM trees (Johnson and others 1991).
Similarly, a study by Benjamin and others (1989) illustrated
that dominant herbaceous plants had lower AM colonization
as tree density increased, possibly because these plants had
insufficient photosynthetic capability to support AM infec-
tion. Finally, some research indicates that while the fungal
propagule densities do not decrease following disturbance,
Table 1—Soil parameter comparisons between thinned and control
ponderosa pine treatments. Average values are presented,
N = 30. Standard error of the mean (SEM) for each value is
in parentheses.
Thinned
Control
pH
6.06
(0.756)
5.85
(0.352)
Total P
0.86
(0.148)
0.95
(0.199)
Total N
1.57
(0.209)
1.65
(0.174)
Organic C
10.29
(1.158)
10.59
(0.994)
Table 2—Plant species richness and Simpson’s diversity index (SI) for
1999 herbaceous transects.  Minimum, maximum and
average richness is by individual transects, not units.
Average
Average
Treatment
richness
Min.
Max.
SI
Min.
Max.
Control
5.1
1
13
4.34
0.58
12.78
Thin
5.8
1
12
4.71
0
13.75
Figure 3—The percentage of external hyphae,
arbuscules, vesicles, and internal hyphae within colo-
nized corn roots for each treatment.  An asterisk indi-
cates that one type of AM is significantly different (P <
0.05) between treatments as determined by Analysis of
Variance for a random block design on log (x + 1)
transformed data (F =  8.3001, P > 0.005, F = 15.4818,
P > 0.0002, respectively).

78
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-22. 2001
Korb, Johnson, and Covington
Effect of Restoration Thinning on Mycorrhizal Fungal Propagules in a Northern Arizona Ponderosa Pine Forest…
AM species composition may change (Johnson and Pfleger
1991). Specifically, AM species from the Glomaceae family
depend more on hyphae for reproduction than spores. In
contrast, AM species from the Gycosperaceae family depend
more on spores for reproduction than hyphae (Biermann
And Linderman 1983).
Implications for Restoration ______
Pre Euro-American ponderosa pine understory communi-
ties were dominated by warm-season (C4) grasses, which are
often obligately mycotrophic (Cooper 1960; Wilson and
Hartnett 1998). However, current ponderosa pine forests
are dominated by species that form no mycorrhizal associa-
tions (Carex sp.) or C3 grasses that are often facultatively
mycotrophic. This pattern is contrary to other studies that
suggest succession proceeds from dominance of
nonmycotrophic and facultative mycotrophic species to obli-
gate mycotrophic species in later successional stages (Janos
1980; Allen and Allen 1984). This reversed pattern has been
established because the natural fires that historically would
minimize competition between ponderosa pine and herba-
ceous plants have been suppressed, and now shade-tolerant
C3 grasses are better adapted to these environments. There-
fore, without the reduction of EM tree competition and
reintroduction of fire, the understory of Southwestern pon-
derosa pine forests will likely continue to be dominated by
nonmycotrophic Carex and facultatively AM species. Noyd
and others (1995) demonstrated that obligate C4 grasses,
Andropogon gerardii (big bluestem) and Schizachyrium
scoparium (little bluestem), were unable to grow or survive
as seedlings in soil where AM fungi were eliminated; how-
ever, Elymus canadensis (C3 grass) establishment was un-
affected by AM fungi availability. Similarly, Hetrick and
others (1994) found that C4 grasses were competitively
superior to C3 grasses when grown in the presence of AM
fungi; but C3 grasses were competitively superior in soils
without AM fungi. As a result, one can predict that increased
populations of AM fungi in the thinned restoration units
may promote increased C4 grass cover. Finally, recent
mycorrhizal fungi research in a variety of environments has
shown that mycorrhizal interactions may be important
determinants of plant diversity, ecosystem variability, and
productivity (Hartnett and Wilson 1999; van der Heijden
and others 1998a,b). Microcosm experiments simulating
European and American grasslands have shown that in-
creasing AM fungal diversity can increase diversity and
overall community structure (Klironomos and others 2000;
van der Heijden and others 1998b).
Conclusions____________________
Restoration thinning impacts propagule densities of EM
and AM fungi. Reducing pine cover and increasing herba-
ceous cover shifts the system toward a more AM dominated
community. Increasing propagule densities of AM fungi may
favor the establishment of a C4 grassland community. As a
result, knowledge of AM fungal propagule densities and AM
fungal species composition will be crucial to understanding
the successional response of herbaceous understory commu-
nities to Southwestern ponderosa pine forest restoration
thinning and prescribed burning treatments.
Acknowledgments ______________
We thank the Grand Canyon Partnership, Forest Service
Research (RMRS), and Coconino National Forest staff for
helping establish the restoration treatments. In addition,
thanks are due to the students and staff of the Ecological
Restoration Institute who assisted in gathering data in the
field. This ongoing research is supported by USDA Research
Joint Venture Agreement RMRS-99156-RJVA.
References _____________________
Allen, E. B., Allen M. F. 1980. Natural re-establishment of vesicu-
lar-arbuscular mycorrhizae following stripmine reclamation in
Wyoming. Journal of Applied Ecology 17: 139–147.
Allen, M. F. 1991. The Ecology of Mycorrhizae. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, New York, NY.
Benjamin, P. K., Anderson, R. C., Liberta A. E. 1989. Vesicular-
arbuscular mycorrhizal ecology of little bluestem across a prairie-
forest gradient. Canadian Journal of Botany 67: 2678–2685.
Bentivenga, S. P., Hetrick, B. A. D. 1991. Relationship between
mycorrhizal activity, burning, and plant productivity in tallgrass
prairie. Canadian Journal of Botany 69: 2597–2602.
Biermann, B., Linderman, R. G. 1983. Effect of container plant
growth medium and fertilizer phosphorus on establishment
and host growth response to VAM. J. Am. Soc. Hortic. Sci. 108:
962–971.
Brundrett, M. C., Abbott, L. K. 1994. Mycorrhizal fungus propagules
in the jarrah forests. I. Seasonal study of inoculum levels. New
Phytologist 127: 539–546.
Cooper C. F. 1960. Changes in vegetation, structure, and growth of
Southwestern pine forest since white settlement. Ecological
Monographs 30: 129–164.
Covington W. W., FulJ P. Z., Moore M. M., Hart S. C., Kolb T. E.,
Mast J. N., Sackett S. S., Wagner, M. R. 1997. Restoring ecosys-
tem health in ponderosa pine forests of the southwest. Journal of
Forestry 95(4): 23–29.
Fairchild, G. L., Miller, M. H. 1988. Vesicular-arbuscular mycorrhi-
zas and the soil-disturbance-induced reduction of nutrient ab-
sorption in maize. New Phytologist 110: 75–84.
Gehring, C. A., Whitham, T. G. 1991. Herbivore-driven mycorrhizal
mutualism in insect-susceptible pinyon pine. Nature 353: 556–
557.
Giovannetti, M., Mosse, B. 1980. An evaluation of techniques for
measuring vesicular-arbuscular mycorrhiza infection in roots.
New Phytologist 84: 489–500.
Harley, J. L., Smith S. E. 1983. Mycorrhizal Symbiosis. Academic
Press, London, UK.
Hartnett, D. C., Wilson, G. W. T. 1999. Mycorrhizae influence plant
community structure and diversity in tallgrass prairie. Ecology
80(4): 1187–1195.
Hetrick, B. A. D., Hartnett, D. C., Wilson, G. W. T., Gibson, D. J.
1994. Effects of mycorrhizae, phosphorus availability, and plant
density on yield relationships among competing tallgrass prairie
grasses. Canadian Journal of Botany 72: 168–176.
Janos D. P. 1980. Mycorrhizae influence tropical succession.
Biotropica 12: 56–64.
Jasper, D. A., Abbott, L. K., Robson A. D. 1991. The effect of soil
disturbance on vesicular-arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi in soils
from different vegetation types. New Phytologist 118: 471–476.
Johnson, N. C., O’Dell T. E., Bledsoe, C. S. 1999. Methods for
ecological studies of mycorrhizae. In: Robertson, G. P., Bledsoe C.
S., Coleman D. G. , Sollins, P, eds. Standard soil methods for long-
term ecological research. Oxford University Press, New York,
New York: 378–411.

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-22. 2001
79
Effect of Restoration Thinning on Mycorrhizal Fungal Propagules in a Northern Arizona Ponderosa Pine Forest…
Korb, Johnson, and Covington
Johnson N. C., Pfleger, F. L. 1992.Vesicular-arbuscular mycor-
rhizae and cultural stresses. In: Mycorrhizae in Sustainable
Agriculture. American Society of Agronomy, Inc., Madison, WI:
71–99.
Johnson N. C., Zak D. R., Tilman, D., Pfleger, F. L. 1991. Dynamics
of vesicular-arbuscular mycorrhizae during old field succession.
Oecologia 86: 349–358.
Johnson N. C., McGraw, A. C. 1988. Vesicular-arbuscular mycor-
rhizae in taconite tailings. I. Incidence and spread of
endogeonaceous fungi following reclamation. Agriculture, Eco-
systems and Environment 21: 135–142.
Klironomos J. N., McCune, J., Hart, M., Neville, J. 2000. The
influence of arbuscular mycorrhizae on the relationship between
plant diversity and productivity. Ecology Letters 3: 137–141.
Koske, R. E., Gemma, J. N. 1997. Mycorrhizae and succession in
plantings of beachgrass in sand dunes. American Journal of
Botany 84(1): 118–130.
Noyd, R. K., Pfleger, F. L., Russelle, M. P. 1995. Interactions
between native praire grasses and indigenous arbuscular mycor-
rhizal fungi: implications for reclamation of taconite iron ore
tailing. New Phytologist 129: 651–660.
Parkinson, J. A., Allen, S. E. 1975. Cummun. Soil Science and Plant
Analysis. 6(1): 1–11.
Pendleton R. L., Smith B. N. 1983. Vesicular-arbuscular mycor-
rhizae of weedy and colonizer plant species at disturbed sites in
Utah. Oecologia 59: 296–301.
Reeves F. B., Wagner D., Mooorman T., Kiel, J. 1979. The role of
endomycorrhizae in revegetation practices in the semi-arid west.
I. A comparison of incidence of mycorrhizae in severely disturbed
vs. natural environments. American Journal of Botany 66: 6–13.
Rives, C. S., Bajwa, M. I., Leberta, A. E., Miller, R. M. 1980. Effects
of topsoil storage during surface mining on the viability of VA
mycorrhiza. Soil Science 129: 253–257.
van der Heijden, M. G. A., Boller, T., Wiemken, A., Sanders, I . R.
1998a. Different arbuscular mycorrhizal fungal species are po-
tential determinants of plant community structure. Ecology 79(6):
2082–2091.
van der Heijden, M. G. A., Klironomos, J. N., Ursic, M., Moutoglis,
P., Streitwolf-Engel, R., Boller, T., Wiemken, A., Sanders, I. R.
1998b. Mycorrhizal fungal diversity determines plant biodiver-
sity, ecosystem variability and productivity. Nature 395(5):
69–72.
Warner, N. J., Allen, M. F., MacMahon, J. A. 1987. Dispersal agents
of vesicular-arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi in a disturbed arid
ecosystem. Mycologia 79(5): 721–730.
Wilson, G. W. T., Hartnett, D. C. 1998. Interspecific variation in
plant responses to mycorrhizal colonization in tallgrass prairie.
American Journal of Botany 85(12): 1732–1738.
