 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Increasing Evidence That Thinning and Burning Treatments Help Restore  
Understory Plant Communities in Ponderosa Pine Forests  
By Robert T. Strahan, Restoration Monitoring Program Manager, New Mexico Forest and Watershed Restoration Institute 
Introduction 
There is a general consensus  that throughout their range, contemporary ponderosa pine forests exist outside of 
their natural range of variability in terms of overstory structure such as tree density (trees ac-1) and basal area (ft2 
ac-1). As a result these ecosystems are increasingly susceptible to landscape-scale, high-intensity wildfires. Over 
the last century, a number of factors—particularly intensive livestock grazing, selective logging, and fire suppres-
sion—have combined to favor pine establishment at the expense of understory diversity and productivity. This 
has given rise to uncharacteristically high tree densities with closed canopies, lower light availability, and deeper 
forest floor litter and duff layers (Covington and Moore 1994). A major consequence of this has been the degra-
dation of understory integrity, including declines in understory cover, productivity, and diversity.  
 
Restoration techniques for mitigating these changes include mechanical thinning, prescribed fire, or a combina-
tion of the two. Empirical studies assessing treatment success have shown that a combination of mechanical thin-
ning plus prescribed fire is most successful at reaching overstory restoration targets (Fulé et al. 2002; Roccaforte 
et al. 2015). Yet consensus on meeting understory objectives remains mixed and few studies have defined quanti-
tative targets to assess understory response (Laughlin et al. 2006). Therefore, developing more specific restoration 
objectives for the understory plant community represents an under-developed and challenging area of research. 
However, a primary goal of ecological restoration for understory plant response following treatments is to max-
imize cover and diversity of native vegetation.   
 
Our first objective in this study was to evaluated understory response to alternative restoration treatments. We 
measured understory cover and species richness five years after treatments in the Mineral Ecosystem Manage-
ment Area (Mineral) located in east-central Arizona and part of the Ecological Restoration Institute’s Long-term 
Ecological Assessment and Restoration Network (LEARN). An untreated control (Untreated) was used for com-
parison of two alternative restoration treatments 1) thinning followed by prescribed fire (Thin + Burn) and 2) pre-
scribed fire only (Burn-only). Our second objective was to compare the understory response patterns we observed 
at Mineral with those following similar treatments at other LEARN sites. To make comparisons we quantified a 
range of variability associated with understory cover and species richness to restoration using three comparison 
LEARN sites located in ponderosa pine forests of northern Arizona: Fort Valley (FV), Mount Trumbull (MT), 
and Grandview (GV). All three sites are located across a gradient of precipitation and soil types, representing a 
broad range of ponderosa pine forest types with characteristic differences in the contribution of species and func-
tional groups to understory cover and diversity. 
Research Findings 
Understory community response at Mineral site   
 
Five years post-treatment understory cover and species richness were significantly greater in Thin + Burn 
compared to Untreated units. Burn-only treatments were less successful in meeting this objective.  
 
Average species richness increased 33%, 36%, and 45% in Untreated, Burn-only, and Thin + Burn treat-
ment units, respectively. 
 
   Fact Sheet: Increasing Evidence That Thinning and Burning Treatments Help Restore  
   Understory Plant Communities in Ponderosa Pine Forests  
 
February 2016 

 
Total graminoid cover was significantly greater in Thin + Burn treatments compared to Burn-only or Un-
treated units. 
 
Total forb cover was significantly higher in Thin + Burn relative to Untreated units. 
 
Burn-only treatments were successful at increasing the number of annual-biennial species. However, this 
increase was not as great as that observed in the Thin + Burn units.  
 
Comparison across LEARN sites  
 
The increase in species richness values in Thin + Burn units at Mineral exceeded those observed in similar 
treatments at other LEARN sites.  
 
There was a consistent increase in total and native plant cover after Thin + Burn treatments across the 
LEARN sites (Figure 1).  
 
Total plant cover five years after Thin + Burn treatments ranged from an average of 7.2% to 13.1% across 
LEARN sites. Total plant cover in the full restoration treatments at Mineral fell within this range.  
 
Native plant cover across LEARN sites ranged from 6.1% to 9.2%. Average native plant cover in Thin + 
Burn at Mineral fell just above these values, at 9.6%.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conclusions  
 
Managers can expect understory plant communities to respond positively following restoration treatments 
that combined mechanical thinning and prescribed fire. 
 
This study suggests that for understory cover, defining more specific goals and objectives to assess restora-
tion success is realistic. 
 
The LEARN provided a valuable opportunity to combine data from within an ecological system, across 
different sites, to compare and evaluate the consistency of responses. 
 
Literature Cited 
Covington, W.W., and M.M. Moore. 1994. Post-settlement changes in natural fire regimes and forest structure: ecological restoration of 
old-growth pine forests. Journal of Sustainable Forestry 2:153-181. 
Fulé, P.Z. W.W. Covington, H.B. Smith, J.D. Springer, T.A. Heinlein, K.D. Huisinga, and M.M. Moore. 2002. Comparing ecological res-
toration alternatives: Grand Canyon, Arizona. Forest Ecology and Management 170:19-41. 
Laughlin, D.C., M.M. Moore, J.D. Bakker, C.A. Casey, J.D. Springer, P.Z. Fulé, and W.W. Covington. 2006. Assessing targets for the 
restoration of herbaceous vegetation in ponderosa pine forests. Restoration Ecology 14:548-560. 
Roccaforte, J.P., D.W. Huffman, P.Z. Fulé, W.W. Covington, W.W. Chancellor, M.T. Stoddard, J.E. Crouse. 2015. Forest structure and 
fuels dynamics following ponderosa pine restoration treatments, White Mountains, Arizona, USA. Forest Ecology and Management 
337:174-185. 
 
   
 
Contact 
Robert T. Strahan, rtstrahan@nmhu.edu 
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
 
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
 
Strahan, R.T., Stoddard, M.T., Springer, J.D. and Huffman, D.W. 2015. Increasing weight of evidence that thinning and burning treatments 
help restore understory plant communities in ponderosa pine forests. Forest Ecology and Management 353: 208-220. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2015.05.040  
Figure 1. Average total (a) and native (b) species cover five years post-treatment (2013) at Mineral relative to the range of varia-
bility across three LEARN sites. Dashed lines represent the lower and upper average values from across three LEARN sites. 
