 
 
1
The Use of Ecosystem Health Indicators in Evaluating Ecological and Social 
Outcomes of Collaborative Approaches to Management: the Case Study of the 
Diablo Trust 
 
Tischa A. Muñoz-Erickson and Bernardo Aguilar-Gonzalez1 
 
“Understanding the loss, creation, and maintenance of resilience through the process of co-discovery (by 
scientists, policy-makers, practitioners, stakeholders, and citizens) is at the heart of sustainability…” 
Gunderson and Holling, Panarchy. 
 
INTRODUCTION  
A collaborative process provides opportunities to integrate social values and learning into 
ecosystem management. Thus, it allows the implementation of an "ecologically 
democratic" vision of sustainability.  Conceptually, this definition requires the integration 
of the natural and human components into what can be called a complex socio-ecological 
system. This conceptual integration poses the challenge of how to measure the success of 
a collaborative process through the effects that it may have on the socio-ecological 
system. This consideration is important because ultimately a collaborative process seeks 
to be a more effective means to higher order societal goals, not just an end in itself. 
 
Nevertheless, the majority of previous evaluation research has focused on examining case 
studies to identify lessons and keys to success with participant perceptions as the most 
common data gathering method2.  Studies regularly cited in the literature use similar 
definitions of collaboration and develop ‘success’ criteria mostly on the basis of internal 
process and organizational dynamics (i.e. effective consensus process, building 
relationships and trust, open communication and information sharing, increased 
education and outreach, development of mutually agreeable management plans, creativity 
and proactiveness, etc.).  Other than perceived outcomes as defined by the participants 
and non-material results, these studies don’t offer systematic criteria for addressing and 
measuring tangible ecological and social outcomes3.  
 
A few studies have tried to evaluate ecological and social impacts.  Yet, although these 
studies developed criteria for measuring actual impacts, evaluations were still limited to 
perceived implementation and effectiveness. Thus, even here we have a partial 
measurement of the effects of the process only focused on its participants4. 
 
Evaluation research is clearly progressing in providing answers to critical questions about 
the collaborative process and its effectiveness. However, the question still remains 
whether there is a correlation between a working collaboration and on-the-ground 
impacts.  Innes and Booher5 believe that the process and outcome are tied together and 
that “a process that involves all stakeholders, including those with little power, is likely to 
produce a just outcome… (and) are likely to be sustainable because both environmental 
and economic interests must be satisfied”.  Yet, as Kenney6  contends, the ultimate 
measure of success is whether efforts have led to improvements in environmental 
conditions and social capital.   
 

 
 
2
 The main challenge facing this type of evaluation is the lack of adequate monitoring data 
linking partnership activities to changes in ecological and socio-economic conditions7 
and the many years required to monitor and test changes on the ground8. This paper seeks 
to be a contribution in the direction of providing an indicator framework that would allow 
the collection of such information and a better understanding of what determines the 
success of these processes.  
 
To this end, since the outcome evaluation depends on the definition of a process vision, 
we need to make a few precisions around the notion of sustainability. Sustainability 
indicators are now widely employed to assess the environmental, social, economic, and 
institutional dimensions of sustainability and measure the progress of these aspects 
towards goals in a simplified manner9. Most efforts developing sustainability indicators 
provide dissimilar parameters and scales. Yet, they can be classified, as is done by the 
International Sustainability Indicators Network, in 1) local community (municipalities 
and rural counties); 2) regional (metropolitan areas, multiple local communities; 3) 
state/province; 4) national, and, 5) international10. As can be seen, scale is defined via 
political unit criteria rather than, with notable exceptions, by a combination with 
bioregional considerations (watershed. micro-watershed, etc.) and at scales that may 
capture the smaller contexts that may characterize collaborative processes. 
 
So, even if sustainability indicator frameworks can serve as a starting point for 
conceptualizing critical elements that define the multidimensional nature of the 
collaborative context, they usually are too broad for the site-specific requirements of 
many collaborative efforts.  Ecological and social aspects at the local level are highly 
variable, thus adopting a broad set of indicators would overlook specific parameters that 
determine the system under study.  
 
In summary, the literature on evaluation research is mostly limited to evaluating the 
internal process of collaboration and not the impacts outside of the meeting room, while 
the frameworks available for integrated evaluations of outcomes are too broad to capture 
the site-specific parameters of many collaboration efforts.  The necessary next step in 
evaluation research is to move to systematic assessment and measure actual site-specific, 
on-the-ground impacts that allow for a relationship to be established between the 
collaborative process and organizational achievement in producing social, economic, and 
environmental benefits11.   
 
PART I:  Ecosystem Health Indicators to Evaluate Outcomes of Collaborative 
Processes. 
 
General Theory Issues 
In order to find a meeting point between the notion of sustainability and the evaluation 
needs of collaborative processes it seems necessary to instrumentalize sustainability 
through the use of a concept that can be contextually grounded in smaller complex 
bioregional scales. The notion of Ecosystem health may prove the necessary tool. 
Ecosystem health is an emerging trans-disciplinary concept useful in bridging the natural, 
social, and health sciences and to integrate the human values and perceptions that are part 

 
 
3
of management.  In this view, a healthy ecosystem is a socio-ecological unit that is 
“stable and sustainable”, maintaining its organization and autonomy over time and its 
resilience to stress, while capable of remaining economically viable and able to sustain 
human communities12.  It is an integrative notion that acknowledges societal values in 
defining future desired conditions while strongly relying on scientific criteria. In addition, 
ecosystem health is an idea, describing a complex set of ecological realities, rather than a 
condition that can be measured directly.  As Stedman aptly states, “The concept of 
ecosystem health does not embody non-ambiguous rules for its measurement or 
valuation. These must be provided by the practitioner, preferably in the form of 
scientifically based decision rules and benchmarks set in a well-documented social and 
cultural context13.”  Such is the paradoxical nature of this concept where it is at once 
descriptive and prescriptive, objective and normative14.   
 
Lackey suggests that to use the concept of ecosystem health appropriately, public 
involvement must be included because such normative concepts require inherent value 
judgments15.  As an integrative notion, it is not meant to rely solely on scientific proof in 
a hypothetico-deductive sense and it does not pretend to give predictive descriptions of 
causal mechanisms of the complex behavior of socio-ecological systems, but rather to 
provide case by case evaluation in their real-world setting16.  To assume otherwise would 
validate the criticisms of the concept, particularly that of masquerading the term as an 
objective science.  
 
Viewed in this light, ecosystem health is a viable paradigm, applied science, and 
professional practice to provide environmental management and policy professionals 
with a theoretical framework and methods through which to monitor and/or assess the 
condition and quality of ecosystems17. Because most people have an intuitive idea of 
what constitutes health, it allows for better communication among citizens, managers and 
scientists when developing management decisions18.   
 
Because ecosystem health is not directly measurable or observable, we are forced to rely 
on surrogate measures to index ecosystem health 19.  The practical application of 
ecosystem health is a process involving the identification of ecological and social 
endpoints of health and development of important indicators that measure progress 
towards these endpoints20.    
 
Scientific methods and information techniques from interdisciplinary fields such as 
ecosystem science, conservation biology, and landscape ecology can serve as the basis 
for making credible decisions as to decide what to manage for and to define appropriate 
reference points for ecosystems21.  Social science and economic methods can also inform 
desirable states for healthy human communities and the appropriate methodologies for 
assessment.  For example, emerging fields such as human ecology and environmental 
sociology are furthering our understanding of social systems in relation to ecological 
systems in terms of structure, function and process22.  Additionally, the necessary trans-
disciplinary research methods are developed. Together, the natural and social sciences 
can approximate the optimal ecosystem condition for socio-ecological systems. 
 

 
 
4
An assessment of ecosystem health should encompass indicators that reflect properties of 
resilience, organization and vigor, essential functions and key attributes that sustain life 
systems (See Table 1 in Appendix 1)23. These attributes are generally derived from 
ecological perspectives, but they have analogous measures in other fields and may be 
applied to the biophysical, socioeconomic, and human health dimensions for the 
ecosystem24. 
 
Most recently, new opportunities for applying ecosystem health in practice on the scale of 
human communities have emerged25.Other studies have also made the connection 
between the use of a participatory decision-making process and the use of an integrated 
methodology of ecosystem health assessment26. 
 
How is the notion of ecosystem health relevant to collaborative processes? 
Organizational theory and collaborative learning theory place the collaborative decision-
making process in the context of complex adaptive systems. Complex adaptive systems 
acquire information about the environment, regularities are identified in that information 
and a ‘schema’ or model is created to help adapt to changing and uncertain world 
conditions27.  Further, Innes and Booher associate the term complex adaptive systems in 
specific reference to explain consensus building methods that some collaborative groups 
employ as a way of organizing and producing agreements, experimenting, learning, and 
building shared meaning28.   
 
Daniels and Walker focus on the function of collaborative processes through 
collaborative learning.  Because of the complexity of ecosystems at multiple spatial 
scales these authors argue that mutual learning is a critical element of ecosystem 
management29.  Understanding complex issues is enhanced by systems thinking, which 
the authors explain, “is essential to active, social learning about complex and 
controversial situations. Drawing on work in soft systems, collaborative learning 
incorporates systems thinking as a significant component, in both philosophy and 
practice”30.  
 
Another aspect of the collaborative approach, as above suggested, is that it seeks to more 
effectively link the ecological and social aspects of ecosystem management. In this light 
collaborative processes are structurally socio-ecological systems.  Functionally, as 
Machlis et al. suggest (using the concept of “human ecosystem model”) they are, as also 
said before, complex and ever changing. Such structural and functional characteristics are 
the framework to understand adaptability in these systems31. 
 
Further, one of the properties of socio-ecological systems that is gaining increasing 
attention in the adaptive management literature is resilience.  The importance of 
managing resilience stems from the increased understanding of the uncertainty and 
‘surprises’ in ecosystems, unexpected events that coupled with exploitation eventually 
lead to the inadvertent loss of ecosystem resilience32. Complex adaptive systems have 
self-reinforcing and adaptive mechanisms that prevent shifts into other states33. 
Therefore, some authors propose, as an alternative to methods based on forecasting, to 
manage the capacity of the system to cope with changes in the future.  To this end, a 

 
 
5
participatory-approach that includes stakeholders (i.e. collaborative process) is proposed 
as the appropriate mechanism to maintain and increase the system’s resilience34.   
 
The key point here is that as we expect to see more support for collaborative processes as 
a mechanism for adaptive management of socio-ecological system resilience, the 
relevance of ecosystem health to establish desired goals and to evaluate the progress 
towards those goals based on the properties of resilience becomes even clearer 
 
The Holistic Ecosystem Health Indicator (HEHI): Framework for the development and 
structure of indicators.  
We hold in this paper that The Holistic Ecosystem Health Indicator (HEHI), an 
integrative indicator developed in Costa Rica in 1999, may be an adequate tool to 
measure the performance of collaborative processes according to the characteristics afore 
stated. The HEHI is an interdisciplinary methodology based on the ecosystem health 
notion.  It quantifies ecological, social, and interactive – the interactions between humans 
and nature - indicators of the health of ecosystems.   The HEHI, first documented by 
Aguilar, was used to assess and evaluate ecosystem health in managed ecosystems in 
Costa Rica.  A key advantage to the HEHI, required by the aforementioned theoretical 
background, is that it incorporates specific management objectives and characteristics of 
the area involved, while also useful for making comparisons leading to regional policy-
making35.    
 
The HEHI follows a hierarchical structure starting with three main branches: ecological, 
social and interactive (See Figure 1 in Appendix 1). Within the ecological branch, 
measures about the condition and trend of the ecosystem under study are organized.  
Socioeconomic measures concerning the community dependent on the ecosystem or 
affected by management decisions are organized within the social branch.  The 
interactive branch includes measures relating to land use and management decisions that 
characterize the interactions between the human communities and the ecosystem.  Each 
branch is sub-divided into categories or criteria, which further operationalize the meaning 
of each branch, yet it is not a direct measure in itself.  Categories reflect particular 
attributes of the management objectives for the system under study, therefore are 
established based on the ecological and social characteristics of the area and management 
goals of the stakeholders involved. 
 
 The categories are comprised of indicators that serve as the measure for the performance 
of each category.  For example, soil quality is a category within the ecological branch and 
it can be measured using indicators such as microbial biomass, water infiltration, 
compaction, etc.  Indicators are carefully selected to test the condition and trend of the 
categories, and each is given a target, or benchmark, based on references available in 
scientific literature and specific objectives defined by management objectives or policy.  
For example, a water quality indicator can have a target defined by legal limits specified 
by the administrative authority in charge, while a target for a productivity indicator may 
be defined by a combination of the capacity of the system and objectives set by 
stakeholders.  
 

 
 
6
To prioritize the importance of each category and indicator, weighted scores are assigned 
to each based on its relative importance to the health of the system and to stakeholder 
goals (see Table 2 in Appendix 1).  Categories are ranked and assigned points from a 
total of 1000 as high, middle, and low measures of ecosystem health, also in accordance 
to the specific purpose and need of the management unit in question.  Individual 
indicators are also assigned a portion of the points from the total given to the category in 
which it is. 
 
The HEHI has been qualified effective at characterizing the complexity of the socio-
ecological systems of Protected Zones in Costa Rica and in developing site-specific 
parameters for assessing and evaluating the factors that influence their ecosystem 
health36.  It is therefore promising as an evaluation tool to asses and evaluate the 
outcomes of a collaborative process. The interactive branch is particularly relevant for the 
collaborative process because it encompasses the management interactions influencing 
the ecological and social system, thus it can capture the effectiveness of collaboration in 
positively influencing its context. 
 
However, as previously discussed, identifying the appropriate variables to be measured 
for a different system is a challenging task. For instance, questions that need to be 
answered include what is the appropriate timescale by which to track management 
progress, and by what benchmarks does one evaluate success or failure of management?  
The answers to these questions are difficult to determine with certainty, which has often 
led managers to adopt a uniform set of indicators across broad regions (as with the 
examples of indicator frameworks previously discussed), even though landscapes, 
management authority, and community interests may vary greatly across that same 
region37. In addition, the number of indicators selected is also a crucial matter, for if too 
few indicators are monitored, the important elements of the system may be overlooked, 
and if too many are monitored, then data acquisition may be too cumbersome and 
expensive. A conceptual understanding using existing scientific literature of the dynamic 
nature of these systems and site-specific parameters to identify the essential component 
systems and define the relevant system structure is necessary prior to establishing 
benchmarks of ecosystem health38.   
 
To address these concerns and assure that site-specific measures are identified based on 
the context specific conditions and success criteria of the socio-ecological system using a 
collaborative process, a methodology based on participatory research was developed to 
assist the process of developing appropriate indicators for the Holistic Ecosystem Health 
Indicator (HEHI) framework.  The following section describes the methodological steps 
involved in the framework using the Diablo Trust, a rangeland collaborative management 
group based in Flagstaff, AZ, as the case study. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
7
PART II: Development of the HEHI for a Collaborative Management Scenario: the 
DiabloTrust Case Study 
 
General Considerations 
The Diablo Trust was convened in 1993 by a group of landowners, agencies, scientists, 
and citizens that were concerned with the mix of private and public lands managed by 
two large ranches.  The lands managed by this collaborative group comprise of 426,000 
acres under the federal (58% - USDS Forest Service), state (22% - Arizona State Land 
Department), and private (20% - Flying M and Bar T Bar Ranches) ownership. While 
official management responsibility exists as a patchwork pattern over the extent of the 
land, it is greatly influenced by the stakeholders participating in the group.  Based on 
Allan Savory’s Holistic Resource Management framework, this non-profit group suggests 
appropriate rangeland management practices to agencies in order to meet the goals of 
ecological and economic sustainability.  As an agroecosystem, food production is a 
driving goal for this landscape, especially for the private lands. Yet, because the land is 
tightly linked to state and federal lands that must also incorporate public values, it is 
necessary for management to address and combine goals for conservation and 
productivity.  Therefore, the first three years of the group’s collaboration were spent 
building trust among stakeholders with different land values, developing a collective 
vision of landscape condition that encompasses stakeholder goals, and writing a 
management plan that comprises a variety of tools and prescriptions in order to achieve 
the desired conditions for the private and public lands as a whole39.   
 
The Diablo Trust developed a three-part holistic goal (see Table 3 in Appendix 1) that is 
composed of goals for quality of life, goals for production, and goals for a future 
landscape and resource base, to drive land management40.  Based on their goals, 
parameters that define this management unit are characterized by a combination of 
biophysical, cultural and socio-economic factors that integrate principles of ecological 
sustainability and economic viability.   In general, the goals for quality of life and forms 
of production guide the information necessary for the social and interactive branches of 
the HEHI.  The Diablo Trust is concerned for the quality of life of the ranches, the 
collaborative group, and to some extent the community in general.  The quality of life 
goals and values define their vision for the Diablo Trust stakeholders and the rest of the 
community.  Their goal is of a “prosperous rural community reflecting a land culture with 
young and old enjoying opportunity and security”.  The goal of production is guided by 
the possibility of the ranches to continue to “serve as the foundation for sustainable long-
term health of the Diablo Trust lands” through food production, while achieving the 
ecological goals as well.  Management objectives of the government agencies that also 
have jurisdiction of the public lands guide the information for the social and interactive 
branches.  Many of the land uses in the Diablo Trust management unit are regulated by 
these management agencies, thus there their legal benchmarks must also be considered in 
management and monitoring. From a social perspective, the county is also involved as it 
provides the general vision for land use in the surrounding lands with private properties.  
Therefore, many of the indicators in the social and interactive branches, particularly those 
concerning land use, management decisions, and public attitudes, will reflect the 
combined goals of the Diablo Trust, management agencies, and county guidelines. 

 
 
8
 
The future landscape and resource base goals describe the vision, or desired conditions, 
for the ecosystem and for the stakeholders that comprise the collaborative group; thus 
defining the ecological and social targets that the group wants move towards (see Table 3 
in Appendix 1). The Diablo Trust landscape is characterized as a semi-arid ecosystem, 
with vegetation types ranging from Great Basin grasslands to pinjon-juniper woodlands 
and ponderosa pine forests.  All are managed for multiple purposes, primarily cattle 
grazing, recreation, hunting and fishing, wildlife management, forest thinning, and 
watershed protection, although the management treatments may vary for each particular 
vegetation type.  Nonetheless, all 426,000 acres are managed as a whole, guided by the 
future landscape goals and specific objectives outlined in their management plan.  
Therefore, along with regulatory management objectives for the public lands as defined 
by the administrative agencies, the ecological branch is developed to address these 
landscape goals.  Similarly, the future human resource base goals the Diablo Trust has 
developed to guide how their collaborative process should function and sustain itself in 
the future inform the management strategy and social capital available to direct the use 
and sustainability of the resources. These aspects are tracked under the interactive 
category of the HEHI.  
 
Process of developing indicators using a participatory approach 
Clarifying the numerous management objectives that guide the use and performance of 
the socio-ecological system (Diablo Trust goals and regulatory objectives in tandem) was 
the first step in the development of indicators for the Diablo Trust system (see Figure 2 in 
Appendix 1).  Existing scientific literature was consulted to establish characteristics that 
define the health of the ecosystem and the community, which may or may not be in 
accordance with the desired conditions defined by the Diablo Trust and management 
agencies.   We developed a definition of ecosystem health that would guide the 
prioritization of indicators, their benchmarks, and how they are weighted41.  Step 2 in the 
process involved the development of a conceptual model to depict the relationships 
between system characteristics, what driving factors are influencing their current 
condition, and the management objectives and goals that are driving the future state of 
the socio-ecological system as a whole (see Figure 3 in Appendix 1). Although this 
model does not depict predictive causal relationships due to the system’s complexity, we 
believe it considers most of the potential key variables that influence the landscape 
composition of the management unit as a whole, including the socio-economic 
characteristics of the community that influence or are influenced by the state of the 
ecosystem.  This information then provides a logical basis for ecosystem health indicators 
to be developed and validated. 
 
Step 3 involved collecting input from stakeholders to select an “optimal set of indicators” 
that informs the list of potential variables chosen previously.  We used a purposive 
sampling approach to select respondents for in-depth interviews that pursued information 
directly pertaining to Diablo Trust’s goals and process, thus respondents needed to be 
intimately familiar with these aspects of the group.  This qualitative assessment used 
open ended questions relating to the effectiveness of the process, what factors they 
perceive facilitate or limit the success of collaboration, and what ecological and social 

 
 
9
factors are most critical to achieve Diablo Trust goals, and consequently to monitor and 
evaluate their performance.  Respondents were also given a list of ecological, socio-
economic, and management or institutional factors to prioritize their importance.  We do 
not discuss results from these interviews in this paper, but we used the information to 
select the preliminary list categories for the HEHI (see Table 4 in Appendix 1).   To assist 
in a final prioritization of indicators and development of protocols and monitoring 
strategy, we also consulted with experts in the natural and social sciences (Step 4 in 
Figure 2 in Appendix 1). 
 
Finally, the optimal indicators under each category are currently being selected, 
weighted, and organized according to the structure of the HEHI (Step 5 in Figure 2 in 
Appendix 1).  This final list of indicators will serve as the finer level possible to capture 
the complexity of the system without compromising information for multiple spatial 
scales. To fill in the information for each indicator and test their utility, we are using 
available ecological and social data (i.e. vegetation data collected by the Diablo Trust 
and/or management agencies, census data for some of the demographic variables, spatial 
data for generating land cover and land use indicators, etc.), as well as primary data that 
we are currently gathering using field sampling methods for the ecological branch and 
survey questionnaires for the social and interactive branches. Context and management 
goals will determine the final weighting that will complete the necessary distribution of 
points for this application of the HEHI. Preliminary point assignments for each category 
are already available (see Table 4 in Appendix 1).  
 
CONCLUSION 
 
Sustainability and ecosystem health are related concepts; they both provide a conceptual 
framework and methodological approach to study the relationship between the 
environment and society. Yet, because of the broad nature of sustainability, this concept 
is often applied to individual aspects of a system (i.e. sustainable agriculture as one sector 
of a landscape type), while ecosystem health can measure endpoints of the system at the 
appropriate scale, as the concept is more biophysically and bioregionally grounded. 
 
Therefore, although ecosystem health still shares the same ambiguity as other emerging 
terms- sustainability and ecological integrity - it is still invaluable in offering a guiding 
concept and practical applications for the holistic integration, understanding and 
communicability of the processes required to reach our management goals.  Ecosystem 
health indicators tools, such as the Holistic Ecosystem Health Indicator (HEHI), are 
promising methods to measure the ecosystem health of the collaborative approach to 
ecosystem management, and consequently provide an evaluation tool to test their 
effectiveness.  The interactive branch of the HEHI is particularly beneficial for these 
purposes because by measuring perceptions, awareness, and involvement of stakeholders 
into management, it allows for the evaluation of the process of collaboration, as well as 
the outcomes. Therefore, the HEHI seems to encompass all the criteria needed for a 
comprehensive evaluation of the collaborative process. Our current preliminary data in 
the application of this model to the Diablo Trust in Flagstaff, AZ. seems to confirm this. 
 

 
 
10
In conclusion, because ecosystem health indicators integrate ecological and socio-
economic criteria of management, provide holistic, yet quantitative measures that can be 
monitored over time, and can communicate complex information effectively, they serve 
as an ideal tool to for both researchers and groups to evaluate tangible outcomes of the 
collaborative effort. 
                                                 
1 Contact information: Tischa Muñoz-Erickson, Center for Environmental Science and Education, Northern 
Arizona University, PO Box 5694, Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5694, tischa2@yahoo.com; Bernardo Aguilar-
González, Prescott College, 220 Grove Avenue, Prescott, AZ 86301, baguilar@prescott.edu . 
2 Conley, A. and A. Moote. 2002. Evaluating Collaborative Natural Resource Management. 2002. Society 
and Natural Resources. Society and Natural Resources 16: 371-386 
3 Among others, examples that may fall under this qualification are Wondolleck, J.M. and S.L. Yaffee. 
2000. Making Collaboration Work: Lessons from Innovation in Natural Resource Management. Island 
Press,  Washington D.C., and, Cestero, B. 1999. Beyond the Hundredth Meeting: A Field Guide to 
Collaborative Conservation on the West’s Public lands. The Sonoran Institute, Tucson, AZ.  
4 Huntington, C.W. and S. Sommarstrom. 2000. An Evaluation of Selected Watershed Councils in the 
Pacific Northwest and Northern California. Parts I, II, III. Prepared for Trout Unlimited and Pacific Rivers 
Council, Eugene, OR. (http://www.pacrivers.org/publications/council.html), and, Leach, W., Pelkey, N.W., 
and P.A. Sabatier. 2002. Stakeholder Partnerships as Collaborative Policymaking: Evaluation Criteria 
Applied to Watershed Management In California and Washington. Journal of Policy Analysis and 
Management 21 (4) can be cited. 
5 Innes, J.E. and D.E. Booher. 1999. Consensus Building and Complex Adaptive Systems: A Framework 
for Evaluating Collaborative Planning. American Planning Association Journal 65 (4): 413-423. 
6 Kenney, D.S. 1999. Are Community-based Watershed Groups Really Effective? Confronting the Thorny 
Issue of Measuring Success. Chronicle of Community 3 (2): 33-37. 
7 Leach, W. et. al. 2002. Op. Cit. 
8 Conley, A. and A. Moote. 2002.Op. Cit. 
9 Bell, S. and S. Morse. 1999. Sustainability Indicators: Measuring the Immeasurable. Earthscan 
Publications. London. 175 p. 
10 http://www.sustainabilityindicators.org/resources/WhoWorkingOnIndicators.html#Regionalefforts  
shows examples at all different scales. 
11 Kenney, D.S. 2000.  Arguing About Consensus: Examining the Case Against Western Watershed 
Initiatives and Other Collaborative Groups Active in Natural Resources Management. Boulder, CO: 
Natural Resources Law Center, University of Colorado School of Law.  
12 Rapport, D.J. 1995. Ecosystem Health: Exploring the Territory. Ecosystem Health 1: 5-13; Costanza, R. 
1992. Toward an operational definition of ecosystem health. in Ecosystem Health: New Goals for 
Environmental Management. Costanza, R. Norton, B.B., Haskell, B .J. , (eds.) Island Press, Washington, 
D.C. and Aguilar, B. J. 1999.  Applications of Ecosystem Health for the Sustainability of Managed Systems 
in Costa Rica.  Ecosystem Health  5:  1-13. 
13 Steedman, R.J. 1994. Ecosystem health as a management goal. Journal of the North American 
Benthological Society 13 (4):  605-610. 
14 Callicot, J.B. 1992. Aldo Leopold’s Metaphor. in Ecosystem Health: New Goals for Environmental 
Management. Costanza, R. Norton, B.B., Haskell, B .J. , editors. Island Press, Washington, D.C. 
15 Lackey, R.T. 2003. Values, Policy, and Ecosystem Health. Bioscience 51(6): 437-443 
16 Wilcox, B. 2001. Ecosystem Health in Practice: Emerging Areas of Application in Environment and 
Human Health.  Ecosystem Health  
17 Ibid. 
18 Rapport, D.J. 1998. Defining Ecosystem Health. In Ecosystem Health. Rapport, D.J., Costanza, R., 
Epstein, P.R., Gaudet, C., and R. Levins (editors). Blackwell Science. Berlin, Germany. Pages 18-33. 
19 Steedman, R.J. 1994. Op. Cit. 
20 Costanza, R. 1992. Op. Cit, Rapport, D.J.1995. Op. Cit. 
21 Steedman, R.J. 1994. Op. Cit. 
22 Peine, J.D., Jones, R.E., English, M.R., and Wallace, S.E. 1999. Contributions of Sociology to 
Ecosystem Management. In Integrating Social Sciences with Ecosystem Management: Human Dimensions 

 
 
11
                                                                                                                                                 
in Assessment, Policy, and Management.  H. K. Cordell and J.C. Bergstrom (eds.). Sagamore Publishing. 
Champaign, IL. 
23 Rapport, D.J. 1998. Op. Cit. note 18. 
24 Ibid; Costanza, R., Mageau, M., Norton, B., and B.C. Patten. 1998. Predictors of Ecosystem Health.in 
Ecosystem Health. Rapport, D.J., Costanza, R., Epstein, P.R., Gaudet, C., and R. Levins (editors). 
Blackwell Science. Berlin, Germany. Pages 231-239. 
25 Wilcox, B. 2001. Op. Cit. 
26 Aguilar-González, B.J. and T.A. Muñoz-Erickson. Interdisciplinary Indicators, Ecosystem Health and 
Holistic Resource Management: Further Evolution and Case Study Comparisons using the HEHI in 
Managed Ecosystems. Ecosystem Health. In review. 
27 Gell-Mann, M. 1994. The Quark and the Jaguar: Adventures in the Simple and the Complex. W.H. 
Freeman and Company. New York, NY. 
28 Innes, J.E. and D.E. Booher. 1999. Op. Cit. 
29 Daniels, S.E.  and Walker, G.B. 1996. Collaborative Learning: Improving Public Deliberation in 
Ecosystem-based Management. Environmental Impact Assessment Review 16: 71-102. 
30 Daniels, S.E. and Walker, G.B. 2001. Working through environmental conflict: the collaborative learning 
approach. Praeger. Wesport, Connecticut. 
31 Machlis, G.E., Force J.E. and W.R. Burch Jr. 1997. The Human Ecosystem. Part I: The Human 
Ecosystem as an Organizing Concept in Ecosystem Management.  Society and Natural Resources 10: 347-
367. 
32 Berkes, F. and C. Folke 2000. Linking social and ecological systems for resilience and sustainability. In 
Linking Social and Ecological Systems: Management Practices and Social Mechanisms for Building 
Resilience. F. Berkes and C. Folke (editors).Cambridge University Press. United Kingdom. Pages 1-27 
33 Ibid; Holling, C.S. 2001.Understanding the Complexity of Economic, Ecological, and Social Systems. 
Ecosystems 4: 390-405. 
34 Walker, B., Carpenter, S., Anderies, J., Abel, N., Cumming, G. , Janssen, M., Lebel, L., Norberg, J., 
Peterson, G.D., and R. Pritchard. 2002. Resilience Management in Social-ecological systems: a Working 
Hypothesis for a Participatory Approach. Conservation Ecology 6 (1): 14. (online) URL; 
http:..www.consecol.org/vol6/iss/art14 
35 Aguilar, B. J. 1999. Op. Cit. 
36 Ibid 
37 Noon, B.R.  2003.  Conceptual issues in Monitoring Ecological Systems. In Monitoring Ecosystems: 
Interdisciplinary Approaches for Evaluating Ecoregional Initiative. D. E. Busch and J.C. Trexler (editors). 
Island Press. Washington D.C. Pages 27-73.  
38 Bossell, H. 2002. Assessing viability and sustainability: a systems-based approach for deriving 
comprehensive indicators sets. Conservation Ecology 5 (2): 12. 
39 Muñoz-Erickson, T., M. Loeser and B. Aguilar-Gonzalez. 2003. Identifying Indicators of Ecosystem 
Health for a Semiarid Ecosystem: A Conceptual Approach. In press. 
40 Diablo Trust Area Range Management Plan and Proposed Action. 1999. Flagstaff, AZ. 38 Pages. 
41 Muñoz-Erickson. T. M. et al. 2003 Op. Cit. 
 
 
 

 
 
12
LITERATURE CITED 
 
Aguilar, B. J. 1999.  Applications of Ecosystem Health for the Sustainability of Managed 
Systems in Costa Rica.  Ecosystem Health  5:  1-13 
 
Aguilar-González, B.J. and T.A. Muñoz-Erickson. Interdisciplinary Indicators, 
Ecosystem Health and Holistic Resource Management: Further Evolution and Case Study 
Comparisons using the HEHI in Managed Ecosystems. Ecosystem Health. In review. 
 
Bell, S. and S. Morse. 1999. Sustainability Indicators: Measuring the Immeasurable. 
Earthscan Publications. London. 175 p. 
 
Berkes, F. and C. Folke 2000. Linking social and ecological systems for resilience and 
sustainability. In Linking Social and Ecological Systems: Management Practices and 
Social Mechanisms for Building Resilience. F. Berkes and C. Folke (editors).Cambridge 
University Press. United Kingdom. Pages 1-27 
 
Bossell, H. 2002. Assessing viability and sustainability: a systems-based approach for 
deriving comprehensive indicators sets. Conservation Ecology 5 (2): 12. 
 
Callicot, J.B. 1992. Aldo Leopold’s Metaphor. in Ecosystem Health: New Goals for 
Environmental Management. Costanza, R. Norton, B.B., Haskell, B .J. , editors. Island 
Press, Washington, D.C. 
 
Cestero, B. 1999. Beyond the Hundredth Meeting: A Field Guide to Collaborative 
Conservation on the West’s Public lands. The Sonoran Institute, Tucson, AZ.  
Community-based Collaboratives Research Consortium. http://www.cbcrc.org. Accessed: 
May 2002. 
 
Conley, A. and A. Moote. 2002. Evaluating Collaborative Natural Resource 
Management. 2002. Society and Natural Resources. Society and Natural Resources 16: 
371-386 
 
Costanza, R. 1992. Toward an operational definition of ecosystem health. in Ecosystem 
Health: New Goals for Environmental Management. Costanza, R. Norton, B.B., Haskell, 
B .J. , (eds.) Island Press, Washington, D.C. 
 
Costanza, R., Mageau, M., Norton, B.,  and B.C. Patten. 1998b. Predictors of Ecosystem 
Health.in Ecosystem Health. Rapport, D.J., Costanza, R., Epstein, P.R., Gaudet, C., and 
R. Levins (editors). Blackwell Science. Berlin, Germany. Pages 231-239. 
 
Daniels, S.E.  and Walker, G.B. (1996). Collaborative Learning: Improving Public 
Deliberation in Ecosystem-based Management. Environmental Impact Assessment 
Review 16: 71-102. 
 

 
 
13
Daniels, S.E. and Walker, G.B. (2001). Working through environmental conflict: the 
collaborative learning approach. Praeger. Wesport, Connecticut. 
 
Diablo Trust Area Range Management Plan and Proposed Action. 1999. Flagstaff, AZ. 
38 Pages. 
 
Gell-Mann, M. 1994. The Quark and the Jaguar: Adventures in the Simple and the 
Complex. W.H. Freeman and Company. New York, NY. 
 
Holling, C.S. 2001.Understanding the Complexity of Economic, Ecological, and Social 
Systems. Ecosystems 4: 390-405. 
 
Huntington, C.W. and S. Sommarstrom. 2000. An Evaluation of Selected Watershed 
Councils in the Pacific Northwest and Northern California. Parts I, II, III. Prepared for 
Trout Unlimited and Pacific Rivers Council, Eugene, OR. 
(http://www.pacrivers.org/publications/council.html) 
 
Innes, J.E. and D.E. Booher. 1999. Consensus Building and Complex Adaptive Systems: 
A Framework for Evaluating Collaborative Planning. American Planning Association 
Journal 65 (4): 413-423. 
 
Kenney, D.S. 1999. Are Community-based Watershed Groups Really Effective? 
Confronting the Thorny Issue of Measuring Success. Chronicle of Community 3 (2): 33-
37. 
 
Kenney, D.S. 2000.  Arguing About Consensus: Examining the Case Against Western 
Watershed Initiatives and Other Collaborative Groups Active in Natural Resources 
Management. Boulder, CO: Natural Resources Law Center, University of Colorado 
School of Law.  
 
Lackey, R.T. 2003. Values, Policy, and Ecosystem Health. Bioscience 51(6): 437-443. 
 
Leach, W., Pelkey, N.W., and P.A. Sabatier. 2002. Stakeholder Partnerships as 
Collaborative Policymaking: Evaluation Criteria Applied to Watershed Management In 
California and Washington. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 21 (4). 
 
Machlis, G.E., Force J.E. and W.R. Burch Jr. 1997. The Human Ecosystem. Part I: The 
Human Ecosystem as an Organizing Concept in Ecosystem Management.  Society and 
Natural Resources 10: 347-367. 
 
Munoz-Erickson, T., M. Loeser and B. Aguilar-Gonzalez. 2003. Identifying Indicators of 
Ecosystem Health for a Semiarid Ecosystem: A Conceptual Approach. In press 
 
Noon, B.R.  2003.  Conceptual issues in Monitoring Ecological Systems. In Monitoring 
Ecosystems: Interdisciplinary Approaches for Evaluating Ecoregional Initiative. D. E. 
Busch and J.C. Trexler (editors). Island Press. Washington D.C. Pages 27-73.  

 
 
14
Peine, J.D., Jones, R.E., English, M.R., and Wallace, S.E. 1999. Contributions of 
Sociology to Ecosystem Management. In Integrating Social Sciences with Ecosystem 
Management: Human Dimensions in Assessment, Policy, and Management.  H. K. 
Cordell and J.C. Bergstrom (eds.). Sagamore Publishing. Champaign, IL. 
 
Rapport, D.J. 1995. Ecosystem Health: Exploring the Territory. Ecosystem Health 1: 5-
13. 
 
Rapport, D.J. 1998. Defining Ecosystem Health. In Ecosystem Health. Rapport, D.J., 
Costanza, R., Epstein, P.R., Gaudet, C., and R. Levins (editors). Blackwell Science. 
Berlin, Germany. Pages 18-33. 
 
Rapport, D.J., Costanza, R. and A.J. McMichael. 1998. Assessing ecosystem health. 
Trends in Ecology and evolution 13 (10): 397-402 
 
Steedman, R.J. 1994. Ecosystem health as a management goal. Journal of the North 
American Benthological Society 13 (4):  605-610. 
 
Sustainability Indicators Organization. 
http://www.sustainabilityindicators.org/resources/WhoWorkingOnIndicators.html#Regio
nalefforts. Accessed: July 2003. 
 
Walker, B., Carpenter, S., Anderies, J., Abel, N., Cumming, G. , Janssen, M., Lebel, L., 
Norberg, J., Peterson, G.D., and R. Pritchard. 2002. Resilience Management in Social-
ecological systems: a Working Hypothesis for a Participatory Approach. Conservation 
Ecology 6 (1): 14. (online) URL; http:..www.consecol.org/vol6/iss/art14 
 
Wilcox, B. 2001. Ecosystem Health in Practice: Emerging Areas of Application in 
Environment and Human Health.  Ecosystem Health  
 
Wondolleck, J.M. and S.L. Yaffee. 2000. Making Collaboration Work: Lessons from 
Innovation in Natural Resource Management. Island Press, Washington D.C. 
 
  

 
 
15
Appendix One: Tables and Figures 
 
Table 1. General concepts for developing indicators of ecosystem health.  
               Adapted from Rapport et al. (1998) and Aguilar (1999) 
Ecosystem health can be assessed using measures of resilience, vigor and organization: 
 
Vigor is measured in terms of ‘activity, metabolism or primary productivity’. Focuses on 
the existing organic base that helps accommodate disturbance. 
 
Organization can be assessed as the diversity and number or interactions between 
system components.  Emphasis on structure and diversity. 
 
Resilience is measured in terms of a system’s capacity to maintain structure and function 
in the presence of stress.  When resilience is exceeded, the system can ‘flip’ to an 
alternate state. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Structure of the Holistic Ecosystem Health Indicator (HEHI) (Aguilar 
1999). 
 
 
 
Ecological Branch    
= 1000 points 
 
 
                   
Categories: 
Biophysical          
= Weighted Points 
Socio-economic       
Branch                 
= 1000 points 
 
                       
Categories:  
Demographic,          
Economic and            
Quality of Life            
=  Weighted Points 
Interactive               
Branch                  
= 1000 points 
 
                       
Categories:              
 Land Use               
Practice, Political,         
and Regulatory           
=  Weighted Points 
Indicators:       
Benchmarks and 
Weighted Points 
Indicators:  
Benchmarks and 
Weighted Points 
Indicators:     
Benchmarks and 
Weighted Points 
HEHI 

 
 
16
Table 2. Rationale for HEHI Weighted Score System (Aguilar 1999) 
 
High Category measures key resources and interactions (structure/function) in the 
socio-ecological system and reflect management objectives of the area. Indicators that 
reflect a greater correlation between the test and the health of the system will receive 
higher score. 
 
Middle   Category measures critical factors in the function and persistence of the system, 
but they are not central goals of the management strategy of the zone. 
 
Low        Interactions between indicators and ecosystem health are still unclear or the 
methods not well developed.  As the individual tests improved and information on 
their relevance to ecosystem health becomes clearer, these could be allocated 
more points. 
 
 
 

 
 
17
 
Table 3.    DIABLO TRUST:  3 – PART HOLISTIC GOAL                       
(Diablo Trust Area Range Management Plan and Proposed Action 1999) 
Quality of Life Goals and 
Values 
Forms of Production 
Future Landscape and 
Resource Base Goals 
• 
To have understanding, 
support, and acceptance 
that the rancher is the 
foundation for 
sustainable long-term of 
the Diablo Trust lands 
and open spaces. 
• 
To lead well-balanced 
lives with individual 
freedom to practice our 
personal beliefs, 
religions, and lifestyles. 
• 
To enjoy, both 
immediate and 
extended family, 
harmony and pride. 
• 
To achieve life-long 
personal satisfaction, 
self-worth and sense of 
well-being. 
• 
To be constructive and 
respected members of 
our communities. 
• 
To contribute 
economically, 
educationally, 
politically, socially, and 
spiritually to 
community well-being. 
• 
To live in safe, 
aesthetic, and 
ecologically sound 
settings. 
• 
To foster rural/small-
town lifestyles and 
community cohesion. 
• 
To hand on optimum 
options to our children 
and future generations.  
• 
Earning a reasonable 
return to management 
and equity from 
livestock, wildlife, 
wood products, 
recreation, education, 
and other sources not 
in conflict with our 
values.  
• 
To produce high 
quality food product 
from our management 
of land and water. 
• 
To implement 
land/resource projects 
initiated by non-
ranchers in 
cooperation with the 
Diablo Trust and the 
community.  
Future human resource base: 
• 
People who are open, 
accessible, and willing to 
listen and learn from others 
as well as share what they 
are doing and learning. 
• 
Are friendly and committed 
to the work they are doing. 
• 
Are honest, trustworthy, 
and consistent; 
• 
Strive to communicate 
well, to be realistic in their 
commitments to each other, 
and don’t promise what 
they cannot deliver. 
 
Future land resource base: 
• 
Viable and diverse faunal 
and floral communities 
throughout all zones of the 
area. 
• 
Some areas within each of 
the vegetative zones will 
appear not to be human-
dominated. 
• 
Forested areas with a 
mosaic of canopy closures 
and forest structures. 
• 
Water cycles, mineral 
cycles, energy cycles, and 
biological succession that 
are fully functional.  
 

 
 
18
Figure 2. Methodological steps for developing the Holistic Ecosystem Health 
Indicator for the Diablo Trust Case study (Muñoz-Erickson et al. 2003). 
 
 
Existing Scientific   
Literature
Stakeholder-defined 
Goals
Science and Policy 
Integration
Ecosystem Health Definition for           
the Study Area
Conceptual Model
Processes / Structure 
and Composition
Ecosystem Health
Science and Policy/ 
Conservation and 
Productivity Goals
Local Knowledge Input: Focus 
Group and Stakeholder Interviews 
“Candidate Set of Indicators”
HEHI Structure Developed: 
finalized indicators and ranking
Expert Consultation:
Natural/ Social Scientists 
and Resource Managers
Step 1
Step 4
Step 2
Step 3
Step 5
Ecological
Interactive
Social
Testing of indicators
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
19
Figure 3.  Conceptual model of the natural and human-induced driving processes, 
socio-ecological system structure and composition, and goals of the Diablo Trust 
management unit (Muñoz-Erickson et al. 2003). 
PROCESSES / STRESSORS
Precipitation / 
Evaporation
Natural Disturbance: fire, 
pest outbreaks
Ungulate Grazing: livestock, 
elk, pronghorn, deer
Historical Land Use: 
grazing, logging, roads, 
fire history, fences, water 
development
Human needs: water, meat 
production, recreation, 
hunting, development, 
roads, fuelwood
Social Processes: market, 
social /cultural values, 
collaboration, laws and 
regulations
Ecosystem processes: 
primary productivity, 
vegetation development 
and succession, nutrient 
cycling, water storage
Ecological
Vegetation structure and 
composition 
Land Cover
Grass / Forage 
Composition 
Ground Cover
Soil Structure/Quality
Water Quality/Distribution
Social 
Decision-making process
Communication structure
Relationships / organization
Market structure
Community Development 
and Involvement
Rural characteristics
Social services
STRUCTURE / COMPOSITION
LAND MANAGEMENT AND CONSERVATION GOALS
Diablo Trust 
Management Goals
Healthy and productive 
grasslands community 
and forage species
Viable and diverse wildlife
Protection of Threatened 
and Endangered Species 
Functional Productive 
Ecosystem : soil / water 
quality, nutrient cycling
Open Space / Recreation
Scientific Theory
Ecosystem Health
Conservation Biology
Rangeland Ecology
Sustainable Food 
Production
Informs 
Candidate 
Indicators
Other Land Uses and 
Regulatory Mandates
Wildlife habitat /    
viewing
Recreation / Hunting
Rare species and areas 
Water conservation
Agricultural
Urban Development
Coconino National 
Forest Plan and Range 
Monitoring 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
20
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 4.  Categories for the Holistic Ecosystem Health Indicator as developed for the                   
Diablo Trust cast study 
I. 
Ecological Categories 
II. 
Social Categories 
III. 
Interactive Categories 
Soil Quality                        200 
Vegetation                          200 
Watershed Health               180 
Primary productivity          140 
Wildlife                              140 
Erosion                               140 
 
 
Total points                      1000         
Economic stability               420 
Demographics                      210 
Community strength            190 
Access to services                180 
 
 
 
 
Total points                        1000 
Land use                          230 
Social capital                   230 
Implementation of  
     regulation                   200 
Public awareness  
     and perceptions          180 
Land distribution             160 
 
Total points                    1000 
 
 
 
