Congress gives schools more than $1 billion without 
competition 
By ARLENE LEVINSON 
AP National Writer 
07/24/2000 
 
Congress directed more than $1 billion to specific colleges and universities in the federal 
budget this year, a record for a noncompetitive process critics assail as pork barrel 
spending, The Chronicle of Higher Education says in a report being issued Sunday.  
The total is more than 30 percent greater than last year's record $797 million, the journal 
said, and it's a sizable portion of the $40 billion in this year's overall federal 
appropriations for higher education, which includes student aid.  
Such funding, without being subjected to review by the agencies directed to give out the 
money, is known as "earmarks" in the federal budget.  
Critics call it "pork" -- gifts that members of Congress give to their districts.  
But defenders say schools have to find money wherever they can, and that no member of 
Congress or school wants to risk looking silly by throwing money at a bad project.  
In Arizona, Northern Arizona University's Ecological Restoration Institute recently 
announced it was set to receive $8.8 million from the Interior Department for forest 
health research and projects, a grant not included in the Chronicle study.  
The last earmarked grant to NAU, according to the Chronicle, was in 1997, when it 
received $300,000 for a forest health partnership.  
It received a total of $6 million in 1990 and 1991 to plan and build the Southwest 
Forestry Science Complex in concert with the U.S. Forest Service.  
Meanwhile, the University of Arizona received nearly $6 million in individual earmarked 
grants in fiscal 2000, along with $5 million more in shared grants, including $3.3 million 
for research on shrimp aquaculture.  
Arizona State University won $1.6 million from Congress this fiscal year in outright 
grants and an additional $2.8 million in shared grants.  
"There's an awful lot of people busy pointing fingers, rather than trying to lend a hand," 
said Vincent Scalia, dean of the College of Health and Human Sciences at the University 
of Northern Colorado. "Politicians are not that dumb."  

Scalia's college got a $1.81 million earmark to enlarge a cancer rehabilitation institute. "I 
would say it's politics at its best, not its worst side."  
But opponents of earmarking sees only politics.  
Many of the funded projects have merit, said Ken White, director of the Massachusetts 
office of Common Cause, the government watchdog group. "But the federal government 
is too often seen as a place for everybody to line up with their hands out to ask for 
something. This is the kind of thing that turns people off to politics."  
The earmarking system "does not allow for anyone to analyze the projects and determine 
if they serve a good educational purpose -- or if the money could be better used at another 
school," said Rep. John F. Tierney, D-Mass.  
The Chronicle, a Washington-based weekly, analyzed spending in the federal budget for 
the fiscal year that ends Sept. 30. Its report appears in the July 28 edition.  
The Daily Sun contributed to this story.  
------  
On the Net:  
Chronicle's report: http://chronicle.com/stats/pork  
 
