Ecological Restoration of Southwestern  
Ponderosa Pine  
W. Wallace Covington, Margaret M. Moore, and Peter Fule1 
Abstract -
Major ecological changes have been observed in the 
ponderosa pine forests of northern Arizona since settlement by Americans 
of European descent approximately 120 years ago. Exclusion of the 
frequent, low-intensity fires characteristic of presettlement forests has led 
to great increases in tree density and forest fuels with concomitant 
decreases in herbage production and water storage. We are applying a 
restoration treatment consisting of postsettlementtree cutting, excess forest 
floor removal, and prescribed burning on a 5 ha site to restore the 
presettlernent forest structure and ecological processes. One third of the 
site will remain as an untreated control, one third will receive restoration of 
forest structure only, and one third will receive the full restoration treatment. 
Over the 20-year span of the study we will measure tree growth, understory 
production, nutrient cycling, fuel accumulation, and wildlife habitat changes. 
PRESETTLEMENT PONDEROSA 
FORESTS 
The Mogollon Plateau, stretching across central and 
northern Arizona. supports a nearly pure forest of ponderosa 
pine (Pinus ponderosa Laws.) at elevations of 2100 to 2600 
meters. Prior to settlement of northern Arizona by Americans 
of European origin, around 1870 to 1880, the forests were 
dominated by large, mature trees. In his 1960 analysis of 
forest change, Charles Cooper quoted the account of the 
early explorer Lt. Edward Beale: "A vast forest of gigantic 
pines, intersected frequently with open glades, sprinkled all 
over with mountains, meadows, and wide savannahs, and 
covered with the richest grasses...It is the most beautiful 
region I ever remember to have seen in any part of the 
world. " 
The open forest was maintained by frequent surface fires 
sparked by the region's dry climate and intense lightning, 
with fire return intervals ranging from 2 to 12 years (Weaver 
1951a, Swetnam 1990). Mature ponderosa trees are 
well-adapted to surface fire due to their thick, insulating bark 
and clean boles (Biswell 1972). Distinct patches of trees 
existed in the grass matrix; these may have been maintained 
1 School of Forestry, Northern Arizona University, P.O. Box 15018, 
Ragstaff AZ 86011 USA. 
by occasional complete burning of dead and down logs 
killing the surrounding grass andleaving a prepared seedbed 
(White 1985). 
CHANGES SINCE SETTLEMENT 
Dramatic changes occurred rapidly upon settlement. 
Cooper (1960) and many others (e.g., Weaver 1951b, Moi. 
and Dieterich 1988, Barrett 1988, Covington and Moon: 
1992) have described these changes primarily due to the 
introduction of vast numbers of domestic animals tha, 
consumed the herbaceous understory, breaking the fuel 
continuity and effectively excluding fire from the ecosystem. 
Organized fire suppression efforts by the Forest Service 
maintained the exclusion. Without fire and herbaceous 
competition to control regeneration, dense seedling patches 
became established in forest openings. Loss of grass covel 
led to erosion and cutting of arroyos. As plant productior 
shifted from herbaceous to woody plants, deep forest floors 
of slowly-decomposing litter accumulated. Together with the 
fuel ladder created by young, dense stands, these fuels 
supported crown fires, which were previously 
unprecendented in ponderosa pine. Projecting these trends 
into the future implies continued ecosystem degradation. 
stagnant growth, and increasing susceptibility to fire, insects. 
or disease (Covington and Moore 1992). 
178  

RESTORATION PROJECT AT THE GUS  
PEARSON NATURAL AREA  
We have initiated a restoration ecology project to 
emulate, as closely as possible, the presettlement ponderosa 
pine forest structure and fire disturbance pattern. Our 
intensive study site is approximately 3 ha at the Gus Pearson 
Natural Area in the Fort Valley Experimental Forest, 15 km 
northwest of Flagstaff, Arizona This Experimental Forest . 
was the first set aside in the USA and the Natural Area has 
been preserved except for fire exclusion and an early 
management policy of cutting snags. Companion studies are 
being implemented at other sites in Arizona, Utah, and New 
Mexico. These studies are designed to establish benchmarks 
for a healthy ecosystem and maintain biodiversity within a 
cultural landscape. 
To define the current forest conditions on the site plus 
. an adjacent 1.8 ha control area, we made a complete 
inventory in 1992 of live and dead trees, downed trees, and 
stumps, recording location, diameter, species, and condition. 
Ages were determined for all presettlement trees and those 
near presettlement age, as evidenced by size, form, and the 
yellow bark color, as well as for 5% of the remaining trees. 
Figure 1 is a canopy view created by projecting crown 
dimensions from diameter (McTague 1988); it shows the 
patchy aggregations and larger size of the presettlement trees 
and the dense postsettlement clusters. Currently there are 
3098 treeslha at the site, mean diameter is 8.4 em, and basal 
area is 34.5 m21ha. 
GUS PEARSON NATURAL AREA SIUDY SITE 
Cttrenl Overslory--1992 
o 
50 
100 Wehn 
""--1 
I 
o 
100 
200 
300 reel 
I
I
I
I 
Figure 1, -
Overstory structure In 1992. 
Figure 2 shows the presettlement forest structure on the 
same site. Crown dimensions are still projected for the live 
presettlement trees, while the locations of presettlement 
snags. stumps, and downed dead trees are also indicated. We 
chose 1876 as the date of settlement because it is the last 
fire year determined by a fire history study at nearby 
Chimney Spring (Dieterich 1980). Characteristics of the 
1876 forest were estimated by measuring diameter increment 
of live presettlement trees and applying decomposition rates 
to dead trees (Cunningham et al. 1980, Rogers et al. 1984). 
Making assumptions about the date of tree deaths and taking 
the 50th percentile of all modeled rates, the estimated 1876 
forest had approximately 60 trees/ha, a mean diameter of 40 
cm, and basal area of 10 m2/ha. While estimates will vary 
depending on the modeling assumptions, these characteristics 
are 1 to 2 orders of magnitude different from those of today. 
Further refinement of the presettlement forest estimates will 
occur following planned dendrochronological analysis of 
stumps and downed trees. 
GUSPEARSON NATURAL AREA STUDY SllE 
a
0 
00-' '. U 
'
'  
0 
• °' 
~
' 
Q0° Uo 
•
0
f 
0 
..
JY) 
0 
0 
,
0 
~. 
0.. 
.. 
,() 
8'\.
• 
~ o 
',0 
0 
n..
~ cP 00 b 
c-, <O},' ':l, 
• ~ 
"
0 
~ 
, 00 
0 
<Y 
' 
~ 
t  
~G-,·o. O -
," 
& 0'0 
OQv 
o 
~ • 
c9& 
,0 
~ 0
0 
o
' 
•
0 
• 0 , 
PresetUernenl Trees, SnO'Js, SIlJT'4ls 
• 
Preseillemenl SnO'J 
Presell\emenl Deod ond Down 
Presell\emenl Sl~ 
so 
tOO 
Meters  
I
I  
100 
200 
300 
fed 
I
I
I 
Figure 2. -
Presettlement structure. 
The ecological restoration treatment to be carried out in 
1993 is designed to restore forest structure by removing most 
of the postsettlement trees and the accumulated forest floor 
material. Native grasses will be loaded on the site to provide 
continuous fuel and a seed source, then fire will be 
re-introduced at presettlement intervals. The full treatment 
will be applied on 1/3 of the total 4.8 ha site. Another third 
will receive structural restoration but with continued fire 
exclusion, and the final third will remain untreated. The 
cutting 'pattern for restoration preserves all the living 
presettlement trees and was designed to recreate the 0.125 
to 0.25 ha patches of the presettlement forest (Fule et al. 
1993, Cooper 1960). Criteria for retention of trees included 
an estimate of fire survivability and spatial relationship to 
live and dead presettlement trees. The cutting pattern is 
shown in Figure 3, where the untreated control area is in the 
northwest comer of the site. 
Baseline ecological measurements included herbaceous 
production by grasses and forbs, forest floor loading and 
bulk density, fuel loading, and soil nutrient content. These 
characteristics will be re-measured over the 20 year study. 
as well as detailed physiological examination of the response 
of presettlement trees to the thinning and burning, 
aboveground and belowground net production, and dynamics 
of nutrient and detritus processing. 
Restoring natural structures and processes to a 
ponderosa pine ecosystem offers the hope of reversing some 
of the ecological degradation observed since settlement. 
179  

GUSPEARSON NATURAL AREASTUDYSITE  
0 1l'iJ 
Restoration Treatment 
50 
100 Uele-n 
I 
I 
100 
200 
JOO f t'e't 
I 
, 
Figure 3. -
Restoration cutting pattern; control area at upper left. 
While a great deal of change has occurred and the future 
holds the possibility of global climatic alteration, an 
ecosystem under natural conditions of vitality is probably 
best equipped to meet these challenges. 
REFERENCES 
Barrett, S.W. 1988. Fire suppression's effects on forest 
succession within a central Idaho wilderness. Western : 
Journal of Applied Forestry 3:76-80. 
Biswell, H .H. 1972. Fire ecology in ponderosa 
pine-grassland. Proc. Tall Timbers Ecology Conference 
12:69-96. 
Cooper, C.F. 1960. Changes in vegetation, structure, and 
growth of southwestern ponderosa pine forests since white 
settlement. Ecological Monographs 30:129-164. 
Covington, W.W., and M.M. Moore. Postsettlement changes 
in natural fire regimes: implications for restoration of 
old-growth ponderosa pine forests. Pages 81-99 in 
Kaufmann, M.R. et al. (tech. coor.), Old-Growth Forests 
in the Southwest and Rocky Mountain Regions. 
Proceedings of a Workshop. USDA Forest Service 
General Technical Report RM-213, Rocky Mountain 
Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, CO. 
Cunningham, J.B., R.P. Balda, and W.S. Gaud. 1980. 
Selection and use of snags by secondary cavity-nesting 
birds of the ponderosa pine forest. USDA Forest Service 
Research Paper RM-222, Rocky Mountain Forest and 
Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, CO. 22 pages. 
Dieterich, J.H. 1980. Chimney Spring forest fire history. 
USDA Forest Service Research Paper RM-220, Rocky 
Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort 
Collins, CO. 8 pages. 
Fule, P.Z., M.M. Moore, and W.W. Covington. 1993. 
Scaling sample plots to estimate patch characteristics in 
southwestern ponderosa pine . Poster presentation at 
Eighth Annual U.S. Landscape Ecology Symposium, 
March 24-27, 1993, Oak Ridge, TN. 
McTague, J.P. 1988. Estimation of stand density with 
probability proportional to size from aerial 
photography. Western Journal of Applied Forestry 
3(3):89-92. 
Moir, W.H ., · and J.H. Dieterich. 1988. Old-growth 
ponderosa pine from succession in pine-bunchgrass 
forests in Arizona and New Mexico. Natural Areas 
Journal 8:17-24. 
Rogers, J.J., J.M. Prosser, L.D. Garrett, and M.G. Ryan. 
1984. ECOSIM: a system for projecting multiresource 
outputs under alternative forest management regimes. 
Administrative Report, USDA Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort 
Collins, CO. 
Swetnam, T.W. 1990. Fire history and climate in the 
southwestern United States. Pages 6-17 In Effects of Fire 
Management of Southwestern Natural Resources. 
Proceedings of the Symposium. USDA Forest Service 
General Technical Report RM-191, Rocky Mountain 
Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, CO. 
Weaver, H. 1951a. Fire as an ecological factor in the 
southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Journal of Forestry 
49:93-98. 
Weaver, H. 1951b. Observed effects ofbuming on perennial 
grasses in the ponderosa pine forests. Journal of Forestry 
49:267-271.· 
. 
White, A.S. 1985. Presettlement regeneration patterns in a 
southwestern ponderosa pine stand. Ecology 66:589-594. 
180  
