33
33
Ecological Restoration Institute 
Working Paper No. 33
The 2012 Mexican Spotted 
Owl Recovery Plan 
Guidelines for Forest 
Restoration in the American 
Southwest
June 2015

Intermountain West Frequent-Fire Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing 
native species, structural characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological 
Restoration International defines ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that 
initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity 
and sustainability … Restoration attempts to return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” 
(Society for Ecological Restoration International Science and Policy Working Group 2004).
Most frequent-fire forests throughout the Intermountain West have been degraded during 
the last 150 years. Many of these forests are now dominated by unnaturally dense thickets 
of small trees, and lack their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests 
in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing fires and increased 
insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers on reintroducing frequent, 
low-severity surface fires—often after thinning dense stands—and reestablishing productive 
understory plant communities.
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in 
researching, implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of frequent-fire forests of 
the Intermountain West. By allowing natural processes, such as low-severity fire, to resume 
self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem 
services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
This publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest 
Service. The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the author(s) 
and should not be interpreted as representing the opinions or policies of the United States 
Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products does not constitute their 
endorsement by the United States Government or the ERI.
Author: Dave Egan
Reviewers: William Block, Joseph Ganey, Shaula Hedwall, and Diane Vosick 
Series Editor: Tayloe Dubay
Cover Photo: A pair of Mexican spotted owls (Strix occidentalis lucida) rests on the branch of a tree in New 
Mexico. The Mexican spotted owl is a threatened species whose well-being and habitat must be considered 
when undertaking forest restoration projects in the American Southwest. Photo courtesy of the Los Alamos 
National Laboratory
Please use the following citation when referring to this Working Paper:
Egan, D. 2015. The 2012 Mexican Spotted Owl Recovery Plan Guidelines for Forest Restoration in the 
American Southwest. ERI Working Paper No. 33. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona 
University: Flagstaff, AZ. 11 p. 

Table of Contents
Introduction......................................................................................................................................1
2012 MSO Recovery Plan: Terms and Concepts.......................................................................2
Owl Site............................................................................................................................... 2
Nest/Roost Core Area....................................................................................................... 2
Protected Activity Center (PAC)..................................................................................... 2
Recovery Habitat............................................................................................................... 2
Ecological Management Units......................................................................................... 2
Desired Conditions: Information to Guide Management............................................ 2
Recommended Management Actions........................................................................................3
Nest/Roost Core Areas: Management Guidelines......................................................... 3
PACs Outside Core Area: Management Guidelines..................................................... 4
Recovery Habitat: Management Guidelines................................................................... 5
Other Considerations and Concerns...........................................................................................7
Other Forest Types............................................................................................................ 7
Salvage Logging................................................................................................................. 7
Canyons as MSO Habitat.................................................................................................. 8
MSO Recovery Plan and Goshawk Guidelines............................................................. 8
Research Needs.................................................................................................................. 8
Developing Treatment Prescriptions in Forested MSO Habitat............................................8
Conclusion........................................................................................................................................9
References.....................................................................................................................................11
Resources.......................................................................................................................................11

1
Ecological Restoration Institute
THE 2012 MEXICAN SPOTTED OWL RECOVERY PLAN GUIDELINES FOR 
FOREST RESTORATION IN THE AMERICAN SOUTHWEST
Summary 
Comprehensive, collaborative forest restoration 
incorporates a broad array of social, economic, legal, 
and ecological concerns in the project planning and 
implementation processes. One issue that frequently 
emerges is the need to protect and restore habitat 
for endangered and threatened wildlife species. Te 
Mexican spotted owl (Strix occidentalis lucida) is a 
threatened species whose well-being and habitat must be 
considered when undertaking forest restoration projects 
in the American Southwest.  
Tis ERI working paper provides an overview of 
the forest management guidelines found in the 2012 
Final Recovery Plan for the Mexican Spotted Owl, First 
Revision (USFWS 2012). It seeks to help land managers, 
especially silviculturalists and fuel-management 
specialists, understand how the revised recovery plan 
aﬀects forest restoration eﬀorts where project goals 
include reducing the severity and scale of wildﬁres as 
well as protecting and restoring Mexican spotted owl 
habitat. Tis working paper also updates ERI Working 
Paper 14 (James 2005), which looked at similar land 
management issues in the original 1995 Recovery Plan 
for the Mexican Spotted Owl: Vol. I (USFWS 1995). 
Introduction
Te Mexican spotted owl (MSO) is one of the iconic 
wildlife species inhabiting American Southwest forests 
(Box 1). Te federal government listed it as “threatened” 
in 1993 because, at that time, there was a real concern 
that the even-aged silvicultural practices (primarly 
shelterwood prescriptions) of federal land management 
agencies were causing a signiﬁcant decline in MSO 
habitat. Te U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) also 
cited high-severity wildﬁres as a potentially signiﬁcant 
threat to the loss of MSO habitat. 
Te FWS established the Mexican Spotted Owl 
Recovery Team in 1993, and they produced the ﬁrst 
Recovery Plan for the Mexican Spotted Owl in 1995 
(USFWS 1995). Te FWS identiﬁed and designated 
critical habitat in 1995 and again in 2001. Both 
designations were challenged in court by those who 
disagreed with the FWS about their assessment of MSO 
critical habitat (p. 1, USFWS 2001). In response to those 
legal challenges, the FWS, in 2004, designated about 8.6 
million acres of federally managed lands in Arizona, 
Colorado, New Mexico, and Utah as critical habitat for 
the MSO.
Following the publication of the 1995 MSO 
Recovery Plan, the MSO Recovery Team and other 
MSO researchers continued gathering more data about 
the MSO and its habitat throughout the Southwest. 
Using this information, the Recovery Team developed 
a revised and updated 10-year strategy, which was 
published in December 2012. Te new MSO Recovery 
Plan (FWS 2012): 1) responds to existing and new 
Box 1. Mexican spotted owl (Strix occidentalis lucida) 
Description: Medium-sized owl; 17 inches in height, 3.3-foot wingspan; large, dark eyes; no ear tufs; brown 
plumage with numerous white spots; short, horizontal bars or spots underside of tail.
Range: Currently found in disjunct areas that correspond with mountain ranges and canyon systems in Arizona, 
southern Colorado, New Mexico, western Texas, Utah, and northern Mexico. Te current distribution generally 
coincides with the historical range. 
Habitat: Older, dense-canopy mixed conifer forests, ponderosa pine-Gambel oak forests, wooded canyons, steep 
canyons; from 4,100 to 9,000 feet in elevation. Nest in live trees on existing and naturally occurring platforms, in 
snags, and in canyon wall caves. Forage in a variety of habitats: managed and unmanaged forests, mixed-conifer 
and ponderosa pine forests, pinyon-juniper woodlands, cliﬀ faces and terraces between cliﬀs, and riparian zones. 
Prey: Woodrats and other small- to medium-sized rodents are typical prey, although bats, birds, reptiles, and 
insects are also consumed.   
Territory and Home Range: Relatively high ﬁdelity to a breeding territory with most owl pairs remaining on the 
same territory from year to year. Migration limited; involves moving down slope in winter when migration does 
occur. Have a relatively large home range.
Reproduction: Sporadic breeding with extremely low clutch size, two eggs being the most common. Breeding 
in early March, eggs laid in late March or early April, eggs hatch in early May, owlets ﬂedge in early to mid-June, 
dispersal from late September into mid-October. 
Fatality: Death due to predation, starvation, accidents, disease, and parasites.
Population Trends: Unknown
Treats: High-severity, stand-replacing wildﬁre, forest management practices 
Legal Status: Treatened (58 FR 14248, March 16, 1993) 

Ecological Restoration Institute
THE 2012 MEXICAN SPOTTED OWL RECOVERY PLAN GUIDELINES FOR 
FOREST RESTORATION IN THE AMERICAN SOUTHWEST
2
threats to MSO habitat, especially high-severity, 
landscape-scale wildﬁre and harmful forest management 
practices; 2) recognizes the importance of landscape-
scale modeling and analysis; 3) provides guidelines for 
land managers working to reduce the amount of high-
severity wildﬁre in MSO habitat; and 4) speciﬁcally calls 
for monitoring and adaptive management as necessary 
measures to advance MSO protection and recovery.  
2012 MSO Recovery Plan: Terms and Concepts 
Recovery plans for endangered or threatened species 
typically contain numerous technical terms relevant 
to the overall MSO recovery process. Some of the key 
terms and concepts of the 2012 MSO Recovery Plan are 
clariﬁed below. 
Owl Site
An owl site is a place on the landscape where MSO have 
been observed nesting and/or roosting. An owl site is 
eligible for Protected Activity Center designation only if 
any of the following scenarios occur: 
“1. One daytime location (visual or auditory) of ≥1 
adult or sub-adult Mexican spotted owl(s) within 
the breeding season (March-August) 
2. Two nighttime auditory detections within 500-m 
(0.31mi) of each other during the breeding season 
(March-August), separated by at least one week 
3. Two owls of diﬀerent sexes heard on the same 
night within 500-m (0.31-mi) of each other; or 
4. Locating one or more owls hatched during that 
breeding season (young-of-the-year) prior to 1 
September.” (Box C.1, p. 259; USFWS 2012)
Nest/Roost Core Area
Te nest/roost core area is the 100-acre area immediately 
surrounding the owl site. It is the innermost part of a 
Protected Activity Center.
Protected Activity Center (PAC)
As in the 1995 recovery plan, a PAC is deﬁned as encom-
passing: “a minimum of 600 acres surrounding known 
owl nest/roost sites” (p. VIII, USFWS 2012).  Protected 
Activity Centers are the only areas of protected MSO 
habitat (FWS 2012, p. VIII). 
Te 2012 recovery plan no longer automatically 
includes areas with steep slopes (i.e., slopes greater than 40 
percent) and reserved lands (i.e., lands that have been ad-
ministratively withdrawn from commercial activities, such 
as wilderness areas or research natural areas) as protected 
MSO habitat. Tis does not mean that reserved lands and 
steep slopes cannot be included in a PAC, but rather that 
PAC designation criteria must be met ﬁrst.
 
Recovery Habitat
Recovery Habitat occurs in areas outside of PACs in 
forest types and rocky canyons used by owls for roosting, 
foraging, dispersal, and other needs. Recovery Habitat 
replaces the term, “Restricted Habitat,” which was the 
term used for the same conditions in the 1995 MSO Re-
covery Plan. Recovery Habitat is intended to: 1) provide 
protection for areas that may be used by MSO, 2) foster 
creation of roost/nest habitat, 3) provide managers with 
greater management ﬂexibility than is allowed in PACs, 
and 4) serve as sites to develop and test management 
strategies that could later be applied in PACs. 
Ecological Management Units 
To agree with current FWS guidelines (USDC NMFS 
and USDI FWS 2010), the name for the geographical 
subdivisions of the overall MSO range was changed in the 
2012 recovery plan from Recovery Units (RU) to Ecological 
Management Units (EMU). Tese EMUs include: Colorado 
Plateau (CP), Southern Rocky Mountains (SRM), Upper 
Gila Mountains (UGM), Basin and Range-West (BRW), 
and Basin and Range-East (BRE) (Figure 1; see also Table 
II.1, Fig. II.1, USFWS 2012). 
Te diﬀerences between the 1995 RUs and the 
EMUs are: 1) the Southern Rocky Mountains-Colorado 
RU and Southern Rocky Mountains-New Mexico RU 
have been combined into a single unit—SRM EMU; 2) 
the boundary between CP and SRM has been revised to 
reﬂect the ecological diﬀerences between the EMUs; 3) 
the BRE now extends into Texas to incorporate veriﬁed 
MSO sightings and potential habitat; and 4) the west-
ern part of the BRW was removed because there are no 
records of MSO sightings and a lack of known MSO 
habitat in the area.
Desired Conditions: Information to Guide Management
As deﬁned in the 2012 recovery plan, desired conditions 
are “quantitative and qualitative descriptions of forest 
and woodland conditions used by spotted owls for nest-
ing, roosting, foraging, and other needs” (p. 381, USFWS 
2012). Te status of these conditions (e.g., tree species 
composition, structure, opening, and patch sizes) is used 
to guide management and monitoring activities (see 
Tables C.2 and C.3, USFWS 2012).  
Te following is a summary of these key habitat 
variables: 
• A diversity of forest vegetation patch sizes with a 
minimum contiguous patch size of 2.5 acres with 
larger patches near the activity center, a mix of patch 
sizes toward the periphery, and between-patch hetero-
geneity. 
• Contiguous forest vegetation patches consisting of 
trees of all sizes, unevenly spaced, with interlocking 
crowns and high canopy cover. 
• Forest vegetation patches with a diversity of tree species, 
especially containing a mixture of hardwoods and shade-
tolerant species, and a diverse composition of vigorous 
native herbaceous and shrub species for prey habitat. 

3
Ecological Restoration Institute
THE 2012 MEXICAN SPOTTED OWL RECOVERY PLAN GUIDELINES FOR 
FOREST RESTORATION IN THE AMERICAN SOUTHWEST
• Openings in forest patches between 0.1-2.5 acres in 
size to provide prey habitat diversity; small openings 
in nest/roost patches with small and larger openings 
throughout the rest of the PAC. 
• A minimum canopy cover within forest stands of 40 
percent in pine-oak and 60 percent in mixed conifer 
forest types. 
• A diversity of tree sizes, with the goal of having trees 
greater than 16 inches dbh contributing the majority 
of the stand basal area. 
Recommended Management Actions 
Te revised 2012 MSO Recovery Plan describes 
numerous recommended forest management actions. 
Tey are written for diﬀerent MSO activity areas (i.e., 
nest/roost core area, PAC, forested recovery habitats, 
riparian recovery habitat). Te recommendations for 
recovery habitats are further developed for several forest 
types (i.e., pine-oak, mixed conifer, riparian). Tese 
guidelines provide managers with information about 
how to manage for the recovery of MSO habitat as well 
as how to minimize treatment eﬀects to MSO. Tere is 
also guidance about what management activities may 
occur in diﬀerent MSO habitat and forest types. Tey 
also reﬂect current knowledge about what types of 
forests provide one or more of the owl’s habitat needs for 
nesting, roosting, foraging, and dispersing.
Nest/Roost Core Areas: Management Guidelines
In forests, Mexican spotted owl nesting/roosting habitat 
is typiﬁed by several structural attributes, common in, 
but not restricted to, late-successional forests. Tese at-
tributes include high canopy cover, large trees, and other 
old-growth characteristics. Te loss of these key forest 
features limits the amount of MSO nesting/roosting 
habitat and, thus, the distribution and recovery of MSO. 
As a result, any activities within nest/roost core areas 
must be coordinated with the appropriate FWS oﬃce. 
Any proposed deviations from the recommendations/
guidelines of the 2012 recovery plan require consultation 
with the FWS through the ESA Section 7 consultation 
process. 
To insure the protection of MSO in nest/roost core 
areas, the FWS recommends no trail maintenance, 
hazardous tree removal, utility line maintenance, and/or 
road repair activities during the MSO breeding sea-
son (March 1-August 31). Low-severity, low-intensity 
prescribed burning and wildﬁre are generally acceptable 
	  
Figure 1. Map of Mexican spotted owl 
(MSO) Ecological Management Units 
(EMUs) found in Table II.1 and Figure 
II.1 of the 2012 Final Recovery Plan for 
the Mexican Spotted Owl, First Revision 
(USFWS 2012).

Ecological Restoration Institute
THE 2012 MEXICAN SPOTTED OWL RECOVERY PLAN GUIDELINES FOR 
FOREST RESTORATION IN THE AMERICAN SOUTHWEST
4
but are best implemented afer consulting with the FWS. 
Research that examines the eﬀects of speciﬁc activities 
on MSOs is encouraged, although researchers will need 
to obtain the necessary scientiﬁc permits from FWS and 
state or tribal wildlife agencies.
PACs Outside Core Area: Management Guidelines
Recognizing that situations exist where management 
is needed to maintain or enhance desired conditions 
for the MSO, the FWS provides guidance for some 
level of management activity within the 500-acre, non-
core areas of PACs. Speciﬁcally, mechanical thinning 
and prescribed ﬁre treatments, or combinations of 
both, may be used to reduce wildﬁre hazard and 
develop the desired conditions for MSO habitat (see 
desired conditions in Table C.2, FWS 2012). However, 
these activities must meet speciﬁc requirements and, 
like activities in the core areas, land managers must 
coordinate with FWS staﬀ and have the appropriate 
FWS oﬃce review their plans. Te basics of these 
requirements for PACs outside the core area (i.e., 
strategic placement of treatments, area limitation for 
mechanical thinning, seasonal restrictions, monitoring) 
are discussed below. 
Strategic Placement of Treatments within 
PACs Outside the Core Area 
Land managers need to assess the landscape-level (i.e., 
EMU-level) risk of large wildﬁres in relation to MSO 
habitat and occupancy. Te most practical method 
for making such an assessment would be to run a ﬁre 
model or use the results of an existing, but current, ﬁre 
model. Te results of this modeling will help identify 
those areas where modeling indicates a high risk of 
wildﬁre and, thus, the potential for substantial loss of 
MSO sites and habitat. Such information can then be 
used as the basis for making strategic decisions about 
the locations and schedule for mechanical treatments 
within a project area. In addition, the recovery plan sug-
gests locating and prioritizing the proposed treatments 
so as to emulate naturally occurring patterns of forest 
cover (i.e., create a mosaic of cover types and canopy 
levels) as well as minimizing impacts to MSO habitat. 
Area Limitations for Mechanical Tinning within PACs 
Outside the Core Area 
Over the 10-year course of the recovery plan, up to 20 
percent of the non-core PAC area within an EMU (e.g., 
Colorado Plateau EMU, Upper Gila Mountains EMU) 
may be treated by mechanical thinning. Since EMUs 
are extremely large, landscape-scale level management 
units, this percentage across a large landscape allows for 
the possibility of numerous smaller-scale, appropriately 
placed projects. Actual treatment placement and extent 
should be guided by ﬁre modeling, as discussed above, 
as well as by inter-agency/expert consultation. 
Tis area limitation guideline does not mean that 
20 percent of each PAC must be mechanically thinned 
or, conversely, that only 20 percent of any PAC can be 
mechanical thinned. During the project planning pro-
cess, FWS staﬀ will provide guidance about any ques-
tions relating to the 20-percent area limitation. 
Te FWS is employing this area limitation guide-
line in order to quantitatively verify that mechanical 
thinning 1) does not exceed 20 percent of the land area 
of any EMU and 2) the location and size of the pro-
posed thinning project is strategically placed in order to 
provide the best opportunity for MSO recovery across 
the EMU. Te 20-percent threshold also allows the FWS 
to monitor the eﬀects on MSO at limited treatment 
levels. Te FWS is responsible for collecting the neces-
sary information about mechanical thinning treatments 
from the land management agencies and compiling it on 
a yearly basis.
Several situations will not be “counted” by the FWS 
as part of the 20-percent total within an EMU. Tese 
include: 1) areas that burn in wildﬁres or are lost to in-
sects or disease, 2) areas treated prior to the publication 
of the 2012 MSO Recovery Plan, and 3) projects that 
were in progress prior to the publication of the 2012 
MSO Recovery Plan. 
Types of Treatments and Seasonal Restrictions 
within PACs Outside the Core Area
Te revised recovery plan provides guidelines for both 
mechanical thinning and prescribed burning, or a 
combination of both treatments, in order to reduce the 
risk of severe wildﬁre and to enhance MSO habitat. 
However, the recovery plan recommends mechanical 
thinning and/or prescribed burning only during the 
non-breeding season (September 1–February 28) un-
less oﬃcial surveys infer or conﬁrm that no breeding is 
occurring that year. Light, surface ﬁres may be allowed 
but only afer careful review by the appropriate agency 
biologist and fuel-management specialists. Mechanical 
thinning may be used whenever prescribed ﬁre alone is 
deemed insuﬃcient to reduce fuels and protect PACs. 
When possible, treatments should avoid the removal of 
hardwood trees, downed woody debris, snags, and other 
key habitat components unless such removal is compat-
ible with MSO habitat management goals.
Te recovery plan recommends that no new roads 
or construction be built in PACs. Any road or trail 
maintenance, repair, and building that occur should 
take place during the non-breeding season to minimize 
disturbance to MSOs unless non-breeding is inferred 
or conﬁrmed by surveys during the year the action is to 
take place. 
Monitoring Treatment Eﬀects within 
PACs Outside the Core Area
Te eﬀects of treatments in MSO habitat, especially 
mechanical thinning, are not well documented. Tus, 
the need for well-designed monitoring of treatment 

5
Ecological Restoration Institute
THE 2012 MEXICAN SPOTTED OWL RECOVERY PLAN GUIDELINES FOR 
FOREST RESTORATION IN THE AMERICAN SOUTHWEST
eﬀects is important. Any monitoring design should 
be developed by a scientiﬁc committee with FWS as 
the lead agency; the agency undertaking the project 
is in charge of its implementation (Table V.1., Action 
Item 3.2.2., USFWS 2012). Box C.5 in the 2012 MSO 
Recovery Plan spells out the basic monitoring questions 
and experimental design/implementation issues. Crucial 
response variables include: MSO occupancy rates, MSO 
reproductive rates, and changes in habitat conditions 
relative to desired conditions. Te monitoring design 
must be rigorous and adhere to strict quality assurance/
quality control standards. Timing of the experimental 
observations should include monitoring 1) one year 
prior to treatments, 2) once during the treatment year, 
and 3) one, three, and ﬁve years post-treatment. It would 
also include a stratiﬁed experimental design according 
to treatment type, and include no-treatment reference 
plots. Te recovery plan suggests monitoring in subsets 
of the landscape rather than in every treated PAC.  Two 
areas speciﬁcally referenced in the 2012 recovery plan 
(p. 262, FWS 2012) as having the best opportunities for 
evaluating treatment eﬀects on MSO are the Four Forest 
Restoration Initiative in Arizona and the Southern 
Sacramento Mountains Collaborative Forest Restoration 
Project in New Mexico.
Te monitoring process is fundamental to an 
adaptive management approach (i.e., results from 
monitoring will be reviewed and may result in changes 
in strategies and approaches to treatments in MSO 
habitat). Much of the monitoring work, in particular 
population and habitat monitoring, will require inter-
agency cooperation. Eﬀectiveness monitoring, however, 
is the responsibility of the appropriate land management 
agency. 
Recovery Habitat: Management Guidelines
Recovery Habitat is located outside of PACs. Tese areas 
can be managed to maintain or create a dynamic land-
scape mosaic that provides MSO with continuing op-
portunities for nesting, roosting, foraging, dispersal, and 
other needs. Within the recovery plan, Recovery Habitat 
is divided into two broad categories: Forested Recovery 
Habitat and Riparian Recovery Habitat.
Forested Recovery Habitat: Management Guidelines
Forested Recovery Habitat consists of mixed-conifer and 
pine-oak forest outside of PACs (see Box 2 for the opera-
tional deﬁnition of these forest types). Te recovery plan 
requires that land management agencies conduct both 
large- and stand-scale assessments of areas that qualify 
as Forested Recovery Habitat. Such assessments will pro-
vide data and other information necessary to prioritize 
treatment areas in order to protect and promote the well-
being of MSO habitat. 
Te recovery plan provides guidelines for two types 
of Forested Recovery Habitat: 1) nest/roost habitat and 
2) foraging/non-breeding habitat. 
Management Guidelines for Nest/Roost Areas in
Forested Recovery Habitat
Nest/roost areas in forested recovery habitat are located 
stands that have been identiﬁed as meeting or exceed-
ing the conditions needed by MSO for nesting/roosting. 
Tese conditions are typically found in forest stands with 
a relatively high BA, numerous large trees, multi-storied 
canopy, multi-aged trees, and high canopy cover as 
well as downed logs and snags (Ganey and Dick 1995). 
Maintaining and creating recovery nest/roost owl habitat 
where appropriate is the primary goal in these areas. 
Tese areas should also provide foraging opportunities 
for MSO by maintaining or creating habitat for MSO 
prey species. 
With these goals in mind, the recovery plan calls for 
managing nest/roost areas in forested recovery habitat by:
• Retaining key owl habitat elements (e.g., large trees, 
snags, large logs, hardwoods, etc.)
• Managing for nest/roost replacement habitat; em-
phasizing the need to attain nest/roost conditions as 
quickly as reasonably possible
• Retaining large (>18 inches dbh) trees
• Tinning to promote the growth of large trees
• Incorporating spatial and structural variation (e.g., 
irregular tree spacing and various stand/patch/group/
clump sizes)
• Maintaining and developing tree species diversity
• Retaining and promoting the growth of large hard-
woods (e.g., Gambel oak in ponderosa pine-oak 
forests, evergreen oaks and madrone in Madrean pine-
oak forests, and aspen in mixed-conifer forests)
• Maintaining forest conditions in stands so they do not 
fall below the minimum conditions for managing nest/
roost areas in forested recovery habitat (Table 1 of this 
document; Table C.3 in Recovery Plan, USFWS 2012).
Management treatments, such as thinning and pre-
scribed burning, are allowed in roost/nest Recovery Habitat 
areas to reduce ﬁre risks, lessen insect or disease prob-
lems, or meet other ecosystem goals. Table 1 (Table C.3 in 
Recovery Plan, USFWS 2012) provides the basic minimum 
requirements for managing nest/roost areas in Recovery 
Habitat (i.e., percentage of planning area to be managed, 
percent BA (12–18 inches), percent BA (> 18 inches), tree 
BA, density of trees greater than 18 inches dbh).
Forested Recovery Habitat Managed for Foraging/Non-
breeding Areas
Forested Recovery Habitat for foraging/non-breeding 
areas currently, or could, provide habitat for MSO forag-
ing, dispersing, and/or wintering needs. Land managers 
have considerable ﬂexibility in these areas, but should 
take care to conserve diﬃcult-to-replace habitat ele-
ments (e.g., large trees, hardwoods, coarse woody debris, 
snags). Tey should also strive to maintain conditions 
where multiple components occur in proximity to one 

Ecological Restoration Institute
THE 2012 MEXICAN SPOTTED OWL RECOVERY PLAN GUIDELINES FOR 
FOREST RESTORATION IN THE AMERICAN SOUTHWEST
6
another. More speciﬁcally, the recovery plan calls for 
management that:
• Retains and promotes the growth of additional, large 
hardwoods.
• Retains all trees greater than 24 inches dbh (i.e., the 
average diameter of MSO nest trees), unless human 
safety or property issues are paramount or where their 
removal is absolutely necessary to create a ﬁre break.
• Retains, whenever possible, MSO habitat elements 
including most hardwoods, large snags (>18 inches 
dbh), large downed logs (>18 inches dbh), trees 
greater than 18 inches dbh.
Of course, thinning and/or prescribed burning treat-
ments adequate to meet fuels and restoration management 
objectives in Recovery Habitats may result in the short-
term loss of some MSO habitat components. Such results 
are acceptable where they produce conditions that lead 
to the long-term protection and sustainability of forests 
occupied by MSOs. However, before proceeding, such 
proposed activities require Section 7 consultation with the 
FWS under the Endangered Species Act.
Riparian Habitat Recovery Areas:  
Management Guidelines
Riparian communities in the Southwest are key land-
scape components for MSO in terms of providing habitat 
for nesting, roosting, and foraging as well as being 
connectivity corridors for individual and population 
movement/dispersal. Tey have distinctive hydrologic 
and vegetative qualities (see Box 2). In terms of the 2012 
MSO Recovery Plan, Riparian Habitat Recovery Areas 
are deﬁned as: “riparian forests outside of PACs that 
could frequently be used by owls for foraging, roosting, 
daily movements, dispersal, and potentially for nesting” 
(p. 270, USFWS 2012).
Te speciﬁc management recommendations for 
Riparian Recovery Habitat suggest:
• Managing for mid- to late-seral conditions, depending 
on the site potential, so as to enhance habitat for both 
the MSO and its prey species.
• Managing for a diversity of age and size classes of 
native riparian trees and shrubs along with a diverse 
understory of native riparian herbaceous species.
• Minimizing the negative eﬀects of ungulate grazing by 
EMU(s)
Forest Type
Minimum % of 
Planning Area 
(no less than a FS 
District in size) 
Minimum 
% BA
12-18 
inches
Minimum 
% BA
> 18
inches
Minimum 
tree BA
(f2/acre)
Minimum 
density of trees 
> 18” dbh
(trees/acre)
BRE 
Mixed-conifer
20
>30
>30
145
15
CP, UGM, SRM, 
BRW 
Mixed-conifer 
25
>30
>30
120
12
CP (Mount Taylor 
and/or  Zuni Mtn. 
regions only) , 
UGM, BRW 
Pine-oak
10
>30
>30
110
12
Table 1. Basic minimum requirements for managing nest/roost areas in Recovery Habitat. This information is specific to certain EMUs and 
specific forest types (original is Table C.3 in Recovery Plan, USFWS 2012).

7
Ecological Restoration Institute
THE 2012 MEXICAN SPOTTED OWL RECOVERY PLAN GUIDELINES FOR 
FOREST RESTORATION IN THE AMERICAN SOUTHWEST
modifying the duration and/or seasonality of grazing, 
installing exclosures to protect vegetation and water 
sources, and/or modifying the number of overall graz-
ing animals.
• Avoiding new construction activities in riparian areas 
unless absolutely necessary for management purposes.
• Selectively removing trees, especially non-native veg-
etation or vegetation that might encourage or support 
stand-replacing ﬁre.
• Conserving large trees, snags, and/or large, downed logs.
Other Considerations and Concerns
Other Forest Types
Te 2012 MSO Recovery Plan does not provide speciﬁc 
guidelines for several forest and woodland community 
types that occur outside of PACs or Recovery Habitat. 
Tese include: ponderosa pine, spruce-ﬁr, pinyon-juni-
per, and aspen. 
Salvage Logging
Salvage logging (i.e., cutting/removal of dead trees due to 
a stand-replacing ﬁre, windthrow event, or insects or dis-
ease) is a signiﬁcant concern when it is proposed within 
a PAC. Land managers who are considering salvage log-
ging should have “sound ecological justiﬁcations” for this 
type of activity and their proposed actions must meet the 
intent of the recovery plan (i.e., to protect existing MSO 
nest/roost habitat and accelerate the development of 
recovery nest/roost habitat) (p. 263, USFWS 2012). Plans 
for such operations should be evaluated, in consultation 
with FWS staﬀ, on a case-speciﬁc basis. 
Te recovery plan provides the following recom-
mendations for land managers considering the possibil-
ity of a timber salvage operation:
• Before non-occupancy of MSOs is inferred, the entire 
PAC and a buﬀer extending 433 yards (400 m) from 
the PAC boundary should be surveyed for MSOs four 
Box 2. Operational Definitions of Forest Types in Recovery Habitats
Pine-oak type 
1) Any stand within the Chihuahuan pine series. 
2) Any stand within the Ponderosa pine series that meets ALL the following criteria: 
a. 
Te stand is located in the Upper Gila Mountains EMU, the Basin and Range-West EMU, or the Zuni 
Mountains or Mount Taylor regions of the Colorado Plateau EMU. 
b. 
Habitat types that feature Gambel oak or a Gambel oak phase of the habitat type. 
c. 
More than 10% of the stand BA or 20 f2/acre (4.6 m2/ha) of BA consists of Gambel oak that measures 
more than 5 inches (13 cm) in diameter at its root collar. 
3) Any stand within the Basin and Range-West EMU of any other series that meets ALL the following criteria: 
a. 
A stand where the majority of the BA is produced by yellow pine species, namely ponderosa pine, Arizona 
pine, Apache pine, or Chihuahuan pine. 
b. 
More than 10% of the stand BA or 20 f2/acre (4.6 m2/ha) of BA consists of any oak species that measures 
more than 5 inches (13 cm) in diameter at its root collar.
Mixed conifer type
Generally limited to the following series (Layser and Schubert 1979) and associated habitat types: white ﬁr, Doug-
las-ﬁr, limber pine, or blue spruce. In addition, this type includes any stand within the bristlecone pine, Engelmann 
spruce, or corkbark ﬁr series not having a majority (Eyre 1980) of BA in bristlecone pine, Engelmann spruce, 
corkbark ﬁr, or ponderosa pine, singly or in combination.
Land managers should note the following forest types are NOT considered mixed conifer forest types in the 
recovery plan: 
1) Stands that can be described as pure (Eyre 1980) for coniferous species other than Douglas-ﬁr, white ﬁr, 
southwestern white pine, limber pine, or blue spruce (i.e, Spruce-ﬁr forest type). 
2) Stands of mixed species where more than half the BA consists of quaking aspen (i.e, Quaking aspen forest 
type).
Riparian forest type
Riparian forest types are generally characterized by: 
1) Presence of riparian species (e.g., cottonwoods, maples, sycamores, or willows). 
2) Presence of larger growth forms of species found in adjacent upland community (e.g., quaking aspen, Douglas 
ﬁr, ponderosa pine). 
3) Generally higher BA, stem densities, and above-ground biomass than adjacent upland communities (Naiman 
and Décamps 1997).

Ecological Restoration Institute
THE 2012 MEXICAN SPOTTED OWL RECOVERY PLAN GUIDELINES FOR 
FOREST RESTORATION IN THE AMERICAN SOUTHWEST
8
times in a single breeding season (March 1-August 31). 
Tis survey should occur during the breeding season 
following the ﬁre or other large-scale mortality events 
and should adhere to the accepted MSO survey protocol 
(Appendix D, USFWS 2012). 
• If MSOs are living within the surveyed area, land 
managers should evaluate the extent and severity of 
the disturbance that might be caused by the pro-
posed timber salvage. In consultation with FWS staﬀ, 
they might consider potential modiﬁcations of the 
proposed actions, including reconﬁguring the PAC 
boundaries. 
• If no MSOs are detected within the surveyed area, 
Section 7 consultation should be used to evaluate the 
proposed salvage plans. 
• Salvage prescriptions should be designed to maintain 
or enhance the desired conditions described in Table 
C.2 of the recovery plan (i.e, diversity of patch sizes; 
horizontal and vertical habitat heterogeneity within 
patches; tree, shrub, and herbaceous species diversity; 
size of openings; and level of canopy cover), and to 
minimize the spread of exotic invasive species. 
• New road construction should be avoided whenever 
possible. Temporary road and skid trail construction 
should be designed and implemented to minimize 
negative eﬀects on soil integrity and natural recovery 
processes. All new and temporary roads and skid trails 
should be decommissioned and restored afer use.
 Surveys of post-wildﬁre conditions in areas where 
PACs were present before the wildﬁre are important 
due to MSO nest/roost site ﬁdelity. Moreover, wild-
ﬁres within PACs are not always detrimental to MSOs 
because ﬁres may result in habitat heterogeneity that 
beneﬁts both the MSO and its prey (Jenness and others 
2004, Bond and others 2009, Ganey and others 2014). 
In situations like this, adjustments to PAC boundaries 
are probably unnecessary and timber salvage should not 
occur. Salvage and boundary adjustments should be con-
sidered in PACs only when the disturbance is extensive 
in size and tree mortality is extensive and substantial. 
Canyons as MSO Habitat 
Whereas most of the information contained in this 
working paper focuses on the MSO as a forest-dwell-
ing species, the owl also inhabits canyonlands in the 
Southwest (see Box B.1, USFWS 2012). In fact, canyon-
land environments provide habitat for MSO in many 
areas of the Colorado Plateau EMU and the Basin and 
Range-East EMU, and to a lesser extent in other EMUs. 
Recognizing this feature of MSO distribution is espe-
cially important to land managers with the National Park 
Service and Bureau of Land Management since those 
agencies manage most canyonland MSO habitat in the 
Southwest. 
Te 2012 MSO Recovery Plan includes limited spe-
ciﬁc management recommendations for MSO in canyon-
land habitats, most of which relate to Riparian Habitat 
Recovery management strategies. 
MSO Recovery Plan and Goshawk Guidelines 
Land managers may encounter situations where both 
Mexican spotted owls and northern goshawks (Accipi-
ter gentilis) either are present or are potential inhabit-
ants in forested landscapes. In such cases, the guide-
lines of the 2012 MSO Recovery Plan supersede those 
of the USFS Goshawk Guidelines (Reynolds and others 
1992) and/or other goshawk management plans (see 
pp. 348-350 of the 2012 MSO Recovery Plan for a sum-
mary of FWS and USFS interactions on this matter). 
Stevenson (2014) provides one example of how this 
type of situation is being planned for on the Coconino 
National Forest in Arizona.
Situations may occur where a federal land manage-
ment agency determines that deviating from the recom-
mendations of the MSO Recovery Plan is unavoidable. 
For example, a USFS oﬃce may determine that some 
Recovery Plan recommendations are going to inter-
fere with an overriding resource, social, or economic 
consideration, such as a fuels-reduction project for the 
purpose of reducing the risk of high-severity ﬁre in the 
WUI. In such situations, the land management agency is, 
nevertheless, required to convene a Section 7 consulta-
tion with FWS to ensure that the agency’s programs and 
individual projects will not jeopardize the continued ex-
istence of the Mexican spotted owl or adversely modify 
its critical habitat (pp. 348-349, FWS 2012 MSO). 
Research Needs
Te 2012 Recovery Plan outlines numerous areas of re-
search that could be undertaken to better understand the 
MSO and how it may react to land management actions. 
Tese areas of research include: 1) MSO habitat and 
demography, 2) biological interactions, 3) MSO popula-
tion structure, and 4) ecosystem function (pp. 97-101, 
USFWS 2012).
 
Developing Treatment Prescriptions in Forested 
MSO Habitat
Developing treatment prescriptions for most types of 
forests is like putting together a multi-dimensional 
puzzle. It requires signiﬁcant amounts of time, energy, 
research and expertise. It also depends on asking the 
right questions at the very beginning of the process 
and having the support and guidance of knowledgeable 
colleagues all along the way. Incorporating the 
recommendations of the 2012 MSO Recovery Plan adds 
yet another level to solving the puzzle, and requires close 
collaboration and consultation with FWS personnel.
A good place to start is to understand what is 
already known and to review the available data. Such 
eﬀorts typically include: 
• Review and analysis of existing agency data and his-
torical information about the project area (e.g., project 

9
Ecological Restoration Institute
THE 2012 MEXICAN SPOTTED OWL RECOVERY PLAN GUIDELINES FOR 
FOREST RESTORATION IN THE AMERICAN SOUTHWEST
area survey, Common Stand Exam data, Terrestrial 
Ecosystem Surveys) and/or collect new data when 
necessary.
• Review and analysis of scientiﬁc literature pertinent to 
the MSO and the proposed project
• Obtain and analyze the results of vegetation and ﬁre 
ecology modeling (e.g., FVS, LANDFIRE) or other ap-
propriate models for the project area and surrounding 
landscape. 
Afer reviewing existing information and the 2012 
MSO Recovery Plan management recommendations, 
deciding on a list of pertinent questions will help set 
the stage for developing prescription goals, objectives, 
and alternative strategies. A list of questions pertinent 
to including MSO Recovery Plan recommendations in a 
treatment prescription might include:
• How would treatments move vegetation structure 
toward the desired conditions by creating a mosaic of 
openings and tree groups of varying sizes? 
• How would treatments improve the project area in 
terms of creating a diverse forest structure with all age 
and size classes represented as identiﬁed in the 2012 
MSO Recovery Plan and other federal agency plan-
ning documents? 
• Where should treatments be located on the landscape 
to achieve the maximum reduction in ﬁre risk possible 
given treatment extent? 
• Where are old-age trees located and how would treat-
ments sustain them over time and across the land-
scape? 
• How would treatments meet the goal of increasing the 
amount of old-growth forest structure and wildlife 
species habitat? 
• How would treatments improve forest health (e.g., 
reduce the potential for stand-replacing wildﬁre, the 
likelihood of widespread bark beetle infestations, and 
the level of dwarf mistletoe)? 
• How would treatments move toward desired condi-
tions for vegetation diversity and composition? 
• Which, if any, areas within the proposed project area 
are naturally ﬁre-resistant?
• Are there any previously treated areas in the project 
area that have the potential to be MSO habitat? 
While each silvicultural prescription reﬂects the spe-
ciﬁc details of the project area as well as its inhabitants and 
surrounding landscapes, there are a few examples of the 
kind of organizational tools and results that may improve 
and explain the process (see Figures 2 and 3).
Finally, collaboration with professional colleagues 
and peers is key to the overall success of writing a 
treatment prescription that will be accepted by both 
agency and public reviewers. Land managers who 
write treatment prescriptions are encouraged to work 
closely with their agency’s wildlife specialists and fuels 
specialists as well as personnel from the FWS who 
have expertise in MSO-related matters (A. Stevenson, 
pers. comm.).   
Conclusion
Te goal of protecting and restoring MSO habitat in 
southwestern forests is a challenging and ambitious 
one. Te current 2012 MSO Recovery Plan is an 
important step in that direction. To do so, agency staﬀ 
and other interested parties need to: 1) identify and 
protect existing MSO habitat, 2) manage existing and 
future threats to MSO habitat; 3) learn how to manage 
forests for present and future MSO, 4) eﬀectively fund 
and implement monitoring/research of MSO habitats, 
and 5) build socio-economic partnerships to facilitate 
this process.
Several key points are pertinent to everyone, in 
particular to land managers, involved in the planning 
and implementation process:
Habitat
Project 
Site
Cover 
Type
Basal 
Area
Avg. Percent 
of Basal Area 
by Size Class
12–18”
Avg. Percent 
of Basal Area 
by Size Class 
>18”
Avg. TPA 
18”+
Avg. Gambel 
Oak BA 
Percent of 
Total BA
Tons 
CWD
Snags 
>18”
MSO PAC 
Habitat – Nest 
Core 
MSO PAC 
Habitat 
Recovery 
Habitat – 
Nest/Roost
Recovery 
Habitat-For-
aging Non-
Breeding
Figure 2. An example of a table for identifying and displaying the various planning areas, structural attributes, and habitat components 
outlined in the 2012 MSO Recovery Plan (adapted from Stevenson 2012).

Ecological Restoration Institute
THE 2012 MEXICAN SPOTTED OWL RECOVERY PLAN GUIDELINES FOR 
FOREST RESTORATION IN THE AMERICAN SOUTHWEST
10
• Our knowledge base about forest treatment eﬀects on 
MSO survival and behavior is minimal.
• Cautious action is necessary to protect MSO and ex-
pand our knowledge base.
• Te results of actual treatment activities should be 
monitored, eﬀectively documented, and made avail-
able to land managers, researchers, and the general 
public. 
• Landscape-level assessments are a necessary part of 
the process; land managers are encouraged to work 
from landscape-scale to stand-scale analysis and plan-
ning before taking action.
• While there are guidelines and recommendations, 
there is no single management approach; each project 
is a real-life experiment that will require inter-agency 
collaboration.
• Rigorous monitoring is key; adaptive management 
must be employed as new information and experi-
ences become available. 
Contacting the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Te U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) encourages 
federal agencies and consultants to coordinate the review 
of all section 7 consultations under the Endangered Spe-
cies Act with the Arizona Game and Fish Department. 
Visit the USFWS Southwest Region’s Treatened and En-
dangered Species web page (http://www.fws.gov/southwest 
/es/arizona/Treatened.htm) for more information.
For a list of USFWS Ecological Services Field Oﬃces 
and areas of responsibility by state, visit http://www.fws.
gov/southwest/es/FieldOﬃces.html. 
Acknowledgments
Te Ecological Restoration Institute would like to 
thank members of the Mexican Spotted Owl Recovery 
Team for their assistance in developing this paper and 
their thorough review of its content. Our appreciation 
goes to Bill Block (USFS Rocky Mountain Research 
Station), Joseph Ganey (USFS), and Shaula Hedwall 
(U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service). Te ERI would also like 
to thank Andy Stevenson, USFS silviculturalist, for his 
contributions to the paper.
Mixed-Conifer
Pine Oak
Other forest-
woodland types
Protected Activity 
Center (PAC)
Nest/Roost Core
Example Treatment
Figure 3. A bird’s-eye view of a possible thinning treatment in Mexican spotted owl habitat. The 100-acre nest/roost cores and their surrounding PAC 
areas are situated in a matrix of mixed conifer, pine-oak forest, and other forest-woodland types. Treatments are located on the southwest side of 
cores and PACs to help reduce the potential of wildfire reaching them on prevailing southwesterly winds. (Adapted from a presentation by Hedwall 
and Block to the Southwest Fire Science Consortium (2013).)

11
Ecological Restoration Institute
THE 2012 MEXICAN SPOTTED OWL RECOVERY PLAN GUIDELINES FOR 
FOREST RESTORATION IN THE AMERICAN SOUTHWEST
References
Bond, M.L., D.E. Lee, R.B. Siegel, and J.P. Ward, Jr. 2009. Habitat use 
and selection by California spotted owls in a postﬁre landscape. 
Journal of Wildlife Management 73:1116-1124.
Eyre, F.H. 1980. Forest cover types of the United States and Canada. 
Bethesda, MD: Society of American Foresters.
Ganey, J.L. and J.A. Dick. 1995. Chapter 4: Habitat relationships of 
Mexican spotted owls: current knowledge. Pp. 1-42 in Recovery 
plan for the Mexican spotted owl (Strix occidentalis lucida), 
Volume II. USDI Fish and Wildlife Service, Albuquerque, New 
Mexico, USA. Available from: http://mso.fws.gov/recovery-plan.
htm.
Ganey, J.L., S.C. Kyle, T.A. Rawlinson, D.L. Apprill, and J.P. Ward, 
Jr. 2014. Relative abundance of small mammals in nest core 
areas and burned wintering areas of Mexican Spotted Owls in 
the Sacramento Mountains, New Mexico. Te Wilson Journal of 
Ornithology 126(1):47-52.
James, M.A. 2005. Integrating forest restoration treatments with 
Mexican spotted owl habitat needs. Ecological Restoration 
Institute, Working Paper 14. Flagstaﬀ, AZ: Ecological Restoration 
Institute. http://library.eri.nau.edu/gsdl/collect/erilibra/index/
assoc/HASH014f.dir/doc.pdf
Jenness, J.S., P. Beier, and J.L. Ganey. 2004. Associations between forest 
ﬁre and Mexican spotted owls. Forest Science. 50:765-772.
Layser, E.F. and G.H. Schubert. 1979. Preliminary classiﬁcation for the 
coniferous forest and woodland series of Arizona and New Mexico. 
USDA Forest Service, Research Paper, RM-208. Fort Collins, CO: 
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station.
Naiman, R.J. and H. Decamps. 1997. Te ecology of interfaces: riparian 
zones. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 28:621-658.
Reynolds, R.T., R.T. Graham, M.H, Reiser, R.L. Bassett, P.L. Kennedy, 
D.A. Boyce, Jr., G. Goodwin, R. Smith, and E.L. Fisher. 1992. 
Management recommendations for the northern goshawk in the 
southwestern United States. Gen. Tech. Report RM-GTR-217. Fort 
Collins, CO: USDA, U.S. Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest 
and Range Experiment Station.
Southwest Fire Science Consortium. 2013. Webinar presentation 
by William M. Block (USFS) and Shaula Hedwall (FWS) about 
MSO recovery plans (1995, 2012). February 19, 2013. http://
www.frames.gov/documents/southwest/consortium/SWFSC_
webinar_20130219_MexicanSpottedOwl.mp4
Stevenson, A. 2014. Flagstaﬀ Watershed Protection Project: Silviculture 
Report. Flagstaﬀ, AZ: U.S. Forest Service, Flagstaﬀ Ranger District, 
Coconino National Forest. http://a123.g.akamai.net/7/123/11558/
abc123/forestservic.download.akamai.com/11558/www/
nepa/92331_FSPLT3_2066867.pdf
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). 2012. Final Recovery Plan for 
the Mexican Spotted Owl, ﬁrst revision. Albuquerque, NM: USDI, 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. http://www.fws.gov/southwest/ES/
Documents/R2ES/MSO_Recovery_Plan_First_Revision_Dec2012.
pdf
___. 2001. Environmental Assessment: Designation of Critical Habitat 
for the Mexican Spotted Owl. Albuquerque, NM: USDI, U.S. Fish 
and Wildlife Service. http://digitalmedia.fws.gov/cdm/singleitem/
collection/document/id/2040/rec/2
___. 1995. Recovery Plan for the Mexican Spotted Owl: Vol. I. 
Albuquerque, NM: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. http://www.fws.
gov/southwest/ES/Documents/R2ES/MSO_Recovery_Plan.pdf
Resources
Fire eﬀects on Mexican spotted owl: Is the sky really falling? Video 
of presentation by William M. Block (USFS) March, 2012 at the 
Southwest Fire Ecology Conference in Santa Fe, NM. https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=hRJl3rGyVws&feature=plcp 
Mexican Spotted Owl Recovery Plan Calls for Expanded Tinning to 
Restore Habitat, Reduce Severe Fire Risk, by April Reese, published 
June 24, 2011 in the New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/
gwire/2011/06/24/24greenwire-mexican-spotted-owl-recovery-
plan-calls-for-ex-24176.html?pagewanted=all
Programmatic Biological and Conference Opinion: Te Continued 
Implementation of the Land and Resource Management Plans 
for the Eleven National Forests and National Grasslands of the 
Southwestern Region, prepared by FWS Regional Oﬃce, Region 2, 
Cons. #2-22-03-F-366, June 10, 2005, pp. 131-179.  
www.biologicaldiversity.org/programs/public_lands/forests/pdfs/
BO_20050610_FS_LRMP.pdf
Ecology of the Mexican spotted owl: Projects, Recovery planning, 
Partners & cooperators, People, Selected publications. Web site 
developed by the USFS/RMRS. http://www.fs.fed.us/rm/wildlife-
terrestrial/mexican-spotted-owl/

For more information about forest restoration, contact the ERI at (928) 523-7182  or nau.edu/eri.
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution   
This report was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.
 NAU Printing Services/77531/300/06-14
 
Working Papers in Intermountain West Frequent-Fire Forest Restoration
1: 
Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons  and Adaptive Management Practices
2: 
Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3: 
Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
4: 
Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits
5: 
Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
6: 
Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
7: 
Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
8: 
Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
9: 
Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
10: The Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Restoration Model
11: Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration
12: Restoring Forest Roads
13: Treating Slash after Restoration Thinning
14: Integrating Forest Restoration Treatments with Mexican Spotted Owl Habitat Needs
15: Effects of Forest Thinning Treatments on Fire Behavior
16: Snags and Forest Restoration  
17: Bat Habitat and Forest Restoration Treatments
18: Prescribed and Wildland Use Fires in the Southwest: Do Timing and Frequency Matter? 
19: Understory Seeding in Southwestern Forests Following Wildfire and Ecological Restoration Treatments
20: Controlling Cheatgrass in Ponderosa Pine and Pinyon-Juniper Restoration Areas 
21: Managing Coarse Woody Debris in Frequent-fire Southwestern Forests
22: Restoring Spatial Pattern to Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
23: Guidelines for Managing Small Mammals in Restored Ponderosa Pine Forests of Northern Arizona
24: Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Burning 
25: Strategies for Enhancing and Restoring Rare Plants and Their Habitats in the Face of Climate Change and Habitat Destruction 
in the Intermountain West
26: Wildlife Habitat Values and Forest Structure in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine: Implications for Restoration
27: Fuel Treatment Longevity
28: Southwestern Mixed-Conifer Forests: Evaluating Reference Conditions to Guide Ecological Restoration Treatments
29:  Post-Wildfire Restoration of Structure, Composition, and Function in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine and Warm/Dry Mixed-
Conifer Forests
30: Impact of Forest Restoration Treatments on Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Tree Resistance to Bark Beetles
31: Climate Change Impacts on Bark Beetle Outbreaks and the Impact of Outbreaks on Subsequent Fires
32. An Evaluation of Fire Regime Reconstruction Methods

Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
nau.edu/eri
