 
 
ERI is the grant leader at NAU 
07/31/2002 
If Wallace Covington has his way, the Ecological Restoration Institute at NAU will 
continue to gain prominence in the forest restoration debate and reap the benefits, in 
federal and private funds, to fuel its research and programs.  
Covington has degrees from Yale and the University of New Mexico and has taught 
courses in forest management, fire ecology, wildlife management and, of course, 
ecological restoration for 27 years.  
Elements of forest restoration became part of NAU's forestry program under Covington 
since the late 1970s. Ecological restoration became an NAU department in 1996 and 
three years later the Arizona Board of Regents formally approved creation of the 
Ecological Restoration Institute.  
ERI lands more federal and private grants than any other NAU department, said 
Covington. The institute has 58 employees and 42 undergraduate and graduate students 
on the payroll.  
ERI also employs nearly three dozen NAU faculty members during the summer.  
ERI says its operating budget is funded by an average of $3.5 million in federal grants 
and other funds received each year. In its first year, ERI landed a whopping $8.8 million 
in federal funds.  
About half of the money ERI and Covington brings in goes to NAU, with the rest used to 
fund research, pay for salaries and reimburse partners in Flagstaff-area thinning projects 
such as the Flagstaff Fire Department.  
ERI shares research and information with federal, state and county land managers as well 
as communities and academics via its Web site and publications.  
Covington is working with Kyl and U.S. Rep. J.D. Hayworth (R-Cave Creek) to obtain 
federal funding to jump-start institutes like ERI in Colorado and New Mexico, where vast 
ponderosa pine forests face an uncertain future and scientific research can help federal, 
tribal and state land managers.  
"I really do feel there should be institutes in each of those states. I've been working 
closely with folks there and to some extent in Montana and Idaho. I think it would be 
very valuable for each state to have academics engaged in their natural resource policy," 
he said.  
-- Gary Ghiotto 
 
