The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Forest Density Preferences of Homeowners in  
the Wildland-Urban Interface 
 
By Evan Hjerpe, Executive Director, Conservation Economics Institute and Yeon-Su Kim, Professor of Ecological  
Economics, Northern Arizona University 
Introduction 
Wildfire management costs in the Western U.S. have skyrocketed over the past two decades, from $1 billion to 
more than $3 billion annually, due to an increase in the number and size of wildfires combined with rapid residen-
tial development of wildland urban interfaces (WUIs) surrounding western communities. The expansion of west-
ern WUIs is driven by increasing demand for homes in dry western forests. Millions of potential WUI acres re-
main available for future development. Arid western forests offer amenities, in terms of shade, cooling effects, 
and aesthetics, but also come with disamenities such as high wildfire risk. With little empirical evidence of how 
forest density and associated wildfire risk are incorporated into WUI house prices, we investigated the level of 
surrounding tree density as a possible explanatory influence on sales prices in four fire-prone western WUIs.  
 
Methods 
 We estimated a spatial hedonic pricing model for 418 home sales in four WUI areas surrounding Flagstaff, 
AZ; S. Lake Tahoe, CA; Missoula, MT; and Bend, OR.   
 Potential explanatory variables included attributes of each house including structural, neighborhood, environ-
mental, and wildfire risk characteristics.  
 Forest density levels surrounding WUI homes at both 100-meter (109-
yard) radius and 500-meter (547-yard) radius levels were broken down 
into low, medium, and high levels for each WUI and analyzed as aggre-
gate dummy variables to determine any relative influence of forest den-
sity. 
 Implicit prices were calculated for marginal willingness to pay for all 
significant attributes.  
 
Results 
In addition to traditional house measures such as size, number of bathrooms, 
and lot area, forest density categories were found to significantly influence 
WUI house prices. Results include:  
 In the more immediate forest surrounding WUI houses (100-meter (109-
yard) radius level), WUI homebuyers have a preference for lower forest 
density.  
 In the larger surrounding vicinity of WUI houses (500-meter (547-yard) 
radius level), higher forest density was preferred.  
 Newer, or more recently built, WUI houses were associated with higher 
surrounding forest density levels.  
 
June 2016 
Arid western forests offer amenities, 
but also come with disamenities such 
as high wildfire risk. Photo by Kari 
Greer, courtesy of the U.S. Forest Ser-
vice 

Policy Application 
 WUI homebuyer’s preference for lower forest 
density immediately surrounding homes is a 
positive sign that house prices are beginning to 
reflect the added value of reduced fire risk, 
whether that be from naturally less dense forests 
or from the creation of defensible space with 
fuels treatments and forest restoration. In close 
proximity to homes, forest density in fire-prone, 
dry-mixed conifer western forests is expressed as 
a net disamenity.  
 
 The preference for higher forest density at the 
broader surrounding scale is likely an indica-
tion of the attractiveness of dense western forests 
in terms of cooling effects, aesthetics, and recrea-
tion where forest density is valued as a net amen-
ity. But this preference is also likely due to subsi-
dized federal fire management and underestimat-
ed fire risk. Without full information and without 
full accountability, markets are skewed toward 
dangerous and socially expensive WUI develop-
ment.  
 
 Current incentives to locate in high wildfire risk areas are contributing to rapid, and often times, un-
strategic expansion of the WUI. One way to address rising WUI fire management costs is to explicitly in-
clude local fire management costs in any new WUI development. Our research indicates that new WUI 
development is being relegated to the most at-risk areas and that there are market premiums for high fire 
risk areas that can be captured by county and municipal governments in order to provide for greater 
local fire management efforts in terms of both fire suppression and prevention (i.e., fuels treatments and 
forest restoration) in new WUI developments and adjacent public lands.  
 
 Including fire management costs at the onset of WUI development will be a critical means to address 
this new growth. All new WUI development can be accompanied with wildfire risk assessments and 
developers and new WUI homebuyers can contribute a percentage of assessed home and property value, 
according to their assigned fire risk level, to a fire management fund above and beyond current county and 
overlapping municipal fire and emergency response fees. Implementing cost-share agreements between 
regional governments and federal management agencies can help coordinate and leverage collected pri-
vate wildfire funds with federal fire management funds. Collecting fire management funds from new WUI 
developments in the beginning, based on fire risk levels, would ensure greater private contributions to 
fire management and would provide incentives for not locating in the highest fire risk areas and for reduc-
ing current forest density and fuel levels. With escalating wildfire risk and WUI expansion guaranteed in 
the future, new policy applications that can limit and evenly distribute the cost of fire management are par-
amount. 
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
Hjerpe, E.E., Y.S. Kim, and L. Dunn. 2016. Forest density preferences of homebuyers in the wildland-urban 
interface. Forest Policy and Economics, 70: 56–66.  
 
Contact: Yeon-Su Kim, yeon-su.kim@nau.edu; Evan Hjerpe, evan@conservationecon.org 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
The 2012 Waldo Canyon Fire destroyed approximately 346 
homes, including several homes in this neighborhood near Colo-
rado Springs, Colorado. The Waldo Canyon Fire forced the evac-
uation of 32,000 residents and burned 18,247 acres. Photo by 
Kari Greer, courtesy of the U.S. Forest Service  
