
Ecological Restoration Institute
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928/523-7182, FAX 928/523-0296, www.eri.nau.edu 
The Effects of Restoration Thinning on Small Mammals and their Predators 
Introduction 
Small mammals perform several important ecosystem functions, including increasing soil aeration, dispersing seeds 
and mycorrhizal fungi, regulating vegetation abundance and composition, and serving as prey for predators. While 
wildlife ecologists know that small mammal densities often fluctuate in response to disturbances in their environ-
ment, there is little understanding about disturbance impacts to the functional roles of these animals. We assessed the 
effects of restoration thinning treatments by examining responses of the small mammal community before and after 
treatment, and compared to natural conditions (i.e., those that existed prior to Euro-American settlement), in ponder-
osa pine forests in northern Arizona. In addition to comparing individual species densities (compositional changes) 
after treatment, we evaluated their total density and biomass, which are indicators of the amount of prey available to 
predators. We also measured ectomycorrhizal spore content in small mammal feces, an indication of fungi dispersion 
potential. Thus, we attempted to understand the implications of restoration thinning to both small mammal commu-
nity composition and function.  
 
Research Findings 
We were able to trap eight species (all rodents; miss-
ing only shrews and rabbits) of small mammals on 
the Coconino National Forest in Arizona from 2006–
2009, at 279 sites. We evaluated species densities in 
stands that were 1) dense, 2) one to six years post-
thinning, and 3) reference stands that were open 
(meadow-like) similar to natural conditions. Our 
findings were as follows: 
 
 
Small mammal community composition differed 
in each of six years following treatment, with 
individual species responding differently to 
changes in habitat (Fig. 1).  
 
 
Total animal density and biomass remained con-
stant after thinning and was similar to open sites, 
indicating that the functional role of small mam-
mals as prey is restored after treatment.  
 
 
Three species that decreased in density after 
thinning (Mexican woodrat, tassel-eared squir-
rel, Botta’s pocket gopher) reached their highest 
densities at reference stands, suggesting that if 
restoration treatments can achieve this desired 
endpoint, it will benefit these species despite 
short-term losses.   
    Fact Sheet: Restoration Effects on Small Mammals and their Predators        September 2012     
 
Figure 1. Densities of each small mammal species averaged over each 
year since restoration treatment. “Dense” were not thinned, 1-6 indi-
cate years since thinning treatment, and “open” were meadow-like.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To determine how thinning and prey density affected predator occurrence, we assessed relationships be-
tween predator occupancy (defined as the probability that a given site is occupied by the species) and the 
density of small mammals we found in the study. We did this assessment across a range of tree stocking 
levels (basal area of 45–280 ft2/ac), which is representative of the historical range of variability with re-
spect to forest density. We sampled 33 sites for two weeks each in order to detect presence of predators 
using two techniques: 1) baited track plates and 2) motion sensor cameras (Fig. 2). Our results were as fol-
lows: 
 
 We successfully modeled occupancy and detection rates for gray fox (Urocyon cinereoargenteus), 
coyote (Canis latrans), and raccoon (Procyon lotor). 
 Gray fox was the most common of these predators. 
 Restoration thinning may have a positive influence on gray fox and coyote occupancy, but a negative 
influence on raccoon occupancy (see Barrett et al. 2012 for analysis).  
 Predator occupancy was unaffected by prey density, although our ability to assess the impacts of 
thinning and prey was limited by the small sample size. 
 
Management Implications 
Our results indicate that the small mammal community continues to perform important ecosystem func-
tions following restoration treatments (six years post-treatment); however, more research is needed to un-
derstand the impacts of treatments in the long term, particularly to predators of small mammals.  
 
 
 
 
   
 
Contact 
 
Steve Rosenstock, Steve.Rosenstock@nau.edu  
 
 
This Fact Sheet summarizes information from the following publications: 
Kalies, Elizabeth L., and W. Wallace Covington. 2012. Small mammal community maintains stability 
through compensatory dynamics after restoration of a ponderosa pine forest. Ecosphere 3:art78. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1890/ES12-00143.1  
 
Barrett, K.J., E.L. Kalies, and C.L. Chambers. 2012. Predator occupancy rates in a thinned ponderosa 
pine forest, Arizona: a pilot study. Wildlife Society Bulletin 36(2): 232-239. 
 
Figure 2. Photos of predators taken with motion-sensitive cameras at baited sites in ponderosa pine forest. The left photo 
shows a fox (probability of occupancy = 1.44 ± 0.14), the right a coyote (0.16 ± 0.09). Raccoons were only detected via 
track plates (0.11 ± 0.06). 
