 
Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to reversing declines in the condition of forested communities throughout the Intermoun-
tain West, particularly those affected by severe wildfires and insect outbreaks.  Our efforts focus on science-based research of ecological 
and socio-economic matters related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach, and education. 
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928/523-7182, FAX 928/523-0296, www.eri.nau.edu 
Survey of Monitoring and Management Activities for Conserving Rare Plants in  
National Parks and Protected Areas (Arizona and Nevada) 
Introduction 
Plant species are typically rare due to human activities such as habitat destruction, 
overharvesting, and introduction of exotic species. These specialized habitat require-
ments restrict the species to small portions of the landscape or combinations of both 
(Kruckeberg and Rabinowitz 1985). Protected areas such as national parks frequently 
are refugia for rare species. However, even when protected from wholesale habitat de-
struction due to construction or land development, habitat in these protected areas is 
threatened by many of the same factors such as climate change, fire-regime disruption, 
and exotic species encroachment (Falk et al. 1996). Monitoring rare species is essential 
for understanding status and trends of their populations and whether further research or 
active management intervention is needed to protect populations from threats. This 
study focused on monitoring and management activities being undertaken to conserve 
rare plant species. The purpose was to synthesize the status of monitoring and manage-
ment actions ongoing in the states of Arizona and Nevada aimed at conserving popula-
tions of rare plant species. To accomplish this, land managers responsible for managing 
rare plant populations were surveyed, and their responses on activities being undertak-
en on lands overseen by these managers were compiled. 
 
Survey Findings 
 
The amount of land managed by respondents was 32 million acres in Arizona and 59 million acres in Nevada (53% 
of public lands in Arizona and greater than 80% in Nevada).  
 
 
Employees assigned to work with rare plants on public lands often divide their time between invasive plant manage-
ment, revegetation, and ecological restoration, to name a few; and less frequently spend time on wildlife and haz-
ardous waste management issues.  
 
 
Seventy-one percent of respondents spend greater than 50% of their time working on rare plant issues, but 24% re-
ported spending less than 10% of their time working with rare plants, due to competing priorities. 
 
 
Forty-three percent of survey respondents believe that currently implemented monitoring strategies and conserva-
tion measures are inadequate for protecting all of the rare plants at a given site, and 34% believe they are sufficient. 
The reasons most often cited for inadequate monitoring were lack of available personnel (53%) and insufficient 
funding (34%).  
 
 
Some type of rare plant monitoring is being conducted in 69% of the protected areas. The most commonly reported 
methods are inventories and monitoring that account for presence or absence of rare species (29%), followed by 
demographic or phenologic studies (24%), monitoring for abundance (22%), and mapping (4%). 
 
 
Management actions can include both passive activities such as protection of habitat or safeguarding from disturb-
ance, as well as active operations, such as eradicating weeds or building fences. Thirty-four percent of respondents 
reported that passive management is the primary strategy used. 
 
    Fact Sheet: Conserving Rare Plants in National Parks and Protected Areas         July 2012     
Sclerocactus sileri (Siler fishhook  
cactus). Photo by Wendi Hodgson. 

 The most widely performed rare plant conservation and management efforts include mitigation to replace habitat lost 
to construction as well as building fences to protect plants from trampling by animals or humans (both listed at 31%). 
Invasive plant eradication is conducted by 20% of respondents. Reintroduction and transplant measures for rare plants 
are carried out by 14% of land managers, and closure to off-road vehicles (ORVs) was reported by 9%. 
 
 Eighty-one percent of management actions are being monitored in some form, although at times only rarely or infre-
quently. In the majority of cases (61%), a decline was not detected in the rare species being monitored. Declines over 
time have been noted in eight species. Management actions, such as fence construction, increases in the size of buffer 
zones, and prevention of disturbance, have been undertaken to attempt to reverse declines in five of these species, and 
the decline appears to have been reversed in three species. 
 
 Attempts to establish species on unoccupied but seemingly suitable habitat was reported by 11% of managers. Four 
respondents attempted to actively establish five rare plant species at unoccupied sites, and two more have plans to do 
so. Of the five species, two were successfully established at new sites and three of the attempts were unsuccessful.  
 
Management Implications 
References 
Falk, D.A., Millar, C.I., and Olwell, M. (Eds.). 1996. Restoring diversity: strategies for reintroduction of endangered 
plants. Washington, D.C.: Island Press. 
 
Kruckeberg, A.R., and Rabinowitz, D. 1985. Biological aspects of endemism in higher plants. Annual Review of Ecology 
and Systematics 16, pp. 447-479. 
 
 
 
   
 
Contacts 
Judy Springer, Judy.Springer@nau.edu  
Dr. Scott Abella, Scott.Abella@unlv.edu  
 
 
This Fact Sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
Springer, J.D., Abella, S.R., and DeKoker, T.R. 2011. A Survey of Monitoring and Management Activities for 
Conserving Rare Plants in National Parks and Protected Areas, Arizona and Nevada, USA. In: Advances in 
Environmental Research. Volume 8, Edited by Justin A. Daniels. Nova Science Publishers, pp. 307-317. 
The four greatest threats to rare plants across Arizona and Neva-
da noted by respondents of the survey are herbivory and tram-
pling by animals, invasive exotic plant species, ORV use, and 
fire suppression or fire regime disruption (Table 1). The impacts 
of these threats on rare plants are often easily observable. In 
some cases they may be reversible, or at least manageable to 
some degree, if funding is available. On the other hand, effects 
of climate change (listed as a threat by 9%) are not as easily ob-
served or managed and therefore may be under the radar for 
many of the respondents; and therefore could pose a much great-
er threat than it would appear based on these survey results. 
While many land management agencies have expended efforts 
to inventory and monitor rare plant resources, some state and 
federal land managers still have little to no idea of the rare 
plants that exist on the land they manage. This is due mainly to 
the vast amount of public land in these two states, insufficient 
training in plant identification, and a shortage of human and fi-
nancial resources to carry out monitoring efforts. With 43% of 
managers believing that current strategies are insufficient for 
protecting rare plants coupled with more than 17 threats to rare 
plants identified in these two states, the data suggest that active 
management of rare plant populations could be investigated in 
more situations than currently practiced. 
Table 1. Threats to rare species noted by land managers in Arizona 
and Nevada. Percentages given were the proportion of respondents 
who listed each threat. 
 
Threat 
 
% 
Herbivory and/or trampling by animals 
51 
Exotic plant species 
49 
Off-road vehicle (ORV) use 
26 
Fire suppression or fire regime disruption 
20 
Tree encroachment 
11 
Global climate change 
 9 
Drought 
 9 
Unmanaged recreation (non ORV) 
 9 
Hydrologic regime disruption 
 9 
Illegal border activity and border patrol  
impacts 
 9 
Fire regime disruption from exotic plant  
species 
 6 
Mineral exploration 
 3 
Overharvesting (ethnobotanical) 
 3 
Landscape fragmentation 
 3 
Insect outbreaks 
 3 
Erosion 
 3 
Urbanization 
 3 
