Recommendations for Integrating Restoration
Ecology and Conservation Biology in
Ponderosa Pine Forests of the
Southwestern United States
Reed F. Noss,1,8 Paul Beier,2 W. Wallace Covington,3 R. Edward Grumbine,4
David B. Lindenmayer,5 John W. Prather,6 Fiona Schmiegelow,7
Thomas D. Sisk,6 and Diane J. Vosick3
Abstract
Over the past century, ponderosa pine–dominated land-
scapes of the southwestern United States have been
altered by human activities such as grazing, timber har-
vest, road building, and ﬁre exclusion. Most forested areas
within these landscapes now show increased susceptibility
to stand-replacing ﬁres, insect outbreaks, and drought-
related mortality. Recent large wildﬁres in the region have
spurred public interest in large-scale fuel reduction and
restoration programs, which create perceived and real
conﬂicts with the conservation of biodiversity. Conserva-
tion concerns include the potential for larger road net-
works, soil and understory disturbance, exotic plant
invasion, and the removal of large trees in treated areas.
Pursuing prescribed burning, thinning, or other treat-
ments on the broad scale that many scientists and manag-
ers envision requires the reconciliation of ecological
restoration with biodiversity conservation. This study
presents recommendations from a workshop for integrat-
ing the principles and practices of restoration ecology and
conservation biology, toward the objective of restoring
the composition, structure, and function of dry ponderosa
pine forests. Planning on the scale of hundreds of thou-
sands of hectares offers opportunities to achieve multiple
objectives (e.g., rare species protection and restoration
of ecological structures and processes) that cannot easily
be addressed on a site-by-site basis. However, restoration
must be coordinated with
conservation planning to
achieve mutual objectives and should include strict guide-
lines for protection of rare, declining, and sensitive habi-
tats and species.
Key words: biodiversity, conservation, ponderosa pine,
restoration.
Introduction
Restoration ecology and conservation biology are distinct
disciplines with somewhat different cultures, histories,
norms, and methods (Young 2000). They are represented
by two professional societies: the Society for Ecological
Restoration International (SERI) and the Society for
Conservation Biology (SCB). Although many scientists
and practitioners ﬁt equally well within the conservation
biology or restoration ecology camps, many professionals
from the two disciplines do not interact regularly. Mem-
bership surveys conducted by SCB in 2000 and 2004 found
that, in both years, only 9% of SCB members were also
members of SERI (http://conbio.net/SCB/Information/).
We summarize some typical attributes of conservation
planning and ecological restoration in Table 1. A compari-
son of the two columns in Table 1 not only shows the areas
of overlap between the two ﬁelds but also the substantial
areas of divergence. In this study, we focus on the challenge
of integrating ecological restoration with conservation plan-
ning within landscapes dominated by dry ponderosa pine
(Pinus ponderosa) forests in the southwestern United
States.
The roots of restoration ecology can be traced back to
1938 when Aldo Leopold, John Curtis, and others at the
University of Wisconsin began developing restoration
treatments for establishing reference sites within the Uni-
versity of Wisconsin Arboretum. Restoration ecology re-
ceived a boost in 1964 with the founding of the ﬁeld of
applied ecology and its journal, Journal of Applied
1 Department of Biology, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL
32816-2368, U.S.A.
2 School of Forestry, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5018,
U.S.A.
3 Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ
86011-15017, U.S.A.
4 Prescott College, 220 Grove Avenue, Prescott, AZ 86301, U.S.A.
5 Centre for Resource and Environmental Studies, The Australian National
University, Canberra, ACT 0200, Australia.
6 Center for Environmental Sciences and Education, Northern Arizona
University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5694, U.S.A.
7 Department of Renewable Resources, University of Alberta, Edmonton,
Alberta, Canada, T6G 2H1.
8 Address Correspondence to R. F. Noss, email rnoss@mail.ucf.edu
 2006 Society for Ecological Restoration International
4
Restoration Ecology Vol. 14, No. 1, pp. 4–10
MARCH 2006

Ecology, by the British Ecological Society. The ﬁrst issue
included themes, such as land reclamation, that are within
the domain of restoration ecology (Ormerod 2003). The
publication of Restoration & Management Notes (now
called Ecological Restoration) starting in 1981, the found-
ing of SERI in 1987, and the inauguration of Restoration
Ecology in 1993 have established the ﬁeld of restoration
ecology as a science (Davis & Slobodkin 2004). The grow-
ing interest in the annual SERI conferences, the increas-
ing number of papers with a restoration theme submitted
to scientiﬁc journals (Ormerod 2003), and government-
mandated restoration of disturbed sites demonstrate that
restoration ecology has advanced rapidly in recent deca-
des. Restoration ecology increasingly encompasses the
‘‘human dimension,’’ placing value on societal decisions
on what constitutes appropriate endpoints of restoration
efforts (Allen 2003).
The term ‘‘conservation biology’’ was ﬁrst used in 1937,
in the inaugural issue of the Journal of Wildlife Manage-
ment (Errington & Hamerstrom 1937). Conservation at
that time was dominated by utilitarian objectives, such as
producing game for hunting. Yet, as early as 1917, ecolo-
gists in the United States were involved in identifying
remaining, relatively pristine examples of ecosystem types,
hoping to secure them in nature reserves for scientiﬁc use
as reference sites and for their inherent values (e.g., Shelford
1926). As noted, reference conditions were also recognized
as important in the early history of restoration ecology. The
SCB was founded in 1985 and, in 1987, initiated its journal
Conservation Biology. SCB currently has more than 8,000
members organized into regional sections across the world.
The mission of SCB includes the encouragement of ‘‘com-
munication and collaboration between conservation biol-
ogy and other disciplines (including other biological and
physical sciences, the behavioral and social sciences, eco-
nomics, law, and philosophy) that study and advise on con-
servation and natural resources issues’’ (http://conbio.net/
SCB/Information/Mission/).
Both restoration ecology and conservation biology rec-
ognize that the degradation of nature poses threats to eco-
system sustainability. The concept of the evolutionary
environment, which shaped adaptation of the native biota,
is central to both. The increasing emphasis on natural dis-
turbance regimes and ecosystem processes and functions,
in addition to structure and composition, in planning
offers an ideal opportunity to bridge the two disciplines in
their application to real-world problems.
An integration of restoration ecology and conservation
biology is urgently needed in the ponderosa pine forests
of the southwestern United States. The current condition
of these forests is the manifestation of a century of ﬁre
suppression, livestock grazing (which, among other prob-
lems, reduces the accumulation of herbaceous fuels
necessary to carry frequent, low-severity ﬁres), timber har-
vesting, road building, the introduction of invasive exotic
plants, and other human activities. These activities in com-
bination have created forests that are often highly suscep-
tible to uncharacteristic stand-replacing ﬁre, drought,
insect attack, and other deviations from historic conditions
(Covington & Moore 1994; Covington et al. 1997; Allen
et al. 2002; Friederici 2003; Moore et al. 2004). The
Mogollon Plateau of central Arizona contains the largest
continuous ponderosa pine forest (Cooper 1960). In 2002,
the Rodeo-Chediski Fire burned almost 200,000 ha in the
central Mogollon Plateau, including almost 500 homes.
The western Mogollon Plateau, which has landscape-scale
Table 1. A comparison of typical attributes of conservation planning (from the conservation biology perspective) and ecological restoration.
Conservation Planning
Ecological Restoration
The primary value assumption is that biodiversity and ecological
integrity are good
The primary value assumption is that naturalness,
ecosystem health, and ecological integrity are good
Goal is to save all the pieces (i.e., species, genetic lineages)
The overall cohesion of the ‘‘puzzle’’ is paramount
and should conserve all the pieces
Emphasis on composition
Emphasis on structure and function
Planning focus is usually on protecting hotspots of biodiversity
or endemism, and areas and species at high risk
Planning focus is usually on restoration at the ecosystem
level (less at the individual species level)
Uses viability/persistence at the species level as a
driver for site selection, conservation action, and
measures of success
Uses reference conditions/knowledge of natural range of
variability and the evolutionary context as a driver for
action
Focus on maintaining what is left at species
and community level
Focus on bringing the ecosystem back to historic or
natural condition and restoring structure and function
Historical focus on protected areas; however, now
recognizes the need for management of the landscape matrix
Often focuses more on the managed landscape matrix
than on protected areas
Historical approach is to minimize human intervention
or interference
Considers management as often desirable and needed;
more interventionist than conservation planning
Historically, approach was usually to minimize human use of
protected areas, exclude people from system
Assumes that people are part of the system; indigenous
cultural practices are accepted as part of the evolutionary
history
Time: Viability analyses may consider long time periods; however,
short-term crisis management still drives many decisions
Time: Objective is to put the ecosystem on a trajectory of
recovery that may take many human generations
Integrating Restoration Ecology and Conservation Biology
MARCH 2006 Restoration Ecology
5

fuel loads similar to those that fed the Rodeo-Chediski ﬁre,
includes the cities of Flagstaff and Williams and numerous
unincorporated developments, extensive public lands, and
prime wildlife habitat. Furthermore, it provides critical
water supplies and recreation opportunities for people,
including those from the populous cities of central Arizona.
With increases in the area affected by wildﬁres in this
region and across much of the West, citizens, policymakers,
and some scientists are calling for a radical increase in the
size and number of treatments to reduce fuel loads,
thereby reducing the probability of stand-replacing ﬁres
and the potential for loss of human life and property. One
major and controversial response to these concerns is the
Healthy Forests Restoration Act of 2003, a law with
potentially wide-ranging consequences for western forests
because it mandates restoration mainly in the form of
fuel-reduction treatments. Large-scale treatments, when
warranted, must be implemented on the basis of the best
available scientiﬁc information and guidance. Some proj-
ects may conﬂict with efforts to protect habitat for imper-
iled species (Allen et al. 2002; DellaSala et al. 2004) as
well as with the public’s interest in recreation, aesthetics,
and wilderness values. Conservationists are legitimately
concerned about timber harvest, road building, soil and
understory disturbance, exotic plants, and loss of key habi-
tats on treated sites. In response to these and other con-
cerns, and to provide scientiﬁc support for prudent
restoration and hazardous fuel actions, the Southwest For-
est Health and Wildﬁre Prevention Act of 2004 establishes
ecological restoration institutes at universities in Arizona,
New Mexico, and Colorado.
Remaining old trees within unnaturally dense stands
of post-settlement trees are at increased risk of stand-
replacing ﬁre. In such cases, the threats posed by lack
of action may be greater than risks associated with legiti-
mate restoration. Fortunately, unlike the situation in many
other forest types (Veblen 2003; Brown et al. 2004), in
dry ponderosa pine forests efforts to reduce fuel loads and
associated risks to human communities may be largely com-
patible with ecological restoration goals (Schoennagel et al.
2004). Nevertheless, as restoration or fuel-reduction pro-
grams are expanded from stands to landscapes, the linkage
of ecological restoration with conservation planning be-
comes
more
urgent
because
the
ecological
integrity
(Pimentel et al. 2000) of larger areas is at stake.
This study presents ﬁndings from a workshop at North-
ern Arizona University on 20–22 July 2004, which ad-
dressed the potential for integrating ecological restoration
and conservation planning for ponderosa pine ecosystems
of the Mogollon Plateau. Ongoing efforts by the Ecologi-
cal Restoration Institute (http://www.eri.nau.edu) through
the ForestERA project (http://www.forestera.nau.edu) in
the region provide tools and data for large-scale planning
(Hampton et al. 2003; Sisk et al. 2004) and opportunities
for the integration of restoration and conservation objec-
tives. We do not offer explicit guidelines for restoring pon-
derosa pine forests here but rather identify and discuss the
biodiversity-related issues involved in such restoration.
We start from the premise that both ecological restora-
tionists and conservation biologists want to protect and
restore biodiversity and ecological integrity. We then dis-
cuss how these ﬁelds might be reconciled with respect to
southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems.
Workshop Recommendations for Recovery of
Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Ecosystems
The ﬁre ecology and management of southwestern pon-
derosa pine forests are of high public interest. Public con-
cern about catastrophic ﬁre risk, wildlife habitat, and
other issues cannot be addressed without the integration
of conservation and restoration. We summarize our rec-
ommendations on integration as follows.
Think Big—Plan Conservation and Restoration
Projects on Landscape and Regional Scales
Resolving conﬂicting goals in ecosystem management
becomes easier as the spatial scale of the planning region
expands. At the scale of a few hectares, where the needs
of imperiled species may conﬂict not only with each
other but also with general objectives for restoration of
vegetation structure, ﬁnding a win–win solution may be
impossible. Planning on a broad spatial scale facilitates
multiobjective management and may allow seemingly
irreconcilable goals to be met. For example, high-quality
habitat for the Mexican spotted owl (Strix occidentalis
lucida) is much denser than the open-canopied, park-like
forest often considered the restoration ideal for south-
western ponderosa pine ecosystems (Beier & Maschinski
2003). Fire rarely burns homogeneously across a land-
scape, however, and often leaves a mosaic with denser
stands retained in such areas as north-facing slopes and
steep canyons and where erratic weather reverses the
wind direction and ﬁre intensity. On a landscape scale,
restoring a natural ﬁre regime can result in a range of
stand conditions, including dense stands with abundant
snags and woody debris. Therefore, restoring a stand-
maintenance ﬁre regime (i.e., low severity but frequent
ﬁre) over large portions of the landscape could be done
without eliminating the habitat for Mexican spotted owls
(ForestERA, unpublished data) and could beneﬁt the owl
by reducing the probability that high-severity ﬁre will
eliminate the dense but scattered stands that serve as the
prime habitat.
High-severity ﬁres in southwestern ponderosa pine for-
ests are increasing in frequency and spatial extent after
decades of active and passive ﬁre exclusion (Covington
2003). Because the landscape shifts toward larger and
potentially more homogeneous patches after severe ﬁres,
or toward alternative recovery states such as unnaturally
dense stands or nonforest communities, as recent evidence
suggests (Savage & Mast 2005), conﬂicts with biodiversity
conservation
and
restoration
objectives
are
obvious.
Integrating Restoration Ecology and Conservation Biology
6
Restoration Ecology
MARCH 2006

Management approaches are needed that maintain or
restore forest biodiversity at multiple spatial scales (Lin-
denmayer & Franklin 2002). The appropriate manage-
ment of each site can only be determined by considering
the attributes of the site within the broader landscape con-
text (Noss & Harris 1986).
Manage Each Forest Landscape within Its Characteristic
Range of Variability
To achieve conservation and restoration objectives simul-
taneously, forest managers should strive to emulate the
natural range of variability in conditions, including the
patchiness of the landscape on a variety of spatial scales
(Landres et al. 1999; Moore et al. 1999; Swetnam et al.
1999; Allen et al. 2002). This characteristic range of vari-
ability will differ from place to place within and among
regions because forest landscapes are tremendously vari-
able in composition, structure, and function. Policymakers
and the public need to be educated on this fact because
they often assume that all forests are the same and require
the same type of management (DellaSala et al. 2004).
Restorationists and conservationists working in dry pon-
derosa pine ecosystems need to be cautious not to extra-
polate
their
recommendations
beyond
their
system
(Johnson et al. 2001). For example, Schoennagel et al.
(2004:662) warn
Ecological
restoration
and
ﬁre
mitigation
are
urgently needed in dry ponderosa pine forests,
where previous research supports this management
action. However, we are concerned that the model
of historical ﬁre effects and 20th-century ﬁre sup-
pression in dry ponderosa pine forests is being
applied uncritically . including places where it is
inappropriate ..
Natural variability in structure often can be addressed
by using reference conditions (historical/retrospective or
existing natural areas) to guide prescriptions (Moore et al.
1999; Friederici 2003). A variety of restoration approaches
(e.g., various combinations of thinning and burning treat-
ments) should be used to spread the risk of failure of any
one approach. Managers should not implement the same
treatment everywhere, even within the same landscape
and forest type.
The issue of whether a strict ‘‘diameter cap’’ (i.e.,
a diameter limit above which trees cannot be cut) should
be imposed for restoration or fuel-reduction treatments is
controversial. We do not believe a ‘‘one-size-ﬁts-all’’ diam-
eter cap is any more justiﬁable scientiﬁcally than a one-
size-ﬁts-all restoration strategy. Although cutting of old
trees always should be avoided, because they have been
severely depleted since European settlement (Allen et al.
2002), it should be recognized that stands differ in their
history (e.g., the date when ﬁre exclusion began) and site
conditions. Thus, a diameter cap that is sensible in one
stand may not be in another.
The social dimensions of land management inevitably
inﬂuence decision-making, and this inﬂuence is particu-
larly evident with respect to diameter caps. In cases where
public opposition to the cutting of large trees threatens to
delay or scuttle restoration actions, a diameter cap may
allow critical management actions to proceed in a timely
manner. In such cases, caps should be sufﬁciently large so
that they do not inhibit legitimate treatment options, not
just for restoring patches of trees but also for restoring
grassy openings within the forest, while small enough to
assure protection of existing old trees without interfering
with the rapid tree growth needed to provide replacement
old trees. Wherever possible, we suggest that the laudable
goals of protecting existing old growth (the conservation
objective) and restoring old-growth conditions and pro-
cesses (the restoration objective) be addressed directly,
e.g., through polices that require close involvement of
qualiﬁed scientists in the planning and implementation of
treatments and adherence to environmental laws.
Recognize That Salvage Logging Is Not Restoration
By restoration, we mean guiding an ecosystem along a tra-
jectory of recovery of natural structure, function, and
composition, that is, toward ecological health and integrity
(Franklin et al. 1981; Noss 1990; Pimentel et al. 2000;
Covington 2003). A popular belief among nonscientists is
that salvage logging is often necessary to help ecosystems
heal. Except in extreme cases, however, ecosystems
usually recover naturally after ﬁres, and often the pace of
recovery is much faster than anticipated (Turner et al.
2003). Salvage logging can undermine the ecological bene-
ﬁts of ﬁre and reduce prospects for ecosystem recovery
(Lindenmayer et al. 2004). Studies of the Rodeo-Chediski
ﬁre suggested that several kinds of treatments, including
salvage logging, were effective in reducing ﬁre severity
and spread (Wilmes et al. 2002; Schoennagel et al. 2004).
Interpretation of the results of this study is problematic,
however, because sampling did not control for the effects
of ﬁre-suppression efforts or daily weather and in general
was not consistent with statistical requirements for experi-
mental design (Rhodes & Odion 2004). In rare cases, the
careful removal of woody material to reduce intense
reburn potential and improve restoration potential in for-
ests that have experienced uncharacteristic stand-replace-
ment ﬁres may be justiﬁed, but salvage logging is not
restoration and often has countervailing effects.
Restoration Should Respect Roadless Areas
A potential conﬂict exists between conservationists and
those advocating for mechanical fuel-reduction treatments
regarding roads and roadless areas. Roadless areas often
have high value for conservation of biodiversity (Noss &
Cooperrider 1994; Strittholt & DellaSala 2001). For example,
they serve as refugia for sensitive terrestrial and aquatic
species, reduce invasions of non-native species, and provide
Integrating Restoration Ecology and Conservation Biology
MARCH 2006 Restoration Ecology
7

reference conditions for management experiments. They
are more representative of natural landscapes than for-
mally protected areas (DeVelice & Martin 2001; Strittholt
& DellaSala 2001). The deleterious impacts of roads on
wildlife and ecosystems are abundantly documented
(Trombulak & Frissell 2000). For example, there is a close
connection between roads and non-native species (e.g.,
Tyser & Worley 1992; Gelbard & Belnap 2003). Invasive
non-native plants often change ﬁre regimes and inﬂuence
the efﬁcacy of restoration treatments (Brooks et al. 2004).
Roads serve as unnatural ﬁrebreaks and, conversely, as
sources of ignitions (Cardille et al. 2001; Chou et al. 1993).
They also provide access to humans, increasing the poten-
tial for recreational uses to affect biodiversity adversely.
It is often assumed without justiﬁcation that roads are
required to conduct restoration and other active manage-
ment. Ecological restoration should not be used as an
excuse to build new roads or keep existing roads open
indeﬁnitely. Indeed, the reduction of road density across
the landscape may be essential for comprehensive ecologi-
cal restoration, which would include reintroduction of car-
nivores and other species that are sensitive to the access
provided by roads (Noss et al. 1996). The potential conﬂict
between conservation and hazardous fuel reduction objec-
tives with respect to roadless areas might be addressed
simply by requiring that restoration activities be imple-
mented without the construction of new roads. Intelligent
use of topographic features and attention to climatic con-
ditions might allow many restoration objectives to be met
using prescribed ﬁre alone. Even unmanaged ﬁre in road-
less areas may result in signiﬁcant restoration gains under
speciﬁc conditions (Fule´ et al. 2003). We agree with other
ecologists (e.g., DellaSala & Frost 2001) that roadless
areas require special attention in developing restoration
prescriptions because many of their conservation values
would be compromised by road-based mechanical fuel
treatments. In roaded areas, especially near towns and
other critical landscape elements at risk of severe ﬁre
damage, more-intensive treatments may be appropriate;
however, managers should exercise caution to minimize
soil disturbance during restoration and should shut down,
reclaim, and revegetate undesirable roads after treatments.
Given the staggering costs of road maintenance and current
budget constraints on management of public lands, com-
bined with the push of some elected ofﬁcials for road
building in roadless areas, this is an opportune time to
reexamine this issue objectively.
Recognize That Protected Areas May Require
Active Management
Protected areas are cornerstones of conservation (Noss
et al. 1999) and restoration (Covington 2003), albeit they
will seldom be sufﬁcient (Lindenmayer & Franklin 2002).
A conservation area design that includes identiﬁcation of
core areas should be a central component of landscape-
scale restoration planning. Protected areas are convention-
ally thought of as places where human impacts (including
management) are kept to a minimum. When forest com-
munities that are naturally characterized by frequent ﬁre
are ﬁre suppressed, however, they may lose the qualities
for which they were set aside.
Because the effects of ﬁre exclusion and other human
activities are widespread in southwestern ponderosa pine
forests, protected areas such as wilderness areas, national
parks, and natural areas should not automatically be
excluded from consideration for treatments such as pre-
scribed burning or thinning. This is a controversial issue
with many in the conservation community strongly opposed
to any active management within reserves. This distrust of
management intervention is understandable in that some
managers have been motivated by political and economic
interests at the expense of biodiversity protection. Further-
more, treatments within some reserves would be imprudent
and unnecessary. For example, a disproportionate number
of protected areas are at high elevation (Scott et al. 2001)
and contain forest types, such as moist mixed conifer and
subalpine forests, that burn less frequently and, therefore,
have not suffered from ﬁre exclusion as have low-elevation
types (Brown et al. 2004; Schoennagel et al. 2004). On the
other hand, protected areas that contain dry ponderosa
pine and other forest types characterized by frequent,
stand-maintaining
ﬁres
often
require
management
to
restore and sustain their natural condition.
We recommend that treatments in ponderosa pine–dom-
inated reserves be of the minimal intensity needed to
restore grassy understories and protect old trees and imper-
iled species habitat. A treatment in one reserve should not
be viewed as a precedent for similar treatments in other
reserves. Given the foregoing discussion, it seems prudent
that no new roads should be built within protected areas to
accommodate restoration treatments. Once restored, if
reserves are sufﬁciently large (e.g., expanded through road
closures), they may be able to incorporate an unmanaged
natural disturbance regime (Pickett & Thompson 1978;
Noss & Cooperrider 1994). Because variability in landscape
conditions is desirable for scattering risks of management
uncertainty—and because we do not fully understand the
impacts of restoration and management—some proportion
of protected areas should be exempt from active manage-
ment, at least for now. These exempt areas will provide
insurance against management mistakes and can serve as
comparison areas for adaptive management. Similar to res-
toration fuel breaks used to protect human communities
from severe wildﬁre, thinning and burning of buffer zones
upwind or adjacent to wilderness boundaries in some cases
may reduce the probability of uncharacteristic stand-replac-
ing ﬁres occurring inside.
Restoration Strategy Should Encompass Wildlands
and the Wildland–Urban Interface
There is widespread agreement among policymakers,
many environmental groups, and communities for focusing
Integrating Restoration Ecology and Conservation Biology
8
Restoration Ecology
MARCH 2006

fuel-reduction treatments in the wildland–urban interface
(Southwest Forest Alliance 2002). Less support exists for
treatments in the wildlands (Solop 2003). The rapidly
expanding human population, especially urban sprawl into
surrounding wildlands, is the primary factor confounding
ﬁre-management policies in the American West (Dom-
beck et al. 2004). We recommend that county-level and
urban planning explicitly take into account the ﬁre risks in
the wildland–urban interface and limit development in
ﬁre-prone areas (Marzluff & Bradley 2003).
From a regional restoration perspective, managing the
wildland–urban interface versus managing wildlands is
a false dichotomy—they are parts of the same land-
scapes. For example, they are often within the same
watersheds and provide habitat for the same populations.
Nevertheless, intensive fuel-reduction treatments, ﬁre
suppression, and other management practices that would
not be appropriate in wildlands may be appropriate in
the wildland–urban interface because of the premium
placed on protecting human lives and property (Della-
Sala et al. 2004).
Conclusions
Our conclusions represent the collective opinion of the
scientists who participated in this effort to reconcile eco-
logical restoration and conservation planning within the
context of the political debate surrounding the manage-
ment of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. We suggest
that the integration of concepts, principles, and methods
of conservation planning and ecological restoration pro-
vides a scientiﬁcally rigorous basis for managing ponder-
osa pine landscapes for the recovery of a natural range of
variability in structure and function, while saving all the
pieces (i.e., composition). The scientiﬁc basis for moving
forward with landscape-scale restoration and conserva-
tion is solid, even if many questions remain about the
efﬁcacy of particular techniques. Available evidence
indicates that planning should occur on a regional scale
in order to integrate and reconcile multiple objectives
(e.g., biodiversity conservation and restoration of ecosys-
tem health). It is also evident that a variety of restoration
treatments should be used to spread the risk of failure of
any one approach and that a ‘‘one-size-ﬁts-all’’ approach
to forest restoration is inappropriate. Such an active
adaptive management approach is sensible, but only if
pursued rigorously with a valid experimental design and
monitoring plan, and including the comparative testing
of multiple hypotheses. Reducing road density across the
landscape and protecting the remaining old trees from
logging, unnatural stand-replacing ﬁre, and uncharacter-
istic levels of insect and disease attack are perhaps the
most needed conservation measures. Such measures will
increase the likelihood that biodiversity will persist into
a restored state, when natural ﬁre regimes and informed
management complete the integration of restoration and
conservation.
Acknowledgments
We thank the Ecological Restoration Institute, the Forest-
ERA Project, and the Northern Arizona University for
hosting the workshops that led to this study. We thank
E. Aumack, T. McKinnon, M. Clark, and T. Schulke for
their comments on the report that preceded this study. We
thank P. Friederici and two anonymous referees for valu-
able comments on the submitted draft. Thanks also to
S. Singh for editorial assistance.
LITERATURE CITED
Allen, C. D., M. Savage, D. A. Falk, K. F. Suckling, T. W. Swetnam,
T. Schulke, P. B. Stacey, P. Morgan, M. Hoffman, and J. T. Klingel.
2002. Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine ecosys-
tems: a broad perspective. Ecological Applications 12:1418–1433.
Allen, E. B. 2003. New directions and growth of restoration ecology.
Restoration Ecology 11:1–2.
Beier, P., and J. Maschinski. 2003. Threatened, endangered, and sensitive
species. Pages 306–327 in P. Friederici, editor. Ecological restoration of
southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Island Press, Washington, D.C.
Brooks, M. L., C. M. D’Antonio, D. M. Richardson, J. B. Grace, J. E.
Kelley, J. M. DiTomaso, R. J. Hobbs, M. Pellant, and D. Pyke. 2004.
Effects of alien plants on ﬁre regimes. BioScience 54:677–688.
Brown, R. T., J. K. Agee, and J. F. Franklin. 2004. Forest restoration
and ﬁre: principles in the context of place. Conservation Biology
18:903–912.
Cardille, J. A., S. J. Ventura, and M. G. Turner. 2001. Environmental and
social factors inﬂuencing wildﬁres in the Upper Midwest, United
States. Ecological Applications 11:111–127.
Chou, Y. H., R. A. Minnich, and R. A. Chase. 1993. Mapping probability
of ﬁre occurrence in the San Jacinto Mountains, California. Envi-
ronmental Management 17:129–140.
Cooper, C. F. 1960. Changes in vegetation, structure, and growth of south-
western pine forests since white settlement. Ecological Monographs
30:129–164.
Covington, W. W. 2003. The evolutionary and historical context. Pages
26–47 in P. Friederici, editor. Ecological restoration of southwestern
ponderosa pine forests. Island Press, Washington, D.C.
Covington, W. W., P. Z. Fule´, M. M. Moore, S. C. Hart, T. E. Kolb, J. N.
Mast, S. S. Sackett, and M. R. Wagner. 1997. Restoring ecological
health in ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest. Journal of
Forestry 95:23–29.
Covington, W. W., and M. M. Moore. 1994. Southwestern ponderosa pine
forest structure: changes since European settlement. Journal of
Forestry 92:39–47.
Davis, M. A., and L. B. Slobodkin. 2004. The science and values of resto-
ration ecology. Restoration Ecology 12:1–3.
DellaSala, D. A., and E. Frost. 2001. An ecologically based strategy for
ﬁre and fuels management in national forest roadless areas. Fire
Management Today 61:12–23.
DellaSala, D. A., J. E. Williams, C. D. Williams, and J. F. Franklin. 2004.
Beyond smoke and mirrors: a synthesis of ﬁre policy and science.
Conservation Biology 18:976–986.
DeVelice, R. L., and J. R. Martin. 2001. Assessing the extent to which
roadless areas complement the conversation of biological diversity.
Ecological Applications 11:1008–1018.
Dombeck, M. P., J. E. Williams, and C. A. Wood. 2004. Wildﬁre policy
and public lands: integrating scientiﬁc understanding with social
concerns across landscapes. Conservation Biology 18:883–889.
Errington, P. L., and F. N. Hamerstrom. 1937. The evaluation of nesting
losses and juvenile mortality of the ring-necked pheasant. Journal of
Wildlife Management 1:3–20.
Integrating Restoration Ecology and Conservation Biology
MARCH 2006 Restoration Ecology
9

Franklin, J. F., K. Cromack, W. Denison, A. Mckee, C. Maser, J. Sedell,
F. Swanson, and G. Juday. 1981. Ecological characteristics of old-
growth Douglas-ﬁr forests. General Technical Report PNW-118.
USDA Forest Service, PNW Forest and Range Experiment Station,
Portland, Oregon.
Friederici, P., editor. 2003. Ecological restoration of southwestern pon-
derosa pine forests. Island Press, Washington, D.C.
Fule´, P. Z., A. E. Cocke, T. A. Heinlein, and W. W. Covington. 2003.
Effects of an intense prescribed forest ﬁre: is it ecological restora-
tion? Restoration Ecology 12:220–230.
Gelbard, J. L., and J. Belnap. 2003. Roads as conduits for exotic plant
invasions in a semiarid landscape. Conservation Biology 17:420–432.
Hampton, H. M., Y. Xu, J. W. Prather, E. N. Aumack, B. G. Dickson,
M. M. Howe, and T. D. Sisk. 2003. Spatial tools for guiding forest
restoration and fuel reduction efforts. CD-ROM. Proceedings of the
2003 ESRI Users Conference. San Diego, California.
Johnson, E. A., K. Miyanishi, and S. R. J. Bridge. 2001. Wildﬁre regime in
the boreal forest and the idea of suppression and fuel buildup. Con-
servation Biology 15:1554–1557.
Landres, P. B., P. Morgan, and F. J. Swanson. 1999. Overview of the use
of natural variability concepts in managing ecological systems. Eco-
logical Applications 9:1179–1188.
Lindenmayer, D. B., and J. F. Franklin. 2002. Conserving forest biodiversity:
a comprehensive multiscaled approach. Island Press, Washington, D.C.
Lindenmayer, D. B., D. R. Foster, J. F. Franklin, M. L. Hunter, R. F.
Noss, F. A. Schmiegelow, and D. Perry. 2004. Saving forests or
saving ﬁber? Salvage harvesting policies after natural disturbance
impairs ecosystem and species recovery. Science 303:1303.
Marzluff, J. M., and G. A. Bradley. 2003. Ecological restoration in the
urban-wildland interface. Pages 353–370 in P. Friederici, editor.
Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests.
Island Press, Washington, D.C.
Moore, M. M., W. W. Covington, and P. Z. Fule´. 1999. Evolutionary envi-
ronment, reference conditions, and ecological restoration: a southwest-
ern ponderosa pine perspective. Ecological Applications 9:1266–1277.
Moore, M. M., D. W. Huffman, P. Z. Fule´, W. W. Covington, and J. E.
Crouse. 2004. Comparison of historical and contemporary forest
structure and composition on permanent plots in southwestern pon-
derosa pine forests. Forest Science 50:162–176.
Noss, R. F. 1990. Indicators for monitoring biodiversity: a hierarchical
approach. Conservation Biology 4:355–364.
Noss, R. F., and A. Cooperrider. 1994. Saving nature’s legacy: protecting
and restoring biodiversity. Defenders of Wildlife and Island Press,
Washington, D.C.
Noss, R. F., Dinerstein, E., B. Gilbert, M. Gilpin, B. Miller, J. Terborgh,
and S. Trombulak. 1999. Core areas: where nature reigns. Pages 99–
128 in M. E. Soule´ and J. Terborgh, editors. Continental conserva-
tion: scientiﬁc foundations of regional reserve networks. Island
Press, Washington, D.C.
Noss, R. F., and L. D. Harris. 1986. Nodes, networks, and MUM’s: preserv-
ing diversity at all scales. Environmental Management 10:299–309.
Noss, R. F., H. B. Quigley, M. G. Hornocker, T. Merrill, and P. Paquet.
1996. Conservation biology and carnivore conservation. Conserva-
tion Biology 10:949–963.
Ormerod, S. J. 2003. Restoration in applied ecology: editor’s introduction.
Journal of Applied Ecology 40:44–50.
Pickett, S. T. A., and J. N. Thompson. 1978. Patch dynamics and the
design of nature reserves. Biological Conservation 13:27–37.
Pimentel, D., L. Westra, and R. F. Noss. 2000. Ecological integrity: inte-
grating
environment,
conservation,
and
health.
Island
Press,
Washington, D.C.
Rhodes, J. J., and D. C. Odion. 2004. Evaluations of the efﬁcacy of forest
manipulations still needed. BioScience 54:980.
Savage, M., and J. N. Mast. 2005. How resilient are southwestern ponder-
osa pine forests after crown ﬁres? Canadian Journal of Forest
Research 35:967–977.
Schoennagel, T., T. T. Veblen, and W. H. Romme. 2004. The interaction
of ﬁre, fuels, and climate across Rocky Mountain forests. BioScience
54:661–676.
Scott, J. M., F. W. Davis, R. G. McGhie, R. G. Wright, C. Groves, and
J. Estes. 2001. Nature reserves: do they capture the full range of
America’s biological diversity? Ecological Applications 11:999–
1007.
Shelford, V. E., editor. 1926. Naturalist’s guide to the Americas. Williams
and Wilkins, Baltimore, Maryland.
Sisk, T. D., H. M. Hampton, J. W. Prather, E. N. Aumack, Y. Xu, M. R.
Loeser, T. Munoz-Erickson, and J. Palumbo. 2004. Forest Ecologi-
cal Restoration Analysis (ForestERA) Project Report, 2002–2004.
Center for Environmental Sciences and Education, Northern
Arizona University, Flagstaff.
Solop, F. 2003. Grand Canyon poll: a survey to assess public attitudes
towards forest health and management. Social Research Lab,
Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff (available from http://www4.
nau.edu/srl/News.aspx?Year = 2003) accessed December 14, 2005.
Southwest Forest Alliance. 2002. Public opinion on forest management in
Arizona. Poll prepared by the Behavior Research Center. Phoenix,
Arizona.
Strittholt, J. R., and D. A. DellaSala. 2001. Importance of roadless areas
in biodiversity conservation in forested ecosystems: a case study—
Klamath-Siskiyou ecoregion, U.S.A. Conservation Biology 15:
1742–1754.
Swetnam, T. W., C. D. Allen, and J. L. Betancourt. 1999. Applied histori-
cal ecology: using the past to manage for the future. Ecological
Applications 9:1189–1206.
Trombulak, S. C., and C. A. Frissell. 2000. Review of ecological effects of
roads on terrestrial and aquatic communities. Conservation Biology
14:18–30.
Turner, M. G., W. H. Romme, and D. B. Tinker. 2003. Surprises and les-
sons from the 1988 Yellowstone ﬁres. Frontiers in Ecology and
Environment 1:351–358.
Tyser, R. W., and C. A. Worley. 1992. Alien ﬂora in grasslands adjacent
to road and trail corridors in Glacier National Park, Montana
(USA). Conservation Biology 6:253–262.
Veblen, T. T. 2003. Historic range of variability of mountain forest
ecosystems: concepts and applications. Forestry Chronicle 79:
223–226.
Wilmes, L. D., Martinez, L. Wadleigh, C. Denton, and G. Geisler. 2002.
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests Rodeo-Chediski Fire Effects
Summary.
Apache-Sitgreaves
National
Forests,
Springerville,
Arizona.
Young, T. P. 2000. Restoration ecology and conservation biology. Biolog-
ical Conservation 92:73–83.
Integrating Restoration Ecology and Conservation Biology
10
Restoration Ecology
MARCH 2006
