 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Effectiveness of Fuel Reduction Treatments: Assessing Metrics of Forest Resiliency  
and Wildfire Severity after the Wallow Fire, AZ  
By Dr. Amy Waltz, Program Director of Science Delivery  
Introduction 
Arizona’s largest wildfire to date, the Wallow Fire, was a human-caused fire ignited on May 29, 2011. By early 
July, the Wallow Fire had burned across 537,820 acres of forest and montane grasslands in eastern Arizona and 
western New Mexico, with fire managers reporting unusually extreme fire behavior including crowning patch 
sizes as large as 25,000 acres and spotting distances greater than 3 miles (Wadleigh 2011). While studies have 
assessed the effectiveness of preventive fire hazard reduction treatment in protecting society’s priority resources 
(Martinson and Omi 2013), few studies have examined if fuel reduction treatments contribute to ecosystem resili-
ence, or the capacity of a system to absorb perturbation and return to a similar set of structures or processes 
(Holling 1973). In this study, we defined short-term metrics of resiliency to test the hypothesis that fuel reduction 
treatments in mixed conifer forests increased a fire-adapted system’s resiliency to uncharacteristically severe 
wildfire. In addition, we tested the hypothesis that fuel reduction treatments reduced burn severity, thereby in-
creasing protection for adjacent human communities.  
 
Forest fuel reduction treatments and the Wallow Fire occurred in a mix of 
ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) and mixed conifer forest types. This 
experiment focused on treatments occurring in warm/dry mixed conifer, 
characterized by a co-dominance of ponderosa pine and Douglas fir. Both 
fuel reduction and restoration objectives in warm/dry mixed conifer for-
ests can be met by thinning out small diameter fire-intolerant species 
(removing ladder fuels) and shifting forest structure and composition to 
larger-diameter, fire-resistant trees (Evans et al. 2011), moving systems 
toward historic reference conditions. Reintroducing fire consumes accu-
mulated surface fuel and contributes significantly to nutrient cycling, veg-
etation composition, and quality wildlife habitat while also increasing re-
siliency to wildfire (Evans et al. 2011).  
 
Key Questions and Findings 
1. Do warm/dry mixed conifer forests with fuel reduction treatments show higher resiliency than those without 
treatment as measured by three short-term metrics of resiliency: 
 
a. All-tree and large-tree survivorship? Initial mortality of large (>16-inch diameter at breast height (DBH)) 
ponderosa pine, the most fire-resistant species in the forest, averaged 42% (range 10–100%) in untreated 
units, compared to just a 6% average mortality in treated stands (range from 0–20%). Of all sized trees, 
the species with little resiliency to fire (aspen, white fir, Gambel oak) showed similar mortality rates be-
tween treated and untreated units (range 64% to 90%).  
b. Non-native/native herbaceous understory cover ratio? Total herbaceous understory plant cover was, on 
average, 1.5 times greater in treated units compared to untreated units, one year following the Wallow 
Fire. Native plant cover dominated both treated and untreated units composing 89% and 84% of the post-
fire vegetation, respectively. Native plant cover was also 1.5 times greater in treated units than untreated 
units. No distinguishable differences were found in nonnative cover between treated and untreated units. 
   Fact Sheet: Metrics of Forest Resiliency, Post-Wildfire 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 2014 
Based on the study’s results, broader land-
scape treatment efforts may be justified to 
increase forest resilience. Photo by Andrew 
Sánchez Meador 

 
c.  High severity patch size? High severity patches were significantly smaller in treated units compared to 
untreated units. In treated units, 31 high severity patches were identified ranging from 0.2 to 19.5 acres, 
whereas 47 individual patches ranging from 0.2 to 158.6 acres were identified in untreated units. Both 
the median and the maximum weighted area patch size are an order of magnitude larger in untreated 
units than in treated units (Figure 1). 
 
2.  Are fuel reduction treatments effective at mitigating 
burn severity under severe wildfire conditions? 
 
Comparisons of severity metrics between treatment 
units showed treated areas had lower tree basal area 
(BA) loss and lower tree mortality when compared to 
untreated units. In treated units, basal area was reduced 
by 29%, compared to a 55% BA reduction in untreated 
areas; tree density reduced by 53% (~347 trees per acre 
(TPA) killed) in treated areas compared to a 74% re-
duction (~1,488 TPA killed) in untreated areas.  
 
Conclusions and Management  
Implications 
In this study, we defined ecosystem resiliency for three 
ecosystem metrics using a combination of known his-
toric reference conditions and empirical data from sys-
tems with observed type changes. Results from this 
study suggest fuel reduction treatments increase resiliency to uncharacteristically severe fire as measured by 
three short-term forest structure attributes. Treated units showed low tree mortality and small high severity 
patch sizes, maintaining a similar ecosystem structure to that reconstructed prior to the Wallow Fire. The treat-
ed units also supported significantly higher understory herbaceous cover; however, nonnative cover metrics of 
resiliency showed no differences among treatments one year post-fire. 
 
These results are important to federal land managers that 
currently work under national policy to “make our NFS 
[National Forest Systems] lands more resilient to climate 
change …” (National Forest System 2012), but lack any 
accompanying definitions of resiliency for their land-
scapes (USDA 2013). Fuel reduction treatments can addi-
tionally increase specific resiliency metrics of forested 
ecosystems, even within short-term timeframes. Not only 
are western landscapes seeing increasing risks from fire to 
human communities, but landscape-scale fire impacts ecological integrity across larger landscapes. This study 
suggests broader landscape restoration and fire hazard reduction efforts may be justified to increase resilience 
across the landscape. 
References 
Evans, A.M., R.G. Everett, S.L. Stephens, and J.A. Youtz. 2011. Comprehensive fuels treatment guide for mixed conifer forests: California, Cen-
tral and Southern Rockies, and the Southwest. Forest Guild and USDA Forest Service, Santa Fe, New Mexico. 
Holling 1973. Resilience and stability of ecological systems. Annual Reviews 4:1-23. 
Martinson, E.J., and P.N. Omi. 2013. Fuel treatments and fire severity: A meta-analysis. RMRS-RP-103WWW. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Depart-
ment of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 35 p. 
National Forest System Land Management Planning; Final rule and record of decision. 77 Federal Register No. 68 (April 9, 2012) pp. 21162-
21275. 
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). 2013. Land Management Planning Handbook (draft). Proposed FS 1909.12, version 02/14/2013. Avail-
able at www.fs.usda.gov/goto/planningrule/directives. 
Wadleigh, L. 2011. Wallow Fire 2011; Large Scale Event Recovery Fire/Fuels Report. Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest, Southwestern Region. 
July 29, 2011. 
 
 
Figure 1. Area-weighted mean patch size shows the average and me-
dian of high-severity patch sizes were more than 10 times as large in 
the untreated forest as in the treated forest. Box plots represent mini-
mum and maximum at T-bars, median at solid line. Dotted lines repre-
sent the means. Grey box represents range of 50% of patches around 
the median. 
Contact 
Amy Waltz, Amy.Waltz@nau.edu  
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
 
Research Findings 
 Fuel reduction treatments in mixed conifer  
 
forests increased forest resilience to wildfire. 
 Fuel reduction treatments reduced fire severity 
effects from wildfire.  
 Broader landscape treatment efforts may be  
justified to increase forest resilience. 
