 
On November 6, 2012, Flagstaff, Arizona voters over-
whelmingly approved a $10 million bond — Question 
405, “Forest Health and Water Supply Protection Pro-
ject” (hereafter the Watershed Project). This municipal 
bond project, backed by secondary property taxes, will 
finance up to $10 million to support planning and im-
plementation of forest health and water supply protec-
tion projects on 14,446 acres of U.S. Forest Service 
and State lands primarily outside Flagstaff city limits. 
This bond authorization is the first payment for water-
shed services (hereafter water resources) project im-
plemented on national forest lands in the United States 
that was subjected to voter approval and financed 
through municipal bonds. Exit polling was conducted 
by Northern Arizona University (NAU) researchers to 
understand underlying dimensions of voter support or 
opposition to payments for water resources.  
Survey questions were developed from water re-
sources literature and previous research. The survey 
instrument was randomly administered face-to-face at 
polls on Election Day (n=721) and via phone (n=415) 
to early voters, who compromised about 50% of the 
electorate, for a total sample size of 1,126 of the 
21,763 voters. Data was statistically adjusted to accu-
rately reflect the balance of early voters and election 
day voters. Response rates were 51% and 43% for the 
exit poll and phone survey, respectively.   
Question 405 passed with 73% of city voter support 
and crossed demographic factors and party affiliation. 
Approximately 74% of men and 73% of women sup-
ported the measure in addition to strong majorities of 
Democrats (84%), Independents (82%) and Republi-
cans (55%). Supporters and opponents did not differ in 
age or if they were renters or homeowners.  
 
More than 80% of both supporters and opponents re-
ported knowing “some” or “a lot” about the ballot 
measure. However, majorities of supporters and oppo-
nents were unaware that their secondary property tax 
rates, and overall property taxes, would not increase 
with the passage of the ballot measure. Opponents in-
correctly believed that property taxes would increase 
with this measure (73%).  
 
Voters’ evaluation of the perceived effectiveness and 
management of the proposed Watershed Project 
strongly distinguished supporters from opponents. 
Supporters strongly believed that implementation of 
forest treatments would be effective in positively en-
hancing water resources (e.g., water supply, flood reg-
ulation, and/or water quality) (Figure 1, page 2). More 
than 84% of supporters “somewhat” or “strongly 
agreed” that the City of Flagstaff partnering with the 
U.S. Forest Service was a model of how to accelerate 
needed forest restoration around Flagstaff. Finally, 
supporters strongly agreed with the statement “the For-
est Service will be accountable to the City of Flagstaff 
for work accomplished with the bond monies” under 
this management model and proposed partnership. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 1 
Overview 
May 2013   
Forest Health and Water Supply Protection  
Project Ballot Measure 
 
Exit Poll Results 
Voter Awareness of Ballot Measure 
Methods 
Who Supported the Bond? 
Voter Evaluation of Watershed  
Project Design 

 
 
Opposition to the Watershed Project was primarily 
characterized by beliefs related to: 1) the high cost and 
low utility of the property tax, 2) that the monies 
would not be managed wisely or effectively, 3) the 
Watershed Project would not produce the desired out-
comes, and 4) opposition to forest thinning (Table 1). 
Support for the Watershed Project was characterized 
by voter desire to protect water resources and the value 
of investing now to reduce the risks of catastrophic fire 
and post-fire flooding. Supporters also believed that 
the investment will be effectively administered to pro-
duce clear outcomes (Table 2).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A strong majority of Flagstaff voters passed the Wa-
tershed Project ballot measure. Although voters gener-
ally believed that their tax rates and overall property 
taxes would increase, the ballot measure still drew 
strong support from across political parties. Support 
was grounded in a concern about fire and drought as 
threats to local water supply and strong beliefs about 
the effectiveness of forest treatments and the partner-
ship model of the city and the U.S. Forest Service 
working together. With supporters and opponents hav-
ing distinct perceptions regarding the efficacy and effi-
ciency of the proposed project, implementation will 
need to demonstrate to voters that the City and the 
U.S. Forest Service are working effectively together to 
reduce risks and enhance water resources. Communi-
cating the effectiveness of watershed treatments will 
help confirm the vote of confidence in the project by 
supporters, and help assuage concerns among those in 
opposition. 
Page 2 
Voter Opposition 
 
Figure 1: Voter beliefs about implementation effective-
ness and management of the Watershed Project 
Voter Support 
Conclusions 
Table 2: Top Reasons for Supporting Water-
shed Project Ballot Measure 
% 
Will reduce the risk of post-fire flooding 
55 
Prop 405 will protect city water resources 
54 
Should invest now to avoid future costs 
36 
FLG and USFS will use money efficiently 
34 
This will reduce risk of catastrophic fire 
33 
Investment will have clear outcomes 
32 
Federal government does not have sufficient 
resources 
16 
For more information regarding the exit poll, please contact: 
Dr. Erik Nielsen, School of Earth Sciences and Environmental Sustainability, erik.nielsen@nau.edu, 928.523.4980 
Dr. Fred Solop, Politics and International Affairs, fred.solop@nau.edu, 928.523.3135  
Table 1. Top Reasons for Opposing Water-
shed Project Ballot Measure 
% 
My taxes already too high 
55 
Flagstaff and USFS will waste the money 
37 
Cannot afford to pay 
30 
Forest restoration is not solution to water 
supply threats 
19 
Opposed to thinning the forest 
17 
Private industry should pay for restoration 
15 
Unfair for citizens to pay for watershed pro-
jects 
15 
Federal government should pay for restoration 
on federal lands 
12 
Note: percentages add to more than 100% due to multiple 
responses 
Note: percentages add to more than 100% due to multiple 
responses 
