Science Basis for Changing
Forest Structure to Modify
Wildfire Behavior and Severity
U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service
April 2004
Technical Editors:
Dr. Russell T. Graham, Rocky Mountain Research Station
Dr. Sarah McCaffrey, North Central Research Station
Dr. Theresa B. Jain, Rocky Mountain Research Station
United States
Department
of Agriculture
Forest Service
Rocky Mountain
Research Station
General Technical
Report RMRS-GTR-120
April 2004

Abstract
Graham, Russell T.; McCaffrey, Sarah; Jain, Theresa B. (tech. eds.) 2004. Science basis for changing
forest structure to modify wildfire behavior and severity. Gen. Tech. Rep.  RMRS-GTR-120. Fort
Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 43 p.
Fire, other disturbances, physical setting, weather, and climate shape the structure and function of
forests throughout the Western United States. More than 80 years of fire research have shown that
physical setting, fuels, and weather combine to determine wildfire intensity (the rate at which it consumes
fuel) and severity (the effect fire has on vegetation, soils, buildings, watersheds, and so forth). Millions of
acres of forestlands (mainly in dry forests dominated by ponderosa pine and/or Douglas-fir) contain a high
accumulation of flammable fuels compared to conditions prior to the 20th century. Forests with high stem
density and fuel loading combined with extreme fire weather conditions have led to severe and large
wildfires (such as those seen in the summers of 2000, 2002, and 2003) that have put a number of important
values at risk. Although homes in the path of a wildfire are perhaps the most immediately recognized value,
these wildfires also put numerous other human and ecological values at risk, such as power grids, drinking
water supplies, firefighter safety, critical habitat, soil productivity, and air quality.
For a given set of weather conditions, fire behavior is strongly influenced by stand and fuel structure.
Crown fires in the dry forest types represent an increasing challenge for fire management as well as a
general threat to the ecology of these forests and the closely associated human values. Crown fires are
dependent on the sequence of available fuels starting from the ground surface to the canopy. Limiting
crown fire in these forests can be accomplished by actions that manage in concert the surface, ladder, and
crown fuels. Reducing crown fire and wildland fire growth across landscapes decreases the chances of
developing large wildfires that affect human values adjacent to forested areas. However, a narrow focus
on minimizing crown fire potential will not necessarily reduce the damage to homes and ecosystems when
fires do occur. Homes are often ignited by embers flying far from the fire front, and by surface fires. Fire
effects on ecosystems can also occur during surface fires where surface and understory fuels and deep
organic layers are sufficient to generate high temperatures for long periods.
Fuel treatments can help produce forest structures and fuel characteristics that then reduce the
likelihood that wildfires will cause large, rapid changes in biophysical conditions. Fuel treatments can also
help modify fire behavior sufficiently so that some wildfires can be suppressed more easily. Subsequent,
sustained fuel treatments can maintain these conditions. Different fuel reduction methods target different
components of the fuel bed. Thinning mainly affects standing vegetation, and other types of fuel treatments
such as prescribed fire and pile burning woody fuels are needed to modify the combustion environment
of surface fuels. In forests that have not experienced fire for many decades, multiple fuel treatments—that
is, thinning and surface fuel reduction—may be required to significantly affect crown fire and surface fire
hazard. Fuel treatments cannot guarantee benign fire behavior but can reduce the probability that extreme
fire behavior will occur. Fuel treatments can be designed to restore forest conditions to a more resilient and
resistant condition than now exists in many forests, and subsequent management could maintain these
conditions, particularly in dry forests (ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir) where crown fires were historically
infrequent. The degree of risk reduction will depend to some degree on the level of investment, social and
economic acceptability of treatments, and concurrent consideration of other resource values (for example,
wildlife).
This report describes the kinds, quality, amount, and gaps of scientific knowledge for making informed
decisions on fuel treatments used to modify wildfire behavior and effects in dry forests of the interior
Western United States (especially forests dominated by ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir). A review of
scientific principles and applications relevant to fuel treatment primarily for the dry forests is provided for
the following topics: fuels, fire hazard, fire behavior, fire effects, forest structure, treatment effects and
longevity, landscape fuel patterns, and scientific tools useful for management and planning.
Key words: Thinning, fuel treatments, prescribed fire, dry forests
Cover: Intense crown fire behavior exhibited by the Star Gulch Fire burning
on the Boise National Forest in Idaho in 1994 (K. Watenmaker photo).

Science Basis for Changing Forest Structure to
Modify Wildfire Behavior and Severity
U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service
April 2004
Technical Editors:
Dr. Russell T. Graham, Rocky Mountain Research Station
Dr. Sarah McCaffrey, North Central Research Station
Dr. Theresa B. Jain, Rocky Mountain Research Station
Contributing Authors:
Dr. David Peterson, Pacific Northwest Research Station (PNW)
Dr. Mark Finney, Rocky Mountain Research Station (RMRS)
Dr. Carl Skinner, Pacific Southwest Research Station (PSW)
Dr. Merrill Kaufmann, RMRS
Morris Johnson, PNW
Dr. Wayne Shepperd, RMRS
Michael Harrington, RMRS
Dr. Robert Keane, RMRS
Dr. Donald McKenzie, PNW
Dr. Elizabeth Reinhardt, RMRS
Dr. Kevin Ryan, RMRS

You may order additional copies of this publication by sending your
mailing information in label form through one of the following media.
Please specify the publication title and number.
Telephone
(970) 498-1392
FAX
(970) 498-1396
E-mail
rschneider@fs.fed.us
Web site
http://www.fs.fed.us/rm
Mailing Address
Publications Distribution
Rocky Mountain Research Station
240 West Prospect Road
Fort Collins, CO 80526
Acknowledgments_______________________________________
Providing this information for informing decisions on changing forest structure to modify wildfire
behavior and severity involved people from throughout the United States.  In particular the technical
editors would like to thank the contributing authors for their timely and significant contributions.  A key
to providing scientific information is the peer review process. This document was reviewed by our
peers and their comments were reconciled. We, the technical editors and authors, thank them for their
insight, criticisms, and timely response.  They include:
Dr. Jim Saveland, USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station
Dave Thomas, USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Region
Dr. Tom Zimmerman, USDA Forest Service, Southwestern Region
Dr. Dave Cleaves, USDA Forest Service, Washington Office
Dr. Susan Conard, USDA Forest Service, Washington Office
Mike Hilbruner, USDA Forest Service, Washington Office
Dr. James Agee, University of Washington
Dr. Jim Brown, USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station (retired)
Frank Burch, USDA Forest Service, Washington, DC
Art Latterell, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Dr. Roger Ottmar, USDA Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Experiment Station
Paula Seamon, The Nature Conservancy
Dr. Thomas Swetnam, University of Arizona
Dr. Thomas Waldrop, USDA Forest Service, Southern Research Station
Andy Youngblood, USDA Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Experiment Station
Jane Kapler Smith, USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station
Several anonymous reviewers
We also commend the Publishing Services staff members of the Rocky Mountain Research Station
for their excellent work in editing and producing this publication.
ii

Contents
Page
Key Points ....................................................................................................... iv
Introduction ...................................................................................................... 1
Historical Fire Patterns and Forest Structure .............................................. 2
Forest Change ............................................................................................ 3
Fuels ........................................................................................................... 8
Conditions for Ignition .................................................................................... 12
Fire Behavior .................................................................................................. 12
Ground Fire ............................................................................................... 13
Surface Fire............................................................................................... 14
Crown Fire................................................................................................. 15
Other Influences on Fire Behavior ............................................................ 17
Fire Severity and Fire Effects ......................................................................... 19
Fuel Modifications .......................................................................................... 22
Prescribed Fire .......................................................................................... 24
Mechanical Thinning ................................................................................. 25
Other Treatments – Mastication, Mulching, and So Forth......................... 25
Thinning and Prescribed Fire Combined................................................... 26
Posttreatment Environment....................................................................... 27
Treatment Longevity ................................................................................. 28
Fuel Treatment on Large Landscapes ...................................................... 29
Treatment Efficacy .................................................................................... 31
Evaluation Tools............................................................................................. 32
Uncertainties in Predicting Fire Behavior ....................................................... 34
Summary ........................................................................................................ 35
References ..................................................................................................... 36
iii

Key Points
Science Basis for Changing Forest Structure
to Modify Wildfire Behavior and Severity
General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-120
More than 80 years of fire research have shown that physical setting, weather, and fuels, combine to determine wildfire
intensity and severity. Of these three factors, fuels (vegetation) is the only one that can be treated. The effectiveness
and effects of various fuel treatments for restoring dry forests in the Western United States are summarized in this paper.
A considerable amount of information is available on fire behavior and the impacts forest structure and fuel modifications
have on fire intensity and severity. Some key findings of this paper include:
•
Historically, many dry forests in the Western United States,
such as those dominated by ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir
were frequently (4 to 25 years) burned by low intensity
surface fires.
•
Changes in forest structure and composition over the past
60 to 100 years have increased fuel loads and made many
of the ponderosa pine forests more susceptible to highly
intense and highly severe fires.
•
Models, field observations, and experiments indicate that for
a given set of weather conditions, fire behavior is strongly
influenced by fuel structure and composition.
•
Crown fires are dependent on the sequence of available fuels
starting from the ground surface to the canopy. Crown fires are
more likely to occur when sufficient surface fuels are available
to ignite ladder fuels and/or the lower crowns of overstory trees.
•
Reducing the likelihood of crown fires requires decreasing the
amount, density, and continuity of surface fuels, and removing
ladder fuels.
•
Surface and ground fires especially those with long (hours to
days) residence times can destroy soil organic matter, reduce
forest productivity, and on some settings fuse soil particles that
in turn can dramatically increase soil erosion compared to
unburned sites.
•
In forests that have not experienced fire for many decades,
multiple fuel treatments—that is, thinning and surface fuel
reduction—may be required to significantly affect crown fire
and surface fire hazard.
•
Models and observations of landscape scale fire behavior and
the impacts of fuel treatments clearly suggest that a landscape
approach is more likely to have significant overall impacts on
fire spread, intensity, perimeters, and suppression capability
than an approach that treats individual stands in isolation.
iv
Untreated fuels on the Boise
Basin Experimental Forest,
Idaho. (K. Watenmaker photo)
Treated fuels on the Boise Basin Experimental
Forest, Idaho. (K. Watenmaker photo)

1
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
Science Basis for Changing
Forest Structure to Modify
Wildfire Behavior and Severity
Introduction ______________________________________________________
Fire, other disturbances, physical setting, weather, and climate shape the
structure and function of forests throughout the Western United States
(Daubenmire and Daubenmire 1968, Perry 1994, Hann and others 1997,
Agee 1998b, Schmoldt and others 1999). More than 80 years of fire research
shows that fuels (that is, composition, amount, structure, moisture content
of dead and live vegetation and detritus), physical setting (slope, aspect,
elevation, relief, soils, and so forth), weather (short- and long-term wind,
humidity, precipitation, and so forth), and climate combine to determine
wildfire intensity (the rate at which a fire is producing thermal energy in the
fuel-climate environment, most often measured in terms of temperature and
heat yield) and severity (the effect the fire has on vegetation, soils, buildings,
watersheds, and so forth; most often expressed in terms of the postwildfire
condition of litter, soil, trees, and so forth) (Larsen 1921, Gisborne 1923,
Wells and Campbell 1979, Rothermel 1983, Chandler and others 1991,
Simard 1991, Hungerford 1996, Debano and others 1998, Robichaud and
others 2003).
Composition, moisture content, amount, and structure (size, distribution,
depth, soundness, age, and so forth) of wildland fuels influence how they burn
and how the fire affects the environment (Albini and Reinhardt 1995, Agee
and others 2002). Physical setting and short-term weather (daily to weekly
temperature, relative humidity, wind, and precipitation cycles) have the
most immediate influence on fire behavior, but long-term weather (droughts)
and location can influence wildfire occurrence and subsequent behavior
(Chandler and others 1991, Rothermel 1991, Agee 1998b, Bradshaw and
others 2003). Landforms (physical setting) and climatic variations produce
a diverse mixture of forest types that span a gradient from wet, dense, coastal
forests to arid interior forests (Daubenmire and Daubenmire 1968, Steele
and others 1983, Cooper and others 1991, Perry 1994). Climatic patterns,
especially magnitude and distribution of precipitation, can influence natural
disturbances and in particular wildfire (Agee 1993, Veblen and others 2000,
Hessl and others 2003).
Fire regimes (characteristics of fire such as the intensity, frequency,
season, size, and extent that create particular fire effects in a biogeographical
region) can be altered by fire exclusion and land management practices. In
the Western United States, alteration of fire regimes by fire exclusion has
been greatest in dry forests, primarily those dominated by ponderosa pine,
Douglas-fir, or both (Covington and Moore 1994, Arno and others 1997,
Swetnam and others 1999, Romme and others 2003). Millions of acres of
forestlands in the Western United States contain a high accumulation of

2
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
flammable fuels compared to fuel conditions prior to the 20th century, which
in turn have posed an increasing fire hazard for many decades (Skinner and
Chang 1996, Covington and Moore 1994, Arno and others 1997, Hann and
others 1997, Swetnam and others 1999).
The large and destructive wildfires in the summers of 2000 and 2002 and
autumn of 2003 have sharpened our focus on fuel accumulation on the
National Forests and other public lands. During the summer of 2000,
122,827 wildfires burned 8.4 million acres, and during the summer of 2002,
73,457 fires burned 7.1 million acres (http://www.nifc.gov). Such severe and
large wildfires put a number of important values at risk as exemplified by the
destruction of more than 3,600 homes in the wildfires that burned in
southern California in 2003. Although homes in the path of a wildfire are
perhaps the most immediately recognized value at risk, there are numerous
other values at risk including critical infrastructure (power grids, drinking
water supplies), sensitive or protected fish and wildlife habitat, firefighter
health and safety, public health and safety, soil productivity, aesthetics,
clean air, and other important components of forest ecosystems (Weaver
1943, Reynolds and others 1992, Covington and Moore 1994, Covington and
others 1997, Fulé and others 1997, Swetnam and others 1999, Conard and
others 2001, Kalabokidis and others 2002, Cohen and Stratton 2003). Some
of these values are also threatened by secondary effects of a severe wildfire,
such as landslides, spread of invasive species, and wind throw (Robichaud
and others 2000).
Historical Fire Patterns and Forest Structure
Prior to reductions in burned area during the 20th century, temperature,
and precipitation patterns, combined with natural and human ignitions,
were most responsible for determining fire return intervals (also referred to
as fire frequency), particularly in the dry ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir
forests. Before Euro-American settlement, cultural burning practices of
Native Americans augmented or even dominated fire regimes in many
vegetation types (Barrett and Arno 1982, Stewart 1951, Lewis 1973). Light-
ning-caused fires were more frequent during periods (decades) of high
temperatures and became less frequent during cool periods because warm
periods tended to have longer fire seasons, resulting in more fires (Swetnam
1993, Stine 1996, Chang 1999). The variation in precipitation from year to
year affected the availability of grass and herbaceous surface fuel and the
duration of windy or dry burning conditions. Moist years allowed rich layers
and amounts of forest vegetation to develop especially in the form of grasses,
shrubs, and other ground-level vegetation. In Southwestern ponderosa pine
forests where grass fuels predominated before Euro-American settlement,
periods with abundant precipitation supported the development of high fuel
loads, which supported the more widespread fires that tended to occur in dry
years that occurred intermittently throughout wet periods (Swetnam 1993).
By contrast, periods of low precipitation supported smaller, less widespread
fires (Swetnam 1993, Chang 1999). Where grass and herbaceous surface
fuels are not dominant (for example, ponderosa pine and mixed conifer
forests of the Sierra Nevada), fire sizes were generally fuel limited except

3
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
when affected by regionwide droughts (Swetnam 1993). These variations in
weather produced variable fire frequencies in many of the dry ponderosa pine
and Douglas-fir forests of the West. For example, in a portion of the Colorado
Front Range of the Rocky Mountains, the fire frequency, determined by tree
ring analysis, varied considerably over the past 700 years, ranging from
relatively frequent (16.8 year interval) fires to moderate fire intervals to one
long interval (more than 50 years) (Kaufmann and others 2001).
Based on tree-ring data, the 20th century has been described as a period of
relatively high precipitation and increasing temperature compared to previ-
ous centuries (Briffa and others 1992, Graumlich 1993, Stine 1996). Stine
(1996) suggests that more frequent and larger fires, characteristic of the
latter portions of the 20th century, were the result of warm temperatures that
likely lengthened the fire season, and the increased precipitation allowed
fuels to accumulate. Yet, fire exclusion through fire suppression or reduction
of fine fuels through grazing, urbanization, and other land use changes
particularly in the dry ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir forests, caused a
dramatic reduction in the area burned by frequent fires. In turn, these and
other past management activities resulted in significant changes since the
late 1800s in the structure of forest stands (contiguous vegetation containing
the same forest structure and composition occurring on a common environ-
mental site) (Helms 1998). Most likely, the greatest changes in stand
structure from those occurring historically, occurred on productive sites
where vegetation readily developed (Weatherspoon and Skinner 1996).
Forest Change
Prior to the 20th century, low severity fires burned regularly in most dry
forest ecosystems (Covington and Moore 1994, Arno and others 1997,
Swetnam and others 1999, Everett and others 2000, Hessl and others 2003),
with ignitions caused by both lightning and humans. Low intensity fires
controlled regeneration of fire-intolerant (plants unable to physiologically
withstand heat produced by fires) species, promoted fire-tolerant species (for
example, ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir), maintained an open forest struc-
ture, reduced forest biomass, decreased the impacts of insects and diseases
(Covington and Moore 1994, Weaver 1943), and maintained wildlife habitats
for many species that utilize open stand structures (for example, northern
goshawk) (Reynolds and others 1992, Fulé and others 1997, Swetnam and
others 1999, Conard and others 2001, Kalabokidis and others 2002). In
addition to the accumulation of fire intolerant vegetation, dense forest
canopies with homogeneous and continuous horizontal and vertical stand
structures (for example, dense trees with low crown base heights) developed
resulting in an increased potential for crown fires in many forests of the
Western United States (Cooper 1960, Dodge 1972, Van Wagner 1977,
Parsons and DeBenedetti 1979, Bonnickesen and Stone 1982, Arno and
Brown 1991, Agee 1993, Mutch and others 1993, Hann and others 1997) (fig.
1). These changes in structure and composition have dramatically altered
how wildfires now burn in these forests from how they burned historically.
Historically, 40 percent of the forests in the United States were burned by
frequent (0- to 35-year intervals) low-severity fires (fire regime 1), but only

4
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
Figure 1—Forest development on the Bitterroot
National Forest in Montana in a ponderosa pine
stand after harvest (1909) in which fire was
excluded since 1895. Note the changes in
vertical arrangement and horizontal continuity
in forest stand structure. In general many of
today’s ponderosa pine forests contain higher
densities of fire-intolerant species and
suppressed trees than historical forests.
1909
1948
1989

5
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
15 percent are currently burned by these kinds of fires. Mixed fire regimes,
characterized by 35- to 100-year fire return intervals, and a mixture of low
to moderate surface fires and higher severity stand replacement fires,
historically occurred on about 40 percent of forested areas. They currently
occur on about 35 percent of the forested areas (Schmidt and others 2002). As
a result of these current conditions, more than 80 percent of the forest
landscape in the inland Northwestern United States contains lands with
mixed to high severity fire regimes (Quigley and others 1996) (fig. 2).
The greatest changes in ponderosa pine and dry Douglas-fir forests have
occurred predominantly in fire regimes characterized historically by high
frequency surface fires (Arno 1980, Agee 1991, 1993, 1994, Taylor and
Skinner 1998, Brose and Wade 2002). Weaver (1943) noted that historically,
dry forests contained diverse understories most often of grasses, forbs, and
low shrubs—a condition maintained by frequent, low-intensity surface fires.
These forests were so open Western settlers were able to travel through many
of the pine stands on wagons and horseback (Evans 1990, Wickman 1992)
(fig. 3). Dense stand and forest structures are now common on sites histori-
cally burned by frequent, low to moderately severe fires (Arno 1980, Agee
1991, 1993, 1994, Taylor and Skinner 1998, Brose and Wade 2002). These
conditions— with their abundant surface and ladder fuels, and low canopy
Figure 2—The proportion of low severity, mixed severity, and
high severity fire regimes in the pre-1900 period and in recent
times in the inland Northwestern United States. Note the
increasing proportion of high severity fire regime. Data from
Quigley and others (1996).

6
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
Figure 3—Historically (1900) open ponderosa pine conditions
were probably maintained by frequent surface fires. Note the
abundant grass layer and the relatively high crown base heights.
base heights—readily facilitate the development of crown fires (Weaver
1943, Dickman 1978, Laudenslayer and others 1989, Scott and Reinhardt
2001) (fig. 1).
Throughout the United States, wildfires have been aggressively sup-
pressed since the early 1900s, although this effort has likely been most
successful only after about 1940 when modern vehicles and equipment
became available and extensive road networks made remote locations
accessible. In the Western United States, the area annually burned de-
creased from the early 1900s into the 1960s, then the trend reversed, with
the number of acres burned each year increasing with significant increases
since the mid-1980s (Agee 1993). This was exemplified by the fires that
burned in and around the Bitterroot National Forest in 2000 (fig. 4). What
appears to be different about the recent fires is the number of ignitions that
contributed to burning large areas. More than 1,700 fire starts were
responsible for burning the 3.1 million acres of the Northern Rocky
Mountains in 1910, and 78 starts burned more than 350,000 acres in the
Bitterroot Valley in western Montana in July 2000 (USDA Forest Service
1978, 2000). Contrast these fire events to the 2002 Rodeo-Chedeski Fire
that was the result of only two fire starts and burned more than 450,000
acres in Arizona. Similarly, on June 8, 2002, one start along the Colorado
Front Range of the Rocky Mountains led to the Hayman Fire that burned
nearly 138,000 acres in 20 days (Graham 2003). These recent and large
wildfires all seem to exhibit uncharacteristically intense wildfire behavior
and increased fire severity (fig. 5).

7
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
Figure 4—One of the many fires that burned in
the Bitterroot Valley of western Montana in 2000.
Figure 5—Uncharacteristically intense wildfire burning a current ponderosa pine
dominated forest. Note the low crown base heights and the intense surface fire.

8
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
Fuels
Fire behavior and severity depend on the properties of the various fuel (live
and dead vegetation and detritus) strata and the continuity of those fuel
strata horizontally and vertically. The fire hazard for any particular forest
stand or landscape can be characterized by the potential for the fuels to cause
specific types of fire behavior and effects. Understanding the structure of
fuelbeds and their role in the initiation and propagation of fire is the key to
developing effective fuel management strategies.
Fuelbeds are classified in six strata: (1) tree canopy, (2) shrubs/small trees,
(3) low vegetation, (4) woody fuels, (5) moss, lichens, and litter, and (6) ground
fuels (duff) (Sandberg and others 2001) (fig. 6). Each of these strata can be
divided into separate categories based on physiognomic characteristics and
relative abundance. Modification of any fuel stratum has implications for fire
behavior, fire suppression, and fire severity (fig. 5).
Figure 6—Six horizontal fuelbed strata represent unique combustion environments.  Each fuelbed
category is described by physiognomic (qualitative features including morphological, chemical, and
physical features) and relative abundance (Sandberg and others 2001).

9
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
• Ground fuels consist of duff (organic soil horizons), roots, and buried
woody material (fig. 7) (Sandberg and others 2001). Often needle fall
and bark slough will accumulate at the base of trees and eventually
create deep organic layers in which fine roots and ectomycorrhizae of
trees and ground level vegetation may accumulate (Graham and others
2000). Ground fuels burn typically by smoldering and may burn for
many hours, days, or even weeks, if initial moisture contents are high
(Frandsen 1991, Hungerford and others 1991) (fig. 7). This long dura-
tion smoldering can often lead to soil damage, tree mortality (high
severity), and smoke impacts (Wells and Campbell 1979, Ryan and
Noste 1983, Ryan and Reinhardt 1988). Rotten material on the ground
surface is particularly ignitable by firebrands (small twig segments or
bark flakes supporting glowing combustion) falling ahead of an advanc-
ing fire front, which increases the success of spotting (fig. 7).
Figure 7—Fuelbed strata have
different implications for
combustion environment, fire
propagation and spread, and fire
effects. The canopy (A), ladder
fuels (B) and shrub layers (C)
contribute to crown fires. Low
vegetation (D), woody fuel (E),
and ground fuel (F) contribute to
surface fires. Woody fuel (E) and
ground fuels (F) are most often
associated with smoldering fires
and residual combustion that can
transfer large amounts of heat
deep into the soil.

10
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
• Surface fuels consist of grasses, shrubs, litter, and woody material lying
on, or in contact with the ground surface (fig. 6, 7) (Sandberg and others
2001). Surface fuel bulk densities (weight within a given volume), and
size class distribution (for example, number of pieces in 0 to 0.25 inch,
0.25 to 1.0 inches, 1.0 to 3.0 inches, and greater than 3 inches size
classes) are critical to frontal surface fire behavior (spread rate and
intensity) compared simply to fuel loading (weight per unit area). Other
characteristics of surface fuels that determine surface fire behavior are
fuel depth, continuity, and chemistry (fig. 8). Surface fires burn in both
flaming and postfrontal (smoldering or glowing—minimal flames but
glowing embers) phases. High energy release rates occur during the
relatively short flaming phase where fine fuels are consumed, and low
energy release rates occur for longer times by smoldering and glowing
phases that consume larger (greater than 3 inches diameter) fuels.
Surface fuel complexes with high loadings of large material—for
example, slash left after timber harvesting, precommercial thinning
operations, or high fuel loads from natural events such as blowdowns
or  ice storms—have long flaming residence times compared to fine
fuels such as shrubs or grasses. High surface fire intensity usually
increases the likelihood for igniting overstory canopy fuels, but surface
fuel types with longer residence times can contribute to drying aerial
Figure 8—Reducing the amount, depth, and continuity of surface fuels, especially
those less than 3 inches in diameter, left after forest management activities using
prescribed fire or mechanical methods reduces the likelihood that overstory
canopies will ignite during a wildfire.

11
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
fuels above a forest canopy, which also leads to torching (when a tree’s
or group of trees’ foliage ignites and flares up, usually from bottom to
top) (Alexander 1998).
• Crown fuels (also referred to as canopy fuels, or aerial fuels) are those
suspended above the ground in trees or vegetation (vines, mosses,
needles, branches, and so forth) (fig. 6, 7). These fuels tend to consist
mostly of live and fine material less than 0.25 inch. Crown fuels are the
biomass available for crown fire, which can be propagated from a
surface fire via understory shrubs and trees, or from crown to crown.
The shrub/small tree stratum is also involved in crown fires by increas-
ing surface fireline intensity and serving as “ladder fuels” that provide
continuity from the surface fuels to canopy fuels, thereby facilitating
crown fires. These essentially bridge the vertical gap between surface
and crown strata. The size of this gap is critical to ignition of crown fire
from a surface fire below (Van Wagner 1977). Van Wagner (1977)
identified two thresholds of crown fire activity. Crowns are ignited after
the surface fire reaches critical fireline intensity relative to the height
of the base of the aerial fuels in the crown. This crown ignition can
become an “active” crown fire if its spread rate is high enough to surpass
the second threshold based on the crown density (often referred as
canopy bulk density—canopy weight for a given volume). Aerial fuels
separated from surface fuels by large gaps are more difficult to ignite
because of the distance above the surface fire, thus requiring higher
intensity surface fires, surface fires of longer duration that dry the
canopy before ignition, or mass ignition from spotting over a wide area
(Byram 1966) (fig. 9). Once ignited, high density canopy fuels (fig. 7A)
are more likely to result in a spreading crown fire (active crown fire)
than low density canopies.
Figure 9—The greater the distance
between surface fuels (A) and the
base of tree crowns (B) the more
difficult it is for surface fires to
become crown fires.

12
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
Conditions for Ignition _____________________________________________
The probability of ignition is strongly related to fine fuel moisture content,
air temperature, the amount of shading of surface fuels, and the occurrence
of an ignition source (human or lightning caused) (Rothermel 1983). Stand
structure strongly influences all these factors. There is generally a warmer,
dryer microclimate in more open stands (fig. 9) compared to denser stands
(fig. 7A) (Countryman 1955, Weatherspoon 1996). Dense stands (canopy
cover) tend to provide more shading of fuels, keeping relative humidity
higher and air and fuel temperature lower than in more open stands. Thus,
dense stands tend to maintain higher surface fuel moisture contents com-
pared to more open stands (Andrews 1986). More open stands also tend to
allow higher wind speeds that tend to dry fuels compared to dense stands
(Weatherspoon 1996). These factors may increase probability of ignition in
some open canopy stands compared to dense canopy stands. However, this
forest structure historically played an important role in maintaining fire-
dependent forest types, such as ponderosa pine.
Fire Behavior _____________________________________________________
In general, wildfire behavior is influenced by short- and long-term weather,
physical setting (local to regional topography and terrain features), fuels
(composition, structure, moisture content of dead and live vegetation and
detritus) (Rothermel 1983, Chandler and others 1991, Debano and others
1998, Graham and others 1999). All of these elements work in concert over
multiple spatial and temporal scales to determine how wildfires behave.
Because of the infinite number of combinations of these elements, as well as
ignition location, the growth and behavior of each fire are likely to be unique.
Most important, the fire behavior characteristics are strikingly different for
cold (for example, lodgepole pine, Engelmann spruce, subalpine fir), moist
(for example, western hemlock, western redcedar, western white pine), and
dry forests (Agee 1993, 1996, 1998b, Romme and others 2003). Cold and moist
forests tend to have long fire-return intervals, but fires that do occur tend to
be high-intensity, stand-replacing fires. Dry forests historically had short
intervals between fires, but most important, the fires had low to moderate
severity.
Fire behavior is typically described at the stand level, but the spatial
arrangement of stands affects the growth of large fires across landscapes.
Fire behavior characteristics include rate of spread, intensity, residence
time, transition to crown fire, and spotting, and are associated with a flaming
front (Rothermel 1972, 1983, 1991, Albini 1976, VanWagner 1977). Typically
these are defined, modeled, and measured at the head of a fire (burns with
the wind or slope) but can apply to any segment of fire perimeter spreading
in any direction such as a flanking (tangential to the direction of the main
active fire, generally across slope) or backing (opposite the direction of the
main active fire, generally downslope) fire. These behaviors usually apply to
fine spatial scales (hundreds to thousands of square feet), and time intervals
of less than a minute to tens of minutes. However, considerable variation
within those periods can be exhibited. In many fires, fuel consumption and

13
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
smoke production occur in both flaming and smoldering postflaming phases
of combustion, with most consumption of, and smoke production from, woody
fuel and ground fuel strata occurring after flaming has ceased (Frandsen
1991, Hungerford and others 1991) (fig. 10).
Frontal fire behaviors in broad landscapes vary at coarser temporal (for
example, days) and spatial scales as the fire moves across various stands,
terrain, and fuel conditions. Fire behavior in landscapes is often described in
terms of perimeter or area growth (Rothermel 1991). Ember production from
torching trees and crown fire can rapidly advance the fire front, increasing
its growth and allowing it to cross natural or artificial barriers (Albini 1979).
The relative spread direction (backing, flanking, heading) is an important
aspect of fire behavior because fires interact with vegetation, weather, and
setting to back and flank around different situations as they move through
a landscape. Fires are usually placed into three broad classes, each contain-
ing unique fire behavior characteristics. These fires include smoldering or
ground fires, surface fires, and crown fires.
Ground Fire
Ground fires or residual smoldering fires, are an important but often
overlooked component of most fires (Frandsen 1991). Three fuelbed strata
contribute to the initiation and slow spread of ground fires (fig. 7, 8, 10).
Ground fuel, consisting principally of soil organic horizons (or duff), contrib-
utes most of the fuel and can burn slowly for days to months even if the fuels
Figure 10—Large amounts of smoke can be produced from smoldering ground fuels
after flames have subsided and large amounts of heat can be transferred to the soil
(K. Watenmaker photo).

14
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
are relatively wet (fig. 7F). Deep layers of continuous ground fuels are often
found in forests that have not experienced fire for several decades, with large
additional accumulations near the bases of large trees. Moss, lichens, and
litter have high surface area and when very dry can facilitate both the spread
of ground fires and a transition to surface (flaming) fire. Woody fuel (sound
logs, rotten logs, stumps, and wood piles) is often underestimated as a
component of ground fires but can sustain low intensity burning for weeks to
months, with potential flaming combustion under dry, windy conditions
(fig. 7E). Combustion of woody fuel also can contribute significantly to smoke
production and soil impacts (for example, loss of organic matter, erosion,
nutrient volatilization) (Hungerford and others 1991, Johansen and others
2001) (fig. 10).
Surface Fire
The intensity and duration of surface fires depend on the availability and
condition of surface fuels. Three fuelbed strata (low vegetation, woody fuel,
and moss, lichen, and litter) contribute to the initiation and spread of
surface fires (fig. 6, 7). These materials can be randomly distributed across
the forest floor or may be concentrated in piles created through manage-
ment activities or naturally occurring events (for example, wind-thrown
trees). Woody fuel can greatly increase the energy released from surface
fires and in some cases increase flame lengths sufficiently to ignite ladder
and/or canopy fuels (fig. 11). Especially in the dry ponderosa pine and
Douglas-fir forests, forest floor litter consisting of small twigs, dead needles,
Figure 11—With sufficient fuels and flame lengths (fire intensity) surface fires can ignite
ladder fuels and tree crowns (K. Watenmaker photo).

15
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
and rotten wood can also increase the energy released during surface fires
(fig. 6, 7). Both burning and fuel conditions of surface fuels are highly
influenced by the presence and density of overstory tree canopies. Fine fuel
moisture content, surface air temperature, and shading of surface fuels
contribute to increasing the spread rate of surface fires in open stands
compared to surface fires burning in dense stands (Rothermel 1983,
Andrews 1986). Additionally, open conditions facilitate the development
of fine fuels (grasses, forbs, small shrubs) more readily than dense stands
(fig. 3), and when continuous these fine fuels can support more rapid fire
spread compared to large woody fuels. When surface fires frequently burn,
they tend to minimize surface and ladder fuel accumulations, which in turn
decrease the likelihood that crown fires will develop. Low severity surface
fires were relatively common (4 to 25 years) in the dry ponderosa pine and
Douglas-fir forests prior to the 20th century (Agee 1993, Hann and others
1997).
Crown Fire
The spatial continuity and density of tree canopies in combination with
wind and physical setting provide the conditions required for rapidly moving
fires that typically consume the crowns (needles and small branches) of large
forest areas (fig. 6, 7). Canopy base height, canopy bulk density (canopy
weight for a given volume), and canopy continuity are key characteristics of
forest structure that affect the initiation and propagation of crown fire (fig.
7A) (Albini 1976, Rothermel 1991). Canopy base height is important because
it affects crown fire initiation (fig. 9). Continuity of canopies is more difficult
to quantify, but clearly patchiness of the canopy will reduce the spread of fire
within the canopy stratum. Forest treatments that target height to live
crown and bulk density can be implemented to reduce the probability of
crown fire. Canopy bulk density varies considerably within stands but can
reach maximum values of 0.4 kg m–3 (Cruz and others 2003). Thinning to
reduce canopy bulk density to less than 0.10 kg m–3 is generally recom-
mended to minimize crown fire hazard (Agee 1996, 1998b, Graham and
others 1999), and for the most part below this point, active crown fire is
difficult to achieve (Scott and Reinhardt 2001).
Wildfires often exhibit sporadic crown fire development with fast and slow
episodes of fire growth. Along with wind and fuels, the relative humidity of
the air can have a large affect on fire behavior. For example, the 2002
Hayman Fire in Colorado experienced rapid growth and intense behavior on
days when the humidity hovered in the 10 percent range (Bradshaw and
others 2003, Finney and others 2003). Fire behavior on these days took place
during prolonged burning periods (daily periods of active fire behavior) that
lasted from mid-morning to nearly midnight and that characteristically had
torching, spotting, and crown fire (Finney and others 2003). When the
relative humidity was more moderate (exceeding 10 percent) the Hayman
Fire behavior was typified by surface fire, although some tree torching and
crown fire occurred.
Surface fires can spread rapidly through dry grass and forest floor fuels
igniting tree crowns (especially those with low crowns). Torching often

16
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
Figure 12—Fires can progress from torching individual and
groups of trees until entire hillsides are a blaze (K. Watenmaker
photos).
progresses from individual trees and small groups of trees to large groups
and stands within a few hours (fig. 12). Torching and crown fire are strongly
associated with spotting because firebrands are produced and injected high
into the windstream by vertical convection above the flame plume (Albini
1979). Winds often carry firebrands hundreds of feet and even miles from
their sources spanning barriers such as roads, ridges, rivers, and rock
outcroppings. Subsequent and numerous ignitions often occur when the
humidity is low and receptive, and when dry and continuous surface fuels
exist. This process can be repeated numerous times because fires can move
many miles in a day (Finney and others 2003). Over time, fire fronts can
increase in both number and size and interact with topography that further
contributes to crown fire runs. Entire stands and hillsides can be simulta-
neously ignited, which further advances fires by spotting. Under these
extreme weather conditions, long-range spotting (0.5 to 0.75 mile) can
accelerate fire intensity and spread. Fires can travel 1 to 2 miles per hour (88
to 176 feet per minute) and produce flame lengths from 100 to 200 feet during
crown fire spread. These kinds of fire behavior are typically associated with
atmospheric instability with vertical contrasts of temperature and humidity.
These conditions often develop above large fires producing large pyrocumulus

17
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
clouds (Werth and Werth 1998, Finney and others 2003) (fig. 13). These kinds
of extreme wildfire behaviors are not well understood, and their associated
fire whirls (Byram and Martin 1970) and mass ignition (Byram 1966, McRae
and Stocks 1987) can create tremendous local convective velocities and
burning rates beyond the scope of operational fire behavior or fire effects
models.
Other Influences on Fire Behavior
Fuels, weather, and physical setting determine fire behavior and in
particular determine fire intensity (the rate at which a fire produces thermal
energy in the fuel-climate environment). Therefore, the relation forest
structure has with fire intensity depends on the setting at which the fire
occurs, and on weather. The attributes of weather and physical settings that
constrain fire behavior occur at multiple spatial and temporal scales. Weather
at small spatial (forest stands and drainages) and temporal (hours) scales
regulates fuel moisture content, which influences diurnal and day-to-day
variation in fuel flammability. Temperature, relative humidity, and wind
throughout the fire season determine fire danger and the potential for
flammability and fire spread during wildfires. Weather at broad spatial
(regions, multiple states) and temporal scales (months to years), or climatol-
ogy, influences the availability of fuel over time and often controls extreme
fire behavior (for example, crown fire spread) and the occurrence of large fires
(Turner and others 1994, DellaSala and others 1995), although this gener-
alization varies considerably among biogeographic regions. Extreme fire
weather (low humidity and strong winds) also played a significant role in the
Figure 13—Pyrocumulus clouds can develop high (20,000 feet) over wildfires carrying
particulates and carbon monoxide.

18
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
1988 Yellowstone Fires (subalpine fir and lodgepole pine forests) (Romme
and Despain 1989) and in the Hayman Fire (ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir
forests) in Colorado in 2002 (Finney and others 2003) (fig. 11, 13).
Elevation, slope angle, aspect, and physiographic position influence how
a fire behaves (Agee 1993). At the broadest scale the orientation of river
corridors and/or mountain ranges influences how wind and precipitation
develops, and topographical features such as mountain passes can funnel
winds. In general, as elevation increases both precipitation and humidity
increases and temperature decreases, and these factors influence a fire’s
behavior as it burns up or down slopes. Fuels occurring on south-facing
aspects tend to be drier and dry faster (annually and diurnally) than fuels
occurring on northerly aspects. Fire spread rates double for every 30 percent
increase in slope angles up to 60 percent and doubles for every 15 percent
increase thereafter (Chandler and others 1991). Fires burning in narrow V-
shaped canyons may radiate sufficient heat to opposite slopes, thereby
predrying fuels, which can enhance a fire’s spread. Also, this canyon configu-
ration can channel winds spreading burning fire brands to opposite canyon
walls. Depending on the ridge and canyon configuration, there tends to be a
zone of turbulence when strong winds blow across ridges, which can radically
influence fire behavior (Chandler and others 1991). Therefore, there are
times when weather and physical setting control fire behavior, with forest
structure having minimal effect.
Depending on the type of fire (crown, surface, or smoldering) the interac-
tion between weather, physical setting, and fuels will vary. For example,
Hely and others (2001) compared BEHAVE (surface fire model) and the Fire
Behavior Prediction (FBP) model (crown fire model) using Canadian mixed
wood boreal forests. Their results disclosed that the dominant factor when
describing fire behavior using the FBP system was weather, whereas using
BEHAVE, surface fuels were more important in explaining the variation in
fire. Bessie and Johnson (1995) evaluated the surface fire intensity relations
in BEHAVE to determine the relative roles of fuel and weather in subalpine
forests of the Southern Canadian Rocky Mountains (Rothermel 1972, Van
Wagner 1977). They determined that surface fire intensity and crown fire
initiation were constrained by weather rather than fuels, while crown spread
was slightly more dependent on fuels. These studies indicate that the relative
influence of weather and fuels varies as a function of the specific biophysical
conditions.
The Hayman Fire in Colorado provides a good example on how the
combination of factors (weather, forest structure, physical setting) occurring
at multiple spatial scales influence how a wildfire burns (Bradshaw and
others 2003, Finney and others 2003). At the broad scale, a low pressure
system centered in eastern Washington influenced the wind direction and
local weather conditions occurring along the Front Range of the Rocky
Mountains. The landscape position of the South Platte River corridor readily
aligned with strong winds generated by the low pressure system along with
local dry air masses (humidity below 10 percent); combine this location with
the continuous dry fuels (ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir forests), and an
ignition in the right location led to rapid wildfire spread. This combination

19
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
of fuels, weather, and topography led to a fire run of 16 to 19 miles lasting an
entire day, burning 60,000 acres. Under these burning conditions fine-scale
forest structural variability (for example, stand density and composition)
that may have altered fire behavior under more benign weather had little
effect on fire progression. Islands of stands where fuels had been modified
were often surrounded by large extents of forest with heavy ladder fuels and
high crown densities. As a result, while the Hayman Fire behavior and
severity were affected locally, these fuel modifications did little to influence
the overall behavior and severity of the fire (Finney and others 2003).
Fire Severity and Fire Effects ________________________________________
Each fuelbed and combustion environment can create a different fire
severity (Ryan and Noste 1983). Crown fires remove much or the entire tree
canopy in a particular area, essentially resetting the successional and
growth processes of stands and forests (fig. 14). These fires typically, but not
always, kill or temporarily reduce the abundance of understory shrubs and
Figure 14—Severe crown fires
can kill large expanses of forests
that may take a 100 years or
more to return to a prefire state
(K. Watenmaker photos).

20
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
trees. Crown fires have the largest immediate and long-term ecological
effects and the greatest potential to threaten human settlements near
wildland areas. Surface fires have the important effect of reducing low
vegetation and woody, moss, lichens, and litter strata. This temporarily
reduces the likelihood of future surface fires propagating into crown fires.
Ground fires that consume large amounts of woody fuels and organic soil
horizons can produce disproportionately large amounts of smoke (fig. 10).
Ground fires reduce the accumulation of organic matter and carbon storage
and contribute to smoke production during active fires and long after flaming
combustion has ended. These fires can also damage and kill large trees by
killing their roots and the lower stem cambium (Swezy and Agee 1991).
Because ground fires are often of long duration, they may result in greater
soil heating than surface or crown fires, with the potential for reducing
organic matter, volatilizing nutrients, and creating a hydrophobic layer that
contributes to erosion (Hungerford and others 1991, Johansen and others
2001, Robichaud and others 2003) (fig. 15).
Figure 15—Ground fires (especially those with long
residence times) can severely burn soils, removing organic
matter, volatilizing nutrients, killing tree roots, and creating
water impermeable layers (see fig. 7, 10).

21
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
Dense forest conditions combined with extreme fire weather conditions
can lead to high fire severity in Western forest landscapes. Areas where
organic matter is entirely burned off may not return to the prefire state for
decades or centuries, but water repellent soil layers are usually more
ephemeral, persisting for 2 to 6 years (Johansen and others 2001) (fig. 16).
Areas where the ground cover is removed and severely burned will likely see
decreased infiltration of water, increased surface runoff and peak flows, and
Figure 16—Water repellent soil layers (A) after wildfires can promote soil
erosion (B), which in turn can impact domestic water supplies, decrease site
productivity, and slow vegetative recovery (K. Watenmaker photos).

22
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
the formation of pedestals, rills, and gullies (Johansen and others 2001). In
riparian settings the recovery of hillslopes and riparian vegetation will
influence how quickly the aquatic environments recover. Clearly, areas that
are less severely burned will likely recover to prefire conditions most rapidly.
Recovery of aquatic ecosystems within severely burned watersheds will be
most dependent on riparian recovery and the proximity to high quality
habitats that can provide sources for recolonization (Cipra and others 2003,
Romme and others 2003).
Depending on the setting (in particular topography and soil), perennial
streams downstream from fires can be impacted by large volumes of sedi-
ment (fig. 16). Depending on the recovery of the hillslopes, these fire effects
can be long lasting, and relatively little can be done to stop the problem. Large
amounts of sediment can be delivered into reservoirs, reducing water storage
capacity and potentially affecting fish and macroinvertebrate habitat. How-
ever, many ecosystems have a long history of fire, and native species and
populations have developed mechanisms for enduring fire or becoming
reestablished after fire. Therefore, most often the terrestrial vegetation will
likely recover normally. Where prefire vegetation is dominated by sprouting
species (for example, aspen, cottonwood, many shrub species, many grasses,
and other herbaceous species), a rapid return to prefire conditions is gener-
ally expected (Cipra and others 2003).
Areas dominated by nonsprouting species (for example, most conifer
species in dry interior forests), and areas burned by low-severity fires that do
not kill the entire forest canopy, may rapidly return to prefire conditions. In
areas where fires burn with moderate severity and also contain small patches
of high-severity burn, tree seedlings will most likely become established
within several years. Areas with large patches of high-severity fire may
become reforested slowly because of high local seed mortality and long
distances to seed sources outside the burned area; planting or seeding can
speed up regeneration in these cases (fig. 14). Fire facilitates the spread of
exotic species in most dry interior forests, and exotic species in turn can alter
fire regimes, nutrient cycling, and hydrology. Exotic plant species typically
persist in riparian and drainage areas, open-canopy areas, and along distur-
bance corridors such as roads and trails (Galley and Wilson 2001, Cipra and
others 2003, Romme and others 2003), and most species are difficult to
control.
Fuel Modifications _________________________________________________
In this section we describe the range of treatments that can be used to
modify forest fuels (vegetation), but we do not attempt to provide indepth
prescriptions for their implementation. Depending on the forest type and
physical setting, high densities of tree seedlings can regenerate after distur-
bance (Haig and others 1941, Pearson 1950), but as forests naturally develop,
tree numbers would decrease (fig. 1, 3). This reduction is caused by intertree
competition, wind, snow, ice, diseases, insects, fire, or a combination of these
factors. In addition to natural events that reduce density of forest stands,
forest management through the application of thinnings also can alter

23
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
species composition and stand structure. Classically, the term “thinning”
was applied to stand treatments aimed at redistributing growth on remain-
ing stems, but often any kind of partial cutting such as cleaning, weeding,
liberation, preparatory, improvement, sanitation, and selection cuttings
could be termed thinning. In all cases these treatments reduce the numbers
of stems in a forest stand and can create an infinite number of stand
structures (Graham and others 1999). These kinds of treatments can be
applied to alter forest species composition and structure to meet manage-
ment objectives such as producing forage for both wildlife and livestock,
producing timber products, creating disease and insect resistant stands, or
altering fire behavior and/or severity. Thinnings can be accomplished
with hand tools, machinery, fire, or combinations of techniques. Most
important, the conditions left after treatment and the subsequent forest
development determines the success of thinnings in meeting forest man-
agement objectives.
Crown fires are often considered the primary threat to the ecology of the
dry forest types and human values as well as the primary challenge for fire
management. However, even surface and ground fires that burn fine fuels
and organic layers on the forest floor can damage soils, weaken or kill
overstory trees, and provide an ignition source for homes and other property
(Hungerford and others 1991, Graham and others 2000, Cohen and Stratton
2003) (fig. 15, 16). Our current understanding of fire behavior in dry forests
dominated by ponderosa pine and/or Douglas-fir indicates that a crown fire
begins with a transition from a surface fire to the ignition of the canopy.
Crown fires are therefore dependent upon the sequence of available fuels
(first surface fuels-woody fuel, low vegetation and shrub strata, then ladder
fuels, then canopy fuels; fig. 4, 5). Fuel management in forest stands can be
designed to target specific fuel strata and disrupt the vertical progression of
fire from surface fuels to ladder fuels to canopy fuels, and the horizontal
progression of fire through individual fuel strata, especially from crown to
crown (Scott 1998a,b, Graham and others 1999, Scott and Reinhardt 2001).
Fuel treatments can increase the probability of modifying fire behavior
during most weather conditions. Extreme weather conditions (low fuel
moisture contents, low humidity, high winds) can create fire behavior that
can burn through or breach most fuel treatments (Finney and others 2003).
A realistic objective of fuel treatments is to reduce the likelihood of crown fire
and other fire behavior that would lead to a loss in value or lead to
undesirable future conditions, not to guarantee elimination of crown fire.
Fuel treatments should integrate ecological, economic, and social values
with respect to reduction of fire hazard and values at risk.
Qualitative observations, limited empirical data, and modeling provide
the scientific basis for identifying how forest structure can be modified to
reduce fire hazard and modify fire behavior. Additionally, research shows
that when activities reduce surface fuels (low vegetation, woody fuel, shrub
layer), those activities decrease the chances that surface fires will be able to
ignite ladder fuels and canopy fuels (Weaver 1955, Cooper 1960, Biswell
1960, Biswell and others 1973, Martin and others 1989, Pollet and Omi
2002). The most effective strategy for reducing crown fire occurrence and

24
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
severity is to (1) reduce surface fuels, (2) increase height to live crown, (3)
reduce canopy bulk density, and (4) reduce continuity of the forest canopy
(Van Wagner 1977, Agee 1996, Graham and others 1999, Scott and Reinhardt
2001, Cruz and others 2002). Objective, quantifiable fuel-treatment criteria
will assist fire managers and silviculturists in achieving desired conditions
for fuels to reduce fire hazard.
Prescribed Fire
The beneficial effects of prescribed fire on altering fuel structure and
wildfire behavior and effects have long been observed and reported (Weaver
1955, 1957, Cooper 1960, Biswell and others 1973, Fernandes and Botelho
2003). There is generally less predictability in posttreatment stand structure
following prescribed fire than with mechanical thinning treatments—re-
gardless of the targeted condition and burning prescriptions, since pre-
scribed fire is not as precise a tool for modifying stand structure and
composition. While there are risks associated with use of prescribed fire
because of the possibility of escapes that may cause unintended resource and
economic damage, in practice, these types of problems are extremely rare
relative to the large number of prescribed fires successfully conducted every
year. On balance, prescribed fire is a useful tool that can effectively alter
potential fire behavior by influencing multiple fuelbed characteristics, in-
cluding (fig. 17):
• Reducing loading of fine fuels, duff, large woody fuels, rotten material,
shrubs, and other live surface fuels, which together with compactness
and continuity change the fuel energy stored on the site and potential
spread rate and intensity.
Figure 17—Prescribed fire can effectively reduce surface fuels when properly
applied, while maintaining high forest cover and soil productivity.

25
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
• Reducing horizontal fuel continuity (shrub, low vegetation, woody fuel
strata), which disrupts growth of surface fires, limits buildup of inten-
sity, and reduces spot fire ignition probability.
• Increasing compactness of surface fuel components, which retards
combustion rates.
Prescriptions designed to remove ladder fuels will decrease the vertical
continuity between surface fuels and canopy fuels. Prescribed burning often
directly consumes some of the lowest ladder fuels (shrubs, dead trees, needle
drape, small trees). Prescribed fire also often scorches the lower branches of
the overstory trees, killing them, and effectively raising the live crown above
the ground surface. Climatic and fuel moisture conditions severely restrict
prescribed burning windows in many forests, especially those with high
densities and heavy fuels.
Mechanical Thinning
Mechanical thinning has the ability to more precisely create targeted
stand structure than does prescribed fire (van Wagtendonk 1996,
Weatherspoon and Skinner 1996, Stephens 1998, Agee and others 2000,
Miller and Urban 2000). Using hand-saws or machinery, specific trees can be
selected for both removal and retention. Used alone, mechanical thinning,
especially emphasizing the smaller trees and shrubs, can be effective in
reducing the vertical fuel continuity that fosters initiation of crown fires. In
addition, thinning of small material and pruning branches are more precise
methods then prescribed fire for targeting ladder fuels and specific fuel
components in the ladder-fuel stratum. The net effect of removing ladder
fuels is that surface fires burning through treated stands are less likely to
ignite the overstory canopy fuels. However, by itself mechanical thinning
with machinery does little to beneficially affect surface fuels with the
exception of possibly compacting, crushing, or masticating it during the
thinning process. Depending on how it is accomplished, mechanical thinning
may add to surface fuels (and increase surface fire intensity) unless the fine
fuels that result from the thinning are removed from the stand or otherwise
treated (Alexander and Yancik 1977).
Other Treatments – Mastication, Mulching, and So Forth
Additional treatments utilize machines to rearrange, compact, or other-
wise change fire hazard without reducing fuel loads. In general, these
treatments are limited to relatively gentle slopes and areas of high values
near homes and communities. The ecological effects of these treatments vary
depending on the size, composition, and location of the fuels left by these
techniques (Graham and others 2000). For example, thin layers of wood chips
spread on the forest floor tend to dry and rewet readily, and deep layers of
both chips and chip piles may have insufficient air circulation, making poor
conditions for decomposition. Moreover, when layers of small woody material
are spread on the forest floor and decomposition does occur, the decomposing
organisms utilize large amounts of nitrogen reducing its availability to
plants. Therefore, any of these crushing, chipping, or mulching treatments

26
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
Figure 18—Machines can be used to chunk
and chip forest residue reducing the fire
hazard.
need to consider their impacts on decomposition processes and their poten-
tial contribution to smoldering fires (fig. 10, 18).
Thinning and Prescribed Fire Combined
The most effective and appropriate sequence of fuel treatments depends on
the amount of surface fuel present; the density of understory and mid-canopy
trees; long-term potential effects of fuel treatments on vegetation, soils, and
wildlife; and short-term potential effects on smoke production (Huff and
others 1995). In forests that have not experienced fire for many decades,
multiple fuel treatments are often required to achieve the desired fuel
conditions. Thinning followed by prescribed burning reduces canopy, ladder,
and surface fuels, thereby providing maximum protection from severe fires
in the future (Peterson and others 2003). Potential fire intensity and/or

27
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
severity in thinned stands are significantly reduced only if thinnings are
accompanied by reducing the surface fuels (woody fuel stratum) created from
the thinning operations (Alexander and Yancik 1977, Hirsch and Pengelly
1999, Graham and others 1999). Given current accumulations of fuels in
some stands, multiple prescribed fires—as the sole treatment or in combina-
tion with thinning—may be needed initially, followed by long-term mainte-
nance burning or other fuel reduction (for example, mowing), to reduce crown
fire hazard and the likelihood of severe ecosystem impacts from high severity
fires (Peterson and others in prep).
The most appropriate fuel treatment strategy is often thinning (removing
ladder fuels and decreasing tree crown density) followed by prescribed fire,
piling and burning of fuels, or other mechanical treatments that reduce
surface fuel amounts. This approach reduces canopy, ladder, and surface
fuels, thereby reducing both the intensity and severity of potential wildfires.
Mechanical treatment to manipulate fuels, used in combination with subse-
quent prescribed fire, offers a viable alternative, but only where mechanical
treatment is feasible. For practical reasons, some areas can only be treated
with prescribed fire or manual operations using chainsaws, even though the
preferred prescription would involve mechanical methods as well. Restoring
dry forests to a condition in which fire can be used to maintain the desired
conditions will take time. Wildland fire use (that is, allowing certain wildfires
to burn under certain conditions and locations) offers some hope once homes
and communities and key resources are protected through thinning, pre-
scribed fires, or other treatments.
Posttreatment Environment
Thinning and prescribed fires can modify understory microclimate that
was previously buffered by overstory vegetation (Agee 1996, Weatherspoon
1996, Scott and Reinhardt 2001, Pollet and Omi 2002). Thinned stands (open
tree canopies) allow incoming solar radiation to penetrate to the forest floor,
which then increases surface temperatures, decreases fine fuel moisture,
and decreases relative humidity compared to unthinned stands—conditions
that can increase surface intensity (that is, how fast the fire is consuming
fuel and producing energy) (Countryman 1955, Pollet and Omi 2002). An
increase in surface fire intensity may increase the liklihood that overstory
tree crowns may ignite (Van Wagner 1977). Therefore, it is important that
the gap between the surface and crown fuels be maintained through either
prescribed fire or pruning (fig. 9) so that if a fire should occur, the potential
for crown fire initiation is minimized. Changing crown structure, while
ignoring surface fuels, will only affect the likelihood of active crown fires—
it will not necessarily reduce the likelihood of surface fires severe enough to
damage soils or intense enough to ignite tree crowns (Alexander and Yancik
1977, van Wagtendonk 1996, Stephens 1998). Therefore, it cannot be empha-
sized enough that all fuel strata need to be managed (over time and space)
to minimize the unwanted consequences of wildfires.
Recent estimates indicate that nearly 100 million acres of forest lands that
were historically burned by frequent surface fires in the Western United
States may benefit from the restoration of surface fire, and 11 million acres

28
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
of forests need to be treated to protect communities from wildfire (Aplet and
Wilmer 2003). In addition, Rummer and others (2003) estimate that over 66
million acres of forest lands could benefit from fuel reduction. Even with
uncertainties and arguments as to the precision and accuracy of these
estimates, they clearly illustrate that treatment needs for modifying fire
behavior and severity are staggering. Access and operability issues further
limit the options available on a large portion of Western forests, and costs and
lack of industrial infrastructure to utilize small diameter material are other
critical factors influencing treatment possibilities.
Treatment Longevity
There are few specific experiments that have evaluated the longevity of
treatments and their effectiveness in altering fire behavior. However, there
is considerable information on forest growth and development, and this
information is useful in providing estimates on the longevity of potential
treatments. There are good models available (Reinhardt and Crookston
2003) that predict vegetation development over time and provide estimates
of treatment longevity.
There is limited information on the relation between canopy structure and
ground-level vegetation, or the relation between vegetation development
and fuel moisture. For short periods (months) after treatment, fuel changes
can produce dramatic differences in fire behavior. Biswell and others (1973)
showed that the effectiveness of prescribed fire treatments in maintaining
desired fuel conditions decreased significantly over two decades in a ponde-
rosa pine forest. Van Wagtendonk and Sydoriak (1987) directly examined
fuel accumulation following prescribed burning and found that fuel amounts
reached 67 percent of their preburn loading after 7 years. Many of the
prescribed fires they used were the first fuel treatments that occurred in
these stands in decades and would be expected to kill many small trees
that would contribute to the woody fuel load. Repeated burns were not
studied, but the elimination of small trees using a series of burns would
be expected to retard fuel accumulation compared to the amounts they
reported. Van Wagtendonk and Sydoriak (1987) concluded that pre-
scribed burning would be required at least every 11 years to maintain fuel
loads below their preburn condition. Van Wagtendonk (1995) also re-
ported reductions in fire spread and intensity of fires up to 14 years after
previous burns within the mosaic of large fires in the mixed-conifer
forests of Yosemite National Park.
The duration of treatment effectiveness will vary with climate, soils, and
other factors that influence productivity and the nature of the fuel treat-
ments (Keyes and O’Hara 2002). For example, the longevity of thinning slash
is greater on drier sites, particularly for finer woody material compared to
fine fuels occurring in wetter forests (Christiansen and Pickford 1991).
Treatment effects will likely last longer in areas in which vegetation devel-
opment is slower than in areas of high productivity in which vegetation
development is more rapid and lush (Weatherspoon and Skinner 1996). Few
data exist, but inferences from fire history show that the length of treat-
ment effectiveness will vary with forest type (general fuel characteristics)

29
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
and fire regime (Taylor and Skinner 1998, Miller and Urban 1999, Chang
1999, Heyerdahl and others 2001, Miller 2003).
Fuel Treatment on Large Landscapes
The spatial patterns of fuel treatments in landscapes will most likely
determine their effectiveness in modifying wildfire behavior (Hessburg and
others 2000), because multiple stands and fuel conditions are involved in
large fires (Finney 2001). Fire behavior under extreme fire weather may
involve large areas of fuels, multiple fires, and spotting, so a “firesafe”
landscape needs to populate hundreds to thousands of acres with strategi-
cally located fuel treatments (Finney 2003). Treating small or isolated stands
without assessing the broader landscape will most likely be ineffective in
reducing wildfire extent and severity.
The spatial arrangement of vegetation influences the growth of large fires.
Patches of vegetation that burn relatively slower or less severely than
surrounding patches can reduce fire intensity, severity, or spread rate, or
may force the fire to move around them by flanking (at a lower intensity),
which locally delays the forward progress of the fire. This modeling approach
indicates that the effect of many patches dispersed throughout the landscape
(conceptually placed into a herringbone pattern) containing fuels that burn
slower could disrupt the forward progress of the fire and create variability in
the intensity of the fire as it moves across the landscape (Brackebusch 1973,
Finney 2001).
There are limited examples of how the effects of a previous fire on forest
structure have altered subsequent fire behavior and severity (Helms 1979,
Martin and others 1989, Pollet and Omi 2002). However, despite small-scale
modification of fire behavior, none of these studies demonstrated that spread
or behavior of a large fire was significantly altered, probably because the
units were relatively small and were surrounded by areas containing vegeta-
tion favoring continued fire growth. In the mixed-conifer forests of northern
California, fire intensity varied with dominance of short-needle or long-
needle conifers in the same fire regime (frequent, low to moderately intense
surface fires). Under similar burning conditions in a retrospective study of
the widespread fires of 1987, stands dominated by Douglas-fir sustained
significantly less damage than did stands dominated by ponderosa pine
(Weatherspoon and Skinner 1995). Given current fuel accumulations across
the interior West, small areas (unknown threshold) favoring low intensity or
severity fires will probably be irrelevant to fire behavior (Salazar and
Gonzalez-Caban 1987, Dunn 1989). Therefore, treatments that alter vegeta-
tion to favor low-intensity or less severe fires must consider spatial arrange-
ment of fuel structures to effectively alter wildfire behavior. Large-scale,
frequent mosaic burning may maintain many portions of some landscapes in
a treated condition and disrupt growth of the inevitable wildfire (Brackebusch
1973). Evidence that mosaic patterns reduce fire spread comes from natural
fire patterns that have fragmented fuels across landscapes. This spatial
pattern produces self-limiting fire growth and behavior by management of
natural ignitions, as shown in Yosemite National Park (van Wagtendonk
1995) and Sequoia National Park (Parsons and van Wagtendonk 1996).

30
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
Finney (2001) theoretically examined the importance of spatial pattern to
the efficiency and effectiveness of treatment units in changing fire behavior
at the landscape scale. Strategic area treatments (Finney 2001, Hirsch and
others 2001) create landscape fuel patterns that collectively slow fire growth
and modify behavior while minimizing the amount of treated area required.
The arrangement of vegetation pattern changes fire behavior by forcing the
fire to repeatedly flank around patches of treated fuels. Thus, the rate of
growth of the fire is slowed, and its intensity and severity are reduced. The
importance of spatial pattern is emphasized by findings that random fuel
treatment arrangements (Finney 2003) are extremely inefficient in changing
fire behavior (fig. 19)—requiring perhaps 50 to 60 percent of the area to be
treated compared to 20 percent in a strategic fashion (Finney 2001). If fuel
treatments are to be effective at changing the growth of large fires, then
strategic placement of treatment areas must be capable of accommodating
constraints on the amount and placement of fuel treatments because of land
ownership, endangered species, riparian buffers, and other concerns. The
costs and maintenance levels that would be needed to maintain this forest
pattern are unknown but should vary depending on the forest type.
An alternative to a landscape approach in altering fuels is to modify
portions of the vegetation in strategic locations across a landscape, and that
those portions are easily accessible and can be used as fuel breaks
(Weatherspoon and Skinner 1996, Agee and others 2000). The purpose of a
fuel break is to reinforce an existing defensible location that can be used by
firefighters to stop fire spread (Green 1977). The benefits of a fuel break are
Figure 19—Comparison of large fire growth rate among different
spatial fuel patterns.
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Relative Spread Rate
Fraction of Landscape Treated

31
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
Figure 20—Forest structure (tree density, surface fuels, crown base height and so
forth) can alter the intensity and severity of wildfires. The fire moving from the left to the
right in this photo ceased being a crown fire as it burned into the thinned stand.
only achieved if the fire suppression activities anchored to the fuel break are
successful in limiting the size or perimeter of the fire. No changes in fire
behavior or effects are achieved away from the fuel break or if a fuel break
fails to stop fires. Moreover, fuel breaks most often require long-term
maintenance and repeated treatments.
Treatment Efficacy
Fire behavior is strongly influenced by stand structure as it relates to live
and dead fuel loadings and ladder fuels. The type and abundance of surface
fuels, which allow falling embers to ignite and spread, also influence fire
behavior. Reducing both ladder fuels and surface fuels is essential to
effectively change fire behavior (fig. 20). Depending on the residual stand
structure, thinning or thinning-like treatments will be less effective at
reducing the risk of  crown fire initiation and spread if remaining trees have
crowns that reach near the ground, or if heavy surface fuel loadings remain.
Conversely, reducing surface fuels and pruning lower live branches could
affect fire behavior, even in fairly dense forests, by reducing the likelihood of
crown ignition (Omi and Kalabokidis 1991, Graham and others 1999, Omi
and Martinson 2002, Pollet and Omi 2002).
Examples from the Hayman Fire in Colorado illustrate these interactions
(Finney and others 2003). The Polhemus prescribed burn in November 2001
removed most surface fuel and pruned lower live branches from trees in a

32
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
ponderosa pine forest but did not significantly reduce overstory density.
These changes were sufficient to stop the Hayman Fire when it burned into
the area in June 2002 even though intense fire behavior was present,
facilitated by high winds (30 mph and greater) and low relative humidities
(near or below 10 percent). This treatment was applied within a few months
before the fire, thus decreasing the surface fuels substantially. In this case,
both the time since treatment plus the treatment itself contributed to the
change in fire behavior and subsequent fire severity. On the Manitou
Experimental Forest (located in the Hayman Fire area), mechanical harvest-
ing reduced density of all sizes of trees in a pure pine forest and concentrated
logging slash in large piles. These actions resulted in an easily suppressed
surface fire when the Hayman Fire burned into the area. On the other hand,
all trees were killed in the Sheepnose Fuels Reduction Project within the
Hayman Fire. Although the stand was heavily thinned from below, heavy
surface fuels from nonmerchantable logging slash allowed the fire to burn
intensely through this stand. It should be noted that the slash treatment was
in progress at the time of the fire, and a different outcome would have been
likely had the treatment been completed (Finney and others 2003).
Another example is the Cone Fire (September 2002) in northern California
that burned into the Blacks Mountain Experimental Forest. The fire burned
approximately 2,000 acres of a study designed to evaluate the effect varying
forest structures had on wildlife. When the fire encountered forest structures
in which the surface fuels had been burned and the canopy density reduced,
the fire dropped from a crown to a surface fire within the first few yards of
entering the treatment units. In areas where the surface fuels were not
treated, the fire continued through the unit as a surface fire with variable
intensity. There was considerable crown scorch and bark charring in these
treatment units with areas up to 2.5 acres where all trees were dead
(Skinner, personal communication).
The Biscuit Fire (August and September 2002) burned 500,000 acres,
mostly in the Siskiyou National Forest, Oregon, including several areas that
had been experimentally thinned 3 years earlier. Thinned stands in which
the surface fuels created during thinning had not been treated experienced
higher fire severity (tree mortality) than unthinned stands (C. Raymond and
D. Peterson, unpublished data). A stand that had been thinned and then
prescribed burned to reduce surface fuels had the lowest fire severity of all
stands studied.
These examples show that it is difficult to generalize the effects of thinning
forests to alter fire behavior due to variability in weather, physical setting,
and forest fuels. A key point from these examples is that thinning treatments
that are followed by reduction of surface fuels can significantly limit fire
spread under wildfire conditions.
Evaluation Tools __________________________________________________
Thinning (decreasing tree and/or shrub density using hand tools and/or
machines) and prescribed burning are the standard tools used to reduce fuels
in forests, with the most empirical data available at the forest stand scale.
Treatments are typically applied at the stand scale and not across large

33
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
landscapes. However, the management of fuels across large landscapes is
required to effectively reduce the area and severity of fires, to increase
recreation benefits, and to reduce negative effects such as smoke emissions,
damage to wildlife habitat, stream habitat, and fisheries. In addition,
because a small proportion of fires (approximately 1 percent) are responsible
for as much as 98 percent of the fire area (Strauss and others 1989), fuel
treatments need to be effective under extreme fire weather such as the
weather conditions experienced during the Hayman Fire of 2002 (Bradshaw
and others 2003).
Silvicultural options for fuel treatment, as summarized in Graham and
others (1999) and Peterson and others (2003), provide visual displays of each
thinning treatment and explain how treatments address fuel loading. Fur-
thermore, Graham and others (1999) provide examples of how specific
thinning treatments affecting stand density, height to live crown, and canopy
bulk density can be linked with National Fire Danger Rating System
(NFDRS) fuel models to evaluate the likelihood of crown fire following fuels
treatments. Scott and Reinhardt (2001) provide the conceptual and quanti-
tative framework for a more detailed analysis of the potential for transition
from surface fire to crown fire.
The Fuelbed Characteristics Classification System (FCCS) (Sandberg and
others 2001) has finer resolution than the NFDRS fuel models and is more
sensitive to fuel manipulations. The FCCS estimates quantitative fuel
characteristics (physical, chemical, and structural properties) and probable
fire parameters from comprehensive or partial stand inventory data, and it
allows users to access existing fuelbed descriptions or create custom fuelbeds
for any location in the United States.
Estimating propagation of fire at broad spatial scales is more challenging
but can be accomplished through geographic scaling and simulation model-
ing. FARSITE is the primary tool used to estimate fire spread, including
crown fire, for forest landscapes (Finney 1998). This simulation approach
integrates geospatial fuels data, climatic data, and fire behavior modeling
(BEHAVE, Andrews 1986) to predict fire spread. Because of the analytical
demands of FARSITE for data, modeling, and interpretation and its use of
stylized fuel models, it is difficult to link this approach with straightforward
fuel treatment guidelines. Still, FARSITE is a powerful tool for simulating
the propagation of fire and comparing treatment scenarios across large
landscapes, assuming that spatially explicit fuels data and good weather
data are available.
The use of analysis tools can also be effective in displaying vegetation
change and scheduling fuel treatments over time. For example SIMPPLE
(Simulating Pattern and Process at Landscape Scales) can be used to re-
create representations of historical conditions that can be compared to
current conditions of specific landscapes to determine treatment priorities
and treatment locations (Chew 2003). Site-specific activities can readily be
evaluated using the Forest Vegetation Simulator (FVS) and the Fuel and
Fire Effects extension of FVS to quantify vegetation and fuel succession
following fire or fuel treatments. These evaluation tools can be used to
display thinning and prescribed burning treatments such as frequent pre-

34
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
scribed burning (say, every 5 to 20 years). This treatment sequence may be
sufficient to control tree regeneration and surface fuels, but if not desirable
or practical, thinning can be scheduled every 20 to 40 years, perhaps
accompanied by prescribed fire. Because scheduling of fuel treatments will
vary by species, elevation, aspect, climatic zone, and soil fertility, these tools
can be effective in displaying the relative differences and consequences of
fuel treatments.
Uncertainties in Predicting Fire Behavior ______________________________
While we have a good general understanding of the factors that govern fire
behavior, the interactions among these factors and the way in which fire
behaves on the landscape are highly complex. As a result, fire behavior and
severity can be understood and predicted in general terms, but exact
predictions are not possible. Different models have been developed that are
widely used and useful to assist in managing fires and developing fuel
treatment plans. However, there are key uncertainties in how the simplify-
ing assumptions of models affect their accuracy and as well as uncertainties
that result from difficulties of providing adequate input data to operate the
models. The limitations to predictions using models can be categorized as:
• Model assumptions and limitations. Because all models are ab-
stractions of reality and not reality itself, there are many limitations to
the predictions resulting from the models. By necessity, models sim-
plify much of what really happens in order to facilitate the user’s
understanding of the process. In addition, many models are developed
to reflect weather conditions that are “normal” and not extreme;
therefore, their predictions do not reflect these types of events (Albini
1976, Van Wagner 1977, Rothermel 1983, Andrews 1986).
• Unknowable fire environment at the time wildfires encounter
treatments. Even if models were nearly perfect, we would never be
able to predict the exact conditions of a wildfire that would encounter
a fuel treatment and serve as the performance measure. For example,
the weather and wind conditions at a particular time, the attendant
ignition location and direction of fire movement through the treatment,
the degree of variability in the treatment conditions at the time of the
fire—all these determine the performance of a fuel treatment in terms
of the changes to fire behavior and effects.
• Coarse data descriptions of fuels and environmental condi-
tions. The most detailed fuel maps are typically resolved to about 30 m,
but this scale is still too coarse to reflect variability within that area,
such as heavy fuel concentrations or thickets of trees. Such fine-scale
variability could be important and may have important consequences
to fire growth over landscapes, but it is unknowable for fire modeling.
Our fuel data today tend to smooth out variation in order to represent
the “average” condition. However, the average fuel condition does not
produce the average fire behavior response because fire behavior
responds nonlinearly to changes in fuels and weather.

35
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
A key area of uncertainty is in how to determine thresholds of treatment
for different fuels when they are encountered by wildfire. Even though
models cannot predict how a given structure created by a fuel treatment will
fare when a wildfire encounters it, they can predict a range of conditions
under which fuel conditions will modify fire behavior and/or severity. In
general, models are effective in showing the contributions to the fire hazard
made by the different fuel strata—that is, the surface fuels, ladder fuels, and
crown fuels. However, each stratum affects fire behavior differently, and
there is uncertainty about how much treatment is needed in each stratum to
achieve desired results.
Stand structure and wildfire behavior are clearly linked (Weaver 1943,
Biswell 1960, Cooper 1960, Dodge 1972, Van Wagner 1977, Rothermel 1991,
McLean 1993), so fuel reduction treatments are a logical solution to reducing
extreme fire behavior. However, a majority of the evidence supporting the
effectiveness of fuel treatments for reducing crown fire hazard is based on
informal observations, nonsystematic inquiry, and simulation modeling
(Omi and Kalabokidis 1991, Scott 1998a,b, Stephens 1998, Finney 2001).
However, there are currently ongoing studies (not yet published) that are
adding to our limited empirical knowledge on the relation between forest
structure and fire behavior (Jain and others 2001, Pollet and Omi 2002, Omi
and Martinson 2002, Fire and Fire Surrogate studies, http://ffs.psw.fs.fed.us).
Summary ________________________________________________________
In many temperate ecosystems, especially the dry forests of the interior
West, biomass accumulates faster than it decomposes. Fire is the ecological
force that restores this balance. The decrease in fire occurrence in many of
these systems has disrupted the process, adding to available fuel and
changing forest structure. These changes increase the risk of uncharacteris-
tically severe surface fires and of initiating and sustaining crown fires. For
some ecosystems, such as those dominated by ponderosa pine and Douglas-
fir, crown fires are a historical anomaly that affects a range of ecological
conditions and socioeconomic values. Although homes in the path of a
wildfire are perhaps the most immediately recognized value at risk, severe
wildfires put numerous other important values at risk including: critical
infrastructure, critical fish and wildlife habitat, firefighter and public health
and safety, soil productivity, clean air, and functional fire-adapted ecosys-
tems. Some of these values are also threatened by the secondary effects of
wildfire, such as landslides, soil erosion, and the spread of exotic species. This
risk can be reduced in some cases by management efforts to alter forest
structure and decrease fuel loads.
Forest ecosystems are inherently complex entities about which we have
limited understanding. Detailed site-specific data on anything beyond basic
forest structure and fuel properties are rare, limiting our analytical capability
to prescribe management actions to achieve desired conditions for altering
fuels and fire hazard. In the face of this complexity, it is important to focus on
basic principles that assist decisionmaking processes (table 1) (Agee 2002b,
Peterson and others 2003).

36
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
Table 1—Principles of fire-resilient forests (adapted from Agee 2002b).
Objective
Effect
Advantage
Comments
Reduce surface and
Reduces potential
Fire control easier,
Surface disturbance
ladder fuels
flame length
less torching
less with fire than
other techniques
Increase canopy base
Requires longer flame
Less torching
Opens understory,
height
length to ignite tree
may allow surface
crowns
wind to increase
Decrease crown
Makes independent
Reduces crown fire
Surface wind may
density
crown fire less probable
propagation
increase, surface
fuels may be drier
Increase proportion
Thicker bark, taller
Increases survivability
Removing smaller
of fire-resistant tree
crowns, higher canopy
of trees
trees is sometimes
species
base height
problematic
As empirical data on fuel treatments and wildfires improve, we anticipate
that more informed decisions can be made for altering forest structure and
composition to impact wildfire behavior and severity in dry forests of the
interior West. Appealing as the idea may be, there is no “one size fits all”
solution. Given that fire behavior and resulting severity result from the
combination of weather, available fuels, and physical setting, the design of
site-specific solutions will be highly variable. Although there continues to be
a need for further work to understand fire behavior, a long-standing and
large body of knowledge about the role of forest structure and fuels on fire
behavior and severity provides a sound foundation for managers to develop
prescriptions for hazard reduction and restoration of dry conifer forests at
the stand level (for example, within individual treatment units). Fuel
management intended to mitigate the effects and behavior of large fires,
however, requires a landscape level perspective, encompassing many forest
types, stands, treatment units, prescriptions, and their spatial arrangement.
Current research clearly indicates the potential of fuel treatments to reduce
large fire growth, thereby reducing the chances of fires leaving wildland
areas, but only if the spatial arrangement of the treatment units is consid-
ered and planned for.
References _______________________________________________________
Agee, J.K. 1991. Fire history along an elevational gradient in the Siskiyou Mountains, Oregon.
Northwest Science 65: 188-199.
Agee, J.K. 1993. Fire Ecology of Pacific Northwest forests. Island Press, Washington, DC.
Agee, J.K. 1994. Fire and weather disturbances in terrestrial ecosystems of the eastern
Cascades. USDA Forest Service Pacific Northwest Research Station General Technical
Report PNW-GTR-320. Portland, OR.
Agee, J.K. 1996. The influence of forest structure on fire behavior. In: Proceedings, 17th
Annual Forest Vegetation Management Conference. Redding, CA. January 16-18, 1996:
52-68.
Agee, J.K. 1998a. Fire strategies and priorities for forest health in the Western United States.
In Proc. 13th fire and forest meteorology conference, Lorne, Australia. 1996. Pp 297-303.
Agee, J.K. 1998b. The landscape ecology of western forest fires regimes. Northwest Science
Special Issue 72: 24-34.

37
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
Agee, J.K. 2002. Fire behavior and fire-resilient forests. In S. Fitzgerald (ed.), Fire in Oregon’s
Forests: Risks, Effects, and Treatment Options. Oregon Forest Resources Institute, Portland,
OR. Pp. 119-126.
Agee, J.K., Bahro, B., Finney, M.A., Omi, P.N., Sapsis, D.B., Skinner, C.N., van Wagtendonk,
J.W., and Weatherspoon, C.P. 2000. The use of shaded fuelbreaks in landscape fire
management. Forest Ecology and Management 127: 55-66.
Agee, J. K., Wright, C.S., Williamson, N., and Huff, M.H. 2002. Foliar moisture content of
Pacific Northwest vegetation and its relation to wildland fire behavior. For. Ecol. Mgt. 167:
57-66.
Albini, F. 1976. Estimating wildfire behavior and effects. USDA Forest Service Intermountain
Forest and Range Experiment Station General Technical Report INT-30. Ogden, UT.
Albini, F.A. 1979. Spot fire distance from burning trees – a predictive model. USDA For. Serv.
Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-56.
Albini, F.A. and Reinhardt, E.D. 1995. Modeling the ignition and burning rate of large woody
natural fuels. Intl. J. Wildl. Fire 5(2): 81-92.
Alexander, M.E. 1998. Crown fire thresholds in exotic pine plantations of Australia. Ph.D.
Thesis, Australian National University, Canberra. 228 pp.
Alexander, M.E. and Yancik, R.F. 1977. The effect of precommercial thinning on fire potential
in a lodgepole pine stand. Fire Management Notes. Summer 1977:7-9.
Anderson, H.E. 1982. Aids to determining fuel models for estimating fire behavior. USDA
Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station, Ogden, UT, General Technical Report
INT-122.
Andrews, P.L. 1986. BEHAVE: fire behavior prediction and fuel modeling system – BURN
subsystem, part 1. USDA Forest Service Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment
Station General Technical Report INT-194. Ogden, UT.
Aplet, G.H. and Wilmer, B. 2003. The wildland fire challenge: focus on reliable data,
community protection, and ecological restoration. The Wilderness Society, Washington,
DC. 40 p.
Arno, S.F. 1980. Forest fire history of the northern Rockies. Journal of Forestry 78: 460-465.
Arno, S.F., and Brown, J.K. 1991. Overcoming the paradox in managing wildland fire.
Western Wildlands 171: 40-46.
Arno, S.F., Smith, H.Y., and Krebs, M.A. 1997. Old growth ponderosa pine and western larch
stand structures: influences of pre-1900 fires and fire exclusion. USDA Forest Service
Intermountain Research Station Research Paper INT-RP-495. Ogden, UT.
Barrett, S.W. and Arno, S.F. 1982. Indian fires as an ecological influence in the Northern
Rockies. Journal of Forestry 80(10):647-651.
Bessie, W.C., and Johnson, E.A. 1995. The relative importance of fuels and weather on fire
behavior in subalpine forests. Ecology 76: 747-762.
Biswell, H.H. 1960. Danger of wildfire reduced by prescribed burning in ponderosa pine.
California Agriculture 1410: 5-6.
Biswell, H.H., Kallander H.R., Komarek, R., Vogl, R.J., and Weaver, H. 1973. Ponderosa pine
fire management. Tall Timbers Research Station Misch. Pub. 2. Tallahassee, FL.
Bonnicksen, T.M. and Stone, E.P. 1982. Reconstruction of a pre-settlement giant sequoia-
mixed conifer forest community using the aggregation approach. Ecology 63: 1134-1148.
Brackebusch, A.P. 1973. Fuel management – a prerequisite, not an alternative to fire control.
J. For. 71:637-639.
Bradshaw, L., Bartlette, R., McGinely, and Zeller, K. 2003. Fire behavior, fuel treatments, and
fire suppression on the Hayman Fire. Part 1: Fire weather, meteorology, and climate. In :
Graham, Russell T. Tech. Ed. Hayman Fire Case Study. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-114.
Ogden, UT, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research
Station. 36-58.
Briffa, K.R., Jones, P.D., and Schweingruber, F.H. 1992. Tree-ring density reconstructions of
summer temperature patterns across western North America since 1600. Journal of
Climate 5: 735-754.
Brose, P. and Wade, D. 2002. Potential fire behavior in pine flatwood forest following three
different fuel reduction techniques. Forest Ecology and Management 163: 71-84.
Brown, A.A. and Davis, K.P. 1973. Forest fire: Control and Use. McGraw-Hill Book Co., New
York, NY. 686 p.
Byram, G.M. 1966. Scaling laws for modeling mass fires. Pyrodynamics. 4:271-284.
Byram, G.M. and Martin, R.E. 1970. The modeling of fire whirlwinds. For. Sci. 16(4):386-399.

38
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
Chandler, C., Cheney, P., Thomas, P., Trabaud, L., and Williams, D. 1991. Fire in forestry:
Forest fire behavior and effects. Malabar, F.L.: Krieger Publishing Company; 91; Volume
1.
Chang, C. 1999. Understanding fire regimes. Ph.D. Dissertation. Duke University, Durham,
NC.
Chew, J.D. 2003. Comparing two methods of identifying ecological restoration opportunities.
In: Omi, Philip N.; Joyce, Linda A. tech eds. Fire, fuel treatments, and ecological restoration:
conference proceedings. Fort Collins, CO. Proceedings. RMRS-P-29. Fort Collins, CO:
USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 135-142.
Christiansen, E.C. and Pickford, S.G. 1991. Natural abatement of fire hazard in Douglas-fir
blowdown and thinning fuelbeds. Northwest Science 65(4):141-148.
Cipra, J.E., Kelly, E.F., MacDonald, L., and Norman, J. 2003. Ecological effects of the Hayman
Fire: Part 3, soil properties, erosion, and implications for rehabilitation and aquatic
ecosystems. In : Graham, Russell T. Tech. Ed. Hayman Fire Case Study. Gen. Tech. Rep.
RMRS-GTR-114. Ogden, UT, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky
Mountain Research Station. 204-219.
Cohen, J. and Stratton, R. 2003. Home destruction within the Hayman Fire perimeter. In :
Graham, Russell T. Tech. Ed. Hayman Fire Case Study. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-114.
Ogden, UT, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research
Station. 263-292.
Conard, S.G., Hartzell, T., Hilbruner, M.W., and Zimmerman, G.T. 2001. Changing fuel
management strategies—the challenge of meeting new information and analysis needs.
International Journal of Wildland Fire 10: 267-275.
Cooper, C.F. 1960. Changes in vegetation, structure and growth of southwestern pine forest
since white settlement. Ecological Monographs 30: 129-164.
Cooper, S.V., Neiman, K.E., and Roberts, D.W. 1991. Forest habitat types of northern Idaho:
A second approximation. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service,
Intermountain Research Station. 143 p.
Countryman, C.C. 1955. Old-growth conversion also converts fire climate. In Proceedings of
Society of American Foresters Annual Meeting. pp. 158-160. Edited by, Society of American
Foresters, Portland, OR.
Covington, W.W., Fulé, P.Z., Moore, M.M., Hart, S.C., Kolb, T.E., Mast, J.N., Sackett, S.S., and
Wagner, M.R. 1997. Restoring ecosystem health in ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest.
Journal of Forestry, 1997. 95(4): 23-29.
Covington, W.W. and Moore, M.M. 1994. Southwestern ponderosa forest structure – changes
since Euro-American settlement. Journal of Forestry 92: 39-47.
Cruz, M.G., Alexander, M.E., and Wakimoto, R.H. 2002. Predicting crown fire behavior to
support forest fire management decision-making. Forest Fire Research and Wildland Fire
Safety. Millpress, Rotterdam, p. 1-10.
Cruz, M.G., Alexander, M.E., and Wakimoto, R.H. 2003. Assessing canopy fuel stratum
characteristics in crownfire prone fuel types of western North America. International
Journal of wildland fire, 12:39-50.
Daubenmire, R. and Daubenmire, J.B. 1968. Forest vegetation of eastern Washington and
northern Idaho. Tech. Bulletin. 60. Washington Agricultural Experiment Station, Pullman,
WA. 104. p.
DeBano, L.F., Neary, D.G., and Ffolliott, P.F. 1998. Fire: its effect on soil and other ecosystem
resources. John Wiley & Sons, Inc, New York. 333 p.
DellaSala, D.A., David, M., and Barth, S.E. 1995. Forest health: moving beyond rhetoric to
restore healthy landscapes in the inland Northwest. Wildlife Society Bulletin 23: 346-356.
Dickman, A. 1978. Reduced fire frequency changes composition of a ponderosa pine stand.
Journal of Forestry 76: 1: 24-25.
Dodge, M. 1972. Forest fuel accumulation-A growing problem. Science 177: 139-142.
Dunn, A.T. 1989. The effects of prescribed burning on fire hazard in the chaparral: toward a
new conceptual synthesis. In: N.H. Berg (Tech. Coord). Proc. of the Symp. on Fire and
Watershed Management. USDA For. Serv. Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-109. Pp 23-29.
Evans, J.W. 1990. Powerful Rocky: The Blue Mountains and the Oregon Trail, 1811-1883.
Enterprise: Eastern Oregon State College, Pika Press.
Everett, R.L., Schellhaas, R., Keenum, D., Spurbeck, D., and Ohlson, P. 2000. Fire history in
the ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir forests on the east slope of the Washington Cascades. Forest
Ecology and Management 129: 207-225.
Fernandes, P. and Botelho, H. 2003. A review of prescribed burning effectiveness in fire
hazard reduction. International Journal of wildland fire 12:117-128.

39
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
Finney, M.A. 1998. FARSITE: Fire Area Simulator – model development and evaluation.
USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station Research Paper RMRS-RP-4. Fort
Collins, CO.
Finney, M.A. 2001. Design of regular landscape fuel treatment patterns for modifying fire
growth and behavior. Forest Science 47: 219-228.
Finney, M.A. 2003. Calculating fire spread rates across random landscapes. Intl. J. Wildl.
Fire. 12(2):167-174.
Finney, M.A., Bartlette, R., Bradshaw L., Close, K., Collins, B.M., Gleason, P., Hao, W.M.,
Langowski, P., McGinely, J., McHugh, C.W., Martinson, E., Omi, P.N., Shepperd W., and
Zeller, K. 2003. Fire behavior, fuel treatments, and fire suppression on the Hayman Fire.
In Graham, Russell T. Tech. Ed. Hayman Fire Case Study. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-
114. Ogden, UT, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research
Station. 33-180.
Finney, M.A. and Cohen, J.D. 2003. Expectation and evaluation of fuel management
objectives. In P.N. Omi (ed.). Proc. of Fire, Fuel Treatments, and Ecological Restoration,
April 14-17, Ft. Collins CO. USDA For. Serv. Proceedings RMRS-P-29, pp 353-366.
Frandsen, W.H. 1991. Burning rate of smoldering peat. Northwest Science. 65:166-172.
Fulé, P.Z., Covington, W.W., and Moore, M.M. 1997. Determining reference conditions for
ecosystem management of southwestern ponderosa pine forest. Ecological Applications
7:895-908.
Galley, K.E.M. and Wilson, T.P. eds. 2001. Proceedings of the Invasive Species Workshop: The
Role of Fire in the Control and Spread of Invasive Species. Held at Fire Conference 2000:
The First National Congress on Fire Ecology, Prevention, and Management. Tall Timbers
Research Station, Tallahassee, Florida. 146 p.
Gisborne, H.T. 1923. Importance of duff moisture content in the forest fire problem. Journal
of Forestry 21: 807-809.
Graham, R.T. tech. ed. 2003. Hayman Fire Case Study. USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain
Research Station General Technical Report PNW-GTR-114: Ogden, UT, CO. 400 p.
Graham, R.T., Harvey A.E., Jain, T.B., and Tonn, J.R. 1999. The effects of thinning and similar
stands treatments on fire behavior in western forests. USDA Forest Service Pacific
Northwest Research Station General Technical Report PNW-GTR-463: Portland, OR.
Graham, R.T., Jain, T.B., and Harvey, A.E. 2000. Fuel: logs, sticks, needles, duff, and much
more. In: Neuenschwander, Leon F.; Ryan, Kevin C. Crossing the Millennium: Integrating
spatial technologies and ecological principles for a new age in fire management, Joint fire
science conference and workshop. Boise, ID. Spokane, WA: International Association of
Wildland Fire. 189-194.
Graumlich, L.J. 1993. A 1000-year record of temperature and precipitation in the Sierra
Nevada. Quaternary Research 39: 249-255.
Green, L.R. 1977. Fuelbreaks and other fuel modification for wildland fire control. USDA
Ag. Handbook 499.
Haig, I.T., Davis, K.P., and Weidman, R.H. 1941. Natural regeneration in the western white
pine type. Tech. Bulletin. No. 767. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture. 99 p.
Hann, W.J., Jones, J.L., Karl, M.G.S., Hessburg, P.F., Keane, R.E., Long, D.G., Menakis, J.P.,
McNicoll, C.H., Leonard, S.G., Gravenmier, R.A., and Smith, B.G. 1997. Chapter 3:
Landscape dynamics of the Basin. In: Quigley, Thomas M.; Arbelbide, Sylvia J. Tech. Eds.
An assessment of ecosystem components in the Interior Columbia Basin and Portions of the
Klamath and Great Basins: Volume II. Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-GTR-405. Portland, OR: U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. 338-1055.
Helms, J.A. 1979. Positive effects of prescribed burning on wildfire intensities. Fire Management
Notes 403: 10-13.
Helms, J.A. 1998. The dictionary of forestry. Society of American Foresters, Bethesda, MD.
210 p.
Hely, C., Bergeron, Y., and Flannigan, M.D. 2000. Effects of stand composition on fire hazard
in mixed-wood Canadian boreal forest. Journal of Vegetation Science. 11 813-824.
Hessburg, P.F., Smith, B.G., Salter, R.B., Ottmar, R.D., and Alvarado E. 2000. Recent changes
(1930s-1990s) in spatial patterns of interior Northwest forests, USA. Forest Ecology and
Management 136:53-83.
Hessl, A.E., McKenzie, D., and Schellhaas, R. 2003. Drought and Pacific Decadal Oscillation
linked to fire occurrence in the inland Pacific Northwest. Ecological Applications. In press.
Heyerdahl, E.K., Brubaker, L.B., and Agee, J.K. 2001. Spatial controls of historical fire
regimes: a multiscale example from the interior West, USA. Ecology 82: 660-678.

40
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
Hirsch, K., Kafka, V., Tymstra, C., McAlpine, R., Hawkes, B., Stegehuis, H., Quintilio, S.,
Gauthier, S., and Peck, K. 2001. Fire-smart forest management: a pragmatic approach to
sustainable forest management in fire-dominated ecosystems. 77(2):357-363.
Hirsch, K. and Pengelly, I. 1999. Fuel reduction in lodgepole pine stands in Banff National
Park. IN Neuenschwander and Ryan Eds. Proc. from the Joint Fire Sciences Conference and
Workshop. Pp 25-256.
Huff, M.H., Ottmar, R.D., Alvarado, E., Vihnanek, R.E., Lehmkuh, J.F., Hessburg, P.F., and
R.L. Everett, R.L. 1995. Historical and current forest landscapes in eastern Oregon and
Washington. Part II. Linking vegetation characteristics to potential fire behavior and
smoke production. USDA Forest Service General Technical Report PNW-GTR-355. Pacific
Northwest Research Station, Portland, OR.
Huffman, E.L., MacDonald, L., and Stednick, J.D. 2001. Strength and persistence of fire
induced soil hydrophobicity under ponderosa pine and lodgepole pine, Colorado Front
Range. Hydrological Process 15: 2877-2892.
Hungerford, R.D. 1996. Soils-fire in ecosystem management notes. Unit II-I. U.S. Department
of Agriculture, Forest Service, National Advanced Resource Technology Center, Marana,
AZ.
Hungerford, R.D., Harrington, M.G., Frandsen, W.H., Ryan, K.C., and Niehoff, G.J. 1991.
Influence of fire on factors that affect site productivity. In: Harvey, A. E. and Neuenschwander,
F. L., Comp. Proceedings—Management and productivity of western-montane forest soils.
Ogden, Utah: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research
Station. 32-50.
Jain, T.B., Ferguson, D.E., Graham, R.T., and others. 2001. Study Plan: Influence of forest
structure on wildfire burn severity: A retrospective look. Study 01.RMS.C2. USDA-FS
RMRS.
Johansen, M.P., Hakonson, T.E., Preshears, and David D. 2001. Post-fire runoff and erosion
from rainfall simulation: contrasting forests with shrublands and grasslands. Hydrological
processes. 15 2953-2965.
Kalabokidis, K.D., Gatzojannis, S., and Galatsidas, S. 2002. Introducing wildfire into forest
management planning: towards a conceptual approach. Forest Ecology and Management
158: 41-50.
Kaufmann, M.R., Fornwalt, P.J., Huckaby, L.S., and Stoker, J.M. 2001. Cheesman Lake: a
historical ponderosa pine landscape guiding restoration in the South Platte watershed of
the Colorado Front Range. In: Vance, R. K.; Covington, W. W.; Edminster, C. B. tech. coords.
Ponderosa pine ecosystems restoration and conservation: steps toward stewardship. Proc.
RMRS-P-22. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service Rocky
Mountain Research Station. 9-18.
Keyes, C.R. and O’Hara, K.L. 2002. Quantifying stand targets for silvicultural prevention of
crown fires. Western Jr. of Applied For. 17: 101-109.
Larsen, J.A. 1921. Sunshine and air temperature in relation to forest fires. Applied Forestry
Note. 9. USDA Forest Service, Northern Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment
Station, Missoula, MT.
Larson, D. and Mirth, R. 2002. Smallwood harvesting by conventional hand felling in the
wildland urban interface.
Laudenslayer, W.F., Darr, H.H., and Smith, S. 1989. Historical effects of forest management
practices on eastside pine communities in northeastern California. USDA Forest Service
Rocky Mountain Research Station General Technical Report RM-185: 26-34. Flagstaff, AZ.
MacCleery, D.W. 1995. The way to a healthy future for national forest ecosystems in the west:
what role can silviculture and prescribed fire play? USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain
Research Station General Technical Report RM-267: 37-45.
Lewis, H.T. 1973. Patterns of Indian burning in California. Ecology and Ethnohistory. Ballena
Press Anthropological Papers No. 1.
Martin, R.E., Kauffman, J.B., and Landsberg, J.D. 1989. Use of prescribed fire to reduce
wildfire potential. In: N.H. Berg (Tech. Coord). Proc. of the Symp. on Fire and Watershed
Management. USDA For. Serv. Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-109. Pp 17-22.
McLean, H.E. 1993. The Boise quickstep. American Forests 99: 11-14.
McRae, D.J. and Stocks, B.J. 1987. Large-scale convection burning in Ontario. Ninth Conf. on
Fire and Forest Meteorology. Am. Met. Soc., Boston Mass. pp 23-30.
Miller, C. 2003. Simulation of effects of climatic change on fire regimes. In Fire and climatic
change in temperate ecosystems of the western Americas. pp. 69-94. Edited by T.T. Veblen,
W.L. Baker, G. Montenegro, and T.W. Swetnam, Springer-Verlag, New York.

41
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
Miller, C. and Urban, D.L. 1999. Interactions between forest heterogeneity and surface fire
regimes in the southern Sierra Nevada. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 29:202-212.
Miller, C. and Urban, D.L. 2000. Modeling the effects of fire management alternatives on
Sierra Nevada mixed-conifer forests. Ecological Applications 10:85-94.
Minnich, R.A. and Chou, Y.H. 1997. Wildland fire patch dynamics in the chaparral of southern
California and northern Baja California. Intl. J. Wildl. Fire. 7:221-248.
Mutch, R.W., Arno, S.F., Brown, J.K., Carlson, C.E., Ottmar, R.D., and Peterson, J.L. 1993.
Forest health in the Blue Mountains: a management strategy for fire-adapted ecosystems.
USDA Forest Service Pacific Northwest Research Station General Technical Report PNW-
GTR-310. Portland, OR.
Omi, P.N. and Kalabokidis, K.D. 1991. Fire damage on extensively versus intensively
managed forest stands in the North Fork Fire, 1988. Northwest Science 65: 149-157.
Omi, P.N. and Martinson, E.J. 2002. Effect of fuels treatment on wildfire severity. Unpublished
final report to the Joint Fire Science Program Governing Board. Western Fire Research
Center, Colorado State University, Fort Collins.
Parsons, D.J. and DeBenedetti, S. 1979. Impact of fire suppression on a mixed-conifer forest.
Forest Ecology and Management 2:21-33.
Parsons, D.J. and van Wagtendonk, J.W. 1996. Fire research and management in the Sierra
Nevada. Chap. 3. In Halvorson, W.L. and G.E. Davis (eds) Science and ecosystem management
in the National Parks. Univ. Ariz. Press., Tucson.
Pearson, G.A. 1950. Management of ponderosa pine in the Southwest as developed by research
and experimental practices. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest
Service. 218 p.
Perry, D.A. 1994. Forest ecosystems. The John Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD. 649  p.
Peterson, D.L., Agee, D.L., Jain, T., Johnson, M., McKenzie, D., and Reinhardt, E. 2003. Fuels
planning: managing forest structure to reduce fire hazard. Proceedings of the 2nd
International Wildland Fire Ecology and Fire Management Congress, Orlando, FL, American
Meteorological Society, Washington, DC. In press.
Pollet, J. and Omi, P.N. 2002. Effect of thinning and prescribed burning on crown fire severity
in ponderosa pine forests. International Journal of Wildland Fire 11: 1-10.
Quigley, T.M., Haynes, R.W., and Graham, R.T. 1996. Integrated scientific assessment for
ecosystem management in the interior Columbia Basin. USDA Forest Service Pacific
Northwest Research Station General Technical Report GTR-PNW-382. Portland, OR.
Reinhardt, E.D. and N.L. Crookston eds. 2003 The Fire and Fuels Extension to the Forest
Vegetation Simulator. USDA Forest Service General Technical Report GTR-RM-116.
Rocky Mountain Research Station, Ogden, UT. 209 pp.
Reynolds, R.T., Graham, R.T., Reiser, M.H., Bassett, R.L., Kennedy, P.L., Boyce, D.A.,
Goodwin, G., Smith, R., and Fisher, E.L. 1992. Management recommendations for the
northern goshawk in the Southeastern United States. Gen. Tech. Rep. 217. Fort Collins, CO:
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range
Experiment Station. 90 p.
Robichaud, P.R., Beyers, J.L., and Neary, D.G. 2000. Evaluating the effectiveness of postfire
rehabilitation treatments. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-63, Odgen, UT. U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 85 pp.
Robichaud, P., MacDonald, L., Freeouf, J., Neary, D., Martin, D., and Ashmun, L. 2003.
Postfire rehabilitation of the Hayman Fire. In : Graham, Russell T. Tech. Ed. Hayman Fire
Case Study. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-114. Ogden, UT, U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 293-313.
Romme, W.H. and Despain, D.G. 1989. Historical perspective on the Yellowstone fires of 1988.
BioScience 39: 695-699.
Romme, W.H., Kaufmann, M.R., Veblen, T.T., Sherriff, R., and Regan, C.M. 2003. Ecological
effects of the Hayman Fire, Part 2: Historical (pre-1860) and current (1860-2002) forest and
landscape structure. In : Graham, Russell T. Tech. Ed. Hayman Fire Case Study. Gen. Tech.
Rep. RMRS-GTR-114. Ogden, UT, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky
Mountain Research Station. 196-203.
Rothermel, R.C. 1972. A mathematical model for predicting fire spread in wildland fuels. Res.
Pap. INT-115 Intermountain Research Station, Forest Service.
Rothermel, R.C. 1983. How to predict the spread and intensity of forest and range fires. USDA
Forest Service Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station General Technical
Report INT-143. Ogden, UT.

42
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
Rothermel, R.C. 1991. Predicting behavior and size of crown fires in the Northern Rocky
Mountains. USDA Forest Service Intermountain Research Station Research Paper INT-
438. Ogden, UT.
Rummer, B., Prestemon, J., May, D., Miles, P., Vissage, J., McRoberts, R., Liknes, G.,
Shepperd, W.D., Ferguson, D., Elliot, W., Miller, S., Reutebuch, S., Barbour, J., Fried, J.,
Stokes, B., Bilek, E., Skog, K., Hartsough, B., and Murphy, G. 2003. A strategic assessment
of forest biomass and fuel reduction treatments in Western States. United States Department
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Research and Development in partnership with the Western
Forest Leadership Coalition. 21 p.
Ryan, K.C. and Noste, N.V. 1983. Evaluating prescribed fires. In: Lotan, J. E.; Kilgore, B. M.;
Fischer, W. C.; Mutch, W. Tech. Eds. Proceedings, symposium and workshop on wilderness
fire. Ogden, UT: United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain
Forest and Range Experiment Station. 230-238.
Ryan, K.C. and Reinhardt, E.D. 1988. Predicting postfire mortality of seven western conifers.
Canadian J. For. Res. 18 1291-1297.
Salazar, L.A. and Gonzalez-Caban, A. 1987. Spatial relationship of a wildfire, fuelbreaks, and
recently burned areas. West. J. Appl. For. 2(2):55-58.
Sandberg, D.V., Ottmar, R.D., and Cushon, G.H. 2001. Characterizing fuels in the 21st
century. International Journal of Wildland Fire 10: 381-387.
Schmidt, K.M., Menakis, J.P., Hardy, C.C., Hann W.J., and Bunnell, D.L. 2002. Development
of coarse-scale spatial data for wildland fire and fuel management. USDA Forest Service
Rocky Mountain Research Station General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-87. Fort Collins,
CO.
Schmoldt, D.L., Peterson, D.L., Keane, R.E., Lenihan, J.M., McKenzie D., Weise, D.R., and
Sandberg D.V. 1999. Assessing the effects of fire disturbance on ecosystems: a scientific
agenda for research and management. USDA Forest Service Pacific Northwest Research
Station General Technical Report GTR-PNW-455. Portland, OR.
Scott, J. 1998a. Fuel reduction in residential and scenic forests: a comparison of three
treatments in a western Montana ponderosa pine stand. USDA Forest Service Rocky
Mountain Research Station Research Paper RMRS-RP-5. Ogden, UT.
Scott, J. 1998b. Reduce fire hazards in ponderosa pine by thinning. Fire Management
Notes 58 1: 20-25.
Scott, J. H. and Reinhardt, E.D. 2001. Assessing crown fire potential by linking models of
surface and crown fire behavior. USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station
Research Paper RMRS-RP-29. Fort Collins, CO.
Simard, A.J. 1991. Fire severity, changing scales, and how things hang together. International
Journal of Wildland Fire. 1 (1): 23-34.
Skinner, C.N. and Chang, C. 1996. Fire regimes, past and present. In Sierra Nevada
Ecosystem Project: Final report to Congress, vol. II chap. 38. University of California,
Centers for Water and Wildland Resources, Davis.
Skinner, C.N. pers. comm. Geographer, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service,
Pacific Southwest Experiment Station, Redding, CA.
Steele, R., Cooper, S.V., Ondov, D.M., Roberts, D.W., and Pfister, R.D. 1983. Forest habitat
types of eastern Idaho-western Wyoming. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-144. U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Ogden,
UT. 122 p.
Stephens, S.L. 1998. Evaluation of the effects of silvicultural and fuels treatments on potential
fire behavior in Sierra Nevada mixed-conifer forests. Forest Ecology and Management 105:
21-35.
Stewart, O.C. 1951. Burning and natural vegetation in the United States. Geographical
Review 41:317-320.
Stine, S. 1996. Climate, 1650-1850. In Sierra Nevada Ecosystem Project: Final report to
Congress,II: Assessments and scientific basis for management options ed., vol. II: Assessments
and scientific basis for management options. pp. 25-30. Edited by, Centers for Water and
Wildland Resources, University of California, Davis, Water Resources Center Report No. 37.
Strauss, D., Bednar, L., and Mees, R. 1989. Do one percent of forest fires cause ninety-nine
percent of the damage? Forest Science 35: 319-328.
Swetnam, T.W. 1993. Fire history and climate change in giant sequoia groves. Science 262:
885-889.
Swetnam, T.W., Allen, C.D., and Betancourt, J.L. 1999. Applied historical ecology: using the
past to manage for the future. Ecological Applications. 9:1189-1206.

43
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
Swezy, D.M. and Agee, J.K. 1991. Prescribed fire effects on fire root and tree mortality in
oldgrowth ponderosa pine. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 21:626-634.
Taylor, A.H. and Skinner, C.N. 1998. Fire history and landscape dynamics in late-
successional reserve, Klamath Mountains, California USA. Forest Ecology and
Management 111: 285-301.
Turner, M.G., Hargrove, W.H., Gardner, R.H., and Romme, W.H. 1994. Landscape disturbance
models and long-term dynamic of natural areas. Natural Areas Journal 14: 3-11.
USDA Forest Service. 1978. When the mountains roared. Coeur d’Alene, ID: U.S. Department
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Coeur d’Alene National Forest. 39 p.
USDA Forest Service. 2000. Bitterroot Fires 2000, an overview of the events, effects on people
and resources, and postfire recovery priorities. Hamilton, MT: U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Forest Service. 108 p.
Van Wagner, C.E. 1977. Conditions for the start and spread of crown fire. Canadian Journal
of Forest Research: 7: 23-34.
van Wagtendonk, J.W. 1995. Large fires in wilderness areas. In: Brown, J.K., R.W. Mutch,
C.W. Spoon, and R.H. Wakimoto. Tech. Coords. 1995. Proc: symp. on fire in wilderness and
park management. USDA For. Serv. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-GTR-320. pp 113-116.
van Wagtendonk, J.W. 1996. Use of a deterministic fire growth model to test fuel treatments.
In Sierra Nevada Ecosystem Project: Final report to Congress,II: Assessments and scientific
basis for management options ed., vol. II: Assessments and scientific basis for management
options. pp. 1155-1165. Edited by, Centers for Water and Wildland Resources, University
of California, Davis, Water Resources Center Report No. 37.
van Wagtendonk, J.W. and Sydoriak, C.A. 1987. Fuel accumulation rates after prescribed
fires in Yosemite National Park. P 101-105 in the 9th Conference on fire and forest
meteorology, Am. Meteorological Society, San Diego, CA.
Veblen, T. T., Kitzberger, T., and Donnegan, J. 2000. Climatic and human influences on fire
regimes in ponderosa pine forests in the Colorado Front Range. Ecological Applications (10):
1178-1195.
Weatherspoon, C.P. 1996. Fire-silviculture relationships in Sierra forests. In Sierra Nevada
Ecosystem Project, Final Report to Congress,II: Assessments and scientific basis for
management options ed., vol. II: Assessments and scientific basis for management options.
pp. 1167-1176. Edited by, Centers for Water and Wildland Resources, University of
California, Davis, Water Resources Center Report No. 37.
Weatherspoon, C.P. and Skinner, C.N. 1995. An assessment of factors associated with damage
to tree crowns from the 1987 wildfires in northern California. Forest Science. 41: 430-451.
Weatherspoon, C.P. and Skinner, C.N. 1996. Landscape-level strategies for forest fuel
management. In Sierra Nevada Ecosystem Project: Final report to Congress,II: Assessments
and scientific basis for management options ed., vol. II: Assessments and scientific basis for
management options. pp. 1471-1492. Edited by, Centers for Water and Wildland Resources,
University of California, Davis, Water Resources Center Report No. 37.
Weaver, H. 1943. Fire as an ecological and silvicultural factor in the ponderosa pine region of
the Pacific slope. Journal of Forestry 41: 7-14.
Weaver, H. 1955. Fire as an enemy, friend, and tool in forest management. Journal of Forestry
53:499-504.
Weaver, H. 1957. Effects of prescribed burning in ponderosa pine. J. For. 55:133-137.
Wells, C. G. and Campbell, R. E. 1979. Effects of fire on soil: a state of knowledge review. GTR-
WO-7 Forest Service: Washington Office. 34 p.
Werth, P. and Werth, J. 1998. Haines Index Climatology for the Western United States. Fire
Management Today. 58(3): 8-18.
Wickman, B.E. 1992. Forest health in the Blue Mountains: the influence of insects and
disease. USDA Forest Service Pacific Northwest Research Station General Technical
Report PNW-GTR-295. Portland, OR.



44
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 2004
Federal Recycling Program 
 Printed on Recycled Paper
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its
programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion,
age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, or marital or family status. (Not
all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require
alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print,
audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA’s TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice
and TDD).
To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights,
Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington,
DC 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal
opportunity provider and employer.
The Rocky Mountain Research Station develops scientific informa-
tion and technology to improve management, protection, and use of
the forests and rangelands. Research is designed to meet the needs
of National Forest managers, Federal and State agencies, public and
private organizations, academic institutions, industry, and individuals.
Studies accelerate solutions to problems involving ecosystems,
range, forests, water, recreation, fire, resource inventory, land recla-
mation, community sustainability, forest engineering technology,
multiple use economics, wildlife and fish habitat, and forest insects
and diseases. Studies are conducted cooperatively, and applications
may be found worldwide.
Research Locations
Flagstaff, Arizona
Reno, Nevada
Fort Collins, Colorado*
Albuquerque, New Mexico
Boise, Idaho
Rapid City, South Dakota
Moscow, Idaho
Logan, Utah
Bozeman, Montana
Ogden, Utah
Missoula, Montana
Provo, Utah
Lincoln, Nebraska
Laramie, Wyoming
*Station Headquarters, Natural Resources Research Center,
2150 Centre Avenue, Building A, Fort Collins, CO 80526
RMRS
ROCKY  MOUNTAIN RESEARCH STATION
