 
 
Forest fire devastation 'coup de grace' of mismanagement 
By SETH MULLER 
Sun Staff Reporter 
07/20/2003 
As thousands of people evacuated their homes to escape the Kinishba fire Thursday, a 
panel of five forest and wildlife experts sat casually before an audience of 80 to tell them 
they still don't have all of the answers concerning forest health and restoration.  
The Ecological Restoration Institute hosted the two-hour panel discussion at Northern 
Arizona University's forestry building to get input and share ideas in a time when years of 
fire suppression in the ponderosa pine forest are meeting with a severe drought.  
"This is the coup de grace of a century of misunderstanding and mismanagement," said 
Taylor McKinnon, program officer for the Grand Canyon Trust and one of the panel 
members.  
The Kinishba Fire in Whiteriver kept 5,000 people from their homes as it grew to cover 
18,200 acres. It has joined this summer's Aspen Fire near Tucson, which destroyed 22 
homes and cabins, seven businesses and four other buildings, in the category of Arizona 
catastrophic wildfires.  
Unfortunately, understanding and agreement among forestry experts has not ignited as 
easily as the forests.  
ERI representative Doc Smith said a consensus does exist that thinning the forest and 
having prescribed burns helps overall forest health and stymies the out-of-control blazes 
that destroy homes and property. However, he and other panel members said it's not a far-
reaching consensus, and not everyone agrees on what size trees should get cut and what 
areas should have their forest fuels -- the dead pine needles and branches on the forest 
floor -- reduced.  
"There's a strong agreement on thinning, but not overwhelming," Smith said. "There 
hasn't been this, 'What the heck are you doing? Why the heck are you standing there? 
Grab a chainsaw!'"  
Special guest panelist Bill Jordan, director of the New Academy for Nature and Culture 
in Chicago, said he started learning about the West's ponderosa pine forests and the fire 
problem about a year ago. Until then, he knew mostly about more urban forest areas in 
the Midwest. He admitted those situations were microcosmic in comparison.  

"There are things going on out here that are taking us into a whole new generation of how 
we think," he said. "It's a world class story."  
The problem for the ponderosas has been heavy duty fire prevention for long periods of 
time, according to Coconino County National Forest representative Heather Green, who 
sat on the panel. She said the pines are a fire-adapted forest, and fires for them are 
healthy as a whole.  
"People didn't recognize fires were good things for a number of years," Green said.  
Now, in Jordan's words, people are finding that the forests come back and "bite you in the 
butt."  
"When you neglect ponderosa pines, they die violently," he said. "They cause 
catastrophe."  
The upshot, according to panelists and certain audience members, is that the perspectives 
on forests and fires are changing, and the growth of the knowledge base will stop future 
catastrophic fires better than an army of firefighters. But experts, politicians and the 
public will have to agree on how to apply the knowledge.  
"I felt like we opened some dialogue," said Ann Moote, coordinator for ERI. "I was 
happy to see there was lots of optimism, despite the problems."  
Reporter Seth Muller can be reached at 913-8607 or by e-mailing him at 
smuller@azdailysun.com  
