A Guide for Residents of
Southwestern Ponderosa
Pine Forests
Restoring
Native Plants
and Landscapes
Much of the richness and beauty of ponderosa pine forests lies in the
diverse flowers, shrubs, and grasses of the forest floor.
G
ardening in the upland Southwest is a
challenge. Extreme temperature swings, a
short frost-free growing season, and
water limitations are just a few of the
hurdles to maintaining a traditional yard
in this region. Native grasses, flowers, and shrubs can
help shape a lovely yard in these difficult growing
conditions, but cultivating them carries its own
challenges. Use the tips in this brochure to boost your
chances of success.
Why native plants?
Native plants have evolved in and adapted to the
specific habitat conditions where they live. Water
supplies are limited in most of the Southwest, so it's a
great benefit that many species native to the region can
survive with little water. Growing them can save you
money and stretch scarce municipal and regional water
supplies. Native plants also tend to be adapted to the
region's short growing seasons, intense sunlight, wind,
and dramatic temperature swings. As a result, native
plants often require less maintenance than nonnative
species.
Native plants are a natural for wildlife. Trees, grasses,
flowers, and shrubs provide a variety of food and shelter
sources for birds, mammals, and pollinating insects. A
native yard planted close to a natural forest or
grassland area can become a habitat extension for its
wildlife—and if your yard is a green island in a town or
city, it can still attract passing butterflies, birds, and
other mobile animals.
Finally, a yard creatively landscaped with native plants is
easier on the eyes than any turfgrass monoculture.
Cultivated with care, native gardens are diverse, colorful,
and vibrant—and an important part of the restoration of
the landscape as a whole.
A natural combination: 
Native plants and healthy
ponderosa pines
Throughout the twentieth century, people disrupted the
natural forest fire regime in much of the West by
preventing fires. As a result, forests grew dense with
thickets of small, highly flammable trees. These thickets
can act as “fuel ladders” that carry fire into tree crowns,
G

aspens and spruces, or shrubs such
as shrubby cinquefoil, mountain
lover, and snowberry. Wild
strawberry and creeping barberry
are good options for ground cover,
while Canada goldenrod, Canada
violets, and prairie smoke are a few
of the native flowers that
withstand colder temperatures.
Specific plants for
specific purposes
Consider planting particular
varieties so that your yard can
meet your particular needs. Here
are a few examples; look for more
in the books and Web sites
included at the end of this guide.
• For color and wildlife action,
plant penstemons. They have
showy flowers—mainly red, blue,
or purple—and different species
grow well at a wide range of
elevations. They're sure attractants for hummingbirds, bees, and
colorful butterflies.
• Provide wild fruits for wildlife. Currants, gooseberries, serviceberries,
chokecherries, and barberries are all native shrubs with abundant
sweet fruits eagerly sought by birds and other wildlife.
• Use good scents. Plant sagebrush, wild roses, banana yucca, Palmer's
penstemon, and such native mints as beebalm and hyssop for blooms
or foliage to tantalize your sense of smell.
• For year-round visual variety, use plants that look attractive when
they've dried. Squirreltail and other grasses, and such wildflowers as
pearly everlasting and coneflowers, add flair to a garden during
winter and drought.
• Create visual screening or wind protection. Try shrubs like three-leaf
sumac, chokecherries, New Mexico locust, chamisa, or Apache plume.
All have dense foliage.
• Keep fire resistance in mind. Plant fire-resistant vegetation, such as
low grasses, succulents, and deciduous shrubs, near your house, and
keep them trimmed and well watered. Avoid flammable evergreens
such as junipers. Increasing vegetation density is acceptable as you
plant further away from the house. For more about fire resistance,
see our brochure Forest Restoration for Homeowners.
Landscaping at high altitude
Patience is key—growing native plants in the mountains takes time. But
the results are worth it in beauty and long-term water savings. Here are
some tips that can help.
• After thinning pine trees, see what grows naturally. Native plants may
be hidden among downed pine needles or present only as seeds.
Increased light and water after thinning will help them grow.
• Plant trees and shrubs. Invest in some container-grown plants with
established root systems. They're more expensive, but they'll greatly
speed the establishment of a yard. Give them about two years, with
appropriate watering, to establish root systems and begin providing
shade. This will provide protection for grasses and wildflowers.
• If cost is a factor, start with “bare-root” versions of trees and shrubs
like currants, chokecherries, or aspens. Buy them from a nursery in
spring, and then place them in containers in protected areas while
their roots develop. Plant them during the summer monsoon season.
where it can spread quickly and burn destructively. In order to reduce
fire danger, many homeowners and municipalities have been thinning
pine trees near homes and other buildings, as wider spaces between
pines can interrupt a crown fire's spread. For ideas on thinning, see our
brochure Forest Restoration for Homeowners.
Thinning can also make remaining trees healthier by reducing
competition for water and other nutrients. Furthermore, thinning trees
allows more sunlight to reach the ground—thereby allowing plants such
as grasses, wildflowers, and shrubs to grow. Reducing fire danger goes
hand-in-hand with having a yard that's both beautiful and inviting for
wildlife.
Understanding your site
In the upland Southwest, elevation, topography, and variation in soil
types and water availability combine to form a sometimes bewildering
array of “microclimates.” As a result, a native tree or shrub that grows
well in a neighbor's yard may not thrive in yours. Making careful
choices about what to plant can greatly increase your chances of
success in raising native species. Use the following guide as a rough
outline to what may grow successfully in your yard, but remember that
local variations can be great. A sunny, south-facing yard at 7,500 feet
may support the same plants as a piñon-juniper woodland, while plants
that typically grow much higher in the mountains may thrive on a
shady, north-facing slope at 6,500 feet.
The piñon-juniper zone: 5,500 to 7,000 feet
At the lower edge of ponderosa pine forest, yards between 5,500 and
7,000 feet often support plants of the relatively hot, dry piñon-juniper
zone, particularly on south and east-facing slopes. Shrubby cliffrose,
Apache plume, and banana yucca do well here. Good ground cover
plants to try are western creeper, prairie sage, and many-headed
groundsel. Rice grass, a native bunchgrass whose pale stems arch
gracefully under beautiful seed heads, thrives in sandy, well-drained
soils; blue and side-oats grama do well here too. The dark pink to purple
flowers of the showy four o'clock or the flashy red or pink of
penstemons will add flair to a piñon-juniper zone yard.
The ponderosa pine zone: 7,000 to 8,000 feet
Ponderosa pines and Gambel oaks dominate this zone. Three-leaf
sumac, mountain mahogany, Woods' rose, and New Mexico locust are
good shrubs for yards in this zone,
and mountain lover will do well at
moist locations. Native grasses to
try include blue grama, junegrass,
Arizona or sheep fescue,
muttongrass, and little bluestem.
Yarrow, golden and red columbine,
coral bells, buckwheats,
penstemons, and other native
flowers bloom beautifully and
attract pollinators.
Mixed conifer zone: 8,000
feet and higher
Cold temperatures and a short
growing season make for
challenging gardening at high
elevations. Try trees adapted to
colder microclimates, such as
Blue grama
(Bouteloua gracilis)
Scarlet bugler
(Penstemon barbatus)

• Find out what seeds need. Some require specialized treatment—such
as cold storage in winter—in order to germinate. Ask your seed
supplier or visit www.nativeplantnetwork.org/network for details.
• Plant native grass and flower seeds around the time of summer
monsoon, or in fall. Keep the seeds just covered with moist soil and a
thin layer of pine needle mulch. You may need to mist the soil on
rain-free summer days. New seedlings should not be allowed to dry
out.
• Broadcast seeds to cover a fairly large area. This works best for
grasses and low-growing, ground cover plants. Seeds are also a good
option for rural properties with limited water supplies. 
• Keep soil moist in grass-planting areas until plants are established.
Perennials should also be watered regularly until established.
• Water established plants as needed. Deep watering once every two
weeks during dry parts of May and June, and once monthly during
dry fall and winter months, may be necessary.
Where to find native plants and seeds
Native plants and seeds are increasingly available in regional nurseries.
But you can also collect some native seeds in the wild. If you do, stay
close to home—locally collected seeds are probably well adapted to your
particular habitat conditions, and they won't alter the local gene pool.
Remember that collecting can deplete wild plant populations. Collect
seed only from common, widespread species. Don't collect a majority of
the seeds from a single plant or in a given area, and avoid collecting
more than you'll use. Be aware that it's illegal to collect seeds and
plants in national parks and on some other public lands. Non-
commercial collecting of wild seed may be legal without a permit, but
check with the appropriate land management agency first. On private
land, of course, check with the landowner.
Controlling weed invasions
Thinning trees or otherwise preparing a yard for planting can disturb
the soil, and disturbed soils are ideal growth sites for such weeds as
cheeseweed, bindweed, nonnative thistles, cheatgrass, salsify, and
knapweed. All of these plants tend to grow quickly in early spring, and
flower just as quickly—thereby setting the crop for the following year.
To control them, it's best to attack weed invasions early, and be
persistent—getting rid of the invaders and transitioning to native plants
could take several years. These methods will help control them:
• Mow and bag flower heads as soon as annual weeds begin to bloom.
Getting them before they set seed helps prevent further spreading. To
kill the seeds, burn them or let the closed trash bags bake in the sun.
• Remove weeds mechanically
whenever possible. Dig them
up or pull them, taking care to
get the roots. Avoid synthetic
herbicides, which can be
harmful to the soil and the
entire ecological system. Use
gloves, as some species, such
as knapweed, contain
potentially harmful chemicals.
• Use corn gluten to inhibit seed
germination. You can buy this
natural substance from
garden-supply stores, and
apply it in spring to areas
where weeds have been
removed. It keeps weed seeds
from sprouting and dissipates
in about three months, in time
to allow planting of native
species during the summer
monsoon season.
• Consider herbicides. Careful and targeted use may be warranted if
you cannot control noxious weeds manually.
• Don't clear and plant large swaths all at the same time. Invasive
weeds thrive in disturbed areas. Instead, prepare one small,
manageable section at a time. Take your time, and be patient. It may
take years to establish a yard with native plants, but their diversity
and vitality will be well worth the effort.
• Encourage natives. The best defense against noxious weeds is a
healthy cover of native plants.
Where to go for help
• Read what the experts have to say. See Native Plants for High-
Elevation Western Gardens (Fulcrum Press, 2003) or Beyond the
Ponderosa: Successful Landscape Trees for Higher Elevations in the
Southwest (Flagstaff Community Tree Board, 1998) for landscaping
ideas.
• Ask a specialist. Ask for help at a regional botanic garden or
arboretum, or contact your state's native plant society or cooperative
extension service.
• Browse plants on the Web. A number of nurseries and nonprofit
organizations maintain good Web sites about southwestern plants.
• Buy natives. Check out www.hort.usu.edu/natives/nurseries/Alpha.html
for a list of native plant nurseries in your area, but make sure to ask
whether the environment the plants came from is similar to yours.
• Landscape for wildlife. For tips, see www.nwf.org/backyardwildlifehabitat.
• Get to know your local weeds. Visit www.weedcenter.org or
www.usgs.nau.edu/SWEPIC/ for guides to identification and control
of noxious plants.
• Think Firewise. Visit http://ag.arizona.edu/firewise/index.html to
learn more about making your house and yard fire-safe.
• Contact us. Visit NAU's Ecological Restoration Institute
(www.eri.nau.edu; 928-523-7182) for information about forest
ecology and restoration, or The Arboretum at Flagstaff
(www.thearb.org; 928-774-1442) for more about native plants.  
Three-leaf sumac
(Rhus trilobata)
Woolly cinquefoil
(Potentilla hippiana)

Ecological Restoration Institute
Northern Arizona University
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
2ERI 35AE
NAU Printing Services G55557/20M/10-04 • NAU is an Equal Employment/Affirmative Action Institution    
C Printed on recycled stock using renewable ink.
Trees
Gambel oak (Quercus gambelii)
Quaking aspen (Populus tremuloides)
New Mexico locust (Robinia neomexicana)
Box elder (Acer negundo)
Rocky Mountain maple (Acer glabrum)
Shrubs
Buffaloberry (Shepherdia spp.)
Snowberries (Symphoricarpos spp.)
Utah serviceberry (Amelanchier utahensis)
Three-leaf sumac (Rhus trilobata)
Wild roses (Rosa spp.)
Golden currant (Ribes aureum)
Fendler's buckbrush (Ceanothus fendleri)
Grasses
Blue grama (Bouteloua gracilis)
Arizona fescue (Festuca arizonica)
Indian ricegrass (Achnatherum hymenoides)
Western wheatgrass (Pascopyrum smithii)
Mountain muhly (Muhlenbergia montana)
Muttongrass (Poa fendleriana)
Prairie junegrass (Koeleria macrantha)
Little bluestem (Schizachyrium scoparium)
Wildflowers
Beebalm (Monarda menthaefolia)
Silvery lupine (Lupinus argenteus)
Blue flax (Linum lewisii)
Penstemons or beardtongues (Penstemon spp.)
Coneflowers (Echinacea, Ratibida, and
Rudbeckia spp.)
Ground Covers
Creeping barberry (Mahonia repens)
Cinquefoil (Potentilla spp.)
Kinnikinnick (Arctostaphylos uva-ursi)
Prairie smoke (Geum triflorum)
Alum root (Heuchera spp.)
Pussytoes (Antennaria spp.)
Suggested native plants for the upland Southwest
Gambel oak
(Quercus gambelii)
Writer: Anne Minard; Editor: Peter Friederici; Drawings: Daniel Laughlin; Reviewers: Jan Busco, Cheryl Casey, 
Tom DeGomez, Nigel Sparks, Judy Springer; Produced by the Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona
University in collaboration with The Arboretum at Flagstaff  
