Wilderness Management and the Restoration 
of Fire: An Analysis of Laws and Regulations in 
Northern Arizona
ERI— Issues in Forest Restoration

A l l  m a t e r i a l  c o p y r i g h t  ©  2 0 0 6  E R I ,  N A U
The Ecological Restoration Institute
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, 
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. 
These forests have been signiﬁcantly altered over the last century, with decreased ecological and 
recreational values, near-elimination of natural low-intensity ﬁre regimes, and greatly increased 
risk of large-scale ﬁres. The ERI is working with public agencies and other partners to restore 
these forests to a more ecologically healthy condition and trajectory—in the process helping 
to signiﬁcantly reduce the threat of catastrophic wildﬁre and its effects on human, animal, and 
plant communities.
Cover photo: Frequent-ﬁre, old-growth forest mosaic on the Powell Plateau, Grand Canyon 
National Park.
Ecological Restoration Institute
Northern Arizona University
Box 15017, Flagstaff AZ 86011-5017
928-523-7182 • www.eri.nau.edu
Publication date: December 2006
Author: David M. Ostergren, Ph.D.
School of Forestry
Center for Environmental Sciences and Education
Northern Arizona University
David.Ostergren@nau.edu
Editor: Dave Egan
 Reviewers: David J. Parsons, Program Director, Aldo Leopold Wilderness Reseach Institute; 
and Gregory H. Aplet, Senior Forest Scientist, The Wilderness Society
Photos: David M. Ostergren
Series Editor: Dave Egan
Please contact ERI for reproduction policies, 928-523-5697

Table of Contents
Executive Summary
1
Introduction
2
Fire in Southwestern Forests and Wilderness Areas
3
Case Studies: Federal Agencies in Northern Arizona
4
       Bureau of Land Management
5
       USDA Forest Service
7
       National Park Service
9
Conclusions and Recommendations
13
Endnotes
16

1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Executive Summary
Our recognition of the ecological importance of fire has increased to the point where the op-
erative question is no longer “Should we have fire on our public lands?” but “How should we 
restore fire as an essential ecosystem process?”. This white paper places the restoration of fire 
in the context of the 1964 Wilderness Act, and then examines the implementation of federal fire 
law and policy in five Wilderness Areas (WAs) in northern Arizona dominated by ponderosa pine 
(Pinus ponderosa) ecosystems. The analysis of these WAs reveals that while the three federal 
agencies involved in the study (Bureau of Land Management, U.S. Forest Service, and National 
Park Service) share similar fire legislation and policies, implementation varies from agency to 
agency. Although initiated in northern Arizona, the implications of this study span wilderness 
ecosystems throughout the United States and suggest the need for a comprehensive national 
Wilderness fire policy.
As a result of this study and analysis, I offer the following observations and recommendations: 
 
•  Managers considering the use of fire in WAs will need to bring interested parties          
 
   together to discuss alternatives well before developing and publishing their plans. 
 
•  There must be a clear demonstration that the WA is out of its natural range of variabil- 
 
    ity and is in need of restoration through the use of fire. 
 
•  Managers must consider whether the use of natural lightning-produced fires (WFU),  
 
   or active management in the form of prescribed burns and/or single-entry light thinning  
 
   is the best means of restoring a ponderosa pine ecosystem. Many of these decisions  
 
   will be driven as much by value judgments about how best to maintain the properties  
 
   and essence of wilderness character as by scientific evidence aimed at restoring 
 
   ecological integrity and diversity. 
 
•  Decisions to use WFU or more-active treatments will require full support from NGOs  
 
   or local officials as well as from agency supervisors, superintendents, and managers in  
 
   regional and national offices.
 
•  The success or failure of treatment in a WA can be measured in terms of how much 
 
   fuels were reduced, how much damage was done, and what wilderness values were  
 
   gained or lost. 

2
A science of land health needs, first of all, a base datum of normality, a picture of how healthy land maintains itself 
as an organism. . . . Paleontology offers abundant evidence that wilderness maintained itself for immensely long 
periods; that its component species were rarely lost, neither did they get out of hand; that weather and water built 
soil as fast or faster than it was carried away. Wilderness, then, assumes unexpected importance as a laboratory for 
the study of land-health.
Aldo Leopold (1941)
Only in a natural environment can people thrive, an environment where there are still places of beauty to go to. The 
effort to protect humanity’s living space from desecration is one of the greatest challenges of this age. Wilderness is 
more than camping or hiking; it is a symbol of a way of life that can nourish the spirit.
Sigurd F. Olson (1968)
Introduction
Our understanding of the ecological importance of fire has increased to the point where the 
operative question is no longer “Should we have fire in our public lands?” but “How should we 
restore fire as an essential ecosystem process to our public lands?”. When considering this latter 
question in terms of ecological restoration in Wilderness Areas (WAs), managers soon realize 
that they face more challenges than they do on other public lands. While the laws and policies 
regarding fire control and suppression are clear for congressionally designated WAs and National 
Park Service (NPS) backcountry, the laws and policies that regulate ecological restoration–
including the restorative use of fire–in such areas are less so. As a result, ecological restoration, 
in particular returning fire as a core ecological process, remains a challenge for agencies on a 
significant proportion of public land in the United States.
Wilderness Areas harbor relatively undisturbed ecosystems as refugia for biodiversity, and 
provide outstanding opportunities for solitude and primitive recreation. Managing agencies 
engaged in restoration in WAs must work with both human expectations and ecological 
constraints. In practice, implementation of wilderness fire management policies has been 
inconsistent across and within land management agencies for a host of reasons--the greatest of 
which is the lack of a comprehensive national wilderness fire policy.1
The analysis I present in this document places the restoration of fire in the context of the 1964 
Wilderness Act, and then examines fire policy and implementation in northern Arizona across 
five Wilderness Areas and three agencies: the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) and the 
National Park Service (NPS) in the U.S. Department of Interior, and the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture Forest Service (USFS). This analysis reveals that all three agencies share many 
common legislative mandates and internal agency policies regarding wilderness and fire, 
although the final implementation of those policies varies from agency to agency.
Wilderness is defined in this analysis as those lands either designated as WAs by Congress or as 
NPS backcountry areas designated to retain their wilderness character and, by policy, managed 
as if they were designated Wilderness. In terms of the 1964 Wilderness Act, “A wilderness, in 
contrast with those areas where man and his own works dominate the landscape, is hereby 

3
recognized as an area where the earth and its community of life are untrammeled by man, where 
man himself is a visitor who does not remain. An area of wilderness is further defined to mean 
in this Act an area of undeveloped Federal land retaining its primeval character and influence, 
without permanent improvements or human habitation, which is protected and managed so as to 
preserve its natural conditions.”2 
The differences between natural and untrammeled have been the subject of several analyses.3 
While the Wilderness Act does not provide a clear definition of natural, one generally accepted 
definition of a natural ecosystem is one whose structure, function, and species composition 
are similar to the same ecosystem prior to the arrival of Euro-Americans.4 “Natural” fires, 
then, would burn with roughly the same frequency, intensity and size as historic fires, and 
produce effects roughly equal to those that dominated prior to Euro-American influences.5 In 
southwestern ponderosa pine forests, these would be primarily low-intensity, ground-level fires 
rather than catastrophic crown fires.
The meaning of untrammeled is much more clear.6 An untrammeled system is unmanipulated, 
free, wild; it is self-willed.7 Untrammeled wilderness is a place where “man himself is a visitor” 
and the area “generally appears to have been affected primarily by the forces of nature, with the 
imprint of man’s work substantially unnoticeable.”8 
Fire in Southwestern Forests and Wilderness Areas
This paper focuses on the long-term goal of restoring fire to federal lands across the Southwest. 
It is generally recognized that fire, as an ecological processes, is missing from many North 
American ecosystems.9 By legal definition, federal land management agencies can return fire to 
an ecosystem either as prescribed fire (management-ignited fire) or as wildland fire use (WFU). 
Wildland fire use consists of naturally ignited fire that is allowed to burn to fulfill natural 
resource management goals. But current conditions—especially the overly dense conditions of 
most southwestern ponderosa pine forests10—make simply allowing lightning-ignited fires to 
burn in the hot, dry months extremely dangerous. For that reason, commonly used restoration 
tactics include the use of prescribed fire in highly controlled situations; some thinning of snags 
or small trees close to old growth and then prescribed fire; and major thinning with tools that 
range from handsaws to chainsaws to large logging equipment, followed by prescribed burns. 
Agency policy is clear that most public lands in the ponderosa pine ecosystem may be thinned 
lightly or heavily by mechanical means, and then burned with prescribed fire to reduce high fuel 
loads (i.e., to mitigate fire risk), and ultimately return fire back to the system. But what actions 
may be conducted in the invaluable WAs and NPS backcountry? 
Reintroducing fire into wilderness should be a priority.11 The literature documenting the 
scientific and philosophical issues that surround restoring fire to wilderness has been 
periodically reviewed, first as a purely scientific consideration in 1985,12 then as a broader 
inter-agency issue in 1999,13 and finally placed firmly into the restoration lexicon in 2001.14 The 
1995 Federal Wildland Fire Policy and 2001 review recognized the ecological benefit of fire and 
encouraged more WFU.15 Yet, despite the recognition that fire is a part of healthy ecosystems, 
Bureau of Land Management (BLM), U.S. Forest Service (USFS), and NPS managers remain             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4
cautious about restoring fire on a wide scale on any lands,16 much less in Wilderness.17 The 
primary obstacles are these:
Risks to human life and property are perceived as too great to let fires “wander” for 
weeks at a time across the 6.5 million acres of southwestern ponderosa pine forests.
Limited funding is available to defray expenses (costs are dependent on the intensity of 
restoration action).
Questions remain as to the ecological effects of such fires on soils, water, and air.
There are questions as to public acceptance of altered forests18 and smoky conditions.19
Public acceptance (or lack thereof) of what some perceive as manipulation or 
trammeling of Wilderness Areas.
Institutional barriers to Wildland Fire Use.20
Limits on strategies for controlling the intensity of fire in Wilderness Areas.21 
Fire suppression to protect resources inside and outside WAs was built into the 1964 Wilderness 
Act, which reads “In addition, such measure may be taken as may be necessary in the control 
of fire, insects, and diseases.”22 Nearly every Wilderness designation since 1964 has included a 
clause allowing fire suppression. Ironically, fire suppression is now cited as one of the biggest 
threats to wilderness.23 The challenge is this: What activities can be conducted to return fire 
to wilderness ecosystems that will not compromise the wilderness character of those same 
ecosystems?
Case Studies: Northern Arizona
I selected five Wilderness Areas in northern Arizona for this analysis—Mount Logan (BLM), 
Mount Trumbull (BLM), Kendrick Mountain (USFS), Kachina Peaks (USFS), and the Grand 
Canyon National Park (USNPS). These five areas are comparable in that they are all subject to 
the 1964 Wilderness Act, all have significant acreage of ponderosa pine forest, all are relatively 
distant from wildland-urban interface areas (WUI), and all are subject to requirements of the 
National Fire Plan (Table 1). In addition, human use of these areas has caused the exclusion 
of fire since the 1880s and, today, agency managers continue to suppress fires to one degree or 
another. Despite these similarities, management occurs under three different agency missions and 
within three different institutional contexts. As a result, differing enabling legislation, overlaid 
with divergent agency histories and associated regulations and policies, creates a complex 
quilt of criteria that managers must consider before getting fire back in the forests. The size, 
ecological history, and geographic location of specific WAs also play an important role in agency 
decisions.
When agency officials determine the management goals and objectives for a particular WA, 
they work within a regulatory system where the enabling legislation takes precedence; then 
the enabling legislation for the monument, national forest, or park unit; and lastly the broader 
agency-wide management policies. A comparison of regulations and legislation between the 
three agencies reveals that, for all practical purposes, each agency has the same mandate 
for Wilderness Area fire restoration. However, current practices are constrained by natural 
conditions, public expectations, and agency history.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

5
Table 1. Wilderness Areas and NPS lands with ponderosa pine ecosystems assessed in this analysis.
Wilderness Area
Federal Agency Regional Authority
Acreage
Year 
Est.
Mt. Logan
Bureau of Land 
Management
BLM/NPS Grand 
Canyon–Parashant 
National Monument
14,650a
1984
Mt. Trumbull
Bureau of Land 
Management
BLM/NPS Grand 
Canyon–Parashant 
National Monument
7,880 a
1984
Kendrick Mountain USDA Forest 
Service
Coconino National 
Forest
Kaibab National
Forest
5,000 a
1,510 a
1984
Kachina Peaks
USDA Forest 
Service
Coconino National 
Forest
18,616 a
1984
North Rim, Grand 
Canyon National 
Park
National Park 
Service
Grand Canyon 
National Park
≈65,000 ponderosa 
pine
≈50,000 mixed conifer 
and spruce-firb
1919
a Acreages taken from www.wilderness.net, reflecting agency reports.
b Acreages from the GCNP Fire and Aviation department.
Bureau of Land Management
The 1976 Federal Land Policy and Management Act (FLPMA) made wilderness management 
one of the multiple uses for the Bureau of Land Management (BLM).24 Subsequent case law has 
underscored the agency’s right and obligation to protect Wilderness character.25
The 1983 Manual Section 8560 “Management of Designated Wilderness” outlines the specific 
management goals, uses, and allowable nonconforming uses for BLM Wilderness. Manual 8560 
specifies that 1) the agency must develop a Wilderness Management Plan for each WA, 2) all 
fires must be controlled to prevent loss of human life or property, and 3) fires must be prevented 
from spreading outside of WAs.26 The manual also states that “natural fire (i.e., lightning-caused) 
is normally a part of the ecology of wilderness, and human effort to ban this agent may have 
resulted in significant ecological changes”27 and that such fires may be allowed to burn if there 
is a Fire Management Plan. The directives of the manual also allow managers to use prescribed 
burns to reintroduce or maintain natural conditions, restore fire, perpetuate a primary wilderness 
value, or perpetuate an endangered species.

6
The Mount Trumbull and Mount Logan WAs were designated in the Arizona Wilderness Act of 
1984.28 There are no specific statements regarding fire or ecological restoration in that enabling 
legislation, although important guidelines for Wilderness management in the BLM are contained 
in H.R. Report 101-405, commenting on P.L. 101-628--the Arizona Desert Wilderness Act 
of 1990. The objectives for fire management contained in the report suggest that “lightning-
caused fires play, as nearly as possible, their natural ecological role within wilderness,” although 
managers cannot use “vegetative manipulation” to justify WFU, and “prescribed fires ignited 
by man may be permitted to reduce unnatural buildup of fuels.” 29 Despite the recognition of 
the role of fire in ecosystems, by 1997 the BLM had not conducted any prescribed burns in 
Wilderness Areas.30
Mount Trumbull and Mount Logan WAs are relatively unique in that they are dominated by 
ponderosa pine ecosystems, which are uncommon on other Arizona BLM lands. Furthermore, 
they have completed Wilderness Management plans31 and Fire Management plans (FMP).32 The 
authors of the FMP report that 54 fires burned 
213 acres from 1980 to 2003 in the two WAs, 
including one in 1989 that burned 84 acres on 
Mount Trumbull. All fires were suppressed. 
But the significance of the plans is that the 
BLM is empowered to allow both WFU and 
prescribed fire.
The most recent regulations regarding the 
implementation of the FLPMA on BLM 
Wilderness are 43 C.F.R. 6300 and 43 C.F.R. 
8560, both of which became effective January 
16, 2001. The only specific reference to fire 
in these regulations is for control; no reference 
is made to restoration. When the BLM issued 
its Final Rule on December 14, 2000, one 
commenter urged that the regulations include 
provisions authorizing BLM to use prescribed 
burns in appropriate situations. The BLM 
believes that wording in the final rule is broad enough to allow prescribed fire as a management 
tool in BLM Wilderness.33 I find the wording rather vague: “(b) Prescribe conditions under which 
other Federal, State, or local agencies or their agents may use, build, or install such items to meet 
the minimum requirements for protection and administration of the wilderness area, its resources 
and users; (c) Authorize officers, employees, agencies, or agents of the Federal, State, and local 
governments to occupy and use wilderness areas to carry out the purposes of the Wilderness Act 
or other Federal statutes.”34 Later language is a bit clearer if one interprets “prescribe measures 
to control fire” as the permission to conduct restoration activities that incidentally restore fire. 
The BLM may likewise prescribe restorative measures to control factors (noxious weeds, non-
native invasive plants, insects, and diseases) that may compromise the character of wilderness. 
Significant amounts of accumulated 
downed trees and pine needles, along with 
dense stands of young ponderosa have 
made conditions right for a catastrophic 
fire at the Mt. Trumbull Wilderness Area.

7
Managers prescribed burned 264 acres on Mount Logan in the late-1990s to protect an ecological 
restoration research area. The BLM is proposing to reenter that area in 2007 even though it is a 
relatively small proportion of the entire WA. Much of Mount Logan has small-diameter, even-
age ponderosa pine trees and any fire would crown out with nearly 100% mortality. 
The BLM has not yet initiated any fire program in the Mount Trumbull WA, much less a full 
restoration program like those that been implemented by the Ecological Restoration Institute 
in non-Wilderness areas between the two WAs.35 Conditions are ripe for a big fire in the Mount 
Trumbull WA36 and managers are concerned about what may happen if a wildfire gets out of 
control. In response, they released, in November 2005, a Draft Resource Management Plan–
Draft Environmental Impact Statement that proposes to restore the area.37 The proposed action 
includes using prescribed fire or WFU on 6,000 acres during the next 20 years. According to 
the DEIS, the BLM “could use appropriate tools to construct control lines” and would protect 
old-growth trees by raking around the tree bases or “using minimum tools to fell and buck small-
diameter trees” that might fuel crown fires.
USDA Forest Service
Policies governing the area that would later become Kachina Peaks WA and the Kendrick 
Mountain WA date to the Organic Act of 1987, which created the National Forest Service for 
the express purpose of preserving a perpetual supply of timber for home industries.38 Decades 
later, the Multiple Use Sustained Yield Act of 1960 (MUSY) expanded the mission of the agency 
by specifying that “the national forests are established and shall be administered for outdoor 
recreation, range, timber, watershed and wildlife and fish purposes.” In 1964, the Wilderness 
Act added wilderness management to the USFS mission. The 1976 National Forest Management 
Act (NFMA) indicated a significant shift in how the USFS makes management decisions.39 
The law reaffirmed many directives in MUSY, but subsequent regulations added a specific 
planning process to develop Forest Management Plans.40, 41 In 2005, new NFMA planning 
regulations generated a great deal of controversy because they were written to streamline the 
planning process and allow for more flexible Forest Management Plans that can be adapted as 
new information becomes available.42 Although comments from the public on the proposed 
rule changes addressed ecological restoration, biological conservation and prescribed fire, these 
topics are not addressed in the new NFMA regulations. The presumption is that these issues will 
be considered at the level of individual national forests.
Significantly, the USFS has always interpreted the Wilderness Act and the NFMA to include 
ecological restoration: “[W]ilderness shall be so administered as to meet the public purposes 
of recreational, scenic, scientific, educational, conservation, and historical uses; and . . . in 
such a manner as to preserve and protect its wilderness character. . . . and, where necessary, 
restore the wilderness character of the land and its specific values of solitude, physical and 
mental challenge, scientific study, inspiration, and primitive recreation. To that end: (a) Natural 
ecological succession will be allowed to operate freely to the extent feasible” (emphasis added).43 

8
Despite this language, the USFS is extremely limited in its ability to use prescribed fire in WAs. 
With the exception of Alaska and the three national forests in Florida, the agency does not allow 
the use of prescribed fire unless it will help reduce hazardous fuels.44  The USFS has used WFU 
but, relative to the total acres of designated Wilderness in the USFS system (29 million acres), 
the percentage of land treated by that method remains very small (0.2 percent).44
The Arizona Wilderness Act of 1984 is the enabling legislation for Kendrick Mountain WA, 
which is split between the Kaibab and Coconino national forests, and Kachina Peaks WA, which 
lies wholly within the Coconino National Forest.45 No special restoration provisions for fire were 
included in the legislation. 
In 1994, a USFS-funded assessment of the Kendrick Mountain WA warned of a dangerous 
accumulation of fuels and claimed that when—not if—a fire started in or near the WA, the 
results could be devastating. In June 2000, the Pumpkin Fire started due to a lightning strike 
outside the Kendrick Mountain WA and burned 14,760 acres, including much of the WA. The 
USFS employed full suppression efforts, and saved a lookout tower and cabin. The fire burned 
in a mosaic pattern across the landscape. Some areas burned very hot, and all organic material 
was consumed, leaving behind burnt stumps and mineral soils that experienced high rates of 
erosion. Other areas experienced moderate- to low-intensity fire with moderate to low tree 
mortality and no erosion. Although the ignition was “natural,” the fire’s intensity was not, and 
the recovery period for some areas will be measured in centuries. Other portions of the Kendrick 
Mountain WA present an excellent opportunity for WFU because those areas can burn with little 
or no risk of a crown fire or fire escape. The entire WA is relatively small—6,500 acres—so 
fire will probably need to be management-ignited to maintain a two- to four-year fire return 
interval, thus leaving the area “trammeled.” To move to an untrammeled scenario, Kaibab and 
Coconino national forest managers might allow a WFU fire to move freely across the Wilderness 
boundaries, thus increasing the likelihood that lightning ignitions will burn into the WA.
The USFS allows WFU on the Kaibab portion 
of the Kendrick Mountain WA, although they 
will suppress any fire that threatens to escape 
or burn the historic fire tower on top of the 
mountain. The Kaibab National Forest has taken 
steps to be able to let fire burn in Kendrick 
Mountain WA by burning nearby Forest Service 
land—928 acres in 2005. In FY06, 2,184 acres 
were treated with several prescribed fires in the 
Kendrick project area.46 There still are problems 
at the Wilderness boundary, however. The 
agency did not allow the prescribed fire into 
the WA because there was not enough time to 
properly complete the NEPA Environmental 
Assessment process. The USFS holds that 
Wilderness is not acceptable as a Categorical
Are these results acceptable in the USFS 
Kendrick Mountain Wilderness Area five 
years after the Pumpkin Wildfire?

9
Exclusion to the NEPA process. Once proposed, the agency would have to enter into a long 
dialogue as to whether prescribed fire is “natural.” The issue revolves around the fact that 
prescribed fire is generally ignited in northern Arizona in April, May, October, or November 
under predictable and relatively mild wind conditions. Alternatively, fires due to lightning 
typically start in June or July in pre-monsoon conditions (dry lightning ignitions without rain) 
with unpredictable and often high wind conditions. Resolving this difference is essential to 
Wilderness management in the region. 
Kachina Peaks WA is in San Francisco Peaks on the Coconino National Forest, just north 
of Flagstaff. It has high visitor usage and public visibility. Wildland fire under “prescribed 
conditions” is allowed to play a natural role in this WA.47 However, the “prescribed conditions” 
are so restrictive that no natural ignition fire (or prescribed fire) has been allowed to burn in the 
area. One reason for tight restrictions is compliance with the 1973 Endangered Species Act and 
concerns for habitat for the endangered Mexican spotted owl.48
Nonetheless, controlled fire may be needed in the Kachina Peaks Wilderness Area.  The WA 
varies in altitude from about 7,000 to more than 12,000 feet in elevation, and includes several 
forest types with ponderosa pine covering about 2,840 of its 18,616 acres. Aspen and mixed 
conifer forests dominate more than 10,000 acres at higher elevations. Records indicate that these 
forests historically experienced both frequent, low-intensity fires and large, stand-replacing 
fires.49 Recent research has demonstrated that plant species composition has changed since 
1880 when fires were excluded from the ecosystem.50 Restoration treatments are recommended 
especially for the lower-elevation ponderosa pine forests, although some fire should be allowed 
to run upslope to create a mosaic of conditions that returns more natural ecosystem processes to 
higher-elevation forests as well.51
National Park Service
In 1916, Congress passed the National Park Service Organic Act, the purpose of which “is to 
conserve the scenery and the natural and historic objects and the wildlife therein and to provide 
for the enjoyment of the same in such manner and by such means as will leave them unimpaired 
for the enjoyment of future generations.”52 The contradictory nature of this mission statement 
has been quoted extensively, although a preponderance of historical evidence suggests the intent 
of Congress was that preservation trumps recreational access.53 Congressional intent does not 
always translate into practice, however, and recreation dominated NPS planning for decades.54 
The Redwood Act Amendment in 1978 expanded the Organic Act to ensure that park visitation 
would not “impair” natural resources.55 In the 1990s, the NPS recognized the need for more 
natural resources research and initiated the Natural Resources Challenge, which has stepped up 
research as well as the restoration and preservation of ecosystems.56 Both policies recognize the 
primacy of managing for natural conditions.
To manage natural resources within Wilderness, the NPS guidelines are: “Management 
intervention should only be undertaken to the extent necessary to correct past mistakes, the 
impacts of human use, and the influences originating outside of wilderness boundaries. 

10
Management actions, including restoration of extirpated and endangered native species, altered 
natural fire regimes, controlling invasive alien species, and the protection of air and water 
quality, should be attempted only when the knowledge and tools exist to accomplish clearly 
articulated goals.”57 Furthermore, “fire management activities conducted in wilderness areas 
will conform to the basic purposes of wilderness. If a prescribed fire program is implemented, 
these plans will also include the prescriptions and procedures under which the program will be 
conducted within wilderness.”58
Restoration activities are mandated by NPS policy, especially for fire. However, restoring fire in 
dense stands of ponderosa pine is delicate business. If fire is to burn in a dry year in the hottest 
months of June and July, as would have been the case under “natural” conditions, some land 
managers and citizens will likely call for judicious thinning preceding the fire. 
The 1919 enabling legislation for Grand Canyon National Park (GCNP) directs that management 
activities be conducted for the benefit and enjoyment of the people and in accordance with the 
1916 Organic Act.59 In the GCNP Enlargement Act of 1975 (as amended), Congress recognized 
“that the entire Grand Canyon . . . is a natural feature of national and international significance” 
wherein the Secretary of Interior is 
required to make recommendations of 
any suitable area for preservation as 
Wilderness.60 A Wilderness designation 
has not been forthcoming, however, 
despite the fact that more than 90 
percent of GCNP was recommended 
as Wilderness in the late 1970s.61 
These early documents also do not 
explicitly refer to restoration activities. 
Nonetheless, guiding principles 
exist in the 1998 GCNP Wilderness 
Management Plan, which requires 
the area to be managed to preserve its 
wilderness character.62 Such provisions 
also exist in broader NPS policy 
documents, specifically, the NPS 
Director’s Order #41 in 199963 and the 
2001 NPS Management Policies. Both 
affirm a policy established in 1988 that 
put the following definition: “for the purposes of applying NPS wilderness policies, the term 
‘wilderness’ includes the categories of suitable, study, proposed, recommended and designated 
wilderness.”64 Although the GCNP backcountry is not designated Wilderness, each action to 
be conducted there is in practice reviewed for minimum tool requirements so that wilderness 
characteristics may be retained.
A clear, clean fire line two years after a prescribed 
fire on the North Rim of the Grand Canyon 
National Park shows positive progress toward 
adopting widespread Wild Fire Use.

11
Among federal agencies, the NPS has the longest history of reintroducing fire into ecosystems. 
Kings Canyon–Sequoia National Park, in 1968, and Yosemite National Park, in 1970, initiated 
prescribed fire regimes after a new issue of NPS policies acknowledged that “Fires in vegetation 
resulting from natural causes are recognized as natural phenomena and may be allowed to run 
their course when such burning can be contained within predetermined fire management units 
and when such burning will contribute to the accomplishment of approved vegetation and/or 
wildlife management objectives.”65 Furthermore, prescribed fire may be employed as a substitute 
for natural fire.66 The prescribed fire program demonstrated that fire could be managed and 
controlled, and, by the early 1970s, the NPS was a leader in the application of prescribed fire 
for the purpose of restoration.67 This policy emerged into allowing for natural ignition fires to 
burn for resource benefit (prescribed natural fires) and as the 1995 National Fire Plan has been 
instituted, natural ignitions are categorized as WFU. As early as the 1980s there was debate on 
whether fire alone is enough to correct the influence of past management decisions or whether 
other manipulation is required.68
The North Rim of the GCNP is the focus of this analysis because it is large, remote, and closed 
to most visitors for about seven months a year. The predominant forest type is ponderosa pine 
grading into mixed conifer and spruce-fir. Areas of mixed conifer and spruce-fir forest are 
difficult to manage for fire because the fire regime may include stand-replacement fire and slow 
re-establishment of old growth. Prescribed fire and WFU have been used as management tools in 
GCNP since the late 1970s.69 However, park managers still suppress “out of prescription” fires, 
including those that occur, as they would have before 
Euro-American settlement, during the dry, hot fire 
season of June and July. 
There are several advantages to implementing fire 
restoration in GCNP, as compared to other forests in 
the region: 1) The fire history and pre-Euro-American 
conditions are relatively well known; 70 2) current 
conditions indicate that the system is out of its natural 
range of variability; 3) there are recommendations 
from within the park unit to restore fire and reduce fuel 
loads;71 4) there appears to be widespread support for 
restoring fire to the ecosystem;72  5) staff and personnel 
are in place; and 6) a Fire Management Plan has gone 
through the NEPA process and a full Environmental 
Impact Statement should be in effect by 2007.
In addition, researchers have conducted recent site-
specific research on the ecological effects of several 
different ponderosa pine restoration treatments in the 
GCNP and, given their findings, they recommend that 
GCNP managers employ some thinning before burning, 
especially around old-growth trees, to restore forest
Wild Fire Use comes with risks like 
the inadvertent loss of this mixed 
conifer forest on the North Rim of 
Grand Canyon National Park.

12
conditions. Such thinning could be carried out without large equipment, but might require 
chainsaws.73 
However, if one overlay the Wilderness Act with the National Fire Plan, it initially appears 
that such restoration efforts will require an army of park rangers with two-man cross-cut saws 
and buckets of water to patrol the fire perimeter to contain a prescribed fire. There are no legal 
barriers that prohibit park managers from employing chainsaws if they are determined to be the 
minimum-impact tool. Managers may determine that chainsaws are safer than cross-cut saws and 
that the end result of controlled fires will enhance wilderness characteristics. According to NPS 
Management Policies, “Administrative use of motorized equipment or mechanical transport will 
be authorized only: If determined by the superintendent to be the minimum requirement needed 
by management to achieve the purposes of the area as wilderness, including the preservation 
of wilderness character and values; or in emergency situations (search and rescue) involving 
the health or safety of persons actually within the area.”74 In 2002, a Finding of No Significant 
Impact for a research experiment at GCNP demonstrated that nothing in the law prevented 
mechanical thinning conducted with chainsaws. However, the preferred alternative was not 
implemented when the level of public resistance to mechanical thinning was made clear to the 
NPS. On the North Rim of GCNP, chainsaws are only used sparingly to clear “black lines” and 
roads that act as barriers for prescribed fires and WFU programs.
Researchers have also investigated whether fire alone can achieve restoration goals. Research 
on a prescribed fire that escaped in 1993 indicated that sufficient mortality occurred to fulfill 
restoration objectives,75 although the fire was much hotter than planned. It’s likely that, despite 
positive ecological results, managers who fear damage to resources or humans will not use 
such hot fires. When a fire gets hot enough to burn off forest-floor detritus and kill younger 
established ponderosa pines—or, in other words, to fulfill the role it played before Euro-
American settlement—the risk that it will get out of control may be just a little too high for 
administrators to tolerate.
The NPS National Wilderness Steering Committee has struggled with the natural/untrammeled 
debate in restoration activities, and has proposed classifying actions into three categories.76 A 
Class I action is a short-term disturbance with long-term wilderness character enhancement, 
Class II is a long-term recurring entry with both benefits and costs, and Class III actions support 
laws and policies but “do not directly enhance wilderness character.” In the end, however, 
the park superintendent is the one to make the call between a Class I, II, or III action, and the 
issue still hinges on whether the tradeoff for a temporary trammeling sufficiently “enhances” 
Wilderness.
The GCNP Fire Management Plan to be issued in 2007 will, presumably, forecast the long-term 
goals of WFU and prescribed fire in the park, and will determine whether or not the North Rim 
forests will move toward both more natural and more untrammeled conditions, and how that goal 
will be accomplished. Ideally the density of ponderosa pine will be reduced, fire suppression 
will stop, and naturally ignited fires would be allowed to burn in all seasons. Fire in the park 
is gaining acceptance with the general public. A recent survey revealed that five times as many 
visitors to GCNP supported some sort of fire in the park as compared to those who opposed all 
fires in the park.77

13
Conclusions and Recommendations
What lies in store for ecological restoration, fire, and Wilderness management for the BLM, 
USFS, and NPS? All three agencies share the National Fire Plan policy directive to restore 
fire to ecosystems, including designated Wilderness. All three agencies are subject to the 1964 
Wilderness Act and have interpreted that legislation to include restoring natural conditions. 
Ostensibly, in ponderosa pine ecosystems, the goal is to create conditions where lightning can 
start a fire any time of the year and managers can just watch it burn. The open forest conditions 
will allow sunlight to nourish the same sorts of understory grasses and other vegetation that grew 
in the period preceding Euro-American settlement of the region, along with a representative host 
of associated fauna. 
The NPS has an aggressive prescribed fire strategy on the North Rim of the GCNP that uses 
heli-torch ignition and old roads or trails as fire boundaries. Undoubtedly WFU is emerging 
as a significant management tool there. The BLM manages two relatively isolated “islands” of 
ponderosa pine–dominated forest in the Mount Trumbull and Mount Logan WAs that have yet 
to see any action other than fire suppression. The USFS Kendrick Mountain WA had a fairly 
dramatic wildfire, while the Kachina Peaks WA has near-total fire suppression because conditions 
are never right to let a fire burn. But the USFS is employing prescribed fire on surrounding lands, 
and the Kaibab National Forest has a WFU policy in place, with the Coconino National Forest 
soon to follow. Theoretically, at least, the Kendrick Mountain WA could have regular fire.
Each agency is also seeking to develop a long-range Wilderness fire policy that will leave these 
areas both more natural and less trammeled. The public will undoubtedly play a role in any 
future decisions, with national wilderness advocacy organizations leading the way. For these 
organizations and other wilderness supporters, the opposition to manipulating conditions in 
WAs is extremely high, even when faced with the argument that if the agencies do nothing the 
ecological consequences could be severe. In fact, those ecological consequences will probably 
have to be demonstrated with more than models if they are to sway public opinion in favor of 
pro-active restoration treatments.
If all parties do agree that fire needs to return to WAs, that the wilderness character of each area 
needs to be maintained, and that the many political and ecological challenges in wilderness 
management need to be faced, I offer the following recommendations. 
Managers who are considering action will need to gather interested parties together 
well before developing alternatives. Agency personnel should have given the issue 
careful consideration before putting anything specific to paper. The motto should be to 
collaborate or consult early and often. 
Managers need to ask whether the area out of its natural range of variability. There 
must be a clear demonstration that the WA is out of its range of natural variability and is 
indeed degrading. The research should be conducted by an independent organization or 
at least in concert with several interested parties. The core issue is trust, and nowhere is 
trust between agencies, researchers, and NGOs put more to the test than in Wilderness.78 
•
•

14
Once the evidence clearly demonstrates that the area requires a change in management, 
then a step-by-step process of escalating intervention may be considered.
Managers must also ask whether the WA can be restored with WFU? In other words, 
although fuel loads may be high, is there a good likelihood that a lightning strike may 
occur in one of the cooler months within the next few years? Or that lightning may 
strike on a section of the WA where prevailing winds will send the fire into an old burn, 
off a cliff, or into another barrier? In parts of the Southwest, lightning is likely to strike 
only in the hot, dry season when the consequences of wildfire might be unacceptable to 
managers and the public. However, if lightning is common, then lightning-ignited fire 
may demonstrate that WFU can work. The WFU option requires that managers accept 
a higher degree of risk than before. Management decisions in Wilderness will require 
full support from NGOs or local officials who sign off on an agreement, as well as from 
agency supervisors, superintendents, and managers in regional and national offices.
No one should lose a job because of a decision to use WFU. The success or failure of a 
WFU event can be measured in how much fuels were reduced, how much damage was 
done, and what wilderness values were lost or gained. Once it has occurred, we may 
be surprised that WFU will work, or surprised that it is impossible—but we will know. 
WFU has the added advantage of being the most cost-effective strategy.
Managers should then ask, if WFU is not appropriate or sufficient, can prescribed fire 
work alone. Lightning may not supply a steady stream of ignition into a relatively 
small WA. For example, the extensive North Rim of the Grand Canyon has multiple 
opportunities to “capture” lightning every year, while the 7,880-acre Mount Trumbull 
WA may not experience many lightning events that either fall into an appropriate 
weather window or onto an appropriate location. Prescribed burns may be warranted 
in such a situation, even though they are not natural, because the eventual effect and 
intention of such a burn may warrant its application. Lessons regarding the intensity of 
prescribed burns may be learned (or in many cases already have been learned) outside 
of Wilderness. Land managers relying on prescribed fire will have to again accept a 
slightly higher level of risk, including damage to trails and/or a small percentage of old 
trees, or even burning on the edge of acceptable mortality. Prescribed fires have escaped, 
they have burned hotter than intended, and they are never totally predictable. There will 
need to be full support for any prescribed burning action on all levels of management 
and from the public. Before prescribed fire can be applied, the agency bears a burden of 
proof that WFU will not be sufficient.
Finally, managers must ask, if prescribed fire is insufficient, can light thinning with a 
single entry fulfill their goals and objectives? Thinning small stems around old-growth 
trees and scattering the slash may provide enough protection to the old-growth trees and 
endangered species habitat. However, spokespersons from several NGOs have indicated 
that any proposal to remove trees within WAs will have a higher likelihood of approval 
if it is a one-time operation, if there is no woody biomass removed, and if the efficacy 
of minimal hand tools, such as cross-cut saws, is at least thoroughly tested. Cross-cut 
saws are not generally preferred (they are infamously referred to as “misery whips”), but 
creative management alternatives may suggest that volunteers with hand tools can thin 
enough small-diameter trees to fulfill management objectives. In contrast, tall stumps 
and the effect of all those people tromping around with hand tools may be considered 
•
•
•
•

15
unacceptable. The public may instead condone the use of chainsaws for a one-time 
treatment. In either case, anyone who values wilderness shudders at the thought of 
stumps and burn piles, no matter how noble the goal—even if it is to make an area more 
natural and less trammeled. These stumps are artificial structures and long-lasting, and 
brush piles require re-entry burning or other trammeling. There is a very real chance 
that some organization will never accept the use of chainsaws in Wilderness Areas. 
Exhausting all other opportunities, though, will greatly increase the odds of wide spread 
support.
At each of these steps there must be a rigorous system of evaluation and monitoring. While 
it is federal land managers who must go through these steps, public support is essential at all 
levels. That support includes a sincere contribution to ideas and strategies that can get fire as a 
significant natural process back into the system. Granted, fire itself is only one part of restoring 
fire as a process, but it is a significant step towards ecological health. Managers may conclude 
that natural conditions have degraded sufficiently that intervention is warranted, or that WFU 
will not work under current conditions in the foreseeable future. Non-government organizations 
invested in wilderness should review the information, test the extent of data and then, if 
appropriate, publicly support management decisions in order to minimize the professional risk 
that a land manager takes. Wildland Fire Use is more unpredictable than controlled burns, and 
both are more unpredictable than pre-fire thinning. Fires do escape their “boundaries” at times, 
so if the decision is to use WFU or controlled burns as the minimum tool, managers need public 
support.
Nothing in this document should be construed to promote one specific action over another. 
Any eventual solution or decision will take years of hard work, and probably extend beyond 
many individual careers. The first managers to embark on this journey will set standards and 
precedents for future action on all WAs where fire is an issue. The lessons learned in ecological 
and political terms will be inestimable. Wilderness areas, as well as many other southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests, have been degraded through action, inaction, benign inattention, and 
heavy use for more than a century. It will require steadfast determination and vision to restore 
even a portion of these areas to their natural composition, structure, and function without losing 
important species or values. It may take decades, spanning entire career of individual land 
managers, just to identify, find, and put back the pieces of these important ecosystems. But to do 
nothing, or to do something in haste, may be worse.
References
Leopold, A. 1941. Wilderness as a land laboratory. The Living Wilderness 6:3.
Olson, S.F. 1968. What is wilderness? The Living Wilderness 33, Spring.
 

16
Endnotes
1. Franklin, J.F. and  J.K. Agee. 2003. Forging a science-based national forest fire policy. Issues in Science  
Technology 20:59-66. Stephens, S.L. and L.W. Ruth. 2005. Federal forest-fire policy in the United States. Ecological 
Applications 15(2):532-542.
2. P.L. 88-577, Wilderness Act of 1964, 16 U.S.C. §1131-1136.
3. Cole, D.N. 1996. Ecological manipulation in wilderness: An emerging management dilemma. International 
Journal of Wilderness 2(1):15-19. Cole, D.N. 2000. Paradox of the primeval: Ecological restoration in wilderness. 
Ecological Restoration 18(2):77-86. Landres, P.B., M. Brunson, and L. Merigliano. 2001. Naturalness and wildness: 
The dilemma and irony of ecological restoration in wilderness. Wild Earth 10(4):77-82.
4. Society for Ecological Restoration International Science and Policy Working Group. 2004. The SER International 
primer on ecological restoration. www.ser.org/pdf/primer3.pdf.
5. Kilgore, B.M. 1985. What is “natural” in wilderness fire management? Pp. 57-67 in J.E. Lotan, B.M. Kilgore, 
W.C. Fischer and R.W. Mutch (eds.), Proceedings: Symposium and workshop on wilderness fire. General Technical 
Report INT-182. Ogden, Utah: USDA Forest Service.
6. Aplet, G.H. 1999. On the nature of wildness: Exploring what wilderness really protects. Denver University Law 
Review 76:347-368. Cole, D.N. 2000. Paradox of the primeval: Ecological restoration in wilderness. Ecological 
Restoration 18(2):77-86. Scott, D. 2004. The enduring wilderness. Golden, CO: Fulcrum Publishing.
7. Zahniser, H. 1961. Managed to be unmanaged. The Living Wilderness 76:2.
8. P.L. 88-577, Wilderness Act of 1964, 16 U.S.C. §1131-1136.
9. Pyne, S.J. 1982. Fire in America: A cultural history. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Pyne, S.J. 2004. 
Tending fire: Coping with America’s wildland fires. Washington, D.C.: Island Press. Arno, S.F. and C.E. Fiedler. 
2005. Mimicking nature’s fire: Restoring fire-prone forests in the West. Washington D.C.: Island Press.
10. Covington, W.W., P.Z. Fulé, M.M. Moore, S.C. Hart, T.E. Kolb, J.N. Mast, S.S. Sackett, and M.R. Wagner. 
1997. Restoring ecosystem health in ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest. Journal of Forestry 95(4):23-29. 
Covington, W.W. 2000. Helping western forests heal. Nature 408:135-136.
11. Leopold, A.S., S.A. Cain, C.M. Cottam, I.N. Gabielson, and T.L. Kimball. 1963. Wildlife management in the 
national parks. American Forestry 69:32-35, 61-63. Christensen, N. L. 1995. Fire and wilderness. International 
Journal of Wilderness 1(1):30-34.
12. Kilgore, B.M. 1986. The role of fire in wilderness: A state-of-knowledge review. Pp. 24-29 in R.C. Lucas (ed.), 
Proceedings—National wilderness research conference: Issues, state-of-knowledge, future directions. General 
Technical Report INT-220. Ogden, Utah: USDA Forest Service. 
13. Agee, J.K. 2000. Wilderness fire science: A state-of-knowledge review. Pp. 5-22 in D.N. Cole, S.F. McCool, 
W.T. Borrie, and J. O’Loughlin (compl.), Wilderness science in a time of change conference: Wilderness 
ecosystems, threats, and management. Proceedings RMRS-15-VOL-5. Ogden, Utah: USDA Forest Service.
14. Hourdequin, M. 2001. Linking wilderness research and management, volume 1. Wilderness fire restoration and 
management: An annotated reading list, series ed. V. Wright. General Technical Report RMRS-70-VOL-1. Fort 
Collins, Colo.: USDA Forest Service.
15. National Fire Plan. 2001. Review and update of the 1995 federal Wildland Fire Management Policy. www.
fireplan.gov/index.html.
16. Agee, J.K. 2000. Wilderness fire science: A state-of-knowledge review. Pp. 5-22 in D.N. Cole, S.F. McCool, 
W.T. Borrie, and J. O’Loughlin (compl.), Wilderness science in a time of change conference: Wilderness 
ecosystems, threats, and management. Proceedings RMRS-15-VOL-5. Ogden, Utah: USDA Forest Service.
17. Parsons, D.J. 2000. The challenge of restoring natural fire to wilderness. Pp. 276-282 in D.N. Cole, S.F. McCool, 
W.T. Borrie, and J. O’Loughlin (compl.), Wilderness science in a time of change conference: Wilderness 

17
ecosystems, threats, and management. Proceedings RMRS-15-VOL-5. Ogden, Utah: USDA Forest Service.
18. Covington, W.W., P.Z. Fulé, M.M. Moore, S.C. Hart, T.E. Kolb, J.N. Mast, S.S. Sackett, and M.R. Wagner. 
1997. Restoring ecosystem health in ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest. Journal of Forestry 95(4):23-29.
19. Sweedo, L. 1999. Where there is fire, there is smoke: Prescribed burning in Idaho’s forests. Dickenson Journal 
of Environmental Law & Policy 8:121-142.
20. Doane, D., J. O’laughlin, P. Morgan, and C. Miller 2006. Barriers to Wildland Fire Use: A preliminary problem 
analysis. International Journal of Wilderness 12(1):36-38.
21. Miller, C. 2006. Wilderness fire management in a changing world. International Journal of Wilderness 12(1):18-
21.
22. P.L. 88-577, Wilderness Act of 1964, 16 U.S.C. §1131-1136. Bunnell, D.L. 1995. Prescribed fire considerations 
and the Wilderness Act. Pp. 64-73 in D.C. Bryan (ed.), Conference proceedings: Environmental regulation and 
prescribed fire: Legal and social challenges. Tampa, Fla.: Center for Professional Development, Florida State 
University.
23. Cole, D. N., and P. B. Landres. 1996. Threats to wilderness ecosystems: Impacts and research needs. Ecological 
Applications 6(1):168-184.
24. USC 43 § 1701-1782 the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976.
25. Rashkin, A., B.J. Siddoway, A. Strachan, A. Swallow, J. Waddoups, and J.J. Wechsler. 2001. The state of the 
law: The Wilderness Act of 1964: A practitioner’s guide. Journal of Land Resources & Environmental Law 21:219-
284.
26. §.35(A)1.
27. §.35(A)2.
28. P. L. 98-406, Arizona Wilderness Act of 1984. Title III, § 301(a)(4) Mount Logan Wilderness. Title III, § 
301(a)(5) Mount Trumbull Wilderness.
29. H.R. Report 101-104, H.R. Rep. No. 405, Appendix B, § 14, 101st Congress, 2nd Session 1990, 1990 WL 
259127.
30. Parsons, D.J. 2000. The challenge of restoring natural fire to wilderness. Pp. 276-282 in D.N. Cole, S.F. 
McCool, W.T. Borrie, and J. O’Loughlin (compl.), Wilderness science in a time of change conference: Wilderness 
ecosystems, threats, and management. Proceedings RMRS-15-VOL-5. Ogden, Utah: USDA Forest Service.
31. BLM (Bureau of Land Management). 1990. Mt. Trumbull Wilderness, Mt. Logan Wilderness, Wilderness 
management plan. BLM-AZ-PT-90-009-8500. U.S. Department of Interior.
32. BLM. 2004. Arizona Strip Fire Management Zone fire management plan. Unpublished document, available 
through the Arizona Strip BLM Office and on file with author.
33. BLM. 2000. 43 CFR Parts 6300 and 8560: Wilderness management; final rule. Federal Register 65 (241): 
78357–78376.
34. BLM. 2000. 43 CFR Parts 6300 and 8560: Wilderness management; final rule. Federal Register 65 (241), § 
6303.1 b and c.
35. Covington, W.W., D.W. Huffman, M.T. Stoddard, C.M. McGlone, and P.Z. Fulé. 2006. Mt. Trumbull ecosystem 
restoration: Final report to BLM, Arizona Strip District. Unpublished report, Northern Arizona University 
Ecological Restoration Institute. http://hdl.handle.net/2019/285.
36. Covington, W.W., T.A. Heinlein, P.Z. Fulé, A.E. Waltz, and J.D. Springer. 1999. Changes in ponderosa pine 
forests of the Mt. Trumbull Wilderness: Report to BLM, Arizona Strip District. Unpublished report, Northern 
Arizona University Ecological Restoration Institute. http://hdl.handle.net/2019/62.
37. DOI (Department of Interior) 2005. Bureau of Land Management and National Park Service, draft resource 
management plan/draft EIS for the Arizona Strip Field Office, the Vermillion Cliffs National Monument, and the 
BLM Portion of Grand Canyon–Parashant National Monument and a draft general management plan/draft EIS for 
the NPS portion of Grand Canyon–Parashant National Monument 2-45.

18
38. 16 U.S.C. §§ 473-478, 479-482 and 551, June 4, 1897, as amended 1905, 1911, 1925, 1962, 1964, 1968 and 
1976, Forest Service Organic Administration Act of 1897.
39. P.L. 94-588, National Forest Management Act of 1976.
40. 36 C.F.R. § 219 et. seq. 1982.
41. 36 C.F.R. § 219.
42. 36 C.F.R. § 219.7 (a)(5) (ii).
43. 36 C.F.R. § 293.2.
44. Parsons, D. J. 2000. The challenge of restoring natural fire to wilderness. Pp. 276-282 in D. N. Cole, S. F. 
McCool, W. T. Borrie, and J. O’Loughlin (compl.), Wilderness science in a time of change conference: Wilderness 
ecosystems, threats, and management. Proceedings RMRS-15-VOL-5. Ogden, Utah: USDA Forest Service.
45. P. L. 98-406, Arizona Wilderness Act of 1984. Title I, § 101(a)(22) Kachina Peaks Wilderness. Title I, § 
101(a)(12) Kendrick Mountain Wilderness (16 U.S.C. 1132 notes).
46. Personal communication with J. Denk, Fire Information Officer, Williams/Tusayan Ranger Districts, Kaibab 
National Forest. October 28, 2005.
47. Coconino National Forest. 1987. Land and resource management plan, p. 111. Unpublished document on file 
with Coconino National Forest.
48. Coconino National Forest. 1997. USDA Forest Service, Peaks Ranger District, Kachina Peaks Wilderness 
prescribed natural fire plan biological opinion summary 2-21-94-F-220 (September 10). Available from USFS or 
author.
49. Heinlein, T.A. 1996. Fire regimes and forest structure in lower mixed conifer forests: San Francisco Peaks, 
Arizona. M.S. thesis, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff.
50. Cocke, A.E., P.Z. Fulé, and J.E. Crouse. 2005. Forest change on a steep mountain gradient after extended fire 
exclusion: San Francisco Peaks, Arizona, USA. Journal of Applied Ecology 42:814-823.
51. Ibid.
52. 16 U.S.C. § 1 et seq. An act to establish a National Park Service, and for other purposes. Aug. 25, 1916, 39 Stat. 
535.
53. Winks, R.W. 1997. The National Park Service Act of 1916: “A contradictory mandate”? Denver University Law 
Review 74:575-623.
54. Sellars, R.W. 1997. Preserving nature in the national parks: A history. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
55. P.L. 95-625, National Parks and Recreation Act of 1978: Act of November 10, 1978, 92 Stat. 3467.
56. NPS. 2003. Natural Resource Challenge. www.nature.nps.gov/challenge/index.cfm.
57. NPS. 1999. Director’s order #41 and Director’s order #41 reference manual: Wilderness preservation and 
management, § 6.3.7. http://data2.itc.nps.gov/npspolicy/DOrders.cfm.
58. NPS. 1999. Director’s order #41 and Director’s order #41 reference manual: Wilderness preservation and 
management, § 6.3.7. http://data2.itc.nps.gov/npspolicy/DOrders.cfm.
59. 40 Statute 1175 § 2, 1919.
60. 16 U.S.C. § 228a.
61. Crumbo, K. and R. George. 2005. Protecting and restoring the greater Grand Canyon ecoregion.  Flagstaff, AZ: 
Sierra Club Grand Canyon Chapter. http://arizona.sierraclub.org/.
62. National Park Service. 1998. Grand Canyon National Park draft Wilderness management plan.  www.nps.gov/
grca/wilderness/draftwmp.htm.
63. National Park Service. 1999. Director’s order #41 and Director’s order #41 reference manual: Wilderness 
preservation and management, § 6.3.7. http://data2.itc.nps.gov/npspolicy/DOrders.cfm. 
64. National Park Service. 2001. National Park Service management policies. § 4.4.1. www.nps.gov/policy/mp/
policies.html.

19
65. National Park Service. 1968. P. 17 in Compilation of the administrative policies for the national parks and 
national monuments of scientific significance. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Interior.
66. NPS (National Park Service). 1968. Compilation of the administrative policies for the national parks and 
national monuments of scientific significance. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Interior.
67. van Wagtendonk, J.W. 1991. The evolution of National Park Service fire policy. Pp. 328-332 in S.C. Nodvin and 
T.A. Waldrop (eds.), Fire in the environment: Ecological and cultural perspectives. General Technical Report SE-69. 
Asheville, N.C.: USDA Forest Service.
68. Bonnickson, T.M. 1983. Ecological information for park and wilderness fire management planning. Pp. 168-
173 in J.E. Lotan, B.M. Kilgore, W.C. Fischer, and R.W. Mutch (eds.), Proceedings: Symposium and workshop on 
wilderness fire. General Technical Report INT-182. Ogden, Utah: USDA Forest Service.
69. Fulé, P.Z., A.E. Cocke, T.A. Heinlein, and W.W. Covington. 2004. Effects of an intense prescribed fire: Is it 
ecological restoration? Restoration Ecology 12(2):220-230.
70. Fulé, P.Z., W.W. Covington, M.M. Moore, T.A. Heinlein, and A.E.M. Waltz. 2002a. Natural variability in forests 
of the Grand Canyon, USA. Journal of Biogeography 29:31-47.
71. Nichols, T., B. Callenberger, and G. Kleindienst. 1994. Report of the task force review of the hazard fuel 
situation on the North Rim of the Grand Canyon. Unpublished report, on file at the Division of Resource 
Management, Grand Canyon National Park.
72. Crumbo, K. and R. George. 2005. Note 10 in Protecting and restoring the greater Grand Canyon ecoregion.  
Flagstaff, AZ: Sierra Club Grand Canyon Chapter. http://arizona.sierraclub.org/.
73. Fulé, P.Z., W.W. Covington, H.B. Smith, J.D. Springer, T.A. Heinlein, K.D. Huisinga, and M.M. Moore. 2002b. 
Comparing ecological restoration alternatives: Grand Canyon, Arizona. Forest Ecology and Management 170:19-41.
74. Ibid, p. 38.
75. Fulé, P. Z., A. E. Cocke, T. A. Heinlein, and W. W. Covington. 2004. Effects of an intense prescribed fire: Is it 
ecological restoration? Restoration Ecology 12(2):220-230.
76. National Park Service. 2001. National Park Service management policies. § 6.3.5. www.nps.gov/policy/mp/
policies.html.
77. NPS. 2004. What constitutes appropriate conservation and restoration activities in Wilderness? National Park 
Service, National Wilderness Steering Committee, Guidance White Paper No. 2.
78. Liljeblad, A. and W.T. Borrie 2006. Trust in wildland fire and fuel management decisions.  International Journal 
of Wilderness 12(1):39-42.
     

ERI White Papers: Issues in Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by 
reestablishing native species, structural characteristics, and ecological processes. The 
Society for Ecological Restoration International deﬁnes ecological restoration as “an 
intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem with respect 
to its health, integrity and sustainability….Restoration attempts to return an ecosystem to 
its historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration International Science & Policy 
Working Group 2004).
In the southwestern United States, most ponderosa pine forests have been degraded 
during the last 150 years. Many ponderosa pine areas are now dominated by dense thickets 
of small trees, and lack their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests 
in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing ﬁres and increased 
insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers on reintroducing 
frequent, low-intensity surface ﬁres—often after thinning dense stands—and reestablishing 
productive understory plant communities. 
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer 
in researching, implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests. By allowing natural processes, such as ﬁre, to resume self-
sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem services, 
wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The ERI White Papers series provides overviews and policy recommendations derived 
from research and observations by the ERI and its partner organizations. While the ERI 
staff recognizes that every forest restoration is site speciﬁc, we feel that the information 
provided in the ERI White Papers may help decisionmakers elsewhere.
This publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest 
Service. The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors 
and should not be interpreted as representing the opinions or policies of the United States 
Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products does not constitute their 
endorsement by the United States Government or ERI.
ERI White Papers: Issues in Forest Restoration 
1. Forestlands Health and Carbon Sequestration: Strengthening the Case for
Western Forest Restoration
2. Smoke from Prescribed Burning: Issues on Public Forestlands of the Western
United States
3. Public Perceptions of Forest Restoration in the Southwest: A Synthesis of Selected
Literature and Surveys
4. Integrating Ecological Restoration and Conservation Biology: A Case Study from 
Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
20

