USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-22. 2001
141
In: Vance, Regina K.; Edminster, Carleton B.; Covington, W. Wallace;
Blake, Julie A. comps. 2001. Ponderosa pine ecosystems restoration and
conservation: steps toward stewardship; 2000 April 25–27; Flagstaff, AZ.
Proceedings RMRS-P-22. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station.
Dr. Dennis L. Lynch is Professor Emeritus, Department of Forest Sciences,
College of Natural Resources, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO. At
the time of this conference he was employed by State and Private Forestry,
Region 2, Forest Service, USDA to complete research related to other forest
restoration projects and the utilization of small diameter wood in Colorado.
Dr. Lynch has completed three other similar cost studies on forest restoration
in Colorado.
Financial Results of Ponderosa Pine Forest
Restoration in Southwestern Colorado
Dennis L. Lynch
Abstract—From 1996 to 1998, the Ponderosa Pine Partnership
conducted an experimental forest restoration project on 493 acres of
small diameter ponderosa pine in the San Juan National Forest,
Montezuma County, Colorado. The ecological basis and the finan-
cial analysis for this project are discussed. Specific financial results
of the project including products sold, revenues collected, harvest-
ing costs incurred, and profits or losses realized are reported.
Restoration costs are also compared with fire suppression costs
experienced both in Colorado and nationwide. Using data collected
since the conclusion of the project, the future potential for financing
forest restoration in southwestern Colorado is explored.
Introduction ____________________
This paper presents specific financial results from a forest
restoration project conducted by the Ponderosa Pine Part-
nership in southwestern Colorado. This Partnership was
created by a group of organizations to explore potential
benefits of forest restoration and includes Montezuma
County, San Juan National Forest, Ft Lewis College, Colo-
rado Timber Industry Association (CTIA), Colorado State
Forest Service, College of Natural Resources, and Coopera-
tive Extension at Colorado State University (CSU). The
Partnership was formed because the County and the San
Juan National Forest were concerned about several prob-
lems present in the 183,000 acre ponderosa pine forest
northeast of Cortez, CO. These problems included:
• Potential for insect and disease outbreaks
• Risk of catastrophic forest fires
• Decline of small forest product businesses
• Recognition that ponderosa pine forests in this area are
not within their range of natural variability and are
probably not sustainable in their current condition
(Romme 1999).
Dr. William Romme, professor in the Department of Biol-
ogy at Ft Lewis College, Durango, CO, had principal respon-
sibility for ecological data collection, development of an
ecological prescription for this experimental forest restora-
tion project, and subsequent monitoring. In his previous
research in southwestern Colorado (Montezuma, La Plata,
and Archuleta Counties) Romme (1999) reached generally
similar conclusions as research from Arizona and New
Mexico (Cooper 1960; Covington and others 1997; Dahms
and Geils 1997; Fulé and others 1997). He found that in this
forest area there were seven times more trees per acre today
than in 1900. Specifically, there are 280 to 390 trees per acre
today versus 40 to 50 trees per acre in 1900. Stands were
characterized in 1900 by clumps of trees. These clumps were
typically one-tenth to one-quarter acre in size, while today
the clumped pattern of stands has largely been lost. Stump
diameters of trees living in 1900 averaged 27 inches and ages
were likely to reach 300 years. Today 95 percent of the trees
are 16 inches in diameter at breast height or smaller and 110
years or less in age. Additionally, less than 20 percent of
today’s stands have pine regeneration. Mortality is also
disproportionate, occurring in the very young and oldest
trees.
He also discovered that fire frequencies have changed. For
example, in the forest area, of which this study is a part, he
found that during the period 1685–1872, the interval be-
tween fires ranged from 5 to 20 years, with a median of 12
years. In another part of the area he found that between
1729 to 1879 the range in fire frequency was 2 to 31 years
with a median of 10 years. Since 1879, there has not been a
fire that created a fire scar in most of the area.
On the basis of his research, Dr. Romme suggested that
the current forest could be modified and restored to condi-
tions similar to pre-1870 structure and processes. He de-
signed an ecological prescription that retained large trees,
developed the clumped nature of tree groups within the
forest, developed glades and parks between tree clumps,
reduced shrub understory while increasing the grass-forb
component, and reintroduced low intensity fire as a process.
A dominant concern of this study was to ensure that the
ecological prescription controlled implementation. It was
also obvious that forest restoration could not proceed unless
costs were paid. As previously stated, no government money
was available to implement this study. Further it was highly
unlikely that tax dollars would be appropriated to pay for
forest restoration in any situation except, perhaps, those
most severely threatening to life and property. Even then,
the material to be removed would have to be disposed of in
some way. Leaving thinning slash in the forest would only
increase fuel loading and the probability of intense fires.
Sackett (2000) commented that prescribed burning alone
has been unable to remove the volume of existing material
in the Chimney Springs, AZ, area forest to a healthy state,
let alone presettlement conditions. Recent catastrophic fires
in the Southwest also attest to the danger associated with
the use of prescribed fire alone. Therefore, this financial

142
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-22. 2001
Lynch
Financial Results of Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration in Southwestern Colorado
study was conducted to determine harvesting costs and
potential revenues available from products removed in this
experimental attempt at forest restoration.
It is also important to recognize that forest restoration
projects are very different from typical timber sales. In forest
restoration, the material removed is the least desirable from
a product standpoint and may contain a predominance of
small diameter trees that cost more to remove than they are
worth. A large body of timber harvesting research, from the
United States and internationally, clearly documents that
manual or mechanical removal of small diameter trees is
expensive. Thus the basic premise of forest restoration,
which requires removing small trees and leaving the largest,
presents a difficult financial problem. This problem is fur-
ther complicated in Montezuma County because there are
only a few local industries available to process small diam-
eter material. Therefore, long haul distances are necessary
to take small material to processing points. Forest Service
procedures that required treating forest restoration activi-
ties as timber sales and an appraisal process that did not
accurately estimate values of the material removed made
the problem even more complex.
Carla Garrison Harper, representing Montezuma County,
served as project coordinator for the Ponderosa Pine Part-
nership. The Partnership completed forest restoration on six
representative sites in the Mancos-Dolores District of the
San Juan National Forest. However, because financial data
were incomplete and inconclusive on one unit, this report
discusses financial results for five of the areas completed.
These five study units totaled 492.6 acres. An overview of the
ecological prescription, restoration work, costs, and subse-
quent monitoring is included in a paper by Lynch and others
(2000). It does not, however, provide the cost detail pre-
sented here nor a comparison with wildfire costs.
Three key points should be emphasized:
• Dr. Romme’s ecological prescription was formed on the
basis of his previous research. The project objective was
to restore the forest toward the ecological balance he
envisioned.
• The Partnership did not have any Federally appropri-
ated money to use to subsidize the removal of small
diameter trees.
• After the largest trees had been retained in clumps, as
specified by the ecological prescription, the excess ma-
terial was removed and sold. The financial results
presented here are for that undesirable and excess
material. The project was not designed to make money,
but to determine if forest restoration work based on
good ecology could pay its way.
Description of Project
Implementation _________________
The five units selected for this study are representative of
forest conditions in this area and are quite similar in regard
to soil, slope, terrain, and access to haul roads. To implement
forest restoration it was necessary, under existing Forest
Service procedures, to transfer Dr. Romme’s ecological guide-
lines to a timber sale format. Phil Kemp, forester with the
Mancos-Dolores District, had primary responsibility for
applying Dr. Romme’s research and guidelines to develop
and implement ecological restoration prescriptions. The
retention of larger trees, and the clumped nature and spac-
ing of tree groups were key considerations. Phil developed
on-the-ground silvicutural prescriptions, and trained and
supervised crews to mark the trees to be retained in the
forest. He coordinated with Dr. Romme to develop a marking
guide that would achieve the desired forest condition. Trees
to be retained on the site were marked with blue paint.
Following marking of each unit in this study, a cruise was
conducted to determine the amount and character of the
material to be removed. The Forest Service, using this
information, prepared administrative timber sale contracts.
Montezuma County purchased each timber sale and ar-
ranged to pay for the wood removed and associated costs
such as road rock replacement and slash disposal. Initially,
costs to conduct the ecological and economic studies were
also to be charged to the timber sale. However, research
funds from other sources were secured to pay for the studies.
Timber volumes and subsequent payments were initially
based on cruise data that ultimately proved to be inaccurate.
Cruise estimates tended to overestimate the amount of
sawtimber available for removal and underestimate the
volume of POL material to be removed. Such faulty esti-
mates are of critical concern to both the Forest Service and
small businesses. Cruise estimates of timber are not only
costly to perform, but in forest restoration sales have the
potential to be very erroneous because there is such great
variation in the material to be removed. Therefore, weight
samples were taken from logs and truckloads of logs were
scaled after weighing to determine weight-volume relation-
ships. Subsequent payments were based on weight, which
proved to be more accurate and fair to both seller and
purchaser.
CTIA coordinated with local industry and the San Juan
National Forest to determine which industry firms were to
be involved in the project. Ragland and Sons Logging of
Dolores, CO, purchased the five timber sale units from
Montezuma County and had primary responsibility for
harvesting and marketing material removed from the forest.
The material removed was used to produce a variety of wood
products, some of which were experimental attempts to use
small diameter trees. Every effort was made to market logs
to processors in or near Montezuma County, but some small
diameter material simply could not be processed locally. The
bulk of this small material was taken as waferwood logs to
the oriented strand board plant in Olathe, CO. At the plant,
logs are debarked and processed through a waferizer, also
known as a flaker, to create wafers or strands for oriented
strand board production. Sawlogs from the sale were pro-
cessed at the Ragland’s Stonertop sawmill near Dolores into
timbers and lumber. Material brought to the mill was
appraised to all other possible mill sites and the value of the
logs estimated on that basis.
Ragland and Sons Logging utilized both manual (chain-
saws) and mechanical (JD 743 Harvester) equipment for
felling, limbing, and bucking (FLB) in this project. Slash was
lopped and scattered in place for prescribed burning. Skid-
ding was done with rubber-tired grapple skidders (CAT 518
and JD 540). Logs were loaded with a knuckle boom loader
on conventional log trucks for transportation by product

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-22. 2001
143
Financial Results of Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration in Southwestern Colorado
Lynch
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
1
5B
5E
4
Joyce
POL
Sawlogs
LEGEND
Left axis — Tons
Bottom axis — Units
Bars- POL or Sawlogs
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
1
5E
5B
4
Joyce
5" to 7.9"
8" to 11.9"
12+"
LEGEND
Left Axis — Number of Trees
Bottom Axis — Units
Bars- Diameter (DBH) Classes
type to various mills. All trucks were weighed on scales to
determine the amount of material removed.
We followed a program of adaptive management. As each
unit was completed we reviewed the results to ensure that
appropriate changes were made in the next unit to improve
ecological accomplishment (Lynch and others 2000). Follow-
ing logging, broadcast burning of slash by the Forest Service
was used to reintroduce fire to the forest. Prescribed burning
of these areas in later years will be done at intervals that are
historically characteristic of these forests. This should re-
sult in low intensity fires in the future. Ecological monitor-
ing of these areas is continuing.
Financial Studies and Results _____
Study Methodology
In this financial study, we recorded every tree cut by
diameter class. Distributions of trees removed by unit and
diameter class are shown in figure 1. Every log skidded and
every log loaded onto a truck were also counted. All trucks
were weighed to determine the tons hauled by product type.
The relationship of products other than logs (POL) to sawlog
material by unit is shown in figure 2. Samples were taken
from logs and sample truckloads were scaled by a Forest
Service scaler to determine weight to volume relationships.
Complete records of time and costs for all aspects of the
operation were collected using established logging cost col-
lection techniques. These included all costs associated with
labor, equipment, oil, gas, diesel, supplies, field and office
administration, and transportation involved in felling,
limbing, bucking, skidding, loading, slash treatment (except
prescribed burning), roads, and hauling logs. These costs are
specific to the company participating in this study, so item-
ized cost information is not presented in order to respect the
privacy of the firm. Revenues for each product were recorded
and profit or loss calculated. The efficiency of the logger was
compared to USDA Forest Service  regional average harvest-
ing costs and harvesting cost studies in New Mexico, Ari-
zona, Oregon, and Canada. Correlation analysis was used to
compare the characteristics of units 1, 5B, 5E, and Joyce
with unit profit. Initial analysis indicated that factors asso-
ciated with the cold temperatures and deep snow in Unit 4
inflated costs and would bias results. Only correlations
above 0.8 (+ or –) were considered strong enough to merit
consideration.
Unit Results
Unit 1—Also known as the Smoothing Iron unit, Unit 1 is
located on Haycamp Mesa and is 125 acres. A total of 6,754
trees were removed from the unit during August 25 to
October 3, 1995. Figure 1 shows tree distribution by diam-
eter class. In this unit, 1 cubic foot of ponderosa pine log at
the landing weighed 71.78 lb with a standard deviation of
5.11 lb
The removal of trees resulted in the delivery of 1,232.76
tons of sawlogs to Stonertop sawmill in Dolores, 2,322.75
tons of waferwood logs to the Louisiana-Pacific oriented
strand board mill in Olathe, and 145 tons of pine excelsior
logs to Western Excelsior in Mancos. This was a relationship
of 33.3 percent sawlogs to 66.7 percent products other than
logs (POL) by weight. It amounted to a removal of 29.6 tons
per acre. Any tree 8 inches d.b.h. or larger that would make
a sawlog was taken to the sawmill. Other trees were taken
for waferwood logs or pine excelsior logs. Table 1 lists unit
revenue, and cost to the logger as well as profit or loss data
per ton.
There was a total profit (total revenue minus actual costs)
for the unit of $440.48. Note that this is total profit before
taxes. No previous allowances for profit and risk or income
taxes were made during cost collection or analysis.
The effort to develop pine excelsior was experimental. It
was first believed that pine might be added as a supplement
to aspen excelsior for certain applications and was, there-
fore, worth trying as a potential local outlet for small, poor
quality logs. However, pine contains terpenes, a compound
Figure 1—Numbers of trees by unit and
diameter class.
Figure 2—Relationship of products by unit (tons
of POL and tons of sawlogs per unit).

144
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-22. 2001
Lynch
Financial Results of Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration in Southwestern Colorado
that has a characteristic pine odor and, when it occurs in
sufficient concentrations, can be used to produce turpentine.
Terpenes can also attract certain insects, such as termites,
and in sufficient concentrations can interfere with the vi-
ability of seeds. Further, pine excelsior proved to be brittle
and difficult to ship. These characteristics reduced the
marketability of pine excelsior and, at this time, pine excel-
sior does not appear to be a viable product.
The effort to use ponderosa pine for waferwood was also
experimental to a degree. Usually, wood materials of lighter
density, such as aspen, are sought for waferwood used in the
production of oriented stand board (OSB). However, Louisi-
ana-Pacific at Olathe, CO, was willing to mix ponderosa pine
from this area with other species as a test. This provided an
excellent outlet for poor quality, small diameter material
that would have been impossible to market elsewhere. The
long haul distance of 160 miles to the plant contributed to
losses for this product.
Unit 5B—This unit is also known as one of the Found
Park units, and is located off Forest Road 521 on Ormiston
Point. It is 108 acres. A total of 9,177 trees were removed
from the unit during June 26 to November 11, 1996. Figure 1
shows the distribution of trees cut by diameter class. Ponde-
rosa pine sawlogs at the landing weighed 72.81 lb per cubic
foot with a standard deviation of 2.0 lb. The POL logs
weighed 76.56 lb per cubic foot at the landing with a stan-
dard deviation of 4.03 lb. The removal resulted in the
delivery of 1,397.44 tons of sawlogs to the Stonertop mill,
1,899.86 tons of waferwood logs to the Louisiana-Pacific
mill, 353.07 tons of wood for posts and poles to Cannon
Forest Products in Cortez, and 177.54 tons of pulpwood sold
at the landing and ultimately delivered to Stone Container
in Snowflake, AZ. This was a relationship of 36.5 percent
sawlogs to 63.5 percent POL by weight and a removal of 35.4
tons per acre. Table 1 summarizes the per ton financial
results by product for this unit. The total profit for the unit
was $6,875.60.
Shipment of pulpwood to Snowflake, AZ, was another
experimental attempt to evaluate potential markets. In this
case, a trucker from Cortez was hauling house logs from an
area near Snowflake to a location in Colorado. He needed a
back haul to Snowflake and this provided an opportunity to
explore this market. However, he estimated his costs re-
sulted in a loss to him of approximately $8.00 per ton for the
haul. Thus, this pulpwood market proved to be uneconomi-
cal to the trucker, although the revenue at the landing to the
logger was near the break-even point.
Post and pole logs were sorted at the landing and trucked
separately to Cannon Forest Products. It takes a reasonably
straight, defect free, and uniform tree to yield a satisfactory
post or pole. Forest restoration material, however, often
contains large volumes of deformed, poor quality, small
diameter material that does not fit post and pole specifica-
tions. Sorting out higher quality material can introduce
additional costs. Also, the quantity of post and pole logs
ultimately overwhelmed the small local mill capacity to buy
and process the material.
Unit 5E—The second of the Found Park units is bisected
by Forest Road 521 on Ormiston Point. It is 65 acres and
almost equally distributed on either side of the road. A total
of 5,307 trees were removed from this unit during May 29 to
June 27, 1997. Figure 1 shows the distribution of trees cut by
diameter class. In this unit, ponderosa pine logs at the
landing weighed 71.68 lb per cubic foot with a standard
deviation of 6.04 lb. This removal resulted in a delivery of
274.85 tons of sawlogs to Stonertop mill, 881.07 tons of
Table 1— Unit summary of revenue, costs, and profit (loss) per ton.
Product
Revenue
Costa
Stumpage
Profit (loss)
Unit 1—Smoothing Iron
Waferwood
$31
$31.06
+ $1.51
=
(–$1.57)
Excelsior
$17
$23.35
+ $1.51
=
(–$7.86)
Sawlogs
$30.52
$22.64
+ $3.64
=
$4.24
Unit 5B—Found Park
Waferwood
$31
$30.84
+ $1.32
=
(–$1.16)
Pulpwood
$18.82b
$16.87b
+ $1.32
=
$0.63
Posts-poles
$24.00
$22.81
+ $1.32
=
(–$0.13)
Sawlogs
$30.52
$20.86
+ $3.21
=
$6.45
Unit 5E—Found Park
Pulpwood
$24.04b
$21.77b
+ $1.14
=
$1.13
Posts-poles
$24.00
$27.55
+ $1.14
=
(–$4.69)
Waferwood
$32.00
$35.37
+ $1.14
=
(–$4.87)
Sawlogs
$30.52
$30.52
+ $8.92
=
(–$3.76)
Unit 4—West Trail —“Snow Unit”
Waferwood
$31
$36.20
+ $1.48
=
(–$6.68)
Sawlogs
$30.52
$26.42
+ $4.63
=
(–$0.53)
Joyce Unit
Waferwood
$32
$27.10
+ $ 2.32
=
$2.58
Sawlogs
$30.52
$17.22
+ $ 5.21
=
$8.09
aIncludes all costs described in text associated with logging and hauling logs to mill.
bNote: pulpwood revenue and costs are at the landing, not to the mill.

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-22. 2001
145
Financial Results of Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration in Southwestern Colorado
Lynch
waferwood logs to Louisiana-Pacific, 269.64 tons of wood for
posts and poles to Cannon Forest Products, and 101.9 tons
of pulpwood to Stone Container in Snowflake, AZ. This is a
relationship of 18 percent sawlogs to 82 percent POL by
weight and was a removal of 23.5 tons per acre. Table 1
presents the per ton financial data for this unit.
The loss for the unit was $6,473.71. This loss does not
include any allowances for profit, risk, or income taxes.
Factors contributing to the loss were a high stumpage rate
for sawlogs coupled with the small amount of sawtimber
removed from the unit. The high stumpage price resulted
from cruise data that indicated there were more sawlogs in
the unit than actually existed. Thus, the logger paid for
material that did not, in fact, exist. This was a key reason for
using a weight basis for subsequent sales of this low value
material.
While pulpwood again appears to be profitable in this unit,
the trucker had delayed in calculating his costs only to
discover losses similar to those discussed in the narrative for
Unit 5B. It is likely that the large amount of small material
of poor quality created additional sorting and handling for
post and pole logs, thus increasing costs.
This unit illustrates the financial losses that occur when
there is a small percentage of sawlogs to POL material. It
simply costs more to harvest small diameter material and
when sawlogs are not present, overall costs increase. In
addition, the stumpage cost for sawlogs was too high and
that added to losses.
Unit 4—Also known as the West Trail unit, this unit is
located off Forest Road 524. We refer to it as the “snow unit”
because it was logged from November 11, 1996, to January
31, 1997, when the area was besieged with very cold weather
and deep snows.
The unit is 95 acres. A total of 6,824 trees were removed
from the unit. Figure1 shows the distribution of trees cut by
diameter class. Ponderosa pine logs in this unit weighed
72.43 lb per cubic foot with a standard deviation of 4.6 lb. The
removal resulted in the delivery of 1,152.51 tons of sawlogs
to Stonertop Mill and 2,008.57 tons of waferwood to Louisi-
ana-Pacific. This is a relationship of 36.5 percent sawlogs to
63.5 percent POL by weight. This was a removal of 33.27 tons
per acre. Table 1 presents per ton financial results for this
unit.
This resulted in a loss of $14,028.08. Factors contributing
to this loss were increased costs from logging in deep snow
and somewhat higher sawlog stumpage prices. The POL
stumpage price was also near that of unit 1 and higher than
units 5B and 5E. It is important to note that all of the other
characteristics of this unit indicate it would have been a
profitable unit, like unit 5B, if it had not been logged in deep
snow. While it is often desirable to encourage winter logging
of areas, this sale illustrates the importance of scheduling
forest restoration sales during periods when costs will not be
increased by weather conditions. It also underlines the need
to provide flexibility for contract extensions when such
conditions arise.
Joyce Unit—This unit is located in the Boggy Draw area,
which is a favorable site for tree growth. It is 99.6 acres. A
total of 3,101 trees were removed from this unit. Figure 1
shows the distribution of trees cut by diameter class. In this
unit, ponderosa pine sawlogs weighed an average of 78.82 lb
per cubic foot (the mean of two scaled loads). A total of
2,021.24 tons of sawlogs were delivered to the Stonertop mill
and 142.46 tons of waferwood logs to Louisiana-Pacific. This
is a relationship of 93.4 percent sawlogs to 6.6 percent POL
by weight. A total of 21.72 tons per acre were removed from
the unit. Table 1 presents the per ton financial data for this
unit.
The total profit for this unit was $16,719.38. This unit is,
from an economic standpoint, at the upper end of profitabil-
ity for a forest restoration sale. It is at the opposite end of the
spectrum from Unit 5E where the material removed was
predominately POL. The quantity of larger trees on the site
when the ecological prescription was applied resulted in the
removal of more sawlog material than in the other units. The
Joyce unit restoration would resemble a traditional timber
sale if it had removed the largest trees from the site.
However, the largest trees were left on the site in adequate
densities and trees in excess of the prescription were
removed.
Harvesting costs declined overall as a result of the re-
moval of a larger proportion of sawlogs in this unit. The
higher POL costs, which had been typical up to this point,
were offset by the lower harvesting costs of sawlogs. In
addition, the loggers had learned from our reports that POL
was resulting in serious losses. In this unit they did every-
thing possible to salvage material for sawlog use.
This unit illustrates that opportunities can arise to bal-
ance costly units (like 5E that have high proportions of POL),
against units like this one to achieve break-even or profit-
able forest restoration projects. This may require combining
scattered units at a variety of locations into one sale or
adopting landscape scale restoration in order to modify
costs.
Summary of Key Results _________
This forest restoration project incorporated five sale units
covering a total of 492.6 acres and the removal of 31,163
trees (63.3 trees per acre) for use as sawlogs (6,075.8 tons),
waferwood (7,254.71 tons), and other products such as posts
and poles, pulpwood, and pine excelsior (1,047.15 tons). The
loggers’ costs in this study, for each step in the harvesting
process except hauling, were less than USFS Regional aver-
ages and very comparable to cost studies from other areas.
Forest Service and independent observers rated the restora-
tion logging conducted by Ragland and Sons as excellent
work.
Table 2 records a summary of profit and loss by unit. Total
profit to the logger of $3,533.67 was 0.81 percent (less than
Table 2—Unit profit or loss.
Unit
Profit or (loss)
Per acre profit (loss)
1
$ 440.48
$ 3.52
5B
$ 6,875.60
$ 63.66
5E
$( 6,473.71)
$( 99.60)
4
$(14,028.08)
$(147.66)
Joyce
$ 16,719.38
$ 167.86
Total
$ 3,533.67

146
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-22. 2001
Lynch
Financial Results of Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration in Southwestern Colorado
FLB
26%
SKID
16%
LOAD
6%
HAUL
44%
ADMIN
7%
ROADS
1%
1 percent) on gross revenues of $434,645.54. This approxi-
mates a break-even situation that is better than suffering a
loss, but is hardly a model for a sustainable business ven-
ture. Usually, it is appropriate to expect profit and risk
allowances of 10 to 15 percent for logging in this region.
Sale characteristics with the strongest correlation to unit
profit were percent of sawtimber removed by unit (0.93356),
number of trees per acre 12 inches d.b.h. or larger (0.92516),
and cubic foot volume per tree (0.81464). Percent of POL was
negatively correlated with unit profit (–0.93536).
 Harvesting costs were also compared to unit profit. Indi-
vidual harvesting cost elements that were most negatively
correlated included felling, limbing, and bucking (–0.99989),
loading of POL (–0.91372), and hauling of POL (–0.83338).
Total POL costs were also negatively correlated (–0.88099).
The market conditions that existed at the time of this
study were ponderosa pine sawlogs selling at $240 per 1,000
board feet, waferwood logs selling for $31 to $32 per ton, and
post and pole logs selling for $24 per ton. Under those
conditions, the analyses conducted in this study suggest that
future restoration projects in this area of Colorado can be
near the financial break-even point when material removed
meets the following criteria:
1. Sawtimber should be at or above 40 percent of the total
weight removed and POL should be at or below 60
percent of the total weight of material removed. Note
the relationship of sawlogs to POL in figure 2 and then
relate that to profit and loss in table 2. Utilizing trees
in the 8 inch to 11.9 inch diameter class for the highest
value product possible is critical to profitability. Pay-
ments for material removed should be based on weight
scaling and not cruise data, given the variability of this
material.
2. Six or more sawtimber trees 12 inches d.b.h. or larger
should be available for removal per acre with an aver-
age cubic foot volume of 12 cubic feet per sawtimber
tree removed. Given that forest areas are being reduced
from 200 to 350 stems per acre down to half that
number or less, this should not be viewed as a difficult
problem in landscape scale projects. However, when
units do not meet these criteria, they should be com-
bined with other units to create break-even projects.
3. POL harvesting costs must be carefully managed. Note
the summary cost distribution for waferwood logs in
figure 3. Attention to cost control and record keeping is
important when dealing with low value, small diam-
eter material.
4. Felling, limbing, and bucking (FLB) costs must be kept
as low as possible. Note the proportion of FLB costs to
all POL costs in figure 3. In an analysis of the FLB cost
per cubic foot of wood removed, mechanical felling was
more expensive in all diameter classes in this study
than manual felling. This is due both to the type of
harvester used in this study and the scattered nature
of the trees being cut. Also it is clear that forest restor-
ation logging in adverse weather conditions should be
avoided.
5. Loading and hauling costs for POL must be reduced.
Note that the proportion of costs attributable to loading
and hauling in figure 3 were 50 percent of all costs. It
also suggests the need to strengthen and/or develop
local manufacturing businesses that could use small
diameter material and decrease hauling distances.
6. Stumpage prices for POL should be zero or less in some
cases. Note in table 1 that the loss per ton for POL is
often nearly equal to the stumpage paid for it. Also, as
a general rule, the revenue from the lowest quality
material, such as waferwood logs, must not be below
$31 per ton to break even.
Potential to Improve Profitability ___
Information developed from this study and other market
studies by the author was used to persuade the USFS to
revise its appraisal process for forest restoration projects
in Region 2. Stumpage prices for ponderosa pine POL in
Region 2 restoration projects may now be appraised at zero
or even a negative value, because the basis for the project is
ecological improvement of forest stands and POL material
typically costs more to harvest than it is worth. In other
words, this is recognition that POL is a liability, not a
valuable product. This change would, for example, reduce
the loss in Unit 5E from $6,473.71 to $1,204.28 and increase
the profit in Unit 5B from $6,875.60 to $9,476.36. Thus,
future restoration units with low value POL might actually
be financially feasible if new appraisal policies are used.
In addition, tremendous demand for OSB in housing and
commercial construction improved the market for waferwood
logs immediately following this study. During the study,
waferwood log prices paid at the mill were either $31 or $32
per ton. March 2000 waferwood log prices being paid ranged
between $35 and $37 per ton. An average price of $36 per ton
would have improved the profitability of this project to 7.3
percent. Similarly, a down turn in the OSB market or the
ponderosa pine lumber market could adversely affect resto-
ration projects. Thus, market fluctuations are important to
consider when restoration projects are being planned.
We gained some insight into ways to reduce harvesting
costs. Figure 3 shows the summarized cost distribution for
one product, waferwood logs. Note that hauling and loading
costs comprise a significant cost center as does felling,
Figure 3—Cost distribution for
waferwood harvesting.

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-22. 2001
147
Financial Results of Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration in Southwestern Colorado
Lynch
limbing, and bucking. Hauling costs could be reduced using
more efficient trailers that better accommodate small diam-
eter material. Research should be directed at the potential
use of “hay rack” trailers or short log trucks with pup trailers
commonly used for hauling pulpwood. Felling and bucking
costs could probably be improved with mechanized equip-
ment designed for harvesting small material. However, this
requires further experimentation. If FLB could be mecha-
nized efficiently there might also be some improvement in
skidding costs. Logging should be planned to avoid adverse
weather that increases costs.
We also have learned to avoid some products, such as
pulpwood, that did not return sufficient revenue to cover
costs or excelsior logs that are not technically feasible.
Studies to improve utilization of wood wastes at the mills
and the development of new products are also important to
future profitability and sustainability of restoration projects.
Comparison of Forest Restoration
Costs to Forest Fire Costs ________
In the previous analysis, the principal focus was on the
identification of factors that could produce break-even or
profitable forest restoration projects. This focus resulted
from concerns that appropriated tax money would not be
available for service contracts to accomplish restoration
work.
However, there are important nonmarket benefits from
forest restoration that might merit investment of public
funds. One of these benefits is the reduction of catastrophic
forest fire hazard. To analyze the economic benefit of fire
hazard reduction, the costs or profit per acre from the five
units were calculated and are presented in table 2. These
costs were subsequently compared with local, State, and
national fire suppression costs per acre.
The nearest large-scale fire to the study area was the 1996
Disappointment Fire that occurred in the pinyon-juniper
forest type north of Dolores, CO. San Juan National Forest
records show that this fire burned 3,840 acres and cost
$992,000 to suppress. This is a per acre suppression cost of
$258.33. That cost is almost double the worst-case restora-
tion cost that occurred in Unit 4 (which had extraordinary
snow costs and high stumpage costs). It is almost three times
more expensive than Unit 5E, which had extensive amounts
of POL and the highest stumpage costs in our study. Recall
that the other restored units recorded profits. Also, all five
restored units still have forests with large trees, pleasing
esthetics, desirable wildlife habitat components, and eco-
logically functioning processes. The Disappointment Fire
area, on the other hand, lost tree cover, esthetics, and
wildlife habitat, while also requiring additional rehabili-
tation costs to reduce erosion and reestablish forest veg-
etation. Unfortunately the amount of those additional
rehabilitation costs were not recorded.
From 1991 to 1996, U.S. Forest Service wildfires in Colo-
rado cost an average of $482.78 per acre to suppress (USFS
1996). Property damage and rehabilitation costs for these
burned areas were not recorded. During the period 1977 to
1992, national large fire costs averaged $570.98 per acre
(USFS 1995). Again, property damage costs and rehabilita-
tion costs for these fires were not recorded.
Suppression, property damage, rehabilitation costs, and
subsequent flooding costs were studied for the 1996 Buffalo
Creek fire that occurred in ponderosa pine near Denver. All
costs after fire and flooding amounted to $679.47 per acre
and are expected to climb to $2,000 per acre because of
continuing flooding and water quality problems (Dennis
2000).
It can be argued that it may not be fair to compare fire
suppression costs with forest restoration costs because no
one can predict when and where a catastrophic fire will
occur. However, because research in ponderosa pine forests
suggests that fuel conditions for catastrophic fire are wide-
spread and that fire can be expected to occur at some time,
the comparison is not far fetched.
An estimate of expected fire suppression costs in restored
forests versus suppression costs under current forest condi-
tions was also developed as an example. Dr. Romme studied
fire frequencies in the Five Pine Canyon area west of Units
5B and 5E. He found that fire frequencies during the past 30
years in the Five Pine Canyon area were similar to fire
frequencies that occurred prior to Euro-American settle-
ment. The Doe Canyon Fire occurred recently in this vicin-
ity, just north and west of Units 5B and 5E, and serves as an
interesting cost comparison. It covered 600 acres and fire
observers noted that the fire was of low intensity and burned
like a prescribed fire. Some of the area had been previously
thinned, there are some open areas mixed with ponderosa
pine forest areas, the terrain is fairly level, and it is likely
that fire frequencies there have been similar to those iden-
tified by Dr. Romme in the adjacent Five Pine Canyon area.
Fire suppression, in this case, consisted mostly of burning
out from the roads. San Juan National Forest records show
that the cost to suppress this fire totaled $7,500 or $12.50 per
acre. Some small ponderosa pines were destroyed, but over-
all the forest remained intact. This better resembles the
lower intensity type of fire expected in restored forests and
may well suggest that the costs of future fire suppression in
such areas will be much lower.
Commentary ___________________
Given the results of this project, I think two questions are
pertinent to the future implementation of forest restoration
projects in the Southwest. These are:
• Who is going to do the work and why should they do it?
• Why should appropriated tax money be used to finance
forest restoration if well designed projects could pay for
themselves?
It is clear that an ecological prescription must control
project implementation to achieve the goals of forest restora-
tion. Forest restoration projects are not traditional timber
sales. Restoration of the forest to its inherent characteris-
tics and processes is, after all, the basic purpose for these
projects.
It is also just as clear that forest restoration is a risky,
financially expensive proposition. In Colorado all of the
forest industry businesses, except two, meet the qualifica-
tions for small businesses. Nearly all are family owned and
operated, similar to the Ragland and Sons Logging Com-
pany studied in this report. It is presumptuous, therefore,
to expect small businesses that characterize the forest

148
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-22. 2001
Lynch
Financial Results of Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration in Southwestern Colorado
industry of Colorado and the Southwest to make a silk purse
out of a sow’s ear, or low quality, small diameter material
into a valuable product. Break-even projects or government
subsidized programs may accomplish ecological objectives
in the short term, but they will never result in the invest-
ments necessary to improve efficiencies, develop new prod-
ucts, and provide sustainable forest stewardship. Therefore,
it is important to approach these projects with long-term
financial sustainability in mind, providing loggers with
incentives to function as forest stewards, providing a variety
of restoration services such as watershed rehabilitation and
wildlife improvement projects. By paying attention to fac-
tors that influence profitability, such as the use of new
appraisal guidelines that recognize the low quality of this
material and alertness to market fluctuations, agencies can
improve the playing field for small businesses. A consistent
supply of wood from well-designed projects with long-term
contracts could encourage investments to improve efficien-
cies associated with harvesting and product manufacturing.
To further aid in this, government could provide incentives
in the form of tax advantages, low cost loans to create and
strengthen small businesses, and applied research to im-
prove harvesting efficiency and product development. For
example, forest product studies currently under way through
the Four Corners Initiative (Reader 1998) are intended to
support profitability by increasing local utilization of mate-
rial removed, improving manufacturing efficiencies, and
creating new value-added products.
The lessons learned from our experimental forest restora-
tion project are encouraging enough to recommend further
projects, I hope, at the landscape level. I also recognize that
other forest areas are so beset with worthless material that
subsidies will have to support restoration.
Finally, restoration projects cost much less than forest fire
suppression. Building a forest restoration infrastructure
makes more financial sense than spending tax money fight-
ing catastrophic forest fires.
Acknowledgments ______________
The author recognizes Catherine Jones, research associ-
ate, and Bob Lillie, research assistant, for their invaluable
assistance in the collection of financial data. Cooperative
Extension and the College of Natural Resources at CSU
supported technology transfer workshops and provided
McIntire-Stennis research funding for this project. Without
the thorough research and patient leadership of Dr. Bill
Romme coupled with the field experience and diligence of
Phil Kemp, this project would have never occurred. Doug,
Harold, and Bill Ragland deserve very special recognition
for doing all the hard work, taking all the serious financial
risks, opening their record keeping to us, and accepting such
a small profit in order to try to make forest restoration a
reality in Montezuma County.
References _____________________
Cooper, C.F. 1960. Changes in vegetation, structure, and growth of
Southwestern pine forests since white settlement. Ecological
Monographs 30:129–164
Covington, W.W., P.Z. Fulé, M.M. Moore, S.C. Hart, T.E. Kolb, J.N.
Mast, S.S. Sackett, and M.R. Wagner. 1997 Restoring ecosystem
health in ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest. Journal of
Forestry 95(4):23–29
Dahms, C.W. and Geils, B.W., tech. eds. 1997. An assessment of
forest ecosystem health in the Southwest. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-
GTR-295. Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service.
Dennis, C. 2000. Public presentation to Denver Water Board tour.
Colorado State Forest Service, Colorado State University, Fort
Collins, CO.
Fulé, P.Z., W.W. Covington, and M.M. Moore. 1997. Determining
reference conditions for ecosystem management of Southwestern
ponderosa pine forests. Ecological Applications 7:895–908.
Forest Service, USDA. 1995. U.S. Forest Service fire suppression
costs on large fires. Chiefs Office, Washington, DC.
Forest Service, USDA. 1996. Suppression costs and acres burned in
Colorado 1991–1996. Region 2 Fire Staff Calculations, Denver,
CO.
Lynch, D.L., W.H. Romme, and L. Floyd. 2000. Forest restoration in
Southwestern ponderosa pine. Journal of Forestry 29(3):17–24
Reader, T. 1998. A summary of forest products extension activities
in Montezuma County during 1998. Colorado State Forest Ser-
vice, Durango, CO.
Romme, W.H., H.D. Grissino-Mayer, M.L. Floyd, and D. Hanna.
1999 Landscape condition analysis for the South Central High-
lands Section: ponderosa pine forests. Unpublished final report to
the San Juan National Forest, Durango, CO.
Sackett, S.S. 2000. Chimney Springs interval burning field trip
comments. Presented at the steps toward stewardship confer-
ence. Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ.
