R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Using trait-based ecology to restore resilient
ecosystems: historical conditions and the future
of montane forests in western North America
Daniel C. Laughlin1,2,3, Robert T. Strahan4, David W. Huffman5, Andrew J. Sánchez Meador2,5
Historical reference conditions have provided empirical benchmarks for guiding ecological restoration but the relevance of
historical conditions has been questioned in this era of rapid global change. Trait-based ecology offers an alternative approach
for setting restoration objectives. If we understand which phenotypic traits confer high survival in a given environment, then we
can restore assemblages of species with favorable trait combinations to reduce mortality risk, achieve functional outcomes, and
enhance restoration success. Our objective was to compare restoration prescriptions based on historical reference conditions
versus trait-based objectives in southwestern United States mixed conifer forests. To optimize survival and enhance resilience
under projected increasing frequencies of fire and drought, we constructed and evaluated models based on combinations of
three traits: thick bark, dense wood, and moderate leaf nitrogen concentration. Models with multiple traits accurately derived
historical species abundance distributions, which is a necessary condition for the application of trait-based models under less
certain future conditions. Model results indicated that trait-based restoration objectives could be achieved in two ways: by
manipulating abundances of species that already coexist at a site or by adding native species from warmer climates to the
local species pool. The latter approach may create no-analog communities of native species. Restoration goals based on either
historical reference conditions or future projections are special cases of a more general class of desired future conditions that
are derived from trait-based objectives. Functional ecology provides a general, flexible, and theory-based approach to restoring
resilient ecosystems at a time of rapid environmental change.
Key words: bark thickness, climate change, community assembly, mixed conifer forests, reference conditions, wood density
Implications for Practice
• To restore resilient ecosystems, practitioners can select
species with favorable trait combinations to reduce mor-
tality risk under changing environmental conditions.
• In the western United States where drought and fire are
projected to increase in frequency, restoration can include
managing for species with traits such as dense wood,
tough leaves, and thick bark.
• Trait-based models operationalize the process of select-
ing species with the appropriate trait combinations and
produce ranges of relative abundances for every species,
which can be rescaled to a measure of total biomass to
translate the results into prescriptive site-specific treat-
ments.
• Management plans and policies must be revised to allow
for the inevitable changes in community composition
under environmental change and to increase the flexibility
of species selection for restoration.
Introduction
Ecologists are engaged in an important debate about how to
set and achieve restoration goals in a rapidly changing world
(Hobbs et al. 2009; Higgs et al. 2014; Murcia et al. 2014).
Historical reference conditions have long been the gold stan-
dard on which to base restoration objectives in many ecosystems
(White & Walker 1997; Landres et al. 1999). For well-studied
ecosystems, historical ecosystem structure, composition, and
function provide robust empirical information for defining
desired future conditions (Moore et al. 1999; Swetnam et al.
1999). However, current and future environmental conditions
are becoming more disparate from historical environmental
conditions in this era of rapid global change (Harris et al. 2006;
Choi et al. 2008; Hobbs et al. 2009) and historical reference
conditions are completely unknown for many ecosystems in
long-inhabited regions of the world (Thorpe & Stanley 2011).
Author contributions: All authors conceived the research and collected the data; DCL
performed the analyses; all authors wrote and edited the manuscript.
1Environmental Research Institute and School of Science, University of Waikato,
Private Bag 3105, Hamilton, 3240, New Zealand
2School of Forestry, Northern Arizona University, PO Box 15018, Flagstaff, AZ 86011,
U.S.A.
3Address correspondence to D. C. Laughlin, email d.laughlin@waikato.ac.nz
4New Mexico Forest and Watershed Restoration Institute, New Mexico Highlands
University, PO Box 9000, Las Vegas, NM 87701, U.S.A.
5Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, PO Box 15017,
Flagstaff, AZ 86011, U.S.A.
© 2016 Society for Ecological Restoration
doi: 10.1111/rec.12342
Restoration Ecology
1

Trait-based restoration ecology
Rather than restoring historical assemblages that may not
survive the changing environmental conditions, a more general
approach has recently emerged that emphasizes achieving
functional objectives to restore resilient ecosystems (Hobbs &
Cramer 2008; Seastedt et al. 2008; Jackson & Hobbs 2009).
Ecosystem resilience is the ability of the ecosystem to maintain
essential features of its composition, structure, and function
in the presence of disturbance and environmental change
(Halofsky et al. 2014; Waltz et al. 2014).
Species that were dominant in historical ecosystems were
abundant because they had traits that endowed high survival
rates in those conditions (Keddy 1992; Shipley 2010). As the
environment changes, the trait values that optimize survival
will necessarily change as well. If we understand which traits
confer fitness (i.e. higher survival and reproduction) in the new
environmental conditions (Aitken et al. 2008; Kimball et al.
2012), then we can manage for species with more favorable
trait combinations to reduce mortality risk and enhance restora-
tion success (Funk et al. 2008; Martínez-Garza et al. 2013;
Laughlin 2014a; Cadotte et al. 2015; Ostertag et al. 2015).
Trait-environment relationships can be indicative of which
trait values confer fitness in a given environment (Laughlin &
Messier 2015), but there are caveats to this approach. Rare or
small species may exhibit different traits and life history strate-
gies than dominant species yet still maintain high per capita
population growth rates, and the composition of forest commu-
nities comprised of long-lived organisms may reflect responses
to past climates or disturbance events. Although acknowl-
edging that trait frequencies are not a direct proxy for fitness,
understanding how trait combinations shift along environmental
gradients is a first approximation to linking traits to performance
(Shipley 2010).
The key advance of recent trait-based models is their ability
to derive a range of abundances for each species in the regional
pool that can be used as a prescription for establishing assem-
blages of phenotypes that are adapted to the given conditions
(Laughlin 2014a). However, it is unknown how restoration
objectives based on historical structure and composition would
differ from an approach based on traits under changing envi-
ronmental conditions. It is important to critically evaluate
the accuracy of the models and compare restoration prescrip-
tions that are based on history versus trait-based ecology. The
objective of this article, therefore, is to compare restoration
prescriptions based on detailed historical reference conditions
versus those that are based on the traits of well-adapted pheno-
types for the given conditions. In order for trait-based models
to be useful in restoration, they need to be able to reproduce
historical assemblages where the optimum trait combinations
for those conditions are known. If trait-based models can-
not reproduce historical assemblages when these trait values
are known, then trait-based approaches will be unreliable
to plan for the future because the optimum traits for future
conditions are unknown, or at best, they are predicted using
statistical trait-environment relationships (Frenette-Dussault
et al. 2013). Furthermore, the accuracy of model output may
depend on the number and importance of traits used in the
model because additional traits provide more information
about functional differences among species and because
increasing trait dimensionality improves predictions of com-
munity composition and niche differences (Laughlin 2014b;
Kraft et al. 2015).
We synthesized data on historical conditions (i.e. forest
structure and composition) and functional traits in southwest-
ern United States warm/dry mixed conifer forests to compare
the traditional and trait-based approaches to setting restora-
tion objectives. This ecosystem is useful for this comparison
because historical reference conditions in these montane forests
are well-studied and quantifiable. Prior to the late 1800s ad,
warm/dry mixed conifer forests in Arizona, U.S.A. were charac-
terized by a frequent, low-severity fire regime and were gener-
ally dominated by shade-intolerant and fire-tolerant trees (Fulé
et al. 2004; Huffman et al. 2015). Since the beginning of the
1900s, fire suppression along with timber harvesting practices
favoring the removal of large trees have allowed shade-tolerant
and fire-intolerant species to significantly increase in abun-
dance. This has led to important functional shifts because cur-
rent forests are now dominated by species with thinner bark,
lower wood density, and slightly lower leaf nitrogen (N) con-
centrations (Strahan et al. in review).
Two major changes have been predicted to occur in the
western United States over the next century: increased wildfire
frequency and increased drought severity. First, earlier spring
onset and warmer temperatures are drying out fuel loads and
priming forests for more frequent fires (Westerling et al. 2006).
In this case, optimum traits in the past serve as a guide for
restoration (Harris et al. 2006; Fulé 2008). Given that historical
forests were composed of fire-tolerant species with thick bark
(Fulé et al. 2004; Strahan et al. in review), species with thick
bark should also be a large component of the future forest.
Second, hotter droughts are also likely to occur with increasing
frequency (Breshears et al. 2005; Allen et al. 2015; Millar &
Stephenson 2015). In this case, reliance on the past alone limits
the available options because the climate is rapidly changing.
A trait-based solution is to apply ecophysiological principles
to restore forests that are drought resistant. Species with traits
associated with a conservative growth strategy, such as dense
wood and low to moderate leaf nutrient concentrations, may
be more able to resist drought-induced cavitation and tolerate
resource limitation, respectively (Hacke et al. 2001; Westoby
et al. 2002). Only a few trees in western mixed conifer forests
have dense wood, so expanding the pool of native species may
be required to achieve these functional objectives (Millar &
Stephenson 2015).
We asked two main questions to investigate how trait-based
models can be applied in this new era of restoration ecology.
First, can trait-based models accurately derive historical species
abundance distributions, and does the number and combina-
tion of traits affect the accuracy of model output? Second,
how do the species abundance distributions derived from the
model change when trait values are used that confer higher sur-
vival under projected future conditions, and when other native
species that are adapted to warmer climates are added to the
species pool?
2
Restoration Ecology

Trait-based restoration ecology
Methods
Study System
Two mixed conifer forests in Arizona were used to define ref-
erence conditions using historical forest structure and compo-
sition. First, historical forest conditions were determined in
a 1,135 ha warm/dry mixed conifer ecosystem on the Black
Mesa Ranger District of the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest
in northern Arizona (2,313–2,405 m elevation range, 695 mm
average annual precipitation, and 5.5 ∘C average annual tem-
perature) (Huffman et al. 2015). Current overstory composi-
tion and structure were determined using 147 permanent 0.04
ha plots, arrayed on a 250-m systematic grid. Species iden-
tity and diameter at breast height (dbh; measured at 1.37 m
height on stem) were recorded for live trees, and diameter at
stump height (dsh; measured at 40 cm above root collar) was
recorded for dead trees. Historical forest structure in 1879 was
reconstructed to quantify the changes following fire exclusion.
For trees that were alive during contemporary sampling, radial
growth increments were measured on tree cores and a propor-
tional reconstruction method was used to calculate historical
tree diameters (Bakker 2005). For trees that were dead during
contemporary sampling, a percentile-based exponential decay
model was used to estimate tree death date and then tree diam-
eter was reconstructed in 1879 using a stand reconstruction
model (Bakker et al. 2008). Fire scar analysis indicated that the
mean point fire interval across the site was 11.8 years, indicat-
ing that historically the fire regime was characterized by high
frequency, low-severity fires. However, the frequent fire regime
was abruptly halted after 1879 (Huffman et al. 2015).
Second, reference conditions were also determined in a
490 ha never-harvested mixed conifer forest (the “Northwest 3”
unit) in Grand Canyon National Park (GCNP), Arizona, U.S.A.
(2,427–2,549 m elevation, 650 mm annual precipitation, and
5.9∘C average annual temperature). Current overstory compo-
sition and structure were determined using 30 plots of 0.1 ha
arrayed on a 300-m systematic grid. We recorded species and
dbh of all trees greater than 15 cm dbh on the entire plot,
and on all trees between 2.5 and 15 cm on a 250-m2 subplot
(Laughlin et al. 2011b). Fire scar analysis indicated that the
mean point fire interval across the site was 8.7 years, indicat-
ing that historically the fire regime was characterized by high
frequency, low-severity fires. However, the frequent fire regime
was abruptly halted after 1879 (Fulé et al. 2003). This forest was
burned twice with prescribed fire in the last few decades, which
restored forest structure to conditions similar to those reported
as the historical range of variability in this forest type (Fulé et al.
2004; Huisinga et al. 2005; Laughlin et al. 2011b). Given its
long-term protection from logging and Grand Canyon National
Park’s burn-only approach to forest management, this forest is
a useful extant reference site.
Nine tree species were detected in the forest on the Black
Mesa Ranger District in Arizona (Table 1). The five conifer
species included Pinus ponderosa (ponderosa pine), Pseudot-
suga menziesii (Douglas-fir), Pinus strobiformis (southwestern
white pine), Abies concolor (white fir), and Abies lasiocarpa
(subalpine fir). The four broadleaf angiosperms included
Table 1. Names and four-letter codes of tree species in this study.
Species
Common Name
Code
Abies concolor (Gordon &
Glendinning) Hoopes.
White fir
ABCO
Abies lasiocarpa (Hooker)
Nuttall
Subalpine fire
ABLA
Acer grandidentatum Nutt.
Bigtooth maple
ACGR
Juniperus deppeana Steud.
Alligator juniper
JUDE
Juniperus scopulorum Sarg.
Rocky Mt. juniper
JUSC
Pinus edulis Engelm.
Pinyon pine
PIED
Pinus ponderosa P. & C. Lawson
Ponderosa pine
PIPO
Pinus strobiformis Engelm.
Southwestern white
pine
PIST
Populus tremuloides Michx.
Quaking aspen
POTR
Pseudotsuga menziesii (Mirb.)
Franco
Douglas-fir
PSME
Quercus gambelii Nutt.
Gambel oak
QUGA
Robinia neomexicana A. Gray
New Mexico locust
RONE
Populus
tremuloides
(quaking
aspen),
Quercus
gambelii
(Gambel oak), Acer grandidentatum (big tooth maple), and
Robinia neomexicana (New Mexico locust). Five tree species
were detected in the Northwest 3 unit in GCNP: Abies con-
color, Picea engelmannii (Engelmann spruce), P. ponderosa,
P. menziesii, and P. tremuloides (Table 1).
We measured three functional traits that influence tree per-
formance in a semi-arid region with a frequent fire regime:
bark thickness (expressed as an average percentage of stem
diameter), wood density (mg/mm3), and leaf nitrogen (N)
concentration (% dry mass). Bark thickness and wood density
are important traits that affect fitness along gradients of fire
frequency and moisture availability, respectively, as discussed
above. Low leaf nitrogen concentration corresponds with dense,
long-lived leaves that are associated with a conservative growth
strategy in low resource conditions (Westoby et al. 2002).
All traits were measured following standardized protocols
described in detail in Laughlin et al. (2011a). Figure 1 illus-
trates where each species occurs within the three-dimensional
trait space by plotting their average trait values.
The Model
Trait-based models can be used to derive species abundance
distributions that satisfy the selected functional trait values to
meet a restoration objective (Laughlin 2014a). There are four
main steps. Step 1: Articulate the objectives of the project. For
example, a practitioner may wish to restore a plant community
that is resilient to drought. Step 2: Translate the objectives into
trait values that will achieve those objectives. For example, to
increase resiliency to drought, select traits such as dense wood.
Step 3: Define the species pool and quantify the traits of these
species. This list could include all native species known to have
occurred in a specific site, or could be the species that are
available for seed mixes. Step 4: Set up and solve a system of
linear equations.
Systems of linear equations can be used to estimate species
probabilities given any set of constraints, where in this case the
Restoration Ecology
3

Trait-based restoration ecology
Leaf N (%)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Wood density (mg/mm^3)
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Bark thickness (%)
1
2
3
4
PIED
JUDE
PSME
ACGR
PIPO
JUSC
QUGA
ABCO
PIST
PIEN
ABLA
RONE
POTR
Figure 1. Species locations within a three-dimensional trait space. The
species names are shortened to four-letter codes (see Table 1) and their
location is defined by the species’ three average trait values. The gray
points are shadows cast onto each panel to illustrate bivariate scatterplots
between each pair of traits.
constraints are functional traits that are proposed to optimize
survival (Laughlin 2014a). A vector of unknown species relative
abundances (pi) can be estimated by developing a system of
linear equality and inequality constraints:
S
∑
i=1
tikpi = Tk,
(1)
S
∑
i=1
pi = 1,
(2)
pi > 0.
(3)
Equation 1 states that the linear combination of the kth
trait from the ith species (tik) and unknown species relative
abundances (pi) is equal to the constraint Tk, where Tk is the
kth trait value of an average unit of biomass or individual
in a community. There are K (the number of traits) of these
constraint equations, and S is the size of the species pool. The
values of Tk are defined in Step 2 (above). Equation 2 constrains
the abundances to sum to one so that the solutions represent
relative abundances or probabilities. Equation 3 constrains the
abundances to be non-negative (there are S of these inequalities).
In practice, there should be fewer traits than unknown species
abundances, which results in an underdetermined system of
equations with many possible solutions (Lay 2006).
The range of possible solutions provides valuable infor-
mation about the potential range of variability in species
abundances that satisfies the trait constraints. The “limSolve”
package in R (van den Meersche et al. 2009) can be used to
obtain a sample from the solution set. The “xsample” function
uses a Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm to
uniformly sample the solution set of any constrained linear
problem. This application of linear algebra can be applied to
the problem at hand by rewriting Equations 1 and 2 in matrix
form Ax = b, where A is a matrix of coefficients (i.e. species
mean traits), x is a matrix of unknown relative abundances, and
b is a vector of constants (i.e. trait constraints) representing
the right-hand side of the equations. As long as the constraints
are consistent (i.e. either one or an infinite number of solu-
tions exists), one can obtain a uniform sample from x, which
will represent the range of species abundances that meet the
trait-based objectives.
This model uses species-level trait means and does not
explicitly incorporate intraspecific trait variation, which can be
an important source of variation related to population responses
to environmental change (Jung et al. 2014). Using data col-
lected at the individual level, interspecific variation accounted
for 93% of the variation in leaf nitrogen, 77% of the variation
in wood density, and 46% of the variation in relative bark
thickness. Although it is possible to incorporate such variation
into the modeling framework, this increases the complexity
of the modeling process and these data are currently rarely
available in restoration projects. Model results that use only
mean values will be similar to model results that use both means
and variances when the trait constraints are unimodal, as is the
case here (Laughlin 2014a).
Data Analysis
We conducted the following analyses to answer the two main
research questions. First, we asked whether trait-based models
could accurately derive historical species abundance distri-
butions. If the answer to this question is no, then trait-based
models will yield unreliable forecasts of species abundances
in an uncertain future. To answer this question, we used
historical mixed conifer forest composition to calculate the
community-weighted mean trait values and used these as con-
straints in the model (i.e. the Tk). The historical average trait
values in the Black Mesa Ranger District were the following:
wood density was 0.46 mg/mm3, bark thickness was 3.5%, and
leaf nitrogen was 1.5%. The average trait values in the Grand
Canyon National Park reference site were the following: wood
density was 0.43 mg/mm3, bark thickness was 3.7%, and leaf
nitrogen was 1.4%. To test model accuracy, we evaluated the
linear relationship between the average model-derived species
abundances and the average observed historical reference site
species abundances. We also analyzed whether the number of
traits affected the accuracy of model output. The model-derived
species abundance distributions were computed using one
trait, two traits (all three pair combinations), and three traits,
and we compared observed species relative abundances to
model-derived species abundance distributions. To test model
accuracy, we evaluated the linear correlations between each
of these distributions and the observed relative abundances to
determine if the number of traits improved the output of the
model.
Second, we asked how the species abundance distributions
change when traits that confer higher fitness under projected
4
Restoration Ecology

Trait-based restoration ecology
future conditions are used, and when other native species
adapted to warmer climates are added to the species pool. The
critical step when applying this model to meet future conditions
is the selection of the trait constraints (Tk). There are both
theoretical and practical considerations for selecting these
trait values. First, from a theoretical perspective, these trait
constraints represent the trait values that confer the greatest
survival in a given environmental condition, so physiological
and ecological principles must be used to select the appro-
priate traits (Westoby et al. 2002; Reich et al. 2003). In many
cases, we are still learning which trait values confer survival
in a given environment. Restoration ecology offers an exper-
imental testing ground to advance our understanding of how
trait-environment interactions drive organism fitness. Second,
from a practical perspective, it is important to select reasonable
trait values that fall within the range of trait values present
in the species pool, otherwise there will be no mathematical
solution. For this analysis, thick bark was chosen because of
the projected future increase in fire frequency, and high wood
density and moderate leaf nitrogen concentration were chosen
to enhance resilience under drought stress (Hacke et al. 2001;
Westoby et al. 2002; Laughlin et al. 2011a). We fit two models.
For the first model, output was obtained using the species that
are currently present in the study site. For the second model, we
added three other native species that occur in warmer and drier
ecosystems to the species pool: Juniperus deppeana (alligator
juniper), Juniperus scoparium (Rocky mountain juniper), and
Pinus edulis (pinyon pine) (Table 1), because these species have
some potential for establishing in these sites in a warmer envi-
ronment (Laughlin et al. 2011a). To express the model-derived
relative abundances in terms of basal area for each species, we
multiplied the relative abundances by the targeted total basal
area based on historical forest structure.
Results
Trait-Based Model Accuracy
Contemporary mixed conifer forests on the Black Mesa Ranger
District are co-dominated by Pinus ponderosa, Abies concolor,
Pseudotsuga menziesii, Pinus strobiformis, and Quercus gam-
belii (Fig. 2A & 2B). However, historical (1879) forests were
dominated by P. ponderosa, with much lesser contributions
toward total basal area by P. menziesii, A. concolor, and Q. gam-
belii (Fig. 2C & 2D). The model-derived species abundances
(shown in Fig. 2E) using all three historical trait values were
strongly correlated (R2 = 0.96, Table 2) with the reconstructed
historical abundances (shown in Fig. 2C). The model-derived
species abundances using two traits at a time captured the domi-
nance of P. ponderosa and secondary dominance by P. menziesii,
and all exhibited strong correlations with observed abundances
(Table 2). The models using either bark thickness and wood
or bark thickness and leaf nitrogen rivaled the model using all
three traits (Table 2). The model-derived species abundances
using one trait at a time were more uniform across species, did
not predict the dominance of P. ponderosa, and exhibited the
weakest correlations with the observed abundances (Table 2),
indicating that more than one trait is required to achieve accurate
reproductions of historical assemblages.
Reference site mixed conifer forests in Grand Canyon
National Park are currently dominated by P. ponderosa with
lesser contributions from A. concolor, P. menziesii, Picea
engelmannii and Populus tremuloides (Fig. 3A & 3B). The
model-derived species abundances (shown in Fig. 3C) using all
three trait values were strongly correlated (R2 = 0.99, Table 2)
with the observed abundances in the reference site (shown in
Fig. 3B). The two-trait models that included bark thickness
were each significantly correlated with observed abundances,
but the model using leaf nitrogen and wood density was not
significantly correlated with the observed abundances (Table 2).
The bark-only model was the only one-trait model that yielded
accurate abundances (Table 2), indicating that bark thickness
was the most important trait for accurately reproducing the
assemblage at this reference site.
Setting Trait-Based Objectives for the Future
To derive an assemblage of species that may be resilient to
drought and frequent fire, bark thickness was maintained at the
historical average of 3.5% (percentage of stem diameter), leaf
nitrogen concentration was maintained at the historical average
of 1.5%, and wood density was increased from historical levels
to 0.50 mg/mm3. This wood density value was selected because
it was the intermediate value between the softwood conifers
that currently dominate mixed conifer stands and the hardwood
species and drought-tolerant Pinus edulis (Fig. 1). However,
there were no solutions to this set of constraints because the
system of linear equations was not consistent; in other words, no
combination of species abundances could achieve this proposed
set of traits. To obtain a set of solutions, a minor adjustment
to leaf nitrogen was made by increasing it from 1.5 to 1.6%.
The four species that had the highest abundances in the model
output were, in the order of decreasing abundance, P. menziesii,
P. ponderosa, Q. gambelii, and Acer grandidentatum (Fig. 4A).
These four species were allocated the highest abundances by the
model because the linear combination of those abundances and
the species’ trait values equaled the chosen trait constraints.
Three native species were added to the species pool to
acknowledge the possibility that other species adapted to
warmer environments may be more suited to future conditions.
Using the same trait values to achieve a resilient future commu-
nity as above, the six species that had the highest abundances in
the model output were, in the order of decreasing abundance,
P. ponderosa, Q. gambelii, P. edulis, Juniperus deppeana,
P. menziesii, and A. concolor (Fig. 4C & 4D). These six species
do not commonly coexist across large contemporary landscapes
in the southwestern United States and in combination would
represent a no-analog community.
Discussion
Strict reliance on historical reference conditions may limit
our flexibility in restoring ecosystems because they do
not acknowledge current and future environmental change
Restoration Ecology
5

Trait-based restoration ecology
ABCO
ABLA
ACGR
PIPO
PIST
POTR
PSME
QUGA
RONE
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Observed current conditions
Relative basal area
ABCO
ABLA
ACGR
PIPO
PIST
POTR
PSME
QUGA
RONE
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Observed current conditions
Basal area (m2/ha)
ABCO
ABLA
ACGR
PIPO
PIST
POTR
PSME
QUGA
RONE
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
(C) 
Relative basal area
ABCO
ABLA
ACGR
PIPO
PIST
POTR
PSME
QUGA
RONE
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
(D) 
Basal area (m2/ha)
(A) 
(B) 
Reconstructed historical conditions
Reconstructed historical conditions
ABCO
ABLA
ACGR
PIPO
PIST
POTR
PSME
QUGA
RONE
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
(E) 
Model−derived relative abundance
0
1.8
3.6
5.5
7.3
Model−derived basal area (m2/ha)
Model−derived assemblage using
historical trait values
Figure 2. Current conditions of (A) relative abundance and (B) basal area (m2/ha1) for each species in the mixed conifer forest on the Black Mesa Ranger
District, Arizona. Reconstructed (C) relative abundance and (D) basal area in the same forest in 1879 (Strahan et al. in review). (E) Trait-based model output
of relative abundances and basal area using historical trait values. Relative abundances were rescaled to a total basal area of 9.1 m2/ha. Four-letter species
codes are found in Table 1.
(Harris et al. 2006; Choi et al. 2008; Higgs et al. 2014). In this
article, we have shown that trait-based models can reliably
reproduce historical and reference site species abundances, and
that shifts in the dominance structure of extant communities
may be required to maintain forest structure under a regime
of increasing fire frequency and drought. Our results also
indicate that no-analog assemblages of native species could be
useful for maintaining forest structure into the future (Millar &
Stephenson 2015).
Restoration goals based on either historical data or future pro-
jections are special cases of a more general class of desired
future conditions that are derived from trait-based objectives
(Fig. 5). Species occurred in historical ecosystems because they
had the traits that endowed them with higher survival rates in
those environmental conditions. Likewise, species that will suc-
ceed in the future will be those that express phenotypes that are
the most adapted to future environmental conditions (Fig. 5).
It has been predicted under a changing climate that large shifts
6
Restoration Ecology

Trait-based restoration ecology
Table 2. Results of which trait combinations and dimensionalities yielded the most accurate species abundance distributions. NS, not significant. Accuracy
was assessed by the R2, the coefficient of determination, for the linear relationship between the observed species abundances and the model-derived species
abundances. Significance of linear relationships: ***p < 0.001; **p < 0.01; *p < 0.05.
Type of Reference Conditions
Number of Traits
Traits in the Model
Historical (Black Mesa)
Reference Site (Grand Canyon)
3
Bark, wood density, leaf N
R2 = 0.96***
R2 = 0.99***
2
Bark, wood density
R2 = 0.93***
R2 = 0.99***
2
Bark, leaf N
R2 = 0.96***
R2 = 0.96**
2
Wood density, leaf N
R2 = 0.70**
R2 = 0.71 NS
1
Bark only
R2 = 0.27 NS
R2 = 0.95**
1
Wood density only
R2 = 0.51*
R2 = 0.59 NS
1
Leaf N only
R2 = 0.27 NS
R2 = 0.23 NS
in forest structure, species relative abundances (Tarancón et al.
2014), and species’ environmental optimums (Laughlin et al.
2011a) will occur in montane forests of western North Amer-
ica. Incorporating these predictions into planning may enhance
restoration success. In the case of western montane forests,
simultaneously reducing fuel loads and managing for species
with traits that promote fire and drought tolerance may be an
effective restoration strategy (Churchill et al. 2013; Halofsky
et al. 2014; Duveneck & Scheller 2015).
The answer to our first research question is “yes”: trait-based
models can accurately reproduce historical and reference site
assemblages when their trait distributions are known. This result
is important because it is a necessary condition for the applica-
tion of such models to derive assemblages under less certain
future conditions. Moreover, to achieve the best results more
than one trait will often be required to select the appropri-
ate assemblage of species. Managing for appropriate species
will depend on an adequate number of traits for two reasons.
Mathematically, it is easier to discriminate between species in
higher trait dimensions. Ecologically, independent traits pro-
vide unique information about how a species functions, so more
information about adaptations enhances our ability to select the
best species (Laughlin 2014b). In mixed conifer forests, bark
thickness was an important trait because it separated species
according to fire resistance strategies. However, wood density
was also important, especially under future conditions, so more
than one trait was often required to select a range of species
to simultaneously promote both fire and drought tolerance. The
additional use of moderate leaf nitrogen concentrations further
constrained the set of solutions to derive a drought tolerant
assemblage. When the species pool is large, using multiple traits
will be even more important (Sonnier et al. 2010), although it
is still not certain what ratio of traits to species is required to
optimize model accuracy.
We also asked how the species abundance distributions
change when traits were selected to enhance resilience to
drought and fire, and three important implications emerged.
First, trait values must be logically consistent with the range of
traits in the species pool. Our first choice of trait values was not
possible because those constraints produced an inconsistent sys-
tem of linear equations. In other words, there were no solutions
and we could not derive any predicted species abundances. It is
important to consider the range of multidimensional trait com-
binations that exist in the species pool when setting trait-based
objectives. Second, adjustments to the relative dominance struc-
ture of the current species pool could meet the selected trait
values. Specifically, by increasing the relative abundances of
Pseudotsuga menziesii, Quercus gambelii, and Acer grandiden-
tatum, we could achieve an assemblage with both relatively
thick bark and dense wood. Third, no-analog assemblages of
native species that do not readily coexist in contemporary land-
scapes would satisfy future trait-based objectives. Two native
species, Juniperus deppeana and Pinus edulis, which currently
occur at lower elevations that are warmer and drier, could be
introduced to these forests to increase diversity and enhance
community-level drought tolerance. Juniperus deppeana can
resprout following fire, which confers long-term fire resilience
if fire intervals are not too short. However, P. edulis is fire intol-
erant despite having relatively thick bark. This demonstrates
that although these species may provide resilience to drought,
not every species will also be tolerant to disturbances such as
fire. Achieving multifunctionality is an important challenge and
restoration practitioners will need to be aware of the tradeoffs
that occur when trying to meet multiple restoration objectives.
Careful selection of species using expert knowledge will still
be needed to select species in restoration because functional
traits do not always perfectly describe the ecological niches of
species.
Novel assemblages composed of species that are not cur-
rently associated with one another may become increasingly
common in response to rapid global change (Hobbs et al. 2009).
By expanding the species pool, we detected other native species
that had thick bark, dense wood, and moderate leaf nitrogen
concentration to satisfy the traits that were predicted to confer
maximum survival under more frequent fires and droughts. A
combination of six species met the trait-based objectives: Pinus
ponderosa, Q. gambelii, P. edulis, J. deppeana, P. menziesii, and
Abies concolor (Figs. 1 and 4B). These species rarely occur
together in close proximity at present, except perhaps along
short and steep gradients from shaded canyons to rocky hill-
slopes. This combination of species may represent a no-analog
community for the southwestern United States. We deliberately
restricted our species pool to native species (Williams & Dum-
roese 2013), but recognize that there may be circumstances
Restoration Ecology
7

Trait-based restoration ecology
ABCO
PIEN
PIPO
POTR
PSME
0
10
20
30
40
50
Current basal area in reference forest
Basal area (m2/ha)
ABCO
PIEN
PIPO
POTR
PSME
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
(B) 
Relative basal area
ABCO
PIEN
PIPO
POTR
PSME
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
(C) 
Model−derived relative abundance
0
5.7
11.4
17.1
22.8
Model−derived basal area (m2/ha)
(A) 
Current relative abundance in reference forest
Model−derived abundances using
reference forest trait values
Figure 3. (A) Observed basal area and (B) observed relative abundances
of species in the reference mixed conifer forest in Grand Canyon National
Park, Arizona, U.S.A. (C) Trait-based model-derived relative abundances
using three functional traits. Relative abundances are scaled on the right
axis to a total forest basal area of 28.5 m2/ha. Four-letter species codes are
found in Table 1.
in other ecosystems where non-native species could be bene-
ficial to maintain specific ecosystem processes (Ostertag et al.
2015).
The trait-based approach illustrated here yields a species
abundance distribution, but an important question remains:
how do you design prescriptive treatments to achieve these
objectives on the ground? Restoration prescriptions that use
undecomposed evidence of historical forest structure in south-
western forests are objective, empirical, and site-specific strate-
gies for determining which trees to keep in a restoration thinning
ABCO
ABLA
ACGR
PIPO
PIST
POTR
PSME
QUGA
RONE
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Model−derived assemblage using future
trait−based objectives
Model−derived relative abundance
0
1.8
3.6
5.5
Model−derived basal area (m2/ha)
ABCO
ABLA
ACGR
PIPO
PIST
POTR
PSME
QUGA
RONE
JUDE
JUSC
PIED
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Model−derived assemblage using future
trait−based objectives and additional species
Model−derived relative abundance
Additional
     species
0
1.8
3.6
5.5
Model−derived basal area (m2/ha)
(B) 
(A) 
Figure 4. (A) Trait-based model output of relative abundances using future
trait-based objectives. (B) Trait-based model output of relative abundances
using future trait-based objectives and three additional native species. In
both panels, the same results are scaled on the right axis to a total forest
basal area of 9.1 m2/ha. Four-letter species codes are found in Table 1.
treatment (Tuten et al. 2015). In monospecific P. ponderosa
forests, canopy composition is much less important than struc-
tural elements such as tree density and spatial arrangement.
However, restoration in most other ecosystems requires some
consideration of abundances for a diversity of species (Funk
et al. 2008). If the restoration project is starting from a denuded
site, then the results illustrated in Figures 2–4 provide a descrip-
tion of the relative abundances of each species that can be used
to create diverse seed mixes or planting designs (Pywell et al.
2002; Bakker & Wilson 2004). However, the strategy will be
much different for preventative and proactive restoration treat-
ments in forest stands. If the treatment is to be implemented
on an existing forest, then the prescription needs to reduce the
importance of undesirable species and increase the importance
of desirable species while simultaneously meeting structural
objectives (Churchill et al. 2013). The output of the trait-based
model is a relative abundance distribution that sums to one
because they represent probabilities. Therefore, in the case of
forests, one of the first decisions is to determine the targeted total
basal area. If, for example, you desire to restore forest structure
and composition by thinning the forest from 31.6 to 9.1 m2/ha
(Huffman et al. 2015), then you can multiply the model-based
8
Restoration Ecology

Trait-based restoration ecology
Trait-based objectives 
HISTORICAL:
Natural and document
archives 
 
 
FUTURE:
Projected forecasts
 
 
MODEL OUTPUT: Trait-based species assemblages  
Information: data and models 
Increasing drought
Increasing fire frequency
 
 
 
Use ecophysiological
principles to define
trait values that
will increase survival 
 
 
 
 
Observed abundances
 
Trait-based 
model 
Derived abundances
 
DATA INPUT 
Calculate 
community-
level traits  
Define
community-
level traits   
Traits of
species pool
 
 
Historical
 
Future 
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
ABCO
ABLA
ACGR
PIPO
PIST
POTR
PSME
QUGA
RONE
ABCO
ABLA
ACGR
PIPO
PIST
POTR
PSME
QUGA
RONE
ABCO
ABLA
ACGR
PIPO
PIST
POTR
PSME
QUGA
RONE
0.4
0.8
Figure 5. Ecological restoration that is based on either historical or future conditions is both special cases of a more general class of desired future conditions
that are derived from trait-based objectives. Historical data or forecasting models can be used to set trait-based objectives (i.e. average trait values). For
example, historical forest structure can be used to define which traits enhanced survival historically. Restoring ecosystems that are resilient to future changes
can be accomplished using this same general approach: ecophysiological principles can be applied to select which trait combinations will promote fitness in
the new conditions. Four-letter species codes are found in Table 1.
relative abundances by 9.1 to express the relative abundances as
basal area per species (see Figs. 2E, 3C & 4B).
Spatial scale is also important to consider. The models use
stand-level average trait values as input; therefore, the output
must also be interpreted as a stand-level average. However,
stand-level averages do not directly reflect species abundances
at the forest patch scale (e.g. 0.1 ha) because of the large natu-
ral range of variability in species composition among patches in
Restoration Ecology
9

Trait-based restoration ecology
mixed species forests. In other words, a species that is uncom-
mon at the landscape scale may dominate a small patch of
forest. A common goal for restored forests is high structural
and compositional heterogeneity (Peterson & Anderson 2009),
and compositional heterogeneity can be important for achieving
multifunctionality at a landscape scale. The trait-based prescrip-
tion is useful for determining which species should dominate
at a landscape scale, but fine-scale patches can still be domi-
nated by less common species while still meeting the overall
landscape-scale objectives. For example, Populus tremuloides
was not one of the five dominant species that were predicted
to dominate future mixed conifer forests (Fig. 4), but retaining
or enhancing patches of P. tremuloides within the larger land-
scape would promote compositional heterogeneity and improve
wildlife habitat. Alternatively, practitioners can interpret the
derived relative abundances illustrated in Fig. 4B as the rel-
ative area in the landscape that is occupied by each species:
P. ponderosa will occupy 40% of the landscape, Q. gambe-
lii will occupy 20% of the landscape, and P. tremuloides will
occupy less than 5%. Land managers will also need to balance
prescriptions to achieve other restoration goals, such as habi-
tat provisioning and pest management, which were not directly
included as objectives in the model used here. Importantly, rare
or less common species, such as P. tremuloides, with different
trait combinations may be important for achieving these objec-
tives. In these cases, the model output should be used as a gen-
eral guide to define ranges of species abundances that satisfy
the stated goals, but flexibility in managing species abundances
will be important for achieving multiple management objectives
simultaneously.
This model is a statistical translation of environmental filter-
ing (Keddy 1992), and here we focused on the filtering effects of
climate and fire frequency. However, we acknowledge that this
model does not incorporate other known drivers of community
assembly, such as species interactions and dispersal limitation
(Fukami 2015). Indeed, species that are not currently present at
a site, and are therefore dispersal limited, will need to be intro-
duced through seed addition or direct planting. In the example
presented here, P. edulis and J. deppeana do not currently occur
in mixed conifer forests in Arizona, so these species may need
to be introduced from off-site. Most restoration prescriptions to
reduce fuels and restore historical forest structure in the west-
ern United States do not include seeding or planting seedlings
of other tree species (Fulé et al. 2012; Churchill et al. 2013).
However, species are and have been predicted to shift their dis-
tributions into higher elevations in the future (Lenoir et al. 2008;
Laughlin et al. 2011a). This restoration activity would assist the
migration of these species (Vitt et al. 2010; Williams & Dum-
roese 2013; Duveneck & Scheller 2015; Grady et al. 2015) in
order to construct resilient communities to maintain forest cover
and forest ecosystem services (Millar & Stephenson 2015).
Introducing species from off-site would be the largest departure
from current vegetation management practices and will likely
cause the most discussion and debate among the land managers
that oversee the restoration of these forests. Many of the cur-
rent federal U.S. policies, such as the USDA Forest Service’s
Reforestation Policy FSM 2472.03, restrict the use of offsite
species in restoration programs. Revisions and updates to such
policies are needed to permit scientists and land managers to
experiment with assisted migration to maintain forest struc-
ture and service provision under rapid environmental change
(Williams & Dumroese 2013; Duveneck & Scheller 2015;
Grady et al. 2015).
The approach used here did not explicitly incorporate trait
plasticity and intraspecific variation, which will likely affect
how species respond to global change (Jung et al. 2014). In our
study, interspecific variation was high in leaf nitrogen (93%)
and wood density (77%), but it accounted for only 46% of the
variation in bark thickness. This rather high intraspecific varia-
tion in bark thickness will affect how individuals survive under
changing fire frequencies and these individual-level responses
will affect the persistence of populations over time. Focusing
on species-level trait means will often be the most practical
approach for restoration planning given the current constraints
on data availability. However, incorporating intraspecific trait
variation may be necessary when all traits exhibit strong envi-
ronmentally induced plasticity, or when multiple trait values per
trait are chosen as constraints to achieve high functional diver-
sity (Laughlin 2014a).
How many traits are required to achieve high model accu-
racy in diverse ecosystems? There are not enough studies to
rigorously answer this question, but it was recently shown that
models with four to eight traits measured from multiple plant
organs performed well across a range of ecosystems (Laughlin
2014b). After choosing the list of traits, how do you select the
appropriate trait values to set restoration objectives? Although
much deeper fundamental understanding of traits is required to
choose exact trait values for any given situation, we recommend
two approaches to improve this understanding. First, trait val-
ues can be selected according to empirical trait–environment
relationships. For example, Frenette-Dussault et al. (2013) used
empirical relationships between traits and an aridity index to
predict how optimum trait values might change under the
more arid conditions of climate change scenarios, then used
these trait values to predict future community composition.
Given the increasing number of studies that are quantifying
trait–environment relationships at biogeographic scales (Violle
et al. 2014), this approach could be applied across a range of
ecosystems. Second, our imperfect understanding of how traits
confer survival along environmental gradients is an opportu-
nity for restoration ecology. Using this framework, experiments
can be designed to test which trait combinations yield desirable
outcomes under varying environmental conditions (Laughlin
2014a).
Specifying desired future conditions in terms of trait-based
objectives is a general, flexible, and theory-based approach
to restoring resilient ecosystems at a time of rapid global
change. Trait-based models are a new tool for selecting phe-
notypes for restoration, but project success will still rely on
an understanding of which trait values confer optimum fitness.
There is an urgent need to deepen our understanding of which
multidimensional trait combinations promote survival under
a range of environmental conditions to enhance restoration
success.
10
Restoration Ecology

Trait-based restoration ecology
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by grants from the Royal Society of
New Zealand Marsden Fund (UOW1201) and the USDA Forest
Service.
LITERATURE CITED
Aitken SN, Yeaman S, Holliday JA, Wang T, Curtis-McLane S (2008) Adapta-
tion, migration or extirpation: climate change outcomes for tree popula-
tions. Evolutionary Applications 1:95–111
Allen CD, Breshears DD, McDowell NG (2015) On underestimation of global
vulnerability to tree mortality and forest die-off from hotter drought in the
Anthropocene. Ecosphere 6:art129
Bakker JD (2005) A new, proportional method for reconstructing historical tree
diameters. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 35:2515–2520
Bakker JD, Sanchez Meador AJ, Fule PZ, Huffman DW, Moore MM (2008)
“Growing trees backwards”: description of a stand reconstruction
model. Pages 136–147. In Olberding SD, Moore MM (eds) Fort Valley
Experimental Forest: a century of research 1908–2008. Proceedings
RMRS-P-53CD. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky
Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, Colorado
Bakker JD, Wilson SD (2004) Using ecological restoration to constrain biological
invasion. Journal of Applied Ecology 41:1058–1064
Breshears DD, Cobb NS, Rich PM, Price KP, Allen CD, Balice RG, Romme
WH, Kastens JH, Floyd ML, Belnap J (2005) Regional vegetation die-off
in response to global-change-type drought. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 102:15144–15148
Cadotte MW, Arnillas CA, Livingstone SW, Yasui S-LE (2015) Predicting
communities from functional traits. Trends in Ecology & Evolution
30:510–511
Choi YD, Temperton VM, Allen EB, Grootjans AP, Halassy M, Hobbs RJ, Naeth
MA, Torok K (2008) Ecological restoration for future sustainability in a
changing environment. Ecoscience 15:53–64
Churchill DJ, Larson AJ, Dahlgreen MC, Franklin JF, Hessburg PF, Lutz JA
(2013) Restoring forest resilience: from reference spatial patterns to sil-
vicultural prescriptions and monitoring. Forest Ecology and Management
291:442–457
Duveneck MJ, Scheller RM (2015) Climate-suitable planting as a strategy
for maintaining forest productivity and functional diversity. Ecological
Applications 25:1653–1668
Frenette-Dussault C, Shipley B, Meziane D, Hingrat Y (2013) Trait-based
climate change predictions of plant community structure in arid steppes.
Journal of Ecology 101:484–492
Fukami T (2015) Historical contingency in community assembly: integrating
niches, species pools, and priority effects. Annual Review of Ecology,
Evolution, and Systematics 46:1–23
Fulé PZ (2008) Does it make sense to restore wildland fire in changing climate?
Restoration Ecology 16:526–531
Fulé PZ, Cocke AE, Heinlein TA, Covington WW (2004) Effects of an intense
prescribed forest fire: is it ecological restoration? Restoration Ecology
12:220–230
Fulé PZ, Crouse JE, Roccaforte JP, Kalies EL (2012) Do thinning and/or
burning treatments in western U.S.A. ponderosa or Jeffrey pine-dominated
forests help restore natural fire behavior? Forest Ecology and Management
269:68–81
Fulé PZ, Heinlein TA, Covington WW, Moore MM (2003) Assessing fire
regimes on Grand Canyon landscapes with fire-scar and fire-record data.
International Journal of Wildland Fire 12:129–145
Funk JL, Cleland EE, Suding KN, Zavaleta ES (2008) Restoration through
reassembly: plant traits and invasion resistance. Trends in Ecology &
Evolution 23:695–703
Grady KC, Kolb TE, Ikeda DH, Whitham TG (2015) A bridge too far: cold and
pathogen constraints to assisted migration of riparian forests. Restoration
Ecology 23:811–820
Hacke UG, Sperry JS, Pockman WT, Davis SD, McCulloh KA (2001) Trends in
wood density and structure are linked to prevention of xylem implosion by
negative pressure. Oecologia 126:457–461
Halofsky JS, Halofsky JE, Burcsu T, Hemstrom MA (2014) Dry forest resilience
varies under simulated climate-management scenarios in a central Oregon,
U.S.A. landscape. Ecological Applications 24:1908–1925
Harris JA, Hobbs RJ, Higgs E, Aronson J (2006) Ecological restoration and
global climate change. Restoration Ecology 14:170–176
Higgs E, Falk DA, Guerrini A, Hall M, Harris J, Hobbs RJ, Jackson ST,
Rhemtulla JM, Throop W (2014) The changing role of history in restoration
ecology. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 12:499–506
Hobbs RJ, Cramer VA (2008) Restoration ecology: interventionist approaches
for restoring and maintaining ecosystem function in the face of rapid
environmental change. Annual Review of Environment and Resources
33:39–61
Hobbs RJ, Higgs E, Harris JA (2009) Novel ecosystems: implications for con-
servation and restoration. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 24:599–605
Huffman DW, Zegler TJ, Fulé PZ (2015) Fire history of a mixed conifer forest
on the Mogollon Rim, northern Arizona, U.S.A. International Journal of
Wildland Fire 24:680–689
Huisinga KD, Laughlin DC, Fulé PZ, Springer JD, McGlone CM (2005) Effects
of an intense prescribed fire on understory vegetation in a mixed conifer
forest. The Journal of the Torrey Botanical Society 132:590–601
Jackson ST, Hobbs RJ (2009) Ecological restoration in the light of ecological
history. Science 325:567
Jung V, Albert CH, Violle C, Kunstler G, Loucougaray G, Spiegelberger T (2014)
Intraspecific trait variability mediates the response of subalpine grassland
communities to extreme drought events. Journal of Ecology 102:45–53
Keddy PA (1992) Assembly and response rules: two goals for predictive com-
munity ecology. Journal of Vegetation Science 3:157–164
Kimball S, Gremer JR, Angert AL, Huxman TE, Venable DL (2012) Fitness and
physiology in a variable environment. Oecologia 169:319–329
Kraft NJ, Godoy O, Levine JM (2015) Plant functional traits and the multidimen-
sional nature of species coexistence. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 112:797–802
Landres PB, Morgan P, Swanson FJ (1999) Overview of the use of natural vari-
ability concepts in managing ecological systems. Ecological Applications
9:1179–1188
Laughlin DC (2014a) Applying trait-based models to achieve functional targets
for theory-driven ecological restoration. Ecology Letters 17:771–784
Laughlin DC (2014b) The intrinsic dimensionality of plant traits and its relevance
to community assembly. Journal of Ecology 102:186–193
Laughlin DC, Fulé PZ, Huffman DW, Crouse J, Laliberté E (2011a) Cli-
matic constraints on trait-based forest assembly. Journal of Ecology
99:1489–1499
Laughlin DC, Messier J (2015) Fitness of multidimensional phenotypes in
dynamic adaptive landscapes. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 80:487–496
Laughlin DC, Roccaforte JP, Fulé PZ (2011b) Effects of a second-entry pre-
scribed fire in a mixed conifer forest. Western North American Naturalist
71:557–562
Lay DC (2006) Linear algebra and its applications. Pearson Education, Boston,
Massachusetts
Lenoir J, Gégout JC, Marquet PA, de Ruffray P, Brisse H (2008) A significant
upward shift in plant species optimum elevation during the 20th century.
Science 320:1768–1771
Martínez-Garza C, Bongers F, Poorter L (2013) Are functional traits good predic-
tors of species performance in restoration plantings in tropical abandoned
pastures? Forest Ecology and Management 303:35–45
Millar CI, Stephenson NL (2015) Temperate forest health in an era of emerging
megadisturbance. Science 349:823–826
Moore MM, Wallace Covington W, Fulé PZ (1999) Reference conditions and
ecological restoration: a southwestern ponderosa pine perspective. Ecolog-
ical Applications 9:1266–1277
Murcia C, Aronson J, Kattan GH, Moreno-Mateos D, Dixon K, Simberloff D
(2014) A critique of the ‘novel ecosystem’ concept. Trends in Ecology &
Evolution 29:548–553
Restoration Ecology
11

Trait-based restoration ecology
Ostertag R, Warman L, Cordell S, Vitousek PM (2015) Using plant func-
tional traits to restore Hawaiian rainforest. Journal of Applied Ecology
52:805–809
Peterson CE, Anderson PD (2009) Large-scale interdisciplinary experiments
inform current and future forestry management options in the U.S. Pacific
Northwest. Forest Ecology and Management 258:409–414
Pywell RF, Bullock JM, Hopkins A, Walker KJ, Sparks TH, Burke MJW, Peel
S (2002) Restoration of species-rich grassland on arable land: assessing
the limiting processes using a multi-site experiment. Journal of Applied
Ecology 39:294–309
Reich PB, Wright IJ, Cavender-Bares J, Craine JM, Oleksyn J, Westoby M, Wal-
ters MB (2003) The evolution of plant functional variation: traits, spectra,
and strategies. International Journal of Plant Sciences 164:S143–S164
Seastedt TR, Hobbs RJ, Suding KN (2008) Management of novel ecosystems:
are novel approaches required? Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment
6:547–553
Shipley B (2010) From plant traits to vegetation structure: chance and selection
in the assembly of ecological communities. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom
Sonnier G, Shipley B, Navas M-L (2010) Plant traits, species pools and the
prediction of relative abundance in plant communities: a maximum entropy
approach. Journal of Vegetation Science 21:318–331
Strahan RT, Laughlin DC, Huffman DW, Sánchez Meador AJ (in review) Shifts
in functional identity and diversity reveal functional consequences of fire
exclusion in a mixed conifer forest
Swetnam TW, Allen CD, Betancourt JL (1999) Applied historical ecology: using
the past to manage for the future. Ecological Applications 9:1189–1206
Tarancón AA, Fulé PZ, Shive KL, Sieg CH, Meador AS, Strom B (2014)
Simulating post-wildfire forest trajectories under alternative climate and
management scenarios. Ecological Applications 24:1626–1637
Thorpe AS, Stanley AG (2011) Determining appropriate goals for restora-
tion of imperilled communities and species. Journal of Applied Ecology
48:275–279
Tuten MC, Meador AS, Fulé PZ (2015) Ecological restoration and fine-scale
forest structure regulation in southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Forest
Ecology and Management 348:57–67
Van den Meersche K, Soetaert K, Van Oevelen D (2009) xsample (): an R function
for sampling linear inverse problems. Journal of Statistical Software 30
Code Snippet 1:1–15
Violle C, Reich PB, Pacala SW, Enquist BJ, Kattge J (2014) The emergence and
promise of functional biogeography. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 111:13690–13696
Vitt P, Havens K, Kramer AT, Sollenberger D, Yates E (2010) Assisted migration
of plants: changes in latitudes, changes in attitudes. Biological Conserva-
tion 143:18–27
Waltz AE, Stoddard MT, Kalies EL, Springer JD, Huffman DW, Meador AS
(2014) Effectiveness of fuel reduction treatments: assessing metrics of
forest resiliency and wildfire severity after the Wallow Fire, AZ. Forest
Ecology and Management 334:43–52
Westerling AL, Hidalgo HG, Cayan DR, Swetnam TW (2006) Warming and
earlier spring increase western U.S. forest wildfire activity. Science
313:940–943
Westoby M, Falster DS, Moles AT, Vesk PA, Wright IJ (2002) Plant ecological
strategies: some leading dimensions of variation between species. Annual
Review of Ecology and Systematics 33:125–159
White PS, Walker JL (1997) Approximating nature’s variation: selecting and
using reference information in restoration ecology. Restoration Ecology
5:338–349
Williams MI, Dumroese RK (2013) Preparing for climate change: forestry and
assisted migration. Journal of Forestry 111:287–297
Coordinating Editor: Elise Gornish
Received: 2 November, 2015; First decision: 7 December, 2015; Revised: 4 Jan-
uary, 2016; Accepted: 4 January, 2016
12
Restoration Ecology
