 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Implications of Diameter Caps on Multiple Forest Resource Responses in the  
Context of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative 
 
By Timothy Bryant, Northern Arizona University School of Forestry 
Introduction 
Due to the ecological and social importance of large, old (presettlement) trees, it is often desirable to protect 
them when planning forest treatments, and a diameter cap is one way to try to accomplish this. A diameter 
cap is a limitation on cutting trees above a certain diameter during treatment implementation. Some environ-
mental and conservation groups have advocated for them and caps have been implemented on a range of pro-
jects in the western U.S. Nevertheless, there is little knowledge of the potential effects of a diameter cap on 
forest resources. The large scale restoration treatments proposed by the Four Forest Restoration Initiative 
(4FRI) in northern Arizona provide an opportunity to use current stand data (Fig. 1A) and treatment prescrip-
tions targeting desired future conditions (Fig. 1B) to provide insights into the use of diameter caps on a varie-
ty of forest resource responses.  
 
This fact sheet’s purpose is to give an overview of the effects of diameter cap implementation on a variety of 
forest resources in ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) stands within the Coconino National Forest, Arizona.  
Methods 
A subset of stands in the Coconino National Forest was selected and examined using the Central Rockies var-
iant of the Forest Vegetation Simulator (CR-FVS). By using this simulator, the effects of the treatments pro-
posed by 4FRI were examined under six different diameter cap scenarios: 12-inch, 16-inch, 20-inch, 24-inch, 
30-inch, and no treatment.  
 
The 30-inch treatment scenario was tested to approximate the effects of a no-cap treatment scenario and a no 
treatment alternative was also tested. Numerous forest attributes were examined, including tree density (trees/
acre), average basal area (ft2/acre), quadratic mean tree diameter, torching index (wind speed in miles per 
hour (mph) necessary to initiate torching or passive crown fire), crowning index (wind speed in mph neces-
sary to maintain an active crown fire), percent canopy cover, total volume (ft3/acre), relative density index 
(percent maximum stand density index), snags per acre, scenic beauty, water yield, and herbaceous produc-
tion (pounds/acre). 
Research Findings 
Findings suggest that tradeoffs exist when evaluating multiple resource benefits. For example, a 12-inch di-
ameter cap (the minimum tested) appeared to be the best compromise between wood fiber production and 
short-term fuels reduction because it allows for some thinning of the stand while ultimately retaining high 
levels of basal area and tree volume. Alternatively, the results suggest that a 30-inch diameter cap (the simu-
lated no-cap scenario) may be the best option for reducing the effects of wildfire due to the observed increase 
in simulated crowning index (wind speed at which active crown fire is possible). Conditions resulting from 
the diameter caps of less than 20-inch showed little variation by the end of the simulation period (year 2100) 
but may result in a more even-aged distribution. 
 Fact Sheet: Implications of Diameter Caps on Multiple Forest Resource Responses in the  
 Context of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative 
June 2015 

 
The Forest Vegetation Simulator (FVS) is a deterministic model that has limitations in its evaluation of future 
stand conditions. Specifically, FVS is not spatially explicit and does not have the ability to simulate the reten-
tion of old trees. In addition, diameter caps were the only treatment strategies evaluated by this study. As a 
result, the implications and recommendations of this study likely underestimate the true costs to natural re-
sources imposed by implementing diameter caps. Given the differing results of diameter cap scenarios and the 
variety of other possible treatment strategies, the information contained in this fact sheet will help land man-
agers and landowners evaluate the efficacy of a diameter cap based on their specific goals and objectives. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Management Implications 
 The 30-inch diameter cap was the most effective for maintaining stand basal area between 50–70 ft2/
acre, retaining old growth, promoting spatial heterogeneity, and reducing the continuity of canopy fuels. 
It also moved the stand toward uneven-aged conditions and resulted in the highest herbaceous produc-
tion, the lowest percent canopy cover, and the highest simulated water yield. 
 The reduction in canopy cover and the increase in herbaceous production simulated in the 30-inch diam-
eter cap scenario would have a positive effect on many wildlife species; however, corresponding reduc-
tions in snag density could be considered unfavorable. 
 The effects of diameter caps became less pronounced over the 90-year simulation, which underscores 
the importance of maintenance treatments and the simulated reintroduction of fire for lasting effects. 
 
 
 
 
Contact 
Andrew Sánchez Meador, Andrew.SanchezMeador@nau.edu 
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
 
 
Figure 1. Photographs depicting current, untreated (A), and desired future conditions (B) for a ponderosa 
pine stand in the southwestern United States. This transition in forest structure is one of the primary goals of 
landscape scale collaborative restoration projects such as 4FRI.  
This Fact Sheet summarizes information from the following source: 
Sánchez Meador, A.J., K.M. Waring, and E.L. Kalies. 2015. Implications of Diameter Caps on Multiple Forest Resource 
Responses in the Context of the Four Forests Restoration Initiative: Results from the Forest Vegetation Simulator. 
Journal of Forestry: 113.  
