Copyright © 2007 by the author(s). Published here under license by the Resilience Alliance.
Murphy, A., J. Abrams, T. Daniel, and V. Yazzie. 2007. Living among frequent-fire forests: human history
and cultural perspectives. Ecology and Society 12(2): 17. [online] URL: http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/
vol12/iss2/art17/
Synthesis, part of a Special Feature on The Conservation and Restoration of Old Growth in Frequent-fire
Forests of the American West
Living among Frequent-fire Forests: Human History and Cultural
Perspectives
Alexandra Murphy, Jesse Abrams 1, Terry Daniel 2, and Victoria Yazzie 3
ABSTRACT. Ecological and social factors shaped old-growth forests of the western United States before
Euro-American settlement, and will, in large part, determine their future. In this article, we focus on the
social factors that affected the forest’s ecological structure and function, review the changing cultural
influences through law and policy of public land management and use, and discuss the changing public
perceptions of fire use. We also provide an overview of the current debates about the conservation of old-
growth forests, and the current congressional protection and management of old-growth forests in public
land management and use.
Key Words:  Euro-American land-use practices; fire suppression; indigenous peoples’ forest management;
land ethic; post-WWII environmental legislation; preservationist philosophy; utilitarian philosophy
INTRODUCTION
The current condition of old growth in frequent-fire
forests—the ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa)-
covered Black Hills region; the pine (Pinus spp.)
and mixed-conifer forests of the Southwest, Rocky
Mountains, and interior Northwest; and the sequoia
(Sequoiadendron giganteum) and mixed-conifer
forests of the Sierra Nevada—stems from a host of
ecological and social forces that shaped these
forests. This article focuses on the latter: the social
forces that have affected the forests’ ecological
structure and function and will, in large part,
determine their future. These social forces have
wrought changes that range from localized effects
around major population centers to landscape-level
alterations in composition and structure (Delcourt
and Delcourt 1997, Freiderici 2003, Anderson
2005). Although people have inhabited frequent-
fire forests for millennia, human activities during
the last two centuries have fractured the ecological
and sociocultural processes that perpetuated old-
growth forests in low- to moderate-severity,
frequent-fire regimes.
MILLENNIA OF COEXISTENCE: NATIVE
AMERICAN INHABITANTS AND THE
ENVIRONMENT
All human cultures alter their environments to some
extent, both intentionally and unintentionally. A
culture’s stability depends in large part on how
successfully 
these 
alterations 
maintain 
the
environment’s ability to sustain itself. Although the
landscape initially shapes the choices available to
the humans that inhabit it, the people, in turn,
reshape that landscape in responding to those
choices (Crumley 1994, Yazzie 2006). In terms of
the relationship between people and North America,
Stephen Pyne writes that: “The modification of the
American continent by fire at the hands of Asian
immigrants [now called American Indians, Native
Americans, or First Nations/People] was the result
of repeated, controlled, surface burns on a cycle of
one to three years, broken by occasional holocausts
from escape fires and periodic conflagrations during
times of drought” (Pyne 1982, pp. 79–80).
1Ecological Restoration Institute, 
2Department of Psychology, University of Arizona, 
3College of Menominee Nation

Ecology and Society 12(2): 17
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art17/
For more than 10 000 years, Native Americans have
lived in the frequent-fire, old-growth forests of the
interior West. In those old-growth forests, they have
hunted, cultivated food, fished, camped, gathered
berries and nuts, collected firewood, found spiritual
sustenance, 
and 
altered 
the 
landscape 
by
purposefully 
lighting 
fires. 
Indigenous 
fire
management shaped the structure and composition
of frequent-fire forests at the landscape scale,
through carefully timed burning at specific
locations. For example, Lewis and Clark credited
seven of ten fires they encountered in the Lolo Pass
region of western Montana to indigenous burning
(Gruell 1985a). In the Sierra Nevada region of
California, indigenous burning enhanced the
quantity and improved the qualities of plant species
used for food, medicine, ceremonies, and baskets
(Anderson 2005).
The Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes of the
Flathead Indian Reservation in western Montana
view fire from a different perspective than Euro-
Americans. In their tradition, fire is a gift from the
Creator, brought to them by the animals. This gift
has been used for thousands of years in frequent-
fire ecosystems—from dry ponderosa pine forests
to moist, mixed-conifer forests (White 2006). As a
result of frequent use of fire by Native Americans,
the mixed-conifer forests of the Cordillera (the
mountainous region of the western United States)
were once composed of lightly stocked stands of
shade-tolerant species, fire-tolerant tree species,
and understory vegetation of grasses, forbs, and
shrubs (Arno and Fielder 2005, McKenzie et al.
2006). Native peoples used fire to drive game and
open the forest to increase visibility and improve
forage (Kay 1995). Fire use encouraged the growth
of plant species essential for ceremonies and
medicinal use (Kimmerer 2000, Kimmerer and
Lake 2001, Turner et al. 2003, Anderson 2005).
Indigenous fire use remains a tool to maintain
cultural integrity and cultural resources within
Native American communities—a tool that
modifies, maintains, and restores the structure and
composition of frequent-fire forests to meet cultural
needs and subsistence use (Arno 1980, Kay 1995,
Kimmerer and Lake 2001, Anderson 2005). From
the indigenous perspective, the use of fire is a
mutually beneficial relationship between the
landscape and the people. This relationship reveals
the history and culture of the people who live in it
(Yazzie 2006), and the place-based environmental
values they have developed (Berkes et al. 2000,
Moller et al. 2004, Yazzie 2006).
In 
ecological 
terms, 
low-severity 
fires 
in
southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems, whether
ignited by lightning or Native Americans,
historically occurred at intervals ranging from 2–35
years, whereas high-severity fires were rare or non-
existent (Weaver 1967, Cooper 1960, Covington
and Moore 1994b). By maintaining an open stand
structure, low-severity fires limited the scope and
severity of insect outbreaks and kept dwarf
mistletoe (Arceuthobium spp.) in check (Covington
2003, Alcoze 2006). High-severity fires did,
however, occur periodically in dry forests in other
parts of the West (Shinneman and Baker 1997,
Veblen et al. 2000, Bonnicksen 2000). Fires burned
less frequently within many mixed-conifer forests
in the Inland West, with mean fire return intervals
of 5–25 years in the warm, dry ecosystems and 35–
45 years in the cool, moist ecosystems (Arno 1980,
Fischer and Bradley 1987).
CHANGING INHABITANTS, CHANGING
ECOLOGY
During the 16th century, Spanish explorers made
their first forays into the frequent-fire forests of the
interior West. Two hundred years before Lewis and
Clark embarked on their Journey of Discovery, Juan
de Oñate and a band of Spanish settlers marched
north through the dry forests of New Mexico,
bringing with them thousands of head of livestock
(Scurlock and Finch 1997). Since that time, Euro-
American influences have dramatically altered
frequent-fire old-growth forests through interactions
that roughly divide into four periods: 1) a period
before the mid-19th century, characterized by a
relatively low Euro-American population; 2) a
period of rapid Euro-American expansion into the
West from 1850–1900, characterized by unregulated
exploitation of old-growth resources; 3) a period
from 1900 through the 1960s, characterized by
increased governmental control and regulation of
Western forests, guided by a philosophy of use; and
4) a period from the 1960s until the present,
characterized by increasingly successful challenges
to the use philosophy by an environmentally
concerned public.
Early Euro-American Settlement
When Euro-Americans began settling western
frequent-fire forest regions, they often encountered
open forests of large, old trees with a dense ground

Ecology and Society 12(2): 17
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art17/
cover of grasses and forbs (Oliver et al. 1994,
Robbins and Wolf 1994, Langston 1995, Beesley
1996). Although there is no definitive information
on the proportion of presettlement forests in old-
growth condition, the accounts of early explorers
suggest an abundance of large, mature trees, as in
this passage from C. Hart Merriam’s report on an
exploration of northern Arizona: “It is a noteworthy
forest, not alone on account of the size and beauty
of the single species of tree of which it is composed
(Pinus ponderosa), but also because of its openness,
freedom from undergrowth, and its grassy carpet....
The pine forest is thoroughly mature, nearly all the
trees being of large size, and rarely crowded...”
(Merriam 1890, p. 119).
Above the arid grassland plains and below the dense
thickets of spruce–fir (Picea spp.–Abies spp.) and
lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta subsp. murrayana)
at higher elevations, frequent-fire forests provided
easy travel—even for horse-drawn wagons—and
attractive places for livestock grazing and
settlement (Langston 1995, Bonnicksen 2000). Less
attractive were the frequent understory fires and
attendant haze of smoke that interfered with travel
and seemed wasteful to some early settlers (Robbins
and Wolf 1994, Langston 1995).
Before the mid-1800s, few Euro-Americans
inhabited the West’s frequent-fire forests. Those
that did were largely fur trappers, traders,
missionaries, and, in places, communities of
Spanish descent. Although some limited logging for
building and firewood purposes took place, the
overall effect of timber harvest on old-growth
forests was minimal (Scurlock and Finch 1997).
Grazing by domestic sheep, cattle, goats, and horses
may have had a more significant effect on forests
near early Euro-American settlements (Scurlock
and Finch 1997) and in the vicinity of indigenous
communities that acquired European livestock
(Savage and Swetnam 1990, Scurlock and Finch
1997, Hessburg and Agee 2003). Despite these
localized grazing effects, low-intensity ground fires
still regularly sculpted frequent-fire forests
throughout much of their range.
It is difficult to estimate the proportion of frequent-
fire forest that existed in an old-growth condition
before widespread Euro-American settlement. Not
only are published estimates rare, but differences in
old-growth definitions can affect how old-growth
acreage is calculated. Taking a very fine-scale
approach, Bonnicksen (2000) notes that “old
pioneer forest” in the ponderosa pine type probably
constituted less than 40% of pre-European
settlement conditions, more typically ranging from
17% to 25%, with grassy openings and younger
forests comprising the remainder. Beardsley et al.
(1999) report that around 45% of current Sierra
Nevada forest in “reserved” status (wilderness
areas, parks, and private reserves) was in old-growth
condition in 1993, and they suggest this figure as a
rough estimate of the proportion of old growth that
could exist under a natural disturbance regime.
However, this figure includes higher-elevation
forest where fire only infrequently occurs. Between
10% and 26% of mixed-conifer sites in the
Sacramento Mountains of New Mexico may have
been old-growth before 1898, based on early
inventory data (Regan 1997). Langston (1995)
references a 1912 report in which 85% of ponderosa
pine-dominated acres on the Wallowa and Minam
National Forests in northeastern Oregon were found
in an old-growth condition; vast stretches of
frequent-fire forests in mostly old-growth condition
were found in other nearby forests. These disparate
figures do not clarify an overall estimation of pre-
Euro-American settlement forest conditions, but
they do suggest that old growth constituted a
significant proportion of forests in the western
United States.
Westward Expansion
Euro-American immigration into the West’s
frequent-fire forests increased dramatically in the
mid- to late 19th century. Several factors prompted
this: discoveries of gold and other valuable
minerals, rapidly expanding railway service to the
West, and government incentives to settlers
(Langston 1995, Beesley 1996, United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA) Forest Service
1996). When settlers encountered the West’s
expansive, seemingly inexhaustible old-growth
forests, they quickly set about exploiting them
(Beesley 1996, Scurlock and Finch 1997, Hessburg
and Agee 2003). Industrial-scale timber harvest
soon provided structural lumber, fuel wood, railroad
ties, and mining timbers to local and regional
markets (Robbins and Wolf 1994, Geores 1996).
As rail connectivity increased, settlers increasingly
shipped lumber from the old-growth forests out of
the region to destinations as distant as New York
City (Friederici 2003). Rail expansion also ushered
in the era of “railroad logging” in which loggers

Ecology and Society 12(2): 17
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art17/
high-graded the old-growth forests of the interior
West, felling the largest, straightest trees. Often only
the valuable bole was loaded on the train, and the
rest of the slash and debris left on site. Sparks from
skidding and loading machinery and passing trains
often ignited this debris, causing uncharacteristic,
high-intensity fires in cutover areas (Williams 1908,
Robbins and Wolf 1994, Langston 1995). Early
logging practices were focused on the removal of
the highest-value timber with little or no thought
given to reforestation. Once land had been cut,
timber companies often abandoned it and moved on
(Wilkinson 1992, Langston 1995).
Early grazing practices also acted to maximize
short-term economic gain, with little understanding
of long-term consequences. Cattle and sheep
severely overgrazed openings and understories in
old-growth forests, eliminating the grasses that
fueled the spread of surface fires (Robbins and Wolf
1994, Beesley 1996, Covington 2003). The
relationship between overgrazing and fire cessation
is illustrated by the localized disappearance of
frequent fires coincident with overgrazing early in
the 19th century in northeastern Arizona (Savage and
Swetnam 1990). Tree-ring analyses in Arizona
ponderosa pine forests have shown that regularly
occurring, low-severity fires virtually disappeared
from the landscape by the late 1800s (Dieterich
1980).
The effects of Euro-American land-use practices
and policies toward Native Americans began to
transform frequent-fire, old-growth forests during
the coming decades. High-grading changed the
complex forest structure that was typical of old-
growth frequent-fire forests (Covington 2003) and
altered fire regimes in logged-over areas,
encouraging hot burns that consumed slash and
remaining trees (Robbins and Wolf 1994, Beesley
1996, Scurlock and Finch 1997). Overgrazing
reduced the fine, flammable materials of the
understory, thereby removing a key component of
the frequent, low-severity fire regime that had
characterized these forests for thousands of years
(Cooper 1960, Savage and Swetnam 1990). As
Euro-American settlement spread throughout the
West, indigenous tribes that had historically
encouraged low-severity fires were dislocated,
under attack, or confined to reservations by settlers
and the United States military (Hessburg and Agee
2003).
Heavy grazing and timber cutting produced two
common results: 1) increases in shade-tolerant, fire-
intolerant tree species and 2) overall increases in
tree densities (Hessburg and Agee 2003). Some
harvested ponderosa pine forests in the dry forests
of the Northwest became lodgepole pine and true
fir 
forests, 
often 
at 
high 
densities. 
This
transformation eventually led to high tree mortality,
susceptibility to insect and disease infestations, and
a shift to a stand-replacing fire regime (Langston
1995). In moist ponderosa pine forest sites, true fir
and Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii) began
reproducing vigorously in the understory, creating
fuel ladders that could carry fire into the canopy
(Weaver 1943, Hessburg and Agee 2003). In the
Southwest, grazing, logging, and fire exclusion
combined with climatic conditions to result in an
eruption of ponderosa pine seedlings, the legacy of
which persists to this day (Cooper 1960, Covington
2003).
GOVERNMENT REGULATION AND THE
UTILITARIAN PHILOSOPHY
By the time Euro-American settlers began to exploit
the West’s resources in earnest, much of the forest
land in the eastern half of the United States had
already been cut over or converted to agriculture
(Williams 1989). As in the West, early cutting
practices in the East—particularly in the Lake States
—tended to resemble “timber mining,” with little
or no thought given to regeneration of future forests
or the condition of the post-logging landscape (Hirt
1994, Williams 1989). When settlers and
lumbermen reached the interior West and West
Coast, the country was faced with the geographic
limits of its forest resources. It became clear that, at
current rates of cutting and under common harvest
practices, the nation would soon exhaust its supply
of standing timber. Concerned about wasteful
logging and grazing practices, and fearful of an
impending nationwide “timber famine,” Congress
authorized the creation of forest reserves in 1891
(Clary 1986). In 1897, Congress passed the Organic
Act, giving the federal government authority to
regulate “occupancy and use” of the reserves and to
restrict timber harvest to “dead, matured, or large
growth of trees.” It also called for the forest reserves
to be protected against “destruction by fire.”
The purposes for these forest reserves remained
unclear until 1905, when Division of Forestry Chief,
Gifford Pinchot, had them transferred to the
Department of Agriculture and branded them with
his 
Progressive-era 
vision 
of 
conservation.
President Theodore Roosevelt, under Pinchot’s

Ecology and Society 12(2): 17
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art17/
guidance, greatly increased federal control of
western forests by designating more than 100
million acres of western land as “national forests.”
Pinchot changed the name from “forest reserves” to
indicate that the forests would not be reserved from
management (Wilkinson 1992). Most of the West’s
frequent-fire forests would eventually become part
of the National Forest System.
In the utilitarian land management philosophy of
Pinchot and Forest Service chiefs that followed,
forests were storehouses of raw materials to be
converted into goods for human use (Clary 1986,
Wilkinson 1992). From this perspective, old growth
was an inefficient storehouse because the net growth
in older forests tends to be low or even negative,
with annual additions of wood volume offset by
mortality and decay. For this reason, old-growth
forests were referred to as “overripe” or
“overmature,” even seen as “parasitic” for taking
up space that could otherwise be occupied by more
productive, younger forests (Langston 1995). Old
growth lacked intrinsic value to early forest
managers, who believed older forests would best
serve human purposes if converted to well-managed
second growth. Pinchot’s vision of forest
management resulted in ongoing timber, grazing,
and fire policies that dramatically reduced the
quantity and quality of old growth in frequent-fire
forests within the National Forest System (Langston
1995, Covington 2003).
Timber Policies
Pinchot’s 
utilitarian 
philosophy 
called 
for
eliminating waste in forest management. Waste
primarily existed in two forms: 1) destructive
logging practices that left forests in poor condition
and 2) unharvested old-growth forests (Wilkinson
and Anderson 1987, Hirt 1994, Langston 1995).
Guided by the principles of sustained yield, Pinchot
made the conversion of economically stagnant, old-
growth forests to vigorous second-growth a top
priority (Wilkinson and Anderson 1987). Indeed,
early federal foresters believed that harvesting
existing old growth and setting the stage for
productive younger forests was a duty of national
importance because it was the only way to prevent
an impending timber famine (Langston 1995).
During the first few decades of the 20th century,
national forest timber sales on dry western forests
combined with those on private lands and Bureau
of Indian Affairs-administered reservation lands to
supply logs to new mills (Baker et al. 1988, Scurlock
and Finch 1997). Ponderosa pine throughout the
West, in addition to Jeffrey pine (Pinus jeffreyi) and
sugar pine (Pinus lambertiana) in the Sierra
Nevada, were favored species, constituting more
than 99% of harvested timber in some places
(Robbins and Wolf 1994, Beesley 1996).
Fire Policies
The Forest Service’s policy of suppressing all fires
began under Pinchot’s leadership, but was adopted
only after several years of intense debate within state
and federal forestry circles (Pyne 1982). Some early
western scientists, including John Wesley Powell,
noted the beneficial effects of low-severity fire
(Pyne 2001, Stephens and Ruth 2005, Alcoze 2006).
Powell believed that, through their burning
practices, Native Americans in the Southwest
prevented catastrophic fires and maintained
landscape productivity sufficient to sustain their
populations (Alcoze 2006). Opponents derided
indigenous fire management as “Paiute forestry,”
and believed that low-severity fire would damage
mature timber and decrease timber production
(Pyne 1982, Beesley 1996, Alcoze 2006). After the
fires of 1910, which burned three million acres in
the northern Rockies and killed 85 people—most of
them firefighters—the Forest Service’s total
suppression policy gained strong support (Pyne
1982, 2001). In 1935, the agency went so far as to
adopt a policy that all fire starts were to be
extinguished by 10 a.m. the following morning
(Pyne 1982). By the early decades of the 20th 
century, the creeping ground fires that had sculpted
and maintained interior old-growth forests for
millennia would be almost universally absent from
the landscape. Needles, cones, branches, brushy
undergrowth, and slash from timber harvests
accumulated on the forest floor in the absence of
fire, and large quantities of young trees filled the
forest understory, ready to fuel high-severity fires.
Grazing Policies
By the time the first forest reserves were established
in the late 1800s, much of the grassy and herbaceous
understory of frequent-fire forests in the West had
already been intensively grazed (Beesley 1996,
Scurlock and Finch 1997). Euro-American settlers
saw the western range as a free public resource,
which made the regulation of grazing a difficult task.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 17
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art17/
Early grazing regulation helped establish rights to
particular 
allotments, 
improve 
management
practices, and institute nominal grazing fees, but did
not significantly reduce herd sizes (Beesley 1996).
In fact, the overall number of livestock on public
and private lands increased during the early decades
of the 20th century, although herd numbers were
reduced in some locales (Beesley 1996, Wilkinson
1992).
It is important to note that the history of frequent-
fire old-growth forest during this period is not
simply a story of national forest lands. Millions of
acres of old growth were once found on privately
owned land and on Native American reservations.
Since Euro-American settlement, old-growth
forests on private lands have largely been liquidated,
generally before World War II (Hirt 1994). Old-
growth forests can still be found today on isolated
parcels of private land, but these are rare exceptions
(Beardsley et al. 1999).
EARLY VOICES FOR PRESERVATION
One of the earliest and best-known voices calling
for the preservation of western forests was John
Muir. His preservationist philosophy was both
biocentric—in the sense that it valued all natural
entities for their own sake rather than their utility to
mankind—and deeply religious (Nash 1967). Muir
saw the newly created western forest reserves not
as storehouses for human use, but as “terrestrial
manifestations of God” imbued with inherent value.
Speaking of the forests of the Sierra Nevada, Muir
protested: “The gardens of the Sierra also, and the
noble forests in both the reserved and unreserved
portions, 
are 
sadly 
hacked 
and 
trampled,
notwithstanding the ruggedness of the topography....
In the noblest forests of the world, the ground, once
divinely beautiful, is desolate and repulsive, like a
face ravaged by disease” (Muir 1898, p. 17).
Although Muir was a minor celebrity in his time,
and his fledgling Sierra Club had a sizeable local
following, societal demands to preserve, rather than
liquidate, old-growth forests were too weak in the
early 20th century to significantly alter management
direction for most western public land (Nash 1967).
Some of the more spectacular landscapes were
transferred out of Forest Service jurisdiction to
become national parks, but the primary forces
preserving old-growth in the interior West were low
timber prices, the inaccessibility of the terrain, and
pressure by timber barons to keep federal wood off
the market (Clary 1986, Wilkinson 1992, Beesley
1996). As long as there was an abundant supply of
large trees on private land, federal timber was seen
as competition, threatening to drive prices lower
(Wilkinson 1992, Nelson 1995).
Nonetheless, Muir’s vision of a preservationist
approach to public lands both inspired and
articulated a growing societal demand for wild,
undeveloped nature. His philosophy is often
contrasted with the utilitarian approach of his one-
time 
friend 
Pinchot, 
and 
battles 
between
preservation and utilization would come to define
much of the landscape of federal forest management
later in the 20th century.
The first credible call for a change in the utilitarian
management philosophy from within the ranks of
the Forest Service came from restoration pioneer,
Aldo Leopold. Leopold began his career as a loyal
agent of the utilitarian-focused Forest Service,
taking part in predator eradication and arguing
against “Piute [sic] forestry” (Leopold 1920).
However, his time spent observing the changes
wrought by decades of manipulating the forest to
meet mankind’s material needs caused a sea change
in his thinking. Rather than seeing the forest as a
collection of independent resources of variable
value to humans, he saw it as a complex,
interconnected system, wherein manipulating one
part (e.g., predators or fire) would have unintended
second-order effects that would reverberate
throughout the system (Leopold 1939, 1949,
Callicott 2000).
Leopold’s influence on management of old growth
in frequent-fire forests was significant for several
reasons. His early calls for the preservation of
wilderness areas prompted the administrative
designation of the Gila Wilderness in 1924 and,
eventually, the Wilderness Act of 1964. Perhaps just
as significantly, Leopold’s ecological vision
articulated a role for humans in the ecosystem that
was neither commodity driven nor purely aesthetic
or romantic. Some authors have compared
Leopold’s land ethic to the Native American land
management philosophy, both in its extension of
ethical considerations to the non-human world and
in its inclusion of humans as an integral part of a
complex, dynamic ecosystem (e.g., Anderson and
Moratto 1996). This land ethic—whether called
“Leopoldian” or “Native American”—forms an
important starting point for the management of old-
growth forests in fire-prone landscapes.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 17
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art17/
POST-WORLD WAR II AMERICA
World War II served as a turning point for federal
forest management because of the massive demand
for wood to support both the war effort and the post-
war housing boom (Hirt 1994, Nelson 1995), and
because increased mechanization following the war
boosted the efficiency of timber cutting and hauling
(Hessburg and Agee 2003). Old-growth and other
merchantable forests had largely been removed
from private lands by this time, and the nation turned
to the West’s federal forests with their as yet
untapped bounty of large trees.
However, America’s post-war prosperity also
meant that more people had time to drive, vacation,
and recreate—often in and around national forests,
where they came into contact with increasingly
intensive, industrial-style timber management
practices (Clary 1986, Baker et al. 1988, Wilkinson
1992, Hirt 1994). In 1960, Congress legitimized
non-commodity uses in national forests with the
passage of the Multiple Use–Sustained Yield Act,
which listed outdoor recreation and conservation of
wildlife habitat as purposes of national forests.
Although the “multiple use” side of the legislation
recognized non-commodity forest values, the
“sustained yield” side made it clear that old-growth
forests would continue to be cut to make way for
faster-growing secondary forests (Clary 1986). The
post-war emphasis on multiple use and sustained
yield led to ever more complex and overly optimistic
schemes to increase timber outputs from federal
lands while trying to address the growing demand
for non-timber uses of national forests (Hirt 1994,
Clary 1986). This dynamic, rather than a concern
about a future timber famine, would come to define
federal forest management in the decades following
World War II.
By the early 1960s, more and more Americans
began to express concern for the environmental
effects of industrialization: declining water and air
quality, degraded wild places, and loss of plant and
animal species. Outdoor recreation was booming,
and with it, the membership rolls of environmental
organizations, such as the Sierra Club and The
Wilderness Society (Baker et al. 1988, Hirt 1994).
At the same time, there was a growing recognition
in the scientific community of the ecologically
beneficial role of fire. The 1963 “Leopold Report”
on wildlife management in national parks posited
that fire was a natural process and should be
integrated into park management (Leopold et al.
1963).
In 1964, after years of failed attempts, Congress
passed the Wilderness Act as a means of preserving
wild places on public land. According to the act,
wilderness was to be “an area where the earth and
its community of life are untrammeled by man,
where man himself is a visitor who does not
remain.” Upon signing the act into law, President
Lyndon Johnson remarked on the importance of
leaving future generations “a glimpse of the world
as it was in the beginning, not just after we got
through with it.” The American public increasingly
saw protection of old-growth forests and other
natural areas as a process of excluding or
minimizing human influence on natural systems
(Nash 1967).
Although the American environmental movement
continued to gain political strength and popular
support, the U.S. Forest Service held fast to its
emphasis on commodity production and fire
suppression, and to its faith that increasingly
intensive forest management practices would result
in greater benefits for all (Clary 1986, Hirt 1994).
Lawsuits by environmental and sportsmen’s groups
in the 1970s successfully challenged forest
management practices, including clearcutting, on
national 
forests, 
culminating 
in 
the 
1975
“Monongahela” decision that temporarily shut
down all clearcut logging on national forests
(Wilkinson 1992). Congress responded with the
National Forest Management Act of 1976, which
increased public involvement in, and scrutiny of,
national forest plans and practices. Congress also
responded to public demands for environmental
protection 
by 
designating 
wilderness 
areas
throughout the coming decades. Although these
areas were largely concentrated in scenic, higher
elevation locations, many wilderness areas included
at least some frequent-fire forest acreage (Beardsley
et al. 1999, Arno et al. 2000, Kipfmueller and
Swetnam 2000).
Despite the growing number of designated
wilderness areas, the conversion of old growth to
young stands continued at a record pace through the
1970s and 1980s (Hirt 1994). Even those frequent-
fire old-growth forests that remained unharvested
were vastly changed in terms of structure and
biological integrity. As early as the 1940s, some
foresters became concerned with changes occurring
in western frequent-fire forests, and they linked
these changes to decades of fire exclusion (Weaver
1943). By the mid-20th century, forests that
historically experienced only creeping ground fires
were being consumed by high-severity crown fires

Ecology and Society 12(2): 17
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art17/
(Savage and Mast 2005). In 1960, Charles Cooper
published a seminal investigation of changes in
ponderosa pine stand structure caused by fire
exclusion, contrasting current overstocked, crown-
fire-prone conditions with forest conditions before
European settlement (Cooper 1960).
By the late 1980s, public attention focused squarely
on old-growth forests, but it was the damp, old-
growth forests of the Pacific Northwest that held the
stage, not the dry, frequent-fire forests of the interior
West (Yaffee 1994, Wilkinson 1992). On one side
of the debate were loggers, the timber industry,
resource-dependent rural communities, and their
allies arguing that old-growth forests should be
cleared to provide jobs and set the stage for future,
fast-growing forests. On the other side were
environmentalists, wildlife advocates, and others
who wanted the forests left alone and protected from
human influences.
Public discourse at the time characterized old-
growth forests as “ancient,” “virgin,” and
“primeval” (Norse 1990), whereas individual stands
were described as “cathedral-like” (Carey 2003).
Old-growth forests perfectly characterized an ideal
of untouched nature, and opponents of old-growth
logging used this to their political advantage, often
employing metaphors of chastity and religious
sanctity to describe unlogged forests (Davis 1995).
Conversely, logged forests were often described as
having been violated or defiled (Davis 1995). The
old-growth showdown in the Pacific Northwest was
largely settled with creation of the Northwest Forest
Plan (USDA and United States Department of the
Interior (USDI) 1994), which shifted management
emphasis from timber production to wildlife and
watershed protection.
Not long after the old-growth dispute in the Pacific
Northwest reached its apex, similar legal and
political battles emerged in drier, fire-prone forests
of the interior Northwest, Southwest, and Sierra
Nevada. The issues were strikingly similar, with
old-growth forests at the center of divisive conflicts
over endangered species, road-building, timber
harvests, and other issues (Nie 1998, Erman 1999,
Quigley et al. 1999). These conflicts were—and
continue to be—complex and highly politicized,
with implications for the future of old-growth
forests. In general, all three of these regions
experienced reductions in timber harvests and
consequent loss of workforce and milling capacity.
The harvests that did continue tended to focus on
smaller-diameter material and salvage of fire- or
insect-killed trees. Management direction, guided
by ecosystem management principles (Grumbine
1994), signaled an end to the emphasis on old-
growth conversion, and subsequent policies guided
management toward restoring more natural forest
structures and fire regimes.
During this time, the American public increasingly
voiced concern for the non-commodity values of
frequent-fire old growth—recreational, aesthetic,
spiritual, and ecological. At the same time, surveys
revealed an increased understanding of the role of
fire in maintaining the structure and ecological
functions of frequent-fire old growth. As early as
1981, two-thirds of survey respondents in southern
Arizona acknowledged the beneficial effects of fire
on forests (Cortner et al. 1984). In surveys in 2000,
2002, and 2003, a majority of people living in the
Southwest supported the use of prescribed fire in
forest management, and believed that prescribed
fire reduces wildfire risk and severity (Abrams and
Lowe 2005).
Throughout 
the 
West, 
conflicts 
over 
the
management of frequent-fire old-growth forests
changed the legal, political, and economic
frameworks for forest management, even if these
changes were never explicitly delineated in
Congressional policy (see article by Vosick et al. in
this issue). The curtailment of old-growth logging
was a necessary, but insufficient, step in the
conservation of frequent-fire old-growth. Although
old-growth forests were largely protected from the
chainsaw, even greater threats continued to loom—
competitive stress from the smaller trees that had
grown up in the absence of fire, insect infestations
made more severe by both competitive stress and
drought, and the growing risk of stand-replacing fire
in these unnaturally crowded forests.
A series of fierce political battles about the fate of
old-growth forests waged through the 1990s. The
decade also saw a rash of expensive, destructive fire
seasons throughout the West, including the 1994
fire season, which resulted in 34 fire-related
fatalities. The 1995 Federal Wildland Fire
Management Policy was the first national fire policy
document to recognize the role of fire as an
ecologically important natural process, even as it
indicated methods to reduce the negative effects of
high-severity wildfire. The National Fire Plan, first
developed in 2000 after another particularly costly
fire season, posited that “the removal of large,

Ecology and Society 12(2): 17
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art17/
merchantable trees from forests does not reduce fire
risk and may, in fact, increase such risk.”
As federal forest managers shifted their focus from
wood fiber production to restoration and fuel
reduction, public disputes about tree removal
remained a constant part of the sociopolitical
landscape. The removal of large trees during
restoration operations was a practice that
engendered a particularly high level of controversy
(Friederici 2003). Old-growth forests received their
first explicit Congressional protection as part of the
Healthy Forests Restoration Act of 2003. Section
102(e) of that legislation requires forest managers
carrying out authorized hazardous fuels reduction
activities to “fully maintain, or contribute to the
restoration of, the structure and composition of old-
growth stands according to the pre-fire suppression
old-growth conditions characteristic of the forest
type...and retaining the large trees contributing to
old-growth structure.” Despite this safeguard,
restoration projects continue to be contentious and
as a result, much work to date has focused on
reducing fuels in the wildland–urban interface.
Forests in the backcountry, including degraded
remnant stands of old growth, continue to exist in a
state of imminent collapse, threatened by
unnaturally high populations of young trees and
attendant risks of crown fire and insect attack (Mast
et al. 1999).
THE CURRENT MANAGEMENT
CONUNDRUM
Two 
centuries 
of 
overgrazing, 
high-grade
harvesting, and fire exclusion have made former
frequent-fire forested ecosystems prone to stand-
replacing fire, devoid of a rich and diverse
understory, and too dense to produce valuable
timber. Much of this degradation can be attributed
to human (especially Euro-American) views of
frequent-fire forests as either limitless frontiers or
as engineered industrial landscapes. At the same
time, a purely preservationist strategy of excluding
human influences altogether appears to be an
untenable strategy for old-growth protection in
frequent-fire forests (Agee 2002). The conservation
and restoration of frequent-fire old-growth forests
may depend on fostering a relationship between
humans and forests that avoids the pitfalls of both
utilitarianism and preservationism.
There are, however, no easy solutions for attaining
and sustaining public support for the management
interventions needed to restore an old-growth
condition in frequent-fire forests. The increased
risks of injury and property damage from escaped
fires and negative reactions to smoke and scorched
landscapes can be substantial obstacles to
ecologically motivated fire management near
rapidly expanding developments. Even though
residents in the wildland–urban interface have been
exposed to extensive fire-safety programs in recent
years, they continue to perceive the situation in
terms of a trade-off between uncertain safety
benefits and the costs of certain and substantial
sacrifices in convenience, privacy, aesthetic, and
naturalness (Hodgson 1995, Teie and Weatherford
2000, Winter and Fried 2000, Daniel et al. 2003,
Collins 2005, Nelson et al. 2005).
In managing for old growth in frequent-fire forests,
the relevant issues are complex and often play out
across spatial and temporal scales that do not easily
fit into normal patterns of human comprehension
and concern. People are often reluctant to pay now
for benefits that will only be realized much later—
perhaps after the current generation is dead.
Moreover, forests are dynamic, with conditions at
any given location certain to change with time.
Finally, people are more likely to attach their values
to a specific special place, and often view any
change at that place as negative. Although forest
managers may appreciate the changing mosaic of
forest conditions that occurs in frequent-fire old
growth across broad spatial and temporal scales,
such a scenario is difficult for most of the public to
embrace.
Unfortunately, conventional means of public
education and outreach, such as printed brochures
and public information messages that feature
knowledge change, have not shown an ability to
substantially shift public sentiments or behavior
toward recommended fire safety actions (Cortner et
al. 1990, Cheng and Cortner 2003, Daniel 2003,
Nelson et al. 2003, McCaffrey 2004). For the
growing segments of the public who favor old-
growth preservation and naturalness as goals for
public forest management (Xu and Bengston 1997,
Shields et al. 2002, Nelson et al. 2005), the very
concept of old-growth “management” may seem
oxymoronic.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 17
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art17/
If the public can be convinced that the goal of old-
growth management is protection and that proposed
management policies can effectively achieve that
goal, majority support might be achieved. But
acceptance will likely be fragile and subject to re-
negotiation on a case-by-case basis. In that context,
managers will need to be clear about both objectives
and means, and be as careful in protecting the
public’s trust as in protecting old-growth forests
(Shindler et al. 2002). Public education will be an
ongoing challenge, although surveys indicate a
significant level of acceptance of some negative side
effects in order to reduce the risk of catastrophic
fire. For example, in surveys conducted in the
Southwest during 2000 and 2003, most respondents
expressed acceptance of smoke as a necessary
consequence of prescribed fires, at least in concept
(Abrams and Lowe 2005).
Although management of old growth in frequent-
fire forests is fraught with challenges, growing
public concern for both forest health and public
safety necessitates concerted intervention. As forest
managers and policy makers grapple with
management issues, they will face critical
questions: What is the public willing to sacrifice and
tolerate to manage for old growth in frequent-fire
forests? How much do we value the ecological
integrity of frequent-fire, old-growth forest
communities? How much financial burden are we
willing to shoulder to restore those values? What
risks are we willing to assume? The answers to these
questions will determine the extent and success of
efforts to reestablish the ecological structure and
functions of frequent-fire forests.
Responses to this article can be read online at:
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art17/responses/
LITERATURE CITED
Abrams, J. B., and K. Lowe. 2005. Public
perceptions of forest restoration in the southwest: a
synthesis of selected literature and surveys. 
Ecological Restoration Institute, Issues in Forest
Restoration. Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff,
Arizona, USA.
Agee, J. K. 2002. The fallacy of passive
management: managing for firesafe forest reserves.
Conservation Biology in Practice 3(1):18–25.
Alcoze, T. 2003. First Peoples in the pines: historical
ecology of humans and ponderosa. Pages 48–57 in 
P. Friederici, editor. Ecological restoration of
southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Island Press,
Washington, D.C., USA.
Anderson, M. K. 2005. Tending the wild: Native
American knowledge and the management of
California’s natural resources. University of
California Press, Berkeley, California, USA.
Anderson, M. K., and M. J. Moratto. 1996. Native
American land-use practices and ecological
impacts. Pages 187–206 in D. C. Erman, editor.
Sierra Nevada Ecosystem Project: final report to
Congress, volume II, Assessments and scientific
basis for management options. University of
California, Centers for Water and Wildland
Resources, Davis, California, USA.
Arno, S. F. 1980. Forest fire history in the Northern
Rockies. Journal of Forestry 78:460–465.
Arno, S. F., and C. E. Fiedler. 2005. Mimicking
nature’s fire: restoring fire-prone forests in the West. 
Island Press, Washington, D.C., USA.
Arno, S. F., D. J. Parsons, and R. E. Keane. 2000.
Mixed-severity fire regimes in the northern Rocky
Mountains: consequences of fire exclusion and
options for the future. Pages 225–232 in D. N. Cole,
S. F. McCool, W. T. Borrie, and J. O’Loughlin,
compilers. Wilderness science in a time of change
conference–Volume 5: Wilderness ecosystems,
threats, and management. U.S. Forest Service
Proceedings RMRS-P-15-VOL-5.
Baker, R. D., R. S. Maxwell, V. H. Treat, and H.
C. Dethloff. 1988. Timeless heritage: a history of
the Forest Service in the Southwest. U.S. Forest
Service Report FS-409. [online] URL: http://www.
fs.fed.us/r3/about/history/timeless/index.shtml.
Beardsley, D., C. Bolsinger, and R. Warbington. 
1999. Old-growth forests in the Sierra Nevada: by
type in 1945 and 1993 and ownership in 1993. U.S.
Forest Service Research Paper PNWRP-516.
Beesley, D. 1996. Reconstructing the landscape: an
environmental history, 1820–1960. Pages 3–24 in 
D. C. Erman, editor. Sierra Nevada Ecosystem
Project: Final report to Congress, volume II,
Assessments and scientific basis for management
options. University of California, Centers for Water

Ecology and Society 12(2): 17
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art17/
and Wildland Resources, Davis, California, USA.
Berkes, F., J. Colding, and C. Folke. 2000.
Rediscovery of traditional ecological knowledge as
adaptive management. Ecological Applications 10
(5):1251–1262.
Bonnicksen, T. M. 2000. America’s ancient forests:
from the Ice Age to the Age of Discovery. John Wiley,
New York, New York, USA.
Callicott, J. B. 2000. Harmony between men and
land: Aldo Leopold and the foundations of
ecosystem management. Journal of Forestry 98
(5):4–13.
Carey, A. B. 2003. Restoration of landscape
function: 
reserves 
or 
active 
management?
Forestry 76(2):221–230.
Cheng, A. S., and H. J. Cortner. 2003. Policy,
political, and institutional dimensions. Pages 51–57
in H. J. Cortner, D. R. Field, and P. Jakes, editors.
Humans, fire, and forests: social science applied to
forest management. Papers in Restoration Policy,
Northern Arizona University Ecological Restoration
Institute, Flagstaff, Arizona, USA.
Clary, D. 1986. Timber and the Forest Service. 
University Press of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas,
USA.
Collins, T. W. 2005. Households, forests, and fire
hazard vulnerability in the American West: a case
study of a California community. Environmental
Hazards 6:23–37.
Cooper, C. F. 1960. Changes in vegetation,
structure, and growth of southwestern ponderosa
pine forest since white settlement. Ecological
Monographs 30:129–164.
Cortner, H. J., P. D. Gardner, and J. G. Taylor. 
1990. Fire hazards at the urban–wildland interface:
what the public expects. Environmental Management 
14:57–62.
Cortner, H. J., M. J. Zwolinski, E. H. Carpenter,
and J. G. Taylor. 1984. Public support for fire-
management policies. Journal of Forestry 82
(6):359–361.
Covington, W. W. 2003. The evolutionary and
historical context. Pages 26–47 in P. Friederici,
editor. Ecological restoration of southwestern
ponderosa pine forests. Island Press, Washington,
D.C., USA.
Covington, W. W., and M. M. Moore. 1994.
Southwestern ponderosa forest structure: changes
since Euro-American settlement. Journal of
Forestry 92(1):39–47.
Crumley, C. L. 1994. Historical ecology: a
multidimensional ecological orientation. Pages 1–
16 in C. L. Crumley, editor. Historical ecology:
cultural knowledge and changing landscapes. 
School of American Research Press, Sante Fe, New
Mexico, USA.
Daniel, T. C. 2003. Social science of wildfire risk
management: individual level of analysis. Pages 9–
15 in H. J. Cortner, D. R. Field, and P. Jakes, editors.
Humans, fire, and forests: social science applied to
forest management. Papers in Restoration Policy,
Northern Arizona University Ecological Restoration
Institute, Flagstaff, Arizona, USA.
Daniel, T. C., E. Weidemann, and D. Hines. 2003.
Assessing public tradeoffs between fire hazard and
scenic beauty in the wildland–urban interface.
Pages 36–44 in J. L. Jakes, compiler. Homeowners,
communities, and wildfire: science findings from the
National Fire Plan. U.S. Forest Service General
Technical Report NC-231.
Davis, S. 1995. The role of communication and
symbolism in interest group competition: the case
of the Siskiyou National Forest, 1983–1992.
Political Communication 12(1):27–42.
Delcourt, H. R., and P. A. Delcourt. 1997. Pre-
Columbian Native American use of fire on southern
Appalachian landscapes. Conservation Biology 11
(4):1010–1014.
Dieterich, J. H. 1980. Chimney Spring forest fire
history. U.S. Forest Service Research Paper
RM-220.
Erman, D. C. 1999. Sierra Nevada ecosystem
project: case study. Pages 305–320 in K. N.
Johnson, F. Swanson, M. Herring, and S. Greene,
editors. Bioregional assessments: Science at the
crossroads of management and policy. Island Press,
Washington, D.C., USA.
Fischer, W. C., and A. F. Bradley. 1987. Fire

Ecology and Society 12(2): 17
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art17/
ecology of western Montana forest habitat types. U.
S. Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station,
GTR-INT-223.
Friederici, P. 2003. The “Flagstaff model.” Pages
7–25 in P. Friederici, editor. Ecological restoration
of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Island
Press, Washington, D.C., USA.
Geores, M. E. 1996. Common ground: the struggle
for ownership of the Black Hills National Forest. 
Rowman and Littlefield Publishers, Inc., Lanham,
Maryland, USA.
Gruell, G. E. 1985. Indian fires in the interior West:
a widespread influence. Pages 68–74 in J. E. Lotan,
editor. Proceedings—Symposium and Workshop on
Wilderness Fire. U.S. Forest Service, Intermountain
Forest and Range Experiment Station, General
Technical Report INT-GTR-182.
Grumbine, R. E. 1994. What is ecosystem
management? Conservation Biology 8(1):27–38.
Hessburg, P. F., and J. K. Agee. 2003. An
environmental narrative of inland northwest United
States forests, 1800–2000. Forest Ecology and
Management 178:23–59.
Hirt, P. W. 1994. A conspiracy of optimism:
management of the national forests since World War
Two. University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln,
Nebraska, USA.
Hodgson, R. W. 1995. Strategies for and barriers
to public adoption of fire safe behavior. Pages 93–
98 in D. R. Weise, and R. E. Martin, technical
coordinators. The Biswell Symposium: fire issues
and solutions in urban interface and wildland
ecosystems. U.S. Forest Service General Technical
Report SW-GTR-158.
Kay, C. 1995. Aboriginal overkill and native
burning implications for modern ecosystem
management. Western Journal of Applied Forestry 
10:121–126.
Kimmerer, R. W. 2000. Native knowledge for
native ecosystems. Journal of Forestry 98(8):4–9.
Kimmerer, R. W., and F. K. Lake. 2001.
Maintaining the mosaic: the role of indigenous
burning in land management. Journal of Forestry 
99:36–41.
Kipfmueller, K. F., and T. W. Swetnam. 2000.
Fire–climate interactions in the Selway-Bitterroot
Wilderness Area. Pages 270–275 in D. N. Cole, S.
F. McCool, W. T. Borrie, and J. O’Loughlin,
compilers. Wilderness science in a time of change
conference–Volume 5: Wilderness ecosystems,
threats, and management. U.S. Forest Service
Proceedings RMRS-P-15-VOL-5.
Langston, N. 1995. Forest dreams, forest
nightmares: the paradox of old growth in the Inland
West. University of Washington Press, Seattle,
Washington, USA.
Leopold, A. 1920. “Piute forestry” vs. forest fire
prevention. Southwestern Magazine 2:12–13.
———. 1939. A biotic view of land. Journal of
Forestry 37:727–730.
———. 1949. A Sand County almanac. Oxford
University Press, New York, New York, USA.
Leopold, A. S., S. A. Cain, C. M. Cottam, I. N.
Gabrielson, and T. L. Kimball. 1963. Wildlife
management in the National Parks. American
Forests 69:32–35, 61–63.
Mast, J. N., P. Z. Fulé, M. M. Moore, W. W.
Covington, and A. E. M. Waltz. 1999. Restoration
of presettlement age structure of an Arizona
ponderosa pine forest. Ecological Applications 9
(1):228–239.
McCaffrey, S. 2004. Thinking of wildfire as a
natural hazard. Society and Natural Resources 17
(6):509–516.
McKenzie, M. D., T. H. DeLuca, and A. Sala. 
2004. Forest structure and organic horizon analysis
along a fire chronosequence in the low elevation
forests of western Montana. Forest Ecology and
Management 203:331–343.
Merriam, C. H. 1890. Results of a biological survey
of the San Francisco Mountain region and desert of
the Little Colorado, Arizona. Government Printing
Office, Washington, D.C., USA.
Muir, J. 1898. The wild parks and forest
reservations of the west. Atlantic Monthly 81
(483):15–28.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 17
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art17/
Nash, R. 1967. Wilderness and the American mind. 
Yale University Press, New Haven, Connecticut,
USA.
Nelson, K. C., M. C. Monroe, and J. Fingerman-
Johnson. 2005. The look of the land: homeowner
landscape management and wildfire preparedness
in Minnesota and Florida. Society and Natural
Resources 18:321–336.
Nelson, K. C., M. C. Monroe, J. F. Johnson, and
A. W. Bowers. 2003. Public perceptions of
defensible space and landscape values in Minnesota
and Florida. Pages 55–62 in P. L. Jakes, compiler.
Homeowners, communities, and wildfire: science
findings from the National Fire Plan. U.S. Forest
Service General Technical Report NC-231.
Nelson, R. H. 1995. The federal land management
agencies. Pages 37–59 in R. L. Knight and S. F.
Bates, editor. A new century for natural resources
management. Island Press, Washington, D.C., USA.
Nie, M.A. 1998. Green sagebrush: the American
West, political culture, and environmental politics. 
Dissertation. Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff,
Arizona, USA.
Norse, E. A. 1990. Ancient forests of the Pacific
Northwest. Island Press, Washington, D.C., USA.
Oliver, C. D., L. L. Irwin, and W. H. Knapp. 1994.
Eastside forest management practices: historical
overview, extent of their applications, and their
effects on sustainability of ecosystems. U.S. Forest
Service General Technical Report PNW-GTR-324.
Pyne, S. J. 1982. Fire in America: a cultural history
of wildland and rural fire. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, New Jersey, USA.
———. 2001. Year of the fires: the story of the great
fires of 1910. Penguin Books, New York, New York,
USA.
Quigley, T. M., R. T. Graham, and R. W. Haynes. 
1999. 
Interior 
Columbia 
basin 
ecosystem
management project: case study. Pages 271–287 in 
K. N. Johnson, F. Swanson, M. Herring, and S.
Greene, editors. Bioregional assessments: science
at the crossroads of management and policy. Island
Press, Washington, D.C., USA.
Regan, C. M. 1997. Old-growth forests in the
Sacramento Mountains, New Mexico: characteristics,
stand dynamics and historical distributions.
Dissertation, Colorado State University, Fort
Collins, Colorado, USA.
Robbins, W. G., and D. W. Wolf. 1994. Landscape
and the Intermontane Northwest: an environmental
history. U.S. Forest Service General Technical
Report PNW-GTR-319.
Savage, M., and J.N. Mast. 2005. How resilient
are southwestern ponderosa pine forests after crown
fires? Canadian Journal of Forest Resources 
35:967–977.
Savage, M., and T. W. Swetnam. 1990. Early 19th-
century fire decline following sheep pasturing in a
Navajo ponderosa pine forest. Ecology 71(6):2374–
2378.
Scurlock, D., and D. M. Finch. 1997. A historical
review. Pages 43–67 in W. M. Block and D. M.
Finch, technical editors. Songbird ecology in
southwestern ponderosa pine forests: A literature
review. U.S. Forest Service General Technical
Report RM-GTR-292.
Shields, D. J., I. M. Martin, W. E. Martin, and
M. A. Haefele. 2002. Survey results of the American
public’s values, objectives, beliefs, and attitudes
regarding forests and grasslands: a technical
document supporting the 2000 USDA Forest Service
RPA Assessment. U.S. Forest Service General
Technical Report RMRS-GTR-95.
Shindler, B., M. Brunson, and G. Stankey. 2002.
Social acceptability of forest conditions and
management practices: a problem analysis. U.S.
Forest Service General Technical Report PNW-
GTR-537.
Shinneman, D. J., and W. L. Baker. 1997.
Nonequilibrium dynamics between catastrophic
disturbances and old-growth forests in ponderosa
pine landscapes of the Black Hills. Conservation
Biology 11(6):1276–1288.
Stephens, S. L., and L. W. Ruth. 2005. Federal
forest-fire policy in the United States. Ecological
Applications 15(2):532–542.
Teie, W. C., and B. F. Weatherford. 2000. A report
to the Council of Western State Foresters: fire in the
West, the wildland/urban interface fire problem. 

Ecology and Society 12(2): 17
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art17/
Deer Valley Press, Rescue, California, USA.
Turner, N. J., I. J. Davidson-Hunt, and M.
O’Flaherty. Living on the edge: ecological and
cultural edge as sources of diversity for social–
ecological resilience. Human Ecology 31(3):439–
463.
United States Department of Agriculture
(USDA) Forest Service. 1996. Status of the Interior
Columbia Basin: summary of scientific findings. U.
S. Forest Service General Technical Report PNW-
GTR-385.
USDA and United States Department of Interior
(USDI). 1994. Record of decision for amendments
to Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management
planning documents within the range of the northern
spotted owl. U.S. Forest Service Regional Office,
Portland, Oregon, USA.
Veblen, T. T., T. Kitzberger, and J. Donnegan. 
2000. Climatic and human influences on fire
regimes in ponderosa pine forests in the Colorado
front range. Ecological Applications 10(4):1178–
1195.
Weaver, H. 1943. Fire as an ecological and
silvicultural factor in the ponderosa-pine region of
the pacific slope. Journal of Forestry 41:7–15.
———. 1967. Fire and its relationship to ponderosa
pine. Proceedings of the Tall Timbers Fire Ecology
Conference 7:127–149.
White, G. 2005. The gift of fire. Pages 66–68 in 
Forestry in Indian Country: models of sustainability
for our nation’s forests? Evergreen, Winter 2005–
2006, Evergreen Foundation, Portland, Oregon,
USA.
Wilkinson, C. 1992. Crossing the next meridian:
land, water, and the future of the West. Island Press,
Washington, D.C., USA.
Wilkinson, C., and H. M. Anderson. 1987. Land
and resource planning in the national forests. Island
Press, Washington, D.C., USA.
Williams, A. S. 1908. Logging by steam. Forestry
Quarterly 6(1):1–33.
Williams, M. 1989. Americans and their forests: a
historical geography. Cambridge University Press,
New York, New York, USA.
Winter, G., and J. S. Fried. 2000. Homeowner
perspectives on fire hazard, responsibility, and
management strategies at the wildland–urban
interface. Society and Natural Resources 13(1):33–
49.
Xu, Z., and D. N. Bengston. 1997. Trends in
national forest values among forestry professionals,
environmentalists, and the news MEDIA, 1982–
1993. Society and Natural Resources 10(1):43.
Yaffee, S. L. 1994. The wisdom of the spotted owl:
policy lessons for a new century. Island Press,
Washington, D.C, USA.
Yazzie, V. 2006. A cultural ethic in tribal forest
management and self-determination: the human
dimension of silviculture. Dissertation, University
of Montana, Missoula, Montana, USA.
