 
 
Forest thinning stalled again 
By GARY GHIOTO 
Sun Staff Reporter 
 
10/22/1999 
In a project that has split the environmental community, the first phase of an ambitious 
plan to thin forests in Flagstaff has been stalled again by a second round of appeals.  
The effect of the second appeal will be to prevent the thinning from starting this year, 
although project officials believe they will ultimately win project approval.  
The Fort Valley Restoration Project is proposed by the U.S. Forest Service and the Grand 
Canyon Forests Partnership. It calls for selected logging, the closing of roads, 
construction of recreation trails and restoring the natural role of fire on 1,700 acres off 
North Fort Valley Road.  
The project is the first step in a 10-year plan aimed at improving forest health on 180,000 
acres in the Coconino National Forest known as the Flagstaff-Urban-Wildlands Interface.  
Three environmental groups -- the Grand Canyon Trust, the Nature Conservancy and the 
Rural Wildlife Fund -- have signed on to the project. Others that in the past have opposed 
logging in national forests, including the Sierra Club, the Southwest Center for Biological 
Diversity and the Flagstaff office of the Southwest Forest Alliance -- have remained 
neutral.  
But seven other groups, including the Flagstaff Activist Network, Forest Guardians and 
the Forest Conservation Council in Santa Fe, N.M., say the project is too costly, will do 
little to reduce fire danger and threatens wildlife, cultural resources and recreation sites.  
This week, the groups filed their second challenge to the project, opposing as inadequate 
steps taken by Coconino National Forest officials to correct problems noted by the 
regional forester in Albuquerque after an initial appeal.  
Roxanne George of the Flagstaff Activist Network said that the Forest Service failed to 
provide adequate studies outlining the long-term impact of the logging project.  
"There's a lot of urgency to get the project under way. I'm sure they have funding 
concerns ... but their motivation doesn't excuse them for doing the level of analysis that 
the National Environmental Protection Act requires," she said.  

The new appeal eliminates any chance that the project will begin this year, but it's 
doubtful that the appeal will derail the overall project, said Brett KenCairn, executive 
director of the Grand Canyon Forests Partnership.  
"We're very confident that the science that we built this restoration strategy on remains 
essentially unchallenged," said KenCairn.  
Last month, Coconino National Forest Supervisor Jim Golden announced the project was 
under way again because his staff had answered the regional forester's concern about its 
possible adverse impact on historic and cultural resources.  
Golden added that documentation was also provided to rebut claims by environmentalists 
that the Forest Service had not considered the long-term effects of the 180,000-acre forest 
thinning project.  
But Bryan Bird, executive director of the Forest Conservation Council, said the latest 
appeal contains numerous examples of deficiencies in Forest Service efforts to satisfy 
points raised by the regional forester.  
Bird charged that Golden did not conduct a comprehensive analysis of the long-term 
impact of the logging plan as required by the National Environmental Protection Act.  
"Instead ... the Forest Service simply admitted that it won't do such an analysis," said 
Bird, because of the tremendous scope of such a study.  
To prove the project won't disturb or destroy historic or cultural resources, the Forest 
Service received a written clearance from the State Historic Preservation Office instead 
of conducting a study as required by law, said the appeal.  
And on a technical point, the appeal claims that the Forest Service violated federal law by 
not allowing public participation before Golden issued his decision last month.  
"It's too bad we keep catching them on these technical issues, because we really would 
like to debate the substantive portions of the project," said Bird.  
He added that environmentalists will drop the appeal and possible litigation if the Forest 
Service will:  
· Prepare an environmental impact statement for the 1,700-acre project.  
· Help landowners defend their properties against fire danger.  
· Develop a non-commercial restoration alternative.  

"Commercial timber sales have built-in incentives to take larger trees," said Bird, 
"Instead of conducting a timber sale that we know is harmful to the environment, why 
don't they develop programs to assist landowners to defend their properties against fire?"  
The Fort Valley project will take no trees larger than 16 inches in diameters, and the 
cutting will be done selectively to reduce the impact on soils and wildlife.  
But Bird said alternative restoration methods favored by environmentalists include 
allowing natural fire cycles, disease and various forest parasites to reduce congested 
stands of timber.  
"Federal land managers have blindly embraced the concept that the damage from past 
logging practices can be corrected through further commercial logging," said Bird, "We 
want to demonstrate that this is a flawed approach and there are non-commercial 
alternatives."  
The regional forester has 45 days to rule on the latest appeal. The appeal can be rejected 
and the project can resume or it could be remanded back to the Coconino National Forest.  
Bird said his organization will file a federal lawsuit if the latest appeal is overturned by 
the regional forester.  
Gary Ghioto can be reached at 556-2251 or by e-mail at gghioto@azdailysun.com.  
