Appeal denied 
By GARY GHIOTO 
Sun Staff Reporter 
12/22/2000 
 
Fort Valley, the controversial on-again, off-again forest thinning and restoration project 
to reduce wildfire danger on more than 9,000 acres north of Flagstaff, is back on again.  
For the moment, anyway.  
Regional Forester Eleanor Towns Thursday denied an appeal filed by 10 local and out-of-
state environmental groups who said the project was too extreme and was not sensitive to 
wildlife concerns.  
Some of the appellants said the next stop could be a courthouse, which might stop the 
project again.  
The Fort Valley Ecosystem Restoration Project calls for thinning 4,500 acres of some 
9,100 acres of private and government land. Roads will be closed, meadows restored and 
prescribed burns will remove decades of accumulated debris on 7,000 acres in Fort 
Valley under the plan.  
"It's not unexpected that the regional forester has affirmed our decision. We are looking 
forward to finally getting this project underway because we believe it's real important to 
the community as well as to the forest itself," said Jim Golden, supervisor of the 
Coconino National Forest.  
For the past two years, opponents such as the Flagstaff Activist Network, Forest 
Guardians of Santa Fe, N.M., and the Forest Conservation Council have cited the 
project's impact on wildlife, forest health and recreational resources in an effort to stall 
the project.  
"We think on balance it's going to do more harm than good and there are other 
alternatives out there for reducing fire risk that don't involve basically dismantling the 
forests around Flagstaff," said John Talberth of Forest Conservation Council, "We are 
going to be looking over the decision and making a decision whether or not to litigate on 
this next week."  
The other groups have also not decided whether they will file a legal challenge. 
Opponents have 15 days to decide before the Forest Service awards its first bid on the 
timber that will be removed from Fort Valley.  

We expect there could be further litigation, but we feel we're well-prepared for that at this 
point," said Golden.  
Fort Valley is considered a model for restoration across the West by Interior Secretary 
Bruce Babbitt and U.S. Sen. Jon Kyl, R-Ariz., and is being touted in some forestry circles 
as the "Flagstaff Plan."  
The potential for the various forest thinning treatments proposed for Fort Valley being 
adopted across the nation concerned the Southwest Forest Alliance, Center for Biological 
Diversity and the Sierra Club.  
In their appeal, the groups said Fort Valley "sets precedent across millions of acres" and a 
comprehensive environmental impact statement for the project needs to be prepared 
before it is launched.  
But Towns agreed with Coconino National Forest officials that the only national 
precedent set by the Flagstaff Plan is its focus on collaboration between community 
groups, local officials and conservation groups.  
Brian Nowicki of Southwest Forest Alliance called Towns' response troubling. "We gave 
them a whole book on how it does set precedents for future projects and they discounted 
it. This is a significant federal action and other places across the West will be looking at 
it," he said.  
Nowicki also noted that Towns ignored many points showing deficiencies in the Fort 
Valley plan that could have been easily corrected to satisfy the Southwest Forest 
Alliance's concerns.  
"Obviously, we're a little bit disappointed, by not necessarily the decision, but the failure 
to even address a lot of the questions and the points we raised in the appeal. The decision 
doesn't even mention a lot of the points, and when it does, it leaves out the evidence that 
we said about it. So it really looks like it's based on politics and that they had to fill up so 
many pages to give us the decision," he said.  
Environmentalists said the Forest Service violated the National Environmental Policy Act 
by not conducting an environmental study before moving ahead. Specifically, the groups 
said a study is required because it is highly debatable and "controversial" that the 
thinning at Fort Valley will accomplish its major goal of reducing wildfire threats.  
But the Forest Service said many studies show that when the thinning is done in 
combination with prescribed burns removing accumulated forest fuels, the risk of 
catastrophic wildfire is reduced. Towns agreed that the Forest Service had done a 
thorough search of available scientific literature on the impact of thinning on reducing 
fire danger and did not need to go further.  

In its appeal, the Forest Conservation Council raised alarms about the various thinning 
prescriptions being used at Fort Valley, especially the "pre-settlement" model pioneered 
by the Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University.  
While some prescriptions remove only small percentages of small trees less than 16 
inches in diameter on various parcels in Fort Valley, the pre-settlement model calls for 
the removal of up to 80 percent of small trees on lots, leaving a "plantation" appearance, 
say opponents.  
"In general we feel that the prescriptions being used are inconsistent with maintenance of 
the forest as a forest ecosystem. There are a number of species -- goshawk, flammulated 
owls, Abert squirrels and Mexican spotted owls -- that depend on a certain kind of forest 
structure and this pre-settlement model that seeks to convert the forest from what it is 
now to what they believe are pre-settlement conditions .... is inconsistent with the 
survivability of these species. So that is a major concern," Talberth said.  
Forest Guardians said the project will cause a decline of forest species, including the 
northern Goshawk, pygmy nuthatch and hairy woodpecker and thinning will violate the 
National Forest Management Act.  
The Forest Service responded that the bird species are declining because of a lack of 
large, old growth trees in Fort Valley and that thinning small-diameter trees is not an 
issue. By thinning and protecting what old growth is left in Fort Valley, the project will 
eventually "provide good habitat" for these species, the Forest Service said.  
Thinning and meadow restoration will cause Abert squirrel populations to decline, but 
enough will remain in northern goshawk foraging areas. Forest treatments will also result 
in increased populations of the goshawks' prey species such as cottontail rabbits, robins, 
gold-mantled ground squirrels and chipmunks, said the Forest Service.  
The Fort Valley project involves the Forest Service, the Grand Canyon Forests 
Partnership and the Ecological Restoration Institute.  
The project will be implemented in two phases. The first one involves 1,700 acres of 
thinning, divided into blocks using various thinning prescriptions. Once it is completed, 
Partnership, Forest Service specialists and interested parties will evaluate the results. The 
second phase will implement any changes required on an additional 2,800 acres of 
thinning, followed by the use of prescribed fire on up to 7,000 acres in the Fort Valley 
area. Eventually, the Partnership hopes to restore 180,000 acres of forests in and around 
the San Francisco Peaks.  
Gary Ghioto can be reached at gghioto@azdailysun.com or 556-2251.  
 
