 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Effects of Tree Cutting and Fire on Understory Vegetation  
in Mixed Conifer Forests 
By Scott Abella and Judy Springer  
INTRODUCTION 
Mixed conifer forests and their understory floras evolved with disturbance such as fire, drought, windthrow, 
insects, or disease (Heinlein et al. 2005, Reynolds et al. 2013). Historically, fire occurred in some mixed co-
nifer forests as often as every 2-20 years, which is as frequent as in many ponderosa pine forests. Other 
mixed conifer forests, often on moister sites, likely burned less frequently but with greater severity. Fire, to-
gether with the other disturbance types, created patches of tree mortality to form canopy openings. These 
opening resulted in diverse environments — shaded and sunny — for understory vegetation. Changes to 
mixed conifer forests since Euro-American settlement beginning in the 1800s have included the introduction 
of livestock and exotic species, the removal of upper food-web predators, fire exclusion, increased fuel loads, 
reduced sunlight on the forest floor, and decreased proportional abundance of fire-tolerant trees such as pon-
derosa pine (Covington et al. 1994, Knapp et al. 2013). Current mixed conifer forests are susceptible to stand
-replacing wildfire, even where such regimes were uncommon historically. Additionally, these forests are 
currently of keen interest for other conservation reasons such as vulnerability to climate change (Barbour et 
al. 2002, Anderson et al. 2008). 
 
Understanding influences of silvi-
cultural, fuel reduction, and restora-
tion treatments involving tree cut-
ting and fire is fundamental to man-
aging mixed conifer forests, cou-
pled with knowledge of effects of 
wildfires that are likely eventual 
outcomes of passive management. 
To examine influences of tree cut-
ting, prescribed fire, and wildfire on 
understory vegetation in mixed co-
nifer forests, we conducted a sys-
tematic review of published litera-
ture. We used a reproducible litera-
ture search in research databases 
such as AGRICOLA, and we creat-
ed a database of understory data ex-
tracted from papers. 
 
 
     Fact Sheet: Effects of Tree Cutting and Fire on Understory Vegetation in  
     Mixed Conifer Forests 
 
 
 
  
 
July 2014 
Thinned mixed conifer unit, Klamath Mountains, Oregon. Photo courtesy of S.R. 
Abella 

 
RESEARCH FINDINGS 
 We identified 41 studies (Figure 1) that met criteria for analysis (e.g., including either pre-treatment data 
or untreated controls) of effects of tree cutting and fire on understories in mixed conifer forests. 
 Time since treatment dominated understory response to treatment. Initial declines in understory plant 
cover and diversity were common following tree cutting and prescribed fire. Studies that measured re-
sponse ≥4 years post-treatment, however, usually reported that understories had increased over the long-
er term. 
 For example, a study in Sequoia National Park found that understory plant cover and diversity did not 
increase above levels in unburned controls until more than 5 years after prescribed fire (Webster and 
Halpern 2010). Burned understories then remained greater than controls at 20 years post-treatment.  
 Heavy slash loadings, or associated treatments for slash (e.g., chipping, pile burning), were suggested by 
several authors to have tempered understory response. Further research to identify optimal slash treat-
ment procedures is warranted.  
 Tree thinning and prescribed fire applied individually increased understory measures at similar rates. 
 However, there is apparently a component of fire-dependent native species that are uncommon or absent 
after tree cutting alone (e.g., Dodson et al. 2007). These species are primarily short-lived forbs, such as 
Chamerion angustifolium (fireweed).  
 Applying tree thinning 
and burning together at 
the same sites resulted 
in the greatest abun-
dance 
of 
non-native 
plants, but native spe-
cies still predominated. 
It is important to fur-
ther compare levels of 
non-native plant inva-
sion in treated areas 
against a benchmark of 
post-wildfire communi-
ties. 
 Depending on site con-
ditions, 
overstory-
understory relationships 
suggest that to elicit a 
strong understory re-
sponse, treatments must 
reduce overstory cano-
py cover to <40-50%, 
and <30% on many 
sites 
(Larson 
and 
Wolters 1983). 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Gray shading signifies mixed conifer forests, with colors designating different ecore-
gions where studies in the review occurred. Studies are numbered 1-41. Inset photo is mixed 
conifer forest on Coconino National Forest, Arizona. Figure courtesy of S.R. Abella 

Contact 
Scott Abella, abellaNRC@gmail.com  
Judy Springer, judith.springer@nau.edu 
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This review was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service via the Ecological Restoration 
Institute at Northern Arizona University to Natural Resource Conservation, LLC.  
 
 
MANAGEMENT IMPLICATIONS 
1) Managers can expect possible temporary reductions in total understory cover or biomass immediately 
after tree cutting or prescribed fire, but longer term increases often subsequently occur. 
2) In contemporary mixed conifer stands where tree canopy closure is nearly complete, tree cutting and 
prescribed fire must substantially reduce overstory canopies to produce increases in understory vegeta-
tion. Tree canopy cover must be reduced to <30% on many sites to elicit vigorous understory respons-
es. 
3) Tree thinning alone may produce many fire management and forest health benefits, including promoting 
understory vegetation. Subsequently reinstating fire after thinning may not only sustainably reduce haz-
ardous fuels, it may also promote fire-dependent native flora. 
4) This review suggests that fuel reduction or restoration treatments can be implemented in mixed conifer 
forests to both a) reduce hazardous fuels, and b) enhance disturbance-associated native species in the 
short term and total understory abundance in the long term.  
REFERENCES 
Anderson, R.S., R.B. Jass, J.L. Toney, C.D. Allen, L.M. Cisneros-Dozal, M. Hess, J. Heikoop, and J. Fessenden. 
2008. Development of the mixed conifer forest in northern New Mexico and its relationship to Holocene 
environmental change. Quaternary Research 69:263-275. 
Barbour, M., E. Kelley, P. Maloney, D. Rizzo, E. Royce, and J. Fites-Kaufmann. 2002. Present and past old-
growth forests of the Lake Tahoe Basin, Sierra Nevada, USA. Journal of Vegetation Science 13:461-472. 
Covington, W.W., R.L. Everett, R. Steele, L.L. Irwin, T.A. Daer, and A.N.D. Auclair. 1994. Historical and antici-
pated changes in forest ecosystems of the inland west of the United States. Journal of Sustainable Forest-
ry 2:13-63. 
Dodson, E.K., K.L. Metlen, and C.E. Fiedler. 2007. Common and uncommon understory species differentially 
respond to restoration treatments in ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir forests, Montana. Restoration Ecology 
15:696-708. 
Heinlein, T.A., M.M. Moore, P.Z. Fulé, and W.W. Covington. 2005. Fire history and stand structure of two pon-
derosa pine-mixed conifer sites: San Francisco Peaks, Arizona, USA. International Journal of Wildland 
Fire 14:307-320. 
Knapp, E.E., C.N. Skinner, M.P. North, and B.L. Estes. 2013. Long-term overstory and understory change fol-
lowing logging and fire exclusion in a Sierra Nevada mixed-conifer forest. Forest Ecology and Manage-
ment 310:903-914. 
Larson, F.R., and G.L. Wolters. 1983. Overstory-understory relationships: mixed conifer forests. Pp. 21-25 in 
Bartlett, E.T., and D.R. Betters (eds.). Overstory-understory relationships in western forests. Western Re-
gional Research Publication No. 1. Colorado State University Experiment Station, Fort Collins, CO. 36 
pp. 
Reynolds, R.T., A.J. Sánchez Meador, J.A. Youtz, T. Nicolet, M.S. Matonis, P.L. Jackson, D.G. DeLorenzo, and 
A.D. Graves. 2013. Restoring composition and structure in southwestern frequent-fire forests: a science-
based framework for improving ecosystem resiliency. General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-310. U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, CO. 76 pp. 
Webster, K.M., and C.B. Halpern. 2010. Long-term vegetation responses to reintroduction and repeated use of 
fire in mixed-conifer forests of the Sierra Nevada. Ecosphere 1(5):art9. 
 
 
 
 
   
 
