 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Impacts and Implications of the Woody Biomass Utilization  
Grant Program in Eastern Arizona 
 
By Anne Mottek-Lucas, Yeon-Su Kim, Emily Jane Davis, Cassandra Moseley, Max Nielsen-Pincus, and Ted Bilek  
INTRODUCTION 
Utilizing woody biomass — small-diameter material and low-valued trees removed from forest restoration activ-
ities — on public lands may help reduce agency costs, enhance community wildfire protection, and create em-
ployment and economic activity. Yet small businesses adjacent to public land often lack the capacity to harvest 
and utilize biomass. Businesses face challenges such as limited access to capital and markets, technical assis-
tance, and inconsistent material supply. From 2005–2010, the USDA Forest Service’s Woody Biomass Utiliza-
tion Grant (Woody BUG) program provided resources to address these barriers. We evaluated and compared the 
impacts of this program in eastern Oregon and in eastern Arizona. Here we summarize the findings from eastern 
Arizona. 
 
APPROACH 
We studied grants awarded between 2005 and 2010 in the White 
Mountains region of eastern Arizona. We employed mixed methods 
including document analysis, semi-structured interviews, and eco-
nomic impact analysis and modeling using IMPLAN.   
 
RESEARCH FINDINGS 
This relatively small ($5 million authorized nationwide annually) pro-
gram contributed to regional biomass processing capacity, despite 
challenging market and economic conditions brought about by the 
recession. The Woody BUG program was unique in that it allowed a 
land management agency to fund equipment acquisition, fill gaps in 
regional industry, and support networks of technical assistance and learning. Outcomes such as increased acres 
treated, reduced costs per acre, and green tons removed were less discernible. Specifically, we found that: 
 
The Woody BUG program increased business capacity  
 
 
Many businesses expanded and diversified their product lines to utilize different types of biomass through 
integrated strategies that steered away from products reliant on the depressed housing industry.  
 
The Woody BUG program expanded sawmill capacity in the region, which was important to industry suc-
cess in the area because increased processing of material helped maintain competitive prices for manufac-
tured wood products.  
 
The program helped build a network of processing facilities and services that several biomass businesses 
shared, which improved these businesses’ efficiencies; thus, creating a “microcosm” that had developed 
valuable networks and created a balanced system. 
 
Minimizing haul distances to processing infrastructure reduced associated costs. 
 
  
Fact Sheet: Impacts and Implications of the Woody Biomass Utilization Grant  
 
Program in Eastern Arizona 
April 2014 
Photo courtesy Patrick Rappold,  
AZ State Forestry  Division 

 
In-state economic impacts arose from use of matching funds for labor and services (Table 1) 
 
Grantees lacked adequate and reliable supply from 
public lands 
 
Despite the award of the first Forest Service 10-year 
stewardship contract in the nation, grantees still experi-
enced difficulties due to lack of biomass supply. This 
led to limitations in production, delays in promoting 
their new product lines, inability to fill backlogs of or-
ders, and difficulty in planning sawmill production.  
There were several key challenges:  
 
 
Operationalization of the contracting mechanism 
deterred opportunities for competitive bids, flexi-
bility of supply, and competitive pricing of both 
raw material and finished products. 
 
Timely salvage logging from the 2011 Wallow 
Fire. 
 
Lack of agency capacity and funding on a local 
level.  
 
POLICY IMPLICATIONS 
The clearest accomplishments of the Woody BUG program have been its significant contributions to the revival of 
eastern Arizona’s biomass processing capacity and associated rural economic development, which occurred de-
spite challenging markets and economic conditions.  
 
Future policy and programs designed to encourage woody biomass utilization can be further improved by:  
 
 
Direct intermediary assistance both before and during the program;  
 
Assessing the needs of the regional forest products industry as new programs/initiatives are conceptualized 
that include initiatives that further support increasing regional biomass utilization capacity;  
 
Consistent involvement of the Forest Service and deliberate, coordinated investment in agency capacity at 
local levels (e.g., effective implementation and coordination of stewardship contracts and grants, and under-
standing of local businesses’ needs);  
 
Matching business demand for raw material supply with investment in agency capacity to complete plan-
ning, once Forest Service decisions are made regarding the number and types of treatments;  
 
Assuring close oversight of the raw material stream, from the contractor(s) through the distribution and uti-
lization channels; and  
 
Monitoring grant impacts with information grant recipients readily know. 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
*12 awarded; 2 unsuccessful grants were eliminated for  
economic analysis 
  
Eastern Arizona 
Number of grants* 
12 
Total grant funds 
$2.6 million 
Total matching funds 
$4.9 million 
Percent of total funds spent on equip-
ment 
54 
Total one-time spending impacts 
           Jobs created or retained 
           Wages generated 
           Economic activity generated 
           Tax revenues 
  
45 
$3.7 million 
$6.6 million 
$0.93 million 
This Fact Sheet summarizes information from the following publication*: 
 
Davis, E.J., A.M. Lucas, Y.S. Kim, C. Moseley, M. Nielsen-Pincus, T. Bilek. 2014. The Impacts of the Woody Biomass Utilization Program 
in Eastern Oregon and Eastern Arizona. Ecosystem Workforce Program Working Paper Number 46. Eugene, Oregon: Institute for a 
Sustainable Environment, University of Oregon. http://library.eri.nau.edu/gsdl/collect/erilibra/index/assoc/D2014015.dir/doc.pdf 
 
*This research was supported by the USDA Forest Service’s Forest Products Laboratory and the Sustainable Northwest/U.S. Endowment 
for Forestry and Communities. 
Contact 
Dr. Yeon-Su Kim, Yeon-Su.Kim@nau.edu 
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service 
Table 1. Woody Biomass Utilization Grants in eastern Arizona,  
2005–2010. 
