Testimony of Dr. William Wallace Covington, Regents’ Professor 
And Director of the Ecological Restoration Institute 
Northern Arizona University 
http://www.eri.nau.edu 
 
Before the House Subcommittee on Forests and Forest 
Show Low, Arizona 
 
Field Hearing to Discuss Interagency Cooperation in Wildland Fire Fighting 
 
September 28, 2002 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
John Wesley Powell with Paiute Indian Chief Tau-gu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gifford Pinchot with President Teddy Roosevelt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chairman McGinnis, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to 
testify on a subject of personal importance to me and of critical importance to the health 
of our nation’s forests and the people and communities that live within them. 
 
My name is Wally Covington.  I am Regents’ Professor of Forest Ecology at Northern 
Arizona University and Director of the Ecological Restoration Institute.  I have been a 
professor at NAU for just over 27 years. My colleagues, graduate students and I have 
conducted research into ponderosa pine and related frequent fire types in South Dakota, 
Eastern Washington, California, Utah, Colorado, New Mexico, Chihuahua, Sonora, and 
Durango (Mexico), and, of course, Arizona since I arrived in Arizona in 1975. 
 
In addition to my publications on fire ecology and management, ecosystem health and  
forest restoration, I have co-authored scientific papers on a broad variety of topics in 
forest ecology and resource management including research on fire effects, prescribed 
burning, thinning, operations research, silviculture, range management, wildlife effects, 
multiresource management, forest health, and natural resource conservation.  I am senior 
author of the Ecosystem Restoration and Management Principles chapter of the 
interagency publication on Ecological Stewardship published in 1999.   
 
I am a member of numerous professional societies including the Ecological Society of 
America, the International Society for Ecosystem Health, the Society for Conservation 
Biology, and the Society of American Foresters.  I am also a member of the Society for 
Ecological Restoration and was chair of its Science and Policy Working Group from its 
inception through 2000 when I vacated that position to take a sabbatical year at Duke 
University.  In addition to publishing in the scientific literature I have been actively 
involved in outreach efforts to natural resource professionals, community leaders, the 
general public, and local to national policy makers on issues related to forest ecosystem 
management. 
 
A Textbook Example of How to Do it Right 
 
Before I begin my formal remarks I want to take a minute to recognize the outstanding 
community support and interagency coordination, dedication, and firefighting expertise 
demonstrated by those who worked so long and diligently to keep the Rodeo-Chediski 
fire from being even more devastating than it was.  Were it not for the great skill, team 
work, and creativity of firefighters, federal, state, and local governments and community 
leaders working together for a common goal, it is likely that hundreds more houses would 
have burned, and worse yet civilian and firefighter lives would have been lost.  We now 
need to develop and apply that same approach to implementing preventative restoration 
based hazard reduction and ecosystem health treatments at similar scales so that a disaster 
of this magnitude never happens again. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2

My Approach in this Testimony 
 
Although the general principles that I will discuss apply broadly to the vast majority of 
the West’s dry frequent fire forest types, I will focus my testimony on ponderosa pine 
forests. As the GAO has pointed out in 1999 over 90 percent of the severe crown fire 
damage nationally is in this forest type.   
 
In my remarks I will give a brief overview of the historical context for federal fire 
management policies, discuss some ideological barriers to achieving consensus about 
how to proceed, and recommend a set of actions designed to help overcome these 
limitations. 
 
Historical Background: Ideology and Land  
Management Rivalry 1889-Present 
 
Ideological warfare over how to manage western forests is not new.  The roots of this 
crisis in western forest management go deep.  Fire historian Stephen Pyne is undoubtedly 
our best modern day chronicler of the history of our failure to work with fire in forests of 
the West.  In his book, Paiute Forestry: A History of the Light-burning Controversy, 
Pyne describes the historic meeting between then Secretary of Interior John Noble and 
John Wesley Powell, then director of Interior’s Geological Service.  The meeting had 
been set up by Gifford Pinchot, director of the government’s new Forestry Department, 
then in the Department of Interior also. 
 
It was obvious to Aldo Leopold shortly after he graduated from the Yale School of 
Forestry arrived in the Southwest in 1909.  Having just graduated with a Master of 
Forestry degree from Yale University, Leopold was trained as a keen observer of land 
conditions.  He wrote a series of reports and essays, perhaps the most notable of which 
was his 1924 paper in the Journal of Forestry entitled, “Grass, brush, timber and fire in 
southern Arizona.”   In that paper he noted that south of the US:Mexico border, frequent 
fires and absence of overgrazing had maintained diverse, productive, sustainable 
watersheds, but that north of the border, assiduously protected from fire but mercilessly 
overgrazed, watersheds were degrading rapidly and woody vegetation was encroaching 
everywhere. 
 
Bureau of Indian Affairs forester, Harold Weaver, recognized the coming forest health 
crisis in the 1930s raising the alarm that because of the disruption of the natural frequent, 
low intensity fire regime ponderosa forests were becoming overstocked with dense 
sapling thickets, unprecedented tree disease and insect attacks were occurring, and fire 
behavior was intensifying.  He warned that unless something was done, these symptoms 
of degrading forest health would only get worse (H. Weaver.  1943.  Fire as an ecological 
and silvicultural factor in the ponderosa pine region of the Pacific slope.  Journal of 
Forestry 41:7-14.  Working with tribal members, Weaver started a prescribed burning 
research program on the Colville Indian Reservation in 1942, designed to be re-burned on 
an approximate 10 yr interval.  Those plots continue to be burned regularly today.   
 
 
3

 
 
It is interesting to note that in a 1976 report entitled, “Ponderosa fire management: a task 
force evaluation of controlled burning in ponderosa pine forests of central Arizona”, 
Harold Weaver along with Harold Biswell, Harry Kallendar, Roy Komarek, Richard 
Vogl noted that: 
 
“Between 1947 and 1956 in the National Forests of New Mexico and Arizona, 
115,000 acres of timber were burned in six fires with most trees killed or heavily 
damaged.  In 1948, 1950, and 1954, three wildfires on the Fort Apache 
Reservation in Arizona covered 8,100 acres in which nearly all timber was 
killed.” 
 
We only wish we had that problem today. 
 
Weaver became BIA Area Forester in Phoenix, Arizona, in March, 1948.  Weaver began 
working with Fort Apache tribal members to restore periodic burning to reservation 
lands.  Despite periodic setbacks due to restrictions related to air quality concerns dating 
from the late 1970s, prescribed burning coupled with active forest management have 
continued, and as you have heard helped to prevent severe crownfire in several stands 
within reservation lands. 
 
In the late 1950s, Charles Cooper, also a BIA forester, conducted a sweeping analysis 
that constituted his doctoral dissertation from Duke University.  In that dissertation and in 
subsequent publications (see Charles F. Cooper. 1960.  Changes in vegetation, structure, 
and growth of southwestern pine forests since white settlement.  Ecological Monographs 
30:129-164) Cooper described the population irruption of pine trees, the increase in fuel 
loads, and the degradation of forest health.  In his concluding paragraphs on page 162 of 
his monograph, Cooper states: 
 
“It is doubtful if, after 40 yrs of protection, use of prescribed fire can now reverse the 
trend toward excessively dense pine thickets.  Silvicultural possibilities of planned fire 
can probably only be realized in young stands originating after timber harvest.  Some 
practical and economic means must be found for thinning young pine stands and for 
reducing the amount of hazardous fuel.” 
 
By the late 1970s it became obvious to me that ponderosa pine dominated landscapes 
were filling in so quickly with overly dense stand level fuel loadings such that by early on 
in the 21st century we would see very large, landscape scale fires that were essentially 
uncontrollable. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4

 
 
 
 
My warnings became more strident as I saw both the size and the severity of crownfires 
increase throughout the 1980s.  In fact in a recently discovered video tape of a 
presentation Silver City, NM, on February 23, 1993, I forecast that if we failed to 
implement large restoration-based hazardous fuel reduction treatments, by 2010 we 
would witness greater ecosystem scale fires in excess of 100,000 acre and that we would 
have to evacuate communities along the Mogollon Rim rapidly and efficiently or risk 
losing 100s of civilian lives.  It is not a prediction that I wanted to come true, but, of 
course it did. 
 
 In 1994 I was senior author on a review paper (Attachment One) in which I stated that 
we could anticipate exponential increases in the severity and extent of catastrophic fire.  
It is not a prediction I ever wanted to come true.  In that same paper, I also suggested that 
we have a narrow window of opportunity to take preventative actions to restore forest 
health and minimize the losses of civilian and firefighter lives as well as the mounting 
damage to our nation’s natural resources.   
 
How We Can Meet the Demands Placed upon Our Generation 
 
 Recognizing that unnatural crownfires and other symptoms of ecosystem stress are 
signals that these ecosystems are falling apart, we must act and we must act quickly.  A 
“learning by doing” approach known as active adaptive management is a well established 
procedure that we know will work.  No one is talking about tinkering here and this isn’t 
just some new fangled academic idea.  Adaptive management is rooted deep in theory 
and practice, having sprung from the evolutionary operations approach long used in 
optimizing complex chemical engineering problems.  Crawford S. Holling (University of 
Florida) and Carl Walters (University of British Columbia) and their intellectual 
“offspring” have developed this approach as a tried and true procedure for solving 
complex resource management problems, monitoring and evaluating a range of policy 
options, and then feeding resulting knowledge back into the ongoing resource 
management endeavor.   
 
A soft systems approach to adaptive management might be most appropriate for 
restoration of ponderosa pine and related frequent fire landscapes.  In such a situation 
collaborative groups consisting of policy makers, stakeholders, technical specialists and 
land managers develop well informed alternative working hypotheses about reasonable 
ways to simultaneously work toward restoring ecosystem health while probing for deeper 
understanding of greater ecosystem structure and function. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5

We Need Thorough Knowledge and Carefully Reasoned Analysis, Systematically 
Checked Against Factual Evidence. 
 
In applying this approach, clear thinking, objective acquisition and interpretation of 
information, and open dialogue among collaborators is essential.  Following are some 
steps to implement this approach 
 
 
Define the problem 
 
Describe the pathology of degradation 
 
1. Are there unnatural population dynamics-- irruptions of some, crashes of others? 
2. Are there deleterious changes in nutrient cycling and hydrology?   
3. Are there decreases in diversity and net productivity of herbaceous food webs? 
4. Are there losses of tree vigor, especially of old-growth? 
5. Are there unnatural insect and disease outbreaks? 
6. Are fuels steadily accumulating on the forest floor and in the tree canopies? 
7. Has there been a shift away from presettlement fire regimes? 
 
Describe the contexts for the ecological restoration issues. 
 
1. What are reference conditions for different hierarchies? 
2. What is the cause of degradation? 
3. What are the temporal and spatial patterns of post-disruption changes? 
4. To what extent, and at what rate, do current disturbances (e.g. wildfire, bark 
beetle irruptions) and conventional management practices (e.g., thinning alone, 
prescribed fire alone) restore ecosystem structure and function? 
5. What ecological, social, and political factors affect recovery? 
6. How can humans speed recovery to fully functioning ecosystems? 
7. How can we do this while providing for continued use by humans? 
 
Determine changes in reference conditions over time. 
 
1. What was the natural fire regime? 
2. When was the fire regime disrupted? 
3. How have ecosystem structures/processes changed over time? 
4. How have ecosystem functions/processes 
 
Assemble practical field data readily available or easy to acquire to inform treatment, 
monitoring, and evaluation design.  Examples of such data are: 
  
1. Fire scars 
2. Tree structure, species composition, age, vigor 
3. Herbaceous density and composition 
4. Forest floor fuels and dead biomass 
 
6

 
Use practical analysis techniques to provide useful information for designing and 
comparing proposed treatments.  Examples of such analysis are: 
 
1. Reconstruction of presettlement forest structure 
2. Intersecting lines of evidence 
3. Dendrochronology / fire history 
4. Ecological simulation  
5. Fire behavior analysis 
 
Develop restoration-based sideboards for designing alternative prescriptions.  Examples 
of such sideboards are: 
 
1. Retain all trees which predate settlement 
2. Retain postsettlement trees needed to re-establish presettlement structure 
3. Thin and remove excess trees 
4. Rake heavy fuels from base of trees 
5. Burn to emulate natural disturbance regime 
6. Seed with natives/control exotics 
 
Determine how alternative restoration treatments will be tested. A multi-scaled approach 
might make sense, with pre/post measurements, replication, and random assignment of 
treatments where possible.  One such approach that we have developed in concert with 
collaborators in federal, state and local agencies, nongovernmental organizations, and 
interested volunteers consists of: 
 
1. Spot treatments (.01-.03 acres) around old-growth trees 
2. Micro treatments (1 - 40 acres) 
3. Initial large-scale treatments (500 - 1000 acres) 
4. Monitoring and feedback of results from these treatments 
5. Adaptive management approach at the scale of 10-50 thousand acres 
 
Overcoming Barriers to Implementing 
Restoration at the Greater Ecosystem Scale 
 
There are some challenges to getting operational scale adaptive ecosystem restoration and 
management on the ground. 
 
1. Fuzzy thinking about the problem. 
2. Reverse logic: prejudging the conclusion then selectively finding facts and 
arguments that support that conclusion 
3. Scientific, social, and political perfectionism; let’s not do anything until all 
uncertainties are removed 
4. Cultural differences and distrust among policymakers, practitioners, researchers, 
interest groups, and the public 
5. Funding problems 
 
7

 
 
There is much wailing and gnashing of teeth by activists, members of the lay public, and 
even some within the academic community about the scientific basis of forest restoration.  
Some of the arguments are founded on differences of opinion about desirable ecological 
conditions for western forestlands.  Others stem from differences of opinion about 
whether public lands should be used for consumptive resource use, especially by wood 
products or grazing interests, or for individual uses and/or non-consumptive uses.  Some 
differences of opinion are ideological.  At times individuals use what might best be 
described as pseudoscientific arguments to try to advance a particular cause.   
 
By pseudoscience, I mean a set of theories, assumptions, and methods erroneously 
advanced as science.  Pseudoscience stands in contrast to science, which is based on 
attempts to objectively discover the truth about a natural system.  The scientific method 
has been developed as a systematic way to discover truth, or more specifically to avoid 
being fooled by biases about how we imagine that things might be.  A.D. Bradshaw of 
the University of Liverpool in England has often presented a particularly cogent 
discussion of the need for objectivity in ecological restoration work.  Otherwise, he fears 
that arguments over restoration objectives and approaches will tend to degenerate in to 
decisions and actions based on intuition and impressions instead of the best knowledge 
available.  He goes on to state that,  “With this goes the belief that good restoration is 
intuitive, stemming from feelings rather than logical understanding, and that because of 
this it is only learned by experience… Certainly nobody should ever decry the 
importance of intuition.…  Yet applied to the exclusion of other principles, these beliefs 
will destroy the efficiency and effectiveness of restoration ecology….”     
 
Restoration ecology, he posits, must be based on six cardinal points: 
 
1. Awareness of other work. 
2. Preparedness to carry out proper experiments to test ideas. 
3. Preparedness to monitor fundamental parameters in a restoration scheme. 
4. Further tests and experiments suggested by these monitoring observations. 
5. The restoration of functioning ecosystems in which a whole variety of species is 
involved. 
6. Published results. 
 
We must seek to follow such a science-based approach if we are to resolve the forest 
ecosystem health and crownfire problems we are confronted with today.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8

Love of the Land is Good, But not Enough 
 
We all love the land.  It’s in our genetic makeup.  Although love of the land is important, 
it is not sufficient.   Actions based on love alone without adequate knowledge can be 
devastating.  The philosopher Bertrand Russell used a teaching story to illustrate this 
point.  In the Middle Ages when the plague was rampant in Europe, religious leaders 
urged the population to assemble in churches to pray for deliverance.  As a result of so 
many people being gathered in overcrowded conditions, the plague spread with 
accelerated rapidity throughout Europe.  No one questions the love of the religious 
leaders for their congregations, but without scientifically based knowledge of how the 
plague spread, their advice had consequences that were the opposite of their desires for 
their congregations.  This is an example of love without knowledge of the consequences 
of uninformed action.  Today there are many examples of individuals inspired by love of 
the land, but without sufficient knowledge or time for critical and comprehensive thought 
who are obstructing meaningful action to restore forest ecosystem health and protect the 
land and people of the West. 
 
Restoration has Many Benefits 
 
If we overcome these challenges, the benefits of ecological restoration and diligent land 
stewardship in ponderosa pine and related ecosystems are many and they are sustainable 
indefinitely 
 
1. It eliminates unnatural forest insect and disease outbreaks 
2. It enhances native plant and animal biodiversity 
3. It protects critical habitats for threatened or endangered species 
4. It improves watershed function and sustainability 
5. It enhances natural beauty of the land 
6. It improves resource values for humans, not just for current, but also for future 
generations 
7. In cases where a road system is in place and small wood processing facilities are 
available, the trees removed can often help defray the cost of restoration 
treatments and provide jobs and income for local communities 
  
We Must Think and Act Big and Start Immediately 
 
We can restore ecosystems but we must act on large scales and act immediately. 
 
1. To restore these degraded ecosystems, it is essential that we restore entire greater 
landscapes, and do so quickly—time is clearly not our ally. 
2. We must do so in a systematic, scientifically rigorous fashion. 
3. For protection of structures such as houses, the science seems pretty clear: use fire 
resistant materials, fire resistant landscaping and don’t build too close to heavily 
fueled landscapes.  
 
 
 
9

 
 
4. For protection of watersheds, critical habitat for humans and other animals and 
plants we have to think much bigger.  Here we need to think and act at the scale 
of greater ecosystems—large chunks of the landscape that include not only 
wildlands but also embedded human communities.  These greater ecosystems 
typically occur on a scale of 100,000 to 1,000,000 acres. 
 
What Congress Can Do 
 
There are several constructive steps Congress and the federal agencies can take to 
improve our current situation.  
 
1. Treatments to reduce fire threat and restore the ecological integrity of forests 
should become the single biggest priority of forest management policy and the 
land management agencies working in the Intermountain West.   
 
2. Congress should provide adequate resources to the agencies to maximize 
comprehensive restoration treatments, not just thinning and burning, but also 
restoration and rehabilitation of seeps, springs and riparian areas, closure and 
rehabilitation of unwanted roads, improvement of existing roads to minimize 
watershed impacts, control of aggressive exotic species and reintroduction of 
missing native plants and animals.   
 
3. Where ever possible, Congress and the land management agencies should support 
the collaboration of forest communities to design ecologically based restoration 
treatments.  This includes: producing high quality, timely environmental review 
documents; elevating the production of the review documents to a top priority; 
assisting communities to develop economically viable opportunities for 
restoration jobs and where feasible restoration products; and, assisting to develop 
new employment opportunities related to restoration. 
 
4. Support the development of science-based restoration treatments. 
 
Conclusion 
 
In conclusion, I suggest that those participating in restoration efforts follow a holistic, 
systematic approach characterized by clear thinking, local collaboration, and solid 
knowledge, both of the biophysical system and of the sociopolitical system.  Then we 
need to develop clear objectives for desired resource uses and ecosystem conditions 
coupled with practical plans for implementing and testing alternative treatments at 
operational scales.  Otherwise, decisions regarding restoration-based fuel treatments will 
continue to degenerate into ill informed speculation, subjective judgment, bias, ideology, 
and personal policy preferences.   
 
 
10

We are at a fork in the road.  Down one fork lies burned out, depauperate landscapes—
landscapes that are a liability for future generations.  Down the other fork lies healthy, 
diverse, sustaining landscapes—landscapes that will bring multiple benefits for 
generations to come.  Inaction is taking, and will continue to take, us down the path to 
unhealthy landscapes, costly to manage.  Scientifically-based forest restoration 
treatments, including thinning and prescribed burning, will set us on the path to healthy 
landscapes, landscapes like the early settlers and explorers saw in the late 1800s. 
 
Knowing what we now know, it would be grossly negligent for our generation not to 
move forward with large-scale restoration based fuel treatments in the dry forests of the 
West.  Inaction is clearly the greatest threat to the long-term sustainability of these 
western ecosystems. 
Thank you very much for asking me to appear before the Subcommittee.  
 
 
11
