Integrating Ecological Restoration and Conservation Biology:
a case study from Southwestern Ponderosa Pine forests
ERI— Issues in Forest Restoration

The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, 
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. These 
forests have been significantly altered over the last century, with decreased ecological and recreational 
values, near-elimination of natural low-intensity fire regimes, and greatly increased risk of large-scale 
fires. The ERI is working with public agencies and other partners to restore these forests to a more 
ecologically healthy condition and trajectory—in the process helping to significantly reduce the threat 
of catastrophic wildfire and its effects on human, animal, and plant communities.
Ecological Restoration Institute
Northern Arizona University
Box 15017, Flagstaff AZ 86011-5017
928-523-7182 • www.eri.nau.edu
Authors: Reed F. Noss and Peter Friederici
Publication: June 2006
Please contact ERI for reproduction policies
Cover photo (WARGRA): Grace’s warbler is only one of many plant and animal species dependent 
upon southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Photo: Mike Danzenbaker
A l l  m a t e r i a l  c o p y r i g h t  ©  2 0 0 6  E R I ,  N A U

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction 
1
Background 
1
Integrating the Two Disciplines: A How-to Guide 
3
Set Goals 
3
Think Big 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Work Within the Natural Range of Variability 
5
Focus Both on Processes and on Species 
6
Don’t Write Off Burned Areas 
7
Manage Roads Wisely 
8
Recognize That Protected Areas May Require Active Management 
9
Focus on Both the WUI and on Backcountry Wildlands 
10
Use Adaptive Management 
10
Conclusion 
11
Acknowledgments 
12
Notes 
13
References 
15

x

INTRODUCTION
Among the many challenges land managers face in implementing restoration projects, one of 
the greatest is the difficulty of integrating restoration with other management imperatives. One 
of the most significant of those is the need to manage natural areas for the conservation of 
native animal and plant species. Some species are popular for hunting and wildlife watching; 
many serve vital ecological roles; many are rare and under special legal protection. It is not 
always clear if their habitat needs are compatible with restoring ecological integrity across the 
landscape. Yet there is evidence that ecological restoration can overlap to a large degree with the 
priorities of conservation biology.
In 2004 the Ecological Restoration Institute sponsored two workshops aimed at exploring this 
issue. In presenting some of the results of those workshops, this publication examines how the 
two fields are related in a single ecosystem type—southwestern ponderosa pine forests—and 
suggests steps managers might take to better integrate the two.
BACKGROUND
Ecological restoration and conservation biology 
have different yet overlapping roots and aims.1 
Ecological restoration grew out of a perceived 
need to restore damaged sites at a small scale 
(such as strip-mined areas) and habitats that 
had been damaged on a larger scale (such as 
tallgrass prairies that had been heavily altered 
by agriculture).2  In the southwestern United 
States restoration of ponderosa pine forests has 
grown out of a recognition that such nineteenth- 
and twentieth-century practices as logging, 
livestock grazing, and exclusion of natural fire 
dramatically changed ecological structures and 
processes.3 These changes, in turn, have led to 
damaging and unnatural high-severity fires well 
outside this ecosystem’s natural range of variability, as well as damaging insect outbreaks, large-
scale mortality exacerbated by drought, declines in herbaceous vegetation, and other declines 
in ecological health. Ecological restoration activities are intended to address the root causes of 
these declines, not just the symptoms, by returning forests to a condition similar to that which 
prevailed before extensive human-caused changes. Within southwestern forests restoration 
Efforts to conserve populations of the threatened Mexican 
spotted owl have underlined differences—and common 
ground—between ecological restoration and conservation 
biology.  Photo by Amanda Moors. 
1

activities run a gamut from “hands-off ” actions, such as allowing lightning-caused fires to burn, 
to intensively “hands-on” activities, such as large-scale thinning to reduce unnaturally high tree 
densities.
Conservation biology is rooted in concerns about the present-day extinction crisis and the 
widespread destruction of ecosystems by human activity.4  Though it recognizes the importance 
of ecological processes such as fire in maintaining ecosystem health, it has focused heavily on the 
ecological needs and genetic integrity of individual rare species and with the identification and 
protection of “hot spots” where biological values and risks are concentrated.5  Like restorationists, 
its practitioners engage in a wide range of management actions, from avoidance (e.g. declaring 
tracts around Mexican spotted owl nest sites off-limits to most human activities) to direct 
intervention (e.g. reintroducing Mexican wolves to wildlands through captive breeding, feeding, 
and intensive management).
 
Both ecological restoration and conservation biology are problem-solving disciplines. Their 
practitioners are mission-oriented and emphasize particular values in land management. In 
the case of restoration, the primary values revolve around returning natural processes to the 
landscape so that ecosystems can function within their natural range of variability.6  In the case 
of conservation biology, the primary values revolve around retaining a full range of biological 
diversity—in ecosystems, in species, and in gene pools within species.7 
More so than many ecosystems, southwestern ponderosa pine forests present a promising, yet 
urgent, opportunity to link these two disciplines and management approaches. These forests, 
though often in need of management attention, are still large and extensive enough to allow 
a wide array of management goals and activities to be put into place. Furthermore, restoration 
of southwestern ponderosa pine forests can help reduce the likelihood of dangerous high-
severity fires; it is more closely linked to human needs and desires than is restoration within 
many other ecosystems.8  For that reason, widespread public support and political will exists 
for restoration within this particular landscape. Restoration of these forests, if successful, would 
result in sustainable conditions across much of the region similar to those that prevailed before 
Euro-American settlers disrupted the region’s ecology. Those conditions will closely replicate the 
evolutionary environment in which native plant and animal species evolved. For that reason, it 
ought to be easier to achieve conditions that provide habitat for native species in this ecosystem 
than in many others.
 
2

INTEGRATING THE TWO DISCIPLINES: A HOW-TO GUIDE
There will likely never be full agreement between the priorities of ecological restoration and 
conservation biology. The need to preserve a particular tract of rare-plant habitat from soil 
disturbance and invasion by nonnative species, for example, may override—at least in the short 
term—the need to return its tree density to that which prevailed before modern human-caused 
ecological disturbance. But there are numerous steps that can be taken to integrate the two.
SET GOALS
Both ecological restoration and conservation biology use the past as a guideline for the future. 
Restoration uses “reference conditions,” which document such variables as tree density, as a 
guideline to indicate what a particular tract of land looked like, and how it functioned, within 
its natural and sustainable range of variability.9 Conservation biology uses an ecosystem’s 
native suite of species as a guideline in setting protection and management goals and advocates 
protection of representative examples of native ecosystems, in part for their value as reference 
sites that allow comparison with more intensively used areas.10  Both disciplines use the concept 
of the “evolutionary environment,” or the suite of environmental conditions in which native 
species evolved, as a key in determining what is natural and sustainable.11  Both ask how human 
intervention has altered natural systems, and seek to use further well-guided intervention to alter 
them in the future. Both place a premium on setting goals wisely and on working, realistically, 
to accomplish them.
 
Within southwestern ponderosa pine forests, a primary goal of most restoration work has been 
reducing the likelihood of dangerous, high-severity fire, which according to multiple lines 
of evidence was uncommon in this ecosystem prior to Euro-American settlement.12  Such 
restoration activities as thinning of small trees and prescribed fire reduce fire risk, but they also 
produce corollary benefits. They reduce the likelihood of large-scale insect outbreaks and can 
promote the growth of a diverse herbaceous understory.13 Well implemented, they will also 
allow low-severity fire (whether ignited by lightning or by people) to safely shape the landscape 
in the future. Indeed, the reinstitution of a regime of frequent, low-severity fires that maintains 
healthy forest conditions is a worthwhile end goal for forest restoration work in the region.
 
Conservation biology has as a primary goal the perpetuation of species and evolving lineages. 
Increasingly, ecologists take a landscape-level view of conservation priorities and tactics, 
recognizing that even large protected areas are by themselves too small for viable populations 
of such animals as wide-ranging predators.14  This recognition underlines the importance of 
maintaining areas outside designated parks and reserves as healthy habitat for native plants 
3

and animals. In the upland Southwest a matrix of relatively unprotected forested land—much 
of it within national forests or on tribal or private land—connects scattered wilderness areas 
and other core wildlands. A successful conservation biology strategy must incorporate those 
lands as parts of an overall reserve network. That the health of those lands is closely tied to their 
dependence on a natural fire regime provides a close link between the goals of conservation 
biology and ecological restoration.
THINK BIG
There will always be conflicting goals in land 
management, yet resolving them becomes 
easier as the scale of the region in question 
increases. It may be impossible to manage a 
forest area of only a few acres to protect a rare 
plant species and to meet large-scale ecosystem 
restoration objectives: managing only patches 
on the scale of a few acres may leave those areas 
and the larger landscape threatened by severe 
disturbances, such as wildfires, that occur over 
a much larger spatial extent.15  On the scale of 
many southwestern ponderosa pine forest areas, 
though, it is possible to balance both. For example, it is quite possible, and indeed advisable, for 
managers to reduce fire risk in ponderosa pine forest areas around many Mexican spotted owl 
territories, whether or not any thinning or prescribed burning takes place within the territories.16 
Many Mexican spotted owl pairs live within forest stands that are denser, for reasons of 
(above: Wildlife layers; below: Priority Ranking) Landscape 
assessment tools, such as ForestERA, offer a means of integrating 
conservation biology needs with other management objectives in 
order to prioritize treatments across a broad landscape. Illustrations 
courtesy of NAU ForestERA.
4

topography, climate, or chance, than surrounding pine forest areas.17  Buffering those stands 
from high-intensity wildfire is likely to benefit both the owls (by making it less likely that 
nest and roost stands will burn) and the surrounding landscape matrix (by reducing the overall 
connectivity of trees and other fuels that could feed a large-scale blaze). Over time, well-planned 
and -implemented treatments to reduce fuel loads are likely to benefit the species more than a 
hands-off strategy.18
Thinking big is also critical in preserving or reestablishing healthy populations of the wide-ranging 
species, notably large carnivores, that play a key role in maintaining ecological functioning. The 
size and the natural variability of the southwestern landscape ought to ensure that conservation 
goals can be met at multiple scales while restoration work proceeds at a scale large enough to 
affect the landscape as a whole. Such landscape-level assessments as the ForestERA project 
provide planning tools and data with which managers can set priorities that meet both sets of 
goals.19 
WORK WITHIN THE NATURAL RANGE OF VARIABILITY
Ecosystems are dynamic, yet they tend to operate within a certain range of variability that 
matches the evolutionary experience of the majority of species within them. It is when they 
depart from this natural range that the viability of species within them is threatened. Many 
southwestern ponderosa pine forests appear to have reached a condition well outside their 
natural range of variability, with the result that they are threatened with long-term changes in 
species composition and function.20  For example, some areas once forested with ponderosa pine 
remain shrubfields or grasslands decades after unnaturally severe crown fires.21  At a landscape 
scale, such changes could be harmful to species that rely on forest conditions. Our knowledge of 
the landscape’s natural range of variability, then, can help set targets for restoration.
It also provides a cautionary note. Both ecological restoration and conservation biology need 
to be case-specific; it is unwise to extrapolate from one forest area to another, or from one 
threatened species to another. Ponderosa pine forests in the southwestern United States are 
unlike some of those in other parts of western North America.  Even within the Southwest 
they exhibit a great natural diversity, as has been documented on the Kaibab Plateau and in the 
San Juan Mountains.23  Prior to disturbance by Euro-American settlers the region’s ponderosa 
pine forests supported both Mexican spotted owls and pronghorn, which have dramatically 
different habitat needs. There is simply no “one size fits all” restoration strategy or tactic that will 
return all southwestern ponderosa pine forests to conditions of ecological health; there is ample 
room, instead, for differing tactics that work with, rather than against, the landscape’s natural 
heterogeneity.24 
5

For the same reason, restoration prescriptions that place a blanket cap on the cutting of trees 
above a certain size are likely to hamstring managers who desire flexibility, for example in 
creating grassy openings within forests. However, in some places socio-political realities dictate 
that a diameter limit be put into place. Implementing treatments with a diameter cap may bring 
the landscape closer to its natural range of variability without engaging in political conflict that 
could result in further limits on restoration activities. It may ensure that more large trees remain, 
and these trees have particular importance for many wildlife species both while they are alive 
and later as snags or downed logs. However, conducting treatments with a diameter cap can 
prevent managers from re-creating the grassy openings that were a key element of presettlement 
ponderosa pine forests, thereby resulting in a forest structure unlike what once existed—and one 
that offers less habitat for some species. The scale of the southwestern ponderosa pine landscape 
suggests that a variety of restoration approaches should be tried in case a single approach results 
in unanticipated harmful effects sometime in the future.
FOCUS BOTH ON PROCESSES AND ON SPECIES
There is a close relationship between species and their habitats. Species such as bunchgrasses 
fundamentally shape southwestern ponderosa pine forests because their flammability and ability 
to resprout allow frequent low-intensity fires to sculpt forest structures. But ecological processes 
such as fire also shape the landscape and the species that live within it. Ecological restoration 
recognizes this relationship: if the ecological structures and processes within a forest are restored 
so that they fall within the natural range of variability, then the species that lived within that 
natural range ought to be able to live there. Nevertheless, conservation biology recognizes that 
some imperiled species require individual attention until they recover to the point where they 
can take care of themselves within a restored ecosystem.
Yet shaping the landscape for restoration and conservation biology must be approached from 
both ends—in other words, at multiple scales at the same time. Over large parts of the landscape 
it may make sense to allow natural processes to shape forest structure. At a smaller scale, though, 
it may be necessary to shield some areas from those natural processes. The habitat of a rare plant, 
or of a Mexican spotted owl, may need to be buffered from both restoration thinning and from 
fire even if it remains much denser than it may once have been. An early awareness of such 
tradeoffs, while projects are in a conceptual phase, will do much to ensure that eventual conflicts 
are minimized. So will a recognition that multiple ecological processes are important. Many 
so-called restoration projects focus solely on reducing woody fuels through thinning. Without 
the reintroduction of fire and an emphasis on restoring a healthy understory, these projects are 
unlikely to result in true restoration of ecological processes or in habitat that is beneficial for the 
widest possible array of native species. True restoration is holistic.25 
6

It is fortunate that southwestern ponderosa pine forests are in many cases extensive enough to 
allow both management tactics that focus on processes and those that emphasize the needs of 
particular species. Planning for restoration on a regional scale protects the overall landscape from 
severe disturbance and allows local areas—such as spotted owl nesting areas—to be maintained 
in a certain condition without increasing overall fire risk.
DON’T WRITE OFF BURNED AREAS
Rehabilitation of severely burned areas is not the same thing as restoration before fire occurs. Yet 
it is important. Reseeding of grasses and herbaceous plants may help prevent severe soil erosion 
in burned areas, especially on steep slopes. Where necessary, reseeding to combat erosion should 
be done with local seed of native species, or at a minimum with seed of sterile annual plants such 
as cereal grains.26 
 
Post-fire (salvage) logging is often promoted as a means of reducing future fire danger in severely 
burned areas. However, some forest scientists suggest that salvage logging is more likely to 
increase reburn potential than reduce it, since the large, less flammable boles are removed and 
the more flammable logging slash is left behind.27  Although available evidence suggests that 
salvage logging can rarely be justified ecologically,28  there has been remarkably little peer-
reviewed research on the effects of salvage logging,29 and virtually none in dry ponderosa pine 
forests. In certain locations salvage logging is needed for public safety, such as along roads and 
in campgrounds. Also, in some cases salvage logging may facilitate restoration in ponderosa 
pine stands that, as a consequence of fire suppression and increased tree density, experienced 
unnatural high-severity fire that left overly abundant dead wood on site.30 
Severely burned areas can act as firebreaks that allow the implementation of cost-effective restoration treatments, such as prescribed fire, 
in adjacent, less severely burned areas. Illustration courtesy of Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests.
7

Many observers write off badly burned tracts of ponderosa pine forests because they have lost 
important ecological attributes such as large trees and even soils. Yet such areas still function 
as wildlands that provide wildlife habitat and watershed values. They should not be neglected. 
Severely burned areas can form the building blocks of future forests, and research shows that even 
severely burned forests have remarkable recovery potential.31  Specifically, the mosaic pattern 
typical of most large fires in ponderosa pine forests can help to create a future patchwork of forest 
conditions. Severely burned areas can serve as de facto firebreaks between lightly burned areas 
where denser stands of trees remain. They may allow restoration work to proceed more easily 
within those denser stands. An “island” of dense ponderosa pine forest surrounded by burned 
areas may be a prime candidate for restoration with prescribed fire alone, for example, because 
the surrounding areas function as large firebreaks. Using such features will allow restoration to 
proceed more quickly, and at lower cost.
MANAGE ROADS WISELY
Roads cause significant ecological harm in southwestern forests and other ecosystems.32  Roads 
facilitate the spread of invasive plant species,33  contribute to off-road-vehicle use and soil 
compaction,34  and provide an avenue for human-caused fire starts.35  Road density is in general 
inversely proportional to habitat suitability for species sensitive to human contact, such as large 
carnivores.36  Areas without roads often have high conservation value and serve as core reserve 
areas for such wildlife.
Forest roads serve a valuable function in some restoration projects by providing access for logging 
equipment and functioning as firebreaks, but new roads typically cause ecological harm. Much 
restoration work can be conducted without constructing new roads.37  In some cases this can be 
done by using fire, appropriately timed and scaled, to restore natural forest structures and fire 
regimes.38  Programs of this sort exist in the Gila National Forest and Grand Canyon National 
Park.
In other areas, where thinning before prescribed burning is necessary to avoid overly severe 
fires, thinning should be done without the development of new roads to the extent possible. 
Some modern logging equipment with wide tires or treads allows access to forest areas without 
building roads and without significant soil compaction. Logging slash can be disposed of on site. 
39 Where roads are used in implementing restoration work, they can be closed and rehabilitated 
after the completion of thinning and/or prescribed burning.40 
In roadless areas managers should also take full advantage of topographic features that affect 
how fire moves across the landscape. Rocky hillsides or canyons may serve as natural firebreaks 
8

that reduce the need for mechanical thinning in downwind areas. By assessing a forest landscape 
as a whole, managers can limit the need to conduct intensive restoration thinning in many 
roadless areas.
RECOGNIZE THAT PROTECTED AREAS MAY REQUIRE ACTIVE MANAGEMENT
Though protected areas such as national parks and designated wilderness areas provide important 
core habitats for many species,41  it is widely recognized that they are by themselves not large 
enough to provide for their perpetuation and fail to represent many species and habitats entirely.42 
Nor does their protected designation ensure their ecological health. Many protected areas have 
been subjected to the same factors—fire exclusion, livestock grazing, recreational pressures, 
invasions by noxious species—as unprotected areas. It is unrealistic to expect that changes 
caused by these factors can be reversed in all cases without active, hands-on management. In 
many cases deliberate intervention, such as mechanical thinning, the deliberate introduction of 
fire, or the eradication of invasive species, may be necessary to avert further ecological declines in 
parks or wilderness areas.43  For example, it may prove necessary to manually thin dense stands 
of ponderosa pine within a national park if they threaten to fuel unnaturally intense fires that 
could damage some of the park’s natural values.
Such interventions, though, must be well considered, and should be conducted with extreme 
care.44  Regardless what sorts of treatments are implemented, managers need to remain aware 
of the great value many members of the public place on protected areas. To the extent possible, 
treatments should consist of the minimum intervention required to reverse ecological damage. 
In many reserves fire alone, whether kindled by lightning or with a drip torch, may serve as 
a restoration tool, albeit one with often unpredictable results.45  Wildland Fire Use policies 
in the Gila National Forest, Grand Canyon National Park, and Saguaro National Park serve 
as good models that show how managers have been able to reestablish somewhat natural fire 
regimes within protected yet altered forest landscapes. In other situations managers may be able 
to buffer wilderness areas without treating them directly by focusing on reducing fire danger in 
strategically located areas upwind of or topographically below them.46 
Because of the important role many parks and reserves play as reference areas, park managers 
should also ensure that some areas remain untouched even if they are suffering ecological damage. 
It is vital to retain some “control” areas with which treated areas, whether inside or outside a 
park, may be compared. Such control areas are more likely to persist inside rather than outside 
reserves. Researchers in the future will be able to learn much, including the answers to questions 
yet unasked, by comparing treated with untreated areas.
9

FOCUS ON BOTH THE WUI AND ON BACKCOUNTRY WILDLANDS 
Much forest restoration work has focused on areas in the “wildland-urban interface” (WUI), or 
areas immediately adjacent to human communities and resources.47  Given the high fire danger 
present in many southwestern forests, this is perfectly reasonable. Yet integrating conservation 
biology with restoration requires that the conservation and restoration of backcountry wildland 
areas be emphasized as well.
 
WUI and backcountry wildland areas are linked by an array of ecological phenomena. Fires pass 
unhindered from one to another; so do watercourses. Animals range between interface areas and 
remote wildlands, as do the seeds of plants, including invasive species. Many of the species of 
greatest conservation concern live primarily in backcountry areas whose future health is as much 
at risk from high-severity fire as is the health of human communities. A conservation biology 
approach requires that questions of forest restoration be posed across the entire landscape, not 
just in scattered “islands” within the landscape.
From the perspective of conservation biology many backcountry wildland areas are far more 
irreplaceable than WUI areas. It is tragic to lose houses or other elements of human infrastructure 
to wildland fire, but they are generally much more easily replaced than many backcountry 
attributes that can be lost during high-severity fires. It may take hundreds of years to replace a 
burned old-growth forest that supported Mexican spotted owls, and perhaps a thousand or more 
to rebuild soils degraded by high-severity fire and subsequent erosion. At a time when the human 
population of the Southwest is rapidly increasing,48  healthy wildlands represent an important 
and diminishing resource that should be protected from all threats, including unnaturally severe 
wildfire.
The planning of fuel and restoration treatments in WUI areas often focuses on buffering towns 
and cities from fires that begin in wildlands. Yet forest managers should also consider how 
ecological processes move in the other direction. Human-caused fires begin on the outskirts of 
town and move into wildlands; so do invasions by noxious weeds. By in effect “zoning” forest 
areas on the edges of towns and cities for different degrees of access and different types of 
recreational use, managers can minimize harmful ecological effects in neighboring wildlands.49 
USE ADAPTIVE MANAGEMENT
Both ecological restoration and conservation biology are young, and rapidly evolving, disciplines. 
It is likely that within only a few years new discoveries will undermine some of what their 
practitioners believe today. Yet forest managers, policy makers, and members of the public 
10

often demand a certitude in decision making that scientists are unable to endorse. For these 
reasons, it is essential to design restoration and conservation work to incorporate and respond 
to uncertainty.
The best framework within which to do so is that of adaptive management, which calls for 
managers to design management actions as experiments whose results can be carefully tested.50 
Adaptive management requires more than simple observation of treatment results; it requires 
tailoring treatments so that the effects of different management tactics can be measured and 
assessed experimentally according to variables that are decided upon in advance. It also requires 
a stepwise approach, so that a treatment implemented this year yields lessons that inform a 
treatment being planned for next year. To be effective, adaptive management requires patience, 
the commitment of dollars and other resources to regular monitoring, and a clear-eyed assessment 
of results. 
CONCLUSION
Ecological restoration of fire-adapted southwestern forests, like conservation biology, is an 
exercise in risk assessment. Not conducting restoration treatments in these forests exposes them 
to continued risk of high-severity fire and many other forms of ecological degradation. Yet the 
implementation of treatments itself carries with it risks of ecological damage or loss of biodiversity. 
Managers must balance the risks that exist in the presence or absence of restoration work with 
the reality of what is fiscally, logistically, and politically possible. Conservation biologists must 
assess how much the continued viability of native plants and animals is at risk from both direct 
human impacts—including those caused by restoration projects—and from the indirect impacts 
that result from long-term changes in land uses. Considerable uncertainty exists today, and will 
no doubt remain, in both restoration and conservation work. In both disciplines it is prudent 
to use a precautionary approach that minimizes the risks of action; yet it is also critical to avoid 
inaction, since inaction has the potential to result in severe and large-scale ecological changes 
across the landscape.
Balancing caution with the need for action can be done with the help of the best available 
science, including new landscape planning tools. In a landscape as large as the ponderosa pine 
forests of the Southwest, it should be possible to integrate an array of restoration treatments 
with an array of conservation work, and to do so in a way that is acceptable to members of the 
public. These forests, in fact, offer managers a chance to demonstrate that ecological restoration 
can succeed on a truly large scale, across an entire landscape, and that a complete array of native 
species can survive within that landscape.
11

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This publication would not have been possible without the generous contributions of the 
participants at the 2004 workshops, including Paul Beier, Wally Covington, Ed Grumbine, 
David Lindenmayer, John Prather, Fiona Schmiegelow, Tom Sisk, and Diane Vosick. Comments 
received from reviewers Michele A. James, Charlie Denton, John Bedell, Dennis Lund, and  
H. B. “Doc” Smith also helped shape the final manuscript. 
12

NOTES
  1 Young 2000; Noss et al. 2006a.
  2 Jordan 2003.
  3 Covington and Moore 1994; Allen et al. 2002; Covington 2003.
  4 Soulé and Wilcox 1980; Soulé 1985.
  5 Myers et al. 2000.
  6 Landres et al. 1999.
  7 Wilson 1992.
  8 Schoennagel et al. 2004.
  9 Egan and Howell 2001; SER 2004.
  10 Noss and Cooperrider 1994.
  11 Noss et al. 2006a.
  12 Covington et al. 1997; Moore et al. 1999.
  13 Abella and Covington 2004; Huffman and Moore 2004.
  14 Noss et al. 1996; Soulé and Terborgh 1999.
  15 Sisk et al. 2005.
  16 See Working Paper 14: Integrating Forest Restoration Treatments with Mexican Spotted Owl Habitat Needs.
  17 Beier and Maschinski 2003.
  18 Lee and Irwin 2005; Prather et al. in review.
  19 www.forestera.nau.edu; Sisk et al. in press.
  20 Covington 2003.
  21 Savage and Mast 2005.
  22 Brown et al. 2004.
  23 Fulé et al. 2003b; Romme et al. 2003.
  24 Allen et al. 2002.
  25 See Working Paper 4: Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits.
  26 Sieg et al. 2003.
  27 Society for Conservation Biology Scientific Panel on Fire in Western U.S. Forests 2006.
  28 Beschta et al. 2004; Lindenmayer et al. 2004; Donato et al. 2006.
  29 Lindenmayer and Noss in press.
  30 Noss et al. 2006b.
  31 Turner et al. 2003.
  32 Trombulak and Frissell 2000; Forman et al. 2003.
  33 Gelbard and Belnap 2003.
  34 Trombulak and Frissell 2000.
  35 Chou et al. 1993.
  36 Noss et al. 1996.
13

  37 DellaSala and Frost 2001.
  38 Fulé et al. 2003a.
  39 See Working Paper 13: Treating Slash after Restoration Thinning.
   40 See Working Paper 12: Restoring Forest Roads.
   41 Noss et al. 1999.
  42 Scott et al. 2001; Lindenmayer and Franklin 2002.
  43 Sydoriak et al. 2000; Noss et al. 2006a.
  44 Allen et al. 2002.
  45 Fulé et al. 2003a.
  46 Finney 2001.
  47 Radeloff et al. 2005.
  48 Dombeck et al. 2004
  49 Marzluff and Bradley 2003.
  50 Murray and Marmorek 2003.
14

REFERENCES
Abella, S. R., and W. W. Covington. 2004. Monitoring an Arizona ponderosa pine restoration: Sampling efficiency and 
multivariate analysis of understory vegetation. Restoration Ecology 12:359-367.
Allen, C. D., M. Savage, D. A. Falk, K. F. Suckling, T. W. Swetnam, T. Schulke, P. B. Stacey, P. Morgan, M. Hoffman, 
and J. T. Klingel. 2002. Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems: A broad perspective. 
Ecological Applications 12:1418-1433.
Beier, P., and J. Maschinski. 2003. Threatened, endangered, and sensitive species. Pp. 306-327 in Ecological restoration 
of southwestern ponderosa pine forests, ed. P. Friederici. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Beschta, R. L., J. J. Rhodes, J. B. Kauffman, R. E. Gresswell, G. W. Marshall, J. R. Karr, D. A. Perry, F. R. Hauer, and 
C. A. Frissell. 2004. Postfire management on forested public lands of the western United States. Conservation 
Biology 18(4):957-967.
Brown, R. T., J. K. Agee, and J. F. Franklin. 2004. Forest restoration and fire: Principles in the context of place. 
Conservation Biology 18(4):903-912.
Chou, Y. H., R. A. Minnich, and R. A. Chase. 1993. Mapping probability of fire occurrence in the San Jacinto 
Mountains, California. Environmental Management 17:129-140.
Covington, W. W. 2003. The evolutionary and historical context. Pp. 26-47 in Ecological restoration of southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests, ed. P. Friederici. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Covington, W. W., and M. M. Moore. 1994. Southwestern ponderosa pine forest structure: Changes since Euro-
American settlement. Journal of Forestry 92(1):39-47.
Covington, W. W., P. Z. Fulé, M. M. Moore, S. C. Hart, T. E. Kolb, J. N. Mast, S. S. Sackett, and M. R. Wagner. 1997. 
Restoring ecological health in ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest. Journal of Forestry 95(4):23-29.
DellaSala, D. A., and E. Frost. 2001. An ecologically based strategy for fire and fuels management in national forest 
roadless areas. Fire Management Today 61(2):12-23.
Dombeck, M. P., J. E. Williams, and C. A. Wood. 2004. Wildfire policy and public lands: Integrating scientific 
understanding with social concerns across landscapes. Conservation Biology 18(4):883-889.
Donato, D. C., J. B. Fontaine, J. L. Campbell, W. D. Robinson, J. B. Kauffman, and B. E. Law. 2006. Post-wildfire 
logging hinders regeneration and increases fire risk. Science 311:352.
Egan, D., and E. A. Howell. 2001. The historical ecology handbook: A restorationist’s guide to reference ecosystems. 
Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Finney, M. A. 2001. Design of regular landscape fuel treatment patterns for modifying fire growth and behavior. Forest 
Science 47(2):219-228.
Forman, R. T. T., D. Sperling, J. A. Bissonette, A. P. Clevenger, C. D. Cutshall, V. H. Dale, L. Fahrig, R. France, C. R. 
Goldman, K. Heanue, J. A. Jones, F. J. Swanson, T. Turrentine, and T. C. Winter. 2003. Road ecology: Science and 
solutions. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Fulé, P. Z., A. E. Cocke, T. A. Heinlein, and W. W. Covington. 2003a. Effects of an intense prescribed forest fire: Is it 
ecological restoration? Restoration Ecology 12:220-230.
Fulé, P. Z., J. E. Crouse, T. A. Heinlein, M. M. Moore, W. W. Covington, and G. Verkamp. 2003b. Mixed-severity fire 
15

regime in a high-elevation forest: Grand Canyon, Arizona. Landscape Ecology 18:465-486.
Gelbard, J. L., and J. Belnap. 2003. Roads as conduits for exotic plant invasions in a semiarid landscape. Conservation 
Biology 17:420-432.
Huffman, D. W., and M. M. Moore. 2004. Responses of Fendler ceanothus to overstory thinning, prescribed fire, and 
drought in an Arizona ponderosa pine forest. Forest Ecology and Management 198:105-115.
Jordan, W. R., III. 2003. The sunflower forest: Ecological restoration and the new communion with nature. Berkeley: 
University of California Press.
Landres, P. B., P. Morgan, and F. J. Swanson. 1999. Overview of the use of natural variability concepts in managing 
ecological systems. Ecological Applications 9:1179-1188.
Lee, D. C., and L. L. Irwin. 2005. Assessing risks to spotted owls from forest thinning in fire-adapted forests of the 
western United States. Forest Ecology and Management 211:191-209.
Lindenmayer, D. B., D. R. Foster, J. F. Franklin, M. L. Hunter, R. F. Noss, F. A. Schmiegelow, and D. Perry. 2004. 
Saving forests or saving fiber? Salvage harvesting policies after natural disturbance impairs ecosystem and species 
recovery. Science 303:1303.
Lindenmayer, D. B., and J. F. Franklin. 2002. Conserving forest biodiversity: A comprehensive multiscaled approach. 
Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Lindenmayer, D. B., and R. F. Noss. In press. Salvage harvesting, ecosystem processes, and biodiversity conservation. 
Conservation Biology.
Marzluff, J. M., and G. A. Bradley. 2003. Ecological restoration in the urban-wildland interface. Pp. 353-370 in 
Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests, ed. P. Friederici. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Moore, M. M., W. W. Covington, and P. Z. Fulé. 1999. Evolutionary environment, reference conditions, and ecological 
restoration: A southwestern ponderosa pine perspective. Ecological Applications 9(4):1266-1277.
Murray, C., and D. Marmorek. 2003. Adaptive management and ecological restoration. Pp. 417-428 in Ecological 
restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests, ed. P. Friederici. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Myers, N., R. A. Mittermeier, C. G. Mittermeier, G. A. B. Fonseca, and J. Kent. 2000. Biodiversity hotspots for 
conservation priorities. Nature 403:853-858.
Noss, R. F., P. Beier, W. W. Covington, R. E. Grumbine, D. B. Lindenmayer, J. W. Prather, F. Schmiegelow, T. D. Sisk, 
and D. J. Vosick. 2006a. Integrating restoration ecology and conservation biology: A case study from ponderosa 
pine forests of the southwestern USA. Restoration Ecology 14:4-10.
Noss, R. F., and A. Cooperrider. 1994. Saving nature’s legacy: Protecting and restoring biodiversity. Washington, D.C.: 
Island Press.
Noss, R. F., E. Dinerstein, B. Gilbert, M. Gilpin, B. J. Miller, J. Terborgh, and S. Trombulak. 1999. Core areas: Where 
nature reigns. Pp. 99-128 in Continental conservation: Scientific foundations of regional reserve networks, ed. M. 
E. Soulé and J. Terborgh. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Noss, R. F., J. F. Franklin, W. Baker, T. Schoennagel, and P. B. Moyle. 2006b. Ecological science relevant to management 
policies for fire-prone forests of the western United States. Society for Conservation Biology Scientific Panel on 
Fire in Western U.S. Forests, Washington, D.C.
Noss, R. F., H. B. Quigley, M. G. Hornocker, T. Merrill, and P. Paquet. 1996. Conservation biology and carnivore 
16

conservation. Conservation Biology 10:949-963.
Prather, J., R. F. Noss, and T. D. Sisk. In review. Real vs. perceived conflicts between restoration of ponderosa pine 
forests and conservation of the Mexican spotted owl. Forest Policy and Economics.
Radeloff, V. C., R. B. Hammer, S. I. Stewart, J. S. Fried, S. S. Holcomb, and J. F. McKeefry. 2005. The wildland-urban 
interface in the United States. Ecological Applications 15:799-805.
Romme, W. H., M. Preston, D. L. Lynch, P. Kemp, M. L. Floyd, D. D. Hanna, and S. Burns. 2003. The Ponderosa 
Pine Forest Partnership: Ecology, economics, and community involvement in forest restoration. Pp. 99-125 in 
Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests, ed. P. Friederici. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Savage, M., and J. N. Mast. 2005. How resilient are southwestern ponderosa pine forests after crown fires? Canadian 
Journal of Forest Research 35:967-977.
Schoennagel, T., T. T. Veblen, and W. H. Romme. 2004. The interaction of fire, fuels, and climate across Rocky Mountain 
forests. BioScience 54:661-676.
Scott, J. M., F. W. Davis, R. G. McGhie, R. G. Wright, C. Groves, and J. Estes. 2001. Nature reserves: Do they capture 
the full range of America’s biological diversity? Ecological Applications 11:999-1007.
Sieg, C. H., B. G. Phillips, and L. P. Moser. 2003. Exotic invasive plants. Pp. 251-267 in Ecological restoration of 
southwestern ponderosa pine forests, ed. P. Friederici. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Sisk, T. D., J. W. Prather, H. M. Hampton, E. N. Aumack, Y. Xu, and B. G. Dickson. In press. Participatory landscape 
analysis to guide ecological restoration of ponderosa pine ecosystems in the American Southwest. Landscape and 
Urban Planning.
Sisk, T. D., M. Savage, D. A. Falk, C. D. Allen, E. Muldavin, and P. McCarthy. 2005. A landscape perspective for forest 
restoration. Journal of Forestry 103:319-320.
SER (Society for Ecological Restoration International). 2004. The SER International primer on ecological 
restoration.
Soulé, M. E. 1985. What is conservation biology? BioScience 35:727-734.
Soulé, M. E., and J. Terborgh, editors. 1999. Continental conservation: Scientific foundations of regional reserve 
networks. Washington, D.C.: Island Press. 
Soulé, M. E., and B. A. Wilcox. 1980. Conservation biology: Its scope and challenge. Pages 1-8 in Conservation 
biology: An evolutionary-ecological perspective, ed. M. E. Soulé and B. A. Wilcox. Sunderland, Mass.: Sinauer.
Sydoriak, C. A., C. D. Allen, and B. F. Jacobs. 2000. Would ecological landscape restoration make the Bandelier 
Wilderness more or less of a wilderness? Wild Earth 10(4):83-90.
Trombulak, S., and C. Frissell. 2000. Review of ecological effects of roads on terrestrial and aquatic communities. 
Conservation Biology 14(1):18-30.
Turner, M. G., W. H. Romme, and D. B. Tinker. 2003. Surprises and lessons from the 1988 Yellowstone fires. Frontiers 
in Ecology and the Environment 1:351-358.
Wilson, E. O. 1992. The diversity of life. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 
Young, T. P. 2000. Restoration ecology and conservation biology. Biological Conservation 92:73-83.
17
