 
 
The senator's now a doctor 
By CHRIS MARKHAM 
Sun Staff Reporter 
12/13/2003 
Northern Arizona University said goodbye 
and congratulations to nearly 1,500 
graduates Friday during its fall 
commencement ceremony.  
Sen. Jon Kyl, this semester's 
commencement speaker, called success a 
matter of preparation and hard work done 
while waiting for opportunity and advised 
graduates to seek endeavors "worth doing."  
University President John Haeger told 
students their education, while not a 
guarantee for a good job, was a building 
block to a solid future.  
"NAU will always be here to help you," he 
said.  
Graduates were encouraged by Regent Kay 
McKay to be there for their alma mater by 
donating to the university from time to 
time.  
Kyl, who was made an honorary Doctor of 
Humane Letters during the ceremony, opted 
not to use his speech to sound off on public 
policy. He announced at a press conference 
held after the ceremony that the Forest Service is allocating $2 million to NAU's 
Ecological Restoration Institute.  
 
 
Greg Bryan/Arizona Daily Sun Senator Jon Kyl 
addresses Northern Arizona University's fall graduating 
class during commencement at the Walkup Skydome 
Friday. To order this photo, go to 
http://photos.azdailysun.com  
 
The senator, who calls himself "an outdoors nut," said he supported the institute for its 
long-range view of making forests healthy.  
He also declined to say what he thought the institute should do with the money.  

"I purposely stayed clear of where the money will be used," Kyl said. "These people 
know best how to use it."  
The $2 million in funding will come next year, and represents more than half of the $3.5 
million in grants and government funding ERI has received in an average year.  
ERI Director Wally Covington said the money would go toward continuing to keep the 
institute in the forefront of forest restoration efforts.  
The institute has taken the lead nationwide in addressing the science of forest health and 
forest restoration for the Southwest. Covington testified this year before Congress on 
what became the Healthy Forests law that President Bush signed earlier this month.  
Elements of forest restoration became part of NAU's forestry program under Covington 
about 25 years ago. Ecological restoration developed into its own university department 
in 1996. Within three years, the Arizona Board of Regents formally approved creation of 
the Ecological Restoration Institute.  
The institute now has 58 employees and 42 undergraduate and graduate students on the 
payroll, and has taken the lead on forest health research.  
ERI works with multiple federal, state and local agencies to apply, monitor and evaluate 
scientific treatments that restore forest health and reduce the risk of wildfire  
 
Additional photos for this story:  
 
Greg Bryan/Arizona Daily Sun A sea of mortar boards 
sits atop the heads of graduates during Northern 
Arizona University's fall commencement at the Walkup 
Skydome Saturday. To order this photo, go to 
http://photos.azdailysun.com  

 
Greg Bryan/Arizona Daily Sun School of Business 
Administration graduate Andrew Moyer slides down a 
snow bank in his cap and gown following Northern 
Arizona University's fall commencement at the Walkup 
Skydome Saturday. To order this photo, go to 
http://photos.azdailysun.com  
 
Greg Bryan/Arizona Daily Sun School of Business 
Administration graduate Carol Begaye hugs a family 
member following Northern Arizona University's fall 
commencement at the Walkup Skydome Friday. To 
order this photo, go to http://photos.azdailysun.com  
 
