290
•
September 2009
Ecological REstoRation
27:3
Ecological Restoration Vol. 27, No. 3, 2009
ISSN 1522-4740 E-ISSN 1543-4079
©2009 by the Board of Regents of the 
University of Wisconsin System.
Revegetation expeRiments
Planting Trials in Northern Arizona 
Ponderosa Pine Forests
scott R. abella and Judith D. springer
AbsTrAcT
Mechanical tree thinning and prescribed fire have been widely proposed for restoring ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) 
forests in the southwestern United States. However, these restoration activities often result in intensely disturbed sites, 
such as landings for equipment and temporary roads, which managers may need to revegetate. Managers may also wish 
to augment the forest understory through revegetation after thinning and burning treatments. We present five planting 
trials conducted as part of restoration projects in northern Arizona ponderosa pine forests in order to assess survival of 11 
species and the influence of various microsites created by restoration activities. In one trial, five-year survival of four trans-
planted graminoid species ranged from 1% to 23% among species and from 0% (unthinned forest) to 22% (unburned 
slash) among microsites. Also illustrating microsite effects, over three times more Fendler’s meadow-rue (Thalictrum 
fendleri) survived when outplanted below Gambel oak (Quercus gambelii) than in openings created by restoration pine 
thinning. Only 4% of purple locoweed (Oxytropis lambertii) survived in an unsuccessful attempt at revegetating a decom-
missioned road on dry cinder soils. Conversely, two years after outplanting on a different road on moister soil, mountain 
muhly (Muhlenbergia montana) survival was 72% (89% of which were fruiting), and 40% of plants of the biennial ragleaf 
bahia (Bahia dissecta) were surrounded by new seedlings. Results illustrate that successes occurred without supplemental 
watering even in dry years; outcomes hinged on species or planting microsite; and heavy mortality occurred in some 
contexts. Owing to financial costs and logistical constraints, revegetation may be most suited for localized disturbances 
caused by restoration activities or for creating revegetated islands for understory augmentation.
Keywords: outplanting, revegetation, road restoration, species augmentation, transplanting
Introduction
R
estoration through tree thin-
ning and prescribed fire has 
been widely proposed for ponderosa 
pine (Pinus ponderosa) forests in the 
southwestern United States (Coving-
ton et al. 1997, Allen et al. 2002). 
While ecological restoration can serve 
many purposes in these forests (for 
example, reducing crown fire hazard), 
one objective is to better balance eco-
system biomass between trees and 
understory vegetation (Abella et al. 
2006). An irruption of pine densities 
during a period of fire exclusion in the 
1900s came at the expense of other 
ecosystem values, such as understory 
productivity, which is negligible in 
dense stands (Moore et al. 2006).
Following forest thinning and 
burning, the rate, composition, and 
amount of natural reestablishment of 
understory species varies with many 
factors and from site to site (Laugh-
lin et al. 2004). Thinning opera-
tions also often unavoidably result in 
devegetated areas, such as skid trails, 
landings for equipment, temporary 
roads, or scars from slash-pile burn-
ing (Korb et al. 2004, 2007). Since 
dispersal and seedbank-forming abili-
ties of many native forest perenni-
als are limited, natural revegetation 
of these disturbed areas may be slow 
or dominated by non-native species 
(Hunter and Omi 2006). In addition 
to providing many ecological func-
tions (for example, harboring biodi-
versity, limiting erosion, supplying 
food for grazing animals), healthy 
native understories can make the dif-
ference between whether or not eco-
system-based restoration is considered 
successful (Abella et al. 2006).
Active revegetation through plant-
ing has potential for complementing 
the basic restoration treatments of 
thinning and burning by augmenting 
understory establishment and reestab-
lishing plant cover on areas denuded 
by restoration operations. Seeding and 
planting both have advantages and 
disadvantages as revegetation tools 
(Petersen et al. 2004). We focused 
on planting in our studies because 
planting bypasses germination and 
early seedling stages that typically 
exhibit heavy mortality (Harper 
1977). We define transplanting as the 
establishment of translocated wild-
lings and outplanting as the estab-
lishment of container-grown plants 
started from propagules in controlled 

September 2009
Ecological REstoRation
27:3
•
291
environments. For planting to be a 
useful tool in restoration projects, 
managers require information on spe-
cies performance, contexts in which 
planting can be successful, and project 
costs, benefits, and practicality. How-
ever, only a handful of studies have 
assessed planting as a revegetation tool 
in ponderosa pine forests (Steed and 
DeWald 2003, Busco 2005, Johnson 
and Okula 2006).
Two variables that strongly affect 
outcomes of revegetation projects are 
species selection and planting micro-
site. Differences in rooting depth, 
drought tolerance, and growth rate 
affect the suitability of each species 
for planting (Glitzenstein et al. 2001). 
Likewise, favorable planting micro-
sites can increase plant survival, but 
through interactions with species 
traits, suitable microsites vary among 
species (Steed and DeWald 2003). For 
example, some species exhibit greater 
survival when planted below trees or 
in forest litter, whereas others respond 
positively to open conditions (Page 
and Bork 2005). Managers have little 
control over variables such as climate, 
but species selection and microsite 
are two variables that managers can 
influence.
In this paper, we present the out-
comes of five planting trials for reveg-
etation in northern Arizona ponderosa 
pine forests (Table 1). We designed 
the trials as independent studies to 
illustrate different restoration settings, 
so we present each trial separately. We 
provide survivorship for 11 native spe-
cies and compare planting microsites 
created by restoration pine thinning, 
leaf litter, and tree canopy types. The 
planting sites include slash pile scars, 
decommissioned roads, and recently 
thinned forests, all possible targets for 
revegetation efforts. In all of the trials, 
we use plant survival as the measure 
of success.
Trial 1: Effects of 
Restoration Microsite on 
Graminoid Transplanting
To assess the viability of augment-
ing postrestoration establishment of 
grass-sedge (graminoid) understories, 
we conducted a long-term experiment 
of transplanting native graminoids 
(Table 1). We conducted the study in 
Grand Canyon–Parashant National 
Monument, near Mt. Trumbull, 
northern Arizona (elevation 2,100 
m). Precipitation averages 43 cm/y 
(based on 12 years of records) at the 
nearest weather station at Nixon Flat 
(WRCC 2008). We planted in an 18 
ha block that was part of a larger eco-
logical restoration project involving 
tree thinning and prescribed burning 
(Waltz et al. 2003). Ponderosa pines 
had been thinned from 1,396 to 104 
trees/ha and from 12.5 to 9.9 m²/
ha of basal area. Understory vegeta-
tion in adjacent unthinned forests was 
dominated by forbs and graminoids, 
with the four graminoid species that 
we planted being major dominants 
(Table 1).
On November 16 and 17, 1996, 75 
reproductively mature plants of each 
of the four species were transplanted 
from within 2 km of the study site. 
Plants were not actively growing at 
this time. We performed transplanting 
using shovels, attempting to include 
as much soil and intact root mass as 
possible. The plants were immedi-
ately transported to the restoration 
site, where three transplants of each 
species were arranged 0.4 m from 
each other in a triangular pattern in 
a 1 m² subplot within a 2 m × 3 m 
plot. There were a total of 25 plots, 
with five plots randomly located in 
each of the following areas: 1) con-
trol (unthinned, unburned forest); 
2) broadcast burn only (no logging 
slash or evidence of disturbance by 
tree harvesting equipment); 3) skid 
trail (largely devoid of vegetation with 
patchy litter ignition during broad-
cast burning); 4) burned, with slash 
added in amounts representative of the 
area created by the thinning of 1,292 
ponderosa pine trees/ha; and 5) not 
burned, with slash added, protected 
from burning by constructing firelines 
table 1. summary of planting trials in northern arizona ponderosa pine forests. nomenclature and growth forms 
follow UsDa nRCs (2008), and photosynthetic pathways follow Waller and Lewis (1979). precipitation is the total 
from the month of planting through the final monitoring month, expressed as a percentage of the long-term  
average for that period (WRCC 2008). 
study
planting type
environment
species
growth form
Duration 
(years)
precipitation 
(% of mean)
1
Transplant
Restored forest
Bouteloua gracilis
Warm-season grass
5
90
Carex geophila
Cool-season sedge
Elymus elymoides
Cool-season grass
Poa fendleriana
Cool-season grass
2
Outplant
Old road
Oxytropis lambertii
Perennial forb
1
85
3
Outplant
Thinned forest
Ribes cereum
Shrub
2
64
Rosa woodsii
Shrub
Thalictrum fendleri
Perennial forb
4
Outplant
Below oak/openings
Penstemon virgatus
Perennial forb
2
64
Thalictrum fendleri
Perennial forb
5
Outplant
Ripped road
Bahia dissecta
Biennial forb
2
64
Muhlenbergia montana
Warm-season grass

292
•
September 2009
Ecological REstoRation
27:3
around plots. The four experimental 
areas were in a thinned forest typical 
of the mosaic of conditions created by 
the broader restoration project. These 
areas resulted in distinctive microsite 
types. For example, summer morning 
air temperature one meter above the 
ground averaged 3°C warmer in the 
thinned than unthinned forest, and 
midday light intensity was 2.3 times 
greater (Meyer et al. 2001). Each plot 
was surrounded by wire fencing to 
discourage cattle grazing. No supple-
mental water was given to transplants 
at any time. We recorded transplant 
survival in August or September one, 
two, and five years after transplanting.
We analyzed the data using the fol-
lowing analysis of variance (ANOVA) 
mixed model: arcsine-square root 
(proportion alive) = species + microsite 
+ year (+ all interactions) + random 
effects of plot (nested within micro-
site) + plot × species + plot × year. 
Because there was zero variance for 
some components of the model, vio-
lating the homoscedasticity assump-
tion, we computed p-values for 
ANOVA and significance of pairwise 
contrasts between means through per-
mutation (10,000 permutations). To 
obtain 95% confidence intervals for 
resampled means, the samples were 
bootstrapped 1,000 times on a plot-
level basis. Analyses were conducted 
using R (vers. 2.8.1, R Foundation for 
Statistical Computing, Vienna, Aus-
tria) and SAS (vers. 9.1, SAS Institute, 
Cary NC).
A year after transplanting, survival 
of the four species ranged from 17% 
to 52% (Figure 1). Five years after 
transplanting, however, less than 6% 
of White Mountain sedge (carex 
geophila) and blue grama (Bouteloua 
gracilis) were alive. Muttongrass (Poa 
fendleriana) and squirreltail (Elymus 
elymoides) exhibited the highest 
five-year survival at 20% to 23%. Res-
toration microsite also was associated 
with survival, with none of the 60 
transplants surviving in the control. 
The three main effects—species (F3,60 
= 12.0, p < 0.01), microsite (F4,20 = 
3.1, p < 0.01), and year (F2,40 = 26.9, 
p < 0.01)—all were significant in the 
ANOVA model, and there were no 
significant interactions.
Trial 2: Addition of Pine 
Needle Litter to Purple 
Locoweed Outplants
It is often costly or impractical to 
bring water or other materials to res-
toration sites in wildlands. One alter-
native might be to use on-site natural 
materials to try to enhance survival 
of plants. In this study, we assessed 
the effectiveness of using on-site pine 
litter as mulch for creating favorable 
microsites to enhance survival of 
purple locoweed (oxytropis lamber-
tii). We performed this study on a 
decommissioned road (Table 1), 20 
km northeast of Flagstaff, Arizona, in a 
pure ponderosa pine stand at an eleva-
tion of 2,400 m within the 513 ter-
restrial ecosystem survey (TES) type 
(Miller et al. 1995). Precipitation 5 
km from the site averages 43 cm/y 
(WRCC 2008). Soils (to 50 cm depth) 
at the site are sandy loams and are 
among the driest near Flagstaff owing 
to high concentrations of red volcanic 
cinders (Abella and Covington 2006). 
Understories adjacent to the site were 
dominated by locoweed, other forbs, 
and mountain muhly (Muhlenbergia 
montana). Decommissioning of the 
road entailed simply barricading the 
road to stop traffic, and no ripping or 
other treatments were done.
We grew locoweed from seed col-
lected from within 100 m of the plant-
ing site. Seedlings were grown in 700 
cm3 square pots containing potting 
soil (Black Gold, Sun Gro Horticul-
ture, Bellevue WA) for five months fol-
lowing germination and were watered 
daily until planting on July 28, 2005. 
At the planting site, we established 
three transects, each 8 m long, in a 
Figure 1. Five-year survival of graminoids transplanted in november 1996 to a ponderosa pine 
forest restoration unit, northern arizona, varied by a) species and b) restoration microsite.  
Different letters indicate significant differences at p < 0.05.

September 2009
Ecological REstoRation
27:3
•
293
Figure 2. outplanting trial sites: a) view of the upper part of a hillslope at the planting site of trial 3 (post-thinning slope revegetation); b) example 
of a gambel oak thicket, one of three oak canopy types below which Thalictrum fendleri and Penstemon virgatus were outplanted in trial 4; c) a ripped 
road, prior to outplanting Muhlenbergia montana and Bahia dissecta in trial 5; d) the same road three years after planting. Photos (a–c) by S.R. Abella 
in September 2006, (d) by R. Hastings in 2008
3 m × 8 m section of the decommis-
sioned road. We planted randomly 
selected single locoweed plants at 1 
m intervals along each transect. Plant 
heights at the time of planting ranged 
from 4 to 16 cm. Four of the eight 
plants planted on each transect were 
randomly assigned a litter addition 
(ca. 75 g oven-dry weight of ponder-
osa pine needles), and the other half 
received no litter. We placed the litter 
around, but not on top of, plants. No 
watering was done. Survival was moni-
tored three times during a 14-month 
period after planting.
After 14 months, only one (4%) of 
the 24 plants was alive. This individual 
had received pine litter addition, but 
clearly this planting was unsuccessful 
irrespective of treatment.
Trial 3: Post-Thinning 
Slope Revegetation
Plant cover on hillslopes is important 
to limit soil erosion, especially after 
disturbances such as tree thinning. 
Shrubs are uncommon in ponderosa 
pine forests in the Flagstaff area, but 
rocky hillslopes are one of the habitats 
in which shrubs have been observed 
to be more abundant (Hanks et al. 
1983). In this study, we compared 
outplant survival of two shrub species 
with a forb for revegetating a mechani-
cally thinned, rocky hillslope.
This study occurred in the Northern 
Arizona University Centennial Forest, 
10 km southwest of Flagstaff (Table 1). 
Precipitation measured at the Flagstaff 
Airport, within 20 km of the site, has 
averaged 54 cm/y since 1950 (WRCC 
2008). The planting site was located 
in the 570 TES type containing soils 
derived from benmoreite and textures 
averaging silt loam (0–15 cm depth) 
and clay loam (15–50 cm depth) 
(Abella and Covington 2006). We 
planted within a 50 m × 50 m (0.25 
ha) plot containing a post-thinning 
density of 120 ponderosa pine trees 
per hectare (Figure 2). This plot was 
on an east-facing rocky slope (ben-
moreite/basaltic rocks) with a gradient 
of 20% (elevation 2,200 m).
We purchased three-month-old 
greenhouse-grown seedlings of wax 
currant (Ribes cereum), Woods’ rose 
(Rosa woodsii), and Fendler’s meadow-
rue (Thalictrum fendleri) from a com-
mercial nursery (Flagstaff Native Plant 

294
•
September 2009
Ecological REstoRation
27:3
and Seed, Flagstaff AZ). We placed 
these seedlings outside and watered 
them daily for two months before 
outplanting on November 21, 2005. 
Seedlings had been grown in tubes 10 
cm tall by 2 cm wide, and averaged 
5–10 cm tall when outplanted. We 
planted seedlings at randomly selected 
locations along ten 50 m long tran-
sects spaced 5 m apart in the 50 m × 
50 m plot. Five seedlings of each of 
the three species were planted on each 
transect, for a total of 50 seedlings 
of each species. We recorded survival 
on September 9, 2006, and October 
19, 2007, 10 and 23 months after 
outplanting.
We analyzed the data using the fol-
lowing ANOVA mixed model: arc-
sine-square root (proportion alive) = 
species + year + species × year + the 
random effects of transect + transect 
× species + transect × year + transect × 
species × year. As in Trial 1, we com-
puted p-values through permutation, 
and confidence intervals through 
boostrapping.
We found that survival was related 
to species (F2,18 = 6.5, p < 0.01) and 
year (F1,9 = 22.0, p < 0.01). Meadow-
rue had greater survival than the 
shrubs, and overall survival across 
species declined from the first to 
the second year (Figure 3). Survival 
among the three species ranged from 
28% to 56% in 2006, but by 2007, 
had decreased to 12%–40%.
Trial 4: Oak Canopy Effects
Survival may be enhanced and eco-
logical restoration made more rigor-
ous if species are reestablished in the 
microsites most favorable for them. 
We compared survival of two forb 
species planted below Gambel oak 
(Quercus gambelii) tree canopies and 
in canopy openings created by resto-
ration thinning of ponderosa pine. In 
nearby habitats, we had observed that 
one of the planted species, meadow-
rue, seemingly preferred oak canopies, 
whereas the second species, upright 
blue beardtongue (Penstemon virgatus), 
apparently preferred openings.
We purchased seeds of the target 
species from a commercial nursery 
(Flagstaff Native Plant and Seed, Flag-
staff AZ). We grew these seeds in 700 
cm3 square pots in a greenhouse for 
three months before moving the pots 
outdoors and watering them daily for 
two months. We planted the forbs 
around nine oaks in a 4 ha area (slope 
gradient < 2%) surrounding the Trial 3 
plot that was part of the same restora-
tion thinning project. Three randomly 
selected seedlings of each species were 
planted on November 21, 2005, below 
the canopy of each oak. There were 
three oaks of each of the following 
canopy types: single stem, dispersed 
clump, and thicket (Abella 2008). We 
paired each of the nine oaks with an 
adjacent opening and planted three 
seedlings of each species 12 m away 
from oaks in these openings. In total, 
we planted 54 seedlings of each spe-
cies. Seedlings within microsites were 
planted equidistant from each other 
within a 1 m² area. We documented 
survival on September 9, 2006, and 
October 19, 2007.
We used the following ANOVA 
mixed model to analyze the data: arc-
sine-square root (proportion alive) = 
species + planting habitat (below oak or 
in openings) + oak canopy type + year 
(+ all interactions) + random effects 
of oak sample (each of the nine oak 
samples) nested within canopy type, 
oak sample × species, oak sample × 
planting habitat, and oak sample × 
year. Permutation and bootstrapping 
were used for computing p-values and 
confidence intervals as in Trials 1 and 3.
Species × planting habitat was the 
only significant interaction (F1,24 = 
27.5, p < 0.01), with greater meadow-
rue survival below oak compared to 
openings (Figure 4). However, the 
type of oak canopy did not affect sur-
vival (F2,6 = 0.1, p= 0.83). Year also 
was not a significant main effect (F1,6 
= 1.8, p = 0.18), since overall survival 
declined by only 7% from Year 1 to 
Year 2.
Trial 5: Ripped Road 
Revegetation
As in the other trials, this study 
occurred in an actual restoration setting 
where, following completion of resto-
ration thinning operations in 2005, a 
temporary road was decommissioned 
by ripping with heavy equipment. 
This road left a denuded, linear scar. 
We assessed outplant survival of two 
Figure 3. survival after 23 months ranged from 12% to 40% for three species outplanted in 
a thinned ponderosa pine forest, northern arizona. mean alive proportions were analyzed as 
arcsine-square roots, and back-transformed means (center horizontal lines) are presented with 
95% confidence intervals (vertical lines). Bars represent the raw proportion alive; proportions 
with different letters differ at p < 0.05.

September 2009
Ecological REstoRation
27:3
•
295
species used to revegetate the road: the 
biennial ragleaf bahia (Bahia dissecta), 
designed to provide rapid cover, and 
the perennial grass mountain muhly. 
The site was at an elevation of 2,200 
m on the same benmoreite soils of the 
570 TES type as in Trials 3 and 4 and 
approximately 0.4 km north of the 
Trial 3 site. Mountain muhly domi-
nated the understories surrounding 
the road, while ragleaf bahia grew in 
a more scattered manner.
We grew the target species from 
seed collected within a 513 TES map-
ping unit (dry volcanic soils) 27 km 
northeast of the planting site. Seed-
lings were grown in a greenhouse in 
700 cm3 square pots for two months 
after germination and then transferred 
to containers 25 cm tall and 6 cm 
wide, where they were kept for one 
month with daily watering. We then 
moved the plants outdoors for two 
months with daily watering before 
outplanting on November 21, 2005, 
to a 5 m × 30 m section of the ripped 
road (Figure 2). We divided this sec-
tion into five transects 30 m long, 
separated from each other by 1 m. We 
randomly selected planting locations 
at 1 m intervals along each transect 
and planted ten seedlings of each spe-
cies along each transect (50 plants total 
of each species). Since many plants 
subsequently flowered, we monitored 
both survival and the percentage of 
individuals flowering on September 9, 
2006, and October 19, 2007.
We analyzed the survival data using 
the following ANOVA mixed model: 
arcsine-square root (proportion alive) 
= species + year + species × year + 
random effects of transect + transect 
× species + transect × year. Confi-
dence intervals and p-values were 
calculated through permutation and 
boostrapping as in the other trials.
After one year, survival did not 
differ significantly between mountain 
muhly and ragleaf bahia, ranging from 
74% to 80% (Figure 5). In this first 
year, 73% of live bahia and 38% of 
live muhly flowered. Survival of muhly 
remained high at 72% in 2007 after 
two years, with an even greater per-
centage (89%) of live plants flower-
ing. Although only 16% of original 
bahia were still alive by 2007 (the 
biennial species had completed its life 
cycle), 48% of the dead plants were  
surrounded by new seedlings.
Discussion
Study Context and Limitations
As is typical in planting studies, sev-
eral variables such as climate, site fac-
tors, or planting stock, in addition to 
the variables we specifically assessed, 
likely affected outcomes of our plant-
ing trials. Precipitation during all five 
trials was below average (Table 1). 
While it is rarely practical to transport 
water to plants in wildland settings 
(Bainbridge et al. 2001), the generality 
of results from planting trials possi-
bly can be improved by manipulating 
plant watering to predict outcomes 
under different precipitation sce-
narios. Large ungulates were fenced 
out in Trial 1 (graminoid transplant-
ing), but no grazing protection was 
provided in the other trials. We do 
not believe livestock occupied the 
planting sites during Trials 2–5, but 
Rocky Mountain elk (cervus elaphus 
nelsoni) and smaller herbivores were 
likely present. Soils can also affect out-
comes of plantings (Glitzenstein et al. 
2001). Our least successful trial (Trial 
2: purple locoweed–litter addition) 
occurred on the driest soils. It also is 
possible that planting stock affected 
outcomes (Ratliff and Westfall 1992, 
Page and Bork 2005). For example, 
genetic sources of stock varied among 
the trials, ranging from known sources 
less than 100 m from the planting site 
(Trial 2) to unknown sources (com-
mercially purchased seedlings in Trials 
3 and 4). Variation in these factors in 
Figure 4. outplant survival of Thalictrum fendleri was greater below gambel oak than in openings, 
a response not occurring in outplanted Penstemon virgatus. mean alive proportions were analyzed 
as arcsine-square roots, and back-transformed means (center horizontal lines) are presented with 
95% confidence intervals (vertical lines). Bars represent the raw proportion alive; proportions 
with different letters differ at p < 0.05.

296
•
September 2009
Ecological REstoRation
27:3
our studies illustrates some of the con-
texts, settings, and considerations typi-
cal of operational revegetation projects 
(Glitzenstein et al. 2001).
Survival Patterns
None of the 60 transplants survived in 
the unthinned forest control in Trial 
1 (graminoid transplanting), suggest-
ing that factors other than propagule 
availability were more limiting in this 
forest. Given the survival of some 
transplants in thinned areas and the 
well-documented negative effect of 
high ponderosa pine density on under-
story vegetation, it seems probable 
that low light levels, heavy litterfall, 
or belowground competition (Riegel 
et al. 1992) caused the complete 
mortality of transplants. This under-
scores that revegetation is best viewed 
as a secondary restoration treatment 
to follow the initial treatment of 
restoration thinning.
The five-year survival of transplants 
did not exceed 22% in any of the 
other four microsites in Trial 1. It is 
possible that some plants died after 
the first few years simply owing to 
old age during this relatively long-
term trial. In a Kansas prairie, Fair and 
others (1999) found that the average 
life span of blue grama genets, one 
of the graminoid species we planted 
in this trial, was four years. This may 
illustrate the importance of monitor-
ing community variables beyond the 
original planted individuals when 
assessing planting success, such as our 
monitoring of ragleaf bahia seedlings 
in Trial 5 (ripped road revegetation).
In Trial 2 (locoweed-litter addition), 
our reasoning for adding ponderosa 
pine litter around outplants was that 
it may serve as mulch to conserve 
moisture and protect plants. Only one 
plant survived, however. It is unclear 
if other types of shelters, such as taller 
cylinders that more fully enclose plants 
(Bainbridge et al. 2001), would have 
enhanced survival. The volcanic cinder 
soils on which this trial was conducted 
are among the driest in the Flagstaff 
area, with a 0 to 15 cm gravimetric soil 
moisture content of less than 2% in 
early summer (Abella and Covington 
2006). We did not provide any supple-
mental water to outplants, and irriga-
tion (where practical) or slow-release 
irrigation (such as DriWater) may be 
especially important for outplants on 
these dry soils (Newton 2001, Bean 
et al. 2004). Another consideration is 
that plants were five months old and 
10 cm tall on average at the time of 
planting. Older plants with better-
developed root systems may exhibit 
better survival on these dry soils 
(Outcalt et al. 1999). Additionally, 
species other than locoweed may have 
performed better, as Fattorini (2001) 
also had difficulty establishing an  
oxytropis species.
Survival of meadow-rue in Trial 4 
(oak canopy effects) was nearly four 
times greater below Gambel oak than 
in openings. This pattern follows 
natural abundance patterns, where 
meadow-rue flourishes below oak on 
soils where this study took place. It 
remains unclear why the below-oak 
environment is favorable for meadow-
rue. Upper soils below Gambel oak 
often have greater nutrient concentra-
tions and higher pH than ponderosa 
pine soils or openings (Klemmedson 
1987) and exhibit unique microcli-
mates (Evenson et al. 1980). While 
meadow-rue survival was 22% lower 
in 2006 on the rocky slope of Trial 
3 (post-thinning slope revegetation) 
than it was below oaks in Trial 4, sur-
vival was still nearly three times greater 
than in openings in Trial 4. Perhaps 
rocks on the rocky slope in Trial 3 
served roles similar to those of oak 
structures in improving meadow-rue 
survival. Trial 4 supported the find-
ings of the graminoid transplanting 
(Trial 1), illustrating the importance of 
selecting planting locations favorable 
for survival.
We consider Trial 5 (ripped road 
revegetation) to be the most success-
ful planting in terms of survival and 
the proportion of plants reaching 
reproductive stage (Figures 2 and 5). 
This success is noteworthy because it 
occurred during a period of only 64% 
of average precipitation, even though 
no supplemental water was given to 
outplants at any time. Seed for this trial 
was collected from dry, cindery soils of 
the Trial 2 site (locoweed-litter addi-
tion), potentially raising a question of 
whether this stock was especially well 
adapted to survive the dry period of 
the planting trial. Results of this study 
also are encouraging because severely 
disturbed ripped roads of this type 
represent a priority for revegetation 
(Elseroad et al. 2003).
Figure 5. ten months after outplanting two species on a ripped road in a northern arizona pon-
derosa pine forest, 30% to 54% of all outplants were flowering or seeding. two years after plant-
ing in 2007, nearly half of the dead plants of the biennial Bahia dissecta were surrounded by new 
seedlings. mean alive proportions were analyzed as arcsine-square roots, and back-transformed 
means (center horizontal lines) are presented with 95% confidence intervals (vertical lines). Bars 
represent the raw proportion alive; proportions with different letters differ at p < 0.05.

September 2009
Ecological REstoRation
27:3
•
297
Effectiveness Comparisons
While few planting studies have been 
conducted in ponderosa pine forests, 
some recent studies do facilitate com-
parisons with our results. Steed and 
DeWald (2003) found that one-year 
transplant survival ranged from 37% to 
47% among three sedge (carex) species 
in riparian meadows in northern Ari-
zona ponderosa pine forests. This sur-
vival is greater than the one-year 17% 
survival we found for transplanted 
White Mountain sedge in upland 
forests of Trial 1 (Figure 1). Busco 
(2005) found that two-year mutton-
grass transplant survival was less than 
2% at one northern Arizona site, but 
averaged 70% to 81% at a second site. 
Two-year muttongrass survival in our 
study was intermediate at 43%. As in 
our study, Busco (2005) transplanted 
wildlings directly from field site to 
field site without any greenhouse resi-
dence. It is possible that residence in 
a greenhouse could reduce transplant 
shock, but this would require increased 
labor and plant care. For revegetating 
a stand-replacing burn in Oregon pine 
forests, Johnson and Okula (2006) 
reported that one-year survival of out-
planted antelope bitterbrush (Purshia 
tridentata) averaged 62% to 70%. We 
found that one-year survival ranged 
from 28% to 48% for the two shrub 
species (wax currant and Woods’ 
rose) in Trial 3 (post-thinning slope  
revegetation, Figure 3).
Our results are consistent with pre-
vious studies in ponderosa pine forests 
that have found mixed planting suc-
cess. There remains a need to increase 
the generality of results from plant-
ing studies by including more spe-
cies, controlling or comparing plant 
care and processing techniques, and 
manipulating factors (for example, 
water availability to simulate differ-
ent precipitation levels) potentially 
affecting outcomes. Including more 
species with different traits, such as 
rooting depth, may permit more gen-
eral predictions about which species 
are most suitable for outplanting and 
transplanting.
Cost, Benefit and Practicality
To estimate financial costs for plant-
ings such as we pursued, we used data 
from Trial 3 (post-thinning slope 
revegetation), which included three 
outplanted species. To achieve live-
plant densities of 200 per hectare (the 
target density in our trial) for each of 
the species, 714 Woods’ rose, 417 wax 
currant, and 357 Fendler’s meadow-
rue would need to be planted per 
hectare based on our one-year survival 
estimates (Figure 3). Lower or higher 
planting densities could be chosen 
based on project objectives and avail-
able planting resources; we chose 200 
plants/ha of each species to result in a 
density of one individual/species/50 
m². We purchased seedlings from a 
contract grower for $1.45/seedling 
for the shrubs and $1.25/seedling for 
Fendler’s meadow-rue (2005 U.S. dol-
lars). This results in a cost of $1,035/
ha for Woods’ rose, $605/ha for wax 
currant, and $446/ha for Fendler’s 
meadow-rue, or $2,086/ha total for 
all three species. (We purchased only 
small quantities of plants for our 
research project—50 of each species; 
larger quantities may result in lower 
prices per seedling.) A crew of three 
people outplanted the 150 seedlings 
on our 0.25 ha research plot in one 
hour. This results in a projected plant-
ing time of 30 h/ha for one person to 
plant the 1,488 plants/ha required to 
achieve a total of 600/ha live plants 
of the three species. Travel costs to 
or from the planting site, in our case 
only 10 km from Flagstaff, also require 
consideration.
We did not provide supplemen-
tal watering or other treatments to 
outplants in this trial. Any increases 
in survival these supplemental treat-
ments may provide would need to 
be weighed against the added costs 
(Johnson and Okula 2006). If pro-
jections were based on our two-year 
survival estimates that included addi-
tional mortality, however, more plants 
and more money would be required 
to achieve the 200 per hectare long-
term density of each species if original 
plantings did not reproduce and facili-
tate further seedling establishment. 
In this context, costs and benefits 
of supplemental treatments should 
also include whether the treatments 
facilitate reproduction.
Trial 5 (ripped road revegetation) 
provides a different illustration of esti-
mated costs. To achieve the targeted 
live-plant densities of mountain muhly 
and ragleaf bahia (0.33/m² for each 
species), 2,000 muhly and 2,100 bahia 
would be required to revegetate 0.5 ha 
using our one-year survival estimates 
(Figure 5). This 0.5 ha area corresponds 
to a 1 km stretch of the 5 m wide road. 
It cost us less than approximately $1 
to produce each seedling. This results 
in a plant material cost of less than 
$4,100 per kilometer of road. Assum-
ing a planting rate of 50 plants/person/
hour as determined in the Trial 3 pro-
jection above, planting would require 
82 person-hours/km. These projected 
costs, however, do not account for the 
benefit observed in this trial of origi-
nal outplants subsequently facilitat-
ing natural recruitment of additional 
plants at no cost.
Conclusion
Results of the five trials illustrate sev-
eral considerations about planting as 
a revegetation tool. Pine thinning is 
a key first step prior to active reveg-
etation treatments for reestablishing 
understory vegetation in formerly 
dense forests (for example, Trial 1, 
where no transplanted graminoids 
survived in the unthinned forest). 
Microsite effects were also exempli-
fied in Trial 4 (oak canopy effects), 
where survival of meadow-rue was 3.4 
times greater when outplanted below 
oak rather than in exposed openings. 
Although we did not directly test 
effects of soil types, some soils may 
be more amenable to revegetation 
than others. Dry, nutrient-poor soils, 
such as the volcanic cinders of Trial 
2 (locoweed-litter addition), may be 
among the most difficult to revege-
tate in this region. Survival also varied 
among species within trials, consistent 

298
•
September 2009
Ecological REstoRation
27:3
with the principle that species selec-
tion is a key element of revegetation 
projects (Fattorini 2001, Cole and 
Spildie 2006).
Our findings also highlight topics 
that could benefit from further 
research. For example, we measured 
planting success as the percentage 
of plants surviving. However, reveg-
etation success could be evaluated in 
terms of limiting soil erosion, provid-
ing insect and wildlife habitat, pro-
moting native plant recruitment, or 
other benefits (Abella and Newton 
2009). Further study of planting den-
sity as a factor in revegetation success 
is important because, given limited 
resources, managers typically will 
want to plant the minimum density 
(and maximum area) possible to meet 
revegetation objectives. It is unclear, 
however, what specific densities are 
needed for purposes such as restoring 
aesthetic views, providing competition 
with non-native species, or attaining 
sufficient density to promote polli-
nation and subsequent regeneration. 
We need to expand the generality of 
revegetation studies such as ours by 
directly comparing more species, repli-
cating across disturbance or soil types, 
standardizing potentially confounding 
variables (for example, genetic stock) 
within studies, performing treatments 
in both moist and dry years, and 
conducting longer-term monitoring.
Although positive results, such as 
our fifth trial (ripped road revegeta-
tion), illustrate that revegetation is 
feasible in these forests, where and 
when revegetation is most needed 
remains unresolved. For example, 
natural plant colonization without 
intervention could be rapid on narrow, 
linear corridors like decommissioned 
roads where propagules do not need to 
disperse far from nearby undisturbed 
areas. On the other hand, compaction 
on unripped roads could limit plant 
colonization. Choosing whether to 
actively revegetate disturbed areas or 
to wait for natural colonization can 
be difficult. If the early colonizers are 
non-native species, windows for active 
native revegetation and for using 
revegetation as a tool for curtailing 
invasions may close quickly (Bakker 
and Wilson 2004). Since revegeta-
tion is expensive, further research is 
warranted to identify situations where 
revegetation provides the most benefit 
and how to make revegetation more 
successful and cost effective when it 
is needed.
Acknowledgments
For facilitating the Mt. Trumbull forest res-
toration experiment and the Trial 1 plant-
ing, we thank Margaret Moore (School of 
Forestry, Northern Arizona University), 
Pete Fulé, Amy Waltz, Tom Heinlein, Lisa 
Machina and John Paul Roccaforte (Ecologi-
cal Restoration Institute), and Ken Moore 
and Greg Taylor (Bureau of Land Man-
agement, Arizona Strip District). We also 
thank Brad Blake and Phil Patterson for 
greenhouse care of seedlings in the Northern 
Arizona University research greenhouse for 
Trials 2 and 5; Rob Hastings, Mare Nazaire, 
and Teresa DeKoker (Ecological Restora-
tion Institute) for assisting with planting 
for Trials 3–5; J.J. Smith and the Northern 
Arizona University Centennial Forest for 
permission to conduct Trials 3–5; Keith 
Pajkos (Arizona State Lands Department) 
for suggesting the planting site and the shrub 
species for Trial 3; Cheryl Vanier (University 
of Nevada Las Vegas) for conducting statisti-
cal analyses; Sharon Altman (University of 
Nevada Las Vegas) for formatting Figure 2; 
and Nancy Shaw (Rocky Mountain Research 
Station) and four anonymous reviewers for 
reviewing earlier drafts of the manuscript.
References
Abella, S.R. 2008. Managing gambel oak 
in southwestern ponderosa pine forests: 
The status of our knowledge. USDA 
Forest Service General Technical Report 
RMRS-GTR-218.
Abella, S.R. and W.W. Covington. 2006. 
Forest ecosystems of an Arizona Pinus 
ponderosa landscape: Multifactor clas-
sification and implications for ecologi-
cal restoration. Journal of Biogeography 
33:1368–1383.
Abella, S.R., P.Z. Fulé and W.W. Coving-
ton. 2006. Diameter caps for thin-
ning southwestern ponderosa pine for-
ests: Viewpoints, effects, and tradeoffs.  
Journal of Forestry 104:407–414.
Abella, S.R. and A.C. Newton. 2009. A 
systematic review of species perfor-
mance and treatment effectiveness for 
revegetation in the Mojave Desert, 
USA. in A. Fernandez-Bernal and 
M.A. De La Rosa (eds), arid Environ-
ments. Hauppauge NY: Nova Science 
Publishers.
Allen, C.D., M. Savage, D.A. Falk, K.F. 
Suckling, T.W. Swetnam et al. 2002. 
Ecological restoration of southwestern 
ponderosa pine ecosystems: A broad 
perspective. Ecological applications 12:
1418–1433.
Bainbridge, D.A., J. Tiszler, R. MacAller and 
M.F. Allen. 2001. Irrigation and mulch 
effects on desert shrub transplant estab-
lishment. native Plants Journal 2:25–29.
Bakker, J.D. and S.D. Wilson. 2004. Using 
ecological restoration to constrain bio-
logical invasion. Journal of applied 
Ecology 41:1058–1064.
Bean, T.M., S.E. Smith and M.M. Kar-
piscak. 2004. Intensive revegetation in 
Arizona’s hot desert: The advantages of 
container stock. native Plants Journal 
5:173–180.
Busco, J.K. 2005. Establishing junegrass and 
muttongrass by seed, seedlings and wild-
lings in southwestern ponderosa pine 
forests. MS thesis, Northern Arizona 
University.
Cole, D.N. and D.R. Spildie. 2006. Resto-
ration of plant cover in subalpine for-
ests disturbed by camping: Success of 
transplanting. natural areas Journal 26:
168–178.
Covington, W.W., P.Z. Fulé, M. M. Moore, 
S.C. Hart, T.E. Kolb et al. 1997. Restor-
ing ecosystem health in ponderosa pine 
forests of the Southwest. Journal of 
Forestry 95(4):23–29.
Elseroad, A.C., P.Z. Fulé and W.W. Cov-
ington. 2003. Forest road revegetation: 
Effects of seeding and soil amendments. 
Ecological Restoration 21:180–185.
Evenson, W.E., J.D. Brotherson and R.B. 
Wilcox. 1980. Relationship between 
environmental and vegetational param-
eters for understory and open-area com-
munities. great Basin naturalist 40:
167–174.
Fair, J., W.K. Lauenroth and D.P. Coffin. 
1999. Demography of Bouteloua graci-
lis in a mixed prairie: Analysis of genets 
and individuals. Journal of Ecology 87:
233–243.
Fattorini, M. 2001. Establishment of trans-
plants on machine-graded ski runs 
above timberline in the Swiss Alps.  
Restoration Ecology 9:119–126.
Glitzenstein, J.S., D.R. Streng, D.D. Wade 
and J. Brubaker. 2001. Starting new 
populations of longleaf pine ground-
layer plants in the outer Coastal Plain 

September 2009
Ecological REstoRation
27:3
•
299
of South Carolina, USA. natural areas 
Journal 21:89–110.
Hanks, J.P., E.L. Fitzhugh and S.R. Hanks. 
1983. A habitat type classification 
system for ponderosa pine forests of 
northern Arizona. USDA Forest Service  
General Technical Report RM-97.
Harper, J.L. 1977. Population Biology of 
Plants. New York: Academic Press.
Hunter, M.E. and P.N. Omi. 2006. Seed 
supply of native and cultivated grasses in 
pine forests of the southwestern United 
States and the potential for vegeta-
tion recovery following wildfire. Plant 
Ecology 183:1–8.
Johnson, G.R. and J.P. Okula. 2006. Ante-
lope bitterbrush reestablishment. native 
Plants Journal 7:125–133.
Klemmedson, J.O. 1987. Influence of oak 
in pine forests of central Arizona on 
selected nutrients of forest floor and soil. 
soil science society of america Journal 
51:1623–1628.
Korb, J.E., P.Z. Fulé and B. Gideon. 2007. 
Different restoration thinning treat-
ments affect level of soil disturbance 
in ponderosa pine forests of northern 
Arizona, USA. Ecological Restoration 
25:43–49.
Korb, J.E, N.C. Johnson and W.W. Cov-
ington. 2004. Slash pile burning effects 
on soil biotic and chemical properties 
and plant establishment: Recommen-
dations for amelioration. Restoration 
Ecology 12:52–62.
Laughlin, D.C., J.D. Bakker, M.T. Stod-
dard, M.L. Daniels, J.D. Springer et 
al. 2004. Toward reference conditions: 
Wildfire effects on flora in an old-
growth ponderosa pine forest. Forest 
Ecology and Management 199:137–152.
Meyer, C.L., T.D. Sisk and W.W. Covington. 
2001. Microclimatic changes induced 
by ecological restoration of ponder-
osa pine forests in northern Arizona.  
Restoration Ecology 9:443–452.
Miller, G., N. Ambos, P. Boness, D. Reyher, 
G. Robertson et al. 1995. Terrestrial 
ecosystems survey of the Coconino 
National Forest. Albuquerque NM: U.S. 
Forest Service, Southwestern Region.
Moore, M.M., C.A. Casey, J.D. Bakker, J.D. 
Springer, P.Z. Fulé et al. 2006. Herba-
ceous vegetation responses (1992–2004) 
to restoration treatments in a ponder-
osa pine forest. Rangeland Ecology & 
Management 59:135–144.
Newton, A.C. 2001. DRiWATER: an alter-
native to hand-watering transplants in a 
desert environment (Nevada). Ecological 
Restoration 19:259–260.
Outcalt, K.W., M.E. Williams and O. 
Onokpise. 1999. Restoring aristida 
stricta to Pinus palustris ecosystems 
on the Atlantic Coastal Plain, U.S.A.  
Restoration Ecology 7:262–270.
Page, H.N. and E.W. Bork. 2005. Effect 
of planting season, bunchgrass species, 
and neighbor control on the success 
of transplants for grassland restoration.  
Restoration Ecology 13:651–658.
Petersen, S.L., B.A. Roundy and R.M. 
Bryant. 2004. Revegetation methods 
for high-elevation roadsides at Bryce 
Canyon National Park, Utah. Restoration 
Ecology 12:248–257.
Ratliff, R.D. and S.E. Westfall. 1992. Restor-
ing plant cover on high-elevation gravel 
areas, Sequoia National Park, California. 
Biological conservation 60:189–195.
Riegel, G.M., R.F. Miller and W.C. Krueger. 
1992. Competition for resources 
between understory vegetation and over-
story Pinus ponderosa in northeastern 
Oregon. Ecological applications 2:71–85.
Steed, J.E. and L.E. DeWald. 2003. Trans-
planting sedges (carex spp.) in south-
western riparian meadows. Restoration 
Ecology 11:247–256.
USDA NRCS. 2008. The PLANTS Data-
base (December 4, 2008). Baton Rouge 
LA: National Plant Data Center. plants.
usda.gov
Waller, S.S. and J.K. Lewis. 1979. Occur-
rence of C3 and C4 photosynthetic path-
ways in North American grasses. Journal 
of Range Management 32:12–28.
Waltz, A.E.M., P.Z. Fulé, W.W. Covington 
and M.M. Moore. 2003. Diversity in 
ponderosa pine forest structure follow-
ing ecological restoration treatments. 
Forest science 49:885–900.
Western Regional Climate Center (WRCC). 
2008. RAWS USA climate archive. 
Reno NV: Western Regional Climate 
Center. raws.dri.edu
scott R. abella, assistant Research Profes-
sor, Public lands institute and Depart-
ment of Environmental studies, 4505 s 
Maryland Parkway, University of nevada 
las Vegas, las Vegas, nV 89154-2040, 
scott.abella@unlv.edu
 
Judith D. springer, Research special-
ist, sr., Ecological Restoration institute, 
northern arizona University, Flagstaff, 
arizona 86011-5017
