Benefits and Impacts of Road Removal
T. A. Switalski; J. A. Bissonette; T. H. DeLuca; C. H. Luce; M. A. Madej
Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, Vol. 2, No. 1. (Feb., 2004), pp. 21-28.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=1540-9295%28200402%292%3A1%3C21%3ABAIORR%3E2.0.CO%3B2-2
Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment is currently published by Ecological Society of America.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/esa.html.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
The JSTOR Archive is a trusted digital repository providing for long-term preservation and access to leading academic
journals and scholarly literature from around the world. The Archive is supported by libraries, scholarly societies, publishers,
and foundations. It is an initiative of JSTOR, a not-for-profit organization with a mission to help the scholarly community take
advantage of advances in technology. For more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
http://www.jstor.org
Mon Mar 17 17:52:16 2008

REVIEWS REVIEWS REVIEWS 
Benefits and impacts of road removal 
TA switalskil, JA~issonette', TH ~ e ~ u c a ~ ,
CH Luce4, and MA ~ a d e j ~  
Road removal is being used to mitigate the physical and ecological impacts of roads and to restore both pub-
lic and private lands. Although many federal and state agencies and private landowners have created proto-
cols for road removal and priorities for restoration,research hasnot kept pace with the rate of removal. Some 
research has been conductedon hydrologic and geomorphic restoration following road removal,but no stud-
ies have directly addressed restoring wildlife habitat. Road removal creates a short-term disturbance which 
may temporarily increase sediment loss. However, long-term monitoring and initial research have shown 
that road removal reduces chronic erosion and the risk of landslides. We review the hydrologic, geomorphic, 
and ecological benefits and impacts of three methods of road removal, identify knowledgegaps, and propose 
questions for future research,which is urgently needed to quantify how effectively road removal restores ter-
restrial, riparian, and aquatic habitat and other ecosystem processes. 
Front Ecol Environ 2004; 2(1): 21-28 
ore than 885 000 km of roads have been built on US
Mf ederal lands to facilitate resource extraction, recre-
ation, and transportation (Havlick 2002) - enough to 
drive to the moon and back. While these roads provide 
important services, their construction and presence can 
also influence the hydrology, geomorphology, and ecosys-
tem processes. They can substantially alter hillslope 
hydrology by reducing soil infiltration, concentrating 
water through road drainage structures, and converting 
subsurface flow to surface flow (Luce 2002). Overland 
flow can cause geomorphic changes, including chronic 
erosion (Megahan and Kidd 1972),extended channel sys-
tems (Wemple et al. 1996), and increased risk of landslides 
(Swanson and Dyrness 1975), thereby decreasing aquatic 
habitat quality. Roads also influence the ecology of terres-
trial and aquatic ecosystems through direct habitat loss, 
fragmentation, and associated human impacts as a result 
of increased access (Wisdom et al. 2000). 
Recognition of these wide-ranging effects has recently 
thrust roads into the forefront of research, resulting in the 
In a nutshell: 
Road removal is being used to mitigate the impacts of roads 
and restore ecosystemprocesses 
Preliminary research has found that road removal may tem-
porarily increase sediment loss, but reduce chronic erosion and 
the risk of landslidesover the long term 
More research is needed to determine if aquatic and terrestrial 
habitats recover followingremoval 
'Wildlands CPR, PO Box 7516, Missoula, MT 59807 
(adamQwildlandscpr.org); 'USGS Utah Cooperative Fish and 
Wildlife Research Unit, Utah State University, Logan, UT 84322-
5290; 3~epartmentof Ecosystem and Conservation Sciences, 
University of Montana, 402 Science Complex, Missoula, MT 
59812; 4 U S D ~Forest Service Intermountain Research Station, 
316 Myrtle St, Boise, ID 83702; 'USGS Western Ecological 
Research Center, 1655 Heindon Rd, Arcata, CA 95521 
publication of books (eg Forman et al. 2003; Havlick 
2002), reviews (eg Gucinski et al. 2001; Trombulak and 
Frissell 2000), special journal issues (eg Conservation 
Biology 14[1], Earth Surface Processes and Landforms 
26[2 and 31, and Water Resources Impact 3[3]), and thou-
sands of peer-reviewed studies. Increasingly, roads are 
being removed to mitigate these problems. However, to 
date surprisingly little attention has been given to the 
short- and long-term benefits and impacts of road 
removal. Here we describe three methods of road removal, 
summarize research that has been conducted, and identify 
knowledge gaps and research needs in this emerging field. 
Road removal 
Public and private land managers in the US and Canada 
are removing roads to restore habitat connectivity and 
ecosystem processes. For the purposes of this article, we 
define road removal as "the physical treatment of a 
roadbed to restore the form and integrity of associated 
hillslopes, channels, and flood plains and their related 
hydrologic, geomorphic, and ecological processes and 
properties". Road removal projects have been undertaken 
for several reasons: to restrict access, increase hillslope 
stability, minimize erosion, restore natural drainage pat-
terns, protect endangered plants and wildlife, and restore 
aquatic and wildlife habitat. 
Roads are typically built by using heavy equipment to 
cut into a hillslope, with extra fill cast aside below the 
road (Figure 1). Road removal essentially reverses this 
process. The most common forms of road removal include 
"ripping" the roadbed, restoring stream crossings, and fully 
recontouring hillslopes, although a variety of techniques 
have been applied on the ground (Table 1). Road ripping 
involves decompacting the road surface to a depth of 
30-90 cm, typically done with a bulldozer dragging a spe-
cially fitted plow over the roadbed (Figure 2). This is often 
followed by the addition of soil amendments and by 
O The Ecological Society of America 
www.frontiersinecology.org 

Benefits and impacts of road removal 
TA Switalski et al. 
phology, engineering, hydrology, and ecol- 
ogy. For example, the composition of a soil 
can greatly influence the degree of water 
retention and subsurface drainage of a road, 
and thus the risk of erosion and landslides 
and the degree of revegetation. In addition, 
natural environmental factors such as land- 
form features, bedrock type and composition, 
vegetation, hydrological characteristics, and 
climate can all have considerable effects on 
erosion and runoff rates. Although many 
Figure 1. Components of a road. 
thorough evaluation of the ability of this pro- 
cedure to restore hydrologic, geomorphic, 
revegetation. Treatment of stream crossings involves 
and ecological processes has not yet been made. 
removing culverts, excavating the fill down to the original 
We have gleaned much of our knowledge on road 
land surface, recontouring streambanks, installing chan- 
removal from observational studies and monitoring con- 
nel stabilization structures, and revegetating (Figure 3). A 
ducted by land managers in the western US. However, few 
full recontour involves treating stream crossings, reshap- 
experimental studies have addressed this topic and few 
ing the roadbed to its original slope, and revegetating the 
published papers exist. Most studies have occurred in areas 
area (Figures 4 and 5). 
characterized by high precipitation, highly erodable soils, 
Revegetation of the treated road surface is an essential 
and/or steep topography. Additionally, many of the studies 
component of habitat restoration, and can include nat- 
have been short in duration and often do not account for 
ural regeneration or seeding with native or non-native 
long-term variability. 
grasses, nursery-grown trees or shrubs, and transplants 
from adjacent hillsides. Soil amendments, including side- 
Ripping the roadbed 
cast topsoil (soil cast aside during road construction), 
mulches, biosolids (residual materials from wastewater 
Roads are compacted initially during construction and 
treatment), and fertilizers are often added to increase 
later by vehicle traffic. This compaction limits water 
nutrient cycling. Sediment control structures such as silt 
movement and soil aeration, restricts root growth and 
fences, check dams, erosion mats, weirs, rock buttresses, 
elongation, and disrupts nutrient dynamics. In severely 
and timber cribs are often employed to reduce surface and 
compacted soils, infiltration is essentially zero, and 
channel erosion and the risk of landslides immediately 
establishing vegetation can be difficult (Luce and 
following treatment. 
Cundy 1994). Ripping has been used extensively to 
increase infiltration and promote revegetation on 
Research review 
degraded rangelands (Wight and Siddoway 1972), 
mined lands (Ashby 1997), and forest skid trails and 
Road removal is an interdisciplinary endeavor requiring 
landings (Davis 1990). On flat and gently sloping land- 
broad expertise, particularly in soils, geology, geomor- 
scapes, ripping is the primary method of road removal. 
Table 1. Different types of road closure and removal and their relative costs and impacts (modified from Bagley 1998) 
Road impact and 
Gating 
costconsideration 
Fill stability problems 
fixed? 
N o  
Long-term surface 
erosion controlled? N o  
Wildlife security 
improved? 
Cost 
N o  (yes if gate is 
able to deter access) 
Permanent traffic barriers Ripping 
@ouklers,b-=) 
No (yes if barriers 
deter access) 
Yes 
Yes 
Full recontour 
Yes (no if not comple- 
mented with recontour) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
$500-1 50 000 
$3000- 
per crossing* 
200 000lkm* 
*The complexity and variability of stream crossing restoration and full recontour make it easier to compare costs on a 
basis.The cost of excavat- 
ing in Redwood National Park ranges from $1-3.50 per m3. 
www.frontiersinecoiogy.org 
O The Ecological Society of America 

TA Switalski et al. 
Benefits and impacts of road removal 
Figure 2. Rippmg the roadbed, Pueblo Mountain Wilderness 
Study Area, OR. 
Studies on road ripping have been carried out in diverse 
landscapes across North America, in a variety of eco- 
types; this procedure has been found to reduce erosion, 
improve infiltration, increase the rate of revegetation, 
and discourage weed establishment (defined as non- 
native invasive species). 
Infiltration and erosion 
Road ripping increases infiltration and reduces erosion in 
the short term, but has produced mixed results in the long 
term. In the boreal forests of west-central Alberta, 
Canada, ripping substantially reduced bulk density (the 
mass of dry soil relative to volume) immediately following 
treatment (McNabb 1994). In western Montana, Bradley 
(1997) found that ripping successfully improved infiltra- 
tion rates 3 months after treatment. Following a 12-year 
return interval storm, Bloom (1998) concluded that rip- 
ping greatly reduced landslide erosion on low-risk terrain 
in northern California. 
Other studies, however, report that 
ripping alone has marginal long-term 
success. Luce (1997) reported that 
hydraulic conductivity (a measure for 
comparing 
infiltration 
capacity) 
increased immediately following the 
ripping of Idaho logging roads, but a 
number of the roads returned to their i 
original bulk densities after three sim- 
ulated rainfall events. Soil texture I 
Figure 3. Stream crossing restoration, Clearwater National 
Forest, ID. 
Revegetation and weed invasion 
Quickly establishing vegetation is a priority for any road 
removal project. Vegetation is one of the first visual signs 
of ecosystem recovery, and creates habitat for a variety of 
animals. Ripping the road surface loosens soil and 
increases infiltration capacity, improving the germination 
and growth of seeded plants (Wright and Blaser 1981). 
The resulting vegetative cover further protects against 
erosion and maintains infiltration capacity. Revegetation 
studies tested the effectiveness of different seeding tech- 
niques and measured revegetation trends over time. 
While results varied, incorporating soil amendments gen- 
erally increased rates of revegetation. 
Road sites are typically nutrient poor, and the addition 
of organic matter to a ripped roadbed can greatly acceler- 
ate the establishment of vegetation. Applying straw 
mulch decreased erosion and increased the rate of revege- 
tation in northern California (Hekmer and Reed 1991) 
and north-central Idaho (Stonesifer and McGowan 
1999). Incorporating biosolids, an amendment rich in 
determined the success of the treat- 
ment: soils high in fine silts and clays 
underwent surface sealing, while soil 
settlement occurred in sandier, gran- 
itic soils. Although straw mulch could 
be used to treat surface sealing, it had 
no effect on soil settlement (Luce 
1997). In western Montana, however, 
Bradley (1 997) found mulch prepared 
from slash (forest harvest residues) 
mitigated surface sealing successfully. 
Figure 4. Results offuU recontour, Lolo National Forest, MT. 
O The Ecological Society of America 
www.frontie~ineeology.org 

Benefits and impacts of road removal 
TA Switalski et al. 
Restoring stream crossings 
Where roads intersect streams, there is 
the potential for large amounts of sedi- 
Figure 5. Fd recontour, Clearwater National Forest, ID. 
nutrients and organic matter, significantly increased 
total vegetative cover and native plant biomass on 
treated roadbeds in western Washington after 3 years of 
monitoring (Bergeron 2003). Incorporating topsoil to a 
ripped roadbed increased natural revegetation in north- 
western Wyoming (Cotts et al. 1991) and northern 
California (Hektner and Reed 1991). However, in 
northern Arizona neither topsoil nor mulch increased 
total plant density or cover after 14 months (Elseroad et 
al. 2003). Bradley (1997) found that lopped slash com- 
bined with fertilizer yielded healthy grass communities 
in northwestern Montana after 12 weeks, but the effects 
of fertilizer may be short-lived. For example, on restored 
roadbeds in Connecticut, fertilizer only improved vege- 
tation growth in the first year after application (Maynard 
and Hill 1992). 
While road ripping has been shown to increase the 
rate of revegetation, it may create conditions con- 
ducive to weed invasion. Furthermore, soil amend- 
ments may supply higher than normal levels of nitro- 
gen, accelerating revegetation but favoring weeds 
(Zabinski et al. 2002). Monitoring and preliminary 
research, however, suggest that ripping may actually 
reduce the risk of invasions, because native vegetation 
is able to out-compete weeds and because ripping elim- 
inates a primary vector (human access) for further inva- 
sions. Moreover, locations with higher precipitation 
recover faster and are less susceptible to weed invasion. 
In northern California, some weeds emerged following 
treatment and natural revegetation on hot dry terrain, 
but very few weeds appeared in moister areas (Madej et 
al. 2001). Monitoring in the lush forests of north-cen- 
tral Idaho revealed few weeds following treatments 
(USFS 2003). Bradley (1997) also found that weed 
invasion was generally reduced following ripping in wet 
sites in western Montana. 
ment to be released into the stream sys- 
tem. If a culvert is plugged with debris, 
the result is often a washout where the 
streamflow overtops the road and erodes 
to the original stream grade. These 
washouts can then cause other down- 
stream culverts to fail in a domino 
effect. When a blocked culvert does not 
result in a local washout, streamflow 
may be diverted down the roadbed itself 
or along the slope-side ditch, causing 
large amounts of gully erosion along the 
roadbed and hill slopes below the road. 
For example, in northern California, 
Best et al. (1995) recorded that only 15 
stream diversions produced 64 000 mt of 
sediment (about 4000 dump trucks' 
worth) over a 25-year period. 
Stream crossing restoration has been used in many areas 
in an effort to reduce the risk of catastrophic washouts and 
associated impacts on aquatic ecosystems. Most stream 
erosion occurs during times of high streamflow, and the 
effectiveness of stream crossing restoration was typically 
measured after a major flood event. There is potential for 
local erosion immediately after the excavation of a stream 
crossing, but this can be partially mitigated by using sedi- 
ment traps - often straw bales placed in streams to catch 
sediment (Brown 2002). The impacts of short-term sedi- 
ment loss on aquatic biota have not been evaluated yet. 
Channel incision and bank erosion were the most com- 
mon forms of stream erosion reported, and were correlated 
with stream power (velocity of water flow), the amount of 
large wood in channels, the percentage of coarse material 
in stream bank soils, the amount of road fill excavated, 
and local geology. 
Klein (1987) monitored channel adjustments on 24 
stream crossings in Redwood National Park, CA follow- 
ing a 5-year return interval flood. Erosion was correlated 
with stream power and inversely correlated with the per- 
centage of large wood in the channel and coarse material 
in streambanks. Following a 12-year return interval 
storm in 1997, two researchers revisited the impacts of 
stream crossing restoration in Redwood National Park. 
Madej (2001) examined 207 stream crossings treated 
between 1980 and 1997, and found that most treated 
crossings produced very little sediment and none 
resulted in diversions or debris torrents (rapid movement 
of large quantities of materials downstream) (Table 2). 
The amount of sediment eroded was positively corre- 
lated with stream power, but was also correlated with the 
size of the stream crossing (Madej 2001). After surveying 
86 treated stream crossings, Bloom (1998) found that 
only four crossings contributed substantial erosion (>37 
m3). Five to 20 years after culvert removals, pool habitat 
O The Ecological Society of America 

TA Switalskiet al. 
in excavated streams had only partially recovered 
(Madej 2001b), but a riparian zone of young red alder 
(Alnus rubra) was providing a closed canopy and shade 
over the streams (Madej et al. 2001). 
Full road recontour 
Landslides 
If a roadbed on a steep slope becomes saturated, there is 
an increased risk of road-triggered landslides. Full road 
recontour, the most intensive form of road removal, 
includes treatment of the road segments between stream 
crossings, and is often employed to reduce the risk of 
landslides. Most landslides occur during periods of high 
rainfall and, like stream crossing restoration, the success 
of the treatments are gauged following a flood event. Full 
road recontour has been used effectively to reduce land- 
slides in northern California (Bloom 1998; Madej 2001), 
western Washington (Harr and Nichols 1993), coastal 
Oregon (Cloyd and Musser 1997), and north-central 
Idaho (McClelland et al. 1997; USFS 2003). Important 
factors determining the risk of failure following treatment 
include hillslope position and history of landslides. 
In Redwood National Park, where full recontour was 
first introduced, a 12-year return interval storm in 1997 
provided the opportunity to measure the effectiveness of 
two decades of road removal. Most treated roads produced 
very little sediment. Eighty percent of the road reaches 
had no detectable (> 2 m3) landslide erosion following 
treatment (Madej 2001). Untreated roads produced four 
times as much erosion as treated roads, mostly in the form 
of landslides (Bloom 1998; Madej 2001; Figure 6). Both 
Benefits and impacts of road removal 
Bloom (1998) and Madej (2001) reported that hillslope 
position (as a surrogate for hillslope steepness and the 
-
amount of surface and subsurface water present) was an 
important factor in determining treatment success. 
Although treatments dramatically reduced sediment loss 
from upper- and middle-slope roads (< 40% gradient), 
steep lower-slope roads continued to have high failure 
rates, no matter what treatments were used. 
The Clearwater National Forest in north-central Idaho 
experienced a 50-year return interval flood in the winter 
of 199511996. A rain-on-snow event triggered more than 
900 landslides on highly erodible granitic soils, half of 
which were attributed to roads (McClelland et al. 1997). 
Ten kilometers of roads were recontoured prior to the 
storm. Although ten landslides would have been predicted 
in McClelland's model prior to recontouring, no land- 
slides occurred on the treated roads (McClelland et al. 
1997). To date, over 700 km of roads have been removed 
from this forest with only seven landslides observed, four 
of which were in areas of historic or pre-existing landslides 
(USFS 2003). However, the Clearwater has not experi- 
enced a serious flood event since then, and a further test of 
the effectiveness of the road treatments has not occurred. 
Chronic erosion 
Although most full road recontour studies have only 
examined landslide events following floods, the reduc- 
tion of chronic erosion is also a goal of many road 
removal projects. Chronic erosion from roads can greatly 
reduce an aquatic system's integrity, and in some cases 
can be the sole source of sediment input. A short-term 
problem with road removal is that following a road 
Table 2. Sediment loss on treated and untreated stream crossings in northern California  
Treatedor 
Hillskpe 
Mean(medii) 
Meanpercentage(medii) 
S t o r m r e c u m  
Source  
untreaw 
position 
erosion rate(m3)* 
of excavated fill 
~~I 
(PI  
Treated 
All 
27 (1 I) 
-
5 
Klein (1 987)  
Treated 
Lower 
97 (69) 
II (5) 
Bloom ( 1 998)  
Treated 
Middlelupper 
79 (1 1) 
10 (1) 
Bloom (1 998)  
Treated 
All 
50 (17) 
8 (3) 
12 
Madej (200 I)  
Treated 
All 
15 
2 
Pacific Watershed  
Associates 
(unpublished) 
Treated 
All 
42 (4) 
3 (1) 
Six Rivers National 
Forest (unpublished) 
Untreated 
Lower 
115 
-
12 
Bloom (1998) 
Untreated 
Middlelupper 
180 
-
12 
Bloom (1 998) 
Untreated 
All 
235 
-
50 
Best et a/. (1 995) 
*Many studies only report mean values for erosion, but because crossing erosion volumes are not normally distributed (commonly there are a few 
extreme values), median values of erosion may be a more useful indicator of expected erosion in a crossing. 
O The Ecological Society of America 
www.frontiersinecology.org 

Lower 
Middlelupper Hagans (1999) 
Hill. unpublished 
data 
Study roads 
Benefits and impacts of road removal 
TA Switalski et al. 
increased poaching, hunting, trap- 
ping, and additional negative inter- 
actions with humans facilitated by 
easier access, including direct mor- 
tality from car collisions (Wisdom 
et al. 2000). Removed and revege- 
tated roads would presumably 
reverse many of these impacts and 
create habitat for a variety of ani- 
mals. 
Bradley 
(1997) 
found 
Western toads (Bufo boreas) on 
ripped roads in western Montana, 
where slash created structural diver- 
sity and microhabitats. Some 
Figure 6. Sediment loss on treated and untreated roads in northern California. Values from wildlife biologists argue that road 
Bloom do not include sediment loss from stream crossings on these roads (reported in Tabk removal will reduce grizzly bear 
2), whereas the other studies include stream crossing erosion as part of the sediment loss. 
(Ursus arctos) mortality 
risk 
(USFWS 1993) and increase elk 
recontour, the bare slopes are very susceptible to erosion. 
( C e m  elaphus) habitat security. 
As the slope becomes revegetated over time, however, 
Roads can greatly impact aquatic systems in complex 
erosion levels eventually mimic natural slope conditions. 
ways, including blocking fish passages, introducing fine 
Hickenbottom (2000) showed that recently recon- 
sediment and non-native species, changing amounts of 
toured road segments produced significantly (P < 0.05) 
shading and cover, direct channel infringement, and 
more sediment than road segments recontoured 12 
increasing access and predation by anglers (Luce et al. 
months prior to analysis. Average sediment yield was 
2001). A reduction in sediment delivered to streams 
746 g/m2 for recently recontoured roads (versus 402, 62, 
should increase the quality of aquatic habitat. For exam- 
and 26 g/m2 for the untreated roads, 12-month-old recon- 
ple, suspended sediments can negatively impact salmonid 
tour, and control plots, respectively). These values are 
fisheries through direct mortality, hindering the develop- 
derived across five replicate plots for each treatment type 
ment of eggs and larvae, disrupting natural movements 
applied across two geologic strata and three slope classes; 
and migration, reducing food organisms (Newcombe and 
however, the analyses were all performed within one 
MacDonald 1991), and hindering fish feeding behavior 
watershed. Although these numbers demonstrate a great 
through reduced visibility. (In contrast, inboard ditches 
reduction of sediment yield just one year after recontour- 
can serve as habitat for amphibians and benthic macroin- 
ing, recontoured roads are susceptible to erosion immedi- 
vertebrates, and road removal decreases the amount of 
ately following treatment. Similarly, in north-central 
this habitat). There is an urgent need for research that 
Idaho after 5 years of monitoring, the Clearwater National 
specifically addresses the ecological impact of road 
Forest reported that road treatment has eliminated surface 
removal on aquatic, riparian, and terrestrial habitats. 
erosion outside of treated stream crossings (USFS 2003). 
Additionally, in fully recontoured roads in eastern 
w prioritization 
Kentucky, there was considerably less sediment produced 
than in untreated control plots after one growing season 
With limited budgets and hundreds of thousands of kilo- 
(Kolka and Smidt 2001 ). 
meters of roads, it is essential that land managers priori- 
tize road removal efforts. The process of prioritizing road 
Influence on wildlife 
removal is complex and must take into account ecologi- 
cal, economic, and social costs (Luce et al. 2001). Most 
One of the many goals of road removal is the restoration 
projects prioritize "problem" roads that contribute large 
of the ecological integrity of terrestrial, riparian, and 
amounts of sediment to streams, reducing the quality of 
aquatic habitats. In addition to preservation of habitat, 
fish habitat. Many road removal projects in the Rocky 
restoration may be essential to maintaining and increas- 
Mountains have prioritized roads that allow for habitat 
ing biodiversity (Sinclair et al. 1995). Virtually no 
security for grizzly bears and elk. 
research has addressed the impact of road removal on 
An ecologically relevant prioritization approach might 
wildlife. Since terrestrial wildlife is greatly influenced by 
attempt to increase the amount of highest quality habitat 
road density (Wisdom et al. 2000), it is likely that road 
within watersheds. Selecting roads that affect large 
removal may also affect wildlife. 
reaches of streams or watersheds with already low road 
Roads influence wildlife in a variety of ways, including 
densities may be most appropriate. Although handbooks, 
reduced numbers of snags and downed logs; altered move- 
peer-reviewed articles, and workshops have addressed the 
ment patterns; increased negative edge effects; and 
issue of prioritization, no comprehensive protocol exists, 
~(~~.f~mtieninecdogv.org 
O The Ecological Society of America 

TA Switalski et al. 
Benefits and impacts of road removal 
and field units still commonly apply an ad hoc process for .
Acknowledgements 
selecting roads to be removed. Better prioritization prac-
We thank Bethanie Walder, Marnie Criley, Mark 
tices are at least as important as improvements to rehabil-
VanderMeer, Annie Conner, Mary O'Brien, Tom 
itation techniques. 
Peterson, and Chad Dear for reviewing the manuscript. 
Future research questions 
While some research has been conducted on the effec-
tiveness of road removal, there are still large gaps in our 
knowledge. It is imperative that we support any restora-
tion efforts with sound science. Baseline data are impor-
tant, as is meta-analysis (an overview analysis of many 
studies) of similar projects to predict expected out-
comes. Monitoring after intervention is essential to 
understanding the long-term dynamics, as is replication 
in different soil types and climates. The effectiveness of 
a particular approach depends on the context (eg soils, 
climate, and topography) of the treatment. Addressing 
the impacts of road removal at different spatial scales 
would also be very helpful. 
If the restoration of ecosystem processes is the goal of 
road removal, then it is also essential that we document 
ecosystem recovery and modify our mitigation as appro-
priate. The reduction of erosion and increased infiltration 
following road removal has been documented (eg Luce 
1997; Madej 2001) and continued research on hydrologic 
and geomorphic restoration will soon allow meta-analy-
sis. However, the effectiveness of restoring natural stream 
and flood plain function still needs to be addressed. 
Finally, one of the most important research tasks ahead is 
quantifying the benefits of road removal on aquatic, 
riparian, and terrestrial ecosystems. No studies have yet 
examined the influence of road removal on the recovery 
of these ecosystems. Although road removal is now ocur-
ring across the US and parts of Canada, a rigorous evalu-
ation of 20 years of restoration in northern California by 
an interdisciplinary team of experts could be an emi-
nently fundable and important project. 
Even after thousands of kilometers of roads have been 
removed, there is an alarming lack of published analy-
sis of the effectiveness of these efforts. Road removal 
creates short-term disturbances that can temporarily 
increase sediment loss, but in the long-term, road 
removal may reduce chronic erosion and the risk of 
landslides. Continued research is greatly needed, espe-
cially quantifying how effective various road removal 
techniques are in restoring terrestrial, riparian, and 
aquatic habitat. As is often the case, however, the best 
solution is prevention. In northern California, on 
steep lower slope roads, no form of road removal was 
able to prevent chronic erosion completely. Increased 
research on this emerging field will help us more effec-
tively remove roads, set restoration priorities, and ulti-
mately help restore the integrity of entire ecosystems. 
W References 
Ashby WC. 1997. Soil ripping and herbicides enhance tree and 
shrub restoration on stripmines. Restor Ecol5: 169-77. 
Bagley S. 1998. The road-ripper's guide to wildland road removal. 
Missoula, MT: Wildlands Center for Preventing Roads. 
www.wildlandscpr.org/WCPRpdfs/roadremovalguide.pdf. 
Viewed Nov 26 2003. 
Bergeron KD. 2003. The effects of an organic soil amendment on 
native plant establishment and physical soil properties on an 
obliterated forest road (MS thesis). Seattle, WA: University of 
Washington. 
Best DW, Kelsey HM, Hagans DK, and Alpert M. 1995.Role of flu-
vial hillslope erosion and road construction in the sediment 
budget of Garrett Creek, Humboldt County, California. In: 
Nolan KM, Kelsey HM, and Marron DC (Eds). Geomorphic 
processes and aquatic habitat in the Redwood Creek Basin, 
northwestern California. Arcata, CA: US Geological Survey 
Professional Paper 1454-M. www.krisweb.com/krisredwood/ 
krisdb/html/krisweb/biblio/redwood~creek/usgs/usgs~1454m~ 
best.pdf. Viewed Nov 26 2003. 
Bloom AL. 1998. An assessment of road removal and erosion con-
trol treatment effectiveness: a comparison of 1997 storm ero-
sion response between treated and untreated roads in Redwood 
Creek Basin, northwestern California (MS thesis). Arcata, 
CA: Humboldt State University. 
Bradley K. 1997. An evaluation of two techniques for the utiliza-
tion of logging residues: organic mulch for abandoned road 
revegetation and accelerated decomposition in small chipped 
piles (MS thesis). Missoula, MT: University of Montana. 
Brown TM. 2002. Short-term total suspended-solidconcentrations 
resulting from stream crossing obliteration in the Clearwater 
National Foiest, Idaho (MS thesis). Seattle,WA: University of 
Washington. 
Cloyd C and Musser K. 1997.Effectiveness of road stabilization. In: 
Plumley H (Ed.). Assessment of the effects of the 1996flood on 
the Siuslaw National Forest. Cowallis, OR: US Department of 
Agriculture, Siuslaw National Forest. p 19-23. 
Cotts NR, Redente EF, and Schiller R. 1991. Restoration methods 
for abandoned roads at lower elevations in Grand Teton 
National Park, Wyoming. Arid Soil Res Rehab 5: 235-49. 
Davis S. 1990. Effectiveness of a winged subsoiler in ameliorating a 
compacted clayey forest soil. West J Appl For 5: 138-39. 
Elseroad AC, Fule PZ, and Covington WW. 2003. Forest road 
revegetation: effects of seeding and soil amendments. Ecol 
Restur 21: 180-85. 
Forman RTT, Sperling D, Bissonette JA, et al. 2003. Road ecology 
-science and solutions.Washington DC: Island Press. 
Gucinski H, Furniss MJ,Ziemer RR, and Brookes MH. 2001. Forest 
roads: a synthesis of scientific information. General Technical 
Report PNW-GTR-509. Portland, OR: US Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research 
Station. www.fs.fed.us/eng/road~mgt/science.pdf.
Viewed Nov 
26 2003. 
Harr RD and Nichols RA. 1993. Stabilizing forest roads to help 
restore fish habitats: a northwest Washington example. 
Fisheries 18: 18-22. 
Havlick DG. 2002. No place distant - roads and motorized recre-
ation on America's public lands. Washington DC: Island Press. 
Hektner MM and Reed LJ. 1991. Revegetation and watershed 
rehabilitation in Redwood National Park. USDI - Redwood 
National Park in-service report. Oakland, CA: Redwood 
National Park. 
O The Ecological Society of America 
www.frontiersinecology.org 

Benefits and impacts of road removal 
Hickenbottom JA. 2000. A comparative analysis of surface erosion 
and water runoff from existing and recontoured Forest Service 
roads: O'Brien Creek Watershed Lolo National Forest, 
Montana (MS thesis). Missoula, MT University of Montana. 
Klein RD. 1987. Stream channel adjustments following logging 
road removal in Redwood National Park. Arcata, CA: 
National Park Service. Redwood National Park Watershed 
Rehabilitation Technical Report Number 23. 
Kolka R and Smidt M. 2001. Revisiting forest road retirement. 
Water Resour Impact 3: 15-1 6. 
Luce CH. 2002. Hydrological processes and pathways affected by 
forest roads: what do we still need to learn? Hydrol Process 16: 
2901-04. 
Luce CH, Rieman BE, Dunham JB, et al. 2001. Incorporating 
aquatic ecology into decisions on prioritization of road decom- 
missioning. Water Resour Impact 3: 8-14. 
Luce CH. 1997. Effectiveness of road ripping in restoring infiltra- 
tion capacity of forest roads. Restor Ecol5: 265-75. 
Luce CH and Cundy TW. 1994. Parameter identification for a 
runoff model for forest roads. Water Resour Res 30: 1057-69. 
Madej MA, Barr B, Curren T, et al. 2001. Effectiveness of road 
restoration in reducing sediment loads. Arcata, CA: US 
Geological Survey, Redwood Field Station. www.werc.usgs 
.gov/redwood/project-doc.pdf.
Viewed Nov 26 2003. 
Madej MA. 2001a. Erosion and sediment delivery following 
removal of forest roads. Earth Surf Proc Land 26: 175-90. 
www.werc.usgs.gov/redwood/esplroads.pdf.Viewed Nov 26 
2003. 
Madej MA. 2001b. Development of channel organization and 
roughness following sediment pulses in single-thread, gravel 
bed rivers. Water Resour Res 37: 2259-72. 
Maynard AA and Hill DE. 1992. Vegetative stabilization of logging 
roads and skid trails. North] Appl For 9: 153-57. 
McClelland DE, Foltz RB, Falter CM, et al. 1997. Relative effects 
on a low-volume road system of landslides resulting from 
episodic storms in northern Idaho. Transport Res Rec 2: 23543. 
McNabb DH. 1994. Tllage of compacted haul roads and landings 
in the boreal forests of Alberta, Canada. For Ecol Manage 66: 
179-94. 
Megahan WF and Kidd WJ. 1972. Effects of logging and logging 
roads on erosion and sediment deposition from steep terrain. 
J For 70: 136-41. 
Newcombe CP and MacDonald DD. 1991. Effects of suspended 
TA Switalski et al. 
sediments on aquatic ecosystems. N Am J Fish Manage 11: 
72-82. 
Sinclair ARE, Hik DS, Schmitz OJ, et al. 1995. Biodiversity and 
the need for habitat renewal. Ecol Appl5: 579-87. 
Stonesifer A and McGowan F. 1999. 1999 Clearwater National 
Forest watershed restoration monitoring results (road oblitera- 
tion). Orofino, ID: US Department of Agriculture Forest 
Service, Clearwater National Forest. 
Swanson FJ and Dyrness CT. 1975. Impact of clear-cutting and 
road construction on soil erosion by landslides in the western 
Cascade Range, Oregon. Geology 3: 393-96. 
Trombulak SC and Frissell CA. 2000. Review of ecological effects 
of roads on terrestrial and aquatic communities. Cons Biol 14: 
18-30. 
USFWS (US Fish and Wildlife Service). 1993. Grizzly bear recov- 
ery plan. Missoula, MT: USFWS. 
USFS (USDA Forest Service). 2003. Road decommissioning mon- 
itoring report 2002. Orofino, ID: US Department of 
Agriculture Forest Service, Clearwater National Forest. 
Weaver WE and Hagans DK. 1999. Storm-proofing forest roads. In: 
Sessions JC and Chungs WC (Eds). Proceedings of the 
International Mountain Logging and 10th Pacific Northwest Sky- 
line Symposium; March 28 1999; h a l l i s ,  OR. Corvallis, OR: 
Oregon State University Department of Forest Engineering and the 
International Union of Foresay Research Organizations. p 23C-45. 
Wemple BC Jones JA, and Grant GE. 1996. Channel network 
extension by logging roads in two basins, western Cascades, 
Oregon. Water Res Bull 32: 1195-1207. 
Wight JR and Siddoway FH. 1972. Improving precipitation-use 
efficiency on rangeland by surface modification. J Soil Water 
Cons 27: 170-74. 
Wright DL and Blaser RE. 1981. Establishment of vegetation on 
graded road cuts as influenced by topsoiling and tillage. Soil Sci 
Soc Am] 45: 419-22. 
Wisdom MJ, Holthausen RS, Wales BC, et al. 2000. Source habi- 
tats for terrestrial vertebrates of focus in the interior Columbia 
basin: broad-scale trends and management implications. 
Volume 1 - Overview. Portland, OR: US Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research 
Station. General Technical Report PNW-GTR-485. 
Zabinski CA, DeLuca TH, Cole DN, and Moynahan 0 s .  2002. 
Restoration of highly impacted subalpine campsites in the 
Eagle Camp Wilderness, Oregon. Restor Ecol 10: 275-81. 
www.frontiersinecology.org 
O The Ecological Society of America 

You have printed the following article:
Benefits and Impacts of Road Removal
T. A. Switalski; J. A. Bissonette; T. H. DeLuca; C. H. Luce; M. A. Madej
Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, Vol. 2, No. 1. (Feb., 2004), pp. 21-28.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=1540-9295%28200402%292%3A1%3C21%3ABAIORR%3E2.0.CO%3B2-2
This article references the following linked citations. If you are trying to access articles from an
off-campus location, you may be required to first logon via your library web site to access JSTOR. Please
visit your library's website or contact a librarian to learn about options for remote access to JSTOR.
References
Biodiversity and the Need for Habitat Renewal
A. R. E. Sinclair; D. S. Hik; O. J. Schmitz; G. G. E. Scudder; D. H. Turpin; N. C. Larter
Ecological Applications, Vol. 5, No. 3. (Aug., 1995), pp. 579-587.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=1051-0761%28199508%295%3A3%3C579%3ABATNFH%3E2.0.CO%3B2-F
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 1 of 1 -
