 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928/523-7182, FAX 928/523-0296, www.eri.nau.edu 
Herbaceous Vegetation Responses Six Years After Restoration Treatments 
 
By Michael Stoddard 
 
Introduction 
Altered forest structure and functional processes have led to many 
critical conservation problems in southwestern ponderosa pine 
ecosystems, including the loss of native biological diversity, de-
clining herbaceous productivity and increased frequency of large, 
high-severity wildfires. Ecological restoration treatments involv-
ing thinning trees and reducing surface fuels through prescribed 
burning have proven effective in reducing fire severity. Disturb-
ances associated with restoration treatments have the potential to 
enhance native biological diversity and herbaceous production.  
These disturbances can also have the unintended consequences of 
promoting the establishment of non-native species. In spite of the 
widespread use of these treatments, there is little understanding of 
the long-term persistence of both native and non-native herba-
ceous species following restoration treatments.  
Recent research (Stoddard et al. 2011) examined the differences 
in native and non-native understory population in a southwestern 
ponderosa pine forest that 1) has been treated using low, medium 
and high levels of thinning young trees to emulate historical forest 
patterns followed by one prescribed fire and 2) where fires had 
been excluded for more than a century and where no restoration 
treatments had been implemented (typical of today’s forest condi-
tions). 
Research Findings 
 
Native plant cover was generally greatest in treatments that 
involved thinning the most trees. 
 
 
Native species richness was consistently higher in treated 
stands (regardless of thinning intensity) than in untreated 
stands. 
 
 
Plant community composition was still in flux by the sixth 
year after treatment. 
 
 
Immediately after treatment, non-native species comprised 
6% of the total cover where treatment-induced disturbances 
were the greatest, through was reduced by half six years after 
treatment. 
   Fact Sheet: Herbaceous Vegetation Responses Six Years After Restoration Treatments        October 2012     
 
Forest floor is thick with debris and lacking in understory 
plants in this pre-treatment photo from 1998.  
In one year post-treatment (2000), the foreground is  
dominated by non-native forbs. 
Six years after treatment (2006), the understory is  
dominated by native grasses. 

 
Management Implications 
 Disturbances associated with restoration 
treatments can facilitate the establishment of 
non-native plants; however, the post-treatment 
plant community was dominated by native spe-
cies (Figure 1). 
 
 Understory responses take several years to 
develop and vary depending on climate, severi-
ty of treatment disturbances and past history of 
the site.  
 
 Since plant community changes occur 
slowly in semiarid climates of the Southwest, 
long-term monitoring programs are essential to 
evaluate whether observed trends in the post-
treatment understory are successional or persis-
tent changes. 
 
 
 
 
 
References 
Moore, M.M., C.A Casey, J.D. Bakker, J.D. Springer, P.Z Fulé, W.W. Covington, and D.C Laughlin. 
2006. Herbaceous vegetation responses (1992–2004) to restoration treatments in a ponderosa pine 
forest. Rangeland Ecology and Management 59:135-144. 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Contact 
 
Michael Stoddard, Mike.Stoddard@nau.edu  
Dr. Christopher McGlone, Christopher.McGlone@nau.edu 
Dr. Peter Fulé, Pete.Fule@nau.edu 
Dr. Daniel Laughlin, D.Laughlin@waikato.ac.nz 
Mark Daniels, Mark.Daniels@nau.edu 
 
This Fact Sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
Stoddard, M.T., C.M. McGlone, P.Z. Fulé, D.C. Laughlin, M.L. Daniels. 2011. Native 
plants dominate understory vegetation following ponderosa pine forest restoration 
treatments. 
Western 
Northern 
American 
Naturalist 
71:206-214. 
http://
library.eri.nau.edu/gsdl/collect/erilibra/index/assoc/HASHe68a.dir/doc.pdf  
 
Figure 1. Percentage of native and non-native plant cover 
based on level of disturbance, from no thinning (control) to 
high intensity thinning of young trees.  
