 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
What Are the Consequences of Cutting Old Ponderosa Pine Trees? 
A Systematic Review 
By Dr. Liz Kalies, ERI Research Associate 
INTRODUCTION 
In ponderosa pine forests, restoration treatments 
(including thinning and prescribed burning) are being 
implemented to reduce the threat of stand-replacing fire 
and to restore ecosystem structure, composition, and 
function to within the natural range of variability. In 
implementing treatments, old trees (>150 years) are 
typically retained due to their relative rarity and as-
sumed ecological importance, and because old trees 
take centuries to replace. The oldest ponderosa pine 
have unique morphological and presumably functional 
characteristics and can exceed 700 years in age 
(Huckaby et al. 2003). The morphology of such trees 
often includes large trunks and branches, deeply fur-
rowed bark, deformities in crown structure, epicormic 
branching, big mistletoe brooms, or external fire scars (Harrington and Sackett 1992; Huckaby et al. 2003; 
Morgan et al. 2002; Swetnam and Brown 1992), and thus they may have different functions than younger 
trees related to these different structures. As treatments are implemented at increasingly larger scales, a wide 
variety of thinning treatments, including cutting old trees, have been proposed. We used systematic review 
methodology to specifically address the question: What are the consequences to ecosystem function of cut-
ting old ponderosa pine trees; particularly, do old trees serve a different function than younger trees?  
 
METHODS 
We searched Web of Science and Google Scholar in April 2013 and selected studies that met three criteria: 
(1) Subject: old ponderosa pine trees or stands, in any region; defined as trees >150 years of age; (2) Com-
parator: young ponderosa pine trees or stands; and (3) Outcome: any ecosystem function or service, includ-
ing but not limited to biological diversity, fire/drought/insect resistance, carbon sequestration, social values, 
etc. We scored each study based on the study design (randomized, replicated, and controlled=5, replicated 
and controlled=4, controlled=3, observational=2, or inadequate due to problems with methodology=1), the 
quality of the journal (Journal Impact Factor™), and the number of times it has been cited in the scientific 
literature (according to Google Scholar). The final quality of evidence scores were calculated as: (quality of 
design) + (impact factor) + (citations/year), and binned in categories of High (score>20), Medium 
(10<score<20), or Low (score<10). 
 
 
    Fact Sheet: What Are the Consequences of Cutting Old Ponderosa Pine Trees? A Systematic Review  
 
 
 
  
 
April 2014 
Photo courtesy the Ecological Restoration Institute 

RESULTS 
 Our weight-of-evidence summary 
showed that studies with greater 
strength demonstrated positive 
effects of old trees on ecosystem 
properties, compared to younger 
trees, in terms of cone production, 
basal area increment, and soil res-
piration (Table 1). Young trees 
show higher growth efficiency 
and photosynthetic rates, but there 
is no difference between old and 
young trees in terms of nutrient 
cycling (Table 1). Finally, old-
growth stands of trees store more 
total 
ecosystem 
carbon 
than 
young trees (Table 1). 
 Lower scoring studies (score of 3) 
showed that old trees have higher 
scenic beauty than younger trees 
(Table 1). All the wildlife studies 
had a quality of evidence score of 
3; they produced a variety of posi-
tive, negative, and neutral im-
pacts, implying that old-growth 
stands and younger stands often 
have different species composi-
tions, and maintaining both types 
of stands on the landscape leads to 
higher overall wildlife diversity 
and abundance. Similarly, the on-
ly genetic study we found (score 
of 3) showed that old trees are no 
more genetically diverse than 
young trees, but have a different 
genetic composition and thus add 
diversity to the landscape (Table 1).   
MANAGEMENT IMPLICATIONS 
The weight-of-evidence (Table 1) indicated that both old and young ponderosa pine trees provide ecological 
functions; however, young trees are quick to grow and prevalent on the landscape. Further, since some im-
portant ecosystem functions are related to tree age (e.g., carbon storage, quality of wildlife habitat, social 
values, etc.), it is important to differentiate over the range of “old trees” from 150 to 700+ years old when 
making management decisions. In the Southwest, trees older than 400 years are very uncommon, and over 
500 years old are incredibly rare (Swetnam and Brown, 1992). Further, while a 500-year-old tree is replace-
able, a living tree that was alive in 1510 is not; nor is its dendrochronological record. There is a dearth of 
empirical studies on old ponderosa pine trees in terms of their value over young trees, which was a major 
result of this review. Given that old trees take centuries to “replace,” the precautionary approach suggests 
old ponderosa pine trees should be protected during management activities. More studies that specifically 
examine tree age and control for size are needed; if some ecosystem functions could be obtained with simp-
ly fast-growing, large trees, that information would be beneficial from a management perspective. 
Table 1. Response variables; results in terms of whether old trees had a posi-
tive (+), negative (-), or neutral (0) effect on the response variable compared 
to young trees; quality of evidence scores; and citations for studies that met 
search criteria. 

Contact 
Dr. Liz Kalies, Liz.Kalies@nau.edu  
 
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was supported by funding provided by the AZ Board of Regents through the 
Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF).  
REFERENCES 
Anthoni, P.M., M.H. Unsworth, B.E. Law, J. Irvine, D.D. Baldocchi, S. Van Tuyl, and D. Moore. 2002. Seasonal differences in 
carbon and water vapor exchange in young and old-growth ponderosa pine ecosystems. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology 
111:203-222. 
Brown, T.C., and T.C. Daniel. 1984. Modeling forest scenic beauty: concepts and application to ponderosa pine. Research Paper 
RM-256. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA. 
Fajardo, A., J.M. Graham, J.M. Goodburn, and C.E. Fiedler 2007. Ten-year responses of ponderosa pine growth, vigor, and recruit-
ment to restoration treatments in the Bitterroot Mountains, Montana, USA. Forest Ecology and Management 243:50-60. 
George, T.L., S. Zack, and W.F.J. Laudenslayer. 2005. A comparison of bird species composition and abundance between late- and 
mid-seral ponderosa pine forests. GTR-PSW-198. USDA Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Research Station, Albany, Cali-
fornia, USA. 
Gillette, N.E., R.S. Vetter, S.R. Mori, C.R. Rudolph, and D.R. Welty. 2008. Response of ground-dwelling spider assemblages to 
prescribed fire following stand structure manipulation in the southern Cascade Range. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 
38:969-980. 
Harrington, M.G., and S.S. Sackett. 1992. Past and present fire influences on southwestern ponderosa pine old growth. In M. R. 
Kaufmann, W.H. Moir, and R.L. Bassett (Eds.), Old-growth forests in the Southwest and Rocky Mountain Regions: Proceed-
ings of a workshop (pp. 44-50). Portal, Arizona, USA: Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, USDA Forest 
Service, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA. 
Hart, S.C., M.K. Firestone, and E.A. Paul 1992. Decomposition and nutrient dynamics of ponderosa pine needles in a Mediterrane-
an-type climate. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 22:306-314. 
Huckaby, L.S., M.R. Kaufmann, P.J. Fornwalt, J.M. Stoker, and C. Dennis. 2003. Field guide to old ponderosa pines in the Colora-
do Front Range. In  (pp. 43). Fort Collins, Colorado: USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 
Irvine, J., B.E. Law, P.M. Anthoni, and F.C. Meinzer 2002. Water limitations to carbon exchange in old-growth and young ponder-
osa pine stands. Tree Physiology 22:189-196. 
Kelliher, F.M., D.J. Ross, B.E. Law, D.D. Baldocchi, and N.J. Rodda. 2004. Limitations to carbon mineralization in litter and min-
eral soil of young and old ponderosa pine forests. Forest Ecology and Management 191:201-213. 
Knapp, P.A., and P.T. Soulé. 2011. Increasing water-use efficiency and age-specific growth responses of old-growth ponderosa pine 
trees in the Northern Rockies. Global Change Biology 17:631-641. 
Kolanoski, K.M. 2002. Genetic variation of ponderosa pine in northern Arizona: implications for restoration. Northern Arizona Uni-
versity, Flagstaff, Arizona, USA. 
Law, B.E., O.J. Sun, J. Campbell, S. Van Tuyl, and P.E. Thornton. 2003. Changes in carbon storage and fluxes in a chronosequence 
of ponderosa pine. Global Change Biology 9:510-524. 
Law, B.E., P.E. Thornton, J. Irvine, P.M. Anthoni, and S. Van Tuyl. 2001. Carbon storage and fluxes in ponderosa pine forests at 
different developmental stages. Global Change Biology 7:755-777. 
Linhart, Y.B., and J.B. Mitton. 1985. Relationships among reproduction, growth rates, and protein heterozygosity in ponderosa 
pine. American Journal of Botany 72:181-184. 
Mannan, R.W., and E.C. Meslow. 1984. Bird populations and vegetation characteristics in managed and old-growth forests, north-
eastern Oregon. The Journal of Wildlife Management 48:1219-1238. 
Morgan, T.A., C.E. Fiedler, and C. Woodall. 2002. Characteristics of dry site old-growth ponderosa pine in the Bull Mountains of 
Montana, USA. Natural Areas Journal, 22, 11-19. 
Reynolds, R.T., and B.D. Linkhart. 1992. Flammulated owls in ponderosa pine: evidence for preference for old growth. Pages 166-
169 in M. R. Kaufmann, W. H. Moir and R. L. Bassett, editors. Old-growth forests in the Southwest and Rocky Mountain 
Regions: Proceedings of a workshop. Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, USDA Forest Service, Fort 
Collins, Colorado, USA, Portal, Arizona, USA. 
Skov, K.R., T.E. Kolb, and K.F. Wallin. 2005. Difference in radial growth response to restoration thinning and burning treatments 
between young and old ponderosa pine in Arizona. Western Journal of Applied Forestry 20:36-43. 
Stohlgren, T.J., and C.A. Farmer. 1994. Reevaluating delineated bald eagle winter roost habitat in Lava Beds National Monument, 
California. Journal of Raptor Research 28:205-212. 
Swetnam, T.W., and P.M. Brown. 1992. Oldest known conifers in the southwestern United States: temporal and spatial patterns of 
maximum age. Pages 24-38 in M. R. Kaufmann, W. H. Moir and R. L. Bassett, editors. Old-growth forests in the Southwest 
and Rocky Mountain Regions: Proceedings of a workshop. Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, USDA 
Forest Service, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA, Portal, Arizona, USA. 
Yoder, B.J., M.G. Ryan, R.H. Waring, A.W. Schoettle, and M.R. Kaufmann. 1994. Evidence of reduced photosynthetic rates in old 
trees. Forest Science 40:513-527. 
 
 
 
 
