2
Ecological Restoration Institute
Northern Arizona University
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
www.eri.nau.edu
Working Papers in Southwestern 
Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
Understory Plant Community
Restoration in the Uinkaret
Mountains, Arizona

Working Papers in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in
researching, implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of southwestern
ponderosa pine forests. These forests have been significantly altered through more than a
century of fire suppression, livestock grazing, logging, and other ecosystem changes. As a
result, ecological and recreational values of these forests have decreased, while the threat
of large-scale fires has increased dramatically. The ERI is helping to restore these forests
in collaboration with numerous public agencies. By allowing natural processes such as
fire to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide
ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
Every restoration project needs to be site-specific, but the detailed experience of field
practitioners may help guide practitioners elsewhere. The Working Papers series presents
findings and management recommendations from research and observations by the ERI
and its partner organizations.
This publication, like the restoration treatments being implemented in the Uinkaret
Mountains, would not have been possible without significant staff contributions and
funding from the Bureau of Land Management. The views and conclusions contained in
this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the
opinions or policies of the U.S. Government. Mention of trade names or commercial
products does not constitute their endorsement by the U.S. Government.

a
Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
Background
The herbaceous plant community, consisting of shrubs, grasses, sedges, and forbs, is a vital part of
ponderosa pine forest ecosystems. Restoration treatments have tended to focus directly on tree patterns
and reintroduction of fire. For restoration to be successful, however, the natural diversity and
productivity of the understory plant community must be regained, and invasive or exotic understory
species must be removed or maintained at tolerable levels. This document offers preliminary
recommendations for understory restoration based on monitoring and observation in the Uinkaret
Mountains and other ponderosa pine restoration sites in northern Arizona.
Setting Goals
Understory restoration must always be viewed in the context of the natural ecological characteristics of
the ecosystem. In ponderosa pine ecosystems it is often feasible to gain a detailed understanding of
historical reference conditions, as defined in Moore et al. (1999). It may not be possible to reconstruct
historical understory conditions as precisely as those of the overstory, but some reference conditions
can be deduced from direct measurements of relatively undisrupted sites, historical data, or
reconstructions of past conditions (Springer et al. 2001).
An understanding of reference conditions and ecological linkages has allowed us to set the following
goals for understory restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains:
Regain native species richness and community composition. Historical species composition and
abundance are largely unknown; however, plant cover should consist predominantly of native species
that typically provide more resources for wildlife than nonnative species.
Regain historic understory plant cover. Total plant cover at two reference sites on the North Rim of
the Grand Canyon was 35 and 37 percent. In the Uinkaret Mountains, total plant cover in unrestored
forest areas is typically very low. It has risen substantially in units that have been treated, approaching
that at North Rim sites.
Regain the ability to carry surface fire. Frequent, low-intensity ground fires played a decisive role in
maintaining the structure of southwestern ponderosa pine forests prior to Euro-American settlement.
The herbaceous understory should be sufficiently dense to carry periodic fire. It is also essential for
preventing erosion and holding soils in place following fires.
Reestablish a shrub component. Though historic levels are unknown, shrubs currently exist at very
low levels in most of northern Arizona’s ponderosa pine forests. It may be possible to learn about
previous levels by examining old photographs and other historical records.
1

a
Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
What to Measure
The ERI has measured the following parameters at restoration sites to determine to what extent
understory restoration goals have been met. These parameters should be measured for years
following treatment in order to evaluate how they are affected by successional change within the
understory community.
Species richness and diversity. The ERI has used the Simpson’s diversity index, a weighted measure
of richness and abundance, as well as overall species counts within plots. The index rose from 0 prior
to treatment of the seeded part of one plot (96-1) to 14.1 after treatment, while a total of 96 species
has been inventoried in the unit’s treated and untreated portions after treatment.
Species composition. Resource goals are typically best met when a high percentage of understory
species are native rather than invasive.
Total plant cover. Total cover has increased in the treatment units at Mount Trumbull. Cover in a
seeded unit rose from 0 pre-treatment to 44 percent after treatment, and that in an unseeded unit
rose from 6 percent to an average of 25 percent. A target of 33 percent cover has been set by using
the North Rim sites as reference points, and this goal has nearly been reached in some units.
Ability to carry fire. The BLM has suggested a target of 500 to 1,500 pounds per acre of understory
vegetation in order to carry surface fire. This figure, though, will vary widely depending upon such
site-specific variables as soil type and moisture.
Shrub coverage. Coverage of shrubs is monitored together with the herbaceous community, using
measures of total cover and Simpson’s diversity index.
Operations
Restoration plots in the Uinkarets have been monitored for understory response following thinning
and burning. Some plots have been left unseeded, but others have been treated with a seed mix.
Vegetative response has varied widely according to such factors as precipitation, seed presence in the
soil seed bank, and the soil temperature reached in fires.
The reseeding mix includes seeds of perennial grasses, shrubs, and early successional forbs (see
Table) purchased from suppliers in Utah and Colorado and collected locally. An initial 20 percent
rate of germination was increased to 40 percent by covering the mix, which is accomplished by
dragging a weighted bar over the seeded ground behind an all-terrain vehicle or Bobcat. The BLM
will rest restored areas from livestock grazing for at least three or four years. Monitoring of treated
and control blocks will continue to allow precise analysis of the effects of various restoration
treatments.
Significant operational challenges remain before reseeding and understory restoration can be carried
out on a large scale. It has often proven expensive to acquire appropriate seed mixes, especially from
local sources. Collecting from local sources is preferred because it helps preserve local genetic
material, but there are typically only small numbers of plants to serve as seed sources. Control of
exotic or invasive species such as mullein (Verbascum thapsus) and cheatgrass (Bromus tectorum) is
also an ongoing problem, and further research is needed to address this issue.
2

a
Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3
Table. Species reseeded in restoration units, 1996-2001
Cool-season perennial grasses
Price per pound
Agropyron smithii
Western wheatgrass
$3.50-$10.00
Agropyron trachycaulum
Slender wheatgrass
$1.20-$6.00
Bromus marginatus
Mountain brome
$1.80-$3.50
Elymus cinereus
Basin wild rye
$9.75
Elymus elymoides
Squirreltail
$22.00-$40.00
Festuca arizonica
Arizona fescue
$10.50-$20.00
Koeleria cristata
Prairie junegrass
$16.94-$27.00
Oryzopsis hymenoides
Indian ricegrass
$4.80-$8.75
Poa ampla
Big bluegrass
$9.00
Poa canbyi
Canby bluegrass
$9.50
Poa sandbergii
Sandberg bluegrass
$9.00
Stipa comata
Needle-and-thread grass
Collected locally
Warm-season perennial grasses
Bouteloua curtipendula
Sideoats grama
$5.50-$6.50
Bouteloua gracilis
Blue grama
$6.25-$14.00
Schizachyrium scoparium
Little bluestem
$7.75-$13.50
Sporobolus cryptandrus
Sand dropseed
$3.75-$6.75
Perennial forbs
Eriogonum umbellatum
Sulfur buckwheat
$63.00
Geranium caespitosum
Purple geranium
$50.00
Linum lewisii
Blue flax
$9.00
Mahonia repens
Oregon grape
$40.00-$52.00
Oenothera caespitosa
Tufted evening-primrose
$30.00
Penstemon barbatus
Beardlip penstemon
$85.01
Penstemon pachyphyllus
Thick-leaf penstemon
$40.57
Annual forbs
Gilia aggregata
Scarlet gilia
$35.00
Shrubs
Amelanchier utahensis
Utah serviceberry
$80.00
Artemisia frigida
Fringed sagebrush
$60.00
Purshia tridentata
Antelope bitterbrush
$15.53
Rhus trilobata
Skunkbush sumac
$14.20
Ribes cereum
Wax currant
$82.24
Rosa woodsii
Arizona rose
$36.00
Sambucus cerulea
Blue elderberry
$32.92
Symphoricarpos oreophilus
Mountain snowberry
$47.05

a
Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
Recommendations
Experience at Mount Trumbull has allowed the ERI to specify the following preliminary
management recommendations.
•
Include native perennial grasses in seed mixes. Perennial grasses are important 
understory plants that help carry low-intensity fire, but they are present only in low 
numbers in the soil seed bank in the Uinkaret Mountains. The use of mixes that includes 
such native species as mountain brome (Bromus marginatus), western wheatgrass 
(Agropyron smithii), and squirreltail (Elymus elymoides) has aided in perennial grass 
recovery. It appears that most of these grasses require at least two to three years, or a year 
of favorable moisture, to germinate.
•
Include seeds of native forbs that colonize quickly or add nitrogen to the soil. Forbs 
that germinate and grow quickly may be able to outcompete undesirable nonnative 
species.
•
Collect seed from local seed sources. Utilizing local sources of seed whenever possible,
including seed collected by hand near treatment sites, will help minimize changes to the 
genetic material of native species.
•
Cover seed to improve germination rates. Germination rates double when reseeding 
mixes are lightly covered with soil.
•
Limit livestock grazing. Rest from grazing following treatment will allow establishment 
of herbaceous species, which may take several years.
•
Limit spread of invasive species. Invasive plant species such as cheatgrass pose a 
significant threat to the diversity of some restoration sites, and action should be taken to 
limit their spread.
•
Monitor successional change. Understory cover and species composition continue to 
change in the years following treatment. Some invasive species, such as mullein, appear to 
decline after an initial surge of growth. Others, such as cheatgrass, may persist for years.
References
Moore, M. M., W. W. Covington, and P. Z. Fulé. 1999. Evolutionary environment, reference
conditions, and ecological restoration: A southwestern ponderosa pine perspective. Ecological
Applications 9(4):1266-1277.
Springer, J. D., A. E. M. Waltz, P. Z. Fulé, M. M. Moore, and W. W. Covington. 2001. Seeding
versus natural regeneration: A comparison of vegetation change following thinning and burning
in ponderosa pine. In R. K. Vance, C. B. Edminster, W. W. Covington, and J. A. Blake, comps.
2001. Ponderosa pine ecosystems restoration and conservation: Steps toward stewardship. April 25-
27, 2000, Flagstaff, AZ. Proceedings RMRS-P-22. Ogden, UT: USDA Forest Service, Rocky
Mountain Research Station.
4

For More Information
Southwest Exotic Plant Information Clearinghouse
(http://wapiti.wr.usgs.gov/swepic/index.html) is a cooperative interagency effort that
compiles and disseminates information about invasive plants of the Southwest.
Ecological Restoration Institute, http://www.eri.nau.edu or 928-523-7182.
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution   
NAU Creative Communications/A48089/1M/05-02

Ecological Restoration Institute
Northern Arizona University
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
www.eri.nau.edu
2ERI 35AE
NON-PROFIT ORG.
U.S. POSTAGE
PAID
NORTHERN
ARIZONA
UNIVERSITY
