~~
United States
~) Department of
Agriculture
Forest Service
Rocky Mountain
Forest and Range
Experiment Station
Fort Collins,·
Colorado: 80526
General Technical
Report RM-247
Sustainable Ecological Systems:
Implementing an Ecological
Approach to Land Management
July 12-15, 1993
Flagstaff, Arizona

Conservation Biology, Restoration Ecology,
and a Navajo View of Nature
Victoria Yazzie Pii'ia and W. Wallace Covington1
Abstract -
The renaissance of ecologically based forestry over the past
decade has led some individuals within the natural resource management
professions to incorporate concepts articulated by conservation biologists
and restoration ecqloglsts In resource management decisions. However,
many within these professions who embrace the traditional western science
tradition of natural resource management resist some of the premises
advanced by conservation
biolog ists
and restoration ecologists as
unscientific and too metaphysical. Navajo traditionansts, on the other hand,
hold values which strongly support many of these premises. This paper
explores key concepts of conservation biology and restoration ecology from
the perspective of traditional Navajo culture. Central to Navajo "religion-
and culture Is the concept of Sa'e NagMi Blk'e ,H6zh6 ("walking toward the
sacred way"), which expresses happIness, health, and beauty of land as
well as the harmony of the Interrelationship of Individuals with their
environment. Holistic thinking In maintaInIng a harmonious relationship with
the land Is a central foundation of a Navajo cultural perspective.
An awakening of attitudes toward the qu.llity of the human
world and of the preservation of nature has resulted in a
broadened ecological approach to man's relationship with his
environment. Ecosystem management, new perspectives,
biological diversity, sustainable ecosystems, and new forestry
are only a few of thephrases used to characterizethischanging
view. The relationship of man to the environment has been Ire
center of thoughr for many native people across the United
States. These current concepts are not new. In fact, western
philosophers such as Henry David Tborcau, John Muir, and
AIdo Leopold have.long been influenced, in subtle ways, by an
understanding aDd interpretation through lessons of experience
founded in Native American cultures.
The attitude of ecological interrelationships is a progression
of thought incorporating new observations aOO adjusting to
influence a completely new interpretation. It is through
observation, experience,and intuition that these philosophers
evolved to this mature attitude toward a dynamic system. This
study is interxJed .toexamine the Icey elements of conservation
biology and restoration ecology, am those of Navajo philosophy
of land ethics.
, Victoria Yazzla Piffs Is a graduate student and W. WlJ((ace
Covington ($ Professorof Forest E:co(ogy at the School of Forestry,
Northern Arizona University. FllIgstarr. AZ 86011.
122
NAVAJO PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE
The Navajo, called Dine (the People), live in a vast and
.beautiful land in northeast Arizona, southwest Utah, and
northwest NewMexico.
The Navajo culture has survived through an innate sense of
II oneness" that compels them to lJelp each other both in times
of wealth and in times of poverty. Their concept of family
relationships, of man's relation to theworld around him and his
place in the orderof things, is far from thatof Anglo-American
society. The Navajo coreept of religion is so total that, in a
sense, it can be said that there is no such thing as religion in.
ta: .Navajo culture, Everything is religious. Everything the
Navajo knows, hie; home, hisfields, tOO land, andthe sky above
is - ooly." Religion is not a separate entity to bebelieved in or
subscribed to, it is ever present. Inseparable from a traditional
Navajo's daily life more than eating and breathing.
An attempt to portray a complete account of the origins, and
developments regarding NaV'cljo philosophy is beyond thescope
of this paper. Navajo philosophy is built upon traditions that
began in oral epics of inanimate earth-surface creatures, and
have developed through interpretations and understanding of
past events depicted through legends and stories.

In the NRVajo pantheon there is 00 single deitywho can be
deSCribed as a supreme being.Themostimportant deitiesinclude
Changing Woman, who created.human beings and is associated
with the Earth, Sun, First Man, First Woltlnn, the Hero Twins
(Monster Slayer and Born of the Water), sons of Changing
Woman. and her sister White Shell Woman (Changing Woman
·Mci White Shell Woman are one entityill some stories). Other
C:iiIi.~J or Holy people,occupy less dominant or minorpositions
without, however, the clear cut divine hierarchy which
charaCterized the Greek and Roman pantheons. TIle central
concept of Navajo philosophy and vital requisite for
understanding the whole, is Sa'a Naghai Btk:« HdehO.
According to my Grandmother Tsinnie, "Sa'a is harmonious
or desirable destiny or even restoration to youth," the attitude
eneompasses respect and reverence to nature.
A story that describes the importance ofSa' a NaghQi Blk'e
HOzh6. is when a deity named First Man left his medicine
bundle behind (Sa'a NaghtJljin the underworld Today the
process Isrepeated, both in the sense ofthe curingachi(!\/Cd
through the ceremonial,01which thisjourney Isa necessary
part and more generally through knowledge acquisition,
where all of us necessarily return 10 the source or the
beginning (Farella 1984).
This doctrine within the NavcYo culture stemsfrom the idea
that tries to account for everything in the universe, by relating
1t.to man and his activities (Reichard 1974). ~ activities of
·man areviewedin thelight of the supernatural ventures founded
In the stories, and ritualistic explanations in songs used by die
medicine men. Navajo "religion" means ritual and t1le beliefs
tied. to these rituals, according to Reichard (1974). Each
ceremony has its own story from which it derives its authority.
CONSERVAliON BIOLOGY
Conservation biology is a science that does rot fit into tbe
familiar mold of classic western science. Conservation biology
is B crisis- or mission-oriented discipline that deals with
phenomena which frequently addresses human scnslbilirles
Dduding, ethics, morality, and the relationship with animal
communities and ecosystems as a whole dynamic system.
To paraphrase excerpts from M.E. Soule's (1985) article.
What is Conservation Biology?":
Conservation biology tends to b·eholistic. Ecological and
evolutionary processes must be studied at their own
macroscopic levels and reductionism alone :cannot lead
lc explanations ofcommunity and ecosystem processes,
Second, the assumption is that multidisciplinary
approaches will ultimately be the most fruitful
Of1ihe Universe, as viewedby the Navajo, is an orderly system
U!lerrelated elements,an all-inclusive wholethatcontains both
::.and evil. Hence, the universe is simultaneously good,
- olent, and dangerous. Humans are not seen as having
donunion over nature. Instead, nature is seen as powerful and
Jl1Pablc of causing greatharm if not treatedwith respect Thus,
123
a person's altitude and actions towardnature mustberespectful.
If not, then harm will come which %llc1Y only be rectified by
performance of an appropriate healing ceremony.
Another distinguishing characteristic of conservation
hiology Is tts time scale and view ofsystem components
(Soule 1985).
In Navajo culture, past. present, and future are essential for
acquiring knowledge, symbolic of the emergence of th: Navajo,
lind shedding tbe chrysalis of ignorance in the lower worlds.
Tilelegends are not only thebasis of tbecomplex ceremonies,
they are the historyof theNavajo.
For decades man has been advancing toward oneness with
the universe, the NRVll;O identifies with all its parts. TIleNavajo
docs not SCjJ<11'i1tC himself from the natural, he regards himself
as n part of something larger mthcr tban having a separate
existence. The Navajo accent is on repeated creation which is
often, if not always, cyclical. It is to be contrasted with the
lineal, progressive view of timethat dominated muchof western
science (Reichard 1974 and Farella 1984).
Postulates of conservation biology as suggested by Soule
form two sets: a functional/mechanistic set and an
ethical/nonnative set. TIle first functional postulate is the
evolutionary postulate whichstates that manyof the species that
constitute natural communities are the products of
cocvolutionary processes. The second functional postulate
concerns the scale of ecological processes: Many if not all
ecological processes have thresholds below and above which
they become discominuous, chaotic, and suspended.
The second postulate is consistent with thedualism which is
associated with Sa 'a Naghdi Bik'e H6zh6 of good and evil
Hozho and Hochx», Everything in the universe, including but
not limited to knowledge, people, gods, behavior, ritual, thought,
and language are divided iIl10 the good and evil,and are points
ill process that is continual and ongoing (McNeley 1981, and
Fnrella 1984). One portionis not preferred moreover the other,
ratber they arc interdeperdcnt, that is, if evil were eliminated,
there couldbe no good. In a sense, evil and good are seen as
two sides of tile same coin.
Soule (1985) describes the normativcletlJical postulates as:
valuestatements that makeup the basisoflinethicofappropriate
attitudes toward other forms of life. TIleY providestandards by
which our action can be measured. Following is a synopsis of
these normative postulates:
Diversity is good A corollary of this postulate is that
untimely extinction of populations and species is bad
Natural extinctions are rare events on a human time scale.
Ecologtcal complexity is good This postulate parallels the
first one, but assumes the value of habitat diversity and
complex ecological processes. This postulate expresses a
preference for nature (Ncr artifice, lor wilderness over
gardens (cj Dubos 1980). Biotic diversity has intrinsic
value, irrespective of its instrumental or utilitarian value.
In emphasizing the Inherent value ofnon-human lift, It
distinguishes the dualistic exploitive world view from a
more unitary perspective.

, Th.is preferen:e for nature over artifice is obvious ill Navajo
attitudes towardanimals. Althoughforyears tbe tribe I~ depcOOed
upon domesticated animals for subsistence, the religion still
emphasizes wild animals. The beliefthat wild animals are helpers
of humanbeings has rot been laid aside now that g.lIre has been
..supplanted by the more easily obtainable sleep, goat, or steer.
Domesticated animals have little religious respect (Locke 1992).
Theyareproperty (economic value)rntherthansentient (ceremonial
value) beings, such as the fcared bear am snake. This view of
domesticated animals parallels 100 conservation biology post.ulate
of a preference for mturaI systems over artificial systems, am for
ecological integrity, or the coevolved diversity of life (Leopold
1949).
The Navajo attitude toward plants is ore of appreciation of
abundan::e. Every plant is viewed as'an important cornporent of
all of the vegetation upon which man am animals depend. TIllIS,
flowers am otter p1aIi parts from many species arc ueated
ceremonially and used in healing/curing ceremonies.
Many Navajo medicine men aOO trndioonalists believe tlJat tbe
People live in dishaIIoony today. Medicine rren ascribe many of
today's problems to being a result of disharmonious tOO c1rolic
lifestyles. Oneexplanation of tllis dishanoolly is theover abwxL1lX:C
of domestic animals that are stca:fily ovcrgrnzing theonce plcntiful
grassIaOOs, and many have migrated into lhe~nsitive riparian 7.0re5,
decreasing the plants ard grasses whichare reeded both to sustain
wildlife ard for ceremonial uses.
What are tre answers for restoringhannonyof man and nature?
AIde Leopoldstated. "The flISt step is to reconstruct a sample of
whatwe bOO to begin with", similar to the jOlmcy of First Mau,
when be returned back to the beginning rod/or source to retrieve
his medicine bun1Ie.
. RESTORATION ECOLOGY
, Restoration ecolo&}' isthedisciplire Ul3t provides thetlmreticaI
fotmdation for the pcactice of ecological rcstorntion. In tum,
ecological restoration provides the ultimate testing groom for
theories of restoration ecology (Jordan et aI. 1987). In a nutsbell
restoration ecology is the interrelationship of ecological tlml)' and
practice,
Restoration ecology, as a centralchallenge, acquires notonly
an identifiablegoal (undelStanding thesystem and beingableto
demonstrate this understanding in an objective, unambiguous
way), but also a mission (being able to heal the system). To
heal the system like a form of medicine, a science, and art of
healing at the community and ecosystem level (Leopold 1949,
Jordan et al. 1987).,
Ecological restorationdeals with restoring degraded habitats
to more nearly natural conditions using research and
management experimentation. Restoration ecology tmees its
forestry origin to AIdo Leopold after he adapted a stance of
conserving ecosystem integrity and the concept of coevolution
(diversity of life). The history of ecological and evolutionary
thought integrate to' form-a scientific basis for conservation
management (Jordan et el. 1987).
124
"Restoration is more than a step toward a 'bette)
relationship with the environment and
0
decpe~
understanding ofit, but one which went hand in hand!
with it", surmised Aldo Leopold (/949). Such thinking
is consistent with the Navajo concept of Sa'0 Naghal.
Bile'~ H6zhO, walking the saCred path.
CONCLUSION
TheNavajo perception of thelandetluc reflectsand reinfoIM'
the design of the community to whichit is correlative. The baM
concept of Saa Naghaj Bik'e Homo accents and unswprisi~:
parallels many premisesof conservation biology. A holistic ~
of nature does not devalue the dynamic dimension of natUre]
but broadens the scopefor incorporating managementstrateiitti,
to enhance a self-peq>etnating system.
'
In theNavajo culture, theearth is a sacred component of a t!iie.,
family, a revered am respected member called MotherEarth. ~
mountains are sacred, for theNavajo camefrom them and depe:W
upon thmt. "I1'e watercourses areveinsand arteries, Th::y are tit-
mountain's life, as our blood is to out bodies (Reichard 1974).
Restoration to youth is the patternof 100 earth. A deity named
Changing Woman renewed her youth as the seasons progrcsS~
This restpration to youth is something for which the Navajd
lives, for he deduces that what happens to the earth may alsO
happen to him. It is taught that the earth should not be injured!
If the earth is damaged, the People will suffer.
Sa'a Naghlzi Bift~ HOzhd sets value to life,living, and theunit)"
of thought and action. It is an understanding of the whole, it ii
thewhole. It is thesubstance whichadds value to life and living
A change from the inside, from a point of view of t~
community with evolved moral and ethical sensibllities to'
inherent value and biotic rights, can dramatically enhance 1m
land use strategies of today not only in Navajo culture but
also in Anglo-American culture.
REFERENCES
Dubos, R. 1980. The Wooing of the Earth. Charles Scribner's
Sons, New York,
Farclla, John R. 1984. The Main Stalk: A Synthesis of Navajo
Philosophy. The University of ArizonaPress, Tucson, AZ.
Jordan, W.R., M.E. Gilpin, and J.D. Aber. 1987. Restoration
Ecology: A Synthetic Approach to Ecological Research.
Cambridge University Press,New York.
Leopold, AIOO. 1949. A Sand
~UIllY Almanac. Ballantine
Books, Inc., New York. 295p.
Locke, Raymond Friday. 1992. TIle Book of the Navajo. 5th
ed.The Mankind Publishing Company, Los Angeles, CA.
MeNdey, James Kale. 1981.Holy Wind in Navajo Philosophy.
The University of Arizona Press, Tucson, AZ.
Reichard, Gladys 'A. 1974. Navajo Religion: A Study of
Symbolism. Princeton University Press, Oxford, Princeton,
New Jersey.
Soule, ME. 1985. What is Consctvation Biology. BioScieoce
35:727-734.
