D
ecision makers, scientists, and the
interested public now recognize that
there is an urgent need to restore forest
ecosystems after decades of intensive log-
ging, fire suppression, road building, live-
stock grazing, mining, and invasions by
exotic species (see Noss and Cooperrider
1994, Ricketts and others 1999, Pim-
mentel and others 2000 for reviews). Such
damaging activities have compacted soils,
channelized streams, fragmented forests,
suppressed natural fire, assisted the spread
of some invasive species, and caused the
loss of native species and their habitat
(Noss and Cooperrider 1994, Heilman
and others 2002). 
Years of eff o rts by scientists, forest prac-
titioners, environmentalists, re s t o r a t i o n
workers, and others have helped develop
restoration methods and techniques. The
result has been both good and bad re s t o r a-
tion pro j e c t s — m odels of what to do and
what not to do when restoring fore s t s .
Tod a y, job programs are being developed
a round the country to create a work forc e
focused on restoring ecosystems rather than
on re s o u rce extraction. Local govern m e n t s
and citizens are working together to re s t o re
watersheds that provide drinking water for
their communities (for example, Ashland
Watershed Alliance in southwest Ore g o n ) .
Restoration programs and ideas continue to
be developed to help us understand how to
re s t o re forests holistically.
At the same time, there are serious
questions as to whether some proposed
“restoration” activities are really benefi-
cial to the landscape. Due to recent pres-
s u re from decision-makers to addre s s
forest fires in the West, federal agencies
are developing plans to implement envi-
ronmentally questionable “re s t o r a t i o n ”
p rojects on a national scale (see DellaSala
and Frost 2001 for limitations; also see
White House Healthy Forest Legislative
Initiative; www.nifc.gov). The National
Fire Plan has funded fuel reduction pro-
jects (many of them commercial timber
sales) in endangered species habitat, ro a d-
less areas, old-growth forests, and areas
where there is no scientific evidence that
forests are at risk from catastrophic fires
(DellaSala and Frost 2001). An increase
in use by the Forest Service of the com-
mercial timber sale program to “restore”
federal lands poses risks that logging will
adversely affect fish and wildlife habitat
and ecologically sensitive landscapes.
The Citizens’ Call for Ecological
F o rest Restoration is proposed as a national
14
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION
21:1
I MARCH 2003
A Citizen’s Call for
Ecological Fore s t
Restoration: Fore s t
Restoration Principles 
and Criteria 
by Dominick A. DellaSala, Anne Martin, Randi Spivak,
Todd Schulke, Bryan Bird, Marnie Criley, Chris van
Daalen, Jake Kreilick, Rick Brown, and Greg Aplet
SCIENCE & ADVOCAC Y
Ecological Restoration, Vol. 21, No. 1, 2003
ISSN 1522-4740
©2003 by the Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System. 

policy framework to guide sound ecologi-
cal restoration policy and projects. Through
these restoration principles, we seek to
articulate a collective vision of ecologically
appropriate, scientifically supported forest
restoration. Scientifically credible princi-
ples and criteria provide a yardstick with
which to evaluate proposed forest restora-
tion policies and projects that can be used
both on the ground and in policy debates.
While this paper was developed to respond
to restoration policy and projects on fed-
eral lands, the principles and criteria are
relevant to other land ownerships as well.
By including social criteria, the restoration
principles also help to bridge the gap
between what is good for the forest and
what is good for communities and workers.
Moreover, by integrating science with
community participation in restoration,
the principles are consistent with the
expanded approach to ecological restora-
tion as defined by Eric Higgs (1997).
The forest restoration principles and
criteria were developed by a diverse group
of forest activists and forest ecologists from
around the United States with input from
representatives of forest practitioners and
community-based forestry groups. These
people first met in 2001 at a Forest
Activist Restoration Summit in Boulder,
Colorado and in a subsequent restoration
workshop near Spokane, Washington in
2002. This diverse group came together
because they recognized that to develop
and implement a sound restoration
agenda, the conservation community must
learn from and work with both scientists
and practitioners. At the Boulder meeting,
forest ecologists established the scientific
basis for the discussion that generated
these principles. Forest practitioner, labor,
and community-based forestry advocates
then added their traditional, experiential
and methodological knowledge, and pro-
vided focus on the socioeconomic and
hands-on aspects of restoration that were
further refined and presented in the subse-
quent workshop.
The restoration principles covered
here are predicated on the assumption that
successful ecosystem restoration must
address ecological, economic, and social
needs, including community development
and the well-being of the restoration work
force (that is, in the spirit of an expanded
approach to ecological restoration; see
Higgs 1997). While emphasizing that the
primary goal of restoration is to enhance
ecological integrity by restoring natural
processes and resiliency, this approach pro-
poses three core and interrelated princi-
ples to set the stage for what constitutes
good ecological restoration: 1) ecological
forest restoration; 2) ecological econom-
ics, and 3) communities and work force
(Figure 1). 
In order to implement ecologically
sound restoration, all three core principles
must be working together. Restoration
principles and criteria provide a transpar-
ent and verifiable (on the ground)
approach to guide and evaluate the effi-
cacy of restoration projects, programs, and
policies with respect to the core princi-
ples. The restoration principles can be
used to guide the process of restoring eco-
logical integrity through the use of
restoration assessments that are con-
ducted at multiple spatial scales. The
principles outline specific restoration
methodologies and criteria for adaptive
management through monitoring and
evaluation of restoration projects. 
The principles also address the impor-
tance of an economic and institutional
framework that accounts for non-market
ecological services (Rasker 1994, Power
1996a, 1996b), such as clean air and water,
and that encourages the long-term viabil-
ity of communities by operating within the
capacity and resiliency of forest ecosys-
tems, fostering a culture of environmental
sustainability, and meeting human needs.
This includes the development of a highly
skilled and well-paid work force to perform
high-quality restoration work that proac-
tively engages people through socially just
and economically viable training and
employment systems. 
Core Forest 
Restoration Principles
Sound forest restoration requires an inte-
grated, multi-disciplinary approach rooted
in conservation biology and ecosystem
restoration that includes preserving and
protecting intact landscapes (particularly
those that serve as reference or baseline
conditions); allowing the land to heal
itself; and, where necessary, helping it to
do so through active restoration. Through
thoughtful strategies employed over time,
we can reestablish sustainable human
connections to the land, creating high-
quality restoration jobs and encouraging
conservation-based economies. 
The restoration principles approach
to restoring ecological integrity is the
basis for three core principles, several
working principles, and numerous criteria
that are provided in a checklist format for
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION
21:1
I MARCH 2003
15
II. Ecological Economics  
Principle
III. Communities and Work 
Force Principle
I. Ecological Forest 
Restoration Principle
Ecological  
Integrity
Figure 1. General relationship between core restoration principles and ecosystem integrity.
Courtesy of the authors

use by practitioners (Appendix 1). The
checklist can be taken into the field to
evaluate the efficacy of re s t o r a t i o n
projects in meeting the goal of restoring
ecological integrity. It is also useful for
helping to inform policymakers regarding
what constitutes ecologically and socially
appropriate restoration.
Ecological Forest 
Restoration Core Principle
Enhance ecological integrity by restoring 
natural processes and resiliency
E ffective forest restoration should have as
its primary objective the re e s t a b l i s h m e n t
of fully functioning ecosystems. Eco-
logical integrity can be thought of as the
“ability of an ecosystem to support and
maintain a balanced, adaptive commu-
nity of organisms having a species com-
position, diversity, and functional
o rganiztion  comparable to that of natural
habitats within a region” (Karr and Dud-
ley 1981, Karr 2000). A re s t o r a t i o n
a p p roach based on ecological integrity
incorporates the advantages of historical
m odels while recognizing that ecosystems
a re dynamic and change over time. This
is fundamental to the development of
restoration approaches and is the core
principle central to all related principles
and criteria.
Ecological Economics 
C o re Principle
Develop and employ the use of 
economic incentives that protect or 
restore ecological integrity
Intact forest ecosystems provide the nat-
ural capital, including clean air and
w a t e r, upon which all life and all human
economies ultimately depend. Restora-
tion of healthy ecosystems is an invest-
ment in regaining the natural capital that
has been diminished by decades of fore s t
degradation. An economic and institu-
tional framework that fully accounts for
these non-market ecological serv i c e s
should be created in order to re c o g n i z e
the value of intact ecological systems and
to guide restoration eff o rts. As such,
sound restoration must balance achieving
restoration goals with the cost of re s t o r a-
tion, while giving priority to ecological
e ffectiveness (Higgs 1997). However,
because ecologically sound forest re s t o r a-
tion is a long-term natural process that
will not always provide short - t e rm bene-
fits and may not pay for itself, a time
frame for economic analysis must be used
that recognizes the long-term benefits of
restoration (for example, clean water,
re s t o red fire regimes) often must take
p recedent over concerns re g a rd i n g
e fficiency (Higgs 1997). There f o re, eco-
nomic incentives that drive the degrada-
tion of forests must be replaced with
restoration incentives that protect and
re s t o re ecological integrity. 
Communities and 
Work Fo rce Core Principle
Make use of or train a highly skilled, 
well-compensated work force to 
conduct re s t o r a t i o n
Ecological restoration also must become
an important component of an ecologi-
cally sound, socially just forest economy.
This approach has the potential to sup-
port the long-term viability of communi-
ties within the capacity and resiliency of
f o rest ecosystems, while fostering a culture
of environmental sustainability. 
A highly skilled, well-compensated
work force is essential for restoration to
meet high ecological standards. Building
the restoration economy requires a com-
mitment to regional training capacity
(multi-jurisdictional and interd i s c i p l i-
nary), skill certification, consistent fund-
ing over decades, and assuring workers’
rights to organize and bargain collectively.
The process of advancing ecological
restoration must be open, inclusive and
t r a n s p a rent, and should contribute to
breaking down class, culture, gender, lan-
guage, and religious barriers. 
16
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION
21:1
I MARCH 2003
Charlotte Fox, formerly with the Government Accountability Project in Washington, D.C.,
stands between two large diameter trees marked for removal in the Umpqua National Forest
near Roseburg in southwestern Oregon. The trees are marked as part of proposed commer-
cial timber sale that local National Forest and Bureau of Land Management staff claim will
reduce hazardous fuels and tree overcrowding due to fire suppression. In reality, such trees
are marked for cutting to pay the costs of fuel-reduction activities.  Photo by F. Eatherington,
Umpqua Watersheds

Ecological For e s t
Restoration Principles 
and Criteria
Restoration Project 
Planning Principle
Document all restoration projects in the 
context of a restoration assessment and 
a p p ropriate restoration approaches that 
re s t o re ecological integrity
All restoration projects must be planned
and implemented in the context of a
restoration assessment (see Forest Restora-
tion Assessment Principle) and use appro-
priate restoration approaches (see Fore s t
Restoration Approaches Principle) to
re s t o re and enhance ecological integrity.
Because ecological systems are inhere n t l y
complex and dynamic, it is impossible to
accurately predict all the consequences of
our actions, even well-intentioned re s t o r a-
tion actions. The more controversial or
experimental the project is, the smaller the
scale should be. If there is high risk and
weak scientific support, the burden of pro o f
falls upon the pro j e c t ’s pro p o n e n t s .
Restoration planning incorporates
numerous criteria, including making use
of the best available science, monitoring
and evaluation, re g u l a t o ry compliance,
prioritization of integrity goals, endan-
gered species recovery, and securing ade-
quate funding (Appendix 1, I.1).
F o rest Restoration 
Assessment Principle
Conduct a restoration assessment 
prior to restoration activities
A restoration assessment must be done
prior to implementing a restoration pro-
ject or beginning restoration activities.
The assessment is conducted to determ i n e
if any restoration activities are re q u i re d ,
and is used to 1) identify the root causes of
ecosystem degradation at multiple spatio-
temporal scales, including eco-re g i o n a l ,
i n t e rmediate, and site-specific (see re l a t e d
criteria below); 2) determine appro p r i a t e
m e t h ods for restoring degraded systems;
and 3) create a spatially explicit prioritiza-
tion of restoration needs across spatial
scales (Appendix 1, I.2). The assessment
and corresponding actions are then fol-
lowed by sufficient monitoring that mea-
s u res pro g ress towards restoring a degraded
system so that it is more resilient to distur-
bance and can persist in the absence of fur-
ther human intervention. 
The restoration assessment should
first be conducted within the context of a
b roader ecoregional assessment designed
to determine the status and condition of
ecological integrity across the ecore g i o n
and the appropriate spatial layout of core
re s e rves, landscape connectivity, and
restoration areas needed to maintain or
enhance integrity (also see DellaSala and
others 1996). Examples of ecore g i o n a l
assessment criteria can be found in Scott
and others (1993), Noss and Cooperr i d e r
(1994), and Ricketts and others (1999) or
obtained from published regional assess-
ments available for most ecoregions. The
inclusion of additional scales of analysis
p rovides a foundation for assessing cumu-
lative impacts of proposed projects fro m
the site to the ecoregional level (Appen-
dix 1, I.2).
Ecological Restoration
A p p roaches Principle
D e t e rmine the appropriate use of pro t e c t i o n ,
and passive and active restoration based on
restoration assessments
Restoration projects are designed to move
f o rest ecosystems toward a higher level of
ecological integrity. The restoration plan
chosen for a particular place should be
based on the most effective techniques re c-
ognized through the restoration assessment
while favoring the least intrusive or inten-
sive methods that will effectively move the
a rea toward ecological integrity. This
a p p roach will usually produce the best
results for the least amount of time and
e ff o rt, promoting efficient use of re s t o r a-
tion re s o u rces. It is important to note that
t h e re will be projects where short - t e rm
t reatment impacts should be accepted
because the project will result in long-term
positive gains in ecological integrity (for
example, removal of roads, barriers to fish
passage, removal of exotic species). 
In some cases, effective re s t o r a t i o n
may re q u i re taking action in areas of re l a-
tively high ecological integrity. In other
cases, the best approach will be to focus
restoration eff o rts on more degraded land-
scapes. Factors such as broad-based support
among restoration stakeholders and the
potential for restoration of landscape link-
ages between ecologically intact areas may
lead to restoration eff o rts that are more
time consuming and costly, but are neces-
s a ry to achieve restoration objectives.
Restoration assessments can be valuable in
resolving such issues.
The following are three appro a c h e s
and related criteria that define the range of
f o rest restoration methods used to re s t o re
ecological integrity (Appendix 1, I.3).
Protection of Areas of 
High Ecological Integrity 
Identify and secure areas of 
high ecological integrity
Relatively intact natural areas and core
refugia that have high ecological integrity
and little need for restoration should be
protected and maintained. Protection of
areas of high ecological integrity will pro-
vide critical sources of biod i v e r s i t y, and/or
reference landscapes needed as a source of
baseline information (Noss and Cooper-
rider 1994).
A reas of high ecological integrity that
may serve as core refugia include: rare com-
munity types (for example, as identified in
the Natural Heritage database), intact old-
g rowth forests, native forest ecosystems
operating within the bounds of historic dis-
turbance regimes, intact watersheds and
l a rge roadless areas, designated wildern e s s
a reas, and unimpaired streams and other
aquatic habitats of high conservation value
(Noss and Cooperrider 1994, DellaSala
and others 1996).
Passive Restoration
Cease activities that have been 
d e t e rmined by a restoration assessment 
to impede natural re c o v e ry pro c e s s e s
Halting activities that cause degradation
or prevent ecosystem or species recovery
should be considered the first and most
critical step in restoration (Kauffman and
others 1997). This form of restoration,
which should be based on thoughtful
analysis and planning, must be distin-
guished from passive management, which
has been criticized as mere neglect (Agee
2002). Passive restoration should take
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION
21:1
I MARCH 2003
17

precedence where it is vital to eliminate
or reduce the root causes of ecosystem
degradation, including stopping destruc-
tive logging, road building, livestock graz-
ing, mining, building of dams and water
diversions, off-road vehicle use, and alter-
ation of fire regimes (Appendix 1).
Passive restoration can be applied alone
or in combination with active restoration
techniques provided that the primary goal
is to stop the degradation and restore eco-
logical integrity.
Active Restoration
R e i n t roduce natural processes or 
species through direct interv e n t i o n
Direct human intervention is needed in
cases where it is necessary to reintroduce
(or secure) natural processes, at-risk
species, or regionally extirpated species,
and in cases where ecosystem composi-
tion, structure, and function are degraded
or hindered by factors such as compacted
soils, channelized streams, invasive
species, or fire suppression. Active
restoration methods include, but are not
limited to, planting, prescribed burning,
road obliteration, removal of barriers to
fish passage and water diversions, invasive
species control, fuel treatment, and ripar-
ian restoration. Such approaches should
target areas of greatest risk to ecological
integrity and be implemented in situa-
tions where the risks of no action out-
weigh those of active re s t o r a t i o n .
H o w e v e r, given the infancy of fore s t
restoration science, active re s t o r a t i o n
should take a precautionary approach and
make use of monitoring and adaptive
management techniques.
Community Protection 
Zone Principle
Distinguish between fuel-reduction 
treatments that restore ecological integrity
and those that serve primarily to protect
property and human life
A clear distinction must be made
between fuel-reduction treatments that
re s t o re ecological integrity and tre a t-
ments that protect pro p e rty and lives by
reducing fuels in the “community pro t e c-
tion zone” (CPZ: a limited area between
rural communities and undeveloped
f o restlands, also known as the wildlands-
urban interface). Treatments pro t e c t i n g
p ro p e rty and lives in the CPZ may
a d d ress the human safety issue, but
should not be considered forest re s t o r a-
tion in themselves since they may only
involve very limited aspects of ecological
i n t e g r i t y. Mechanical fuel tre a t m e n t s ,
such as thinning small-diameter tre e s ,
can be a step forw a rd toward fore s t
restoration if planned and implemented
in the context of a restoration assess-
ment. However, it must be re c o g n i z e d
that fuel-reduction treatments alone do
not address the wider range of ecological
issues included in a compre h e n s i v e
restoration plan and may result in
degraded soils, native vegetation, and
wildlife habitat (Brown 2000, DellaSala
and Frost 2001). Specific criteria re l a t e d
to the CPZ, defensible space (Cohen
2000), and treatment types for use in this
zone (Center for Biological Diversity
2002) are covered in Appendix 1, I.4.
Adaptive Management
Principle 
Monitoring and evaluation must be assure d
b e f o re restoration proceeds and should be
incorporated into the cost of the pro j e c t
Ecological forest restoration of any type at
any scale is a process of adaptive manage-
ment. Due to high levels of complexity,
u n c e rtainty and risk, restoration re q u i re s
an approach that is careful, flexible and
able to respond to change and new infor-
mation. Acceptable restoration pro j e c t s
must include a transparent public pro c e s s
that provides for assessment, implementa-
tion, monitoring, evaluation, and adaptive
criteria (Appendix 1, I.5). Given that
many restoration projects do not pay for
themselves, monitoring and evaluation are
often underbudgeted and, there f o re, not
included in restoration. The lack of suff i-
cient monitoring and evaluation hampers
the ability of ecological restoration to con-
tribute to our understanding of re s t o r a t i o n
e c o l o g y. There f o re, monitoring and evalu-
ation must be included as criteria in the
assessment of restoration projects. 
18
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION
21:1
I MARCH 2003
A fuel-reduction project in a fire-adapted, Jeffrey pine (Pinus jeffreyi) savanna on Rough and
Ready Creek in southwestern Oregon. The project, which was organized by the Lomakatsi
Restoration Project of Ashland, Oregon, includes small-tree thinning, lower-branch pruning,
and brush pile burning. The project makes use of National Fire Plan funds for small tree and
brush removal.  Photo by O. Catranides

Ecological Economics
Principle and Criteria
Economic Framework Principle
Develop and employ positive incentives to
encourage ecologically sound restoration
Positive incentives are needed to encour-
age ecologically based restoration and
eliminate incentives that encourage
activities that are ecologically degrading.
Such incentives should protect and
restore ecological integrity within an eco-
logical and institutional framework that
accounts for the benefits and costs associ-
ated with restoring natural capital. As
such, incentives that encourage activities
that degrade the ecological health of the
landscape are inconsistent with improv-
ing ecological integrity or otherwise may
cause ecological damage and, therefore,
must be eliminated. Investments in
ecosystem restoration should be applied
across land ownerships, fostering co-man-
agement agreements between the federal
government and the private sector
(Appendix 1). For this to work at the pol-
icy level, specific reforms are needed to
fund restoration projects not tied to tradi-
tional commercial timber operations. We
propose several criteria to encourage the
development of positive restoration
incentives (Appendix 1, II.6).
Communities and Work
Force Principle and Criteria
Community/Work Force
Sustainability Principle
Effective restoration depends on strong,
healthy and diverse communities and a
skilled, committed work force
Restoration must foster a sustainable
human relationship to the land that pro-
motes ecological integrity, social and
economic justice for workers and com-
munities, and a culture of preservation
and restoration. In turn, effective
restoration depends on strong, healthy
and diverse communities and a skilled,
committed work force. While the
restoration principles provide the “eco-
logical horse” for steering such an
approach, the “economic cart” generated
by restoration activities can provide
numerous opportunities for making use
of a highly skilled work force. As such,
restoration must be linked to economic
development in a way that prioritizes the
long-term interests of communities over
short-term and non-local economic
interests (Appendix 1, II.6). Given the
extensive degradation of forests through-
out the nation, there are numerous
opportunities for fostering cooperation
between restoration scientists and a com-
munity work force interested in restoring
forests and creating high-quality jobs and
sustainable communities through related
criteria (Appendix 1, III.7).
Participatory Principle
Encourage involvement of a diversity 
of communities, interest groups, agencies,
and other stakeholders at all levels
Meaningful involvement of a diversity of
communities, interest groups, agencies
and other stakeholders (at local, regional,
and national levels) should be achieved
through open, inclusive, and transparent
decision-making processes with recogni-
tion of and respect for differences. This is
the foundation for an expanded approach
to restoration (Higgs 1997) that takes
advantage of opportunities to blend sci-
entific understanding of restoration with
local and traditional knowledge of forest
ecosystems (Appendix 1, III.8; also see
Kimmerer 2002). Local communities can
be more involved in restoration through
“all-party” monitoring, provided that such
actions are part of the larger public par-
ticipation in public lands restoration and
related criteria for inclusion. 
Conclusion
The Citizens Call for Ecological Forest
Restoration establishes a vision for restor-
ing natural processes and native species in
forested ecosystems through an adaptive
and inclusive process. Ecologically sound
forest restoration provides us with the
opportunity to heal the land and to
restore a viable community connection
that in practice achieves an integrated
vision of bio-cultural restoration. To
ensure that this vision becomes reality, we
must continue efforts to bring community
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION
21:1
I MARCH 2003
19
Road recontouring (middle of photo) along Grass Valley Creek in Redwood National Park,
northern California, one year after project completion. The removal of roads and recontour-
ing of slopes helps restore hydrological processes and aquatic health while reducing the
effects of forest fragmentation.  Photo by John McCullah, Salix Applied Earthcare

f o re s t ry and conservation groups together.
We must commit to thoughtful, science-
based restoration to ensure that future
generations can experience and enjoy
intact, diverse forested landscapes having
the highest ecological integrity. While
these principles do not address regional
ecological differences, they do provide a
national vision and guidance for the
establishment of a sound re s t o r a t i o n
agenda, as well as the tools and a checklist
to implement responsible forest restora-
tion on the ground. The principles were
forged in hopes that they will encourage
the sharing of information and develop-
ment of alliances among org a n i z a t i o n s
and citizens that are necessary for success-
ful forest restoration through an expanded
approach. We have decades of restoration
work ahead. It is vital that we begin to
make the long-term investment in the
protection and restoration of our forests
that is necessary to secure their lasting
value for future generations. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to thank the numerous sci-
entists, practitioners, activists, and organiza-
tions that participated in the discussions,
summit, workshop, and reviews of this manu-
script. Many of the participating organizations
are reflected in the authorship of this docu-
ment, but there were others who participated
but chose not to be included as authors.
REFERENCES
Agee, J. 2002. The fallacy of passive manage-
ment: Managing for firesafe forest reserves.
Conservation Biology in Practice 3(1):18-25. 
B rown, R. 2000. Thinning, fire, and fore s t
restoration: A science-based approach for
national forests in the interior nort h w e s t .
Washington, D.C.: Defenders of Wildlife.
Center for Biological Diversity. 2002. The
community protection zone: Defending
homes and communities from forest fires.
Unpublished report.
Cohen, J.D. 2000. Preventing disaster: Home
ignitability in the wildland-urban inter-
face. Journal of Forestry March:15-21.
DellaSala, D.A., R.G. Anthony, T.A. Spies
and K.A. Engel. 1998. Management of bald
eagle roosts in fire adapted mixed-conifer
f o rests. J o u rnal of Wildlife Management
62(1):322-333.
DellaSala, D.A. and E. Frost. 2001. An eco-
logically based strategy for fire and fuels
management in national forest ro a d l e s s
areas. Fire Management Today 61(2):12-23.
DellaSala, D.A., N.L. Staus, J.R. Strittholt, A.
Hackman and A. Iacobelli. 2001. An
updated protected areas database for the
United States and Canada. Natural Areas
Journal 21:124-135.
DellaSala, D.A., J.R. Strittholt, R.F. Noss and
D.M. Olson. 1996. A critical role for core
re s e rves in managing inland northwest land-
scapes for natural re s o u rces and biod i v e r s i t y.
Wildlife Society Bulletin 2 4 ( 2 ) : 2 0 9 - 2 2 1 .
F i rewise. 2001. Protecting your home fro m
wildfire. www.firewise.org.
Heilman, G.E., Jr., J.R. Strittholt, N.C. Slosser
and D.A. DellaSala. 2002. Forest fragmen-
tation of the conterminous United States:
Assessing forest intactness through ro a d
density 
and 
spatial 
characteristics.
BioScience 52(5):411-422.
Higgs, E.S. 1997. What is good ecological
restoration? C o n s e rvation Biology 1 1 : 3 3 8 - 3 4 8 .
Karr, J.R. 2000. Health, integrity, and biologi-
cal assessment: The importance of measur-
ing whole things. Pages 209-236 i n D .
Pimentel, L. Westra and R.F. Noss (eds.),
Ecological integrity: Integrating environ-
ment, conservation, and health. Washing-
ton, D.C.: Island Press.
Karr, J. R. and D. R. Dudley. 1981. Ecological
perspective on water quality goals. E n v i ro n-
mental Management 5:55-68. 
K a u ffman, J.B., R.L. Beschta, N. Otting and D.
Lytjen. 1997. An ecological perspective of
riparian and stream restoration in the west-
ern United States. Fisheries 22(5):12-24.
K i m m e re r, R.W. 2002. Weaving traditional
ecological knowledge into biological edu-
cation: A call to action. BioScience 52(5):
432-438.
Noss, R.F. and A. Cooperrider 1994. Saving
nature’s legacy. Washington, D.C.: Island
Press.
Pimentel, D., L. Westra and R. Noss, eds.
2001. Ecological integrity: Integrating 
e n v i ronment, conservation, and health.
Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
P o w e r, T.M. 1996a. E n v i ronmental protection and
economic well-being: The economic pursuit of
q u a l i t y. A rmonk, New York: M.E. Sharpe.
__. 1996b. Wilderness economics must look
through the windshield, not the rearview
mirror. Wilderness 2(1):1-10.
Rasker, R. 1994. A new look at old vistas: The
economic role of environmental quality in
western public lands. University of Colorado
Law Review 65(2):369-399.
Ricketts, T., E. Dinerstein, D. Olson, C. Loucks,
W. Eichbaum, D. DellaSala, K. Kavanagh, P.
Hedao, P. Hurley, K. Carn e y, R. Abell and S.
Walters. 1999. A conservation assessment of
the terrestrial ecoregions of North America.
Washington, D.C.: Island Pre s s .
Scott, J.M., F. Davis, B. Csuti, R. Noss, B. Butter-
field, C. Groves, J. Anderson, S. Caicco, F.
D ’ E rchia, T.C. Edwards, J. Ulliman and R.G.
Wright. 1993. Gap analysis: A geographical
a p p roach to protection of biod i v e r s i t y.
Wildlife Monographs 1 2 3 : 1 - 4 1 .
Dominick A. DellaSala, forest ecologist and director
of the World Wildlife Fund, 116 Lithia Way, Suite
7 Ashland, OR 97520, 541/482-4878, Fax: 541/
482-4895, dellasal@wwfks.org.
Anne Martin, national field director, American
Lands, 152 South Oak St. Apt. 4, Spokane, WA
99204.
Randi Spivak, executive director, American Lands,
726 Seventh St. SE, Washington, DC 20003.
Todd Schulke, forest policy director, Center for Bio-
logical Diversity, P.O. Box 53102, Pinos Altos,
NM 88053.
Bryan Bird, conservation biologist, Forest Conser-
vation Council, P.O. Box 22488, Santa Fe, NM,
87502.
Marnie Criley, roads policy coordinator, Wildlands
Center for Preventing Roads, P.O. Box 7516, Mis-
soula, MT 59807. 
Chris van Daalen, program coordinator, Alliance for
Sustainable Jobs and the Environment, P.O. Box
2760, Olympia, WA 98507.
Jake Kreilick, campaign coord i n a t o r, National
Forest Protection Alliance, P.O. Box 8264, Mis-
soula, MT.
Rick Brown, senior resource specialist, Defenders of
Wildlife, Willamette Falls Dr., Ste. 200, West
Linn, OR 97068.
Greg Aplet, forest ecologist and director, Center for
Landscape Analysis, The Wilderness Society, 7475
Dakin St., Suite 410, Denver, CO 80221.
20
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION
21:1
I MARCH 2003

Appendix 1. Ecological Forest Restoration Principles and Criteria Checklist
Core Principle
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION
21:1
I MARCH 2003
21
I. Ecological Forest Restoration—Enhance ecological integrity
by restoring natural processes and resiliency
Subprinciple and Criteria
1. Restoration Project Planning Principle—Document all
restoration projects in the context of a restoration
assessment and appropriate restoration approaches 
that restore ecological integrity
Restoration Planning Criteria 
Take a thoughtful, careful, and conservative approach.
Use the best available science and incorporate experiential and
indigenous knowledge where applicable.
Make use of an adaptive and public process that regularly incor-
porates revisions from monitoring and evaluation.
Prescriptions for active restoration must be clearly applied to
those factors that are currently limiting ecosystem recovery
and integrity. Priorities identified during the assessment
should not be abandoned in order to meet other objectives
not directly aimed at ecosystem integrity and resilience.
Restoration treatments must use the least intrusive techniques
that will be effective in order to avoid negative cumulative
effects to watersheds and wildlife, except under special cir-
cumstances where a high level of intrusiveness is needed to
restore ecological integrity (for example, road obliteration,
see section IV, 2).
Comply with and uphold all applicable local, state and federal
laws and regulations.
Incorporate and/or improve recovery plans for threatened and
endangered species.
Budgets must include realistic and dedicated funding for and 
an institutional commitment to assessment, monitoring and
evaluation, with systems designed and in place before activi-
ties commence.
Assess the work force and community capacity for carrying out
restoration work, and recommend actions to meet Quality
Jobs Criteria below.
2. Forest Restoration Assessment Principle—Conduct a
restoration assessment prior to restoration activities
Ecoregional Level Assessment Criteria (Broad Scale Assessment) 
Use published ecoregional classifications to identify the eco-
region within which the site occurs.
Determine the status and condition of ecological integrity
attributes across the ecoregion (for example, what are the
major forest types or species in decline and what are the
root causes of such declines?).
Identify core refugia, landscape connectivity, and restoration are a s
needed to maintain or re s t o re integrity across the ecore g i o n .
Intermediate Spatial Scale Assessment Criteria
Identify the specific unit used in an intermediate spatial assess-
ment—the unit of analysis should be defined based on the
integrity needs addressed (examples include landscape,
watershed, subbasin, river basin, mountain range).
Focus on extending high-integrity areas and connecting them at
the intermediate scale, wherever connectivity was character-
istic of the natural landscape as recognized by the ecore-
gional assessment.
Determine the need and efficacy for performing restoration
objectives at intermediate spatial scales (for example, Are
treatments needed at the scale of the landscape or is it best
to start at some other unit?)
Evaluate cumulative impacts and address how a site-specific
project will affect ecological integrity at intermediate scales.
Site-Specific Assessment Criteria 
Determine the importance of the site within the larger land-
scape context. 
Identify the specific ecological processes, species, or functions
at risk. 
Document the types of restoration treatments needed to main-
tain or restore ecological integrity.
Establish clear links to the spatial and temporal issues identified
in the ecoregional and intermediate assessments.
Link site-specific information to the role the site plays in deter-
mining resiliency and integrity at the watershed, landscape
and global scales.
Determine the role that individual target sites play within the
watershed or landscape based on conservation biology prin-
ciples (for example, is an area an important corridor for wild-
life, the only old-growth forest in the region, critical habitat
for an area-limited species?).
Evaluate cumulative impacts and address how a site-specific pro-
ject will affect ecological integrity at broader scales. 
Evaluate the appropriate restoration methods (protection, pas-
sive, or active restoration) based on ecological need, impor-
tance of the site in the watershed or landscape, and the
timing and resources needed to restore ecological integrity.
Focus on projects with a high likelihood of successful ecological
results and low risks or where risks of inaction jeopardize
important ecological values of the site.
Give consideration to areas of greatest need/areas where
threats are the greatest.
Give extra consideration to the presence of populations of 
at-risk species. 
Assessments must include data that indicate:
1. Baseline (current) conditions.
2. Associated ecological reference conditions (reference sites
or ecological conditions that support[ed] native biodiver-
sity and ecological processes) that account for resilient and
dynamic systems (for example, flood- or wind-prone areas,
areas experiencing population cycling and periodic fire
events). Ecological reference conditions must inform
restoration and are selected to define, achieve, and main-
tain ecological integrity.
3. Control sites based on reference conditions or landscapes.
3. Ecological Restoration Approaches Principle—Determine
the appropriate use of protection, passive and active
restoration based on restoration assessments
Protection of Areas of High Ecological Integrity Criteria—
Protect areas of high ecological integrity
Identifying and protecting areas that currently exhibit high eco-
logical integrity must be the first priority of restoration plans.

Active restoration should not be applied in these areas unless it
can be shown that there is a high degree of scientific and
stakeholder support, and that there are no other means for
restoring or maintaining ecological integrity.
Passive Restoration Criteria—Cease activities that have been
determined by a restoration assessment to impede natural
recovery processes
Passive restoration should be employed in areas where removal
of degrading activities will allow natural recovery to occur.
Passive restoration can be employed alone, or prior to active
restoration.
Active restoration that fails to incorporate appropriate passive
techniques is unlikely to succeed.
Active Restoration Criteria—Reintroduce natural processes or
species through direct intervention
Focus on areas of greatest risk to ecological integrity and
processes.
Implement in situations where inaction might lead to the
d e s t ruction or loss of natural processes or permanent decline
of a species, stream function, or rare habitat type, or where it
can be demonstrated that active restoration will greatly accel-
erate the re t u rn to a higher state of ecological integrity.
Apply active restoration judiciously in areas of high ecological
integrity based on degree of degradation and ecological need.
Emphasize the least risky interventions that are likely to provide
the greatest ecological benefit, while minimizing manage-
ment-induced ecological risks and costs. 
Provide benefits in areas that exhibit moderate loss of ecologi-
cal integrity but still support key ecological elements and
processes.
Incorporate appropriate passive techniques.
4. Community Protection Zone Principle—Distinguish
between fuel-reduction treatments that restore ecological
integrity and those that serve primarily to protect prop-
erty and human life
CPZ Criteria
• Home-site treatments in the CPZ must be undertaken primar-
ily within a 66-200 feet (20-60 meter)  intensive treatment
zone where fires most directly threaten structures and human
life (Cohen 2000).
• Defensible community space that may include public and pri-
vate lands should be created within an additional treatment
zone up to 1667 feet (500 meters), which includes the 200-
foot (60 meter) home-site treatment zone, for firefighter
safety and protection of other flammable community values
(Center for Biological Diversity 2002).
• Treatments to create defensible space may include thinning
small-diameter trees, pruning, mowing, roof cleaning, as well
as replacement of flammable landscape and building materi-
als (Cohen 2000, Firewise 2001).
• Home-site treatment is sufficient for survival of a home during
a forest fire. It is critical that these treatments be imple-
mented for a CPZ protection plan to be successful. Priority
should be given to home-site treatments when resources are
limited. Federal cost-share grants for home-site treatment
should be increased and maintained until a comprehensive
program is completed.
• Long-term management of the community defensible space
should be a cooperative partnership between the relevant
agencies, communities, and homeowners beginning with the
initial CPZ risk assessment and following through to future
maintenance and should account for appropriate access to
structures for fire fighting, fire-resistant landscaping, and
consideration of construction standards and proper zoning
laws for all land ownerships.
5. Adaptive Management Principle—Monitoring and evalua-
tion must be assured before restoration proceeds, and be
incorporated into the cost of the project
Monitoring and Evaluation Criteria
Have clearly stated objectives, as well as specific indicators and
measures for determining effectiveness.
Be an integral component of the restoration project.
Be incorporated into the essential costs of the project.
Provide a process for all-party and scientific input.
Compile data, models, and analyses related to ecological
restoration efforts in comparable formats and collect them in
a central location. 
Make data available to the public in a user-friendly format in
both on-line and written display formats. Such information
will indicate how data will be used in the restoration process. 
Require that project implementation promptly respond to moni-
toring and evaluation results, as well as new information.
This may include adapting or altering implementation plans
and/or taking corrective actions.
Require that processes for carrying out assessments, planning,
monitoring and evaluation of restoration efforts involve all
local, regional, and national stakeholders.
II. Ecological Economics—Develop or make use of restora-
tion incentives that protect or restore ecological integrity
6. Economic Framework Principle—Develop positive incen-
tives to encourage ecologically sound restoration.
Economic Incentives Criteria
Investments in restoring ecosystems should be applied across
land ownerships in cooperation with willing landowners and
should be tiered to regional and local ecological needs. 
Successful restoration on public lands requires reforming federal
agency funding mechanisms and contracting procedures to
remove incentives for ecologically and socially damaging
activities. Such reforms should include the following:
1. Specific appropriations must commit consistent, adequate
multi-year funding for all aspects of re s t o r a t i o n — a s s e s s m e n t ,
implementation, monitoring, evaluation, and adaptative
m a n a g e m e n t .
2. The current timber sale program continues to give priority
to economic interests and is not appropriate for restoring
forests. However, restoration byproducts derived from eco-
logically based restoration projects may have value secon-
darily. Contracting mechanisms, therefore, must be
developed that are driven by ecological objectives. 
3. Contracts for restoration work on public lands must be
awarded on “best value” rather than “lowest bid” criteria.
Best value should be based on desired ecological, commu-
nity, and work force objectives, which ensure contractors 
possess the necessary skills and capacities to carry out
22
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION
21:1
I MARCH 2003

high-quality work, have successfully performed such work
in the past, and provide social and economic benefits 
to communities.
4. Preference for “best value” contracts on public lands
should not exclude any business or group of persons, but
should be given to local crews and small businesses,
underserved communities, and mobile workers, who can
demonstrate direct knowledge and experience of the
ecosystem in which the work will be done. Procurement
mechanisms should encourage contractors to include a
training and employment component that will increase the
capacity of existing displaced timber workers and mobile
workers to access and perform high-skill, long-duration
work. The Mobile Workforce consists of economically dis-
advantaged, under-represented and culturally diverse
crews of migrant and community-based forest workers who
perform services such as tree planting, thinning, brush dis-
posal, prescribed burning, trail construction, and so on. 
For public lands, restoration funding should not include off - b u d-
get funds generated from commercial activities.
Restoration on private lands requires outreach to landowners
with information about the ecological importance of their
lands within the context of the larger landscape, and
resources for technical and financial assistance to help
landowners restore these lands.
1. Private forestland owners should be encouraged (including
financial support for small landowners) to pursue Forest
Stewardship Council certification to promote sound
forestry on private lands. 
2. Cooperative forestry programs should provide private
forestland owners with access to education, training and
incentives for participation in restorative forestry methods.
Agencies must inform low-income and minority landowners
of such opportunities.
3. A low-interest, revolving loan fund should be established
to cover upfront costs to encourage landowners to shift to
longer timber rotations.
4. Public funding sources and tax incentives for habitat
restoration projects for threatened and endangered
species and imperiled forest habitats should be estab-
lished.
5. Federal land and water conservation funds should be
appropriated for the acquisition, protection, and restora-
tion of priority habitats.
III. Communities and Work Force—Make use of or train 
a highly skilled, well-compensated work force to conduct
restoration
7. Community/Work Force Sustainability Principle—Effective
restoration depends on strong, healthy, and diverse com-
munities and a skilled, committed work force
Sustainability Criteria 
Restoration and economic development must prioritize the
long-term interests of communities over short-term and non-
local economic interests.
Government, interest groups, and communities should cooper-
ate to promote policies and programs that build community
capacity for ecologically sound restoration, including work
force and small business development that:
1. Are based on landscape-scale assessments of restoration
needs, and are scaled appropriately within the carrying
capacity of the land and regional economy.
2. Have the flexibility to adapt over time to new information.
3. Directly and proactively address barriers to equal access,
such as differences based on class, culture, language, and
religion.
4. Provide for intergenerational exchange and other proactive
strategies to engage and empower youth and elders.
5. Are designed to add maximum value to restoration
byproducts at the community level.
Quality Jobs Criteria
Restoration contracts should recognize and foster a multidisci-
plinary, high-skilled work force of trained, certified restora-
tion technicians and applied ecologists, and provide stable,
full-season employment.
Restoration workers should be compensated with a family living
wage at levels commensurate with their knowledge and
skills, set as a functional minimum. 
Restoration must be supported by regional training and skill
certification systems (for example, apprenticeship programs),
with stable funding, that provide for multidisciplinary skill
development to broaden career opportunities. 
Employment and training systems must be equally accessible to
the existing diverse work force. Restoration contracts and
regional training systems must be linked by recognized skill
standards and associated wage and benefit standards.
Contracting, employment, and training systems must promote
the efficient and fair utilization of local, regional, and mobile
workers in a way that most effectively meets ecological
integrity as well as social goals.
Restoration workers at all wage and skill levels must be guaran-
teed the right to organize and bargain collectively.
8. Participatory Principle—Encourage involvement of a
diversity of communities, interest groups, agencies, and
other stakeholders at all levels 
Participatory Criteria 
Adaptive processes for carrying out assessments, planning,
monitoring, and evaluation of restoration efforts on public
lands should be “all-party” processes to the extent feasible;
that is, open to and proactively inclusive of all stakeholders
at local, regional, and national levels.
No one interest or community should be aff o rded control of or
undue influence on public-land management decision making. 
Adaptive all-party processes should strive to build consensus
around ecological, social, and economic principles and 
practices by focusing on common values, mutual goals, 
and the resolution of conflicts based on class, culture, 
language, and religion.
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION
21:1
I MARCH 2003
23
