Estimating Regional Wood Supply Based on
Stakeholder Consensus for Forest Restoration
in Northern Arizona
Haydee M. Hampton, Steven E. Sesnie, John D. Bailey, and
Gary B. Snider
Thinning treatments focused on small-diameter trees have been designed to restore ﬁre-adapted ponderosa
pine ecosystems. Estimating the volume of wood byproducts derived from treatments can assist with agency
planning of multiyear thinning contracts that sustain existing and attract new wood product businesses. Agency,
local government, industry, and environmental representatives were engaged to assess the level of agreement
on restoration treatments in northern Arizona. Participants unanimously agreed on appropriate management
across two-thirds of the 2.4 million ac analysis area and deﬁned desired posttreatment conditions using forest
structure information derived from remotely sensed data. Results indicate that an estimated 850 million ft3
of stem volume and 8.0 million green tn of tree crown biomass could be generated from tree thinning to
reestablish ﬁre-adapted conditions and stimulate new economic opportunities while meeting social and
environmental criteria. Wood supply deﬁned by stakeholders exceeded current utilization levels by 88% when
extrapolated over the next 10 years.
Keywords: restoration treatments, wood supply, stakeholder agreement, ponderosa pine
A
greement exists among stakeholders
that ponderosa pine (Pinus pon-
derosa) forest ecosystems in the
southwestern United States are in urgent
need of restoration to conditions supporting
frequent and low-intensity ﬁre regimes
(Allen et al. 2002). Forest structural changes
in these systems, such as increased surface
fuel loading, crown contiguity, and ladder
fuels known to bolster the size and intensity
of crown ﬁres, have been attributed to over
100 years of ﬁre suppression, livestock graz-
ing, human development, selective harvest-
ing of large trees, predator control, and other
human activities (Covington and Moore
1994, Mast et al. 1999, Swetnam et al.
1999). A subsequent increase in small-diam-
eter trees and hazardous fuels conditions has
precipitated severe ﬁre behavior at an un-
precedented scale, such as the 2002 Rodeo-
Chediski ﬁre, Arizona’s largest wildﬁre in re-
corded history (467,066 ac). This and other
recent severe wildﬁre events, which compro-
mise watershed, wildlife, and aesthetic val-
ues, have galvanized public support for ac-
tive
and
broad-scale
forest
restoration
activities. Reductions in overall forest struc-
tural heterogeneity and understory species
composition are also of concern in terms of
diminished biodiversity levels (Allen et al.
2002, Chambers and Germaine 2003).
Mechanical tree thinning and pre-
scribed burning are recommended to aid in
restoring ponderosa pine forests throughout
the Southwest (Fule´ et al. 2001a, Pollet and
Omi 2002, Graham et al. 2004, Schoenna-
Received April 21, 2009; accepted January 20, 2010.
Haydee M. Hampton (haydee.hampton@nau.edu) is research associate, and Steven E. Sesnie (steven.sesnie@nau.edu) is assistant research professor, School of Earth
Sciences and Environmental Sustainability, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011. John D. Bailey (John.Bailey@oregonstate.edu) is associate professor
of silviculture, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR. Gary B. Snider (gsnider02@fs.fed.us) is natural resource planner, Kaibab National Forest, Williams, Arizona
(Northern Arizona University School of Forestry, graduate student, during project period). The primary author received funding for this project from the Southwestern
Region of the US Forest Service. The authors thank Gilbert Zepeda, Deputy Regional Forester, and others at the Southwestern Regional Ofﬁce and Intermountain
West Forest Inventory Analysis (FIA) Ofﬁce for their insightful comments and data assistance. They appreciate the signiﬁcant time and effort contributed by working
group members, land management and academic experts, and the public. They are grateful for the substantial guidance provided throughout, including contributions
to and reviews of this article, by the project steering committee (Robert Davis, Forest Energy Corporation; Steve Gatewood, Wildwood Consulting and representative
of the Greater Flagstaff Forests Partnership; Todd Schulke, Center for Biological Diversity; Elaine Zieroth and Robert Taylor, Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests;
and Diane Vosick, Ecological Restoration Institute). The authors recognize contributions by Jada Ach, Tony Becker, Brett Dickson, Rosemary Romero, Jill Rundall,
and Thomas Sisk. This article beneﬁted greatly from the insight of three anonymous reviewers.
Copyright © 2011 by the Society of American Foresters.
Journal of Forestry • January/February 2011
15
A B S T R A C T
utilization & engineering

gel et al. 2004). However, broad stakeholder
agreement on acceptable treatment levels at
the regional scale is needed to improve forest
health conditions over extensive areas of the
inland West. Because forest restoration has
not kept pace with hazardous fuels accumu-
lation (Stephens and Ruth 2005, Hjerpe and
Kim 2008), efforts are underway in many
western states to develop private wood prod-
ucts businesses that could purchase restora-
tion byproducts. Restoration projects imple-
mented through US Forest Service thinning
contracts that guarantee supply over several
years will help forest restoration–based in-
dustries attract investors and meet lending
requirements and provide a cost-effective
mechanism to restore ﬁre-adapted condi-
tions over large areas (US Public Law 108-7
2003). By reaching agreement across large
areas, stakeholders gain assurance that in-
dustry will be “appropriately scaled” (i.e.,
the need to improve forest health will drive
utilization opportunities) and individual
project decisions will be designed within a
framework of acceptable thinning levels.
Signiﬁcant administrative cost savings will
likely stem from this approach, e.g., as in-
creased trust and understanding translates
into reductions in controversy over proposed
forest management actions on public land.
In northern Arizona, agency represen-
tatives and stakeholder groups believe that
forest restoration can lead to the creation of
new utilization opportunities while existing
industries can continue to help achieve land-
scape-level restoration goals. In 2006, an ad
hoc group of forest restoration professionals
from agencies, environmental organizations,
community forest partnerships, and aca-
demia in Arizona and New Mexico con-
vened to determine the steps needed to ac-
complish these objectives. At a meeting of
the ad hoc group, ﬁve members volunteered
to form a steering committee designed to
represent a diversity of backgrounds and
stakeholder interests (Table 1) to act as ad-
visors in the collaborative process, public
outreach, and other aspects of the project
described here. Concurrent with this pro-
cess, Arizona’s governor-appointed Forest
Health Council developed a Statewide Strat-
egy for Restoring Arizona’s Forests outlining
similar recommendations and action items
(Governor’s Forest Health Councils 2007).
The two priority information needs emerg-
ing from these efforts were (1) an estimate of
restoration treatment levels that could be
considered ecologically appropriate and
broadly accepted by stakeholders and (2) an
estimate of the potential wood volume from
large-scale forest restoration treatments that
could supply existing and proposed wood
utilization facilities. To perform these anal-
yses, an assessment of existing forest struc-
tural conditions and potential wood supply
derived from forest thinning was needed
across multiple land-management jurisdic-
tions and locations where up-to-date forest
inventory data is typically lacking.
We present a case study that focused on
ﬁlling the aforementioned information gaps
and advancing Arizona’s newly crafted state
restoration strategy. Case studies are useful
tools to establish innovative and creative
problem-solving mechanisms for mediating
contemporary land-management issues. To
accomplish this, and with substantial guid-
ance from the steering committee, we
• Organized a series of highly focused
stakeholder workshops to identify accept-
able locations and restoration treatment lev-
els and consequent wood supply.
• Developed new data resources using
US Forest Service Forest Inventory and
Table 1. List of wood supply working group members and afﬁliations.
Name
Position
Afﬁliation
Ethan Aumack
Director of Restoration Programs
Grand Canyon Trust
Pascal Berlioux
President and Chief Executive Ofﬁcer
Arizona Forest Restoration Products Inc.
Kim Newbauer
Timber Sales Contracting Ofﬁcer
Coconino National Forest
Rob Davis
President/Owner
Forest Energy/Future Forests
Paul DeClay Jr.a
Tribal Forest Manager
White Mountain Apache Tribal Forestry
Jerry Drury
Timber Staff Ofﬁcer
Kaibab National Forest
Steve Gatewood
Owner/Consultant
WildWood Consulting, LLC, representing Greater
Flagstaff Forests Partnership
Bill Greenwood
City Manager
Town of Eagar
Shaula Hedwall
Senior Fish and Wildlife Biologist
US Fish and Wildlife Service
Scott Higginson
Executive Vice-President
NZ Legacy, LLC/Snowﬂake White Mountain Power/
Renegy, LLC
Herb Hopperb
Community-based forest and wood products advocate
Little Colorado Plateau Resource, Conservation and
Development
Robert LaCapa
Forest Manager
Fort Apache Agency, Branch of Forestry, Bureau of
Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior
Sarah (Lantz) Reif
Urban Wildlife Planner
Arizona Game and Fish Department, Region II,
Flagstaff Ofﬁce
Lisa McNeilly
Northern Arizona Program Director
The Nature Conservancy
Keith Pajkos
Timber Staff Ofﬁcer
Arizona State Lands Department, Forestry Division
Chuck Peone Jr.
Tribal Forester
Fort Apache Timber Company
Molly Pittsb
Community-based forest and wood products advocate/
Consulting forester
Northern Arizona Wood Products Association
Todd Schulke
Forest Programs Director
Center for Biological Diversity
Larry Stephenson
Executive Director
Eastern Arizona Counties/Economic Environmental
Counties Organization
Diane Vosick
Associate Director
Ecological Restoration Institute
Elaine Zierothc
Forest Supervisor
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests
Steering committee member information is shown in bold type.
a The authors were honored by Paul DeClay Jr.’s presence before his passing in November 2007. They recognize the helpful participation of Mary Stuever, White Mountain Apache Tribe Forestry, who
served as an alternate representative for the tribe at project workshops.
b Invited to alternate attendance occupying one shared seat to better accommodate their schedules.
c Retired in December 2007 and replaced by Robert Taylor, Supervisory Natural Resource Specialist, Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests.
16
Journal of Forestry • January/February 2011

Analysis (FIA) plot data combined with re-
mote-sensing techniques to estimate existing
wood volume and potential supply across
Arizona’s most contiguous forest type (pon-
derosa pine).
The principal objective of this study
was to determine a socially and environmen-
tally credible region-scale wood supply esti-
mate based on thinning levels and locations
required to accomplish forest restoration
and improve forest health. Laird (1993) ar-
gues that the economic and social implica-
tions of technological and environmental is-
sues create a normative requirement that
they be subject to democratic scrutiny. This
study integrates the idea of “discursive de-
mocracy” or public input in decisionmaking
intrinsic to the democratic process (Dryzek
1990) and encouraging “participatory sci-
ence” or public participation in science
(Fischer 2000). The stated intent of the US
Forest Service was to use the supply estimate
as a tool for developing long-term thinning
contracts and to inform local planning. The
estimate would also serve to foster expanded
and appropriately scaled restoration-based
wood products businesses.
Analysis Area
The steering committee selected a 2.4
million ac analysis area in northern Arizona
(Figure 1). The analysis area was selected be-
cause it comprises the largest contiguous
ponderosa pine forest in Arizona. Recent
wildﬁre activity has shown to pose an ex-
treme threat to human communities and
multiple ecosystem values for this area. The
area included the White Mountain Steward-
ship project designed to thin approximately
150,000 ac of forest in the wildland–urban
interface (WUI; Neary and Zieroth 2007,
Fleeger 2008). The analysis area did not in-
clude extensive ponderosa pine forests on
White Mountain Apache tribal lands, which
could potentially contribute to regional
wood supply. Ninety-ﬁve percent of the
analysis area includes US Forest Service
lands. Decisions on these lands must be con-
sistent with the National Forest Manage-
ment Act, National Environmental Policy
Act (NEPA), and other laws and regulations.
Method for Building Agreement
on Selection of Treatment Area
Location and Type
To build agreement among stakehold-
ers in the region on the location and type of
restoration treatments, we worked with the
Designing successful collaborations.
The importance of obtaining broad
stakeholder acceptance of land-manage-
ment practices has increased since 1970,
when the ﬁrst US Forest Service land-man-
agement decision was overturned in court
(Coggins et al. 2001). In a study of over
700 ﬁnal case outcomes between 1989 and
2002, Keele et al. (2006) found litigants
won or obtained settlements in approxi-
mately 40% of cases brought against the
USForestService.Inanefforttoavoidhigh
litigation costs and adversarial interactions,
most state, federal, and regional policies
over the last 6 years call for the use of col-
laboration in land-management decision-
making (Vosick et al. 2007). To be truly
collaborative, a process needs to involve
more than gathering and summarizing
input from stakeholders, such as accom-
plished in open houses, public hearings,
and comment periods typical of most
NEPA processes. To make informed rec-
ommendations, our project steering com-
mitteesoughtahigherlevelofparticipation
including access to planning and assess-
ment tools. With their guidance, we per-
formed a process encompassing the follow-
ing major factors correlated with successful
collaboration (Cestero 1999; Moote and
Lowe 2008):
• Involve recognized authorities having
—Broad representation
—Formal recognition by government
units
—Ability and willingness to work to-
gether
• Secure adequate resources
• Follow existing regulations
• Provide common factual basis
• Develop and adhere to agreed on and
achievable goals while maintaining ﬂex-
ibility
• Maintain a fair, open, and effective
process
Eagar
Phoenix
Prescott
Williams
Holbrook
Flagstaff
Grand Canyon Village
Arizona
New Mexico
0
30
60
15
Miles
Arizona
0
50
100
25
Kilometers
Figure 1. Map detailing the 2.4 million–ac wood supply analysis area in northern Arizona.
The study area includes ponderosa pine and pine–oak vegetation (shown in green) south
of the Grand Canyon and across the Mogollon Plateau to the border of Arizona and
New Mexico within the proclamation boundaries of the Kaibab (South of Grand Canyon),
Coconino, and Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests, and the Payson and Pleasant Valley
Ranger Districts of the Tonto National Forest (outlined in black).
Journal of Forestry • January/February 2011
17

steering committee to form a 20-member
working group representing a diversity of
public and private land values (Table 1).
Members of the steering committee were
also integrated as stakeholders and all partic-
ipants were included in a series of workshops
AZ
NM
Phoenix
Prescott
Holbrook
Williams
Flagstaff
Grand Canyon Village
0
30
60
15
Miles
Total Wood Volume (cu.ft./acre)
High : 8150
Low : 15
AZ
NM
Phoenix
Prescott
Holbrook
Williams
Flagstaff
Grand Canyon Village
0
30
60
15
Miles
Landscape Management Areas
Aquatic Species Watersheds
Community Protection
MSO Restricted Habitat
Municipal Watersheds
Not Source of Supply
Wildlands
AZ
NM
Phoenix
Prescott
Williams
Flagstaff
Grand Canyon Village
0
30
60
15
Miles
AZ
NM
Phoenix
Prescott
Williams
Flagstaff
Grand Canyon Village
0
30
60
15
Miles
Potential Post-Treatment
Basal Area (ft2/acre)
2 - 29
30 - 46
47 - 55
56 - 66
67 - 76
77 - 87
88 - 100
101 - 118
119 - 143
144 - 284
Pre-Treatment
Basal Area (ft2/acre)
2 - 29
30 - 46
47 - 55
56 - 66
67 - 76
77 - 87
88 - 100
101 - 118
119 - 143
144 - 284
A
B
D
C
Figure 2. (A) Areas not considered a source of wood supply from mechanical thinning treatments (black) and landscape management areas
(various colors) used to deﬁne desired posttreatment conditions in working group treatment scenarios. (B) Estimated ponderosa pine bole
volume for 2006 across the analysis area. (C) Estimated ponderosa pine basal area in 2006. (D) Estimated ponderosa pine basal area
following potential treatments deﬁned in the majority scenario. Spatial data sources include the National Elevation Dataset (USGS), Arizona
Land and Resource Information System roads and private lands, The Nature Conservancy Arizona native ﬁsh species richness data,
National Resources Conservation Service sixth-level watershed boundaries, LANDFIRE existing vegetation data, and US Forest Service data
on streams, soils, roads, MSO protected activity centers, and goshawk nests.
18
Journal of Forestry • January/February 2011

that used a participatory geographic infor-
mation system (GIS) process (Hampton et
al. 2006, Sisk et al. 2006). This process in-
volves the display and analysis of map layers
portraying wildlife, watershed, and other
criteria for use in developing land-manage-
ment scenarios. The steering committee
identiﬁed potential group members and
came to full agreement on group member-
ship by discussing the pros and cons of the
participation of each individual or organiza-
tion. Factors used to select a diverse group of
stakeholders to participate were (1) area of
expertise, (2) representation from a variety
of organizations, (3) geographic purview,
and (4) availability. The working group had
representatives from environmental non-
governmental organizations, private forest
industries, local government, the Ecological
Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona
University, and state and federal land and
resource management agencies. We sent let-
ters to each potential working group mem-
ber or point of contact selected by the steer-
ing committee inviting the participation of
an individual or organization. The compo-
sition of the group changed twice over the
6-month workshop period when a member
retired and another passed away.
Seven full-day workshops were held
monthly from June through November
2007. Workshops were open to the public
and rotated between three locations spread
throughout the analysis area to facilitate at-
tendance. We used a “ﬁsh bowl” process at
each workshop, in which members of the
public were welcome to attend the entire
workshop and could ask questions or pro-
vide comments during a scheduled period.
Public attendance varied from 1 or 2 indi-
viduals to upward of 10. The majority were
industry, local government, and agency rep-
resentatives (e.g., Bureau of Land Manage-
ment). We distributed agendas and detailed
workshop summaries to hundreds of stake-
holders via e-mail and made handouts,
slides, and other materials available on a
project website. The public were also en-
couraged to provide comments via voice
mail, e-mail, or US Postal Service, which
were discussed at the following workshop.
To keep elected ofﬁcials and other key play-
ers in the region informed, the steering com-
mittee developed a list of contacts who re-
ceived periodic updates on project progress.
Maintaining a transparent and open process
was a key element of the project.
A
professional
facilitator
provided
guidance to maximize participation and to
deﬁne a consensus-based decisionmaking
approach, which was reﬁned and agreed on
by the working group. Consensus was
reached when each individual or organiza-
tion fully agreed with a choice or at least
found it acceptable, recognizing that com-
promises were necessary. If a group member
disagreed on an issue, it was up to them to
suggest alternatives. The dialogue then con-
tinued until everyone either agreed or de-
cided they could live with the decision.
Many issues took multiple workshops to re-
solve, especially if the group requested addi-
tional analyses or expertise from outside the
group. The consensus process succeeded be-
cause each member of the group actively
worked toward reaching agreement.
Topical experts from academia, research
institutes, and land-management agencies
augmented the working groups’ signiﬁcant
level of expertise in forest restoration man-
agement by providing specialized informa-
tion on wildlife issues, treatment impacts on
soils, hydrologic considerations, conditions
favorable to ﬁre-only restoration treatments,
and pre-European settlement and posttreat-
ment forest conditions. Throughout the
process, additional specialized topics arose.
Subcommittees of working group members
and invited experts worked between full
group workshops to study these issues and
draft spatial data products to assist the work-
ing group in their collective decisionmaking.
At the initial group workshop, we pro-
vided background and foundational infor-
mation to the group. Each steering commit-
tee member commented on wood supply
and utilization issues related to their respec-
tive organization and described how they
hoped this analysis would aid in these issues.
The US Forest Service Director of Forestry
and Forest Health for the Southwestern Re-
gion described the importance of the study
and how the US Forest Service intended to
use project results. Agency experts provided
information on how treatments might be
constrained or inﬂuenced by regulations and
guidelines related to wildlife, soils, and hy-
drologic factors. We summarized the impor-
tance of landscape-scale forest restoration as-
sessments and reviewed the main task of
developing one or more treatment scenarios
that was the focus of the working group.
Table 2. Areas not considered a source of
wood byproducts from mechanical
restoration thinning treatments.
Landscape feature
Acres
MSO protected activity centers
182,000
Specially designated areasa
177,000
Steep slopes (40%)
147,000
Forest thinned within 10 yr
113,000
Northern goshawk nest areas
63,000
Soil types restricted from
mechanized treatment
126,000
Streamside management zonesb
52,000
Total (excluding overlap between layers)
638,000
a Specially designated areas in the study area include wilderness
areas, national game preserves, research natural areas, primitive
areas, and inventoried roadless areas.
b Streamside management zones were deﬁned as areas within
100 ft of perennial and intermittent streams.
Table 3. Wood volume estimates summarized by total volume and three diameter
classes for 2006,a The total wood volume layer was used to summarize cubic foot
volume for the ponderosa pine type and each landscape management area in the study
area.
Wood volume category
Total volume
(million ft3)b
Percent of
total volume
Acres
(millions)
Total volume in analysis area
4,561
100
2.4
Volume not considered in supply
1,302
28
0.6
Volume in management areas by dbh class
5 in.
79
2
5- to 16-in. dbh
1,394
43
16-in. dbh
1,764
55
Total volume in management areas
3,238
Volume by landscape management area
Community protection
643
14
0.35
MSO restricted habitat
504
11
0.24
Municipal watersheds
128
3
0.06
Aquatic species watersheds
668
15
0.31
Wildlands
1,317
30
0.79
a Total cubic volume estimates for the ponderosa pine type are from a single data layer and volume by diameter class is from three
separate data layers. Discrepancies between estimates derived from the total volume layer those summed over diameter classes is a
primarily result of lower computation accuracy in the 5-in. dbh volume layer.
b Tree bole cubic foot volume includes the entire length of the tree, with no deduction from the main stem for stumps or tops at
speciﬁed diameter.
Journal of Forestry • January/February 2011
19

At the subsequent workshops, we pro-
vided detailed information on how other
collaborative groups had built scenarios for
previous landscape assessments and on the
availability of spatial data on forest structure
and other conditions. Methods to character-
ize and strategically place treatments across
the landscape were presented to the working
group. Building on the presentations by
agency experts at the initial meeting, we pre-
sented maps depicting technical methods to
incorporate treatment guidelines and regu-
lations relevant to siting treatments. For se-
lected landscape conditions (e.g., steep
slopes and northern goshawk nest areas) we
reviewed data layers and estimates describ-
ing how each factor might inﬂuence a treat-
ment scenario. The group found this map-
based presentation of various options useful
and requested that we continue depicting
progress in this manner.
Based on this input, the working group
developed an overall goal for its scenario to
restore ﬁre-adapted (ponderosa pine) eco-
systems and protect communities from de-
structive ﬁres, while mitigating adverse im-
pacts of treatments on soils, surface water,
and wildlife. To accomplish this goal, the
group divided the landscape into areas
where restoration byproducts (i.e., wood
supply) were or were not potentially avail-
able from mechanical tree thinning (Figure
2A). Potential wood supply areas were fur-
ther divided into ﬁve types of landscape
management areas (see section “Areas Ap-
propriate for Mechanical Thinning”), each
with management objectives including de-
sired posttreatment conditions, based on the
informed judgment of experienced restoration
practitioners from land-management agencies
and other organizations within the working
group. Prescribed burning was generally as-
sumed to follow thinning treatments. Post-
treatment conditions were designed to put
these ecosystems on a trajectory toward re-
stored conditions supporting frequent low-
intensity ﬁre regimes and increased forest
structural heterogeneity.
Areas Not Appropriate for
Mechanical Thinning
The working group agreed that areas
within the analysis area associated with seven
landscape features would not be considered
a source of restoration byproducts (i.e.,
wood supply) for the purposes of this study
(Table 2; black areas in Figure 2A). These
areas are typically not mechanically thinned
because of steepness, sensitive soils, proxim-
ity to streams, recent tree harvesting, land-
use restrictions, or wildlife regulations. Par-
ticipants
acknowledged
that
Mexican
spotted owl (MSO) protected activity cen-
ters and other sensitive species habitats
might be thinned lightly from below in
some cases, resulting in minimal thinning
byproducts. No changes were made numer-
ically to wood supply estimates based on
road access; however, the group expressed
that they had low conﬁdence that areas far-
ther than 1⁄4 mi from existing roads (consti-
tuting 241,000 ac) would be a source of
thinning byproducts in the near term, be-
cause of increased costs, limits in harvesting
technologies common in the region, and
concerns over environmental impacts asso-
ciated with new road construction and
improvements.
Areas found that were not a potential
source of wood supply made up 26% of the
analysis area, less than the average value we
observed in 27 NEPA-approved restoration
projects (37%; US Forest Service 2002–
2007). It was reasoned that the value derived
via spatial analysis (26%) is conservative be-
cause several site-scale factors that limit me-
chanical thinning were not accounted for,
such as archeological sites, historical sites,
wildlife movement corridors, and areas with
insufﬁcient road access.
Toward identifying areas that would be
excluded from mechanical thinning treat-
ments, a subcommittee explored where pre-
scribed and/or wildland ﬁre use (WFU)
could or should be used as an initial treat-
ment option. At the group’s request, we per-
formed various GIS analyses to deﬁne possi-
ble ﬁre-only treatment areas including (1)
identifying areas below a speciﬁed basal area
derived from either pre-European settle-
ment conditions or expert opinion on ex-
pected surface-ﬁre conditions, (2) assuming
status quo planning levels for ﬁre-only treat-
ments based on the average in 27 NEPA
planning areas (33%; US Forest Service
2002–2007), and (3) ﬁre behavior model
predictions under various weather scenarios.
A complicating factor threaded throughout
group discussions was the applicability, ac-
ceptability, and predictable effects of ﬁre
and smoke. Concerns were raised that ad-
verse health effects of smoke and exceeding
air quality threshold limits prescribed burn-
ing activities, and, furthermore, that locat-
ing potential ﬁre-only areas was not relevant
to the wood supply analysis and outside the
scope of the project. Given these uncertain-
ties and lack of time to arrive at a mutually
agreeable modeling method within the
6-month workshop period, the subcommit-
tee decided not to recommend a speciﬁc ap-
proach and advocated instead that there are
areas of the landscape where ﬁre only will
continue to be the preferred treatment over
mechanical thinning and that wood supply
estimates needed to be adjusted downward
correspondingly.
Areas Appropriate for
Mechanical Thinning
The working group divided and ranked
lands for receiving mechanical thinning
treatments, which were considered a poten-
tial source of wood supply (colored areas in
Figure 2A). Selected areas were categorized
as ﬁve landscape management areas with dif-
ferent restoration objectives. Community
protection management areas (CPMA) re-
ceived the highest ranking for tree thinning,
meaning that management objectives for
CPMAs took precedence wherever they
overlapped with another management area.
The group struggled with how to geograph-
ically represent areas identiﬁed in commu-
nity wildﬁre protection plans because the
different plans used inconsistent approaches
and delineations. Ultimately, the group cre-
ated a new designation. The group deﬁned
CPMAs by assigning a
1⁄4-mi protection
buffer around all private lands, with 1⁄2- to
11⁄2-mi buffers around “high priority” pri-
vate lands identiﬁed in community wildﬁre
protection plans—the default WUI deﬁni-
tion of the Healthy Forests Restoration Act
of 2003. MSO restricted habitat manage-
ment areas (rank 2) were deﬁned as lands
with pine-oak vegetation and used in tan-
dem with the group’s basal area manage-
ment objectives designed to follow MSO
Recovery Plan guidelines (US Department
of the Interior Fish and Wildlife Service
1995) at a regional scale. Municipal water-
sheds management areas (rank 3) contained
sixth-level watersheds with community sur-
face water supplies. The working group de-
ﬁned aquatic species watersheds manage-
ment areas (rank 4) as sixth-level watersheds
in which native ﬁsh presence has been doc-
umented. The wildlands management area
(rank 5) was a catchall for areas not deﬁned
by the other four (Table 3).
For each landscape management area,
the working group speciﬁed a posttreatment
basal area probability distribution appropri-
ate for the area’s management objectives
20
Journal of Forestry • January/February 2011

(Figure 3). For example, the proposed thin-
ning for the CPMAs, where tolerance for ﬁre
is low, is more aggressive than the thinning
goals in wildland areas, while desired post-
treatment distributions in MSO restricted
habitat allow for denser conditions to pro-
mote MSO target/threshold habitat. Reduc-
tions in basal area over initial conditions de-
termined thinning intensity. Posttreatment
basal area distributions follow a beta-distri-
bution function in which minimum, maxi-
mum, and mode were used rather than a
target basal area (average) to maintain land-
scape heterogeneity as described in early
studies of ponderosa pine (Pearson 1950).
Basal area distributions within a partic-
ular management area were developed with
the aid of experts and include forest manage-
ment regulations and provisions for critical
wildlife species habitat. For example, the
MSO restricted habitat posttreatment distri-
bution of 45–190 ft2/ac (mode, 100 ft2/ac)
was designed to implement current (1996)
National Forest Plans and the 1995 MSO
Recovery Plan. The curve for MSO re-
stricted habitat retained 10% of this man-
agement area with basal area of 150 ft2/ac
to meet US Fish and Wildlife Service guide-
lines for maintaining critical habitat. The
relatively low posttreatment basal area range
of 30–60 ft2/ac (mode, 40 ft2/ac) for CP-
MAs was chosen to reduce ﬁre risk signiﬁ-
cantly (e.g., Fiedler 2002, Fule´ et al. 2002a,
2002b). Curves are based on forest thinning
regimes that are presently being applied in
the southwest (e.g., US Forest Service 2002–
2007) and all basal area ranges are more
heavily weighted to lower values with distri-
bution tails tapering off more gradually to
the right (skewed to the right).
The distributions are not precise deter-
minations
or
silvicultural
prescriptions;
rather, they are realistic assumptions that al-
low for the estimation of wood supply at the
regional scale. The group endeavored to bal-
ance key land-management issues that in-
cluded the desire to (1) reduce the threat of
uncharacteristically intense ﬁre to human
communities, wildlife habitat, and other
ecosystem components; (2) minimize po-
tential negative impacts of treatments (Allen
et al. 2002, Chambers and Germaine 2003);
(3) restore forests to a more naturally heter-
ogeneous
structural
condition
(Pearson
1950, Savage 1991, Covington and Moore
1994); and (4) recognize that changes in the
last 100 years, such as global warming, the
spread of invasive species, and anthropo-
genic edge effects and fragmentation, have
provided novel conditions that may result in
unexpected ecosystem trajectories (Beier
and Maschinski 2003). For example, the de-
sired posttreatment basal area distribution
outside of CPMAs included areas of higher
tree densities to provide a variety of habitat
conditions for wildlife including threatened,
endangered, and sensitive species that may
specialize in habitats “atypical” of those de-
scribed by current reconstructions of pre-
European
settlement
forest
conditions
(Beier and Maschinski 2003).
Consensus Reached
The group reached full agreement that
26% of the 2.4 million–ac analysis area
should not be considered a source of wood
supply and that 41% should be considered a
potential source of byproducts generated by
mechanical harvesting as part of restoration
or fuel reduction treatment (Figure 4). The
41% is an analysis area average, with higher
percentages applied to community protec-
tion areas and lower elsewhere, as described
in the next paragraph. In addition, a major-
ity of working group members believed that
some portion of the remaining 33% of the
landscape (up to a total of 74% of the anal-
ysis area) should be considered for mechan-
ical thinning. The strategy underlying the
consensus scenario was to apply nonme-
chanical restoration options where feasible
in the remaining 33% of areas, including
ﬁre-only treatments and WFU to minimize
Figure 4. Pie chart representing the level of
agreement among stakeholders as a per-
centage of the entire analysis area. Areas in
white represent full agreement over a total
of 67% of the landscape. Areas in gray
represent the remaining 33% of the land-
scape where there is a lack of consensus,
but for which the majority of working group
members believed some mechanical thin-
ning would be acceptable and/or neces-
sary.
Figure 3. Continuous probability distributions of desired posttreatment ponderosa pine
basal area for each landscape management area used in consensus and majority scenar-
ios. Locations with pretreatment basal areas lower than levels described by these curves
were not decreased after potential treatments. CPMAs (yellow), aquatic and municipal
watersheds (blue), MSO restricted habitat (red), and wildlands (green).
Journal of Forestry • January/February 2011
21

potential negative impacts of mechanical
treatments, whereas the majority scenario
intends to provide a higher level of control
and precision by using mechanical thinning
to reduce the threat of uncharacteristic
crown ﬁre and achieve the group’s desired
conditions in these areas.
The working group partitioned the area
to be restored using mechanized thinning
for the consensus and majority scenarios
into various proportions of each landscape
management area (column 2, Table 4). The
proportional breakdowns for the consensus
scenario were based on informed judgment
and were part of a three-tiered landscape res-
toration strategy in which (1) intensive me-
chanical thinning treatments are placed
across all the CPMAs where thinning would
be feasible, (2) additional mechanical thin-
ning treatments are placed strategically
across 30–40% of each of the remaining
landscape management areas to signiﬁcantly
reduce uncharacteristic ﬁre behavior (e.g.,
Finney 2006 and Finney et al. 2007), and
(3) other restoration options are used where
feasible and needed in the remaining areas,
including prescribed burn-only treatments,
WFU, and noncommercial thinning (or
thinning that would not add to wood sup-
ply). The 74% for the majority scenario was
based on the portion of the analysis area re-
maining after areas deemed not appropriate
for mechanical treatments were removed
from consideration.
Assessment of Current Forest
Conditions
Calculations of existing ponderosa pine
wood volume and basal area per acre were a
priority for estimating the potential wood
supply from forest restoration treatments.
Because up-to-date forest inventory data
were lacking for the study area, we devel-
oped an integrated forest mapping system
(IFMS) to map forest structural characteris-
tics by combining US Forest Service Na-
tional FIA plots with multidate Landsat
Thematic Mapper (TM) imagery (Box 1).
FIA plots provided a large-scale, consistent
and systematic measurement (4.8  4.8-km
sample grid) of forest conditions that is pe-
riodically updated (Hicke et al. 2007).
Landsat TM data provided a recent (2006),
low-cost multispectral and multitemporal
platform for mapping ponderosa pine struc-
tural characteristics across all management
jurisdictions in the study area. The integra-
tion of these data sources allowed statistical
imputation using k-nearest neighbor (k-nn)
algorithms to map forest structural condi-
tion for the ponderosa pine type (Box 1).
The k-nn methods are increasingly used to
map forest structure over large areas from
inventory and remotely sensed data for a va-
riety of forest types (Ohmann and Gregory
2002, Tomppo et al. 2008).
Digital forest structural layers resulting
from IFMS were systematically evaluated for
accuracy by comparing k-nn predictions of
the value of each plot from all other FIA
plots in the reference data set. Total forest
volume estimates (Figure 2B) from digital
grids resulted in an R2  0.78 and mean and
median residual error of 228/195 ft3/ac
by comparing the imputed value to that ob-
served from corresponding FIA plots. The
mean residual error was inﬂuenced by plot
locations with high volume and was lower
(189 ft3/ac) for comparisons using 80% of
the FIA plot data for validation. Total basal
area estimates (Figure 2C) showed an R2 
0.72 with a mean and median residual error
of 15/11 ft2/ac in ponderosa pine forest.
Summarized data from the digital volume
layer resulted in a total of 4.56 billion ft3 for
ponderosa pine forest in the study area (Ta-
ble 3). The total volume estimate was also
compared with other recent regional and
state wood volume assessments. Bailey and
Ide (2001) calculated that 4.1 billion ft3 of
ponderosa pine volume existed within the
four counties overlapping much of the wood
supply study area, which include most of
state’s ponderosa pine forest, and O’Brien
(1999) estimated that 5.4 billion ft3 existed
statewide. Although the spatial location of
prior volume estimates do not overlap en-
tirely with the wood supply study area, wood
volume calculated using k-nn imputation
for ponderosa pine forest in the study area
compared well with previous estimates. Re-
cent disturbances from large forest ﬁres be-
Table 4. Wood supply estimates derived from the “consensus” and “majority” treatment scenarios (see text for explanation) as of
2006.a Potential treatments occur in the ponderosa pine type on 41% of the total analysis area acres for the consensus scenario and
on 74% of the area for the majority scenario. The majority scenario was applied to all 74% of the area considered for restoration
treatments; however, 5% was below a minimum amount of basal area and did not have thinning treatments.
Management area
Percent of
management area
Wood volumeb
(ft3)
Crown weightc
(green tn)
Acres treatedd
Percent area
treated
Ave harvestede
(ft3/ac)
Consensus scenario
Community protection
70%
368,975,519
3,479,963
314,017
32%
1,175
MSO restricted habitat
30%
56,832,525
536,384
113,076
11%
503
Municipal watersheds
40%
37,448,212
355,581
34,471
3%
1,086
Aquatic species watersheds
35%
189,626,094
1,788,160
187,157
19%
1,013
Wildlands
35%
194,426,007
1,831,347
338,486
34%
574
Total
847,308,357
7,991,436
987,206
100%
858
Majority scenario
Community protection
74%
371,401,419
3,503,137
335,206
20%
1,108
MSO restricted habitat
74%
83,647,154
789,558
225,773
14%
370
Municipal watersheds
74%
47,206,561
448,773
58,031
3%
813
Aquatic species watersheds
74%
242,247,408
2,284,993
323,531
19%
749
Wildlands
74%
270,810,528
2,550,706
718,927
43%
377
Total
1,015,313,070
9,577,167
1,661,467
100%
611
a Wood supply estimates are from 2006 data and have not been projected forward with forest growth information.
b Tree bole cubic foot volume includes the entire length of the tree, with no deduction from the main stem for stumps or tops at speciﬁed diameter.
c Crown weights from restoration byproducts include all tree foliage, limbs, and bark from limbs.
d Percent of total area potentially treated in each scenario located in each landscape management area. For example, 32% of the potentially treated areas in the consensus scenario are located in the
community protection management areas.
e Average volume of bole and crown material per acre for differ between consensus and majority scenarios because the majority scenario covers an additional 34% of the landscape with generally lower
pretreatment basal area.
22
Journal of Forestry • January/February 2011

fore 2006 and corresponding decreases in
wood volume were also well represented in
digital forest volume and basal area layers
(Figure 2).
A central objective of the wood supply
estimate was to determine the amount of
wood supply from thinning small-diameter
trees. For the purposes of this study, the
group selected a 16-in. dbh threshold be-
cause of its common use within the analysis
area as a break differentiating “small”- and
“large”-diameter trees in the ponderosa pine
forest type. To examine the amount of land
area and volume where thinning could meet
posttreatment
conditions
by
harvesting
small-diameter trees (i.e., trees of 16-in.
dbh), three additional basal area layers were
derived with the IFMS for three diameter
classes of 5-in. dbh (R2  0.45), 5- to 16-
in. dbh (R2  0.51), and 16-in. dbh (R2 
0.50). We assumed that 10 and 20% of the
basal area per acre must be retained after
thinning from trees of 5-in. dbh and 5- to
16-in. dbh, respectively, to promote tree age
and size class diversity. Wood supply esti-
mated from thinning treatment scenarios in
the following section were used to assess the
amount of volume and proportion of analy-
sis area that would meet posttreatment basal
area conditions by thinning small-diameter
trees.
Potential Wood Supply from
Restoration Treatments
Based on the working group’s speciﬁca-
tions for percent area treated and desired
posttreatment conditions within ﬁve land-
scape management categories, we estimated
potential wood supply generated from the
consensus and majority treatment scenarios.
It was acknowledged that treatments should
focus on removing small-diameter trees as
the central objective, but no ﬁxed diameter
limitation was placed on restoration scenar-
ios or supply calculations. For example,
there was no concurrence within the group
that trees over 16 in. should be cut and re-
moved from areas outside the CPMAs.
We ﬁrst needed to identify prethinning
forest characteristics from IFMS data layers
and estimate thinning levels to achieve de-
sired posttreatment conditions. We ﬁt the
pretreatment basal area distribution for each
landscape management area to the desired
posttreatment probability distributions de-
ﬁned by the working group, while maintain-
ing the original order of low to high basal
area conditions. For example, the pretreat-
Integrated Forest Mapping System for combining US Forest Service FIA and
remotely sensed data to model and map ponderosa pine forest structural
characteristics across the study area.
1. FIA forest plots—Georeferenced FIA forest inventory plots on National US Forest Service
lands and live tree measurements (trees of 1-in. dbh) from years 1996 to 2005 were used to
develop a region-scale ground reference data set for mapping ponderosa pine forest structure.
a. Disturbance ﬁlter—FIA plots were selected by using remote sensing change detection
techniques to identify plots without severe wildﬁre, timber harvest, and other disturbance
events since the date of establishment.
b. Forest Vegetation Simulator (FVS)1—Selected FIA forest plots representative of the pon-
derosa pine forest type (n  420) were grown forward in time to match the Landsat TM
image year (2006). The Central Rockies Variant of FVS provided species-speciﬁc growth
models for the southwestern United States (Dixon 2002) to estimate tree basal area and cubic
foot volume per acre. Plots were established between years 1996 and 2005 (i.e., 10 years of
simulated growth).
c. Forest structure reference data set—Plot basal area and volume were used to model forest
structural conditions from sampled to unsampled locations using a set of predictor variables
and k-nn imputation methods discussed next.
2. Landsat TM data—Twelve Landsat TM scenes from 2006 (6 leaf-on and 6 leaf-off for decid-
uous tree species) were assembled to cover ponderosa pine forest type in the study area.
a. Spectral bands and indices—Spectral bands and indices were derived from leaf-on and
leaf-off TM images including TM bands 1–5 and 7, normalized difference vegetation index
(NDVI) and derivatives such as corrected NDVI (NDVIc; Pocewicz et al. 2004) and NDVI
ratio (leaf-on/-off), bands from a tasseled cap transformation (i.e., wetness, greenness, and
brightness), and minimum noise fraction bands 1–3. These variables were initially selected
because of their potential usefulness for predicting forest structural parameters (e.g., Cohen et
al. 1995, Moisen and Frescino 2002, Tomppo et al. 2008).
3. Digital Elevation Model (DEM)—A 30-m DEM was used to derive four variables related to
the biophysical environment that were likely to be important predictors of forest structure.
a. Terrain information—Terrain variables included percent slope, elevation, surface rough-
ness, and aspect. Aspect was cosine transformed for use as a continuous index of solar radia-
tion related to site moisture conditions (Moisen and Frescino 2002).
4. Predictor variable selection—All spectral and terrain predictor variables (grids) were resampled
to a 90-m grid cell size and used to attribute each reference plot for developing models and digital
data layers. As part of statistical imputation (below), we used the random forest regression tree
algorithm (Breiman 2001) to estimate variable importance. Therefore, a reduced subset of the
best predictor variables was selected for use in a ﬁnal model predicting each structural variable
(see also Cutler et al. 2007, Sesnie et al. 2008a, 2008b, Evans and Cushman 2009). Predictor
variable importance indicated that minimum noise fraction band 1 (leaf-on), NDVIc, and
NDVI ratio in addition to TM bands 1–5, 7 from both leaf-on and leaf-off TM images, were
necessary for generating accurate basal area and wood volume estimates. Elevation and roughness
(elevation SD in a 3  3 pixel window) variables taken from a DEM were also important and
used in forest structure imputations.
5. The k-nn imputation—Statistical imputation has become increasingly important for mapping
forest characteristics across large areas from existing forest inventories and remotely sensed data.
The k-nn imputation techniques used for the wood supply assessment accessed a set of reference
data (y  forest structural variable on FIA plots) attributed by predictor variables (x  spectral
and terrain predictors) to estimate y for many unsampled locations (pixels) with x variables only.
The yaImpute package in R statistical software (The R Foundation for Statistical Computing
2007) was used to implement the random forest regression tree algorithm (Breiman 2001) for
k-nn imputation for deriving forest structural layers (see also Crookston and Finely 2007).
6. Digital forest structure layers—The IFMS produced digital data layers of ponderosa pine basal
area and volume (Figure 2, B and C) that were passed to a GIS for the wood supply assessment.
Forest restoration treatments were applied as reductions in basal area to estimate wood supply.
1We used USDA FIA forest inventory plots for study on national forests in the FVS ﬁle format (US Forest Service
2007). Georeferenced FIA plot locations on National Forestland were obtained under a written agreement with
the USFS Forest Inventory and Analysis program ofﬁce. Ogden, UT and the USFS Southwestern Regional ofﬁce
in Albuquerque, NM.
Journal of Forestry • January/February 2011
23

ment basal areas in CPMAs were reduced to
a minimum basal area of 30 ft2/ac and a
maximum of 60 ft2/ac, with the mode set at
40 ft2/ac (Figure 3). The pretreatment basal
area was reduced unless it was below a min-
imum desired condition (e.g., 40 ft2/ac in
wildlands) in which case the values were left
unchanged. The difference between pre-
and posttreatment basal area represented
thinning intensity. The dominant thinning
level ranged from heavy in the CPMAs,
which were designed to buffer communities
from severe wildlife behavior, to light in
MSO restricted habitat, reﬂecting a prefer-
ence for denser conditions. The modeled
treatments, especially the high-intensity
treatments in the CPMAs, interspersed with
areas not thinned, created a heterogeneous
pattern of potential posttreatment basal area
across the landscape (Figure 2D).
To obtain estimates of wood volume
harvested as a byproduct of treatments, non-
linear regression was used to determine the
cubic foot volume from the amount of basal
area removed. To establish these relation-
ships, we used basal area and log trans-
formed total wood volume from FIA plots in
the reference data set (n  420). A ﬁnal
model showed a good ﬁt to the data (R2 
0.81; P  0.0001). A range of wood supply
volumes was estimated for each manage-
ment area, integrating the two working
group scenarios and thinning levels (Table
4). In the consensus scenario, the highest
basal area locations were thinned in each
landscape management area up to the per-
cent areas speciﬁed by the working group.
This was not necessary in the majority sce-
nario because each entire landscape manage-
ment area was available for treatment.
Thinning treatments considered under
the majority scenario produced 17% more
wood supply (1.015 billion ft3) than that of
the consensus scenario (0.847 billion ft3).
The greater number of acres treated with the
majority scenario included locations with
lower basal area, which reduced the average
volume harvested. Average supply volumes
ranged from 611 ft3/ac (majority) to 858
ft3/ac (consensus), which closely matched
the amount of harvest volume estimated
from US Forest Service timber cruise data
and recent thinning treatments within the
study area (White Mountain Stewardship
contract, 2008, US Forest Service, unpub-
lished data). Differences between pre- and
posttreatment landscape conditions (basal
area) for the majority scenario indicate the
locations treated, which cover a total of 69%
of the study area where minimum basal area
conditions were met (Figure 2, C and D).
From our analysis of wood supply gen-
erated from small-diameter trees we found
that 1.44 million ac (81% of the area
treated) had sufﬁcient basal area from trees
of 16-in. dbh, meaning that only small
trees would be harvested. This accounted for
90% of the total wood supply volume (917
million ft3) in the majority scenario. High-
intensity treatments in CPMAs were the
principal locations where thinning larger
trees would be necessary to meet desired
posttreatment conditions. The consensus
scenario, which was comprised of areas hav-
ing the highest initial basal area over 41% of
the analysis area, resulted in similar out-
comes.
In addition to stem volume, forest bio-
mass removed by treatments was also esti-
mated because potential wood products may
be derived from residual materials. To esti-
mate crown biomass (limbs, bark, and foli-
age) that is in addition to wood supply from
tree boles, a relationship between bole and
crown weights from FIA plots was devel-
oped via nonlinear regression. Stem weight
was generally three times greater than bio-
mass comprised of crown material. Esti-
mates of crown biomass for the consensus
and majority scenarios ranged from 8.0 to
9.6 million green tn, respectively (Table 4).
Per acre volume and biomass estimates were
similar to harvest volumes taken from exist-
ing forest restoration activities (White
Mountain Stewardship contract, 2008, US
Forest Service, unpublished data).
Harvesters removed a total of 319,800
tn of nonresidues and 12,900 tn of residues
from the Kaibab, Coconino, and Apache-
Sitgreaves National Forests in 2006 (unpub-
lished data provided by the four National
Forests) equivalent to 1.2% of the total bole
biomass and 0.2% of the total crown bio-
mass that would potentially be generated
from treatments in the consensus scenario. A
simple linear extrapolation of year 2006 har-
vest levels over 10 years would result in
3,198,000 and 129,000 green tn, which is
12 and 1.6% of the respective bole and
crown biomass from the consensus scenario.
Therefore, wood supply deﬁned by stake-
holders exceeded current utilization levels by
88% when extrapolated over the next 10
years.
Wood supply estimates based on the
working group scenarios represent a snap-
shot in time. Forest growth will likely add to
potential wood supply, averaging about 40
ft3/ac per year including self-thinning mor-
tality. Simple volume multipliers can be
used to adjust these published values. How-
ever, increasing frequency and severity of
western wildﬁres (Westerling et al. 2006),
expected continued drying of the southwest-
ern climate (Seager et al. 2007), and associ-
ated insect outbreaks and tree mortality (van
Mantgem et al. 2009) could drive down bio-
mass stocks and growth rates.
Conclusions
A primary goal of this case study was to
build agreement on the location and type of
ecologically appropriate forest restoration
treatments that could supply wood byprod-
ucts to new and existing businesses and mar-
kets. Maintaining forest structural heteroge-
neity across the landscape and restoring ﬁre-
adapted conditions were the two guiding
principles used to design broad-scale thin-
ning
treatments.
The
working
group
reached full consensus across 67% of the
landscape (26% not appropriate for me-
chanical thinning and 41% appropriate),
which is a remarkable achievement consid-
ering such diverse stakeholder interests. In
addition, a majority of working group mem-
bers believed that some portion of the re-
maining 33% of the landscape (up to a total
of 74%) should be considered for mechani-
cal thinning. The entire group also agreed
on the intensity of mechanical treatments
that could be applied within ﬁve landscape
management categories. Where a difference
of opinion occurred for 33% of the analysis
area, the estimated bole volume of restora-
tion byproducts potentially available dif-
fered by 17% (ranging from 847 to 1,015
million ft3).
Lessons learned include the importance
of involving participants with broad repre-
sentation among stakeholder groups and
close contact with decisionmakers in their
organizations. In addition, to ensure that the
process and methods used to reach project
objectives make sense to participants, time
should be allocated up front to involve par-
ticipants in their development. Finally, facil-
itation techniques that encourage contribu-
tion from each participant and minimize
dominance by one or several groups are es-
sential for permitting critical issues to
surface.
The consensus scenario produced esti-
mates of potential wood byproducts from
restoration treatments that greatly exceed
current thinning levels. The outcome of the
study catalyzed new forest restoration initi-
24
Journal of Forestry • January/February 2011

atives and planning mechanisms to achieve
the intent of the wood supply analysis. On
Nov. 13, 2008, Janet Napolitano, then Gov-
ernor of Arizona, endorsed accelerated resto-
ration across northern Arizona in a letter to
the Regional Forester, asking that the con-
sensus reached in this study be institutional-
ized. On Mar. 2, 2009, US Representative
Ann Kirkpatrick requested the US Forest
Service work with stakeholders toward re-
leasing a request for proposals to accelerate
treatments. In a Mar. 6, 2009, letter, the
Regional Forester announced the intent of
four Forest Supervisors with management
authority for lands in the wood supply anal-
ysis area to develop a strategy to substantially
accelerate the rate of restoration treatments
across 750,000 ac of the analysis area, fol-
lowed by a “Sources Sought” notice released
by the Southwestern Region of the US For-
est Service on April 23rd to gather informa-
tion to design contract options for the “Four
Forest Restoration Initiative Project.” In a
letter dated May 6, 2009, Arizona Governor
Janice Brewer asked the Regional Forester to
work with the Governor’s Forest Health
Council, (6 of the 20 council members were
working group members on this study), to
implement the restoration goals of the con-
sensus scenario. On June 26, 2009, Arizona
Senate and House of Representatives re-
quested that the Director of the US Forest
Service and the Governor “… clearly iden-
tify additional federal appropriations needed
to support acceleration of consensus-sup-
ported and scientiﬁcally informed forest res-
toration treatments.” Challenges remain,
such as, securing funding, designing effec-
tive contracts, and stepping region-scale
analyses down to project level prescriptions;
however, based on the unprecedented align-
ment of stakeholder and policymaking in-
terests, the success of achieving landscape-
scale restoration in northern Arizona’s
ponderosa pine forests looks promising.
Literature Cited
ALLEN, C.D., M. SAVAGE, D.A. FALK, K.F. SUCK-
LING, T.W. SWETNAM, T.P. SCHULKE, P.B.
STACEY, P. MORGAN, M. HOFFMAN, AND J.T.
KLINGEL. 2002. Ecological restoration of
southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems: A
broad perspective. Ecol. Applic. 12:1418–
1433.
BAILEY, J.D., AND D. IDE. 2001. Four corners re-
gional assessment, Table B-3. Northern Arizona
Univ., School of Forestry, Flagstaff, AZ. 75 p.
BEIER, P., AND J. MASCHINSKI. 2003. Threatened,
endangered, and sensitive species. P. 306–327
In Ecological restoration of southwestern pon-
derosa pine forests, Friederici, P. (ed.). Island
Press, Washington, DC.
BREIMAN, L. 2001. Random Forests. Mach.
Learn. 45:5–32.
CESTERO, B. 1999. Beyond the hundredth meeting:
A ﬁeld guide to collaborative conservation on the
West’s public lands. Sonoran Institute, Tucson,
AZ. 92 p.
CHAMBERS, C., AND S. GERMAINE. 2003. Verte-
brates P. 268–285 in Ecological restoration of
southwestern ponderosa pine forests, Friederici,
P. (ed.). Island Press, Washington, DC.
COGGINS, G.C., C. WILKINSON, AND J. LESHY.
2001. Federal public land and resource law, 4th
Ed. Foundation Press, New York. 1,232 p.
COHEN, W.B., T.A. SPIES, AND M. FIORELLA.
1995. Estimating the age and structure of for-
ests in a multi-ownership landscape of western
Oregon, U.S.A. Int. J. Remote Sens. 16:721–
746.
COVINGTON, W.W., AND M.M. MOORE. 1994.
Southwestern
ponderosa
forest
structure:
Changes since Euro-American settlement. J.
For. 92:39–47.
CROOKSTON, N.L.,
AND A.O. FINLEY. 2007.
yaImpute: An R package for k-NN imputation.
The yaImpute package. Available online at
www.cran.r-project.org/web/packages/yaIm
pute/yaImpute.pdf.; last accessed Sept. 18,
2007. 37 p.
CUTLER, D.R., T.C. EDWARDS, JR., K.H. BEARD,
A. CUTLER, K.T. HESS, J. GIBSON, AND J.J.
LAWLER. 2007. Random forest for classiﬁca-
tion in ecology. Ecology 88:2783–2792.
DIXON, G.E. 2002. Essential FVS: A user’s guide
to forest vegetation simulator. US For. Serv.,
For. Manag. Service Center, Fort Collins, CO.
DRYZEK, J.S. 1990. Discursive democracy: Politics,
policy, and political science. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge, UK. 254 p.
EVANS, J.S., AND S.A. CUSHMAN. 2009. Gradient
modeling of conifer species using random for-
ests. Landsc. Ecol. 24:673–683.
FIEDLER, C.E., C.E. KEEGAN III, S.H. ROBERT-
SON, T.A. MORGAN, C.W. WOODALL, AND
J.T. CHMELIK. 2002. A strategic assessment of
ﬁre hazard in New Mexico. Final Rep. submit-
ted to the Joint Fire Sciences Program, Feb.
11, 2002. 27 p.
FINNEY, M.A. 2006. A computational method for
optimizing fuel treatment locations. P. 107–
123 in Proc. of conf. on Fuels management—
How to measure success, Andrews, P.L., and
B.W. Butler (comps.). US For. Serv. RMRS-
P-41, Fort Collins, CO.
FINNEY, M.A., R.C. SELI, C.W. MCHUGH, A.A.
AGER, B. BAHRO, AND J.K. AGEE. 2007. Simu-
lation of long-term landscape-level fuel treat-
ment effects on large wildﬁres. Int. J. Wildl.
Fire 16:712–727.
FISCHER, F. 2000. Citizens, experts and the envi-
ronment: The politics of local knowledge. Duke
University Press, Durham, NC. 336 p.
FLEEGAR, W.E. 2008. Collaborating for success:
Community wildﬁre protection planning in
the Arizona White Mountains. J. For. 106(2):
78–82.
FULE´, P.Z., A.E.M. WALTZ, W.W. COVINGTON,
AND T.A. HEINLEIN. 2001a. Measuring forest
restoration effectiveness in reducing hazardous
fuels. Ecol. Res. 99:24–29.
FUL´E, P.Z., C. MCHUGH, T.A. HEINLEIN, AND
W.W. COVINGTON. 2001b. Potential ﬁre be-
havior is reduced following forest restoration
treatments. P. 28–35 in Ponderosa pine ecosys-
tems restoration and conservation: Steps toward
stewardship, Vance, G.K., C.B. Edminster,
W.W. Covington, and J.A. Blake (comp.).
Proc. RMRS-P-22, US For. Serv., Rocky Mtn.
Res. Stn., Ogden, UT.
GOVERNOR’S FOREST HEALTH COUNCILS, STATE
OF ARIZONA. 2007. The statewide strategy for
restoring Arizona’s forests, Aumack, E., T. Sisk,
and J. Palumbo (eds.). Arizona Public Service,
Phoenix, AZ. 151 p.
GRAHAM, R.T., S. MCCAFFREY, AND T.B. JAIN.
2004. Science basis for changing forest structure
to modify wildﬁre behavior and severity. US For.
Serv. Gen. Tech. Rep., RMRS-GTR-120, Og-
den, U. 43 p.
HAMPTON, H.M., E.N. AUMACK, J.W. PRATHER,
B.G. DICKSON, Y. XU, AND T.D. SISK. 2006.
Development and transfer of spatial tools
based on landscape ecology principles: Sup-
porting public participation in forest restora-
tion planning in the southwestern U.S. P.
65–95 in Forest landscape ecology: Transferring
knowledge to practice, Perera, A., L. Buse, and
T. Crow (eds.). Springer Publishing, New
York, New York.
HICKE, J.A., J.C. JENKINS, D.S. OJIMA, AND M.
DUCEY. 2007. Spatial patterns of forest charac-
teristics in the western united states derived
from inventories. Ecol. Applic. 17:2387–2402.
HJERPE, E.E., AND Y.S. KIM. 2008. Economic im-
pacts of southwestern national forest fuels re-
ductions. J. For. 106:311–316.
KEELE,
D.M.,
R.W.
MALMSHEIMER,
D.W.
FLOYD, AND J.E. PEREZ. 2006. Forest Service
land management litigation 1989–2002. J.
For. 104:196–202.
LAIRD, N.L. 1993. Participatory analysis, democ-
racy, and technological decision making. Sci.
Technol. Hum. Val. 18(3):341–361.
MAST, J.N., P.Z. FUL´E, M.M. MOORE, W.W.
COVINGTON, AND A.E.M. WALTZ. 1999. Res-
toration of presettlement age structure of an
Arizona ponderosa pine forest. Ecol. Applic.
9:228–239.
MOISEN, G.G., AND T.S. FRESCINO. 2002. Com-
paring ﬁve modelling techniques for predict-
ing
forest
characteristics.
Ecol.
Model.
157:209–225.
MOOTE, M.A., AND K. LOWE. 2008. What to ex-
pect from collaboration in natural resource man-
agement: A research synthesis for practitioners.
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Ar-
izona Univ., Flagstaff, AZ. 20 p.
NEARY, D.G., AND E.J. ZIEROTH. 2007. Forest
bioenergy system to reduce the hazard of wild-
ﬁres: White Mountains, Arizona. Biomass
Bioenerg. 31:638–645.
O’BRIEN, R. 1999. Arizona’s forest resources. US
For. Serv. Resour. Bull. RMRS-RB-2:1, Og-
den, UT. 116 p.
OHMANN, J.L., AND M.J. GREGORY. 2002. Pre-
dictive mapping of forest composition and
structure with direct gradient analysis and
Journal of Forestry • January/February 2011
25

nearest-neighbor imputation in coastal Ore-
gon, U.S.A. Can. J. For. Res. 32:725–741.
PEARSON, G.A. 1950. Management of ponderosa
pine in the southwest as developed by research and
experimental practices. Agric. Monograph 6,
US For. Serv. Washington, DC. 218 p.
POCEWICZ, A.L., P.E. GESSLER, AND A. ROBIN-
SON. 2004. The relationship between effective
plant area index and Landsat spectral response
across elevation, solar insolation and spatial
scales in a northern Idaho forest. Can. J. For.
Res. 34:465–480.
POLLET, J., AND P.N. OMI. 2002. Effect of thin-
ning and prescribed burning on crown ﬁre se-
verity in ponderosa pine forests. Int. J. Wild-
land Fire 11:1–10.
SAVAGE, M. 1991. Structural dynamics of a
southwestern ponderosa pine forest under
chronic human inﬂuence. Ann. Assoc. Am.
Geogr. 81:271–289.
SCHOENNAGEL, T., T.T. VEBLEN,
AND W.H.
ROMME. 2004. The interaction of ﬁre, fuels,
and climate across Rocky Mountain forests.
Bioscience 54(7):661–676.
SEAGER, R., M. TING, I. HELD, Y. KUSHNIR, J. LU,
G. VECCHI, H. HUANG, N. HARNIK, A. LEET-
MAA, N. LAU, C. LI, J. VELEZ, AND N. NAIK.
2007. Model projections of an imminent tran-
sition to a more arid climate in southwestern
North America. Science 316:1181–1184.
SESNIE, S.E., P.E. GESSLER, B. FINEGAN, AND S.
THESSLER. 2008a. Integrating Landsat TM
and SRTM-DEM derived variables with deci-
sion trees for habitat classiﬁcation and change
detection in complex neotropical environ-
ments. Remote Sens. Environ. 112:2145–2159.
SESNIE, S.E., S.E. HAGELL, S.M. OTTERSTOM,
C.L. CHAMBERS, AND B.G. DICKSON. 2008b.
STRM-DEM and Landsat ETM data for
mapping tropical dry forest cover and biodi-
versity assessment in Nicaragua. Rev. Geogr.
Acad. 2:53–65.
SISK, T.D., J.W. PRATHER, H.M. HAMPTON,
E.N. AUMACK, Y. XU, AND B.G. DICKSON.
2006. Participatory landscape analysis to guide
restoration of ponderosa pine ecosystems in
the American Southwest. Landsc. Urban
Plann. 78:(4)300–310.
STEPHENS, S.L., AND L.W. RUTH. 2005. Federal
forest-ﬁre policy in the United States. Ecol. Ap-
plic. 15:532–542.
SWETNAM, T.W., C.D. ALLEN, AND J.L. BETAN-
COURT. 1999. Applied historical ecology: Us-
ing the past to manage for the future. Ecol.
Applic. 9:1189–1206.
TOMPPO, E., H. OLSSON, G. STAHL, M. NILSSON,
O. HAGNER, AND M. KATILA. 2008. Combin-
ing national forest inventory ﬁeld plots and
remote sensing data for forest databases. Re-
mote Sens. Environ. 112:1982–1999.
US DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR (USDI) FISH
AND WILDLIFE SERVICE. 1995. Recovery plan for
the Mexican spotted owl, Vol. I. USDI, Albu-
querque, NM. 347 p.
US FOREST SERVICE. 2002–2007. Environmental
Assessments for the following restoration and fuel
reduction projects in the Coconino, Apache-Sit-
greaves, Tonto, and Kaibab National Forests in
Arizona: Eastside, Mormon Lake, Kachina,
Munds Park, Mountainaire, Rocky Park, Woody
Ridge, Smith/Schultz, Upper Beaver, Victorine,
Huffer, Elk Park, East Clear Creek, Fort Valley,
Blue Ridge, Chitty Creek, Greer, Eager South,
Nutrioso, Long Jim, Twin, Jacob Ryan, East
Rim, Dogtown, City, Nagel, and Los Burros. US
For. Serv. Southw. region. 1080 p.
US FOREST SERVICE. 2007. Forest inventory
mapmaker. Version 1.2. Forest Inventory and
Analysis Program. No longer available online.
Last accessed Oct. 16, 2007.
US PUBLIC LAW 108-7. 2003. Consolidated appro-
priations resolution. H.J. Res. 2, 117 Stat. Sec-
tion 323 Feb. 20, 2003. p. 275 16 U.S.C.
2104 Note. (Revised Feb. 28, 2003 to reﬂect
Section 323 of H.J. Res. 2 as enrolled.)
VAN MANTGEM, P.J., N.L. STEPHENSON, J.C.
BYRNE, L.D. DANIELS, J.F. FRANKLIN, P.Z.
FULE´, M.E. HARMON, A.J. LARSON, J.M.
SMITH, A.H. TAYLOR, AND T.T. VEBLEN. 2009.
Widespread increase of tree mortality rates in
the western United States. Science 323:521–
524.
VOSICK, D., D.M. OSTERGREN, AND L. MURFITT.
2007. Old-growth policy. Ecol. Soc. 12(2):19.
Available online at www.ecologyandsociety.
org/vol12/iss2/art19/; last accessed Apr. 16,
2010.
WESTERLING, A.L., H.G. HIDALGO, D.R. CAYAN,
AND T.W. SWETNAM. 2006. Warming and ear-
lier spring increase western U.S. forest wildﬁre
activity. Science 313(5789):940–943.
26
Journal of Forestry • January/February 2011
