30
Ecological Restoration Institute 
Working Paper No. 30
Impact of Forest Restoration 
Treatments on Southwestern 
Ponderosa Pine Tree 
Resistance to Bark Beetles
March 2014

Intermountain West Frequent-Fire Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing 
native species, structural characteristics, and ecological processes. Te Society for Ecological 
Restoration International deﬁnes ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that 
initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity 
and sustainability….Restoration attempts to return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” 
(Society for Ecological Restoration International Science and Policy Working Group 2004).
Most frequent-ﬁre forests throughout the Intermountain West have been degraded during 
the last 150 years. Many of these forests are now dominated by unnaturally dense thickets 
of small trees, and lack their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests 
in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing ﬁres and increased 
insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers on reintroducing frequent, 
low-severity surface ﬁres—ofen afer thinning dense stands—and reestablishing productive 
understory plant communities.
Te Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in 
researching, implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of frequent-ﬁre forests of 
the Intermountain West. By allowing natural processes, such as low-severity ﬁre, to resume 
self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem 
services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
Te Southwest Fire Science Consortium (SWFSC) is a way for managers, scientists, and 
policy makers to interact and share science. SWFSC’s goal is to see the best available science 
used to make management decisions and scientists working on the questions managers 
need answered. Te SWFSC tries to bring together localized eﬀorts to develop scientiﬁc 
information and to disseminate that to practitioners on the ground through an inclusive and 
open process.
Tis publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest 
Service and the Southwest Fire Science Consortium. Te views and conclusions contained in 
this document are those of the author(s) and should not be interpreted as representing the 
opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of trade names or commercial 
products does not constitute their endorsement by the United States Government or the ERI.
Cover Photo: Ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest are home to multiple bark beetle species. Bark 
beetles can have a wide range of positive and negative eﬀects on ponderosa pine ecosystems. Photo courtesy 
of the Wagner Lab, Northern Arizona University
Author: Monica Gaylord
Reviewers: Tom DeGomez, Dave Egan, David Huﬀman, Andrea Tode, and Barb Satink Wolfson 
Series Editor: Tayloe Dubay
Please use the following citation when referring to this Working Paper:
Gaylord, M.L. 2014. Impact of Forest Restoration Treatments on Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Tree 
Resistance to Bark Beetles. ERI Working Papers. Ecological Restoration Institute and Southwest Fire 
Science Consortium, Northern Arizona University. 16 p. 

Table of Contents
Introduction ...................................................................................................................... 1
Bark Beetles .................................................................................................................... 1
Effects of Tree Thinning on Bark Beetle Activity ..................................................... 2
Stand Density/Basal Area Studies .......................................................................2 
Changes in Stand Microclimate ..........................................................................3
Making Host Trees More Diﬃcult to Locate .....................................................4
Increasing Host Tree Defenses ............................................................................4 
Management Implications....................................................................................4 
Effects of Prescribed Fire on Bark Beetle Activity .................................................. 5 
Time Since Treatment and Season of Measurement ........................................5 
Crown Damage ......................................................................................................5
Season of Burning .................................................................................................5
Eﬀects of Burning on Subsequent Bark Beetle Attacks  ...................................6
Management Recommendations ................................................................................ 6
References ....................................................................................................................... 8

1
Ecological Restoration Institute
IMPACT OF FOREST RESTORATION TREATMENTS ON SOUTHWESTERN  
PONDEROSA PINE TREE RESISTANCE TO BARK BEETLES
Introduction
Insects can have a wide-range of both positive and 
negative eﬀects on forest ecosystems. Positive impacts 
include serving as pollinators, creating snags for 
cavity nesting birds and bats, helping to increase forest 
heterogeneity, and aiding in decomposition and nutrient 
cycling. Negative impacts can range from relatively 
minor impacts at the individual tree level, such as 
reductions in growth or form defects, to landscape-level 
tree mortality (Coulson and Witter 1984, Raﬀa et al. 
2008). In the ponderosa pine forests of the southwestern 
United States, the bark beetle has been the insect most 
ofen associated with widespread tree mortality.
Restoration eﬀorts in ponderosa pine ecosystems 
have the overarching goal of making these forests 
more healthy and resilient by reducing fuel loads and 
restoring ecosystem functions. Stand restoration in 
these ecosystems usually involves varying intensities 
of thinning or prescribed burning treatments or, more 
ofen, some combination of both. Tese same treatments 
may also alter tree susceptibility to disturbance events, 
such as insect attacks and wildﬁre. Tis working 
paper will highlight current research about the eﬀects 
of restoration treatments on ponderosa pine tree 
resistance/susceptibility to bark beetles. 
Bark Beetles 
Although bark beetles are ofen viewed negatively 
because they cause tree mortality, bark beetles are native 
to forest ecosystems and play an important ecological 
role. Tey serve as a disturbance agent and play a vital 
role as a food source for other insects and birds. Tree 
mortality due to bark beetles increases forest structural 
diversity and creates habitat for cavity-nesting birds and 
bats. Terefore, complete eradication of these insects 
is not desirable and, based on past eﬀorts, not feasible 
at the landscape scale. Tat said, recent outbreaks of 
bark beetles in North America are unprecedented and 
appear to be driven by human-caused factors, such 
as increasing tree density (due to past management 
decisions), and environmental factors, such as 
increasing temperatures and more frequent and extreme 
droughts (Raﬀa et al. 2008, Bentz et al. 2010). 
Ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest are home 
to multiple bark beetle species, most of which belong 
to either the Dendroctonus or Ips genera (Table 1). 
Of the two genera present in ponderosa pine forests, 
the species in the Dendroctonus genus are generally 
considered to be primary bark beetles: beetles capable 
of attacking and killing vigorous trees. Ips beetles, also 
called engraver beetles, are known as secondary beetles: 
beetles which generally attack only weakened or even 
recently dead trees. However, large populations of Ips 
beetles have been known to attack and kill vigorous 
trees. Pine engraver outbreaks ofen occur afer beetle 
populations have increased due to an abundance of 
Figure 1:  Bark beetles. Photo courtesy of the Wagner Lab, Northern 
Arizona University
Key Information about Bark Beetles
• 
Native to ponderosa pine ecosystems
• 
Natural disturbance agents 
• 
Range in size from (0.008-0.33 inches/2.0-8.3 
mm) (Figure 1)
• 
Black to reddish-brown in color
• 
Kill trees by using a mass attack strategy that 
can overwhelm the tree’s defensive capabilities
• 
Lifecycle depends on species and location; may 
have multiple generations per year or only one 
generation every two years
• 
Active when ambient temperatures begin to 
exceed 59°F (15°C), although this varies by 
species and lifecycle
• 
Majority of the lifecycle occurs under the bark 
of the tree, which protects the beetle from pre-
dation and environmental extremes
• 
Resin is a tree’s primary defense against bark 
beetles (Smith 1972)
• 
Bark beetle success is measured by its ability to 
reproduce; for most beetle species, tree death is 
a prerequisite for beetle success
Evidence of attack
• 
Pitch tubes (Figure 2) form on tree trunk 
• 
Woodpeckers ofen ﬂake oﬀ the outer portion 
of bark
• 
Sawdust-like material will collect in bark crev-
ices
• 
Needles ofen do not turn yellow until many 
months afer attack
• 
Beetles create “galleries” on the surface of the 
wood and in the bark (Figure 3)

2
Ecological Restoration Institute
IMPACT OF FOREST RESTORATION TREATMENTS ON SOUTHWESTERN 
PONDEROSA PINE TREE RESISTANCE TO BARK BEETLES
slash piles or if many stressed trees are present on the 
landscape. For instance, Ips beetles were implicated in 
widespread tree mortality of both ponderosa and piñon 
pine trees during the drought years of 2002 and 2003 
(USDA 2013). 
Effects of Tree Thinning on Bark Beetle Activity
For almost 90 years, forest researchers have suggested 
that tree stands with higher tree densities and/or 
basal area (BA) are more susceptible to damage from 
bark beetles (reviewed in Fettig et al. 2007). The 
origin of this hypothesis comes from multiple studies 
that surveyed stands after bark beetle outbreaks. 
These studies found that stands with higher BAs or 
stand density have higher rates of bark beetle attacks 
and subsequent tree mortality than comparable 
stands in the same geographic area with lower BAs/
densities (Table 2). 
Although these studies seem to provide strong 
correlative evidence that trees in thinned stands are less 
likely to be attacked by bark beetles, the reasons why 
these stands/trees are not attacked as frequently are still 
being investigated. Most researchers think that forest 
thinning treatments increase tree resistance to bark 
beetles by reducing tree competition for resources and 
increasing tree vigor (as ofen indicated by increased 
growth rates) (Sartwell and Stevens 1975). Other 
research indicates that tree/stand susceptibility to bark 
beetles changes afer thinning is due to diﬀerences in 
microclimate (temperature, wind movement, stand 
structure) (Bartos and Amman 1989, Schmid et al. 
1995, Amman and Logan 1998). 
Stand Density/Basal Area Studies 
Multiple studies from ponderosa pine ecosystems have 
compared individual trees or forest stands afer bark 
beetle attacks. Tese studies show that stands/trees 
with higher BAs, higher stand density, and/or trees 
with lower growth rates are more likely to have higher 
amounts of bark beetle-driven tree mortality (reviewed 
in Fettig et al. 2007). Some of these studies establish 
threshold BAs below which beetle attacks are less likely 
(Table 2), while others examine the relationship using 
more complex techniques. For instance, Negrón (1997) 
conducted surveys in the Sacramento Mountains of 
New Mexico and concluded that initial BA was a good 
predictor of the probability of attack by the roundheaded 
pine beetle (Dendroctonus adjunctus). Furthermore, 
in the Pinaleño Mountains of Arizona, Negrón et al. 
(2000) developed a model that found a 72% probability 
of roundheaded pine beetle infestations in ponderosa 
pine when BA was greater than 105 f2/acre. In the Pine 
Valley Mountains of Utah, these models predicted that 
trees in stands with ponderosa pine BA greater than 250 
f2/acre had a 91% probability of infestation compared 
to a 32% chance in stands with a lower BA. Since tree 
death is a prerequisite for beetle success, increased 
infestation and increased likelihood of attack all suggest 
an increased likelihood of tree mortality. An additional 
study, conducted afer the severe drought of 2002, 
found that thinning ponderosa pine stands might help 
to decrease the amount of tree mortality even during 
extreme drought events (Negrón et al. 2009). While 
these studies have found varying thresholds (see Table 
2), they provide strong evidence that thinning stands 
decreases the amount of ponderosa pine mortality due to 
bark beetles. 
Figure 2:  Bark beetle trapped in pitch tube on a ponderosa pine tree.
Table 1: List of bark beetles most commonly found in ponderosa pines 
in Arizona.
Figure 3: Bark beetle galleries. Formed when beetles lay eggs.
Genus species
Dendroctonus adjunctus
Dendroctonus approximatus
Dendroctonus brevicomis
Dendroctonus frontails
Dendroctonus ponderosae
Dendroctonus valens
lps calligraphus
lps knausi
lps lecontei
lps pini
Common name
Roundheaded pine beetle
Larger Mexican pine beetle
Western pine beetle
Southern pine beetle
Mountain pine beetle
Red turpentine pine beetle
six spined ips
Arizona ﬁve spined ips
Pine engraver

3
Ecological Restoration Institute
IMPACT OF FOREST RESTORATION TREATMENTS ON SOUTHWESTERN  
PONDEROSA PINE TREE RESISTANCE TO BARK BEETLES
Changes in Stand Microclimate 
Te microclimate hypothesis suggests that thinned 
stands may be less susceptible to bark beetle attacks due 
to changes in stand structure and microclimate, both 
of which could aﬀect the ability of the bark beetles to 
ﬁnd susceptible hosts and/or reproduce successfully. Of 
particular interest to managers is the fact that changes 
in microclimate would occur immediately afer thinning 
treatments, whereas changes in host resistance may take 
a year or longer. Research from other areas of the United 
States shows that thinning changes air temperature, 
as well as the temperature in the phloem of the tree, 
especially those areas exposed to direct sunlight. Tis 
increased solar exposure may aﬀect beetle development 
(generally more heat accelerates their development) 
or speed phloem drying rate making it more diﬃcult 
for beetles to reproduce successfully (Amman and 
Logan 1998). Accelerated development could increase 
the number of generations beetles produce in a year, 
although it could also force the beetles to overwinter in 
stages that are not as resistant to freezing temperatures 
(reviewed in Bentz et al. 2010). Little research has been 
done in the Southwest about diﬀerences in microclimate 
or beetle performance in thinned compared to 
unthinned stands in standing trees. Two studies have 
looked at beetle reproductive success in slash under 
diﬀerent light intensities. Both studies found that the 
pine engraver beetle (Ips pini) had lower reproductive 
Table 2: Relevant studies about thinning and bark beetle attacks in ponderosa pine forests. Variation in results is likely due to differences in the 
beetle species being examined, levels of beetle populations, or variability in site indices or environmental factors.
Authors
Gaylord et al. 2010
McCambridge et al. 
1982
Negrón et al. 2000
Negrón and Popp 
2004
Sartwell and  
Stevens 1975
Schmid and  
Mata 1992
MPB = Mountain pine beetle
RPB = Roundheaded pine beetle
* See text for further results from this study
Species
Tree/Beetle
Ponderosa/  
multiple
Ponderosa/ 
MPB
Ponderosa/ 
RPB
Ponderosa/ 
MPB
Ponderosa/ 
MPB
Ponderosa/ 
MPB
Location
Northern Arizona
Colorado
Arizona and Utah
Colorado
Paciﬁc Northwest 
and Black Hills, 
SD
Black Hills, SD
Relevant BAs 
(f2/acre)
160
120 and 95
170 and 130*
75
150
120
Notes
Increased likelihood  
of attacks above this 
threshold
More mortality in higher 
density stands
Infested and uninfested, 
respectively
Stands with BAs above 
this threshold had 50% 
greater likelihood of  
attacks 
Increased likelihood  
of attacks above this 
threshold
Increased likelihood  
of attacks above this 
threshold

4
Ecological Restoration Institute
IMPACT OF FOREST RESTORATION TREATMENTS ON SOUTHWESTERN 
PONDEROSA PINE TREE RESISTANCE TO BARK BEETLES
success and/or the logs were attacked less frequently in 
slash exposed to more sunlight/light intensity, although 
the eﬀect varied by diameter of the log (Villa-Castillo 
and Wagner 1996, Hayes et al. 2009). 
Making Host Trees More Diﬃcult To Locate
Te microclimate hypothesis also suggests that thinning 
makes it harder for beetles to locate host trees. How 
the ﬁrst group of beetles selects a host tree is complex, 
varies by beetle species, and is still not fully understood. 
It appears that beetles probably use a number of 
diﬀerent factors to select potential hosts, including 
visual orientation toward tree silhouettes, olfactory 
cues from trees (tree volatiles), and other sensory cues 
(Raﬀa and Berryman 1982, Wood 1982, Mattson and 
Haack 1987, Strom et al. 2001, Seybold et al. 2006). Use 
of these diﬀerent cues may allow the beetles to select the 
most vulnerable or optimal host, possibly based on the 
tree’s vigor/defense. Alternatively, the pioneer beetles 
may select hosts at random and successful (tree-killing) 
bark beetle reproduction may be chance events. Once 
the initial selection is made, the pioneering beetles 
begin to emit pheromones that attract other beetles to 
the same host tree.
Thinning appears to disrupt some of the sensory 
cues used by the beetles. Most obviously, thinning 
reduces the number of tree silhouettes and could 
affect the beetles’ ability to visually locate a host tree 
(Strom et al. 2001). Furthermore, thinning appears to 
allow more wind into the stand, which might make 
it more difficult for the beetles to locate either the 
pheromones produced by the other beetles or the 
olfactory cues from susceptible trees (Thistle et al. 
2004). However, two different studies in northern 
Arizona, which used traps baited with pheromone 
lures in stands of different BAs, found no significant 
difference in trap catches among BA treatments 
for Ips beetles (Zausen et al. 2005, Gaylord et al. 
2010), although catches of Dendroctonus beetles 
were higher in unmanaged stands than in managed 
stands (Zausen et al. 2005). These studies suggest that 
regardless of thinning intensity, there is no significant 
impact on Ips bark beetles ability to locate and orient 
toward pheromone cues in ponderosa pine forests, 
but Dendroctonus beetles may be able to locate 
pheromone cues better in stands of higher densities.
Increasing Host Tree Defenses 
Te most prevalent hypothesis regarding stand thinning 
suggests that thinning increases stand resistance to bark 
beetles because it reduces tree competition and, thus, 
residual trees have greater vigor and more resilience 
to bark beetles. Multiple studies in northern Arizona 
have shown that water stress is lower in thinned stands 
than in unthinned stands and that insect resistance 
(i.e., amount of resin produced) increased as stand BA 
decreased (Feeney et al. 1998; Kolb et al. 1998, reviewed 
in Fettig et al. 2007; McDowell et al. 2007). Tese results 
all support the hypothesis that trees in stands with lower 
BAs are healthier and more resistant to insect attacks. 
In contrast, there are some studies that found 
no differences in tree resin flow between thinned 
and unthinned stands (Feeney et al. 1998) or even 
increased resin in unthinned stands relative to 
thinned stands, (Zausen et al. 2005). Thus, while 
studies suggest that changes in water availability 
occur within one year after thinning treatments for 
trees in several different size/age classes (Stone et al. 
1999, Feeney et al. 1998, Skov et al. 2004, Gaylord 
2009), how long it takes for a tree to respond to 
thinning treatments in terms of increased resin 
production or other measures of tree vigor, such as 
growth, may depend on several factors, including 
size or age of the residual tree. In summary, there is 
no clear-cut answer about how quickly tree defense 
to bark beetle attacks will increase, if at all, after 
thinning treatments. Furthermore, the continued 
effects of the thinning treatments also depend on 
residual tree density/BA as well as how often the 
stand is retreated. 
Management Implications 
While some research is contradictory regarding the 
eﬀects of thinning on tree defense to bark beetle attacks, 
overall most evidence suggests that thinning treatments 
are eﬀective in increasing resistance. Fettig and 
colleagues (2007) provide a very comprehensive review 
of the eﬀects of thinning treatments on stand and tree 
resistance to bark beetles. Tey examined studies in 
multiple forest types and came to the conclusion that 
thinning treatments are an eﬀective method to decrease 
the likelihood of bark beetle attacks. 
Nonetheless, while all the research suggests that 
thinning stands makes them more resistant to bark 
beetles, it is impossible to clearly define a threshold 
BA below which a stand is immune to bark beetle 
attacks. There are several reasons this is the case. 
First, when beetle populations are high, there are 
sufficient numbers of beetles to overcome and kill 
even the most vigorous trees. Second, the threshold 
BA will most likely vary by other factors, including 
which bark beetle species is the most abundant, 
abiotic conditions (drought, temperature), site index, 
and the proximity to unmanaged stands (Schmid 
and Mata 2005). Third, may be the degree of spacing 
between trees. For instance, in eastern Oregon, 
researchers found that stands thinned with either 18 
ft. x 18 ft. or 21 ft. x 21 ft. spacing experienced little 
mortality compared to stands with tighter spacing 
(Sartwell and Dolph 1976). It is likely that researchers 
simply do not understand all the multiple factors 
associated with thinning, or how they interact, that 
ultimately determine bark beetle success at the tree, 
stand, or landscape level. 

5
Ecological Restoration Institute
IMPACT OF FOREST RESTORATION TREATMENTS ON SOUTHWESTERN  
PONDEROSA PINE TREE RESISTANCE TO BARK BEETLES
Effects of Prescribed Fire on Bark Beetle Activity 
Prescribed burning, either used alone or afer thinning 
treatments, is a key management tool for restoring 
ponderosa pine forests, and is generally acknowledged to 
help improve forest health and resiliency.  In general, the 
eﬀect of a prescribed ﬁre on a tree’s or stand’s vulnerability 
to successful bark beetle attack depends on multiple factors, 
including the condition of the tree prior to the burn and 
the amount of damage sustained by the tree from the ﬁre. 
Trees that are killed by ﬁres are typically infested afer the 
ﬁre by woodwasps (Hymenoptera: Siricidae) or woodborers 
(Coleoptera; Buprestidae and Cerambycidae), but not 
bark beetles. On the other hand, trees that are infected by 
pathogens, such as mistletoe or root rot, prior to prescribed 
burning may be more susceptible to post-ﬁre bark beetle 
infestations (Parker et al. 2006). 
Time Since Treatment and Season of Measurement 
As mentioned earlier, resin is a tree’s primary defense 
response to bark beetle attacks. Research from Crater 
Lake, Oregon indicates ponderosa pines that had 
been burned showed higher resin flow than unburned 
controls up to two years after treatment (Perrakis 
and Agee 2006). In a follow-up study (Perrakis et al. 
2011), researchers found bole resin flow remained 
higher in trees in burned stands than those in the 
unburned controls four years after the burn treatment. 
Interestingly, this same study (Perrakis et al. 2011) 
also reported that while burned stands produced 
the greatest resin flow they did not have the greatest 
overstory ponderosa pine survival. The authors 
suggest that by damaging live trees or volatizing the 
resin in consumed woody debris, fire may increase the 
release of host volatiles, which are known to attract 
bark beetles (reviewed in Seybold et al. 2006). This, 
in turn, makes fire-damaged trees more attractive 
to bark beetles and, thus, more likely to incur bark 
beetle-induced mortality. The researchers suggested 
that the increased resin volume was inadequate to 
defend the tree due to the amplified attraction of 
beetles (Perrakis et al. 2011). 
In contrast, in another study conducted in northern 
Arizona in stands that had been thinned eight to 15 
years prior to the study initiation and broadcast burned 
within eight years afer the thinning treatments were 
conducted, researchers found no diﬀerence in resin 
volume between stands that had been thinned-and-
burned and untreated stands and the researchers found 
the lowest resin volume in stands that had only been 
thinned (Zausen et al. 2005). While these results suggest 
that any beneﬁts of the restoration treatments on resin 
ﬂow may have dissipated with time, the implications of 
this study should be interpreted with caution as it should 
be noted that resin was only sampled once per year for 
the two years of the study and the sample size (four 
replicates/treatment) was fairly small.
In northern Arizona, the eﬀect of burning on resin 
volume in ponderosa pine appears to be aﬀected not 
only by the time since treatment, but also the season 
during which the resin is measured. Various studies 
(Feeney et al. 1998, Wallin et al. 2004, Wallin et al. 
2008) report that when resin is measured during the dry 
season (June), trees in areas that have been thinned and 
burned produce more resin, and have a lower chance 
of being attacked by beetles, than trees in the controls 
or thin-only treatments. Moreover, they observed that 
the eﬀect of the thin-and-burn treatment on resin lasts 
up to seven years. In contrast, the same treatments do 
not seem to confer the same beneﬁt when resin was 
measured during the wet monsoon season, with trees 
in the control stand producing the same amount, or 
even more, resin than trees in either of the restoration 
treatments seven years post treatment (Wallin et al. 
2004). Since beetles in the southwestern ponderosa 
pine system are active as soon as temperatures exceed 
59 degrees Fahrenheit (15 degrees Celsius) (Williams et 
al. 2008, Gaylord et al. 2008), these results suggest that 
trees in thinned-and-burned stands may have increased 
resistance to bark beetle attacks during the dry season 
but not during the monsoon season. 
Crown Damage
In ponderosa pine forests, the probability of a tree being 
attacked and killed by bark beetles afer a ﬁre appears to 
be strongly correlated to the amount of damage sustained 
by the crown of the tree (Miller and Keen 1960, Breece 
et al. 2008, Perrakis et al. 2011). Research in northern 
Arizona suggests that ﬁres that produce signiﬁcant amounts 
of crown scorch and crown consumption increase the 
likelihood of successful beetle attacks. One study found that 
1) higher crown scorch decreased resin ﬂow four months 
afer burning treatments and 2) bark beetle colonization 
attempts increased with increased crown scorch (Wallin 
et al. 2003). A study by McHugh and colleagues (2003) 
examined trees in both prescribed ﬁres and two wildﬁres. 
In all cases, they found the trees that showed evidence of 
bark beetle attacks had signiﬁcantly more crown scorch and 
total crown damage than trees without evidences of beetles. 
Furthermore, trees that were dead and with evidence of 
beetle attacks had signiﬁcantly more crown scorch and total 
crown damage than trees that had survived with evidence 
of beetle attacks. Overall McHugh et al. (2003) observed 
that mortality was low in trees that had no evidence of 
beetle attacks unless crown damage exceeded 70–80%. 
However, when beetles were present, tree mortality 
occurred with only 30–40% crown damage.
Season of Burning
Research has been conducted to assess how the season of 
burning aﬀects the susceptibility of trees to insect attacks. 
Researchers have hypothesized that crown scorch early in 
the growing season may have more impact than dormant-
season crown scorch (Fischer 1980). However, more recent 
studies in the Sierra Nevada and Oregon concluded that 

6
Ecological Restoration Institute
IMPACT OF FOREST RESTORATION TREATMENTS ON SOUTHWESTERN 
PONDEROSA PINE TREE RESISTANCE TO BARK BEETLES
the probability of bark beetle attack on pines did not diﬀer 
between early and late-season burns. Instead, these studies 
found tree mortality was related to the amount of ﬁre-
related damage and not the season during which the burn 
occurred (Ties et al. 2005, Schwilk et al. 2006, Perrakis et 
al. 2011).
Eﬀects of Burning on Subsequent Bark Beetle Attacks 
Much of our initial understanding of the interaction 
between ﬁre and bark beetles came from chapters 
in Miller and Keen (1960), which suggest increased 
susceptibility to bark beetle attacks afer both wildﬁre 
and prescribed burning in ponderosa pine stands in 
California, Oregon, Idaho, and Montana. However, a 
more recent study by Fettig et al. (2010) in the southern 
Cascades of northern California reported that there 
was relatively little bark beetle-associated mortality on 
plots that had been thinned or thinned-and-burned 
when compared to plots that had received a burn-only 
treatment. In addition, on the burn-only plots, much 
of the mortality occurred to smaller diameter trees. 
Our understanding has also been increased by multiple 
studies that have shown that increased bark beetle 
attacks occur when there is more damage to crown. 
Tus, to reduce the likelihood of bark beetle attacks 
post-ﬁre, and the potential for undesirable tree mortality, 
land managers should attempt to keep crown scorch to a 
minimum during prescribed burning treatments.
Land managers should also recognize that the 
amount of tree mortality from bark beetles varies with 
beetle population levels (Breece et al. 2008). Tus, while 
crown damage does increase the likelihood of attacks, 
when beetle populations are at low, subsequent tree 
mortality from bark beetle attacks will likely be low and 
ofen within acceptable management guidelines (Breece 
et al. 2008). Furthermore, in many cases afer ﬁres, the 
red turpentine beetle (Dendroctonus valens) is the most 
likely bark beetle to be present. Tis insect generally 
attacks only the lower bole of the tree, which results in 
very large, distinctive pitch tubes (Figure 4). In North 
America, this beetle is not considered very aggressive. 
However, red turpentine beetle attacks are ofen followed 
by attacks from other bark beetles. Tus, trees with 
evidence of red turpentine beetle should be closely 
monitored (Parker et al. 2006).
While fire damage to a specific tree may increase 
the chances of that individual tree being attacked 
by bark beetles, there is currently no research in 
southwestern pine forests to indicate how likely it is 
that the beetle infestations will spread to adjacent, 
unburned stands. Older research from Oregon, with 
western pine beetle in ponderosa pine, suggests that 
fire scorched trees may act as a sink for beetles, rather 
than a source (Miller and Patterson 1927). More 
recent research in California found little evidence of 
beetle populations building up in fire-injured white 
fir (Abies concolor) and several species of pines, 
including ponderosa, and expanding to healthy, 
green trees (Fettig et al. 2010). However, research 
after the Yellowstone fires of 1988 (Rasmussen et 
al. 1996) in Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii), 
lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta), and Engelmann 
spruce (Picea engelmannii) trees suggest that beetle 
populations are able to build up in fire-injured trees 
and, subsequently, move to uninjured trees in the 
surrounding forested area. 
Management Recommendations
Te research studies highlighted in this working paper 
suggest the following points for land managers to 
consider when planning restoration treatments to reduce 
bark beetle problems:
• 
In general, thinning forest stands appears to 
decrease the susceptibility of trees to bark beetle 
attacks either due to increased tree vigor/defense, 
changes in microclimate, a combination of the two, 
or some other unexamined set of variables. 
• 
Tere is no clear threshold BA below which no bark 
beetle attacks will occur. 
• 
Bark beetle populations ﬂuctuate and when they are 
at high levels even vigorous trees can be attacked 
and killed. 
• 
Under the predicted climate change scenarios of 
increasing droughts (Seager et al. 2007), thinning 
stands may help to mitigate the amount of water 
stress trees experience and, thus, lessen the 
likelihood of bark beetle-driven tree mortality. 
• 
Since most beetles tend to perform better in trees 
of speciﬁc diameters, thinning stands, and simply 
increasing the heterogeneity across the landscape 
will help to decrease the likelihood of landscape-
level bark beetle attacks. 
• 
Te prompt disposal of slash will reduce the 
potential for bark beetle infestations. Likewise, 
chipping operations, because they release odors 
that may attract beetles and lead to increased beetle 
Figure 4:  Pitch tubes from red turpentine beetles near the bottom of a 
ponderosa pine tree. Photo courtesy of J. McMillin

7
Ecological Restoration Institute
IMPACT OF FOREST RESTORATION TREATMENTS ON SOUTHWESTERN  
PONDEROSA PINE TREE RESISTANCE TO BARK BEETLES
activity, are best done in areas away from vulnerable 
trees (Fettig et al. 2006).
• 
Te impact of prescribed ﬁre on the likelihood of 
bark beetle attacks appears to be aﬀected by the 
amount of crown scorch on the residual trees. 
• 
Managers would be advised to limit the amount 
of crown scorch during prescribed burns in order 
to minimize the likelihood of post-ﬁre bark beetle 
outbreaks (Fowler et al. 2010). 
• 
Although more research is needed, there is some 
evidence to support that ﬁre will increase resin 
production in trees, especially during dry seasons. 
• 
In particular, if management objectives of 
restoration treatments include maintaining old 
ponderosa pine trees from ﬁre, it would be best to 
rake leaf litter away from the base of trees (Egan 
2011). Tis will help limit damage to the tree that 
could further weaken trees making them more 
susceptible to bark beetles. Removing understory 
trees to limit crown scorch is also advisable 
(reviewed in Kolb et al. 2007).

8
Ecological Restoration Institute
IMPACT OF FOREST RESTORATION TREATMENTS ON SOUTHWESTERN 
PONDEROSA PINE TREE RESISTANCE TO BARK BEETLES
References
Amman, G.D. and J.A. Logan. 1998. Silvicultural control of 
mountain pine beetle: prescriptions and the inﬂuence of 
microclimate. American Entomologist 44:166-177.
Bartos, D.L. and G.D. Amman. 1989. Microclimate: an 
alternative to tree vigor as a basis for mountain pine beetle 
infestations. USDA Forest Service. Res. Pap. INT-400. 
Intermountain Research Station. 
Bentz, B.J., J. Regniere, C.J. Fettig, E.M. Hansen, J.L. Hayes, J.A. 
Hicke, R.G. Kelsey, J.F. Negrón, and S.J. Seybold. 2010. Climate 
change and bark beetles of the western United States and 
Canada: Direct and indirect eﬀects. BioScience 60:602-613.
Breece, C.R., T.E. Kolb, B.G. Dickson, J.D. McMillin, and K.M. 
Clancy. 2008. Prescribed ﬁre eﬀects on bark beetle activity 
and tree mortality in southwestern ponderosa pine forests. 
Forest Ecology and Management 255:119-128.
Coulson, R.N. and J.A. Witter. 1984. Forest entomology: Ecology 
and management. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Egan, D. 2011. Protecting old trees from prescribed burning. 
Ecological Restoration Institute Working Paper 24. 
Flagstaﬀ, AZ: Ecological Restoration Institute.
Feeney, S.R., T.E. Kolb, W.W. Covington, and M.R. Wagner. 
1998. Inﬂuence of thinning and burning restoration 
treatments on presettlement ponderosa pines at the Gus 
Pearson Natural Area. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 
28:1295-1306.
Fettig, C., R. Borys, and C. Dabney. 2010. Eﬀects of ﬁre and ﬁre 
surrogate treatments on bark beetle-caused tree mortality in 
the southern Cascades, California. Forest Science 56:60-73.
Fettig, C.J., K.D. Klepzig, R.F. Billings, A.S. Munson, 
T.E. Nebeker, J.F. Negrón, and J.T. Nowak. 2007. Te 
eﬀectiveness of vegetation management practices for 
prevention and control of bark beetle infestations in 
coniferous forests of the western and southern United 
States. Forest Ecology and Management 238:24-53.
Fettig, C.H., J.D. McMillin, J.A. Anhold, S.M. Hamud, R.R. 
Borys, C.P. Dabney, and S.J. Seybold. 2006. Te eﬀects of 
mechanical fuel reduction treatments on the activity of 
bark beetles (Coleoptera: Scolytidae) infesting ponderosa 
pine. Forest Ecology and Management 230:55-68
Fischer, W.C. 1980. Prescribed ﬁre and bark beetle attack 
in ponderosa pine forests. USDA Forest Service. Fire 
Management Notes 41:10-12.
Fowler, J.F., C.H. Sieg, J. McMillin, K.K. Allen, J.F. Negrón, 
L.L. Wadleigh, J.A. Anhold, and K.E. Gibson. 2010. 
Development of post-ﬁre crown damage mortality 
thresholds in ponderosa pine. International Journal of 
Wildland Fire 19:583-588.
Gaylord, M.L. 2009. Factors impacting management of pine 
bark beetles in ponderosa pine forests in northern Arizona. 
Ph.D. dissertation. School of Forestry, Northern Arizona 
University, Flagstaﬀ, AZ.
Gaylord, M.L., R.W. Hofstetter, and M.R. Wagner. 2010. 
Impacts of silvicultural thinning treatments on beetle 
trap captures and tree attacks during low bark beetle 
populations in ponderosa pine forests of northern Arizona. 
Journal of Economic Entomology 103:1693-1703.
Gaylord, M.L., K.K. Williams, R.W. Hofstetter, J.D. McMillin, 
T.E. DeGomez, and M.R. Wagner. 2008. Inﬂuence of 
temperature on spring ﬂight initiation for southwestern 
ponderosa pine bark beetles (Coleoptera: Curculionidae, 
Scoytinae). Environmental Entomology 37:57-69.
Hayes, C.J., R.W. Hofstetter, T.E. DeGomez, and M.R. Wagner. 
2009. Eﬀects of sunlight exposure and log size on pine 
engraver (Coleoptera: Curculionidae) reproduction 
in ponderosa pine slash in northern Arizona, U.S.A. 
Agricultural and Forest Entomology 11:341-350
Kolb, T.E., K.M. Holmberg, M.R. Wagner, and J.E. Stone. 1998. 
Regulation of ponderosa pine foliar physiology and insect 
resistance mechanisms by basal area treatments. Tree 
Physiology 18: 375-381.
Kolb, T.E., J.K. Agee, P.Z. Fulé, N.G. McDowell, K. Pearson, A. 
Sala, and R.H. Waring. 2007. Perpetuating old ponderosa 
pine. Forest Ecology and Management 249:141-157.
Mattson, W.J. and R.A. Haack. 1987. The role of drought 
in outbreaks of plant-eating insects. BioScience 
37:110-118.
McCambridge, W.F., F.G. Hawksworth, C.B. Edminster, and 
J.G. Laut. 1982. Ponderosa pine mortality resulting from a 
mountain pine beetle outbreak. USDA Forest Service, RP-
RM-235. Rocky Mountain Research Station. 
McDowell, N.G., H.G. Adams, J.D. Bailey, and T.E. Kolb. 2007. 
Te role of stand density on growth eﬃciency, leaf area 
index, and resin ﬂow in southwestern ponderosa pine 
forests. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 37:343-355.
McHugh, C.W., T.E. Kolb, and J.L. Wilson. 2003. Bark beetle 
attacks on ponderosa pine following ﬁre in northern 
Arizona. Environmental Entomology 32:510-522.
Miller, J. and F.P. Keen. 1960. Biology and control of the 
western pine beetle. USDA, Misc. Publication 800. 
Miller, J.M. and J.E. Patterson. 1927. Preliminary studies on the 
relation of ﬁre injury to bark beetle attack in western yellow 
pine. Journal of Agricultural Research 34:597-613.
Negrón, J. 1997. Estimating probabilities of infestation and 
extent of damage by the roundheaded pine beetle in 
ponderosa pine in the Sacramento Mountains, New 
Mexico. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 27:1936-1945. 
Negrón, J. F. and J.B. Popp. 2004. Probability of ponderosa pine 
infestation by mountain pine beetle in the Colorado Front 
Range. Forest Ecology and Management 191:17-27.
Negrón, J.F., J.D. McMillin, J.A. Anhold, and D. Coulson. 
2009. Bark beetle-caused mortality in a drought-aﬀected 
ponderosa pine landscape in Arizona, USA. Forest Ecology 
and Management 257:1353-1362. 
Negrón, J., J.L. Wilson, and J.A. Anhold. 2000. Stand 
conditions associated with roundheaded pine beetle 
(Coleoptera: Scolytidae) infestations in Arizona and Utah. 
Environmental Entomology 29:20-27.
Parker, T.J, K.M. Clancy, and R.L. Mathiasen. 2006. Interactions 
among ﬁre, insects and pathogens in coniferous forests of 
the interior western United States and Canada. Agricultural 
and Forest Entomology 8:167-189.
Perrakis, D.D.B. and J.K. Agee. 2006. Seasonal ﬁre eﬀects on 
mixed-conifer forest structure and ponderosa pine resin 
properties. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 36:238-254.
Perrakis, D.D.B., J.K. Agee, and A. Eglitis. 2011. Effects of 
prescribed burning on mortality and resin defenses in 
old growth ponderosa pine (Crater Lake, Oregon): Four 
years of post-fire monitoring. Natural Areas Journal 
31:14-25. 
Raﬀa, K.F. and A.A. Berryman. 1982. Gustatory cues in the 
orientation of Dendroctonus ponderosae (Coleoptera: 
Scolytidae) to host trees. Canadian Entomologist 114:97-104.
Raﬀa K.F., B.H. Aukema, B.J. Bentz, A.L. Carroll, J.A. Hicke, 
M.G. Turner, and W.H. Romme. 2008. Cross-scale 
drivers of natural disturbances prone to anthropogenic 
ampliﬁcation: the dynamics of bark beetle eruptions. 
BioScience 58:501-517.
Rasmussen, L.A., G.D. Amman, J.C. Vandygriﬀ, R.D. Oakes, 
A.S. Munson, and K.E. Gibson. 1996. Bark beetle and wood 
borer infestation in the greater Yellowstone area during 
four postﬁre years. USDA Forest Service, INT-RP-487, 
Intermountain Research Paper. 
Sartwell, C. and R.E. Dolph, Jr. 1976. Silvicultural and 
direct control of mountain pine beetle in second growth 
ponderosa pine. USDA Forest Service, RN-PNW-268.
Sartwell, C. and R.E. Stevens. 1975. Mountain pine beetle 
in ponderosa pine: Prospects for silvicultural control in 
second-growth stands. Journal of Forestry 73:136-140.
Schmid, J.M. and S.A. Mata. 1992. Stand density and mountain 
pine beetle-caused tree mortality in ponderosa pine stands. 
USDA Forest Service, RM-515.

9
Ecological Restoration Institute
IMPACT OF FOREST RESTORATION TREATMENTS ON SOUTHWESTERN  
PONDEROSA PINE TREE RESISTANCE TO BARK BEETLES
Schmid, J.M. and S.A. Mata. 2005. Mountain pine beetle-caused tree 
mortality in partially cut plots surrounded by unmanaged stands. 
USDA Forest Service, Res. Note, RMRS-RP-54.
Schmid, J.M., S.A. Mata, and W.K. Olsen. 1995. Microclimate and 
mountain pine beetles in two ponderosa pine stands in the Black 
Hills. USDA Forest Service, RM-RN-532.
Schwilk, D.W., E.E. Knapp, S.M. Ferrenberg, J.E. Keeley, and A.C. 
Caprio. 2006. Tree mortality from ﬁre and bark beetles following 
early and late season prescribed ﬁres in a Sierra Nevada mixed-
conifer forest. Forest Ecology and Management 232:36-45.
Seager R., M. Ting, I. Held, Y. Kushnir, J. Lu, G. Vecchi, H. Huang, 
A. Leetmaa, N. Lau, C. Li J.Velez, and N. Naikl. 2007. Model 
projections of an imminent transition to a more arid climate in 
southwestern North America. Science 316: 1181-1184.
Seybold, S.J., D.P.W. Huber, J.C. Lee, A.D. Graves, and J. Bohlmann. 
2006. Pine monoterpenes and pine bark beetles: A marriage 
of convenience for defense and chemical communication. 
Phytochemistry Review 5:143-178.
Skov, K.R., T.E. Kolb, and K.F. Wallin. 2004. Tree size and drought 
aﬀect ponderosa pine physiological response to thinning and 
burning treatments. Forest Science 50:81-91. 
Smith, R.H. 1972. Xylem resin in the resistance of the Pinacea to bark 
beetles. USDA Forest Service, General Technical Report PSW-1. 
Stone, J.E., T.E. Kolb, and W.W. Covington. 1999. Eﬀects of 
restoration thinning on presettlement Pinus ponderosa in 
northern Arizona. Restoration Ecology 7:172-182.
Strom, B.L., R.A. Goyer, and P.J. Shea. 2001. Visual and olfactory 
disruption of orientation by the western pine beetle to attractant-
baited traps. Entomologia Experimentalis et Applicata 100:63-67.
Ties, W.G., D.J. Westlind, and M. Loewen. 2005. Season of 
prescribed burn in ponderosa pine forests in eastern Oregon; 
impact on pine mortality. International Journal of Wildland Fire 
14:223-231.
Tistle, H.W., H. Peterson, G. Allwine, B. Lamb, T. Strand, E. H. 
Holsten, and P.J. Shea. 2004. Surrogate pheromone plumes in 
three forest trunk spaces: composite statistics and case studies. 
Forest Science 50:610-625.
United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). 2013. Aerial 
survey information. http://www.fs.usda.gov/Internet/
FSE_DOCUMENTS/stelprdb5238439.pdf.
Villa-Castillo, J. and M.R. Wagner. 1996. Eﬀect of overstory 
density of Ips pini (Coleoptera: Scolytidae) performance 
in ponderosa pine slash. Journal of Economic Entomology 
89:1537-1545.
Wallin, K.F., T.E. Kolb, K.R. Skov, and M.R. Wagner. 2003. 
Eﬀects of crown scorch on ponderosa pine resistance 
to bark beetles in northern Arizona. Environmental 
Entomology 32:652-661.
Wallin, K.F., T.E. Kolb, K.R. Skov, and M.R. Wagner. 2004. 
Seven-year results of thinning and burning restoration 
treatments on old ponderosa pines at the Gus Pearson 
Natural Area. Restoration Ecology 12:239-247.
Wallin, K.F., T.E. Kolb, K.R. Skov, and M.R. Wagner. 2008. 
Forest management treatments, tree resistance, and bark 
beetle resource utilization in ponderosa pine forests 
of northern Arizona. Forest Ecology and Management 
255:3263-3269.
Williams, K.K., J.D. McMillin, T.E. DeGomez, K.M. Clancy, 
and A. Miller. 2008. Inﬂuence of elevation on bark beetle 
(Coleoptera: Curculionidae: Scolytinae) community 
structure and ﬂight periodicity in ponderosa pine forests of 
Arizona. Environmental Entomology 37: 94-109.
Wood, D.L. 1982. Te role of pheromones, kairomones and 
allomones in the host selection and colonization behavior 
of bark beetles. Annual Review Forest Entomology 27:411-
446.
Zausen, G.L., T.E. Kolb, J.D. Bailey, and M.R. Wagner. 2005. 
Long-term impacts of stand management on ponderosa 
pine physiology and bark beetle abundance in northern 
Arizona: A replicated landscape study. Forest Ecology and 
Management 218:291-305.

Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Aﬃrmative Action Institution.
Tis report was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.
For more information about forest restoration, contact the ERI at (928) 523-7182 or nau.edu/eri.
 
Working Papers in Intermountain West Frequent-Fire Forest Restoration
1: 
Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons  and Adaptive Management Practices
2: 
Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3: 
Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
4: 
Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Beneﬁts
5: 
Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
6: 
Butterﬂies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
7: 
Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
8: 
Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
9: 
Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
10: Te Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Restoration Model
11: Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration
12: Restoring Forest Roads
13: Treating Slash afer Restoration Tinning
14: Integrating Forest Restoration Treatments with Mexican Spotted Owl Habitat Needs
15: Eﬀects of Forest Tinning Treatments on Fire Behavior
16: Snags and Forest Restoration  
17: Bat Habitat and Forest Restoration Treatments
18: Prescribed and Wildland Use Fires in the Southwest: Do Timing and Frequency Matter? 
19: Understory Seeding in Southwestern Forests Following Wildﬁre and Ecological Restoration Treatments
20: Controlling Cheatgrass in Ponderosa Pine and Pinyon-Juniper Restoration Areas 
21: Managing Coarse Woody Debris in Frequent-ﬁre Southwestern Forests
22: Restoring Spatial Pattern to Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
23: Guidelines for Managing Small Mammals in Restored Ponderosa Pine Forests of Northern Arizona
24: Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Burning 
25: Strategies for Enhancing and Restoring Rare Plants and Teir Habitats in the Face of Climate Change and Habitat Destruction 
in the Intermountain West
26: Wildlife Habitat Values and Forest Structure in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine: Implications for Restoration
27: Fuel Treatment Longevity
28: Southwestern Mixed-Conifer Forests: Evaluating Reference Conditions to Guide Ecological Restoration Treatments
29:  Post-Wildﬁre Restoration of Structure, Composition, and Function in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine and Warm/Dry Mixed-
Conifer Forests

Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
nau.edu/eri
G1002207
