Societ y and Natural Resources. 17:473-475.2004 
Q Taylor& Francis 
Copyright (l:: Taylor & Francis Inc. 
~ Taylor&.Fl1InclsGroup 
ISSN: 0894-1920 printI1521-0723 online  
DOl: 10.1080108941920490452418  
Introduction to the Special Issue: Humans, Fire, and  
Forests: The Reemergence of Research on Human  
Dimensions  
In response to the call for papers for a special issue of So ciety and Natural Resources 
on humans, fire, and forests, the editorial office of the journal received 28 manu­
scripts, a surprisingly large number, and far more than expected. Wildfire and 
healthy forests have emerged as a highly salient public policy problem, and the 
funding made available to researchers as a result of initiatives such as the National 
Fire Plan and the Joint Fire Science Program has spawned a new generation of fire 
social science. 
There has been a long history of fire social science. One of the classic works in 
public administration-as well as fire policy-is Ashley Schiff's Fire and Water : 
Scientific Heresy in the U.S. Forest Service (1962), which examines the relationship 
between science and management in the Forest Service and how the agency effec­
tively suppressed fire science that challenged the agency's conventional wisdom. The 
historian Stephen Pyne has written extensively on fire (e.g., Fire in America 1982; 
Year of the Fires: The Story of the Great Fires of 1910 2001). During the 1980sand 
early 1990s considerable work was undertaken examining public attitudes toward 
fire management, perceptions of fire risk, wildfire risk mitigation on both public and 
private lands and in the wildland-urban interface, and fire economics (e.g., Cortner, 
Gardner, and Taylor 1990; Taylor and Daniel 1984; McCool and Stankey 1986; 
Gonazalez-Caban and McKetta 1986; Davis 1988). However, the interest of social 
scientists studying fire waned until 2000, when that fire season provided renewed 
opportunities for social science research exploring the human dimensions of fire. The 
National Fire Plan, for example, outlined a cooperative long-term program of 
research and development to support efforts to reduce human and ecological losses 
from wildfire. The early 2000s also saw other activities in support of fire social 
science, including the National Wildfire Coordinating Group's establishment of a 
social science research task group, and sponsorship of Burning Questions, a social 
science research agenda on fire (Machlis et al. 2002). 
This special section of the journal is the outgrowth of collaborative work that 
began June 2002 at the Eighth International Symposium on Society and Resource 
Management in Bloomington, IN. Fire social science played a prominent role in the 
symposium (Jakes 2002). Don Field of the University of Wiscon sin and Hanna 
Cortner of Northern Arizona University embraced the heightened research interest. 
They began planning for a number of activities to foster networking and colla­
boration to stimulate an increase in social science research on fire, and at the same 
time examine the accumulated body of social science fire knowledge for management 
and policymaking. With the cooperation of Pam Jakes of the North Central 
Research Station of the Forest Service they together sponsored a workshop in 
Tucson, AZ, in January 2003, where researchers shared research perspectives and 
began to address the question of the effective integration of fire social science for 
managers. One of the outcomes of this collaboration was the initiation of a fire 
synthesis project to examine the published fire and natural hazard literature with a 
473 

474 
Introduction to the Special Issue 
goal to derive practical lessons for fire managers and poJicymakers. To provide 
additional opportunities for the latest, state-of-the art research to be showcased in 
the peer-reviewed literature, they conceived of a special issue for Society and Natural 
Resources. 
Given the large number of papers received through the call, however, it soon 
became clear the journal could not plan for just a single issue. Consequently, the 
three fire papers in this volume represent a sampling of the kinds of research that is 
now ongoing. This issue focuses on social values, willingness to pay, and the 
applicability of natural hazard research for fire. In subsequent issues of the journal, 
research on community responses to fire events (pre, during, and post), the socio­
economic and institutional impacts of new policy initiatives, and cultural and ethnic 
fire practices will follow. Manuscripts that have been accepted and those that are still 
in the review process represent these topics. 
As already noted, there has been considerable past work on attitudes and per­
ceptions toward wildfire in general and policy for prescriptions addressing fire. 
However, since much of that work is 20 years old , there is certainly a need for more 
current understanding in the context of changing social values, increased issue 
awareness, and new policy initiatives. The article by Kneeshaw, Vaske, Bright, and 
Absher represents an excellent example of this new generation of research on public 
attitudes and perceptions. The authors examine how public acceptance of wildland 
fire management actions is affected by such factors as fire origin, impact on air 
quality, risk of private property damage, fire recovery rate, and impact on outdoor 
recreation opportunities. Social scientists, however, are quick to point out that as 
important as knowing underlying public and user group attitudes is, attitudes don't 
always translate to behavior, and that social science research also needs to focus on 
understanding actual decision processes and the factors that affect those decisions. 
The article by McKee, Berrens, Jones , Helton, and Talberth showcases one tool­
experimental economics-that can be applied to examining homeowner willingness 
to pay for insurance and other measures for avoiding wildfire risks . 
Because there is scant research about the social impacts of fire events, it is 
necessary and important to look at other related bodies of literature to see where 
lessons might be gleaned that can be applied to fire situations, or where hypotheses 
for new research on fire might be derived. The rich literature on natural hazards is 
one such body, and the policy review essay by McCaffrey examines the applicability 
of hazard research to fire. 
The many reviewers who assisted in developing the special issue deserve special 
recognition. Their reviews were thorough, thoughtful, and extremely useful for the 
guest editors as well as the paper authors. 
There have been new incentives and opportunities for social science researchers 
in the past few years. But what if, after all the new fire research dollars and the 
infusion of new researcher enthusiasm, the end results are a bunch of highly 
reductionist studies-significant perhaps by themselves or contributing to the growth 
of social science theory, but with minimal cumulative impact and utility for man­
agers and policymakers? Will social science have squandered the chance that it had 
been given? Will there be a second chance? What we see in these three articles and the 
other special issue manuscripts yet to be published is a renewed emphasis in social 
science research . This is an elevation, if you will, of the seriousness of attention to 
people and fire, and a broadening of both substantive content and methodological 
approaches. Further, there is an awareness of the responsibility for translating 
research findings into management actions. It is encouraging that social science can 

475 
H. Cortner and D. Field 
be both theoretical and applied, and that both Society and Natural Resources and its 
new parent organization, the International Association for Society and Natural 
Resources, are ideal vehicles for ensuring that theoretically sound science and 
practical utility are not mutually exclusive. 
. 
Hanna J. Cortner 
Northern Arizona University 
Donald R. Field 
University of Wisconsin-Madison 
References 
Cortner, H. J., P. D. Gardner, and J. G. Taylor. 1990. Fire hazards at the urban-wildland 
urban interface: what the public expects. Environ. Manage . 14:57-62. 
Davis , J. B. 1988. The wildland-urban interface: What it is, where it is, and its fire manage­
ment problems. In Protecting people and homes from wild fire in the interior West: Pro­
ceedings oj the symposium and workshop, General Technical Report. pp . 160-165. Ogden , 
UT: USDA Forest Service Intermountain Research Station. 
Gonzalez-Caban, A., and C. W. McKetta 1986. Analyzing fuel treatment costs. West. J. Appl. 
For. 1:116-121. 
Jakes, P. 1. 2002. Homeowners. communities and wildfire: Science findings Jrom the National 
Fire Plan, Proceedings oj the Ninth International Symposium on Society and Resource 
Management, U.S. Forest Service General Technical Report NC-23 I. St. Paul, MN: USDA 
Forest Service North Central Research Station. 
Machlis, G. E., A. B. Kaplan, S. P. Tuler, K. A. Bagby, and J. E. McKendry. 2002. Burning 
questions: A social science research plan for Jederal wildlandfire management. Moscow, ID : 
University of Idaho, College of Natural Resources, Idaho Forest, Wildlife and Range 
Experiment Station. 
McCool, S., and G. Stankey. 1986. Visitor attitudes toward wildernessfire management policy, 
1971-1984. Research paper INT-RP-357. Ogden, UT: USDA Forest Service Inter­
mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 
Pyne, S. J. 1982. Fire in America: A cultural history oj wildland and urban fire . Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press . 
Pyne, S. J. 200I. Year of the fires: The story of the great fir es oj 1910. New York: Viking. 
Schiff, A. 1962. Fire and water: Scientific heresy in the U.S. Forest Service. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. 
Taylor, J. G., and T. C. Daniel. 1984. Prescribed fire: Public education and perception. J. For. 
82(6):361-365. 
