 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928/523-7182, FAX 928/523-0296, www.eri.nau.edu 
Influence of Time Since Fire on Pinyon-Juniper Woodland Structure 
 
 
 
By David W. Huffman 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Pinyon-juniper ecosystems presently occur on approximately 50 million acres across the semi-arid land-
scapes of the western United States. Infrequent, stand-replacing fires characterize both historical and modern 
fire regimes in southwestern pinyon-juniper woodlands (Huffman et al. 2008, Romme et al. 2009). Fires in 
these systems are typically wind-driven events that occur under hot, dry weather conditions and result in 
death of most or all trees on extents that range from small groups of trees to patches hundreds of acres in 
size. In this study, we were interested in understanding how quantities of important woodland structures 
(trees, tree seedlings, stand dead snags, dead and down logs, and shrubs) change over time since severe fire 
(TSF), and how structural complexity changes with TSF. In order to answer these questions, we identified a 
chronosequence of sites that spanned very recently burned areas to older woodlands that had not experienced 
significant fire for several centuries (Table 1). We installed plots on these 13 sites and sampled quantities of 
the important structures. Information concerning long-term changes in structural characteristics allows land 
managers to formulate treatment strategies that emulate natural processes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
      Fact Sheet:  Influence of Time Since Fire on Pinyon-Juniper Woodland Structure                      February 2013     

 
RESEARCH FINDINGS 
 
Live juniper and total tree density increased linearly with TSF. Pin-
yon tree density and TSF were not significantly related. 
 
 
Seedlings were found as early as 6 years TSF. Seedling densities and 
shrub cover were not significantly related to TSF. 
 
 
Live pinyon tree biomass, live juniper biomass, and total tree bio-
mass increased with TSF and followed “s-shaped” functions. Total bio-
mass plateaued at 29 tons per acre around 250 years since fire. 
 
 
Juniper snag density decreased with TSF and total snag density fol-
lowed a “u-shaped” function. Total snag densities were lowest around 
240 years since fire. Pinyon snag density and TSF were not significantly 
related. 
 
 
Density of rotten logs increased linearly with TSF whereas sound 
logs and TSF were not significantly related. 
 
 
Although different structural elements (trees, seedlings snags, logs, 
and shrubs) showed various long-term patterns, on aggregate structural 
complexity showed a positive linear relationship with TSF. 
 
MANAGEMENT IMPLICATIONS 
Results from this study indicate that although individual structural ele-
ments show various relationships with TSF, structural complexity in-
creases as sites approach persistent woodland conditions (see Romme et 
al. 2009) (Fig. 1). These findings provide resource professionals with 
information that can help in developing management approaches intend-
ed to emulate natural structural patterns that correspond with time since 
fire. For example, canopy openings intended to mimic conditions found 
immediately after fire should retain relatively high numbers of snags 
and downed logs. Later stages of development are characterized by all-
aged tree diameter structure, tree seedlings, and higher shrub cover. Old
-growth conditions are relatively complex with higher tree density and 
biomass, and shrubs, snags, and downed logs present.  
REFERENCES 
Huffman, D.W., Fulé, P.Z., Pearson, K.M., Crouse, J.E. 2008. Fire history of pinyon-juniper woodlands at upper eco-
tones with ponderosa pine forests in Arizona and New Mexico. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 38:2097-
2108. 
 
Romme, W.H, Allen, C.D., Bailey, J.D., Baker, W.L., Bestelmeyer, B.T., Brown, P.M., Eisenhart, K.S., Floyd, M. L., 
Huffman, D.W., Jacobs, B.F., Miller, R.F., Muldavin, E.H., Swetnam, T.W., Tausch, R.J., Weisberb, P.J. 2009. 
Historical and modern disturbance regimes, stand structures, and landscape dynamics on pinyon-juniper vege-
tation of the Western United States. Rangeland Ecology and Management 62:203-222.  
 
 
Contact 
 
David W. Huffman, David.Huffman@nau.edu  
 
 
This Fact Sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
Huffman, D.W., Crouse, J.E., Chancellor, W.W., and Fulé, P.Z. 2012. Influence of time since fire 
on pinyon-juniper woodland structure. Forest Ecology and Management 247:29-37.  
 
Figure 1. Representation of development of 
structural characteristics after fire on pinyon-
juniper sites. Top to bottom shows recently 
burned to developing woodland. 
