Final Report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
May 2007– February 2008
Analysis of  
Small-Diameter  
Wood Supply in  
Northern Arizona 
 
S. Allred 
S. Joy 
FCSFP 
FCSFP 
FCSFP 

For more information on the ForestERA Project, please contact: 
 
ForestERA Project 
Center for Environmental Sciences and Education  
Geospatial Research and Information Laboratory 
Northern Arizona University 
NAU Box 4071 
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5694 
Email: ForestERA@nau.edu 
 
 
 
Additional details are available online at: 
www.forestera.nau.edu 
 
 
 
 
Wood Supply Analysis Personnel: 
Haydee M. Hampton,1 M.S. – Principal Investigator 
Steven E. Sesnie,1 Ph.D. – Remote Sensing Specialist 
Brett G. Dickson,1 Ph.D. – Ecologist 
Jill M. Rundall,1 B.S. – GIS Specialist 
Thomas D. Sisk,1 Ph.D. – Ecology Professor 
Gary B. Snider,2 M.S. – Forest Economist 
John D. Bailey,3 Ph.D. – Professor of Silviculture 
 
 
 
The Wood Supply Analysis was supported by funding from the 
USDA Forest Service, Southwestern Region. 
 
 
Front cover photo credits: S. Allred (tassel-eared squirrel), S. Joy (northern 
goshawk), and the Four Corners Sustainable Forest Partnership (three wood 
utilization photos). 
 
 
Suggested Citation:  
Hampton, H.M., S.E. Sesnie, B.G. Dickson, J.M. Rundall, T.D Sisk, G.B. Snider 
and J.D. Bailey. 2008. Analysis of Small-Diameter Wood Supply in Northern 
Arizona. Forest Ecosystem Restoration Analysis Project, Center for Environmental 
Sciences and Education, Northern Arizona University. 
                                                 
1 Center for Environmental Sciences and Education, Northern Arizona University 
2 School of Forestry, Northern Arizona University 
3 Department of Forest Resources, Oregon State University 

 i
Table of Contents 
 
1  Executive Summary.............................................................................................................. 1 
2  Project Background............................................................................................................... 3 
3  Building Agreement on Treatment Location and Type ........................................................ 5 
3.1 Wood Supply Steering Committee ................................................................................. 5 
3.2 Wood Supply Working Group Meetings........................................................................ 5 
3.3 Keeping Stakeholders and Elected Officials Informed of Project Progress ................... 8 
3.4 Working Group Treatment Scenario............................................................................... 9 
3.4.1 Landscape Features Considered Not a Source of Wood Supply ........................... 10 
3.4.2 Landscape Management Areas .............................................................................. 12 
3.4.2.1 Community Protection Management Areas.................................................... 13 
3.4.3 Desired Post-Treatment Conditions....................................................................... 14 
3.4.3.1 Wildlife Considerations in Developing Desired Post-Treatment Conditions. 15 
3.4.4 Review of Recently Planned and Completed Restoration Projects ....................... 16 
3.4.5 Range of Agreement .............................................................................................. 17 
4  Estimating Wood Volume and Supply ............................................................................... 19 
4.1 Methods......................................................................................................................... 19 
4.1.1 Developing Forest Structure and Wood Volume Layers....................................... 19 
4.1.2 Estimating Amount of Wood Byproducts from Restoration Treatments .............. 22 
4.1.2.1 Wood supply volume...................................................................................... 22 
4.1.2.2 Wood supply biomass..................................................................................... 24 
4.1.2.3 Wood supply from small-diameter trees......................................................... 25 
4.2 Results........................................................................................................................... 26 
4.2.1 Forest Structure and Wood Volume Layer Accuracy............................................ 26 
4.2.2 Current Levels of Wood Volume in the Analysis Area......................................... 27 
4.2.3 Predicted Wood Supply Based on Treatment Scenarios........................................ 28 
4.2.3.1 Wood supply volume...................................................................................... 28 
4.2.3.2 Wood supply biomass..................................................................................... 29 
4.2.3.3 Wood supply from small-diameter trees......................................................... 31 
5  Existing Harvesting Contractors, Mills and Manufactures................................................. 31 
6  Additional Considerations .................................................................................................. 33 
6.1 Fire as an Initial Treatment Option............................................................................... 34 
6.2 Tree Mortality and Climate Change ............................................................................. 36 
6.3 Old-growth Trees.......................................................................................................... 36 
6.4 Forest Growth Review and Recommendations............................................................. 37 
7  Concluding Remarks........................................................................................................... 40 
8  Acknowledgements............................................................................................................. 42 
9  References........................................................................................................................... 42 
Tables...................................................................................................................................... 47 
Figures..................................................................................................................................... 65 
Appendices.............................................................................................................................. 75 
 

 ii
List of Appendices 
 
Appendix A. Letter from Regional Forester on Utility of Wood Supply Analysis 
Appendix B. Meeting Agendas and Summaries 
Appendix C. Estimated Pre-Treatment and Desired Post-Treatment Basal Area Distributions 
for Overall Analysis Area and each Landscape Management Area  
Appendix D. Summary of Presettlement Tree Densities in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine  
Appendix E. Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Handout on Nov. 29, 2007 with Grand 
Canyon Trust Environmental Assessment Analysis 
Appendix F. Tree biomass estimates in oven dry tons per acre from the a) consensus 
treatment scenario and b) majority treatment scenario.     
Appendix G. USDA Forest Service timber cruised data from White Mountain Stewardship 
contracts on the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest.   
Appendix H. Fire Information for Wood Supply Analysis Group 
Appendix I. Potential Follow-on Studies to Wood Supply Analysis 
 

 1
1  Executive Summary 
 
Forest management to restore fire-adapted ponderosa pine ecosystems is a central priority of the 
Southwestern Region of the USDA Forest Service. Appropriately-scaled businesses are apt to 
play a key role in achieving this goal by harvesting, processing and selling wood products, 
thereby reducing treatment costs and providing economic opportunities.  The manner in which 
treatments occur across northern Arizona, with its multiple jurisdictions and land management 
areas, is of vital concern to a diversity of stakeholder groups.  To identify a level of forest 
thinning treatments and potential wood supply from restoration byproducts, a 20-member 
working group representing environmental non-governmental organizations (NGOs), private 
forest industries, local government, the Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona 
University (NAU), and state and federal land and resource management agencies was assembled.  
A series of seven workshops supported by Forest Ecosystem Restoration Analysis (ForestERA; 
NAU) staff were designed to consolidate geographic data and other spatial information and to 
synthesize potential treatment scenarios for a 2.4 million acre analysis area south of the Grand 
Canyon and across the Mogollon Plateau.  A total of 94% of the analysis area is on National 
Forest lands.  ForestERA developed up-to-date remote sensing-based forest structure data layers 
to inform the development of treatment scenarios, and to estimate wood volume in three tree 
diameter classes of <5”, 5-16”, and >16” diameter at breast height (dbh, 4.5’ above base).  For 
the purposes of this report, the group selected a 16” dbh threshold due to its common use within 
the analysis landscape as a break point differentiating “small” and “large” diameter trees in the 
ponderosa pine forest type.  The focus of this study was on small–diameter trees, although wood 
supply estimates include some trees > 16” dbh where their removal was required to meet desired 
post-treatment conditions.4  There was no concurrence within the group that trees over 16” dbh 
should be cut and removed from areas outside community protection management areas 
(CPMAs).  
Participants successfully defined desired post-treatment conditions within five landscape 
management areas that included: communities, municipal and aquatic species watersheds, 
Mexican spotted owl (MSO) restricted habitat and wildlands. Consensus was reached across 
two-thirds of the analysis area. The group unanimously agreed that 26% of the 2.4 million acre 
                                                 
4 Desired post-treatment conditions refer to the working group’s preferred conditions following restoration 
treatments. They are not equivalent to desired conditions defined in the National Forest Management Act. 

 2
analysis area should not be considered a source of wood supply from mechanical restoration 
treatments, due to institutional and biophysical constraints. Consensus was also reached on the 
appropriateness of restoration treatments involving mechanical thinning across 41% of the 
landscape, resulting in a total of 850 million ft3 of wood byproducts from tree boles alone 
(defined as the tree’s main stem, from the ground to top of tree), and an additional 8.0 million 
green tons from branches and other tree crown biomass.  All mechanical thinning treatments 
were assumed to be followed by controlled burning for ecosystem restoration and maintenance 
of fire-adapted conditions. The amount of potential wood byproducts from restoration treatments 
and small-diameter trees from this analysis exceeds current market demand.  In 2006 existing 
wood products businesses in the analysis area removed and utilized 1.2% of the bole biomass (or 
12% extrapolated over 10 years) that would potentially be generated from consensus scenario 
treatments.  
 
There is a high level of agreement, but not consensus, that an additional 33% of the 
analysis area might also be available as a source of wood supply from mechanically-based 
restoration treatments.  When added to the byproducts from the consensus scenario, this would 
result in a total of 1,015 million ft3 from boles and 9.6 million green tons from tree crowns. The 
difference between the two scenarios was relatively small in terms of wood volume and largely 
driven by preferences for varying levels of restoration treatments, such as the preference of some 
stakeholders for prescribed burn-only treatments, wildland fire use5 and non-commercial 
thinning (or thinning that would not add to wood supply). The analysis also revealed that where 
wood harvest included only trees under 16” in diameter, 19% of the landscape with restoration 
treatments would not fully achieve desired post-treatment conditions, as identified by the 
working group. These thinning areas were primarily within CPMAs where objectives called for 
more aggressive thinning.   
The group considered incorporating future tree growth in wood supply assessments, but 
ultimately did not pursue this analysis, however a review of forest growth models was conducted 
to assist with future projections. Consequently, the numbers presented in this report represent a 
“snapshot” of currently available wood supply. Lack of complete data on current road access, the 
presence of archeological sites, and other site-scale considerations introduce some uncertainty in 
                                                 
5 “Wildland fire use is the management of naturally ignited fires to achieve resource benefits, where fire is a major 
component of the ecosystem” (source: http://www.fs.fed.us/fire/fireuse/wildland_fire_use/use_index.html). 

 3
wood supply estimates. Potential changes to future wood supply due to climate change and 
disturbances such as wildfire, insect outbreaks, and drought-related mortality were also 
acknowledged. The results of this study will be used to assist in the development of multi-year 
forest stewardship contracts to attract new industrial users and to supply wood fiber to existing 
local wood product businesses.   
2  Project Background     
The Analysis of Small-Diameter Wood Supply in Northern Arizona (referred to as the “wood 
supply analysis”) was initially called for in the fall of 2006 by an ad-hoc group of forest 
restoration professionals in Arizona and New Mexico. Concerns were mounting over the lack of 
funding for restoration treatments and a need for information regarding the volume of wood that 
might become available to existing and proposed wood utilization facilities, as byproducts from 
forest restoration.  At the request of the ad-hoc group, our applied research team in the Forest 
Ecosystem Restoration Analysis (ForestERA) Project at Northern Arizona University submitted 
a proposal, later funded by the USDA Forest Service, Southwestern Region (Region 3), to 
estimate the supply of wood byproducts stemming from one or more ecologically appropriate 
treatment scenarios.  Treatment scenarios were to be developed collaboratively by a diverse 
stakeholder group.  Five members from the ad hoc group formed a steering committee to advise 
the collaborative process, public outreach, and other aspects of the project.  
This report summarizes the work completed on the project, which officially began in May of 
2007.  Project deliverables specify that the ForestERA Project: 
o Fully engage agency representatives and stakeholders in a collaborative process to build 
agreement on ecologically appropriate map-based treatment scenarios  
o Mobilize the best-available science to quantify wood volume by size-class across the analysis 
area 
o Estimate the volume of wood byproducts removed following each treatment scenario  
o Review and recommend methods for estimating future net growth 
o Prepare a database of existing wood harvesters, processors, and users 
The analysis area includes ponderosa pine-dominated lands within selected National 
Forest boundaries in north-central Arizona (Figure 1); it does not include mixed conifer, pinyon-
juniper, or other forest types. The area is located south of the Grand Canyon and spans the full 

 4
extent of the Mogollon Plateau to the border of New Mexico. The extensive and contiguous 
ponderosa pine-dominated areas on White Mountain Apache lands south of the analysis area are 
not included in this study, although they constitute a potential future source of wood byproducts. 
This study offers a snapshot in time (year 2006) of both wood volumes across the study 
area and the range of wood byproducts that stakeholders agree could potentially be harvested.  
The wood supply working group (described below) decided early in the process to consider only 
treatments harvested mechanically as a source of wood supply, in order to simplify the 
development of their treatment scenarios, given that the vast majority of thinning treatments 
would likely be carried out with mechanized equipment. In addition, all mechanical thinning 
treatments were assumed to be followed by broadcast burns for the purposes of ecosystem 
restoration and maintenance.  Analysis of wood supply for this assessment was implemented at a 
semi-regional scale (2.4 million acres of ponderosa pine dominated lands embedded within the 
proclamation boundaries of all or part of 4 USDA National Forests covering a total of 5.9 million 
acres) and should not be considered as a proposal for National Environmental Policy Act 
(NEPA) analysis. Site-specific analyses will be required to address the complexity of land 
planning issues that arise as thinning projects are developed on a case-by-case basis. 
The overall objectives of the working group’s treatment scenarios match the USDA 
Forest Service “Central Priority” for the southwest of restoring the health of fire adapted 
ecosystems. It supports the second and third components of the strategy to “reduce the threat of 
catastrophic wildfire to communities” and “reduce treatment costs by fostering private sector 
involvement to create the infrastructure to utilize excess biomass” (USDA Forest Service 
Southwestern Region, “Southwestern Region Central Priority: Restoring the Functionality of 
Fire Adapted Ecosystems”, p. 23). It is also consistent with Arizona Governor Napolitano’s 
“Statewide Strategy for Restoring Arizona’s Forests” (Governor’s Forest Health Councils, 2007). 
The Southwestern Region plans to use this study to assist them and others in assessing the 
appropriate scale and scope of restoration treatments and the infrastructure for utilizing forest 
biomass produced as a byproduct of these treatments (Forsgren, 2007a; see Appendix A of this 
report).   

 5
3  Building Agreement on Treatment Location and Type 
A primary goal of the wood supply analysis was to build agreement among stakeholders in the 
region on the location and type of restoration treatments to improve forest health and protect 
communities from wildfire.  To accomplish this goal, we formed a 20-member working group 
and held a series of meetings using a participatory geographic information system (GIS) process 
to develop map-based treatment scenarios.  We also provided opportunities for a much larger 
group of interested parties from outside the working group to record their comments in the 
meeting summaries and make a case for various aspects of scenario development of importance 
to them. 
3.1 Wood Supply Steering Committee 
Five stakeholders served on a project steering committee, which guided the preparation of the 
funding proposal and the design of the collaborative process. The committee met once between 
each working group meeting to review meeting progress and advise planning for the next 
meeting. This project would not have been initiated or possible without the interest and 
perseverance of this committee and the ad hoc group from which they originated; the creative 
and helpful ideas this group contributed are too numerous to list.   
The steering committee selected 15 additional working group members (Table 1) to 
create a broader and more representative team of individuals and organizations.  Collaborative 
meetings were held approximately monthly from June 4 through November 29, 2007. The 
committee used several criteria to select a sufficiently diverse group with the necessary 
background to participate in the collaborative process including: 1) expertise, 2) representation 
from a variety of organizations, 3) geographic purview (range) and 4) availability.   
3.2 Wood Supply Working Group Meetings 
The working group met seven times as a full group (see Appendix B for agendas and detailed 
summaries of each meeting), and held several subcommittee meetings that were organized by our 
team when an issue of interest arose that could not be sufficiently explored by the larger working 
group, due to time constraints.  Attendance at working group meetings was high, ranging from 
14 to 18 participants (Table 2). Meetings were open to the public and rotated between three 
locations spread across the analysis area. We used a "fish bowl" process at each meeting, in 
which members of the public were welcome to attend the entire meeting, and could ask questions 

 6
or provide comments during a scheduled period. We distributed “Work Books” with background 
materials to each working group member at the first meeting, which were updated with 
additional materials throughout the process.  Each meeting followed up on working group 
discussions, requests for additional information and decisions made at previous meetings. The 
subcommittees developed proposals which they presented to the full working group on the 
following topics: community protection management areas (CPMAs), “fire-only treatments” 
where controlled burning might be used in place of mechanical thinning, and treatment scenario 
attributes. ForestERA transformed detailed subcommittee discussions into spatial data layers that 
were integrated with the objectives and needs of the broader wood supply analysis process. 
Topical experts from academia, research institutes, and land management agencies provided 
additional background information to the group on wildlife issues, treatment impacts on soils, 
hydrological considerations, conditions favorable to fire-only restoration treatments, and pre-
settlement and post-treatment forest conditions. 
Meetings were facilitated by Rosemary Romero6, a professional with extensive 
experience on a variety of contentious natural resource topics in the southwest including forest 
biomass utilization. Ms. Romero provided guidance to maximize working group participation 
and for defining a consensus-based decision making approach, which was refined and agreed 
upon by the working group. A scribe took notes and prepared summaries of approximately 15 
pages in length to record working group discussions at each meeting. We distributed a draft of 
the summary to all working group members in attendance for review, incorporated many 
suggested edits, and distributed the final version to approximately 300 stakeholders, as well as 
posting it on the ForestERA web site (http://www.forestera.nau.edu/).  
At the first meeting, held in June of 2007, we provided background and foundational 
information to the group. Each steering committee member commented on wood supply and 
utilization issues related to their respective organizations, and described how they hoped this 
analysis would aid in these issues (for details, see pp. 3-5 of the June 4, 2007 meeting summary 
in Appendix B).  ForestERA summarized the importance of landscape-scale forest restoration 
assessments and reviewed the main task of developing one or more treatment scenarios that was 
the focus of the working group.  We also provided background information to the group on 
previous landscape assessments in the analysis area, leaving the question open to them on how 
                                                 
6 Dexter Albert, Intrinsic, filled in for Rosemary at the last meeting on Nov. 29, 2007. 

 7
they would like to use and/or adapt previous products and processes for the wood supply 
analysis. The USDA Forest Service Director of Forestry and Forest Health for the Southwestern 
Region described the importance of the study and how the Forest Service intended to use project 
results.  Agency experts provided the group with information on how treatments might be 
constrained or influenced by regulations and guidelines related to wildlife, soils, and 
hydrological factors.   
At the second meeting, held in July, ForestERA provided detailed information on how 
other collaborative groups in northern Arizona have built scenarios for previous landscape 
assessments (Hampton et al, 2006; Sisk et al, 2006). Methods to characterize and strategically 
place treatments across the landscape were presented to the working group.  Building on the 
presentations by agency experts at the June meeting, ForestERA presented maps depicting 
technical methods to incorporate treatment guidelines and regulations relevant to siting 
treatments. For selected landscape conditions (e.g., steep slopes, northern goshawk nest areas) 
we reviewed data layers and estimates describing how each factor might influence a treatment 
scenario. The group found this map-based presentation of various options useful and requested 
that we continue depicting progress in this manner. At the end of this meeting, the working group 
developed the following “road map” for the process they would like to use to develop their 
treatment scenario for the purposes of determining potential wood supply:  
1. Identify areas appropriate for restoration treatments that recover wood byproducts (i.e., 
“What’s on the map?”) 
2. Define management objectives (i.e., “target conditions”)  
3. Select appropriate landscape-level treatment characterizations 
The working group also discussed the utility of prioritizing treatment locations to convey their 
preference of how treatments should be sequenced in time. Some individuals expressed that it is 
the spatial and temporal heterogeneity of forest structural features that prevent large-scale 
stochastic changes in wildlife habitat and allow for transitional shifts in wildlife distributions in 
response to treatments.  However, the group decided that there was insufficient time to pursue a 
prioritization assessment with the current wood supply analysis.  
At the third through sixth meetings, held between August and November, the working 
group defined specific components of their scenario, such as the desired post-treatment forest 
conditions, following the road map they had developed previously. At the final meeting, on Nov. 

 8
29, a proposal to place thinning treatments on approximately 40% of the full analysis area 
(partitioned within the landscape as 70% within the CPMAs and between 30% and 40% within 
the remaining management areas, for a total of 41% overall; see details in section 3.4.5) was 
offered by a minority of participants as the greatest area that they felt would be broadly 
acceptable for mechanical restoration treatments.  This minority preferred other restoration 
options be used where feasible in the remaining areas, including fire-only treatments, wildland 
fire use (WFU), non-commercial thinning (or thinning that would not add to wood supply).  This 
precipitated a spirited discussion by the group that included concerns about whether this level of 
mechanical treatments would achieve the USDA Forest Service Southwestern Region’s objective 
of restoring the functionality of frequent-fire forests. After considerable debate the group 
accepted this level of thinning as the consensus scenario. However, a majority of participants 
were adamant that the final report reflect that a large number of working group members felt that 
mechanical thinning was appropriate on up to 74% of the landscape.  We scheduled time at this 
meeting to discuss potential economic analyses that might be pursued in the future, as a follow-
up to this supply analysis, however, the group required this time to finalize their treatment 
scenarios.  
Throughout the process, special topics came up requiring more time than available at the 
full working group meetings. For example, several working group members identified the need 
for better information on the parameters that affect the timing, placement, and application of 
prescribed and/or wildland fire use practices within the wood supply study area. Complex 
questions about the location and intensity of treatments in areas defined by the wildland-urban 
interface (WUI) also arose. Subcommittees of working group members worked between full 
group meetings to study these issues in greater detail and draft spatial data products to assist the 
working group in their collective decision making concerning these and other topics demanding 
special consideration.  
3.3 Keeping Stakeholders and Elected Officials Informed of Project Progress 
We used several modes of communication to update stakeholders of the progress made 
throughout the wood supply analysis. The most comprehensive were meeting summaries posted 
on the wood supply analysis web site (http://www.forestera.nau.edu/project_woodsupply.htm).  
We also developed a Wood Supply stakeholder list with approximately 300 email addresses, 
drawn from previous ForestERA efforts, that was updated with recommendations from working 

 9
group members, Forest Service public affairs officers and requests from individuals.  
Stakeholders received agendas prior to each meeting inviting them to attend as observers, and 
they were sent summaries following each meeting.  A time was reserved at the end of each 
meeting for observers to ask questions or provide comments. We also announced in each email 
and on our web site how to provide comments via voice mail, email or U.S. post.  Comments and 
questions provided were addressed at subsequent meetings.  
Based on advice from the working group, we selected meeting locations distributed 
throughout the analysis area to encourage public attendance. We also prepared a one-page 
handout and distributed these at our first meetings, to assist working group members as they 
informed their colleagues and constituents who were not part of the working group. At the 
request of an observer at our first working group meeting on June 4, we expanded the wood 
supply analysis web site to include the contents of the Wood Supply Work Book that had been 
provided to working group members.  To keep elected officials and other key players in the 
region informed of project developments, the steering committee developed a list of contacts to 
whom they provided periodic updates on project progress and products. 
3.4 Working Group Treatment Scenario 
One of the main goals of the wood supply analysis, and the primary task of the working group, 
was to build agreement on the location and type of ecologically appropriate treatments across the 
analysis area to improve forest health. This map-based product is referred to in this analysis as a 
“treatment scenario.”  The overall objectives of the group’s scenario were, first, to restore fire-
adapted (ponderosa-pine) ecosystems and protect communities from destructive fires, while 
mitigating adverse impacts of treatments on soils, surface water and wildlife.  Secondly, based 
on restoration needs, the scenario defines the intensity and location of potential mechanical 
thinning treatments used to estimate the supply of wood byproducts.  To accomplish these 
objectives, the group divided the landscape into areas where restoration byproducts were not 
available from mechanical tree thinning and those that were a potential source.  They further 
divided the potential source areas into the five landscape management areas for which they 
developed various management objectives and desired post-treatment conditions, based on the 
“informed judgment” of experienced restoration practitioners from land management agencies 
and other organizations within the group (Table 3; Figure 2).   Working group meeting 
summaries (Appendix B) contain detailed discussions on the development of treatment scenarios. 

 10
3.4.1 Landscape Features Considered Not a Source of Wood Supply 
The working group agreed that areas associated with seven landscape features were not 
considered a source of wood supply, ranging from slopes too steep for most mechanical 
harvesting equipment, to various soil, hydrological and wildlife habitat conditions (Tables 3 and 
4).  However, the group agreed that MSO protected activity centers (PACs) and other sensitive 
species habitats might be thinned lightly from below in some cases. The seven landscape features 
covered 26% of the 2.4 million acres of ponderosa pine-dominated lands in the analysis area 
(shown in black in Figure 2), leaving 1.8 million acres available as potential supply (Table 5).  In 
addition, even though no changes were made numerically to the acres or volumes in either 
scenario based on road access, the group wanted to express that they had low confidence that 
areas further from ¼ mile from existing roads (constituting an additional 241,000 acres outside 
of the seven landscape features not considered a source of wood supply) would be a source of 
restoration byproducts in the near-term, due to limits of harvesting technologies in common use 
in the region, and to concerns over environmental impacts associated with both the road 
improvements necessary for harvesting and new road construction.  An increase in the use of 
forwarders was looked on favorably by the working group to extend the yarding distance from ¼ 
to ½ mile from roads. A USDA Forest Service transportation engineer informed the group that 
many current roads were not adequate for transportation of wood in large trucks. Many of the 
areas with roads may not be available for wood supply or would need improvements. It was 
impossible to quantify the net impacts of these various access issues, given existing roads data.   
On a separate issue, the group decided not to discuss or identify wood supply associated 
with severely burned areas. Salvage logging is controversial, and the group recognized that 
revisiting this debate could detract from the goal of the study to find common ground. 
 
MSO PACs are 600 acre areas within which owls have been found to be nesting.  Trees 
<_9” dbh may be removed in these areas, but it is minimal, so the working group decided not to 
include these areas as potential wood supply for the purposes of this study.  Specially Designated 
Areas found in the analysis area include Wilderness Areas, National Game Preserves, Research 
Natural Areas, Primitive Areas and Inventoried Roadless Areas.  For our analysis, a northern 
goshawk nest area was defined as a 180-acre circular area (i.e., total area was computed as six 
nests areas each encompassing 30 acres) geometrically centered on an individual goshawk post-
fledgling area (PFA). These 180-acre areas were not considered a source of wood supply.  Six 

 11
unique goshawk nest locations, for which PFA data were not available, were also buffered at an 
extent that totaled 180 acres.  Soils with mechanical treatment limitations due to factors such as 
erodibility and rocky conditions were identified by USDA National Forest soil scientists.  Areas 
with soil conditions that could be mitigated using best management practices (BMPs) were not 
included in this landscape feature.  The working group considered the various management 
practices of the four National Forests and other lands in the analysis area in terms of restricting 
treatments directly adjacent to streams in order to maintain and protect these “filter strips” from 
potentially negative impacts of mechanical treatments.  We determined from contacting Forest 
Service hydrologists and other staff that the Apache-Sitgreaves is the only National Forest in the 
analysis area that precludes mechanical treatments from areas next to streams. The other 
National Forests specify BMPs to mitigate damage, but have no rules that specifically restrict 
equipment from these areas.  In order to maintain consistency across the landscape, the working 
group decided not to consider areas as a source of wood supply that are within 100 feet of 
perennial streams throughout the analysis area, and on both perennial and intermittent streams in 
the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests due to the availability of data on intermittent streams. 
The “treated areas” landscape feature includes areas the USDA Forest Service identified 
as having moderate to high intensity thinning treatments completed or contracted in the last 10 
years,7 including 30,000 acres as part of the White Mountain Stewardship Project (WMSP) 
contract. These areas warrant special attention due to data limitations and because they do not 
include the majority of areas contracted to the WMSP. The USDA Forest Service estimates that 
there are upwards of 120,000 acres remaining in the WMSP contract, however specific locations 
for these thinning treatments have not been defined, so could not be included in the “treated 
areas” landscape feature. This is important to consider in developing new stewardship contracts 
as the wood volume estimates provided in this analysis include byproducts from remaining 
WMSP restoration treatments.   
Incomplete treatment information, in combination with disturbance-related mortality 
(e.g., wildfire, insect outbreaks, drought) over the past 10 years lead to our decision to develop 
updated forest structural information based on 2006 Landsat imagery.  The compilation of data 
on previous forest treatments in the wood supply analysis area required contacting and visiting 
                                                 
7 As this study focused on year 2006 conditions, working group members did not discuss or indicate preferences for 
the type or intensity of future restoration treatments within areas thinned in the past ten years. 

 12
an interdisciplinary team of GIS, timber, fuels, managers, and silvicultural staff at the four 
National Forests.8 During the course of this analysis, the National Forests in the study area were 
in transition between two databases, Rocky Mountain Resource and Information System 
(RMRIS) and Forest Activity Tracking System (FACTS). This transition complicated data access 
and, in some cases, rendered the most current data unavailable. Also, spatial data often resides in 
multiple locations, such as individual district offices, and the attribute or tabular data resides 
elsewhere (databases or individual digital or hard copy documents) requiring more than one 
person with knowledge of the data and the correct expertise to access, query, or compile the 
various data sources. In addition to the incomplete nature of this data layer across the study area, 
the standards for tracking forest treatment data have changed over time.   
3.4.2 Landscape Management Areas 
Among the five landscape management areas that were considered a potential source of wood 
supply, the community protection management areas (CPMAs) received the highest ranking for 
tree thinning from the working group.  The group’s ranking meant that management objectives 
for CPMA’s took precedence wherever they overlapped another management area (see rank of 
each management area in column 1 of Table 3). Although, the working group ranked the 
management areas for purposes of reconciling spatial overlap and defined procedures resulting in 
varying areal extents for each, they did not prioritize them in terms of a preferred sequencing 
over time for restoration. The MSO restricted habitat management area (rank 2) is defined by 
areas with pine-oak vegetation and used in tandem with the group’s basal area management 
objectives is designed to follow MSO Recovery Plan guidelines for other restricted habitat and 
target/threshold conditions at the semi-regional scale.  The municipal watersheds management 
area (rank 3) contains 6th level watersheds with surface water supplies for communities.9 The 
                                                 
8 We either met in person or otherwise contacted the following Forest Service employees from the Kaibab NF: 
Jerry Drury, Bob Richardson, Bruce Higgins (contractor and former FS employee), Mark Herron, Tim McGann, 
Dave Mills, Woody Rokala; from the ASNF: Susan N Lee, Gayle Richardson, Monica Boehning, Joseph A 
Hamrick, Laura A Mounce, William H Ripley, Georgia Morris, Margaret Kirkeminde, Nancy Loving, Pamela 
Klein-Taylor, Stacey L Weaver, Steven Richardson, Dan Mindar, James Pitts, Robert S Taylor, Kerry Nedrow, 
Raymond Rugg, Deryl Jevons, Elaine Zieroth, Patti O'Connor, Margaret Kirkeminde; from the Coconino NF: Pat 
Key, Mike Manthei, Frank Thomas , Kim Newbauer, Jeffrey Thumm, Joe Luttman, Carl Beyerhelm, Andy 
Stevenson, Patty Ringle; and from the Tonto NF: David Bailey, Carolyn Williams, Don Nunnelly and Pam Rule.  In 
addition on fire and vegetation mapping issues, we contacted: from the Missoula Fire Lab: Laurie Kurth, Chuck 
McHugh, and Rob Seli; from Region 3: Gilbert Zepeda, Linda Wadleigh, Wayne Robbie, Jack Triepke, Tom Mellin, 
Jeff Hogg, Georgie Porter, and Bill Krausmann; and from FIA Ogden, UT: Michael Wilson, Ron Tymcio and John 
Shaw.  
9 Municipal watersheds are also referred to as community “source water supply” by the USDA Forest Service. 

 13
working group defined the aquatic species watersheds management area (rank 4) as 6th level 
watersheds in which native fish are known to occur.  The wildlands management area (rank 5), 
which was a catch-all for areas not defined by the other four, covered the largest area at 788,000 
acres, or 33% of the 2.4 million acre ponderosa pine-dominated analysis area (Table 5).   
3.4.2.1 Community Protection Management Areas 
A working group subcommittee developed several options for defining the CPMAs, which they 
presented to the full group. A total of six Community Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPPs; 
Tusayan, Flagstaff, Williams, Rim Country, Apache and Sitgreaves), encouraged by the Healthy 
Forests Restoration Act of 2003, have been developed and approved by local governments in the 
wood supply study area.  In evaluating WUI zones defined in the CWPPs to develop proposed 
treatments for the wood supply analysis, it became apparent that not all CWPPs were developed 
in the same manner, and this variability precluded consistent application of analytical techniques 
across the analysis area. For example, some plans identified high priority treatment areas as 
subsets within their community’s CWPP boundary, while other plans assigned high priority to 
the entire area contained within their CWPP boundary.  The working group struggled to 
incorporate and honor the boundaries and recommendations established in the various 
community-sponsored CWPPs in the analysis, but decided for consistency to apply the same 
treatment scenario approach within all CWPP analysis areas as was applied through the study 
area. This should not be construed as an attempt by the working group to reestablish the 
boundaries designated by communities, but rather as necessary in order to create consistency 
across the analysis area. Specifically, the full group decided to define CPMAs by assigning a ¼-
mile protection buffer around all private lands, with an additional ½-mile protection buffer, 
extending to 1½-mile in the upwind direction, of all private property within “high priority” areas 
identified in CWPPs. This resulted in a CPMA, aggregated across the study area, that is 
approximately 600,000 acres smaller than the area identified in the various CWPP’s, and 
proposed treatments that differ slightly from some CWPPs.  The wood supply volumes derived 
could be adjusted, if adequate information on volumes generated by specific CWPP 
recommended treatment scenarios is developed through alternate techniques, however, only four 
of the six CWPPs defined recommended treatments. Therefore, the working group agreed that 
current estimates be developed from consistent application of the same techniques throughout the 
study area while presenting the treatment information available in completed CWPPs (Figure 3).  

 14
3.4.3 Desired Post-Treatment Conditions 
For each landscape management area, the working group specified a post-treatment basal area 
distribution appropriate for the area’s management objectives (see column 2, Table 3) and 
designed to generate heterogeneous forest structural conditions at the landscape scale (Figure 4).  
Basal area distributions were derived through informed judgment and group negotiation. The 
group endeavored to balance key land management issues that included: 1) the desire to reduce 
the threat of catastrophic fire; 2) concerns about aggressive or intensive thinning in wildland 
areas; 3) the need to both protect wildlife habitat from unnaturally-severe fire while 
simultaneously proceeding with caution to minimize any potential negative impacts of treatments 
on wildlife and their habitats; and 4) a desire to maintain landscape heterogeneity. Scenario and 
wood supply outcomes reflect this balancing act. For example, the proposed thinning for the 
CPMAs is more aggressive than the thinning goals in wildland areas, while desired post-
treatment distributions in MSO restricted habitat allow for 10% of the forest to have a basal area 
> 150 ft2/acre to promote MSO target/threshold habitat.  These are not precise determinations or 
prescriptions; rather, they are assumptions that allow for the estimation of wood supply, as 
requested in this semi-regional scale analysis.   
From the total basal area layer (described below and shown in Figure 5), a scenario 
algorithm was used to fit the existing distribution for each landscape management area to a 
desired post-treatment condition, while maintaining the original order of low to high basal area 
conditions (Figure 4).  In other words, lower pre-treatment basal areas were “matched” to lower 
post-treatment basal areas and higher initial values were matched to higher post-treatment values 
according to the shape of each curve.  The pre-treatment basal area was shifted downward 
(Appendix C) unless it was below a minimum desired condition (e.g., < 40 ft2/acre in wildlands) 
in which case the values were left unchanged. The dominant thinning level ranged from heavy in 
the CPMAs to light in MSO Restricted Habitat (Tables 6 and 7) and match the guidelines for 
these levels developed by the group (column 4, Table 3).  The modeled treatments in the 
management areas, especially the high intensity treatments in the CPMAs, interspersed with the 
untreated areas removed from consideration as a source of wood supply, create a heterogeneous 
pattern of potential post-treatment basal areas across the landscape (Figure 6).  

 15
3.4.3.1 Wildlife Considerations in Developing Desired Post-Treatment Conditions 
Ponderosa pine forests in northern Arizona are naturally heterogeneous in structure (Covington 
and Moore 1994, Allen et al. 2002, Appendix D: table supplied by ERI to working group on pre-
settlement conditions in Woolsey plots and other sites), and provide habitat for a diversity of 
wildlife species. Although the effects of thinning and burning on forest over- and understory 
vegetation are fairly well understood, we do not completely understand how changes in forest 
structure and function impact, modify, and/or change habitat for individual wildlife species, their 
population dynamics, or community organization (Governor’s Forest Health Councils, 2007, 
p.19). It is likely that the spatial arrangement of retained trees following forest restoration 
treatments plays an important role in determining habitat value at the landscape scale. Wildlife 
are ecologically and socially important components of the forest ecosystem, and management 
interventions should be designed to provide the diversity of habitats needed to support and 
sustain wildlife populations (as recommended by Chambers and Germaine, 2003).  Therefore, 
the working group recommends implementation of a variety of thinning and/or burning 
treatments juxtaposed across the landscape, including areas with untreated forest.  The timing of 
treatments should also vary across the landscape to allow for transitional shifts in wildlife 
distribution in response to treatments.  
The broad target range of basal area and the distribution of different treatments included 
in the working group’s scenario (Figure 4), interspersed with areas having no mechanical 
thinning treatments, afford a variety of future potential conditions for wildlife. Beier and 
Maschinski (2003) point out that our current knowledge of pre-settlement conditions is likely 
incomplete as it does not fully account for portions of the landscape that had dense stands with 
large snags, prior to EuroAmerican settlement.  They also note that Threatened, Endangered, and 
Sensitive (TES) species may specialize in habitats “atypical” of those described by current pre-
settlement reconstructions. They recommend that we increase our understanding of the spatial 
heterogeneity of pre-settlement conditions, while noting that, given the relatively small areas 
occupied by TES species, their consideration will likely not seriously constrain restoration 
efforts (see also Prather et al., 2007, for a closer look at the MSO). In addition, Beier and 
Maschinski (2003) reason that ecosystem changes in the last century (climate change, loss of top 
carnivores, the spread of invasive species, anthropogenic edge effects and fragmentation) may 
preclude full restoration of structure and function, and “ecosystems may as a result take 

 16
unexpected trajectories after restoration treatments, justifying a cautious approach.” The working 
group targets for basal area distributions outside of CPMAs include some areas of higher tree 
densities to provide a variety of habitat conditions for TES and other wildlife species, such as 
tassel-eared squirrels.  
3.4.4 Review of Recently Planned and Completed Restoration Projects 
The amount of ponderosa pine (PP) that is thinned mechanically in recently planned and 
completed restoration projects in the analysis area is influenced by both biophysical and 
institutional constraints.  These include the presence of archeological and historical sites, steep 
slopes, wildlife habitat concerns, access on suitable roads, streamside management zones, 
erodible soils, and administrative removals (e.g., Research Natural Areas). The effect of these 
factors on areas thinned shift over time to varying degrees given forest growth, vegetation 
disturbances and other changes.  This study is focused on year 2006 conditions.  The consensus 
and majority scenarios identified 26% of the study area as being inappropriate as a source of 
wood byproducts from restoration thinning treatments, based on spatial analysis using available 
map-based data.  Since it was not possible to include all factors known to affect treatment 
placement at the landscape scale due to data limitations, it is reasonable to expect that a higher 
percentage of the total area would not be thinned.  To explore this hypothesis we reviewed a 
sample of current treatment projects and interviewed Forest Service personnel. 
We reviewed eight National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) approved restoration 
projects on the Coconino and Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests as described in the 
Environmental Assessments (EAs). All projects had successfully gone through the NEPA 
process and all special considerations (e.g., riparian areas, slope, MSO PACs) were included 
within the original NEPA planning area.  In combination with 19 additional EAs analyzed by the 
Grand Canyon Trust, an average of 37% of project areas were found not to have been thinned 
(Table 8; see Appendix E for more details).  A similar review by a Timber Staff Officer on the 
Kaibab National Forest (NF) of recently sold and closed timber sales, all NEPA approved, found 
38% of the project areas were not thinned (personal communication with Jerry Drury, 2007) and 
Forest Service personnel on the Apache-Sitgreaves NF estimated that perhaps 40-50% were not 
thinned (personal communication with Elaine Zieroth, 2007).  These figures indicate a value in 
the high 30s up to mid- 40s may be a reasonable estimate of the average percent of acres within a 
NEPA planning area which would not receive mechanical treatment.  However, a larger sample 

 17
size distributed throughout the study area would be required to provide a range with greater 
certainty.      
3.4.5 Range of Agreement 
The group reached consensus that 26% of the 2.4 million acre analysis area should not be 
considered a source of wood supply for various reasons (see section 3.4.1) and that 41% should 
be considered a potential source of material generated by mechanical harvesting as part of the 
restoration or fuel reduction treatment.  In addition, a majority of working group members 
believed that some portion of the remaining 33% of the landscape (up to a total of 74%) should 
be considered for mechanical thinning. The following pie chart represents the level of agreement 
among stakeholders as a percentage of the entire analysis area:  
 
Majority 
believes some 
mechanical 
thinning 
acceptable/ 
necessary, 
33%
Consensus 
that 
mechanical 
thinning is 
appropriate, 
41%
Consensus 
that
 mechanical 
thinning is 
inappropriate, 
26%
 
In the above pie chart, areas in white represent consensus over a total of 67% of the landscape. 
Areas in gray represent the remaining 33% of the landscape where there is a lack of consensus, 
but the majority of working group members believed that some mechanical thinning would be 
acceptable and/or necessary.   
Although there was consensus among working group members that 26% of the analysis 
area was not a potential source of wood supply, as described in section 3.4.1, this value is less 
than the average value we observed from a sample of actual projects (37%) and estimated by 
Forest Service staff (high 30s to mid 40s). It was reasoned that the value derived via spatial 
analysis (26%) is an underestimate because site-scale factors known to limit the extent of 
treatments were not accounted for by this semi-regional scale analysis, such as archeological 
sites, historical sites, wildlife movement corridors, and areas with insufficient road access, that 

 18
were stated in EAs as reasons for limiting the amount of area thinned. It was not possible to 
adequately determine the magnitude of these factors without more detailed study of the EAs and 
more detailed map-based data. The reason that the majority finds mechanical thinning acceptable 
on some, and not all, of the remaining 33% of the landscape is due both to the unknown 
influence of factors that affect the total amount of area treated, but also the fact that the group ran 
out of time to more thoroughly discuss this topic. Therefore the group did not decide under what 
conditions these additional acres might be considered appropriate for mechanical treatment 
yielding wood supply.  
Working group members who recommended the consensus scenario maintain that if 
mechanical treatments were placed strategically across the 41% of the landscape identified in the 
consensus scenario, unnatural fire behavior might be significantly curtailed at the landscape 
level.  They envision that the remaining areas could be left open for additional restoration 
treatment options, such as wildland fire use, prescribed fire-only treatments, and non-commercial 
thinning.  The strategic aspect of this approach is recommended in the Statewide Strategy for 
Restoring Arizona’s Forests (Governor’s Forest Health Councils, 2007): “Federal and state land 
management agencies should collaboratively and strategically place treatments in order to 
increase efficiency and maximize benefits.”  However, others hold the view that thinning 
provides more “control” in terms of determining which trees will remain and reducing fire threat. 
The working group partitioned the area to be restored using mechanized thinning for the 
consensus and majority scenarios into to the following proportions of each landscape 
management area: 
 
 

 19
Landscape management area 
Consensus (% / acres)
Majority (% / acres)
Community protection 
70% / 316,000
74% / 335,000
MSO restricted habitat 
30% / 114,000
74% / 237,000
Municipal watersheds 
40% / 35,000
74% / 60,000
Aquatic species watersheds 
35% / 184,000
74% / 334,000
Wildlands 
35% / 339,000
74% / 788,000
FULL ANALYSIS AREA TOTALS:
41%10 / 988,000
74% / 1,775,000
 
These proportional breakdowns for the consensus scenario were based on informed judgment, 
without mention of specific, area-by-area rationale during the collaborative meetings,11 whereas 
the 74% for the majority scenario was based simply on the portion of the analysis area remaining 
after areas deemed not a source of wood supply in the consensus scenario (Table 4) were 
removed from consideration.  Note that the 74% figures for each management area in the 
majority scenario are only approximations, as some of these areas already meet desired post-
treatment conditions, and each management area had different proportions of steep slopes and 
other factors contributing to the 26% of areas across the full landscape considered not to be a 
source of wood supply. 
4  Estimating Wood Volume and Supply 
4.1 Methods 
4.1.1 Developing Forest Structure and Wood Volume Layers 
Data to perform the wood supply analysis were developed using modern statistical tools and 
remotely-sensed data outlined in the following section.  Principle data layers developed were for 
                                                 
10 The proportional breakdowns for each landscape management area resulted in a total of 41% of the overall 
landscape dedicated to mechanical thinning treatments in the consensus scenario. 
11 As part of comments received during working group review of a draft version of this final report, the following 
rationale was put forth by the minority who proposed the proportional breakdown. The proportional breakdown is 
part of a three-tiered comprehensive landscape restoration strategy in which: 1) intensive mechanical thinning 
treatments are placed across 70% of the CPMA, 2) additional mechanical thinning treatments are placed 
strategically to significantly reduce uncharacteristic fire behavior across 30-40% of each of the remaining landscape 
management areas (informed in part by the work of Mark Finney at the USDA Forest Service Missoula Fire 
Sciences Lab, e.g., Finney 2006 and Finney et al. 2007), and 3) other restoration options are used where feasible and 
needed in the remaining areas, including prescribed burn-only treatments, wildland fire use (WFU) and non-
commercial thinning (or thinning that would not add to wood supply). In addition, this approach provided a 
surrogate for explicit fire treatments and other thinning treatments that wouldn't result in wood supply during the 
process (see Section 6.4). The individual components of this strategy were discussed during the collaborative 
process, however, they were not presented to the group as a cohesive strategy. 

 20
total wood volume and basal area per acre.  Additional layers for basal area and wood volume 
were developed for trees <5”, 5 to16” and >16” dbh.  Three broad diameter classes were selected 
by the working group as an appropriate range for estimating wood volume at the scale of the 
analysis area with available data. Tree density and percent canopy cover were additional forest 
structural layers derived for the wood supply analysis area.  A total of 10 principal data layers 
developed are listed as follows: 
• Volume 
o Total wood volume (ft3/ac)12 (Figure 7) 
o Wood volume (ft3/ac) for classes <5”, 5-16” and >16” dbh (Figures 8-10)  
• Forest structural parameters 
o Tree density (trees per acre) 
o Canopy cover (%) 
o Total basal area (ft2/ac) (Figure 5) 
o Basal area (ft2/ac ) for classes <5”, 5 to16” and >16” dbh  
A total cubic foot volume layer was used for comparison with three diameter class layers 
to assess potential computation errors within each category.  We developed basal area layers by 
diameter class to estimate whether the amount of wood byproducts13 resulting from restoration 
treatments could meet post-treatment objectives by harvesting small-diameter trees (<16” dbh) 
further discussed below.  Three primary data sources were integrated for mapping forest 
structure and volume across the study area to estimate wood supply, 1) USDA Forest Service 
Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA) permanent plots for the ponderosa pine type established 
from years 1995 to 2005, 2) twelve Landsat 5 Thematic Mapper (TM) scenes from “leaf-on” 
(September 2006) and “leaf-off” (October 2006) image dates and 3) a 30m digital elevation 
model (DEM).  We resampled all digital data to a 90m pixel resolution to adjust for potential 
spatial displacement between FIA plots and grid cells.       
We used FIA plots and coordinates to create a ground reference dataset of forest 
structural attributes from plot locations with no evidence of disturbance (e.g., fire, tree harvest, 
insect attack, etc.) prior to Landsat image dates.  Plots were selected using a change detection 
                                                 
12 Cubic foot volume includes all portions of the tree bole or main stem without deductions for top and stump 
material above or below a diameter limit.  Crown material such as limbs, foliage and bark are not included for this 
estimate.  
13 Byproducts are defined as all woody material removed from a site as a result of forest restoration treatments.  

 21
analysis and the Normalized Vegetation Difference Index (NDVI) derived from Landsat image 
years 1999, 2004 and 2006.  NDVI is calculated as Landsat (Band 4 – Band 3)/(Band 4 + Band 
3), which is sensitive to changes in plant biomass (Jensen 2000).  Plots showing no negative 
departure in NDVI values over time in the ponderosa pine type were retained for the reference 
dataset (n = 420).   
Forest structural variables and wood volume for each plot were then estimated for year 
2006 using the Central Rockies Forest Vegetation Simulator (FVS) growth model to match 
image dates.  FVS was used to project FIA plots and forest structural variables up to 2006 using 
growth simulations. To implement growth simulations compatible with FVS assumptions, site 
indices taken from FIA plots and tree cores were first converted from a base age of 50 to 100 
years using equations obtained from the USDA Forest Service-FVS support group at the Forest 
Management Service Center in Fort Collins, Colorado.  No tree regeneration was added to 
simulations as short growth cycles were used ranging from 1 to approximately 11 years 
depending on the plot establishment date.   
Wood volume was calculated from the ground reference dataset (FIA plots) in FVS using 
total cubic feet for the ponderosa pine type in the study area with equations by Hann and Bare 
(1978) for southwestern tree species. A total volume measurement for tree boles was chosen for 
this scale of analysis and technical constraints as they apply to the ground data and the remote 
sensing applications used.  Wood volume and biomass estimates, further discussed below, were 
derived from images acquired by the Landsat TM satellite sensor that observes forest canopy 
from overhead.  Deductions or separate quantifications for portions of the stem such as tree tops 
and stumps above and below a diameter limit were not feasible at the spatial and spectral 
resolution of TM data. Nevertheless, tree tops and other parts of the tree are also potentially 
utilized with increased market demand for these materials (Rummer et al. 2005).  Other methods 
were employed to determine restoration byproducts from tree crown material (limbs, bark and 
foliage) outlined in section 4.1.2.2. Thus, estimates for crown weight in addition to wood supply 
from tree boles were derived separately. 
 
From leaf-on and leaf-off Landsat imagery, we derived 34 spectral variables (e.g., TM 
bands 1-5, 7, corrected NDVI (NDVIc), wetness, greenness, brightness, etc.) potentially related 
to forest structure and ponderosa pine wood volume. NDVIc applies a middle infrared correction 
to NDVI (Nemani et al. 1993) that has been shown to be a better predictor of leaf area index and 

 22
sensitive to differences in coniferous forest biomass (Pocewicz et al. 2004).  Terrain corrected 
images from the USGS Earth Resources Observation and Science Data Center were used to 
assure minimal registration error.  Landsat bands were converted to top of atmosphere (TOA) 
reflectance from image calibration data following (Chander and Markham 2003).  Additional 
predictor variables related to the biophysical environment; elevation, surface roughness, slope 
and cosine transformed aspect, were derived from the DEM.    
To estimate forest structural parameters and wood volume across the study area via 
digital data layers, we used k-nearest neighbors (k-nn) imputation statistics.  Summary forest 
structural variables from the reference dataset were predicted using spectral variables associated 
with each plot, and then used to interpolate values across the entire study area.  Each data layer 
was evaluated for accuracy (Table 9) using a “second nearest neighbors approach” that compares 
forest structure values from FIA reference plots to imputed values (also see Ohman and Gregory 
2002).  To implement this approach, the “yaImpute” package (Crookston and Finley 2007) in R 
statistical software v. 2.5.1 (R Foundation for Statistical Computing 2007) was used.  Ohmann 
and Gregory (2002) provide a recent example of k-nn methods that were enhanced for the wood 
supply analysis using the Random Forest decision tree algorithm (Breiman 2001).  Comparisons 
between Random Forest and other modeling techniques have demonstrated superior 
performance, flexibility and accuracy (Gislason et al. 2006, Culter et al. 2007).  Modifications to 
Random Forest for k-nn imputation and deriving forest structural variables are further discussed 
in Crookston and Finley (2007).   
Data layers developed using the above methods considers forest conditions for the 2006 
Landsat imagery and FIA reference dataset. Volume accumulation for the ponderosa pine type in 
northern Arizona averages ~40 ft3/ac/yr (see section 6.4) that contribute additional wood volume 
and supply over time.  The present analysis limits wood supply predictions to volume levels 
determined from the 2006 dataset only (Table 10).  Further analysis is warranted to include 
assumptions about annual treatment and growth rates to estimate forest growth and additions to 
wood supply over a specified planning period.   
4.1.2 Estimating Amount of Wood Byproducts from Restoration Treatments 
4.1.2.1 Wood supply volume 
Forest restoration treatment scenarios for each landscape management area (Figure 2) were 
applied as reductions in existing total basal area by the wood supply working group.  Restoration 

 23
objectives for the ponderosa pine type and desired post-treatment conditions developed by the 
working group are outlined for each of five landscape management areas in Table 3.  The group 
wished to limit their assumptions on how restoration treatments might be applied at a local-scale 
and no guidance is being given with this report for designing site-level silvicultural treatments.   
Assumptions for implementing restoration scenarios were functionally applied to 
accommodate data layers and analyses developed at a semi-regional scale. Manipulation of stand 
tree lists and size-class distributions were not feasible at this scale.  A desired distribution or 
range of post-treatment conditions is based on total basal area (Figure 4).  Therefore, post-
treatment basal area and the amount removed from treatments was the variable of interest used to 
guide scenarios and generate wood supply estimates (Figures 5 and 6). Moreover, it was 
acknowledged that treatments should focus on removing small-diameter trees as the central 
objective of the wood supply analysis, but no diameter limitation was placed on restoration 
scenarios or supply calculations.   
To obtain wood volume harvested as a byproduct of treatments, a non-linear regression 
model was used to determine cubic foot volume from the amount of basal area removed.  To 
establish these relationships, we used basal area and total wood volume from FIA plots in the 
reference dataset (n = 420).  All values were log transformed to meet variance and normality 
assumptions. A final model showed a good fit to the data (r2 = 0.81, p <0.0001) resulting in the 
following equation: 
Eq. 1  f = y0 + a*x 
where,  f = cubic foot volume, y0 = 0.9770, a = 1.118 and x = log(basal area).  Results from the 
regression model demonstrate a strong relationship between total basal area and total cubic foot 
volume in the ponderosa pine forest type for this landscape.     
From the total basal area layer, a scenario algorithm was used to fit the existing basal area 
distribution for each management area to post-treatment conditions (Figure 4).  Locations within 
a management area that were already at or below a minimum basal area specified in Table 3 
were left untreated and did not contribute to wood supply.  Locations with a basal area above the 
minimum value were assumed treated (i.e., thinned) and used to determine wood supply with 
regression Equation 1.  Thus, the total amount of basal area removed from each grid cell was the 
principle explanatory variable used for wood supply calculations. A range in wood supply 
volumes were estimated for each management area, integrating working group scenarios from a 

 24
consensus level (100% agreement) to a level where the majority of the participants were in 
agreement (Table 11).  In the consensus scenario, locations with the highest basal area within the 
specified fraction of each landscape management area (see section 3.4.5) were assumed to be 
treated (41% of landscape).  These areas were also included in the majority scenario as well as 
remaining lands deemed appropriate for thinning (74% of landscape).  Pre- and post-treatment 
landscape conditions (basal area) for the majority scenario are shown in Figures 5 and 6.   
4.1.2.2 Wood supply biomass 
The working group wished to augment cubic foot volume estimates of potential wood supply 
from tree boles with forest biomass in terms of weight (i.e., tonnage).  For this report on wood 
supply, biomass was defined as the weight of all above ground material generated as a result of 
the consensus or majority restoration scenarios.  Tree bole and crown weights are useful 
measurements when all parts of the tree are potentially utilized or disposal costs of non-
merchantable portions of the tree are important (Rummer et al. 2005).  Biomass estimates for this 
analysis were calculated in green tons that include all above ground portions of the tree 
partitioned into tree boles and crown material.  Biomass was calculated by using a simple factor 
to convert from cubic foot volume14 to green tons for tree boles generated as wood byproducts 
from each restoration scenario.  Therefore, calculations for crown weights were in addition to 
wood supply estimates for tree boles.  Crown biomass estimates included material from foliage 
or needles, bark and limbs that were calculated by developing a relationship between tree bole 
and crown weights with the following procedures: 
1. FIA plots from 1995 to 1997 (n = 482) in the ponderosa pine type were used to develop a 
relationship between tree bole and crown weight from regression estimation.  For each 
plot, tree bole and crown weights were calculated using the tree biomass function in FVS 
(“Treebio” FVS event monitor function)15.   
2. Total cubic foot wood supply estimates from tree boles for each restoration scenario (i.e., 
consensus and majority) were converted to green tons using a factor of 0.0315 (0.0315 
                                                 
14 Cubic foot volume and tree bole weights from the wood supply estimate include all material from entire length of 
the main tree stem.  Bole weight supply estimates are equivalent to cubic foot volume estimates and are the result of 
a unit conversion. 
15 FVS equations for tree boles and crown weights are from the USDA Forest Service Wood Products Laboratory 
(1999) and Brown and Johnston (1976) respectively.    

 25
green tons = MCF)16.  This was a simple unit conversion and does not contribute 
additional wood supply above that from tree bole volume estimates derived for each 
restoration scenario.   
3. To estimate crown biomass that is in addition to wood supply from tree boles, a 
relationship between bole and crown weights from FIA plots was developed via non-
linear regression. Values for stem and crown weight were square root transformed to 
meet normality and variance assumptions.  The regression resulted in an r2 = 0.69 (F = 
1078, p <0.0001) and equation: 
Eq. 2   f = y0 + a*x  
where, f = crown weight (green tons), y0 = 0.5997, a = 0.5432 and x = sqrt(stem 
biomass).  Stem weight was generally three times greater than biomass comprising crown 
material.  
4. Data were summarized by total and average per acre bole and crown biomass for 
treatments in each landscape management area (Table 12).  We compared green tons to 
USDA Forest Service timber cruise estimates from White Mountain Stewardship Project 
(WMSP) contracts (n = 31) on the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest from years 2004 to 
2007.  WMSP contracts are referred to as “stewardship contracts” for discussing results 
below.  
5. Biomass estimates are also presented in oven dry tons for tree boles and crown material 
(Appendix F).   
4.1.2.3 Wood supply from small-diameter trees 
The working group also wished to examine the amount of land area and volume where thinning 
could meet post-treatment conditions by harvesting only small-diameter trees (i.e., trees <16” 
dbh).  For the purposes of this report, the group selected a 16” dbh threshold due to its common 
use within the analysis area as a break differentiating “small” and “large” diameter trees in the 
ponderosa pine forest type.  Although wood supply estimates include trees >16” dbh to meet 
post-treatment conditions, the focus of this study was on small-diameter trees. There was no 
concurrence within the working group that trees >16” dbh should be cut and removed outside of 
CPMAs.   
                                                 
16 A wood volume to biomass conversion factors were obtained from “Monitoring and Measuring Wood Carbon” by 
Sampson (http://www.sampsongroup.com/Papers/papersdocuments.htm). 

 26
To perform this analysis, we estimated the extent and location of areas where post-
treatment basal area conditions were met by cutting only trees <16” dbh and locations where 
cutting trees >16” dbh would be necessary to match basal area distributions in Figure 4.  A rule 
set developed by the working group for identifying these locations follows that 10% and 20% of 
the basal area per acre must be retained after thinning from trees <5” dbh and 5 to 16” dbh 
respectively to allow for uneven-age or heterogeneous forest structural conditions17.  Principle 
data layers for existing basal area from trees <5” dbh and trees 5 to 16” dbh were used, 
subtracting them from the amount of basal area harvested from a location (grid cell). A minimum 
of 10 and 20% of the basal area was assumed un-harvested for each diameter class and pixel.  
This has the computational form of: 
Eq. 3 Basal area removed – (BA <5” dbh * 0.9 + BA 5 to 16” dbh *0.8)  
Pixels with negative values represent areas with sufficient basal area for trees <16” dbh to 
meet post-treatment basal area conditions.  Positive values indentified the amount of basal area 
that would be necessary to harvest from larger trees (>16” dbh) to meet these conditions.  
Regression Equation 1 was used to estimate the amount of cubic foot volume potentially derived 
from small and large diameter trees (i.e., trees <16” dbh and >16” dbh) with the majority 
restoration scenario only. The number of acres and wood supply volume in each post-treatment 
condition was then summarized by management area and included with results (Table 13).   
4.2 Results  
4.2.1 Forest Structure and Wood Volume Layer Accuracy 
We derived volume and forest structural layers from TM imagery representing conditions up to 
the fall of 2006.  FIA plots were used to validate imputed forest structure and volume layers.  
The impute function of the yaImpute R package provides a practical method to determine layer 
accuracy by estimating the value of a reference plot (e.g., basal area, cubic foot volume, canopy 
cover, etc.) from other references in the dataset.  Reference data were compared to imputed 
values via coefficients of determination (r2) from a linear regression with the intercept set to one.   
An analysis of residual errors between observed and predicted values (i.e., |observed – predicted 
values|) was used to estimate accuracy for 50% of the predicted values and then 80% of the 
                                                 
17 For this analysis, no formal assumptions were made about post-treatment tree size class distributions. However, 
the working group wished to retain trees <5” dbh (10% of existing basal area) and 5-16” dbh (20% of existing basal 
area) to allow for spatially heterogeneous forest conditions with a diversity of tree age and size classes.  

 27
predicted values (Table 10).  For example, the average difference between observed and imputed 
basal area values is ±5 ft2 for 50% of the data (Table 9). 
Structural layers for total basal area and tree density showed the highest r2 values (0.77 
and 0.74).  Imputed values for all structural layers had accuracies which were considered 
adequate to assess forest conditions at the scale of the wood supply analysis area.  Results for the 
total wood volume estimate showed the highest r2 value (0.87) overall and low residual error 
relative to average volume (Table 9).  Volume within diameter categories (Figures 8 - 10) 
showed lower accuracy with available data inputs (Table 9).  Nevertheless, total cubic foot 
volume imputed for the ponderosa pine forest type was quite similar to volume summed over the 
three diameter classes at 4,561 million ft3 vs. 4,526 million ft3 respectively (Table 10).  Volume 
summed for two diameter categories, above and below 16” dbh, was nearly equal to the total 
volume layer estimate at 4,559 million ft3.  These comparisons identify the <5” dbh class as the 
greatest source of error among the cubic foot wood volume layers.   
Overall, methods used to produce digital data layers showed better than expected 
accuracy levels.  Forest structural data layers showed similar or improved accuracies compared 
with structural estimates by Ohman and Gregory (2002) who used similar methods and data.  
Volume estimates within diameter categories were lower than the actual volume in locations 
with high biomass or canopy cover.  Scatter plots for observed and imputed values within 
diameter classes showed greater variability for FIA plots with volumes >2000 ft3/ac and basal 
area >110 ft2/ac (data not shown).  Landsat imagery’s overhead view and spatial and spectral 
resolution likely reduces accuracy for pixels more fully saturated by overstory tree canopies.  A 
stronger relationship between spectral values and overstory trees, that contribute a larger 
proportion of the total volume and basal area, potentially explains greater accuracy for these 
layers.   
4.2.2 Current Levels of Wood Volume in the Analysis Area 
We calculated bole wood volume for the ponderosa pine type across the entire analysis area, 
4,561 million ft3, from the total cubic foot volume layer (Figure 7, Table 10).  Average wood 
volume per acre was 1,890 ft3 across the entire analysis area.  A total of 3,263 million ft3 was 
estimated for the ponderosa pine type after areas such as steep slopes, MSO PACs and other 
locations unlikely to be treated by mechanical thinning were removed (Table 10).  A total of 
26% of the analysis area was removed from the wood supply assessment for the reasons stated 

 28
above and 74% was considered to be within forest management areas where restoration 
treatments could potentially take place.  Wood volume per acre was only slightly lower (1,830 
ft3/ac) for management areas after removing 26% of the area unlikely to be thinned.   
We also estimated volume for each of the three tree diameter classes for the entire 
analysis area and within each landscape management area considered in the two treatment 
scenarios (Table 10).  A roughly even proportion of the total wood volume was estimated for tree 
diameter classes <16” dbh (45%) and trees >16” dbh (55%) within management areas (Table 
10).  The wildlands management area represents the largest land area (33%) with 30% of the 
wood volume across the entire study area.  All five forest management areas showed a similar 
proportion of wood volume to the size of the area included within the area (Table 10). For 
example, municipal watersheds were only 3% of the total area and contained 3% of the volume.  
4.2.3 Predicted Wood Supply Based on Treatment Scenarios 
4.2.3.1 Wood supply volume 
Each landscape management area represents a portion of the analysis area where a level of 
mechanical thinning can potentially be implemented, therefore contributing to wood supply.  The 
proportion of wood supply from a management area was determined by working group members 
(section 3.4.5).  Management areas treated under the consensus scenario generated a total wood 
supply of 847 million ft3 from 41% of the entire analysis area (Table 11).  Thinning treatments 
under a scenario agreed upon by the majority of working members generated greater wood 
supply (1,015 million ft3) from 74% of the analysis area (Table 11).  Note that the full 74% of 
the analysis area is not treated under this scenario because 5% of the area was already at or 
below a minimum basal area condition for management areas (Table 3).    
Wood volumes from the two supply scenarios did not range widely even though 33% 
more area was covered with potential restoration treatments under the majority scenario. 
Additional acres included in the majority scenario add areas with lower pre-treatment basal area 
yielding a lower amount of wood byproducts from mechanical thinning.  Average supply 
volumes ranged from 611 ft3/ac (majority) to 858 ft3/ac (consensus) and also reflect differences 
due to more heterogeneous forest conditions over the larger area.  It is likely that actual thinning 
contracts will range in supply values as with WMSP thinning contracts which removed between 
109 ft3/ac and 1,281 ft3/ac (n = 31) for trees >5” dbh (Appendix G).  Nevertheless, stewardship 
contracts removed 611 ft3/ac on average (Appendix G) and were identical to the majority 

 29
scenario supply estimates (Table 11) that likely cover similar landscape-level forest structural 
variability.  The consensus scenario wood supply estimate was also well within the range of per 
acre volumes and resulting wood byproducts from stewardship contracts (Table 11, Appendix 
G).    
These figures represent wood supply from the analysis area up to the fall of 2006.  
Accordingly, estimates for the amount of area treated annually and tree growth during the life-
span of forest restoration projects (e.g., a 10 to 30 year planning period) will be necessary to up-
date wood volume estimates and yield over time.  
A total of 94% of the ponderosa pine forest in the analysis area was on USDA Forest 
Service land and only 5% of the area distributed among private, state and BLM jurisdictions. The 
analysis area does not include all lands with extensive ponderosa pine forest in northern Arizona. 
Tribal forest jurisdictions have the potential to contribute to regional wood supply though 
estimates could not be obtained for these lands during the analysis period.  Accordingly, the 
estimated wood supply for either scenario was predominately generated from four USDA Forest 
Service jurisdictions (Table 14).   
4.2.3.2 Wood supply biomass 
We calculated biomass estimates for crown material in addition to tree boles as a 
potential source of wood supply as market demand for these materials increases in the southwest.  
Total biomass weights (tree bole and crown) summarized for the wood supply analysis were 
similar for the consensus and majority scenarios ranging from 34.8 to 41.8 million green tons 
respectively (Table 13).  Separate biomass estimates for tree bole18 and crown byproducts from 
thinning treatments are reported in Table 13.  From either of the two restoration scenarios, 23% 
of the total above ground biomass generated by treatments was from crown material and 77% 
from tree boles.  That is, approximately 23% additional biomass is derived from tree crowns with 
restoration treatments.  The amount of biomass harvested in each management area was 
dependant on the number of acres and level of treatment.  CPMAs showed the highest biomass 
                                                 
18 Tree bole weight is the cubic foot bole volume converted to green tons using a factor of 0.0315 green tons = 1000 
cubic feet.  Tree bole cubic foot volume or weight in green tons includes the entire length of the tree with no 
deduction from the main stem for stumps or tops at specified diameter.  Crown weights from restoration byproducts 
include all tree foliage, limbs and bark from limbs.   
 

 30
removals per acre and MSO restricted habitat the lowest, parallel to supply patterns observed 
with cubic foot volume estimates (Table 13).   
Biomass estimates from the wood supply scenarios were compared to timber cruise data 
from stewardship contracts that reflect recent thinning treatments in the analysis area.  On 
average, the total above ground biomass estimated from stewardship contracts (27.9 green 
tons/ac) was quite similar to biomass removed from treatments simulated with the majority 
scenario (25.2 green tons/ac).  The consensus scenario showed somewhat higher per acre supply 
estimates on average (35.5 green tons/ac) as treatments were targeted to areas with highest pre-
treatment basal area.  The majority scenario covered an additional 33% of the landscape which 
had lower initial basal area which decreases average per acre estimates.  
Comparisons of separate crown and stem weights from wood supply estimates and 
WMSP cruise data must account for the different methods used for calculating biomass weights 
from stewardship contracts.  According to contract cruise data, average green tons for harvest 
“residues” include all “non-merchantable”19 trees < 5” dbh, tops and crown material from larger 
diameter trees and tree bole weight is for merchantable trees >5” dbh minus top and crown 
material (Appendix G).  Crown biomass from the wood supply estimate includes only limb, bark 
and foliage weights that is in addition to bole weight, from the total length of the tree’s main 
stem.  Average green tons estimated as tree residues from stewardship contracts were 
approximately 10.7 tons/ac in comparison with 5.8 tons/ac from crown material from the 
majority wood supply scenario (Table 13).  Tree bole material averaged 17.2 tons/ac from 
stewardship contracts and 19.4 tons/ac in the majority wood supply estimate.   As anticipated, 
biomass calculations for wood supply resulted in lower estimates for crown weight and higher 
estimates for tree bole weight.  Tree bole weights from wood supply calculations include small-
diameter material (e.g., trees <5” dbh and tops <3” diameter) that were categorized as residual or 
non-merchantable biomass in timber cruise data from stewardship contracts.  
Therefore, contracts with no thinning of trees < 5” dbh (n = 4) resulted in an average of 
5.4 tons/ac in residues which more closely approximate crown weights calculated for the wood 
supply analysis (5.8 tons/ac).  These comparisons suggest that the above biomass calculations 
provide a reasonable estimate of tree bole and crown weights that could potentially be generated 
                                                 
19 “Non-merchantable” or “residues” refer to all harvest materials that were not considered to have a market value 
for the WMSP contracts.      

 31
with either of the wood supply scenarios.  Biomass estimates for this report do not account for 
materials separated into sub-merchantable thinning byproducts (trees <5” dbh), tree tops and 
other categories more readily determined from site-scale assessments and timber cruise data.   
Weight values reported here are general approximations for above ground biomass that 
would potentially be removed as a result of forest restoration treatments in the wood supply 
analysis area.  To improve accuracy of future biomass estimates, we recommend that digital data 
layers be derived for both tree boles and crown biomass using the k-nn imputation approach.  
These methods would provide information on the spatial distribution of tree biomass across the 
study area, similar to cubic foot volume and forest structural layers.  These data would afford 
follow-on assessment and spatially explicit analyses of wood biomass utilization, treatment 
costs, present and future markets and distance to processing facilities. 
4.2.3.3 Wood supply from small-diameter trees 
From the majority scenario, we estimated the proportion of the total area that would not 
attain target post-treatment basal area conditions by harvesting only trees <16” dbh.  This 
analysis assumes 10% and 20% of the basal area is retained from trees in the <5” dbh and 5 -16” 
dbh classes respectively.  Summaries of all forest management areas indicate that 19% of the 
area treated with the majority scenario (74% of landscape) would require thinning for trees >16” 
dbh to match the basal area distributions in Figure 4.  Conversely 81% of the area treated showed 
that sufficient basal area can be harvested from small-diameter trees accounting for 90% of the 
total wood supply volume (917 million ft3) in the majority scenario.  Community protection areas 
had the greatest amount of area where post-treatment basal area was in surplus of what could be 
harvested from small-diameter trees (Table 13).  The higher level of forest thinning in 
communities would require cutting trees >16” dbh in over half of the CPMAs though this 
represents only 7% of the analysis area (74% of study landscape).  This analysis was conducted 
for only the majority scenario as even fewer acres would require thinning trees >16” dbh in the 
consensus scenario, which applies to a subset of the lands in the majority scenario. 
5  Existing Harvesting Contractors, Mills and Manufactures 
One of the tasks of this wood supply study was to define and describe the existing wood 
harvesting utilization industry in the analysis area.  As pointed out by the Regional Forester, 
future multi-year stewardship contracts “will be structured to not only attract new, large 

 32
industrial users that can achieve landscape-scale treatment objectives, but also continue to supply 
fiber to existing local industries that have been purchasing timber sale and service contracts for 
many years and have been the foundation of our forest restoration programs” (Forsgren 2007b). 
To this end, it is important to know how much wood from what areas is supporting current 
utilization industries and how this affects overall supply and potential for development of 
additional wood utilization infrastructure for small-diameter trees. 
We began the analysis of existing wood harvesting and utilization industries by collecting 
lists of firms thought to be operating in the region20 from the following sources: Wood 
Processing Facility History and Summary in Arizona and New Mexico, 2007 (provided by 
USDA Forest Service Regional Office 3); Wood Product Harvesters, Processors, and Users 
(ERI); and White Mountain Stewardship Partnership Economic Assessment (Gibson 2007). 
These documents included the names and locations of about 135 firms in Arizona and New 
Mexico.  The information gathered from these sources included everything from large logging 
operators and mill facilities to small firewood lots and custom woodworking shops.  They also 
included firms that were in no way affiliated with the study area or were thought to no longer be 
in existence.  A winnowing process was conducted whereby only those firms that were directly 
involved in the harvesting and processing of small-diameter ponderosa pine on the Coconino, 
Kaibab, and Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests remained in the analysis.  The winnowed list of 
harvesters, mills and manufacturers was completed in consultation with staff members from the 
three NFs above as well as the White Mountain Stewardship Project (WMSP) administrator 
(Future Forest, LLC) and the Southwest Forest Products representative in Flagstaff, Arizona. 
A draft set of tables were produced and sent to the three Forests, WMSP administrator, 
and SW Forest Products for review.  We incorporated review comments in the wood volume 
estimates (Tables 15-18) and materials flow charts (Table 19).  Harvesters removed a total of 
174,200 green tons of wood byproducts from Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests in year 2006 
(7.4% or 12,900 green tons of these materials were residual biomass) and another 158,500 green 
tons from the Coconino and Kaibab National Forests. Additional material was treated and left on 
site. This value may be larger for the full analysis area as non-Forest Service lands (5% of the 
analysis area) and two Ranger Districts on the Tonto National Forest were not included.  The 
                                                 
20 We contacted the following Forest Service employees for information on utilization industry and project level 
considerations: Carol Boyd and Kim Newbauer (Coconino NF); Jerry Drury (Kaibab NF); Kerry Nedrow, Elaine 
Zieroth, Mitchell White, and Ed , Collins (ASNF); and Jeff Hogg and Marlin Johnson (Regional Office 3). 

 33
total of 319,800 green tons of non-residues and 12,900 green tons of residues removed are 
equivalent to 1.2% of the total bole biomass and 0.2% of the total crown biomass that would 
potentially be generated from treatments in the consensus scenario (Table 12).  These values 
extrapolated over 10 years would be 3,198,000 and 129,000 green tons, which is 12% and 1.6% 
of the respective bole and crown biomass from the consensus scenario.  Uncertainties in future 
wood supply including tree growth or disturbances such as wildfire influence projected values.  
There are two primary organizations driving utilization in the White Mountains (Apache-
Sitgreaves National Forests; ASNF) and Western Mogollon areas.  On the ASNF side, treatment 
and utilization is driven by the WMSP.  The WMSP is managed and administered by Future 
Forest, LLC which is comprised of WB Contracting (Walker Bros. Logging) and Forest Energy.  
In some cases other harvesting contractors (e.g., Tri-Star Logging / S. Reidhead, Renegy) sub-
contract to WB Contracting.  The third harvesting contractor working in the area is Nutrioso 
Logging operated by J. Reidhead.  The primary consumers of wood in the area are Forest Energy 
(WMSP/Future Forest) and Reidhead Lumber.  On the western Mogollon Plateau, treatment and 
utilization are driven by Southwest Forest Products (SWFP).  SWFP is a vertically integrated 
company providing over two-thirds (91K tons) of its wood requirements to itself at its facilities 
in Phoenix and Ash Fork.  The remaining 42K tons are harvested by three other contractors 
(Perkins from nearby Williams, Colorado Wood from Snowflake, and Hurd Bros. from Chama, 
NM). 
6  Additional Considerations 
 
Several analyses were performed as part of this project that did not explicitly affect wood supply 
estimates based on year 2006 conditions, including a review or forest growth models and several 
fire modeling exercises designed to identify locations appropriate for fire-only treatments. 
However, existing levels of harvesting and utilization are important to consider in developing 
new stewardship contracts.  In addition, several factors were discussed that are likely to impact 
wood supply estimates, such as climate change, however due to high levels of uncertainty and 
lack of data, they were not quantified.  We summarize these topics and modeling efforts in this 
section.  

 34
6.1 Fire as an Initial Treatment Option 
With the collaborative process deciding to look at the entire study area and identify areas 
that would be excluded from mechanical thinning treatments, the issue of where prescribed 
and/or wildland fire could or should be used as the initial treatment option to restore fire-adapted 
ecosystems was raised.  A “fire” subcommittee was formed to evaluate approaches to address 
this issue, although several working group members did not believe it was appropriate to address 
the subject of fire in the wood supply analysis.  It should be noted that virtually all mechanical 
thinning treatments are followed by broadcast burns for ecosystem restoration and maintenance. 
The fire group focused solely on locating areas on which fire-only was the preferred restoration 
treatment. 
 Initially, the fire subcommittee considered using spatial data provided by the interagency 
LANDFIRE program and the fire behavior modeling program FlamMap to identify specific areas 
(i.e., 30-m pixels) on the landscape where existing forest structural conditions (e.g., crown-base 
height, crown bulk density, canopy cover) would permit the safe application of prescribed fire as 
a first treatment option. Specifically, it was the hope of the subcommittee that areas predicted by 
fire models to be representative of a surface fire condition would allow fire to be safely 
reintroduced without fuel reduction by mechanical means. To develop predictive models of fire 
behavior over the large spatial extent of the wood supply study area, the ForestERA team 
collaborated with researchers (Chuck McHugh and Laurie Kurth) from the USDA Forest Service 
Fire Sciences Lab in Missoula, Montana. The resultant fire behavior models and GIS-based maps 
were implemented under multiple weather scenarios (e.g., 95th and 97th percentile weather 
conditions for the central Mogollon Plateau). Appropriate weather and forest structure 
parameters were also vetted by regional fire behavior experts (e.g., Pete Fulé (Appendix H), 
NAU/ERI and Linda Wadleigh, Region 3 Forest Service). Model results and group-defined 
iterations were presented over the course of several subcommittee and full working group 
discussions. Given these results, many members of the working group believed that agreement 
could not be reached regarding the threshold values at which existing forest structure conditions 
would permit a safe and reasonable reintroduction of fire on the landscape. When maps of 
predicted fire behavior across the study area were presented, a few members were able to 
identify that specific areas modeled as exhibiting surface fire behavior, for example, had instead 
exhibited crown fire behavior during recent wildfire events. Even under less-than-extreme 

 35
weather scenarios, it was difficult for some members to consider models of predicted fire 
behavior as an acceptable tool for identifying areas appropriate for fire-only restoration methods.  
Time constraints added to the difficulty of using the fire models to effectively identify thresholds 
for prescribed burning and wildland fire use as an initial restoration treatment.  Additional work 
in this area is warranted. 
 Beyond spatial models of predicted fire behavior, other approaches to defining fire-only 
treatment areas were also considered during subcommittee discussions and presented to the 
working group, including: 1) identifying areas with a specified basal area derived from pre-
settlement conditions where fire would be a ground fire; 2) identifying areas where both medium 
to high basal areas and low numbers of trees per acre exist (assuming this would be mature, open 
forest conditions with a few large trees); 3) applying a percentage reduction to the landscape 
derived from an analysis of acres where mechanical thinning verses fire-only treatments were 
proposed for completed or pending Forest Service projects; and 4) using a percentage (65%) of 
the landscape that is burned, verses mechanically thinned, modeled after the Gila National Forest 
in western New Mexico, which has an aggressive fire management program.  
As with the fire modeling approach described above, determining numeric threshold 
values (e.g., basal area and/or tree density) where forest structure attributes conducive to surface 
fire could be reasonably defined became problematic for the group to reconcile. A complicating 
factor threaded throughout the discussions was the applicability, acceptability and predictable 
effects of fire and smoke in CPMAs, wildlands, and MSO habitat.  Concerns were raised that 
adverse health effects of smoke and exceeding air quality thresholds will limit prescribed 
burning activities. Smoke production is expected to be greater where fire is used an initial 
treatment than when prescribed burning follows thinning. Thus, the subcommittee decided to not 
recommend a specific approach or number (i.e., value(s) for basal area and/or tree density) to the 
entire working group. Instead, the subcommittee advocated a) that there are areas of the 
landscape where fire only will be the preferred treatment and mechanical thinning is not 
desirable, b) that decisions about these areas are project specific and determined during NEPA 
analysis, and c) that resulting wood supply volumes will need to be adjusted downward to 
accommodate the realistic and observed impact of fire-only treatments on the landscape.  
The full group also discussed that the review of 27 Environmental Assessments found 
that 33% of NEPA planning areas (part of the 37% assigned no thinning treatments, Table 8) 

 36
either had been burned or were approved via NEPA to be burned. There was some 
acknowledgement, however, that these areas do not often actually receive fire-only treatments 
for various reasons. The full working group acknowledged that fire-only treatment are currently 
being planned and carried out, however they did not agree on a specific level or locations.  It was 
noted from the discussion that the consensus scenario affords additional land areas over the 
majority scenario for potential prescribed fire-only treatments or Wildland Fire Use (WFU). 
6.2 Tree Mortality and Climate Change 
There are several factors that could not be included in the wood supply analysis due to lack of 
data or uncertainty about the magnitude of their impacts, for example the inability to predict the 
timing and location of large events, such as crown fire, drought, and insect outbreaks. It is likely 
that wildfires and WFU fires will burn some percentage of the estimated wood supply, but the 
working group agreed that there was no adequate information to quantify the risk or likely 
consequences of these stochastic events.  Similarly, the working group expects that pest 
infestations, drought, and climate change may also -- either singularly or by exacerbating the 
effect of one another -- reduce the amount of wood supply available for mechanical treatment, 
but did not have sufficient predictive ability to include in this analysis.  This anticipated 
reduction of supply should be considered when interpreting the wood supply estimate and 
adjustments to the estimate will be necessary in the future, as the extent of climatic factors – and 
progress in implementing treatments or other forest disturbances – become known. In this 
respect, the working group strongly recommends that the harvest of small-diameter timber from 
these forests be conducted in an adaptive management framework. 
6.3 Old-growth Trees 
Old-growth trees (those that became established before Euro-American settlement or currently 
exhibit old-growth structural characteristics e.g., yellow platy bark) are rare and under 
represented in the ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest (Moir and Dietrich 1988, Kaufman et 
al. 1992), therefore it is imperative to take action to conserve and manage them to stave off 
further attrition.  In addition, forest management that leads to the recruitment and development of 
old-growth trees and the structural attributes that characterize old trees is important for overall 
forest health and the persistence and vitality of biodiversity (Kaufman et al. 1992).  
No reliable methods have been developed to assess old-growth trees at the scale of the 
wood supply analysis area, with the remote sensing and GIS applications applied with this study.  

 37
Old-growth forest conditions were not specifically addressed with the wood supply analysis. 
Therefore, the collaborative group has chosen to express qualitatively what they believe should 
be management activities with respect to old-growth old trees.  The group recognizes that 
unnatural, crown fire and competition from small trees are two of the biggest threats to old-
growth survival in Arizona today (Covington and Moore 1994).  Old-growth trees are typically 
surrounded by irruptions of younger and smaller trees that act as ladder fuel during fire.  Old-
growth trees also suffer from competition with these dense younger trees for water and nutrients. 
Consequently, the group supports management action that seeks to restore old-growth structure 
by retaining all pre-settlement trees (no matter what their diameter), thins and removes post-
settlement trees from below, and carefully reintroduces fire taking precautions to remove excess 
fuels from around old trees before burning.  
6.4 Forest Growth Review and Recommendations 
A project deliverable for the wood supply analysis was to identify region specific forest growth 
models and provide technical information about their use.   Forest growth modeling was not 
explicitly integrated into analyses of future wood supply for this report.  A tree growth model 
(i.e., FVS) was used to project ground reference plots forward to match Landsat TM image dates 
and impute forest volume and structural layers for year 2006.  The objective of the following 
section is to outline major forest growth model types and their potential application for 
projecting future wood supply in the present analysis area.     
Forest growth models fall into two major categories of empirically derived growth and 
yield models and mechanistic process-based models.  The former category has been widely used 
by forest managers while the latter is more commonly applied for scientific research. 
Mechanistic models that integrate climate data, nutrient cycling and plant respiration processes 
to predict forest growth have received less attention by forest managers.  Nevertheless, 
adaptations to include biogeochemical cycling (BGC) as an extension of empirical models have 
been recently developed (Peng 2000).  A BGC extension to forest growth models currently used 
in the southwest is discussed below.   
Peng (2000) provides a thorough review of past, present and future growth modeling 
approaches applied to uneven-aged forest systems, that includes models commonly applied to 
North American forest types.  For this report, we provide a brief overview of empirical models 
used for making forest growth predictions in southwestern forest types, their inputs, assumptions 

 38
and extended capabilities (e.g., disturbance, BGC and forest management extensions).  We 
distinguish “traditional” forest growth models from succession models which are used to project 
forest development stages and composition changes.  While succession models are useful to 
determine the status of forest development, they are less frequently applied to determine tree 
growth and changes in wood volume.  Linkages between empirical growth models and 
simulating forest succession are, nevertheless, important to landscape planning (Teck et al. 1996, 
Sesnie and Bailey 2003).  Data requirements for integrating empirical and landscape succession 
models for predicting large area forest changes may limit these approaches.  Nevertheless, data 
integration and remote sensing applications are quickly being developed to fill such information 
voids (Remmel et al. 2005, Lefsky et al. 2002, Vanclay 2003). 
The Forest Vegetation Simulator (FVS), a forest growth modeling framework currently 
maintained by the USDA Forest Service, is highlighted in this review due to its widespread 
application and support (Teck et al. 1996).  FVS contains over 20 region specific variants of 
forest growth models accessed through a common interface, SUPPOSE (Crookston 1997).  
While FVS and the SUPPOSE interface is a relatively new forest modeling toolkit, its 
predecessor Prognosis has been in use since the 1970s (Stage 1973) and iteratively improved 
(Wykoff et al. 1982).  Tree population data from forest plots with measurements such as tree 
diameter, crown ratio, age and site index serve as inputs to FVS.  Therefore, implementing 
growth simulations with FVS relies on forest inventory data that is typically collected on the 
ground.  The USDA Forest Service Forest Inventory and Analysis Program (FIA) currently 
provide inventory data in a format utilized by FVS to facilitate plot summary and simulation 
modeling.  FVS software (http://www.fs.fed.us/fmsc/fvs/) and FIA data 
(http://www.ncrs2.fs.fed.us/4801/fiadb/fim21/wcfim21.asp) can be freely downloaded via the 
internet and provide a base set of information used for regional forest biomass and carbon 
assessments (Fried et al. 2005, Hickey et al. 2007).  From a practical standpoint, FVS is capable 
of quickly processing several thousand forest plots at a time with database features to link 
outputs to spatial data layers in a GIS (Peng 2000).   
For southwestern coniferous forests, the Central Rockies FVS (CR-FVS) variant accesses 
the GENGYM stand table projection system (Edminster et al. 1991).   GENGYM and model 
relationships are calibrated with tree data taken from plots established in major southwest forest 
types to predict tree diameter growth, height, crown ratio and mortality.  GENGYM and its 

 39
adaptation to FVS have several features important to modern forest management applications in 
the southwest.  Forest measurement plots and tree data used for developing tree growth 
regression equations were collected from even and uneven-aged stands on the Apache-
Sitgreaves, Lincoln, Carson, Kaibab and Santa Fe National Forests (Edminster et al. 1991).  It is 
a distance-independent, individual tree model calibrated for each tree species, or species groups 
in the case of hardwood trees and shrubs (Edminster et al. 1991).  Therefore, it is capable of 
predicting growth in both even and uneven-aged forest conditions and in pure and mixed species 
compositions.  As a distance-independent model, it does not require coordinates for individual 
trees that are typically unavailable from forest inventories.  These innovations are clearly an 
advantage over earlier whole stand models such as RMYLD (Edminster 1978) and ASPNORM 
(Mowrer 1986) that are designed for even-age forest structure and homogeneous species 
composition.   
A potential limitation of FVS, as with many forest growth models, is the deterministic 
manner in which trees are grown into the future (Vanclay 2003).  Calibration data for models are 
derived from tree core data reflecting past forest growth, though tree rings are expected to 
contain variation in growing conditions due to soil factors, inter-annual climate shifts and 
temporal changes in water availability (e.g., periodic drought).  Nevertheless, tree growth and 
mortality assumptions may not reflect future climate conditions and subsequent changes tree 
growth.  Net growth can be influenced by a number of factors including climate, soils, insects 
and disease, fire and mortality (Vanclay 2003, Abella and Covington 2006).  To address these 
issues, a BGC extension the FVS empirical models incorporates daily climate data and its effect 
on individual tree physiology (http://www.fs.fed.us/foresthealth/technology/bgc_model.shtml).  
The FVS-BGC extension is currently under evaluation and requires daily temperature and 
precipitation data as inputs in addition to tree measurements.  Once calibrated, processes based 
models are anticipated to enhance empirical model relationships to further incorporate climate 
change and its impact on tree growth.  Disturbance extensions that include fire occurrence, insect 
outbreaks and tree disease factors have also been incorporated into FVS and can be integrated to 
simulation scenarios.  As a practical tool to perform forest management simulations, tree harvest 
and prescribed burning can also be implemented to determine impacts on future forest growth 
and yield.  

 40
For the present wood supply analysis, we used FVS model runs with FIA plot data (n = 
327) to estimate future growth in ponderosa pine forest type.  Plots from years 1995 to 1997 for 
the Coconino, Apache-Sitgreaves, Kaibab and Tonto National Forests were projected to 2007 
and 2027.  Tree growth from these runs averaged 40 ft3/ac/yr up to 2007 and 38.9 ft3/ac/yr 
between 2007 and 2027, minus volume was lost due to mortality (Table 20).  Quadratic mean 
diameter (QMD) increment averaged 0.076 in/yr and ranged from 0.013 to 0.202 in/yr.  These 
figures are comparable to diameter growth increments from 66 plots in Northern Arizona on a 
range of soil conditions reported by Abella and Covington (2006) that showed 0.091 to 0.169 
in/yr in predominantly open ponderosa pine stands.  For our analysis, a large number of FIA 
plots were used crossing a greater diversity of site and forest conditions, which likely explains a 
wider range in annual growth increment.   
Average volume and mortality accumulation from FVS runs within the three tree 
diameter categories used for the wood supply analysis are also included in Table 20.  These data 
reflect the difference in total cubic foot volume for live and dead standing trees in each diameter 
class at the end of 10- and 20-year FVS cycles.   
From these cursory evaluations, we consider FVS growth predictions with FIA data 
capable of producing an accurate estimate of future wood volume.  Relatively short 10 and 30-
year simulation cycles can potentially avoid some uncertainty about future forest growth 
conditions and climate changes.  Applications to project forest growth across the entire wood 
supply study area and ponderosa pine type would necessarily require additional assumptions for 
making landscape- or region-scale projections.  Forest growth estimates incorporating 
information such as an estimated annual rate of tree thinning and prioritized treatment locations 
would enhance wood supply estimates over a specified planning period.  Differing site 
conditions such as soil type, topography, elevation, climate and solar radiation will likely need to 
be integrated into future growth estimates at this scale (Abella and Covington 2006).   
7  Concluding Remarks 
A primary goal of the wood supply analysis was to build agreement on ecologically appropriate 
forest restoration treatments, across the study area, which could supply wood byproducts to new 
and existing businesses and markets. The fact that the working group reached consensus over 
67% of the landscape (26% not appropriate as a source, 41% appropriate for mechanical 

 41
thinning) is remarkable. The group also agreed that community fire protection was important and 
agreed on the intensity of mechanical treatments that could be applied within five landscape 
management areas. Where a difference of opinion occurred on the method by which an 
additional 33% of the landscape should be restored, such as with the use of natural or prescribed 
fire-only treatments versus mechanical thinning, the estimated bole volume of wood byproducts 
potentially available differed by only 16% (ranging from 850 to 1,015 million ft3).   
The values derived in this study present a snap shot of currently available wood supply, 
however, a review of forest growth models was conducted to assist with future projections.  
Including forest growth would increase supply estimates over time, however the study also 
identified several factors which could lower the estimated wood supply, including lack of 
complete data on current road conditions and access, presence of archeological sites, and other 
project-level considerations. In addition, uncertainty in actual future wood supply due to climate 
change and disturbances such as wildfire, insect outbreaks and drought-related mortality were 
recognized. Because many factors are considered in choosing treatment locations, the group did 
not specify or prioritize project boundaries for their treatment scenarios, and actual wood supply 
values will shift according to decisions made during the NEPA process. Also, when developing 
new stewardship contracts it should be taken into consideration that these estimates include 
restoration byproducts from some remaining areas already dedicated to the White Mountain 
Stewardship contract, which is estimated to treat upwards of 120,000 additional acres.  As the 
exact contract treatment areas were not available at the time of this analysis, it was not possible 
to exclude their contribution to wood supply estimates.  The amount of potential wood 
byproducts from restoration treatments and small-diameter trees exceeds current market demand.  
In 2006 existing harvesters, mills and manufacturers in the analysis area removed and utilized 
1.2% of the bole biomass (or 12% extrapolated over 10 years) that would potentially be 
generated from consensus scenario treatments.  
Over the course of the project, additional studies and planning efforts, such as those 
needed to prioritize treatments and specify their preferred sequencing over time, and to assess 
wood supply from pinyon-juniper ecosystems, were discussed and recommendations were made 
(see Appendix I). As indicated in communications from the USDA Forest Service, Region 3, the 
results of this study will be used to assist in management decisions and the development of 

 42
multi-year forest stewardship contracts to attract new industrial users, and to supply wood fiber 
to existing local wood product businesses.   
8  Acknowledgements 
This analysis was funded by the Southwestern Region of the USDA Forest Service and 95% of 
the analysis area includes USDA Forest Service lands. Any decisions on these lands must be 
consistent with the National Forest Management Act (NFMA) and NEPA requirements. The 
wood supply analysis does not meet the requirements of the NFMA for timber suitability 
analysis; this will be done in the appropriate Forest Plan revisions. Future projects will conduct 
NEPA analysis and will be consistent with the Forest Plans.   
Individuals from the USDA Forest Service Intermountain West Forest Inventory and 
Analysis group in Ogden, Utah Michael Wilson, John Shaw and Ron Tymcio contributed data 
and logistical support critical to the wood supply analysis. Support from the USDA Forest 
Service Region 3 FIA coordinator, Jeff Hogg, was all essential to the project.  
We’d like to thank all of the working group members for the significant time and effort 
they put into this analysis, as well as the land management and academic experts who 
contributed, and stakeholders who observed meetings and provided comments.  We give thanks 
to our main contact at the USDA Forest Service Southwestern Region, Gilbert Zepeda, Deputy 
Regional Forester, for always providing guidance and assistance when needed and the Directors 
at the Southwestern Regional Office for their insightful comments on report drafts.  We are 
grateful to Harv Forsgren, former Regional Forester and Corbin Newman, the current Regional 
Forester, Southwestern Region, for allocating funds to this novel study and collaborative 
approach which promotes deliberation on restoration issues important to many stakeholders. It is 
our hope that the stakeholder agreement built during this process and the wood supply estimates 
we provide will be useful tools for informing landscape-scale stewardship contracts. 
9  References 
Abella, S. R. and W.W. Covington. 2006. Forest ecosystems of an Arizona Pinus ponderosa 
landscape: multifactor classification and implications for ecological restoration. Journal 
of Biogeography 33:1368-1383. 

 43
Allen, C.D., Savage, M., Falk, D.A., Suckling, K.F., Swetnam, T.W., Schulke, T.P., Stacey, P.B., 
Morgan, P., Hoffman, M., Klingel, J.T., 2002. Ecological restoration of southwestern 
ponderosa pine ecosystems: a broad perspective. Ecol. App. 12, 1418–1433. 
Beier, P. and J. Maschinski., 2003. Threatened, Endangered, and Sensitive Species. In: 
Friederici, P. (Ed.), Ecological Restoration of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests. 
Island Press, Washington, D.C., pp. 306-327. 
Biondi, F. 1996. Decadal-scale dynamics at the Gus Pearson Natural Area: evidence for inverse 
(a)symmetric competition? Canadian-Journal-of-Forest-Research. 1996; 26(8): 1397-1406 
Breiman, L. 2001. Random Forests. Machine Learning 45:5-32. 
Brown, J.K. and C.M. Johnston, 1976. Debris Prediction System. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fuel 
Science RWU 2104. 28 p.  
Chambers, C. and S. Germaine. 2003. Vertebrates. In: Friederici, P. (Ed.), Ecological Restoration 
of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests. Island Press, Washington, D.C., pp. 268-285. 
Chander, G. and B. Markham. 2003. Revised Landsat-5 TM radiometric calibration procedures 
and postcalibration dynamic ranges. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote 
Sensing 41:2674-2677. 
Covington, W.W., Moore, M.M., 1994. Southwestern ponderosa forest structure: changes since 
Euro-American settlement. J. For. 92, 39–47. 
Crookston, N. L. 1997. Suppose: an interface to the forest vegetation simulator. In: Teck, R.//M. 
Moeur//J. Adams (Eds.), Proc. Conf. on Forest Vegetation Simulator.  USDA Forest 
Service Intermountain Research Station, INT-GTR-373:7-14. 
Crookston, N. L. and A.O. Finley. 2007. yaImpute: an R package for k-NN imputation. The 
yaImpute Package <http://cran.r-project.org/doc/packages/yaImpute.pdf>:37p. 
Culter, D. R. , T.C. Edwards Jr., A. Culter K.H. Beard, K.T. Hess, J. Gibson and J.J. Lawler. 
2007. Random forests for classification in ecology. Ecology 88, no. 11:2783-2792. 
Edminster, C. B., H.T. Mower, R.L. Mathiasen, T.M. Schuler, W.K. Olsen and F.G. 
Hawksworth. 1991. GENGYM: a variable density stand table projection system 
calibrated for mixed conifer and ponderosa pine stands in the southwest. Research Paper. 
RM-297. Fort Collins, CO: Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Forest and Range Experimental Station. 

 44
Finney, M.A. 2006. A computational method for optimizing fuel treatment locations. USDA Forest 
Service Proceedings RMRS-P-41. 
Finney, M.A., R.C. Seli, C.W. McHugh, A.A. Ager, B Bahro and J.K. Agee. 2007. Simulation of 
long-term landscape-level fuel treatment effects on large wildfires. International Journal of 
Wildland Fire, 16: 712-727. 
Forest Products Laboratory. 1999. Wood handbook – Wood as an engineering material. Gen.Tech. 
Rep. FPL-GTR-113. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest 
Products Laboratory. 463 p. [Online] Available: 
http://www.fpl.fs.fed.us/documnts/FPLGTR/fplgtr113/fplgtr113.htm  
Forsgren, H. 2007a. Personal communication.  Letter to Haydee Hampton dated July 19, 2007 (see 
Appendix A) from Supervisor of the Southwestern Region of the USDA Forest Service. 
Forsgren, H. 2007b. Personal communication.  Letter to Steve Gatewood dated July 19, 2007 from 
Supervisor of the Southwestern Region of the USDA Forest Service. 
Fried, J.S., Christensen, G., Weyermann, D., Barbour, R.J., Fight, R., Hiserote, B., Pinjuv, G. 
2005. Modeling opportunities and feasibility of siting wood-fired electrical generating 
facilities to facilitate landscape-scale fuel treatment with FIA BioSum. In: Bevers, M.; 
Barrett, T.M., comps. Systems analysis in forest resources: proceedings of the 2003 
symposium. Gen. Tech. Rep.PNW-GTR-656. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station: 195–204. 
Gibson, L. 2007. WMSP Economic Assessment. Conducted for WMSP multi-party monitoring 
FAO 2001. Global forest resources assessment. Forestry Paper 140, Rome, pp. 75-80. 
Gislason, P. O., J.A. Benediktsson and J.R. Svenisson. 2006. Random forests for landcover 
classification. Pattern Recognition Letters 27:294-300. 
Governor’s Forest Health Councils, State of Arizona. June 2007. The Statewide Strategy for 
Restoring Arizona’s Forests. Aumack, E., T. Sisk, and J. Palumbo, editors. Published by 
Arizona Public Service, Phoenix, AZ. 
Hampton, H. M., E. N. Aumack, J. W. Prather, B. G. Dickson, Y. Xu, and T. D. Sisk.  2006.  
Development and transfer of spatial tools based on landscape ecology principles: 
supporting public participation in forest restoration planning in the southwestern U. S.  
Pp. 65-95 in Forest Landscape Ecology: Transferring Knowledge to Practice (A. Perera, 
L. Buse, and T. Crow, eds.). Springer Publishing, New York. 

 45
Hann, D. H. and B.B. Bare. 1978. Comprehensive tree volume equations for major species of 
New Mexico and Arizona: II. Tables for unforked trees.  Ogden, UT, USDA Forest 
Service Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. Res Paper INT-210. 127p.  
Hickey, J. A., J.C. Jenkins, D.S. Ojima and M. Ducey. 2007. Spatial patterns of forest 
characteristics in the western United States derived from inventories. Ecological 
Applications: 2387-2402. 
Jensen, J. R.  2000. Remote sensing of the environment: an Earth resources perspective. Upper 
Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice Hall Inc. 
Kaufman, M.R., W.H. Moir and W.W. Covington. 1992.  Old-growth forests: what do we know 
about their ecology and management in the Southwest and Rocky Mountain regions?  In: 
Old-growth forest in the Southwest and Rocky Mountain Region: proceedings of a 
workshop, M arch 9-13, 1992, Portal Arizona. Tech Eds. M.R. Kaufman, GTR-RM-213. 
W.H. Moir and R.L. Bassett. USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain Forest and Range 
Experimental Station, Ft Collins, CO. pp. 1-11. 
Lefsky, M. A., W.B. Cohen, G.G. Parker and D.J. Harding. 2002. Lidar remote sensing for 
ecosystem studies. BioScience 52, no. 1:19-30. 
Moir, W. H. and J.H. Dieterich. 1988. Old-growth pine from succession in pine-bunchgrass forest in 
Arizona and New Mexico. Natural Areas Journal. 8:17-24. 
Mower, H. T.  1986. ASPNORM: a normal diameter distribution growth and yield model for 
aspen in the central Rocky Mountains. Research Paper RM-264. USDA Forest Service, 
Rock Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Ft Collins, CO.:3 p. 
Nemani, R. R., L. Pierce, S. Running and L. Band. 1993. Forest ecosystem processes at the 
watershed scale: sensitivity to remotely-sensed leaf area index estimates. International 
Journal of Remote Sensing 14:2519-2534. 
Ohmann, J. L. and M.J. Gregory. 2002. Predictive mapping of forest composition and structure 
with direct gradient analysis and nearest-neighbor imputation in coastal Oregon, U.S.A. 
Canadian Journal of Forest Research 32:725-741. 
Peng, C. 2000. Growth and yield models for uneven-aged stands: past, present and future. Forest 
Ecology and Management 132:259-279. 
Pocewicz, A. L., P.E. Gessler and A. Robinson. 2004. The relationship between effective plant 
area index and Landsat spectral response across elevation, solar insolation and spatial 

 46
scales in a northern Idaho forest. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 34:465-480. 
Prather, J.W., R.F. Noss, and T.D. Sisk. 2007. Real and perceived conflicts between restoration 
of ponderosa pine forests and conservation of the Mexican spotted owl, Forest Policy and 
Economics 
Remmel, T. K., F. Cillag, S. Mitchell and M.A. Wulder. 2005. Integration of forest inventory and 
satellite imagery: a Canadian status assessment and research issues. Forest Ecology and 
Management 207:405-428. 
Rummer, B., J. Prestemon, D. May, P. Miles, J. Vissage, R. McRoberts, G. Likens, W.D. 
Shepperd, D. Ferguson, W. Elliot, S. Miller, J. Barbour, J. Fried, B. Stokes, E. Bilek, K. 
Skog. 2005. A strategic assessment of forest biomass and fuel reduction treatments in 
Western States. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-149. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 17 p. 
Sampson, N. (unpublished material). Monitoring and measuring wood carbon. 
http://www.sampsongroup.com/Papers/papersdocuments.htm  
Sesnie, S. and J. Bailey. 2003. Using history to plan the future of old-growth ponderosa pine. 
Journal of Forestry 101:40-47. 
Sisk, T. D., J. W. Prather, H. M. Hampton, E. N. Aumack , Y. Xu, and B. G. Dickson. 2006. 
Participatory landscape analysis to guide restoration of ponderosa pine ecosystems in the 
American Southwest. Landscape and Urban Planning. Vol. 78, Issue 4, pp. 300-310. 
Stage, A. R. 1973. Prognosis model for stand development. USDA Forest Service Research 
Paper, INT-137:32 p. 
Teck, R., M. Moeur and B. Eav. 1996. Forecasting ecosystems with the forest vegetation 
simulator. Journal of Forestry 94:7-10. 
Vanclay, J.K. 2003. Realizing opportunities in forest growth modelling.  Canadian Journal of 
Forest Research 33(3): 536-541. 
Wykoff, W. R., N.L. Crookston and A.R. Stage. 1982. User's guide to the Prognosis model. 
General Technical Report INT-133, Ogden, UT. USDA Forest Service, Intermountain 
Research Station. 

 47
Tables 
Table 1. List of wood supply working group members and affiliations. 
 
Name 
Position 
Affiliation  
Ethan Aumack  
Director of Restoration Programs  
Grand Canyon Trust  
Pascal Berlioux 
President and Chief Executive 
Officer  
Arizona Forest Restoration Products Inc.  
Kim Newbauer  
Timber Sale CO 
Coconino National Forest  
Rob Davis* 
President / Owner 
Forest Energy / Future Forests 
Paul DeClay  
Tribal Forester  
White Mtn. Apache Tribal Forestry  
Jerry Drury  
Timber Staff Officer  
Kaibab National Forest  
Steve 
Gatewood* 
Owner / Consultant  
WildWood Consulting, LLC 
representing Greater Flagstaff Forests 
Partnership 
Bill Greenwood  
City Manager  
Town of Eagar 
Shaula Hedwall 
Senior Fish and Wildlife Biologist 
U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service  
Scott Higginson  
Executive Vice President  
NZ Legacy, LLC / Snowflake White Mountain 
Power / Renegy, LLC  
Herb Hopper 
Community-based forest and 
wood products advocate  
Little Colorado Plateau Resource, 
Conservation & Development  
Robert LaCapa  
Forest Manager  
Fort Apache Agency, Branch of Forestry, 
Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the 
Interior  
Sarah Lantz  
Urban Wildlife Planner  
Arizona Game & Fish Department, Region II, 
Flagstaff Office  
Lisa McNeilly  
Northern Arizona Program 
Director  
The Nature Conservancy  
Keith Pajkos  
Timber Staff  
Arizona State Lands Department, Forestry 
Division  
Chuck Peone, Jr.    
Fort Apache Timber Company 
Molly Pitts  
Community-based forest and 
wood products advocate / 
consulting forester  
Northern Arizona Wood Products 
Association  
Todd Schulke* 
Forest Programs Director 
Center for Biological Diversity 
Larry 
Stephenson  
Executive Director  
Eastern Arizona Counties (ECO) / Economic 
Environmental Counties Organization 
(EECO)  
Diane Vosick* 
Associate Director 
Ecological Restoration Institute 
Elaine Zieroth* 
Forest Supervisor 
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests 
 
* Steering Committee Members 

 48
Table 2. Working group meeting schedule and level of attendance at each meeting. 
 
Meeting 
No.  
Date 
Time 
Location 
No. of Participants 
 
1 
June 4, 2007 
9am - 4:15pm 
(PST) 
Northland Pioneer College, Painted Desert 
Campus, 2251 N. Navajo Blvd., Holbrook, 
AZ  
16 
2 
July 18, 2007  
9am - 4:15pm 
(PST) 
AZ Game and Fish Dept. 
Pinetop Regional Office Conference Room  
2878 E. White Mtn. Blvd. 
Pinetop, AZ (Directions) 
16 
3 
Aug. 17, 2007  
9am - 4:15pm 
(PST) 
Northern Arizona University, Applied 
Research & Development, 1298 S. Knoles 
Drive, Bld. 56, Large Pod Conference 
Room, University Drive, Flagstaff, AZ  
18 
4 
Sept. 17, 2007  
9am - 4:15pm 
(PST) 
Northland Pioneer College, Painted Desert 
Campus, 2251 N. Navajo Blvd., Holbrook, 
AZ  
14 
5 
Oct. 15, 2007 
9am - 4:15pm 
(PST) 
AZ Game and Fish Dept. 
Pinetop Regional Office Conference Room  
2878 E. White Mtn. Blvd. 
Pinetop, AZ (Directions)  
15 
6 
Nov. 16, 2007  
9am - 4:15pm 
(MST)  
Northern Arizona University, Applied 
Research & Development, Bld. 56, Large 
Pod Conference Room, University Drive, 
Flagstaff, AZ  
16 
7 
Nov. 29, 2007  
9am - 4:15pm 
(MST)  
Northern Arizona University, Applied 
Research & Development, Bld. 56, Large 
Pod Conference Room, University Drive, 
Flagstaff, AZ  
17 
 

 49
Table 3. Management objectives, desired post-treatment conditions, management actions, and criteria layers used by the working group to 
define land management areas, areas not considered a source of restoration byproducts and areas of special consideration.  
 
Overall objectives of working group treatment scenarios:  1) Restore fire-adapted (ponderosa-pine) ecosystems21 and protect communities from 
destructive fires while mitigating adverse impacts of treatments on soils, surface water and wildlife.  2) Based on restoration needs, define potential 
mechanical thinning treatments for use in estimating the supply of wood byproducts. Note: The USDA Forest Service’s adoption of the “Management 
Recommendations for the northern goshawk in the southwestern United States” under the 1996 Regional Forest Plan Amendments guide management 
actions on all forest lands outside of Mexican spotted owl (MSO) or other federally listed species habitat. 
 
POTENTIAL RESTORATION BYPRODUCTS FROM LANDSCAPE MANAGEMENT AREAS 
Rank22 
Landscape management areas: 
Management objective 
Desired Post-Treatment 
Conditions23 
Management Action24 
Criteria Layers25 
1 
Community protection management area 
(CPMA): In areas close to communities where 
tolerance for fire is low, reduce predicted fire 
behavior to acceptable levels (achieve low end of 
surface fire). Maintain a range of forest conditions 
(e.g., basal area) across the landscape.  To define 
CPMA assign a ¼-mile protection buffer around all 
private lands with an additional ½-mile protection 
buffer extending to 1½-mile upwind of all private 
property within “high priority” areas identified in 
CWPPs. Protect infrastructure from severe crown 
fire by following FERC guidelines for power and gas 
line fire protection.  Follow ADOT guidelines for right 
of way safety zone on either side of roads.   
Basal area: 30-60 ft2/ac (distributed 
according to a skewed bell-shaped 
curve more heavily weighted to lower 
values with a high point, or mode, at 40 
ft2/ac) 
Density: 40-60 trees/ac (50 avg) 
Canopy cover: 30-40% (35% avg) 
 
 
Heavy thinning followed by 
prescribed fire26 (light burn) near 
communities.27 Feather intensity 
with distance from communities 
(higher intensity thinning 
immediately adjacent to 
communities).  Apply heavy 
thinning in areas near power 
lines (50 ft from high voltage 
lines), gas lines, and roads (42 ft 
from highways, 30 ft from other 
roads) as stated in FERC and 
ADOT guidelines for fire 
protection of these features. 
Community Wildfire 
Protection Plan 
(CWPP) priority 
areas, private lands, 
state and federal 
highways and utility 
corridors (power 
lines). Gas line data 
was not available.  
                                                 
21 Areas once dominated by ponderosa-pine that mixed-conifers have expanded into are not considered in this study. 
22 Factors with higher rank (lower value) trump factors with lower rank.  For example, a factor with a rank of one takes precedence over another with rank 2 occurring in the same 
location. Areas not considered a source of wood supply are given a rank of zero and take precedence over all landscape zones. 
23 Desired post-treatment condition expressed in terms of ranges of forest structural attributes. Basal area is the attribute of most interest. Density and canopy cover are guidelines.  
24 Goshawk guidelines (RMRS General Technical Report, RM-217, 1992) dictate management actions on all forest lands outside of MSO or other federally listed species habitat.  
The desired post-treatment conditions in column 2 take precedence over the thinning levels in this column as the group ended up choosing basal area distributions to define post-
treatment conditions. 
25 Criteria layers used to represent landscape feature. 
26 Burn where appropriate following ponderosa pine thinning in riparian areas.     
27 Where smoke concerns are high or difficult to mitigate, haul wood off-site. 

 50
Rank22 
Landscape management areas: 
Management objective 
Desired Post-Treatment 
Conditions23 
Management Action24 
Criteria Layers25 
228 
MSO Restricted Habitat: Implement current (1996) 
Forest Plans and 1995 MSO Recovery Plan.29 
Follow MSO Recovery Plan guidelines for restricted 
habitat. See Recovery Plan Table III.B.1 for 
target/threshold conditions. 
Basal area: 45-190 ft2/ac (100 mode) 
 
Light to moderate in other 
restricted.  
 
Pine-oak habitat  
3 
Municipal watersheds: Protect watersheds (6th 
order) containing municipal surface water supplies 
from the effects of high severity crown fire (including 
increased sedimentation risk).  Allow torching 
(passive crown fire).  
Basal area: 40-120 ft2/ac (60 mode) 
Density: 20-300 trees/ac (160 avg) 
Canopy cover: 30-60% (45% avg) 
(ranges are more heavily weighted to 
lower values) 
Apply light to heavy thinning 
treatments followed by 
prescribed fire (light burn) 
Watersheds 
containing municipal 
surface water 
supplies (6th level 
watersheds) 
4 
Aquatic species watersheds: Protect watersheds 
(6th order) containing sensitive (special 
consideration) aquatic species and directly feeding 
into their perennial water habitat from the effects of 
high severity crown fire (including increased 
sedimentation risk). 
Basal area: 40-120 ft2/ac (60 mode) 
Density: 20-300 trees/ac (160 avg) 
Canopy cover: 30-60% (45% avg) 
(ranges are more heavily weighted to 
lower values) 
Apply light to heavy thinning 
treatments thinning followed by 
prescribed fire (light burn) 
TNC native fish layer 
and 6th level 
watershed 
boundaries 
5 
Wildlands: Reduce the occurrence of high severity 
fire (unnaturally severe; uncharacteristic for the 
site). Reduce predicted fire behavior in areas 
predicted to actively or passively crown to a mix of 
surface and low intensity passive fire throughout the 
analysis area. Maintain a range of forest conditions 
(e.g., basal area) across the landscape to support 
wildlife and other forest resources. 
Basal area: 40-160 ft2/ac (80 mode)30 
Density: 20-300 trees/ac (160 avg) 
Canopy cover: 40-80% (60% avg) 
(ranges are more heavily weighted to 
lower values) 
Light to heavy thinning followed 
by prescribed fire (light burn) in 
wildlands (defined as areas 
outside of community protection 
management areas and other 
landscape features).   
 
“Wildlands” are 
defined as all parts of 
study area not in one 
of the other four 
management areas. 
 
                                                 
28 Where community fire protection goals are not met in WUI, the USDA Forest Service may increase thinning levels in MSO habitat following consultation with the 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 
29 US Fish and Wildlife Service uses an ESA mandated layer for “MSO Designated Critical Habitat” based on coarser and older vegetation layers than available 
currently. Purpose is to maintain and enhance the primary constituent elements within designated critical habitat that meets the definition of protected or restricted 
habitat. 
30 Although not modeled spatially, the working group recommends applying the lower end of wildlands DPTC range (40-60 ft2/ac) to top edges of canyons to 
reduce the rate of spread of fire in these areas and increase suppression effectiveness. 
POTENTIAL RESTORATION BYPRODUCTS FROM LANDSCAPE MANAGEMENT AREAS (Cont.)

 51
AREAS NOT CONSIDERED A SOURCE OF RESTORATION BYPRODUCTS 
 
Rank 
Landscape feature: Management Objective 
Management Action 
Criteria Layers 
0 
MSO PACs:  Minimize treatment impacts on Mexican 
spotted owl Protected Actively Centers31 (MSO PACs) and 
follow MSO Recovery Plan guidelines to avoid treatments 
on at least 90% of PACs until more is known of impacts.32 
Do not consider PACs a source of wood supply (do not specify 
treatments in these areas) as they are expected to contribute 
little to overall wood supply.4 
MSO PACs 
0 
Specially Designated Areas:  Follow existing land mgmt 
regulations for SDAs and Inventoried Roadless Areas (e.g., 
restrictions on road building and use of mechanized 
equipment). 
Do not consider Specially Designated Areas and Inventoried 
Roadless Areas a source of wood supply (do not specify a 
particular treatment in these areas). 
Specially Designated Areas 
and Inventoried Roadless 
Areas 
0 
Steep slopes: Minimize the impact of mechanized 
equipment on soils and consider the need for specialized 
equipment, operator training and administrative approvals 
on steep slopes. 
Do not consider areas with steep slopes (slope > 40%) a 
source of wood supply (do not specify a particular treatment in 
these areas as little wood will realistically be removed from 
them). 
Slope 
0 
Treated areas: Use completed/under contract treatment 
location, type and intensity to inform where and how forest 
structure has changed. Consider areas where treatments 
are planned or marked as a source of wood supply.33 
Do not consider areas with completed or under contract 
treatments of moderate intensity or greater that have taken 
place in the last 10 years as a source of wood supply.  
Treatments completed and 
under contract  
0 
Northern goshawk nest areas: Follow goshawk guidelines.  Six nest areas, each 30 acres in size for a minimum 180 acres 
should be identified within each post-fledgling area (PFA). Do 
not consider these areas a source of wood supply. 
Goshawk nest sites and 
PFAs 
0 
Soils with mechanized treatment limitations: Avoid 
mechanized management activities on sensitive soils. 
Do not consider soils with limits on mechanical treatment a 
source of wood supply. 
Terrestrial Ecosystem 
Survey units 
0 
Streamside management zones: Maintain and protect filter 
strips next to streams from potentially negative impacts of 
mechanized equipment. 
Do not consider areas within 100 feet of perennial and 
intermittent streams a source of wood supply.   
Perennial and intermittent34 
streams  
                                                 
31 Mexican spotted owl Protected Actively Centers (PACs) are 600 acre areas within which owls have been found to be nesting. 
32 Trees < 9” dbh may be removed in PACs, so there is potential wood supply from PACs, but it is minimal. 
33 Planned and marked Stewardship contract areas will be considered a source of wood supply, but tallied separately as they have already been allocated. 
34 Place streamside management zones around perennial streams (not intermittent) for all Forests, except the ASNF, as data that differentiates between 
intermittent and ephemeral streams exist only for the ASNF. 

 52
 
AREAS OF SPECIAL CONSIDERATION 
 
Landscape feature: Management Objective 
Management Suggestions 
Criteria Layers 
Use fire as a restoration tool where practicable: Minimize 
short term ecological costs of thinning treatments which 
decrease resilience of the system (e.g., soil compaction and 
erosion, wildlife disturbance) in areas where burn only 
treatments are potentially feasible. 
Consider fire-only treatments where feasible.  
n/a 
Areas not accessible from current roads: Areas greater than 
¼ mile from existing roads are difficult to access with harvesting 
equipment in common use in the study area. New roads would 
likely need to be constructed to reach these areas with 
associated environmental impacts, however harvesting 
technologies used in the area may shift over the next 20 years 
resulting in increased access to the entire area with minimal 
new road construction and thus lowered environmental impacts.  
The working group has less confidence that these areas will be 
a source of wood supply. 
Minimize environmental impacts associated 
with new road construction and road 
improvements necessary for harvesting.  
Forest Service and 
TIGER roads 
 
 
 
 

 53
Table 4. Areas not considered a source of wood byproducts from mechanical restoration 
treatments and areas of special consideration (PAC = Protected Activity Center). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Acres 
1. Mexican Spotted Owl PACs 
 
 
182,000 
2. Specially Designated Areas 
 
 
177,000 
3. Steep slopes (>40%) 
 
  
 
147,000 
4. Contracted and completed treatments 
 
113,000 
5. Northern goshawk nest areas 
 
  
  63,000 
6. Soil restricted from mechanized treatment  
126,000 
7. Streamside management zones  
 
  52,000 
       
 
Total Acres (including overlap)    
860,000 
 
Spatial overlap among all layers     
 
           -222,000 
 
 
Total Acres (excluding overlap) 
638,000 
 
Ponderosa-pine lands in study area  
         2,413,000 
Ponderosa-pine lands remaining 
                    1,775,000 
 
Areas of Special Consideration 
Areas over ¼ mi. from existing roads35 
 
241,000 
Remaining White Mountain Stewardship 
         Contract Areas36 
 
 
 
120,000 
 
 
Table 5. Landscape management areas and percent of full analysis and wood source areas 
occupied by each. 
 
Landscape management areas 
Areas w/o 
removals 
(acres)
% of Wood 
Source Area
Areas w/ 
removals 
(acres) 
% of 
Analysis 
Area
Not considered source of wood  
n/a
n/a
638,000 
26%
Community protection  
451,000
20%
355,000 
15%
Mexican spotted owl restricted 
habitat 
381,000
13%
237,000 
10%
Municipal watersheds 
86,000
3%
60,000 
2%
Aquatic species watersheds 
527,000
18%
334,000 
14%
Wildlands  
968,000
46%
788,000 
33%
Ponderosa-pine dominated lands 
in full analysis area 
2,413,000
2,413,000 
100% 
Ponderosa-pine dominated lands 
that are a potential source of 
restoration byproducts 
1,775,000
100%
 
                                                 
35 Group has low confidence of these being a source of wood supply, however no changes in wood supply volume or 
biomass estimates were made to account for lack of current road access. 
36 ASNF estimate of areas remaining to be treated, however no upper acreage is specified in contract. As the exact 
location of these areas within the NEPA Analysis Areas has yet to be determined, no wood supply volume estimate 
has been made.  These 120,000 acres are in addition to the 113,000 acres listed in Table 5, which include areas 
already that have already been thinned as part of the Stewardship or other contracts. 

 54
Table 6. Treatment characterizations which consider a level of forest “fuels reduction” and 
restoration for the ponderosa pine type in the study area.   
 
Thinning Level 
Stem density1 
(% reduction) 
Basal area1 
(% reduction) 
Canopy closure1 
(% reduction) 
Description 
1/ Heavy thinning 
followed by 
prescribed 
burning 
80 (70-90) 
60 (50-70) 
40 (25-55) 
Representative of a 
“full” restoration, heavy 
fuels reduction, multi-
age group selection, or 
WUI-based treatment. 
 
 
 
 
 
2/ Moderate 
thinning 
following by 
prescribed 
burning 
65 (55-75) 
40 (30-50) 
30 (15-45) 
Representative of a 
“moderate” or “full” 
restoration, moderate 
fuels reduction, or WUI-
based treatment. 
 
 
 
 
 
3/ Light thinning 
following by 
prescribed 
burning 
50 (40-60) 
20 (10-30) 
20 (15-25) 
Representative of a 
“light” restoration or 
fuels “maintenance” 
treatment. 
1Forest structure metrics and mean percent reduction values used to parameterize landscape-scale 
treatment alternatives. Minimum and maximum values in parentheses are derived from published 
studies and expert opinion. 
 
 
Table 7. Percent reduction in basal area following application of desired post-treatment basal 
area distributions 
 
Landscape Management 
Areas 
Thinning 
Range 
(Table 7) 
Dominant 
Thinning 
Level
Average 
Median
StdDev 
Min
Max
Community Protection 
Light to 
Heavy 
Heavy
60%
64%
14% 
3%
79%
MSO Restricted 
Light to 
Moderate 
Light
19%
20%
5% 
2%
35%
Municipal Watersheds 
Light to 
Heavy 
Moderate
41%
45%
11% 
2%
53%
Aquatic species watersheds 
Light to 
Heavy 
Moderate
41%
43%
11% 
2%
58%
Wildlands 
Light to 
Moderate 
Light to 
Moderate
25%
25%
8% 
2%
44%
 

 55
Table 8.  Areas not thinned in 27 completed or planned projects in the analysis area based on a 
review of Environmental Assessments.   
 
 
Project Name 
Planning Area 
(acres) 
Area not 
thinned 
(acres) 
Area not 
thinned 
(%) 
Fire-only Areas 
(acres) 
Fire-only 
Area 
(%) 
1 
Eastside* 
19,977 
12,356 
62% 
12,356 
62% 
2 
Mormon Lake 
2,799 
293 
10% 
301 
11% 
3 
Kachina* 
6,229 
1,429 
23% 
1,429 
23% 
4 
Munds Park* 
2,980 
1,998 
67% 
1,988 
67% 
5 
Mountainaire 
13,979 
1,476 
11% 
1,476 
11% 
6 
Rocky Park* 
13,678 
8,000 
58% 
8,000 
58% 
7 
Woody Ridge 
11,543 
2,945 
26% 
2,945 
26% 
8 
Smith/Schultz* 
11,700 
1,103 
9% 
700 
6% 
9 
Upper Beaver* 
44,694 
27,072 
61% 
30,414 
68% 
10 
Victorine* 
8,678 
6,922 
80% 
6,922 
80% 
11 
Huffer* 
1,146 
- 
0% 
- 
0% 
12 
Elk Park 
6,485 
1,785 
28% 
1,700 
26% 
13 
East Clear 
Creek* 
16,228 
- 
0% 
- 
0% 
14 
Ft. Valley* 
6,960 
2,900 
42% 
1,800 
26% 
15 
Blue R. MSO* 
16,282 
8,124 
50% 
2,399 
15% 
16 
Chitty Creek* 
13,076 
11,676 
89% 
12,600 
96% 
17 
Greer* 
19,629 
- 
0% 
- 
0% 
18 
Eager South 
17,543 
3,816 
22% 
3,233 
18% 
19 
Nutrioso37 
37,171 
8,595 
23% 
5,687 
18% 
20 
Long Jim* 
1,375 
662 
48% 
462 
34% 
21 
Twin* 
14,900 
14,518 
97% 
14,518 
97% 
22 
Jacob Ryan* 
33,103 
9,149 
28% 
9,149 
28% 
23 
East Rim* 
9,630 
4,307 
45% 
1,440 
15% 
24 
Dogtown* 
7,317 
2,250 
31% 
2,000 
27% 
25 
City* 
12,359 
3,780 
31% 
3,263 
26% 
26 
Nagel* 
18,770 
5,751 
31% 
5,751 
31% 
27 
Los Burros* 
23,798 
4,262 
18% 
3,790 
16% 
 
 Average: 
  
 
37% 
  
33% 
* Acres not thinned and treatment areas provided by Grand Canyon Trust.
                                                 
37 Nutrioso: A total NEPA areas (FS lands) excluding meadows & riparian/water & PJ  of 31,094 acres 
was used in fire-only % calculation 

 56
Table 9.  Summary and error statistics for each forest structure and volume layer comparing reference and imputed values from FIA 
plots (n=420) in the ponderosa pine type.  Data ranges are from a minimum of ~0 to the maximum value reported in the table.   
 
Response variable 
Mean 
Range  
SD 
 
r2 
Mean residual error 
80% of data 
SD 
Mean residual error 
50% of data 
SD 
Basal area (ft/ac2) 
118 
234 
51 
 
0.77 ±9 ft2/ac 
4.5  
±5 ft2/ac 
2.8  
Density (tpa)  
675 
5724 
831 
 
0.74
±62 trees/ac  
46.2 
±31 trees/ac 
19 
Canopy cover (%)  
42 
83 
15 
 
0.56
±2.7%  
2.1 
±1.4%  
1.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total volume (ft3/ac)  
2091 
8135 
1221 
 
0.86 ±189 ft3/ac 
132  
±96 ft3/ac 
59  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vol. <5" dbh  
63 
798 
105 
 
0.46 ±15 ft3/ac 
16  
±4 ft3/ac 
6  
Vol.  5 - 16" dbh  
1069 
3139 
675 
 
0.41 ±197 ft3/ac 
140  
±104 ft3/ac 
70  
Vol. >16" dbh  
959 
6479 
968 
 
0.68 ±184 ft3/ac 
115 
±97 ft3/ac 
78  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vol. <16" dbh  
1132 
3206 
695 
 
0.53
±180 ft3/ac 
126 
±96 ft3/ac 
61 
 

 57
Table 10.  Wood volume estimates summarized by total volume and three diameter classes for year 20061.  The total wood volume 
layer was used to summarize cubic foot volume for the ponderosa pine type and each landscape management area in the study area. 
 
Wood volume category  
Total (million ft3)2  Vol.%  
Acres (million)  
% of total ac 
Total volume  
4,561 ft3 
100% 
2.4 ac 
100 % 
Vol. by dbh class  
 
 
 
 
<5" dbh 
118  
3  
 
 
5 to 16" dbh 
2,442  
54  
 
 
> 16" dbh 
1,966  
43  
 
 
Sum 4,526  
 
 
 
Vol. not considered in supply  
1,302 
28 
0.6  
26  
Total vol. in management areas 
3,263  
72 
1.8  
74  
Vol. in management areas by dbh class 
 
 
 
 
<5" dbh 
79 
2 
 
 
5 to 16" dbh 
1,394 
43 
 
 
> 16" dbh 
1,764 
55 
 
 
Sum 3,238 
 
 
 
Volume by management area 
 
% of total 
vol.  
 
% of total ac  
Community protection   
643  
14  
0.35  
15  
MSO restricted habitat 
504  
11  
0.24  
10  
Municipal watersheds 
128  
3  
0.06  
3 
Aquatic species watersheds 
668 
15  
0.31  
13  
Wildlands  
1,317  
30  
0.79  
33  
1Total cubic volume estimates for the ponderosa pine type are from a single data layer and volume by diameter class is from three 
separate data layers.  Discrepancies between estimates derived from the total volume layer those summed over diameter classes is a 
primarily result of lower computation accuracy in the <5” dbh volume layer.  
2Tree bole cubic foot volume includes the entire length of the tree, with no deduction from the main stem for stumps or tops at 
specified diameter. 

 58
Table 11.  Wood supply estimates derived from the consensus and majority treatment scenarios as of year 20061. Potential treatments 
occur in the ponderosa pine type on 41% of the total analysis area acres for the consensus scenario and on 74% of the area for the 
majority scenario.  The majority scenario was applied to all 74% of the area considered for restoration treatments however, 5% was 
below a minimum amount of basal area and did not have thinning treatments. 
 
Management area 
Consensus scenario 
Wood supply (ft3)2 
Acres treated 
Ave ft3/ac harvested 
Community protection 
70% of area  
368,975,519  
314,017 
1,175 
MSO restricted habitat 
30% of area  
56,832,525  
113,076 
503 
Municipal watersheds 
40% of area  
37,448,212  
34,471 
1,086 
Aquatic species watersheds 
35% of area  
189,626,094  
187,157 
1,013 
Wildlands 
35% of area  
194,426,007  
338,486 
574 
 
Sum
847,308,357  
987,206 
Ave     858
 
 
 
 
Management zone 
Majority scenario 
 
Community protection 
74% of area  
371,401,419 
335,206 
1,108
MSO restricted habitat 
74% of area  
83,647,154 
225,773
370
Municipal watersheds 
74% of area  
47,206,561  
58,031 
813
Aquatic species watersheds 
74% of area  
242,247,408  
323,531 
749
Wildlands 
74% of area  
270,810,528  
718,927
377
 
Sum
1,015,313,070 
1,661,467 
Ave     611
1Wood supply estimates are from 2006 data and have not been projected forward with forest growth information.  Restoration 
treatments will be implemented over several years and tree growth will likely contribute additional wood supply than is shown in the 
figures above.  
2Tree bole cubic foot volume includes the entire length of the tree, with no deduction from the main stem for stumps or tops at 
specified diameter. 
 
 

 59
Table 12.  Tree bole1 and crown biomass estimates (green tons) for consensus and majority scenarios for the ponderosa pine type and 
each landscape management area.  Wood supply for tree boles in cubic foot volume units is added for comparison. 
 
Landscape zone 
Tot. bole1 
(tons)
Wood supply1 
(ft3)
Tot. crown2 
(tons) 
Total area
Ave bole3 
(tons/ac) 
Ave crown3 
(tons/ac)
Consensus scenario 
 
Community protection 
11,713,509 
368,975,519 
3,479,963  
314,017 
37.3
11.08 
MSO restricted habitat 
1,804,207 
56,832,525 
536,384  
113,076 
16.0
4.74 
Municipal watersheds 
1,188,832 
37,448,212 
355,581  
34,471 
34.5
10.32 
Aquatic species watersheds 
6,019,876 
189,626,094 
1,788,160  
187,157 
32.2
9.55 
Wildlands 
6,172,254 
194,426,007 
1,831,347  
338,486 
18.2
5.41 
Sum 
26,898,678 
847,308,357 
7,991,436  
987,206 
27.2
8.09 
 
 
 
 
Majority scenario 
 
Community protection 
11,790,521 
371,401,419
3,503,137  
335,206 
35.2
10.45 
MSO restricted habitat 
2,655,465 
83,647,154
789,558  
225,773 
11.8
3.50 
Municipal watersheds 
1,498,621 
47,206,561 
448,773  
58,031 
25.8
7.73 
Aquatic species watersheds 
7,690,394 
242,247,408 
2,284,993  
323,531 
23.8
7.06 
Wildlands 
8,597,160 
270,810,528 
2,550,706  
718,927 
12.0
3.55 
Sum 
32,232,161 
1,015,313,070
9,577,167  
1,661,467 
19.4
5.76 
1Tree bole weight is the cubic foot wood volume converted to green tons using a factor of 0.0315 green tons = 1000 cubic feet.  Tree 
bole cubic foot volume or weight in green tons includes the entire length of the tree with no deduction from the main stem for stumps 
or tops at specified diameter. 
2Crown weights from restoration byproducts include all tree foliage, limbs and bark from limbs.   
3Averge tons of bole and crown material per acre for differ between consensus and majority scenarios because the majority scenario 
covers an additional 34% of the landscape with generally lower pre-treatment basal area.  
 
 

 60
Table 13.  The amount of the analysis area and ponderosa pine type where a desired post-treatment basal area was not met by the 
majority scenario by removing only small-diameter trees (<16” dbh).  Wood volumes reported in the table are from trees >16” dbh.  A 
total of 81% of the area treated in the majority scenario (74% of landscape) showed that sufficient basal area can potentially be 
harvested from small-diameter trees accounting for 90% of the total volume (917 million ft3).  This analysis assumes 10% and 20% of 
the basal area is retained from trees in the <5” dbh and 5 -16” dbh classes respectively. 
 
Management area 
Acres 
%  of management area 
condition not met1 
% of total area 
condition not met 
Vol. for trees 
>16” (ft3) 
% of total volume 
from trees >16” 
Community protection  
190,870
53.9 
10.8 
70,964,198 
7.0 
MSO restricted habitat 
7,496  
3.2 
0.4 
787,812 
0.1 
Municipal watersheds  
70,397 
27.4 
0.9 
3,467,404 
0.3 
Aquatic species watersheds 
16,465 
21.1 
4.0 
15,201,905
1.5 
Wildlands  
46,838 
5.9 
2.6 
7,591,187 
0.8 
Sum 332,066
 
18.7 
98,012,506
9.7 
1Desired post-treatment basal area condition is not met by harvesting only trees <16” dbh. 
 
 
 
Table 14.  Treatment scenarios in the ponderosa pine type summarized by level of treatment on national and non-national USDA 
Forest Service (USFS) lands.   
 
Land type 
Treatment 
Total area (acres)
Total volume (ft3)
Ave ft3 harvested/ac
USFS lands 
Consensus 
886,531 
742,492,760 
838 
Non-USFS lands 
Consensus 
100,578 
104,734,206 
1,041 
USFS lands 
Majority 
1,541,262 
906,795,594 
588
Non-USFS lands 
Majority 
120,013  
108,407,979  
903

 61
Table 15.  Restoration byproducts harvested and removed by White Mountain area (Apache 
Sitgreaves National Forest) harvesting contractors in year 2006. 
 
Harvesting Contractors 
Harvested materials 
 
(thousand green tons)
(million ft3)
(% of total) 
Walker Brothers 
110.8
3.17
63.6 
Tri Star Logging 
44.6
1.27
25.6 
Nutrioso Logging 
12.3
0.35
7.1 
Renegy 
6.5
0.19
3.7 
TOTAL 
174.2
4.98
100.0 
 
Table 16.  Restoration byproducts utilized by White Mountain area (Apache Sitgreaves National 
Forest) mills and manufacturers in year 2006. 1   
Mills and Manufacturers 
Utilized materials 
 
(thousand green tons)
(million ft3) (% of total)
Forest Energy (pellets) 
95.9
2.74 
55.1
Reidhead2  (lumber) 
24.4
0.70 
14.0
Renegy (biomass) 
9.8
0.28 
5.6
Western Renewables3 (biomass) 
14.1
0.40 
8.1
Southwest Forest Products4 
(pallets, mulch, cut stock) 
13.3
0.38 
7.6
Other (post, poles, logs, etc.) 
16.7
0.48 
9.6
TOTAL 
174.2
4.98 
100.0
Source: Apache-Sitgreaves NF, Forest Energy, and SW Forest Products 
                                                 
1 Conversion rate = 3.5 tons per ccf (70lbs/cf). 
2 The 24K tons to Reidhead was distributed between the Eagar lumber mill (21K tons) and the Nutrioso mill (3K 
tons). 
3 Western Renewable is no longer in business. 
4 Southwest Forest Products is no longer operating in the White Mt. area. 

 62
Table 17.  Restoration byproducts harvested and removed by Western Mogollon area (Coconino 
and Kaibab National Forests) harvesting contractors in year 2006.  
 
Harvesting Contractors 
Harvested materials 
 
(thousand green tons)
(million ft3) 
(% of total)
SW Forest Products 
91.0
2.84 
57.4
Hurd Brother’s Logging 
24.1
0.75 
15.2
Perkins Timber 
15.2
0.48 
9.6
Colorado Wood Co. 
2.8
0.09 
1.8
High Desert Inv. Co. 
25.0
0.78 
15.8
Other 
0.4
0.01 
0.2
Total 
158.5
4.95 
100.0
 
 
Table 18.  Restoration byproducts utilized by Western Mogollon Area (Coconino and Kaibab 
National Forests) mills and manufacturers in year 2006.  
 
Mills and Manufacturers 
Utilized materials 
 
(thousand green tons)
(million ft3) 
(% of total)
SW Forest Products 
(pallets, mulch, cut stock) 
133.5
4.17 
84.2
Canyon Fuels 
(Zellner’s Firewood) 
25.0
0.78 
15.8
 
158.5
4.95 
100
Source: Coconino and Kaibab NF, and SW Forest Products 
Conversion rate = 3.2 tons per ccf (64lbs/cf). Original values provided in CCF.

 63
 
 
Table 19. Flow of wood from specific harvesting contractors operating on USDA Forest Service lands processing facilities for the 
White Mountains and Western Mogollon Plateau in Arizona.  
 
Western Mogollon area (Coconino and Kaibab National Forests), 2006 
 
Harvest contractor 
Green tons
Processing facility  
Products 
Southwest Forest 
91,000  SW Forest Products  
Pallets, cut stock, timbers, misc. landscape 
Hurd Bros. Logging 
24,100  SW Forest Products  
Pallets, cut stock, timbers, misc. landscape 
Perkins Timber 
15,200  SW Forest Products  
Pallets, cut stock, timbers, misc. landscape 
Colorado Wood Co. 
28,000  SW Forest Products  
Pallets, cut stock, timbers, misc. landscape 
Other 
4,000  SW Forest Products  
Pallets, cut stock, timbers, misc. landscape 
High Desert 
25,000  Canyon fuels 
Fire wood 
 
 
 
White Mountains area (Apache‐Sitgreaves National Forest), 2006 
 
Future Forest (Walker/WMSP) 
79,000  First Energy 
Pellets 
Future Forest (Walker/WMSP) 
16,400  Reidhead 
Lumber 
Future Forest (Walker/WMSP) 
14,100  West. Renew.  
Biomass 
Future Forest (Walker/WMSP) 
1,300  Other 
Posts, poles, logs etc.  
Nutrioso Logging & Renegy 
7,400  Reidhead 
Lumber 
Nutrioso Logging & Renegy 
6,500  Renegy 
Biomass 
Nutrioso Logging & Renegy 
4,900  Other 
Posts, poles, logs 
Tri Star Logging 
16,900  Forest energy 
Pellets 
Tri Star Logging 
14,100  Other 
‐ 
Tri Star Logging 
300
Renegy 
Biomass 
Tri Star Logging 
13,300  SW Forest Products 
‐ 

 
 64
Table 20.  Forest growth estimates from 10 and 20 year FVS cycles using FIA plots in the 
ponderosa pine forest type (n = 327). 
 
Years 
Diameter 
class1 
Mean 
growth2 
SD 
Max/Min1
Mean 
mortality1 
Net 
growth1 
1997-2007 
All 
42.9
17.8
4/125
2.9 
40.0
2007-2027 
All 
44.2
20.8
4/144
5.3 
38.9
1997-2007 
 
 
 
<5” dbh 
1.2
6.3
0/28
0.40 
0.76
 
5 to 16” dbh 
16.5
20.6
0/74
1.5 
15.0
 
>16” dbh 
25.0
21.2
0/185
0.39 
24.6
2007-2027 
<5” dbh 
0.18
5.9
0/36
0.15 
0.02
 
5 to 16” dbh 
13.1
17.9
0/69
0.90 
12.2
 
>16” dbh 
26.7
18.9
0/129
0.27 
26.4
1Tree growth and mortality for diameter classes is what has accumulated during a 10- or 20 year 
growth period using FVS models.  Trees diameter increment sufficient to move a tree to the next 
larger diameter class after 10 years will be counted as growth in that category.  Some tree 
mortality is unaccounted for in diameter classes between years 2007 and 2027 because of an 
FVS programming limitation.      
2Units are in ft3/ac/yr 
 
 

 
 65
Figures 
 
 
Figure 1. Map detailing the 2.4 million acre wood supply analysis area in northern Arizona. The 
study area includes ponderosa pine and pine-oak vegetation south of the Grand Canyon and across the 
Mogollon Plateau to the border of Arizona and New Mexico within the proclamation boundaries of 
the Kaibab (south of Grand Canyon), Coconino, and Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests, and the 
Payson and Pleasant Valley Ranger Districts of the Tonto National Forest (outlined in green).  
Land cover data source:  Southwest ReGAP 
Grand Canyon 

 
 66
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Map depicting areas not considered a source of wood supply from mechanical thinning 
treatments (black) and landscape management areas (various colors) used to define various 
desired post-treatment conditions in working group treatment scenarios. 

 
 67
 
 
Figure 3. Map of mechanical treatment levels defined in Community Wildfire Protection Plans in 
the analysis area. 

 
 68
Desired Post-Treatment Basal Area Distributions
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
190
Basal Area (ft2/acre)
Prob. density
Community Protection
Aquatic and Municipal Watersheds
MSO Restricted Habitat
Wildlands
 
 
Figure 4. Desired post-treatment ponderosa pine basal area distributions for each landscape 
management area used in consensus and majority scenarios.  Locations with pre-treatment basal 
areas lower than informed by curves were not decreased following potential treatments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 69
 
 
Figure 5. Map of estimated ponderosa pine basal area in year 2006 across the analysis area. 

 
 70
 
Figure 6. Map of estimated ponderosa pine basal area across the analysis area following potential 
treatments defined in the majority scenario. 

 
 71
 
Figure 7. Map of estimated total ponderosa pine bole volume for year 2006 across the wood supply 
analysis area.  

 
 72
          
Figure 8. Map of estimated ponderosa pine bole volume for trees <5” dbh for year 2006 across the 
wood supply analysis area. 

 
 73
          
Figure 9. Map of estimated ponderosa pine bole volume for trees ranging from 5 to 16” dbh for year 
2006 across the wood supply analysis area. 

 
 74
         
Figure 10. Map of estimated ponderosa pine bole volume for trees >16” dbh in year 2006 across the 
wood supply analysis area.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendices  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This page intentionally left blank  
 

 
 75
Appendices 
Appendix A. Letter from Regional Forester on Utility of Wood Supply Analysis 
  
 
 

Appendix B. Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Agendas and Summaries 
 
Wood Supply Working Group  
Analysis of Small-Diameter Wood Supply in Northern Arizona 
 
June 4, 2007, Northland Pioneer College, Holbrook, AZ 
9:00 a.m. – 4:15 p.m. 
 
 
9:00 – 9:15 a.m. 
Welcome - Tom Sisk (Professor, Environmental Sciences, 
Northern Arizona University) 
 
9:15 – 9:30 a.m. 
Agenda Review – Haydee Hampton (Research Associate, 
Environmental Sciences, Northern Arizona University) 
 
9:30 – 9:45 a.m. 
Group Introductions – Rosemary Romero (Facilitator, Rosemary 
Romero Consulting) 
 
9:45 – 10:30 a.m. 
Wood Supply Steering Committee presentations –  
Steve Gatewood (Consultant, Wildwood Consulting and Former 
Director, Greater Flagstaff Forests Partnership) 
Todd Schulke (Forest Programs Director, Center for Biological 
Diversity)  
Diane Vosick (Associate Director, Ecological Restoration Institute) 
Elaine Zieroth (Forest Supervisor, Apache-Sitgreaves National 
Forests) 
Rob Davis (President / Owner, Forest Energy / Future Forests) 
 
10:30 – 10:45 a.m. 
Break 
 
10:45 – 12:00 p.m. 
Wood Supply Analysis Goals and Objectives  
 
Presentation – Gilbert Zepeda (Director of Forestry, Forest 
Health, Cooperative Forestry, and International Forestry, 
Southwestern Region, USDA Forest Service)  
The Region’s interest in funding this project and how they intend to 
use analysis products in decision making (15-20 minutes with Q/A) 
 
Presentation – Tom Sisk  
Benefits of landscape-scale analyses in general and previous 
treatment scenario work accomplished during the Western 
Mogollon Plateau and White Mountains Landscape Assessments 
(20-30 minutes with Q/A) 
 
Presentation – Haydee Hampton and Gary Snider (Forest 
Economist and Doctoral Candidate, School of Forestry, Northern 
Arizona University) 
Description of Wood Supply Analysis objectives, methods, 
analysis area, and time line (20-30 minutes with Q/A)

 
 
12:00 – 1:00 p.m. 
Lunch 
 
 
1:00 – 1:15 p.m. 
Process Review – Rosemary Romero 
 
 
1:15 – 2:30 p.m. 
Setting the Scene  
 
Presentation – Herb Hopper (Community-based Forest and Wood 
Products Advocate, Little Colorado Plateau Resource, Conservation & 
Development)   
 
Economic Considerations for Restoring Forest Health (15 minutes 
with Q/A) (cancelled as Mr. Hopper could not attend) 
 
Presentations – Shaula Hedwall; US Fish and Wildlife, Sarah 
Lantz; Urban Wildlife Planner, AZGF, and Jerry Drury, Timber 
Staff Officer, Kaibab National Forest, Jim Probst, Hydrologist, 
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest 
 
Treatment-related regulations and guidelines relevant to siting 
treatments at the landscape scale. What constraints need to be 
considered when developing treatment scenarios? (15-20 minutes 
each with Q/A)  
 
 
2:30 – 2:45 p.m. 
Break 
 
 
2:45 – 3:45 p.m. 
Data needs for developing treatment scenarios – Tom Sisk, 
Haydee Hampton and Jill Rundall 
 
Treatment scenario development and data available for analysis 
area.  Facilitated discussion and prioritization on need for and 
availability of additional spatial data  
 
Logistics for next meeting 
 
 
3:45 – 4:15 p.m. 
Public comment period 
 
 
4:15 p.m 
 
Adjourn 

June 4, 2007 Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary 
Page 1 of 15 
Meeting Summary 
Wood Supply Working Group Kick-Off Meeting 
Analysis of Small-Diameter Wood Supply in Northern Arizona 
June 4, 2007, Northland Pioneer College, Holbrook, Arizona 
 
Introduction and Agenda Review 
 
Tom Sisk: Welcoming 
Sisk (Professor, Center for Environmental Sciences and Education at Northern Arizona 
University (NAU)) welcomed members of the Working Group and the public to the kick-off 
meeting. After mentioning recent and ongoing forest restoration studies wherein a consensus of 
public opinion had been reached, Sisk encouraged the group to consider ways in which they 
could take the next step of joining economic development with forest health. The working group 
draws from the perspectives of numerous organizations, interest groups and industries, and Sisk 
remarked that this diversity of opinion and interest makes for a radical approach to the forest 
restoration process in Arizona. In addition to the efforts of those involved, Sisk also stated that 
the large base of spatial science and research the group has to draw from may better reveal 
specific areas on the landscape where economic stabilization and forest restoration can exist 
harmoniously. 
 
Sisk then turned the floor over to Haydee Hampton (Research Associate, Center for 
Environmental Sciences and Education at NAU), the Forest Ecosystem Restoration Analysis 
(ForestERA) Project Manager leading this collaborative effort. 
 
Haydee Hampton: Agenda, contents of workbook, and Wood Supply Team introductions  
Hampton presented the agenda for the kick-off meeting, went over possible dates for upcoming 
working group meetings, and explained sections of the workbook to those members present. She 
encouraged Working Group members to review materials included in the workbook. If members 
wish for information/documents to be included in the workbook for subsequent meetings, let 
Hampton know. Members requested that reference materials be made available online, and 
Hampton agreed to make these available on the ForestERA website 
(http://www.forestera.nau.edu/project_woodsupply_documents.htm). Hampton explained that 
the Working Group operates using a fishbowl method, meaning that stakeholders not on the 
Working Group are always welcome to submit comments for consideration both during meetings 
and between meetings by phone, email or post as detailed on the Wood Supply web pages. 
 
Hampton introduced members of ForestERA’s Project Team not present at the Working Group 
kick-off meeting: Brett Dickson (Ecologist), Yaguang Xu (Spatial Analyst, GIS Developer).  She 
then introduced Jill Rundall, GIS Specialist, ForestERA; Jada Ach, Scribe; Rosemary Romero, 
Meeting Facilitator; and Gary Snider, Forest Economist and Doctoral student in the School of 
Forestry at Northern Arizona University. 
 
Rosemary Romero: Group Introductions 
Romero coordinated Working Group member introductions. 
 

June 4, 2007 Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary 
Page 2 of 15 
Working Group members present at meeting (in order of presentation): 
1) Scott Higginson, Executive Vice President of NZ Legacy/Snowflake White Mountain Power, 
Renergy 
2) Elaine Zieroth, Forest Supervisor for Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest 
3) Diane Vosick, Associate Director of the Ecological Restoration Institute 
4) Steve Gatewood, Director of the Greater Flagstaff Forests Partnership 
5) Shaula Hedwall, representative of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Ecological Services 
6) Sarah Lantz, Urban Wildlife Planner for Arizona Game and Fish Department (Region II 
Flagstaff Office) 
7) Keith Pajkos, Timber Staff for the Arizona State Lands Department Forestry Division 
8) Larry Stephenson, Executive Director of the Eastern Arizona Counties Organization 
(ECO)/Economic Environmental Counties Organization (EECO) 
9) Edward Smith, The Nature Conservancy 
10) Kim Newbauer, Representative of Coconino National Forest 
11) Jerry Drury, Timber Staff Officer for Kaibab National Forest 
12) Pascal Berlioux, President and Chief Executive Officer of Arizona Forest Restoration 
Products, Inc. 
13) Ethan Aumack, Director of Restoration Programs for Grand Canyon Trust 
14) Bill Greenwood, City Manager for the Town of Eagar 
15) Rob Davis, President/Owner of Forest Energy Corporation/Future Forests 
16) Todd Schulke, Forest Programs Director for the Center of Biological Diversity 
 
Working Group members not present at meeting: 
1) Robert LaCapa, Forest Manager, DOI BIA Fort Apache Agency Branch of Forestry 
2) Chuck Peone, Fort Apache Timber Co. 
3) Paul DeClay, Tribal Forester, Forestry Department, White Mountains Apache Tribe 
 
 
 
Meeting observers: 
1) Jessica Covey, FEC 
2) Bob Baltes, BDA 
3) Mary Beth Prior, BDA 
4) Carol Boyd, Stewardship Staff Officer, Coconino National Forest 
5) Paul Ferris, City Planner for City of Winslow 
6) Tammy Mazzetti, Grant Forest Products 
 
After introductions, Romero outlined the logistics of the meeting. She stated that it is her role to 
help move the conversation forward during this public process. 
 

June 4, 2007 Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary 
Page 3 of 15 
Steering Committee Presentations 
 
Steve Gatewood: Inception of This Process 
Gatewood spoke of how this collaborative process began and focused on the central 
question of what forest restoration projects generate in terms of wood supply. Gatewood 
repeatedly stressed that such a partnership calls for community-based forest restoration 
and utilization. He asked the Working Group to consider how to generate information 
that seeks to determine the available supply. He posed several additional questions for 
consideration, such as the following: What is the available supply? How much is 
available for utilization? What if the need exceeds the supply of these restoration 
projects? How will large users affect small users? Before coming to a resolution in this 
process, these issues need to be considered. 
 
According to Gatewood, another major issue to consider during this process is the long-
term product supply, of which he begged the following questions: What happens to 
growth, and how much of that growth can we rely on in the future? If we are successful at 
restoring fire-adapted ecosystems, how does that change future wood volumes? In 
conclusion, this group needs seek out ways of estimating the long-term supply. 
 
In order to come closer to restoring Arizona’s forests, this wood supply analysis must 
move forward so that industries have the information they need to determine supply. 
 
Todd Schulke: 
Schulke spoke on the need for a landscape-scale approach to the restoration or Arizona’s 
forests. His two major questions for the group centered on the need for forest restoration 
efforts to pair successfully with economic development: what are the high priority areas 
in Arizona in terms of risk, and how will we pay for such work? It is time to merge these 
ideas of ecological restoration with economics, Schulke said, because paying for such 
restorative efforts will be critical. 
 
Schulke says that he is confident in a landscape-scale approach to forest restoration. The 
success of such an approach has already been documented (Signal Peak Assessment 
Project) which uses LANDFIRE data, further convincing Schulke that such an approach 
to forest restoration is important. 
 
Schulke also expressed confidence in the collaborative process adopted by this Working 
Group. The key for making such a collaborative process run smoothly is to find a zone of 
agreement between the members’ diverse goals and interests. In conclusion, Schulke was 
excited about such a community-based approach to forest restoration that economizes on 
an economically sound approach to Arizona’s ecological needs. 
 
Diane Vosick: 
Vosick spoke on obstacles that the Working Group may encounter when trying to 
develop a feasible restoration plan. The pace and scale of the group’s work is not 
commensurable to the problem, she said, and therefore a better zone of agreement is 

June 4, 2007 Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary 
Page 4 of 15 
needed. She said that Arizona’s economy would not survive unless we restore forest 
health. 
 
Speaking on the economic side of the issue, Vosick stressed that people are a part of the 
landscape; so much of rural Arizona depends on tourism, water and other environmental 
services. Coming to a consensus on a restoration plan that runs concurrent with these 
economic values will be of the utmost importance during this collaborative process. 
Vosick hopes that this process, along with the Statewide Strategy, will provide lots of 
momentum for changing Arizona environmental policies. It will be important in the next 
6 months, Vosick asserted, to seek out a solution that the entire group agrees is a good 
solution. 
 
Elaine Zieroth: 
Zieroth spoke on the tool of stewardship contracting, which may be an outcome of this 
process. She provided the group with background information on Stewardship 
contracting, noting that such contracts are based on authority passed by Congress; the 
Forest Service and the Bureau of land Management engage in long-term contracts where 
goods can be traded for services. In sum, under such contracts wood fiber can be traded 
for work needed on forests (thinning, restoration, etc.). If the wood has more value, the 
industries can pay for the restoration activities themselves. She added that the value of 
products alone might now be enough to generate work in some areas, which makes such 
pairing of restoration with economic development so important. 
 
Zieroth posed several questions for the group to consider in regards to stewardship 
contracting: What treatment do our forests need? What is left in the forest, and what is 
the economic value of that? Is entering into a 10-year contract enough to stimulate the 
industry, or should we be thinking more long-term? 
 
She commented on the success of stewardship contracts, citing the Vincent Fire as an 
example. This fire recently burned into units thinned under such contracts and went right 
to the ground; groups were able to put out the fire almost immediately. In addition to fire 
risks, Zieroth listed drought and climate change as other factors to consider when 
determining zones for contracting. Markets for smaller material, such as the products of 
the Apache-Sitgreaves Forest, need to be developed. To do this, we need to pick up the 
pace, she said, and look for both large industries and community-based industries for 
support. 
 
 
Rob Davis:   
Davis encouraged the group to consider ways to better utilize forest restoration products. 
Wood that remains on the ground after such restorative efforts (i.e. thinning) should not 
be considered waste, Davis argues, but a valuable resource. The value and cost of such a 
supply needs to be recognized. 
 
There is a need, Davis said, to find people and industries that can pay for such efforts. 
After seeking out larger consumers to work under larger contracts, money can be put into 
smaller industries. Davis said that if they can’t find industries to pay for restoration 

June 4, 2007 Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary 
Page 5 of 15 
products, then that restoration is not going to happen. While working with this group, 
Davis feels that the following questions will be necessary to answer if this process is to 
move forward: What is an appropriate landscape size for such efforts? What can be done 
in those prescribed areas? What is the available supply? What industries fit our resources 
economically and volume-wise? What projects will work for the long-term? Only when 
these economical questions can be answered will there be hope for Arizona’s forests, 
Davis says. We are looking for a policy, Davis says of the group’s mission, and if the 
community and state want to move forward on this then that is the reliability of the 
supply   
    
Romero summarized questions and ideas remarked upon thus far in presentations: addressing 
community needs, seeking out an appropriate industry, estimating available supply, and 
accounting for needs of wildlife. She encouraged the group to untangle this complexity – to think 
about where members can find a zone of agreement. 
 
 
Wood Supply Analysis Goals and Objectives – Presentation by Gilbert Zepeda:  Zepeda 
(Director of Forestry, Forest Health, Cooperative Forestry, and International Forestry, 
Southwestern Region, USDA Forest Service) began his discussion by remarking on what he 
considered to be the central priority of forest restoration discussions: to restore functionality of 
fire-adapted forests. We must ground ourselves in that goal, he said, by seeking support across 
districts and forests. 
 
Much of Zepeda’s presentation focused on the efforts of forest restoration projects as 
they affect WUIs (Wildland Urban Interfaces). Until we are able to reduce the risk of 
uncharacteristic fires in communities, we’re never going to be able to let fire run its 
natural course across the landscape in an effective way, he said. One possible solution is 
to perform strategically placed thinning treatments in these areas. With Zepeda citing the 
original estimate of WUIs at 2 million acres, he stresses the need to assess risk factors in 
those areas first and foremost. Treatments of WUIs are expensive, however, usually 
necessitating mechanical treatment. Funding for such efforts is therefore a key question. 
 
The challenge lies between the need to restore 17 million acres of unhealthy forests in 
Arizona and the costs which would be associated with such a plan, Zepeda said. 
According to cited figures, to treat WUIs and non-WUIs would cost an estimated 1.5 
billion dollars; Zepeda remarked that in no way would we be able to make such a dent 
without considering creative alternatives. 
 
In an effort to reduce those costs, Zepeda encouraged the Working Group to consider 
private investment in excess biomass, noting, however, that such investment should be 
seen not as the end-all goal, but as a by-product of restoration efforts. The goal is to 
restore fire-adapted ecosystems – not to benefit industries, not economic development. 
This goal must be achieved at a faster rate and in a larger way. 
 
Zepeda stated that he admires such a collaborative effort between diverse stakeholders 
and spatial scientists. This broader approach to forest restoration has always been missing 

June 4, 2007 Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary 
Page 6 of 15 
in previous studies and figures, and Zepeda stated that unless there’s a collaborative 
effort in coming up with the necessary gross and net amounts of woody material, this 
could end up being just another study. All critical players that have a stake in Northern 
Arizona must have a voice in what comes out of this. In terms of agency capacity, Zepeda 
mentioned that those supporting restorative efforts for Arizona forests have lost a lot of 
institutional capacity in the last couple of years; the restoration needs exceed what such 
groups are capable of working on. If this group comes to a conceptual agreement of what 
large-scale restoration looks like while considering the support of biomass in a 
sustainable way, then there will be less of a need to run mechanical treatments. If such 
solutions are reached in this study, Zepeda believes that support can be garnered at the 
national level to build institutional capacity for facilitating such efforts. 
 
While fire risk poses one of the largest threats to forest health, Zepeda urged the group to 
also consider such risk factors as drought and climate change. What are the long term 
consequences of these elements to forests? Unless we build resiliency in the system to the 
threat posed by fire, climate change will only exacerbate the current negative state of 
forest health. 
 
Zepeda remarked that while Stewardship contracting is not an end-all, it is obviously a 
part of an overall restoration priority. Such contracts can be a tool we can use when 
appropriate, offering assurances to industries and communities. Zepeda concluded by 
asking the group to think about the high priority areas throughout this collaborative 
process. Focusing on key risk areas will lend more structure to restorative investments. 
When groups fail to look at high priority areas, then they are not employing a landscape-
scale approach to the problem of forest health. 
 
Q: Are you looking at applying stewardship contracts in different ways? Setting up a 
regional stewardship contracting program? 
 
A: This is a business plan the Forest Service considers a central priority, Zepeda said. Do 
we invest in a lot of small contracts? One large one? On a regional scale? He is looking at 
it in multiple scales and is concerned that by going with one huge contract, the smaller 
guy would be aced out. Depending on local needs and type of utilization that’s taking 
place, Zepeda said, there is a need for an array of industries.  Zepeda also noted that the 
Working Group’s activities do not satisfy the public process requirements that are 
initiated when a stewardship contract is officially considered by the Forest Service. 
 
Q: Are the results of this process being institutionalized in any way? 
 
A: Zepeda said that the issue of institutionalization is an ongoing discussion. When the 
initial proposal came forward, that was a concern. This study will hopefully be a 
springboard for looking at that zone of agreement across larger audiences. He stated that 
the Forest Service has no preconceived notions of what would come out of this study, nor 
is the Forest Service planning to use this information to analyze proposals from any one 
particular industrial user. At the beginning, the Forest Service questioned whether or not 
they should be involved in the Working Group dialogue. Zepeda wishes this process to be 

June 4, 2007 Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary 
Page 7 of 15 
a community-based approach without any preconceived notions coming from the Forest 
Service. Without a zone of agreement and a broad idea of what the available supply is, he 
doesn’t think we can make the gains that we wish to make as a community at-large. 
 
Tom Sisk: The importance of a landscape-scale perspective in forest treatment planning and a 
review of previous collaborative landscape assessments in the analysis area (PowerPoint 
Presentation) 
 
Before beginning the PowerPoint presentation, Sisk wanted to make his role as a member 
of ForestERA clear to the Working Group. He stated that his aims are to help this process 
and to clarify three key elements of this group’s aim: the idea of landscape, the 
collaborative process, and the scientific tools that can be utilized for reaching a consensus 
on risk areas and supply. 
 
ForestERA uses a landscape-based approach to forest restoration analysis and planning, 
and in the following PowerPoint presentation (which can be downloaded from the 
ForestERA site), Sisk wishes to outline the benefits of such an approach. His portion of 
the presentation delved into how spatial analysis can determine priority areas, how such 
an analysis can be crafted to benefit the work of the Working Group, and what role Forest 
ERA can play in providing such an analysis. 
 
Note: Power Point slides from this presentation are available at the Wood Supply 
Analysis Documents web page at: 
http://www.forestera.nau.edu/docs/June04_07_Wood_Supply_Kick-off_Mtn_TDS.pdf 
 
The first few slides defined what it means to approach forest restoration at a landscape 
scale. Sisk stressed that all analysis and planning should be conducted at scales that 
capture the key process that shape our forests, and there is therefore a need to conduct the 
planning and analysis on a larger scale. Such a large scale is able to assess such important 
determining factors as fire, wildlife habitat, and the utilization of supply. He noted that 
this group is taking the first swing at this utilization issue, emphasizing the fact that 
utilization needs to be a piece of the restorative process. 
 
Fire, Sisk noted, is obviously a factor that determines what the landscape is. We just can’t 
determine the precise size of the landscape at risk, Sisk said, but we must instead think of 
it as dynamic.  
 
Q: For some people it is difficult to grasp what you mean when you say “landscape-
scale.” It is difficult to communicate that with people because people want something to 
hold onto specifically. 
 
A: Tom responded to this question by saying that one cannot distill “landscape” into a 
specific acreage. As a public speaker on this issue, Sisk acknowledged that he must work 
to try to communicate to the public what, exactly, this means. He insisted, though, that 
the group must not get away from thinking about this process at a landscape-scale. 
 

June 4, 2007 Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary 
Page 8 of 15 
An issue for this group, Romero noted, will be how to distill this term and relay it to a 
broader audience. We must learn to give them enough information so that they may better 
understand this group’s goals. 
 
Sisk responded by saying that since this group is operating in a collaborative way, the 
goal for understanding what is meant by “landscape-scale” will be to give people the 
space to define this notion in their own terms. 
 
When presenting the slide titled “Science-Based Public Process,” Sisk emphasized the 
need to identify and prioritize landscape features in critical need of attention. He 
discussed examples of tools that ForestERA has been developing and noted that in 
addition to the available science, people play a key role in assessing regions of high risk. 
Not every place on the landscape has the same risk, Sisk noted, and by involving people 
in scientific assessments, we can get an idea of where the risk is the highest. 
 
The greatest risk to forest health, Sisk said, is unnatural wildfire, but he also mentioned 
other notable risks for consideration: insect outbreaks and erosion-prone watersheds. 
ForestERA has been working on developing ways to rank landscapes according to 
vulnerability to these factors, in addition to the risk of fire. 
 
Once risk has been assessed using GIS assessment tools, ForestERA can identify 
treatments on a map as well. Landscape constraints are taken into account, allowing for 
the determination of appropriate restorative treatments. Sisk says this type of spatial 
approach to forest restoration collapses traditional one-size fits all approaches, paving the 
way for healthier forests. 
 
The GIS tools ForestERA has at their disposal can also predict possible effects/outcomes 
of treatments. Maps are available that show how a specific treatment would change the 
fire hazard or to reveal how different wildlife habitats could be improved or affected. On 
the flip-side, there is currently no data to reveal how treatments would affect small-
diameter wood supply. 
 
In conclusion, Sisk encouraged the group to feel confident about such a landscape-scale 
approach to restorative efforts. Even though the Working Group is comprised of 
stakeholders with different desires, he said, their goals merge in regards to forest 
restoration projects. Such goals reveal the “sweet spot” where restoration meets economic 
development.  
 
Q: I thought the objective was not to develop a proposal, but to develop techniques and 
analysis. Is this the basis of a proposal? A plan to get this amount of wood? 
 
A: Sisk answered by saying that it’s not up to him to answer that question due to his 
technical role in the project. His role is to support the working group. There is no 
decision mandate. Sisk did say, however, that he hopes that this process will form a 
foundation for those decisions, but he did not comment further since he sees his role as 
more of a facilitator than a decision-maker. 

June 4, 2007 Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary 
Page 9 of 15 
 
 
Haydee Hampton: Description of Wood Supply Analysis objectives, methods, analysis area and 
time line (PowerPoint Presentation) 
 
Hampton followed Sisk in discussing the scientific basis needed for such restorative 
efforts. She began by discussing the Wood Supply Analysis goals and objectives included 
in ForestERA’s contract with Region 3, emphasizing the necessity to build agreement on 
the type and location of forest restoration treatments and estimate the wood supply 
following collaboratively developed treatment scenarios.  
 
Note: Power Point slides from this presentation are available from the Wood Supply 
Analysis Documents web page at: 
http://www.forestera.nau.edu/docs/June04_2007_WoodSupplyAnalysis_HH_GS.pdf 
 
She also explained that ForestERA will be developing a prediction of the actual area and 
intensity of treatments versus the area and intensity planned. These factors often differ 
due to site-specific information not considered in coarser-level planning processes. 
 
Hampton reviewed a map of the Wood Supply Analysis area, emphasizing that the reason 
we can move forward so quickly in this project (only a 7-month timeline) is that 
ForestERA has conducted landscape assessments of most of the ponderosa-pine 
dominated regions in the analysis area. ForestERA has already collected data for and 
supported two major collaborative processes in the White Mountains and Western 
Mogollon Plateau. The darker green areas on the basal area map, she noted, denote the 
presence of ponderosa pine and are the focus of the analysis. 
 
On the slide titled “Build Agreement on the Type and Location,” Hampton outlined the 
logistics involved in such a collaborative process. Hampton explained that the Working 
Group will meet a total of 6-8 times in Northern Arizona and that the public is always 
encouraged to attend. Announcements for meetings were sent to about 250 stakeholders. 
In choosing a location for this meeting, the Wood Supply Steering Committee 
recommended Holbrook as a good central location located conveniently on an interstate 
highway. Hampton asked the Working Group for input on locations of future meetings. 
Some members responded that it was a good central location. Other members thought 
that meetings should take place in various locations inside analysis area, including 
Flagstaff and Show Low, so that a greater number of stakeholders could observe. 
 
Hampton then outlined a meeting timetable and explained methods for mapping wood 
volume layers. ForestERA will be using imputation methods, which link multiple 
vegetation layers and plot data to common descriptors of vegetation states. Uncertainty 
estimates will also be provided. Layers used in previous assessments and that will be 
soon available for the Wood Supply Analysis area from Region 3 include dominant 
vegetation and cover type, forest canopy cover, and mean tree diameter class. 
 

June 4, 2007 Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary 
Page 10 of 15 
Hampton then posed the question of which diameter-size ranges would be the most 
important for the analysis. Is it enough to have 2 DBH classes? Or is it 4 or nothing? She 
noted there is tradeoff as accuracy will decline as more classes are added, so it’s 
important to assess which classes are most useful and necessary. A member of the 
Working Group noted the four potential classes shown on Hampton’s slide (<5in, 5-9 in, 
9-16 in., >16 in. DBH) were fairly standard. Others commented that a 12 in. cutoff, in 
place of or in addition to a 16 in. break, would also be of interest. 
 
Sisk then responded by saying that ForestERA is breaking new ground in identifying 
these classes because it is a difficult task to map size-class information. He stated that it 
is their goal to come up with the best layers for these forests, and this was their first 
chance to get an initial reaction from the group. 
 
Hampton then delved into how ForestERA develops their vegetation inventory for 
mapping basal area and other forest structure metrics. She stated that their inventory is 
based on a stratified random sample and will target under-represented vegetation states in 
new acquisition. ForestERA is compiling ground plot data from other sources, such as 
Forest Inventory Analysis (FIA) and Forest Service spatial data, for use in this Analysis 
and reviewing spatial data from LANDFIRE, Southwest ReGAP, and Region 3 Forest 
Service.  
 
For more information on the Wood Supply Analysis, Hampton suggested visiting the 
ForestERA Wood Supply web pages: www.forestera.nau.edu/project_woodsupply.htm. 
The web pages contain a project summary, meeting information, a list of Working Group 
members, project updates, a link to a map server and information on how to participate.  
 
Gary Snider: 
 
 
Gary Snider concluded the presentation (slides 21-23) by discussing existing wood 
utilizers, framing the issue in terms of supply and demand (for small diameter wood). The 
demand side of the equation must be considered, Snider noted, meaning we must take 
wood harvesters, processors, and users into account. Snider will be gathering information 
on current levels of wood used and existing contracts, as well as capacity, from those on 
the demand side to include in a database. 
 
Snider mentioned that Arizona forests are currently experiencing a lot of growth, but the 
question is how much and for how long? Growth affects buying estimates, and in an 
attempt to begin dissecting these issues for better understanding, Snider said he would put 
together an annotated bibliography of methods and assumptions, and then make 
recommendations on best methods. Finally, in order to assess the impact of fine-scaled 
changes to treatments when they are actually carried out versus planned, he will be 
reviewing past studies on this issue and interviewing two ID teams from different regions 
of the study areas. 
 

June 4, 2007 Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary 
Page 11 of 15 
Gilbert Zepeda: 
 
Following lunch, Zepeda took the floor to share his thoughts about the collaborative 
process and to clarify for the group how the Forest Service would respond to such 
dialogue. This study, he remarked, is a result of an unsolicited proposal which can be a 
source of information to us as we evaluate proposals from wood utilizers. He explained to 
the Working Group that the Forest Service was not currently soliciting recommendations 
for restoration plans, so it is a delicate balance as to how this group should engage in this 
dialogue. 
 
Zepeda asked the group to consider what would be an appropriate means and venue to 
bring forward recommendations once they reached a consensus. Since the Forest Service 
funded this study, he stressed that it is important for the group to consider the following 
question throughout the process: identify what restoration means and what the by-product 
of those efforts would be in terms of amounts. He further went on to say that the Forest 
Service will use the information generated from this study as a source of information 
born from the most contemporary science we have available which is set in a framework 
that represents a zone of agreement. 
 
Q: Do you see us as making recommendations? 
 
A: This group is not being paid to do a study, Zepeda answered.  The information that 
results in this process will be a tool for the Forest Service to consider, but since the 
Working Group was not paid by the Forest Service to conduct such a study, FS is not 
obliged to implement the group’s recommendations. 
 
 
Q: Would getting something in writing help if we wish to later solicit the Forest Service 
to consider our recommendations? Could a letter or notes from meeting, etc. save time?  
 
A: Sure, Zepeda answered. We could work on drafting a letter with Harv’s consent. 
 
 
Setting the Scene 
 
Shaula Hedwall: 
Hedwall, representative from the Fish and Wildlife Service, talked on the issue of 
wildlife considerations for a regional wood supply analysis. Along with Sarah Lantz from 
Arizona Game and Fish, she presented a Power Point presentation (which can be viewed 
on the Wood Supply Analysis documents web page) which delved into how wildlife 
considerations should be taken into account in this analysis. Her main question was this: 
how can we incorporate wildlife issues into these treatment plans? 
 
The outline of Hedwall and Lantz’s presentation is as follows: USFWS and AGFD 
Missions, laws and guidance, wildlife/forest treatment goals, and wildlife considerations 
for forest treatments.  Hedwall and Lantz noted that the missions of their respective 
agencies are quite similar: to provide leadership for sustaining fish and wildlife across the 
board, not just endangered species. 

June 4, 2007 Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary 
Page 12 of 15 
  
 
Hedwall outlined several applicable laws and guidelines that both organizations use as a 
means of protecting wildlife, including the Endangered Species Act, the Bald and Golden 
Eagle Protections Act, and the Migratory Bird Treaty Act. Both Hedwall and Lantz stated 
that while there is no Forest Practices Act in the state of Arizona, both agencies still 
highly recommend the conservation of species’ habitats. 
 
Hedwall concluded her segment of the presentation by saying that FWS works hard to 
maintain, enhance, and restore habitats. They take a very comprehensive look at the 
habitat for multiple species’ needs in these areas. She feels that the Working Group can 
fulfill both the supply goals and these FWS goals in creative ways. She encourages the 
group to consider the effects of widespread analysis and treatment on multiple habitats. 
 
Sarah Lantz: 
Lantz continued the PowerPoint presentation by encouraging the Working Group to take 
a multi-species approach to the question of forest restoration during this process. She 
proposes a mosaic approach when this group begins implementing treatments. According 
to Lantz, a mosaic approach would simulate a pattern that most closely resembles the 
diversity of habitats and wildlife needs. 
 
Regarding the placement of treatments, Lantz listed several key habitat areas where 
treatments should not take place when considering the needs of wildlife: riparian 
corridors, canyon rims, steep slopes, north-facing slopes, seeps, springs, tanks, known 
movement corridors, and known nest sites. 
 
 
Lantz asked the Working Group to think about what they considered to be the definition 
of WUIs. Such definitions mean a lot for wildlife as many species live and thrive in such 
areas. Restoration projects must take that into account before implementing treatment 
plans in those areas. While Lantz and Hedwall agree that strategic placement of 
treatments in WUIs is important for this group, they stress that the group must also 
consider wildlife habitats on equal grounds with other factors such as restoration, 
economics, and small diameter wood supply. 
 
Q: How do you envision bringing your perspectives into this process? 
 
A: Lantz responded by promoting a mosaic approach to restoration where different 
treatments would be implemented next to each other. Implementing treatments at 
different times and assessing species’ responses to restoration treatments are other ways 
that wildlife considerations could be taken into account. Hedwall added that treatments 
should be modified to account for wildlife habitat. 
 
Participants engaged in the ongoing dialogue by saying that there are two obvious places 
where the concerns of these wildlife agencies can enter the process. What places in the 
landscapes could be designed for wildlife? Can we design new types of treatments to fit 
wildlife needs? Lantz emphasized that she does not want the group to consider wildlife as 
a constraint to treatments but as a part of what the picture has to look like. Hedwall 

June 4, 2007 Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary 
Page 13 of 15 
remarked that the group should also consider how wildlife will be affected by specific 
treatments.  Participants also remarked that there are prescriptions that can be placed in 
the WUI that provide for the needs of both wildlife habitats and healthy forest stand 
structure. 
 
Jim Probst: 
 
Probst (Hydrologist, Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest) encouraged the group to 
consider the effects of restoration and treatment efforts on soils and watersheds. In terms 
of watersheds, he addressed two main concerns: high erosion hazards on steep slopes that 
account for 33% of the project area, and matters of soil sensitivity when determining 
where to implement treatments.  
 
Probst’s advice for large-scale treatment implementation is to avoid restorative efforts 
during the wet harvest and to consider the impact of roads, landings and skid trails on the 
landscape, especially near watershed areas. 
 
In conclusion, Probst hopes the Working Group will consider distance from private land, 
slope gradation, water proximity, and erosion hazards when assessing areas where 
treatments may be necessary. 
 
Data needs for developing treatment scenarios:  Tom Sisk began by discussing the timeline 
involved in gathering necessary data for reaching a consensus regarding wood supply and 
restoration needs. Previous analyses have looked at this entire area, he noted, which makes it 
possible for ForestERA to merge data into products that will be useful for this Working Group. 
He reminds the group that they are not starting from scratch in terms of research. A goal for the 
group, he said, will be to prioritize layers of spatial data. Layers available for analysis include 
basal area, stand density, canopy cover, and wildlife habitat. 
 
His second slide outlined how wildlife habitat can focus efforts. A landscape-level 
analysis can result in strategizing how species-specific information can be utilized to 
focus restoration efforts. Sisk cited spatial research regarding the spotted owl and 
goshawks, illustrating how the Working Group could develop treatment scenarios to 
minimize the effect of treatments on wildlife. 
 
Haydee Hampton:  Hampton stressed that many GIS layers are available for this project, and 
data is already available for the Working Group to consider. Using spatial data made available to 
the group in the work book, Hampton reviewed several layers for this region of focus.  
 
Some members of the group were concerned with the presentation of such data of which 
they have no technical expertise. They remarked that due to their lack of knowledge in 
the arena of spatial data, they were hesitant to participate in that aspect of the 
conversation. Sisk reassured the group that the presentation of this data is merely to 
inform them of what’s available and that the goal of ForestERA is to get the group to the 
level where they can understand such data. 
 

June 4, 2007 Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary 
Page 14 of 15 
Hampton ended her presentation by informing the group that their spatial data will soon 
be available online due to a grant received by NAU’s Geospatial Research and 
Information Laboratory (GRAIL). ForestERA will provide groups with various layers as 
they are created throughout the period of the meetings. 
 
Wrap-Up Discussion (facilitated by Romero): 
One group member found the phrase “type and location” to be too vague in the goal: “Build 
agreement on the type and location of forest restoration treatments”. He went on to say that if the 
group cannot agree upon the operable acreage, then they were never going to find the total 
potential as a resource. On this point, another participant stated that treatments are linked to 
acreage – the approach ForestERA is proposing seems to include both the treatment approach 
and a number of acreage approach – from a methodology perspective he didn’t see any 
disconnect between ForestERA’s proposal and those who want a specific acreage amount.  
 
Several members of the Working Group stated that it would be helpful to add more detail to the 
goal: “Build agreement on the type and location of forest restoration treatments.”  One 
participant reminded the group that the central priority is to restore fire adapted ecosystems, and 
that any estimate of wood supply available for industry use should be based on restoration by-
products. She suggested the following steps as part of an iterative process to reach this goal: 
 
1. Identify acres available and appropriate for restoration 
2. Identify the restoration goals for those acres 
3. Prioritize and assign treatments by size and location to reach the restoration goals 
4. Estimate the volume of supply of those acres given these treatments. 
Consensus would need to be reached at each step in this process. 
 
The observation was made that these steps were the same as what ForestERA presented. Another 
participant suggested a similar plan: 
 
1. Identify specific areas that are available and appropriate for restoration 
2. Build agreement on forest restoration types for various locations 
3. Develop a spatial layer that captures this information. 
 
One participant recommended that we should only consider mechanical treatment in this study. 
Another countered that we need to consider what happens to areas without mechanical 
treatments as these will either have Wildland Fire Use or prescribed burning and that this 
information will be important in placing treatments strategically at the landscape scale. 
 
One participant proposed working through multiple scenarios instead of attempting to arrive at 
just one scenario that the Forest Service would then have to work with. Some members of the 
Working Group felt uncomfortable with taking out the phrase “building agreement.” One 
scenario has much more weight than multiple scenarios, they stated, and the group should not 
begin watering down that goal before even entering the process. Another member stated that the 
group needs to examine multiple scenarios – not a one-size-fits-all recipe, but a way of assessing 
problem areas and problem solutions.  Sisk responded by saying that arriving at a consensus is 
the most powerful way to build agreement. The goal of the group is to try to find the sweet spot 

June 4, 2007 Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary 
Page 15 of 15 
upon which they can build agreement. Another Working Group member stated that this is a 
process, not a restoration plan. Ultimately the need of this group is to develop a map of at-risk 
places and general treatment plans for those places. “Treatment” was defined as an action that 
would happen in a specific place. “Treatment Scenario” was defined as consisting of multiple 
treatments of various types across an analysis area. 
 
A member of the Working Group suggested that the group adopt a filter which would assess how 
much acreage is available for treatment. There is a need to narrow it down to something more 
practical, she said, because treatment types are tools.  Another group member agreed that acreage 
and treatment need to go together. He suggested that the group go through each area and 
progress accordingly with each layer to determine availability. A member of the group expressed 
concern with such a desire for specificity of acreage and supply. Stakeholders who want 
certainty want it for political or economic reasons, he said. They want to go to their investors 
with those figures. 
 
One member of the group stated that this analysis is already tied to a specific purpose, linked to a 
commissioned study – concerned with an issue of process – fulfill purpose of the study first and 
foremost – should be acknowledgement, we’re only looking at step 1. People from industry need 
to know right away so they can go out and start working with this supply information. 
ForestERA staff emphasized that they must deliver an estimate of wood supply under one or 
more scenarios – hard for us to give estimation on supply without a scenario – we aren’t trying to 
say how much should be taken out, but it involves the goal of restoring the forests – the supply is 
a by-product of the restoration. Another participant stressed that the focus should be on 
mechanized treatments, however another reasoned that all types of treatments should be 
considered.  Another participant asked what’s going to happen to the acres that aren’t treated? 
Recognizing the reality that fire will play out one way or another will influence treatments. 
 
Public Comments 
A stakeholder observing the meeting encouraged the group to be more specific in regards to the 
goals and objectives. There need to be specific ways to tackle those goals and objectives. 
 
Meeting Locations:  Haydee Hampton noted that half the group was closer to Flagstaff while 
most of the remaining participants were in the White Mountains regions.  The group thought the 
Holbrook location worked well, but hoped that other meetings could be held in Flagstaff and 
other parts of project area, perhaps Show Low.  ForestERA will work on organizing the location 
in order to accommodate as many people as possible; keeping in mind that the Holbrook location 
will not be available for the next meeting.  The dates of the meetings were organized as follows 
with locations TBD: 
 
 Wednesday, July 18  
 Friday, August 17 
 Monday, September 17 
 Tuesday, October 9 
 Monday, October 15 
 Monday, October 29 
 Friday, November 16 

Wood Supply Working Group Meeting 
Analysis of Small-Diameter Wood Supply in Northern Arizona 
 
July 18, 2007, Arizona Game and Fish Department, Pinetop, AZ 
9:00 a.m. – 4:00 p.m. 
 
 
 
9:00 – 9:15 a.m. 
Welcome – Rosemary Romero (Facilitator, Rosemary Romero 
Consulting)  
 
9:15 – 9:30 a.m. 
Agenda Review – Haydee Hampton (Research Associate, 
Environmental Sciences, Northern Arizona University) 
 
9:30 – 9:45 a.m. 
Group Decision-Making Process – Rosemary Romero  
 
 
Treatment Scenario Development 
 
9:45 – 10:30 a.m. 
Review: 1) stakeholder questions and comments submitted after 
June 4 Working Group meeting, 2) how other collaborative groups 
have built scenarios in previous landscape assessments 3) Working 
Group suggestions on building treatment scenarios – Haydee 
Hampton 
 
Treatment characterizations and strategically placed treatments– 
Brett Dickson 
 
10:30 – 10:45 a.m. 
Break 
 
10:45 – 12:00 p.m. 
Suggested ways to account for treatment-related guidelines and 
regulations relevant to siting treatments at the landscape scale  
 
 Guidelines regarding wildlife and wildland urban interface 
(WUI) – Brett Dickson (Assistant Research Professor, NAU) 
 Guidelines regarding streams, soils, access, and mechanized 
equipment – Haydee Hampton 
 
12:00 – 1:00 p.m. 
Lunch 
 

1:00 – 2:30 p.m. 
Factors important to identifying areas appropriate for restoration 
for the Wood Supply Analysis 
 
 Vegetation types, Wilderness Areas and other primary factors 
Jill Rundall (Senior Research Specialist, NAU) 
 Working Group brainstorming session to develop a list of on 
additional factors to consider in identifying areas appropriate 
for restoration – facilitated by Rosemary Romero 
 Discussion of available spatial data representing priority 
factors – Brett, Jill, Haydee and Working Group members 
 
2:30 – 2:45 p.m. 
Break 
 
2:45 – 3:30 p.m. 
Optional Working Group Session (if time allows) 
 Brainstorming session on restoration objectives for areas 
available and appropriate for restoration – facilitated by 
Rosemary Romero 
 Discussion of ways to address restoration objectives in the 
Working Group’s treatment scenario – all 
 
3:30 – 3:45 p.m. 
Updates on Wood Estimation Analyses  
 
 Wood utilizer database, ponderosa pine growth models, and 
actual acres/volume following planned treatments – Gary 
Snider (Forest Economist and Doctoral Candidate, School of 
Forestry, Northern Arizona University) 
 Wood volume layer by tree-diameter class – Haydee Hampton 
 
Logistics for next meeting 
 
 
3:45 – 4:00 p.m. 
Public Comment Period 
 
4:00 p.m. 
 
Adjourn 
 

July 18, 2007 Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary 
 Page 1 of 14 
Meeting Summary 
Wood Supply Working Group Meeting #2 
Analysis of Small-Diameter Wood Supply in Northern Arizona 
July 18, 2007, AZ Game and Fish Dept., Pinetop Regional Office, Pinetop, Arizona 
 
 
Introduction and Agenda Review 
 
Rosemary Romero: Welcome 
Romero (Meeting Facilitator) welcomed back the working group members and observers to the 
second of eight scheduled meetings (2 meetings may be cancelled if sufficient progress is made). 
She made several brief announcements concerning the meeting and had the working group and 
audience members introduce themselves.   
 
Working Group members present at meeting (in order of presentation): 
1) Scott Higginson, Executive Vice President of NZ Legacy/Snowflake White Mountain Power, 
Renergy 
2) Shaula Hedwall, representative of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Ecological Services  
3) Sarah Lantz, Urban Wildlife Planner for Arizona Game and Fish Department (Region II 
Flagstaff Office) 
4) Molly Pitts, advocate for Northern Arizona Wood Products Association 
5) Elaine Zieroth, Forest Supervisor for Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests 
6) Lisa McNeilly, Director of the Northern Arizona Program for The Nature Conservancy 
7) Bill Greenwood, City Manager for the Town of Eagar 
8) Pascal Berlioux, President and Chief Executive Officer of Arizona Forest Restoration 
Products, Inc. 
9) Rob Davis, President/Owner of Forest Energy Corporation/Future Forests  
10) Jerry Drury, Timber Staff Officer for Kaibab National Forest  
11) Herb Hopper, Advocate for Little Colorado Plateau Resource Conservation & Development 
12) Diane Vosick, Associate Director of the Ecological Restoration Institute  
13) Todd Schulke, Forest Programs Director for the Center of Biological Diversity  
14) Chuck Peone, Fort Apache Timber Co. 
15) Keith Pajkos, Timber Staff for the Arizona State Lands Department Forestry Division  
16) Mary Stuever, Forestry Department, White Mountain Apache Tribe (alternate for Paul 
DeClay, Tribal Forester) 
 
Working Group members not present at meeting: 
1) Robert LaCapa, Forest Manager, DOI BIA Fort Apache Agency Branch of Forestry 
2) Steve Gatewood, Director of the Greater Flagstaff Forests Partnership 
3) Larry Stephenson, Executive Director of the Eastern Arizona Counties Organization 
(ECO)/Economic Environmental Counties Organization (EECO) 
4) Kim Newbauer, Representative of Coconino National Forest 
5) Ethan Aumack, Director of Restoration Programs for Grand Canyon Trust 
 
 
 

July 18, 2007 Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary 
 Page 2 of 14 
Meeting observers: 
1) Penny Pew, Representative for Congressman Renzi 
2) Bob Baltes, BDA 
3) Greg Morion, USDA - FS 
4) Scott Lockhard, USDA - FS 
5) Stacey Hamburg, Sierra Club 
6) Ed Martin, SFP 
7) Sue Sitko, TNC 
8) Dwayne Walker, Future Forest 
 
Romero then turned the floor over to Haydee Hampton (Research Associate, Center for 
Environmental Sciences and Education at Northern Arizona University (NAU)), the Forest 
Ecosystem Restoration Analysis (ForestERA) Project Manager leading this collaborative effort. 
 
Haydee Hampton: Wood Supply Team Introductions and Agenda 
Hampton began by introducing new members of ForestERA’s Project Team since the last 
Working Group meeting: Tony Becker, Scribe (PhD student in Linguistics at NAU) and Steve 
Sesnie, Remote Sensing Specialist (Post-doctoral Research Associate). Sesnie will begin 
attending Working Group meetings in August. 
 
Hampton provided an overview of the agenda and briefly discussed the highlights for the day’s 
meeting, including three points related to treatment scenario development. Furthermore, 
Hampton included an overview of the scheduled individual presentations about different 
treatment scenarios conducted in the past. She encouraged working group members to 
thoughtfully consider the treatment options presented and provide contributions to the treatment 
scenarios.   Once the agenda was covered, “clickers” were distributed to working group members 
and Hampton provided a brief PowerPoint presentation to inform members on how to use the 
clickers, as well as a description of their function. Hampton explained that, if agreed upon, the 
clickers would be used by the working group to gauge agreement on decisions requiring 
consensus. The clicker technology will primarily be utilized for group members to indicate their 
level of agreement on certain issues covered throughout future meetings. 
 
Rosemary Romero: Group Decision-Making Process  
Romero reviewed a slide (“What leaders can do”) that covered some characteristics of leadership 
and she explained how she envisioned the session would proceed. She encouraged participation 
from working group members, and explained that the use of clickers would enable rather quiet 
individuals to participate along-side those who are outspoken. Romero continued by explaining 
that the clickers were “an anonymous tool to gauge the level of agreement”, and should prove 
effective to promote additional discussion. 
 
In terms of the proposed group decision-making process, Romero commented that the 
ForestERA group is bringing data and analyses to inform group members, and she encouraged 
group members to propose ideas and add to the discussion until agreement is reached. She also 
encouraged group members to work towards an understanding on the issues related to treatment 
options, rather than simply stating disagreement. She explained that there is never 100 percent 

July 18, 2007 Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary 
 Page 3 of 14 
agreement, but she hoped that this process would promote bargaining and eventually lead to 
language resulting in agreement among working group members.  
 
Afterwards, several statements were presented to the working group members via PowerPoint 
presentation, in which they were asked to use the clickers to vote. Statement #1 – “The wood 
supply working group should use the consensus-based decision process described.” The results 
were that five working group members strongly agreed, while five others agreed. At this point, 
one group member interjected and asked about formatting the voting process – “Can we have 
time to discuss the matters before we go straight to using the clickers?” Romero responded that 
this was a baseline question, used to familiarize group members with the technology and voting 
format. She and Hampton added that dialogue could either follow or precede the actual voting, 
so that people could express their concerns.  
 
Then, statement #2 was presented – “The wood supply working group should use an online 
discussion forum.” The results were not compiled via the clicker program, but instead were 
discussed as a group. A discussion of the online forum revealed that some members were 
opposed to the online forum, since they preferred small or large group discussions compared to 
the online forum. Another member was concerned that not everyone could participate online 
because of various reasons, such as time availability and access issues. Another member 
commented that the online system did not reflect the fish bowl process of discussion because it 
promotes debates that are not in the public forum. He felt that it was rather isolated.  
 
Romero informed the group that the email discussions could work, especially to facilitate small 
group work. Large group discussions should be reserved for face-to-face meetings, where ideas 
could be more effectively discussed. The group came to an agreement that informal email 
discussions, and not a more organized on-line discussion forum, would be maintained as a tool 
for sharing ideas, but the majority of larger issues would be reserved for large-group meetings.  
 
Lastly, statement #3 was presented – “The June 4th meeting summary is an adequate record of 
the meeting.” The results were that most members strongly agreed or agreed, but several 
members did not vote, since they had not read the summary. At that time, Romero explained the 
nature of the summary as “a neutral document that enables people to recall what happened, as 
well as to reflect on the matters discussed.” Afterwards, members voted on the “clicker” 
technology and it was unanimously approved for future use in facilitating decisions.    
 
 
Treatment Scenario Development –  
 
Review - Presentation by Haydee Hampton 
 
First, Hampton briefly outlined the information covered from the last meeting, related to layer 
analysis, wildlife issues, treatment scenarios, spatial data, and guidelines. Then, she provided a 
working group meeting timetable for members: 6/4, 7/18, 8/17 meetings would be used for 
developing a draft of the treatment scenario(s) to be included in the 9/7 progress report; 9/17 
would reflect the revised treatment scenario(s) and a discussion of the results of the forest growth 
review; 10/15 would include the finalized treatment scenario(s), a review of wood volume layer, 

July 18, 2007 Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary 
 Page 4 of 14 
treatment definitions, and information regarding the wood user database; 11/16 would include a 
discussion of the wood supply results and the potential economic impact; 12/1 will focus on the 
final deliverables of the proposal.  
 
 
Hampton then segued into the PowerPoint presentation about the treatment scenario 
development. She began by discussing the “Western Mogollon Plateau and White Mountains 
Landscape Assessments” – supported by NAU, covering approximately two million acres each. 
She encouraged members to evaluate the Work Book contents with information about the 
treatment scenarios developed during these landscape assessments. Furthermore, Hampton asked 
working group members, “Did you attend the Western Mogollon Plateau adaptive landscape 
assessment or the White Mountains landscape assessment?” Ten group members indicated that 
they did attend the meeting, while one group member responded that they did not. 
  
 
Hampton then provided a slide of a wood supply analysis map that provided boundaries 
of the assessment for the current study. She also provided information about previous landscape 
assessments – (about 50 stakeholders attended the landscape assessment workshops in Pinetop 
and Flagstaff); Hampton discussed the conceptual approach for landscape prioritization and 
provided another map that showed the prioritized areas in need of management attention. She 
described how previous researchers identified and prioritized the landscape values and risks, as 
well as the spatial layers represented in the research (they applied weighting factors according to 
priority level). Hampton indicated that the spatial layers that receive priority ranks were 
considered, in terms of how they are identified, weighted and overlaid to construct a composite 
map. 
 
Next, Hampton covered the findings from the research of the highest priority values and risks 
from the previous assessments in the analysis areas. She clarified that “values” included human 
communities and infrastructure, water features, biodiversity, and key forest indicator species, 
while “risks” included fire hazard and behavior, fire risk, post-fire erosion and sedimentation 
potential, and tree density. She provided three spatial layer maps that revealed the priority layer 
development process; there were three maps included to demonstrate how this process was done 
in the past. The development process was explained as a three-fold process:  
• Define management objectives (e.g., reduce the risk of uncharacteristic 
wildfire) 
• Select areas in need of management (e.g., areas predicted to experience 
crown fires in dry years)  
• Recommend management action for those areas (e.g., plan intermediate 
intensity thinning followed by prescribed burning in areas predicted to 
possibly crown) 
 
Following this, Hampton presented several examples of objectives from previous assessments in 
the analysis areas:  
• Protect communities and important infrastructure 
• Maintain water quality in municipal watersheds 
• Protect and enhance habitat for endangered species and minimize 
treatment impacts 
• Restore grasslands 

July 18, 2007 Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary 
 Page 5 of 14 
• Protect and maintain the biological integrity of riparian and aquatic 
habitats 
• Increase the quality and extent of special habitats, such as aspen stands 
and pine-oak woodlands.  
 
In addition, a spatial layer of the management objectives for crown fire and interest in 
minimizing fire plus a thinning map were combined to equal treatment areas across the 
landscape. Hampton added that the team could take the high priority areas and move forward 
with them. At that point, she asked the working group members how they could use the previous 
assessments for the wood supply analysis. Working group members were encouraged to choose 
either, “Not use them at all”, “Consider, select, and build on relevant components from previous 
scenarios”, or “Use prioritization and/or management action layers from previous assessments”.  
One comment from a working group member was to wait to use these previous assessments until 
data were collected for the current project. Two other members added that considering, selecting, 
and building on relevant components from previous scenarios would be relevant and useful for 
the future interests and progress of this group.  
 
Then, Hampton encouraged a discussion into ways to evaluate potential sustainability over 
certain time periods while considering the following: 
• Identify acres available and appropriate for restoration (e.g., thinning and 
prescribed fire treatments) 
• Identify the restoration objectives for those acres 
• Build agreement on the size and location of treatments necessary to reach 
the restoration objectives 
• Estimate the volume of supply following recommended thinning 
treatments.  
 
One group member emphasized the need to look at “what’s off the table” in terms of acreage 
available. Another group member commented that he was not familiar with the prioritization 
process, adding that it may or may not be useful for issues the group is discussing. He thought 
this process could facilitate some decisions made about topics – “We need to start from scratch 
and move forward and see how the assessments unfold.” In addition, a group member 
commented that, “other factors need to be considered in the decisions made about which areas to 
include or exclude.” 
 
 
Hampton continued her segment by acknowledging that three tribal representatives are on the 
wood supply working group. She mentioned that in discussions with these representatives she 
learned that the White Mountain Apache Tribe might consider providing reservation-wide wood 
volume figures to the wood supply analysis if prompted. At that point, one group member 
indicated that he doesn’t usually deal with the small diameter class and thinning programs, as his 
logging company usually deals with larger diameter classes. Therefore, he felt he could not 
comment very much on this topic.  
 
Hampton went on to indicate that she spoke with Susan Johnson of Region 2 Forest 
Service and found our from a working group member that there was a tribal land resolution that 
would allow Johnson to conduct her study (funded by the Ford Foundation) on their lands. 

July 18, 2007 Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary 
 Page 6 of 14 
However, Hampton inquired about the wood supply analysis being conducted on tribal lands too; 
evidently, the tribes were not necessarily interested at this time.  
 
Treatment Characterizations and Strategically Placed Treatments – Presentation by Brett 
Dickson 
 
Brett opened his presentation with coverage of the treatment characterizations (Ponderosa Pine-
dominated strands). He explained that he was going to cover the various treatment alternatives 
and how they are developed and quantified. The treatment alternatives included 1) high-density 
thin (i.e., light burn); 2) intermediate intensity thin + light burn; 3) low-intensity thin + light 
burn; 4) heavy burn only; and 5) light burn only. He indicated that all the treatments were further 
explained in Tab 9 of the workbook.  
 
 
Next, Dickson discussed the tools that were utilized in building a management action 
scenario, which covers the treatment alternatives of the landscape. He also reviewed the 
treatment effects on forest structure, to include before basal-area treatment and after basal-area 
treatment. He presented spatial data on the treatment effects on fire hazard (before) and heavy 
burn (after). Lastly, he included another option, within the FlamMap fire behavior program (in 
cooperation with USFS RMRS Missoula Fire Lab). This option included key LANDFIRE-
derived input maps for:  
• Crown bulk density 
• Crown base height 
• Canopy cover 
• Canopy height 
• Elevation 
• Slope 
• Aspect 
• Fuel model (includes 21 different models) 
 
Dickson also provided several additional slides, which included information about the predicted 
heat output if a fire occurred (fire hazard), crown fire behavior (when a fire transitions from a 
ground fire to passive to active crown fire), and the Treatment Optimization Model (TOM). He 
explained that TOM is a FlamMap-implemented algorithm used to optimize the placement of 
treatment units that limit and interrupt the movement of large fires, given user defined ignition 
points. He followed this with data related to current fuel conditions and potential fuel conditions 
after treatment. He explained that the data from the TOM model identifies major fire travel 
routes and their intersection with user-identified areas for treatment.  
 
Dickson reviewed a “straw man” process that the group might use to develop their treatment 
scenario, using FlamMap’s TOM. This process consisted of several steps:  
• Develop layer of priority areas across analysis area  
• Develop layer showing potential treatments   
• Run TOM to select optimal areas (e.g., 10 or 20% of total area) for 
treatment 
• Use prioritization process to provide preferred sequencing within TOM 
areas 

July 18, 2007 Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary 
 Page 7 of 14 
 
Q: How can you convert percent reduction in forest structure metrics to actual values such as a 
basal area goal?  
A: Dickson responded that other programs are available to convert these values, but they were 
not used for the purposes of this study.  
Q: Is there information about what we end up with (target objectives) instead of the percent 
reduction values?  
A: Dickson indicated that the literature was constrained and therefore the best metric was percent 
reduction instead of looking at target objectives.  
Q: How is the use of the FlamMap model with and without TOM related?  
A: Dickson explained that TOM is an alternative to using the fire hazard and behavior FlamMap 
outputs and he just wanted to make it apparent to the members; TOM is geared to minimizing 
fire spread.  
Q: Is there a program that would allow members to look at what the existing conditions are and 
what they desire for that acre?  
A: Dickson indicated that it wouldn’t be a difficult exercise, as long as the parameters are 
explicit.  
At that time, one member indicated that she agreed that it is a challenge to think about percent 
reductions in stem density, basal area and other metrics, but instead would rather consider the 
desired conditions – easier to consider for foresters. Dickson added that he has 10-12 relevant 
citations that he can point people towards.  
Romero presented an idea to provide a list of citations that will be available for group members, 
either on the website or in a handout.  
Q: Is this going to be an effective tool for us to look at areas from the SW? 
A: Dickson alluded to the fact that there is existing data that dates back to the 1970’s that 
includes tribal information, for fuel characteristics and fire structure – federal data exists about 
fire risk too.  
 
Dickson continued the presentation by relating the information provided at the June 4 Wood 
Supply Working Group meeting by Sarah Lantz and Shaula Hedwall and in some follow up 
meetings indicating that there are certain areas where not to target treatments that he has worked 
on modeling spatially:  
• Canyon rims 
• Steep slopes  
• Seeps and springs 
• Known nest sites 
 
He reviewed how canyon features were discriminated using a method that entails partitioning the 
landscape into the following elements: canyon bottoms, ridgelines, and areas of gentle and steep 
slopes. He showed a map dividing the analysis area into locations with <40% slope and >40% 
slope; the members of the wildlife small group indicated that steep slopes are associated with 
greater diversity of wildlife and are thus relevant to the current research. One group member 
commented that steep areas should not be excluded, but included as potential future sources of 
small diameter wood. Another group member commented that very rarely do treatments occur in 
areas with over 40% slopes.  
 

July 18, 2007 Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary 
 Page 8 of 14 
Dickson also included a map outlining the springs and seeps in the area of focus, as well as 
database results of raptor nest locations throughout the area. He explained that the wildlife team 
was working with people to acquire more data on the nest locations – “it is an ongoing process”.  
 
Guidelines Regarding Wildlife and Wildland Urban Interface (WUI) – Presentation by Brett 
Dickson 
 
Dickson indicated that they would like to form a small group to help come up with ideas to 
quantify information on WUI areas. At that time, the team did not have complete information 
about the CWPP priority areas (e.g., Williams and Blue Ridge); Dickson suggested that further 
discussion about this issue needed to come from the working group members. He went on further 
to say that the two WUI definitions could be used to form a complete WUI layer across the 
analysis area: CWPP priority areas and where CWPP have not been completed 0.5 and 1.5 mile 
buffers around private lands, but that requires more consideration too. A map of the USFS R3 
15-year WUI areas was also presented. 
 
Tom Sisk told members that the team wasn’t sure how these models fit into the wood supply 
analysis quite yet, but he acknowledged that this is where the working group fits in – to help find 
ways in which this information can be used. One working group member then noted that the 
group needs to discuss “what is acceptable/not acceptable” for treatment, and to find ways to 
address this. Dickson then told members that he can use the data to provide applicable findings 
to inform the group about making decisions, although he made it clear that he was not trying to 
trump the group member’s decision-making process. Rather, the support team wanted to respond 
to what was indicated last meeting and make sure they could find ways to incorporate as much as 
possible into the wood supply analysis. Another working group member indicated concern that 
the same things should not be done in every situation.  
 
Guidelines Regarding Streams, Soils, Access, and Mechanized Equipment – Presentation by 
Haydee Hampton 
 
Here, Hampton wanted to focus on a discussion of the treatment guidelines for soils and steep 
areas. More specifically, she highlighted two major points provided by ASNF staff:  
• Avoid treatments on highly erodible soils (datile and cinder soils in this 
area) 
• Mechanical treatment on slopes >40% requires specialized equipment – 
for example a TIMCO can go up to 60% slope.  
 
A working group member explained that the cost and lack of availability of the specialized 
equipment restricts mechanical treatments’ use in steep slopes. Another member added that the 
economics determine what treatment options are available and are used. 
  
Next, Hampton commented on streamside management zones (Tab 9 in the workbook) 
delineated by ASNF staff to protect stream water quality. She explained that ASNF recommend 
avoiding mechanical treatment within “filter strips” 75 to 300 feet of certain streams depending 
on several factors. Hampton showed GIS layers that could be used to define variable width 
streamside management zones according to slopes and stream types, and the presence of native 

July 18, 2007 Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary 
 Page 9 of 14 
fish species in the area. She is working on obtaining information from other Forests and 
jurisdictions. The State lands working group member indicated they used guidelines provided by 
the Coconino and Kaibab NFs.  
 
Hampton moved on to describing the access options available to treatment areas, but relayed that 
working group members have indicated that roads are widespread, but it is their condition that 
can limit access. Also, she explained that the BioSum roads layer was built from Forest Service 
roads (core and CFF) and ALRIS TIGER street files. One working group member noted that 
areas where there aren’t any roads should also be considered in the analyses. Another member 
added that the reservations have considered the 40% slope, but the costs are not feasible to 
include this factor. Finally, another group member commented that the working group should 
maintain whether the issue is economic or environmental – these issues/considerations should be 
kept separate from each other, and if it’s an economic issue, it needs to be dealt with differently.  
 
Vegetation Types, Wilderness Areas and Other Primary Factors – Presentation by Jill Rundall 
 
Rundall wanted to address the study area (5.5 million acres), including the four relevant forests 
and two Native American areas as well.  
 
Q: Why was the Young area (Pleasant Valley Ranger District, Tonto NF) not included in the 
ponderosa pines area?  
A: Hampton answered that there wasn’t really an effort to exclude it -- the ad-hoc committee 
didn’t recommend it be included in the study. 
At that time, a working group member commented that it was likely just an oversight. Another 
member commented that the Clifton district could likely be excluded because it didn’t garner a 
large ponderosa pine inclusion. Hampton suggested that the Clifton District will be essentially 
removed as this process in focused mainly on ponderosa pine.  
 
Rundall continued with her presentation by examining the different vegetation types in the 
analysis area. Rundall showed a layer of the dominant vegetation. She stated that there was 
approximately 2.2 million acres of ponderosa pine dominated areas found in the designated 
research area. Other group members considered removing Special Designated Areas (e.g., 
primitive areas, Wilderness areas, and Inventoried Roadless Areas), but Rundall explained that 
these areas would likely fall under the category of not being able to be treated mechanically. 
Furthermore, she added that if Specially Designated Areas were removed from the group’s 
treatment scenario that 1.87 million acres of ponderosa area remained of the initial 2.2 acres.  A 
series of map layers illustrated the ponderosa pine areas remaining after these various 
considerations were removed.  
 
Rundall then explained that she is collecting many different types of information, including 
planned and historical treatment types and treatment dates, for use by the group to determine if 
another treatment is/was needed. She explained that the treatment layer for the ASNF was not up 
to date at that moment, and as a result contains 2001-2004 data for its most current information. 
She is in the process of requesting more recent data from the Forests and other jurisdictions in 
the analysis area. Other layers available to the group for use in their scenario include estimates of 
burn severity, which is related to vegetation death, following a particular fire. She also explained 

July 18, 2007 Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary 
 Page 10 of 14 
that the USDA provides insect and drought related tree mortality estimates throughout the area; 
these layers may help to narrow down the available areas to which we can apply treatment. 
Rundall encouraged members to provide any additional GIS information that would help with 
this process, and she noted that there are still many layers that the team is in the process of 
acquiring information (e.g., fuel treatments/Stewardship contracts; tree mortality 2006+, ADEQ 
impaired waters from A-S; Coconino, Kaibab, Tonto, and others). Two group members 
commented that Flagstaff City and the AZ state government could provide a fair amount of this 
information. Randall included that she was researching a system in which she could avoid 
pursuing 2 different sources and could instead find one combined source for this information.  
 
Rundall also indicated that she is in the process of acquiring information concerning wildland 
fire use (WFU), fire history, riparian areas, stand exam, and roads. At this point, she has only 
received information from the Coconino NF for WFU. Also, Rundall tried to get information 
from the Forests concerning streams and relevant to northern goshawk/Mexican spotted owl and 
other raptor nest locations; N. Goshawk PFA’s/MSO PACs; Wildlife corridors; CWPP 
(Williams, Blue Ridge, ACWPP, and SCWPP). Hampton made it known to the group that the 
current information indicated those layers that the team is in the process of acquiring, but they do 
have lots of other layers already available.  
 
Q: What is your estimate of how many acres of ponderosa pine would be left after all the layers 
you presented are included in the treatment scenario? 
A: Rundall explained that she couldn’t guess because it would depend on how each layer would 
be used in the group’s scenario.  
Q: How much might the group decide?  
A: Sisk explained that it’s pretty hard to guess on such a matter. He added that the answer might 
be to decide which areas the group is less willing to treat. He reiterated that the information 
about those layers hasn’t been acquired by the team just yet.  
Two group members informed the others that there has been very little treatment in Tonto, 
Coconino, and Kaibab NFs. They explained that there is likely to be very little change. Romero 
suggested that group members contact Rundall in the future to help located up-to-date 
information and to uncover the “gaps” in the acquisition process.  
 
Brainstorming Session – Facilitated by Rosemary Romero 
 
At that time, Romero opened the floor to the group members to provide information that would 
pertain to Rundall’s presentation. Hampton suggested Working Group members look for 
information about layers available to them in the White Mountains Landscape Assessment data 
atlas available in the workbook as 80 to 90 percent of the layers we’ve discussed are in that 
document. 
 
Romero suggested a bulleted list of additional factors to consider for the analysis:  
• Mining claims – has no bearing on this analysis 
• Grazing leases – has no bearing on this analysis 
• Existing contracted timber sales 
• Stewardship contracts 
• Culturally significant sites 

July 18, 2007 Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary 
 Page 11 of 14 
• Private wells/tanks 
• Municipal watersheds 
 
The group members decided that the mining claims and grazing leases have no bearing on the 
analysis, while Hampton also added that the team already had some data available on the 
municipal watersheds.  
 
 
 
A group member then asked about the steps that are needed to go through to get all of these 
things accomplished. This group member acknowledged that the spatial data was comprehensive, 
but felt that a road map on how to proceed needed to be reached by consensus. The group 
member commented that they didn’t feel that the group knew where it was going. Romero 
clarified that the actual approach “road map” was not yet decided. She reiterated that the team 
provided the data and located the gaps, and it was the responsibility of the working group to 
decide which approaches to follow. Hampton added that the team had data from what other 
groups had done and one possibility was to follow what other groups had done or NOT do what 
those groups did. Similarly, another group member commented that the group needed to 
prioritize these areas and come up with categories that will help the group to decide the 
treatments and the products that the treatments will generate. At that time, both Hampton and 
Romero suggested going through the layers and thinking about which layers can be eliminated or 
kept.  
 
Q: Should we eliminate Wilderness Areas from the group’s treatment scenario?  
Group discussion: One group member felt that Wilderness areas did need restoration, but that the 
group didn’t need to go there first. Instead, the member suggested a two-tier approach for 
prioritization. Another group member indicated that they disagreed with a 1-2-3 prioritization 
approach, and the group should try another approach instead.  
Q: What do we mean about treatment (mechanical or something else)?  
Group discussion: One group member responded to this question by commenting that the group 
needed to think about the treatment in relation to the wood supply production, since that was the 
whole basis for the working group formation. Another group member agreed that the objective of 
the group is a wood supply analysis. This member added that the group should focus on the 
wood that could potentially produce a product. A third group member expressed their agreement 
on this issue and added that the objective is to figure out the tons of wood that can come out of 
these areas. This member added that the group needed to focus on these areas of treatment that 
will help production, and that a discussion about treating areas with steep slopes using cables 
was off the table and a non-starter for the conservation community.  
 
 
Q: Is there something that the team has that suggests to us that those areas are good candidates 
for mechanical treatment because they’re overstocked?  
A: Dickson responded by claiming that the tree density layer could be included in the decision 
process. He concluded that the ForestERA team could assist with its use.  
Q: How do we determine which areas are best treated with prescribed fire? Can we identify these 
areas where burning is going to be most effective?  
A: Tom Sisk answered these questions by explaining that there are two different approaches:  

July 18, 2007 Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary 
 Page 12 of 14 
1) identify the areas that are off the table and the areas that are suitable for mechanical 
treatment, and 2) identify those areas where mechanical treatment is possible, but 
determine which treatment type is most suitable.   
 
One group member expressed their concern about the accessibility issues. They felt that it was 
difficult to accomplish the road mapping, but they also felt that it was a key point in determining 
what is possible. Two group members indicated their desire to discuss what restoration means to 
the group and what the group’s objectives are.  
Q: What are we considering “roads”?  
A: To this, one group member concluded that road building is a flash point, since temporary 
roads are being added all the time. This group member expressed their interest in developing 
some agreed-upon road network, and that experts can be consulted about the road mapping.  
Q: How much wood do we have? How much underbrush will be thinned out and how much will 
replace itself?”  
This same group member explained that their organization spends about 40,000/month on roads, 
and there were problems when working with the Forest Service. 
Q: What is the potential availability for forest growth/replacement in the model? Can the model 
do that? Hampton responded that Gary Snider is researching forest growth assumptions as part of 
this analysis. 
 
At that time, Romero transitioned to the brainstorming session on restoration objectives for areas 
available and appropriate for restoration. Romero proposed the idea of having a small group 
discussion concerning road mapping.  To this idea, one group member expressed their opposition 
to small groups, because they felt that format didn’t necessarily mean that group members would 
come to an agreement as a large group. This group member also expressed that there was a 
dichotomy with what was mapped and the wooded area in the White Mountain Apache 
Reservation, because it is part of the regional supply and should be actively engaged in the 
supply line. In response to this, Hampton turned the discussion over to a representative from a 
local tribe group. This representative commented that the tribe has some desires to keep their 
data confidential, but would consider working with the team, if they felt their data could be 
protected; they just need a clearer idea and then they can take that proposal to the tribal council 
and see if it can get approval.  
 
The issue of agreement about defining “restoration” was left for the next meeting, since two 
working group members, who were proponents of defining it, had to leave early.    
 
 
 
Wood Estimation Analyses – Presentation by Gary Snider  
 
Snider (Forest Economist and Doctoral Candidate, School of Forestry, NAU) explained that he 
has provided several resources for group members, including a handout for the current session 
and some additional materials in the workbook. Included in the materials are sources from 
Dwayne Walker, which includes how much material will be taken and where it will be delivered. 
Snider reiterated that he will provide a comprehensive list of what is being extracted, where it’s 
going, who is receiving what, and so on. Snider also indicated that he would include information 

July 18, 2007 Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary 
 Page 13 of 14 
related to growth rates. These materials will be sent out to group members at some point. His 
handout provided information about the primary, secondary, and tertiary wood producers within 
the realm of the present study.  
 
Wood Volume Layer by Tree-diameter Class – Presentation by Haydee Hampton 
 
Hampton provided information that focused on wood volume layer development, which may 
incorporate imputation methods that link multiple vegetation layers and plot data to common 
“vegetative states” (e.g., similar to R1 vegetation mapping project (VMP) methods). This is only 
one of several methodologies ForestERA is considering. She highlighted the spatial and plot data 
updates that had been made since the June 4th meeting. The data included a US Forest Service 
Region 3 image segmentation layer with several attributes including canopy cover and dominant 
tree size. She explained that there are several additional steps that need to take place:   
• Combining and arranging plot information in one database, planning additional plot 
data acquisition, and testing various diameter class breaks  
• The selection of diameter classes will be a combination of what is possible given 
available data and what is of interest to the working group and the stakeholders  
• Stakeholders have expressed interest in the following classes: (<5 or 6 inches DBH, 
5-9, 9-12 or 9-16, >12 or >16, 16-24).   
 
Hampton said that they are aiming to get sufficient accuracy for three, possibly four classes, but 
again this has not been decided. She emphasized that it is not possible to provide detailed 
information for all class breaks.  
 
Romero and the support team then took a few minutes to develop language with the working 
group defining a “Road Map” for use in developing treatment scenario(s):  
 
• Identify areas appropriate for restoration treatments that recover wood byproducts 
(i.e., “What’s on the map?”) 
• Define management objectives (i.e., “target conditions”)  
• Selection of appropriate treatments.  
• Prioritization? (No definitive answer on how to address this emerged.) 
 
In addition: 
• Calculate supply produced by applying the appropriate treatments across the map.  
• Once forest growth recommendations are available, discuss as group how to use them 
in this study.  
 
 
The group and team members also asked if there were any volunteers from the Working Group 
to serve on small topic groups, which would bring straw man ideas to the larger group for 
consideration: 
•  Small group formation (ForestERA is looking for volunteers) 
o Wildlife – Brett (so far includes Shaula and Sarah)  
o WUI information– Brett (Steve Gatewood was recommended to be in this 
group) 

July 18, 2007 Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary 
 Page 14 of 14 
o Roads – Haydee (other members TBD) 
1) What road layers are out there?  
2) What are they used for?  
3) What are the appropriate methods for restoration?  
 
 
Comments from Observing Public 
 
o Ruling out areas because there are no roads on the Forest Service’s roads GIS layer 
would be wrong as this may or may not mean there are existing roads.  Leave all 
ponderosa areas in the analysis,  I guarantee there will be roads there, unless it’s really 
steep, regardless of whether there are current roads there or not. 
o Include existing NEPA and treatment plans that have been made. Include the 
collaborative efforts over the last 10 years of the Greater Flagstaff Forest Partnership for 
the 180,000 acres surrounding Flagstaff 
o The cleanest way to deal with roads is not to exclude any areas due to road access; 
assume an appropriate method will be found to access any area. 
o In one area there are tens of thousands of wood piles sitting in the forest today. What are 
you going to do with it? If you burn it, it will create smoke and global warming issues. 
 
 
Note: The next meeting is in Flagstaff, Friday, August 17th. Directions to the facility will be 
provided. Draft meeting summaries will be sent out to Working Group members and members 
will be given two weeks instead of one to provide comments at the request of one working group 
member. 
 

Wood Supply Working Group Meeting 
Analysis of Small-Diameter Wood Supply in Northern Arizona 
 
August 17, 2007 
9:00 a.m. – 4:15 p.m. 
Applied Research and Development (AR&D) Building 
Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 
 
 
 
9:00 – 9:15 a.m. 
Welcome – Rosemary Romero (Facilitator, Rosemary Romero 
Consulting)  
 
9:15 – 9:30 a.m. 
Review meeting agenda and “road map” developed by Working 
Group at July 18 Wood Supply meeting – Haydee Hampton 
(Research Associate, Environmental Sciences, Northern Arizona 
University) 
 
9:30 – 10:30 a.m. 
ACTION ITEM 1: Select areas appropriate for restoration 
treatments  
 
Working Group decision-making session to identify areas 
appropriate for restoration treatments that recover wood 
byproducts – ForestERA technical support by Jill Rundall (Senior 
Research Specialist, Environmental Sciences, NAU), Brett 
Dickson (Assistant Research Professor, Environmental Sciences, 
NAU), Steve Sesnie (Postdoctoral Research Associate, 
Environmental Sciences, NAU) and Haydee Hampton 
 
10:30 – 10:45 a.m. 
Break 
 
10:45 – 12:00 p.m. 
Select areas appropriate for restoration treatments (cont.) 
 
12:00 – 1:00 p.m. 
Lunch  
 
*** Optional Applied Research & Development building tour 
12:40 – 1:00 p.m., Richard Baron, AR&D Building Manager) *** 
 
1:00 – 2:30 p.m. 
Restoration options  
 
Presentation on recommendations for restoring ponderosa pine 
forests from the Statewide Strategy for Restoring Arizona’s Forests 
and other sources – Tom Sisk (Professor, Environmental Sciences, 
NAU) 
Facilitated discussion on fuel and restoration treatments of interest 
to Wood Supply Working Group – Rosemary Romero 

 
2:30 – 2:45 p.m. 
Break 
 
2:45 – 3:45 p.m. 
ACTION ITEM 2: Select treatments based on management 
objectives 
 
Brainstorming session on the selection of treatments of interest to 
Working Group – facilitated by Rosemary Romero 
Optional additional information: Map-based treatments 
recommended by collaborative groups in the Western Mogollon 
Plateau Adaptive Landscape Assessment (WMPALA) and the 
White Mountains Landscape Assessment (WMLA) – ForestERA 
staff 
 
3:45 – 4:00 p.m. 
Updates on available spatial data and wood estimation analyses 
and logistics for next meeting 
 
 
4:00 – 4:15 p.m. 
Public comment period 
 
 
4:15 p.m. 
 
Adjourn 
 

 
August 17, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary       Page 1 of 16     
 
Meeting Summary 
Wood Supply Working Group Meeting 
Analysis of Small-Diameter Wood Supply in Northern Arizona 
August 17, 2007, Applied Research and Development (AR&D) Building 
Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 
 
 
Introduction and Agenda Review 
 
Rosemary Romero: Welcome 
Romero (Meeting Facilitator) welcomed back the working group members and observers 
to the third group meeting. She opened the meeting with reading the letter from Harv 
Forsgren, Forest Supervisor for the Southwestern Region of the US Forest Service, which 
was distributed to participants at the July 18, 2007, Working Group meeting in Pinetop 
and is posted on Documents page of Wood Supply Analysis web site: 
http://www.forestera.nau.edu/project_woodsupply.htm ) concerning how the 
Southwestern Region would use the results from this study. Afterwards, she asked 
everyone present to give brief introductions.   
 
Working Group members present at meeting (in order of presentation): 
1) Keith Pajkos, Timber Staff for the Arizona State Lands Department Forestry Division  
2) Scott Higginson, Executive Vice President of NZ Legacy/Snowflake White Mountain 
Power, Renergy 
3) Molly Pitts, Executive Director of the Northern Arizona Wood Products Association   
4) Herb Hopper, Community-based forest and wood products Advocate, Little Colorado 
Plateau Resource Conservation & Development 
5) Steve Gatewood, Consultant, Wildwood Consulting Inc., representing the Greater 
Flagstaff Forests Partnership 
6) Ethan Aumack, Director of Restoration Programs for Grand Canyon Trust  
7) Rob Davis, President/Owner of Forest Energy Corporation/Future Forests  
8) Bill Greenwood, City Manager for the Town of Eagar 
9) Bob Taylor, Supervisory Natural Resource Specialist for the Apache-Sitgreaves 
National Forest 
10) Jerry Drury, Timber Staff Officer for the Kaibab National Forest  
11) Kim Newbauer, Timber Sales Contracting Officer for Coconino National Forest 
12) Pascal Berlioux, President and Chief Executive Officer of Arizona Forest 
RestorationProducts, Inc. 
13) Sarah Lantz, Urban Wildlife Planner for Arizona Game and Fish Department (Region 
II Flagstaff Office) 
14) Lisa McNeilly, Northern Arizona Program Director of The Nature Conservancy  
15) Diane Vosick, Associate Director of the Ecological Restoration Institute (Wally 
Covington, Director of the ERI and NAU Forestry  Department Regents’ 
Professor filled in for Diane part way through meeting). 
16) Larry Stephenson, Executive Director of the Eastern Arizona Counties Organization 
(ECO)/Economic Environmental Counties Organization (EECO) 
17) Todd Schulke, Forest Programs Director for the Center of Biological Diversity 
18) Shaula Hedwall, Ecological Services, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 

 
August 17, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary       Page 2 of 16     
 
 
Working Group members not present at meeting: 
1) Robert LaCapa, Forest Manager, DOI BIA Fort Apache Agency Branch of Forestry 
2) Chuck Peone, Fort Apache Timber Co. 
3) Paul DeClay, Tribal Forester, Forestry Department, White Mountains Apache Tribe 
4) Elaine Zieroth, Forest Supervisor for Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest (alternate 
present: Bob Taylor) 
 
Meeting observers: 
1) Wally Covington, Ecological Restoration Institute 
2) Sue Sitko, The Nature Conservancy 
3) McKinley-Ben Miller, BLM-AZ 
4) Rich VanDemark, Southwest Forestry 
5) Michael Smith, SW Forestry 
6) Chelsea Lett, Congressional Liaison, Congressman Renzi  
7) Stacey Hamburg, Sierra Club 
 
Romero then turned the floor over to Haydee Hampton, the Forest Ecosystem Restoration 
Analysis (ForestERA) Project Manager leading this collaborative effort.  
 
Haydee Hampton: Wood Supply Team Introductions and Agenda 
Hampton formally introduced Steve Sesnie, a new ForestERA Project team member who 
received his Ph.D. from the University of Idaho and recently worked on the LANDFIRE 
project. She indicated that Sesnie will be working with the group for the remainder of the 
current project.  
 
Hampton then began reviewing the meeting agenda and the “road map” developed by the 
working group at the July 18th Wood Supply Meeting in Holbrook. She presented 
information concerning the “roadmap to develop the treatment scenario”. Hampton 
informed the working group members that the ForestERA Project Team developed the 
slides and presentation in response to comments given by group members, as well as the 
results of the small group discussions. She also indicated that the group members would 
have the “clickers” available again to determine group agreement and promote discussion 
on some issues.  
 
Hampton continued her segment by explaining the conditions of the roadmap for group 
members. She presented a PowerPoint slide with the main points of the roadmap:  
  
• Identify areas appropriate for restoration treatments that can recover wood 
byproducts (i.e., “What’s on the map”) 
• Define management objectives (target conditions) to guide selection of 
treatments  
• Select appropriate treatments. Several layers that might be useful include: 
- 
Fire hazard 
- 
WUI 
- 
Wildlife areas 

 
August 17, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary       Page 3 of 16     
 
• Prioritize areas in order to define preferred treatment sequence? 
• Calculate supply produced by applying the appropriate treatments across 
the map  
 
Hampton mentioned to group members that the ForestERA Project Team has acquired 
and developed map-based information for the analysis area, but she also wanted to make 
it clear that the working group should not feel constrained by those maps. She felt that the 
maps could act as a guide for helping group members in their decision-making process, 
but they should not be the sole source of information. Hampton also included a timetable 
for the group members, in order to let them see their progress and what lies ahead for 
future meetings: 
  
• June 4 – Provide background and description of wood supply analysis and 
discuss treatment scenarios available, spatial data, and agency guidelines 
• July 18 – Agree on workshop decision-making process and work towards 
developing treatment scenario. At each meeting, review and respond to 
stakeholder comments/questions submitted between meetings, review 
layer acquisition and provide analysis updates  
• Aug 17 – Develop draft treatment scenario to include in Sept.7th progress 
report  
• Sept 17 – Revise treatment scenario and discuss treatment characterization 
and results of forest growth review. Decide on need for Oct. 9 optional 
meeting. 
• Oct 15 – Finalize treatment scenario, review draft of wood volume layer 
and wood use database. Decide on need for Oct 29 optional meeting. 
• Nov 16 – Discuss wood supply results; discuss potential economic or other 
follow-up analyses 
 
Hampton then moved onto discussing the expansion of the analysis area to include the 
Pleasant Valley Ranger District. She wanted to get back to group members about this 
issue to let them know that all new data collection will include the Pleasant Valley 
Ranger District. To illustrate this, Rundall displayed a map on screen to show the 
additional area that would be included in the new analysis.  
Q: Has the White Mountain Apache Tribe been included in this analysis? What is the 
progress? Hampton responded by saying that the tribe may provide a reservation-wide 
wood volume estimate. She indicated that the ForestERA Project Team was talking with 
tribal members and that they would find out soon if tribes were willing to provide this 
information. One group member commented that the group should be careful when 
saying “putting wood on the market” because tribes’ wood isn’t on the market at this 
time. It’s just potential wood supply. Another group member added that they were not 
sure these tribes were willing to make these decisions, but that they have a lot of wood 
that is ready to be put on the market. This group member thought that this information 
could be added to the analysis as a footnote. Romero then added that the issue is a sidebar 
that the group could revisit.  
 

 
August 17, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary       Page 4 of 16     
 
Hampton moved forward and presented a slide with “Steps for reaching agreement on 
scenario components”. She reminded group members about the use of clickers to gauge 
agreement and indicated that there were “hard-wired” questions on the Power Point 
(PPT) slides, but that the group could add impromptu or “verbal” questions at any time. 
Hampton also showed the clicker “response report” from the July 18th Working Group 
meeting for group members to see their responses and to highlight the information that 
could be included in project reports. Hampton then reviewed the analysis area, and 
referred to a slide outlining various areas under consideration for the Working Group 
treatment scenario. She discussed the treatment guidelines for steep areas, and mentioned 
that mechanical treatments on slopes > 40% generally require specialized equipment and 
that the Forests require special approval for use of mechanized equipment in these areas. 
Based on conversations from the group’s previous meeting, Hampton then had the group 
register their votes on the following issue:  
 
• Steep areas (>40% slope) are not a source of small diameter wood supply 
to be considered in the working group’s scenario.  
 
Eighteen group members indicated their level of agreement using the clickers: [Strongly 
Agree = 9 members; Agree = 6 members; Neutral = 2 members; Disagree = 1 member; 
and Strongly Disagree = 0 members]. One group member commented that although the 
group discussed briefly that they agreed on this issue, they wanted to encourage others to 
discuss contentious issues, especially if some group members disagree with particular 
issues. Another group member added that the group was not afforded sufficient time for 
discussion after using the clickers on the slope issue (one member had indicated 
disagreement on the issue), and if this continued that issues that really mattered would 
not get aired. Also, they thought displaying the clicker results in project reports would not 
promote discussion, which is what the group needs for this process. Here, Romero 
commented that there would be plenty of room for discussing the harder issues.  
 
Hampton then transitioned into presenting information concerning erodible soils. She 
explained that the ForestERA Project team was collecting map-based information from 
the soil scientists at each of the four Forests in the analysis area on soil types on which 
the Forests have timber harvest limitations (that is, rated as too erosion prone for 
mechanical treatments). She explained that the Forests had indicated that these were 
conservative estimates since sometimes areas will be released to harvest after inspection.  
The ASNF provided a rough estimate of 20% of the areas mapped as off limits due to 
erosion hazard may be released.  Hampton explained that ForestERA had acquired data 
on soils with timber harvest limitations from the Apache-Sitgreaves, Kaibab and 
Coconino NFs, but not yet from the Tonto NF.  In addition to soil types with harvest 
limitations, Rory Steinke, Watershed Program Manager for the Coconino and Kaibab 
NFs, provided the level of difficulty (fairly easy, somewhat difficult, and difficult) of 
mitigating impacts from mechanized treatments with best management practices (BMPs). 
Steinke recommends the group only consider the soil types classified as difficult to 
mitigate in their scenario.  Hampton displayed a map of soils with harvest limitations.  
Q: What percent of the ponderosa pine area have erodible soils? Hampton responded that 
ForestERA had not done this calculation, but offered a guess of about 3%.  

 
August 17, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary       Page 5 of 16     
 
Q: What’s the difference between highly erodible, moderately erodible, etc.? Hampton 
responded that the Forests did not supply information in terms of levels of erodibility, 
only in terms of having timber harvest limitations. However, the Kaibab and Coconino 
NFs had provided information on the level of difficulty of mitigating impacts from 
mechanized treatments with best management practices (BMPs).  
Q: Where will we draw the line? What is acceptable? Another working group member 
responded to these questions by saying, “Only highly erodible soil is where they would 
consider restricting mechanical treatment.”  
Q: Are you mapping the highly erodible sites? Hampton explained that the soil scientists 
gave the ForestERA Project Team information on specific soils types where mechanical 
treatments would be limited. She added that one of the Coconino/Kaibab soil scientist 
recommended that the team consider the most difficult areas to mitigate. A map was then 
projected that included the somewhat difficult areas, as well as the difficult areas shown 
previously.  
Q: Should we consider both the highly difficult and somewhat difficult soil areas, or just 
consider the highly difficult areas?  
One group member conveyed that they would like to remove from consideration those 
areas that are highly difficult. Another group member explained that highly erodible soils 
are a concern as the soil capacity can be removed rapidly in those areas, such as in the 
Red Rock areas. Romero then asked the group if erodible areas should be removed from 
the scenario. Group members agreed that these particular areas could likely be removed 
but they would like more discussion. One group member expressed their agreement in 
learning more about this issue; they claimed that they thought it might be informative to 
have some sort of gradation on those areas which would be included or excluded, in order 
to prioritize. Hampton suggested to group members that she could obtain additional 
information regarding this topic for the next meeting. 
Q: Will we have understanding on topics in which there are definitive wood supplies and 
numbers about areas that are “possible” wood supplies? Hampton responded that it was 
up to the group as to whether they would like to define these types of supplies in their 
scenario.  
 
Hampton continued with her presentation; she presented a new slide on treatment 
guidelines for “streamside management zones”. The guidelines included the following 
information:   
 
o SMZ are delineated to protect stream water quality 
o ASNF recommends avoiding mechanical treatment within “filter 
strips” 75 to 300 feet of certain streams depending on several 
factors:  
 three erosion hazard levels based on slope 
 perennial, intermittent, and ephemeral streams 
 waterways identified by ADEQ as “unique” or “impaired”  
 presence of habitat for ESA listed aquatic species or other 
fish species 
 

 
August 17, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary       Page 6 of 16     
 
Hampton also mentioned that Coconino National Forest recommends 66 to 99 feet off 
stream courses, and she informed group members that the team was still collecting 
information from Kaibab National Forest and Tonto National Forest on these zones.   
 
Hampton then moved onto viewing a map with streamside management zone slope 
classes and ASNF stream data. A group member indicated that they would like to make 
sure that in the calculation of total area removed that streamside mgmt zones are not 
double counted with steep areas (areas with > 40% slope). This group member added that 
information on the incremental change for each type of removal would help the group 
understand the impact of removing additional areas, for example over and above the 40% 
slope areas already out.  
Q: Are we drilling down too deeply? How can we go in and find every land feature that 
the Forest Service won’t let us go into? How do you calculate what is to be taken out? 
One group member added that the accessible areas could not be determined without 
going into these areas on foot. Hampton explained that the ForestERA Project team’s 
approach is threefold:  
 
o Map steep slopes, streamside mgmt zones, and other features using 
available spatial data 
o Estimate the reduced treatment intensity, wood volumes or areal extent 
within project areas due to site-specific factors by developing a list of 
causes and interviewing ID teams  
o Adjust predicted overall wood volumes if map-based data do not 
sufficiently capture project level factors 
 
In response to this, one group member felt that soil and slope answers might help to 
answer this question, but moderate erodible areas are still questionable. They added that 
if the group can answer the first two concerns, then that would help inform the answer to 
moderately erodible soils. Another group member expressed that they were having 
trouble not seeing numbers, and she suggested that the working group could present acres 
or percentage changes for each factor considered. Hampton added that the team will 
continue defining these areas and mapping them out.  
Q: Could you bracket the streamside management zones and provide a scale? One group 
member indicated that operations vary inside filter strips. This member suggested that the 
group was really talking about a reduction of volume in these areas; they felt that the 
group could talk about a reduction of these areas, rather than completely wiping them off 
the map.  
Q: How will we get from what can possibly come off to what is actually coming off? 
Romero indicated that there are topics like this where a small group will be used and has 
been suggested to help come up with ideas and come back to the working group for the 
final decision-making.    
 
Jill Rundall: Select areas appropriate for restoration treatments 
Rundall discussed “treatment data sources”, which included three main categories:  
 

 
August 17, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary       Page 7 of 16     
 
o Individual forests, districts and their departments/divisions (fire versus 
timber staff)  
o National fire map – point data only 
o Arizona fire map – minimal polygons.  
 
Rundall explained that, as suggested by several group members, she was getting planned 
and completed treatment data from the Forests and other sources. She then presented a 
map with point data from Arizona Firemap (azfiremap.org) and explained that this site 
has minimal polygon data. She indicated that she is still in the process of speaking with 
an Arizona Firemap representative, as they have told her that more data exists, but it is 
likely not much.  
 
Rundall then moved onto discussing the completed and planned treatments terminology. 
She then presented a slide that defined treatment terminology: 
 
o Planned – NEPA has been completed 
o Marked – Timber sale boundaries and trees marked but no buyer 
o Under contract – timber sale cutting units established and bid 
accepted; these can be multi-year and extendable.  
o Completed – treatment accomplished and wood has been removed. 
 
Rundall also remarked about the marked–timber sale boundaries (contains multiple 
cutting units) and trees marked with no buyer (also called proposed). She explained that 
these data are relatively new for the forest and haven’t been recorded with GIS data until 
recently.  
Q: How does the group want to work with marked treatments? One group member 
explained that they would put it in the planned category. Several group members agreed 
to include it in that category as well.  
Q: What is the difference between a timber sale and treatment? A group member 
explained that treatment includes wood that is nine inches or less, and timber sale 
includes wood that was not specified who is getting the wood, but rather concerns wood 
that will be sold. Another group member added that marked means that it is still open for 
sale (sometimes put out for contracts), but was not bid on. One group member asked to 
re-address the issue of timber sale and restoration, as it relates to those areas in which 
mechanical treatment might be used in the future. Rundall explained that her analysis was 
comprised mostly of past treatments. She added that she was just starting to gather the 
timber units at this time (up to 10 years in the past), and that she was also trying to find 
out what happened and when. A group member responded that it is complicated because 
people are taking out timber, but some of the smaller diameter wood just sits on the 
ground and the Forest Service has to come in and just burn it because it’s not in use. 
Another group member added that they would consider the task orders under contract too, 
because they have been contracted but have not been cut yet; the task orders have been 
assigned but not carried out.  
 
Rundall further explained that she was receiving data from multiple data sources 
(capturing 10 years of data). That data includes the following:  

 
August 17, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary       Page 8 of 16     
 
 
o Fuel, timber, and stewardship contracts 
o Year of treatment 
o Treatment type 
o Treatment intensity (thinning prescription) 
o Location in digital format 
 
Rundall also provided a slide that outlined her progress to date: 
 
o Everyone has tried to provide some GIS data 
o A-S 
- All available data acquired 
- Stewardship data never completed 
- Request to districts for current cutting unit and stewardship info 
o Coconino 
 
 
 
- No available treatment spatial data 
 
 
 
- Acquired some hard copy and acreages of current cutting unit 
o Kaibab 
 
 
 
- All available data acquired 
 
Q: Are you treating WUI similar to a completed restoration area? Is our discussion what 
land should be for analysis and what should not? One group member suggested that many 
of these areas do not need to be prioritized within the 10-year window. Another group 
member thought it should go way low on the priority list. Yet another group member 
explained that the interests of the working group might lead back into those areas treated 
within 5 years. The member added that the working group needed to get to what is being 
considered for re-treatment and they thought the WUI areas should be included, but not 
as a priority because they need to be treated differently. Another group member 
supported the notion of placing treated areas way down the priority list. This group 
member pointed out that the acreage that has been treated is much less than the area that 
needs treatment. In response to these comments about priority lists, one group member 
explained that they thought priorities weren’t going to be talked about; their 
understanding was that the working group had decided to talk about what’s available for 
the wood supply analysis. This member explained that there is wood available that should 
be considered because it can be counted towards the final wood supply, and WUI is still 
part of the supply, but it is not high on the list. Rundall commented that some of the 
information on treatments which the Forests have spatially is on the stand-level, so does 
not capture the exact boundaries of the treatments. She added that now, they are trying to 
capture exactly where the treatment is happening.  
 
At this time, the working group members and the ForestERA Project Team decided that 
they should discuss whether or not recently thinned areas (completed in last 5 years) 
should be considered a source of wood supply in the working group scenario. One group 
member suggested that it could be taken off depending upon how it was treated.  
Q: Does ForestERA have a sense of high-intensity treatments represented in your 
vegetation structure data? Dickson confirmed that the team did have a sense, but noted 

 
August 17, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary       Page 9 of 16     
 
that it’s a matter of scale. He explained that they could pull out the higher and lower 
intensity levels. Sesnie added that there would be temporal issues because the data had 
been gathered from several sources, and the team needed this kind of data to gauge 
whether treatments have happened after their volume measures. He acknowledged that 
the data is roughly five to six years old. One group member exclaimed that there was one 
major issue as to why areas weren’t treated - the percentage of landscape that has been 
treated versus the land that needs it. He added that it might be pointless to include areas 
that have been more recently treated (as defined by the imagery) because the working 
group didn’t have data on them. Rundall also added that she had a good idea of defining 
planned and timber sale, and she explained that she would need to meet with people 
individually to discuss conditions further.  
 
The ForestERA Project team then presented the working group with an issue in which 
their agreement was needed - “Specially designated areas (e.g., Wilderness Areas) and 
Inventoried Roadless Areas are not a source of wood supply.” Several group members 
spoke up in agreement with this statement. The group maintained that this should not be 
included in the analysis.  
 
Next, Steve Sesnie presented information to the working group on tree mortality and 
disturbance factors affecting wood volume estimates. Sesnie presented aerial sketch map 
data of forest insect outbreaks, as well as data on drought killed trees, and fire perimeters. 
He mentioned that data on fire severity is also available. He explained that it was his 
understanding that the team had data through 5 years. One group member responded by 
saying that standing dead trees are still usable for up to 3 or so years. Another group 
member commented that their organization hasn’t had to deal very much with beetle 
salvage, and that it’s probably under fire salvage. This member added that it doesn’t seem 
to be very controversial. However, another group member iterated that “dead does not 
mean non-usable.” Sesnie commented that the Forest Service sketch map data do not 
show high levels of mortality in many ponderosa pine areas, so it’s not a large factor.  
 
Rundall then presented map layers of fire perimeters. One group member commented that 
their only concern was the issue of methodology, so that the group wouldn’t count the 
overlay of what is available and what is not available. Another group member 
commented that the whole area within the fire perimeters was not totally burned; the 
partially burned areas should be considered a source of wood supply, too. A group 
member responded to that by saying that one aspect is utilization, and the other aspect is 
the lack of consensus about what is salvageable and what is burned. This person felt that 
the working group should have a discussion of this idea. Another group member added 
that there isn’t salvageable wood any longer in the Rodeo-Chediski area because it has 
deteriorated so much that it cannot be sold.  
 
At this time, Romero suggested that wood from burned areas would not be included, and 
that this would be a side bar. A group member responded to this by stating that the group 
should not exclude the whole red area from treatment because there are lush green areas 
within that area. Dickson added that the map presented shows only the perimeter around 

 
August 17, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary       Page 10 of 16     
 
burned areas, but that spatial data on fire severity is also available. One group member 
suggested that it would be useful to depict areas with different severities. 
 
Dickson then presented the group with the next PowerPoint slide - Is protected or 
restricted Mexican spotted owl habitat to be considered a source of wood supply? He 
commented that ForestERA was still stitching together spatial data, mainly on owl 
protected activity centers (PACs), which we are waiting to receive from Region 3. We 
have mapped known PACs in the past for the Western Mogollon Plateau and White 
Mountains Landscape Assessments back (these data goes back to mid to late 90s) and we 
mapped interpretations of the MSO Recovery plan protected and restricted habitat, which 
is a challenge to do since protected habitat includes PACs, as well as a composition of 
landscape characteristics that include steep slopes and pine-oak vegetation.  Restricted 
habitat is a mix of pine-oak where oak contributes about 10% of BA of mixed vegetation 
component. This fine-scale basal area specification makes it tough to pin down using 
landscape scale data.  
 
Dickson added that they were looking at developing a map for the entire study area to 
isolate the restricted habitat areas. You can treat within MSO restricted and protected 
habitats, but it depends on the forest you’re on and the stand you’re in too, and depends 
on how many other PACs have been influenced by disturbance or treatment, so it’s a 
project-scale question. Dickson explained that the maps were important for context on 
where habitat does and may occur and to think about planning appropriate treatments. 
One group member clarified that PAC’s are occupied habitat and restricted habitat is 
currently unoccupied habitat that potentially needs management to move towards MSO 
nesting and roosting habitat. All the forests have adopted the MSO Recovery plan as part 
of their 1996 Forest plans, so implementation shouldn’t be different among forests, 
although these do come up.  
Q: Have treatments been carried out within the PAC’s? A group member explained that 
PAC’s have not yet been treated (well only a few) even though the MSO Recovery plan 
since 1995 allows treatment within 10% of the individual PAC’s within a given area 
(except for a 100 acre nest area), so we haven’t been able to make recommendations for 
improving the management recommendations in the Recovery Plan. Another member 
offered that there are regulatory minimums on intensity of treatments in terms of BA and 
canopy cover that we cannot go below (also for goshawks), so we should depict these to 
make sure our scenario considers what the Forests restrictions are in these areas. A group 
member responded by stating that the only way to create new habitat is if there is activity 
in the adjacent areas where a “landscaping” or other minimal treatment can be done. The 
revised Recovery Plan will not make any major changes in recommendations. It will not 
be out by Oct. 1 as hoped. Dickson mentioned that the MSO map for the White 
Mountains Landscape Assessment is available in the handbook (p. 26 of Atlas).  
Q: How many total acres do the PACs cover? A group member responded to this 
question by stating that one PAC is equivalent to 600 acres; there were about 200 PAC’s, 
which equals about 120,000 acres. Another group member commented that there is a lot 
of debate about “desired” treatment on habitats. One group member then explained that 
120,000 acres would not be removed in addition to what the group has already decided to 
remove, because steep slopes cover some of the same area and also PAC’s occur in 

 
August 17, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary       Page 11 of 16     
 
mixed conifer and other non-ponderosa pine areas. Several group members then 
supported the idea to toss out PACs for simplicity sake, and then decide how to deal with 
the restricted habitat in some way, because there is very little wood that will come out of 
PACs. The group agreed to do so in their scenario.   
 
Dickson then moved on to discussing the updates to the WUI data. He explained the 
status of the spatial data, and commented that he was still waiting for information from 
two Community Wildfire Protection Plans and that only then would the team have a 
complete picture on spatial data. He also asked working group members about 
participating on the WUI small group. Steve Gatewood, Sarah Lantz, Shaula Hedwall, 
and Ethan Aumack all expressed interest in being part of the WUI work group.  
 
Hampton continued the meeting by discussing the availability of road data for this 
analysis. She acknowledged that the quality of the road data was considered fairly weak. 
She explained that she discussed the issue of roads with Chris Bielecki, Supervisory 
Transportation Engineer at ASNF, and he explained that roads are “everywhere”; it’s rare 
that roads are adequate for today’s treatment equipment; roads were built narrower and 
had tighter turns than today’s equipment can handle; treatments have been thrown out 
after completing NEPA due to limited access and high cost to install roads; 
environmental impacts of upgrading roads can be significant; current road GIS layers are 
not complete and are only updated on a project by project basis. Hampton relayed to the 
group that Bielecki recommended that the group consider using a layer based on distance 
from arterial roads (roads already suitable for mechanized equipment). One group 
member commented that the group had to really look at the current level of system roads 
and use that information – don’t anticipate other roads. This group member explained that 
their organization makes these decisions based on no further use, not just whether it will 
have future harvest use. Hampton also reminded the group that observers from the last 
meeting indicated that the working group should not consider road access in the wood 
supply analysis because it was an economic question; if the value of the wood was 
sufficient, a road to access it could be built.  
 
Q: Is there a proposal on how to handle the road issue? One group member indicated that 
they didn’t know if there was agreement on restoration and the construction of new roads; 
if so, then the working group could use that information to look at existing areas for 
harvesting. Another group member commented that it would be nice to see a map that 
looks at the distance from existing system (arterial) roads. Hampton indicated to group 
members that the ForestERA Project Team could bring that information to the next 
meeting. Another group member expressed their worry about relying solely on map 
layers to interpret the old system, because some subject-matter expertise people have said 
that it was not reliable. Rundall then provided a road map of the area. A group member 
commented that there is going to be road work done on roads that were closed before, 
particularly for semi-trucks that have larger turning radii. Another group member 
supported this statement and added that their organization had to widen roads, too. They 
did not see it as an issue. One group member indicated that the working group was 
focusing on the 3-4% of the area where there are contentious issues, and advised them to 
look instead at the 90% where there isn’t any contention.  

 
August 17, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary       Page 12 of 16     
 
Q: Are we talking about enough to justify this area that is not much of a loss? A group 
member expressed that the working group was not qualified to make decisions about 
making roads. Romero indicated that the “how” is not an issue for this group, and that 
they should come back to this issue at a later date, if needed. However, the group 
consented to reviewing a map at the next meeting of distance from arterial/service roads.  
 
Tom Sisk: Restoration and Forest Treatments 
Sisk indicated that the key issue for the working group was locating appropriate 
treatments across the landscape for achieving Region 3’s and many others’ central 
priority of restoring fire adapted ecosystems and protecting communities. He explained 
that there are inherent tradeoffs between thinning (potential to supply small diameter 
timber and biomass) and burning (typically does not).  
Q: Is there an agreed upon consensus for determining where the prescribed fire and 
Wildland Fire Use are most appropriate without initial thinning? Sisk acknowledged that 
the group did not have consensus, and that they only had consensus on the tools available 
for the restoration process. He explained that a wide array of perspectives of how to go 
about a wide-scale restoration was available.  
Q: What conditions would warrant a fire treatment? One group member suggested that 
the forests evolved with fire historically, and sometimes it is appropriate. They also 
explained that FlamMap fire behavior and other models help to outline potential fire 
hazards.  
 
Rundall then presented a map with predicted crown fire behavior (including surface fire 
only, passive crown fire, and active crown fire; NOTE that this layer was not displayed 
properly and thus appeared to underpredict crown fire behaviors). Sisk explained that 
these maps should help direct the group to see areas where the group agrees on areas that 
need thinning or prescribed burning. He mentioned that the working group didn’t need to 
agree on these things now, but that the group needed to make some initial cuts in 
practical conditions in which the group would advocate fire treatments or heavy thinning. 
Sisk added that the group shouldn’t focus primarily on maps, and advocated that they 
hold off on looking at the maps. He further explained that the maps could be helpful, but 
they could also divert the group from the guiding principles of what needs to be done. At 
this time, the group and team members agreed to turn off the map display. Dickson 
explained that ForestERA was working closely with the USFS Missoula Fire Lab to 
recalibrate forest fuel data from the interagency LANDFIRE dataset. These data are 
inputs in the fire behavior and hazard layers derived by ForestERA using the fire 
modeling program FlamMap. ForestERA is continuing to improve these layers based on 
information provided by experts and available ground data. 
 
Sisk iterated that the team wants the group’s guidance, as to what treatments should be 
used in the analysis area.  
Q: What about condition class? Sisk responded by stating that condition class is one of 
the ways the group can go. He then turned the question around to the working group – 
“How would you use condition class?” One group member explained that the Forest 
Service uses condition class for determining where to conduct treatments. Dickson 
indicated that condition class is used on the ground (at a project level), while condition 

 
August 17, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary       Page 13 of 16     
 
class data appropriate for the scale of this analysis is not currently available, although the 
LANDFIRE project is in the process of developing it.  
Q: Is there a model that could show us areas to burn (say a Class 1 burn) that will still fall 
within the parameters of the Clean Air Act? Sisk responded by saying that a one-to-one 
correspondence between the Clean Air Act and burning thresholds is difficult because 
those standards are changed day-to-day, dependent upon wind speed and drought 
conditions. He added that it’s difficult to say that the decisions the group make would 
lead to violations of the CAA on a given day.  
 
At this point, Sisk reiterated that the ForestERA team needed more guidance from the 
group so that the team could take that information and present it back to the group.  
Q: How involved do we want to be in order to meet our restoration objective?  One group 
member suggested that the group think about where they want to get to, and then look at 
which treatments will get them there. Another group member suggested that the group let 
the team go through the process that they are accustomed to and see what it can offer. 
This member also added that they would like prescribed fire too, but the trend is to look 
at lessening the use of fire. Sisk explained that the team could talk about steps towards 
describing the treatments used previously. However, one group member explained that 
they wanted to look at the existing conditions before the group began to think of 
treatments. This member suggested having a map that allows the working group to look 
at their predictions. Sisk responded to this by stating that the team had those maps and 
can do it, but it might be more productive to say that in areas where there is X conditions, 
treatment(s) Y and Z can take place. He added that the map should come out of the 
conditions and the treatments, instead of the other way around.  
 
Romero then suggested two ideas: 1) Use the fire small group to discuss things, 2) Work 
between meetings to develop concrete language. The working group agreed with working 
over the break, but did not support the small group discussion. Sisk then reviewed a slide 
and encouraged the group to build their own map by looking at the different treatment 
types used in previous landscape assessments for the purpose of mapping out what is to 
be done in particular places. He asked the group whether or not they could come up with 
conditions on a landscape where one or more treatments are appropriate? He explained 
that this would give the group direction, as he heard interest expressed before. He added 
that the second pathway is to provide a set of overlays and go through those areas in a 
place-by-place manner. He also encouraged the group to have some ideas to brainstorm 
and make progress towards specificity after the break. One group member stressed the 
importance of making additions to the existing criteria, but added that the group needed 
to think about the density on the forest floor - We could add to each criterion something 
like, (desired treatment condition) if X number of trees per acre exists. Sisk expressed 
interest in the idea and told group members that they needed to develop ideas similar to 
this.  
 
ACTION ITEM 2: Select treatments based on management objectives 
Hampton began by introducing a new matrix to the working group. It was a scenario 
worksheet (simplified from what they have used in the past) to delineate information 
about scenarios and the different facets involved with those scenarios (i.e., criteria layers, 

 
August 17, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary       Page 14 of 16     
 
management objectives, and management actions). She then asked the group “Under 
what conditions would high-intensity thinning treatments be appropriate?” 
 
Working Group member 1: Management objective = Places where the area of 
acceptable risk is lowest and could reduce fire hazard to a particular threshold (e.g., areas 
close to communities); Criteria layer = active crown fire; Management action = high-
intensity thin followed by prescribed (light) burn near communities. Feathered in 
intensity with distance from communities.  
 
Working Group member 2: Criteria layer = MSO PAC’s; Management action = use 
high intensity thin followed by prescribed (light) burn 1 mile upwind of PACs; 
Management objective = protect PACs from fire and high-intensity thin followed by 
prescribed (light) burn in wildlands.  
 
Working Group member 3: Criteria layer = rough terrain; Management objective = 
create fire breaks; Management action = high-intensity followed by prescribed (light) 
burn upwind of rough and significant topography. ALSO, Criteria layer = canyons; 
Management objective = reduce rate of spread of fire between canyons; Management 
action = high-intensity thin followed by prescribed (light) burn between. ALSO, Criteria 
layer = pronghorn and other open forest species; Management objectives = restore 
habitats of open forest species; Management action = high-intensity thin followed by 
prescribed (light) burn. ALSO, Criteria layer = historic meadows; Management objective 
= restore meadows; Management action = high-intensity thin followed by prescribed 
(light) burn.  
 
Q: How can we accomplish our objectives? Dickson responded by stating that the group 
needed to establish associated criteria to add to the management actions. Romero then 
asked the group, “What is the language that should go in there then?” One group member 
suggested that the group could add language that includes what the area could be taken 
down to. Another group member thought it made more sense to come to terms with the 
concern about percent reduction. They indicated that the working group seemed to have a 
lot of comments about this particular topic. This member thought that the group needed 
to first define their objectives, and they felt as though the group wasn’t doing a good job 
of identifying their future objective and the desired outcomes. Several other members 
consented that the desired condition was the main objective for agreement.  
 
In response, one group member felt that the group kept discussing the means, but that 
they weren’t really considering the ends (or desired conditions). Another group member 
added that the group needed to clearly define the desired condition (block-by-block), but 
that the group also needed to determine how to move from the existing condition to the 
desired condition. Another group member indicated that they hadn’t yet decided what 
they wanted their areas to look like, but that this is one of the objectives outlined in the 
road map. This member felt that the group needed to do that before they decided the 
treatment types for those areas. Several group members agreed with this view, and one 
group member commented that the group needed to look at the existing conditions and 
figure out how they could get to the desired conditions. Sisk indicated that mapping out 

 
August 17, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary       Page 15 of 16     
 
the desired conditions and then subtracting those conditions was considerably difficult 
and not realistic. He explained that the more realistic option was to move towards the 
desired conditions, using real people and real methods for moving towards finding 
treatment options and outcomes.    
 
Q: Do you have the time and resources to run both models to see if there is a real wide 
difference between the initial scenario (based on %) input and the output? Sisk responded 
by stating that doing so was very time consuming and that it was very difficult to say that 
they want different basal areas in different places. He stressed that this method was not 
practical when considering millions of acres. Another group member suggested instead of 
focusing on percentage, why couldn’t the group just say what they wanted the area to 
look like. Sisk re-iterated that it was not realistic.  
 
The working group members expressed interest in defining treatments that would reduce 
fire behavior to a particular threshold. Sisk explained that the team could look at a 
particular area’s predicted active crown fire and explore whether it would be possible, 
given the tools available, to define the percent reduction needed to reduce crowning. He 
explained that the group was talking about preserving a range, and that this was an 
expansive, broad vision. He felt that the group needed to work in the broad perspective, 
but also target what they want things to look like after the target condition.   
 
Logistics for next meeting 
Sisk indicated that the team would take into account what has been discussed at the 
meeting and they would work on developing a “stepping stone” for where the group 
wants to go. Q: Can you provide one screen with a baseline and another screen with a 
map with layers that we can overlay and start checking things off to see if we like 
something? Sisk assured the group that the team could do so. He explained that the 
baseline will be the current conditions, and that the group could click a box (e.g., MSO 
habitats) and see how the change looks. He added that it would provide a useful visual for 
the group.  
 
Romero reminded group members that the next meeting is in Holbrook on September 17. 
She explained that the group would need to agree about how much they have finished, in 
order to determine if they would need the optional meeting on Oct. 9 (location to be 
determined). Romero then asked who was working in small groups. WUI: Keith, Steve, 
Sarah, Ethan, Scott, Brett, and Shaula; Fire: Ethan, Todd, Pascal, Steve, and Brett; 
Wildlife: Sarah and Shaula 
 
Public comment period 
One audience member spoke to the group about thinking in concepts, and that he had 
done so with his own team for a previous project. He suggested to the group that they 
should consider different condition classes and treatment options one-by-one and that 
they should work on getting themselves closer to agreement one step at a time. He 
explained that while working on his project, his own team started to think about the 
treatments they would use to get there, as well as the amount of product that could come 

 
August 17, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary       Page 16 of 16     
 
off the land. He stated that by looking at the maps and listening to this group today, he 
could say that it does work and that it is possible.  

Wood Supply Working Group Meeting 
Analysis of Small-Diameter Wood Supply in Northern Arizona 
 
September 17, 2007 
9:00 a.m. – 4:15 p.m. 
Northland Pioneer College, Holbrook, AZ  
 
 
 
9:00 – 9:15 a.m. 
Welcome – Rosemary Romero (Facilitator, Rosemary Romero 
Consulting)  
 
 
9:15 – 9:30 a.m. 
Review meeting agenda, timetable and various project updates – 
Haydee Hampton (Research Associate, Environmental Sciences, 
Northern Arizona University) 
 
 
9:30 – 10:30 a.m. 
Identify areas appropriate for restoration treatments that 
recover wood byproducts 
 
Review Working Group’s efforts to date on identifying areas 
appropriate for restoration treatments using additive display of 
map-based scenario components followed by Working Group 
decision-making session to identify any additional areas – Jill 
Rundall (Senior Research Specialist, Environmental Sciences, 
NAU) and Haydee Hampton 
 
 
10:30 – 10:45 a.m. 
Break 
 
 
10:45 – 12:00 p.m. 
Define management objectives and select treatments 
 
Presentation and group discussion (30 minutes each) on Wildland-
Urban Interface (WUI) and Fire small group efforts. Review 
Working Group draft management objectives and treatments. – 
Brett Dickson (Assistant Research Professor, Environmental 
Sciences, NAU), Jill Rundall and Haydee Hampton 
 
 
12:00 – 1:00 p.m. 
Lunch  
 
*** Lunch will be on site. Sandwich fixings available for $5 
(check or cash only) or bring your own. *** 
 
 

1:00 – 1:45 p.m. 
Updates on wood estimation and other spatial data  
 
Presentation on methods for developing spatial data on wood 
volume and for predicting forest growth – Steve Sesnie 
(Postdoctoral Research Associate, Environmental Sciences, NAU) 
Updates on spatial data collection – Jill Rundall 
 
 
1:45 – 2:30 p.m. 
Define management objectives and select treatments (cont.) 
 
Working Group decision-making session on the selection of 
treatments of interest to Working Group – facilitated by Rosemary 
Romero 
Map-based treatments recommended by collaborative groups in the 
Western Mogollon Plateau Adaptive Landscape Assessment 
(WMPALA) and the White Mountains Landscape Assessment 
(WMLA) – Haydee Hampton 
 
 
2:30 – 2:45 p.m. 
Break 
 
 
2:45 – 3:45 p.m. 
Define management objectives and select treatments (cont.) 
 
 
3:45 – 4:00 p.m. 
Updates on wood utilization database and logistics for next 
meeting 
 
Presentation on harvesters, mills and manufacturers in analysis 
area – Gary Snider (Forest Economist and Doctoral Candidate, 
School of Forestry, Northern Arizona University) 
 
Group discussion on need for Oct. 9 meeting (location to be 
announced). 
 
 
4:00 – 4:15 p.m. 
Public comment period 
 
 
4:15 p.m. 
 
Adjourn 
 

 
 
Meeting Summary 
Wood Supply Working Group Meeting 
Analysis of Small-Diameter Wood Supply in Northern Arizona 
September 17, 2007, Northland Pioneer College, Painted Desert Campus  
2251 N. Navajo Blvd., Holbrook, AZ 
 
 
Introduction and Agenda Review 
 
Rosemary Romero (Meeting Facilitator) welcomed back the working group members and 
observers to the fourth group meeting. She opened the meeting by having working group and 
audience members introduce themselves.  
 
Working Group members present at meeting (in order of presentation): 
1) Bill Greenwood, City Manager for the Town of Eagar  
2) Molly Pitts, Executive Director of the Northern Arizona Wood Products Association 
3) Herb Hopper, Community-based forest and wood products advocate, Little Colorado 
Plateau Resource Conservation & Development  
4) Bob Taylor, Supervisory Natural Resource Specialist for the Apache-Sitgreaves 
National Forest 
5) Steve Gatewood, Consultant, Wildwood Consulting Inc., representing the Greater 
Flagstaff Forests Partnership 
6) Larry Stephenson, Executive Director of the Eastern Arizona Counties Organization 
(ECO)/Economic Environmental Counties Organization (EECO) 
7) Todd Schulke, Forest Programs Director for the Center of Biological Diversity 
8) Rob Davis, President/Owner of Forest Energy Corporation/Future Forests 
9) Kim Newbauer, Timber Sales Contracting Officer for Coconino National Forest 
10) Wally Covington, Director of the ERI and NAU Forestry Department Regents’ 
Professor 
11) Shaula Hedwall, Ecological Services, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service  
12) Sarah Lantz, Urban Wildlife Planner for Arizona Game and Fish Department (Region 
II Flagstaff Office) 
13) Lisa McNeilly, Northern Arizona Program Director of The Nature Conservancy 
14) Scott Higginson, Executive Vice President of NZ Legacy/Snowflake White Mountain 
Power, Renergy 
 
Working Group members not present at meeting: 
1) Robert LaCapa, Forest Manager, DOI BIA Fort Apache Agency Branch of Forestry 
2) Chuck Peone, Fort Apache Timber Co. 
3) Paul DeClay, Tribal Forester, Forestry Department, White Mountains Apache Tribe 
4) Elaine Zieroth, Forest Supervisor for Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest (alternate 
present: Bob Taylor) 
5) Keith Pajkos, Timber Staff for the Arizona State Lands Department Forestry Division 
6) Ethan Aumack, Director of Restoration Programs for Grand Canyon Trust 
7) Jerry Drury, Timber Staff Officer for the Kaibab National Forest 
8) Pascal Berlioux, President and Chief Executive Officer of Arizona Forest 

 
September 17, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary        Page 2 of 14 
Restoration Products, Inc. 
9) Diane Vosick, Associate Director of the Ecological Restoration Institute (alternate 
present: Wally Covington) 
 
Meeting observers: 
1) Sue Sitko, The Nature Conservancy 
2) Penny Pew, Office of Congressman Renzi 
3) Bob Baltes, Federal Development 
4) David Dorum, AZGFD 
5) Ed Martin, SW Forest Products 
6) Dave Brewer, ERI 
 
Romero then turned the floor over to Haydee Hampton, the Forest Ecosystem Restoration 
Analysis (Forest Ecosystem Restoration Analysis; ForestERA) Project Manager leading this 
collaborative effort. 
 
Haydee Hampton: Wood Supply Team Introductions and Agenda 
Hampton reviewed the agenda and covered the major points that were to be covered at the 
meeting. She indicated to group members that she believed the portion of the scenario 
identifying areas appropriate for restoration treatment could be finished today, and she also told 
group members that there would be two presentations that were not covered the previous 
meeting, from ForestERA team members Jill Rundall and Steve Sesnie. She also explained that 
the agenda provided 2 hours for the group to define additional management objectives.  
 
Hampton then discussed details about the remaining timetable for the working group: 
  
September 17: Revise treatment scenarios and discuss treatment characterization and 
preliminary results of forest growth review.  
Hampton informed group members that the wood user database scheduled for Oct 15 would be 
moved up to be discussed at this meeting by Gary Snider. She also told group members that they 
would need to decide whether or not they need the Oct 9 meeting.  
 
October 15: Finalize treatment scenario; review draft wood volume layer and wood use 
database; decide on need for Oct 29 meeting. 
 
November 16: Discuss wood supply results; discuss potential economic or other follow-
up analyses - December 1st for final deliverables. 
 
Hampton reported to group members that they should have received the Wood Supply Analysis 
Progress Report. She also indicated that the ForestERA team would like to receive comments 
from the working group by Thursday, September 27, 2007. She then mentioned that Region 3 
Directors viewed the progress report and some had some questions and comments. Regarding the 
time frame of study: 
- The ForestERA team is estimating current wood supply for a snapshot in time. The “ad hoc” 
committee which initiated this study recommended that any projections on current conditions be 
conducted within a 20 year time frame. She indicated that the team was presenting initial growth 
estimates for this period.  
- A Region 3 director commented that re-entry is highly unlikely within a 20 year period.  

 
September 17, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary        Page 3 of 14 
- She also told group members that decisions about prioritizing treatments, assumption on acres 
treated/yr could be included in the report.  
  
Hampton reviewed comments ForestERA had received after the last meeting regarding the use of 
FRCC LandFire data. Linda Wadleigh, Region 3 Fire Ecologist, who ForestERA staff had met 
with after the Sept. 17 working group meeting, indicated that the National Level LandFire FRCC 
layer was due out soon, but was not yet available and that she would not recommend using the 
Rapid Assessment LandFire FRCC layer that is available.  
 
Hampton pointed out that the landscape level treatment characterizations used in this study will 
allow the estimation of wood supply, while detailed prescriptions will involve public interaction 
at a local level. She then referred the working group to the letter they had requested at the June 4 
working group meeting from Harv Forsgren (Region 3 Forest Supervisor) which pointed out that 
results from this study would be useful for local level discussions. Hampton continued her 
session by explaining that no wood byproducts would result from burn only treatments, so in 
effect they would be excluded from the scenarios similar to the decision made about steep slopes. 
To this, one working group member commented that the use of heavy burn treatment will kill 
trees that could be use for salvage logging (and biomass as well pointed out another member), 
and we should explicitly state in the final report that we’re not including these as available wood 
supply in the study.  
 
Hampton then presented a slide about the potential number of treatment scenarios developed by 
the working group. She explained that it was up the working group to decide how many 
scenarios of which type would result from this process as it unfolded.  
She explained that there were several possibilities:  
 
• One agreed upon scenario 
• More than one on which there is agreement 
• More than one showing various levels of agreement 
• More than one showing a mix 
 
She then reviewed a slide about treatment prioritization and indicated that the ForestERA team 
needed input (about priority areas – for sequencing treatments) by the end of the October 15th 
meeting to have sufficient time to include this type of analysis in this study. She also mentioned 
that this was not a required part of the wood supply analysis. Hampton then continued her 
segment by discussing that there were at least two methods for prioritizing areas in need of 
management attention. The first was the identification of values at risk that collaborative groups 
had used at the previous landscape assessments in the area. She also reviewed the Treatment 
Optimization Modeling (TOM) that Brett Dickson presented at the July 18th working group 
meeting, and one straw man plan for using it to prioritize treatment locations together with 
values at risk:  
 
• Develop layer showing potential treatments  
• Run TOM to select optimal treatment locations (e.g., 10 or 20% of total area)  
• Develop layer of priority areas across analysis area using values at risk method 

 
September 17, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary        Page 4 of 14 
• Use values at risk prioritization process to provide preferred sequencing of treatments 
within TOM areas 
 
Q: How would the approved Community Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPPs) fit into this? 
Hampton responded that the working group could handle this in several ways. At this point, one 
working group member explained that her WUI small group’s talk fits into the where and when, 
as well as the treatment types, as far as prioritizations go. Another group member commented 
that they thought the prioritization might change, and they didn’t believe the working group 
should go this route. Hampton explained that the working group could set out a specific time to 
discuss this topic. Romero suggested that the group could possibly do that after the presentations.  
 
Hampton continued by saying that ForestERA was working together with working group 
members representing the White Mountain Apache tribe to develop methods and access to data 
to estimate reservation-wide wood volumes. She then commented that this had been identified by 
the Steering committee and others as important since there were significant volumes of 
ponderosa pines on the Mogollon Plateau located on reservation land.  
 
Hampton moved onto a slide about identifying areas appropriate for restoration treatments that 
recover wood byproducts. She then outlined those areas that had been excluded by the layers:  
 
• Initial acreage of ponderosa pine area = 2,030,195 
• MSO – acres removed = 142,089; acres remaining = 1,888,106 
• MSO,SDA – acres removed = 91,293; acres remaining = 1,796,813 
• MSO,SDA, Slope – acres removed = 38,142; acres remaining = 1,758,671 
• MSO,SDA, Slope, Soil with limited mechanized treatments – acres removed = 
45,259; acres remaining = 1,713,412 
 
Q: When you found 16% of the study area ponderosa pine removed, did you include areas of 
overlap? Hampton responded that the team counted areas only once, even if more than one factor 
(e.g., slopes and MSO PACs) occurred in the same location.  
 
In addition to this information, Brett Dickson acknowledged that there might be a few PAC’s 
missing from the A-S analysis, and a working group member commented that they didn’t think it 
would be a significant portion of the PAC’s. Hampton indicated that the group could come back 
to this slide and went ahead to the soil issue. She presented a slide with information about soils 
with mechanized equipment limitations 
• Completed collection of soil information from four forests in analysis area 
• ForestERA team members are checking back with soil scientists before finalizing 
layer 
• Limitations based on a number of factors, including areas: 
 
 
 
- with erosion hazard 
 
 
 
- with shallow soils 
 
 
 
- with high rock content 
 
 
 
- prone to sheet and rill erosion once ground cover gets thin 
 
 
 
- prone to compaction when wet (secondary factor) 

 
September 17, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary        Page 5 of 14 
At this time, she referred to Dave Brewer about the soil survey information. He explained that 
the terrestrial soil survey data is useful because it is quite relevant for broad-based planning. He 
indicated that there are several good things about the soil survey including that the data goes 
through a detailed review process. 
  
Hampton responded that the ForestERA team would continue working with soil scientists and 
refine the draft and then get back to the working group.  
Q: You’ll bring that back to us for recommendation, right? Hampton answered that the 
ForestERA team can do that.  
Q: Can’t soil damage be mitigated on the areas you have mapped? Brewer answered this by 
stating that some damage to sensitive soils areas can be mitigated, but that only the areas that 
were too difficult to mitigate damage from mechanized equipment were shown on the maps. 
Areas that could be mitigated were not included. 
 
Hampton then moved forward with discussing completed and contracted (sold) treatments to 
check in with the group on how they were planning to proceed. She included several related 
points in her slide: 
 
• Applies to treatments post-dating the remote-sensing imagery used to develop forest 
structure maps used in this process. 
• For treatments with “exact” boundary information 
- Remove areas with intermediate and high intensity thinning treatments from 
scenario 
- Wood byproducts are assumed not available from these areas 
• Include areas with light thinning or unknown treatment intensity in scenario 
- Wood byproducts are available from these areas 
 
Hampton also commented that for areas in which treatment intensity data and boundary data do 
not exist (e.g., only stand exam data exists), the ForestERA team will account for these acres by 
adjusting analysis area wide volume and supply estimates.  
 
Q: As far as your imagery dating, does that vary across the board? Hampton indicated that it 
does, and that the imagery acquisition dates ranged from 1997 to 2004.  
 
Jill Rundall and Haydee Hampton: Identify areas appropriate for restoration treatments that 
recover wood byproducts.  
Rundall indicated that she met with the different forests to discuss the areas with thinning 
treatments. She provided estimates about these areas, but acknowledged that some of the acres 
may have been treated more than once:  
 
• Kaibab (1997-2006)  
 
19,817 
• Apache-Sitgreaves (1997-2007) 
Pending 
• Tonto (2001-2007) 
 
 
10,906 
• Coconino (n/a) 
 
 
Pending 
 

 
September 17, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary        Page 6 of 14 
Rundall then presented a map of the Kaibab and Tonto treatment areas that she had made from 
data she had collected.  
Q: So that 7,000 acres that you referred to do not include other forest areas? Rundall confirmed 
that they did not include non-ponderosa pine areas.   
 
Hampton then went on to discuss the treatment guidelines for streamside management zones. She 
indicated that the team decided against carrying out a detailed analysis for several reasons. She 
indicated that there is a lack of finalized data for ADEQ’s “unique” or “impaired” waters and the 
current version identifies few streams. Also, the ESA fish data are incomplete. She also 
presented that the ASNF is the only forest that precludes mechanized equipment from areas next 
to streams.  The other Forests specify BMPs to mitigate damage, but no rules that specifically 
restrict equipment from these areas. 
Q: Would it be useful to get an estimated percentage for what would be removed? Hampton 
commented that the Forest Service hydrologist on the ASNF was not able to give her a 
guesstimate, not even a ballpark number like 1% or 5%. One group member said that they had a 
feeling that when you take the steep slope out, streamside management zones wouldn’t add very 
much. Another group member suggested doing a quick analysis by buffering streams throughout 
the study area by 100 feet, in order to gain a better understanding. Other group members agreed 
with applying this buffer to develop an estimate of streamside management zones. Hampton 
agreed that ForestERA would develop a layer of buffered streams to present to the group at the 
next meeting. 
 
Hampton then returned to the areas removed from the group’s scenario. She said the overlap 
among the layers was about 27% (119,242 acres). The total acres (considering overlap) were 
equivalent to about 324,105 acres.  
Q: Does the overlap include the Clifton ranger district as well? Rundall answered that it only 
includes ponderosa pine areas, which are not prevalent on the Clifton RD.  
 
Hampton moved onto discussing a last slide that included information about the Woody Ridge 
and other forest restoration projects reviewed for acres treated within the NEPA planning area. 
She indicated that the team found 2/3 of the areas had been thinned. She explained that 66% of 
Woody Ridge had been thinned, while Jerry Drury had conducted a study on the Kaibab NF and 
found that about 62% of areas were thinned.  
 
Gary Snider commented that he was talking with Drury about how they got to the number 66%. 
Snider then referred to Kim Newbauer, and he indicated that the numbers included the areas he 
could think of. Hampton iterated that the idea here is to look at the project level to compare to 
the landscape level analysis being done for this analysis of wood supply. She expressed that this 
information could be used as a benchmark and it includes archeological sites and other factors 
that cannot be mapped out.  
 
One group member commented that they felt the need for a more careful look at this. They 
indicated that on the Gila, they end up thinning more like 30-40% of the area, and that is 
dramatically less than 60%. This group member added that there’s a pretty strong WUI objective 
that could possibly have an influence, and they also felt that it’s a pretty important objective to 
address and decide how the group will deal with it. Another group member commented that they 

 
September 17, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary        Page 7 of 14 
would be reluctant to take a number and do anything, because the group needed to do an analysis 
instead, and get some numbers and ranges – instead of taking that 66% across the board. Romero 
suggested that the group could make sure to include a list of these factors in the report, as was 
mentioned by someone before. At this point, a group member commented that the group should 
not use a gross number that is not reality on the ground; they wanted the group to be very clear as 
to what the reality is that is done on the project level. To this, another group member commented 
that the working group has been talking about 6 factors today, but that they have other factors in 
their notes. This member wanted to clarify that the group wasn’t saying only 16% is being taken 
off the map.  
Q: We’re not finalizing it at 16%; there are other factors, right?  Hampton agreed that the 
working group could decide to add other factors as well.  
 
One group member expressed that one of the things the group previously talked about was 
getting a supply estimate and a volume estimate. This group member explained that the group 
needed to think about the volume that is there and what will come out and how that will affect 
the supply. One group member responded that they thought the working group should account 
for northern goshawk nests. They suggested excluding 30-50 acres around goshawk nesting sites 
from sources of supply. Romero found that the group was in agreement on this issue and 
Hampton commented that ForestERA could map these areas and include them as additional acres 
removed. One group member thought that this data would provide a floor for the nesting 
treatments. Another group member felt that the group should pull out the areas where there is not 
treatment. Another group member explained that although it’s a small number of thousands, 
when considering 30 acres for each nesting site it becomes more significant.  
 
Define management objectives and select treatments  
 
Working group member, Sarah Lantz, explained that a small group met the week before to 
discuss the WUI and some various approaches, and she indicated that they would present some 
mapping exercises that the working group could use to share some ideas. The small group was 
trying to depict areas of highest priority for community protection to guide decision-making. 
Lantz indicated that each CWPP (Flagstaff, Tusayan, Williams, Mogollon Rim, Apache and 
Sitgreaves) had extremely variable definitions for indicating the priority areas and these did not 
cover the entire study area. However, the small group was able to come up with several proposed 
options:  
 
1. Place ¼ mile buffers around private lands 
2. Only include areas that the CWPPs identified as being high priority 
3. Place a wind-vector of ½ mile downwind and 1½ miles upwind of private lands. This is 
related somewhat to HFRA definitions. 
4. Place a wind-vector of ½ mile downwind and 1½ miles upwind of private lands within 
CWPP high priority areas and ¼ mile buffers around private lands outside of CWPP areas.   
 
After consideration, the last proposal option was the most widely agreed upon. One working 
group member commented there were some other factors that weren’t figured into the small 
group’s analysis, such as power line corridors, etc. Lantz explained that the small group included 
several political, social, and scientific considerations.  

 
September 17, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary        Page 8 of 14 
Q: What was the thinking in option 4? Why expand CWPP areas by adding on the buffer zones? 
Lantz explained that adding the buffer zones doesn’t expand it; instead it really helps to narrow it 
down. One group member responded that the working group needed to be careful when 
addressing this issue in the report. This member indicated that, “CWPPs actually redefine the 
WUI for their community. We are taking their priority areas and applying this buffer – we might 
not want to label this as WUI.”  
Q: What designates an area as priority in a CWPP? Lantz explained that each CWPP is different. 
One group member expressed their agreement with a previous comment about municipal 
watersheds and power lines. This person felt that the working group should be diligent to address 
and consider such issues at some point. Another group member mentioned that the group was 
defining a heavier treatment, not prioritizing the treatment. Lantz agreed and said that, “This 
doesn’t say that this area gets heavier treatment than other ones; that’s for the group to decide.” 
To this, one group member included that the small group was showing treatment in their map 
that the working group decided to exclude (around the Blue River). Lantz affirmed that those 
areas would remain excluded in the working group’s scenario.  
 
Working group member, Steve Gatewood, then presented the “fire” small group’s discussion 
results. Gatewood explained that the small group had talked about fire, specifically about which 
areas might be taken out of consideration as sources of supply because they had been potentially 
treated using fire only. He indicated that the small group made the suggestion that wood be 
utilized when possible instead of burning it in piles, and that the small group wanted to talk about 
fire as a tool (e.g., broadcast burning). Gatewood further explained that output from the 
Landfire/FlamMap models included surface, passive crown fire, and active crown fire, but that 
this did not account for fire spread; it only refers to the fire behavior that would occur in a pixel 
if that area was ignited. He commented that the small group had Brett Dickson do a 500-acre 
analysis where Dickson would group pixels and apply a fire behavior level to the 500-acre block. 
He assured members that this was not a fire spread model.  
 
Gatewood continued his discussion by referring to the second example on the small group’s 
worksheet. He explained that that issue was really their “straw man”. Gatewood commented that 
using FlamMap-generated data for the study area identifies patches characterized by predicted 
surface fire, passive crown fire, and active crown fire; He added that the group determined 
surface fire–dominated patches to be “areas where prescribed burning and/or wildland fire use 
[WFU] are likely to be a preferred first management”. Then, he explained that the group 
identified active crown fire–dominated patches as “areas where prescribed burning and/or WFU 
are unlikely to be a preferred first management approach”. Lastly, Gatewood added that the 
group identified patches largely contained within high priority community protection zones as 
“areas where prescribed burning and/or WFU are unlikely to be preferred first management 
approach”.   
 
Q: Are you running the models assuming a 95th percentile weather scenario? Dickson explained 
that this is a work in progress, and that the ForestERA team can run the model using various 
weather scenarios.  
Q: If you’re going back into these areas and burning after mechanical treatment, why would we 
prioritize these areas? Gatewood responded that currently the Forest Service operates with this 
because fire is the cheapest option. One group member commented that the working group is 

 
September 17, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary        Page 9 of 14 
basing this decision on budget constraints and lack of industry constraints. Gatewood responded 
by saying that he believes a previous working group member indicated that the group should do 
as much burning as possible where feasible to avoid potential negative impacts of mechanical 
treatment. He added that there was a desire to use fire where it can be used, even if there is 
supply there. Another group member explained that this is the policy preference of several 
organizations represented by the Working Group. Another member added that these are policy 
preferences that are based upon assumptions, and that these aren’t really documented.  
 
Another group member indicated that they had a high level of discomfort with using FlamMap 
outputs to determine those areas where fire only treatments are appropriate just because they are 
identified as such on this map. One group member added that there is a strong opinion for an 
approach where fire can be used as the primary restoration tool. They felt that the perspective of 
using fire wherever possible is something that this group should be sure to discuss. In response, a 
group member explained that if this model was torn apart pixel by pixel, the group would not be 
able to see what happens when fire is the first option and mechanical treatment could be used 
too.  
Q: Has there been any effort to work with the individual forests to see if they would agree that 
these models are dependable? Dickson explained that LandFire is holding a meeting in 
Albuquerque, in which experts on the ground would look at the same models the team was using 
here and they would decide if they agree with the models. One group member felt that the 
working group had to think about something a bit smaller than the 500-acre fire unit.  
Q: Is this model part of the next step to put a fire-spread overlay? Again, Dickson responded, 
saying that all the team did was impose a small fire spread effect, being very conservative; they 
then went through the 500-acre exercise based on the assumptions of the model.  
 
Romero then commented that fire only treatment group still had some work to do for the next 
meeting, and she iterated that the group had to come back to the WUI discussion. 
Q: Can the small groups create summary documents and then hand them out to working group 
members? The small group leaders responded that they could do this.  
 
Romero began the second half of the meeting by providing additional information about the 
remaining meetings:  
 
October 9th meeting (if it takes place) will be in Holbrook;  
October 15th meeting in Pinetop;  
October 29th meeting (if it takes place) will be in Flagstaff;  
November 16th meeting in Flagstaff.  
 
Steve Sesnie: Wood volume estimation 
Sesnie began by discussing the forest growth and volume estimates for ponderosa pine forest 
type. He explained that his base set of plots came from the Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA) 
PIPO type, which equals 327 plots. He also indicated that the plots were measured in the mid 
90’s, and that he would grow the plots to reflect conditions now and 20 years from now.  
 

 
September 17, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary        Page 10 of 14 
Sesnie then presented a set of average forest condition graphs, using a base set of information 
from FIA, outlining the 2007 and 2027 data from forest vegetation in the southwest United 
States.  
Q: Does this model reflect regeneration? Sesnie indicated that he could add that to these model 
runs, but added that he didn’t think the volume estimates would change that much. Q: Are you 
going to let us see what that equates to in 2027? Sesnie explained that that would require the 
team to grow the information forward by pixel; he added that he hasn’t thought about how to do 
that yet.  
Q: Can’t you put the treatment data into that then? Sesnie affirmed that the team could do that. 
He explained that they could take an average plot condition and apply the treatment condition to 
it and see what that area will look like in 20 years. He also added that they would need another 
model to estimate forest growth pixel by pixel across the entire landscape.  
Q: Is the 2007 baseline here our map? Sesnie responded by saying that it will be the date of 
imagery that was recorded in 2004. One group member commented that the data were based on 
the FIA plot, which is 1 plot per 6,000 acres, so it’s not a very strong representation.  
 
Sesnie also included a graph showing forest growth for 2007 and 2027. He explained that the 
small diameter volume made up about 30% for 2007 and 24% for 2027; small diameter basal 
area was 54% for 2007, while it was 36% for 2027. He warned the group that they should be 
careful about estimating the volume ranges because there is greater error associated with 
measuring narrower diameter classes. He then confirmed that he would take the FIA data and 
estimate forest volume across the ponderosa pine forest type, using a regression modeling 
approach. He presented this as a three-step process: 
 
• FIA plots – reference data by volume class 
• Data layers – CC, QMD, BA, TPA, biophysical variables (elevations) 
• Error estimation – root mean square difference from observed and imputed 
variables  
Q: What are other biophysical variables? Sesnie answered that these could include precipitation 
and other climate data.  
Q: What about site indexes? Sesnie answered that the data could include site indices to estimate 
how growth behavior looks in the future.  
Q: Have you decided what you will settle on in diameter size class? Sesnie explained that the 
team considered having a diameter range between 5-12 inches, 12 and above, and 5 and below. 
He added that he discussed this issue with John Bailey, a professor at Oregon State, who used to 
be at NAU and has a strong silvicultural background in ponderosa pine forests, who is involved 
in the project and together they thought that the break-point should be around 5 and 12 inches. 
Hampton added that they also reviewed the diameter class breaks recommended by the working 
group at the meeting with Bailey. 
 
Sesnie’s final slide looked at tree mortality and disturbance factors affecting volume estimates:   
• Forest insect outbreaks 
• Fire perimeter (BAER data) 
• Fire severity 
• Drought killed trees 
 

 
September 17, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary        Page 11 of 14 
Sesnie then commented that the first reason he used the growth model was to get the data points 
up-to-date. He explained that it does help give everyone an estimate of how much volume 
estimate can be expected at a given time. He added that density and site conditions are really 
what drive growth, so there is potential to estimate volume in that way.  
Q: Is there a limit to the independent variables? Sesnie explained that other IV’s could be added 
to the model, but that they likely wouldn’t contribute to the accuracy of what he was doing. 
Sesnie then added that the team was planning on doing an independent assessment of the volume 
estimates.  
 
Jill Rundall: Updates on spatial data collection 
Rundall began her segment by reviewing a table summarizing spatial layers that the ForestERA 
team was almost finished acquiring. She continued with discussing the background information 
on roads and she referred to Chris Bielecki, ASNF Transportation Engineer, who suggests the 
group consider using a layer based on distance from arterial roads (i.e., roads already suitable for 
mechanized equipment). Rundall then presented a slide that represented the distance from system 
or arterial roads. Hampton reiterated that Bielecki had suggested that the layer might be useful to 
the working group in lieu of a complete roads layer which does not exist. She added that the 
information presented was in response to what the group wanted from last meeting. One group 
member commented that they didn’t think the system road layer was useful because there 
weren’t enough roads represented that will be used to harvest small-diameter material. This 
group member added that there are too few roads that are represented. Why don’t we have better 
roads layer for the Forests when they are going through a Travel Management process? Another 
group member commented that [from A-S standpoint], there are about 3,000 miles of road that 
are not in the mapped data system; about 6,000 miles are in the system; only 2,000 of those are 
knowingly being used. This group member agreed with a previous comment that the distance 
from system roads layer was not valuable for the group’s work. Rundall then showed the group a 
layer with both system and non-system Forest Service roads – the complete roads data set from 
the Forest Service. She commented that the layer was missing data for classes 1 and 2. A group 
member explained that Class 1 are closed roads and Class 2 are maintained roads.  
Q: Can you characterize these roads? Rundall responded by saying that they were presenting the 
current data from the FS road system that is in their database. One group member commented 
that there are 3,000 miles of roads that are not logged into the system.  
Q: Can we get the roads layer from the Coconino NF stemming from the Travel management 
process? Rundall confirmed that they will ask for this.  
 
Next, Brett Dickson discussed information from treatment alternative worksheet given to 
working group members. He commented that the table included additional information that was 
recently developed with professor Bailey, and he then opened the floor for discussion about what 
was included in the table.  
Q: Could you explain the numbers in the categories? Dickson explained that those are the stem 
reduction values, which were drawn from research and expert opinion.  
Q: What is the thinning effort that has gone on around Forest Lakes? One group member 
commented that that would be the intermediate level – about a 60% reduction in stand density 
and 40% basal area.  
Q: What’s a sufficient large-tree component?  Dickson iterated that sufficient refers to the need 
for a large tree component for the area to be restored in one entry. One group member 

 
September 17, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary        Page 12 of 14 
commented that they needed to work on the language to make it more usable for the working 
group. Dickson confirmed that the team could change the language for the working group. 
Q: How do you define where you use these treatments? Can’t we just start at existing conditions? 
Hampton explained that other groups have done that (i.e., in the White Mountain Landscape 
Assessment). She added that groups have specified ranges of forest structure metrics, such as, 
place thinning treatments where stem density >200 stems/acre.   Hampton then presented several 
management objectives that previous groups had used: 
 
• Reduce the risk of high intensity crown fires throughout study area 
• Prioritize treatments in areas of highest risk for large fires and place higher intensity 
treatments where fires were predicted to burn more intensely.  
• Protect and enhance habitat for endangered species, and minimize treatment impacts 
• Treat areas upwind of Mexican spotted owl PAC’s and excluded treatments within 
them 
• Restore grasslands 
• Select mollisol soil areas as indicators of historic grasslands 
• Increase the quality and extent of special habitats, such as aspen stands and pine-oak 
woodlands 
• Remove ponderosa pine from riparian systems and aspen stands 
 
Q: As a group, can we have a discussion about defining a dozen desired conditions and figure out 
where to apply them? One group member proposed another approach - have a model of fire 
spread and risk that would define the treatments. Another group member explained that this 
approach could work from a fire management position, but not from a restoration position.  
Q: Do you have information about the total volume that is on the forest floor today? Sesnie 
explained that the team didn’t at this time but they plan hope to by next month.  
Q: Can you aggregate areas into 100-acre sections? Sesnie confirmed that they could do this, but 
that the team needed to think of a size that was manageable.  
 
Romero then asked the working group how they felt about the table. One group member 
commented that they were uncomfortable with the language. Several other group members 
claimed that they needed to define desired future conditions (DFC) first. Another group member 
added that they thought people wanted to see the forest structural attributes written in residual 
units instead of percent reduction. Hampton responded to this by stating that this could easily be 
done.  
 
Haydee Hampton: Define management objectives and select treatments (cont.)  
Hampton began the last part of the meeting by recording on screen the working group discussion 
they requested before the break on desired future conditions. One group member suggested 
finishing the WUI discussion first. Another responded by saying that the group should choose 
one of the WUI options. The working group decided to go with the fourth option presented by 
the WUI small group earlier in the day:  
• WUI definition: Place a wind-vector of ½ mile downwind and 1½ miles upwind of private 
lands within CWPP high priority areas and ¼ mile buffers around private lands outside of 
CWPP areas. 
 

 
September 17, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary        Page 13 of 14 
The group discussed the following objectives that have desired future conditions (one member 
commented that the group should decide what to do in the WUI at this meeting. What are the 
desired post-treatment conditions in these areas?): 
  
• Follow goshawk guidelines to reach VSS class targets in terms of % basal area (one member 
commented that the guidelines specify percentages for area covered, not basal area. Another 
commented that these are more appropriate to apply at project level) 
VSS 1-2 
3 
 
4 
 
5 
 
6 
20% 
 
20% 
 
20% 
 
20% 
 
20% 
• Wildlands 
- 
Objective: Apply heavy thinning to predicted crown fire areas; apply moderate 
thinning to passive crown fire areas 
- 
DFCs based on pre-settlement conditions: BA: 40-60 ft2/acre and stem density: 30-70 
trees/acre 
• WUI 
- 
Objective: Reduce fire behavior to surface fire based on 500 acre patch size in WUI 
areas. 
- 
Several group members recommended that more extreme weather conditions (97th 
percentile instead of 95th) be used to predict fire behavior in the WUI to reflect the 
lower tolerance for fire risk in these areas. One member requested 99th percentile in 
the WUI. 
• MSO PACs and restricted habitat 
- 
Apply 1.5 to 3 miles upwind buffer of packs or blocks of packs where intensive 
treatment buffer is needed.  Discussion ensued that there are better ways to protect 
MSO habitat that using upwind vectors and the group agreed to explore these. 
- 
Base on MSO Recovery Plan threshold target habitat. 
 
One group member commented that the goshawk VSS classes apply to fine-scaled project level 
considerations. Instead, they suggested that the group go back to the management objectives, 
because looking at desired future conditions would be too difficult. Several group members 
briefly discussed the issue of current forest structure and what is desired. One member 
recommended the group could determine a DFC in terms of how many tons could be removed; 
several group members commented that they would find it difficult to think about desired future 
conditions in terms of tons (several members concurred).  The group then reviewed their draft 
treatment scenario worksheet on screen. One group member explained that the working group 
needed some ideas from the team to review next meeting and react to, in order to say that they 
agree or disagree with those ideas. Specifically, one member of the group commented that we’d 
like to tease out of the fire behavior models which have inputs of crown bulk density and other 
attributes, conditions in terms of basal area, tree density and canopy cover.  Right now we can 
define the conditions we’d like and later we can assign forest structure values to them. 
 
Several group members suggested that another group should be established, a “scenario 
attribute” group. A group member suggested having Shaula, someone from ERI and someone 
from Forest Service in the group. Hampton commented that the ForestERA team could pull this 
small group together but recommends they meet earlier than later to allow more time to pull 
map-based results together before the next meeting. Romero helped the group to select a date for 

 
September 17, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary        Page 14 of 14 
the fire and scenario attribute groups to meet: Fire group – 9/27 (10-12pm); Scenario attribute 
group – 9/27 (1-3pm). 
 
Audience comments 
Bob Maltis commented that today was the first time that he heard that people considered fire 
only as a restoration treatment. He explained that he could get data from ear, nose and throat 
doctors related to the effects of smoke billowing through Prescott. He added that he could have 
that information available. Romero suggested that he provide the working group with that 
information in the form of a handout. Maltis agreed to get information to Hampton for the next 
meeting.  
 
Gary Snider: Updates on wood utilization database 
Snider summarized his work to date identifying wood harvesters, mills and manufacturers in the 
study area and quantifying the number of tons of material processed by each. He told group 
members that he talked with various contractors in the western Mogollon area at length. He 
indicated that virtually all of the wood was sent to SW Forest Products in 2006. He also included 
information about the White Mountains area, which included contractors like Walker Bros., 
Nutrioso Logging, and Tri Star Logging. He explained that this was wood coming out of 
National Forest lands, but not off reservation land.   
 
Logistics 
Romero asked the group if they wanted to meet on October 9th. One group member commented 
that they were not convinced that working group members could meet in small groups and make 
progress before Oct 9th. They suggested meeting next on the already scheduled date of October 
15th instead. Other group members agreed and added that the Oct 29th meeting was likely to be 
mandatory, however no final decision was made on this date. 
Q: Can we get handouts soon from the small groups? YES – the groups (WUI group and fire 
group) indicated they would distribute handouts by the end of the week.  

Wood Supply Working Group Meeting 
Analysis of Small-Diameter Wood Supply in Northern Arizona 
 
October 15, 2007 
9:00 a.m. – 4:15 p.m. 
Arizona Game and Fish Department Regional Office, Pinetop, AZ  
 
 
 
9:00 – 9:15 a.m. 
Welcome – Rosemary Romero (Facilitator, Rosemary Romero 
Consulting)  
 
 
9:15 – 9:30 a.m. 
Review meeting agenda, timetable and various project updates – 
Haydee Hampton (Research Associate, Environmental Sciences, 
Northern Arizona University) 
 
 
9:30 – 10:30 a.m. 
Identify areas appropriate for restoration treatments that 
recover wood byproducts 
 
Review Working Group’s efforts to date on identifying areas 
appropriate for restoration treatments using additive display of 
map-based scenario components followed by Working Group 
decision-making session to identify any additional areas, such as 
areas next to streams, with no road access, or having soils with 
mechanized equipment limitations – Jill Rundall (Senior Research 
Specialist, Environmental Sciences, NAU) and Haydee Hampton 
 
Updates on spatial data collection – Jill Rundall 
 
10:30 – 10:45 a.m. 
Break 
 
 
10:45 – 12:00 p.m. 
Define management objectives and select treatments 
 
Presentation and group discussion on Scenario Attribute small 
group efforts by volunteer from group (up to 45 minutes) and 
report back on Fire small group efforts (up to 30 minutes) by Brett 
Dickson (Assistant Research Professor, Environmental Sciences, 
NAU), with spatial data support by Jill Rundall and Haydee 
Hampton 
 
 

12:00 – 1:00 p.m. 
Lunch  
 
*** Lunch will be on site. Working group can order sandwiches 
before 9am for ~$7 (check or cash only) or bring their own. *** 
 
 
1:00 – 2:30 p.m. 
Define management objectives and select treatments (cont.) 
 
Landscape-level treatment characterizations – Steve Sesnie 
Working Group decision-making session on the selection of 
management objectives and treatments of interest to Working 
Group – facilitated by Rosemary Romero 
 
 
2:30 – 2:45 p.m. 
Break 
 
 
2:45 – 3:30 p.m. 
Define management objectives and select treatments (cont.) 
 
 
3:30 – 4:00 p.m. 
Parking lot items and logistics for next meeting 
 
Discuss parking lot items, if not covered earlier in day: 
Community Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPPs), Stewardship 
Contracts, White Mountain Apache reservation-wide volume 
estimates, salvage logging, and prioritization to sequence potential 
treatments. 
 
Group discussion on need for Oct. 29 meeting (in Flagstaff). 
 
 
4:00 – 4:15 p.m. 
Public comment period 
 
 
4:15 p.m. 
 
Adjourn 
 

 
 
Meeting Summary 
Wood Supply Working Group Meeting 
Analysis of Small-Diameter Wood Supply in Northern Arizona 
October 15, 2007, Arizona Game and Fish Department Regional Office  
2878 E. White Mtn. Blvd., Pinetop, AZ 
 
 
Introduction and Agenda Review 
Rosemary Romero (Meeting Facilitator, Romero Consulting) welcomed back the working group 
members and observers to the fifth group meeting. She opened the meeting by having working 
group and audience members introduce themselves.  
 
Working Group members present at meeting: 
1) Bill Greenwood, City Manager for the Town of Eagar  
2) Robert LaCapa, Forest Manager, DOI BIA Fort Apache Agency Branch of Forestry 
3) Herb Hopper, Community-based forest and wood products advocate, Little Colorado 
Plateau Resource Conservation & Development  
4) Elaine Zieroth, Forest Supervisor for Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest 
5) Ethan Aumack, Director of Restoration Programs for Grand Canyon Trust 
6) Steve Gatewood, Consultant, Wildwood Consulting Inc., representing the Greater 
Flagstaff Forests Partnership 
7) Todd Schulke, Forest Programs Director for the Center of Biological Diversity 
8) Rob Davis, President/Owner of Forest Energy Corporation/Future Forests 
9) Kim Newbauer, Timber Sales Contracting Officer for Coconino National Forest 
10) Jerry Drury, Timber Staff Officer for the Kaibab National Forest 
11) Sue Sitko, The Nature Conservancy (sitting in for Lisa McNeilly) 
12) Sarah Lantz, Urban Wildlife Planner for Arizona Game and Fish Department (Region 
II Flagstaff Office) 
13) Scott Higginson, Executive Vice President of NZ Legacy/Snowflake White Mountain 
Power, Renergy 
14) Pascal Berlioux, President and Chief Executive Officer of Arizona Forest 
Restoration Products, Inc. 
15) Diane Vosick, Associate Director of the Ecological Restoration Institute  
 
Working Group members not present at meeting: 
1) Molly Pitts, Executive Director of the Northern Arizona Wood Products Association 
2) Larry Stephenson, Executive Director of the Eastern Arizona Counties Organization 
(ECO)/Economic Environmental Counties Organization (EECO) 
3) Chuck Peone, Fort Apache Timber Co. 
4) Lisa McNeilly, Northern Arizona Program Director of The Nature Conservancy (alternate 
attended) 
5) Paul DeClay, Tribal Forester, Forestry Department, White Mountains Apache Tribe 
6) Keith Pajkos, Timber Staff for the Arizona State Lands Department Forestry Division 
7) Shaula Hedwall, Ecological Services, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service  
 

October 15, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary        Page 2 of 14 
Meeting observers: 
1) Chris Bielecki, Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest (supplied expert input) 
2) Bob Baltes, Baltes Distributed Generation 
3) McKinley-Ben Miller, BLM 
4) Wally Covington, ERI (supplied expert input) 
5) Mike Cooley, Cooley Industries, Inc. 
6) Dwayne Walker, Future Forests 
7) Jim Pitts, Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest, Springerville Ranger District 
 
Romero then turned the floor over to Haydee Hampton (Research Associate, Forest Ecosystem 
Restoration Analysis; ForestERA) who is leading this collaborative effort. 
 
Haydee Hampton: Wood Supply Team Introductions and Agenda 
Hampton reviewed the agenda and covered the major points that were to be covered at the 
meeting. She indicated to group members that they would be reviewing a draft treatment scenario 
developed by the scenario attribute subcommittee and that she encouraged the group to complete 
their scenario that day. She also told group members that there would be a brief presentation by 
Steve Sesnie (Postdoctoral Research Associate, Environmental Sciences, NAU) on landscape-
level treatment characterizations.  
 
Hampton then discussed details about the remaining timetable for the working group: 
Oct 15: Finalize treatment scenario and review draft layers representing various components of 
scenario. Decide on need for optional meeting on Oct. 29 (or in November). 
Nov 16: Discuss wood supply results and potential economic or other follow-on analyses. 
 
Hampton gave important project updates such as ForestERA’s acquisition of new FIA and satellite 
imagery and how those will be used to up-date the analysis to the 2006 time period (see meeting 
slides posted at: http://www.forestera.nau.edu/project_woodsupply_documents.htm.   This update 
will require ForestERA to focus on the analytical effort to have the new data processed with the 
goal to present scenario results at the Nov. 16th date.  
 
Hampton thanked those who provided comments on the Wood Supply Analysis Progress Report 
and announced to group members that they should have received an electronic version and that 
hard copies were available at the meeting. She then reviewed some of the comments received on 
the progress report: 
• 
Make clear closer to start that focus is on mechanical treatments.  
• 
ASNF has found that 40-50% of acres are not thinned within NEPA project areas (versus 
lower range of 30-40% found on western Mogollon Plateau). 
• 
To avoid NEPA/FACA issues, change wording to “potential treatments” and don’t get too 
prescriptive. 
– Landscape level treatment characterizations allow the estimation of wood supply, 
while detailed prescriptions will involve public interaction at a local level. 
• 
Local businesses will have access to materials. Forest Service will not supplant existing 
contracts (Forsgren letter to Steve Sesnie, 7/19/07. This document was provided as a 
handout). 
• 
How should the White Mountains Stewardship Contracts be accounted for over the next 7 
years?  

October 15, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary        Page 3 of 14 
– Removals should include task orders in next 2-3 years as these acres are committed 
in contracts 
• 
Include updated scenario worksheet and other materials 
– Decided to keep Sept. 7 timestamp on materials. 
 
Steve Gatewood then discussed stewardship contracts and the timing and scale of these.  New 
contracts will be focused on both large and small-scale contractors. Hampton then reminded the 
group that at the September working group meeting in Holbrook, she had announced that in order 
to have time to develop and report back to the group on priority areas (for sequencing treatments), 
ForestERA would need their input by the end of the today’s meeting. She explained that this was 
not a required part of the Wood Supply Analysis and the Steering Committee recommended 
completing the treatment scenario first, so there was not likely not time to complete a prioritization 
analysis as part of this project. 
 
Hampton ended the introductory presentation by providing background information on the 
goshawk guidelines. She explained that the goshawk guidelines dictate management actions in all 
forest land outside of Mexican spotted owl or other federally listed species habitat. In 1996, the 
Southwestern Region of the Forest Service (FS) amended all its forest plans based on the 
recommendations in GTR-RM-217 (published in 1992), “Management Recommendations for the 
Northern Goshawk in the Southwestern United States,” (the “goshawk guidelines”). Clarifications 
to the 1992 guidelines were made after the FS observed some inconsistency and confusion 
associated with the implementation of the standards. Hampton explained that ForestERA is 
acquiring pre- and post-treatment data on treatments marked or completed using the clarification 
to the guidelines: 
– Demo plots in Pine Hill timber sale, Williams RD (have data in hand) 
– Eager South (trying to obtain) 
– North Kaibab RD  
She explained that at the request of the scenario attribute small group members that she had 
contacted Jim Youtz, Regional Silviculturist, USDA Forest Service, for a recommendation on how 
to address the goshawk guidelines in the wood supply analysis. A participant commented that all 
treatments have been implemented under the guidelines over the past several years. Another that 
many treatments have sided more on the fuels reduction side in some locations. 
 
Hampton continued by saying that she and Sesnie would be traveling to Whiteriver, AZ, on the 
White Mountains Apache reservation the following day to talk to a planning board on whether it 
would be possible to obtain data ForestERA could use to estimate reservation-wide small-diameter 
wood volumes or direct estimates of wood volumes that the tribe had completed in the past. She 
then commented that this had been identified by the Steering committee and others as important 
since there were significant volumes of ponderosa pines on the Mogollon Plateau located on 
reservation land.  
 
Jill Rundall and Haydee Hampton: Identify areas appropriate for restoration treatments that 
recover wood byproducts.  
The meeting session on identifying areas appropriate for restoration treatments that recover wood 
byproducts began with a slide on which Hampton explained that ForestERA had completed 
checking back with soil scientists on the soil information from four Forests in analysis area on 

October 15, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary        Page 4 of 14 
restrictions placed on using mechanized harvesting equipment based on a number of factors 
including: 
– Erosion hazard 
– Shallow soils 
– High rock content 
– Prone to sheet and rill erosion once ground cover gets thin  
– Prone to compaction when wet (secondary factor) 
 
Hampton explained that they had reviewed assumptions used to develop a spatial layer of areas 
with soils restricted from mechanized equipment with Dr. Steve Hart, Professor, Ecosystem 
Ecology and Forest Soils, Northern Arizona University and that he had expressed confidence in 
using the interpretive summaries (e.g., for erosion hazard) in Terrestrial Ecosystem Survey soils 
data for purposes of Wood Supply Analysis. He has found over time that that TES soil survey is a 
useful tool for the mid-level scale for which it was designed and there is no other landscape-scale 
dataset available for the study area. Hart explained that operational factors are also important for 
protecting soils, such as the condition of soils (e.g., wet) and operator skills and having a good 
skid trail plan.  In addition, Dave Brewer, ERI and former soils scientist on the Kaibab National 
Forest explained to Hampton that since the 1980s or 90s you had to have a major in soils to 
qualify (needed a minor in soils) to be a FS Soils Scientist.  The working group agreed that the 
layer should be used in their scenario. 
 
Hampton also explained that ponderosa-pine dominated areas in the study area amounted to 2.4 
million acres and included stands of pure ponderosa pine, ponderosa pine and oak (pine-oak), and 
areas defined in LANDFIRE vegetation layer as riparian which should be classified as ponderosa 
pine dominated.  She summarized that the seven factors considered in the analysis of areas the 
group had decided were not a source of wood supply in their treatment scenario amounted in 27% 
of the ponderosa pine dominated areas removed from the analysis area, resulting in 1,750,869 
acres remaining.   
 

October 15, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary        Page 5 of 14 
Hampton and Rundall (Senior Research Specialist, Environmental Sciences, NAU) presented the 
following table: 
 
Factors (in ponderosa only) 
Acres 
removed  
Acres 
remaining 
Initial ponderosa pine dominated areas 
n/a 
2,412,833 
MSO 
181,707 
2,231,126 
MSO, SDA 
147,256 
2,083,870 
MSO, SDA, slope 
59,155 
2,024,715 
MSO, SDA, slope, completed treatments 
64,223 
1,960,492 
MSO, SDA, slope, completed treatments, 
Goshawk nest areas 
52,249 
1,908,243 
MSO, SDA, slope, completed treatments, 
Goshawk nest areas, 
soil restricted from mechanized treatment 
56,969 
1,851,274 
MSO, SDA, slope, completed treatments, 
Goshawk nest areas, 
soil restricted from mechanized treatment, 
streamside management zones 
100,405 
1,750,869 
 
To further explain how ForestERA had accounted for the overlap in removals, they presented the 
following table: 
1. Mexican Spotted Owl PACS  
 
181,707 
2. Specially Designated Areas  
 
177,477 
3. Steep slopes (>40%)  
 
   
147,067 
4. Marked and completed treatments 
  
  65,030 
5. Goshawk nest areas 
 
 
 
  63,019 
6. Soil restricted from mechanized treatment  126,139 
7. Streamside management zones 
 
144,762 
       
 
Total Acres (including overlap) 
905,201 
 
Overlap among all layers      
 
-243,237 
 
Total Acres (excluding overlap) 
 
661,964 
 
 
Rundall then displayed maps of each layer showing how they progressed to the total removal area.  
This demonstrated the most up-to-data layers and number of acres that would be removed from 
wood supply. She described information added since last meeting including new data on 
treatments. Some additional data will be included from A-S once their layers are ready.     
 
Hampton reviewed material covered in previous meetings concerning the fact that streamside 
management zones are treated differently by each forest. The working group had asked to see a 
layer showing a 100ft buffer on either side of streams as a possible removal, which ForestERA 
displayed explaining that ephemeral, intermittent and perennial streams were all included for all 

October 15, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary        Page 6 of 14 
forests except the ASNF because separate classifications for ephemeral and intermittent were only 
available for that forest.  She mentioned that a layer of perennial streams only was available if the 
group wanted to limit the zones to those stream types. The working group approved the layer with 
the 100 foot buffer on all streams for use in their scenario. 
 
Rundall displayed a Forest Service road layer with ¼ and ½ mile buffers as requested at the last 
meeting by the group. A participant requested the proportion of areas outside of the ¼ mile buffer 
area to use as a potential removal as it may be inaccessible to harvest. Hampton then explained 
that with the recommendation of the Steering Committee, ForestERA had invited Chris Bielecki, 
Transportation Engineer, Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest and two industry representatives with 
years of experience using Forest Service roads for harvesting (Dwayne Walker and Ed Martin). 
Although Ed Martin did not attend, ____ and Walker were present. Bielecki expressed that it 
sounded like the group was going to treat all roads the same.  He cautioned the group in using just 
a blanket road treatment.  Some roads were built to accommodate steep area harvesting.  
Environmental documentation needs to account for this. He explained that arterial roads and ¼ 
mile from them are basically treated as accessible to harvesting.  More primitive roads are 
potentially in need of improvement adding costs or operational strategies. Road access is presently 
viewed from a public access perspective and some changes may need to be made if access for 
wood supply is considered. The ¼ mile buffer shows areas that can be accessed with no additional 
work. Beyond that there are roads that can potentially be utilized but might need improvements. 
Lower standard roads have about 60% confidence to be inventoried. How many of total roads vary 
by forest. In terms of feasibility many roads can be improved depending on economics.  [Bielecki 
provided the following written notes at during the meeting:  
1) Every square inch of desired treatment is “feasible,” but consider that environmental and 
economic impacts are proportional to decreases in road standard and increased distance 
from these routes. 
2) There is a different level of environmental and economic impact based on standard of road 
and distance from roads.  
o Generally, treatment areas within ¼ mile of operational maintenance level 3-5 roads are 
immediately available (no improvements required; access aprons may be required for 
fed/state highways) 
o Treatment areas within ¼ mile of operational maintenance level 2 roads are available 
w/minimal road improvements and/or maintenance 
o Treatment areas within ¼ mile of operations maintenance level 1 roads are available w/ 
moderate road improvements (ranging from removing closures and blading to full 
reconstruction). 
o Treatment areas beyond ¼ mile of exiting roads are available w/adding temporary or new 
system road mileage (generally requiring a level of physical impact greater than utilizing 
existing system routes).] 
 
One participant said in a study he had conducted around the San Francisco Peaks Wilderness Area 
near Flagstaff that the FS roads layer captured 80-90% of the roads according to their assessment.  
Another participant mentioned that most roads need some improvements for chip trucks like 
grading them. Another pointed out that in most of the forest that you can not walk very far without 
hitting a road. 
 

October 15, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary        Page 7 of 14 
Q: Is there a way to make a judgment as to whether an economic or environmental limitation is 
present?  We really need to find what is likely to be treated, and the roads layer does not appear to 
be that useful. 
Q: Do we want to use the ¼ or ½ mile buffer? The ¼ mile buffer has significant implications for 
limitations on wood supply.  
Participant response – there are some limitations given the use of chip truck and some of the roads 
that are adequate.  We may need to look at past projects to estimate limitations and new 
technology and operational equipment may eliminate some limitations. Another suggested that we 
use some of the information from past contracts and constraints, however constraints likely differ 
between forests. 
 
The point of the discussion was to determine what distance is realistic to identify an access 
limitation. One participant commented that ¼ mile is not a realistic distance and that ½ mile buffer 
is more realistic, we should not be considering ¼ mile buffer. Bielecki – we can look at the 
categories that have been realistically used in the past.  Participant – there is going to be a 
significant change in the type and quality of the equipment used as contracts forest restoration get 
under way. Participant – would not like to see roads access on historic economic standards since 
these are changing. Participant – the group in not tasked with assessing the economic ability to 
access areas or do this assessment. 
Q: Is there are number or distance to use from the operations stand point? 
Participant – 2/10th of a mile from a landing is used for developing a logging plan and then road 
condition and time of year when accessible.  Most areas have been accessed at some point in the 
past to access timber.  There are very few acres that have been limited for logging by access.  
Most of the limitations have been due to other factors.  Participant – most access has been limited 
in the field because there is no available road. Participant – part of this discussion is to come to 
some zone of agreement to allow restoration to occur on a larger scale than in the past.  There are 
many users concerned with the use and improvement in roads.  We should take a very 
conservative approach to create a very durable recommendation to get political agreement. 
Participant – the main thing is that the roads layer indicates that the roads are there but may not be 
the exact location. Over time we see the roads as needing to be different depending on the 
operational use – it depends on the past system installed and what the current operations require. 
Q: Can we possibly rule out the building of any new roads especially near Flagstaff? Bielecki – 
legally new road construction is defined as extending roads a mile beyond the current system.  We 
should not have said no new roads since road construction can be minor and still be legally 
considered “new road construction.” Participant – there are some project level details that should 
not be considered here. Participant – there are too many roads already on the map.  But regardless 
we are not going to run a chip van down all of the roads that are shown there.  I think that a ¼ mile 
buffer is good, unless more forwarders are used out there. Participant – we are not defining skid 
trails are new roads, right? So why not use ¼ mile since there are a lot of other ways to remove 
chips from the forest than the truck. 
 
Participant – We need to consider roads because of the estimate of the amount of biomass taken 
out of the wood depends on it.  We need a quantitative estimate from using the existing roads to 
understand biomass that is available for restoration. Participant – we are not necessarily talking 
about an environmental limitation, but an operational one? Participant – there are many individual 
out there concerned with roads and road densities so we should be careful with our 
recommendation. Participant – we should be cautious also to not limit future activities with 

October 15, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary        Page 8 of 14 
information from past logging and the spaghetti of roads out there. Participant – some future 
harvesting also would afford opportunities to close existing roads and get rid of that spaghetti 
pattern.  Participant - to summarize, our opportunity here is to responsibly estimate the amount of 
wood volume and the number of acres accessible related to wood volume, that is, a conservative 
estimate of access and access management. Hampton said that ForestERA would generate the 
number of acres removed if ¼ and ½ mile buffers were used to estimate accessibility.  
 
Define management objectives and select treatments – Fire subcommittee report back 
Brett Dickson (Assistant Research Professor, Environmental Sciences, NAU) reported back on 
Fire small group efforts (up to 30 minutes) since last full group meeting. The purpose of the group 
is to identify areas where fire could be used as a first management option.  The group had 
concerns over how the fire models were characterizing fire behavior at the 95th percentile weather 
conditions.  Brett worked with Chuck McHugh and Laura Kurth to predict fire behavior at the 
97% level and there was little change in the surface fire area extent and conditions.  Crown base 
heights are driving the model predictions and there is a lot of sensitivity in the model for surface to 
passive and passive to active crown fire.  Brett mentioned that we have consulted with the 
Missoula fire lab to find out what manipulation of inputs may be necessary to get potentially more 
realistic runs.  The recommendations were to make extreme adjustments in crown bulk density and 
other inputs and would involve making too many assumptions. Dickson presented the following 
slide summarizing the status of the fire modeling efforts for the Wood Supply Analysis: 
  
• 
Derived new fire models for 97th percentile weather conditions, however: 
• 
Surface fire predictions relatively unchanged from 95th 
• 
Canopy-base height still “too high” in many areas of predicted surface fire 
= “truth” + “fiction” 
• 
LANDFIRE inputs require significant adjustment 
• 
USFS Fire Lab cannot recommend a “better” model 
• 
Large landscape prohibits models of fire dynamics 
• 
Areas of fire only could be identified using, e.g., current or desired future 
conditions 
 
Dickson also consulted with Pete Fulé (NAU Associate Professor and ERI employee), regarding 
how to pin down forest structural conditions that would potentially support or potentially prohibit 
the transition from surface to a canopy fire.   
• 
Forest structure conditions associated with surface fire behavior (Pete Fulé, ERI) 
– 160 trees/acre (400 +/-100 trees/ha)  
– 109 ft2/acre (25 +/- 10 m2/ha) 
Dickson also explained that ForestERA had prepared several spatial layers from their canopy 
cover layers that could be of use to inform efforts to use fire behavior as an indicator of areas that 
can potentially support fire as a first management tool. 
• 
Canopy cover thresholds of 10%, 20% and 30% 
– 30% is lower end of canopy cover range in DFCs identified by scenario attribute 
group. 
– 10 to 30% encompass range reported in manuscripts and unpublished data 
following restoration treatments and reconstructed pre-settlement conditions. 
– Canopy cover is the highest accuracy layer available for the study area 
 

October 15, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary        Page 9 of 14 
Q: What is the objective of this discussion? Participant – to identify areas that could be managed 
right now with fire treatments. Participant – we are developing methods to analyze areas where 
mechanized treatment may not be appropriate and fire is one available tool that may be used. 
Participant – is there some kind of value judgment made as to why fire would be used instead of 
mechanical treatment? Participant –I’m not sure canopy cover is the best structural parameter to 
use for this.  Participant – there are some areas that we are running into critical thresholds with 
smoke that will play a role in the number of acres that can be burned.  Participant – canopy cover 
is an estimate of the cover of trees, not necessarily a density of trees. Participant – if you can use 
fire and get the same result as thinning treatments, we should look at those. Participant – if we can 
use fire and achieve restoration results, we should consider these areas and take that out of the 
wood supply. Participant – from a restoration point of view, there is no published information that 
suggests that 160 trees per acre was a historic condition.  You might be able to get a surface fire 
through a 100 tpa stand, but you would not get to a condition that would be considered restoration.  
Participant – if you still achieve the desired future condition, via fire or mechanical, either method 
should be considered.  
 
Participant – it is not still clear that we can politically restore fire to these systems, that discussion 
is not yet mature.  Our objective is to come out with a recommendation and agreement that each 
member can present to their constituencies that is acceptable.  I will not be able to find agreement 
where treatments recommended do not find that middle ground that is reasonably acceptable to all.  
There is more to this than just this group, but also interested individuals outside the group. 
Participant – we have almost 30% of the landscape that is already taken out of the supply, does 
that help provide by-in or agreement?  Participant – no, it is not just that 30%.  I thought that we 
would get more and quick acres to take out based on fire behavior models and we did not get that. 
Participant – we are not here just to look at areas where burning can be applied, but also where 
mechanized treatments can be applied.  We should to swing from one side to the other.  We have 
been looking for a starting point where we might be able to suggest areas where fire might be 
applied. Participant – it worries me that we are trying to identify prescriptions and where they 
should occur.  I have no problem saying areas should be taking out of wood supply that can be 
treated with fire, but where there is a resource that can be utilized it will not go over well with 
others looking at the results of this process. Participant – there are plenty of areas where fire can 
be used as a treatment right now.  This is a compromise perspective.  Participant – I have heard 
Harv Forsgen say that we are trying to get forests back to a restored condition where we can have 
the use of prescribed or natural fire in the future.  There are some criteria that can be used as to 
where fire can be applied in the future that can be combined with the fire models. Participant – we 
should use the desired future condition and let the restoration goals suggest what the treatments 
should be…we should move along and identify those areas where prescribe fire might be used as a 
first management option. Participant – where we have the opportunity to use fire, we should 
consider some of the other ecological problems of using mechanized equipment on sites such as 
exotic or invasive species.  We should look at the DFC and move forward with treatments to get 
us there.  Participant – We can put fire into some areas that can right now support fire to get us to 
the DFC.  If you are looking at getting just to the ecological condition, then fire could get to you 
the restored condition.  If economics play a role, then harvesting some of the biomass should be 
considered.  Participant – there are still a lot of area that could be treated with fire if we could do 
unlimited burning, but smoke management is an issue.  We should be capitalizing on the 
mechanically treated areas to be able to use fire. 
 

October 15, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary        Page 10 of 14 
Dickson – As we move forward, think about the DFCs and whether these conditions can help 
suggest sideboards for the type of treatments.  Is there additional information that we can give to 
the sub-groups to help move forward with the scenario? 
 
Steve Sesnie: Wood volume estimation 
Sesnie reviewed the wood volume analysis methodology described at the last full group meeting. 
He will be using Forest Inventory Analysis vegetation plot data as it covers the entire analysis area 
in a 4x4 km grid combined with satellite, elevation and other spatial data layers at the 30m pixel 
scale. He’ll use K-nearest neighbor calculations to impute areas for which we don’t have volume 
data.  
Q: Will Stewardship contract data be used in your analysis? Sesnie explained that he will be using 
stand exam forest inventory data and this will be helpful to assess accuracy. I may use some 
procedures to track down main sources of errors in the prediction. 
Q: Will you have results for the next meeting? Sesnie stated that he will have results to show at the 
Nov. 16 meeting. 
Q: Do you anticipate your projection will show the differences between wood supply estimates 
between forests as described in the progress report? Sesnie stated that if the plot data indicated 
differing initial conditions between forests that this may lead to different estimates of supply 
between forests.  
 
Define management objectives and select treatments – Scenario attribute subcommittee 
report back  
Diane Vosick summarized the revisions that the Scenario Attribute subcommittee made to the 
forest treatment scenario worksheet since the last full working group meeting on Sept. 17.  She 
reminded the group that they needed to keep in mind that every acre is under the jurisdiction of the 
goshawk guidelines. However, there is flexibility in the guidelines that would allow differing 
treatment activities.  Participant – we have guidelines of how goshawk treatments are 
implemented, but that is an over-arcing guide, not information that can define a treatment level in 
our scenario.  Participant – the set of potential treatments included in the scenario are to be used as 
a straw man and presented to the group to help quantify the amount of wood volume.  You need 
numbers (DFC) to get numbers (wood volume). 
 
Vosick reviewed the treatment areas and DFC of each area while ForestERA displayed maps 
representing each area discussed (e.g., Community protection zones, MSO restricted habitat, 
municipal watersheds, wildlands, etc.). There is a wide basal area range of in the wildlands as the 
group might be sensitive this large area.   
 
Q:  Will there be a volume estimate for each end of the range and the middle, for example?  
Participant – This was proposed by the scenario attribute group, but we need to discuss where 
different levels of treatment might be applied in terms of distributions, such as in wildlands, to 
give ForestERA a location and level of treatment to estimate wood supply. Participant – should we 
expect to have a number of different scenarios with a range of treatments and is that enough of a 
recommendation to R3?  This will be important as to how we proceed from this point forward, for 
instance having such a range of treatments and different treatments. Participant – it might be good 
to have a range of treatments to suggest what is acceptable. Participant – it will be tricky to come 
to agreement on a particular treatment, as a set of several scenarios. Participant – We don’t want to 
just take of the average of the low to high scenario.  The ranges represent a set of ranges within 

October 15, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary        Page 11 of 14 
certain areas (landscape features).  Participant – we have to have a final product that is useable and 
the zone of agreement that everyone is happy with. This suggests some tighter sideboards on 
treatments in a given area than currently on the scenario worksheet. Participant – is there a way to 
begin thinking about narrowing down the DFC that is realistic. Participant – we should work 
systematically through the table and come up with DFC ranges that the group agrees with. 
A scenario attribute subcommittee member reviewed the general notes on the scenario worksheet: 
1) ForestERA will calculate wood volumes in severely burned areas, falling within fire perimeters, 
across the full study area, so as not to include them in total volume analysis. There is not sufficient 
agreement related to available supply from severely burned areas, thus these areas were not 
identified as sources of available supply in this analysis. 2) Archeological sites and other project 
level factors can reduce acres thinned and intensity of thinning. Total volumes will be corrected 
using a reduction factor to account for these sites.  Volume estimates stemming from this project 
will be presented in terms of ranges. 3) Areas once dominated by ponderosa-pine that mixed-
conifers have expanded into are not considered in this study. 4) No burning should occur 
following ponderosa pine thinning in riparian areas.   
After discussing the last item the group agreed it was too prescriptive and should be changed to 
“Burn when appropriate following ponderosa pine thinning in riparian areas.”   The subcommittee 
member further explained that salvage logging is a difficult area to reach agreement on, so the 
group recommends putting this aside and not considering it in this process.  Participant – we need 
to develop some number or range of numbers to reduce wood supply, for example for 
archaeological sites.  Participant – are there areas that we would apply different “project level” 
factor for wood taken out where there are archeological sites?  Participant – yes, different forests 
have different amounts of these sites.  
 
Q: Can you map old growth?  Sesnie explained that he conducted a Forest inventory data analysis 
on the North Kaibab Ranger District mapping old growth and defining different stages of old 
growth condition. It involved defining conditions leading to and away from old growth conditions 
due to fire removing trees. He plugged data into FVS and projected out where old growth 
conditions would occur. Participant – On CocNF they identify old growth as project level 
planning. VSS6 are considered almost or old growth. Many stands do not have old growth so they 
designate stands that are approaching old growth. 
 
Q: Why are we deviating from what is the place of importance or area of importance decided by 
the community. Member of the WUI subcommittee – community protection area layer was 
developed based on what we thought were important areas for community protection.  For 
example areas up-wind of the prevailing winds. Participant – the community protection layer has 
the benefit that all private lands will receive some level of treatment, as not all are included in the 
CWPP priority areas. Participant – the sub-group found that that definitions and process used to 
define the WUI in CWPP was applied differently across these communities. Participant – from the 
state wide strategy, we found that communities perceived themselves and boundaries differently 
across the state. Participant – the consensus achieved from the CWPP WUI is somewhat 
undermined by redelineating the boundaries. Q: if the group can articulate why the boundaries 
have been changed that would be presented in the report, would that be enough for the 
communities that originally identified them. Participant – no, I think that a member or members of 
the community might be unhappy with undermining their original decision and WUI boundaries. 
Participant – We should not undermine what the communities have decided.  We could 

October 15, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary        Page 12 of 14 
demonstrate both layers showing the high priority zones identified by the community and other 
zones that could realistically be protected. Dickson– there are some question about inconsistencies 
methodological approach used and the data used that were identified as having treatments or not 
(in the CWPPs). The type of treatments are not specific enough to implement them in the context 
of estimating wood supply.  
 
Participant – I want to honor what the communities have decided as they have worded hard. 
Participant – there was too much flexibility allowed communities for identifying priority areas so 
there is less consistency in the prioritization. Participant – why does if matter that communities 
came up with different types of priorities? Participant – we need to consider that the policy 
developed for the CWPP areas and decision making was not necessarily consistent with landscape 
scale restoration treatments. Participant – we have no option but to consider what the communities 
have defined. Participant – the Forest Service only has to only consider the CWPP under HFRA.  
It tells the Forest Service whether the CWPP is consistent with intent of the policy.  Participant – 
we can probably move on from this with the idea that we explain the difference in the volume and 
areas for CWPP.  Participant – use two sets of estimates based on a selected scenario from the 
ForestERA process and then also one with the CWPP less specific estimate. Hampton – we will 
clarify in the report what changes were made in what the communities identified as priority and 
what was captured by the sub-group.  In areas where we don’t have spatially explicit information 
or enough treatment information we will not use the CWPP. 
 
Sesnie passed out a handout to provide additional information on the post-treatment conditions 
that would result following the three thinning levels (low, moderate, and heavy) for three forest 
structure metrics: BA, CC and stem density. Also shows distributions from FIA data of these stand 
parameters. Note that 300 t/a is average conditions and that ending condition for heavy, moderate 
and light thinning potential treatments differ depending on initial conditions. Hampton pointed out 
that the range of community protection DFCs for basal area approximate those of the post-heavy 
thinning treatment. 
 
Participant – Using a bell curve as the distribution for the basal area ranges is interesting, but we 
don’t have agreement on this. ForestERA should model high, med, and low treatments across 
landscape so group can see how they play out. I hope we can reach one common scenario that 
represents agreement to provide to the FS. Participant – Maybe we can define for a certain area a 
percentage of the area in each part of DFC range. Participant – It’s not prudent to narrow the DFC 
range too much on some areas of landscape. Participant – We are looking at immediate condition 
following treatment not DFCs. We’re managing for DFCs. In SW US we have good info on 
reconstructed range 15-35 t/ac on fine texture soils, 55-65t/a on coarser textured soils.  We’ll have 
to plant trees to make the DFC in the current scenario. Participant – We’re calculating the amount 
of wood following treatment so we should use PTC, post-treatment condition. Participant – But 
we don’t have Powell Plateau conditions, so we’re erring on side of more trees, DPTC. Participant 
– We could say that anywhere within range is OK. Some have too wide of ranges. Participant – If 
we have high BA and low densities then it will be on one end of DFC range. We should state 
which initial conditions lead to what part of DFC/DPTC range. Participant – Could take low, med, 
and high part of DFC ranges and use predicted effects on MSO, squirrel, etc. then this will be an 
information based process. This is arbitrary unless we consider these factors. Participant – Why is 
the range for municipal watersheds so wide if MSO is taken out, such as for Lake Mary 
watershed? 

October 15, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary        Page 13 of 14 
 
ForestERA reviewed the data layers used for the scenario. Sesnie summarized how MSO restricted 
habitat layer was derived. Pine-oak was taken from LANDFIRE and ForestERA vegetation layers. 
He found target/threshold conditions were met on some areas on the Tonto NF using forest stand 
data. Hampton explained that infrastructure such as interstate highways and roads were buffered 
and power lines also (50 ft buffer) at the request of the scenario attribute subcommittee.  
Participant – the right-a-way is wide depending on the size of the power line. Participant – the 
Forest Service thins heavily, rather than clear cuts under these. Participant – why do we consider 
these if they are going to be treated already anyway? Participant – not always treated, lump these 
infrastructures with priority community areas. 
 
Participant – there are more areas that the Forest Service has identified as level six municipal 
watershed (Eager South area is already marked for treatment in one). 
 
Haydee – We used data on native fish provided by Shaula Hedwall (from Bureau of Reclamation), 
TNC (native fish on perennial waters), and the University of Kansas to develop a layer of the 6th 
level watersheds with native fish.  A ForestERA layer of high post-fire sedimentation areas were 
used to narrow the number of native fish habitat 6th code watersheds to form a second layer.  The 
models predict potential sediment load from a large fire and not from treatments. 
 
Participant – we need an estimate of volume from different tree size classes so that we can tell the 
model which trees to cut.  That is a critical part of this analysis to calculate wood supply – which 
size class of trees are going to be cut and the volume from that.  
 
Hampton – we have calculated topographic position to identify canyon areas to protect.  Treatment 
areas would be along rim areas  Participant – many of the canyon areas will be MSO habitat, so 
this layer does not provide much useful information (many agreed). Participant – in reality the 
edge of canyons, if just a small strip surrounded by areas that we would not treat, is not feasible 
for allocating equipment.  
 
Hampton – does everyone agree that these canyon areas should be placed back into the wildlands? 
Participant – there is some disagreement, I would like to leave it in. Participant – I’m a lumper and 
this make management planning more complicated, without buying anything. Participant – we 
should drop this and move on. 
 
Haydee – For meadows, we have TNC grassland data and TES data on mollisols, an indicator of 
past grassland and savannah conditions. There are more mollisol areas on the west side of the 
study area that a FS soils scientist verified is a real condition and not an artifact of the way the soil 
survey was carried out. Participant – have you looked at the TES potential vegetation data for 
existing meadows? Hampton – we can look at that, we have the TES data. Participant– the TNC 
historic grasslands characterization was from a study mainly on BLM land and some of the 
Apache reservation, not as much information about historic grassland on USFS land.  
 
A participant proposed creating a scenario of PTC, use low, med, high proportion (area) of each 
PTC for each landscape feature.  For example, 20% of the wildlands area would fall in the low 
basal area range for wildlands following treatments, 60% medium, and 20% high.  There was 
some discussion on this method, but no decision to move forward with it. 

October 15, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary        Page 14 of 14 
 
Public comment period 
An observer asked if the group had done anything with the information provided in an email letter 
from a Prescott ear, nose and throat doctor to the Working Group by ForestERA as his request. 
The letter contained information about increase in medical cases associated with smoke generated 
from burning activities.  A participant said that this information was more appropriate for the 
USFS Forest Plan revision process underway and that she had sent it to the appropriate Forest 
Service staff. Another observer said he had used LANDFIRE FRCC tools as an evaluation tool.  
How VSS classes can be used to inform outcomes.  Gave old-growth example and how much land 
should be left in that category.   
 
Parking lot items and logistics for next meeting 
Elaine Zieroth announced that Harv Forsgren, Regional Forest Supervisor would be leaving his 
post on Nov. 7th, Gilbert Zepeda will become Deputy Forest Supervisor (acting), and Corbin 
Newman will be the new R3 supervisor. Elaine is retiring on Dec. 21st. 
 
Participant – Stewardship contracts need to be accounted for with FS NEPA polygon information 
– acres committed to Stewardship contract.  
 
Hampton reiterated that she and Sesnie were going to present at the White Mountain Apache tribal 
planning board meeting tomorrow to ask them for reservation-wide wood volume estimates.  The 
group decided to include wildlife corridor areas in any project level factor applied to wood supply 
estimates as no GIS data existed for this landscape factor.  Tabled for future discussion were old-
growth, roads, burn-only treatments, goshawk guidelines and factors for accounting for project 
level considerations in reducing thinning levels or acres, such as archeological and historical sites.  
 
Logistics 
Romero asked the group if they wanted to meet on October 29th or possibly at the end of 
November after they reviewed how their scenario played out spatially and in terms of wood 
volumes.  The group decided that meeting at the end of November would work better for reaching 
agreement on their scenario and Thursday November 29th in Flagstaff was chosen as the final 
meeting date. A proposal was made to have a small group go over the scenario worksheet and use 
today’s discussion to revise the table. The scenario attribute subcommittee agreed to meet to 
provide ForestERA with recommended assumptions that they needed to complete the analysis to 
report back to the larger group on November 29th.   The following working group members 
volunteered to serve on the scenario attribute subcommittee: Todd Schulke, Scott Higginson, 
Shaula Hedwall, Pascal Berlioux, Steve Gatewood, and Diane Vosick.  The necessity of keeping 
the group at a low number of participants representative of the larger group in order to move 
forward efficiently to develop suggestions to present to the larger group was discussed and agreed 
upon. 

Wood Supply Working Group Meeting 
Analysis of Small-Diameter Wood Supply in Northern Arizona 
 
November 16, 2007 
9:00 a.m. – 4:15 p.m. 
Large Pod Conference room, Applied Research and Development (AR&D) Building 
Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 
 
 
 
9:00 – 9:15 a.m. 
Welcome – Rosemary Romero (Facilitator, Rosemary Romero 
Consulting)  
 
 
9:15 – 9:30 a.m. 
Review meeting agenda, timetable and various project updates – 
Haydee Hampton (Research Associate, Environmental Sciences, 
Northern Arizona University) 
 
 
9:30 – 10:30 a.m. 
Review treatment scenario 
 
Review Working Group’s efforts to date on identifying areas 
appropriate for restoration treatments and the desired post-
treatment conditions for those areas.  ForestERA will build the 
Wood Supply scenario on screen using an additive display of maps 
highlighting various components (e.g., steep slopes, community 
protection areas).  – Jill Rundall (Senior Research Specialist, 
Environmental Sciences, NAU) and Haydee Hampton 
 
 
10:30 – 10:45 a.m. 
Break 
 
 
10:45 – 12:00 p.m. 
Review treatment scenario (cont.) 
 
Complete review of treatment scenario including using fire as a 
restoration tool where practicable by Steve Gatewood representing 
the Fire subcommittee, with spatial data support by Jill Rundall  
 
 
12:00 – 1:00 p.m. 
Lunch  
 
*** Lunch will be on site. Working group members may order 
sandwiches before 9am for $5.00 for a 1/2 sandwich and $7.75 for 
a whole (check or cash only) or bring their own. *** 
 
 

1:00 – 2:30 p.m. 
Report out on major project results 
 
Presentation on estimates of wood volume by size class for Wood 
Supply Analysis area and methods for estimating supply based on 
group’s desired post-treatment conditions – Steve Sesnie 
(Postdoctoral Research Associate, Environmental Sciences, NAU) 
Presentation on results of project level analysis of restoration 
treatment areas and intensity – Haydee Hampton and Gary Snider 
(Forest Economist and Doctoral Candidate, School of Forestry, 
Northern Arizona University) 
Presentation on existing small-diameter wood harvesters, mills and 
manufactures – Gary Snider 
 
2:30 – 2:45 p.m. 
Break 
 
 
2:45 – 3:45 p.m. 
Address miscellaneous issues  
 
Discuss how “parking lot” or miscellaneous items that are not fully 
or otherwise included in the group’s treatment scenario will be 
addressed in the final project report, such as Community Wildfire 
Protection Plans (CWPPs), White Mountain Apache reservation-
wide volume estimates, salvage logging, old growth, and use of 
previous landscape assessments. 
 
 
3:45 – 4:00 p.m. 
Wrap-up and logistics for next meeting 
 
 
The final Wood Supply Working Group meeting is scheduled for 
November 29th in Flagstaff. 
 
 
4:00 – 4:15 p.m. 
Public comment period 
 
 
4:15 p.m. 
 
Adjourn 
 

November 16, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary     
    Page 1 of 12 
Wood Supply Working Group Meeting  
Analysis of Small-Diameter Wood Supply in Northern Arizona 
 
November 16, 2007 
9:00 a.m. – 4:15 p.m. 
Large Pod Conference room, Applied Research and Development (AR&D) Building 
Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 
 
 
Introductions and Agenda Review 
Rosemary Romero, meeting facilitator, introduced herself and welcomed Working Group 
Members to the second to the last official meeting. Group members introduced themselves. 
 
Working group members present at meeting: 
1) Keith Pajkos, Timber Staff for the Arizona State lands Department Forestry Division 
2) Bill Greenwood, City Manager for the Town of Eagar 
3) Herb Hopper, Community-based forest and wood products advocate, Little Colorado 
Plateau Resource Conservation & Development  
4) Steve Gatewood, Consultant, Wildwood Consulting Inc., representing the Greater Flagstaff 
Forests Partnership 
5) Pascal Berlioux, President and Chief Executive Officer of Arizona Forest Restoration 
Products, Inc. 
6) Lisa McNeilly, Northern Arizona Program Director of The Nature Conservancy 
7) Jerry Drury, Timber Staff Officer for Kaibab National Forest 
8) Rob Davis, President/Owner of Forest Energy Corporation/Future Forests 
9) Todd Shulke, Forest Programs Director for Center of Biological Diversity 
10) Diane Vosick, Associate Director of the Ecological Restoration Institute 
11) Elaine Zieroth, Forest Supervisor for Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest 
12) Shaula Hedwall, representative of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Ecological Services 
13) Molly Pitts, Executive Director of the Northern Arizona Wood Products Association 
14) Larry Stephenson, Executive Director of the Eastern Arizona Counties Organization 
15) Ethan Aumack, Director of Restoration Programs for Grand Canyon Trust 
16) Kim Newbauer, Timber Sales Contracting Officer for Coconino National Forest 
 
Working group members not present at meeting: 
1) Sarah Lantz, Urban Wildlife Planner for Arizona Game and Fish Department (Region 
II Flagstaff Office) 
2) Scott Higginson, Executive Vice President of NZ Legacy/Snowflake White Mountain 
Power, Renergy 
3) Robert LaCapa, Forest Manager, DOI BIA Fort Apache Agency Branch of Forestry 
4) Mary Steuver, Acting Tribal Forester, Forestry Department, White Mountains Apache Tribe 
5) Chuck Peone, Fort Apache Timber Co. 
 
Project Team Present at Meeting: 
1) Rosemary Romero, Meeting Facilitator, Romero Consulting 
2) Jill Rundall, GIS Specialist, ForestERA 

November 16, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary     
    Page 2 of 12 
3) Tom Sisk, Professor, Center for Environmental Sciences and Education at Northern Arizona 
University (NAU) 
4) Haydee Hampton, Research Associate, Center for Environmental Sciences and Education at 
NAU; Project Director, ForestERA Wood Supply Analysis 
5) Steve Sesnie, Post-Doctoral Research Associate, Center for Environmental Sciences and 
Education at NAU; Remote Sensing Specialist, ForestERA 
6) Gary Snider, Forest Economist and Doctoral student in the School of Forestry at Northern 
Arizona University 
7) Jada Ach, English Instructor, NAU; scribe 
 
Experts and Observers: 
1) Wally Covington, Director, ERI (supplied expert input) 
2) Pete Fulé, Faculty, NAU Forestry and ERI (supplied expert input) 
3) Taylor McKinnon, Center for Biological Diversity 
 
Haydee Hampton: Overview of Agenda 
Hampton presented an overview of the meeting’s agenda commented that at this meeting the two 
major parallel tracks of the project, collaboration and wood volume estimation, will merge. She 
referred to the first working group meeting which took place in Holbrook, AZ on June 4, 2007, 
remarking on the progress that the group has thus far made in terms of reviewing and developing 
a scenario. During this particular meeting, Hampton noted, the focus should be on revising the 
final scenario, reviewing wood volume estimates, and agreeing on methods for wood supply 
estimation. The final working group meeting will take place on November 29 in the ARD 
building on NAU campus in Flagstaff, AZ. 
 
Hampton informed the group of the timeline for finalizing the project report: report will be 
submitted to working group and Region 3 by Dec. 17, 2007; comments from working group 
should be submitted to ForestERA by January 18, 2008; and a final report will be ready to 
distribute by Jan. 31, 2008. Representatives from ForestERA will be presenting analysis results 
at a meeting hosted by the Association for Fire Ecology in Tucson, AZ Jan. 28-31, 2008. 
 
Hampton then summarized the working group’s email discussion two weeks prior regarding the 
shift in the upper diameter threshold from 12 in. DBH to 16 in. DBH resulting in the following 
three classes: <5in. DBH, 5-16 in. DBH, and >16 in. DBH. She explained that the main reason 
given by working group members for requesting this shift was that the classes should be 
comprehensive enough to encompass as much of the useable material on which there has been a 
general agreement. She stated that some working group members had commented that a 16 in. 
threshold is less informative for some types of industry than a 12 in. threshold, and some 
members requested an 18 in. threshold to match the top end of VSS4, as used in Goshawk 
Guidelines. 
 
After reviewing the agenda and the shift in diameter class ranges, Hampton provided the 
members with updated information regarding their restoration treatment scenario. Jill Rundall 
displayed maps portraying areas with Mexican spotted owl protected activity centers (MSO 
PACs), Specially Designated Areas such as Wilderness areas, steep slopes, goshawk nesting 
areas, completed treatments, streamside management zones, soils with limits on mechanized 

November 16, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary     
    Page 3 of 12 
equipment, and other areas deemed otherwise unavailable as a source of wood supply by the 
working group in the total 2.4 million acre project area. Once these areas are taken into 
consideration, the resulting acreage in the analysis area is 1.8 million acres (see details in table 
below).  
 
Hampton then reviewed information gathered by Gary Snider regarding 8 environmental 
assessments (EAs) conducted under NEPA in both Coconino National Forest and Apache-
Sitgreaves National Forest. She provided draft estimates of the percentage of areas not thinned 
on the project-level analysis (22% on average for CNF); for ASNF, the average of areas not 
thinned was 27%.  The group had expressed interest in possibly adjusting the number of areas 
not considered a source of wood supply in their treatment scenario based on the EA assessment 
as a greater number of factors, such as archeological or historical sites and wildlife movement 
corridors, are considered at the project level. One participant commented that these project level 
values validate the amount of area the group has already decided would not significantly 
contribute to wood supply. Participant: 26% from the landscape level analysis seems on the 
lower side given that Designated Roadless/Wilderness are not included. Another participant 
stated that this is an issue the Grand Canyon Trust has been looking at over the last couple of 
weeks, and agreement on the issue demands a hard look at what’s happening realistically across 
the landscape. We have reviewed 30 EAs – and have found higher percentages of areas have not 
been thinned. Here are our averages: mean percentage of thinned on ASNF is 51%, on Kaibab 
the mean is 47%, Coconino is 37%, with a mean of 45% for all projects thinned.  
 
Hampton then stated that the project analyses completed by Snider excluded meadows and to the 
extent possible focused on ponderosa pine dominated areas to make them comparable with the 
landscape-scale analysis of the group’s treatment scenario and asked if the analyses used by 
Grand Canyon Trust did the same.  In the CocNF, 83% of the areas included by GCT were 
dominated by PIPO; the remaining areas did include meadows. Another participant noted that the 
difference of percentages between these two groups might reveal other methodological 
differences. It might be important, she said, for the two groups to sit down and make sure they 

November 16, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary     
    Page 4 of 12 
are comparing apples to apples.  Hampton agreed and suggested they meet during a break that 
day and again before the next meeting.  One participant recommended that the calculations be 
based on each project area and not the larger analysis areas.  Participant: Urban interface projects 
are an issue we need to talk about when discussing this percentage as well. We need to consider 
land classifications, because a lot of the wood supply analysis area is wildlands, not urban 
interface where thinning has been favored vs. burning; this may be what is reflected in this 
difference. Group members decided to hold the current conversation until later in the meeting. 
Hampton then continued with the scenario analysis. 
 
Hampton reviewed the restoration treatment zones included in the final scenario (see table 
below).  
 
The remaining areas available for new contracts comes to 1,432,000 acres. However, the group is 
still contemplating if more areas should be removed based on the EA study, which is still in 
progress. White Mountain Stewardship contract NEPA analysis areas amount to 416,000 acres 
across the full 2.4 million acres ponderosa-pine dominated area.  A participant commented that 
once NEPA has been completed for these areas then the exact project areas within these greater 
analysis areas will be known. There is no upper limit in the contract. 150,000 acres in the 
contract is the goal. Participant response: An excess of acreage could go to any contract. Those 
acres should not be taken out of the wood supply analysis since they are not part of any contract 
right now.   After further discussion the group agreed that the 120,000 acres remaining as part of 
the initial 150,000 Stewardship contract acres should be used in the report as an estimate of what 
has already been allocated for the White Mountain Stewardship contracts and thus is not 
available for new contracts. 
 
Hampton then directed the group members to reconsider the issue of roads as it pertains to the 
scenario, an issue upon which the members focused much of their attention during the last 
meeting. After areas of overlap with areas not considered a source of wood supply are not 
considered, 241,000 acres of land in the project area is further from a quarter mile from existing 

November 16, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary     
    Page 5 of 12 
roads in ponderosa pines areas (10% of full area, 14% of source area). This might be valuable 
information for the Forest Service to use since areas greater than that distance (quarter of a mile) 
are difficult to access with today’s chip trucks and other equipment. Hampton inquired what the 
group’s feelings were regarding this proposal from the scenario attributes committee. Participant: 
My question is this: what would be the best way to present these numbers? The base amount we 
are confident about? Have an adder, perhaps? Participant response: A quarter mile is the basic 
skid distance. Participant: This is a conservative number. We have to keep in mind that we are 
dealing with existing equipment, say nothing of the current condition of the roads. It is probably 
beyond this group’s ability to analyze the accessibility. But the number is there, nonetheless, 
even if we are unable to get all of these roads in the rest of the area up to the standard for such an 
endeavor. Another participant mentioned that the group should look 10-20 years from now and 
consider the machinery that may be available to access zones further than a quarter mile from the 
roads. He stated that more advanced machinery may then be available, allowing greater access to 
areas past the quarter-mile mark.  Commenting on the language to be used in the report, another 
participant noted that the roads evaluated in the project area are accessible, and that it is just a 
question of whether to utilize them or not. They should not be left out of the project because of 
questions of accessibility; they may just be more expensive to use.  Romero paused the 
discussion, asking the group members to consider the language used to discuss this issue of roads 
in the report. She questioned how such an issue should be phrased to encompass everything the 
group had discussed up to this point. Hampton further clarified Romero’s question, stating that 
wood harvesting technology may shift over the next 20 years, allowing people to access more 
than .25 miles. She asked the group how this issue should be portrayed in the scenario.  A 
participant responded to this question by stating that it is unlikely that there will be mechanical 
treatment in those harder-to-access areas. The narrative of the report, he stated, should 
characterize the issue in that way. He suggested that we should give the current 
available/accessible landscape a value – albeit, a conservative value. In addition, the narrative 
should discuss the road network; the working group does not have the ability to judge what is 
and is not usable. The narrative should therefore state that with existing technology, it is unlikely 
that there will be mechanical treatment in these areas. Participant response: Why are these areas 
still included in the total number, then, but left out? Mechanical treatment may be unlikely today, 
but should still be considered when discussing future supply. Some participants stated that 
different scenarios should be described in the report, one of them discussing the issue of future 
technology. One participant stated that grants are currently being written for such advancements 
in technology, making this more of an economic issue than a technological one. The group chose 
to go with a suggestion by one member on the use of confidence intervals in the report, outlining 
that supply may be derived in the future from additional acres with moderate or low confidence. 
When more acres become possible in the future, these items of lower confidence may then be 
realized. 
 
Hampton then outlined the scenario attribute subcommittee’s proposed strategy for defining 
post-treatment forest structural conditions in each landscape zone using recommended basal area 
ranges (i.e., in community protection areas the subcommittee recommended a range between 30 
and 60 ft2/acre with a mode, or most common value, of 40; in municipal and aquatic species 
watersheds 40 to 120 with mode of 60; in MSO Target pine-oak habitat 60 to 120 with mode of 
100; in MSO other restricted pine-oak habitat 45 to 120 with mode of 70; and in remaining areas 
or “wildlands” 40 to 160 with a mode of 80 ft2/acre). The subcommittee also provided ranges of 

November 16, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary     
    Page 6 of 12 
desired post-treatment conditions for canopy cover and tree density as guidelines. She noted that 
ForestERA has not determined that it is possible to model treatments across the landscape in this 
way since the methodology differs from what ForestERA has used in the past and given time 
limits on the project, but they have been working towards getting as close to this as possible and 
will at a minimum include a description of the group’s desired future conditions in the report 
even if they need to use a more simplified approach.  One working group member was concerned 
that using a mode of 80 ft2/ac in the wildlands would leave the forest too dense to reduce the 
threat of high severity wildfires.  Another member stated that the subcommittee chose a range of 
basal areas in order to increase the post-treatment heterogeneity of the landscape. He also noted 
that there were no numbers on the y-axis of the chart as ForestERA has not yet derived curves 
representing 100% of the basal areas in each zone [i.e., probability density functions] from these 
curves hand drawn by the scenario attribute committee. They will need to determine the y values 
for each curve in a subsequent step. Subcommittee participant: The tails of the curves could shift 
a bit. There is nothing prescribing what those numbers should be. We are trying to push towards 
a heterogeneous landscape. In the narrative we need to explain why we came up with the 
numbers for the tails that we did.  Hampton asked the group if they agreed to include the 
distributions in their scenario as they were currently presented; Romero tallied the group and 
established that consensus had been reached on this issue. Members then discussed what would 
be an appropriate patch size within which each basal area distribution would apply, however did 
not come to a conclusion.  Hampton commented that this would add greater complexity to the 
modeling which ForestERA may not be able to include in the analysis given time and resource 
constraints, but understood that this was of interest to the group even though no specific patch 
size was decided upon. At any rate, this issue of patch size will be included in the narrative. 
 
Steve Gatewood: Fire Subgroup 
Gatewood presented information discussed by the fire subgroup since the last full group meeting, 
stating that the group has focused heavily on where fire-only should be used on the landscape as 
a restoration treatment.  This is relevant to this process as it could impact the quantity of 
restoration by-products from mechanical treatments (followed by prescribed burning). On the 
other hand, where is wildfire such a great threat that we need to use mechanical thinning, he 
asked? Can we define conditions where prescribed burns would be the preferred treatment? 
Among the factors the group needs to consider when assessing the preferred treatment are 
weather conditions and structural characteristics. To seek information regarding these questions, 
the fire group asked, Pete Fulé, Associate Professor of Forestry at NAU and ERI faculty member 
for his expert opinion. This information was sought to enlighten the working group on issues 
regarding burn only treatments as they relate to forest restoration and wood supply. In response 
to a question regarding appropriate treatment strategies under various weather conditions, Fulé 
responded by saying that under the right conditions, any forest can be burned. In other words, the 
right weather conditions, when combined with the right fire, will result in a successful treatment. 
Fulé had been asked whether there was a set of forest structural parameters that one could apply 
across the landscape to assess where prescribed fire may be the best first-entry tool. Fulé 
responded that a good rule of thumb would be to consider areas with less than 100sq ft/acre and 
less than 100 trees per acre, however went on to say that these are complicated questions, and the 
weather question asked is the only one with a real answer. The forest structure question has more 
to do with people’s interests and opinions. Nothing is set in stone, he then said, and other 
opinions are valid as well, when discussing these issues. 

November 16, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary     
    Page 7 of 12 
 
Gatewood then commented on the percentage of the landscape that falls below 109 ft2/acre BA 
and 160 trees per acre, which cover between 6 and 10% of the landscape as calculated by 
ForestERA based on 2006 forest conditions. These are very thick, dense forests. How can we 
look at those numbers/ranges/percentage sets – where and how much do we want to draw on this 
analysis? Two parameters affect how the landscape is shown.  Hampton then provided maps 
revealing three different basal area thresholds (below 100 ft2/acre BA, 70BA, and 50BA). Below 
50BA (10% of landscape), below 70BA (22% of landscape), below 100BA (40%).  Gatewood 
reiterated that different treatment plans for these three ranges would need to be discussed. Maps 
revealing trees per acre are not yet available, she said, but will be developed in the next several 
days. A participant voiced her concern by stating that the fire issue was a NEPA decision, and 
she was not sure why it should be debated in the context of the working group. NEPA decides 
what the best tool is and how much smoke we can put into the environment. Proximity to 
communities is taken into account. This group member said that she does support tagging some 
acres for group consideration, but while fire might sometimes be suitable for a given area, it may 
not always be practical.  Fulé followed up on the issue of practicality as it relates to prescribed 
burns. In reference to the checker-boarded zones on the basal area maps displayed, he said that 
one cannot manage fire in zones this small (say, one or two 90m pixels) – fire managers cannot 
differentiate between pixels on the land and burn that way, so a using a larger minimum patch 
size for burn-only treatments would be a better way to model these treatments. 
 
A participant encouraged the group to be soft with language in the narrative in regards to fire 
treatment issue. For the report to appeal to a broader audience, he proposed a “status quo” 
approach to the burn-only issue. This approach, according to the participant, would assume that 
the same proportion of the landscape should be burn-only (~30%) as it has been specified in 
NEPA documents to burn over the last 10 years. Stay with the current Forest Service burn 
numbers, he urged. Another participant challenged the assumption that burning was always a 
restorative treatment. While the Gila NF had been earlier referenced as a good example of a area 
with many successful burns, the member stated that what he has found in his research is that it 
doesn’t always restore forest structure. Participant response: The issue of using fire as a 
restorative tool is debated across the political spectrum, and if we want to come to some wood 
supply numbers, we should go with the interpretation of status quo. Some participants voiced 
their disagreement with this opinion, stating that current FS policy, as it relates to fire treatment, 
may not be the best way of arriving at the ultimate goal of forest restoration.  Also, just because 
an area is marked for burn-only in an EA doesn’t mean it will be burned.  Another member 
proposed a range of burn-only treatments to include in the report’s narrative, using 65% as the 
high-end percentage. He used the example of fire treatments in the Gila NF as a means of 
demonstrating to the group that fire is already being used as an effective restorative tool. (Many 
were concerned with the use of Gila as a model for the rest of the project area, as appropriate 
treatment depends on individual characteristics of each landscape-unit, proximity to 
communities, and tree density.) Gatewood stressed the need to agree on structural parameters to 
include in the report. He stated that the report should be able to inform its readers where, exactly, 
the fire should go on the landscape and this would allow for a more exact determination of wood 
supply. 
 

November 16, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary     
    Page 8 of 12 
Hampton stated that the reasons lands were designated as burn-only in the NEPA reviewed by 
Snider were due to steep slopes, road inaccessibility, soils restricted from treatments, and MSO 
PACs.  A participant responded by saying that many of these conditions were noted in previous 
maps, and those zones (soil, no roads, steep slopes, etc.) were already taken out of the available 
supply area. We now need to look at risk factors in the remaining areas (smoke, urban interface, 
etc.), she argued, to make our final decision. A participant added that wildlife movement 
corridors and old growth were additional reasons “NEPA”ed areas were designated burn only 
and that the group had already determined that these cannot be accurately portrayed in the 
landscape analysis.  Romero asked the group if there were any alternatives to propose besides the 
“status quo” proposal. Sisk then reiterated Romero, encouraging those participants who did not 
agree with the “status quo” proposal to voice an alternative proposal. He stated that the group 
needed to come to some sort of agreement on one proposal if the process is to move forward. 
After much debate in regards to appropriate treatment, the outlining of spatial parameters, and 
the purpose of this project (whether the report should propose directives for the Forest Service or 
not), the group came up with the following three ways of approaching fire treatment strategies in 
their scenario: 
 
General info: 
• NEPA burn-only areas amount to approximately 28% of all ponderosa-pine dominated 
areas in the analysis area. These burn only areas occur on: 
o Steep slopes, PACs, areas inaccessible from existing roads, old growth areas and 
wildlife movement corridors 
o Some of these burn-only areas were in PJ 
• The Wood Supply scenario’s Areas Not Available for Wood Supply (PACs, steep slopes, 
soils, SDA, streamside mgmt zone, goshawk nests) cover 26% of the study area. 
• Burning may not be the best treatment for steep slopes and PACs 
 
Alternatives: 
1.) 
Recent project-level burning levels: Use percent of areas planned via NEPA for burn-only 
treatments.  Most of these areas are included in Areas Not Available, however some are not 
(e.g., old growth and wildlife movement corridors).  The area (acres) of the remaining 
features will be assumed as the differential between the landscape assessment Areas Not 
Available and the NEPA burn-only areas and will be indicated in narrative as high 
confidence as unavailable for wood supply and estimated in terms of average volume per 
acre. Need to remove Wilderness and Roadless Areas at front end as these are not included 
in NEPA planning areas.  Develop best guess estimate today.  
2.) 
Low risk of wildfire: Use forest structure parameters (basal area and tree density) to define 
areas where prescribed burning may be the preferred restoration treatment due to low risk 
of escaped fire or wildfire spread through tree canopies. Develop map showing areas with 
the following combinations of basal area and tree density: 1) 100 ft2/ac and 100 trees/acre, 
and 2) 80 ft2/ac and 160 trees/acre. 
3.) 
Wildlands focus: Apply more aggressive burning percentage outside of WUI and possibly 
municipal watersheds. 65% of area burned to reflect current burning in some wildland 
settings. 

November 16, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary     
    Page 9 of 12 
Below is general discussion of the three approaches to fire-only treatments to include in the 
scenario:  One participant said that she was uncomfortable with all of the alternatives. She 
worries about what characteristics would be left were such aggressive strategies to be instituted. 
There is not enough data, she said, to assess to what degree fire would be a necessary treatment 
in the project area. We want to say that those areas could be available for treatment and supply in 
the future, she said, but we have yet to replace the placement habitats of those species. She went 
on to say that she is not going to recommend the available areas all be burned without additional 
analysis, as burning may not be the best treatment for many zones in the project area, such as 
MSO PACs. The member to propose the third alternative recommended that the narrative deal 
with one of these plans clearly and robustly in the narrative. Unlike stating a specific 
recommended percentage for fire treatment, he instead wishes the report to offer a range (for 
example, 10-65%). Such a range should be mentioned in the actual scenario, not lost in a 
paragraph of the document. A member responded by saying that she worries about the 
implications of discussing the issue in such a way. The number currently being debated deals 
with fire treatment, not restoration. How do you get back, she asked, to the best restoration of the 
landscape’s structure and function? The goal of restoration, she reiterated, should be the focus of 
this discussion. She went on to say that she does not think that 65% of the landscape can safely 
receive fire. Another participant agreed with this statement, saying that to burn 65% of the forest 
would be irresponsible. The Apache-Sitgreaves Forest, she said, is a fairly urban forest, ad there 
would be no way to burn that high of a percentage. Oftentimes fire is the default treatment due to 
lack of mechanization. We are trying, however, to restore these acres, she said, and if we go 
through and thin first, then in the future we can get close to burning 65% of the landscape. 
Today, however, the number will be much lower – close to 10%. We will not be able, she said, to 
pull off more than that. After a group member asked Hampton what the consequences would be 
if they did not arrive at a decision during today’s meeting, Hampton said that the information 
would then not be available to present back to the group in their final meeting on Nov. 29. She 
stressed that ForestERA would need a set of criteria today if the group wanted them to conduct a 
spatial analysis before the next meeting. Sisk told the group that their ability to shape where they 
go is now. One participant suggested that due to the high mortality rate that would result in 
instituting the third alternative at present, the group should highly consider the first alternative. 
Another member stressed the empirical strength of the second option. He reiterated the need to 
rethink the basal area and trees per acre, however. If we look at both, he said, we are at 10% of 
the study area. The group asked if ForestERA could come back with an analyses of 1, 2 and 3 for 
the next meeting, although alternative #1 received the most support from the group. 
 
The rest of the discussion regarding the issue focused mainly on the range suggested in 
alternative #3. While some members agreed conceptually on the third alternative, they felt as 
though 65% was unsafe and unrealistic. Others feared that if wide-scale fire was introduced in 
wildlands areas, old growth would be at risk. Some members disagreed with option 3 on the 
grounds of how such wide-scale burning could affect the available wood supply. Some members 
in support of alternative 3 claimed that as forest conditions change, and depending on various 
other factors that may change in the future, 65% may not be as unrealistic as it currently seems. 
Romero asked the group whether these three alternatives should merely be described in the 
narrative, or if the group should make a specific preference. Hampton said that ForestERA would 
be able to do a spatial analysis of 2 and 3 fairly easily, although they would have to make some 
assumptions on patch sizes and other details that the group did not specify. For alternative #1, 

November 16, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary     
    Page 10 of 12 
she said that ForestERA and the Grand Canyon Trust could meet to bring their project level 
analyses together. Sisk said that while figures for all three alternatives could be developed, the 
working group had always tried to resist the temptation to split into multiple scenarios. Including 
all three alternatives into the report, he said, will not take the group to their final objective. We 
can look at all three alternatives and present them at the next meeting – all three will come out 
with a number of supply – but the group should consider coming to an agreement on one (or a 
combination) of the plans. Rosemary summarized the group’s final decision on this item for the 
current meeting, re-emphasizing Sisk’s words of honing in on a zone of agreement. If one 
alternative cannot be agreed upon, the two options may be possible. Information on all three 
alternatives will be analyzed by ForestERA and presented to the group at the next meeting for 
the final alternative to be decided on. 
 
Wood Volume Estimates (Steve Sesnie) 
Sesnie provided the working group with information on how ForestERA had arrived at their 
current estimates of wood volume. Information entered into the analyses includes Forest 
Inventory Analysis ground data and Landsat TM 2006 remote sensing imagery and digital 
elevation models. After outlining the data used to predict forest structural elements and estimated 
volume, Sesnie explained the accuracy of such imputations. Between the observed and imputed 
data, Sesnie stated he had achieved an r-value of 76% for total wood volume. Some of the final 
data is currently being re-run to ensure the accuracy of the derived amounts. Sesnie stated that 
the accuracy for smaller basal areas is not as high since it is more difficult to measure differences 
below the canopy. Also, where there are high density levels of saturation, volume is more 
difficult to predict.  
 
Sesnie stated that the total wood supply volume in cubic feet in the pine type was 4.6 billion in 
the 2.4 million acre project area. With 1.3 billion cubic feet (CF) of this volume being set aside 
in the working group scenario, the total available volume reaches 3.3 billion CF (see table below 
for additional details): 
Volume category 
Total 
Cu. Ft. 
(billion) Vol.% 
Acres 
(million) 
Acres % 
Total volume 
4.6 
100 
2.4 
100  
Tot. vol. removed  
1.3 
28 
0.6 
28 
Tot. vol. remaining 
3.3 
72 
1.8 
72 
  
  
  
  
% of available 
Community protection 0.6 
20 
0.36 
20 
MSO restricted habitat 0.5 
15 
0.24 
13 
Municipal watersheds 
0.1 
4 
0.06 
3 
Aquatic species 
watersheds 
0.6 
19 
0.31 
18 
Wildlands 
1.4 
42 
0.81 
46 
 
Sesnie stated that he will be able to calculate the percentage of volume in each diameter class (5 
in., 5-16, 16+) after running the grids before the next meeting. To ensure that these estimates 

November 16, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary     
    Page 11 of 12 
reach the highest level of accuracy possible, Sesnie plans to compare the totals from these 
categories to total volume.  
 
Hampton then shifted the discussion to wood supply. Hampton reviewed a proposal developed 
by the Steering Committee and reviewed with the scenario attribute subcommittee for assuming 
that restoration by-products will largely come from <5 in. DBH and 5-16 in. DBH classes. The 
report will highlight areas where it is not possible to meet desired post-treatment conditions by 
removing wood solely from these classes. However, near communities, removals in the > 16 in. 
DBH class may be realized if necessary. A participant proposed 10% of each of these lower 
DBH classes should not be removed. The group agreed with this suggested and the plan 
developed by the Steering Committee. One member suggested including a growth model into the 
equation as the supply is stretched over the years. Sesnie then stated that growth averages 30 
CF/acre a year. 
 
One participant noted that the maps of the project area do not take into consideration the White 
Mountain Apache Tribe where much wood volume is available on the ground. In past meetings, 
he said, we mentioned the desire to work with the tribe, and now that we are close to the end of 
our study we need to act on it. Hampton mentioned that she and Sesnie had traveled to White 
River on the White Mountain Apache lands on Oct. 18 and met with the Paul DeClay, the Tribal 
Forester on this issue. A participant announced that sadly, he had passed away several weeks ago 
and that it would be unlikely for the tribe to provide reservation-wide volume estimates of small-
diameter wood for this project.  Hampton said she had been in contact with the acting tribal 
forester, Mary Steuver, who had attended two of the working group meetings, and at the 
appropriate time, would revisit this issue with her. 
 
In addition to the narrative, Hampton presented a map created by Rundall, that identified 
treatments recommended in previous CWPPs. Rundall described the types of treatments and 
intensity of treatments for the areas of Flagstaff, Rim Country, and Apache-Sitgreaves National 
Forest which are the only CWPPs where specific information on treatments was available. 
Hampton explained that the idea is to create what we have spatially for CWPPs, not calculated as 
volume, but just as one scenario. A member questioned how this information would be used, as 
she was worried that the report may speak against such community-derived treatment plans. 
Participant response: In the report we plan on discussing why our recommended treatments may 
or may not match community-approved treatments. We plan on addressing that difference in the 
report.  The member responded by saying the WUIs in her area (Apache-Sitgreaves) were 
defined by the community, and that the report should not arbitrarily second guess what the 
community wants. She went on to say that the report has to show why the group is deviating 
from the CWPP; we may be able to deviate when we prove with science that we need to deviate.  
Hampton then asked the group if they were ready to decide between the two scenarios for the 
report: stick with the Wood Supply Analysis community protection zones currently in their 
scenario, or offer the alternative treatment zones defined by CWPPs. A member stressed that 
whatever the group decided to do, they must make sure to be consistent in the entire project area. 
He suggested running it the same everywhere (using the Wood Supply Analysis community 
protection zones), and then run the CWPP. In other words, he preferred taking a standardized 
approach, following that standard approach by deviating according to each community’s specific 
wants and needs as outlined in the CWPPs. The group decided to run a consistent application of 

November 16, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary     
    Page 12 of 12 
treatment zones before consideration of the CWPP. Results would be calculated on a location-
by-location basis. In the report he stressed that much care should be taken in deciding how to 
present this information. 
 
A group member requested that the report should, in some way, address climate issues over the 
next 20 years in the context of forest restoration and available supply. In the same vein, 
estimated fire risk, disease, and insect threat should also be placed into consideration. In sum, 
one member stated that these issues could be handled in a section addressing/estimating future 
tree mortality. She explained that such an issue should not be handled as a spatial analysis issue, 
but as a discussion which arrives at a percentage lost in volume. Sisk said that while ForestERA 
would be able to look at the current trends and project those trends out, such projections always 
result in there being no forests left. We are left with only uncertainties, he stated, and must 
therefore rely on adaptive management. The narrative can address these uncertainties, but, it is 
not possible to provide firm figures on how these risks may affect wood supply or overall forest 
health. In terms of the final report, several group members have volunteered to supply text for 
certain sections of the report by Tuesday Nov. 27: Steve Gatewood on CWPPs, Shaula Hedwall 
on wildlife/restoration treatment issues, Ethan Aumack on burn only treatments, and Lisa 
McNeilly on impacts of climate change and natural disturbances on future wood supply. Vosick 
sculpted the narrative for the issue of old growth management and submitted copies to the entire 
working group during the meeting. Hampton encouraged the group to read through this portion 
of the narrative carefully and email Vosick comments by Tuesday Nov. 27. These sections will 
be discussed and finalized at the Nov. 29 meeting. 
 
Gary Snider provided the group with additional information on the 4 EAs from Coconino NF and 
4 EAs from Apache-Sitgreaves NF discussed earlier. Taking into account ownership and 
landscape features, Snider said that, across the board, ~75-80% of these project sites had been set 
aside for thinning treatments and ~20% had burn-only treatments. The implications of these 
projects is not yet easy to determine, Snider noted, but he will provide the group with that 
information once it becomes available. Snider also presented the following updated table for the 
White Mountain Area (Apache Sitgreaves NF) on Harvesting Contractors for year 2006: 
 
Harvesting Contractors Green Tons 
(old) 
Green Tons
(new) 
CCF 
(new) 
% of Total 
CCF 
 
(thousand) 
(thousand) 
(thousand)
 
Walker Brothers 
110.8 
129.3 
36.9 
63.8 
Tri Star Logging 
44.6 
52.0 
14.6 
25.3 
Nutrioso Logging 
12.3 
14.4 
4.1 
7.1 
Renegy 
6.5 
7.6 
2.2 
3.8 
Total 
174.2 
203.3 
57.8 
100.0 
 
 
The numbers obtained by Snider indicate that green tons have become heavier – 3-3.5 tons. This 
shift does not affect CCF, however. 
 
The final wood supply working group meeting will be held on Thursday, November 29, 2007, 
from 9am-4:15pm at the same location as this meeting (Large Pod Conference room, Applied 
Research and Development Building, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff). 

Wood Supply Working Group Meeting 
Analysis of Small-Diameter Wood Supply in Northern Arizona 
 
November 29, 2007 
9:00 a.m. – 4:15 p.m. 
Large Pod Conference room, Applied Research and Development (AR&D) Building 
Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 
 
 
 
9:00 – 9:15 a.m. 
Review meeting agenda and various project updates – Haydee 
Hampton (Research Associate, Environmental Sciences, Northern 
Arizona University) 
 
 
9:15 – 10:30 a.m. 
Review final treatment scenario 
 
Review Working Group’s final treatment scenario including areas 
selected as appropriate for restoration treatments and the desired 
post-treatment conditions for community protection and other 
landscape zones defined within these areas. – Haydee Hampton 
 
Present final results of NEPA project-level analyses completed by 
Gary Snider (Forest Economist and Doctoral Candidate, School of 
Forestry, Northern Arizona University) and Andrew Frost 
(Assistant, Grand Canyon Trust) – Ethan Aumack (Director of 
Restoration Programs, Grand Canyon Trust) and Haydee Hampton 
 
10:30 – 10:45 a.m. 
Break 
 
 
10:45 – 12:00 p.m. 
Review final treatment scenario (cont.) 
 
Continue any remaining review from earlier session. Present 
alternatives identified at Nov. 16 meeting for addressing fire as a 
restoration tool – Brett Dickson (Assistant Research Professor, 
Environmental Sciences, NAU) and Haydee Hampton 
 
 
12:00 – 1:00 p.m. 
Lunch  
 
*** Lunch will be on your own. Working group members are 
encouraged to bring their own lunch. ***                          
 
 
 

1:00 – 2:30 p.m. 
Report out on major project results 
 
Presentation on estimates of wood volume by size class across 
analysis area and estimates of potential wood supply stemming 
from working group’s desired post-treatment conditions – Steve 
Sesnie (Postdoctoral Research Associate, Environmental Sciences, 
NAU) and Haydee Hampton 
 
2:30 – 2:45 p.m. 
Break 
 
 
2:45 – 3:15 p.m. 
Discuss project report and potential follow-on economic 
analyses  
 
 
3:15 – 3:45 p.m. 
Wrap-up – Tom Sisk (Professor, Environmental Sciences, NAU) 
. 
 
3:45 – 4:15 p.m. 
Public comment period 
 
 
4:15 p.m. 
 
Adjourn 
 

November 29, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary     
    Page 1 of 8 
Wood Supply Working Group Meeting  
Analysis of Small-Diameter Wood Supply in Northern Arizona 
 
November 29, 2007 
9:00 a.m. – 4:15 p.m. 
Large Pod Conference room, Applied Research and Development (AR&D) Building 
Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 
 
 
Introductions and Agenda Review 
Haydee Hampton welcomed Working Group Members and reminded them that this was the final 
of seven working group meetings and the purpose was mainly to review the treatment scenario 
they had developed over the last half year including estimates of wood supply based on their 
scenario. She introduced Dexter Albert, a meeting facilitator filling in for Rosemary Romero 
who could not attend. Dexter asked members to introduce themselves. 
 
Working group members present at meeting: 
1) Keith Pajkos, Timber Staff for the Arizona State lands Department Forestry Division 
2) Bill Greenwood, City Manager for the Town of Eagar 
3) Herb Hopper, Community-based forest and wood products advocate, Little Colorado 
Plateau Resource Conservation & Development  
4) Steve Gatewood, Consultant, Wildwood Consulting Inc., representing the Greater Flagstaff 
Forests Partnership 
5) Pascal Berlioux, President and Chief Executive Officer of Arizona Forest Restoration 
Products, Inc. 
6) Lisa McNeilly, Northern Arizona Program Director of The Nature Conservancy 
7) Jerry Drury, Timber Staff Officer for Kaibab National Forest 
8) Rob Davis, President/Owner of Forest Energy Corporation/Future Forests 
9) Todd Shulke, Forest Programs Director for Center of Biological Diversity 
10) Diane Vosick, Associate Director of the Ecological Restoration Institute 
11) Bob Taylor, Supervisory Natural Resource Specialist, Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest 
(Alternate for Elaine Zieroth, Forest Supervisor, ASNF) 
12) Shaula Hedwall, representative of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Ecological Services 
13) Larry Stephenson, Executive Director of the Eastern Arizona Counties Organization 
14) Ethan Aumack, Director of Restoration Programs for Grand Canyon Trust 
15) Kim Newbauer, Timber Sales Contracting Officer for Coconino National Forest 
16) Sarah Lantz, Urban Wildlife Planner for Arizona Game and Fish Department (Region 
II Flagstaff Office) 
17) Scott Higginson, Executive Vice President, Renergy Holdings Inc. 
 
Working group members not present at meeting: 
1) Robert LaCapa, Forest Manager, DOI BIA Fort Apache Agency Branch of Forestry 
2) Mary Steuver, Acting Tribal Forester, Forestry Department, White Mountains Apache Tribe 
3) Chuck Peone, Fort Apache Timber Co. 
4) Molly Pitts, Executive Director of the Northern Arizona Wood Products Association 
 

November 29, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary     
    Page 2 of 8 
Project support team present at meeting: 
1) Haydee Hampton, Research Associate, Center for Environmental Sciences and Education at 
NAU; Wood Supply Analysis Project Director and Spatial Analyst, ForestERA 
2) Steve Sesnie, Post-Doctoral Research Associate, Center for Environmental Sciences and 
Education at NAU; Remote Sensing Specialist, ForestERA 
3) Brett Dickson, Assistant Research Professor, Center for Environmental Sciences and 
Education at NAU; Wildlife Ecologist, ForestERA 
4) Tom Sisk, Professor, Center for Environmental Sciences and Education at Northern Arizona 
University (NAU) 
5) Gary Snider, Forest Economist and Doctoral student in the School of Forestry at Northern 
Arizona University 
6) Dexter Albert, Meeting Facilitator, Intrinsic 
 
Observers: 
1) Bob Baltes, Baltes Distributed Generation and Camp Navajo Tribal Development 
2) Diane Williamson, Earth Friendly Fuels 
3) Sue Sitko, The Nature Conservancy 
4) Ed Smith, The Nature Conservancy 
5) Stacey Hamburg, Sierra Club 
 
Overview of Agenda and Group Treatment Scenario 
Haydee Hampton presented an overview of the meeting’s agenda including that ForestERA 
would review the working group treatment scenario and that the group had several final 
decisions related to the scenario to make that day: 1) how to use the results of the Environmental 
Assessment review, 2) choosing among the three fire-only alternatives the group developed at 
the Nov. 16 meeting, and, 3) reaching agreement on several details of how wood supply would 
be determined, including the post-treatment basal area distributions. 
 
Haydee then summarized the overall goals of the project and the “roadmap” for developing 
treatment scenario(s) that the working group had developed at their second meeting in Pinetop: 
 
1. Identify areas appropriate for restoration treatments that recover wood byproducts 
(“what’s on the map”) 
2. Define management objectives (“target conditions”) to guide selection of treatments  
3. Select appropriate treatments.   
• 
Calculate supply produced by applying the appropriate treatments across the map 
• 
Once forest growth recommendations are available, discuss as group if and how to 
best use them in this study. 
 
Haydee displayed a map portraying areas with Mexican spotted owl protected activity centers 
(MSO PACs), Specially Designated Areas such as Wilderness areas, steep slopes, northern 
goshawk nesting areas, completed treatments, streamside management zones, soils with limits on 
mechanized equipment, and other areas deemed otherwise unavailable as a source of wood 
supply by the working group within the total 2.4 million acre project area. Once these areas are 
taken into consideration, the resulting acreage in the analysis area is 1.8 million acres. Haydee 
noted that tree mortality due to fire, insect outbreaks and other natural disturbances are 
accounted for in reduced volume estimates.  She then reviewed the restoration treatment zones 

November 29, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary     
    Page 3 of 8 
included in the working group’s scenario explaining that at the Nov. 16 meeting the group had 
decided to include an ASNF estimate of 120,000 acres remaining to be treated as part of the 
White Mountains Stewardship Contracts even though there is no upper limit to number of acres 
in the White Mountains Stewardship Contract (at least 150,000 acres is the goal).  As there is no 
spatial information available yet on the location of the project areas within the broader NEPA 
analysis areas, the contracted acres will be discussed in narrative, but a spatially-derived wood 
supply estimate will not be possible. 
 
Haydee then outlined the group’s strategy for defining post-treatment forest structural conditions 
in each landscape zone using recommended basal area distributions (i.e., in community 
protection areas the subcommittee recommended a range between 30 and 60 ft2/acre with a 
mode, or most common value, of 40; in municipal and aquatic species watersheds 40 to 120 with 
mode of 60; in MSO Target pine-oak habitat 60 to 120 with mode of 100; in MSO other 
restricted pine-oak habitat 45 to 120 with mode of 70; and in remaining areas or “wildlands” 40 
to 160 with a mode of 80 ft2/acre). A participant recommended removing the MSO Target 
threshold distribution as basal areas are not supposed to be reduced below 150 f t2/ac in areas 
where MSO Target Threshold conditions are met. In addition, the locations of these areas are 
unknown and MSO Target conditions cover only a very small percentage of the landscape. The 
MSO restricted post-treatment basal area distribution tail should be moved to the right and the 
MSO Target areas should be assumed to be part of that distribution. The group decided that the 
US Fish & Wildlife working group member should develop a new MSO restricted curve to 
provide to ForestERA following the meeting. A member commented that ERI-provided ranges 
for pre-treatment conditions [in 0.1 to 0.25 acre plots] range widely, from 0 to 337 f t2/ac. 
 
Review of Past Thinning Projects 
Haydee and Ethan Aumack, Grand Canyon Trust, then reviewed an environmental assessment 
(EA) analysis of the National Forests in the analysis area gathered by Gary Snider, a PhD student 
at the NAU School of Forestry contracted by ForestERA for the Wood Supply Analysis, and 
Andrew Frost an assistant at the Grand Canyon Trust. The group had expressed interest in 
possibly adjusting the number of areas not considered a source of wood supply in their treatment 
scenario based on the EA assessment as a greater number of factors, such as archeological or 
historical sites, old growth areas, and wildlife movement corridors, are considered at the project 
level than possible at the landscape-scale. Gary reviewed 6 WUI projects and 2 Wildlands 
projects and these had an average area not thinned of 22% and burn-only treatments of 20%.  
Gary also interviewed Forest Service staff who guesstimated a range of 40-50% of the area not 
treated on the ASNF and found an average of 38% not thinned on the Kaibab NF. Andrew found 
in a review of 25 EAs (including 6 of the same reviewed by Gary) an average area not thinned of 
37% and burn-only treatments of 34% (and higher values by approximately 4% if a larger area 
was considered as the area of possible treatment).  One participant commented that about 7 of 
these were in wildlands (vs. WUI areas). NAU and GCT compared methods before the meeting 
and determined they were using the same if the smaller total area was used. An average of all 27 
EAs reviewed by both groups resulted in 36% not-thinned and 33% burn-only.  There was a 
large range in the values: from 0 to 97% of areas not thinned.  Ethan responded to various 
questions on specific numbers GCT presented for various projects saying that are various types 
of inaccuracies and imprecisions in the data, but that overall the numbers were valid and that the 
status quo percent of areas not thinned are in high 30s.  One participant noted un-thinned areas 
include MSO PACs, steep slopes, so there is some overlap with areas already considered not a 

November 29, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary     
    Page 4 of 8 
source of wood supply in the group’s treatment scenario.  Another commented that this validates 
what we already removed from a wood supply source, but we may need another fudge factor, 
such as an additional 12% (the difference between 26% and 38%), to account for the greater 
amount of areas not being thinned in project completed over the last decade. Several members 
thought this would not be scientifically credible and that past performance does not necessarily 
represent future desired conditions. Does the group want to extrapolate status quo conditions into 
the future? What do the Forest Service reps think: will high 30s be the percent of land not-
thinned in the future? One FS rep responded that we should stick with the 26% to maintain the 
spatial perspective we have been working with so far as new projects will occur in areas with 
differing slopes and other conditions that may be better represented at the landscape scale that on 
the basis of 27 past projects. On ASNF we will be not be burning more that 10% of the landscape 
both as burn-only and after thinning, however we may let fires burn that we have not set, such as 
was done on the Chiti Fire.  On Kaibab, we have found that areas not treated are 37%.  
Participant: we could use these values (e.g., 37%) as error bars.  Participant: current conditions 
represent mainly WUI treatment, so higher than 38% should be used such as done on Gila NF.  
In about 4 or 5 large landscape scale non-WUI projects 58-78% of areas on Gila NF, 40-75% 
were burned-only, with some areas are not getting any treatment.  I would like to see more fire 
oriented projects, so do not like the status quo. Tom Sisk commented that we’ve looked at the 
systematic reasons (slopes, soils, etc.) for areas not-thinned.  There is no technical way to 
anticipate acres not treated due to idiosyncratic and project specific reasons; so we will always 
underestimate the areas not-thinned with a landscape scale systematic analysis. There is an 
undeterminable number that won’t be treated that should be included in the report.  We should 
discuss in narrative this additional range of nonsystematic factors.  Participant: Holding the 26% 
up as the scientific standard is an over-statement, it’s just what we could do with the time and 
tools available. Participant: I would argue for more thinning on the Mogollon Plateau than in the 
Gila NF.  Participant: Getting into the project level percentages in dangerous because the ranges 
in the values are so great and prefer going with the landscape scale.  Let’s quantify what the 
consensus is on how many acres to treat and then say there may be some more for this and that 
reason. 
 
Participant: There is not consensus on the lower “status quo” limit (38% not thinned). The 
broader environmental community position as you extend out from community protection zones 
to the larger wildlands on how much should be treated is likely about 40% of all ponderosa pine 
to be thinned (60% not thinned). This value will differ among the zones in our scenario, such as 
higher in community protections zones and lower in aquatic.  We’ve done a good job of 
determining where the pine would most likely come from and within that area, there would be a 
certain proportion, perhaps 40% on average, that we could obtain agreement that could be 
thinned.   This position existed before this process began. This is a process to clarify positions, 
not to change them. Participant: We should tease out the extent of the range of acres according to 
various levels of accuracy, uncertainty and consensus.  Participant: If the environmental 
community’s offer on the table is 40%, let’s start there and see if we have consensus on at least 
this amount. Participant: We should assign confidence levels. We have total confidence 
[agreement] on this value and less on higher values. Participant: Most of the lack of agreement is 
in wildlands and this makes up only 800,000 acres which is less than ½ the supply area. 
Participant: The 40% seems arbitrary, but given that the environmental community supports this 
as a maximum level of thinning, it is the zone of agreement we should present to the Forest 
Service, however the majority of the rest of the group prefers about 60% be available for 

November 29, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary     
    Page 5 of 8 
thinning and has a higher level of agreement.  The 40% are the highest priority areas to thin 
mechanically. Participant: I’ll throw out these values for consideration: 60% available for 
thinning in ponderosa pine in communities; 30% in wildlands; 35% aquatic species habitats; 
40% municipal watershed, 30% MSO predicted habitat. Participant: Where do these values come 
from? Answer: The 26% of the area where wood supply is not available that we’ve come up with 
here has value. Tom Sisk:  It’s unreasonable to have expected that the group would all agree.  In 
any problem with a lot of uncertainty, you partition out the where the uncertainty comes from. 
We have accounted for with great accuracy and high precision, the areas all agree are not a 
source of wood supply [26%] and have quantified the areas with high uncertainty that we cannot 
quantify or level of disagreement [between 26% and 60%] due to social and ecological 
component of the problem that is unknowable.  The group has gone as far as it could reasonably 
be expected to go. Participant: Does the environmental communities’ position for an overall 60% 
of area not thinned (40% to be thinned) include the 26% we already agreed to as a group would 
not be thinned and if we take out another 6% with no road access, then we’re taking out another 
28% of the landscape that will not be mechanically thinned? So we do have consensus on the 
40% that can be thinned. Answer: yes. Participant:  I thought our objective was to reduce the 
threat of catastrophic wildfire and more acres may need to be thinned in wildlands than 30% to 
do this. Shouldn’t we follow the science?  Participant: We’re not going through a planning 
process of what can and should be done. Reality is that 10 years ago many wanted thinning to 
occur only hundreds of feet from communities. There has been a coming together over time on 
these issues.    
 
Burn-Only Treatments 
Haydee and Brett Dickson then presented the three burn-only alternatives that participants 
requested ForestERA analyze at the Nov. 16, 2007, working group meeting (see p.8 of the Nov. 
16 meeting summary for a description of each), so they could choose one. Alternative 1, Recent 
project-level burning levels: Brett displayed a map showing where burn-only treatments would 
be if the lowest basal area regions were selected to total 34% of the landscape outside of 
community protection and municipal watersheds. Participant: The primary value for mapping 
this alternative is to provide a process for calculating the reduction in wood supply that would 
occur if 34% of the landscape had burn-only treatments. Participant: The conversation on the 
environmental community limit of 40% we had earlier supersedes this discussion.  Alt#2 Low 
risk of wildfire: Brett displayed maps showing areas with less than 100 ft2/ac and 100 trees/acre, 
and areas with 80 ft2/ac and 160 trees/acre; both in terms of 100 acre patches. Alt#3: Wildlands 
focus with 65% of area with burn-only treatments starting with the lowest basal area regions for 
all zones except for community protection zones. The basal area threshold ends up being 125 
ft2/ac.  Participant: Let’s not try to make a decision on burn-only treatments and return to the 
morning discussion. Participant: Let’s try to characterize the zone of agreement on this.  The 
group decided to set aside this discussion aside as it’s a subset of the earlier discussion. 
 

November 29, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary     
    Page 6 of 8 
Level of Agreement on Percent of Landscape to be Thinned 
Steve Gatewood agreed to present the following scale developed by several working group 
members for describing the group’s level agreement on the percentage of the landscape to be 
thinned and not-thinned: 
 
No thinning 
 
 
 
 
 
Thin 
26% 
 
36% 
 
 
40% 
 
 
Treat everything 
 
 
 
High  
Lower  
 
High 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Landscape 
 
 
 
 
2.4 million acres 
Volume 
4.6 billion cubic feet 
 
Participant: Where is the science behind 40%? Participant: Some of Mark Finney’s work at the 
Missoula Fire lab informs the treatment of some fraction of the landscape. Tom Sisk: Science has 
informed the discussions so far, such as the volume estimates and landscape analyses.  There is 
no linear set of logical steps that has lead to the 40%. Society does not run on science. Science 
can inform society so the deliberative process can reach a social outcome that is acceptable for 
the greatest number. What’s important is what the agreement is, given that we have a wide range 
of core values around the table. Participant: There are constituents who would like to see their 
homes protected with greater that 40% of the lands treated. I thought consensus was that two 
numbers are put out and we work towards the middle. Participant:  The 40% is an overall 
landscape average; the environmental community also would like a higher percentage of area 
treated near communities, perhaps 70% or more. For the majority of the working group members 
the 40% is a floor, whereas for the environmental community it is the ceiling.  The group 
discussed two options for determining wood supply: 1) assume the area thinned per zone starts at 
the highest of the basal areas and go down till the percent for each zone (40% on average) of the 
landscape is reached, 2) multiply the percent of thinning per zone by the overall wood supply in 
cu. ft volume for each zone.  Participant: There are alternate ideas on how much of the landscape 
you need to treat. The majority view, not just the minority needs to be expressed.  Participant: 
The variability in post-treatment basal areas is what we should focus on in terms of getting 
agreement for what the majority has expressed for the 74% area not thinned.  So for the high 
values compared to the low of 40% avg, just use what is left in each zone after 26% is removed.  
The high value should represent the status quo (~65% of the area not thinned), so adjust per zone 
percentages to get 65% overall.  
 
The group developed the following language for use in the final report describing their level of 
agreement: “The group reached consensus that 40% of the landscape should be considered a 
source of wood supply. There is high level, but not total, agreement that an additional 23% to 
34% of the landscape might also be available as a source of wood supply. The group reached 
consensus that 26% should not be considered a source of wood supply.” 
 

November 29, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary     
    Page 7 of 8 
Proportion of landscape to be treated in each zone:  
 
 
 
Complete agreement High level of agreement 
Community 
 
70% 
63-74% 
MSO restricted habitat  
30% 
63-74% 
Municipal Watersheds  
40% 
63-74% 
Aquatic species Watersheds 
35% 
63-74% 
Wildlands 
 
35% 
63-74% 
Average 
41% 
63-74% 
 
Wood Volume Estimation 
Steve Sesnie presented additional wood volume estimates with a discussion of accuracy for year 
2006 forest conditions by three diameter size classes as well as the methodology ForestERA is 
using to calculate wood supply following treatments specified in the working group’s scenario.  
Volume category 
Total (billion 
ft3) 
Vol.% 
Acres 
(million) 
Acres% 
Total volume 
4.56 
100 
2.4 
100  
Vol. not considered 
supply 
1.3 
28 
0.6 
26 
Vol. considered for 
supply  
3.3 
72 
1.8 
74 
Landscape feature 
  
 
% of total 
vol. 
  
% of total ac 
Community 
infrastructure 
0.64 
14 
0.35 
15 
MSO restricted habitat 0.50 
11 
0.24 
10 
Municipal watersheds 0.13 
3 
0.06 
3 
Aquatic species 
watersheds 
0.67 
15 
0.31 
13 
Wildlands 
1.31 
30 
0.79 
33 
Diameter categories 
  
  
  
  
Cf <5" 
0.12 
3 
  
  
Cf 5 to 16" 
2.45 
54 
  
  
Cf > 16" 
1.96 
43 
  
  
Sum  
4.53 
  
  
  
 
Steve reminded the group that the volume was a whole stem estimate, which includes tops, as 
was discussed several meetings prior. It does not include branches and needles, but we 
understand that these residual materials are of interest to some industries. Steve is exploring 
ways we could estimate whole tree volumes within the time limits of this project to include in the 
final report.  He then turned back to the methodology for estimating supply explaining that he 
had developed a regression equation between volume and basal area to relate the post-treatment 
basal areas to post-treatment volume.  ForestERA estimated how much basal area was removed 
in the under 16 inch diameter categories and mapped these spatially. Based on working group 
comments and advisement from John Bailey (Associate Professor, Oregon State Univ.) we 
retained 10% of the BA in <5 in. diameter class and 20% of the BA in 5-16 in. class.  Haydee 

November 29, 2007, Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Summary     
    Page 8 of 8 
presented maps depicting before and after basal areas in community and wildlands areas. She 
clarified that the post-treatment basal area layer had been developed by applying the frequency 
distributions developed by the working group to the pre-treatment basal area in order of low to 
high BA values.   She also displayed maps showing the surplus of basal area that could not be 
removed solely in the classes below 16 inch DBH. In other words, to achieve the post-treatment 
desired BA in some areas, it would require taking trees in the > 16 in. diameter class.  These 
areas are few except for the community protection zones where the post-treatment basal area 
range is lower.  Steve explained that in 54% of the area in community protection zones it was not 
possible to meet the post-treatment BA conditions in the < 16 in classes. The group asked 
ForestERA to indicate this in the report for each of the zones. The group asked that the post-
treatment basal area mode for wildlands be decreased to 70 ft2/ac and that a sharper decline in 
values be made.   
 
Wood Supply Final Report 
Haydee reminded the group of the timeline for finalizing the project report: ForestERA 
distributed the report to the working group and Region 3 by Dec. 17, 2007; comments must be 
provided to ForestERA by January 18, 2008; and a final report will be ready to distribute by late 
January. The report will include the following major sections: 
 
• 
Background 
• 
Wood Volume Methods and Results 
– Forest growth review and recommendations 
• 
Description of Treatment Scenario 
• 
Wood Supply Methods and Results 
– Project level considerations 
– Existing Harvesters, Mills, Manufacturers 
• 
 Other considerations 
– Old growth 
– Climate change and future disturbances 
– Effects of treatments on wildlife 
– CWPPs 
– Burn-only treatments 
  
Haydee reminded the group that she will be presenting wood supply analysis results at a meeting 
hosted by the Association for Fire Ecology in Tucson, AZ Jan. 28-31, 2008. 
 
Tom and Haydee thanked the group for their participation over the last half year including 
recognition of the efforts of the Steering Committee, Region 3 Forest Service, Rosemary 
Romero, participating experts, scribes, and those who arranged for facilities at the Pinetop 
AZGFD, Northland Pioneer College, and NAU. 

Appendix C. Estimated Pre-Treatment and Desired Post-Treatment Basal Area Frequency 
Distributions  
 
 
  
Note: Charts on first 2 pages include areas deemed not a source of wood supply to provide an overall summary 
for the analysis area.  These areas are not included in the distributions on all other pages of this appendix as 
post-treatment conditions were not assessed in these areas.
BASAL AREA (ft
2/acre) 
BASAL AREA (ft2/acre) 

 
Page 2 of 7 
 
 
 
 
 
BASAL AREA (ft
2/acre) 
BASAL AREA (ft2/acre) 

 
Page 3 of 7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BASAL AREA (ft
2/acre) 
BASAL AREA (ft
2/acre)
Full consensus scenario includes 
forest BA ≥ 127 ft2/acre 

 
Page 4 of 7 
 
 
 
BASAL AREA (ft
2/acre)
BASAL AREA (ft
2/acre) 
Full consensus scenario includes 
forest BA ≥ 106 ft2/acre 

 
Page 5 of 7 
 
 
 
 
BASAL AREA (ft2/acre) 
BASAL AREA (ft2/acre)
Full consensus scenario includes 
forest BA ≥ 106 ft2/acre 

 
Page 6 of 7 
 
 
 
 
BASAL AREA (ft2/acre) 
BASAL AREA (ft2/acre)
Full consensus scenario includes 
forest BA ≥ 104 ft2/acre 

 
Page 7 of 7 
 
 
 
 
 
BASAL AREA (ft2/acre) 
BASAL AREA (ft2/acre)
Full consensus scenario 
includes forest BA ≥ 47 ft2/acre 

Joe Crouse 
10-22-2007 
ERI 
 
 
        Summary of Presettlement Tree Densities in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine 
 
Site 
TPA 
TPA-Range 
BA/Acre 
BA/Acre-Range 
Reference 
Bar-M, Coconino N.F., AZ 
23 
  
  
  
1 
Camp Navajo, AZ 
26 
10-141 
51 
0-170 
2 
Carson N.F., NM 
37 
26-47 
  
  
3 
Coconino N.F., AZ 
27 
  
  
  
3 
Ft. Valley, Coconino N.F., AZ 
13 
  
  
  
4 
Grandview, GCNP, Kaibab N.F., AZ 
26 
0-116 
34 
0-96 
5 
Gus Pearson Natural Area, Coconino N.F., AZ 
23 
 
18 
3-37 
6 
Kaibab (Tusayan) N.F., AZ 
35 
  
  
  
3 
Mt. Trumbull, AZ 
15 
0-51 
38 
0-139 
7 
North Kaibab R.D., Kaibab N.F., AZ 
56 
  
  
  
8 
North Kaibab R.D., Kaibab N.F., AZ 
43 
40-45 
  
  
9 
Powell Plateau, GCNP, AZ 
62 
8-262 
78 
20-337 
5 
Zion N.P., UT 
14 
3-25 
  
  
10 
Swamp Ridge, GCNP, AZ 
53 
8-106 
93 
24-216 
5 
White Mountains, Apache-Sitgreaves N.F., AZ 
40 
35-45 
  
  
11 
Woolsey Plots, AZ and NM (average of 15 sites) 
47 
8-90 
58 
1-196 
12 
 
 
References: 
 
1. Covington, W.W. and M.M Moore. 1994. Southwestern ponderosa forest 
structure: Changes since Euro-American settlement. Journal of Forestry 92(1):39-
47. 
2. Fulé, P.Z., W.W. Covington and M.M. Moore. 1991. Determining reference 
conditions for ecosystem management of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. 
Ecological Applications 7(3):895-908. 
3. Woolsey, T.S., Jr. 1911. Western yellow pine in Arizona and New Mexico. 
USDA Bulletin 101, 64 p. 
4. White, A.S. 1985. Presettlement regeneration patterns in a southwestern 
ponderosa pine stand. Ecology 66:589-594. 
5. Fulé, P.Z., W.W. Covington, M.M. Moore, T.A. Heinlein, and A.E.M. Waltz. 
2002. Natural variability in forests of Grand Canyon, USA. Journal of 
Biogeography 29:31-47. 
6. Covington, W.W., P.Z. Fulé, M.M. Moore, S.C. Hart, T.E. Kolb, J.N. Mast, S.S. 
Sackett, and M.R. Wagner. 1997. Restoring ecosystem health in ponderosa pine 
forests of the Southwest. Journal of Forestry 95(4):23-29. 
7. Waltz, A.E.M., P.Z. Fulé, W.W. Covington, and M.M. Moore.  2003.  Diversity 
in ponderosa pine forest structure following ecological restoration treatments.  
Forest Science 49(6):885-900. 
Appendix D. Summary of Presettlement Tree Densities in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine

8. Covington, W.W., and M.M. Moore. 1992. Post-settlement changes in natural 
disturbance regimes: implications for restoration of old-growth ponderosa pine 
ecosystems. Pages 81-99 in Old-growth forests in the Southwest and Rocky 
Mountain Region. Proceedings of the symposium, 9-13 March Portal, Arizona. 
USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RM-213. 
9. Rasmussen, D.I. 1941. Biotic communities of Kaibab Plateau, Arizona. 
Ecological Monographs 11:229-276. 
10. Madany, M.H. and N.E. West. 1983. Livestock grazing – fire regime interactions 
within montane forests of Zion National Park, Utah. Ecology 64:661-667. 
11. Cooper, C.F. 1960. Changes in vegetation, structure, and growth of southwestern 
pine forest since white settlement. Ecological Monographs 30:129-164. 
12. Moore, M.M., D.W. Huffman, P.Z. Fulé, W.W. Covington, and J.E. Crouse. 2004 
Comparison of historical and contemporary forest structure and composition on 
permanent plots in southwestern ponderosa pine forests 50(2):162-176. 
 

Appendix E. Wood Supply Working Group Meeting Handout on Nov. 29, 2007 with Grand Canyon Trust Environmental 
Assessment Analysis 
 
Projects(25) 
Project 
Area 
Treatment 
Area 
Acreage 
PIPO 
Acreage 
burn only 
Why 
(PIPO) 
not 
thinned 
%Pipo 
not 
thinned 
%treatment 
area not 
thinned 
%project 
area 
burned 
%treatment 
area 
burned 
Eastside 
22,000 
19,977 
16,776 
12,356 
No reason given 
12,356 
74% 
62% 
56% 
62% 
MormonLk. 
2,831 
2,831 
2,831 
313 
MSO 
313 
11% 
11% 
11% 
11% 
Kachina 
10,417 
6,229 
8,418 
1,429 
MSO, steep slopes 
1,429 
17% 
23% 
14% 
23% 
MundsPark 
2,980 
2,980 
2,950 
1,988 
No reason given 
1,998 
68% 
67% 
67% 
67% 
Mountainaire 
16,603 
13,979 
12,958 
1,476 
Steep slope; DFC's 
1,476 
11% 
11% 
9% 
11% 
RockyPark 
13,878 
13,678 
11,282 
8,000 
DFC's 
8,000 
71% 
58% 
58% 
58% 
WoodyRidge 
31,000 
11,544 
26,014 
2,945 
No reason given 
2,945 
11% 
26% 
10% 
26% 
Smith/Schultz 
11,827 
11,700 
9,747 
700 
DFC's, steep slopes 
1,103 
11% 
9% 
6% 
6% 
UpperBeaver 
49,123 
44,694 
41,922 
30,414 
Broadcast &maintenance 
27,072 
65% 
61% 
62% 
68% 
Victorine 
19,915 
8,678 
10,661 
6,922 
839prev.treated;DFC's 
6,922 
65% 
80% 
35% 
80% 
Huffer 
1,146 
1,146 
1,146 
- 
NA 
- 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
ElkPark 
6,886 
6,886 
6,485 
1,700 
Steep slope; DFC's 
1,785 
28% 
26% 
25% 
25% 
EastClearCreek 
70,000 
16,228 
56,116 
- 
NA 
- 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Ft.Valley 
9,100 
6,960 
7,281 
1,800 
Steep slope; DFC's 
2,900 
40% 
42% 
20% 
26% 
BlueR.MSO 
16,282 
16,282 
14,817 
2,399 
No reason given 
8,124 
55% 
50% 
15% 
15% 
ChittyCreek 
14,000 
13,076 
4,972 
12,600 
Steep slope; DFC's 
11,676 
89% 
89% 
90% 
96% 
Greer 
24,092 
19,629 
18,636 
- 
NA 
- 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
EagerS 
21,779 
17,543 
7,946 
3,233 
Steep slope; DFC's 
3,233 
41% 
18% 
15% 
18% 
Nutrioso 
41,768 
36,166 
31,964 
7,590 
Steep slope; DFC's 
7,590 
24% 
21% 
18% 
21% 
LongJim 
1,375 
1,375 
1,074 
462 
Steep slope 
662 
62% 
48% 
34% 
34% 
Twin 
14,900 
14,900 
9,834 
14,518 
Fuel reduction 
14,518 
97% 
97% 
97% 
97% 
JacobRyan 
35,946 
33,103 
32,142 
9,149 
Fuel reduction 
9,149 
28% 
28% 
25% 
28% 
EastRim 
17,216 
9,630 
4,791 
1,440 
Fuel reduction 
4,307 
90% 
45% 
8% 
15% 
Dogtown 
8,209 
7,317 
6,689 
2,000 
Steep slope 
2,250 
34% 
31% 
24% 
27% 
City 
12,403 
12,359 
10,369 
3,263 
Fuel reduction 
3,780 
36% 
31% 
26% 
26% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41% 
37% 
29% 
34% 
Two more from 
ForestERA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nagel 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31% 
 
31% 
LosBurros 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18% 
 
16% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36% 
 
33% 

Appendix F.  Tree bole and crown biomass estimates in oven dry tons1 for the consensus and majority scenarios within each 
landscape management area.  
Landscape zone 
Tot. stem 
tons 
Tot. crown 
tons 
Wood supply 
(ft3) 
Total area 
Ave stem 
tons/ac 
Ave crown 
tons/ac 
Consensus scenario 
 
Community protection 
4,867,751 
1,451,606 
368,975,519  
314,017 
15.5
4.62 
MSO restricted habitat 
749,769 
223,829 
56,832,525  
113,076 
6.6
1.98 
Municipal watersheds 
494,040 
148,874 
37,448,212  
34,471 
14.3
4.32 
Aquatic species 
watersheds 
2,501,664 
745,835 
189,626,094  
187,157 
13.4
3.99 
Wildlands 
2,564,987 
763,374 
194,426,007  
338,486 
7.6
2.26 
Sum 
11,178,211 
3,333,518 
847,308,357  
 987,206 
11.3
3.38 
Majority scenario 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Community protection 
4,899,755 
1,461,340 
371,401,419
335,206 
14.6
 4.36 
MSO restricted habitat 
1,103,524 
329,499 
83,647,154
225,773 
4.9
 1.46 
Municipal watersheds 
622,778 
188,016 
47,206,561 
58,031 
10.7
3.24 
Aquatic species watersheds 
3,195,876 
953,205 
242,247,408 
323,531 
9.9
2.95 
Wildlands 
3,572,698 
1,063,201 
270,810,528 
718,927 
5.0
 1.48 
Sum 
13,394,632 
3,995,261 1,015,313,070
1,661,467 
8.1
2.40 
1A factor of 0.0758 was used to convert from oven dry tons to MCF 
 

Appendix G.  USDA Forest Service timber cruise data from White Mountain Stewardship Project tree thinning contracts on the 
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests.  Data were provided to us by Bob Taylor from the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests.  
Steward contract 
Acres 
Acres thin1 
Thin residue2 
ST & RW residue 3 
Total merch.4 
Ave merch./ac 
Residue/ac 
Ave merch./ac5 
Year 2004 
` 
 
green tons 
green tons 
green tons 
green tons/ac 
green tons/ac 
Ft3 
Alpine WUI 2 
426 
426 
1,077 
3,940 
11,466 
26.9 
11.8 
897.2 
Little 
635 
430 
662 
1,458 
3,735 
5.9 
3.3 
196.1 
Mineral A 
1,763 
1,370 
3,699 
18,002 
40,632 
23.0 
12.3 
768.2 
Ranch/Iris 
817 
817 
4828 
3,425 
5,142 
6.3 
10.1 
209.8 
Sponseller6 
1,244 
0 
0 
4,611 
9,924 
8.0 
3.7 
265.9 
Whipple6 
1,397 
0 
0 
9,807 
24,822 
17.8 
7.0 
592.3 
Little Springs 
2,039 
2,039 
30,822 
24,679 
60,453 
29.6 
27.2 
988.3 
Heber/Overgaard 
2,276 
2,276 
9,559 
5,872 
9,147 
4.0 
6.8 
134.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Year 2005 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mineral B1 
1,157 
1,022 
3,050 
10,208 
23,733 
20.5 
11.5 
683.8 
Alpine 3,7,9 
1,030 
1,030 
2,104 
9,545 
19,665 
19.1 
11.3 
636.4 
Woods Canyon6 
448 
0 
0 
2,033 
5,856 
13.1 
4.5 
435.7 
Woodland/Camps 
851 
629 
2,460 
4,747 
9,933 
11.7 
8.5 
389.1 
Greer A 
1,377 
1,377 
4,311 
9,010 
24,294 
17.6 
9.7 
588.1 
Brookbank 
1,258 
936 
6,867 
1,872 
4,119 
3.3 
6.9 
109.1 
Blue Ridge 2A 
925 
45 
320 
7,302 
15,864 
17.2 
8.2 
571.7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Year 2006 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Club 
915 
795 
4,000 
11,257 
27,615 
30.2 
16.7 
1006.0 
Forest Lakes WUI 
946 
946 
4,523 
6,199 
12,294 
13.0 
11.3 
433.2 
Dutch Joe A 
356 
150 
573 
3,578 
7,881 
22.1 
11.7 
737.9 
Greer B 
2,649 
2,649 
4,577 
16,741 
38,766 
14.6 
8.0 
487.8 
Alpine WUI 5,6 
900 
654 
3,468 
9,571 
14,211 
15.8 
14.5 
526.3 
Dutch Joe B 
810 
810 
2,414 
9,292 
21,294 
26.3 
14.5 
876.3 
Mineral B Hideaway 
226 
226 
675 
1,994 
4,635 
20.5 
11.8 
683.6 
Mineral B2 
766 
766 
2,286 
6,758 
15,711 
20.5 
11.8 
683.7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Year 2007 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Greens Peak6 
11 
0 
0 
146 
423 
38.5 
13.3 
1281.8 

1Acres of thinning for trees <5” dbh 
2Green tons of tree residues from thinning trees <5” dbh that included tree boles, tops, limbs, foliage and bark.  
3Green tons of saw timber (ST) and round wood (RW) tree residues from trees > 5” dbh that included tops, foliage and bark. 
4Green tons of harvested material from merchantable portions of the tree bole. 
5 Cubic foot volume for ST and RW without residues (trees >5” dbh). 
6Projects in which only trees > 5” dbh were harvested (i.e., no thinning residues from trees <5” dbh). 
 
 
Alpine WUI 4 & 8 
1,188 
1,188 
5,194 
10,404 
25,308 
21.3 
13.1 
710.1 
Blue Ridge 2B 
1,851 
255 
760 
13,971 
31,752 
17.2 
8.0 
571.8 
Greer D 
1,827 
1,299 
1,688 
12,905 
32,067 
17.6 
8.0 
585.1 
Eagar South 
1,095 
1,095 
2,933 
3,834 
15,705 
14.3 
6.2 
478.1 
Vincent A 
1,170 
1,170 
5,346 
12,239 
31,338 
26.8 
15.0 
892.8 
Vincent B 
813 
813 
3,716 
8,782 
22,527 
27.7 
15.4 
923.6 
Sum 
33,166 
25,213 
 
 
Ave 
17.2 
10.7 
611.5 

 
1
Pete Fulé 
November 14, 2007 
 
Fire Information for Wood Supply Analysis Group 
 
A) Based on your experience in the field and with the literature, what would you consider to be the low- 
and high-end weather conditions (e.g., temperature, RH, windspeed) that would be “typical” or suitable 
for implementing prescribed fire in ponderosa pine-dominated stands? 
 
A general guideline for southwestern ponderosa forests was presented in a widely used 
textbook by Pyne et al. (1996:574): 
 
• Relative humidity 20-40% 
• Temperature 40-60°F 
• 10-hour fuel moisture (sticks between ¼ and 1” diameter) 8-12% 
• Winds 5-15 mph in open areas, 2-7 mph in closed stands 
 
Pyne et al. also reproduced a graphic illustration of prescription guidelines that suggested 
relatively more moist conditions: 
 
 
 
Managers can alter these parameters based on their experience.  An example comes from a 
City of Flagstaff prescription which includes drier, warmer, and windier values for a very 
open, low-fuel thinned stand: 
 
• Relative humidity 15-30% 
• Temperature 60-75°F 
• Winds 10-25 mph at 20´ above ground (equivalent to 4-10 mph at mid-flame height) 
Appendix H. Fire Information for Wood Supply Analysis Group

 
2
 
Conversely, if burning an area with substantial surface fuel and fuel ladders to a dense 
canopy, managers might select cooler conditions or forego burning until after tree thinning 
and/or surface fuel treatment was completed. 
 
  
B) Under each of these sets of conditions (low and high), what is the range of basal area and tree 
density values, alone or in combination, which would permit the use of prescribed fire as a primary 
restoration and/or fuels reduction tool? We recognize that these values may be different in a 
restoration vs. fuels reduction context, so please provide ranges for each context, if necessary.  
  
This question does not have a simple answer, for several reasons.  First, nearly any 
southwestern ponderosa pine forest could be burned with prescribed fire.  As an example, 
even the extraordinarily dense forest at the Chimney Spring interval burning site (up to 4,300 
trees/acre) has been successfully burned many times.  Second, even a very open, low-hazard 
forest could not be burned if it were adjacent to an area with high hazards or high values at 
risk.  An example is that a manger might refrain from using fire even in low-density stands if 
they were located at the base of a steep canyon with many dead trees or with spotted owl nest 
sites, as is the case on north aspects at Walnut Canyon National Monument.  Light grassy 
fuels can also be “flashy” and present hazards of high rate of spread and long flames, thus 
even open pine savannas can be considered to be hazardous fuels under certain conditions.  
Third, prescribed fire behavior is regulated not only by weather, fuel moisture, fuel type, and 
topography, but also by the way in which the fire is ignited.  Perhaps the most common 
ignition method in the Southwest is strip headfires, but different fire behavior would be 
encountered under otherwise identical conditions if the fire were ignited by aerial ignition, 
backing fire, or ring burning. 
 
Taking all of the above factors into consideration, it is clear that there can be no single 
guideline for stand conditions “which would permit the use of prescribed fire as a primary 
restoration and/or fuels reduction tool.”  However, it is also logical to suggest that in many 
cases there may be a rational basis for drawing distinctions about the use of prescribed fire.  
The following is simply my opinion about how to differentiate these conditions based on 
several criteria: 
 
1. Does the subject stand or forest present a reasonably low risk of escaped fire or 
wildfire burning into the canopy due to dense canopy fuels or fuel ladders?  I would 
answer this question by looking at the attributes of stands that are vulnerable to 
crownfire.  In a statewide analysis of New Mexico forest data, Fiedler et al. (2002) 
classified forests with basal areas below 50-80 ft2/acre as low hazard and those up to 
90-110 ft2/acre as moderate hazard, as measured by calculating crowning index 
windspeed values.  Studies in northern Arizona indicated that stands averaging basal 
area of 81 ft2/acre and 71 pines/acre had low crownfire hazard (Fulé et al. 2001a).  
Even higher values of 97 ft2/acre and 98 pines/acre had acceptably low crownfire 
hazard—that is, fires were predicted to stay on the surface even under severe burning 
conditions (Fulé et al. 2001b, Appendix A).  This line of reasoning leads to a relatively 
low-hazard stand condition of approximately ≤ 100 ft2/acre and ≤ 100 pines/acre.  
Both attributes are important, because basal area is proportional to total biomass and 

 
3
canopy fuel loading, while tree density is associated with fuel ladders.  However, if it 
were to be necessary to choose only one attribute, the basal area is probably more 
important because it relates most closely to the ability of fire to spread through the tree 
canopies (canopy bulk density).   
2. Is the subject stand located in a reasonably safe landscape context?  Answering this 
question requires spatial data about the stand´s location and proximity to hazardous 
fuels and values at risk. 
3. Does management exclusively or primarily with prescribed fire meet all the goals and 
constraints associated with the desired future condition of the subject stand?  
Answering this question also requires additional information about goals, social 
values, and other data. 
 
The question referred to burning for “restoration and/or fuels reduction.”  There is no question 
that prescribed fire is an effective fuel reduction tool in ponderosa pine forests.  Repeated 
prescribed burning (intervals ≤ 10 yr) reduces surface fuels (Covington and Sackett 1992) and 
burning was shown to protect many stands during the most severe fire in southwestern 
history, the Rodeo-Chediski fire (Finney et al. 2005, Strom 2005).  However, there is less 
evidence indicating that prescribed burning can serve as an effective ecological restoration 
tool in forests that are substantially more dense than historical reference conditions, because 
established pine trees are resistant to mortality from light surface fires.  Repeated fires at 
Chimney Spring led to negligible thinning of excess young trees, although deliberate use of 
ring burning fire patterns created higher local mortality (Sackett et al. 1996).  Free-burning 
wildland fire use fires at Grand Canyon National Park in 2003 did exert a substantial thinning 
effect in ponderosa pine forests invaded by white fir (Fulé and Laughlin 2007).  Thus the 
evidence suggests that effective tree thinning would require relatively intense burning.  Such 
fire behavior would probably not be desirable near communities or other values at risk, 
though in other places it may be acceptable.  It is worth noting that the rough guidelines of ≤ 
100 ft2/acre and ≤ 100 pines/acre are still 40-250% higher than estimates of pre-European 
settlement forests (Appendix B).   
 
 
C) I would add that we would like to include the same two questions applied to “Fire Use Fire” 
conditions. That is, Rx fire conditions might be very conservative, whereas if one or more of the forests 
implement “fire use for resource benefit” programs on a larger landscape, the prescription might be 
less conservative, allowing for greater variability in acceptable conditions, and hence, more acres in 
fire management. 
 
The information presented in the preceding sections is also applicable to Wildland Fire Use 
(WFU), but some additional considerations may be relevant.  The premise of the question, 
that a greater variability in fire behavior might be acceptable in WFU, probably depends on 
the specific circumstances.  Most agencies with approved WFU plans to date have adopted a 
zoning approach, meaning that certain areas of the wildlands they administer are considered 
suitable for WFU and others are not.  The WFU zones tend to be in the backcountry, where 
there may be reduced concerns about smoke impacts, aesthetics, and risks of escaped fires 
damaging developments.  Therefore, to the extent that acceptable fire behavior may vary over 
a wider range, this variability may be more a reflection of the nature of the WFU zone than an 
inherent characteristic of WFU itself.   
 

 
4
Probably the best example of WFU (previously “prescribed natural fire”) in the Southwest 
comes from the Gila Wilderness and adjacent lands, where free-burning fires are permitted to 
proceed for extended periods and a wide range of fire behavior is considered acceptable.  The 
Gila Wilderness exemplifies the natural role of fire in modern times.  However, the Gila also 
has certain unusual qualities: the lands are mostly designated Wilderness; populations are low, 
rural, and socially accepting of fire; developed values at risk are minimal; few critical airsheds 
lie downwind; and the forest itself has had relatively fewer deleterious impacts since 
European settlement, with little roading or logging and a number of fires in the twentieth 
century (Rollins et al. 2001).  Elsewhere in the Southwest, only the North Kaibab Ranger 
District and North Rim of Grand Canyon National Park share most of these attributes.  Other 
forests tend to have substantial private inholdings and developments, nearby urban 
populations with low smoke tolerance, nearby critical airsheds, and substantial forest 
degradation over the past 100+ years resulting in dense stands of young trees, forest floor fuel 
buildup, and invasive exotic species.  Both the management goals and the methods selected to 
attain these goals are likely to differ between the Gila Wilderness and the Coconino National 
Forest, for example. 
 
 
References 
 
Covington, W.W. and Sackett, S.S., 1992. Soil mineral nitrogen changes following prescribed 
burning in ponderosa pine. For. Ecol. Manage., 54:175-191. 
Fiedler, Carl E., Keegan III, Charles E., Robertson, Stephen H., Morgan, Todd A., Woodall, 
Chris W., and Chmelik, John T.  2002.  A strategic assessment of fire hazard in New 
Mexico.  Final report submitted to the Joint Fire Sciences Program, February 11, 2002. 
Finney MA, McHugh CW, Grenfell IC (2005) Stand- and landscape level effects of 
prescribed burning on two Arizona wildfires. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 35, 
1714–1722. 
Fulé, P.Z., and D.C. Laughlin.  2007.  Wildland fire effects on forest structure over an 
altitudinal gradient, Grand Canyon National Park, USA.  Journal of Applied Ecology 
44:136-146. 
Fulé, P.Z., A.E.M. Waltz, W.W. Covington, and T.A. Heinlein.  2001a.  Measuring forest 
restoration effectiveness in hazardous fuels reduction.  Journal of Forestry 99(11):24-
29. 
Fulé, P.Z., C. McHugh, T.A. Heinlein, and W.W. Covington.  2001b.  Potential fire behavior 
is reduced following forest restoration treatments.  Pages 28-35 in Vance, G.K., C.B. 
Edminster , W.W. Covington, and J.A. Blake (compilers), Ponderosa Pine Ecosystems 
Restoration and Conservation: Steps Toward Stewardship.    Proc. RMRS-P-22.  
Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station. 
Pyne, S.J., P.L. Andrews, and R.D. Laven.  1996.  Introduction to Wildland Fire.  Second 
Edition.  John Wiley & Sons, Inc.  New York. 
Rollins, M.G., Swetnam, T.W. & Morgan, P.  (2001)  Evaluating a century of fire patterns in 
two Rocky Mountain wilderness areas using digital fire atlases. Canadian Journal of 
Forest Research, 31, 2107-2123. 

 
5
Sackett, S.S., Haase, S.M., Harrington, M.G.  1996.  Lessons learned from fire use for 
restoring southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems.  Pages 53-60 in USDA For. Serv. 
Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-278, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station, Fort Collins, CO. 
Strom, B.A.  2005.  Pre-fire treatment effects and post-fire forest dynamics on the Rodeo-
Chediski burn area, Arizona.  M.S. Thesis, School of Forestry, Northern Arizona 
University. 
 

 
6
Appendix A: Summary of Pre- and Post-Treatment Forest Structure  
at Ecological Restoration Experimental Sites 
 
 
Pete Fulé  
September 26, 2007 
 
 
Site 
Treatment 
Pretreatment 
Posttreatment 
Reference
Note 
 
 
Trees per 
Acre 
Basal Area
(ft2/acre) 
Trees per 
Acre 
Basal Area 
(ft2/acre) 
 
 
Mt Trumbull 
Full Restoration 
554.4 
148.5 
127.5 
77.1 
1 
1 
GPNA 
Full Restoration 
1253.8 
150.3 
61.5 
46.2 
2, 3, 4 
2 
Ft Valley 
Full Restoration 
386.5 
151.5 
56.8 
67.8 
5 
2 
Ft Valley 
Intermediate Thinning 
603.7 
167.7 
68.8 
77.7 
5 
2 
Ft Valley 
Reduced Thinning 
422.1 
148.5 
98.3 
97.2 
5 
2 
Tusayan 
Full Restoration 
541.3 
76.2 
62.2 
27.0 
6 
1 
Tusayan 
Minimal Thinning 
1187.8 
98.0 
276.7 
58.4 
6 
1 
Average  
Full Restoration 
684.0 
131.6 
77.0 
43.0 
 
 
Average  
All Treatments 
707.1 
134.4 
107.4 
57.9 
 
 
 
References: 
 
1. Waltz, A.E.M., P.Z. Fulé, W.W. Covington, and M.M. Moore.  2003.  Diversity in 
ponderosa pine forest structure following ecological restoration treatments.  Forest 
Science 49(6):885-900. 
2. Covington, W.W., P.Z. Fulé, M.M. Moore, S.C. Hart, T.E. Kolb, J.N. Mast, S.S. Sackett, 
and M.R. Wagner.  1997.  Restoration of ecosystem health in southwestern ponderosa 
pine forests.  Journal of Forestry 95(4):23-29. 
3. Covington, W.W., P.Z. Fulé, S.C. Hart, and R.P. Weaver.  2001.  Modeling ecological 
restoration effects on ponderosa pine forest structure.  Restoration Ecology 9(4):421-431. 
4. Mast, J.N., P.Z. Fulé, M.M. Moore, W.W. Covington, and A. Waltz.  1999.  Restoration 
of presettlement age structure of an Arizona ponderosa pine forest.  Ecological 
Applications 9(1):228-239. 
5. Fulé, P.Z., C. McHugh, T.A. Heinlein, and W.W. Covington.  2001.  Potential fire 
behavior is reduced following forest restoration treatments.  Pages 28-35 in Vance, G.K., 
C.B. Edminster , W.W. Covington, and J.A. Blake (compilers), Ponderosa Pine 
Ecosystems Restoration and Conservation: Steps Toward Stewardship.    Proc. RMRS-P-
22.  Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station. 
6. Fulé, P.Z., W.W. Covington, H.B. Smith, J.D. Springer, T.A. Heinlein, K.D. Huisinga, 
and M.M. Moore.  2002.  Comparing ecological restoration alternatives: Grand Canyon, 
Arizona.  Forest Ecology and Management 170:19-41. 
 
Notes: 
 
1. Ponderosa dominated, some Gambel oak. 
2. Pure ponderosa pine. 
This is part of the Wood Supply Analysis appendix H.

 
7
Appendix B: Summary of Presettlement Tree Densities in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine 
 
 
Joe Crouse 
10-17-2007 
       
 
 
References: 
 
1. Covington, W.W. and M.M Moore. 1994. Southwestern ponderosa forest structure: 
Changes since Euro-American settlement. Journal of Forestry 92(1):39-47. 
2. Fulé, P.Z., W.W. Covington and M.M. Moore. 1991. Determining reference 
conditions for ecosystem management of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. 
Ecological Applications 7(3):895-908. 
3. Woolsey, T.S., Jr. 1911. Western yellow pine in Arizona and New Mexico. USDA 
Bulletin 101, 64 p. 
4. White, A.S. 1985. Presettlement regeneration patterns in a southwestern ponderosa 
pine stand. Ecology 66:589-594. 
5. Fulé, P.Z., W.W. Covington, M.M. Moore, T.A. Heinlein, and A.E.M. Waltz. 2002. 
Natural variability in forests of Grand Canyon, USA. Journal of Biogeography 29:31-
47. 
6. Covington, W.W., P.Z. Fulé, M.M. Moore, S.C. Hart, T.E. Kolb, J.N. Mast, S.S. 
Sackett, and M.R. Wagner. 1997. Restoring ecosystem health in ponderosa pine 
forests of the Southwest. Journal of Forestry 95(4):23-29. 
7. Waltz, A.E.M., P.Z. Fulé, W.W. Covington, and M.M. Moore.  2003.  Diversity in 
ponderosa pine forest structure following ecological restoration treatments.  Forest 
Science 49(6):885-900. 
8. Covington, W.W., and M.M. Moore. 1992. Post-settlement changes in natural 
disturbance regimes: implications for restoration of old-growth ponderosa pine 
Site 
Trees per Acre 
Reference 
Bar-M, Coconino N.F., AZ 
23 
1 
Camp Navajo, AZ 
26 
2 
Carson N.F., NM 
26-47 
3 
Coconino N.F., AZ 
27 
3 
Ft. Valley, Coconino N.F., AZ 
13 
4 
Grandview, GCNP, Kaibab N.F., AZ 
26 
5 
Gus Pearson Natural Area, Coconino N.F., AZ 
23 
6 
Kaibab (Tusayan) N.F., AZ 
35 
3 
Mt. Trumbull, AZ 
14 
7 
North Kaibab R.D., Kaibab N.F., AZ 
56 
8 
North Kaibab R.D., Kaibab N.F., AZ 
40-45 
9 
Powell Plateau, GCNP, AZ 
62 
5 
 Zion N.P., UT 
3-25 
10 
Swamp Ridge, GCNP, AZ 
53 
5 
White Mountains, Apache-Sitgreaves N.F., AZ 
35-45 
11 
Woolsey Plots, AZ and NM (average of 15 sites) 
47 
12 
This is part of the Wood Supply Analysis H.

 
8
ecosystems. Pages 81-99 in Old-growth forests in the Southwest and Rocky Mountain 
Region. Proceedings of the symposium, 9-13 March Portal, Arizona. USDA Forest 
Service General Technical Report RM-213. 
9. Rasmussen, D.I. 1941. Biotic communities of Kaibab Plateau, Arizona. Ecological 
Monographs 11:229-276. 
10. Madany, M.H. and N.E. West. 1983. Livestock grazing – fire regime interactions 
within montane forests of Zion National Park, Utah. Ecology 64:661-667. 
11. Cooper, C.F. 1960. Changes in vegetation, structure, and growth of southwestern pine 
forest since white settlement. Ecological Monographs 30:129-164. 
12. Moore, M.M., D.W. Huffman, P.Z. Fulé, W.W. Covington, and J.E. Crouse. 2004 
Comparison of historical and contemporary forest structure and composition on 
permanent plots in southwestern ponderosa pine forests 50(2):162-176. 
 
 

Appendix I. Potential Follow-on Studies to Wood Supply Analysis 
 
 
In the event that follow-up projects emerge as a result of this study, Working Group 
members and ForestERA recommend the following: 
 
1. Conduct fire spread model analyses (e.g., strategically placed treatments), among 
other collaborative prioritization analyses, to inform the appropriate spatial and 
temporal priorities for fuel reduction treatments.  
2. Include forest growth in supply estimates based on collaboratively derived 
priorities. 
3. Use fire models to identify thresholds for prescribed burning and wildland fire use 
as an initial treatment. 
4. Evaluate patch quality and habitat connectivity for a suite of wildlife species in a 
post-treatment scenario.  Conduct connectivity analyses for those species to 
evaluate the potential for distributional shifts of behavioral movements in 
response to patch treatments. 
5. Refine this regional-scale analysis down to a finer scale. 
6. Analyze additional Environmental Assessments to more precisely evaluate the 
reasons why and where certain treatments (e.g., mechanical thinning, fire-only) 
are planned. 
7. Conduct more detailed estimates of biomass (in tons) as was done in the wood 
supply analysis for wood by-product volumes. 
8. Improve Forest Service roads layer. 
 
