COMPARING ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION AND NORTHERN GOSHAWK 
MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES TREATMENTS IN A SOUTHWESTERN 
PONDEROSA PINE FOREST 
By Matthew C. Tuten 
A Thesis 
Submitted in Partial Fulfillment 
of the Requirements for the Degree of 
Master of Science 
in Applied Geographic Information Systems 
Northern Arizona University 
December 2008 
Appm(L 
Peter Z. Fule, Ph.D., Co-Chair 
-Chair 

ABSTRACT 
COMPARING ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION AND NORTHERN GOSHAWK 
MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES TREATMENTS IN A SOUTHWESTERN 
PONDEROSA PINE FOREST 
Matthew C. Tuten 
We compared forest structure patterns resulting from application of 
revised Northern Goshawk Management Guidelines (GMG) and Ecological 
Restoration Guidelines (ERG)-based silvicultural thinning approaches in 
ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa C. Lawson var. scopulorum Engelm.) 
forests on replicated sites on the Kaibab Plateau in Northern Arizona. These 
management approaches have been proposed for wide application across 
tens of thousands of hectares of southwestern National Forests within 
Northern Goshawk (Accipiter gentilis) foraging areas. Both sets of guidelines 
use patterns and densities of presettlement forest evidences in the form of old 
forest remnants (pre Euro-American settlement era trees, stumps and snags) 
to guide their tree marking methodologies. Tree densities resulting from 
application of these treatment approaches and estimated presettlement 
densities were not significantly different. GMG-based treatments retained a 
larger proportion of trees in middle to large size classes, resulting in 
statistically significantly higher canopy cover and basal area. Tree spatial 
point patterns and tree patches (e.g., groups of trees with interlocking crowns) 
were analyzed. GMG-based treatments resulted in more consistent tree 
aggregation at fine-scales «15 meters), than ERG-based treatments, a 
pattern similar to presettlement evidence patterns. GMG-based treatments 
ii 

resulted in significantly fewer isolated individual trees, a higher mean density 
of trees within patches and more high density tree patches than ERG-based 
treatment results. No difference was observed in average diameter range of 
trees within groups. We conclude that with minimal modification, initial 
thinning approaches similar to those described in this study are highly 
compatible, both with each other and presettlement conditions, especially 
within forest landscapes where reintroduction of naturally ignited fires is a 
management goal. Despite this similarity, ERG and GMG-based stand 
management approaches will differ over the long term. The goal of ERG-
based management is forests that can be regulated by natural processes, 
most notably surface fires similar to those common in the Southwest. The 
GMG approach, while allowing the use of fire, will require continual forest 
structure regulation and will inevitably result in future removal of large, old 
trees. 
iii 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I would first like to thank District Ranger Tim Short and all staff of the 
North Kaibab Ranger District of the Kaibab National Forest for supporting 
these research efforts over the last three years. Without this support this 
project would not be possible. I would also like to thank Richard Reynolds, 
Allison Cofer and crew, and Dennis Lund, Charlie Denton, Dave Brewer and 
Michael Stoddard for generously donating days of time and effort to mark 
trees for retention with each treatment prescription. Integral to this study was 
the support of several enthusiastic crews of ERI staff members and student 
research assistants who worked to document over 7500 tree locations and 
attributes assessed in this study. I also thank Andrew Sanchez Meador for 
his generous spatial statistical advice and technical support. Finally, I would 
like to thank my committee members including co-advisors Dr. Pete Fule and 
Dr. Christina Kennedy, and Dr. Margaret Moore, who helped to design this 
study and also reviewed the seemingly endless number of thesis drafts that 
I've sent to them for review over the course of my last semester as a graduate 
student. 
iv 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
ABSTRACT ..................................................................................................... II 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS .............................................................................. IV 
TABLE OF CONTENTS .................................................................................. V 
LIST OF TABLES ............................................................................................ VI 
LIST OF FIGURES ........................................................................................ VII 
PREFACE ..................................................................................................... VIII 
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION ....................................................................... 1 
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REViEW ............................................................. 5 
THE DEVELOPMENT OF Two IMPORTANT FOREST THINNING ApPROACHES ......... 5 
THE DEVELOPMENT OF PRESETTLEMENT FOREST STRUCTURE PA TTERNS IN 
PONDEROSA PINE FORESTS ......................................................................... 17 
CHAPTER 3. COMPARING ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION AND 
NORTHERN GOSHAWK MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES TREATMENTS 
IN A SOUTHWESTERN PONDEROSA PINE FOREST ............................... 29 
ABSTRACT ................................................................................................... 29 
INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................... '" 31 
METHODS .................................................................................................... 36 
RESULTS ...................................................................................................... 42 
DISCUSSION ................................................................................................ 46 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: ................................................................................. 59 
CHAPTER 4. MANAGEMENT IMPLICATIONS ............................................ 69 
CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSION ........................................................................ 81 
LITERATURE CITED .................................................................................... 84 
APPENDIX: ADDITIONAL FIGURES ............................................................ 89 
STEM AND CANOPY COVER MAPS ................. .. ............................................... 91 
RIPLEY'S K PLOTS ......................................................................................... 94 
INDIVIDUAL PLOT DIAMETER DISTRIBUTIONS ................................................. . 96 
v 

LIST OF TABLES 
TABLE 3.1 . SUB-STAND FOREST PATTERN DEFINITIONS . .................... 60 
TABLE 3.2. DENSITY, BASAL AREA, AND CANOPY COVER ESTIMATES . 
...................................................................................................................... 61 
TABLE 3.3. TREE DENSITIES RESULTING FROM EACH TREATMENT 
WITHIN SIX DIAMETER CLASSES .............................................................. 62 
TABLE 3.4. SPATIAL DISTRIBUTION [L(T)-T] OF PRESETTLEMENT 
FOREST REMNANTS AND RESIDUAL TREES FOLLOWING SIMULATION 
OF ERG AND GMG-BASED THINNING TREATMENTS ............................. 63 
TABLE 3.5. OBSERVED POST-TREATMENT TREE GROUP 
CHARACTERISTICS . ................................................................................... 64 
vi 

LIST OF FIGURES 
FIGURE 3.1 . A HYPOTHETICAL REPRESENTATION.OF VEGETATION 
STRUCTURAL STAGE GROUP AREA TARGETS AND RESERVE TREES 
FOR AN APPROXIMATELY 1.2 HECTARE AREA WITHIN A NORTHERN 
GOSHAWK FORAGING AREA. .................................................................... 66 
FIGURE 3.2. DISCERNING SUB-STAND GROUPS AND SPATIAL POINT 
PATIERNS ................................................................................................... 67 
FIGURE 3.3. CUMULATIVE RESIDUAL TREE DIAMETER DISTRIBUTION 
AND APPROXIMATE VEGETATION STRUCTURAL STAGE (VSS) 
DIAMETER CLASS BREAKS FOR ALL SIX MEASURED PLOTS OF EACH 
TREATMENT APPROACH ........................................................................... 68 
FIGURE 4.1. INDIVIDUAL TREE-SCALE PRESETTLEMENT EVIDENCE 
REPLACEMENT VERSUS TREE PATCH-SCALE PRESETTLEMENT 
EVIDENCE REPLACEMENT. ....................................................................... 79 
FIGURE 4.2. PRESETILEMENT FOREST EVIDENCE PATIERNS (CUT-
STUMPS AND PRESETILEMENT-ERA LIVING TREES) RELATIVE TO 
CONTEMPORARY FOREST STRUCTURE ................................................. 80 
APPENDIX 1. STEM AND CANOPY COVER MAPS .................................... 91 
APPENDIX 2. RIPLEY'S K PLOTS ............................................................... 94 
APPENDIX 3 INDIVIDUAL PLOT DIAMETER DISTRIBUTIONS .................. 96 
vii 

PREFACE 
Some redundancy exists in the information presented in the five chapters 
comprising this thesis. The structure of this document follows a format 
intended to speed the preparation of the manuscript, presented in chapter 3, 
for submission to a scientific journal. Chapter 4, Management Implications, 
contains much of the same information in the discussion presented in Chapter 
3, but contains more in-depth practical forest management topics than 
presented in the manuscript chapter. The conclusions of the thesis are 
contained in abbreviated form within Chapter 3 and are also repeated again in 
a separate conclusion chapter (Chapter 5). One literature cited section is 
presented at the end of the thesis, including references from throughout the 
entire thesis. 
viii 

Background 
CHAPTER 1 
Introduction 
Forest management approaches described in Management 
recommendations for the Northern Goshawk in the Southwestern United 
States, also known as the northern goshawk management guidelines 
(GMGs), mandate detailed forest spatial structure requirements and 
management activities to create habitat conditions for prey species that 
comprise the food web for the northern goshawk (Reynolds et al. 1992; 
2006). The GMGs were developed in response to a growing body of research 
documenting population declines of this top avian predator in southwestern 
forests (Kennedy 2003). The stringent nature of the silvicultural requirements 
set forth in the GMGs and varying interpretations regarding their intent has 
made practical implementation of these guidelines in southwestern National 
Forests difficult and controversial (Kennedy 2003). This has. led to 
abandonment of planned ecological restoration-based forest treatments within 
goshawk territories, incorrect application of GMGs at several project sites and 
overall uncertainty regarding the ecological basis for GMG-based forest 
treatments (Reynolds et al. 2006). 
A regional review of the goshawk guidelines at several Forest Service 
(USFS) workshops in the fall of 2006 was initiated in order to clear up 
ambiguity and misunderstanding regarding application of the GMGs. At these 
1 

workshops, ecological restoration guidelines (ERGs) were proposed by USFS 
southwestern region personnel as a compatible alternative to strict 
implementation of the GMGs (Reynolds et al. 2006). ERGs use the 
composition, density and location of presettlement forest remnants (stumps, 
snags, old trees and stump holes pre-dating settlement of the region) as a 
template for the spatial pattern of restored forests. The desired end result of 
ERG-based treatments at a particular site is a resilient, self-sustaining forest 
where ecosystem processes, structural patterns and species composition are 
similar to those present at the site prior to the influence of livestock grazing, 
fire suppression and logging (Moore et al. 1999; Society for Ecological 
Restoration 2004). 
Goshawk Management Guidelines and Ecological Restoration -based 
forest treatment approaches have much in common when applied to 
southwestern ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa C. Lawson var. 
scopulorum Engelm.) forest types. Both treatment approaches involve 
retention of trees with old age characteristics (Moore 1999; Reynolds et al. 
2006; Reynolds et al. 2007). Additionally, both attempt to emulate relatively 
open, park-like conditions known to exist across southwestern forests prior to 
Euro American settlement (Cooper 1960; Reynolds et al. 1992; Moore 1999). 
It is reasonable to assume that both approaches, when applied to typical 
contemporary ponderosa pine forests (typically high density, high canopy 
cover forests comprised of one to two cohorts), will result in reduced tree 
2 

densities, reduced canopy cover, creation of forest openings, a reduction in 
crown fire hazard and overall un-even aged forest conditions. 
It is possible that ecologically significant differences exist between 
forests treated with each technique. These potential differences may not only 
affect northern goshawk habitat, but also understory plant production, small 
mammal and bird habitat suitability, fire behavior and other ecological values 
and processes (Reynolds et at. 1992; Griffis et al. 2001; Fule et. al 2001). 
Thesis purpose and structure 
This study was designed to quantify and compare impacts of these 
forest thinning approaches upon tree spatial structure. Therefore, this study 
required a unique approach for the assessment of treatment outcomes. First, 
this study is based upon stem-mapped tree and presettlement tree evidence 
location and attribute data collected within several mapped areas randomly 
located across a ponderosa pine domiAated forest. This spatially explicit and 
relatively time consuming methodology was required because forest spatial 
structure characteristics are at the core of each treatment approach. An 
assessment of forest spatial structure conditions would be difficult, if not 
impossible, to quantify without spatially explicit mapping of tree locations. 
Second, thinning treatment outcomes were simulated from tree markings 
rather than measured in residual forest stands following implementation of 
each treatment. 
3 
d

This strategy, while not capable of providing results of practical 
treatment implementation, had two main benefits. It allowed both treatment 
guidelines to be marked and assessed within the same six mapped areas, 
thereby eliminating error associated with comparing treatment outcomes in 
separate forest stands having different initial forest structure. This was 
accomplished by applying prescriptions with removable tree marks (colored 
flagging), permitting application of a separate treatment prescription mark 
after trees marked with the initial prescription flagging were mapped and 
flagging was removed. A second benefit of this simulation approach was time 
and money savings associated with forgoing the expensive and often delay-
prone process of implementing forest treatments on public forest lands. 
The approach used in this study addressed the following study objectives: 
1) Assess local presettlement forest densities and spatial patterns as 
evidenced by forest remnants (old living trees, snags, stumps, dead 
and downed trees). 
2) Assess ERG and GMG-based treatments efficacy in restoring site-
specific presettlement forest densities and spatial patterns. 
3) Compare forest structure patterns of ERG and GMG-
based treatments at sub-plot to plot-scales. 
4 

CHAPTER 2 
Literature Review 
The Development of Two Important Forest Thinning Approaches 
The Ecological and Social Basis for Forest Thinning Treatments 
Goshawk management guidelines and ecological restoration 
guidelines are forest management approaches that have been developed in 
response to changes in southwestern ponderosa pine forests since Euro-
American settlement of the region in the late 1800s. Frequent surface fires, 
ignited by lightning or indigenous people, were a major regulator of 
ponderosa pine forest tree density, structural patterns and species 
composition prior to this time (Cooper 1960; White 1985; Covington and 
Moore 1994; Allen et al. 2002). A number of factors, including intense 
livestock grazing of herbaceous understory-fuels, logging, railroad and road 
construction, and a policy of active fire suppression, rapidly changed the way 
fire interacted with forest structure after settlement (Cooper 1960; Dieterich 
1980; Moore 1999; Allen et al. 2002). Associated results have been 
landscape-scale increases in tree biomass, changes in forest structural 
patterns, decreases in forest herbaceous understory productivity, as well as 
decreases in suitable habitat for several native vertebrate and invertebrate 
species (Reynolds et a1. 1992; Covington and Moore 1994; Waltz 2003; 
Sanchez Meador 2006). 
5 

These structural changes are also, in large part, responsible for an 
ecosystem-wide transition from a low severity, frequent, surface fire regime to 
a less frequent, high severity, crown fire regime over the last century (Fule et 
al. 1997; Swetnam et al. 1999). Such fires are often destructive to both 
human life and property and to forest ecosystems. These struct~ral changes 
have also been linked to northern goshawk (Accipiter gentilis) population and 
prey base declines (Reynolds et al. 1992). In recent years, political pressure 
to reverse goshawk population declines and rising costs associated with the 
aftermath of destructive wildfires has drawn regional and national attention·to 
ponderosa pine forest restoration efforts (Moir and Dieterich 1999). For these 
reasons, forest restoration approaches such as ecological restoration 
guidelines (ERG) and northern goshawk management guidelines (GMG) have 
been proposed for millions of hectares of public lands throughout the western 
United States (Allen et al. 2002). 
Development and Purpose of Ecological Restoration Treatments 
Ecological restoration has its roots in the field of restoration ecology. 
This branch of applied science developed through contributions from various 
fields ranging from conservation biology, geography, wetland management 
and disturbed land rehabilitation (Ehrenfeld 2000). As a result, ecological 
restoration project objectives and desired future conditions are not limited to a 
particular ecosystem type and are often highly variable. They may range from 
conservation or promotion of localized species populations or communities, 
6 

rehabilitation of polluted or damaged sites, the recovery of ecosystem 
structure, to species composition or function across entire landscapes 
(Ehrenfeld 2000; Society for Ecological Restoration 2004). 
In general, all ERG-based treatments are intended to "initiate or 
accelerate the recovery of an ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity 
and sustainability (Society for Ecological Restoration 2004)." To accomplish 
this goal, it is essential to have an understanding of an ecosystem's reference 
conditions, or conditions known to be within the range of healthy ecosystem 
variability, in order to guide ecosystems back to healthy conditions where 
ecosystem structure and processes can be maintained indefinitely (Moore et 
al. 1999; Society for Ecological Restoration 2004). For this reason, 
restorationists often must rely on presettlement ecosystem structure 
reconstructions, long-term ecological data and a variety of other anecdotal 
information sources to develop a coherent picture of ecosystem reference 
conditions (Covington and Moore 1994; Mcore et al. 1999; Allen et al. 2002; 
Moore et al. 2004). 
For decades, Southwestern restorationists have known that ponderosa 
pine forest structure within this lightning, drought and wind-prone region were 
shaped in large part by frequent surface fires (Weaver 1943; Weaver 1951 ; 
Cooper 1960). A well-established body of research has shown that prior to 
Euro-American settlement of the region (i.e, "presettlement" time periods) 
these landscapes burned frequently, with a fire-return intervals ranging from 
2-20 years (Oliver and Larson 1996). 
7 

Early restoration attempts using fire alone were greeted with mixed 
success. An experiment in Northern Arizona in the 1970s had some beneficial 
effects--reducing tree densities, forest floor litter depths and recycling 
nutrients--but reintroduction of fire into dense, flammable forests was not only 
somewhat dangerous, but also resulted in mortality of large old trees, survival 
of many small diameter trees and little change in overall forest structure 
(Sackett et at. 1995). It was soon apparent that fire alone was not always 
capable of restoring ponderosa pine forests to presettlement forest structure 
conditions. In order to allow low severity surface fires to be reintroduced to 
contemporary ponderosa pine forests, some form of thinning was needed to 
create forest structure conditions similar to those present in presettlement 
forests (Sackett et at. 1995). 
Due to the extremely dry climate of the Southwest and resulting slow 
decay rates, evidence of forest structure patterns existing prior to Euro-
American settlement around 1879 (Fule et at. 1997) can still be found in the 
form of stumps, snags, downed woody debris and old living trees. The 
location, density, and species composition of these forest remnants provide a 
source of evidence of presettlement forest structure and a guide for 
restoration thinning activities (Fule et at. 1997; Moore et a11999; Heinlein et 
at. 2002; Taylor 2002). 
Ecological restoration practitioners have used these presettlement 
forest evidences to guide forest thinning projects in several areas. In the 
Sierra Nevada Mountains of California, practitioners have used stumps cut in 
8 

the late 19th century to identify changes in forest density, species composition 
and spatial pattern over the last c~ntury (Taylor 2002). Several ecological 
restoration experiments making use of presettlement forest structures have 
been initiated in ponderosa pine forests of Northern Arizona; these include 
experiments at the Gus Pearson Natural Area, Apache-Sitgreaves National 
Forest, and Uinkaret Mountains in Northern Arizona (Covington et aJ. 1997; 
Fule et aJ. 1997; Waltz et. al 2003). 
Each of these studies features an Ecological Restoration Guidelines 
(ERG)-based thinning prescription developed from the composition, density 
and location of local presettlement forest remnants (stumps, snags, old trees, 
stump holes) to varying degrees in determining the desired character of 
restored forests. Using this approach, all trees established prior to Euro-
American settlement, typically trees having old age characteristics (Le., yellow 
bark, large branches, and/or large diameters) are retained. Non-living 
presettlement forest remnants (stumps, snags, stump holes) are replaced by 
one to several healthy trees that have established since Euro-American 
settlement within a fixed search radius (approximately 18 meters) surrounding 
each forest remnant (Covington et aJ. 1999). Replacement rates range from a 
ratio of 1.5 to 3 replacement trees to every presettlement evidence 
(Covington et aJ. 1999). The desired result of ERG-based treatments is forest 
structure patterns capable of developing into conditions comparable to those 
present at the site prior to the influence of industrial grazing, fire suppression 
and logging practices (Moore et aJ. 1999; Heinlein et aJ. 2002). 
9 

Choice of which specific trees are retained using ERGs depends upon 
the relative location of replacement trees to presettlement evidences and the 
choice of the tree marker and other site specific treatment objectives rather 
than predetermined diameter distribution targets. In general, a variable, but 
unregulated diameter distribution of healthy retained trees is sought 
(Covington et al. 1999). Specific spatial patterns created are determined by 
site-specific presettlement forest remnant patterns. Typically no forested 
patch sizes (i.e., groups of trees with interlocking crowns) are indicated 
(Covington et al. 1999). 
ERG-based thinning treatments are designed to be completed in a 
single management entry. Ecological restoration-based management 
approaches rely on ecosystem processes such as fire to maintain forest stand 
structure over time (Society for Ecological Restoration 2004). Application of 
some form of prescribed or naturally ignited wildland fire is a cornerstone 
component of all ecological restoration guidelines in southwestern ponderosa 
pine forests. Restorationists advocate use of prescribed fire or naturally 
ignited wildfires to manage future forest structure development within restored 
areas (Moore et. al 1999). 
Restoration of forest structural patterns using mechanical treatments is 
often the most conspicuous aspect of the ecological restoration process, and 
is often mistakenly confused as the entire ecological restoration process. 
Local ecological disturbance processes, such as fire, were primarily 
responsible for regulation and maintenance of presettlement forest structure 
10 

patterns from microscopic to landscape spatial scales in southwestern 
forests. The restoration of dynamic, natural processes (e.g surface fires), not 
the creation of static forest structural patterns, is what allows forest 
management efforts to be considered ecological restoration (Falk 2006). 
Development and Purpose of the Goshawk Management Guidelines 
Ostensibly, goshawk management guidelines (GMG) were developed 
for use in southwestern National Forests to address twentieth century 
changes in forest structural patterns as they relate to northern goshawk 
habitat and prey-base availability. While this is true, GMG-based forest 
management represents a transition from a resource production-based 
strategy, to a much more complex, ecosystem-based strategy. 
For a large part of the twentieth century, USFS land management 
policy was oriented toward resource production. This was officially outlined in 
policy contained within the Multiple Use Sustained Yield (MUSY) Act of 1960. 
The act declared that National Forests, should maintain, "a high-level regular 
output of the renewable resources of the national forest without impairment of 
the land's productivity (www.wildlifelaw.unm.edu/fedbook/multiu-
.htm!)." The MUSY act allowed land management oriented toward timber 
production to proceed within southwestern National Forests, often at the 
expense of broader ecosystem sustainability. 
As early as the 1970s, wildlife biologists from the Arizona Department 
Game and Fish began to acknowledge that contemporary forest management 
11 

activities might be at odds with northern goshawk survival and reproduction 
(Peck 2000). During the mid 1970s to the mid 1980s, goshawk nest 
monitoring was implemented by southwestern National Forests. This 
monitoring resulted in placing the northern goshawk on USFS Region 3 
Sensitive Species List and adding goshawk management recommendations 
to several southwestern National Forest Plans (Peck 2000; Kennedy 2003). 
Early goshawk management recommendations were primarily intended to 
limit forest harvesting near goshawk nesting areas (Reynolds et al. 2006). 
In 1990, a seminal paper by Cole Crocker-Bedford published in the 
Wildlife Society Bulletin described effects of logging on goshawk survival and 
reproduction on the North Kaibab National Forest. Bedford concluded that 
both goshawk nest occupancy and reproduction success were negatively 
influenced by logging practices during the 1970s and 1980s (Bedford 1990; 
Reynolds et al. 2007). 
Public outcry and a flurry of legal aGJivities and agency policy 
development occurred following the 1990 publishing of the Crocker-Bedford 
paper (Peck 2000). Legal activities included several failed attempts to list 
goshawks as a federally endangered species, and an injunction halting forest 
cutting in all known goshawk territories in Arizona and New Mexico National 
Forests until forest plans were amended to address the goshawk issue (Peck 
2000; Kennedy 2003). These activities prompted southwestern National 
Forests to form the Goshawk Scientific Committee (GSC) "to develop forest 
management recommendations based on the best science to protect 
12 

goshawk populations" (Kennedy 2003; Reynolds et al. 2007). In 1992, the 
recommendations of the committee were released in the form of the research 
report RM-217: Management Recommendations for the Northern Goshawk in 
the Southwestern United States (Reynolds et al. 1992). The 
recommendations set forth in this document became part of an Environmental 
Impact Statement that eventually was included within Southwestern Region 
National Forest plans in a final record of decision issued in 1996 (USDA 
1996). 
Efforts to develop a broad northern goshawk conservation strategy 
were bolstered by a 1992 executive order directing the USFS to adopt 
ecosystem management policy (USFS 1992). This paradigm shifting policy 
directive quickly changed official national forest management priority from one 
based on short-term resource production, to one promoting long term 
ecological sustainability. While not entirely at odds with timber resource 
production, ecosystem management policy inherently restricts some timber 
management activities that are in conflict with sustain ability of the broader 
ecosystem (Grumbine 1994). The GMGs could be considered one of the first 
coarse-scale Southwestern Region National Forest policies created to 
promote ecosystem management prinCiples (Grumbine 1994; Peck 2003). 
The fundamental premise of the GMGs is that goshawk and goshawk 
prey populations are limited by available food and suitable habitat (Reynolds 
et al. 1992). The goal of the GMGs is to create a range of forest habitats 
suitable for both goshawk nesting, hunting and diverse populations of 
13 

goshawk prey. Such conditions are thought to allow goshawk populations the 
ability to withstand periodic decreases in anyone prey species through 
reliance on other species comprising the broad food web of this top predator 
(Reynolds et al. 1992; Reynolds et al. 2006). 
Under the GMGs, specific forest structure requirements apply to 
different portions of the 2428 hectare home range surrounding known 
goshawk nests. While the most stringent requirements apply to an 
approximately 73 hectare nesting area, the coarsest-scale requirements apply 
to a 2185 hectare area surrounding nesting areas comprised of goshawk 
post-fledgling areas and foraging areas (Reynolds et al. 1992). There are 
slight differences between foraging area and post-fledgling area management 
guidelines, but in general management recommendations for both of these 
areas are very similar (Reynolds et al. 1992; Richard Reynolds Personal 
Communication 2007). 
GMGs employ Vegetation StructuraH,tages (VSS), a forest succession 
classification system first described in the late 1970s for use in western 
Oregon (Thomas et al. 1979) and adapted for the Southwest in RM-217. This 
system classifies 0.04 to 0.1 hectare clumps of trees of six forest structure 
deveiopment classes ranging from seedlings to old, large diameter trees 
(Reynolds et al. 1992). In this classification system diameter is used as a 
surrogate for age. A target distribution of these VSS classes is required for 
each component of the goshawk home range in order to provide habitat for 
several different prey species. Additionally, forested areas comprised of 
14 

these VSS groups must meet certain criteria such as canopy cover, maximum 
opening size, snag and downed woody debris density and reserve trees 
(Reynolds et al. 1992). The objective of GMG-based treatments is a 
structurally regulated, uneven-aged forest composed of a mosaic of 
interspersed even aged tree groupings. 
The GMGs are not a set of prescriptive forest management guidelines, 
but are instead a set of desired forest conditions for goshawk territories. 
These conditions are thought to be similar to forest conditions that existed 
prior to Euro-American settlement of the region (Reynolds et al. 1992; 
Reynolds et al. 2006; Youtz et al. 2008). To bring desired GMG-based forest 
structure requirements closer in line with pre-settlement conditions, recently 
regional USFS personnel have advocated use of presettlement forest 
remnants (old trees, old stumps and logs) to guide tree stocking levels and 
local vegetation patterns (Reynolds et al. 2006; Youtz et al. 2008). Beyond 
this recent change, GMG-based approaches do not prescribe any single 
specific silvicultural management action, but instead recognize that a variety 
of silvicultural approaches can be used to attain desired forest structure 
conditions (Reynolds et al. 1992). 
Since attaining desired conditions prescribed in the GMGs is unlikely 
after only one treatment, it is assumed that, over time, multiple thinning 
entries into an area will be necessary to meet or maintain stated forest 
structure targets (Reynolds et al. 1992). A GMG-based forest management 
approach will inevitably result in southwestern forest structure patterns 
15 

shaped primarily by silvicultural thinning. Since trees in smaller size classes 
will eventually grow into the largest size classes over time, a GMG-based 
management approach eventually will result in an over abundance of old, 
large diameter tree groups (VSS 5-6). These large tree cohorts will need to be 
harvested to maintain stated structural regulation requirements. The upper 
density limit of this VSS class within management areas is regulated by a set 
rotation age of approximately 200 to 250 years specified by regional USFS 
policy (Youtz et al. 2006). Perpetual regulation of large old age tree cohorts 
may be the most ecologically and socially important aspect of a GMG-based 
forest management approach (Long and Smith 2000). 
16 

The Development of Presettlement Forest Structure Patterns in 
Ponderosa Pine Forests 
Presettlement forest spatial patterns 
Several researchers have attempted to quantify spatial patterns in 
ponderosa pine forests located throughout the western United States. 
Perhaps most applicable to southwestern ponderosa pine forests are a small 
number of studies of presettlement forest spatial patterns. These include 
studies completed in Arizona by Cooper in 1960-61, White in 1985 and most 
recently Sanchez Meador (et al.) in 2006. Other studies completed in fire-
adapted ponderosa pine forests in other areas of the western U. S. are also 
relevant. Spatial pattern metrics, spatial analysis techniques and the scale of 
spatial assessment employed in studies of forest spatial patterns have 
changed over time, and in some instances, the results of such studies are not 
always directly comparable. Taken together, all provide important information 
describing presettlement tree spatial patterns at sub-plot scales . 
. Cooper investigated spatial patterns within a ponderosa pine forest 
along the eastern Mogollon Rim in Arizona (1960). He used a contiguous 
quadrat analysis technique common to early spatial pattern studies (Grieg-
Smith 1952). Cooper's results indicated that mature pines in this forest were 
aggregated in groups ranging in size from 0.06 to 0.13 hectares. In addition 
to this finding, in another nearby study Cooper (1961) used a metric of spatial 
point patterns, Clark and Evans R, developed by Clark and Evans in 1954 to 
17 

further describe tree location patterns. Results of this analysis indicated that 
tree locations within 12 of the 14 mature stands (approximately 80 years old 
or older) that he assessed' exhibited statistically random spatial arrangement 
at the stand-scale, with trees within the remaining two stands exhibiting 
statistically significant uniform (i.e." evenly spaced) patterns at the scale of 
his study sites. Cooper was one of the earliest Southwest researchers to 
quantify southwestern ponderosa pine forest patterns that previously had only 
been qualitatively described. 
With the benefit of Cooper's research, White (1985) investigated 
spatial patterns of trees that predated Euro-American settlement (circa 1875) 
in a ponderosa pine forest near Flagstaff, Arizona. Pre-settlement era trees 
were observed in groups of trees with interlocking crowns ranging in size from 
0.02 to 0.29 hectares (White 1985). Using Clark and Evans R assessed at the 
tree group-scale, White reported that overall tree location patterns within 
groups most commonly were statistically random, although one group 
exhibited a significantly aggregated pattern. Since the sample size of each 
tree group was quite small (ranging from 3 to 44 trees per group), it is not 
clear whether tree group-scale patterns were truly random or if findings 
indicating random patterns were a result of a low sample size (White 1985). 
White's study provides further quantitative evidence of the "grouped" (i.e., 
distinct groups of trees with interlocking crowns) structure of presettlement 
forests, evidence of a random pattern of trees within these groups and 
evidence indicating that tree groups are un-even, or multi-aged. 
18 

Early studies of forest spatial patterns were hindered by the scale of 
analysis. In Cooper's studies, the forest stand was the sole scale of spatial 
analysis; in White's, the tree group was the scale of analysis (Cooper 1961; 
White 1985). More'recent studies of presettlement forest spatial patterns use 
advanced spatial statistical techniques such as K-function analysis, also 
known as Ripley's K analysis, to assess forest spatial patterns at multiple 
scales, ranging from fine-scales «10 meters) to coarse-scales (up to half the 
minimum dimension of a mapped area) (Wong and Lee 2005). Ripley's K 
analysis allows comparison of measured forest patterns to Monte Carlo 
simulations of random patterns in order to assess statistically significant 
spatial randomness, aggregation or uniformity at a range of spatial scales 
(Wong and Lee 2005). Use of the K function, along with readily available 
advanced computing technology, has allowed contemporary researchers to 
assess forest spatial patterns in a way that was previously impossible. 
The most relevant use of the K funerion, with reference to 
presettlement southwestern ponderosa pine forests, is a study completed by 
Sanchez Meador (2006; Sanchez Meador et al. 2008). In this study, Sanchez 
Meador reconstructed presettlement forest conditions from permanent plots 
ranging in size from 1.2 to 4.1 hectares near Flagstaff, Arizona. Results 
indicate that presettlement forests exhibited significantly aggregated spatial 
patterns at all six sites assessed in the study, with the most significant 
aggregation occurring at 5-15 meter spatial scales. 
19 

Sanchez Meador also used a novel spatial modeling technique to 
assess presettlement forest spatial patterns as part of the same study (2006). 
In this portion of the study, he assessed forest patterns using groups of trees 
with interlocking crowns as the subject of analysis. He predicted crown radius 
for all mapped trees in this study using a regression equation of diameter 
versus crown radius (R2=0.83), and then used a GIS buffering technique to 
create canopies for all mapped tree locations using these radii. This 
approach allowed identification of sub-plot scale tree groups, and tree group-
scale characteristics, and indicted that prior to settlement, 75 to 83 percent of 
the trees within the six study areas were arranged in groups with interlocking 
crowns ranging in size from an average of approximately 45 to 90 m2. These 
groups contained an average of 4.2 (range 3.6 to 5.4) trees per group 
(Sanchez Meador 2006). 
In other regions of the western US, studies of presettlement ponderosa 
pine spatial patterns using Ripley's K analysis yield similar results. A 
reconstruction of presettlement stand patterns observed in forty-eight 0.5 
hectare ponderosa pine stands in central Washington by Harrod (1999) 
indicated aggregation in presettlement stands at scales ranging from <1 
meter to 15 meters. Youngblood and others (2004) reported variable spatial 
patterns within for old-growth ponderosa pine forests in eastern California and 
Oregon. In this study a significantly uniform pattern was observed within two 
of the three study areas at scales less than 1.0 and 1.4 meters respectively. 
Random tree patterns were observed at all sites. At one of the three areas, no 
20 

deviation from a random pattern was observed at all scales (0 to 25 m). 
Random patterns were observed within the other two areas from 1.2 to 2.6 
meters and 1.6 to .8.4 meters respectively. Significant aggregation was 
observed at both these sites at increasingly greater scales. Boyden et al. 
(2005) reported spatial patterns within a 9.3 hectare stand of old-growth 
ponderosa pine forest in the Front Range of the Colorado Rockies. Both 
random and uniform patterns were observed in the largest (i.e., oldest) 
diameter classes, with deviation from simulated random patterns observed at 
scales ranging from 5 to 7 meters (Boyden et a!. 2005). 
As discussed above, studies completed throughout the 20th century 
reveal several key patterns of presettlement ponderosa pine forest spatial 
structure. First, at the coarsest-scale of analysis, typically the plot or stand-
scale, forest spatial patterns have been most commonly described as 
random. Secondly, while coarse-scale patterns are random, more 
sophisticated multi-scale analysis has revealed that at finer scales (25 meters 
or less), presettlement patterns were typically significantly aggregated. 
Lastly, fine-scale aggregated patterns are associated with a readily 
observable characteristic of presettlement or mature ponderosa pine forests: 
presettlement forests were comprised of groups or clumps of trees with 
interlocking crowns. Nearly seventy years of forest spatial pattern analysis 
provides quantitative evidence that supports the "patchy", "groupy" or 
"clumpy" descriptions of ponderosa pine forest spatial structure noted by 
many forest researchers and practitioners (M. Tuten, personal observation). 
21 

Forest structure development 
Development of sub-plot scale aggregated forest patterns in 
presettlement ponderosa pine forests is a complex and not well understood 
process. It includes regeneration processes and patterns, the influence of 
disturbance processes such as fire and herbivory upon tree regeneration, 
competition between regeneration and understory plant species, as well as 
the interaction of climate and topography upon these processes. Assessment 
of these important factors offers insight into the development of ponderosa 
pine forest spatial patterns. 
Mature forest spatial patterns are inherently related to tree 
regeneration processes and patterns. Ponderosa pine seeds are wind 
dispersed and rarely travel more than approximately 37 meters from the 
parent seed source (Larson 1961). Ponderosa pine seedling germination 
requires a mineral soil seed bed and warm and moist soil, conditions often 
limited by seasonal temperature and precipitation. Additionally, the bimodal 
precipitation regime common throughout the Southwest induces a high rate of 
seedling mortality, making regeneration establishment typically episodic 
(Larson 1961). 
Other important influences on tree cohort establishment are elevation 
and associated changes in temperature and preCipitation, soil type and 
texture, and biotic factors such as competition with understory vegetation and 
herbivory (Oliver and Larson 1996). On poor volcanic soils, seedling growth 
is typically slow and hindered by frost-heaving during winter months, and, 
22 

regeneration patterns are less dense compared to areas with more productive 
limestone soils (Heidmann 1988; Covington et.al. 1997). Livestock grazing 
and wildlife browse also affect regeneration patterns. Pearson (1942) found 
that livestock grazing practices during early decades of the 20th century 
probably favored pine regeneration establishment by limiting seedling 
competition with grass. Other research indicates that elk and deer browse 
may contribute greatly to seedling and sapling mortality and limit height 
growth (Jones 1967). Consideration of all of these as well as other factors 
may be necessary to understand the processes driving regeneration structure 
and pattern at management-scales. 
Under favorable conditions, ponderosa pine regeneration often forms 
dense thickets (Covington et al. 1997). These thickets have several important 
structural features. High canopy fuel loadings along with low live crown 
heights predispose these dense patches to mortality resulting from fire 
(Peterson et al. 2005). Regeneration patterns within regeneration patches has 
been described as random (Cooper 1961) in Arizona (trees less than 44 
years old), but uniform (West 1969) in eastern Oregon (four of five sapling 
thickets ranging from 60 to 84 years old). Uniform or random regeneration 
patterns may be a product of intense root competition within the dense 
regeneration patch soon after seedling establishment (West 1969). This 
conclusion is supported by the finding that ponderosa pine allocates a greater 
proportion of carbon to root development versus height growth in the seedling 
phases (Grulke and Williams 2001). In montane ponderosa pine forests, 
23 

during this phase of stand development, inter-tree resource competition may 
be more similar to levels common in the stem exclusion stand development 
phases described by Oliver and Larson (1996) in other North American 
forests. 
Natural disturbance processes, such as fire, alter forest structure over 
time affecting mature forest spatial patterns (Oliver and Larson 1996). There 
is little, if any, evidence of stand-replacing crown fires in southwestern 
montane forests prior to the turn of the 20th century (Moore 1999). Many 
photos from this time period indicate forest conditions were not consistent 
with conditions necessary to propagate crown fire under all but the most 
extreme fire weather conditions (Fuh§ et al. 2006). Typically forest cover was 
highly discontinuous, the bases of the live tree crowns typically were several 
meters high, surface fuel loadings were low, and fuel complexes capable of 
allowing fire to transition from the ground to live tree crowns were uncommon 
(Covington 2003). 
There is, however, a great deal of evidence that high intensity, wind-
driven fires, burning in light surface fuels were common across these 
landscapes (Arno 1996). Such fires have variable, yet somewhat predictable, 
effects upon ponderosa pines of different developmental stages and spatial 
patterns. Large old pines are very resistant to these fires and typically suffer 
little mortality (Mast 1993). Typically, crowns in these trees are high enough 
from surface fire heat to avoid crown scorch (i.e., damage to living foliage) 
24 

and the thick bark is capable of insulating the cambium from heat damage 
(Wright et al. 1991). 
In smaller age classes, fire effects are more variable. Pines in the pole 
to middle size tree diameters also have insulating bark and are capable of 
resisting heat damage to the cambium, but often experience crown scorching. 
This fire effect can lead to many outcomes including delayed mortality 
through crown scorch (Wright et al. 1991), increased susceptibility to insect 
attack or (Breece et al. 2007), or, if the tree survives, fire induced "pruning" of 
live crown foliage. In these classes, fire effects can range from causing direct 
mortality to increasing resistance to subsequent surface fires by raising the 
height to live crown (Biswell et al. 1973). 
Surface fires interact perhaps most dynamically with pine seedlings 
and saplings. Fire is capable of spreading through the crowns of these 
individuals and can cause nearly complete mortality in seedling classes, 
depending upon the intensity and movement'0f the fire (Peterson et al. 2005). 
Surface fire effects on young pines changes rapidly as these trees grow. Six-
year-old pines have been shown to survive in low intensity surface fire 
conditions (Bradley et al. 1992). Large sapling and pole size trees have been 
shown to survive all but the most intense fires as long as 50% of buds and at 
least 10% of the live crown remains intact following the fire (Zwolinski 1996). 
Observations in southwestern montane forests throughout the 20th 
century indicate that, in the absence of fire, dense regeneration thickets do 
not typically develop into mature forests characteristic of presettlement 
25 

forests. When dense conditions are maintained in an environment free of 
disturbance, growth stagnates (Oliver and Larson 1996; Peterson et. al 2005). 
Two competing theories exist to explain how frequent surface fires 
interacted with forest structure to create the highly dumped patterns observed 
in many mature southwestern ponderosa pine forests. The first theory was 
proposed by Cooper in 1960. He proposed that aggregated, even-aged 
mature tree groups develop from the interaction of fire within even-aged 
ponderosa pine regeneration patches. This theory meshes nicely with the 
observation that ponderosa pine regeneration establishes in dense, single 
cohort thickets. Cooper concluded that mortality induced by frequent fire 
within young regeneration thickets resulted in a less dense, yet still 
aggregated tree spatial pattern. 
Another theory was proposed by White (1985) after observations in 
ponderosa pine forests of northern Arizona. White observed that trees within 
groups of mature trees with interlocking crowns were two-aged to uneven 
aged, with tree ages ranging from 33-268 years. To explain this observation, 
White proposed that pine regeneration periodically established near the 
edges of existing mature pine clumps. He explained that this regeneration 
was capable of germinating in mineral soil seedbeds created when downed 
logs were completely consumed during frequent fires (White 1985). 
Neither Cooper's nor White's spatial pattern development theories are 
entirely accurate. Both the Cooper and White pattern development theories 
are limited because evidence supporting each theory is limited in spatial 
26 

extent. White's study was completed in a small area in northern Arizona and 
Cooper's in a small area in the White Mountains of eastern Arizona. Cooper's 
theory appears compatible with contemporary pine regeneration thicket 
patterns on seen on productive soils, while White's theory appears to be more 
compatible with regeneration patterns observed on less productive soils 
(Heidmann 1988; Covington et al. 1997). Contemporary regeneration 
patterns are also highly influenced by 20th century management practices 
such as grazing, harvesting and perhaps human activity induced changes in 
the regional climate (Sanchez Meador 2006). Additionally, topographic and 
climatic variation is known to affect fire regime parameters such as fire 
frequency, intensity and severity which may also affect ponderosa pine spatial 
patterns (Heyerdahl et al. 2001). 
The development of presettlement spatial patterns across 
southwestern ponderosa pine forests is a complex and unresolved process 
involving many factors. What is clear is ,that such patterns developed in an 
environment prone to periodic surface fires. Given this reality, it is probable 
that whatever the exact mechanisms for the development of these patterns 
may be, understanding interactions between surface fires and ponderosa pine 
regeneration is fundamental to understanding the overall process that shaped 
presettlement forest spatial patterns. 
27 

Summary 
Many contemporary southwestern ponderosa pine forests do not 
exhibit spatial patterns similar to presettlement spatial patterns described by 
Cooper (1960; 1961), White (1985) and others (Harrod 1999; Youngblood 
2004; Boyce et al. 2005; Sanchez Meador 2006). Silvicultural thinning 
treatments are currently proposed to recreate these presettlement patterns in 
contemporary forests. A goshawk management guidelines-based approach 
relies heavily on Cooper's (1960) forest spatial pattern development model, 
while ecological restoration guidelines more closely follow the White (1985) 
model. Understanding the ability of these treatment approaches to recreate 
presettlement spatial patterns requires both quantification of local 
presettlement forest spatial patterns, and a rigorous comparison of patterns 
developed with each of these management approaches. 
28 

CHAPTER 3 
Comparing Ecological Restoration and Northern Goshawk Management 
Guidelines Treatments in a Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forest 
Abstract 
We compared forest structure patterns resulting from the application of 
revised Northern Goshawk Management Guidelines (GMG) and Ecological 
Restoration Guidelines (ERG)-based silvicultural thinning approaches in 
ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa C. Lawson var. scopulorum Engelm.) 
forests on replicated sites on the Kaibab Plateau in Northern Arizona. These 
management approaches have been proposed for wide application across 
tens of thousands of hectares of southwestern National Forests within 
Northern Goshawk (Accipiter gentilis) foraging areas. Both sets of guidelines 
use patterns and densities of presettlement forest evidences in the form of old 
forest remnants (pre Euro-American settlement era trees, stumps and snags) 
to guide their tree marking methodologies. Tree densities resulting from the 
application of these treatment approaches and estimated presettlement 
densities were not significantly different. GMG-based treatments retained a 
larger proportion of trees in the middle to large size classes, resulting in 
statistically significantly higher canopy cover and basal area. Tree spatial 
point patterns and tree patches (e.g., groups of trees with interlocking crowns) 
were analyzed. GMG-based treatments resulted in more consistent tree 
aggregation at fine-scales «15 meters), than ERG-based treatments, a 
29 

pattern similar to presettlement evidence patterns. GMG-based treatments 
resulted in significantly fewer isolated individual trees, a higher mean density 
of trees within patches and more high density tree patches than ERG-based 
treatment results. No difference was observed in average diameter range of 
trees within groups. We conclude that with minimal modification, initial 
thinning approaches similar to those described in this study are highly 
compatible, both with each other and presettlement conditions, especially 
within forest landscapes where reintroduction of naturally ignited fires is a 
management goal. Despite this similarity, ERG and GMG-based stand 
management approaches will differ over the long term. The goal of ERG-
based management is forests that can be regulated by natural processes, 
most notably surface fires similar to those common in the Southwest. The 
GMG approach, while allowing the use of fire, will require continual forest 
structure regulation and will inevitably result in future removal of large, old 
trees. 
30 

Introduction 
A legacy of 20th century land management activities in southwestern 
ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa C. Lawson var. scopulorum Engelm.) 
forests has been gradual development of dense and contiguous forested 
landscapes, highly susceptible to expensive and destructive stand replacing 
wildfires (Dombeck et al. 2004). There is broad agreement that forest 
structure restoration activities are necessary across vast areas of ponderosa 
pine forest in the southwestern and western United States (Moore et al. 1999; 
Allen et al. 2002). Ecological restoration guidelines (ERG) and Goshawk 
Management Guidelines (GMG)-based thinning treatments have been 
proposed for use across thousands of national forest hectares in the 
southwestern United States to reduce tree densities to levels commensurate 
with those common in the region prior to Euro-American settlement of the 
region in the late 19th to early 20th centuries (Reynolds et al. 1992; Covington 
and Moore 1994; Allen et al. 2002). 
Ecological Restoration and Goshawk Management Guidelines Fundamentals 
Ecological restoration guidelines were recently proposed by USFS 
Southwestern Region personnel as a silvicultural thinning approach 
compatible with desired conditions advocated by the GMGs (Reynolds et al. 
2006). While specific project objectives may be highly variable, all ecological 
restoration-based activities have the goal of "reestablishing to the extent 
possible the structure, function, and integrity of indigenous ecosystems and 
31 

the sustaining habitats that they provide (Society for Ecological Restoration 
2004)". 
Ecological restoration efforts within ponderosa pine forests over the 
last half century have shown that restoration of presettlement forest structure 
using fire alone often results in unintended ecosystem changes such as large, 
old tree mortality and the risk of stand-replacing crown fires (Sackett et al. 
1995). There is now widespread agreement among restorationists that forest 
thinning approaches are necessary to alter forest structure conditions in order 
to allow ecologically beneficial surface fires to be reintroduced to ponderosa 
pine forests to maintain ecological function and regulate forest structure over 
time (Moore et al. 1999; Allen et al. 2002). 
Creation of forest structural patterns within the presettlement range of 
ecosystem variability is the goal of ERG-based thinning approaches (Moore 
et al. 1999). An ERG-based thinning approach draws upon insight gained 
from a study completed by White (1985) near Flagstaff, Arizona. White 
observed that trees within tree groups (i.e., two or more trees with interlocking 
crowns; Figure 3.1; Table 3.1) were uneven-aged, ranging in age from 33-268 
years (White 1985). For this reason, ERG-based methods attempt to manage 
for uneven or multi-aged forests comprised of un-even or multi-aged tree 
groups (Moore et al. 1999). ERG thinning methodologies do not focus upon 
regulated diameter distributions, but instead use the location and density of 
presettlement forest remnants (old trees, stumps, snags, and stump holes 
predating settlement of the region) as a reference for the spatial pattern and 
32 

density of the restored forest. Thinning guidelines comprise only a small part 
of an ERG-based approach within a degraded ponderosa pine forest. Other 
activities may include the restoration of understory plant community 
composition, control of exotic plant species and regulation of livestock grazing 
practices and importantly the restoration of natural disturbance processes 
such as frequent surface fire (Moore et a!. 1999; Allen et al. 2002). A 
fundamental objective of ERG-based treatments is the reintroduction of 
periodic surface fires following initial thinning treatments in order to allow the 
structure and function of future forest ecosystems to be shaped by this 
important natural disturbance process (Moore et al. 1999; Allen et al. 2002). 
While ERG-based management focuses on management for 
ecosystem structure, function and integrity, GMG-based approaches have a 
greater wildlife habitat conservation focus (Reynolds et. al. 1992, Long and 
Smith 2000, Society for Ecological Restoration 2004). A fundamental 
premise of the GMGs is that northern gosh'awk and prey populations are 
limited by available food and suitable habitat (Reynolds et al. 1992). The goal 
of the goshawk guidelines is to create a range of forest habitats similar to the 
range found in presettlement forests, suitable for both goshawk nesting and a 
wide variety of sustainable populations of goshawk prey species (Reynolds et 
a!. 1992; Reynolds et al. 2006). 
A GMG-based approach draws upon research completed by Charles 
Cooper in the central Arizona highlands indicating presettlement ponderosa 
pine forests were uneven or multi-aged at coarse-scales, but comprised of 
33 

even-aged groups of trees with interlocking crowns at finer-scales (Cooper 
1960). In order to manage for similar conditions, the GMG-based approach 
regulates forest structure within a 2185 hectare post-fledgling and foraging 
area surrounding known goshawk nests using a Vegetation Structural Stage 
(VSS) forest structure classification system. The VSS system was developed 
in the late 1970s for use in western Oregon (Thomas et al. 1979) and was 
adapted for the National Forest Service Southwestern Region (Reynolds et 
al. 1992). It classifies forest structure into 0.04 to 0.16 hectare tree groups 
(i.e., trees with interlocking crowns; Table 3.1) of six homogenous structural 
classes ranging from seedlings to old, large diameter trees (Reynolds et al. 
1992). A GMG-based approach regulates forest structure by balancing the 
relative area occupied by forest structure within each of the six VSS classes 
using repeated management entries (i.e., harvesting) (Figure 3.2) 
Additionally, GMG foraging areas must meet certain criteria such as within 
group canopy cover, maximum opening size, snag and downed woody debris 
density and reserve trees (Reynolds et al. 1992). Lastly, in recent 
discussions regarding the implementation of the GMGs, regional USFS 
officials have highlighted the importance of using presettlement forest 
remnants (old trees, logs, stumps, snags) to guide site-specific tree stocking 
levels and spatial patterns (Youtz et al. 2006). While this activity is not 
specifically mentioned within the original GMGs, it is a recent effort intended 
to bring GMG desired future conditions closer into congruency with local 
34 

presettlement forest densities and spatial patterns (Reynolds et al. 1992; 
Youtz et al. 2006). 
Since tree groups in younger structural stages will eventually grow into 
the oldest and largest stages over time, a GMG-based management 
approach will eventually result in both an over abundance of old, large 
diameter tree groups (VSS 6), and the need to harvest these large tree 
cohorts to maintain the GMG structural regulation requirements. The upper 
density limit of this VSS class within management areas is regulated by the 
rotation age specified by regional National Forest policy, approximately 200 to 
250 years old (Youtz et al. 2006). 
Study Objectives 
Since local evidence for both ERG and GMG stand development 
models exists, it is unclear which of these models is best suited to develop 
forest structural patterns similar to presettlement conditions (Cooper 1960; 
White 1985). What is becoming increasingly clear is the ecological 
importance of forest spatial patterns. Forest spatial patterns affect northern 
goshawk habitat and wildlife values (Reynolds et. al. 1992; Turner et al. 
1997), but also influence tree regeneration and understory plant community 
structure (Griffis et. al. 2001), fire behavior (Agee 1998; Fule et. al 2001) and 
other ecological values and processes. 
The goal of this study is to quantify and compare presettlement forest 
structure patterns and patterns resulting from implementation of ERG and 
35 

GMG-based treatments in order to understand the compatibility of these 
management approaches. To accomplish this goal, the approach used in this 
study addressed the following the following three objectives: 
1) Assess local presettlement forest densities and spatial patterns as 
evidenced by forest remnants (old living trees, snags, stumps, dead 
and downed trees). 
2) Assess ERG and GMG-based treatments efficacy in restoring site-
specific presettlement forest densities and spatial patterns. 
3) Compare forest structure patterns of ERG and GMG-
based treatments at sub-plot to plot-scales. 
Methods 
Study Site 
The study area is an approximately 2000 hectare area located on the 
western edge of the Kaibab Plateau in the Kaibab National Forest, Arizona, 
USA (112° 30" W, 36° 30" N) ranging in elevation from 2260 to 2350 meters. 
Soils across the study area are derived from porous, Permian age Kaibab 
limestone rock layer which underlies the majority of the Kaibab Plateau 
(USFS 1991). Annual precipitation is bimodal, split between winter snowfall 
and late summer thunderstorms, averaging 59 centimeters annually between 
1971 and 2000 (Western Regional Climate Center, www.wrcc.dri.edu). The 
majority of the study area is comprised of pure ponderosa pine stands, with 
scattered groups of Gambel oak (Quercus gambe/ii Nutt.) and aspen 
(Popu/us tremu/oides Michx.) present sporadically. Since these species were 
36 

relatively rare throughout the study area only ponderosa pine forest structure 
information is presented in this study. 
Fule et al. (2003) reported a range ot presettlement mean fire return 
intervals ranging from 6-12 years from an area approximately 25 kilometers 
south of the study area. Removal of grassy fuels through livestock and large 
deer herds grazing during the 1920's to 1950's (Rasmussen 1941; Merkle 
1962), as well as active fire suppression efforts beginning in the 1920s, 
reduced the frequency of fires within the region during the majority of the 20th 
century (Fule et al. 2003). Current high densities of trees within the study 
area can be attributed in large part to the exclusion of tree density regulating 
surface fire from the landscape starting around the late 1800's (White and 
Vankat 1993; Fule et al. 2002; Fule et al. 2003). 
Plot Selection 
We randomly located six, two-hectare sites within stratified areas of the 
study area extent to provide examples of forest conditions present within 
ponderosa pine dominated forests of the North Kaibab Plateau. We chose a 
two-hectare plot size partly because of logistical limitations, but also to allow 
assessment of finer-scale tree groups and spatial point patterns (Figure 3.1), 
features reported elsewhere to exist at the scale of approximately 0.02 to 0.3 
hectares (Cooper 1960; White 1985; Sanchez Meador 2006; Sanchez 
Meador et al. 2008). We stratified areas for plot selection within the study 
area extent before selecting plots according to the following criteria: 
37 

1.) Areas between the elevations of 2210 and 2360 meters. Locally, 
forests within this elevation band are predominantly of the ponderosa 
pine type. 
2.) Areas of less than 15% slope. This was done to minimize variation 
in forest structure patterns due to the influence of aspect on forest 
species composition. 
3.) Areas with less than 75% of living presettlement-era trees 
remaining. Unharvested or very lightly harvested forests were excluded 
from the study due to their relative rarity across the Kaibab Plateau 
and southwestern ponderosa pine forests. 
Plot Marking and Mapping 
Richard Reynolds, the senior author of Management 
Recommendations for the Northern Goshawk in the Southwestern United 
States (Reynolds et al. 1992), and several crew members marked trees to be 
retained with colored flagging using a Goshawk Management Guidelines-
based foraging area thinning prescription (Reynolds et al. 1992) during mid-
summer 2007. Because of the relatively small size of the stem-mapped plots 
relative to most silvicultural thinning projects, GMG tree markings were not 
adjusted to meet the stated area targets published within the guidelines; only 
Vegetation Structural Stage-based (VSS) tree groupings were marked. The 
approach used by Reynolds in this example was intended to serve as the 
initial management entry into the six stands observed in this study. 
Following tree marking, we used a reference grid of survey tapes to 
map the locations of all live trees taller than 1.4 meters within each study plot 
using survey methods are similar to those used by Abella (2006) and 
38 

Covington et al. (1997). For each mapped tree and presettlement forest 
remnant within the plot boundary, we recorded species, diameter at breast 
height, condition (living or snag/log classes), bark color, and the presence or 
absence of flagging (indicating retention using a GMG-based prescription). 
We then removed all flagging from each marked tree after mapping. 
During fall, 2007, an ERG-based prescription was marked within the 
same plots by staff from the Ecological Restoration Institute following an 
established ecological restoration marking protocol (Covington et al. 1999). 
ERG marking personnel used a 1 to 1.5 presettlement evidence to post-
settlement tree replacement rate described by Covington et al. (1999) for this 
comparison. Field staff made a modification to the previously described 
methodology by employing a minimum 5-6 meter spacing of post-settlement 
trees in order to encourage growth of these individuals. Finally, to minimize 
potential measurement bias, no personnel involved with marking activities 
were involved with tree mapping activities.
" 
Spatial Analysis 
We combined all live presettlement trees as well as stumps, snags and 
downed trees present within study plots for presettlement (PRE) tree density 
and spatial pattern analyses. We considered all living trees of any size with 
yellow platy bark and other old-age characteristics (large diameter branches, 
dead tops, mature growth form) as presettlement forest evidences in this 
study. Field increment boring tests, reported by ERG marking personnel, 
39 

indicated trees with diameters at breast height greater than 44.4 em diameter 
germinated prior to the approximate settlement date of 1880 and were 
therefore included as presettlement trees (D. Lund personal communication). 
Further, this diameter cut-off is comparable to White's (1985) findings 
indicating presettlement era «1880 establishment) trees could be 
conservatively identified as trees having a diameter at breast height of 37.5 
cm or larger. Although the use of presettlement forest remnants as evidence 
of presettlement forest structure is imperfect, a recent study comparing 
presettlement remnants to long-term forest survey data (83 years or older) 
indicates that this technique is reliable within 10 percent of presettlement 
densities (Moore et al. 2004). 
We investigated tree and presettlement evidence location point 
patterns to determine if patterns were uniform, random or aggregated (Table 
3.1 ; Figure 3.1). This was accomplished through assessment of point data 
using the Ripley's K(t) function (Ripley 1978, 1977, 1981) with a square root, 
variance stabilizing transformation of K(t) to L(t)-t (Besag 1977). Significant 
aggregation or uniformity was tested by comparing observed L(t)-t values to a 
distribution of values from 99 simulated random point patterns (Upton and 
Fingleton 1985, Dale 1999). All Ripley's L(t)-t analyses were completed using 
a custom script written in R version 2.6.1 (R Development Core Team 2007) 
by Sanchez Meador (2006). 
40 

Since crown radii were not measured for individual trees we predicted 
a crown radius for each measured tree using the following regression of tree 
diameter and crown radius developed by Sanchez Meador (2006): 
CrownRadius(m) = . 1387(DBHcm) 07901 
n = 5075; ? = 0.83 
We modeled canopies for all mapped trees using a vector GIS 
approach by buffering tree locations using crown radii estimated with this 
method. 
Tree group-scale analyses were completed using trees with 
interlocking tree crowns to define individual tree groups (Table 3.1; Figure 
3.1). Only tree groups entirely contained within plot boundaries were included 
in group analyses. All tree group analyses were completed using ArcGIS 9.2 
vector data analysis capabilities. 
Statistical Analysis 
This study was designed as a replicated comparison of forest structure 
attributes resulting from the application of GMG and ERG-based treatments 
and to estimates of presettlement forest structure (PRE). Therefore, no 
statistical comparisons were made to contemporary forest structure 
conditions. However, contemporary information is presented for visual 
comparison with ERG and GMG-based treatment results. An alpha level of 
0.05 was used for all tests. Assumptions of normality were assessed using 
the Shapiro-Wilk test. If assumptions of normality were met, paired parametric 
41 

t-tests were used, otherwise the non-parametric Wilcoxon-signed rank test 
was used. Bonferroni correction was used to test for tree density differences 
in six diameter classes corresponding to the six VSS classes between 
treatment results. An exception to the use of paired t-tests was the use of a 
single factor ANOVA test to compare ERG and GMG-based treatment 
densities with estimated presettlement tree densities (PRE). 
Results 
Plot-scale metrics 
Both GMG and ERG-based treatments resulted in tree densities that 
were not significantly different from presettlement forest densities (Table 3.2). 
GMG-based treatments resulted in a statistically significant, although only 
slightly higher, average basal area versus ERG-based treatment (21.8 m2 ha-1 
versus 18.0 m2 ha-1). Overall canopy cover, as determined by simulated tree 
canopy area as a percentage of the total ptat area, was also significantly 
higher after GMG-based treatments than ERG treatments, although the 
absolute difference between these canopy cover estimates was quite small 
(24 versus 26 percent cover) (Table 3.2). 
Diameter distributions resulting from GMG and ERG treatments were 
similar, although there were statistically significant differences in kurtosis and 
diameter classes. Although not statistically significant, on average, GMG 
diameter distributions were more negatively skewed (Y1 = -0.07) toward larger 
diameter classes than ERG diameter distributions (Y1 = 0.04). GMG-based 
42 

treatment diameter distributions exhibited a peak in the middle to larger tree 
size classes (30 to 50 cm), while diameter distributions resulting from ERG-
based treatments were more evenly distributed across all size classes. 
Average kurtosis values, a measure of distribution "peakedness," were 
negative for both GMG and ERG distributions, although diameter distributions 
resulting from GMG treatments were statistically significantly different than 
those resulting from ERG treatments (Y2 = -0.42 versus -1.02). 
Cumulative diameter distributions from all six mapped plots (8 
hectares) illustrate the overall differences in diameter distributions between 
the two treatment approaches (Figure 3.3). ERG-based treatments resulted 
in higher densities of small diameter «16 cm) and lower densities of medium 
diameter (24-48 cm) trees compared to GMG-based treatments. 80th 
treatments resulted in nearly identical tree densities in the largest diameter 
classes (>56 cm). Of the six VSS classes, only tree densities in VSS class 4 
differed significantly between treatment approaches, with GMG based 
treatments resulting in significantly higher densities (Table 3.3). 
Point Pattern Analysis 
Living presettlement era trees and non-living presettlement forest 
remnants were significantly aggregated at lag distances from 0 to 10 meters 
on all plots with the exception of plot 5 (Table 3.4). The mean minimum lag 
distance at which the fine-scale aggregation patterns were no longer 
discernable from a random pattern was approximately 23 m (S.E. = 6.5). 
43 

Significant aggregation of these structures was also observed at longer lag 
distances from 20-30 m on plots 2, 3 and 6 up to a 50 m lag distance on plot 
1. This contrasts with contemporary forest conditions where live trees are 
aggregated at distances from 0 to approximately 20 to 40 meters on all plots 
and aggregated at all distances on plots 2, 3, and 6 (Table 3.4). 
Both treatments dramatically affected tree spatial patterns. GMG-
based treatments resulted in forest structure aggregation at lag distances of 
less than 10 meters on all measured plots. Aggregation patterns became 
indistinguishable from random patterns at lag distances of 14 meters or less 
on all plots with the exception of plots 2, 5 and 6 where significant 
aggregation either continued to greater lag distances (plots 2 and 5) or 
exhibited a additional aggregation greater lag distances (plot 6). Only one 
plot (plot 1) exhibited significant uniform spacing at any lag distance. On this 
plot, uniform spacing was observed at lag distances ranging from 8 to 16 
meters. ERG-based treatments resulted iii a peak of uniform spacing at 
distances less than 10 meters on plots 3, 4 and 5 and another peak in uniform 
spacing at distances beyond 40 meters on plot 5. Several peaks in significant 
aggregation were observed at distances ranging from 4 to 30 meters on plots 
2, 4 and 5. Plot 6 exhibited significant aggregation from a lag distance of 16 
meters to the maximum lag distance of 50 meters. 
44 

Tree group characteristics 
Both treatments reduced the average number of tree groups per plot 
dramatically, from 43 to 79 percent overall. The number of tree groups per 
plot was very similar between treatment approaches, with GMG-based 
treatments resulting in a slightly higher, statistically insignificant, number of 
groups versus ERG-based treatments (Table 3.5). 
GMG treatments yielded significantly more large groups per plot. GMG 
treatments resulted in an average of 11 groups with 5 or more trees per plot 
versus an average of about 4 groups of this size resulting from ERG-based 
treatments (Table 3.5). A similar difference was observed at larger group 
sizes, with GMG-based treatments resulting in an average of 3.3 groups 
comprised of 10 or more individuals, versus an average of 0.3 groups per plot 
resulting from ERG-based treatments (Table 3.5). ERG based treatments 
resulted in a significantly higher number of solitary trees than GMG-based 
treatments 
While overall tree group numbers decreased, average group area 
(projected crown area) increased 52 percent on average after ERG-based 
treatments and 67 percent after application of GMG-based treatments. 
Average group area was reduced following these treatments only on plots 5 
and 6 (Table 3.5). The two treatment approaches differed little in average tree 
group area, but GMG treatments resulted in larger average maximum group 
area versus ERG treatments, although this difference was not statistically 
significant (Table 3.5). 
45 

Average diameter range, a surrogate metric of tree group agedness, 
dropped an average of 16 and 17 percent following the application of ERG 
and GMG-based thinning treatments respectively (Table 3.5). This drop was 
not entirely consistent in all situations, as diameter range increased after 
treatment on some plots. Overall no statistical difference in average tree 
diameter range within groups was observed between ERG and GMG-based 
treatment approaches. 
Discussion 
What are the patterns of presettlement forest remnants used by practitioners 
of ERG and GMG-based treatments? 
Average presettlement forest evidence densities of stands assessed in 
this study are slightly lower than presettlement forest structure studies 
reported in the literature for nearby areas. Fule et al. (2002) used 
dendrochronological methods to reconstruct presettlement ponderosa pine 
densities in three areas along the North Rim within Grand Canyon National 
Park. Densities reported in these three sites averaged 152.7 pines ha-1 
versus a mean of 141.2 pines ha-1 observed within the six plots assessed in 
this study. These lower density estimates may be related to the slightly lower 
elevation range of our study landscape relative to the sites assessed by FLJle 
et al. (2003). 
Spatial patterns evident from analysis of the locations of presettlement 
forest structures indicates a high degree of aggregation at fine-scales «10 
meter lag distances). This finding is similar to other presettlement ponderosa 
46 

pine forest spatial patterns observed in the Southwest. Sanchez Meador 
(2006) reported statistically significant aggregation patterns at lag distances 
less than 40 meters with a peak in aggregation at lag distances of 6 to 8 
meters for presettlement forest structures on six plots near Flagstaff, Arizona. 
Other studies of presettlement forest spatial patterns in ponderosa pine 
forests of the western US report similar results (Harrod et al. 1999; 
Youngblood et al. 2004). Consistent fine-scale spatial aggregation of 
presettlement forest structures observed within all six plots may be due in part 
to the relatively small study landscape and stratification techniques employed 
in this study. It is possible that these presettlement patterns may differ with 
other patterns existing on other soil types, aspects and slopes (Heyerdahl et 
al. 2001). 
At coarser-scales (>10m lag distances), there a fairly consistent 
gradual transition from an aggregated pattern to random spatial patterns, 
indicating a random arrangement of tree clusters throughout the study plots. 
This trend is also supported by other studies in western and southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests (Harrod et al. 1999; Youngblood et al. 2004; Sanchez 
Meador 2006). An important issue associated with this finding is the relatively 
small plot size used in this study to assess aggregation patterns at these 
coarse-scales. At the coarsest-scales, edge effects increase in importance, 
complicating spatial analysis results (Boots and Getis 1988). 
47 

Do Ecological Restoration and Goshawk Management Guidelines-based 
treatments restore presettlement forest density and spatial patterns? 
Use of presettlement evidences by both ERG and GMG practitioners 
during tree marking was consistent with restoring presettlement densities. 
However, there appear to be important differences in the spatial arrangement 
of these trees with the implementation of each approach. 
It is not realistic to assume ERG-based treatments are capable of 
restoring presettlement evidence patterns perfectly; but spatial patterns 
resulting from use of this treatment approach differed consistently with 
presettlement patterns in this study. Fine-scale ERG spatial patterns exhibited 
a much greater trend towards random and uniform spatial patterns than those 
resulting from GMG-based treatments. Several important factors are likely 
responsible for this inconsistency. First, is the use of a minimum tree spacing 
of approximately 6 meters, a modification to existing ecological restoration 
guidelines. Through use of this modification, marking personnel were unable 
to replicate the significantly aggregated presettlement forest spatial patterns 
observed on all of the six plots assessed. While at odds with presettlement 
evidence patterns, this modification may be useful for restoration of dry sites 
or sites with few large trees, as it may encourage tree growth by restricting 
intra-tree root competition. A second contributing explanation may be the 
maximum search radius employed in ERGs. The search radius is the 
distance between presettlement forest evidences and a post-settlement 
replacement trees. Since replacement trees are not necessarily adjacent to 
presettlement evidences, use of a search radius is often necessary. An 
48 

approximately 18 meter maximum search distance was employed by ERG-
marking personnel in this study. Because such a large search radius was 
used, the distance between presettlement evidences and a replacement trees 
may have been greater than presettlement forest evidence aggregation 
distances. Casual observations within study plots indicate this situation is 
fairly common. This situation is further compounded when a long distance 
search radius is used for selection of several replacement trees. Finally, 
some degree of error in application of the ecological restoration guideline 
methodology is also possible. Such errors could take the form of overlooking 
or missing presettlement evidences, or selecting replacement trees at a 
distance greater than the maximum search radius. While personnel involved 
in the ERG marking process have years of experience applying these 
guidelines, it is probable that such errors contributed to the observed 
discrepancies with presettlement patterns to some degree. 
GMG-based treatments resulted in tree location aggregation patterns 
consistently similar to presettlement forest evidence aggregation patterns at 
fine-scales «10 m lag distances). These fine-scale aggregation patterns are 
also intrinsically related to the method GMG-based treatment marking 
personnel used to assess presettlement evidence spatial patterns and the 
wildlife habitat management objectives described within the GMGs. 
Although inclusion of site specific reference information recently has 
been promoted as a means to implement GMG-based treatments (Reynolds 
et al. 2006; Youtz et al. 2008), a specific methodology for doing so has not 
49 

been outlined in published literature. The GMG-based approach used a 
"patch-scale" presettlement evidence to post-settlement tree patch 
replacement method. Whenever an aggregated patch of several dead 
presettlement evidences (most commonly cut stumps) was encountered by 
Reynolds or crew members, a patch of similar density and spatial pattern was 
selected from the surrounding post-settlement forest structure as a 
replacement for the presettlement evidence patch (Richard Reynolds 
personal communication). Further, GMG wildlife management perspective 
undoubtedly influenced selection of retained tree patches. Such fine-scale 
aggregation patterns are known to be beneficial to many small mammal and 
bird species that comprise the northern goshawk food web (Reynolds et at. 
1992, Reynolds et al. 2006). This patch-scale approach, while obviously not 
capable of restoring patterns exactly, appeared to succeed in recreating 
presettlement patterns and initial wildlife habitat conditions better than ERG-
based methods. 
How do forest structure patterns of ERG and GMG-based treatments 
compare at sub-plot to plot-scales?? 
Despite statistically significant differences in basal area and canopy 
cover values (the latter being highly dependent upon the former) absolute 
differences were not large, with only 17 percent average difference in basal 
area and a 1.6 percent average difference in canopy cover. These 
differences are attributable to significantly different tree densities in the 30 to 
46 cm diameter tree size class, corresponding to VSS class 4 (Figure 3.3). 
50 

Since ERGs specifically advocate retention of trees with old age 
characteristics, it is probable that the majority of this basal area difference is 
found in the large, but not necessarily old post-settlement tree classes. 
Density differences in these size classes may be related to two components 
of GMGs. First, trees in these size classes are preferred habitat for the tassel-
eared squirrel (Sciurus abertl) and other closed-canopy dependent goshawk 
prey species. Second, the regulated diameter distribution required by GMGs 
necessitates greater numbers of trees in larger diameter classes than in 
smaller ones (Patton 1984, Reynolds et al. 1992). While density differences 
in smaller size classes were not observed, the more positively skewed and 
significantly higher average kurtosis values resulting from ERG-based 
treatments indicate that a broader range of tree diameters were retained 
throughout the entire diameter range than in GMG-based treatments. This 
difference is probably the result of an unregulated diameter distribution 
applied within forests containing large contemporary densities of small 
diameter trees (Table 3.2). 
Sub-stand tree group differences and trends 
Tree group-scale characteristics appear to be related to point patterns. 
The consistent fine-scale tree aggregation patterns created by GMG-based 
treatments resulted in significantly more groups of trees with interlocking 
crowns, fewer single trees, higher average group densities and higher 
densities of large tree groups (groups with 5 or 10 or more trees) per plot. 
51 

Spatial patterns within tree groups were not assessed in this study, but it is 
probable that trees within GMG groups are more closely aggregated than 
ERG-marked tree groups, as average group area and average maximum 
group area did not differ despite the previously mentioned differences. Since 
GMGs advocate retention of groups of large trees with interlocking crowns 
with high canopy cover to provide habitat for animals that form northern 
goshawk's prey base (Reynolds et al. 1992; Reynolds et al. 2006; Youtz et. al 
2008), the high aggregation and patchiness associated with this treatment 
was a logical outcome. 
A surprising finding is the lack of an observed difference in average 
diameter range of trees within groups resulting from ERG and GMG-based 
treatments. An uneven-aged forest comprised of well-interspersed, even-
aged, or homogenous VSS groupings is a stated goal of GMG-based 
treatments. If diameter is used as a surrogate for age, as is often done, the 
range of diameters within even-aged groupsr·should logically be narrower than 
the range of diameters within uneven-aged groups. Results of this study 
indicate that there is no consistent difference in the range of diameters within 
tree groups resulting from ERG or GMG-based thinning treatments. This lack 
of difference may be related to the finding that both treatments sought to 
retain nearly all of the oldest, largest diameter trees within all six plots, and, 
ERG-based treatments resulted in higher proportions of single trees 
unassociated with tree groups. The largest trees have the largest crown radii, 
and, therefore, are the most likely to be part of a group, regardless of their 
52 

location relative to other trees. By the same rationale, small diameter trees 
are less likely to be incfuded in a group and more likely to occur singly. Large 
trees drive both the formation of tree groups with interlocking crowns and 
contribute a large amount of group diameter variation. The retention of these 
trees with both treatment approaches is probably in large part responsible for 
the group diameter range results observed in this study. The significantly 
higher number of smaller, solitary trees retained by ERG-based treatments 
provides a further explanation for this trend. 
GMG-based treatment results should be interpreted with caution, as 
this study represents only the initial management entry into these six stands. 
It is likely that many of the large diameter trees retained with the GMG-based 
treatment would be removed during the second management to regulate the 
abundance of VSS 5 and 6 group area to other VSS class groups. 
Tree group metrics: limitations and presettlement context 
Tree group-scale characteristics presented in this study are an inexact 
representation of actual patch structure characteristics existing within forest 
stands. Irregular tree crown shapes and bole lean were not assessed or 
incorporated into the tree patch model used in this study, thus restricting the 
accuracy of the results. Sanchez Meador (2006) has indicated that number of 
trees included within tree groups is highly sensitive to crown radii variation. 
Furthermore, tree group characteristics will change over time as crown radii 
increase with tree diameter growth. Despite these limitations, the tree patch 
53 

identification technique employed in this study is. useful for understanding the 
underlying effects of GMG and ERG-based treatments on tree group 
characteristics. 
Since reconstruction of presettlement forest groups was not completed 
in this study, it is unclear how the results of GMG and ERG-based treatments 
compare with presettlement group characteristics at this site. A study that 
reconstructed presettlement «1875) tree group characteristics at six sites 
located in the Coconino National Forest near Flagstaff, Arizona (Sanchez 
Meador 2006), reported tree group densities 40 to 60 percent higher than 
those reported in this study. While average group density was higher, 
average tree density within groups assessed by Sanchez Meador (2006) (4.2 
trees per group) was consistent with GMG-based treatment results and 49 
percent higher than ERG-based treatment results. Sanchez Meador's 
average maximum patch density (17.5) was more similar to GMG-based 
results (20.5) than ERG-based results (8.8,) (Sanchez Meador 2006). Since 
little is known about variation in presettlement tree group characteristics 
within ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest, the similarities or differences 
between the results of these studies mayor may not be coincidental. 
54 

Ecological Restoration and Goshawk Management Guidelines: Compatible 
Forest Restoration Solutions? 
Overcoming fundamental differences 
A fundamental difference between the forest management approaches 
assessed in this study is the means by which future forest structure patterns 
at these sites will be regulated. Ecological restoration clearly promote use of 
prescribed or natural fires as the primary means of regulating future tree 
regeneration and forest spatial patterns because much evidence indicates 
that interaction of surface fires with patches of young trees was responsible 
for regulating presettlement spatial patterns in Southwest ponderosa pine 
forests (Covington 2003). Conversely there is little evidence that fires 
interacted dynamically with mature or old ponderosa pine trees to shape 
presettlement forest structure patterns. 
GMG-based forest management advocates consistent forest structure 
regulation through the use of repeated man9gement thinning entries over 
time. Harvesting large, old, fire-resistant trees over time is a tacit assumption 
of these guidelines as they are applied over time. Since presettlement 
surface fires did not interact dynamically with trees in these structural classes 
there is no evolutionary or ecological basis for such a management approach. 
Furthermore, as trees in smaller size classes will eventually grow into the 
largest size classes over time, it is not a question of whether large old trees 
will be cut using the GMGs, but more a question of when they will be cut. 
55 

The level of large diameter harvesting associated with GMG-based 
forest approaches will depend, in large part, upon the rotation age employed 
throughout the region and the method used to assess VSS class regulation 
within Goshawk foraging areas. The former issue is essentially a question of 
whether society is ready to harvest large, old trees, both now and in the 
future. Unsustainable harvesting of large old trees in many portions of the 
Southwest is often cited as one of the major causes of forest health declines 
over the last century (Moore et al. 1999; Allen et al. 2002). While it is 
impossible to rule out future harvesting of large, old trees, today this approach 
may receive little public support given the relatively high ecological value and 
low density of these trees across Southwest forest landscapes, not to mention 
their social importance within the region. The latter issue, VSS class 
regulation, is a technical one, and will require a realistic approach to 
assessing and regulating VSS tree groupings throughout the region. 
First, treatment implementation monitoring will be necessary to assess 
tree aggregation patterns. Monitoring approaches must evolve to be able to 
assess forest spatial patterns. Forest inventory approaches developed to 
assess tree density and volume are not suitable for assessment of sub-stand 
forest spatial patterns advocated by the GMGs. The mapping approach used 
in this study was time consuming and expensive, and may not be practical for 
forest treatment effectiveness monitoring purposes. A GIS based inventory 
approach utilizing high resolution imagery or LlDAR data (Lo and Yeung 
56 

2002) may be both more efficient and practical for assessing the success of 
silvicultural thinning treatment objectives. 
Second, it will be difficult to regulate VSS groupings by area if trees are 
not aggregated at the required spatial scales. Even with improved, spatially 
explicit monitoring approaches, VSS group identification will always be a 
challenge. VSS structural stage distinctions vary with elevation, aspect, 
latitude and stand productivity. While many contemporary forests are 
essentially even-aged, many also contain uneven-aged tree groups. Given 
these challenges, agency budgetary limitations, and competing forest 
management priorities, it may not be possible to accurately assess and 
regulate VSS structures during a single management entry. 
The approach used by Richard Reynolds in this study is a realistic first 
step to implementing GMGs in contemporary southwestern forest lands that 
often lack presettlement tree aggregation patterns. With initial treatments, 
managers can focus on recreating site-specific aggregated tree spatial 
patterns and densities before attempting to regulate VSS groups by area. 
Stands treated with a GMG-based management approach may not be 
reassessed for silvicultural treatments for many years, and during this time 
forest structure may change due to wildland fire impacts or other factors. The 
use of a similar approach may help managers to avoid "analysis paralysis" 
associated with VSS class regulation, while slowly moving towards the 
desired forest conditions described within the GMGs. 
57 

Finally, the realities of southwestern climate and regional USFS 
management will ultimately determine the degree to which fire plays a role in 
stand development within goshawk foraging areas. During this study, one of 
six the assessed stands was allowed to burn in a lightning-ignited wildfire 
under Wildland Fire Use guidelines (www.inciweb.org 2008). In landscapes 
where fires are allowed to burn, the question shifts from whether these 
management approaches are compatible with each other to whether these 
management strategies are compatible with fire. This question was not 
specifically assessed within this study, but it is clear that both approaches 
reduced many forest attributes (e.g." canopy cover, canopy biomass, tree 
density) associated with the threat of catastrophic crown fire (Peterson et al. 
2005). In this regard, both approaches appear highly compatible. 
If initial GMG-based silvicultural thinning treatments are applied in forests 
similar to the ones described in this study, results can be expected to be 
highly compatible with ERG-based objectives. Further, minimal modification 
of ERG-based treatment methodology appears capable of producing forest 
structural patterns with greater wildlife habitat values. While there is room for 
refinement of the methodologies used in both approaches, both appear 
capable of moving current forest structural conditions closer to presettlement 
forest structure patterns. Perhaps more importantly, both silvicultural 
approaches appear to result in forest structure conditions that are sustainable 
within landscapes managed with either natural or management ignited fires. 
58 

Acknowledgements: 
The authors would first like to thank District Ranger Tim Short and all staff of 
the North Kaibab Ranger District of the Kaibab National Forest for supporting 
these research efforts over the last three years. We would also like to thank 
Richard Reynolds, Allison Cofer and crew, as well as Dennis Lund, Charlie 
Denton, Dave Brewer and Michael Stoddard for generously donating days of 
time and effort to mark trees for retention with each treatment prescription. 
We also thank Andrew Sanchez Meador for his generous spatial statistical 
advice and technical support. Finally, we would like to thank the enthusiastic 
crew of ERI staff members and student research assistants for their tireless 
efforts to document the over 7500 tree locations and attributes assessed in 
this study. 
59 

Table 3.1: Sub-plot scale forest pattern definitions. 
Group 
Aggregated 
Uniform 
A sub-stand or plot patch consisting of two or more trees with interlocking crowns. 
Indicates that at a certain scale (h), tree locations are significantly more aggregated 
than what would be expected from 99 simulated random point patterns. 
Indicates that at a certain scale (h), tree locations are significantly less aggregated 
than what would be exoected from 99 simulated random ooint oatterns. 
60 

Table 3.2: Density, basal area and canopy cover estimates. All contemporary trees (ALL), resulting Ecological Restoration 
Guidelines (ERG), and Goshawk Management Guidelines (GMG) and Presettlement Evidences (PREt). 
Trees per Hectare 
Basal Area (m2 ha-1) 
Canopy Cover (%) 
Plot 
PRE 
% Live 
ALL 
ERG 
GMG 
ALL 
ERG 
GMG 
ALL 
ERG 
GMG 
1 
183.5 
37 
538.1 
159.2 
155.7 
27.1 
20.7 
23.3 
32.4 
26.2 
28.2 
2 
114.1 
46 
302.5 
104.1 
137.4 
22.1 
15.5 
19.5 
24.5 
19.0 
21.1 
3 
131.4 
50 
761.3 
135.4 
109.6 
31 .8 
18.8 
23.6 
40.0 
27.5 
27.1 
4 
176.1 
34 
794.0 
163.2 
176.6 
29.4 
18.3 
22.6 
39.1 
25.9 
29.5 
5 
122.5 
58 
398.7 
100.7 
153.7 
34.8 
16.1 
21.1 
42.3 
20.9 
24.1 
6 
122.5 
43 
368.0 
131.9 
144.8 
30.1 
18.4 
20.6 
35.5 
23.6 
23.1 
Mean 
141.7 
44.7 
527.1 
132.4 
146.3 
29.2 
18.0* 
21.8* 
35.6 
23.9* 
25.5* 
Standard Error 
12.3 
3.7 
85.3 
10.8 
9.1 
1.8 
0.8 
0.7 
2.7 
1.3 
1.3 
t where applicable; * statistically significant difference at 95% level 
61 

Table 3.3: Tree densities (per hectare) resulting from each treatment within six diameter classes (classes correspond to 
VSS diameter class cut-offs). Two-tailed paired t-test; alpha = .0083 with Bonferoni adjustment. 
VSS 
Diameter 
Mean 
Class 
Range (em 
at DBH) 
ERG 
GMG 
1 
0-4 
9.7 
5.3 
2 
4.1-16 
18.5 
8.0 
3 
16.1-32 
27.9 
34.4 
4 
32.1-46 
26.3* 
46.0* 
5 
46.1-62 
34.0* 
36.5* 
6 
62.1+ 
16.0 
16.0 
* Statistically significant difference at 95% level 
62 

Table 3.4: Spatial distribution [L(t)-t] of presettlement forest remnants and residual trees following simulation of ERG and 
GMG-based thinning treatments. Statistical significance at the 95% level is indicated by (+) for aggregated, (-) for uniform 
patterns; R represents forest structure patterns that do not differ significantly from a random (Poisson) pattern. 
Lag Distance (meters) 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
16 
18 20 22 24 
26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 
Plot 1 
PRE 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
ERG 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
GMG 
R 
+ 
+ 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
Plot 2 
PRE 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
ERG 
R 
R 
+ 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
GMG 
R 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
Plot 3 
PRE 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
ERG 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
GMG 
R 
R 
+ 
+ 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
Plot 4 
PRE 
ERG 
GMG 
Plot 5 
+ 
R 
R 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
R 
+ 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
+ 
+ 
+ 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R· R 
R 
R 
R R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R R 
R 
R 
R R 
R R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R R 
R R 
PRE 
+ 
+ 
R 
R 
R 
+ 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
ERG 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
GMG 
R 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
Plot 6 
PRE 
ERG 
GMG 
+ 
R 
R 
+ 
R 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
R 
R 
+ 
+ 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
+ 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
63 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R R 
R 
R 
R 
+ 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
+ 
+ 
+ 

Table 3.5: Observed post-treatment tree group characteristics: Total Groups and Group Densities (asterisks indicate 
statistica"~ si~nificant differences at the 95% leveQ. 
Plot Number 
Descriptive 
Statistics 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Mean 
SD 
Single Trees 
ALL 
335 
209 
298 
303 
161 
151 
242.8 
79.3 
ERG 
146 
99 
127 
152 
88 
98 
118.3* 
27.1 
GMG 
83 
57 
50 
73 
51 
45 
59.8* 
14.9 
Total Groups 
ALL 
150 
58 
181 
198 
99 
80 
127.7 
57.0 
ERG 
50 
29 
39 
65 
35 
43 
43.5 
12.7 
GMG 
62 
28 
38 
72 
49 
46 
49.2 
15.9 
Groups with 5 or more trees 
ALL 
34 
17 
64 
77 
35 
32 
43.2 
22.5 
ERG 
8 
3 
4 
1 
0 
6 
3.7 
3.0 
GMG 
11 
7 
6 
13 
18 
11 
11.0 
4.3 
Groups with 10 or more trees 
ALL 
16 
6 
24 
29 
12 
14 
16.8 
8.4 
ERG 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
0.3* 
0.5 
GMG 
2 
4 
2 
2 
5 
5 
3.3* 
1.5 
Mean Group Density 
ALL 
4.4 
5.7 
5.9 
6.0 
5.3 
6.2 
5.6 
0.7 
ERG 
3.2 
2.9 
3.1 
2.4 
2.4 
3.1 
2.8* 
0.4 
GMG 
3.3 
6.4 
3.6 
3.4 
4.6 
4.1 
4.2* 
1.2 
Max Group Density 
ALL 
35.0 
49.0 
37.0 
50.0 
32.0 
43.0 
41.0 
7.5 
ERG 
9.0 
7.0 
16.0 
6.0 
4.0 
11.0 
8.8 
4.3 
GMG 
11.0 
48.0 
16.0 
13.0 
18.0 
17.0 
20.5 
13.7 
64 

Table 3.5 (continued): Observed post-treatment tree group characteristics: Groups Area and Tree Diameter Range 
(asterisks indicate statistically significant differences at the 95% level 
Plot Number 
Descriptive 
Statistics 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Mean 
SD 
Mean Group Area (m2) 
ALL 
34.4 
52.9 
30.3 
31.4 
63.4 
61.6 
45.6 
15.4 
ERG 
66.3 
67.0 
82.4 
44.8 
53.5 
58.2 
62.0 
13.0 
GMG 
68.2 
87.4 
82.7 
50.8 
66.9 
59.7 
69.3 
13.8 
Max Group Area (m2) 
ALL 
254.3 
587.2 
400.3 
411.8 
381.1 
343.6 
396.4 
109.4 
ERG 
221.6 
160.9 
373.3 
138.6 
153.2 
168.0 
202.6 
88.3 
GMG 
242.3 
587.2 
359.7 
197.4 
193.5 
228.3 
301.4 
152.5 
Mean DBH Range within 
groups 
ALL 
17.3 
23.8 
7.7 
20.9 
21.6 
22.7 
19.0 
5.9 
ERG 
18.0 
17.0 
23.6 
17.5 
9.8 
17.9 
17.3 
4.4 
GMG 
17.7 
21.6 
17.6 
16.2 
17.3 
14.7 
17.5 
2.3 
65 

Grouping 
Group: Tree crowns interlock 
(i.e., tree crown buffers overlap) 
I ····
··'··"·',·· 
.;;.,: .... 
~{;::( 
~~>~~ 
h 
Aggregation 
1. Map tree locations 
2. Compare to simulated 
random patterns 
3. Are there more or less 
tree locations per h (lag 
distance) class as compared 
to a random pattern (left). 
If more, the pattern is 
No Group: Tree crowns do not interlock 
--------=----
aggregated; if less, uniform; 
(i.e., tree crown buffers do not overlap) 
if similar random. 
Figure 3.1: Discerning Sub-Plot Scale Groups and Spatial Point Patterns. Tree groups are discerned by the 
characteristics of individual trees (crown radius) comprising the group. Aggregation is determined by comparing the 
relative density of n tree centers within multiple concentric plots of increasing radii (h) to the relative density of n 
points generated by 99 simulated random point patterns within multiple concentric plots of increasing radii (h). 
66 

C-==::> VSS1 (10%) 
~ 
VSS2 (10%) 
c:::> 0,04 hectare ~ 
VSS3 (20%( 
VSS4 (20%) 
VSS5 (20%) 
VSS6 (20%) [] 
Non-forested 
Interspaces 
Figure 3.2: A hypothetical representation of Vegetation Structural Stage (VSS) group area targets and reserve 
trees for an approximately 1.2 hectare area within a northern goshawk foraging area. 
67 

~ 
ro 
t5 
(J) 
8~----~~----~----~------~----------------~ 
6 
/\ Ii 
t' \, , " 
, " 
, \ 
V ' 
I 
4 
..... 
(J) 
0-
W 
(J) 
(J) 
t= 
2 
VSS 1 
o 
VSS 2 
VSS 3 
VSS 4 
VSS 5 
VSS 6 
o 
8 
16 
24 
32 
40 
48 
56 
64 
72 
80 
88 
96 
Diameter at Breast Height (em) 
~ 
~ 
Figure 3.3: Cumulative residual tree diameter distribution and Vegetation 
Structural Stage (VSS) diameter class breaks for all six measured plots of 
each treatment approach. GMG = Goshawk Management Guidelines for 
Foraging Areas, ERG = Ecological Restoration Guidelines. 
68 

CHAPTER 4 
Management Implications 
Both ecological restoration (ERG) and goshawk management 
guidelines (GMG)-based forest management approaches have the broad goal 
of approximating presettlement forest spatial patterns through the use of 
forest management activities. To this end, practitioners of both approaches 
make use of presettlement forest remnant patterns (large old trees, snags 
and downed trees) to inform site-specific thinning treatment prescriptions. 
Use of these remnants to guide thinning processes has been described in 
ERG literature (Moore et al. 1999), but practical application of these 
guidelines is often complicated, and the efficacy of this approach in recreating 
site specific presettlement remnant patterns has not been tested. Given the 
ecological importance of forest spatial patterns, and the importance of specific 
spatial patterns to future VSS group regulation within goshawk foraging areas 
(Reynolds et al. 1992), it is important that forest spatial patterns resulting from 
both thinning and burning treatments are monitored and evaluated. Spatially 
explicit monitoring and assessment of forest spatial patterns is necessary to 
understand the effects of management approaches and natural processes 
that will ultimately shape future southwestern forests. 
69 

Using presettlement forest remnants to understand and create contemporary 
forest spatial patterns. 
Forest researchers and policy makers have advocated using 
presettlement forest remnants to guide silvicultural thinning prescriptions 
(Moore et al. 1999; Taylor 2004; Reynolds et al. 2006; Youtz et al. 2008). 
These presettlement remnants or evidences are most commonly found within 
forests in the form of old living trees and old, non-living stumps, snags and 
downed trees. Non-living presettlement forest remnants often persist in 
ponderosa pine forests due to extremely slow rates endemic to the 
southwestern region. Locations of these remnants can be used to both 
inform and guide spatial pattern generation of forest restoration thinning 
projects (Covington and Moore 1994; Covington et al. 1999). 
Despite widespread agreement among forest managers and 
researchers regarding the ecological importance of restoring presettlement 
spatial patterns, specific methods for using these structures in silvicultural 
thinning treatments either have not been thoroughly assessed for their 
efficacy in recreating presettlement patterns or remain unstated in technical 
terms (Reynolds et aJ. 2006; Youtz et aJ. 2008). 
Three Approaches for Restoring Spatial Pattern 
Three general methods exist for using site-specific presettlement forest 
evidence to guide forest spatial pattern generation in silvicultural thinning 
projects. The first involves a pretreatment assessment of presettlement 
remnant patterns and the latter two involve utilizing the locations of 
70 

presettlement evidences during the tree marking (typically "leave-tree" 
marking) process: 
1.) Assessment of presettlement forest structure patterns before treatment 
prescriptions are developed. 
General forest spatial structure information such as tree aggregation 
patterns and tree group (Le., groups of trees with interlocking crowns) sizes 
can be obtained through pre-treatment assessments. This information should 
be included in the development of site-specific silvicultural thinning 
prescriptions when restoration of presettlement spatial patterns is a project 
goal. This information can be used to assess the effectiveness of thinning 
treatments in recreating site specific spatial patterns. This approach requires 
substantial investment in pre-treatment presettlement spatial pattern 
assessment and analysis, and may be an expensive option not suitable for 
small "project-scale" thinning treatments. 
2.) Individual tree-scale presettlement evidence replacement. 
This approach uses the location, density and species composition of 
presettlement evidences to guide selection of trees for retention during 
ecological restoration marking activities (Figure 4.1). Such an approach has 
been widely researched and promoted at Northern Arizona University's 
Ecological Restoration Institute (Covington et al. 1994; Fule etal. 2004). 
Typically all trees having old age characteristics, regardless of size, are 
retained. An additional 1.5 to 3 healthy trees that have established after 
71 

settlement (settlement dates range from 1870s to after 1900 in some areas) 
are retained as close as possible to every non-living presettlement evidence 
(e.g., stumps, snags, dead and down trees) encountered during the tree 
marking phase of restoration activities. The goal of this approach is to 
recreate not only the spatial aggregation patterns (Le., tree group sizes and 
patterns), but to also retain tree groups as near as possible to the location of 
presettlement evidence groups. 
3.) Patch-scale presettiement evidence replacement 
This approach is similar to individual tree-scale replacement described 
above, but differs in the scale at which presettlement evidences are replaced 
by post-settlement trees (Figure 4.1). Using patch-scale replacement, all old 
age trees are retained, but contemporary live tree patches are retained for 
every presettlement remnant patch. Using this approach, special effort is 
taken to select patches of similar size, density.and aggregation patterns to 
non-living presettlement remnant patches. This approach is used by 
practitioners of Goshawk Management Guidelines (Richard Reynolds, 
personal communication). Key differences between this approach and 
individual tree replacement approach are: Patches are the unit of replacement 
versus individual trees, and the location of the retained post-settlement tree 
patches relative to presettlement remnant patch locations is not maintained. 
72 

Each of these three methods has utility for recreating and assessing 
presettlement forest spatial patterns. An understanding of site specific spatial 
patterns is useful to those designing site-specific, presettlement reference 
condition-based silvicultural thinning treatments. If management for local 
presettlement spatial patterns is a project objective, knowing the spatial 
pattern parameters will inform both the selection of activities needed to 
accomplish this objective and whether or not spatial pattern objectives have 
been accomplished. Ideally, spatial pattern information would be collected for 
every intensive thinning project to aid in development of local prescriptions. In 
practice, there is unlikely to be time or funds available for this purpose. In 
such situations, managers must rely on spatial pattern assessment and 
recreation techniques during the tree marking phase of forest thinning 
treatments. 
An individual tree-scale presettlement evidence replacement approach 
is useful in situations where live post-settlement-replacement trees are 
located within a short distance of non-living presettlement evidences within 
the stand (Figure 4.2c). This method can also be applied where presettlement 
evidences such as cut-stumps or downed trees exist within or among old, 
living trees (Figure 4.2b). 
In forests where aggregated non-living presettlement evidence patches are 
located a long distance from live post-settlement replacement trees (Figure 
4.2a) a patch-scale replacement method may be a more useful approach for 
replicating presettlement evidence patterns. The ratio of presettlement 
73 

evidences to replacement trees can be used to guide the density of trees per 
replacement patch (i.e., using a 1:1.5 replacement ratio a presettlement-- - .' ---
evidence patch containing four stumps would yield a post-settlement 
replacement patch containing six trees). 
The final location of aggregated tree patches relative to presettlement 
evidences is an attribute that will be determined from contemporary forest 
structure locations. If it is possible to retain aggregated tree patches near 
presettlement evidences an attempt should be made to do so, as the 
locations of presettlement forest remnants provide evidence that these areas 
were once forested in the past. Most importantly, both approaches should 
attempt to create post-settlement tree replacement patches of similar fine-
scale spatial characteristics to presettlement evidences. Tree aggregation at 
scales less than 0.12 hectares is associated with small mammal and avian 
habitat suitability (Reynolds et al. 1992), and is a consistent pattern seen in 
several studies of presettlement ponderosa pine forest spatial patterns 
(Cooper 1960; White 1985; Sanchez Meador 2006; Tuten this volume). 
Forest spatial patterns and GMG-based forest structure regulation. 
Forest spatial patterns created through thinning treatments are 
permanent, and' affect the ability of future managers to regulate forest 
structural development classes. Recreation of these patterns is an integral 
objective of both ERG and GMG-based forest restoration treatments 
(Reynolds et al. 1992, Moore et al. 1999). ERG-based, stand-scale tree 
74 

diameter distributions are typically unregulated and future stand structure 
regulation will be accomplished through the use of fire. Inability to meet exact 
spatial pattern objectives using ERGs may have ecological ramifications, but 
this inability does not limit the ability to meet future stand management 
objectives. This is not necessarily true when implementing initial GMG-based 
thinning treatments. 
Contemporary forest conditions amplify the importance of creating 
specific forest spatial patterns during initial GMG-based forest management 
. entries. Throughout much of the Southwest, forests are essentially even-
aged or two-aged, dominated by trees in VSS classes 3 and 4 due to 20th 
century land management practices (Allen et al. 2002; Reynolds et al. 2006). 
In order for future GMG-based VSS regulation to occur, it is essential that 
managers create distinct aggregated VSS group spatial patterns. If these 
patterns are not created during initial thinning treatments, it will be difficult, if 
not impossible, to regulate VSS 3 and 4 groups relative to younger VSS 
classes currently absent from the landscape in the future. 
Influence of fire upon forest spatial patterns 
It is especially important to monitor the effects of prescribed and 
naturally ignited wildfires upon contemporary forest patterns. Advocates of 
ERG-based forest management or, "natural process restoration," assume that 
contemporary fires are capable of maintaining future forest spatial patterns 
75 

similar to presettlement spatial patterns. Currently_little long-term evidence 
exists to support this assertion. 
- .- - -
Presettlement fires typically burned in continuous abundant grassy 
fuels. Currently, much of the landscape once occupied by these fuels is 
dominated by pine litter and dissected by roads or other artificial firebreaks. 
Today, in many areas where grasses are present, much of this fuel is 
consumed annually through livestock grazing. Furthermore, presettlement 
fires often burned during windy hot, and dry conditions; a suite of conditions 
generally incompatible with practical contemporary fire management. 
Historical fires were likely capable of inducing a greater amount of tree 
mortality than contemporary fires. If severity differences between 
contemporary and presettlement fires are large, contemporary fires may be 
incapable of maintaining forest spatial patterns in a manner similar to that of 
presettlement fires. Therefore, it is essential to monitor effects of 
contemporary fires upon forest density and spatial. patterns. Spatially explicit 
monitoring following fires will allow mangers to understand the long-term 
effects of fire on forest spatial pattern maintenance. This knowledge will be 
useful to both practitioners of ERG or GMG-based management approaches. 
Fires, either naturally or management ignited, are likely to burn within 
managed forests over time, affecting both the spatial pattern and density of 
tree regeneration and the future mature forests. 
76 

Spatial pattern assessment approaches 
Unfortunately, typical forest treatment monitoring techniques are not 
capable of assessing spatial patterns. Also, most forest treatment monitoring 
techniques are not spatially explicit. Tree location information typically is not 
recorded together with tree attribute information (condition, diameter, height, 
etc ... ). Tree attribute information is sampled within management areas at 
several systematically or randomly placed plots. This approach is suitable for 
assessing average stand-scale tree attributes (e.g., tree density, basal area, 
canopy cover, etc ... ), but sampling tree information in this manner makes 
spatial pattern assessment inherently unreliable, if not impossible. 
Compounding this problem is the reality that tree attribute information is 
collected within variable or fixed-radius plots equal to or smaller in area than 
the scale of tree aggregation or tree groups (Avery and Burkhardt 1983). 
Even if spatially explicit tree attribute data were to be collected within these 
plots, the often systematic or random spacing af these plots and the small 
size of the plot would limit the ability to assess patterns that typically exist at 
scales often coarser than the plot-scale (Cooper 1960; White 1985; Sanchez 
Meador 2006). 
Since management of sub-stand scale spatial patterns is a 
management objective, these patterns should be monitored and assessed 
using appropriate methods and experimental designs. Field surveys using 
planar mapping techniques are capable of capturing spatially explicit tree 
attribute data, but such approaches are likely too expensive and time 
77 

consuming to be used in a treatment effectiveness monitoring scenario. Even 
if time and money were available, data collected using this approach would 
be inherently discontinuous, since mapping entire forested landscapes would 
likely be impossible. 
Treatment monitoring approaches must evolve to be able to assess 
forest spatial pattern objectives. Geographic information systems (GIS) and 
remote sensing technology promise a technological solution to this monitoring 
shortfall. A GIS-based inventory approach utilizing high resolution imagery 
(Quickbird™), LlDAR or other remotely sensed continuous data may be a 
more efficient and practical approach for assessing the success of silvicultural 
thinning treatment spatial pattern objectives (Lo and Yeung 2002). In the 
near future, it is likely that spatially explicit, GIS-based approaches will gain 
importance in monitoring the ecological and future management implications 
of contemporary forest thinning and burning treatments. 
78 

Figure 4.1: Individual tree-scale presettlement evidence replacement versus 
tree patch-scale presettlement evidence replacement. Individual tree-scale 
replacement (left) and patch:.scale replacement (right). A 1: 1.5 presettlement 
evidence to post-settlement tree replacement ratio was used in this example. 
79 

Figure 4.2: Presettlement forest evidence paUerns (cut stumps and 
presettlement-era living trees) relative to contemporary forest structure. A) 
Stumps present within an intact forest opening a large distance from 
contemporary replacement trees; patch-scale replacement can be used to 
restore cut stump patterns using replacement trees from the forested areas 
surrounding the opening. 8) Stumps are present within an existing 
presettlement era tree group; individual tree replacement can be used to 
replace these stumps. C) Nearby post-settlement trees in photo can be used 
to replace the cut stumps using individual tree replacement. 
80 

CHAPTERS 
Conclusion 
Some inherent differences exist between ecological restoration 
guidelines anq goshawk management guidelines-based forest management. 
An ERG approach is grounded in the idea that thinning actJvities should be 
used to create forest conditions where natural processes such as low to 
moderate intensity surface fires can be reintroduced to stimulate future forest 
pattern generation and other ecological functions. A GMG-based approach 
uses.thinning to promote specific forest structural patterns that also allow the 
reintroduction of fire, but also create specific habitats for the prey base of the 
northern. goshawk. Most importantly a GMG-based approach attempts to 
meet these first two objectives while attempting to provide a framework for 
sustainable management of economically valuable renewable forest 
resources. 
Fire management in southwestern national forests is here to stay. 
Given the current trend of increasing fire use and agreement on the 
ecological benefits of fire, it is unlikely that future southwestern National 
Forest policy will restrict the use of fire in favor of purely silvicultural thinning 
approaches. Southwestern forest landscapes are simply too extensive, fir~­
prone and fire adapted to avoid the use of fire as a forest management tool in 
the future. 
Ecological restorationists advocate using thinning to promote forest 
conditions amenable to the reintroduction of natural processes such as fire. It 
81 

is also reasonable to assume that restorationists would advocate the use of 
thinning to regulate tree regeneration to promote locally appropriate spatial 
patterns if contemporary fires are proven unable to accomplish this goal. 
ERGs advocate thinning small diameter trees because scientific evidence 
indicates that natural processes (Le., surface fires) endemic to southwestern 
forests regulated the structure of trees within these size classes and little 
evidence that such processes regulated the structure of trees in the largest 
size classes. 
GMGs share many ecological objectives with ERG-based 
management approaches. This study indicates that the results of initial ERG 
and GMG-based thinning treatments differ significantly, but that absolute 
differences between these treatments are quite small and do not appear to 
prohibit use of ERG-based treatments within goshawk post-fledgling and 
foraging areas. While the importance of fire as a management tool is not 
highlighted within GMGs, use of fire within goshawk foraging areas is likely to 
become more prevalent in the future. 
GMG-based forest management should be seen as a first-step toward 
accomplishing the lofty goal of ecosystem management in southwestern 
national forests. GMGs go one step further than ERG-based forest 
management in attempting to integrate both ecological and economic 
management objectives, recognizing and planning for harvesting needed 
renewable forest resources. Harvesting large old trees is often an anathema 
to restorationists, as these trees are both ecologically important and rare 
82 

across southwestern landscapes. In the future, such trees may be more 
common and political and economic conditions may promote the harvesting of 
these trees. Successful and sustainable southwestern ponderosa pine 
forests management approaches in the future will undoubtedly require 
integration of both ecological and economic considerations. 
83 

LITERATURE CITED 
Abella, S.R., Fule, P.Z., and Covington, W.W.2006. Diameter Capsfor-'~- --- . __ 0 
_
___ _
_
_ 
-
Thinning Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests: Viewpoints, Effects, and 
Tradeoffs. Journal of Forestry. 104,407-414. 
Agee, J. K. 1998. The Landscape Ecology of Western Forest 
Fire Regimes. Northwest Science. 72, 24-34. 
Allen, C. D., Savage, M., Falk, D. A., Suckling, K. F., Swetnam, I. W., 
Schulke, T., Stacey, P. 8., Morgan, P., Hoffman, M., Klingel, J. I. 2002. 
Ecological Restoration of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Ecosystems: A 
Broad Perspective. Ecological Applications. 12 (5),1418-1433. 
Arno, S. F. 1996. The Seminal Importance of Fire in Ecosystem Management: 
Impetus for this Publication. The Use of Fire in Forest Restoration. INT-GTR-
341. 
Avery, I. E., and Burkhardt, H. E. 1983. Forest Measurements. McGraw-Hili 
Book Company, New York, New York. 
Besag, L. 1977. Contributions to the Discussion of Dr. Ripley's Paper. Journal 
of the Royal Statistic Society, Series B. 39: 193-195. 
Biswell, H. H., Kallander, H. R.; Komarek, R., and others. 1973. Ponderosa 
Fire Management. Misc. Publ. NO.2. Tallahassee, FL: Tall Timbers Research 
Station. 49 p. 
Bradley, A. F.; Noste, N. V.; Fischer, W. C. 1992:' Fire Ecology of Forests and 
Woodlands in Utah. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-287. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station. 128 p. 
Breece, C.R., Kolb, I.E., Dickson, B.G. , McMillin, J.D. and Clancy K.M. 
2007. Prescribed Fire Effects on Bark Beetle Activity and Tree Mortality in 
Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests. Forest Ecology and Management. 
255, 119-128. 
Boots, N.B. & Getis, A. (Eds.). 1988. Point Pattern Analysis. Sage 
Publications, New York, NY. 
Boyden, S., Binkley, D. and Shepperd, W. 2005. Spatial and Temporal 
Patterns in Structure, Regeneration, and Mortality of an Old-growth 
Ponderosa Pine Forest in the Colorado Front Range. Forest Ecology and 
Management. 219, 43-55. 
84 

Cooper, C.F. 1960. Changes in Vegetation, Structure and Growth of 
Southwestern Pine Forests Since White Settlement. Ecological Monographs. 
30, 129-164. 
~-~~--
Cooper, C.F. 1961 . Pattern in Ponderosa Pine Forests. Ecology. 42, 493-499. 
Covington, W.W. and Moore, M.M. 1994. Southwestern Ponderosa Forest 
Structure: Changes Since Euro-American Settlement. Journal of Forestry. 92, 
39-47. 
Covington, W.W. 2003. The Evolutionary and Presettlement Context. In: 
Friederici. P. (ed.), Ecological Restoration of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine 
Forests. Island Press, Washington. pp. 26-47. 
Covington, W.W., Fule, p.z., Moore, M.M., Smith, H.B. Waltz, A.E.M. and 
Heinlein, T.A. 1999. Ecological Restoration Marking Guidelines for Ponderosa 
Pine Restoration Areas. Northern Arizona University. 
Crocker-Bedford, D. C. 1990. Goshawk Reproduction and Forest 
Management. Wildlife Society Bulletin. 18, 262-269. 
Dombeck, M. P., Williams, J. E., and C. A. Wood. 2004. Wildfire Policy and 
Public Lands: Integrating Scientific Understanding with Social Concerns 
Across Landscapes. Conservation Biology. 18,883-889. 
Ehrenfeld J. G. 2000. Defining the Limits of Restoration: The Need for 
Realistic Goals. Restoration Ecology. 8 (1), 2-9. 
Falk, D. A. 2006. Process-centred Restoration.in a Fire-adapted Ponderosa 
Pine Forest. Journal for Nature Conservation. 14, 140-151. 
Fule, P.l., M.M. Moore, and W.W. Covington. 1997. Determining Reference 
Conditions for Ecosystem Management in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine 
Forests. Ecological Applications. 7 (3), 895-908. 
Fule, p.z., A.E.M.Waltz, W.W. Covington, and T.A. Heinlein. 2001 . 
Measuring Forest Restoration Effectiveness in Hazardous Fuels Reduction. 
Journal of Forestry. 99 (11), 24-29. 
Fule, P.l., Covington W. W., Moore M.M., Heinlein T.A. ,and Waltz, A. E. M. 
2002. Natural Variability in Forests of Grand Canyon, USA. Journal of 
Biogeography. 29, 31-47. 
-
Fule, P.l., Heinlein, T.A.,Covington, W.W., and Moore, M.M. 2003. Assessing 
Fire Regimes on Grand Canyon Landscapes with Fire Scar and Fire Record 
Data. International Journal of Wildland Fire. 12 (2),129-145. 
85 

Grieg-Smith, P. 1952. The Use of Random and Contiguous Quadrats in the 
Study of the Structure of Plant Communities. Ann. Bot. 16,293-316. 
Griffis K. L., Crawford, J. A., Wagner, M.R., and Moir, W. H. 2001. Understory 
Response to Management Treatments in Northern Arizona Ponderosa Pine 
Forests. Forest Ecology and Management. 146 (1-3), 239~245. 
Grulke, N. E. and Retzlaff, W.A. 2001. Changes in Physiological Attributes of 
Ponderosa Pine from Seedling to Mature Tree. Tree Physiology. 21 (5), 275-
286. 
Grumbine, E.R. 1994. What Is Ecosystem Management? Conservation 
Biology. 8 (1), 27-38. 
Heidmann, L. J.1988. Regeneration Strategies for Ponderosa Pine. In: 
Baumgartner, D. M., Lotan, J. E. (eds.), Ponderosa pine: The species and its 
management: Symposium proceedings. Spokane, WA. Pullman, WA: 
Washington State University, Cooperative Extension, pp. 227-233. 
Harrod, R. J., McRae, B. H., and Hartl, W. E. 1999. Presettlement Stand 
Reconstruction in Ponderosa Pine Forests to Guide Silvicultural Prescriptions. 
Forest Ecology and Management. 114 (2-3), 433-446. 
Heinlein, T.A., Covington, W.W., Fule, P.Z., Moore, M.M. and Smith, H.B. 
2002. Development of Ecological Restoration Experiments in Fire Adapted 
Forests at Grand Canyon National Park. Rocky Mountain Research Station 
Proceedings. 15 (5), 249-254. 
Heyerdahl, E. K., Brubaker, L. B., Agee., J. K. 2001. Spatial Controls of 
Presettlement Fire Regimes: A Multiscale Example from the Interior West, 
USA. Ecology. 82 (3), 660-678. 
Inciweb Incident Information System www.iniciweb.org. September 15, 2008. 
Jones, J.R. 1967. Regeneration of Mixed Conifer Clearcuttings on the Apache 
National Forest, Arizona. Res. Note RM-79. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station. 8 p. 
Kennedy, P.L. 2003. Northern Goshawk (Accipiter gentilis atricapil/us): A 
Technical Conservation Assessment. USDA Fo~est Service, Rocky Mountain 
Region. 
86 

Larson, M. M. 1961. Seed Size, Germination Dates, and Survival 
Relationships of Ponderosa Pine in the Southwest. Research Note No. 66. 
Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 4 p. 
Long, J.N. and Smith, F.W. 2000. Restructuring the Forest: Goshawks and 
the Restoration of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine. Journal of Forestry. 98 (8), 
25-30. 
Lo, C. P. and Yeung, A. K. W. 2002. Concepts and Techniques of Geographic 
Information Systems. Prentice Hall, NJ. pp. 50, 270-273. 
Mast, J.N., P.z. Fule, M.M. Moore, W.W. Covington, and A. Waltz. 1999. 
Restoration of presettlement age structure of an Arizona ponderosa pine 
forest. Ecological Applications 9 (1), 228-239. 
Merkle, J. 1962. Plant Communities of the Grand Canyon Area, Arizona. 
Ecology. 43 (4), 698-711. 
Moir, W. H., Dieterich, J. H. 1988. Old-growth ponderosa pine from 
succession in pine-bunchgrass forests in Arizona and New Mexico. Natural 
Areas Journal. 8(1),17-24. 
Moore, M. M., Covington, W. W. and Fule, P. Z. 1999. Reference Conditions 
and Ecological Restoration: A Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Perspective. 
Ecological Applications. 9,1266-1277. 
Moore, M.M., Huffman, D.W., Fule, P.Z., Covington, W. W., and Crouse, J.E. 
2004. Comparison of Presettlement and Contemporary Forest Structure and 
Composition on Permanent Plots in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests. 
Forest Science. 50 (2),162-176. 
Oliver, C.D. and Larson, B.C. 1996. Forest Stand Dynamics, John Wiley & 
Sons, New York. 520 pp. 
Patton, D.R. 1984. A Model to Evaluate Abert Squirrel Habitat in Uneven-
aged Ponderosa Pine. Wildlife Society Bu"etin. 12: 408-414. 
Peck, J. 2000. Seeing the Forest Through the Eyes of a Hawk: An Evaluation 
of Recent Efforts to Protect Northern Goshawk Populations in Southwestern 
Forests. Natural Resources Journal. 40, 125-156. 
87 

Pearson, G.A. 1942. Herbaceous Vegetation as a Factor in Natural 
Regeneration of Ponderosa Pine in the Southwest. Ecological Monographs. 
12, 316-338.
~-
-~-
Peterson, D.L., Johnson M.C., Agee, J.K., Jain, T.B., McKenzie, D. and 
Reinhardt, E.D. 2005. Forest Structure and Fire Hazard in Dry Forests of the 
Western United States. General Technical Report PNW-GTR-628. USDA 
Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. Portland, OR 
Rasmussen, D. I. 1941. Biotic Communities of Kaibab Plateau. 
Arizona Ecological Monographs. 11, 229-275. 
Reynolds, R T., Graham, R, Reiser, M., Hildegard, M., and others. 1992. 
Management Recommendations for the Northern Goshawk in the 
Southwestern United States. General Technical Report RM-217. USDA 
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort 
Collins, CO. 
Reynolds, R, Graham, R, Youtz, J. and others. 2006. Northern Goshawk 
Workshop, USDA Forest Service Southwestern Region. Albuquerque, NM, 31 
October -1 November 2006. 
Reynolds, RT., Graham, RT., and Boyce, D.A. 2006. An Ecosystem-based 
Conservation Strategy for the Northern Goshawk. Studies in Avian Biology. 
31, 299-311. 
Ripley, B.D. 1976. The Secon9-order Analysis of Stationary Point Processes. 
Journal of Applied Probability. 13, 255-266. 
Ripley, B. D. 1977. Modelling Spatial Patterns. Journal of the Royal Statistical 
Society, Series B. 39, 172-212. 
Ripley, B.D. 1981 . Spatial statistics. Wiley Press, New York, NY, US. 
Sackett, S.S., Haase, S.M., and Harrington, M.G. 1995. Lessons Learned 
from Fire Use for Restoring Southwestern Ponderosa Pine ecosystems. In: 
Conference on Adaptive Ecosystem Restoration and Management: 
Restoration of Cordilleran Conifer Landscapes of North America, Flagstaff, 
Arizona. 6-8 June 1995. Technical Coordinators: W.W. Covington and P.K. 
Wagner. USDA Forest Service GTR-RM-278, pp. 54-61. 
Sanchez Meador, A.J. 2006. Modeling Spatial and Temporal Changes of 
Ponderosa Pine Forests In Northern Arizona Since Euro-American 
Settlement. Dissertation, School of Forestry, Northern Arizona University. 
88 

Sanchez Meador, AJ., Moore, M.M., Bakker,J.D.,Parysow, P.F. 2008. 108 
Years Of Change In Spatial Pattern Following Selective Harvest Of A Pinus 
Ponderosa Stand In Northern Arizona, USA. Journal of Vegetation Science. 
20, 1-12. 
Society for Ecological Restoration International Science & Policy Working 
Group. 2004. The SER International Primer on Ecological Restoration. 
Tucson: Society for Ecological Restoration International. 
Swetnam, TW., Allen, C.D., and Betancourt, J.L. 1999. Applied 
Presettlement Ecology: Using the Past to Manage for the Future. Ecological 
Applications. 9, 1189-1206. 
Taylor, A H. 2004. Identifying Forest Reference Conditions on Early Cut-
Over Lands, Lake Tahoe Basin, USA Ecological Applications. 14 (6), 1903-
1920. 
Thomas, J. W. 1979. Wildlife Habitats in Managed Forests the Blue 
Mountains of Oregon and Washington Agriculture Handbook No. 553. U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 512 p. 
Turner, M. G., Pearson, S. M., Romme, W. H., and Wallace, L. H. 1997. 
Landscape Heterogeneity and Ungulate Dynamics: What Spatial Scales are 
Important? In: Bissonette, J. A (ed.), Wildlife and Landscape Ecology: Effects 
of Pattern and Scale. Annual Meeting of the Wildlife Society. Portland, 
Oregon. pp. 331-338. 
Upton, G. & Fingleton, B. 1985. Spatial Data Analysis by Example: Point 
Pattern and Quantitative Data. Wiley and Sons, NY, US. 
U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service Southwestern Region. 1991. 
Terrestrial Ecosystem Survey of the Kaibab National Forest. 
United States Department of Agriculture Forest Service. 1992. Ecosystem 
management of the National Forests and Grasslands. Memorandum 1330- 1. 
USDA Forest Service, Washington, D.C. 
United States Department of Agriculture Forest Service, 
Southwestern Region. 1996. Record of Decision for Amendment of Forest 
Plans Arizona and New Mexico. 
Waltz, A.E.M., Fule, P.Z., Covington, W.W. and M.M. Moore. 2003. Diversity 
in Ponderosa Pine Forest Structure Following Ecological Restoration 
Treatments. Forest Science. 49 (6), 885-900. 
89 

Weaver, H. 1943. Fire as an Ecological and Silvicultural Factor in the 
Ponderosa-pine Region of the Pacific Slope. Journal of Forestry. 41 (1), 7-15. 
Weaver, H. 1951. Fire as an Ecological Factor in the Southwestern 
Ponderosa Pine Forests. Journal of Forestry 49,93-98. 
West, N. E. 1969. Tree Patterns in Central Oregon Ponderosa Pine Forests. 
American Midland Naturalist. 81 (2),584-590. 
White, A.S. 1985. Presettlement Regeneration Patterns in a Southwestern 
Ponderosa Pine Stand. Ecology. 66, 589-594. 
White, M. A. and Vankat, J.L. 1993. Middle and High Elevation 
Coniferous Forest Communities of the North Rim Region of · 
Grand Canyon National Park, Arizona, USA. Vegetatio. 109, 161-174. 
Wong, D. and lee, J. 2005. Statistical Analysis of Geographic Information. 
Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
Wright, H. A. and Bailey, A. W. 1982. Fire Ecology: United States and 
Southern Canada. New York: John Wiley & Sons. 501 p. 
Youtz, J. 2006. Implementation Strategies for Forest Vegetation 
Management. Presentation. 2006 Northern Goshawk Workshop, USDA 
Forest Service Southwestern Region. Albuquerque, NM, 31 October31 -
November 1, 2006. 
Youtz, J. A., Graham, R. T., Reynolds, R. T.; Simon, J. 2008. Implementing 
northern goshawk habitat management in South,western forests: A template 
for restoring fire-adapted forest ecosystems. In: Integrated restoration of 
forested ecosystems to achieve multiresource benefits: Proceedings of the 
2007 national silviculture workshop. Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-GTR-733. 
Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific 
Northwest Research Station. p. 173-191. 
Youngblood, A., Max, T. and Coe, K. 2004. Stand Structure in Eastside Old-
growth Ponderosa Pine Forests of Oregon and Northern California. Forest 
Ecology and Management. 199 (2-3), 191-217. 
Zwolinski, M. J. 1996. Effects of fire on montane forest ecosystems. In: 
Ffolli ott , P. F., DeBano, L. F., Baker, M., B., Jrtech. coords. Effects of Fire on 
Madrean Province ecosystems: a symposium proceedings; 1996 March 11-
15; Tucson, AZ. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-289. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station: pp. 55-63. 
90 

APPENDIX: Additional Figures 
Plot 1 
A 
B 
.::\~ 
' ~'. ' Ifl 
" 
~, •• 'I. 
l::5~~·;:.~\~~). 
(,. -, 
Plot 2 
\;; ' 
,~, 
'; '" 
~ .•. 
f.:. ,,(;'.: .::. ~ :~. :~ ~. " ,,'. 
(; 
'-' 
i ~·./' .,', '; r-
I . 
~ :. 
; ';';-'.' 
~~, . , .. 
:?t:,~,~" ·i;.' 
,;:,~ I~::;::; :,~.:~~/: ';" {;'. 
9" "; 
: ::~~. 
". -~ .. ~) 
~ . )'~/ . 
.' .~ 
',:"; 
.t") 
,. 
\ 2 
.:1..':., 
<~·:~lf." \ 
,.: ....... 
\)(. " / ;.' 
:':/:) " ~;. 
~' \: ~!~~0 
r. ..... 
(l:. 
.f ,,· 
. . 
~ 
, •• ~~~ ..... ,'.'J 
;~.) ::. -: 
' ! 
. ~ , 
iii 
, 
;t 
) 
:. ' '. ',. ~~,t 'i:0~ j /' 
(;. 
....... 
,. 
~.' ',: :':1' (.~ . 
' . .oJ 
\1~" 
. ,' . 
~ .. ",; 
. 
. 
~',: .. 
'~~.~ 
.... 
-""/ 
( ! W, 
,:~." , 
i
'" 
i · 
"', 
. :," 
:',;'1 ' 
; . 
'.', 
!"'. 
,-' ...... ; 
i, ' 
~ ' .~) 
\ 0 , 
. ~. ~ .. 
c 
{.'.:. 
.<.) 
'..1\ 
" 
(,:! '., ~, '\:; ,' ;:,., 
~~ ~/. . 
,,: ' 1 
fi:';.;:: 
c.:~: 
,x-.J::D 
~~.' '. 
~ 
,., 
. ' 
/ 
. '.' 
(. '~' . 
~~ .. ' ~ i~.) 
~;~' ... : . 
<.i 
.. ":1' 0 ,1 
~:: -> 
(~'; 
. .~.~ ~. , e': .. ;; 
' , 0. 
;'~:" 
' .. ' 
(\':, ~. 
". 
~:;: 
t) 
, (~) 
'.' 
( ,-'; .. 
..... .... " 
:, " 
' '::: I:; >,~ ' .. ' 
(," . ,. ,, ' 
~ ; " 
. 
{ ~ 'i ' .. 
0 .
.. , 
::00 . 
"
.:;~ "·I 
f.o .' 
) , ', 
, 
. 
~ ~.~:' 
.,." 
;, ~ ~ /,/,> \ : ~ 
'.,'1 
" '<~ J . 
I , ', 
I " 
. \ ~"'~ " 
1'".:; 
\"~ ., 
':Ji:" 
'· <i:~, ,,.. . ,:' /) 
" :~ 
Appendix 1: Stem and canopy cover maps. All contemporary trees (A), post-treatment goshawk guidelines (B), and post-
treatment ecological restoration guidelines (C), 
91 

Plot 3 
A 
Plot 4 
~~~(~':.~;~:' 
~.UF~ 
~i~if~i;~.~' 
:~<t:'·~~~ 
/ . \ .; 
i'.):?Y>i 
!: ".:;' ... 
;~~(~;, .:::; 
;-: .. ;~\~:;. ;~\':[,\ ,;;j{: r.;~··.i~!:·~::\ 
B 
' . ,\.-, 
':. j '" ·t· ~) " 
,~ " . 
< 
; i , 
. 
" '. 
i . .. . 
, 
_ ',. ov 
,. " '; . 
: :\.,.~.:, ;,(", 
. 
/.:)~~.' :; . '. 
~ 
• ~ .;!/ ,}-
". : 1' 
, 01 t. 
-; , .. ; . ! 
. ' 
;-:; 
. : '..i 
:;.1. 
, . 
-,'",' 
",' lo' 
-~ ~ - '~ 
-, • .• ,': ,:; ','j 
. ~.J . • • 
~ •.•.. 
,;," " 
;;:/ .. i ' ~'" 
. 
,.... 
'-.. ' 
.. ~. 'j 
,'.~ . -' . 
. ~-. '\~I " '":1 
'," 
[. '-."
. 
0 
t:-·~,· ~ ' .. ~ .-
• OJ 
: .::-
!'~;"" :I 
) . 
i''' ;.'"," ' .~ ./ 
\ ' . 
" . 
\· .>';t~ 
:\;;~ ) ..•. ; .. 
~. 
;/,':'..' 
t;"; . 
.... : .. 
: 
.' 
..•.. 
. 
,~. 
:.,"/;: 
;~; 
.j) 
\.
, 
't;:, 
(!;;);/";'" 
' .', ' .. 
' 
.< :.:·<;1 
"'" .;~ " ~ . ) 
... ' r 
' -. {.~.i 
, .' ~ 
,I/; 
,:};<;': : .. , 
~.~ :* , 
,,:. 
."" ',, . 
c 
" 
.;" 
) 
:'(:': ':~<.:Y~ . '/ 
i.~ '.; ; . 
~) 
~. . 
, . 
.' 
'" f> 
"
0 r 
.~. 
. 
• 
'i i , ,:.: : .;.;.\ 
•. ,;~. : \ ' 
·• .. 1 
{~-":{ .. ~ 
:~. ; i/ 
.'<?;,,("'" 
(.' ,, " 
(to'~; 
'.~~ .; ,~:,> 
(~,1 
,~~ (: 
( . 
", 
(: ( 
" 
( . ; 
" : '" :.".J: 
. 
~ ' ~ t\ 
.~.:.<~::~ ~' 
-'," 
(., 
(~ 'i: 
'9~" _ ;~:~ 
;;., .;; ~ . ~':. . (~.;:. '. 
: t' 
.. 
:.. • • ; 
',0 1 
:";'.: .,~ e, ::·::·,'o',t>~;., 
;:i '~ l 
,. ~~':;.~~aJ:~y 
~J 
, ' . ' ,;' 
(~ 
.1'".1:' "\.;',',' 
... ; , 
",' 
" ',.:* 
,~~. ~"Il . :~" 
1.';<:' 
'., < '~ 
i:,.:;'',c +!.' ;!'.\;~ ~~ .. )}:'i:' 
<I 
" ~~ ,~,:.:/:~. 
,~):"~,, . (. ,(" 
(",· · .;: ·'.::;Xii:)\';.:;~';.; ,_
.'. 
1 :'-
,~ . 1<)":"
'') 
;, 
/~"
I 
.,,' 
' \~) 
1"':;"(;:; 
!-·")<lIC: ~ h 
.. 
( ,'; . , 
. :,,: 
Appendix 1 (continued): Stem and canopy cover maps. All contemporary trees (A), post-treatment goshawk guidelines 
(B), and post-treatment ecological restoration guidelines (C). 
92 

Plot 5 
A 
B 
'.I( ! 
.,' 
... ;~ 
Plot 6 
,. 
, . 
~ 
. ' 
_.' 
to,,', 
': 
".' 
. 
,. 
, 
.~'" .". 
," 
.. ';-..... ':. 
/ . : 
; )~ ';',i 
, ~ i 
t' . , 
''OJ; .. ' 
;. 
,". 
" 
. .' 
" 
(:{:, ... :~. 
J'.,' 
••• ' 
~ .. ..: 
,', 
~~ . ; 
~ ~ . 
\1, 
c 
" 
l' 
:.li.j' 
.':,; . 
\ .,,, 
:. 
Appendix 1 (continued): Stem and canopy cover maps. All contemporary trees (A), post-treatment goshawk guidelines 
(8), and post-treatment ecological restoration guidelines (C). 
93 

<I) 
CD 
,~ 
a; 
-c 
'5 
(!lCD 
.x~ 
~.a 
",0 
..<:2 
<1)-
om 
(!l-
,00 
-CD 
<I)~ 
00 
c..u.. 
~ 
'" 
1:) 
~s 
,_ tn 
Ole 
Eo 
0:;::; 
0'" 
UJ~ 
,.!..,9 
<1)00 
o 
CD 
c..o::: 
'CD 
0 e 
CD 
-c 
';; 
UJ 
C 
CD 
ECD 
CD~ 
~
'" 
CD-
<1)0 
CD'" 
§:c7) 
(5 
a:: 
I 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
( 
, , 
~ : 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ I 
I' 
l~ 
~~ 
/ , 
( 
I 
I 
) 
I 
I 
I 
I , 
\ 
\ , 
" 
, 
I 
N 
(5 
a:: 
f 
/ 
\ 
I 
I 
\ 
f 
I 
I 
) 
~ 
\ 
( 
-' 
) 
I 
I 
I 
/ 
I 
/ 
I , 
"/ 
I 
(, 
I 
\ , 
I , 
I 
~ 
J- (J)l 
I 
Q) 
0 
C 
tU 
v 
I 
U; 
I 
6 
0\ 
I 
Cl 
I I 
ro 
C'0 
II 
-I 
II 
II " 
II 
..c 
Cl 
::l 
0 
II 
I 
I 
L-
..c -
I 
..-
(/) -
0 
a.. 
( 
(/) 
/ 
/ 
I 
\ 
","iii 
( 
11§ 
I 
'" '" 
I 
,,-
I 
- ., 
::r.g 
I 
:;:. ., 
, 
-'" 
'O\; 
, 
., '" 
I 
l!8 
) 
~~ 
\ 
'" 
o:ll 
(5 
~ -' 
a:: 
c 
0 
~ 
CJ 
C 
::l -
"'I --
'-'" 
-l 
"0 
(J) 
L-
::l 
(/) 
CIl 
(J) 
2 
N 
.~ 
"0 
C 
(J) a. 
a. 
<C 

UI 
Gl 
.!: 
Qi 
-0 
.:; 
ClQl 
12 
",0 
.s=2 
"'-
om 
Cl-
,UI 
-Gl 
UI 
~ 
a a 
a.u. 
. - -
I 
I 
, 
} 
\ 
I 
I 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
\ 
I I 
I I 
\ I 
, I 
I I 
I I 
I 
~ 
" . 
-
• 
• 
• 
• 
. , 
. , 
. 
} 
\ 
/' 
} 
( 
I 
I 
\ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
10 
( 
I 
-0 
-' 
a: 
1- (1)1 
. , 
I 
) 
<0 
15 
I i 
a: 
CD 
..c 
0) 
:::J o 
'-
..c 
..... 
C") 
en 
..... o 
a.. 
en c o 
:;::; u 
C 
:::J -
I 
...-.. 
..... 
'-" 
....J 
"0 
<D 
.... 
:::J 
en 
ro 
<D 
~ 
...-.. 
"0 
<D 
:::J 
C 
:;::; 
C o 
U 
'-" 
N 
.~ 
"0 
C 
<D a. 
a. 
« 

~ 
~ 
w 
s::. 
l!i 
Q, 
Of) 
<Il 
~ 
Plot 1 
--
,.,~ -.-- ,-_ ... -
'- --'1 
A. 
I 
" ] 
I 
B. 
C. 
" •. j 
j 
'! 
~ ' ; • 
I 
); -j F~ 
POt-
' 
, : I;. Ll~rJ~ri~ ,!g!!}~r:C~~'»~'''~""''jt'llg,, .... ,... ", 
", 
.,.J 
I 
::;;1:1" , [ '-, J!" 
!~; 'iij,'i i. !j~lnl m. 'illl : 
,: ... _)ij~:. !q~ 'L~ll ;J IJtiJ~l i~ l :" 
----'------1 
I 
r 
I 
~Ll ll I 
'lU'b 
f:, 'f ' :~ fil 
::~::J' il:t 'l!I)) i 
11 
21 
II 
~1 
~1 
51 
T1 
, , 
Plot 2 
.iij~: ',JaPe'iJd' ~ ,'til' ;,~q"" ,U,. ""'" ",_ •• ' 
, 
I 
. ,. 
I 
: : " 
n :J. ~~::!Ir~' i r: ~A~ ';, 
I 
, 
~ 
-\1 
.,1, 
' .' . 
• , ., 
' 1 
"!, ,, 1 ;'1 
1'i). , ',iH ' ~~ pi:, ",Ciij ! 
, ;~" :q~I ,,~!t ,), 
. ; "JH:
;~lIi'J I~\';':"'_.' 
I 
lijl' 
.! 
'j~
! I 
i! 
! 
!
' 
I 
'I II, [ ·f 
" 
I 
,: i "'1'
, 
,," " 
I "',i,' n ' "'1 
flJ.,;,~a~·! \:~~i . ,'ul'
,6iU Uf ·;1!11;.:i •.• ;: 
.J 
:" 
~ " 
',il 
~
... 
"'. -·1 . 
t ,,1, 
, 
1 
11 
21 
~1 
.41 
51 
el 
71 
Diameter class midpoint (centimeters) 
Plot 3 
I 
" 
I 
'ij . 'h 
• !.(( 
I 
11'1 
., ':1' j ~ 
I 
"lr 1 
i" ~ 
:: :~ ~ 
'11111" Uh 
•• . 
' - ·Ll".. •.. 
-ddd·, 
.1..,._ ,,!(I!f,~J.:1r,:L"·" "',1"',."-_",,, ,,~,~ , • 
, . 
'" 
~ 
5 ~'I~' r." 'l~ i'j I, I 
. 
• 
L1 ' ~' 
i 
'. " , -Iii i i !r~1:l p i i: tp" ,;)1.1 'j' 
. 1tlj[M,hlbJjl:! !~l:.dl~i fl,_dj! 1oJ: :b . q." .. i 
,. [111 
, 
i 
r .' 
, , 
I 
•. I, "'I" 
" 1 • 
' 1'1 i ii 
• r 
,I: 'j I 
, 
l !;,:In.r-
I , '! 
f j' fn" _ h~ 
. 
I 
, ;I ~;:n:d1!1 ; II " .',.1': ' .I f.: ,,:,~,,~," 
: 
· • ~i:I;. i',I~11 ';jF:l!l~l .~) , ,\~lt lltJb " I~)\l), L ..... , 
11 
21 
31 
41 
51 
61 
11 
Appendix 3: Individual plot diameter distributions. Plots 1 through 3. All contemporary trees (A). post-treatment goshawk 
guidelines (8). and post-treatment ecological restoration guidelines (C). 
96 

~ 
~ 
! 
~ 
~ 
A. 
>
", -
.- -
I 
:1 
,~ " 
Plot 4 
, 
I 
I 
i 
':.' !'lhift~'I"'-·!,m,n., '''''''"'''~ J 
.\. " '," 1.,~ ~·,", J
. 
B. u 
'. ~ " -""'.-"'--' ._, _.,,_" __ "H.-'-"" " ___ H.~ ""_"'_"_·. ·-¥· .. · .. ·~- ··I 
c. ". -
-",,-
' -.- _ 
... -._. '1 
\ 
... "J 
Plot 5 
:." ~ . 
. t 'n "".\, .. , 
I 
JI 
" 
~ 'i" ",_ ~1~I' f l, 
:', ,\lF~~ ~,lk.tl~.·;A!!LJ;,A: .l~-~~' 1;:!::'t' -:·,, "!~ ,~, .1" ~ < ' .... 
> 
1'\' 
, ~!iJ.l 
i 
1",,1,·, 
, 
'.' 
J ill rl~~~; ~ i 
I 
;; _ 
1 
,;~ : 
I.~:~~; i · .:':; -; . 
! 
, J >1' 1" 
. !Ijd l'''i 
I 
6~l\i\'lr J :ltt, ! :i:JfJI~ ~!.h!~:1"E J ,,: ... ,1 
I 
·n 
I 
, !. 
,If 1 
I 
I l ~ 
[ '11,
' 
'0' 1\ I'l fro ,II ~~I' 
I 
' 
q 
\,:,l!.j!II,!ntl ;!i I' ir 
• 
' 
,_w~: rtl !j~ I" .. .iJ:Jl tlll'.~IJn~ h.1 .. ...1 
, 
11 
21 
~1 
,1 
~1 
61 
11 
Oiameter class midpoint (centimeters) 
Plot 6 
, . 
iDCiJI~~:;U~:r~i~;~J:'1~" -':'M"'~~f :'~'_M~j 
u" 
~~ r.~f.1 
h Nil 
iil:IA,:i ~ 
I 
11'~';iII,11 , !' 
, . If:f 
!;:I I ~' :l l'~1 
r., ",_ ,~,: 
~~
.1 ', li~l, ,_,P:,~ , 
I 
. ., ;o\ijl!1 \idi- r:.!J\:)11J\~1~Jjt'iIll'-t. I);;! ' '''''''; 
! 
, 
I 
~'. n;" lf~\r;H\~I~-~i'1~ [, 
1" .. 
' 
'til" [:,lllr'iiii;m 
H:!i·r!I'L I:: 1!'llf)i~ ,:' " 
I 
,
. ~ .,' .b L ... ,-... , ..... \ ...... Q.- 1." .•••..•.•••. 
1 
11 
21 
ill 
41 
~1 
61 
11 
Appendix 3 (continued): Individual plot diameter distributions. Plots 4 through 6. All contemporary trees (A), post-
treatment goshawk guidelines (B), and post-treatment ecological restoration guidelines (C). 
97 
