Clinton restoration plan may boost local efforts 
By GARY GHIOTO 
Sun Staff Reporter 
09/12/2000 
 
A Clinton administration plan to spend $2.8 billion to repair wildfire damage and thin 
millions of acres of congested, fire-prone forest may boost local forest restoration efforts 
proposed by the Grand Canyon Forests Partnership and the Ecological Restoration 
Institute at Northern Arizona University.  
Decades of fire suppression and timber mismanagement have left a dangerous legacy of 
overgrown forests and an unnatural buildup of ready-to-burn timber and brush, said 
President Clinton in a radio address last weekend.  
The Interior and Agriculture departments proposed adding $1.6 billion above the 
administration's 2001 budget because of the disastrous western fire season which has 
consumed more than 6 million acres so far.  
The proposal includes spending $468 million next year for community and regional 
projects to reduce fire risk and forest fuel management programs.  
"We are thrilled to see this kind of attention focused on our forests," said Ecological 
Institute Director Wallace Covington, "In this action, I hope the administration will 
recognize the need for a large-scale ecologically based approach to treat not only the 
symptom of devastating crown fires, but the underlying causes that have made the 
ponderosa pine vulnerable."  
Covington added that ecological restoration, which includes thinning and prescribed fire, 
can prevent wildfires, improve wildlife habitat and return "health and vigor" to the 
forests.  
The administration proposal is facing criticism from some environmental groups that are 
opposed to logging on public lands and Republicans in Congress who favor other 
spending priorities. But powerful western U.S. senators, including Republican Arizona 
Sen. Jon Kyl, have supported increases in spending for forest restoration.  
Members of the Grand Canyon Forests Partnership say many of the strategies proposed 
by the Clinton administration such as thinning and prescribed burning are already being 
researched or moving forward in the Flagstaff area.  

The Flagstaff restoration plan, supported by Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt and Kyl, 
and devised by the Ecological Institute and the NAU Forestry Department may receive a 
financial boost under the president's plan, said Diane Vosick of the Institute.  
"Yes, I think there is a potential for funding. The work that is going on here in Flagstaff 
is part of what the president is calling for," Vosick said.  
The administration is calling for the development of lumber markets using small diameter 
timber, Vosick said.  
"That's something we've been struggling with in Flagstaff," she said. The Partnership is 
committed to cutting only trees 16 inches and smaller to thin congested forests but 
finding a market for small trees has been a problem.  
Babbitt and other Clinton administration officials are meeting with western governors 
this week in Denver to discuss the plan.  
Gary Ghioto can be reached at gghioto@azdailysun.com or 556-2251.  
 
 
