11
Ecological Restoration Institute
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
www.eri.nau.edu
Working Papers in Southwestern 
Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
Collaboration as a Tool 
in Forest Restoration
May  2005 

Working Papers in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native species, structural
characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological Restoration International
defines restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an
ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability. . . . Restoration attempts to return
an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration International 2004).
In the southwestern United States, most ponderosa pine forests have been degraded during the last
150 years; many areas are now dominated by dense thickets of small trees and have lost their once
diverse understory. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing
fires and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers on
reintroducing frequent, low-intensity surface fires—often after first thinning dense stands—and
reestablishing productive understory plant communities. The Ecological Restoration Institute at
Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, implementing, and monitoring ecological
restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. By allowing natural processes such as fire to
resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem
services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
Every restoration project needs to be site specific, but the detailed experience of field practitioners
may help guide practitioners elsewhere. The Working Papers series presents findings and
management recommendations from research and observations by the ERI and its partner
organizations.
This publication would not have been possible without significant funding from the USDA Forest
Service. The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and
should not be interpreted as representing the opinions or policies of the U.S. Government.
Mention of trade names or commercial products does not constitute their endorsement by the
U.S. Government.
1: Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons and Adaptive Management Practices
2: Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3: Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
4: Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits
5: Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
6: Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
7: Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
8: Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
9: Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
10: The Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Restoration Model

Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration
Introduction
Many policy makers, stakeholders, and land management agencies have embraced
collaborative approaches as a means of guiding forest management on public lands. A
growing number of federal policies, such as the Healthy Forests Restoration Act of 2003
and the “Facilitation of Cooperative Conservation” Executive Order of 2004, call for
“cooperative conservation” by encouraging federal agencies to work collaboratively with
multiple stakeholders on natural resource management issues. These directives have
created both optimism and uncertainty. This publication presents an overview of
collaborative forest restoration, including both benefits and challenges.
The idea of working collaboratively on forest management projects became popular in
the 1990s. It grew from a grassroots demand for increased public participation in
natural resource decision-making and the application of alternative dispute resolution
methods to environmental conflicts.
One of the oldest and best-known collaborative forest restoration groups is the
Applegate Partnership in Oregon. This collection of environmentalists, loggers, mill
owners, ranchers, and agency scientists and managers came together in 1992 to assess,
manage, and restore a 500,000-acre watershed in southwestern Oregon. In the decade
since its inception, the Applegate Partnership has completed assessments of social,
economic, and ecological conditions in the watershed, implemented forest and riparian
restoration projects, developed an extensive monitoring program, and completed one of
the first Community Wildfire Protection Plans in the country.
Collaborative efforts have also promoted forest restoration efforts in many other locales,
such as Flagstaff, Arizona; Montezuma County, Colorado; and Catron County, New
Mexico. These models have advanced the concept of collaborative resource management
around the country. Increasingly, people who have grown tired of conflict and gridlock
are coming together to explore new, innovative, and more effective strategies for
informing land management.
What Is Collaborative Forest Restoration?
Collaborative forest restoration is a process through which multiple stakeholders jointly
explore diverse values and interests and attempt to come to some level of agreement
about appropriate management. Typically, the goal is to develop new approaches to
restoration that are both scientifically credible and socially acceptable. Collaboration
implies stakeholder involvement that goes well beyond the usual processes of public
comment on agency proposals, such as public meetings and comment periods. In a
collaborative process, all stakeholders participate directly in identifying issues of
concern, developing proposed actions, and reviewing alternatives.
Not all collaborative groups are the same. Groups vary considerably in their number of participants, scope of goals
and activities, land ownership represented, interest groups involved, and the decision-making processes used. There are
a variety of ways to collaborate (Figure 1), but what they all have in common is the active involvement of multiple
stakeholders.
Using Collaboration to Meet Restoration Goals
Forest restoration projects present an ideal opportunity for using the collaborative process. Forest restoration usually
requires the input of many experts, including wildlife biologists, fire managers, and planners. It also affects many
people and groups, from people who live near the project area to those with a strong interest in resource protection.
Often tradeoffs must be made that involve prioritizing differing values, such as protecting wildlife species and reducing
fire risk. A project that includes multiple stakeholders in the restoration process from the beginning is likely to have
more local involvement and support, resulting in improved results.
Potential Benefits of
Working
Collaboratively on
Forest Restoration
Projects
• Increased public
participation in and
support for restoration
efforts
• Opportunities for
information sharing and
mutual learning
• Enhanced understanding
of community issues and
legal and management
constraints
• Innovative restoration
options
• Possible financial savings
due to pooling of
resources
• Implementation of
challenging projects
1
a

Benefits and Challenges of Working Collaboratively 
Collaboration is not easy. Although there are many benefits, there are also challenges. Collaboration is time-consuming
and unpredictable, which can lead to frustration. Common challenges include competitiveness among group members,
burnout, unbalanced representation, resistance to change, and lack of support from key community leaders and agency
officials. Interpersonal relationships within any group can become complex, necessitating extra patience and diplomacy
in order to resolve disputes. Collaboration does not guarantee consensus or elimination of controversy. It can be
difficult to make the logic behind decisions clear to everyone in the process, as well as to outsiders. For that reason, it is
critical to be as transparent as possible. Decisions made through collaboration are rarely binding and may or may not be
upheld by participants or outsiders.
Despite these challenges, the potential benefits of collaboration are significant. Inviting multiple stakeholders to
participate provides an opportunity to try new strategies, improve community relations, reduce existing tension, and
share the responsibility among many people. Collaboration encourages communication and collective learning among
all interested parties and can result in more innovative and comprehensive restoration plans and projects. By promoting
open and transparent planning and decision-making, collaboration can build trust. Collaboration also brings to light
issues early in the planning process, preventing unexpected resistance to a proposed restoration project or management
plan later on. By working together, stakeholders can expand the human and financial resources required for restoration.
Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration
a
2
Potential Benefits
• Information sharing and mutual learning
• More innovative and informed decisions
• Increased trust among stakeholders and land
management agencies
• Opportunity to work on landscape-level projects
• Long-term commitment 
• Challenging projects get implemented
Potential Challenges
• Loss of autonomy
• Willingness to let go of personal positions
• Achieving transparent decision-making
• Complex interactions among several different interests
• Considerable time investment
• Unpredictable process and uncertain outcomes
• Focus on process may eclipse on-the-ground work 
Natural Resource Agencies and Collaboration  
Natural resource agency personnel face unique challenges in a collaborative process. They have specific legal
responsibilities to uphold and operate under highly structured, bureaucratic management protocols. As professionals,
they are trained to be technical experts, and may not be comfortable engaging in discussions of management tradeoffs
with people from different backgrounds. The time required for collaboration can be stressful if it is viewed as an
additional job responsibility. Few agencies incorporate collaboration in job descriptions or as a performance goal or
measure. Both agency and non-agency participants in collaborative efforts regularly cite agency organizational culture
as the most significant obstacle to successful collaboration. Overcoming these challenges requires ongoing
communication with upper management to ensure support for the collaborative effort, as well as ongoing
communication with fellow participants in the collaborative process to ensure that they understand agency
constraints.
Characteristics of Successful Collaborative Projects 
Collaborative groups and the issues they address are too variable for any single set of criteria to apply in all cases. But
the characteristics listed here are common to many successful groups. They should not be viewed as requirements of
collaboration, nor are they a recipe for success. However, they can serve as useful ideas for those involved in or
considering participating in a collaborative effort.
• Broad participation. All stakeholders, including anyone who could affect or be affected by their activities, are
invited to participate in the process. Participants may include local community members; federal, state, and local
government agencies; tribes; businesses; non-profit organizations; researchers; environmental groups; and others.
• Significant, shared need. A common, pressing need to work together on a specific issue provides an incentive to
collaborate and can help maintain momentum. Often collaborative efforts are initiated in response to a resource
management crisis, such as fire risk, a legal threat, or a legal requirement.
• Supportive political climate. The support of key decision-makers within the community – both elected officials
and agency personnel, including those with the legal authority to plan and implement restoration projects –
facilitates project implementation.
• Adequate resources. Money, time, and staff are available to support the function of the collaborative group. Often
participants are willing to engage on a volunteer basis; however, many collaborative groups have suggested that
having at least one paid staff member is essential to keep the group moving forward. Sources of support may
include private foundations, government grants, or direct Congressional appropriations.

Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration a
• Clear, agreed-upon goals. Participants have discussed and come to agreement on the purpose and desired
outcomes of the collaborative process. Communication, respect, and mutual learning are all important in
identifying and addressing differing expectations about the collaborative process and its outcomes.
• Fair process. The group is not secretive about how information is obtained or decisions are made. Participation is
open to all interested parties. Everyone can participate in planning and decision-making discussions. Participants
understand their roles and responsibilities within the group and understand the reasoning behind decisions.
• Trust and accountability. Participants can openly and freely express their opinions without fearing ridicule or
derision from other group members. Participants are willing to negotiate and compromise. The group has
developed strategies for managing conflict, reducing individual vulnerability, and encouraging commitment to
group decisions.
• Realistic expectations. Realistic timelines are set for achieving restoration goals. Patience is vital. It is not
uncommon for collaborative groups to spend years engaged in planning before a project is implemented on the
ground.
• Measures of success. Progress is monitored on an established timeline, and project advancements, successes, and
failures are reviewed in order to improve the group’s productivity and maintain momentum. The group finds ways
to recognize and celebrate its efforts, such as using the local media to provide recognition for its accomplishments.
3
Figure 1. Types of Collaborative Forest Restoration Groups
Planning committees and advisory councils  
Main purpose is to provide advice and/or help
develop guidelines and plans for others, such as
government agencies. Group members are usually
invited or appointed based on expertise. The group
typically has no decision-making authority, but its
suggestions are used by authorities to guide the details
of restoration projects. These groups may last for
months or years, or may dissolve once the task at
hand has been accomplished.
Example: Arizona Forest Health Oversight and
Advisory Councils 
Networks
Loosely defined groups of individuals with
overlapping interests or responsibilities who engage in
informal communication over extended periods of
time. The goal is information exchange and resource
sharing, not decision making or project
implementation.
Example: National Network of Forest Practitioners 
Dialogue groups and community forums
Single events or ongoing gatherings to  share ideas
and create a broad vision for future action. May
propose goals or make recommendations, but make
no attempt to reach agreement.
Example: Seventh American Forest Congress 
Comanagement
This is a formal process with focus on shared power
among government authorities or between an agency
and one or more user groups. Participation is limited
to people with legal authority and decision-making
capacity. Comanagement groups may develop and
analyze restoration proposals, develop and ratify
legally binding agreements, and share the decision-
making process among a handful of key stakeholders.
Comanagement can operate permanently or may be
developed to work for a specified length of time.
Example: Valles Caldera Trust, New Mexico  
Partnerships
Generally long-standing and place-based, these groups are used to identify issues, gather information, generate
management options, and develop recommendations for restoration projects within a specified geographic area.
Participants usually represent an agency or special interest group, but non-aligned citizens may also participate. As
with planning committees, partnerships usually do not have decision-making authority, but their suggestions are
influential and are often adopted by agency personnel and government authorities.
Example: Applegate Partnership, Oregon 

Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration
a
4
Online Resources
USDA Forest Service district offices and other land management agencies usually have information on local
collaborative groups. Additional information about collaborative forest restoration can be found online at the
following links:
Readings on collaboration
www.fs.fed.us/newcentury/collaboration_readings.htm
Four Corners Institute
www.fourcornersinstitute.org/restoration.html
Four Corners Sustainable Forests Partnership
www.rmrs.nau.edu/fourcornersforests/
The Partnership Resource Center
www.partnershipresourcecenter.org/ 
National Park Service Community Tool Box 
www.nps.gov/phso/rtcatoolbox/index_comtoolbox.htm
Red Lodge Clearinghouse
www.redlodgeclearinghouse.org/
Ecosystem Management Initiative
www.snre.umich.edu/ecomgt/ 
Healthy Forests Restoration Act
www.sustainablenorthwest.org/pdf/policy/nfp/hfra.pdf
Fort Lewis College: Forest Restoration and Collaborative Stewardship
http://ocs.fortlewis.edu/Stewardship/forest%20restoration%20page.htm  
Tools for Achieving Forest Vegetation Health
www.fs.fed.us/vegtools/index.shtml 
Collaborative Forest Restoration Program
www.fs.fed.us/r3/spf/cfrp/
Southwest Sustainable Forests Partnership
www.southwestareagrants.org/az/fcsfp.php
Greater Flagstaff Forests Partnership
www.gffp.org
Sonoran Institute 
www.sonoran.org
Quincy Library Group
www.qlg.org/pub/miscdoc/terhunecasestudy.htm

For More Information
For more information about forest restoration, contact the ERI at 928-523-7182 or www.eri.nau.edu.
Written by Kimberly Lowe and Ann Moote
Reviewed by Jesse Abrams, Dennis R. Becker, Sam Burns, Andrea Bedell Loucks, Dennis Lund, Vicky
Sturtevant, and Diane Vosick
Series Editor Peter Friederici
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution   
NAU Printing Services/G57086/2500/05-05
Further Readings
Ecological Restoration Institute. 2003. Exploring
barriers to collaborative forestry. Flagstaff, Ariz.
Friederici, P. 2003. The “Flagstaff Model.” Pp. 7-25 in
Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine
forests, ed. P. Friederici. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Gray, B. 1989. Collaborating: Finding common ground
for multi-party problems. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Hummel, M., and B. Freet. 1999. Collaborative
processes for improving land stewardship and
sustainability. Pp. 97-129 in Ecological stewardship: A
common reference for ecosystem management, vol. 3, ed.
W. T. Sexton, A. J. Malk, R. C. Szaro, and N. C.
Johnson. Oxford: Elsevier Science.
Kusel, J., and E. Adler, eds. 2001. Forest communities,
community forests: A collection of case studies of
community forestry. Taylorsville, Calif.: Forest
Community Research.
Mattessich, P. W., M. Murray-Close, and B. R. Monsey.
2001. Collaboration: What makes it work. Saint Paul:
Amherst H. Wilder Foundation.
Moote, A. 2003. Community-based forest restoration.
Pp. 335-352 in Ecological restoration of southwestern
ponderosa pine forests, ed. P. Friederici. Washington,
D.C.: Island Press.
Sabatier, P., W. Focht, M. Lubell, Z. Trachtenberg, A.
Vedlitz, and M. Matlock, eds. 2005. Swimming
upstream: Collaborative approaches to watershed
management. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Schuett, M. A., and S. Selin. 2002. Profiling
collaborative natural resource initiatives and active
participants. Northern Journal of Applied Forestry
19(4):155-160.
Society for Ecological Restoration International. 2004.
The SER International primer on ecological restoration.
www.ser.org/pdf/primer3.pdf.
Weber, E. P. 2003. Bringing society back in: Grassroots
ecosystem management, accountability, and sustainable
communities. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Wondelleck, J. M., and S. L. Yaffee. 2000. Making
collaboration work: Lessons from innovation in natural
resource management. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.

Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
2ERI35AE
