Chapter10 
Hydrology 
MALCHUS B. BAKER JR. 
The atmosphere; the soil, subsoil, and rock of the upper mantle; the biota; 
and water are all linked together by flowing water and energy, or "hydrol­
ogy" (Satterlund and Adams 1992). Water ties together matter and energy. 
Large amounts of energy are needed to evaporate water and melt or subli­
mate ice; this energy is absorbed, transported by, and released by water as 
it moves through the hydrologic cycle. Energy is released when water vapor 
changes to a liquid or to ice; kinetic energy is produced when rain falls 
and when flowing water or ice cause erosion; we harness the energy in 
flowing water to generate electricity, provide transportation, and furnish 
heat. These processes have a major impact on watershed ecology, yet they 
are seldom fully appreciated and often inadequately considered in mak­
ing land management decisions (Baker et al. 1998; Baker 1999). Ignoring 
the impacts of management activities on soil and water resources can lead 
to unwanted effects on watersheds and on areas downstream. For exam­
ple, soil erosion can lead to losses in plant productivity and soil stability, 
while vegetation changes can alter streamflow quantity and quality and 
ultimately influence channel processes and structure, as well as the avail­
ability of water for plants, wildlife, and humans. 
Hydrology in the southwestern United States is complicated by wide var­
iations in precipitation and streamflow regimes that occur within small areas 
and are often amplified by highly variable topography. This variability cre­
ates a diversity of vegetation types that further complicates watershed plan­
ning. On a 150-mile (250-kilometer) trip from just north of Flagstaff to 
Phoenix, Arizona, for example, one passes through a single large watershed, 
but also from tundra vegetation through mixed conifer.and ponderosa pine 


10. Hydrology 
163 
begin in July, breaking the prolonged spring drought and providing relief 
from the hot weather of earlysummer. 
Evapotranspiration 
Evapotranspiration occurs when waterevaporatesdirectlyfrom the ground 
or is transpired by plants. More than 70 percent of the precipitation that 
falls in the United States is lost to evapotranspiration (Brooks et al. 1997); 
in the arid Colorado River basin, more than 90 percent is lost (Hibbert 
1979). In southwestern ponderosa pine forests, 10 to 25 percent of gross 
precipitation is often lost to direct evaporation from tree canopies before 
it reaches the soilsurface (Aldon 1959).With such large amounts ofwater 
being returned to the atmosphere, even a slight reduction in transpiration 
losswould leave substantially more water available for streamflow. Much 
hydrologic research in the Southwest has focused on how to reduce these 
losses. Ifevapotranspiration over the entire Colorado River basin could 
be reduced by only 1 percent, for example, the annual surface water sup­
plywould increase on average bymore than 1.75million acre-feet (2.5 tril­
lion liters) (Hibbert 1979). 
Opportunities to significantly reduce evapotranspiration by manage­
ment of vegetation and snow, however, are limited to certain vegetation 
types that cover about 15 percent of the basin (Brooks et al. 1997). Little 
opportunityexists to reduce transpirationwhere annual precipitation isless 
than about 18 inches (46 centimeters), because precipitation does not pen­
etrate far into the soiland all vegetationtypesare equally efficient in using 
this amount of water (Hibbert 1979). Far greater opportunities to increase 
runoff by reducing transpiration exist where precipitation is greater and 
potential evapotranspiration exceeds 15 inches (38 centimeters) yearly. 
Changing the amount of water used by plants in these areas, including 
ponderosa pine forests, can increase the amount of water available for veg­
etation, deep percolation, or streamflow. 
Management strategies that reduce evapotranspiration include 
decreasing stand density to reduce transpiration and interception losses; 
converting plant cover from one cover type to another that uses less 
water; creating forest openings to reduce transpiration and to concen­
trate snow to. reduce evaporation loss; and establ ishing trees, large 
shrubs, or fences in windswept, treeless areas to accumulate snow in 
large drifts. 


10. Hydrology 
165 
road and skid trail development, though, total infiltration capacity can be 
reduced, and surface runoff may increase at the expense of subsurface and 
groundwater flow. The net effect of such activities depends on whether 
reductions in evapotranspiration or in infiltration have the greatest impact. 
Streamflow 
Water that is not lost through evapotranspiration and that does not remain in 
the soil produces streamflow. When the soil is saturated, or when precipita­
tion is heavy, precipitation or snowmelt runs off across the soil surface . The 
path followed by runoff determines the potential for erosion. Many human 
land uses and disturbances modify the soil surface and subsurface, either 
intentionally or unintentionally, and change their streamflow characteristics. 
Ponderosa pine forests yield an average of about 0.25 acre-feet (914,715 
liters per hectare) of streamflow per year (Brown et al. 1974; Baker 1986a, 
1999). The potential for increasing streamflow is less in ponderosa pine 
forests than in mixed conifer forests because the former occur on drier sites; 
still, that potential has been the focus of much research. Water yield from 
pine forests is derived mostly from snowmelt and is influenced by the 
amount and distribution of precipitation, basin physiography, aspect, and 
soil type. It is well documented that increases in tree cover can increase 
evapotranspiration and reduce water yields. On the Santa Fe municipal 
watershed, a 20 percent reduction in water yield from 1913 to 1997 was 
attributed to increases in density of ponderosa pine and other tree species 
(Santa Fe National Forest 2001). Experimental treatments have shown that 
water yield increases in the short term following forest thinning. On central 
Arizona's Beaver Creek watershed, various thinning treatments increased 
water yields for about six years (Baker 1986a) . Wide variations in annual 
yield, though, showed that the amount and timing of precipitation had a 
greater overall effect on water availability than did the removal of trees. 
After thinning, evapotranspiration returns to pretreatment rates fairly 
quickly on 'sites with shallow soils because available water is captured by 
shrubs and herbaceous plants or by root invasion from remaining trees. 
Still, initial water yield increases of 15 to 40 percent are realistic on shal­
low, basalt-derived soils when the basal area of ponderosa pine forest is 
reduced by 30 to 100 percent. Areas with a northern exposure or deeper soil 
mantle will generally provide increased water yields for a longer time than 
south-facing slopes or sites with shallow soil development (Gottfried and 
DeBano 1990). Research conducted in Arizona on increased water yield 


10. Hydrology 
167 
mine a "normal" or "natural" rate of erosion on either undisturbed or dis­
turbed watersheds in the Southwest (DeBano 1977). 
Howsediment moves through channel systemsin response to disturbances 
is complex (Heede 1980). Riparian vegetation regulates sediment trans­
portationbydissipating streamAow energy and stabilizing stream banks (Med­
ina 1996; Brooks et al. 1997), allowing more water to recharge banks, Aood­
plains, and the groundwater system. Energy dissipation and increased 
infiltrationalsoreduce erosion,maintain the physical stability ofthe riparian 
systems, and encourage establishment of riparian vegetation (DeBano and 
Schmidt 1989; Medina 1996). Factors such as a loss of plant cover by poor 
watershed management practices- including overgrazing, wildfire, Hooding, 
and improper road construction or lackof maintenance -can resultin large 
quantities of surface runoff, which are quickly concentrated in the channel 
network and may move sediment even during relatively small storm events. 
Combined Effects 
The balance among these processes determines a watershed's condition 
and health (Baker et al. 1998). Due to inherent differences in topography, 
geology, soil type, precipitation, and other factors, it is difficult to general­
ize about the condition and health of all southwestern ponderosa pine 
watersheds. In general, though, watersheds in good condition exhibit the 
following qualities (DeBano et al. 1998): 
• Precipitation readily infiltrates the soil. 
• Precipitation does not contribute to excessive runoffand erosion 
because levels of overland flow are generally controlled. 
• StreamAow response to precipitation is relatively slow. 
• Basestreamflowissustained between storms. 
On a watershed in poor condition: 
• Precipitation readily flows over the soil surface. 
• Excessive erosion occurs during precipitation events. 
• StreamAow response to precipitation is rapid. 
• There .is little or no base streamAow between storms. 
Overall watershed health can be measured using a number of indica­
tors, including vegetativecover, integrityofstream channels, degree ofsur­
face and gully erosion, soil mass stability, sedimentation regimes, and soil 
productivity in relation to plant growth. 


10. Hydrology 
169 
coat mineral soil particles, causing water to bead up instead of penetrating 
into underlying layers. It also increases the amount of raindrop splash. 
More material is moved on water-repellent soil surfaces than on nonre­
pellent soil (Terry and Shakesby 1993). Fire-induced water repellency is 
usually confined to areas beneath plant canopies; continuous, widespread 
water-repellent layers are most common where dense vegetative cover has 
burned during a wildfire. A weakened, discontinuous layer is likely to occur 
where sparse vegetation has been onl y partially consumed by low-severity 
prescribed fires. Water-repellent soils are particularly troublesome on steep 
slopes, where they concentrate overland flow and accelerate surface and rill 
erosion (Wells 1987). 
Evapotranspiration 
Large, stand-replacing wildfires that destroy most aboveground vegetation 
can cause substantial short-term decreases in evapotranspiration. Even low­
intensity prescribed fires can result in the replacement of some deep-rooted 
trees and shrubs by shallow-rooted herbaceous plants that use less water 
and hence leave more water stored in the soil. In either case this reduction 
typically increases runoff and streamflow and leaves more water in the soil 
at the end of the growing season than would be present had the vegetation 
not burned (T iedemann et al. 1979; Wells et al. 1979). 
Soil Water Storage 
The total water storage capacity of the surface soil can be changed sub- . 
stantially by fire, particularly after intense wildfires that destroy significant 
amounts of organic matter in upper soil layers. The loss of organic aggre­
gating matter causes the collapse of soil structure in the upper few inches, 
reducing the size and amount of pores available for storing and transmit­
ting water. 
The quantity of water stored in the soil can also be decreased when 
lower infiltration rates result in more surface runoff. In contrast, evapo­
transpiration losses are reduced by burning overstory vegetation, thereby 
reducing losses of water stored in the soil. Prescribed fire has been reported 
to restore flow in springs that had been dry for thirty years (Feth and Hem 
1963). When the general lack of perennial flow in ponderosa pine forests, 
high percentage of overland flow, the relatively quick loss of water yield 
response due to evapotranspiration reduction, and the small and highly 
variable contributions to groundwater recharge are considered together, 


10. Hydrology 
171 
The timing of runoff produced by snowmelt can also be significantly 
affected by fire. Fire produces large open areas and an abundance of black­
ened surface that absorbs solar radiation. These changes usually cause 
snowpacks to melt earlier and more rapidly, resulting in earlier and more 
rapid runoff of spring snowmelt. 
Soil Erosion and Sediment Transport 
Fire-induced changes in the soil directly and indirectly affect rates of soil 
erosion and the transport and deposition of eroded soil material in streams . 
By partially or completely removing protective vegetation and litter, high­
intensity fires expose more of the soil surface to erosion by raindrop splash 
and overland flow (Hibbert et al. 1974; DeBano et al. 1998; Baker 1999). 
Water-repellent soils are also more likely to be formed during intense 
wildfires. Although raindrop splash transports small particles only a short 
distance downslope, it does disperse fine soil and ash particles that seal the 
soil surface, reducing infiltration and initiating rapid overland flow. As a 
result, severely burned watersheds experience accelerated soil erosion and 
can yield large amounts of sediment (DeBano et al. 1996; Figure 10.2), 
potentially overwhelming the transport capacity of streams and, in some 
instances, leading to channel deposition and aggradation. Nutrient losses 
accompany this postfire erosion (DeBano et al. 1998), as reduced vegeta­
tive cover reduces opportunities for nutrient uptake by plants and increases 
nutrient losses through leaching. 
In contrast, prescribed burns usually neither consume extensive 
amounts of surface litter nor substantially alter the overhead canopy. A 
mosaic pattern of burned and unburned vegetation and litter often 
remains, limiting soil movement to short distances. The difference in ero­
sion following different fire intensities is illustrated by measurements taken 
following the 1972 Rattle Fire (Campbell et al. 1977; Figure 1003). Sedi­
ment losses from severely burned watersheds were almost 450 times greater 
than those from lightly burned areas, and more than seventy-five times 
than those of a moderately burned watershed. During a recent assessment 
of a proposed restoration project in the Santa Fe municipal watershed, 
planners calculated that a severe wildfire would increase erosion rates in 
ponderosa pine forest from 0.31 to 3.7 tons per acre (694 to 8,290 kilo­
grams per hectare) (Santa Fe National Forest 2001). 


10. Hydrology 
173 
4 
Years 
14 
1000 
10 . , ~ / 
J I 
100 II 
I I 
0.1 
FIGURE 10.3. Average increases in annual sediment yield from ponderosa pine 
watersheds that were severely (darkgraybars), moderately (light graybars), and 
lightly(white bars) burned. From DeBano et al. 1996. 
influences; recognizing that the effects of human activities often follow 
watershed, not political, boundaries; and by better understanding that 
actions taken on upland sites often impact downstream areas (Brooks et al. 
1992; Ffolliott et al. 2002). Integrated watershed management practices 
focus on minimizing adverse impacts to soil and water, sustaining high­
quality water flows, and rehabilitating watersheds to increase productivity, 
particularly by identifying nonpoint sources of pollution and sedimentation 
(Brown et al. 1993; Lopes and Ffolliott 1992, 1993; Baker et al. 1995; Baker 
1999; Lopes et al. 2001). 
Watershed management practices should dovetail with forest restora­
tion. Severe, widespread degradation of southwestern watersheds has been 
attributed to overgrazing, fire exclusion, drought, and poor road design, 
construction, and maintenance- many of the same factors that have led to 
a deterioration of forest health. In the future, demands on these watersheds 
are only going to increase. Water supplies for human uses, always in short 
supply in the Southwest, will only become more limited as the population 
increases. Recreational demands on riparian areas will increase, as will 
concern for threatened and endangered plants and animals that depend 
upon aquatic systems or riparian areas (Richter et al. 1997; Ffolliott et al. 
2002). It is unlikely that managers will try to implement large-scale vege­
tation manipulations to increase water yields, as has been done in the past. 
Instead, a custodial management strategy to improve and maintain the 

