We divided the 24 plots into 11 that were burned and
thinned, eijiht burned with no thinnin^j, two tbinned hut not
burned, and three left untreated as a control. Practical con-
straints necessitated assignment of uneqii^il numbers of plots for
each treatment. Prior to treatments, tbere were an averaj^e of
92.1 overstory trees per acre (227.5 trees/ha) and 9,397 saplings
per acre (23,210.6 saplings/ha). We defined overstory trees as
being greater tban 4-5 incbes diameter at breast height. Our ini-
tial goal was to reduce the overstory by 25 percent, and increase
the prevalence of white oak and pine species while reducing that
of red and black oaks. From September to December 2000, local
loggers barvested all overstory trees, except wbite oaks and
pines, on thinning-treatment plots. Prescribed burns were con-
ducted in either March 2001 or February 2002.
In August 2002, we found tbat the number of overstory
trees per acre was significantly lower in tbinneJ plots (36.4), hut
did not change in response to burning alone (115.7). Neitber
burning nor thinning significantly affected sapling density.
Altbough tbe total number of groundcover species increased
from an average of 10.9 species per plot to 20.2 species in tbe
burned and/or harvested areas, this increase was not statistically
significant wben compared to tbe average number of species In
control plots (12.5). In contrast, we found tbat burning signifi-
cantly increased tbe floristic quality index (FQI) (Swink and
Wilbelm 1994) in plots. Before treatments, the mean FQI for all
plots was 14.35. By 2002, tbe average FQI of burned plots
increased to 19.85 compared to 14.64 for unburned plots. Plants
with bigh coefficients of conservatism in Missouri that were new
or increased after burning included black edge sedge (Carex
nigromar^naia), cypress panicgrass {Panicitm armulum). Samp-
son's snakeroot (Orhexilum pedunculatum var. psnraiioidcs), and
western rougb goldenrod (Soiidago radula).
Wbile numerous studies have sbown the benefits oi using
prescribed burns to restore woodlands and barrens in the mid-
western United States (tor example, Anderson and Scbwegmann
1999, Laatscb and Anderson 2000), few have demonstrated tbe
potential of using judicious forest harvesting to restore tbe struc-
ture of native pine-t)ak woodlands. Our Initial data from this pro-
ject indicate that prescribed fire alone, and in combination witb
torest thinning, are useful strategics, and we are continuing to
monitor tbe long-term effects of tbese treatments.
In areas like Charter C^ounty, where timbering has histori-
cally supported local economies, tbe use ai harvesting as a
restoration tool is valuable botb to the landscape and tbe people
who inbabit It (LeVan-Gree and Livingston 2003). By restoring
tbese pine-oak woc^dland communities for ecological as well as
social benefits, we are creating a biologically diverse and stable
landscape in wbich to live, a beautiful place to recreate, and a
small yet sustainable source of income for tbe future.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank the tdilowing for ussistiny with this study: DDnald Smith,
Brandon Turner, Terry Thompson, Marshall Price, Tom Draper, John
Tuttle, Tim Nigh, Georfje Hiirtman, Dave Mayers, Steve Orchard, Jenny
Grahner, Tim Smith Karen Kramer, Jeff Briggler, CD. Scott, Gar>-
Gognat, Lorrcn Leatherman, Sarah Howerton, Steven LaFal, Steve
Pacs, Tom Rothwcll, Amy Smith, and Tim Stiinton.
REFERENCES
Anderson, R, anJ J. Schwegman. 199!. Twenty years o{ vegetational
chan{;e on a Knithem Illinois barren. Natural Arcasjuumal 11; 100-107.
Liiatsch, J. and R- Anderson. 2000. An evaluation ot o;ik woodland
manaycmeni in northeastern lllinoi.s, USA. Natural Areas Journal
20:211-220.
Ladd, D. 1991. Reexamination ot the rt)le ot fire in Missouri oak wood-
lands. Pages 67-80 m G.V. Burger, J.E. Ehinger, and G.S. Wilhelm
(eds.). Proceedings of the Oak Woods Management Work.shop.
Charleston: Eastern Illinois University.
LeVan-Grccn, S. and j . Livingston. 2003. Uses lor sinall-diiimeter and
low viilue forest thinniny.s. Eailo^cal Restoration 21 (1):H-W.
McCarty, K. 1998. Landscape-scale restoration in Missouri savannas and
woodlands. Restoration & Maiuigement Notes 16:1(22-32).
Swink, F. and G. Wilhclm. 1994. Plants of the Chicago region. Indiana-
polis: Indiana Academy of Science.
151
Seeding with Natives Increases Species Richness in a
Dry Ponderosa Pine Forest (Arizona)
Judith D. Springer and Daniel C. Laughlin, EaAo^cal R<^mnation
Institute, Northern Arizona University, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff.
AZ 860/ /, 928I523'7751, 
Jtd
Many restoration practiti<,)ners In tbe scnitbwestern United
States bave questioned the efficacy of seeding native understory
species in regional ponderosa pine (Pi'nus ponderosa) forests,
where limited soil moisture and Inopportune precipitation
events may prevent tnany seeds from germinating. Moreover,
some researchers and land managers are concerned tbat seeding
could potentially introduce exotics or plants oi unknown
genetic history (Allen and others 2002). Seeding, however, may
provide a supplemental source of propagules in tbinned and
burned areas that lack mature, seed-dispersing native plants.
Sowing native plant seeds on bare mineral soil that is .sometimes
exposed by prescribed burns may help jump-start revegetation
and provide resistance to colonizatioti by non-native species.
To better understand the effects of seeding, we compared
changes In species richness and composition in 11 seeded and 8
unseeded 0.25-acre (0.1-ha) monitoring plots located in a pon-
derosa pine-Gambel oak {Quercus gambelii) forest at Grand
Canyon-Parasbant National Monutnent (GCPNM) in north-
west Arizona, All plots were located in areas that were thinned
by fail 1998 and burned in early 1999. Pine trees were thinned
fr<.)m an average density of 75 trees per acre (185 trees /ha) to 18
per acre (46 trees/ba). Tbe seeded plots were evenly spaced
tbrougboLit nearly 175 acres (71 ha), where, in tbe summer of
1999, Bureau oi Land Management staff had hand broadcast
220
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION 
22:3 • SRrTHMRBR 2004

seed at an average rate of 8 Ihs of pure live seed per acre (9
kg/ha). The certified weed-free seed mix included native species
that were previously inventoried in the study area and were
commercially available and affordable (Table 1). The main man-
agement objective was to create a grass-dominated understory
that would provide ctjntinuous fuels tt) carry frequent ground
fires (Schoppmann 1999).
In 2003, we found that species richness in the seeded plots
had increased since a 1996 survey by a mean of 27.4 species per
plot compared to 17.9 species in the unseeded plots (repeated
ANOVA,/= 6.1, p = 0.02). There were more grass species in the
seeded plots, probably because grass seeds were conspicuously
absent from the seed bank in ponderosa pine forests at GCPNM
(Springer 1999). We found no difference in rate of increase in
forb species richness between seeded and unseeded plots.
Six species increased considerably after seeding (Table 1).
Ft)r example, needle and thread (Hesperostipa comata) increased
its presence by 36 percent in seeded plots and did not change on
unseeded plots. Four other grasses—mountain brome {Bromus
mar^natus), slender wheatgrass {Eiymus trachycauius), prairie
Junegrass {Koeleria macrantha), and western wheatgrass
{Pascopyrum smithii)—and one forb, prairie flax (Linum kwisii),
also increased notably. We recommend that these species be
included in seeding treatments in ponderosa pine forests at
GCPNM and investigated for use at other restoration sites in
northern Arizona where they are found in the extant vegetation.
Non-native species increased slightly in all plots after thin-
ning and burning, which is to be expected after disturbance.
Unfortunately, we cannot determine whether these species were
introduced in the seed mix or in some other manner. We observed
a greater increase in native species and no difference in percent-
age of exotic species between seeded and unseeded plots.
Cheatgrass (Bromus tecturum), an invasive annual, was abundant
in 2003 and is a cause of concern. We suspect that it germinated
from the soil seedhank, since it was present on the site before
treatment (Springer 1999).
The cost of prescribed thinning and burning in southwestern
monrane forests ranges from $200 to $800 per acre ($500-
$2,000/ha) (Snider and others 2003). The seeding treatments for
this study cost about $110 per acre ($275/ha) (Schoppmann
1999). Given the enormous amount of acreage that is under con-
sideration for restoration in this region, these high costs could be
a problem. However, we recommend seeding with natives if the
primary goal is to increase species richness in degraded ponderosa
pine forests. We also recommend additional research to deter-
mine the species-specific mortality rates of sown seeds, find more
native forb and shrub species that can germinate reliably under
^emi-arid field conditions, and develop optimal seed mixes and
seeding methods for southwestern ponderosa pine forests.
Table 1. Changes from 1996 to 2003 in frequencies (proportion
of total plots in which a species was detected) of native seeded
species in both seeded and unseeded plots at the Grand
Canyon-Parashant National Monument in northwest Arizona.
Seeded Species
Grasses
Achnatherum hymenoides
Bouteloua curtipendula
Boutehua gracilis
Bromus marginatus*
Eiymus elymoides
Eiymus trachycaulus*
Festuca arizonica
Koeteria macrantha*
Hesperost/pa comata*
Pascopyrum smithii*
Poa secunda
Schizachyrium scoparium
Sporobofus cryptandrus
Forbs
Eriogonum umbellatum
Geranium caespitosum
Ipomopsis aggregata
Linum iewisii*
Mahonia repens
Oenotbera caespitosa
% Change
Seeded
+18
0
+27
+73
+9
+64
0
+55
+36
+73
0
0
0
0
+9
0
+27
0
+9
% Change
Unseeded
0
0
+25
-12
0
+38
0
+25
0
+25
0
0
0
0
0
0
+ 13
0
+25
* Indicates species that notably increased after seeding
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Pete Fule, Dave Huffman, Wally Covington, Doc Smitb, Lind
John Piiul Roccaforte nf tbe Ecolofjical Re.storiition Institute at Northern
Arizona University and Kevin Schoppmann, Lee Hughes, Greg Taylor,
Ro(jer Moore, and Ken Moore of the Bureau of Land Management
(BLM) for making tbis project possible. We also thank the staff and stu-
dents of the Ecol<igica! Research Institute for field assistance. This work
was funded by grants from the BLM.
REFERENCES
Allen, CO., M. Savage, D.A. Falk, K.F Suckling, T.W. Swetnam, T
Schulke, P.B. Stacey, P. Morgan, M. Hoffman andJT. Klingel. 2002.
Ecological restoration (if southwestern ponden>sa pine ecosystems: A
broiid perspective. Ecolo^cal Applications 12:141S-1433.
Schoppmann, K. 1999. Seeding trick tank and rye units. Memorandum
on file at the Bureau oi Land Management, Fredonia, Arizona.
Snider, G.B,, D,B. Wood and P.J. Daugherty. 2003. Analysis of costs and
benefits of restoration-based hazardous fuel reduction: Treatment vs.
no treatment. Progress Report *1, June 13. School of Forestry,
Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff. UnpuhlisheJ report.
Springer, J.D. 1999. Soil seed bank in southwestern ponderosa pine:
Implications ft^r ecological restoration. M.S. thesis. Northern
Arizona University, Flagstaff.
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION 
22:3 • SEPTEMBER 2004
221
