The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Ecological Restoration and Fine-Scale Structural Regulation 
In Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests 
 
By Andrew J. Sánchez Meador, Program Director of Biometrics and Forest Management  
Introduction 
Forest spatial patterns and heterogeneity1 at multiple scales are increasingly recognized as important compo-
nents of forest structural complexity. Variation in tree spatial patterns at scales finer than those associated 
with forest stands (typically 10–1,000 acres) is a result of complex interacting biotic and abiotic ecological 
processes. Spatial heterogeneity not only influences future tree growth and stand development, but is also 
important for understory plant community dynamics, fire behavior and effects and wildlife habitat suitabil-
ity. There is increasing recognition that maintenance of fine-scale spatial heterogeneity increases the capaci-
ty of dry forest ecosystems to adapt to changing climate and to persist and recover from disturbances. 
  
Methods 
In this study, we quantified forest spatial patterns (e.g., tree group size) and non-spatial structure (e.g., tree 
density) resulting from applications of evidence-based ecological restoration guidelines (ERG) and northern 
goshawk (Accipiter gentilis) foraging area management recommendations (GMR) in ponderosa pine forests. 
Specifically, we sought to answer the following three questions: 1) Do these treatments create forests with 
similar structure to estimates of historical forest structure?; 2) Are there differences in structure and pattern 
resulting from each approach?; and 3) What is the Vegetation Structural Stage (VSS)2 composition and dis-
tribution at the scale of individual tree groups resulting from each approach? We compared stand-level char-
acteristics, tree point patterns and group-level attributes resulting from the two different marking approaches 
to current forest conditions (CUR) and patterns of historical forest conditions (PRE) on six, 5-acre stem 
mapped plots located on the North Kaibab Ranger District of northern Arizona.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
May 2017 
Figure 1. Ecological restora-
tion guidelines (ERG, left) 
used a historic tree remnant-
to-replacement tree spacing of 
approximately 15–20 feet 
while the goshawk manage-
ment recommendations (GMR, 
right) favored whole-group 
replacement. Both methods 
use historical forest remnants 
and emphasize fine-scale spa-
tial patterns. Red circles indi-
cate trees to be retained in 
thinning operations.  
1 Heterogeneity: the uneven distribution of a trait, event, or relationship across a region. 
2 VSS: a structure classification and framework focused on the management of even-aged groups ranging from seedlings to old, large trees. 

Results 
 
Tree densities resulting from ERG- or GMR-based markings (i.e., simulated treatments) were not 
significantly different from historical (PRE) densities; however, stand-level PRE, ERG and GMR 
densities were significantly different from current (CUR) conditions.   
 
GMR-based approaches resulted in a significantly higher average basal area versus ERG-based ap-
proaches and average stand canopy cover did not significantly differ between ERG and GMR.  
 
Both treatments exhibited significantly aggregated tree spatial patterns across a range of scales when 
compared to CUR, while ERG-based treatments resulted in more evenly spaced trees and GMR-
based treatments resulted in much more intensely aggregated patterns. 
 
Regulating tree groups, a goal of GMR, resulted in significantly lower ranges of tree sizes within 
tree groups (e.g., VSS 4–6) as compared to current condition, while the ERG-based approach result-
ed in retaining a greater degree of the contemporary tree size heterogeneity. 
 
Mean maximum group size resulting from ERG-based treatments was 8.5 trees, significantly less 
than the mean current maximum 208.7 trees per group but not statistically different from mean max-
imum GMR and PRE group size (19.9 and 16.3 trees per group, respectively). 
 
Management Implications 
 
Managers should be aware that GMR-based approaches focus more on the artificial creation of spe-
cific habitat patches than the methods used in the ERG-based approach (Figure 1) and thus may re-
sult in more fine-scale spatial heterogeneity.  
 
Attempts to meet multiple silvicultural objectives may cause marking to deviate from ecological 
restoration marking guidelines (e.g., Covington et al. 1999) and may result in uniformity of tree spa-
tial patterns. For example, if suitable replacement trees were not found nearby when using the ERG-
based marking, then trees up to 60 feet away were used in this study. In a hypothetical extreme ex-
ample, a group of three forest remnants could then be replaced by four to five trees up to 120 feet 
apart (i.e. two times the search radius — see Figure 1) essentially weakening fine-scale forest rem-
nant spatial aggregation. 
 
If maintaining heterogeneity of within-group tree sizes is a desired outcome, ERG-based approaches 
may be better approach, since GMR-based approaches tend to homogenize fine-scale group struc-
ture. 
 
Further Reading 
Churchill, D.J., A.J. Larson, M.C. Dahlgreen, J.F. Franklin, P.F. Hessburg, and J.A. Lutz. 2013. Restoring 
forest resilience: From reference spatial patterns to silvicultural prescriptions and monitoring. Forest 
Ecology and Management, 291, 442-457.  
Covington, W.W., P.Z. Fulé, M.M. Moore, H.B. Smith, A.E.M. Waltz, and T.A. Heinlein. 1999. Ecological 
restoration marking guidelines for ponderosa pine restoration areas. Northern Arizona University.  
Reynolds, R.T., A.J. Sánchez Meador, J.A. Youtz, T. Nicotlet, M.S. Matonis, P.L. Jackson, D. Delorenzo, 
and A.D. Graves. 2013. Restoring composition and structure in Southwestern frequent-fire forests: a 
science-based framework for improving ecosystem resiliency. General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-
310. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, CO. 
Reynolds, R.T., R. Graham, M.H. Reiser, R.L. Bassett, P.L. Kennedy, D. Boyce, G. Goodwin, R. Smith, and 
E.L. Fisher. 1992. Management recommendations for the northern goshawk in the Southwestern United 
States. General Technical Report RM-217. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station, Fort Collins, CO. 
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
Tuten, M.C., A.J. Sánchez Meador, and P.Z. Fulé. 2015. Ecological restoration and fine-scale structural reg-
ulation in Southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Forest Ecology and Management, 348: 57-67. 
Contact: Andrew Sánchez Meador, Andrew.SanchezMeador@nau.edu 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
