ERI Spring 2017 Newsletter
View this email in your browser
ERI Spring 2017 Newsletter
Plot photo from resource objective wildﬁre study, measuring post-ﬁre effects.
NEW RESEARCH: Resource Objective Wildﬁres
Resource objective wildﬁres, or unplanned ignition ﬁres, are monitored and
managed by land management agencies to achieve resource management
objectives such as hazardous fuels reduction. The use of resource objective
wildﬁres has increased in recent years; however, there is little research to

determine whether these wildﬁres actually achieve restoration goals and
objectives, like sufﬁciently changing forest structure consistent with restoring
ecological health and resilience to forests.
 
In February, a group of ERI scientists released a paper in Forest Ecology and
Management detailing ﬁndings from their study on the efﬁcacy of resource
objective wildﬁres for restoration of ponderosa pine forests in northern Arizona.
In the ﬁrst study of its kind, researchers randomly selected 10 resource
objective wildﬁres based on several criteria. They used four burn severity
classes—unburned/low, low burn, moderate, and high severity—to stratify ﬁeld
sampling, and evaluated 12 structural and hazardous fuels attributes within
those severity classes.
 
The ecologists found statistically signiﬁcant differences among burn severity
classes in tree density, basal area, coarse wood loads, canopy cover, and
canopy fuel loads. Areas classiﬁed as moderate burn severity met historic
ranges of variability (HRV) for more attributes (67 percent) than did other areas
in other severity classes. High severity was within HRV for the fewest (17
percent) of the 12 attributes. The results suggest that the effectiveness of
resource objective wildﬁres for meeting restoration goals may be increased by
managing for proportionally more moderate burn severity and allowing greater
tree mortality across landscapes. However, with this approach managers will
likely face challenges related to public acceptance and increased potential for
undesirable, high severity and escaped ﬁres. 
 
To read the full journal article, click here. For the fact sheet that summarizes the
paper’s ﬁndings, click here.
ERI in the News
Managed wildﬁres could be doing more in forests around Flagstaff, Arizona
Daily Sun
Recent Publications

JOURNAL ARTICLES
DeWald, L.E., and K.M. Kolanoski. 2017. Conserving genetic diversity in
ecological restoration: a case study with ponderosa pine in northern Arizona,
USA. New Forests. Online: DOI 10.1007/s11056-016-9565-1
 
This study evaluated potential impacts of ecological restoration treatments on
genetic diversity of ponderosa pine populations within the Fort Valley
Experimental Forest near Flagstaff, AZ. Overall results indicate use of genetic
structure and diversity can help guide restoration treatments to help ensure
adaptive potential is conserved.
 
Huffman, D.W., A.J. Sánchez Meador, M.T. Stoddard, J.E. Crouse, and J.P.
Roccaforte. 2017.
Efﬁcacy of resource objective wildﬁres for restoration of ponderosa pine (Pinus
ponderosa) forests in northern Arizona. Forest Ecology and Management.
389:395-403.
 
A team of ERI ecologists present ﬁndings from a study of 10 past ﬁres
managed for resource objectives. They found that more restoration objectives
(67% of targets) were met with moderate-severity ﬁre, which only covered 12%
of the ﬁre landscapes. Results suggested that effectiveness may be increased
by managing for proportionally more moderate burn severity on these
landscapes.
 
Huffman, D.W., M.T. Stoddard, J.D. Springer, and J.E. Crouse. 2017.
Understory responses to tree thinning and seeding indicate stability of
degraded pinyon-juniper woodlands. Rangeland Ecology and Management.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rama.2017.01.008
 
In this study, ecologists analyzed 10-year understory plant community
responses to restoration treatments that included: tree thinning to approximate
historical densities of pinyon pine and juniper, scattering of thinning slash to
improve soil conditions, and seeding at two woodland sites in northwestern
Arizona. This treatment resulted in only minor changes in understory cover and
species richness at both sites.
 
Mottek Lucas, A., Y.S. Kim, B. Greco, D.R. Becker, E.E. Hjerpe, and J. Abrams.

2017. The Social and Economic Contributions of the White Mountain
Stewardship Project: Final 10-Year Assessment—Lessons Learned and
Implications for Future Forest Management Initiatives. Journal of Forestry,
http://dx.doi.org/10.5849/jof.2016-008R3
 
A team of researchers presents an assessment of the White Mountain
Stewardship Project and lessons learned in large-scale contracting. The paper
examines the project initiation, contractual process, overall impact to the local
forest products industry and economy, and formation of key partnerships.
 
FACT SHEETS
Huffman, D.W. 2017. Efﬁcacy of Resource Objective Wildﬁres for Restoration
of Ponderosa Pine (Pinus ponderosa) Forests in Northern Arizona. Ecological
Restoration Institute Fact Sheet. Northern Arizona University. 2 p.
 
This summary of ﬁndings from a study by a team of ERI scientists shows that
effectiveness of resource objective wildﬁres may be increased by managing for
proportionally more moderate burn severity on managed wildﬁres.
 
Kalies, E.L., and L.L. Yocom Kent. 2017. Tamm Review: Are Fuel Treatments
Effective at Achieving Ecological and Social Objectives? A Systematic Review.
Ecological Restoration Institute Fact Sheet. Northern Arizona University. 2 p.
 
This fact sheet addresses whether fuel treatments are effective at achieving
ecological and social objectives. It analyzed studies that examined post-wildﬁre
responses in both treated and untreated sites. The review of the literature
suggests that thin plus burn treatments are likely to be more effective at
meeting objectives because they remove both canopy and surface fuels.
 
Rodman, K.C. 2017. Reference Conditions and Historical Fine-Scale Spatial
Dynamics in a Dry Mixed-Conifer Forest, Arizona, USA. Ecological Restoration
Institute Fact Sheet. Northern Arizona University. 2 p.
 
This fact sheet details the results of a study that examined reference conditions
and the natural ranges of variability within southwestern dry mixed-conifer
forests, particularly with respect to ﬁne-scale spatial patterns.
 

Sánchez Meador, A.J. 2017. Ecological restoration treatments improve soil
function in frequent-ﬁre forests of the western United States. Ecological
Restoration Institute Fact Sheet. Northern Arizona University. 2 p.
 
The review investigates the general effects of ecological restoration treatments
on soil function in frequent-ﬁre forests of the western U.S., and ﬁnds that tree
thinning and/or prescribed ﬁre may positively affect soil processes and function.
 
Strahan, R.T. 2017. Shifts in Community-Level Traits and Functional Diversity
on a Mixed-Conifer Forest: A Legacy of Land-Use Change. Ecological
Restoration Institute Fact Sheet. Northern Arizona University. 3 p.
 
Researchers used dendrochronology to reconstruct historical forest structure
and composition (from 1880) in a warm-dry mixed-conifer site on the Apache-
Sitgreaves National Forest. They analyzed presettlement and contemporary
forest composition and structure, community-weighted mean traits, and
functional diversity metrics for four plant functional traits. 
 
WHITE PAPER
Esch, B., and D. Vosick. 2016. The Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI):
The Role of Collaboration in Achieving Outcomes. ERI White Paper. Ecological
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University.
 
This policy paper details the lessons learned from a six-year period of the 4FRI
collaborative process leading up to the ﬁrst 4FRI Environmental Impact
Statement.
TECHNICAL REPORTS
Evans, A. 2017. 2016 Wildﬁre Season: An Overview, Southwestern U.S.
Technical Report. Ecological Restoration Institute and Southwest Fire Science
Consortium, Northern Arizona University. 12 p.
This report covers the 12 largest ﬁres in Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas in
2016. It reports on ﬁre management costs, vegetation types, previous burn
footprints, and burn severity and compares some trends over the past four
years.

Notes from the Field
Research and Development – 2017 Summer Field Season Outlook
By Dave Huffman, Director of Research and Delivery
During the summer of 2017, the ERI will continue to work with the Mogollon
Rim Ranger District of the Coconino National Forest to implement a
randomized, replicated study of restoration treatments in warm/dry mixed-
conifer forests. Information on restoration options in these important
ecosystems is lacking and urgently needed. Study sites have been established
and pretreatment data on the forest structure, vegetation, and hazardous fuels
have been collected.
 
Also in 2017, the ERI will initiate a study to quantify historical ﬁre regimes and
structural characteristics in ponderosa pine forests growing at lower elevations,
below the Mogollon Rim (see the Science Delivery notes for initial outreach
activities on this project). Historical reference information for these vegetation
communities is lacking, and this project will allow forest managers to develop

science-based restoration prescriptions and more clearly evaluate treatment
outcomes. Field crews will establish sample plots and collect tree increment
cores and ﬁre scars for reconstruction analyses.
 
Lastly, ERI ﬁeld crews will re-measure long-term monitoring plots established in
pinyon-juniper woodlands on the Tusayan Ranger District of the Kaibab
National Forest. Very few replicated studies have examined restoration and
hazardous fuels reduction treatment responses in southwestern pinyon-juniper
woodlands. This study will provide forest and woodland managers with critically
needed information about pinyon-juniper woodland restoration and adaptive
management.
 
ERI Science Delivery and Outreach News 
By Amy Waltz, Director of Science Delivery
The ERI is committed to assessing science needs and
communicating primary restoration science to our land
management partners to better meet forest
management goals. A few highlights across this broad
program of work include:
 
West-Wide. Science delivery staff shared Broader-Scale Monitoring project
(part of the 2012 Planning Rule requirements) outcomes at the Region 3
planners workshop in Albuquerque. All the national forests in New Mexico and
the Tonto National Forest in Arizona are revising forest plans under the 2012
Planning Rule, with opportunities to synchronize their Broader-Scale Monitoring
Plans across two or more forests.
 
Forest Projects. Not all ponderosa pine forests are as well studied as those on
the Colorado Plateau. The ERI Research and Delivery team initiated ﬁre history
and forest reconstruction work in the less-studied transitional pine habitat —
ponderosa pine over shrub and deciduous communities, where pine is
transitioning to lower elevation vegetation types. Our science delivery work for
this project includes planning a fall workshop on the ﬁre history work with the
Prescott, Tonto, and Coronado national forests to look at available science, ﬁrst
ﬁeld season observations, and managers’ lessons-learned and additional
information needs.
 

Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI) Science and Planning Support.
Science Delivery partnered with Alan Ager at the Rocky Mountain Research
Station to facilitate the use of the Ager et al.’s modeling tool, the Landscape
Treatment Designer, to provide implementation scenarios for the 4FRI 1st EIS.
Treatment units were crafted based on spatially optimizing restoration goals
and economic value to examine the trade-offs between economic feasibility and
restoration outcomes. Initial results show optimizing for both values allows for
feasible economic output while concurrently achieving almost maximum
restoration value. Data layers continue to be reﬁned with more accurate
information in this iterative project.
Partner Spotlight
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Southwest Region
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS), Southwest Region works with a
variety of partners and other agencies, communities, tribal governments,
conservation groups, business interests, landowners, and concerned citizens to
conserve, protect, and enhance ﬁsh, wildlife, and their habitat. The ERI has
worked closely with the USFWS Fish and Wildlife Biologist Shaula Hedwall and
the U.S. Forest Service on a management experiment to study Mexican
spotted owl occupancy and reproduction following mechanical and burning
treatments in protected activity centers as part of the Flagstaff Watershed
Protection Project. The ERI is speciﬁcally working with USFWS to conduct
vegetation monitoring as part of a project to assess how treatments designed to
reduce hazardous fuels modify owl habitat.
To learn more about the USFWS Southwest Region, visit
https://www.fws.gov/southwest/.

EVENTS
14th Biennial Conference of Science & Management on the Colorado
Plateau & Southwest Region
September 11-14, 2017
Northern Arizona University, High Country Conference Center
The 14th Biennial Conference is the preeminent forum for bringing together
resource managers and research scientists to discuss ﬁndings and
management needs associated with the Southwest’s natural and cultural
resources. For more information, click here.
 
2017 Natural Areas Conference
October 10-12, 2017
Hilton Fort Collins
Fort Collins, Colorado
The 44th annual conference will be held at the Hilton Fort Collins, on the edge
of the Colorado State University Campus. The theme this year is “Working
Beyond Boundaries: Collaboration as a Key to Natural Areas Management.”
For more info, click here.
NAU is an equal opportunity provider. 
ERI's research is funded by many sources, including the USDA Forest Service and the AZ Board of
Regents through the Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF).
Want to change how you receive these emails?
You can update your preferences or unsubscribe from this list
Copyright © 2017 Ecological Restoration Institute, All rights reserved.
