The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Shifts in Community-Level Traits and Functional Diversity in a 
Mixed-Conifer Forest: A Legacy of Land-Use Change 
By Robert T. Strahan, Restoration and Monitoring Program Manager  
Introduction 
Over the last century, intensive land uses including unregulated livestock grazing, selective timber har-
vesting, and active fire suppression have resulted in significant shifts in forest composition and struc-
ture in warm/dry mixed conifer forests (Figure 1). A major consequence of this has been large increases 
in tree densities and a shift in dominance toward more shade- and fire-intolerant species (Huffman et al. 
2015). In turn, wildfires on the landscape have become increasingly more severe, with an increase in 
the size and frequency of wildfires and longer duration wildfire seasons (Westerling et al. 2006). There 
is a concerted effort to mitigate this risk through landscape-scale restoration efforts. Restoration treat-
ments are based largely on applying the concept of reference conditions and the natural range of varia-
bility, defining targets based on historical forest structure and composition (Roccaforte et al. 2015).  
 
 
Although recent changes in contemporary forest structure and composition have received much atten-
tion, functional trait responses related to these changes are not fully understood. A functional trait can 
be defined as any morphological, phenological, or physiological attribute impact fitness through their 
influence on growth, reproduction, or survival. Studies have shown that shifts in structure and composi-
tion have been primarily due to declines in the abundance of fire-tolerant P. ponderosa and P. menziesii 
(Korb et al. 2013; Huffman et al. 2015). Selective harvest and reduced recruitment of these species 
have left some stands deficient in number and sizes needed to meet objectives focused on precise resto-
ration of historical composition and structure. Additionally, as climate change progresses, forest eco-
systems in many regions are expected to experience conditions outside of their natural range of varia-
bility, increasing the probability of widespread mortality and large-scale disturbance events (Williams 
et al. 2010). As a consequence, defining restoration targets based on historical composition might be-
come less tenable. One alternative is for restoration practitioners to focus on restoring resilient ecosys-
tems by targeting functional attributes better adapted to anticipated future environmental conditions. 
May 2017 
Figure 1. Con-
temporary forest 
structure and 
composition at 
Black Mesa 
study site has 
shifted toward 
dominance by 
shade tolerant 
and fire intoler-
ant species due 
to fire exclusion 
and land use 
change. 

Methods 
Our study was conducted within a 2,805-acre warm/dry-mixed conifer ecosystem on the Black Mesa 
Ranger District of the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest in northern Arizona. We used dendrochronolo-
gy to reconstruct historical forest structure and composition in 1880, the year immediately following the 
disruption of the natural fire regime at this site (Huffman et al. 2015). We analyzed differences in preset-
tlement and contemporary forest composition, structure, and community-weighted mean (CWM) traits, 
and functional diversity metrics (Rao’s Q and functional richness) for four plant functional traits: leaf 
nitrogen content (leaf N), specific leaf area (SLA), wood density, and bark thickness. These traits were 
chosen to represent two independent axes of plant specialization. Leaf N and SLA represent the leaf eco-
nomics spectrum (LES), which  describes a gradient from species with short-lived leaves that allow for 
the acquisition and processing of carbon, nutrients and water more rapidly than those with longer-lived 
leaves that reduce carbon and nutrient turnover (Reich 2014). Traits associated with the LES have been 
shown to influence litter flammability, which has important implications in semi-arid environments 
where litter accumulation is high and fine surface fuels are the primary source of surface fire spread 
(Bradstock and Cohn 2002). The wood economics spectrum (WES) describes a gradient from species 
with dense wood with low tissue moisture content to species with lower wood density and  higher mois-
ture content (Baraloto et al. 2010). Higher density wood confers greater resistance to drought-induced 
cavitation (Hacke et al. 2001) and may also play a role in fire tolerance by allowing species to compart-
mentalize damage and reduce the risk of mortality (Brando et al. 2012). Bark thickness has been shown 
to align with the WES (Baraloto et al. 2010) and represents a key adaptation related to fire resistance 
(Jackson et al. 1999).  
 
Results 
 Prior to fire exclusion, ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) was the most dominant species in the pre-
settlement 1880 forest, followed by Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii), Gambel oak (Quercus 
gambelii), white fir (A. concolor), and aspen (Populus tremuloides), respectively. By 2011, white fir 
was the most dominant species in contemporary forests, followed by Douglas fir, ponderosa pine, 
southwestern white pine (Pinus strobiformis), and Gambel oak. 
 Compositional changes between 1880 and 2011 were associated with declines in CWM leaf N, 
SLA, wood density, and bark thickness. We found lower multi-trait functional diversity (Rao’s Q) 
in contemporary forests driven primarily by leaf N; however, bark thickness variation was greater 
in contemporary forests than in 1880 (Figure 2). 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Species-specific diameter distributions in a) presettlement (1880) and b) contemporary 
(2011) time periods. Note the order of magnitude difference between y-axes in panels a and b. 

 
Management Implications 
 Compositional shifts toward reduced average bark thickness and wood density in contemporary for-
ests driven by land-use change has likely reduced forest resilience to both fire and drought. 
 Managers can manipulate forest structure and species composition to achieve functional objectives 
by increasing stand-level bark thickness to promote fire tolerance and increasing stand-level wood 
density to promote drought tolerance. 
 A focus on restoring optimal functional traits may be important for sustaining resilient ecosystems 
under changing climate effects that are likely to include extended fire seasons and declining precipi-
tation for many ecosystems around the planet. 
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
Strahan, R.T., A.J. Sánchez Meador, D.W. Huffman, and D.C. Laughlin. 2017. Shifts in community-level traits 
and functional diversity in a mixed conifer forest: a legacy of land-use change. Journal of Applied Ecology, doi: 
10.1111/1365-2664.12737  
 
References 
Baraloto, C., C.E.T. Paine, L. Poorter, J. Beauchene, D. Bonal, A.-M. Domenach, B. Hérault, S. Patiño, J.-C. Rog-
gy, and J. Chave. 2010. Decoupled leaf and stem economics in rain forest trees. Ecology Letters, 13, 1338-1347 
Bradstock, R., and J. Cohn. 2002. Fire regimes and biodiversity in semi-arid mallee ecosystems. In: Flammable 
Australia: The Fire Regimes and Biodiversity of a Continent (eds. R. Bradstock, J. Williams and A. Gill). Pages 
238–258, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
Brando, P.M., D.C. Nepstad, J.K. Balch, B. Bolker, M.C. Christman, M. Coe, and F. Putz. 2012. Fire-induced mor-
tality in a neotropical forest: the roles of bark traits, tree size, wood density and fire behavior. Global Change 
Biology, 18, 630-641. 
Hacke, U.G., J.S. Sperry, W.T. Pockman, S.D. Davis, and K.A. McCulloh. 2001. Trends in wood density and 
structure are linked to prevention of xylem implosion by negative pressure. Oecologia, 126, 457-461. 
Huffman, D.W., T.SJ. Zegler, and P.Z. Fulé. (2015) Fire history of a mixed-conifer forest on the Mogollon Rim, 
northern Arizona, USA. International Journal of Wildland Fire, 24, 680-689. 
Jackson, J.F., D.C. Adams, and U.B. Jackson. 1999. Allometry of constitutive defense: A model and a comparative 
test with tree bark and fire regime. American Naturalist, 152, 614-632. 
Korb, J.E., P.Z. Fulé, and R. Wu. 2013. Variability of warm-dry mixed conifer forests in southwestern Colorado, 
USA: Implications for ecological restoration. Forest Ecology and Management, 304, 182-191. 
Reich, P.B. 2014. The world-wide “fast-slow” plant economics spectrum: a traits manifesto. Journal of Ecology, 
102, 275-301. 
Roccaforte, J.P., D.W. Huffman, P.Z. Fulé, W.W. Covington, W.W. Chancellor, M.T. Stoddard, J.E. Crouse. 2015. 
Forest structure and fuels dynamics following ponderosa pine restoration treatments, White Mountains, Arizo-
na, USA. Forest Ecology and Management, 337, 174-185. 
Westerling, A.L., H.G. Hidalgo, D.R. Cayan, and T.W. Swetnam. 2006. Warming and earlier spring increase west-
ern U.S. forest wildfire activity. Science, 313, 940–43. 
Williams, A.P., C.D. Allen, C.I. Millar, T.W. Swetnam, J. Michaelsen, C.J. Still, S.W. Leavitt. 2010. Forest re-
sponses to increasing aridity and warmth in the southwestern United States. Proceedings of the national Acade-
my of Sciences, 107, 21289-21294. 
Contact: David W. Huffman, David.Huffman@nau.edu 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
