2016 Wildﬁre Season: An Overview
Southwestern U.S.
MAY 2017

Table of Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Wildfire Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
The 2016 Fire Season . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Regional Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Data Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Cedar Fire, Arizona . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
North Fire, New Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Jack Fire, Arizona . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Juniper Fire, Arizona . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Dog Head Fire, New Mexico  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Brown Fire, Arizona . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Fuller Fire, Arizona . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Coyote Fire, Texas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
McKenna Fire, New Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Clavel Fire, New Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Rim Fire, Arizona . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Mule Ridge, Arizona  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Conclusion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
Appendix I. Fire Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

Author: Alexander Evans
Reviewers: Jose Iniguez, USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station and Barb Satink Wolfson,  
Southwest Fire Science Consortium; and Doug Cram, New Mexico State University
Acknowledgements: Chuck Maxwell, Southwest Coordination Center, Predictive Services produced the Energy  
Release Component graphs.
Cover photo: Engine 337 of the Tonto National Forest monitors the Juniper Fire, which started by a lighting strike on  
May 20, 2016 approximately 10 miles south of Young, Arizona. Photo courtesy of  USDA Forest Service, Tonto National Forest.
Please use the following citation when referring to this report:
Evans, A. 2017. 2016 Wildﬁre Season: An Overview, Southwestern U.S. Technical Report. Ecological Restoration  
Institute and Southwest F ire Science Consortium, Northern Arizona University. 12 p.
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Afﬁrmative Action Institution. 
This report was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service. 
In accordance with Federal law and U.S. Department of Agriculture policy, this institution is prohibited from discriminating  
on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, or disability. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.)
To ﬁle a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Ofﬁce of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building,  
1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice and TDD).  
USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.
Intermountain West Frequent-fire Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by 
reestablishing native species, structural characteristics, and ecological processes.  
The Society for Ecological Restoration International deﬁnes ecological restoration  
as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem  
with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability….Restoration attempts to  
return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration 
International Science & Policy Working Group 2004).
Most frequent-ﬁre forests throughout the Intermountain West have been degraded 
during the last 150 years. Many of these forests are now dominated by unnaturally 
dense thickets of small trees, and lack their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, 
and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing 
ﬁres and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers on 
reintroducing frequent, low-severity surface ﬁres—often after thinning dense stands—
and reestablishing productive understory plant communities. 
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in 
researching, implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of frequent-ﬁre forests 
of the Intermountain West. By allowing natural processes, such as low-severity ﬁre, 
to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide 
ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The Southwest Fire Science Consortium (SWFSC) is a way for managers, scientists, 
and policy makers to interact and share science. SWFSC’s goal is to see the best available 
science used to make management decisions and scientists working on the questions 
managers need answered. The SWFSC tries to bring together localized efforts to develop 
scientiﬁc information and to disseminate that to practitioners on the ground through  
an inclusive and open process.
Ecological Restoration Institute
2016 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN U.S.
ii

Ecological Restoration Institute
2016 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN U.S.
1
Introduction
Wildfire is part of the landscape in the Southwest.  
It can be a threat to lives and property, but it is also crucial 
to maintaining healthy ecosystems. Forests in the Southwest 
are adapted to fire and many trees can easily survive low-
intensity fires burning along the forest floor. For example, 
ponderosa pine forests need regular, low severity fires to 
remain healthy. Over decades without fire on the landscape, 
fuel loads accumulated and facilitated more intense, high 
severity fire. Each fire is different, and while some burn in 
ways that increase ecosystem resilience, others burn with 
greater severity than forests are adapted to, killing even the 
toughest trees and threatening lives and homes. 
This report is the fourth in a series of annual overviews 
available from the Southwest Fire Science Consortium and the 
Ecological Restoration Institute. The goal of this overview is 
to provide a concise summary of the fire season and to facilitate 
comparison with past fires. It follows the format of past years’ 
overviews1 and describes the impacts of the 12 largest fires 
in Arizona, New Mexico, and western Texas in 2016 (all 
fires greater than 8,000 acres in the Southwest region). As in 
previous overviews, this report covers: when the fire burned, fire 
management costs, vegetation types, previous burn footprints, 
and burn severity, where available. The conclusion section 
summarizes these same measures for the large wildfires in the 
region and also touches on how these fires burned in proximity 
to human communities.
Wildfire Management
Weather, climate, vegetation type, fuel conditions, and 
topography all influence how an individual wildfire burns 
on the landscape and whether it has beneficial effects on the 
landscape. Some fires will leave a large number of unburned 
patches creating a mosaic burn pattern, whereas others will 
burn more contiguously. Managers can approach each wildfire 
with multiple objectives that range from managing the wildfire 
for public safety to managing the fire to improve natural 
resources. Federal wildland fire management policy states:
Response to wildland fires is based on ecological, social and 
legal consequences of the fire. The circumstances under which a 
fire occurs, and the likely consequences on firefighter and public 
safety and welfare, natural and cultural resources, and, values 
to be protected, dictate the appropriate response to the fire.2
A full range of wildland fire response strategies may be 
employed to meet these objectives, including containing, 
confining, or suppressing the wildfire. The national Incident 
Management Situation Report identifies the percentage of 
each fire managed with a monitor, confine, point protection, 
or suppression strategy. This report compiles these figures to 
better understand how fires were managed in 2016.
Wildland fire management strategies are based on a 
thoughtful and systematic risk-based approach that takes into 
account firefighter and public safety, cause of the wildfire, 
location, existing land management plans, availability of 
resources, values at risk, and social factors. Federal policy 
dictates that “initial action on human-caused wildfire will be 
to suppress the fire.”2  The same federal policy allows wildfires 
(or parts of wildfires) to be managed for resource benefits such 
as mitigating fuel loads to reduce the risk of high severity, 
enhancing wildlife habitat, improving watershed health, and 
reducing risk to neighboring communities. Though multiple 
strategies are used to manage wildfires, it is important to 
note that federal agencies only recognize two types of fires: 
prescribed fires and wildfire.
The 2016 Fire Season
In 2016, wildfire burned 577,974 acres, more than double the 
number of acres burned in 2015 or 2014 (Figure 1). Arizona 
had more wildfires over 100 acres than New Mexico in 2016 
and more acres burned (62 percent of the acres burned in the 
Southwest). Prescribed fires made up 19 percent of the acres 
burned, which is nearly 20,000 acres more prescribed fire than 
occurred in 2015. Based on the wildfires that burned more 
than 100 acres, managers used full suppression strategies on 45 
percent of the wildfire acres and other strategies on 55 percent 
of the wildfire acres in 2016.4 Eighty-six percent, 65 percent, 
and 11 percent of fires over 100 acres were managed with full 
suppression strategies in 2013, 2014, and 2015 respectively. 
This overview focuses on the 12 largest fires (Figure 2), 
which includes four New Mexico fires: the North, Dog 
Head, McKenna, and Clavel fires; seven Arizona fires: 
Cedar, Jack, Juniper, Brown, Fuller, Rim, and Mule Ridge; 
and one Texas fire: and the Coyote Fire. The 12 largest fires 
in this report represent nearly half of the acres burned by 
wildfire in 2016. These 12 fires are listed in order of size 
starting with the largest. 
3 National Interagency Coordination Center Wildland Fire Annual Reports  
www.predictiveservices.nifc.gov/intelligence/intelligence.htm
4 Southwest Coordination Center  https://gacc.nifc.gov/swcc/predictive/
intelligence/Historical/Fire_Data/Historical_Fires_Acres.htm
Figure 1. Wildfires and prescribed fires acres burned in Arizona and New Mexico, 2002 to 2016.3
1 2015, 2014, and 2013 Wildfire Season: An Overview, Southwestern U.S.  
http://library.eri.nau.edu/gsdl/collect/erilibra/index/assoc/D2016014.dir/doc.pdf
2 Guidance for Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy  
www.nifc.gov/policies/policies_documents/GIFWFMP.pdf

Ecological Restoration Institute
2016 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN U.S.
2
Regional Context
The 2016 ﬁre season started with minimal drought impacts, 
but then exhibited an unusual weather pattern with early 
wildﬁre conditions and activity in February and March due 
to lack of precipitation and signiﬁcant ﬁne fuels from the 
previous growing season. Wetter conditions (a reduction in 
drought conditions) in 2015 produced above normal ﬁne 
fuels carrying over into the 2015/2016 winter. In addition, 
snowpack was signiﬁcantly below normal across the 
Southwest (less than 25 percent of normal for the Gila area 
and central Arizona). However, precipitation events in April 
and May allowed grasses and other plants to grow and this 
“green up” reduced ﬁre dangers. In New Mexico, ﬁre danger 
peaked during June, as is common, but a secondary peak 
occurred in the middle of July due to hot, dry, and windy 
conditions. Arizona faced unusually hot weather during June 
with numerous days over 110 degrees Fahrenheit. August 
monsoonal precipitation brought the active wildﬁre season  
to a close. A dry October allowed for prescribed ﬁre. 
The Energy Release Component (ERC) is an index that 
estimates potential available energy released per unit area 
in the ﬂaming front of a ﬁre based on the fuel model and 
live and dead fuel moistures. The ERC is often used to track 
seasonal ﬁre danger focused on fuel loading, woody fuel 
moistures, and larger fuel moistures (lighter fuels have less 
inﬂuence and wind speed has no inﬂuence on ERC). Graphs 
of ERCs for two regions show the 2016 ﬁre season (blue 
line) in comparison to the 10-year average (gray line) and 10-
year maximums (red line) (Figures 3 and 4).5 
Wildﬁre ignition dates are noted as black marks. In much of 
the Southwest, ERCs dropped below the 10-year average in 
May and returned to average or above average values in July.
5 Graphs produced by Charles Maxwell, Predictive Services Meteorologist, 
Southwest Coordination Center. For more information see https://gacc.nifc.gov/
swcc/predictive/intelligence/Historical/Fire_Data/Historical_Fires_Acres.htm
Figure 2. Map indicating the location of the 
12 large fires in 2016 analyzed in this report. 
Small fires from 2016 are marked with an ‘x.’
Figure 3. Energy release component (ERC) index for the 2016 fire 
season in the central Arizona region. Note the lower ERCs prevalent 
at the start of the Juniper Fire (black circle) compared to the Cedar 
Fire (black triangle).
Figure 4. Energy release component (ERC) index for the 2016 fire 
season in the central New Mexico region. Note ERC values had 
returned to normal highs around the time the Dog Head Fire started 
(black dot).

Ecological Restoration Institute
2016 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN U.S.
3
Data Sources
Management, Objectives, and Cost 
The InciWeb website (https://inciweb.nwcg.gov/) 
provides background information on most large ﬁres 
such as location and start date. InciWeb is an interagency 
information management system designed to provide the 
public a single source of incident-related information. 
Because InciWeb only sporadically reports costs, Incident 
Status Summary (ICS-209) reports were collected to 
document suppression or management costs. These costs 
do not reﬂect any post-ﬁre costs such as rehabilitation or 
soil stabilization. The cost data from each ﬁre is collected 
in a ﬁnal table at the end of the document. Incident 
Status Summaries also provide “strategic objectives,” 
which brieﬂy describe the desired outcome for the 
incident, high-level objectives, and in some cases strategic 
beneﬁts. Though strategic objectives often change during 
a ﬁre, review of the most common or persistent strategic 
objectives for each ﬁre provides some insight into the 
overarching management goals. 
Perimeters
Boundaries for each ﬁre were taken from the  
Geospatial Multi-Agency Coordination (GeoMAC) 
archive of ﬁre perimeter maps (http://rmgsc.cr.usgs.
gov/outgoing/GeoMAC/). GeoMAC also provides the 
perimeters of ﬁres back to 2000, which provided a historic 
context for
this year’s ﬁres. One ﬁre perimeter, the Clavel Fire, was 
not included in GeoMAC database and another, the  
Rim Fire, did not have the ﬁnal perimeter.
Vegetation 
Basic information about vegetation and topography  
of burned area was available from LANDFIRE   
(www.landﬁre.gov). LANDFIRE provides nationally 
consistent, scientiﬁcally based maps of existing vegetation 
as well as Vegetation Condition Class (VCC). Vegetation 
Condition Class was formerly referred to as Fire Regime 
Condition Class (FRCC). Vegetation Condition Class is 
a map of how existing vegetation has departed from an 
estimated natural or historic condition. In the Southwest, 
this departure is generally due to ﬁre exclusion, past 
logging, and grazing and results in greater density of trees 
and less healthy conditions. Vegetation Condition Class 
is a useful metric because it integrates information on 
existing vegetation, historic vegetation, and ﬁre regimes 
into one variable and has been used to help determine 
where to focus restoration efforts. The most current  
VCC maps (2012) were used in this report.
Soil Burn Severity
Soil burn severity maps provide Burned Area  
Emergency Response (BAER) teams a tool to quantify 
soil impacts and assess potential for post-ﬁre erosion   
(https://fsapps.nwcg.gov/afm/baer/download.php).  
In the immediate aftermath of a ﬁre, BAER teams 
perform an emergency assessment of post-ﬁre soil 
conditions based on a combination of ﬁeld observations 
and remote sensing change detection products derived 
from the differenced Normalized Burn Ratio (dNBR). 
The dNBR measures change in the ratio of near infrared 
reﬂected by healthy green vegetation to the shortwave 
infrared reﬂected by bare soil and rock. Most soil burn 
severity maps have four classes: high, moderate, low, and 
unburned; but some combine the last two categories into 
a “low/unchanged” category. The distribution of soil burn 
severity is included for those ﬁres for which it is available 
both in the individual ﬁre discussions as well as in ﬁnal 
summary table.
Rapid Assessment of Vegetation Condition after Wildfire 
Rapid Assessment of Vegetation Condition after  
Wildﬁre (RAVG) maps estimate canopy mortality 
(www.fs.fed.us/postﬁrevegcondition). The U.S. Forest 
Service (USFS) Remote Sensing Applications Center 
provides RAVG analysis as a ﬁrst approximation of 
areas that may require reforestation treatments because 
of canopy killed by high-severity ﬁre. RAVG maps are 
created for wildﬁres that burn greater than 1,000 acres of 
forested USFS land or for ﬁres where it is requested. The 
maps are produced by measuring the change between a 
satellite image before and immediately after a wildﬁre 
using an algorithm called relative differenced Normalized 
Burn Ratio (RdNBR), which is sensitive to vegetation 
mortality resulting from the wildﬁre event. The RdNBR 
is derived directly from the dNBR but is more sensitive to 
vegetation mortality than the dNBR. 
While soil burn severity maps and RAVG canopy 
mortality maps use similar satellite change detection 
methods, they measure fundamentally different forest 
attributes. In many areas, canopy mortality and soil 
burn severity patterns are similar. However, in some 
vegetation types, such as chaparral or grass, it is possible 
for a ﬁre to cause complete canopy mortality with little 
effect on soils. 
Wildland Urban Interface
Another geospatial dataset that helps put ﬁres in context 
is the location and density of housing, often referred to 
as the wildland-urban interface, or WUI. The Silvis Lab 
at the University of Wisconsin developed a nationwide 
map of the WUI based on U.S. Census data (http://silvis.
forest.wisc.edu/maps/wui/2010/download). The Silvis 
map uses fairly standard deﬁnitions of the two main 
WUI conditions: intermix (one or more structures per 
40 acres) and interface (three or more structures per acre, 
with shared municipal services).
Caveats
There are important caveats for all the data used in  
this summary. First, the ﬁre information presented 
here was taken from ofﬁcial sources in November 2016 
and may not include updates or revisions. Second, the 
geospatial data used to generate the maps and tables are 
also based on the best available information, but these 
data have errors and uncertainties. For example, the 
remote sensing data used in all these datasets can include 
errors introduced during collection, processing, and 
interpretation.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2016 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN U.S.
4
Cedar Fire, Arizona
The Cedar Fire burned for 49 days, from June 15 to 
August 4, and covered 45,977 acres on the White 
Mountain Apache Reservation. The cause for the Cedar 
Fire was unknown and it was managed with a full 
suppression strategy. Airtankers, helicopters, and a Type 
I Incident Management Team (IMT) quickly started 
suppression efforts because of the threat to communities 
above the Mogollon Rim, natural and cultural resources, 
and safe travel concerns on Highway 60. A more detailed 
report on the weather conditions, resources employed, and 
fuel treatment effectiveness for the Cedar Fire is available 
from the Bureau of Indian Affairs.6 
Fire behavior was extreme on the ﬁrst day with wind-
driven ﬁre runs, torching of individual trees, and spotting. 
A Type 1 crew conducted a burnout operation on the south 
and southeast ﬂanks of the wildﬁre to protect communities, 
a timber sale, and habitat for threaten and endangered 
species. Though no structures were burned and the wildﬁre 
perimeter did not include any area mapped as WUI, there 
was a pre-evacuation notice for Forestdale, Amos Ranch, 
Show Low, and Pinetop-Lakeside. The cost of managing 
the Cedar Fire was $13.5 million, or $294 per acre. 
Figure 5. Canopy mortality map Cedar Fire from the BIA report.
Vegetation and Past Fires
The most common vegetation type within the Cedar Fire 
footprint was piñon-juniper woodlands (38 percent), with 
conifer-oak woodlands (29 percent) and ponderosa pine  
(26 percent) making up the rest of the vegetation. Based 
on the VCC map, the majority of the vegetation within 
the Cedar Fire was not signiﬁcantly different from historic 
conditions (i.e., low departure). The entire northwest side of 
the wildﬁre burned up to the footprint of the 2002 Rodeo-
Chediski Fire. On the east the Cedar Fire burned to the 
perimeter of the 2015 Playground Fire and through the 2015 
Forestdale Fire on the northeast. The BIA report notes the 
importance of past treatments and ﬁres in controlling the 
Cedar Fire on the north and northeast sides. In the report, 
Rocky Gilbert, Operations Section Chief for the Type 1 
Southwest Area Incident Management Team 2, said, “The 
Playground (Fire) really helped us, we picked up every spot 
(ﬁre) that went in there. That helped more than anything.” 6
Fire Severity
Though the RAVG map was not available for this analysis 
through the USFS website, the Cedar Fire report includes  
a map that indicates the majority of the ﬁre caused greater  
than 75 percent canopy mortality (Figure 5). 
6 Miller, R., and R.R. Johnson. 2017. 2016 Cedar Fire Landscape 
Treatment Effectiveness in Moderating a Wildfire. Bureau of 
Indian Affairs, Whiteriver, AZ.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2016 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN U.S.
5
mapped as moderate departure from historic conditions 
and the remainder (29 percent) was low departure. 
The southwest portion of the North Fire burned up to 
the perimeter of the Red Canyon Fire, which burned 
17,843 acres in 2015.
Fire Severity
The majority of the North Fire had little to no canopy 
mortality; 76 percent of the ﬁre in the RAVG map had 
less than 25 percent canopy mortality. Ten percent of the 
North Fire (4,201 acres) experienced complete canopy 
morality (i.e., greater than 90 percent canopy morality). 
Most (56 percent) of the patches of complete mortality 
were in piñon-juniper, although 1,042 acres of ponderosa 
pine also experienced complete mortality. Soil burn 
severity maps (Figure 6) show a similar proportion of 
unburned or low soil burn severity (74 percent) and high 
soil burn severity (16 percent). However, most of the high 
soil burn severity patches were in ponderosa pine. More 
than 4,300 acres of ponderosa pine were mapped as high 
soil burn severity and only 284 acres of high soil burn 
severity in piñon-juniper.
North Fire, New Mexico
A lightning strike started the North Fire on May 21 on 
the Magdalena Ranger District of the Cibola National 
Forest. After it burned for 60 days, a total of 42,102 
acres were affected. According to InciWeb reports, 
the wildﬁre exhibited moderate behavior with ﬂames 
backing, ﬂanking, or just creeping through surface 
fuels. It was managed with a strategy that included 
monitoring, conﬁning ﬁre spread, and point protection 
for values at risk. For example, ﬁring operations that 
burned away from the Withington Mountain lookout 
tower protected it from damage. Fire managers saw 
some isolated torching in the interior of the wildﬁre 
during aerial ignition operations, which increased 
burn severity in some areas. The cost for managing the 
North Fire was $200,000, or about $5 per acre.
Vegetation and Past Fires
The North Fire mainly burned through ponderosa pine 
(43 percent) and piñon-juniper (35 percent) forests but 
also affected small areas of mixed-conifer and riparian 
forests. Seventy one percent of the North Fire was 
Figure 6. Soil burn severity map for the North Fire.
Soil Burn Severity
High
Moderate
Low
Unburned - Very Low

Ecological Restoration Institute
2016 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN U.S.
6
the Camillo Fire and they share a mile and half of 
perimeter. The area within the Jack Fire was either 
low (35 percent) or moderate (65 percent) departure 
from historic conditions. The Jack Fire burned within a 
quarter mile of mapped medium density intermix WUI.
Fire Severity
More than 90 percent of the RAVG map for the Jack 
Fire is less than 25 percent canopy mortality (Figure 7), 
which is similar to the way the Camillo Fire burned the 
previous year. Since the majority of the ﬁre burned through 
ponderosa pine, it is not surprising that almost all of the 
acres of the highest canopy mortality were in ponderosa 
pine. A signiﬁcant proportion of the soil burn severity 
map was in the categories of least impact: 53 percent low 
or unburned. Nearly a third of the Jack Fire was labeled 
moderate and 18 percent high soil burn severity. Ninety 
one percent of the high soil burn severity was in ponderosa 
pine. Riparian forest types made up seven percent of both 
the moderate and high soil burn severity categories. 
 
The soil burn severity map also had some data lost due to 
remote sensing problems (visible as striping in the map). 
Seventy-nine percent of the ﬁre had very low or no soil 
impacts and again only 2 percent of the area had high  
soil burn severity.
Jack Fire, Arizona
Lightning started the Jack Fire on May 29 and it continued to 
burn until July 1. During those 32 days, it burned 33,850 acres 
on the Coconino National Forest. After preparing a perimeter 
to contain the wildﬁre, managers used ignitions to secure the 
perimeter, reduce long-term smoke impacts, and minimize 
adverse ﬁre effects on wildlife habitat, soil, watershed, and 
cultural resources. The overarching strategic objective from 
ICS-209 was to use ﬁre to reduce fuel accumulations, reduce 
future risks, reintroduce ﬁre back into the planning area, and 
improve ecosystem health. Managers worked to keep wildﬁre 
out of timber sales and private property while also minimizing 
smoke impacts to highways and communities. By June 15, 
managers were focused on monitoring control lines and 
assessing the interior ﬁre area for hazards in preparation for 
public access. The management cost of the wildﬁre was $1.5 
million, or $44 per acre.
Vegetation and Past Fires
The majority of the Jack Fire burned through ponderosa pine 
forests (85 percent) with small patches of scrub, grass, and 
riparian forests. The Jack Fire re-burned 304 acres of  the 
2007 Bargaman Fire.
The Jack Fire also burned in a matrix of nearby ﬁres 
including 2009 Brady, 2009 Bow, 2015 Goose, and 
2015 Camillo ﬁres. In fact, the Jack Fire burned up to 
Figure 7. Canopy mortality map for the Jack Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2016 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN U.S.
7
as the ﬁre burned through the ﬁrst time and then 
dried out sufﬁciently and re-burned with high severity 
effects. The Fire Ecology Report suggests that high ﬁre 
severity impacts may have been a necessary tradeoff for 
reintroducing ﬁre as a natural process to an area with 
limited options for ﬁre management.
Vegetation and Past Fires
A quarter of the area that burned in the Juniper Fire was 
ponderosa pine forest but the majority was woodlands: 
conifer-oak (41 percent) and piñon-juniper (18 percent). 
The Juniper Fire reburned 6,282 acres of the 2000 Coon 
Creek Fire and 1,772 acres of the 2011 Tanner Fire. The 
Juniper Fire burned up to the 2010 Zimmerman Fire at 
its southern most point. Most of the Juniper Fire was 
mapped as close to historic conditions (75 percent) or 
moderately departed from historic conditions.
Fire Severity
RAVG maps identiﬁed nearly 10,000 acres (32 percent) 
where the canopy had greater than 90 percent canopy 
mortality (Figure 8). Forty four percent of the Juniper 
Fire caused less than 25 percent canopy mortality. The 
portion of high canopy mortality by forest type was 
similar to the overall distribution of forest types with in 
the ﬁre: ponderosa pine (18 percent), piñon-juniper (33 
percent), and conifer-oak (38 percent). The soil burn 
severity maps had an even 
greater percentage in the highest 
severity class (69 percent) and 
only 18 percent in the low 
or unchanged category. It is 
worth noting that the soil burn 
severity map included in the 
Fire Ecology Report records 
only 11 percent high soil burn 
severity with in the Juniper 
Fire. The distribution of forest 
types within the high soil burn 
severity category used in this 
analysis was similar to the 
RAVG maps for ponderosa pine 
(23 percent), piñon-juniper (22 
percent), and conifer-oak (39 
percent). In both the soil burn 
severity and RAVG maps, the 
highest patches of high severity 
were on the eastern ﬂakes of the 
Sierra Ancha.
 
Juniper Fire, Arizona
The Juniper Fire started with a lightning strike 10 miles 
south of Young, Arizona on the Tonto National Forest. 
Managers used a point protection strategy to manage the 
30,631-acre wildﬁre from May 20 until August 11, when 
it was fully contained (it was put on monitor status starting 
June 27). Steep, inaccessible terrain on the eastern portions 
of the ﬁre limited opportunity for safe direct suppression. 
Managers assessed that they were able to accomplish 
their resource objectives with minimal impacts to natural, 
historic, or other values. Resource objectives included 
reintroduction of low to mixed-severity ﬁre to ponderosa 
pine and mixed-conifer forests to reduce understory and 
canopy continuity. In juniper woodlands, the objectives 
were to reduce tree density and promote grass and forb 
response. The Juniper Fire burned 13 acres of low density 
WUI intermix that included recreation infrastructure but 
only damaged one minor structure. Managers identiﬁed 
asbestos and uranium mining areas within the ﬁre planning 
area and put mitigation measures in place. The wildﬁre cost 
$11.6 million to manage, or $379 per acre. 
The FEMO/Fire Ecology Final Report for the Juniper 
Fire notes that increasingly hot and dry conditions 
during June dried out fuels and soil. In turn, this allowed 
areas to burn that had been too wet previously. In some 
areas, oak shrubs were underburned and leaves scorched 
Figure 8. Canopy mortality map for the Juniper Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2016 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN U.S.
8
Vegetation and Past Fires
Most of the area burned in the Dog Head Fire was 
ponderosa pine forest (63 percent), with piñon-juniper 
woodland as the second most common forest type (27 
percent). Though it did not overlap or even share a border 
with past ﬁres, the Dog Head Fire burned near the 2008 
Big Spring and 2008 Trigo ﬁres. The Dog Head Fire 
behaved similarly to these recent neighboring ﬁres, that  
is, it started on top of the mountain and proceeded to  
burn downhill. Most of the forest that burned in the  
Dog Head Fire was highly departed from historic 
conditions (76 percent).
Fire Severity
The RAVG map for the Dog Head Fire indicated that two 
thirds (66 percent) of the area experienced greater than 90 
percent canopy mortality (Figure 9). Only 21 percent of 
the area burned with less than 25 percent canopy mortality. 
The near complete canopy mortality occurred in ponderosa 
pine and piñon-juniper in proportions very close to their 
proportion of the overall ﬁre.
Dog Head Fire, New Mexico
A masticator being used to reduce fuel loads started 
the Dog Head Fire on June 14, six miles northwest of 
Tajique, New Mexico. It burned from Iseleta Pueblo 
land onto Cibola National Forest land and then private 
land for a total of 17,912 acres. Managers responded 
with a full suppression strategy because of the threat 
to 300 homes in the community of the Chilili Land 
Grant, watershed health, cultural sites, and threatened 
and endangered species habitat. Unfortunately, the 
combination of consistent high winds, low relative 
humidity, and low fuel moisture created excellent 
conditions for ﬁre growth and extreme behavior. 
During the second day of the wildﬁre, ﬁreﬁghters took 
defensive stands near structures. By June 27, 95 percent 
containment had been achieved and it was declared fully 
contained on July 13. Though it did not burn through 
areas mapped as WUI, the Dog Head Fire destroyed 
12 residences and 44 minor structures and caused 650 
people to evacuate. Suppression cost $10.8 million, or 
$603 per acre. 
Figure 9. Canopy mortality map for the Dog Head Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2016 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN U.S.
9
or injuries were reported and one minor structure was 
destroyed during the ﬁre. The management cost of the 
ﬁre was $1.8 million, or about $115 per acre.
 
Vegetation and Past Fires
The Brown Fire burned through nearly equal portions 
of conifer-oak woodlands (45 percent) and grass (48 
percent) (Figure 10). Ninety-one percent of the Brown 
Fire burned in the footprint of the 2009 Elk Horn Fire, 
of which a small portion also burned in the 2015 Spring 
Fire. An additional 172 acres (1 percent) of the Brown 
Fire burned in the 2012 Montezuma and Babo ﬁres. 
The 2009 Elk Horn Fire was likely part of the reason 
that 60 percent of the area burned in the Brown Fire 
showed little departure from historic conditions.
Fire Severity
Fire severity maps were not available for this ﬁre.
Brown Fire, Arizona
The Brown Fire was a human caused wildﬁre that 
burned 12,349 acres in the mountains southwest of 
Tucson, from June 17–30. On the ﬁrst day, it showed 
extreme behavior with uphill and wind driven ﬁre runs, 
primarily through brush and grass. Inaccessible terrain 
meant little action could be taken on the north, west, 
or east, and ﬁreﬁghters used Thomas Canyon Road 
to halt ﬁre spread to the south. As the ﬁre continued, 
ﬁreﬁghters protected private structures in Shaffer 
Canyon and at the Elkhorn Guest Ranch to the north, 
while also constructing hand-line in Sabino Canyon. 
Extreme temperatures (i.e., over 105 degrees Fahrenheit) 
forced crews to disengage during the hottest part of 
the day. The portion of the ﬁre that burned on to the 
Tohono O’odham Nation was monitored (20 percent of 
the total area), though most of the ﬁre (80 percent) was 
managed with a suppression strategy. No evacuations 
Figure 10. Vegetation and past fires around the Brown Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2016 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN U.S.
10
Vegetation and Past Fires
The Fuller Fire burned through mixed-conifer (26 
percent), ponderosa pine (17 percent), piñon-juniper (25 
percent), and scrub (10 percent) (Figure 11). A small 
portion (1 percent) of the Fuller Fire burned over the 
perimeter of the 2011 Woolsey Fire. The Fuller Fire 
started in an area burned by the older 2000 Outlet Fire. 
The Outlet Fire was a high-severity ﬁre that now has 
vigorous aspen regeneration and also heavy post-ﬁre fuels. 
Managers planned for and were able to allow the Fuller 
Fire to create patches of aspen mortality and a new age 
class within the Outlet Fire perimeter. The area burned 
in the Fuller Fire was close (44 percent) or moderately 
departed (56 percent) from historic conditions.
Fire Severity
Fire severity maps were not available for the Fuller Fire.
Fuller Fire, Arizona
Lightning ignited the Fuller Fire on June 29 on the north 
rim of Grand Canyon National Park. Managers focused 
on monitoring, conﬁning, and minimizing the threat to 
Mexican spotted owl habitat and cultural resources. Based 
on the ICS-209 reports, they expected to see continued 
ﬁre growth to the north, south, and east until monsoonal 
moisture arrived and planned to keep the wildﬁre south 
of Forest Road 610. Fire behavior included single tree 
torching and spotting. By July 14, the incident objectives 
were to manage the wildﬁre with no injuries; protect 
infrastructure, heritage sites, and sensitive species/habitat; 
maintain public access to recreational areas; and help park 
visitors understand the role of ﬁre in the ecosystem. By 
the time the wildﬁre was fully contained on September 
29, it had burned 15,091 acres. Wildﬁre management 
cost $12.5 million, or about $828 per acre. It is worth 
noting that the per-day cost of the Fuller Fire was similar 
to other ﬁres in this review (e.g., Juniper, Brown, Mule 
Ridge) but lasted the longest of any ﬁre (90 days).
Figure 11. Vegetation map for the Fuller Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2016 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN U.S.
11
Vegetation and Past Fires
Most of the Coyote Fire burned through piñon-juniper 
woodlands (60 percent) with the remainder made up of 
grasslands (36 percent) and riparian forest (4 percent) 
(Figure 12). Forty-ﬁve percent of the perimeter of the 
Coyote Fire was within the area previously burned by the 
2010 Cutoff Fire. Though the 2010 Cutoff Fire is too 
recent to be included in the vegetation condition class 
mapping, only 17 percent of the Coyote Fire burned 
through areas highly departed from historic conditions.
Fire Severity
Fire severity maps were not available for the Coyote Fire.
Coyote Fire, Texas
On May 7, a lightning strike started the Coyote Fire 
6 miles north of Guadalupe Peak, the highest point 
in Texas, in the Guadalupe Mountains National Park. 
Managers identiﬁed that structures at Hughes Ranch 
to the north, a ranger station, and a communication 
repeater were threatened by the ﬁre. They expected 
the ﬁre to grow to the south and east with heavy fuels, 
wind, and topography contributing to its spread. They 
planned to conﬁne and contain the ﬁre within the 
national park boundaries to minimize impact to local 
land owners and to use direct suppression tactics where 
safe and applicable. By May 25, ﬁre managers’ approach 
was to monitor the ﬁre until monsoon season and take 
suppression actions as needed to commensurate with 
values at risk. The wildﬁre was fully contained on June 
13 after burning 13,592 acres. Management of the 
wildﬁre cost $4,850,028, or $357 per acre.
Figure 12. Vegetation map for the Coyote Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2016 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN U.S.
12
2011 Miller Fire. The footprint of the 2010 Horse Fire at 
the center of the McKenna Fire completely re-burned for 
the third time since 2010. The majority of the McKenna 
Fire was ponderosa pine (77 percent) with portions of 
mixed-conifer (13 percent), piñon-juniper (3 percent), 
and conifer oak (4 percent). 
Fire Severity
The RAVG maps indicate that almost all of the  
McKenna Fire (97 percent) burned with little impact  
on the overstory canopy (less than 25 percent mortality). 
Only 274 acres had more than 25 percent canopy mortality 
(and none had greater than 50 percent canopy mortality) 
(Figure 13).
McKenna Fire, New Mexico
The McKenna Fire was reported just after noon on 
May 6 in the Gila Wilderness, 8 miles west of the Gila 
Cliff Dwellings National Monument. Fire behavior was 
minimal as ﬂames were backing, creeping, and smoldering 
through litter and grass. Fire managers used a strategy 
of monitoring and point protection to use the wildﬁre to 
remove hazardous fuels, clear forest debris, and decrease 
the potential for high-severity ﬁres in the future. The 
wildﬁre burned for 68 days and covered 10,210 acres. The 
wildﬁre cost $204,000 to manage, or about $20 per acre.
Vegetation and Past Fires
The McKenna Fire re-burned areas that recently burned 
in either the 2012 Whitewater-Baldy Complex or the 
Figure 13. Canopy mortality map for the McKenna Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2016 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN U.S.
13
Vegetation and Past Fires
Though the exact boundary of the Clavel Fire was not 
available, the majority of the area around the wildﬁre was 
grassland with smaller areas of piñon-juniper woodlands 
or savannas and other scrublands (Figure 14). The Clavel 
Fire did not burn through any recent wildﬁre perimeters.
Fire Severity
Fire severity maps were not available for the Clavel Fire.
Clavel Fire, New Mexico
The Clavel Fire was a lightning ignited ﬁre that burned 
through grass and shrublands with moderate ﬁre 
behavior across private land south of the town of Yates 
in northeastern New Mexico. The Clavel Fire started 
on July 9, burned for nine days, and covered 9,842 acres. 
Fire managers used direct attack tactics as part of a full 
suppression strategy on the wildﬁre. Suppression of the 
Clavel Fire cost $45,000, or about $5 per acre.
Figure 14. Existing vegetation around the Clavel Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2016 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN U.S.
14
Vegetation and Past Fires
The perimeter for the Rim Fire provided on GeoMAC 
was not the ﬁnal extent. Based on the location of the Rim 
Fire, it appears to have burned through mainly piñon-
juniper, ponderosa pine, conifer-oak, and riparian forests 
(Figure 15). The Rim Fire burned in a matrix of recent 
ﬁres, most notably the 2015 Sawmill Fire, which bounded 
the southern edge of the Rim Fire. Most of the area the 
Rim Fire burned through appears to have been moderately 
departed from historic conditions.
Fire Severity
Fire severity maps were not available for the Rim Fire.
Rim Fire, Arizona
The Rim Fire was a natural ignition on July 21 on 
the San Carlos Apache Nation. Its initial behavior 
was creeping, backing, and ﬂanking through litter and 
grass. High dew points and precipitation meant there 
was low spread potential. Since there was no threat 
to infrastructure, natural, or cultural resources, ﬁre 
managers chose to manage the wildﬁre for resource 
beneﬁts as long as burning conditions produced the 
desired ﬁre effects. The Rim Fire burned for 20 days 
and covered 8,872 acres. The cost to manage the ﬁre 
was $70,000, or about $8 per acre.
Figure 15. Canopy mortality/soil burn severity map for the Rim Fire. 
(Note: map does not depict the Rim Fire’s full extent.)

Ecological Restoration Institute
2016 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN U.S.
15
of the area in the Mule Ridge Fire showed little departure 
from historic conditions (63 percent). 
Fire Severity
Canopy mortality and soil burn severity mapping may 
diverge in grasslands (as discussed in past editions of the 
ﬁre season overviews7). However, in the Mule Ridge Fire, 
both RAVG maps and soil burn severity maps agree that 
a large portion of the ﬁre had very severe ﬁre impacts. 
Forty-six percent of the RAVG map was in the most 
severe category (greater than 90 percent mortality) and 
43 percent of the soil burn severity map was in the high 
category (Figure 16). Both maps had only 10 percent in 
the low or unburned category. The distribution of high 
severity by vegetation type was similar between the two 
maps and to the distribution across the ﬁre perimeter. In 
other words, the ﬁre severity maps show a large proportion 
of high severity, but the areas of high severity were 
distributed evenly across vegetation types.
Mule Ridge Fire, Arizona
The cause of the Mule Ridge Fire was uncertain; however, 
when it started on May 31, it burned actively through oak 
grasslands on the north end of the Pajarita Wilderness, 
just north of the Mexican border. It threatened the 
historic mining town of Ruby and required structure 
protection at Bear Valley Ranch. The Mule Ridge Fire 
also threatened border protection surveillance equipment 
and rare plant habitat. Fire managers used a suppression 
strategy for all of the Mule Ridge Fire and the cost was 
$1.4 million, or $161 per acre. 
Vegetation and Past Fires
Portions of the Mule Ridge Fire were classiﬁed as piñon-
juniper (10 percent), conifer-oak (28 percent), chaparral 
(9 percent), scrub (27 percent), and grassland (25 percent). 
Much of the Mule Ridge Fire abutted the 2011 Murphy 
Complex and small portions re-burned the 2011 Jackie 
(22 acres) and 2011 Divot ﬁres (40 acres). The majority 
Figure 16. Canopy mortality map for the Mule Ridge Fire.
7 2013 Wildfire Season: An Overview, Southwestern U.S.
http://library.eri.nau.edu/gsdl/collect/erilibra/index/assoc/D2014008.dir/doc.pdf

Ecological Restoration Institute
2016 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN U.S.
16
acreage burned in 2016. Ponderosa pine forests were the 
most commonly burned vegetation type and made up 37 
percent of the area analyzed in this report (Figure 17). The 
inclusion of the Clavel and Rim ﬁres would likely increase 
the percentage of grassland and conifer-oak areas burned. 
The distribution of vegetation types is similar to 2014 and 
2015; and 2013 remains an outlier because of the large 
portion of mixed-conifer forest that burned in that year.
very low soil burn severity (Figure 18). Thirty two percent of 
the area of these four ﬁres burn with high soil burn severity. 
The Juniper Fire makes up a large proportion of this area of 
high soil burn severity (56 percent).
Conclusion
More acres burned in 2016 than in the previous two years, 
but many of those acres burned with a low or moderate 
severity. This report covers the 12 largest wildﬁres of 2016 
and 44 percent of the acreage burned. For some metrics, 
fewer acres are included because full perimeters were not 
available for the Clavel or Rim ﬁres. The 10 ﬁres for which 
perimeters were available make up 40 percent of the total 
Soil burn severity maps analyzed in this report account for 
only 20 percent of the total acres burned in 2016 (45 percent 
of the 12 largest ﬁres). For the four ﬁres in this report with 
soil burn severity maps, half of the acres burned with low or 
Figure 17. Summary of acres burned by vegetation type.
Figure 18. Summary of acres burned by soil burn severity class.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2016 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN U.S.
17
burned with greater than 90 percent canopy mortality. 
The Dog Head and Juniper ﬁres account for 72 percent 
of the highest canopy mortality areas.
related. The Dog Head Fire makes up 77 percent of 
the area burned that was highly departed from historic 
conditions. Unlike the Dog Head Fire, the Juniper Fire 
has a higher proportion of acres with low to moderate 
departure from historic conditions.
RAVG maps were available for more ﬁres (six in this 
analysis) and show the majority (64 percent) of acres 
analyzed were less than 25 percent canopy mortality  
(Figure 19). Twenty-one percent of the area analyzed 
Only 9 percent of the area in this analysis was highly 
departed from historic conditions based on the 
LANDFIRE vegetation condition class maps (Figure 20). 
It is reasonable to assume that the high proportions of 
wildﬁre burning with low severity and the high portion 
of the area burned close to the historic condition are 
Figure 19. Summary of acres burned by canopy mortality class.
Figure 20. Summary of acres burned by vegetation condition class.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2016 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN U.S.
18
could be managed with other strategies. The average cost 
of acres where a suppression strategy was used was $287 
per acre while the average cost for acres where wildﬁre 
was managed with other strategies was $199 per acre. 
For the ﬁve ﬁres that were managed with strategies other 
than suppression and RAVG data are available, it is 
possible to estimate the cost of restoring natural surface 
ﬁre per acre. Using the simplifying assumption that acres 
where less than 25 percent canopy mortality experienced 
healthy ﬁre, on four wildﬁres (North, Jack, Juniper, and 
McKenna) more 86,000 acres beneﬁted from ﬁre. If all 
the wildﬁres managed with strategies other than full 
suppression in 2016 had similar proportions of beneﬁcial 
ﬁre, the positive impact on the landscape is signiﬁcant. 
Across the 255,791 acres of wildﬁre managed with 
strategies other than full suppression, the number of 
acres of beneﬁcial ﬁre might even cover more area than 
the 120,000 acres of prescribed ﬁre in 2016. 
The cost of restoring surface ﬁre in incidents managed  
with strategies other than full suppression was low. 
Dividing the full cost of managing each ﬁre by the 
number of these low and moderate severity acres 
provides an average of $157 per acre. These costs are  
not a value judgment as each ﬁre burns in different 
terrain, different vegetation, during different weather 
conditions, and puts different values at risk. Fire 
managers must make the best decision to protect lives 
and properties for each ﬁre. It is also important to note 
that these costs do not include post-fire rehabilitation 
or other indirect costs. 
 
The Dog Head Fire was the most destructive in terms of 
property damage and was the only ﬁre to destroy more 
than a minor structure. The Dog Head Fire burned 12 
homes and was the only ﬁre in this analysis that required 
evacuations. The Cedar Fire required a pre-evacuation 
notice and point protection of structures was necessary 
on other ﬁres. 
Past ﬁres played a role in all of the ﬁres this this analysis 
except for the Dog Head and Clavel Fires. Six ﬁres 
(Cedar, Mule Ridge, McKenna, Coyote, Brown, Fuller, 
and Juniper) re-burned areas within ﬁre perimeters from 
wildﬁres in the last 10 years. Eight ﬁres burned up to 
the perimeters of recent wildﬁres (Cedar, North, Jack, 
Juniper, Brown, Coyote, Rim, and Mule Ridge). 
The 12 ﬁres in this analysis cost more than $58 million 
dollars to manage (with a range of strategies) for an 
average of $232 per acre. Since large ﬁres are often more 
expensive, extending the cost calculation to the largest 
21 ﬁres (all those larger than 5,000 acres) the total 
cost is $61.5 million, or $198 per acre. As noted above, 
managers identify the most appropriate strategy for each 
part of a wildﬁre to minimize threats and maximize 
positive outcomes. Using the percentage of strategies 
reported in the ICS-209 forms allows a portioning of 
acres and costs by the strategy used. In 2016, managers 
used full suppression strategies on 45 percent of the 
acres burned in ﬁres over 100 acres and other strategies 
on remaining 55 percent of the acres. For the 12 largest 
wildﬁres, the acres where a full suppression strategy was 
used had higher per-acre costs than those acres that 

Ecological Restoration Institute
2016 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN U.S.
19
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Afﬁrmative Action Institution/161868/05.17
Appendix I Fire Statistics
Vegetation Departure
Name
Acres
Cost
cost/ac
Low
Medium
High
Cedar 
45,977
$13,500,000 
$294 
85%
14%
1%
North 
42,102
$200,000 
$5 
29%
71%
1%
Jack 
33,850
$1,504,000 
$44 
35%
65%
0%
Juniper 
30,631
$11,600,000 
$379 
75%
25%
0%
Dog Head 
17,912
$10,803,337 
$603 
16%
8%
76%
Brown
15,436
$1,773,200 
$115 
60%
37%
3%
Fuller
15,091
$12,500,000 
$828 
44%
56%
0%
Coyote 
13,592
$4,850,028 
$357 
46%
37%
17%
McKenna 
10,210
$204,000 
$20 
18%
82%
0%
Clavel 
9,842
$45,000 
$5 
Rim 
8,872
$70,000 
$8 
Mule Ridge
8,522
$1,370,000 
$161 
63%
34%
3%
Soil Burn Severity
RAVG Canopy Mortality
Name
Unburned
Low
Moderate
High
0%
< 25%
< 50%
< 75%
< 90%
≥ 90%
Cedar 
North 
58%
16%
10%
16%
16%
59%
7%
5%
3%
10%
Jack 
37%
17%
29%
18%
30%
61%
7%
1%
0%
1%
Juniper 
11%
7%
14%
69%
16%
28%
10%
8%
5%
32%
Dog Head 
7%
14%
6%
4%
3%
66%
Brown
Fuller
Coyote 
McKenna 
45%
52%
3%
0%
0%
0%
Clavel 
Rim 
Mule Ridge
10%
13%
34%
43%
10%
14%
11%
11%
8%
46%

P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
eri.nau.edu
1003031
