The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Ecological restoration treatments improve soil function in  
frequent-fire forests of the western United States 
By Andrew J. Sánchez Meador, Program Director of Biometrics and Forest Management 
Introduction 
Soil processes in natural systems are complex, and our understanding of these processes in relation to forest 
restoration practices is still in relatively early stages. Manipulation of tree density and application of pre-
scribed fire may affect soil function in a number of ways, and soil responses reflect complex interactions 
among vegetation, soil microbiota, and physicochemical processes. However, anticipation of soil functional 
responses to ecological restoration treatments is problematic because to date, no systematic analysis of gen-
eral patterns has been undertaken. 
 
Methods 
We used a systematic review methodology to investigate the general effects of ecological restoration treat-
ments on soil function in frequent-fire forests of the western United States. Systematic reviews use an evi-
dence-based framework to review the effectiveness of various interventions, including manipulations at an 
ecosystem level. We searched numerous publication databases for original research papers and used well-
defined criteria developed theoretically to select papers for review. We evaluated each study based on inclu-
sion criteria (western U.S., ponderosa or Jeffrey pine-dominated pine/pine-oak forests, where soil function 
was examined following ecological restoration) and included those considered relevant in a database for re-
view and/or analyses. We used meta-analysis and qualitative summaries to compare reported responses of 
macronutrients, nitrogen cycling, and soil respiration among tree thinning only (thin), prescribed fire only 
(burn), and thinning plus prescribed fire treatments (composite).  
 
Results 
 
An initial database search returned 942 candidate pa-
pers, of which 110 were retained to evaluate against in-
clusion criteria.  
 
Forty-nine papers met inclusion criteria, representing 
studies located throughout the western United States and 
spanning a range of frequent-fire forest types, with 
northern Arizona and the Sierra Nevada Mountains most 
represented (55 percent of studies examined).  
 
Mean responses in macronutrients were consistently re-
duced (as indicated by negative values in Figure 1) fol-
lowing burn-only treatments as compared to controls. 
While not statistically significantly different from zero, 
thin-only and composite treatments generally resulted in 
increased (positive values) macronutrient abundance.  
 
May 2017 
Systematic review suggests that restoration treatments, 
such as those implemented in the ponderosa pine forest 
near Flagstaff, Arizona (pictured), commonly result in 
increased macronutrient abundance (particularly availa-
ble nitrogen and ammonium), mineralization, nitrifica-
tion, and soil respiration rates following thinning and 
burning treatments. Photo by Andrew Sánchez Meador  

 
Significant increases were observed for all responses following composite treatments related to 
nitrogen cycling (i.e., mineralization, ammonification, and nitrification), while burn-only and thin-
only treatment responses were insignificant.  
 
While soil function, nutrient cycling, and soil respiration differed among treatments, the most sig-
nificant effects were observed for nitrogen and carbon responses, mineralization, nitrification, am-
monium availability and soil respiration rate, which were highest in treatments that received com-
posite treatments.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Management Implications 
 Systematic reviews are powerful and efficient tools for providing reproducible summaries of evi-
dence relevant to restoration treatments and exhibit great potential to guide policy decisions and 
consideration of management alternatives. 
 Most significant responses to restoration treatments were positive and observed for total nitrogen- 
and carbon-related variables, ammonium availability, net mineralization and nitrification, and soil 
respiration rate. 
 Manipulation of forest structure and composition, particularly through tree thinning and/or pre-
scribed fire, may positively affect soil processes and function and consideration should be given to 
the complex nature of interactions among vegetation, soil microbiota, and physicochemical process-
es when planning restoration treatments. 
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
Sánchez Meador, A.J., J.D. Springer, D.W. Huffman, M.A. Bowker, and J.E. Crouse. 2017. Soil func-
tional responses to ecological restoration treatments in frequent-fire forests of the western United 
States: A systematic review. Restoration Ecology, doi: 10.1111/rec.12535. 
Contact: Andrew Sánchez Meador, Andrew.SanchezMeador@nau.edu 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
Figure 1. Standardized mean difference in effect size and ±95 percent confidence in-
tervals for three restoration treatments compared for each of three macronutrient-related 
responses. Standardized mean difference of zero, positive, or negative indicated no 
change between treatment and control, increases in the response variable compared to 
the control, or decreases in the response variable, respectively. 
