The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Understory Responses to Tree Thinning and Seeding Indicate 
Stability of Degraded Pinyon Juniper Woodlands 
 
By David W. Huffman, Director of Research and Development 
Introduction 
Degraded ecological conditions stemming from intensive land use (e.g., heavy livestock grazing, overhar-
vesting, etc.) are common in pinyon-juniper woodlands and savannas in the western United States. In some 
cases, conditions on highly impacted sites may represent degraded stable states, resistant to change from 
management. A goal of ecological restoration is to drive systems from stable, degraded states toward more 
desirable conditions, closer to historical ranges of variability. To facilitate such transition, woodland sys-
tems may require active restoration treat-
ments that include manipulation of vegeta-
tion structure and alteration of microclimate 
and soil conditions. Treatments found to be 
successful on other sites have included tree 
thinning, slash additions, and augmentation 
of understory communities with seeds or 
propagules of native plants. In this work, we 
examined understory plant community re-
sponses to ecological restoration treatments 
at two pinyon-juniper woodland sites in 
northwestern Arizona. We asked the follow-
ing questions: 1) do restoration treatments, 
that include tree thinning prescriptions guid-
ed by reference conditions, scattering thin-
ning slash, and seeding, lead to increases in 
plant cover and species richness; and 2) how 
do understory responses differ across sites 
with contrasting soils characteristics? 
 
Methods 
We initiated repeated studies in 2002 at two sites (“Craig Ranch” (CR) and “Goose Pond” (GP)) on Grand 
Canyon-Parashant National Monument near Mount Trumbull, Arizona. The two sites were within 3 miles of 
one another, and were generally similar in terms of vegetation and woodland structure; however the sites 
differed in soils characteristics. At each site, we tested a restoration prescription that included thinning trees 
to lower densities and approximate historical overstory structure (ca 1880); lopping and scattering thinning 
material (tree boles, branches, and tops) across nearby interspaces; and seeding using a native species mix 
(Figure 1). The overall goal of the prescription was to increase understory cover and species richness. Moni-
toring plots established in untreated control areas and within treatment units were measured prior to treat-
ment implementation (2002), and then subsequently to evaluate understory responses at various times, in-
cluding 10 years post-treatment (2014). 
 
 
June 2017 
Figure 1. Tree thinning (A), lopping and scattering slash into open interspaces (B), 
and seeding with site-adapted native species (C) have been shown to provide establish-
ment sites (D) and help restore understory communities in degraded pinyon-juniper 
woodlands of the Southwest. In our studies, these treatments may not have been intensive 
enough to produce lasting results. 

Results 
 
Tree thinning resulted in statistically signif-
icant reductions in tree density at both sites 
as well as reductions in tree basal area at 
the GP site.  
 
Boles, branches, and tops of the thinned 
trees scattered across the study sites result-
ed in few changes to woody surface fuel 
loading, 10-years post-treatment (2014).  
 
Thinning and addition of woody material, 
along with seeding, resulted in only minor 
changes in understory cover and species 
richness at both sites (Figure 2).  
 
Plant cover and species richness were both 
negatively correlated with tree density. 
 
Management Implications 
 
Degraded woodlands resistant to restoration prescriptions may force managers to choose between 
strict adherence to historical reference-based prescriptions and more intensive thinning approaches 
that rely on longer succession processes to reestablish diverse ecological conditions. 
 
More intensive thinning than tested in our studies may further increase resources available to under-
story plants and produce more woody material to for improving soil conditions. However, such thin-
ning would require cutting presettlement-aged trees.  
 
Successful restoration of understory diversity may require seeding at heavier rates than tested in our 
studies.  
 
More work is needed to test new restoration approaches that are designed to drive degraded pinyon-
juniper woodlands over resilience thresholds (i.e., stable degraded conditions) toward more diverse 
understory communities.  
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following publication:  
Huffman, D.W., M.T. Stoddard, J.D. Springer, and J.E. Crouse. 2017. Understory responses to tree thin-
ning and seeding indicate stability of degraded pinyon-juniper woodlands. Rangeland Ecology and 
Management, 70:484-492.  
 
Further Reading 
Laycock, W.A. 1991. Stable states and thresholds of range condition on North American rangelands: a 
viewpoint. Journal of Range Management, 44:427–433. 
Stoddard, M.T., D.W. Huffman, T. Alcoze, P.Z. Fulé. 2008. Effects of slash on herbaceous communities 
in pinyon-juniper woodlands of northern Arizona. Rangeland Ecology and Management, 61:485–495. 
Suding, K.N., K.L. Gross, and G.R. Houseman. 2004. Alternative states and positive feedbacks in restora-
tion ecology. Trends in Ecology and Evolution, 19:46–53. 
Contact: David W. Huffman, David.Huffman@nau.edu  
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
Figure 2. Native plant cover (%) and species richness (species per 5,382 
ft2) at the CR and GP study sites. Means were significantly different be-
tween treated and untreated units only for species richness at the GP site in 
2014 (asterisk). 
