The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
A Meta-Analysis of Management Effects 
on Forest Carbon Storage 
 
Introduction 
Concern about global climate change has focused attention on carbon storage in forests as an important 
ecosystem service. Forest carbon dynamics (the storage and release of carbon) are a key component of 
global carbon budgets. Conservation of forests has become a primary concern, especially in the trop-
ics, where deforestation is the source of more carbon than from forests in other latitudes. While tem-
perate and boreal forests predominantly store carbon, they are vulnerable to a variety of natural and 
human disturbances such as timber harvesting and wildfire, the effects of which may be exacerbated 
by climate change. In addition, new concern exists about the 
conservation of undisturbed old-growth forest stands that 
were once thought to be carbon neutral, but have been found 
to actively sequester carbon for up to 800 years.1 Under-
standing the influence of managed versus unmanaged forests 
on carbon storage and release are important to understand 
management options and carbon trade-offs. Existing synthe-
ses of research on forest management and the effects on eco-
system carbon have limitations. For example, most of the 
focus of forest carbon storage has been on live and dead bio-
mass, which comprises roughly 60 percent of global forest 
carbon; however, litter and soil make up the remaining 40 
percent, and are thus critical components of forest carbon 
dynamics.  
 
This study is based on a thorough, global literature search on total forest ecosystem carbon gains or 
losses in response to management treatments, including fuel reduction (prescribed fire and thinning), 
harvesting, and clear-cutting. The literature search also included wildfire as an inadvertent treatment 
(or lack of management activities) to better contextualize carbon gains or losses with other manage-
ment treatments. The objective of the study was to compare the amount of carbon stored in multiple 
ecosystem carbon components in managed versus unmanaged forests, to more fully understand the 
carbon costs and benefits of a wide variety of forest management strategies.  
Methods 
The analysis used a systematic review protocol to identify and extract data to be used in a meta-
analysis, a statistical procedure for combining data from multiple studies. Only studies that measured 
total ecosystem carbon in at least four ecosystem components (soil, litter, vegetation, and deadwood) 
were included in order to reduce variation between studies and to ensure that the trade-off between 
ecosystem components was captured in the analysis.  
 
___________________ 
1Luyssaert, S., E.D. Schulze, A. Borner, A. Knohl, D. Hessenmoller, B.E. Law, and J. Grace. 2008. Old-growth forests as global carbon 
sinks. Nature, 455(7210), 213–215. doi:10.1038/nature07276 
June 2017 
Fuel reduction treatments, like the ones used 
to restore this forest, result in less carbon loss 
than wildfire or clear-cuts.   

 
Results 
There were 35 studies from North America and elsewhere that had quantitative data suitable for the 
meta-analysis. There was a surprising scarcity of papers that fit the established criteria because many 
ecosystem carbon papers only evaluate two or three of the four ecosystem components that were re-
quired for inclusion (often focusing only on either aboveground or below ground carbon). Ultimately, 
29 studies exclusively from North American were used in the analysis, yielding 800 separate observa-
tions.   
 
Discussion 
We found that the most important variables in predicting changes in carbon storage were, in decreas-
ing order of importance, ecosystem carbon component (soil, litter, vegetation, and deadwood), time 
since treatment, and age of control. The different ecosystem carbon components (soil, vegetation, lit-
ter, and deadwood) responded differently to forest management. Across all management treatments, 
the largest carbon losses occurred in the litter, roots, and vegetation. This makes sense because man-
agement treatments manipulate those ecosystem components the most. Soil appears to remain relative-
ly unaffected by the different management types, a finding that is consistent with other analyses. The 
deadwood ecosystem carbon component trends toward a decline following treatment but with large 
variability likely caused by a number of factors. When evaluating ecosystem component responses to 
treatment, the time since treatment is important to consider because although carbon stocks may de-
crease in the short-term immediately following a treatment, carbon stocks may increase in the long-
term due to an increase in growing space and associated increase in vegetation.   
 
Although only a weak trend in the analysis, fuel reduction treatments resulted in less carbon loss than 
wildfire or clear-cuts. The finding that wildfire and clear-cuts result in greater carbon loss than thin-
ning and/or burning is consistent with existing modeling studies. Modeling studies also suggest that 
forest management is unimportant to long-term carbon dynamics when compared to the effects of nat-
ural disturbance such as tree loss caused by drought, fire, or insects—disturbances that are predicted to 
increase under climate change.  
 
Finally, the value of a meta-analysis is that it reveals knowledge gaps that exist in the literature that 
can inform the need for future research. This study found that despite the interest that has existed in 
this topic since the 1990s there are still large data gaps in our understanding of forest management and 
carbon dynamics, particularly in regions other than North American, and in timber production forests 
and plantations.   
 
 
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
Kalies, E.L., K.A. Haubensak, and A.J. Finkral. 2016. Berlyn Review: A meta-analysis of manage-
ment effects on forest ecosystem carbon. Journal of Sustainable Forestry. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/10549811.2016.1154471 
 
 
Contact: Tayloe Dubay, Tayloe.Dubay@nau.edu 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
