Ecological 
Restoration 
Institute
College of Engineering, Forestry,  
and Natural Sciences
A Guide to Fire Safety and Native Landscaping  
in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
for Homeowners
Restoration

 Introduction
any people live in the 
upland forests of the Southwest 
for its mild weather, beautiful 
scenery, and recreation opportunities. But, 
living in this idyllic landscape also means 
living with fire, which has played a natural role 
in the forests of the West for millions of years. 
As people push further into natural areas 
that historically experience frequent fire, it is 
critical that residents and communities work 
together to be fire adapted. Although much 
is being done by land managers to restore 
southwestern forests and reduce the risk  
of catastrophic fire, residents can and 
should take action, too, to protect their 
homes and families.
Throughout the West there are homes, 
subdivisions, and entire communities located 
in and adjacent to unhealthy and fire-prone 
forestlands. Evidence shows that restoration 
treatments, which 
include the mechanical 
thinning of excess 
small trees and the 
reintroduction of fire 
through prescribed 
burns, help reduce 
the risk of fire in 
these areas. Forest 
restoration not only 
reduces hazardous 
fuels but it improves 
wildland health by 
returning overgrown 
forests to a more 
resilient condition, 
one that can better 
withstand major 
disturbances from 
insects, fire, and changes in climate. Treatments 
also increase firefighter safety and allow 
increased tactical fire suppression options that 
may not be possible in untreated locations. 
Although firefighters play a key role in 
safeguarding communities, their resources 
are limited during extreme fire events. They 
may not be able to protect every home, 
especially those where homeowners have 
taken no proactive steps to increase safety.  
It is important that homeowners chip in to 
protect their homes and neighborhoods and 
help create a Fire Adapted Community. In 
the end, wildfire safety and home protection 
starts with the homeowner. While it may not 
be possible to be 100 percent fireproof, what 
you do around your home and surrounding 
property can mean the difference between 
damage, loss, or survival.
This guide is intended to provide homeowners 
with information to help reduce wildfire risk 
while also promoting a healthier and more 
sustainable environment. This guide will 
help you determine whether your home and 
property are in danger of ignition, and provide 
actionable steps and resources to reduce that 
risk. It will also provide tips on choosing fire-
resistant plants and landscape designs that 
conserve water and provide wildlife habitat.
Yellow coneflower (Ratibida columnifera)

Fire’s Natural Role in the Forest
Fire has played a natural role in forested 
ecosystems throughout western North 
America for millions of years. The evolutionary 
environment of ponderosa pine forests included 
frequent, low-intensity fire, which managed 
tree populations, supported plant diversity, and 
provided wildlife habitat by maintaining healthy 
understory forest conditions. 
Fire scars on pine trees, along with other lines 
of evidence, tell a history of low-intensity fires 
burning through the woods every two to 12 
years. Before Euro-American settlement in the 
late 1880s, forests were open and parklike. 
The fires, mostly ignited by lighting, would 
burn across the forest surface, regulating over-
abundant tree growth by removing saplings 
and stimulating native grasses, wildflowers, 
and shrubs. The resulting landscape was one 
interspersed with clumps of old, large pine trees 
and grassy meadows—ideal habitat for foraging 
animals, butterflies, and birds.  
With settlement came intense livestock grazing, 
logging, and fire exclusion, as few of these   
ecologically beneficial fires were allowed to 
burn. Forests grew dense with small, highly 
flammable pines and a thick ground cover of 
decades of accumulated dead and downed 
woody debris, which serve as fuel for future 
wildfires. These forest fuels would have been 
naturally cleaned up by our once frequent, 
low-intensity fires. Today’s abundance of 
fuel produces dangerous, destructive, and 
fast-moving wildfires. They burn so hot  
that they kill large trees, destroy buildings 
and homes, and threaten lives.
What Is a Fire Adapted Community?
The Fire Adapted Communities Network takes a collaborative approach to 
wildfire risk reduction. It engages key stakeholders in the community and invites 
everyone—from wildfire officials, community planners, residents, business owners, 
emergency responders, insurance representatives, and land managers—to take 
action in preparing for wildfire. Firewise is an important element of being fire 
adapted. It provides a framework that includes concepts and tips for homeowners 
to best prepare for wildfire by reducing 
their home’s risk of ignition. 
There are more than 45 million homes near or in the  
wildland-urban interface (National Fire Prevention Association).
Restoration for Homeowners    1

What is Restoration?
Restoration is a process to restore the natural 
patterns and arrangements of native forest 
plants so they can tolerate and bounce back 
from disturbances like natural fire, insect 
infestations, and drought.  
In places where forests are 
highly degraded and stocked 
with an over-abundance of 
trees, fire alone cannot restore 
natural structure. In these 
cases, land managers use 
mechanical thinning operations 
to cut down and remove excess 
small trees. Prescribed fire is 
often applied after thinning to 
reduce fuel accumulation on 
the forest floor and reinvigorate 
grasses and wildflowers. By 
reducing competition for water 
and nutrients, restoration 
improves the health of the 
remaining trees. Ecologists in the Southwest 
have spent decades studying the historical and 
natural conditions of the forests and use these 
conditions to guide restoration treatments.
The ecological and social benefits of restoration 
are numerous. Healthy forests protect water 
supplies, create wildlife habitat, provide 
recreational opportunities, strengthen economies, 
improve surface water quality and recharge 
groundwater, and protect carbon storage in trees, 
to name a few. Studies show that the removal of 
small trees and hazardous fuels, like pine needles 
and woody debris, greatly 
reduces the risk of catastrophic 
fire. Many communities across 
the West have developed wildfire 
protection plans that include 
forest restoration activities in 
the wildland-urban interface 
(WUI), defined as the area where 
forests and urban development 
intersect. Research has shown 
that restoration treatments 
in the WUI have protected 
communities from wildfire by 
slowing down or even stopping 
the spread of the fire and 
providing areas for safe and 
effective firefighting efforts. 
Fire Scars Help Paint 
a Picture of the Past
Tree rings tell the story of the past—and the future. 
Small char marks (arrows) reveal that this northern 
Arizona ponderosa pine tree experienced 34 low-
severity fires over 240 years. The fires stopped after 1869, 
when newly introduced livestock ate away grasses and 
other fine fuels. Small trees proliferated and fire danger 
grew. Restoration requires reestablishing the ecological 
processes that shaped these forests,  
including low-severity fire.
There were 1,251 large or significant wildfires reported in 2016 (40,000 acres or more)  
(National Interagency Fire Center).
2	
Ecological Restoration Institute 

How to Protect Your Home from Fire
Wind-blown embers from a wildfire can travel well over a mile.  
So while the flames may not be at your back doorstep, depending 
on wind and weather conditions, a distant fire can be just as 
dangerous, igniting smaller fires ahead of the main fire front.  
Excess fuel accumulations of live and dead vegetation plus a 
changing climate that includes warmer, drier weather patterns 
increase the danger of extreme wildfire behavior. Fire intensity 
and severity are influenced by a variety of factors, like fuel, 
weather, and terrain. We cannot control the weather or 
topography, but we can help control the fuel a fire needs  
to grow and spread. 
Fire tends to move from the ground into the crowns of trees 
through “ladder” fuels like shrubs and low-hanging tree 
branches and limbs. As it moves into the trees, the flames 
become longer and larger and create more heat. Flying 
embers can land and easily ignite on roofs, gutters, and 
decks if they are strewn with dead leaves and pine needles 
as well as wooden patio furniture and cushions, firewood 
piles, underdeck storage items, and other combustibles. 
Excess pine cones, dead leaves, and needles on lawns can 
carry the fire to your home’s flammable features.
The key is to create a defensible space from fire in and 
around your home. You can do this by managing the fuels 
on your property through appropriate treatments in three 
key zones extending around your home.
Living with
SMOKE
Fire is simply a part of life 
in southwestern ponderosa 
pine forests. Seasonal 
prescribed burns—planned 
ignitions designed to safely 
reduce excess hazardous 
fuels—do produce 
smoke. But smoke from 
a prescribed fire is not as 
heavy, abundant, or long-
lasting as smoke produced 
from a wildfire because 
land managers plan 
in advance to mitigate 
such impacts. For many, 
tolerating occasional light 
smoke from controlled 
fires is more desirable than 
experiencing heavy smoke 
from unpredictable and 
destructive wildfires. 
Forest managers typically 
give the public advance 
warning of prescribed 
burns. If you have concerns 
about smoke, contact your 
local fire department or 
the agency conducting 
burns. Many have 
plans for notifying and 
accommodating people 
sensitive to smoke.
Restoration for Homeowners    3

home ignition zones
Zone 1 0–30 ft
Zone 1 is a well-irrigated area that includes your home, any structures that extend from it, 
and the area around it for at least 30 feet on all sides. This area includes decks, porches, 
fences, and other attachments to the home. Consider non-flammable or low flammability 
construction materials when building, repairing, or remodeling your home, particularly 
regarding roofs, siding, and windows. 
In this area:
•	 Firewood stacks and propane tanks should 
be moved far away from the home; they 
should not be located in this zone.
•	 Create a “fire-free” area within five feet of  
the home by avoiding plants and mulch.  
Use non-flammable landscape materials 
instead and/or high-moisture content 
annuals and perennials.  
•	 Rake leaves and pine needles away from  
the foundation, and remove dead vegetation 
and stored combustible items from under  
the deck.
•	 Remove pine needles and other flammable 
materials from the roof and gutters.
•	 Plants in this zone should be widely spaced 
and low growing. Make sure the plants are 
free of resins, oils, and waxes that burn easily. 
•	 Mow the lawn regularly. Prune trees  
up to 10 feet from the ground.
•	 Space conifer trees 30 feet between 
crowns. Trim back trees that overhang  
the house.
•	 Consider fire-resistant material for patio 
furniture, swing sets, etc.
•	 Water plants, trees, and mulch regularly.
•	 Consider xeriscaping—a style of 
landscaping that uses little to no water—
to conserve water and break up ground 
fuel continuity. 
ZONE 1
ZONE 2
ZONE 3
NFPA, Firewise Communities Program
For more info on xeriscaping, visit 
https://www.nationalgeographic.org/ 
encyclopedia/xeriscaping/.
Site and Structure Hazards (facing page, from top to bottom)
a Pine needles and pine cones should be cleared from decks.  b Woodpiles should be moved away from the house.
c/d Propane tanks are highly flammable and should be moved far away from the home. 
e Pine needles should be cleared from roofs and gutters.
4	
Ecological Restoration Institute 

Zone 2 30–100 ft
Zone 2 is 30 to 100 feet from the home.  
Plants in this zone should be low-growing, 
well irrigated and less flammable.
In this area:
•	 Leave 30 feet between clusters of  
two to three trees, or 20 feet between  
individual trees.
•	 Maintain open space between tree  
crowns and prune trees up to 10 feet 
from the ground.
•	 Clear and dispose of heavy accumulations of pine needles, fallen leaves, 
and other flammable materials.
•	 Keep plants watered and mow dry grasses and weeds.
•	 Choose deciduous trees.
•	 Create “fuel breaks,” like driveways and gravel walkways.
•	 Allow good access. Maintain a wide, uncluttered driveway with sufficient 
vertical and horizontal clearance to allow fire engines to enter and to 
turn around. Post your house number so it is visible from the street.
Zone 3 100–200 ft
Zone 3 is 100 to 200 feet from the home. This area should be thinned, 
although less space is required than in Zone 2. NOTE: Because of other 
factors such as topography, the recommended distances to mitigate for 
radiant heat exposure actually extend between 100 to 200 feet from the 
home — on a site-specific basis.
In this area:
•	 Reduce the density of tall trees so canopies are not touching and 
remove ladder fuels — such as smaller conifers growing between taller 
trees and dead, dangling branches — to lower the danger of crown fire 
without losing the forest’s natural qualities. 
•	 Protect big, old trees. Large pines provide important wildlife habitat, are 
aesthetically pleasing, and increase property values. Rake pine needles 
and woody debris at least 2 feet away from their trunks and trim nearby 
small trees and shrubs that could carry fire into their crowns.
•	 Remove heavy accumulations of downed logs and branches.
•	 Think clumps. Some clumps of dense trees and shrubs can be left 
standing for visual screening or for wildlife habitat, as long as they’re 
separated from the house and from one another by defensible open 
space—and placed so they can’t carry fire into the crowns of large trees.
•	 Think openings. Openings with grasses and other low vegetation are 
important for many wildlife species, and can help stop or slow a fire.
a
b
c
d
e
Trimming trees reduces fire risk.
 Restoration for Homeowners    5

Landscaping and landscape management play a critical role in minimizing 
wildfire risk to homes and property. Firewise landscaping can be aesthetically 
pleasing while reducing potential wildfire fuel. Plant choice, spacing, and 
maintenance are critical and your landscape, which includes the plants in it, 
must be maintained to continue being Firewise. There are many native and 
local species that are appropriate for Firewise plant material.
Creating a Natural, Firewise Landscape
Designing Your Landscape
Increasing your home and property’s fire resistance doesn’t mean you have to relinquish  
aesthetic landscaping methods. In fact, there are many landscaping ideas that add aesthetic value  
to your home while reducing its risk from fire, increasing wildlife habitat, and conserving water. 
Some ideas to incorporate are:
•	 Use small irregular clusters of plants. For example, 
if you plant trees or shrubs for privacy make 
sure they are positioned in “islands” away from 
buildings or large trees.
•	 Use decorative rock, gravel, and stepping 
stones for landscaping and pathways to break 
up ground fuels and add visual dimension.
•	 Use rock mulch, cinders, or gravel in and around 
flower beds to inhibit weed growth and maintain 
soil moisture without increasing fire danger.
•	 Make sure tall, woody plants or groupings on 
slopes are spaced widely, since fire travels 
more quickly on slopes than flat ground. Well-
maintained native perennial ground covers can 
control erosion without significant fuel increases.
•	 Create rock piles instead of dead brush  
piles for wildlife cover. 
•	 Use a variety of plant species. Plant 
diversity results in fewer harmful insects 
and diseases and supports a healthy 
landscape more resistant to wildfire.
•	 Control invasive species. Nonnative plants 
like Dalmatian toadflax, cheatgrass, and 
spotted knapweed threaten natural forest 
diversity and can readily carry fire.
•	 Use native plants that tolerate local 
conditions. Consult your local arboretum, 
botanic garden, garden club, plant nursery, 
municipal planning department, or county 
extension master gardener program.
6	
Ecological Restoration Institute 

The following are some tips on choosing 
Firewise plant species for your home 
landscape plan:
Choosing Firewise Plants
Look for the following characteristics 
when choosing Firewise plants:
•	 Plants that grow without accumulating large 
amounts of dead branches, needles, or 
leaves (e.g., aspen or maple trees).
•	 Plants that have open, loose branches  
with a low volume of total vegetation  
(e.g., currant and elderberry).
•	 Plants with low resin content (many 
deciduous species).
•	 Plants with high-moisture content 
(succulents, some herbaceous plants).
•	 Plants that grow slowly and do not  
need frequent clipping.
•	 Plants that are short and grow close  
to the ground (small wildflowers,  
non-coniferous groundcovers).
•	 Choose deciduous shrubs and trees. Their leaves have 
higher moisture content and they tend to be more fire 
resistant. These plants drop their leaves seasonally, 
which means less fuel to carry fire through their 
canopies; however, it is critical you rake and remove the 
leaves every year.
•	 Choose drought-adapted plants, like succulents or cacti. 
They tend to have smaller leaves or leaves that store water.
•	 Avoid plants with high resin content, which makes them 
flammable even when well-watered. Conifers like pines, 
firs, spruces, junipers, and Arizona cypress tend to be 
flammable due to their oil and pitch content, regardless 
of moisture status. watered.
 •	Conifers like pines, firs, spruces, junipers, and Arizona 
cypress tend to be flammable due to their oil and pitch 
content, regardless of moisture status.
Most homes, an estimated 90 percent, are destroyed during wildfire by burning embers 
landing on, in, or near the house on something that easily ignites  (Living with Fire Program).
Restoration for Homeowners    7
Showy goldenflower (Heliomeris multiflora)
Blue grama (Bouteloua gracilis)
Blue flax (Linum Lewisii)
Western yarrow (Achillea millefolium)

Backyards are a part of a home’s landscape that have the potential to 
provide habitat for many wildlife species. Migratory birds and butterflies 
travel through the Southwest visiting shade trees and flower gardens on their 
migrations in the spring and fall. They are best adapted to feed and nectar 
on local, native plants. Check with your local plant nursery for a list of plants 
best suited for your garden and region.
Backyard Wildlife Habitat
Water Features
There are many water features on the 
market today that are designed with 
water conservation in mind. Birdbaths, 
small fountains, or ponds attract birds 
and dragonflies. Water should be 
changed frequently to avoid algae 
growth or mosquito larvae. 
Plants as Food for Wildlife
Many plants provide food for animals. 
Leafy trees, shrubs, and wildflowers 
support populations of small insects  
that attract birds and other animals. 
Showy wildflowers produce nectar and pollen for hummingbirds, butterflies, moths, and bees. 
Shrubs and trees that bear fruit or nuts attract an array of animals through winter. Plant many 
different types of vegetation to ensure a variety of food sources. To avoid wildlife conflicts, seal 
crawl spaces, attics, and garages to keep out skunks, squirrels, rodents, and other unwanted wildlife.
8	
Ecological Restoration Institute 
On average, U.S. land management agencies spend $2.6 billion on fire  
suppression-related activities each year (National Fire Prevention Association).

Native Plant Web Resources
Arizona Native Plant Society: http://www.aznps.com/sources.php
National Wildlife Federation’s Garden for Wildlife: http://www.nwf.org/Home/  
  Garden-For-Wildlife.aspx
Center for Water Efficient Landscaping (CWEL), Water-Wise and Native Plants:  
   http://cwel.usu.edu/plants
Invasive Weeds of the Southwest: http://www.invasiveweeds.com/canido
Center For Invasive Plant Management: www.weedcenter.org
Southwest Exotic Plant Information Clearinghouse: www.usgs.nau.edu/SWEPIC
Flowers ~ Pollinator animals like bees, hummingbirds, bats, 
butterflies, and moths are attracted to yards and garden with 
a diversity of flowering species. Penstemons are a widely used 
group of native flowers because they have showy, colorful 
flowers that attract hummingbirds, bees, and butterflies. 
Perennial wildflower meadows that incorporate a variety of 
species ensures that some flowers will bloom every year even 
with varying moisture conditions. Native wildflowers such as 
yellow coneflower (Ratibida columnifera), showy goldenflower 
(Heliomeris multiflora), and blue flax (Linum lewisii), are a few 
plants to consider. 
Berries ~ Currants, gooseberries, serviceberries, chokecherries, 
and barberries are all native shrubs that produce wild fruits. Their 
abundant, sweet fruits are sought after by birds and other wildlife. 
As an added bonus, shrubs, when planted away from the house, 
can also provide visual screening or wind protection.
Grasses ~ A more economical and environmentally friendly 
alternative to the classic bluegrass lawn is to use native 
grasses that are drought tolerant. Blue grama (Bouteloua 
gracilis) is often suggested, but many people mix this grass 
with western yarrow (Achillea millefolium), a flowering plant. 
Many plants depend on 
honeybees or other pollinators 
to reproduce. In recent years, 
bee populations have dwindled 
and bee colonies, both wild 
and managed, across the 
country are at risk due to a 
phenomenon called colony 
collapse disorder (CCD).  
This occurs when a majority  
of worker bees abandon the 
hive causing it to collapse,  
or die. This is a major concern 
for the U.S. agricultural 
industry, which relies on bees 
to pollinate crops. There are 
many contributing factors to 
CCD, but agreement exists 
that pesticides, loss of habitat, 
climate change, and disease 
are at the forefront. 
So what can you do?
Create a pesticide-free space 
for pollinators that will invite 
native bees and other beneficial 
insects. Purchase plants that 
aren’t pretreated with pesticides. 
If it is unclear if the plants were 
treated, ask questions when 
shopping for seeds and flowers. 
Leave the blooming clover, which 
some see as a weed, for bees to 
enjoy. Plant high-nectar flowers 
and provide a “bee bath”—a 
shallow container of fresh, clean 
water for thirsty bee visitors.
the BUZZ
 on bees and Other  
 Pollinators
For more information on specific flowers 
and plants for your bee garden, go to 
thehoneybeeconservancy.org.
A total of 4,312 structures were destroyed by wildfires in 2016, including more than  
3,000 homes and more than 70 commercial buildings  (National Interagency Fire Center). 
   9

How to Create a Wildfire Action Plan*
Before a wildfire threatens your home, prepare an action plan and familiarize all 
members of the family with it. Use the checklist below to help craft your plan:
General Resources 
•	 National Fire Prevention Association, Wildfire Safety:  
http://www.nfpa.org/public-education/by-topic/wildfire-and-
seasonal-fires/wildland-fires
•	 Firewise Communities Program: http://www.firewise.org/
•	 Firewise Toolkit: http://www.firewise.org/wildfire-preparedness/
firewise-toolkit.aspx
•	 Fire Adapted Communities Learning Network: https://
fireadaptednetwork.org/
•	 Forests and Rangelands, Community Wildfire Protection Plans:  
www.forestsandrangelands.gov/communities/cwpp.shtml
•	 U.S. Fire Prevention and Education: https://www.fs.fed.us/fire/prev_ed/
•	 The Wildfire Home Assessment and Checklist by the Insurance Institute 
for Business & Home Safety: http://disastersafety.org/wp-content/
uploads/wildfire-checklist_IBHS.pdf. (This link has a cost estimator to 
help prioritize projects and plan your home improvement budget.)
•	 The “How to Prepare for a Wildfire” guide by the Federal 
Emergency Management Agency: https://www.fema.gov/
media-library-data/1409003859391-0e8ad1ed42c129f11fbc2
3d008d1ee85/how_to_prepare_wildfire_033014_508.pdf 
•	 The International Association of Fire Chiefs Ready, Set, Go! 
program: http://www.wildlandfirersg.org/
Resources by State
•	 Arizona Department of Forestry and Fire Management, 
Firewise: https://dffm.az.gov/fire/prevention/firewise
•	 Colorado Firewise Communities: https://csfs.colostate.edu/
wildfire-mitigation/colorado-firewise-communities/
•	 New Mexico State Forestry Fire Prevention and Outreach: 
http://www.emnrd.state.nm.us/SFD/FireMgt/
FirePreventionandOutreachProgram.html
•	 Utah Division of Forestry, Fire & State Lands, Wildfire 
Community Preparedness: http://www.ffsl.utah.gov/index.
php/fire/resources-for-homeowners
Create an Evacuation Plan:
	
Designate an emergency meeting location  
outside the fire or hazard area. 
	
Identify several different escape routes  
from your home and community.
	
Have an evacuation plan for pets and  
large animals like horses and other livestock.
	
Create a family communication plan with  
a friend or relative as the primary point-of-
contact. This person can help coordinate with 
family members in case of separation.
Be Prepared:
	
Have fire extinguishers available on site, train your 
family to use them, and make sure they are up-to-date.
	
Ensure your family knows where your gas, electric, 
and water main shut-off controls are located. Teach 
everyone how to shut them down in an emergency.
	
Assemble an emergency supply kit for each person.
	
Maintain a list of emergency contacts in the  
emergency supply kit.
	
Keep an extra emergency supply kit in your car in  
case you cannot reach your home because of fire.
* Modified from www.readyforwildfire.org
Ecological 
Restoration 
Institute
College of Engineering, Forestry, 
and Natural Sciences
The Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a 
pioneer in researching, implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration 
of dry, frequent-fire forests in the Intermountain West. These forests were 
significantly altered during the last century, with decreased ecological and 
recreational values, near-elimination of natural low-intensity fire regimes, 
and greatly increased risk of large-scale fires. 
The ERI is working with public agencies and other partners to restore these 
forests to a more ecologically healthy condition and trajectory—in the 
process helping to significantly reduce the threat of catastrophic wildfire  
and its effects on human, animal, and plant communities.
Restoration for Homeowners –
A Guide to Fire Safety and Native  
Landscaping in Southwestern  
Ponderosa Pine Forests
Publication date: August 2017
Author: Tayloe Dubay, Knowledge Specialist
Reviewers: Mark Brehl,  
Judy Springer, Diane Vosick
Graphic Designer: Mary Ross 
Cover images, clockwise from top: A Firewise home (courtesy National Fire Protection Association); Butterfly visiting a native flower (photo by ERI);  
Low-water, fire-resistant landscaping (courtesy Mark Brehl, Arizona State Forestry).  Page 8: “Spring Bath” by TJ Gehling, 2015.
NAU is an equal opportunity provider. This report was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service. 
