The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Developing a Framework for the U.S. Forest Service Broader-Scale 
Monitoring Strategy: Processes and Outcomes 
By Bryce E. Esch, Program Coordinator, Ecological Restoration Institute 
Introduction 
The 2012 U.S. Forest Service (USFS) Planning Rule requires “the development of a broader-scale monitoring 
strategy [BSMS] for plan monitoring questions that can best be answered at a geographic scale broader than one 
plan area.” The Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes, in partnership with the USFS Southwestern and 
Rocky Mountain Regions, developed a framework for a regional broader-scale monitoring strategy. The project 
included a multi-step process designed to capture input from stakeholders, USFS staff, other agency partners, 
and other monitoring experts to best meet the intent and requirements of the 2012 Planning Rule. A BSMS 
framework was synthesized from four state-based workshops (AZ, NM, CO, WY) in 2016 and more than 90 
interviews.  
 
Monitoring is a critical component of the 2012 Planning Rule framework. The intent of a BSMS is to monitor 
important elements at scales greater than one forest to better inform forest plan effectiveness and identify if and 
when any modifications to plan guidance may be necessary. USFS Handbook direction suggests appropriate 
scales for a BSMS include multiple forests and surrounding lands within a region, and can span multiple re-
gions. A key opportunity for a BSMS is to create monitoring efficiencies through increased communication and 
coordination with USFS staff and partners that can help to achieve the “all-lands” approach emphasized by 
USFS and other public land agency leadership. For this effort to be successful, support from the Washington 
Office and regional leadership is needed. 
 
The following recommendations and observations encapsulate the major findings from this process to create the 
basic framework for moving forward with a broader-scale monitoring strategy. Additionally, a set of broader-
scale monitoring indicators and available datasets were developed and can be found in the full report at 
www.sweri.eri.nau.edu/BroadscaleMonitoring.html. 
 
Primary Recommendations for a Broader-Scale Monitoring Strategy: 
1)  Increase efficiency. The Planning Rule directs the USFS to increase efficiencies, while also addressing 
stressors and threats at the landscape scale. Suggested mechanisms to increase efficiency include (Figure 1): 
 
Develop a common set of broader-scale monitoring questions at the regional level.  
 
Identify existing monitoring efforts that meet BSMS criteria.  
 
Aggregate existing data from forest-level monitoring.   
 
Standardize the monitoring indicators and data collection protocols within and across national forests.  
 
Utilize existing corporate data and analytical capacity.  
 
Support and share USFS innovations developed at forest and regional levels. 
 
Share lessons learned, including processes, collaboration, and monitoring resources, between and across 
partners and landscapes.  
 
Coordinate data sharing and data management within and across agencies and partnerships. 
 
2)  Build Capacity. A BSMS requires capacity at regional or sub-regional levels for implementation. The plan-
ning rule states the need for a BSMS to operate within existing funding levels; no new funding was allocated 
for a BSMS. We suggest additional capacity gains may be accomplished from utilizing existing staff, USFS 
corporate and partner resources, as well as increasing monitoring efficiencies across forests. 
 
February 2017 

 
Dedicate technical exper-
tise to assist with question 
and protocol development 
and integration, data roll-
up and assessment.  
 
Plan for technical training 
and education for USFS 
staff. 
 
Work with high capacity 
partners (state and federal 
agencies, non-profits, 
tribes) strategically and 
efficiently to fill BSMS 
monitoring gaps. 
 
Dedicate regional staff for 
coordination, communica-
tion and adaptive manage-
ment recommendations.  
 
Engage line officers and 
forest staff in BSMS de-
velopment.  
 
3)  Capitalize on existing opportunities. The planning rule suggests multiple broad-scale monitoring (BSM) strat-
egies and sub-strategies can be developed to meet the BSM requirement. This allows a flexibility to be oppor-
tunistic across the forests in a region.  
 
Capture BSM needs for each forest as opportunities arise through forest planning.  
 
Link monitoring to forest plan assessment through the forest planning process. 
 
Utilize national-level reviews of forest-level monitoring plan development.  
 
To achieve these recommendations, participants also recommended specific communication needs and partner-
ship engagement opportunities: 
 
BSMS communication: 
1) Identify opportunities to work closely with other land and wildlife management agencies to better understand 
key stressors and threats across boundaries. 
2) Identify efficient and effective strategies for collecting BSMS data and communicating BSMS results and 
information back to forests and other audiences. Clear articulation of the audiences for BSMS data delivery, 
and the appropriate time intervals for that communication are needed.  
3) Formal communication methods are recommended given the high level of turnover within USFS positions. 
Similar to sharing innovations, in-person workshops are preferred; report delivery or web delivery are less 
effective for information dissemination. 
 
BSMS partner engagement: 
1) USFS regional and forest leadership should work together to identify partnership opportunities and develop 
partnership strategies prior to engaging partners in the process. 
2) Technical workshops with USFS resource professionals (at regional and forest levels) and corporate analysts 
will clarify existing BSMS strategies already in place and allow for more strategic engagement with partners. 
3) Third-party facilitation will strategically engage partners with technical expertise prior to public engagement.  
 
An over-arching recommendation across four workshops and 90 interviews is that a BSMS can build on current 
monitoring efforts. Existing data and existing monitoring that meets BSMS criteria should be leveraged, and 
monitoring indicators and data collection protocols should be standardized within and across national forests and 
surrounding landscapes. Increased coordination and understanding across agencies will support an “all-lands” 
approach to land management and engage partners in monitoring across land management jurisdictions.  
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following report: 
Contact: Bryce E. Esch, Bryce.Esch@nau.edu 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
Figure 1. A Broader-Scale Monitoring Strategy can increase efficiencies by incorporating existing 
monitoring from USFS forest plans and national, regional, and partner efforts. 
