original surveyors. 111ey interpolated this data using two Arc/Info inrcr-
pclation processes and indicator kriging (a method to create continuous
surface dura from points) ro create a Ill:l p . They then compared their mar
ron map of "true" vegetation obtained from aerial photographs. While
the interpolation methods accurately estimated the relative forest com-
position (If the landscape and the dominant vegetat ion types. they could
nor accurately estimate the actual area occupied by the vegetation types
or re-create landscape patterns found in the historic landscape. 111e
auth .Irsdo not recommend using these methods in combination with the
survey datu to re-create pre-European settlement vegetation at small
scales and recommend ways in which to increase accuracy.
212
A Multistage Approach to Estimate Fish Abundance in Streams
Usi ng Geographic Information Systems. 2000. Toepfer. c.s., W.L.
Fisher, Dept. of Zoology, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, O K
74078, wfisher@okstare.edu; and W.O. \V,m lt:. North American j ou r-
nal of Fisheri es Man agement 20(3 ):634-645.
The authors developed a three-stage meth od that
incorpora tes
Geographic Information Systems (G IS) for estimating fish abundance in
large streams. G IS techn ology facilitates the classification and analysis of
large stream segments that arc logistically difficult to sample visually. As
a case study, the authors used this method to estimate the abundance and
population dynamic." of the leopard darter (Per cmcr panrhl?lina) in Big
Eagle Creek in southeastern Oklahoma. They I) classified and
lllarrt~l
stream habitat rypcs. 2) quantified the suitabilirv of the habitats for
stream fishes, and 3) tl5C\.1 this information to estimate fish population
abundance and expand...··d the estimates to an entire stream segment.
A lthough the method has some difficulties, the authors believe that G IS
technology has porcnrial as a tool for fisheries research and management .
GENERAL REVEGETATION
& MONITORING
21 3
Sampling Method Captures Vegetation and Wildlife
Data in a Sagebrushgrassland Ecosystem (Arizona)
Mauheu..' Hurteau, Depr. of EntJiromnenral Honiculw.re. Unittersiry
of California, One Shields Aoe., Dat'is, CA 95616, mdhurreau
@ucd"" js.ed,,;MichaelStoddardand Brandon Oherhardl, Ecological
Restorarion Insriwre. Northern Arizona Unit'er.sit:'t', P.O. Box
15018, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 520/523-0997, michael.scoddard
@nau.edu, brandon.oherhardt@nau.edu
We are experimenting with a multi-perspect ive sampling method
that we think will he useful in monitoring vegetation, fuel loads,
and wildlife on th e stlgcbmsh-,I.,rras.<;lanJ meadows of th e Kaibah
Pniure Rcscrvarlon in nonhem Arizona. This work is in Jlrcrara ~
tion for hurning treatments that will he conducted in fall 200 2.
The new procedure integrates four existing sampling methods.
including 1) a shrubland ecosystem monitoring r iot structure
developed by th e N ationa l Park Se rvice
(Western
Re gion
Prescribed and Natural Fire Monitoring Task Force 1992), 2) a
point-intercept method for sampling veuetation cover (USDA
Cooperative Extension Service 1996)13) a method for using scar
268
counts to survey animal absenc e/presence (Cooperrider and others
1986), and 4) <In inventory syste m for determining fuel load devol-
"red hI' the Forest Service (Brown 1974, Brown and others 1982).
Since 1999. we have monitored experimental riots using this
methodology and f",'e1 we have been able to obtain a well-rounded
data set. \VJe believe that thi s method has several advantages:
• It requires less installation rime than other methods and allows
more tim e for data co llection.
• It rep laces two d ifferent sampling methods and obtains th e
same or better quality data.
• It separates vegetation and v.riIdlifc sampling areas allowingcol-
lcction of both sets of data simultaneously,
• It is holi stic in its approac h.
Establ ishim; th e monitoring riot was fairly straightforward.
We established a single 50~m x -l-rubelt transect pint bisected bya
SO·m centerline
transect (Figure
I ). We monitor vegetation
(shrubs) on the right side of the ceuretlinc transect and wildlife on
the le(t side. At the zero point (Or) an.l the ,0-111 point (SOP) we
esrabllshed a photo point. Two meters above and ro rhe left of the
or. we established a O .S~ 111 x
2~ m vegetative quadrat. We estab-
lished a similar-seed vegetative quadrat 2 meters below and to the
right of the SOP. TIle entire plot was located parallel to the slope to
capture any vegetation differen ces due to cha nges in gradien t.
We recorded each plant species and th e height of individual
plants along with the substrate at
0 . 3 ~ m intervals, beginning
from or along the cente rline transect. T hese data will help us
determine spec ies richness, relati ve frequency, and percent cover,
We measured height to check for browsing. We also measured
fuels over ;,1 I SO~foot section ;'llong the centerline transect. using
the U.S. Forest Service inventory system (Brown 1974. Brown
and others 1982). Litter and duff depths were measured at each 5
foot interval. We also co unted the number of individual sh rubs in
three categor ies: up to l inch diameter, 1~3 inch es diameter, and
more than 3 inch es in diameter at the first 25 feer, 50 feet, and
ISO feet, respectively. We cat egorized sh rubs greater than 3
inches in d iameter as either rotten or so lid. We will use th ese data
to determine th e kilogram per hectare of fuel load for each
meadow. C onvert ing rhc out puts of th e fuel load model to met -
ric un its redu ces the total number of co nversions that need to he
calculated. We also took a photo at both photo points faci ng th e
plot center as a baseline for documenting changes resulting from
prescr ibed fire treatments.
Within the sh rub belt transec t, we measured th e occ urrenc e
of eac h sh rub spec ies and coun ted th e number of sh rubs in four
different life stages (seedlings. respruuts, mature, dead). These
data will be used to determine the structural make-up of the
sh rub community in the study areas.
To berrer estimate th e occ urrence , den sit y, and average
height of understory species. \v·c ralli ed and measured th e height
of each individ ua l in th e two vegetation quadrats outside the
large heir transect plot . We used a lCccm x lOccm visual refer-
ECOLOGICAL R ESTORATION
19A '
ZOOI

Figure 1. Sag ebrush-grassland mon itoring plot struct ure.
o----vegetation Quadrat
OP/Pho to Point
RECLAMATION
215
monitoring of wildlife habitat. U.S. Department of Interior. Bureau
of Land Man agcrncnr Servic e Center. Denver, CO, 858 pp.
\Vestern Region Prescribed and Natural Fire Mon itoring Task Force.
1992. Western region prescribed and natural fire moni tori ng hand -
hook. National Park Service publication.
Rapid
Sampling
of
Plan t
Species Compos itio n
fur
Ass essing
Vegetation Pattern s in Rugged Ter rain . 2000 . Mecm emever. R.K. and
A. Mt)l,llly, Dept. (IfGeography, University of North Carolina at C hapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599·l.J20. Landscape Ecology 15(8):697·711.
Mecnremever and Moody argue that th e usc of a high-powered Ide,
scope allo ws th e rapid collection of detailed spec ies compos it ion dnta
from remote vantage points at both a site level and parch level , assum-
ing the areas have a homogeneous vegetat ion composition. This sam-
pling methodology is app ropriate in environmen ts that perm it open
visibility h UI have ptlOT accessibilirv, The aut ho rs analvaed data gadl-
cred from remote sampling of a steep watershed dominated bv closed-
cauopv chapa rral. They conclude that scaling the dura from site level ro
patch level results in minimal Has. The author!" believe that this
methodology strikes an acceptab le balance between sampling efficiency
and field-data accuracy.
21 4
Center Line Transect SOm
SOm point-intercept
vegetation line
SOm shrub cover line rr
150 It fuels line
Mammal Belt Transect
SOx2m Pellet group
counts , ., Om SCm
track/scat belt transect
SOP/Photo Point
sect
rout,
ubs
<.
Shrub Belt Tran
SOx2m Tally
individuals.
seedlings, resp
and mature shr
Vegetation Quadrat-----0
ence-c-equivalenr to 1 percent of the area of the quadrat- to
determine percent vegetative cove r.
Flnallv, we counted deer tracks, coyote tracks and scat, and
bobcat tracks and scm th roughout the entire wildlife transect.
\Y./e counted deer and rabbit scar only in the first 10 III of the
transect (starring at Or) due to the large quantities of Jeer and
rabbi t scat on the studv sites.
We plan to lISC these data to determine selected wildlife usc
of the area following burn treatm ents, We found evidence of
mule deer (Ocdocoileus hemionus). the primary species of con,
cern , in every plot within the study site, Rem easurcrncnt of all
plots. following the application of prescribed fire, will indicate
mule deer use of the area,
Because \ve are still in the experimental stage with this
methodology, we hope that other practitioners and researchers
will try this procedure and to provide us with their feedback.
This will help us furth er develop this sampling method.
R EFEREN C ES
Brown.j.K. 1974. Handbook for invcu torving downed material. USDA
Forest Service. General Technical Report INT1 6. Ogden, UT,n pp,
Brown, J.K.. R.D. O berhue and C.M. johnston . 1982. Inventorying sur,
face fuels and biomass in th e interior west. Intermountain Forest and
Range Experimental Station, USDA. Ge neral Technical Report
INTI29. 48 pp.
Cooperative Extension Service, USDA and USDI. 1996. Sampling veg-
etatio n att ributes:
interagency techn ical referen ce, BLlvl/RS/
ST96/002 +1730. 136 pp.
Cooperrider, A. Y., R.J. Boyd, and H.R. Stua rt.eds. 1986. lnveutotv and
Car neco, Key Lake Regrcening Project. in Harmony with Nature.
2000 . Haji, L.. Ca meco Corporation. Key Lake O pera tions, 2121 11 tit
St.
Wesl, Saskatchewan. SK STM 1]3, Canada,
306/884·2100,
Lotfollah _H aji@callleCO,Ctllll. Land and Water 44(3}:43'46.
As a result of mining activities of the Kl'YLake O peration. a joint opera-
tion of Cameco Corporation and Cogcma Resources, approx imately 2,470
acres of disturbed land in north-central Saskatchewan requ ire rcclarna-
tion . The author discus-es the progress of Key LakeOperation's five-year
revegetation plan, developed from continuing on-site experimental recla-
marion projects. to return the sites to a state similar to the pre-mining em.
Objectives include id"nt ifying the most suitable specie; for the site condi-
tions, w,ing nati ve species from the surrounding areas when possible, and
harvesting seeds of native species (rom seed farms. The plan GIlls for using
native or noninvasive species ro stabilize rhe nrcns for the climax species.
ENDANGERED SPECIES
216
Hawaiian Bird C hick
I ~ a First, 2000. Maxfield . 8., Field O ffice, U.S.
Fish & Wil,llife Service, Honolulu. HI. Endangered Species Bulletin
25(5):21.
The Keauhou Bird Conservation Ce nte r on the island tl Hawaii is work-
ing with other public agencies and private landowners for Hawaiian forest
bird conservation. The hatching there of an endangered Maut parrutbill
(f'seudonestor xanUto/"lrys) chick in July lOOO marks the first lime the
species has l-ecn bred in captivity. The.' parrotbill's decline seems due
mainly to ,1 disease introduced by uon-uarivc mosquitos. Before reint ro-
duction is possible, forest restoration and elimination of non-na tive prcda-
tors is necessary The Ce nter also holds two other endangered Hawaiian
ECOLOGtCAl RESTORATION
19:4 '
2001
269

Copyright © 2002 EBSCO Publishing
