The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Reference Conditions and Restoration of Transitional 
Ponderosa Pine Forests in the Southwest 
 
By David W. Huffman, Director of Research and Development 
Introduction 
Ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) forests are found on roughly 8.4 million acres in the American Southwest. 
The majority of this forest type is found on montane sites above the Mogollon Rim in north-central Arizona 
and in northern New Mexico. Ponderosa pine forests are also found scattered throughout the rugged land-
scapes below the Mogollon Rim, adjacent to and intermixed with interior chaparral and Madrean evergreen 
woodland biotic communities. These transitional, or “fringe” forests often occur on xeric sites, and because 
they occur at the environmental limits of ponderosa 
pine, they are vulnerable to rapid changes (e.g., tree 
mortality and composition shifts) after disturbances 
such as severe drought and wildfire. In addition, a 
dense cover of understory shrubs may increase po-
tential for stand-replacing crown fire.   
 
To improve tree health, reduce crown fire hazard, 
and protect human communities in the wildland-
urban interface, public land managers are imple-
menting a variety of treatments, including tree thin-
ning, shrub control, and prescribed burning in tran-
sitional ponderosa pine forests. However, the com-
patibility of fuel hazard reduction prescriptions with 
ecological restoration principles is unclear, and 
there is strong interest from land managers to im-
prove their understanding of historical conditions, 
recent ecosystem changes, and restoration responses 
appropriate for transitional ponderosa pine forests of 
the Southwest. 
 
Methods 
In this synthesis project, we searched online bibliographic databases and summarized available literature re-
garding pre-Euro-American fire regimes, historical forest structure, and impacts of Euro-American settlement 
on ponderosa pine forests within interior chaparral and Madrean evergreen woodland biotic communities. Re-
sults from studies of montane ponderosa pine ecosystems and literature on long-needled pine dynamics at eco-
tones in analogous systems of the western United States were used for context and comparison. Sprouting re-
sponses to fire and thinning were summarized for shrub species common in transitional forests, chaparral, and 
evergreen woodlands. We researched ecological responses and effectiveness of various hazardous fuels reduc-
tion and restoration treatments implemented in the Southwest and other regions. Information from the litera-
ture was synthesized to identify restoration implications and management strategies for these important eco-
logical systems. 
February 2018 
Figure 1. Transitional ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest oc-
cur within shrub-dominated biotic communities such as interior chapar-
ral and Madrean evergreen woodlands (upper left). Published studies 
suggest an increase in understory shrubs in forests where frequent sur-
face fire has been excluded (upper right). Treatments such as mastica-
tion followed by prescribed fire can reduce shrub cover (lower left). 
Without repeated treatments, recovery of a shrub understory is likely 
(lower right). 

 
Findings 
 
Relatively few fire history reconstructions have been published for southwestern transitional pine 
forests, particularly those adjacent to, or intermixed with, interior chaparral communities.  
 
Available literature suggests that historical fire regimes likely were similar to those widely reported 
for montane ponderosa forests. Frequent surface fires likely kept forests in open structural conditions 
and limited establishment and regeneration of sprouting woody species (Figure 1, page 1).  
 
There were no studies to suggest that shrubs were historically absent from transitional ponderosa 
pine forests.  
 
Expansion of forest trees into shrublands was suggested by narrative accounts, although empirical 
data on this process are lacking. 
 
In similar systems of other bioregions, studies suggest that repeated entries with mechanical cutting 
or mastication, followed by prescribed fire, tend to be more effective at controlling woody shrubs 
than single-entry approaches (Figure 1).  
 
Implications 
 Additional primary research is needed to better characterize historical fire regimes, their variability, 
and recent structural changes in southwestern transitional ponderosa pine forests. 
 Due to the complexity of transitional forests, determining site-specific reference conditions is a cru-
cial first step for developing treatment strategies in a restoration project.  
 Using multiple lines of evidence such as historical photographs, written accounts, local knowledge, 
and biological remnants still occurring on-site, i.e., reference conditions, will help land managers 
gain a more complete understanding of a site’s historical structure and composition.  
 Site-specific reference conditions are recommended as restoration objectives developed for historical 
forest environments may run counter to those appropriate for historical shrublands, and these com-
munities may be intermixed on transitional landscapes.  
 Basic forest restoration treatments will include reducing density of trees that have established due to 
fire exclusion, reintroduction frequent surface fire, and reducing shrub abundance to favor herba-
ceous species in understory communities. 
 Although anthropogenic fire exclusion may have allowed increases in shrub abundance, an understo-
ry shrub component was likely an historical feature of these ecosystems. Thus, management objec-
tives that include understory type conversion and elimination of shrub cover are not likely to be com-
patible with general restoration principles.   
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
Huffman, D.W., J.D. Springer, J.E. Crouse. 2018. Reference Conditions and Restoration of Transitional 
Ponderosa Pine Forests in the Southwest. ERI Working Paper No. 38. Ecological Restoration In-
stitute, Northern Arizona University. www.nau.edu/eri 
 
Further Reading 
Battaglia, M., C. Rhoades, M.E. Rocca, and M.G. Ryan. 2009. A regional assessment of the ecological effects of chipping and 
mastication fuels reduction and forest restoration treatments. Final report: JFSP Project Number 06-3-2-26.  
Dieterich, J.H., and A.R. Hibbert. 1990. Fire history in a small ponderosa pine stand surrounded by chaparral. Poster paper pre-
sented at the conference, Effects of Fire in Management of Southwestern Natural Resources (Tuscon, AZ, November 14-17, 
1988). 
Fulé, P.Z., and W.W. Covington. 1997. Fire regimes and forest structure in the Sierra Madre Occidental, Durango, Mexico. Acta 
Botánica Mexicana, 041:43-79.   
Fulé, P.Z., and W.W. Covington. 1998. Spatial patterns of Mexican pine-oak forests under different recent fire regimes. Plant 
Ecology, 134:197-209. 
Leopold, A. 1924. Grass, brush, timber, and fire in southern Arizona. Journal of Forestry, 22:1-10. 
Moir, W.H., B. Geils, M.A. Benoit, and D. Scurlock. 1997. Ecology of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. USDA Forest Ser-
vice General Technical Report RM-GTR-292. 
Contact: Dave W. Huffman, David.Huffman@nau.edu 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
