Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Forest Ecology and Management
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/foreco
Reference conditions are inﬂuenced by the physical template and vary by
forest type: A synthesis of Pinus ponderosa-dominated sites in the
southwestern United States
Kyle C. Rodmana,⁎, Andrew J. Sánchez Meadorb,c, Margaret M. Mooreb, David W. Huﬀmanc
a University of Colorado Boulder, Department of Geography, 260 UCB, Boulder, CO 80309, United States
b School of Forestry, Northern Arizona University, 200 East Pine Knoll Drive, Room 116, Flagstaﬀ, AZ 86011, United States
c Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, 200 East Pine Knoll Drive, Room 116, Flagstaﬀ, AZ 86011, United States
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
NRV
Spatial ecology
Historical reconstruction
Dendrochronology
Abiotic factors
Species composition
Ponderosa pine
American Southwest
A B S T R A C T
Natural ranges of ecosystem variability (NRVs) describe the array of conditions and processes common to re-
latively intact or natural ecosystems, and are used to help land managers plan ecological restoration eﬀorts and
better understand ecosystem dynamics. In an eﬀort to describe the variation in forest reference conditions and
NRVs related to forest structure and spatial pattern across the American Southwest (Arizona and New Mexico,
USA) prior to widespread ﬁre exclusion (ca. late 1800s), we used historical inventory data and den-
drochronology to reconstruct 33 Pinus ponderosa-dominated sites (0.8–3.2 ha in size) throughout the region.
Though the historical stand densities, species compositions, tree spatial patterns, and modern increases in
density varied widely among sites, site-level diﬀerences could partially be explained by abiotic factors and by
forest type. Soil parent material and US Forest Service Terrestrial Ecosystem Units (TEUs) were important
predictors of historical stand density, and species composition was a signiﬁcant predictor of spatial pattern on
our sites, with sites dominated by Pinus ponderosa and Quercus gambelii showing more distinct clustering of
overstory trees. Reconstructed stand density (live trees ha−1) was also correlated with the proportion of trees
found in groups. Lastly, the sites showing the smallest increases in stand density tended to be in the warmest,
driest locations studied, suggesting that densities in these types of sites may be climatically limited and have
changed comparatively less since the late 1800s.
1. Introduction
Natural ranges of ecosystem variability (NRVs) describe the array of
conditions and processes common to relatively intact or natural eco-
systems, either in the past, or from sites without detrimental human
impact (Landres et al., 1999; Keane et al., 2009). Over the past century,
widespread ﬁre exclusion and human land use change have altered
many Pinus ponderosa var. scopulorum (ponderosa pine)-dominated
forests across the southwestern United States (“Southwest”; Arizona
and New Mexico, USA), making reference conditions and the NRVs for
structure and composition important considerations for land managers
in the region (Covington and Moore, 1994; Swetnam and Baisan, 1996;
Allen et al., 2002). Climate in the United States is also changing at an
unprecedented rate, which is having profound impacts on forests in the
Southwest and may further push forest ecosystems toward tipping
points and facilitate shifts toward grassland, woodland, or shrubland
cover types (McDowell et al., 2016; Vose et al., 2016). In southwestern
P. ponderosa-dominated forests, NRV concepts are used to help restore
natural patterns and processes to these ecosystems while also increasing
the resilience of forests to a warmer, drier future (Reynolds et al.,
2013). Though some scientists question the relevance of NRVs in a
changing climate (e.g., Millar et al., 2007), retrospective studies that
improve our understanding of historical ecosystem patterns and pro-
cesses may lend insight into the inﬂuences of future perturbations on
forests, and are particularly useful when conducted at scales appro-
priate to management objectives (Millar et al., 2007; Keane et al.,
2009).
Abiotic and biotic factors both inﬂuence NRVs for forest structure
and composition, as well as the rate of ecosystem change over time
(Mast et al., 1997; Black et al., 2003; Abella and Covington, 2006;
Abella and Denton, 2009; Reynolds et al., 2013). Abiotic factors (the
physical template, sensu Urban et al., 2000) such as climate, topo-
graphy, parent material and soils, help determine site potential by in-
ﬂuencing carrying capacity and site productivity (e.g., Merschel et al.,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2017.09.012
Received 15 June 2017; Received in revised form 30 August 2017; Accepted 1 September 2017
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: Kyle.Rodman@Colorado.edu (K.C. Rodman).
Forest Ecology and Management 404 (2017) 316–329
0378-1127/ © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
MARK

2014). Biotic factors and processes such as competition, facilitation,
and seedling establishment then inﬂuence the realized characteristics of
a stand – the density, composition, and spatial patterns of vegetation
(Cooper, 1961; Wiens, 1976; White, 1985; Forman and Godron, 1981;
Oliver and Larson, 1996). Wildﬁre also plays a central role in in the
distribution of forest vegetation, and interacts with both the biotic and
abiotic environment (Bond et al., 2005; Staver et al., 2011). At local- to
landscape-scales, time since ﬁre, site productivity, distance to grass-
land, and topographic position aﬀect ﬁre regimes (Heyerdahl et al.,
2007; Keith et al., 2010; Gartner et al., 2012). Thus, abiotic and biotic
factors inﬂuence the NRVs of stand structure and composition directly
(by inﬂuencing tree growth, establishment, and survival), and in-
directly (by altering the ﬁre regime).
Previous research in the Southwest has documented variability in
NRVs for stand structure and composition and explored some abiotic
and biotic factors aﬀecting this variability. Abella and Covington
(2006) and Abella and Denton (2009) described the variation in P.
ponderosa reference conditions on sites across northern Arizona as a
function of soil parent material, existing vegetation, and climate. Other
studies in the region have also noted the importance of soils, climate,
and topography in inﬂuencing historical stand structure and composi-
tion (e.g., Dyer et al., 2008; Schneider et al., 2015; Rodman et al.,
2016). Recently, Reynolds et al. (2013) provided a comprehensive lit-
erature review of the factors that inﬂuenced historical variation of dry
forests across the Southwest. However, a quantitative investigation of
abiotic and biotic factors that broadly inﬂuence variability in reference
conditions and recent changes in density (sensu Merschel et al., 2014)
across southwestern P. ponderosa-dominated forests has yet to be done.
We address this gap using data from 33 stem-mapped sites across
Arizona and New Mexico – many of which were established early in the
20th century (Woolsey, 1911, 1912; Pearson, 1933). Ranging 0.8–3.2
ha in size, these permanent sites are useful because they increase the
precision of historical reconstructions (Sánchez Meador et al., 2010),
and allow for the validation of reconstruction accuracy (sensu Huﬀman
et al., 2001). Stem-mapped study sites also permit the analysis of tree
spatial patterns, an important concept in modern silviculture as man-
agers design harvests to mimic natural heterogeneity (Sánchez Meador
et al., 2011; Larson and Churchill, 2012; Churchill et al., 2013;
Reynolds et al., 2013). It is believed that many P. ponderosa-dominated
forests across the western United States exhibited ﬁne-scale (< 1 ha)
heterogeneity historically, in which many trees were found either as
isolated individuals or in discrete groups throughout a stand (Larson
and Churchill, 2012). However, the level of spatial aggregation and the
proportion of trees in groups are likely to vary both among and within
regions, and the factors inﬂuencing spatial pattern have yet to be
adequately analyzed for forests in the Southwest.
By investigating NRVs for structure and composition across P.
ponderosa-dominated forests in the Southwest, we provide tangible in-
formation that can be incorporated by managers when developing sil-
vicultural prescriptions within several forest types and across a broad
geographic region. Nearly all previous studies describe NRVs by forest
type because of the direct inﬂuence of species composition on structure
(e.g., density, spatial pattern), and the indirect proxy that species
composition provides for soil moisture and site productivity. In addi-
tion, generalizations about historical densities and spatial patterns for
P. ponderosa-dominated forests should be tested across the range of this
species in order to recognize potential diﬀerences in NRVs for stand
density and tree spatial pattern among common subunits of these for-
ests. Therefore, we ﬁrst described broad-scale trends and variability in
the NRVs for stand density and spatial pattern across southwestern
forests dominated by P. ponderosa, then described diﬀerences among
pine-oak,
ponderosa
pine,
and
dry
mixed-conifer
forest
types.
Speciﬁcally, we focused on the following objectives: (1) Identify the
relative contributions of climate, topography, soils/parent material,
and stand-scale species composition in explaining variability in NRVs
for stand density and spatial pattern, as well as modern increases in
stand density among sites in the Southwestern region. (2) Describe
diﬀerences in NRVs for historical densities and tree spatial patterns
among the three most common P. ponderosa-dominated forest types.
2. Methods
2.1. Datasets
We used a combination of historical inventory data and den-
drochronology to reconstruct forest structure and composition in
southwestern pine-oak, ponderosa pine, and mixed-conifer forests ca.
late 1800s. For these analyses, we compiled data from 33 stem-mapped
sites that ranged 0.8–3.2 ha in size, totaling 41.6 ha in area sampled;
data from some of these sites were previously published (see Moore
et al., 2004a, 2004b; Dyer et al., 2008; Sánchez Meador et al., 2009,
2010, 2011; Rodman et al., 2016). Field surveys, performed between
the summers of 1997 and 2014, yielded data for 59,878 trees or tree
remnants (e.g., snags, logs, or stump holes) and 10,566 individual in-
crement cores. To date, this is one of the largest datasets used for this
purpose. Where available, we incorporated logging records and his-
torical inventories as ancillary data in the reconstructions. These his-
torical data were collected for 25 of these sites between 1909 and 1915
and include early stem maps, as well as the size and species for all trees
with diameters (at 1.37 m above ground level) greater than 10.17 cm
(Woolsey, 1911, 1912; Pearson, 1933). A detailed dendrochronological
reconstruction of harvest history was previously completed for four of
the sites lacking historical data and logging records (Rodman et al.,
2016), leaving only eight of our sites lacking known historical in-
ventories and only four sites lacking detailed information relating to
past timber harvest(s).
2.2. Study sites
Our study sites cover portions of Arizona and New Mexico, USA,
between 33–36°N, 106–112°W, and 2000–2700 m elevation (Fig. 1).
Across
these
sites,
average
annual
precipitation
ranges
444.2–940.7 mm,
average summer
maximum temperatures
range
23.3–28.3 °C, and average winter minimum temperatures range −3.8
to 2.5 °C (PRISM Climate Group, 2011). The sites are underlain by
basalt, black cinder, volcanic tuﬀ, granite, mixed-metamorphic, and
mixed-sedimentary parent materials (United States Geological Survey,
2015). Sites include multiple forest types dominated by P. ponderosa
including pine-oak (ponderosa pine intermixed with Quercus gambelii
Nutt. and other Quercus spp.), ponderosa pine (P. ponderosa mono-
cultures with less than 20% dominance by other species), and dry
mixed-conifer (mixed species forests co-dominated by P. ponderosa,
Pseudotsuga menziesii var. glauca (Mayr) Franco (Douglas-ﬁr), Abies
concolor var. concolor (Gordon) Lindley ex Hildebrand (white ﬁr), and/
or other species common on more mesic sites; Appendix A).
2.3. Field methods
Methods for ﬁeld data collection are described at length in Moore
et al. (2004a, 2004b), Sánchez Meador et al. (2010, 2011), and Rodman
et al. (2016). On each site we performed a full census of all live trees
taller than breast height (1.37 m) and of all dead trees that may have
pre-dated Euro-American settlement (conifers > ca. 20 cm in diameter
and hardwoods > ca. 15 cm). We also extracted increment cores at
0.4 m above ground level from all large live trees or those with mor-
phological characteristics suggesting tree ages greater than 100 years
(bark color or thickness, branch characteristics, and crown form).
Diameter thresholds for the collection of increment cores from large
trees varied by site and by species, but were derived from pre-existing
dendrochronological data and were meant to capture all live trees that
pre-dated Euro-American settlement. For the development of basal area
increment models used in the reconstruction (see Section 2.4) and to
K.C. Rodman et al.
Forest Ecology and Management 404 (2017) 316–329
317

validate size thresholds for large trees, we also collected increment
cores or cross sections from a ca. 20% sample of all live trees smaller
than our size thresholds. Lastly, we recorded the spatial locations of all
live trees and tree remnants at the site-level using an Impulse 200LR
laser rangeﬁnder and Mapstar compass module (Laser Technology,
Inc.), with accuracies within 0.05 m and 0.1°, respectively.
2.4. Reconstruction methods
We used a variation of the historical reconstruction model described
by Bakker et al. (2008), which was recently updated to incorporate
additional species and dendrochronological data (Rodman et al., 2016).
Stumps were assumed to have been live trees that died during years of
known or reconstructed harvests on each site. This is with the exception
of sites 7–10, where death dates for stumps were speciﬁed as 1894, the
Fig. 1. Map (top) of study area and site locations in Arizona and New Mexico, USA, and summaries (bottom) of historical ranges in density (a, b), spatial pattern (c), and normalized
increase in density (d). For panel (c), the horizontal line represents a theoretical value of complete spatial randomness. Sites with values above this line show distinctly clustered tree
spatial patterns. Boxplots are grouped by forest types with progressively darker tones indicating pine-oak (PO), ponderosa pine (PP), and mixed-conifer (MC) types. Numbers 1–33
(jittered horizontally for clarity) indicate individual site values of density and spatial pattern and correspond with numbers on the site map.
K.C. Rodman et al.
Forest Ecology and Management 404 (2017) 316–329
318

same year as a harvest in sites 4 and 5. The model also includes de-
composition equations used to estimate the death year of snags and logs
and “back-grow” them from that point (Bakker et al., 2008), as well as a
proportional method to estimate historical tree diameter when core
data are available (Bakker, 2005). For all current pine-oak and pon-
derosa pine sites, we used the 50th percentile of decomposition, and for
current mixed-conifer sites we used the 25th percentile of decomposi-
tion, consistent with previous studies (Moore et al., 2004a; Rodman
et al., 2016). Speciﬁc reconstruction years varied by site, and ranged
1876–1890 (Appendix A). We selected the year of reconstruction for
each site using the year of the last widespread ﬁre from published ﬁre
history studies most proximal to a given site location (Swetnam and
Baisan, 1996; Heinlein et al., 2005; Huﬀman et al., 2015), or from ﬁre
scarred samples collected on site (Moore et al., 2004a).
2.5. Analytical methods
Objective 1: The inﬂuence of climate, topography, soils/parent
material, and stand-scale species composition on the NRVs for stand
density and tree spatial pattern, as well as modern increases in density
To describe the NRVs for structure, composition and spatial pattern
of frequent-ﬁre forests of the Southwest, we summarized the spatial and
non-spatial reference conditions for our sites using four speciﬁc metrics
relating to density, spatial pattern, and changes in stand density be-
tween the late 1800s and early 2000s. Reported stand densities and
spatial patterns were for all trees predicted to have been taller than
1.37 m in the reconstruction year for a given site. Following historical
reconstruction, we standardized the numbers of tree stems and basal
area for site extent to calculate the number of live stems ha−1 and basal
area ha−1. We then used Clark and Evans’ R index (Clark and Evans,
1954) to describe the average tree spatial pattern for each site’s extent.
To account for edge eﬀects, we used a guard correction for the Clark
and Evans analyses, with the clipping distance set as the maximum
observed nearest neighbor distance on a given site (Baddeley and
Turner, 2005). Next, we re-scaled Clark and Evans R index, for ease of
interpretation,
with
the
following
formula:
=
Aggregation
−
∗−
Rindex
(
1)
1. Positive aggregation values suggest that many trees are
clustered on a site, and higher values indicate more substantial clus-
tering.
Lastly, we calculated the normalized change in density for each site
(ca.
late
1800s–2000s)
using
the
following
formula:
=
∗
+
∗
−
−
−
−
(
)
(
)
Increase i( )
0.5
0.5
TPHc i
TPHh i
MAX TPHc
TPHh
BAHc i
BAHh i
MAX BAHc
BAHh
( )
( )
(
)
( )
( )
(
)
,
where
Increase(i) is the normalized increase in density for a given site, TPHc is
the contemporary value of live stems ha−1, TPHh is the reconstructed
tree density (ca. late 1800s), and MAX(TPHc-TPHh) is the diﬀerence
between contemporary and historical density for the site showing the
greatest change in tree density. Metrics on the right side of the equation
are similar, but use basal area ha−1 rather than live stems ha−1. This
index of normalized density change integrates changes in both density
metrics (live stems and basal area) on a consistent scale across all sites.
Within the values of this index, density increases range from 0 to 1,
where 1 would be the site that showed the greatest change in both
metrics (when compared to all sites), and a site with 0 would show no
increases in density.
Potential exploratory variables thought to inﬂuence historical tree
densities, basal area, aggregation, and increase in density were broadly
divided into climatic inﬂuences, topographic factors, geological de-
scriptors, and stand attributes (Table 1). We obtained climatic data
from the Parameter elevation Regression on Independent Slopes Model
(PRISM) dataset at a spatial resolution of ca. 800 × 800 m (PRISM
Climate Group 2011). We acquired these data as 30-year monthly cli-
mate normals of precipitation, minimum temperature, maximum tem-
perature, and vapor pressure deﬁcit for the time period 1980–2010.
Vapor pressure deﬁcit (VPD) is a measure of atmospheric moisture
demand that is strongly related to ﬁre activity and tree drought stress in
the Southwest (Williams et al., 2012, 2015). Though recent climate is
not necessarily representative of historical conditions, recent PRISM
provides the most accurate characterization of site-level climate avail-
able because very few weather stations were present in the Southwest
ca. late 1800s. Following acquisition, PRISM data were spatially
downscaled to the site level (30 m resolution) using gradient and in-
verse distance-squared weighting (GIDS). GIDS uses local regression
functions and topographic information to increase the spatial resolution
of gridded climate data, and has been shown to outperform co-kriging
and other common interpolation methods for this purpose (Nalder and
Wein, 1998; Flint and Flint, 2012). We later aggregated monthly cli-
matic data into 3-month seasonal periods, in which spring was March-
May, summer was June-August, fall was September-November, and
winter was December-February. We also quantiﬁed the relative inﬂu-
ence of summer monsoonal precipitation – known to vary across the
Southwest – at each site by dividing average summer precipitation by
annual average precipitation at each site. We also explored the use of
climatic water deﬁcit and potential evapotranspiration (sensu Lutz
et al., 2010) as explanatory variables, but these variables were highly
correlated with PRISM data (r > 0.7). In addition, these variables did
not improve model ﬁt, and were therefore not included in our ﬁnal
analyses.
Topographic information included slope angle, northeastness (co-
sine transformed aspect using:
+
∗
cos
aspect
pi
((
45)
/180)), and solar
radiation index, a proxy for the average solar intensity on a given site
(Keating et al., 2007). Raw elevation values were not included in the
analysis because of the broad latitudinal gradient of the study and
strong correlation between climate and elevation. We extracted all to-
pographic information as median values across each site’s extent from
30 m resolution digital elevation models available through the National
Elevation Dataset (United States Geological Survey, 1999). We also
included landform type, a publically available spatial dataset that in-
corporates slope, topographic position, estimated heat load, and soil
parent material (Theobald et al., 2015). In addition, we obtained data
that described the dominant soil order (Natural Resources Conservation
Service, 2015) and soil parent material (United States Geological
Survey, 2015) on each site.
We also incorporated several stand attributes in the analysis. These
metrics included reconstructed forest type and stand-scale species
composition (as deﬁned by EIV values of four species groups, see
Methods – Objective 2). Species groups were deﬁned as follows: (1) all
sprouting hardwoods (e.g., Quercus spp., Acer grandidentatum Nutt.,
Robinia neomexicana A. Gray, and Populus tremuloides Michx.), (2) P.
ponderosa, (3) mid-tolerant conifers (P. menziesii and Pinus strobiformis
Engelm), and (4) A. concolor. These groups were created based on re-
latively similar ecological traits of the component species within them
(Burns and Honkala, 1990a, 1990b). Lastly, we extracted US Forest
Service Terrestrial Ecosystem Unit Inventory geospatial data for each
site (TEUs; United States Forest Service, 2015). TEUs are a site classi-
ﬁcation system based upon a combination of climatic data, topography,
soils, aerial photo interpretation, and expert knowledge (Robbie, 1992).
To assess univariate relationships among independent and depen-
dent variables, we ﬁrst calculated Pearson correlation coeﬃcients be-
tween all pairs of continuous independent and dependent variables.
Next, we used the ICC package in R (Wolak, 2015) to calculate the
intraclass correlation coeﬃcients (ICCs) among historical tree density,
basal area, spatial aggregation, and normalized density increases with
several unordered categorical variables (forest type, soil order, parent
material, TEUs, and landform). ICCs are derived from the variance
components within one-way ANOVA and provide a measure of the
strength of a relationship between a categorical predictor and a con-
tinuous response variable.
To describe multivariate relationships among these independent
variables and the NRVs for density and spatial pattern, as well as with
changing forest densities on each site, we used conditional inference
frameworks (CIFs). Based on random forests (Breiman, 2001), CIFs are
K.C. Rodman et al.
Forest Ecology and Management 404 (2017) 316–329
319

a statistical learning algorithm that use many binary classiﬁcation and
regression trees (CARTs) to identify important relationships in datasets.
CIFs minimize bias in estimates of variable importance through the use
of conditional permutation tests, and deal well with categorical vari-
ables with many groups, uneven scales of measurement, and colli-
nearity among predictors (Cutler et al., 2007; Strobl et al., 2007, 2008).
Following the development of the CIFs, we used classiﬁcation and re-
gression trees (CART) with up to ten of the best predictor variables (for
each dependent variable) to visualize the factors that best diﬀerentiated
homogeneous groups of sites. Only variables lending a positive variable
importance (as indicated by CIFs) were included in the CART analysis.
We performed the CIF analysis and developed regression trees in the
party package (Hothorn et al., 2006) in R, and used the caret package
(Kuhn, 2008) to determine r-squared (r2) values and the root mean
square error (RMSE) of the ﬁnal regression trees.
Objective 2: NRVs by forest type
To analyze diﬀerences in the NRVs for density and spatial pattern
among Pinus ponderosa-dominated forest types, we separated sites by
historical forest type based on reconstructed historical species compo-
sitions. We assigned forest types to each site using the ecological im-
portance value (EIV; Curtis and McIntosh, 1951) of each of the com-
ponent species following historical reconstruction. Our variation of EIV
combines the proportion of stand basal area and the proportion of live
stems in a stand that are of species X. Ranging 0–200, greater EIVs
indicate greater dominance on a site by a given species (Rodman et al.,
2016). A pure stand contains at least 80% dominance by a single species
(Nyland, 2016), therefore we classiﬁed sites with Pinus ponderosa
(PIPO) EIV values greater than 160 (80% dominant) as the ponderosa
pine forest type, while sites with PIPO EIV values less than 160 were
either pine-oak or mixed-conifer. We classiﬁed mixed-conifer sites as
having at least one tree species typical of more mesic sites (e.g., Pseu-
dotsuga menziesii, Pinus strobiformis, Picea spp., Populus tremuloides) with
an EIV of at least 20. Lastly, we classiﬁed pine-oak sites as having at
least one tree species from the Quercus genus with an EIV of at least 20
and few, if any, individuals from tree species that were common on
mesic sites. Following these steps, we performed Kruskal-Wallis rank
sum tests to determine if density and spatial pattern diﬀered among
forest types. If Kruskal-Wallis tests yielded a signiﬁcant result for a
given variable (α = 0.05), we then performed post hoc analysis using
pairwise Mann-Whitney tests with a Bonferroni correction to adjust for
multiple comparisons (Hollander and Wolfe, 1973).
Next, we computed the Ripley’s K function with a Besag transfor-
mation (Besag, 1977; Ripley, 1977) using isotropic edge correction
(Ripley, 1988) to describe spatial pattern across multiple scales
Table 1
Description of dependent and independent variables related to climate, topography, and stand structure, that were included in univariate and multivariate analyses of the natural range of
variability in dendrochronologically reconstructed sites (n = 33) across Arizona and New Mexico, USA.
Variable
Description/Units
Source
Tree Density
The number of live stems ha−1 for a site ca. late 1800s based on dendrochronological reconstructions.
Reconstruction Model
Basal Area
The amount of live basal area ha−1 for a site ca. late 1800s based on dendrochronological reconstructions.
Reconstruction Model
Aggregation
A transformed version of Clark and Evans’ R index. (R Index – 1) * −1. Higher values suggest more
substantial clustering.
Reconstruction Model,
Clark and Evans (1954)
Density Change
A normalized value ranging 0–1, that describes the relative increase in both tree density and basal area on
a site ca. late 1800s–2000s.
Reconstruction Model
Spring Ppt
30-year monthly climate normals (mm) from 1980 to 2010. Sum of average Ppt from March to May.
PRISM Climate Group (2011)
Summer Ppt
30-year monthly climate normals (mm) from 1980 to 2010. Sum of average Ppt from June to August.
PRISM Climate Group (2011)
Fall Ppt
30-year monthly climate normals (mm) from 1980 to 2010. Sum of average Ppt from September to
November.
PRISM Climate Group (2011)
Winter Ppt
30-year monthly climate normals (mm) from 1980 to 2010. Sum of average Ppt from January, February,
and December.
PRISM Climate Group (2011)
% Summer Ppt
Average summer Ppt/annual Ppt. 30 – year annual climate normals (deg C) from 1980 to 2010. Estimate of
the importance of monsoonal precipitation.
PRISM Climate Group (2011)
Spring tMax
30-year monthly climate normals (mm) from 1980 to 2010. Average tMax from March to May.
PRISM Climate Group (2011)
Summer tMax
30-year monthly climate normals (mm) from 1980 to 2010. Average tMax from June to August.
PRISM Climate Group (2011)
Fall tMax
30-year monthly climate normals (mm) from 1980 to 2010. Average tMax from September to November.
PRISM Climate Group (2011)
Winter tMax
30-year monthly climate normals (mm) from 1980 to 2010. Average tMax from January, February, and
December.
PRISM Climate Group (2011)
Spring tMin
30-year monthly climate normals (mm) from 1980 to 2010. Average tMin from March to May.
PRISM Climate Group (2011)
Summer tMin
30-year monthly climate normals (mm) from 1980 to 2010. Average tMin from June to August.
PRISM Climate Group (2011)
Fall tMin
30-year monthly climate normals (mm) from 1980 to 2010. Average tMin from September to November.
PRISM Climate Group (2011)
Winter tMin
30-year monthly climate normals (mm) from 1980 to 2010. Average tMin from January, February, and
December.
PRISM Climate Group (2011)
Spring VPD
30-year monthly climate normals (mm) from 1980 to 2010. Average vapor pressure deﬁcit from March to
May.
PRISM Climate Group (2011)
Summer VPD
30-year monthly climate normals (mm) from 1980 to 2010. Average vapor pressure deﬁcit from June to
August.
PRISM Climate Group (2011)
Fall VPD
30-year monthly climate normals (mm) from 1980 to 2010. Average vapor pressure deﬁcit from September
to November.
PRISM Climate Group (2011)
Winter VPD
30-year monthly climate normals (mm). Average vapor pressure deﬁcit from January, February, and
December.
PRISM Climate Group (2011)
Slope
Median site value obtained from 30 × 30 m DEM (degree)
United States Geological Survey (1999)
Solar Radiation
Solar radiation index. Higher values indicate a higher predicted radiant intensity on a given site.
United States Geological Survey (1999);
Keating et al. (2007)
Northeastness
Transformed aspect on a scale of −1 to 1, 1 being closest to an aspect of 45 degrees.
United States Geological Survey (1999)
PIPO EIV
Ecological importance value for Pinus ponderosa
Reconstruction Model
Hardwood EIV
Ecological importance value for Quercus spp., Robinia neomexicana, and Populus tremuloides
Reconstruction Model
PSME/PIST EIV
Ecological importance value for Pseudotsuga menziesii and Pinus strobiformis
Reconstruction Model
ABCO EIV
Ecological importance value for Abies concolor
Reconstruction Model
TEU
U.S. Forest Service Terrestrial Ecosystem Unit map number
United States Forest Service (2015)
Landform
Ecologically relevant landform unit
Theobald et al. (2015)
Soil Type
Dominant soil order from Natural Resource Conservation Service SSURGO geospatial data
Natural Resources Conservation Service (2015)
Parent Material
Primary type of underlying bedrock from USGS state lithology map
United States Geological Survey (2015)
Forest Type
Categorical variable derived from EIV values
Reconstruction Model
K.C. Rodman et al.
Forest Ecology and Management 404 (2017) 316–329
320

(0–50 m). Additionally, we treated individual sites as replicates for
pooled Ripley’s K analyses (sensu Tuten et al., 2015; Clyatt et al., 2016;
Rodman et al., 2016) by forest type. We developed conﬁdence envel-
opes for each site-level pattern using 999 Monte Carlo simulations of
complete spatial randomness (CSR) and judged the statistical sig-
niﬁcance of deviations from CSR using a one-sided variant of the
Diggle,
Cressie, Loosmore, and Ford (DCLF) goodness-of-ﬁt test
(Loosmore and Ford, 2006; Baddeley et al., 2014). We performed DCLF
tests from 0 to 30 m based on previously reported patch sizes in the
region (Sánchez Meador et al., 2011; Reynolds et al., 2013; Rodman
et al., 2016). If DCLF tests suggested a signiﬁcant deviation from CSR
(α = 0.05), we then ﬁt a Matérn cluster process to the observed point
pattern to extract the estimated mean patch area in the observed pat-
tern, minimizing bias in interpretation (Baddeley et al., 2014).
To identify local spatial attributes within each site (tree groups and
openings in the canopy), we used the tree cluster-detection algorithm
described in Sánchez Meador et al. (2011) to assign trees to groups, and
the PatchMorph tool described in Lydersen et al. (2013) to delineate
openings. For group and opening delineation, we used species-speciﬁc
non-linear regressions (power functions) of diameter at breast height
(1.37 m) to crown radius to predict tree crown radius from estimated
tree diameters in the reconstruction year (Rodman, 2015). To facilitate
a direct comparison among sites and forest types, we performed these
group and opening delineations using 1 ha subset areas from each site,
clipped from a site’s center when site extent exceeded 1 ha. Like many
ecological questions, group and opening sizes are scale-dependent and
large groups and openings may be truncated at the 1 ha-extent of our
sites (sensu Gardner et al., 1987; O’Neill et al., 1996). Therefore, the use
of a consistent study site extent facilitates direct comparisons of these
metrics among sites, and larger extents would be likely to show larger
maximum values and possible increases in the range in historical group
and opening sizes. Seven of the sites had sampling areas marginally
smaller than 1 ha (0.8–0.99 ha). For these sites, we used the entire
sampled area, and acknowledge that group and opening sizes may be
slightly underestimated relative to other sites. However, to demonstrate
the greatest range of group and opening sizes present in our data, we
also delineated groups and openings using the entirety of each site.
These metrics (for the unclipped site extents) are only reported in the
overall ranges of group and opening sizes.
3. Results
3.1. Objective 1
Reconstructed historical densities (of trees taller than 1.37 m)
showed considerable variability among sites, ranging 27.2–314.3 live
stems ha−1 and 1.4–18.6 m2 of basal area ha−1 in the late 1800s
(Fig. 1). Similarly, metrics describing historical aggregation and in-
creases in stand density also varied among sites (−0.15 to 0.37 and
0.06–0.78, respectively). Pearson correlation coeﬃcients describing the
factors relating to historical density and spatial pattern (Fig. 2) de-
monstrated that historical tree density was most strongly correlated
with slope angle (r = 0.33) and percentage of summer precipitation
(strength of monsoon; r = 0.32). Basal area was poorly correlated with
most factors relating to climate, topography, and species composition,
but showed a negative relationship with winter VPD (r = −0.3). Ag-
gregation showed a negative relationship with the importance value of
P. menziesii and P. strobiformis (r = −0.52), and was positively corre-
lated with summer and fall maximum temperatures (r = 0.44 and 0.43,
respectively). Increases in stand density were related to spring and
annual precipitation (r = 0.36 and 0.34, respectively) and negatively
correlated with spring vapor pressure deﬁcit (r = −0.42). Among ca-
tegorical variables, US Forest Service TEUs had the highest intraclass
correlation (ICC) with tree density (ICC = 0.50), parent material had
the highest ICCs for basal area and spatial aggregation (ICC = 0.32 and
ICC = 0.47, respectively), but forest type also showed a strong
Fig. 2. Pearson correlation coeﬃcients (continuous numerical; above solid line) and in-
traclass correlation coeﬃcients (categorical; below solid line) among dependent variables
relating to the NRV (x-axis), and exploratory variables (y-axis) for sites Arizona and New
Mexico, USA. Circle area increases with the strength of the relationship between two
variables and circle color is based on the direction of the relationship (positive or negative
correlation). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the
reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
K.C. Rodman et al.
Forest Ecology and Management 404 (2017) 316–329
321

Fig. 3. Results of conditional inference analysis. Variable importance plots (left; VIMP), and regression trees (right) show relative inﬂuence of factors on (a) historical tree density, (b)
basal area, (c) spatial aggregation, and (d) normalized changes in density (ca. late 1800s to early 2000s) in dendrochronologically reconstructed sites (n = 33) in Arizona and New
Mexico, USA. Regression trees visualize signiﬁcant splits in the data based on the variables given in each branch. Terminal nodes (boxplots) show the ranges of site values for the
dependent variable following the splits above. VIMPs show the relative importance of each independent variable included in the conditional inference framework. Greater variable
importance can be described as a greater increase in model error (RMSE) with the omission of that variable. Note that the X-axes have diﬀerent scales on VIMPs within a, b, c, and d. For
descriptions of each variable, see Table 1.
K.C. Rodman et al.
Forest Ecology and Management 404 (2017) 316–329
322

relationship with aggregation (ICC = 0.46).
Using the CIFs for multivariate analysis, we produced binary deci-
sion trees that used at least one independent variable to partition sites
into homogenous groups based on historical tree density, basal area,
spatial aggregation, and normalized changes in density. During this
process, we also identiﬁed the variables that most eﬀectively con-
tributed to group partitioning within each CIF (Fig. 3). Of the variables
examined, tree density had the strongest relationship with TEUs (62%
relative importance). The ﬁnal CART analysis for tree density separated
sites by Terrestrial Ecosystem Units alone. Notably, sites in TEUs with
plant associations dominated by A. concolor or P. menziesii, with major
components of P. ponderosa and Quercus spp. (213, 657, 675, 676), as
well as pine-oak sites on clayey soils (585) were found to have higher
densities than several other plant associations.
Basal area was strongly related to parent material (63% variable
importance), with minor relationships with several climatic variables.
No single variable exhibited strong relationships with the level of spa-
tial aggregation, but parent material (18% importance), EIVs of P.
strobiformis and P. menziesii (17% importance), and summer precipita-
tion (15% importance) all helped to predict inﬂuence aggregation.
Importantly, forest type was the factor that best partitioned sites in
CART analysis, and this could be related both to species composition
and summer precipitation (two of the three most inﬂuential variables in
CIFs). Several climatic variables were related to the site-level increases
in tree density ca. late 1800s–2000s. Of these climatic variables, spring
vapor pressure deﬁcit had the highest relative importance (15%), and
CART analysis demonstrated a potential threshold eﬀect in which sites
with especially warm and dry spring climates showed the lowest in-
creases in tree density (Fig. 4g). Interestingly, of the seven sites in CART
analysis that showed the lowest increases in density, all forest types
were represented (Fig. 4g). Final regression tree model ﬁts were all
reasonable, but were best for basal area (r2 = 0.41, RMSE = 3.47),
intermediate for tree density (r2 = 0.36, RMSE = 49.26) and ag-
gregation (r2 = 0.33, RMSE = = 0.11) and lowest for normalized
density increases (r2 = 0.30, RMSE = 0.17).
3.2. Objective 2
Next, we compared values of the four NRV metrics – historical tree
density and basal area, historical spatial patterns, and normalized
changes in density – among forest types. Mixed-conifer forests had the
highest maximum value in terms of historical tree density (Fig. 1),
though forest types did not signiﬁcantly diﬀer with respect to historical
tree density or basal area (Kruskal-Wallis p = 0.605 and 0.399, re-
spectively). Normalized increases in density from the late 1800s to the
early 2000s also did not vary by forest type (p = 0.247). On the other
hand, historical spatial aggregation (tendency of trees to grow in
groups) substantially diﬀered among forest types (p = 0.003), and both
pine-oak and ponderosa pine forests showed greater spatial aggregation
than did mixed-conifer forests (p = 0.004 and 0.049, respectively).
Pine-oak forests appeared to show greater aggregation than did pure
ponderosa pine sites, but the two distributions were not signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent (p = 0.302).
Ripley’s K results of historical spatial patterns were generally similar to
those of the Clark and Evans analysis (Fig. 5). Pine-oak sites showed the
greatest relative departure from complete spatial randomness (CSR), par-
ticularly at ﬁne spatial scales (< 5 m), and 75% of pine-oak sites were
signiﬁcantly aggregated. Within the ponderosa pine forest type, 80% of
sites were signiﬁcantly aggregated, but variability in scale of aggregation
was evident among sites. Pooled Ripley’s K for both ponderosa pine and
pine-oak were more aggregated than CSR (p < 0.05). Half of mixed-
conifer sites analyzed were signiﬁcantly aggregated, but the pooled pat-
tern did not deviate from CSR (p > 0.05). Mean patch sizes extracted
from the Matérn cluster models were smallest for pine-oak, and showed
comparatively little variability (mean = 27.11 m2, sd = 20.36, n = 6).
Patch
sizes
were
larger
and
more
variable
in
ponderosa
pine
(mean = 367.20 m2, sd = 711.04, n = 12), and highest in mixed-conifer
sites (mean = 709.78 m2, sd = 832.37, n = 5). Our aggregation index
(r = 0.07) and mean patch areas derived from the Matérn cluster models
(r = 0.26) were not strongly correlated with reconstructed stand density
(trees ha−1), suggesting that these metrics are comparable among sites
with diﬀering densities.
Group and opening delineation indicated that sites of all forest types
were dominated by trees in small groups intermixed with small open-
ings (or interspaces), but to varying degrees. Mixed-conifer sites
showed the greatest numbers of small groups and small openings ha−1
(Fig. 6), again reﬂective of a random spatial distribution at ﬁne scales.
Pine-oak sites had 62–88% of all trees in groups (rather than isolated
single trees), ponderosa pine sites ranged 9–85%, and mixed-conifer
sites ranged 31–87%. The percentage of trees in groups was correlated
with reconstructed stand density (trees ha−1; r = 0.55) with denser
plots showing a greater proportion of live trees and basal area in groups
(Appendix A). Overall, group sizes ranged 1–22 trees, and opening sizes
ranged 0.003–2.52 ha. The largest openings were sinuous and con-
nected open areas between many individual trees and small groups,
rather than being large, circular treeless gaps surrounded by forest.
4. Discussion
Herein we addressed two speciﬁc research objectives. The ﬁrst was
to describe the diﬀerences in the NRVs for stand density and spatial
pattern – as well as modern increases in density – among 33 stem-
mapped sites in the Southwest, and to explore the potential inﬂuences
of climate, topography, soils/parent materials, and stand-scale species
composition on these diﬀerences. The second objective was to further
describe speciﬁc diﬀerences in the NRVs for density and spatial pattern
among pine-oak, ponderosa pine, and dry mixed-conifer forest types.
Related to these objectives, there were three key ﬁndings.
4.1. Key ﬁndings
(1) Historical tree densities and basal area diﬀered according to TEUs
and parent material
Terrestrial ecosystem units (TEUs) and soil parent material were
helpful in making predictions for both tree density and basal area.
While our sites were not selected a priori to test for these eﬀects, pre-
vious studies in the region emphasize the importance of parent material
and the utility of the US Forest Service’s Terrestrial Ecosystem Survey
(Abella and Covington, 2006; Abella and Denton, 2009). Abella and
Covington (2006) and Abella and Denton (2009) suggested that soil
type, climate, and understory vegetation (all included within TEUs) are
the most important factors in predicting historical tree densities. Tree
regeneration plays a central role in determining overstory tree density,
and Puhlick et al. (2012) noted lower pine seedling densities on basaltic
soils than on sedimentary soils due to diﬀerences in site productivity
and soil texture – sedimentary soils tended to have higher site index
values and lower clay content than did basaltic soils. Cinder soils are
also known to have low rates of seedling establishment and survival,
contributing to lower stand densities in these areas (Abella and
Covington, 2006). Dense herbaceous understory vegetation can also
inﬂuence the success of pine seedling establishment due to competition
for moisture and nutrients (Puhlick et al., 2012; Flathers et al., 2016),
which then may have limited stand densities in more productive sites
(Abella and Denton, 2009). The abundance of herbaceous understory
ﬁne fuels on these types of sites could also have allowed for more fre-
quent surface ﬁres that would cause seedling mortality – ﬁne fuel
availability is a clear factor that has inﬂuenced past ﬁre activity in the
Southwest (Swetnam and Betancourt, 1998). In short, TEU site classi-
ﬁcation and parent material help to predict site productivity, which in
turn inﬂuences understory composition and cover, wildﬁre activity,
seedling establishment, overstory growth rates, and stand density.
K.C. Rodman et al.
Forest Ecology and Management 404 (2017) 316–329
323

(2) Though all sites showed increases in density ca. late 1800s to the
early 2000s, xeric sites had lower increases than did moderate or
mesic sites
Our results indicate that sites with high spring vapor pressure deﬁcit
and maximum winter temperatures (n = 7) experienced the lowest
increases in tree density through the 20th century. Of the sites that
experienced the lowest increases in density, ﬁve were in New Mexico,
Fig. 4. Distribution and raw data values for the two most inﬂuential exploratory variables identiﬁed in CIFs explaining historical (ca. late 1800s) tree density (a, b; live stems ha−1), basal
area (c, d; m2 ha−1), spatial aggregation (e, f), and normalized increases in stand density between the late 1800 and the early 2000s (g, h). Each point represents a dendrochronologically
reconstructed site in the Southwest (n = 33) and tones indicate forest type. Vertical lines identify binary splits in the data for a given variable pair based on CART analyses.
K.C. Rodman et al.
Forest Ecology and Management 404 (2017) 316–329
324

and it could be argued that the longer history of Euro-American set-
tlement in New Mexico (than in much of Arizona; Liebmann et al.,
2016) may have altered the dynamics of wildﬁre earlier in these loca-
tions, leading to abnormally high stand densities in the late 1800s.
However, widespread ﬁre exclusion occurred at nearly the same time
across all of our sites (Swetnam and Baisan, 1996; Moore et al., 2004a;
Heinlein et al., 2005; Huﬀman et al., 2015), suggesting that climate and
local site diﬀerences were more important factors in our analysis than
was the timing of Euro-American settlement. Precipitation, particularly
in the winter and spring months, is crucial for P. ponderosa seedling
establishment (League and Veblen, 2006) as well as the growth of
mature ponderosa pine (Kerhoulas et al., 2013), and it is logical that
winter and spring drought would limit stand densities in these forests.
Climate likely played an important role in limiting historical stand
densities across the Southwest when considered in conjunction with
historical ﬁre.
The inference that climate inﬂuences historical and contemporary
stand density is well supported in the existing literature. Previous stu-
dies in other regions note interactions between climate and net primary
productivity or leaf area (Grier and Running, 1977; Gholz, 1982). In a
study in central Oregon, USA, Merschel et al. (2014) identiﬁed strong
relationships between climate and increases in stand density. Similar to
our ﬁndings, higher and more mesic sites had comparatively greater
increases in stand density through the 20th century than did dry, low
elevation sites (Merschel et al., 2014).
On one site in northern Arizona, Dyer et al. (2008) suggest that a
site underlain by volcanic black cinder soils did not change sub-
stantially in tree density or spatial pattern from the late 1800s to early
2000s, however it was hypothesized that the conditions of this parti-
cular site were relatively unique. On the contrary, we identiﬁed a
handful of sites (n = 5; site IDs 14, 21, 22, 27, 28) that experienced low
to moderate increases in tree density (normalized density increases less
than 0.2), demonstrating that these southwestern P. ponderosa land-
scapes cannot be painted with a broad brush. Understanding the
variability in ecosystem changes across the Southwest may help to
prioritize silvicultural treatment areas in collaborative landscape-scale
restoration projects, and further develop our understanding of the
ecology of these important systems.
(3) Forest types diﬀered with respect to spatial patterns, though many
underlying factors also inﬂuence pattern.
Results of correlation analyses, CIFs, and Ripley’s K were convergent
in the ﬁnding that xeric sites and those within the pine-oak and pon-
derosa pine forest types tended to show the most substantial levels of
spatial aggregation (i.e., trees were highly clustered on a site). Of the
three forest types included in this study, sites of the mixed-conifer forest
type were more likely to be found in higher elevations and mesic lo-
cations, and were least likely to demonstrate spatial aggregation at ﬁne
scales (< 1 ha). These ﬁndings could be attributed to several factors.
First, regarding sites in the pine-oak type, it is not surprising that sites
dominated by sprouting hardwoods would show high levels of
Fig. 5. Second-order point pattern analysis (L transformations of Ripley’s K) for dendrochronologically reconstructed sites (n = 33) in Arizona and New Mexico, USA for each of three
forest types. Solid lines are the pooled patterns across all sites in a given forest type, dashed lines are the patterns of individual sites, and shaded areas are 95% conﬁdence envelopes for
complete spatial randomness. DCLF (Diggle, Cressie, Loosmore, and Ford) p. values are presented for goodness of ﬁt tests of the pooled pattern, where p < 0.05 indicates signiﬁcant
aggregation. The number of aggregated sites (relative to the within-forest type sample size) indicates the number of individual sites that are signiﬁcantly more aggregated than random.
Fig. 6. The estimated historical distributions of group sizes (a) and opening sizes (b) within stem-mapped sites (n = 33) in Arizona and New Mexico, USA. Group sizes refer to the number
of trees in a given group size ha−1, and opening size refers to the number of discrete openings (devoid of trees) in a given size range ha−1. Bar heights are the mean counts across all sites
of a given forest type, and error bars are one standard error.
K.C. Rodman et al.
Forest Ecology and Management 404 (2017) 316–329
325

aggregation. Given the growth form of Q. gambelii and other species of
oaks – many stems share the same root mass below ground (Burns and
Honkala, 1990b) – dominance of these species should be correlated
with spatial aggregation, and this was true in our study. However, the
dominance of hardwoods was not the best predictor of aggregation on
our sites, and there are likely other factors to be considered.
Heterogeneity and ﬁne-scale spatial pattern can be inﬂuenced by
ecological disturbances as well as the distribution of scarce environ-
mental resources (e.g., moisture, sunlight, soil nutrients; Forman and
Godron, 1981). Both local variability in ﬁre severity and environmental
resource limitations (especially moisture availability) played a role in
historical tree spatial patterns in Pinus ponderosa or Pinus jeﬀreyi-
dominated forests throughout western North America (Cooper, 1961;
White, 1985; Mast and Veblen, 1999; Stephens and Fry, 2005; Sánchez
Meador et al., 2009; Larson and Churchill, 2012). In the Southwest, soil
type and site productivity inﬂuence the ﬁne-scale spatial heterogeneity
of overstory trees (Abella and Denton, 2009). A highly productive P.
ponderosa site in Arizona was shown to exhibit a random spatial dis-
tribution of trees (Schneider et al., 2015), but mesic sites with A. con-
color (Lydersen et al., 2013; Rodman et al., 2016) or P. menziesii (Clyatt
et al., 2016) have shown aggregation when many individuals of shade-
tolerant species are present. These ﬁndings in mixed-conifer forests are
likely due to the inﬂuence of the forest overstory, which has an im-
portant moderating inﬂuence on the microclimate experienced by
seedlings (Dobrowski et al., 2015), and can facilitate the growth of
shade-tolerant individuals (Mast and Wolf, 2004).
Some sites that are harsh for tree regeneration but suitable for es-
tablished trees may be highly aggregated at ﬁne-scales (< 10 m) and
show little change in spatial pattern over time (Dyer et al., 2008). Re-
source sharing through mycorrhizal networks may be an important
beneﬁt of an aggregated pattern, and could be especially important on
warm, dry sites that are harsh for seedling establishment (Simard, 2009;
Simard et al., 2012). Our ﬁndings hint at the importance of both en-
vironmental resource limitations and ﬁne-scale ﬁre behavior in driving
ﬁne-scale heterogeneity, but disentangling the eﬀects of disturbance
and resource limitation without spatially explicit reconstructions of
past disturbance history remains a diﬃcult problem and one that we
ultimately could not address within the scope of this study.
Spatial heterogeneity is always present in ecological systems,
though this heterogeneity can be present at many scales (Forman and
Godron, 1981; Reynolds et al., 2013). We noted that mean patch sizes
increased from pine-oak to ponderosa pine and then to mixed-conifer,
suggesting that the spatial scale of heterogeneity increases as moisture
becomes more readily available. Larger forest patches could be in-
dicative of a lower level of resource limitations in mesic sites (parti-
cularly moisture). On these productive and more mesic sites, hetero-
geneity could have been topographically driven (i.e., stands varied in
density by aspect or hillslope position) or driven by competition for
available light (Reynolds et al., 2013). This is in contrast to harsher,
more xeric sites, where spatial heterogeneity might be inﬂuenced by the
availability of protected microsites for seedling establishment. Alter-
natively, larger patch sizes in mixed-conifer (when compared to the
drier ponderosa pine or pine-oak) could also be the result of larger
patches of mortality during previous wildﬁres when compared to the
drier pine-oak and ponderosa pine sites (i.e., sites may occur in areas
typiﬁed by a mixed-severity ﬁre regime).
It has also been proposed that spatial structure could relate to stand
density (Clyatt et al., 2016), and we found evidence to support this
idea. Among our sites, denser stands typically had a greater proportion
of live trees in groups, rather than as isolated single trees. Though our
ﬁndings did not suggest that forest types diﬀered with respect to his-
torical tree density, previous research indicates that dry mixed-conifer
sites often had higher historical densities than ponderosa pine and pine-
oak sites (e.g., Reynolds et al., 2013). Our results for historical densities
of dry mixed-conifer may be skewed by the use of four sites on the San
Francisco Peaks, AZ. These sites (near the “West Sites” in Heinlein et al.,
2005) exhibited some of the lowest reported historical densities of any
of the forests in the Southwest (Reynolds et al., 2013), so surveying
additional mixed-conifer sites may demonstrate a general increase in
historical density from pine-oak or ponderosa pine to dry mixed-con-
ifer.
4.2. Study limitations
Studies that use dendrochronology to reconstruct historical stand
structure and composition are limited by the loss of evidence (historical
trees) through ecological disturbance and decomposition (Fulé et al.,
1997). Because decomposition rates are likely to vary by species, his-
torical evidence may be lost at greater rates for certain species than
others. For example, though P. ponderosa and P. menziesii are thought to
take long periods of time to decompose in southwestern forests, A.
concolor, P. tremuloides, and Quercus spp. may decompose more rapidly
(Barger and Ffolliott, 1972; Burns and Honkala, 1990a, 1990b; Fulé
et al., 1997; Vankat, 2011). Still, previous research suggests that the
techniques described herein can be eﬀectively used to relocate most
historical trees with only minimal error (Huﬀman et al., 2001; but see
Vankat, 2011 regarding aspen). Also, our sites were intentionally se-
lected to remove locations that burned recently, to limit the inﬂuence of
lost evidence. An additional source of error may be an uncertain
management history. When detailed logging records are not available,
harvest years and cut dates must be estimated, which can aﬀect re-
construction accuracy. However, 75% (n = 25) of our sites were sup-
plemented with historical inventory data and known harvest histories,
and harvest dates for four of the remaining sites were reconstructed
using growth releases and expert knowledge. Due to this, many of the
limitations relating to lost evidences and uncertainty in past manage-
ment practices would be minimal for our study.
Most of our sites were not selected randomly or systematically, but
based on the locations of pre-existing historical data (n = 25; Woolsey
1911, 1912); as such the sampling design is unbalanced. Furthermore,
our sample of 33 sites limits the multivariate inferences that can be
made regarding the inﬂuence of abiotic factors on historical stand
structure. It should be noted then that these factors, and the complex
interactions among them, could be more eﬀectively assessed with a
larger sample size, preferably of the types of sites that are under-
represented in our data – granitic and sedimentary parent materials
from regions outside northern Arizona. Similarly, the majority of the
pine-oak sites were from a fairly limited geographic region (site IDs
12–20). It is possible that biophysical factors present in these sites could
be inﬂuencing the results of our comparison of the NRV for density and
spatial pattern among forest types. Still, site 27, a pine-oak stand from a
separate area in New Mexico with very diﬀerent biophysical char-
acteristics, showed very similar trends in density and spatial pattern to
pine-oak sites in northern Arizona. The eight most recently surveyed
sites (site IDs 7–10, 23–26; Fig. 1) were an initial step to survey sites
that were not thoroughly represented in past research, but additional
work is still needed. Many sites in northern Arizona are not re-
presentative of the abiotic conditions or current forest structure across
the Southwest as a whole, but are likely representative of the TEUs they
are sampled from (at least with respect to historical forest structure;
Bell et al., 2009). Our analyses should be interpreted as identifying the
factors important in explaining variance among our sites and the TEUs
represented, but not across all forested sites of the Southwest.
Plot size is one additional limitation of this study, particularly with
respect to the identiﬁcation of groups and openings. Many of the largest
groups and openings were in contact with plot edges and could have
extended beyond plot boundaries. It is likely that sites with larger
sampling areas would have shown larger groups and openings than the
ca. 1-ha extents of many of our sites. As such, managers may want to
occasionally incorporate groups and openings larger than those shown
in this study into silvicultural prescriptions.
The accuracy of historical data is often weighed against the extent of
K.C. Rodman et al.
Forest Ecology and Management 404 (2017) 316–329
326

the area studied (Swetnam et al., 1999). In the past, these landscape-
scale or regional analyses have been performed using remotely sensed
data (e.g., Mast et al., 1997; Black et al., 2003; Platt and Schoennagel,
2009), or using extensive ﬁeld surveys without the collection of tree age
data (e.g., Abella and Denton, 2009). This study improves upon pre-
vious approaches to similar problems because of the inclusion of den-
drochronological data, logging records, and historical inventories, as
well as robust statistical techniques that can account for correlation
between variables and small sample sizes. To date, this study is the most
thorough and rigorous assessment of historical stand densities and tree
spatial patterns performed in the Southwest (but see Reynolds et al.,
2013 for a broad review of previous literature). Furthermore, this study
serves as an initial attempt to assess the relative importance of factors
inﬂuencing historical forest change across the landscape, linking site-,
landscape-, and region-scale processes.
4.3. Implications
The physical template (abiotic factors) must be considered when
developing any silvicultural prescription, both from the standpoint of
understanding variability in NRVs for stand structure and composition,
and to serve as a baseline for assessing relative departure from histor-
ical conditions. The US Forest Service Terrestrial Ecosystem Unit Survey
(TEUs; Cleland et al., 1997) and several LANDFIRE (Rollins, 2009)
datasets were initial attempts to develop spatial datasets to aid man-
agers in this process, and provide a useful starting point. Abella and
Covington (2006) and Abella and Denton (2009) suggest that TEUs may
be a very useful way to make generalizations about variations in re-
ference conditions across the broader landscape, and our results support
this recommendation. TEUs helped to predict historical stand densities,
and could aid in identifying sites that experienced lower increases in
density ca. 1800s to present. More work must be done to understand the
range of conditions present across the many TEUs in the Southwest,
given that we only sampled from a subset of these units and had only
one or two sites in some of the units.
Though our analyses did not suggest diﬀerences in density among
forest types, previous studies indicate that southwestern mixed-conifer
forests often had higher historical densities than did P. ponderosa
monocultures (Reynolds et al., 2013), and historical densities often
increased with elevation within a given study area (Cocke et al., 2005;
Roccaforte et al., 2015). Fire regimes are also known to diﬀer slightly
among forest types in the Southwest, even across small gradients in
space (Tepley and Veblen, 2015). Therefore, forest type remains an
important consideration when planning restoration treatments, both to
aid in identifying areas in which ﬁre mitigation and ecological re-
storation are convergent goals, and to generalize about ranges of re-
sidual stand densities and spatial patterns.
Sites with higher stand densities also had a greater proportion of
live trees within groups, rather than as isolated individuals. This is a
useful ﬁnding that could be applied by land managers in the Southwest.
Our results also suggest substantial diﬀerences in tree spatial patterns
among forest types, though more research may be needed to conﬁrm
this. The goal of explicitly retaining small to moderate-sized tree groups
separated by grass-forb-shrub openings should be a high priority in
many pine-oak and ponderosa pine sites, particularly on those with
basaltic soils. However, trees on highly productive ponderosa pine-
dominated sites (e.g., Schneider et al., 2015) and mixed-conifer forests
(e.g., Rodman et al., 2016; this study) were often randomly distributed
at the 1-ha scale, with larger mean patch areas. Still, random dis-
tributions are very diﬀerent than a uniform, plantation-style spatial
pattern, and spacing-based tree thinnings are not eﬀective in mimicking
heterogeneous patterns inherent to frequent-ﬁre forests in the western
United States (Churchill et al., 2013). Stand- and landscape-scale het-
erogeneity is an important consideration in all southwestern forests
(Evans et al., 2011; Reynolds et al., 2013), and tree spatial pattern
likely varied across the region, with some sites showing distinctly
clustered patterns of trees at ﬁne-scales and other sites being more
randomly distributed, even within the same forest type.
Reconciling diﬀerences between historical, contemporary, and ex-
pected future conditions of forests is one of the most important issues
facing land managers in the Southwest. As argued by Fulé (2008),
rapid, anthropogenically-driven climate change may force managers to
prioritize treatments in higher elevation, more mesic sites that are best
positioned to maintain forest cover in the future. Furthermore,
Dobrowski et al. (2015) suggest that excessive thinning could increase
the drought stress experienced by seedlings in warmer, more xeric sites.
Moderate to mesic sites in our study area increased in density through
the 20th century comparatively more than did dry marginal sites, and
may then be a higher priority for forest management. However, this
consideration must be carefully balanced against other factors such as
wildlife habitat and the magnitude of expected climate change. Dense,
mesic forests in the Southwest are crucial habitat for certain species of
wildlife (e.g., Ganey and Balda, 1989). And while forest management
meant to restore natural stand density, composition, and spatial pattern
could improve ecosystem resilience to climate change under current
conditions and moderate emissions scenarios (Stoddard et al., 2015),
these activities may not be eﬀective at promoting resistance and resi-
lience under high emissions scenarios or extreme weather conditions
(Tarancón et al., 2014; Parsons et al., 2017). While NRVs for stand
density and tree spatial patterns are just one of many management
considerations in an uncertain and diﬃcult future (Millar et al., 2007),
generalizations about factors inﬂuencing historical density and tree
spatial patterns, as well as modern increases in stand density, provide
an improved understanding of forest dynamics and the ways in which
they vary across the American Southwest.
Acknowledgements
This project was made possible by several USDA grants (US Forest
Service Rocky Mountain Research Station Joint Venture Agreement 28-
JV7–939 and USDA-NRI (now AFRI) Grant 02-03807), and by ﬁnancial
and administrative support from the Northern Arizona University
(NAU), the Ecological Restoration Institute, and NAU School of
Forestry’s Mission Research Program. Lastly, we owe a debt of gratitude
to the numerous research assistants involved in data collection and lab
assistance over the course of this project. Without help from each of
you, this would not have been possible. The authors would also like to
thank Dr. Thomas Veblen and an anonymous reviewer for helpful
feedback on a previous version of this manuscript.
Appendix A. Supplementary material
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the
online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2017.09.012.
References
Abella, S.R., Covington, W.W., 2006. Forest ecosystems of an Arizona Pinus ponderosa
landscape: multifactor classiﬁcation and implications for ecological restoration. J.
Biogeogr. 33, 1368–1383.
Abella, S.R., Denton, C.W., 2009. Spatial variation in reference conditions: historical tree
density and pattern on a pinus ponderosa landscape. Can. J. For. Res. 39, 2391–2403.
Allen, C.D., Savage, M., Falk, D.A., Suckling, K.F., Thomas, W., Schulke, T., Stacey, P.B.,
Morgan, P., Hoﬀman, M., Klingel, J.T., 2002. Ecological restoration of southwestern
ponderosa pine ecosystems: a broad perspective. Ecol. Appl. 12, 1418–1433.
Baddeley, A., Diggle, P.J., Hardegen, A., Lawrence, T., Milne, R.K., Nair, G., 2014. On
tests of spatial pattern based on simulation envelopes. Ecol. Monogr. 84, 477–489.
Baddeley, A., Turner, R., 2005. Spatstat: an R package for analyzing spatial point patterns.
J. Stat. Softw. 12, 1–42.
Bakker, J.D., 2005. A new, proportional method for reconstructing historical tree dia-
meters. Can. J. For. Res. 35, 2515–2520.
Bakker, J.D., Sánchez Meador, A.J., Fulé, P.Z., Huﬀman, D.W., Moore, M.M., 2008.
“Growing Trees Backwards”: description of a stand reconstruction model. In:
Olberding, S.D., Moore, M.M. (Eds.), Fort Valley Experimental Forest–A Century of
Research 1908–20082. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station,
Flagstaﬀ, AZ, pp. 136–147.
K.C. Rodman et al.
Forest Ecology and Management 404 (2017) 316–329
327

Barger, R.L., Ffolliott, P.F., 1972. Physical Characteristics and Utilization of Major
Woodland Tree Species in Arizona. USDA Forest Service Research Paper RM-83.
Bell, D.M., Parysow, P.F., Moore, M.M., 2009. Assessing the representativeness of the
oldest permanent inventory plots in Northern Arizona ponderosa pine forests. Restor.
Ecol. 17, 369–377.
Besag, J.E., 1977. Comments on Ripley’s Paper. J. R. Stat. Soc. B 39, 193–195.
Black, A.E., Morgan, P., Hessburg, P.E., 2003. Social and biophysical correlates of change
in forest landscapes of the interior Columbia Basin, USA. Ecol. Appl. 13, 51–67.
Bond, W.J., Woodward, F.I., Midgley, G.F., 2005. The global distribution of ecosystems in
a world without ﬁre. New Phytol. 165, 525–538.
Breiman, L., 2001. Random forests. Mach. Learn. 45, 5–32.
Burns, R.M., Honkala, B.H., 1990a. Silvics of North America: Vol 1, Conifers. Agricultural
Handbook 654. Washington, D.C.
Burns, R.M., Honkala, B.H., 1990b. Silvics of North America: vol 2, Hardwoods.
Agricultural Handbook 654. Washington, D.C.
Churchill, D.J., Larson, A.J., Dahlgreen, M.C., Franklin, J.F., Hessburg, P.F., Lutz, J.A.,
2013. Restoring forest resilience: from reference spatial patterns to silvicultural
prescriptions and monitoring. For. Ecol. Manage. 291, 442–457.
Clark, P.J., Evans, F.C., 1954. Distance to nearest neighbor as a measure of spatial re-
lationships in populations. Ecology 35, 445–453.
Cleland, D.T., Avers, P.E., McNab, W.H., Jensen, M.E., Bailey, R.G., King, T., Russell,
W.E., 1997. National hierarchical framework of ecological units. In: Boyce, M.S.,
Haney, A. (Eds.), Ecosystem Management: Applications for Sustainable Forest and
Wildlife Resources. Yale University Press, New Haven, CT, pp. 181–200.
Clyatt, K.A., Crotteau, J.S., Schaedel, M.S., Wiggins, H.L., Kelley, H., Churchill, D.J.,
Larson, A.J., 2016. Historical spatial patterns and contemporary tree mortality in dry
mixed-conifer forests. For. Ecol. Manage. 361, 23–37.
Cocke, A.E., Fulé, P.Z., Crouse, J.E., 2005. Forest Change on a Steep Mountain Gradient
After Extended Fire Exclusion: San Francisco Peaks, Arizona, USA. J. Appl. Ecol. 42,
814–823.
Cooper, C.F., 1961. Pattern in ponderosa pine forests. Ecology 42, 493–499.
Covington, W.W., Moore, M.M., 1994. Southwestern ponderosa forest structure: changes
since Euro-American settlement. J. For. 92, 39–47.
Curtis, J.T., McIntosh, R.P., 1951. An upland forest continuum in the prairie-forest border
region of Wisconsin. Ecology 32, 476–496.
Cutler, D.R., Edwards, T.C., Beard, K.H., Cutler, A., Hess, K.T., Gibson, J., Lawler, J.J.,
2007. Random forests for classiﬁcation in ecology. Ecology 88, 2783–2792.
Dobrowski, S.Z., Swanson, A.K., Abatzoglou, J.T., Holden, Z.A., Saﬀord, H.D., Schwartz,
M.K., Gavin, D.G., 2015. Forest structure and species traits mediate projected re-
cruitment declines in Western US tree species. Glob. Ecol. Biogeogr. 24, 917–927.
Dyer, J.H., Sánchez Meador, A.J., Moore, M.M., Bakker, J.D., 2008. Forest structure and
tree recruitment changes on a permanent historical cinder hills plot over a 130-year
period. In: Olberding, S.D., Moore, M.M. (Eds.), Fort Valley Experimental Forest - A
Century of Research 1908–2008, Conference Proceedings. USDA Forest Service,
Rocky Mountain Research Station, Flagstaﬀ, AZ, pp. 156–161.
Evans, A.M., Everett, R.G., Stephens, S.L., Youtz, J.A., 2011. Comprehensive Fuels
Treatment Practices Guide for Mixed Conifer Forests: California. Central and
Southern Rockies, and the Southwest, Santa Fe, NM.
Flathers, K.N., Kolb, T.E., Bradford, J.B., Waring, K.M., Moser, W.K., 2016. Long-term
thinning alters ponderosa pine reproduction in Northern Arizona. For. Ecol. Manage.
374, 154–165.
Flint, L.E., Flint, A.L., 2012. Downscaling future climate scenarios to ﬁne scales for hy-
drologic and ecological modeling and analysis. Ecol. Process. 1, 1–15.
Forman, R.T.T., Godron, M., 1981. Patches and structural components for a landscape
ecology. Bioscience 31, 733–740.
Fulé, P.Z., 2008. Does it make sense to restore wildland ﬁre in changing climate? Restor.
Ecol. 16, 526–531.
Fulé, P.Z., Covington, W.W., Moore, M.M., 1997. Determining reference conditions for
ecosystem management of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Ecol. Appl. 7,
895–908.
Ganey, J.L., Balda, R.P., 1989. Distribution and habitat use of Mexican spotted owls in
Arizona. Condor 91, 355–361.
Gardner, R.H., Milne, B.T., Turner, M.G., O’Neill, R.V., 1987. Neutral models for the
analysis of broad-scale landscape pattern. Landsc. Ecol. 1, 19–28.
Gartner, M.H., Veblen, T.T., Sherriﬀ, R.L., Schoennagel, T.L., 2012. Proximity to grass-
lands inﬂuences ﬁre frequency and sensitivity to climate variability in ponderosa pine
forests of the colorado front range. Int. J. Wildl. Fire 21, 562–571. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1071/WF10103.
Gholz, H.L., 1982. Environmental limits on aboveground net primary production, leaf
area, and biomass in vegetation zones of the Paciﬁc Northwest. Ecology 63, 469–481.
Grier, C.G., Running, S.W., 1977. Leaf area of mature northwestern coniferous forests:
relation to site water balance. Ecology 58, 893–899.
Heinlein, T.A., Moore, M.M., Fulé, P.Z., Covington, W.W., 2005. Fire history and stand
structure of two ponderosa pine-mixed conifer sites: San Francisco peaks, Arizona,
USA. Int. J. Wildl. Fire 14, 307–320.
Heyerdahl, E.K., Lertzman, K., Karpuk, S., 2007. Local-Scale controls of a low-severity ﬁre
regime (1750–1950), Southern British Columbia, Canada. Ecoscience 14, 40–47.
Hollander, M., Wolfe, D.A., 1973. Nonparametric Statistical Methods, ﬁrst ed. John Wiley
and Sons, Hoboken, NJ.
Hothorn, T., Hornik, K., Zeileis, A., 2006. Unbiased recursive partitioning: a conditional
inference framework. J. Comp. Graph. Stat. 15, 651–674.
Huﬀman, D.W., Zegler, T.J., Fulé, P.Z., 2015. Fire history of a mixed conifer forest on the
Mogollon Rim, Northern Arizona, USA. Int. J. Wildl. Fire 24, 680–689.
Huﬀman, D.W., Moore, M.M., Covington, W.W., Crouse, J.E., Fulé, P.Z., 2001. Ponderosa
Pine Forest Reconstruction: Comparisons with Historical Data. In: Vance, R.K.,
Edminster, C.B., Covington, W.W., Blake, J.A. (Eds.), Ponderosa Pine Ecosystems
Restoration and Conservation: Steps Towards Stewardship. Flagstaﬀ, AZ, pp. 3–8.
Keane, R.E., Hessburg, P.F., Landres, P.B., Swanson, F.J., 2009. The use of historical range
and variability (HRV) in landscape management. For. Ecol. Manage. 258, 1025–1037.
Keating, K.A., Gogan, P.J.P., Vore, J.M., Irby, L.R., 2007. A simple solar radiation index
for wildlife habitat studies. J. Wildl. Manage. 71, 1344–1348.
Keith, R.P., Veblen, T.T., Schoennagel, T.L., Rosemary, L., Journal, S., June, N., Keith,
R.P., Veblen, T.T., Schoennagel, T.L., Sherriﬀ, R.L., 2010. Understory vegetation in-
dicates historic ﬁre regimes in ponderosa pine-dominated ecosystems in the Colorado
Front Range. J. Veg. Sci. 21, 488–499.
Kerhoulas, L.P., Kolb, T.E., Koch, G.W., 2013. Tree size, stand density, and the source of
water used across seasons. For. Ecol. Manage. 289, 425–433.
Kuhn, M., 2008. Building predictive models in R using the caret package. J. Stat. Softw.
28, 1–26.
Landres, P.B., Morgan, P., Swanson, F.J., 1999. Overview of the use of natural variability
concepts in managing ecological systems. Ecol. Appl. 9, 1179–1188.
Larson, A.J., Churchill, D., 2012. Tree spatial patterns in ﬁre-frequent forests of western
North America, including mechanisms of pattern formation and implications for
designing fuel reduction and restoration treatments. For. Ecol. Manage. 267, 74–92.
League, K., Veblen, T.T., 2006. Climatic variability and episodic Pinus ponderosa estab-
lishment along the forest grassland ecotones of Colorado. For. Ecol. Manage. 228,
98–107.
Liebmann, M.J., Farella, J., Roos, C.I., Stack, A., Martini, S., Swetnam, T.W., 2016. Native
American depopulation, reforestation, and ﬁre regimes in the Southwest United
States, 1492–1900 CE. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 113, 696–704.
Loosmore, N.B., Ford, E.D., 2006. Statistical inference using the G or K point pattern
statistics. Ecology 87, 1925–1931.
Lutz, J.A., van Wagtendonk, J.W., Franklin, J.F., 2010. Climatic water deﬁcit, tree species
ranges, and climate change in Yosemite National Park. J. Biogeogr. 37, 936–950.
Lydersen, J.M., North, M.P., Knapp, E.E., Collins, B.M., 2013. Quantifying spatial patterns
of tree groups and gaps in mixed-conifer forests: reference conditions and long-term
changes following ﬁre suppression and logging. For. Ecol. Manage. 304, 370–382.
Mast, J.N., Veblen, T.T., 1999. Tree spatial patterns and stand development along the
pine-grassland ecotone in the Colorado front range. Can. J. For. Res. 29, 575–584.
Mast, J.N., Veblen, T.T., Hodgson, M.E., 1997. Tree invasion within a pine/grassland
ecotone: an approach with historic aerial photography and GIS modeling. For. Ecol.
Manage. 93, 181–194.
Mast, J.N., Wolf, J.J., 2004. Ecotonal changes and altered tree spatial patterns in lower
mixed-conifer forests, Grand Canyon National Park, Arizona, U.S.A. Landsc. Ecol. 19,
167–180.
McDowell, N.G., Williams, A.P., Xu, C., Pockman, W.T., Dickman, L.T., Sevanto, S.,
Pangle, R.E., Limousin, J.-M., Plaut, J.A., Mackay, D.S., Ogée, J., Domec, J.C., Allen,
C.D., Fisher, R.A., Jiang, X., Muss, J.D., Breshears, D.D., Rauscher, S.A., Koven, C.,
2016. Multi-scale predictions of massive conifer mortality due to chronic temperature
rise. Nat. Clim. Chang. 6, 295–300.
Merschel, A.G., Spies, T.A., Heyerdahl, E.K., 2014. Mixed-conifer forests of central
Oregon: eﬀects of logging and ﬁre exclusion vary with environment. Ecol. Appl. 24,
1670–1688.
Millar, C.I., Stephenson, N.L., Stephens, S.L., 2007. Climate change and forests of the
future: managing in the face of uncertainty. Ecol. Appl. 17, 2145–2151.
Moore, M.M., Huﬀman, D.W., Bakker, J.D., Sánchez Meador, A.J., Bell, D.M., Fulé, P.Z.,
Parysow, P.F., Covington, W.W., 2004a. Quantifying Forest Reference Conditions for
Ecological Restoration: The Woolsey Plots. Final Report to the Ecological Restoration
Institute for the Southwest Fire Initiative, Flagstaﬀ, AZ.
Moore, M.M., Huﬀman, D.W., Fulé, P.Z., Covington, W.W., Crouse, J.E., 2004b.
Comparison of historical and contemporary forest structure and southwestern pon-
derosa pine forests. For. Sci. 50, 162–176.
Nalder, I.A., Wein, R.W., 1998. Spatial interpolation of climatic normals: test of a new
method in the Canadian boreal forest. Agric. For. Meteorol. 92, 211–225.
Nyland, R.D., 2016. Silviculture: Concepts and Applications. Waveland Press, Long
Grove, IL.
O’Neill, R.V., Hunsaker, C.T., Timmins, S.P., Jackson, B.L., Jones, K.B., Riitters, K.H.,
Wickham, J.D., 1996. Scale problems in reporting landscape pattern at the regional
scale. Landsc. Ecol. 11, 169–180.
Oliver, C.D., Larson, B.C., 1996. Forest Stand Dynamics, Update. ed. John Wiley and Sons,
New York.
Parsons, R.A., Linn, R.R., Pimont, F., Hoﬀman, C., Sauer, J., Winterkamp, J., Sieg, C.H.,
Jolly, W.M., 2017. Numerical investigation of aggregated fuel spatial pattern impacts
on ﬁre behavior. Land 6, 43.
Pearson, G.A., 1933. A twenty year record of changes in an Arizona pine forest. Ecology 4,
272–285.
Platt, R.V., Schoennagel, T., 2009. An Object-Oriented Approach to Assessing Changes in
Tree Cover in the Colorado Front Range 1938–1999. For. Ecol. Manage. 258,
1342–1349.
PRISM Climate Group, Oregon State University, 2011. URL < http://prism.oregonstate.
edu > (accessed 1.1.15).
Puhlick, J.J., Laughlin, D.C., Moore, M.M., 2012. Factors inﬂuencing ponderosa pine
regeneration in the southwestern USA. For. Ecol. Manage. 264, 10–19.
Reynolds, R.T., Sánchez Meador, A.J., Youtz, J.A., Nicolet, T., Matonis, M.S., Jackson, P.
L., Delorenzo, D.G., Graves, A.D., Richard, T., Meador, S., Andrew, J., James, A.,
Megan, S., Patrick, L., Donald, G., Andrew, D., 2013. Restoring Composition and
Structure in Southwestern Frequent-Fire Forests: A Science-Based Framework for
Improving Ecosystem Resiliency.
Ripley, B.D., 1988. Statistical Inference for Spatial Processes. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, England.
Ripley, B.D., 1977. Modelling spatial patterns. J. R. Stat. Soc. B 39, 172–212.
Robbie, W.A., 1992. Terrestrial ecosystem survey of national forest system lands in the
K.C. Rodman et al.
Forest Ecology and Management 404 (2017) 316–329
328

Southwest. In: Proceedings of the National Workshop: Taking an Ecological Approach
in Management. USDA Forest Service, Washington, D.C., Salt Lake City, UT, pp.
114–118.
Roccaforte, J.P., Huﬀman, D.W., Fulé, P.Z., Covington, W.W., Chancellor, W.W.,
Stoddard, M.T., Crouse, J.E., 2015. Forest structure and fuels dynamics following
ponderosa pine restoration treatments, white Mountains, Arizona, USA. For. Ecol.
Manage. 337, 174–185.
Rodman, K.C., 2015. Reference Conditions and Spatial Dynamics in a Southwestern Dry
Mixed-Conifer Forest. Northern Arizona University Masters Thesis.
Rodman, K.C., Sánchez Meador, A.J., Huﬀman, D.W., Waring, K.M., 2016. Reference
conditions and historical ﬁne-scale spatial dynamics in a dry mixed-conifer forest,
Arizona, USA. For. Sci. 62, 268–280.
Rollins, M.G., 2009. LANDFIRE: a nationally consistent vegetation, wildland ﬁre, and fuel
assessment. Int. J. Wildl. Fire 18, 235–249.
Sánchez Meador, A.J., Moore, M.M., Bakker, J.D., Parysow, P.F., 2009. 108 Years of
change in spatial pattern following selective harvest of a pinus ponderosa stand in
Northern Arizona, USA. J. Veg. Sci. 20, 79–90.
Sánchez Meador, A.J., Parysow, P.F., Moore, M.M., 2010. Historical stem-mapped per-
manent plots increase precision of reconstructed reference data in ponderosa pine
forests of Northern Arizona. Restor. Ecol. 18, 224–234.
Sánchez Meador, A.J., Parysow, P.F., Moore, M.M., 2011. A New method for delineating
tree patches and assessing spatial reference conditions of ponderosa pine forests in
Northern Arizona. Restor. Ecol. 19, 490–499.
Schneider, E.E., Sánchez Meador, A.J., Covington, W.W., 2015. Reference conditions and
historical changes in an unharvested ponderosa pine stand on sedimentary soil.
Restor. Ecol. 24, 212–221.
Simard, S.W., 2009. The foundational role of mycorrhizal networks in self-organization of
interior Douglas-ﬁr forests. For. Ecol. Manage. 258, S95–S107.
Simard, S.W., Beiler, K.J., Bingham, M.A., Deslippe, J.R., Philip, L.J., Teste, F.P., 2012.
Mycorrhizal networks: mechanisms, ecology and modelling. Fungal Biol. Rev. 26,
39–60.
Soil Survey Staﬀ, Natural Resources Conservation Service, United States Department of
Agriculture, 2015. Soil Survey Geographic (SSURGO) Database. URL < https://
sdmdataaccess.sc.egov.usda.gov > (accessed 4.6.16).
Staver, A.C., Archibald, S., Levin, S.A., 2011. The global extent and determinants of sa-
vanna and forest as alternative biome states. Science 334, 230–232.
Stephens, S.L., Fry, D.L., 2005. Spatial distribution of regeneration patches in an old-
growth Pinus jeﬀreyi-mixed conifer forest in northwestern Mexico. J. Veg. Sci. 16,
693.
Stoddard, M.T., Meador, A.J.S., Fulé, P.Z., Korb, J.E., 2015. Five-year post-restoration
conditions and simulated climate-change trajectories in a warm/dry mixed-conifer
forest, Southwestern Colorado, USA. For. Ecol. Manage. 356, 253–261.
Strobl, C., Boulesteix, A.L., Kneib, T., Augustin, T., Zeileis, A., 2008. Conditional variable
importance for random forests. BMC Bioinform. 9, 307.
Strobl, C., Boulesteix, A.L., Zeileis, A., Hothorn, T., 2007. Bias in random forest variable
importance measures: illustrations sources and a solution. BMC Bioinform. 8, 25.
Swetnam, T.W., Allen, C.D., Betancourt, J.L., 1999. Applied historical ecology: using the
past to manage for the future. Ecol. Appl. 9, 1189–1206.
Swetnam, T.W., Baisan, C.H., 1996. Historical ﬁre regime patterns in the southwestern
United States Since AD 1700. In: Allen, C.D. (Ed.), Fire Eﬀects in Southwestern
Forests: Proceedings of the 2nd La Mesa Fire Symposium. U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Los Alamos, NM,
pp. 11–32.
Swetnam, T.W., Betancourt, J.L., 1998. Mesoscale ecological responses to climatic
variability in the American Southwest. J. Clim. 11 3128–1347.
Tarancón, A.A., Fulé, P.Z., Shive, K.L., Sieg, C.H., Sánchez Meador, A.J., Strom, B., 2014.
Simulating post-wildﬁre forest trajectories under alternative climate and manage-
ment scenarios. Ecol. Appl. 24, 1626–1637.
Tepley, A.J., Veblen, T.T., 2015. Spatiotemporal ﬁre dynamics in mixed-conifer and aspen
forests in the san juan mountains of Southwestern Colorado, USA. Ecol. Monogr. 85,
583–603.
Theobald, D.M., Harrison-Atlas, D., Monahan, W.B., 2015. Ecologically-relevant maps of
landforms and physiographic diversity for climate adaptation planning. PLoS One 10,
1–17.
Tuten, M.C., Sánchez Meador, A.J., Fulé, P.Z., 2015. Ecological restoration and ﬁne-scale
forest structure regulation in southwestern ponderosa pine forests. For. Ecol. Manage.
348, 57–67.
United States Geologic Survey, Geologic Maps of US States, 2015. United States
Department of Interior. URL < https://mrdata.usgs.gov/geology/state/ > (accessed
1.6.15).
United States Geological Survey, National Elevation Dataset, 1999. URL < nationalmap.
gov/elevation.html > (accessed 1.1.15).
United States Forest Service, R3 Geospatial Data, 2015. United States Department of
Agriculture. URL < http://www.fs.usda.gov/detail/r3/landmanagement/gis/?cid=
stelprdb5202474 > (accessed 7.6.16).
Urban, D.L., Miller, C., Halpin, P.N., Stephenson, N.L., 2000. Forest Gradient response in
sierran landscapes: the physical template. Landsc. Ecol. 15, 603–620.
Vankat, J.L., 2011. Post-1935 changes in forest vegetation of Grand Canyon National
Park, Arizona, USA: Part 2-Mixed conifer, spruce-ﬁr, and quaking aspen forests. For.
Ecol. Manage. 261, 326–341.
Vose, J.M., Clark, J.S., Luce, C.H., Patel-Weynand, T., 2016. Eﬀects of Drought on Forests
and Rangelands in the United States: A Comprehensive Science Synthesis. Gen. Tech.
Report WO-93b. USDA Forest Service, Research and Development, Washington D.C.
White, A.S., 1985. Presettlement regeneration patterns in a southwestern ponderosa pine
stand. Ecology 66, 589–594.
Wiens, J.A., 1976. Population responses to patchy environments. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 7,
81–120.
Williams, A.P., Allen, C.D., Macalady, A.K., Griﬃn, D., Woodhouse, C.A., Meko, D.M.,
Swetnam, T.W., Rauscher, S.a., Seager, R., Grissino-Mayer, H.D., Dean, J.S., Cook,
E.R., Gangodagamage, C., Cai, M., McDowell, N.G., 2012. Temperature as a potent
driver of regional forest drought stress and tree mortality. Nat. Clim. Chang. 3,
292–297.
Williams, A.P., Seager, R., Macalady, A.K., Berkelhammer, M., Crimmins, M.A., Swetnam,
T.W., Trugman, A.T., Buenning, N., Noone, D., McDowell, N.G., Hryniw, N., Mora,
C.I., Rahn, T., 2015. Correlations between components of the water balance and
burned area reveal new insights for predicting forest ﬁre area in the southwest United
States. Int. J. Wildl. Fire 24, 14–26.
Wolak, M., 2015. R Package “ICC.” URL < https://cran.rproject.org/web/packages/ICC/
ICC.pdf> (accessed 1.30.15).
Woolsey, T.S.J., 1911. Western Yellow Pine in Arizona and New Mexico. Bulletin 101.
Washington, D.C.
Woolsey, T.S.J., 1912. Permanent sample plots. For. Q. 10, 38–44.
K.C. Rodman et al.
Forest Ecology and Management 404 (2017) 316–329
329
