The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
 
What Fire Scars Tell Us About the Past 
 
 
 
Prior to Euro-American settlement of the American Southwest, ponderosa 
pine forests experienced low-severity ground fires every two to 20 years 
across the landscape. Occasionally, these fires would burn through the  
bark and cambium tissue at the base of a tree and create a scar. If  
the tree survived, the cambium directly adjacent to the scar would  
grow, beginning to overlap the dead section of the tree—much  
like new skin trying to cover an injury. This occurs each succ- 
essive year following a fire and this growth pattern results in  
a small lobe as seen in a cross-section of the tree.  
 
Once a tree has an exposed scar, known as a “cat face,”  
on its trunk, it is susceptible to further scarring from  
subsequent fires due to the relatively thin bark covering  
the new growth and the presence of flammable tree resin  
surrounding the scar. If another fire scars the tree, it kills  
the cambium of the outer ring on the lobe, usually direct- 
ly adjacent to the first fire scar. This causes the tree to  
form a new lobe by growing over the recently killed tissue  
every year until the next fire. Scientists can determine the year  
and often the season in which the fire occurred by studying the 
charred section between the growth rings.   
 
Starting in the late 1800s Southwest forests stopped experienc-
ing frequent, low-intensity fire. Fire stopped because of the re-
moval of grass by livestock and in later years as a result of fire 
suppression. Fire scar samples indicate that the last fire often 
dates from the late 1800s and is followed by a large growth 
lobe. This large lobe indicates decades of a lack of fire that 
contrasts the frequent, low-intensity fires evidenced by the 
smaller, more populous fire-scarred lobes. On samples from 
relic sites, which still receive frequent fire, the large “fire ex-
clusion” lobe is observed less often.  
Small char marks  
(arrows) reveal that this 
northern Arizona pondero-
sa pine tree experienced 
34 low-severity fires over 
240 years. The fire stopped 
after 1869, when newly 
introduced livestock ate 
away grasses and other 
fine fuels.  
Mt. Trumbull, 
Arizona 
lobe 

 
 
 
Collecting Fire Samples 
It is important to note that researchers do not need to kill the tree to get fire scar samples. 
Most samples are taken from dead structures, like stumps, snags, and logs (see photos below). 
By removing just a small portion of the circumference of the tree, like a small piece of pie, the 
tree can remain standing and healthy. Also, fire scar dating methods are just one line of evi-
dence scientists use to study historical fire regimes, or the frequency of fire, of ponderosa 
pine. Combined with other evidence, such as forest structure, plant trait, and soil core charcoal 
data, scientists can more accurately determine the set of natural forest conditions that existed 
prior to Euro-American settlement.  
Contact: Tayloe Dubay, tayloe.dubay@nau.edu 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
Here the tree grew from right to left. 
The darker section of the trunk is 
heartwood and the lighter section is 
sapwood. Notice fire scarred this tree 
for the last time close to the last 
growth ring in the heartwood 
(coincidental). Then the tree contin-
ued to grow for ~130 more years with-
out recording another fire.  
Last fire recorded 
by this tree 
Northern Arizona University School of Forestry professor Dr. Pete Fulé cuts a fire scar out of the cat 
face of a standing dead snag using a chainsaw. Photos courtesy of Dr. Pete Fulé 
