Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Forest Ecology and Management
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/foreco
Restoration beneﬁts of re-entry with resource objective wildﬁre on a
ponderosa pine landscape in northern Arizona, USA
David W. Huﬀmana,⁎, Joseph E. Crousea, Andrew J. Sánchez Meadora,b, Judith D. Springera,
Michael T. Stoddarda
a Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaﬀ, AZ 86011-5017, United States
b School of Forestry, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaﬀ, AZ 86011-5018, United States
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Ecological restoration
Repeated wildﬁre entry
Hazardous fuels reduction
Forest structure
Fire management
A B S T R A C T
Prescriptions for ecological restoration of ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) forests of the American Southwest
are generally aimed at approximating pre-ﬁre-exclusion conditions by reducing tree densities and hazardous
fuels, and reintroducing surface ﬁre. Increasingly, land managers are utilizing natural ﬁre ignitions to achieve
restoration and hazardous fuels reduction objectives, but to minimize risk of escape and reduce potential for
undesirable outcomes ﬁres are commonly managed under weather and fuel moisture conditions that produce
lower burn severities. Few studies have examined eﬀectiveness of incremental approaches that attempt to restore
these ecosystems by allowing repeated, low-severity wildﬁres to reburn sites. We analyzed a 12,035-ha land-
scape on the Kaibab National Forest in northern Arizona and compared forest structure, hazardous fuel loading,
and potential ﬁre behavior in areas that had burned once (single ﬁre) to others that had burned twice (re-entry)
over the preceding 13 years. Forest structure and hazardous fuels characteristics in re-entry areas tended to be
closer to historical ranges of variability (HRV) than in single ﬁre areas; however, we found few statistically
signiﬁcant diﬀerences and tree densities in both single and re-entry ﬁres remained higher than HRV by up to 3.5-
fold. Similarly, potential ﬁre behavior variables were statistically similar between single and re-entry ﬁre areas.
Analysis of burn severity eﬀects suggested that trends toward reduced tree density and canopy fuels in re-entry
areas were consistently driven by “cleanup eﬀects”, whereby re-entry ﬁres produced low-severity eﬀects in areas
showing unburned/low severity after ﬁrst-entry ﬁres. Evidence of “additive eﬀects”, whereby restoration and
hazardous fuels reduction objectives were being met incrementally by repeated low-severity ﬁre, was diﬃcult to
detect on the re-entry ﬁre landscape. Thus, with similar management, several additional ﬁre entries will be
required to restore tree densities to within the historical range. Further, our ﬁndings suggest that managing
resource objective wildﬁres to allow for more moderate-severity burning, even with a single entry, may be more
eﬀective for restoring these forests than repeated low-severity entries.
1. Introduction
It is widely acknowledged that ecological restoration is urgently
needed in ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) forests of the American
Southwest due to historical ﬁre exclusion and subsequent, undesirable
changes in forest structure and function (Covington et al., 1997; Moore
et al., 1999; Allen et al., 2002; Roccaforte et al., 2015). For example,
the largest collaborative forest restoration project in the US, the Four
Forest Restoration Initiative, has a goal of implementing restoration
treatments on just under 1 M ha of U.S. Forest Service lands in northern
Arizona (https://www.fs.usda.gov/4fri). In these forests, restoration
prescriptions are generally aimed at reducing tree densities to break up
and reduce canopy fuel loading, reducing forest ﬂoor fuels, and
reintroducing surface ﬁre as a critical ecosystem process (Agee and
Skinner, 2005). Although thinning can be prescribed through all age
and size classes, it is typically focused on removing smaller trees that
can act as ladder fuels and initiate crown ﬁres. Both site-speciﬁc re-
ference conditions, that describe historical characteristics of local forest
structure and function, and historical ranges of variability (HRV), that
deﬁne ecosystem parameters across broader geographic areas, are used
to guide development of restoration prescriptions and evaluate treat-
ment outcomes (Landres et al., 1999; Moore et al., 1999). Mechanized
thinning and prescribed burning treatments can be implemented pre-
cisely, and thus these methods are highly eﬀective for meeting pre-
scription objectives (e.g., Roccaforte et al., 2010). Mechanized treat-
ments, however, are not appropriate for all lands and can be costly to
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2017.10.032
Received 18 July 2017; Received in revised form 9 October 2017; Accepted 16 October 2017
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: David.Huﬀman@nau.edu (D.W. Huﬀman).
Forest Ecology and Management 408 (2018) 16–24
0378-1127/ © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
MARK

implement. Recently, there has been increasing interest in managing
wildﬁres that occur as a result of natural lightning ignitions to ac-
complish restoration and hazardous fuels reduction goals, but few
studies have evaluated eﬀectiveness of these “resource objective”
wildﬁres for restoring ponderosa pine ecosystems. In a retrospective
analysis of forests in northern Arizona, Huﬀman et al. (2017) found that
resource objective wildﬁres had been eﬀective in restoring historical
ranges for 17–67% of the structural and hazardous fuels attributes ex-
amined, depending on burn severity.
Natural ﬁre ignitions managed to improve ecological conditions and
accomplish natural resource objectives on non-wilderness public lands
are typically allowed to burn when weather and fuel moisture condi-
tions are mild (e.g., low wind speeds and air temperatures, and high
relative humidities). Such burning conditions are sought by managers
to avoid ﬁre escape and undesirable eﬀects, and to protect various
values on the landscape. Fires burning under mild weather and fuels
conditions are likely to be low in severity (i.e., low tree mortality) and
produce minimal ﬁrst-order eﬀects on forest structure (Meyer, 2015;
Huﬀman et al., 2017). In areas where burn severity is low, stand den-
sities and fuel loadings may remain higher than desired and fail to meet
ecological restoration goals (Hunter et al., 2011, Higgins et al., 2015).
Large areas within such ﬁres can remain essentially untreated (Huﬀman
et al., 2017). In contrast, notable reductions in stand density and fuel
loading have been observed in areas of moderate-severity ﬁre (Hunter
et al., 2011), and these may meet an increased number of restoration
objectives (Huﬀman et al., 2017). Land managers may be more apt to
allow ﬁres to burn under more active weather conditions and accept
more substantial ﬁre eﬀects in remote areas where risk to human
communities is lower (Fulé and Laughlin, 2007; Holden et al., 2007;
Larson et al., 2013). On lands nearer human communities, it has been
suggested that restoration objectives could be met incrementally by
allowing repeated, low-severity ﬁres to reburn sites (Allen et al., 2002).
However, several studies have shown only minimal eﬀects of repeated
resource objective wildﬁres, and few have addressed whether repeated
ﬁres actually meet restoration and hazardous fuels reduction goals (e.g.,
Holden et al., 2007; Hunter et al., 2011; Parks et al., 2013; Higgins
et al., 2015).
In this study, we analyzed areas of a ponderosa pine landscape on
the Kaibab National Forest in northern Arizona where resource objec-
tive wildﬁres had been allowed to reburn sites over the preceding 13
years. We established ﬁeld sampling plots to quantify forest structural
characteristics and hazardous fuels amounts, and compared areas that
had burned once (single ﬁres) to others that had burned twice (re-entry
ﬁres). Our main research questions were the following: 1) Are there
signiﬁcant diﬀerences between single and re-entry areas in terms of
forest structure, fuels, and potential ﬁre behavior? 2) How severe have
Fig. 1. Map of 12,035-ha resource objective
wildﬁre landscape on the Tusayan Ranger
District (lighter shading within Arizona out-
line;
Grand
Canyon
National
Park
also
shown, in darker shading, for reference) of
the
Kaibab
National
Forest
in
northern
Arizona. Shown are single ﬁre areas (poly-
gons without hatching) and re-entry ﬁre
areas (hatched polygons). Re-entry ﬁre areas
in the legend are indicted by the name of the
ﬁrst resource objective ﬁre followed by the
re-entry ﬁre name (e.g., “Horse - Hammer”).
D.W. Huﬀman et al.
Forest Ecology and Management 408 (2018) 16–24
17

past resource objective wildﬁres been? 3) How does burn severity in-
ﬂuence forest structure and fuels between single-entry ﬁres and reburn
areas?
2. Methods
2.1. Study site
To address our research questions, we downloaded ﬁre perimeters
from the USDA Forest Service Region 3 ﬁre history database and used a
geographic information system (GIS) to identify non-wilderness lands
on the Coconino and Kaibab National Forests where wildﬁres managed
for resource objectives in ponderosa pine ecosystems had overlapped.
We limited our study to non-wilderness lands as there is increasing
interest in utilizing wildﬁres, along with other more conventional
treatments (e.g., mechanized tree thinning and prescribed ﬁre), to meet
restoration objectives in these forests. Of the few sites that showed
overlapping ﬁres, by far the largest and most complex was located on
the Tusayan Ranger District of the Kaibab National Forest. The Tusayan
site was 12,035 ha in extent and comprised of 10 resource objective
wildﬁres. Eight unique areas (2,484 ha total) had experienced two ﬁres
(hereafter “re-entry” areas), and four unique, areas (9,551 ha total) had
been exposed to just one resource objective ﬁre (hereafter single ﬁre
areas) (Fig. 1). Time between ﬁrst ﬁre and ﬁre re-entry ranged
2–11 years. Three ﬁres, (Camp 36, Twenty-Two, and Scott) had areas
that were not reburned but were also not included in ﬁeld plot sampling
for single ﬁres due to limited area or discrepancies in spatial data
(Table 1). Fires occurred between 2003 and 2015, mainly during the
months of June, July, and August. Prior to this time, thinning treat-
ments had been minimal and dense stand conditions reﬂected inter-
ruption of historical surface ﬁre regimes and decades of ﬁre suppres-
sion.
Maximum
temperatures
ranged
18–34 °C,
average
relative
humidities ranged 14–95%, and average wind speeds were 2–11 k h−1
on the days of ignition (Table 1). In general, average precipitation at the
site is 348 mm y−1, which typically falls in a bimodal pattern as winter
snow and mid-summer, monsoonal rains. Average maximum tempera-
ture in July is 29.3 °C and average minimum temperature in January is
−7.3 °C. Soils at the site are mainly Alﬁsols, Inceptosols, and Mollisols,
derived from limestone and sandstone parent materials. Forest overs-
tories were dominated by ponderosa pine. Also occurring, but less
common, species were Gambel oak (Quercus gambelii Nutt.), pinyon
pine (Pinus edulis Engelm.), Utah juniper (Juniperus osteosperma (Torr.)
Little), and oneseed juniper (J. monosperma (Engelm.) Sarg.). Unders-
tory vegetation in these forests is primarily herbaceous and comprised
of perennial grasses such as squirreltail (Elymus elymoides (Raf.)
Swezey), mountain muhly (Muhlenbergia montana (Nutt.) A.S. Hitchc.),
muttongrass (Poa fendleriana (Steud.) Vasey), and blue gramma (Bou-
teloua gracilis (Kunth) Lag. Ex Griﬃths); graminoids such as western
sedge (Carex occidentalis Bailey); and forbs such as spreading ﬂeabane
(Erigeron divergens Torr. & A. Gray) and silvery lupine (Lupinus argenteus
Pursh). Shrubs that occur include snakeweed (Gutierrezia sarothrae
(Pursh) Britt. & Rusby) and sagebrush (Artemisia tridentata Nutt., and A.
nova A. Nels.).
2.2. Burn severity classiﬁcation
We used the diﬀerenced normalized burn ratio (dNBR) to classify
burn severity within all ﬁres. For ﬁres ≥404 ha occurring before 2015
(Table 1), we downloaded these classiﬁcations from the Monitoring
Trends in Burn Severity (MTBS) database (www.mtbs.gov). For smaller
ﬁres without available MTBS data, or for ﬁres where the MTBS data
were incomplete (i.e., larger ﬁres occurring in 2015; Table 1), we cal-
culated dNBR following MTBS methods using IDL/ENVI software
(version 5.3; Exelis Visual Information Solutions, Boulder Colorado).
The dNBR classiﬁcation method utilizes Landsat imagery (30-m re-
solution) and calculates the diﬀerence between pre-ﬁre and post-ﬁre
reﬂectance in spectral bands 4 and 7 (near-infrared and shortwave in-
frared, respectively). Values are then partitioned into discrete classes
based on apparent thresholds in the dataset as well as evaluation of pre-
and post-ﬁre imagery, plot data when available, and analyst experience.
Resulting classes represent a range of ﬁrst-order ﬁre eﬀects on vege-
tation biomass (Eidenshink et al., 2007). Because there is typically a
considerable amount of variation in dNBR values between diﬀerent
ﬁres (Miller and Thode, 2007), we did not utilize the same dNBR
threshold values for each ﬁre when developing our burn severity clas-
siﬁcations. Rather, we adjusted class thresholds by examining National
Agriculture Imagery Program (NAIP) and post-ﬁre Landsat images ac-
quired the year following the individual ﬁres (sensu Kolden et al.,
2015). For single ﬁres, we used the following classes: unburned/low
(U/L); low (L), moderate (M), and high (H). For reburned areas, we
used a 16-class scheme that was a factorial combination of four burn
severity classes identiﬁed for the initial ﬁre (i.e., ﬁrst entry), and four
burn severity classes for the re-entry ﬁre. For example, a U/L-U/L
classiﬁcation indicated areas that were classiﬁed as unburned/low in
both the ﬁrst and re-entry ﬁres. Our main purpose in utilizing burn
severity classiﬁcations for the ﬁres was to understand the role of burn
severity in aﬀecting changes in forest structure and fuels between
single-entry and re-entry areas, and to stratify ﬁeld sampling (see Field
sampling below).
2.3. Field sampling
In order to capture variability in forest conditions due to ﬁre be-
havior, ﬁeld sampling was stratiﬁed by burn severity class within each
wildﬁre. Using ArcGIS (version 10.2; Environmental Systems Research
Institute, Redlands, California), we selected a minimum sampling unit
size of 0.81 ha from digital burn severity maps. This size was to help
assure that sample plots would fall within the selected burn severity
Table 1
Resource objective wildﬁres on the Kaibab National Forest, Arizona, and average weather conditions on the day of ignition (Date). Shown are names of wildﬁres as well as corresponding
re-entry ﬁres. Bold text indicates ﬁres with areas not reburned that were sampled for comparison.*
Fire name
Date
Maximum temperature (°C)
Relative humidity (%)
Wind speed (km h−1)
Size (ha)
Re-entry ﬁre(s)
Re-entry size (ha)
Horse
26 July 2003
29
18
5
61
Hammer
61
Antelope
10 August 2003
30
19
6
99
Mudersbach
99
Camp 36
08 August 2004
29
17
10
1155
Hammer
995
Mudersbach
24 June 2005
29
52
6
3206
Hammer
91
North
26 June 2005
27
14
10
616
Hammer
616
West
08 June 2006
25
95
3
851
Scott
151
Twenty-two
06 May 2008
21
26
11
508
Hammer, Jar+
47, 424
Scott
07 October 2010
18
36
10
185
Hammer
29 July 2014
26
36
2
3590
Jar
01 July 2015
34
19
8
1765
* Three ﬁres (Camp 36, Twenty-Two and Scott) had areas that were not reburned but were not included in ﬁeld plot sampling (see text).
+ Jar Fire reburn did not overlap with Hammer Fire reburn within the Twenty-Two Fire.
D.W. Huﬀman et al.
Forest Ecology and Management 408 (2018) 16–24
18

classes when using hand-held global positioning systems to navigate to
plot locations in the ﬁeld. From 1 to 21 sample plot locations were
randomly located within each wildﬁre × burn severity class combina-
tion (6–40 plots per ﬁre), with sample plot number based on burn se-
verity class area. Thus in 2016 (May-August), 265 ﬁeld sample plots
were established across the 12 ﬁre areas (eight re-entry and four single
ﬁres), and within these plots we measured forest structure and ha-
zardous fuels characteristics. Sample plots were 0.04 ha in size (11.28-
m radius). For all trees ≥1.37 m in height in each plot, we identiﬁed
species and condition (live, standing dead snag, dead and down log, or
cut stump). For live tees, we measured diameter at breast height (dbh;
diameter at 1.37 m height), total tree height, and height to base of live
crown. We also measured dbh and height of standing dead snags.
Centered within these plots, we used smaller nested plots (100 m2) to
tally shrubs and tree regeneration (< 1.37 m height), by species. To
sample dead, woody surface fuels, we established one 15.2-m planar
transect on each plot and tallied fuels by moisture-lag class according to
methods described in Brown (1974).
2.4. Fire modeling
To evaluate eﬀects of single and re-entry ﬁres on potential ﬁre be-
havior, we used FlamMap (Finney, 2006; Stratton, 2006) to simulate
wildﬁre behavior on the study landscape. The Scott and Burgan Fire
Behavior Fuel Model (Scott and Burgan, 2005) layer was acquired
(LANDFIRE, 2010) and used as a starting point for the ﬁre behavior fuel
model layer required by FlamMap. Field plot data were used as re-
ference for editing the LANDFIRE layer to more accurately reﬂect actual
fuels conditions in 2016. Forest structure and fuels (canopy bulk den-
sity, canopy base height, canopy cover, tree height) means calculated
from ﬁeld sample plots (see Analysis) were used in as inputs into the
ArcGIS inverse distance weighted (IDW) interpolation function to
create the raster layers that were then used to parameterize the model.
The LANDIFRE fuel model layer was reclassiﬁed within burn severity
class polygons as needed based on ﬁeld plot fuels data and observations
as well as examination of aerial images (Reeves et al., 2006). Re-
classiﬁed polygons were then mosaicked over the existing 2010
LANDFIRE fuel model layer. Topographic layers (elevation, aspect,
slope) were derived from 1/3 arc-second Digital Elevation Model data
downloaded from the United States Geological Survey nationalmap.gov
website.
Daily June ﬁre weather data (temperature, relative humidity, wind,
fuel moisture) for the period 1990–2016 were downloaded for the
Tusayan AZ Remote Automated Weather Station (RAWS) and imported
into FireFamilyPlus (version 4.1; Bradshaw and McCormick, 2000).
June was chosen as it has historically been the month with the most
extreme ﬁre weather for this region (Fulé et al., 2001). Fire weather
values for average, 99th percentile and “extreme” weather conditions
were calculated (Table 2). Extreme weather values were deﬁned as
being the maximum or minumum recorded values for the time period.
Maximum wind speeds are often lower than reality because RAWS wind
speed values are averages from a single 10-min period for each day
(Stratton, 2006). To more closely reﬂect actual maximum wind speeds,
we used wind speed values presented by Crosby and Chandler (2004)
where several hundred wind observations were used to develop a table
that converts average wind speeds to probable highest momentary wind
gust speed. Gridded wind ﬁles were generated using the WindNinja
(Forthofer and Butler, 2013) option in FlamMap. Accuracy of ﬁre
spread simulations has been shown to improve using gridded wind data
(Forthofer et al., 2014). Foliar moisture content (FMC) percent of 100%
was used for the average weather scenario, whereas 85% FMC was used
for the 99th and extreme weather scenarios. The Scott and Reinhardt
(2001) crown ﬁre calculation method was selected for all scenarios.
2.5. Analysis
We used paired t-tests to compare (alpha = 0.05) weighted means
of tree density, basal area, canopy fuel load, canopy bulk density, ca-
nopy base height and ﬁne fuel load between single- and re-entry ﬁre
areas. Canopy bulk density and canopy fuel load were calculated using
allometric equations relating dbh to component biomass (i.e., foliage
and ﬁne branches) for individual tree species and followed methods
outlined by Roccaforte et al. (2015). We deﬁned ﬁne fuel load as mass
per unit area of dead woody surface fuels less than 7.6 cm in diameter.
Fuel loading was calculated following methods described in Brown
(1974). Means were estimated using averages for structure and fuels
variables, weighted by burn severity class proportions (i.e., amount of
ﬁre area within each burn severity class) within each unique single ﬁre
or re-entry area. Because we stratiﬁed ﬁeld sampling to estimate con-
ditions within each burn severity class, and land area within the ﬁres
was not evenly distributed among severity classes, weighted averages
were appropriate to estimate means for entire ﬁres. Weighted averages
of forest structure and fuels variables calculated for the eight wildﬁre
re-entry areas were paired with those from their respective single ﬁre
areas in tests. For example, weighted averages calculated from sample
plots in the Horse-Hammer re-entry ﬁre were paired with those from
the single ﬁre portion of the Hammer Fire (Table 1). We were also able
to add an additional pair as the Hammer Fire reburned an area of the
Mudersbach Fire, and both had single ﬁre areas that could be used as
contrasts to this re-entry event (Table 1). Thus nine, unique single ﬁre -
re-entry matched pairs were used in the analysis. Matched pair diﬀer-
ences were examined for normality using the Shapiro-Wilk test. When
diﬀerences were not normally distributed, we used the Wilcoxon
Signed-Rank, nonparametric test to analyze the set of single - re-entry
ﬁre pairs.
In addition to comparing single ﬁre and re-entry areas to one an-
other, we also examined means for forest structure and fuels conditions
with respect to published historical ranges of variation (HRV). These
ranges are often used to guide development of ecological restoration
prescriptions, and can be used as baselines for evaluating restoration
treatment eﬀectiveness (Moore et al., 1999). To examine conditions
within single and re-entry ﬁre areas with respect to HRV, we used
historical ranges for southwestern ponderosa pine tree density, basal
area, canopy fuel load, canopy bulk density, and canopy base height
compiled from published literature and presented in Huﬀman et al.
(2017). We also used paired t-tests and similar methods to compare
potential ﬁre behavior outputs from FlamMap between single- and re-
entry ﬁre areas. In these analyses, we used the nine unique ﬁre area
pairs described above and compared mean proportion of ﬁre areas
showing active crown ﬁre as well as mean ﬂame length, rate of spread,
ﬁre line intensity, and heat per unit area based on pixel values given in
Table 2
Weather and fuel moisture conditions used in three FlamMap ﬁre modeling scenarios:
average, 99th percentile, and “extreme”. Fire behavior under these conditions was
evaluated for single and re-entry resource objective ﬁre areas on the Kaibab National
Forest, Arizona.
Weather scenario
Variable
Average
99th percentile
Extreme
Maximum temperature (°C)
28.3
36.8
36.7
Minimum temperature (°C)
6.7
14.4
28.3
Relative humidity (%)
12
2
2
Average wind speed (km h−1)
25.7
48.3
64.4
1-h fuel moisture (%)
3
2
2
10-h fuel moisture (%)
5
2
2
100-h fuel moisture (%)
7
4
3
Live herbaceous fuel moisture (%)
76
32
30
Live woody fuel moisture (%)
66
60
60
Foliar moisture content (%)
100
85
85
D.W. Huﬀman et al.
Forest Ecology and Management 408 (2018) 16–24
19

model output tables.
To examine burn severity patterns within re-entry ﬁre areas, we
calculated proportional changes in burn severity class from the ﬁrst
resource objective ﬁre to subsequent re-entry ﬁre for all re-entry ﬁre
areas pooled. We also tested eﬀects of burn severity on tree density,
basal area, canopy fuel load, canopy bulk density, canopy base height,
and ﬁne fuel loading. For these tests, we compared mean eﬀect sizes (d)
(Nakagawa and Cuthill, 2007) between burn severity classes using ﬁeld
plot data from the nine unique single-ﬁre - re-entry ﬁre pairs described
above. Eﬀect size (d) was calculated as:
=
−
d
m
m
S
2
1
pooled
where m1 was the mean of a single ﬁre area within a given burn severity
class, m2 was the mean of a re-entry area within a burn severity class,
and Spooled was the pooled standard deviation. Because there was little
high severity ﬁre represented across the single ﬁre areas, we were
limited to using means for U/L, L, and M classes in analyses. Similarly,
re-entry ﬁre areas were overwhelmingly comprised of combinations of
U/L and L burn severity (e.g., U/L-U/L class); thus, we were limited to
means from these classes in eﬀect size analyses. Eﬀect size values from
each single ﬁre - re-entry ﬁre pair were used to calculate a mean eﬀect
size along with a 95% conﬁdence interval for each variable. When in-
tervals did not included zero, we concluded a signiﬁcant eﬀect of single
or re-entry ﬁres on a given variable. Non-zero, positive intervals in-
dicated smaller single ﬁre means whereas non-zero negative intervals
indicated smaller re-entry ﬁre means. Thus, signiﬁcant reductions of
tree density and hazardous fuels due to re-entry ﬁre would be shown by
non-zero negative intervals of d.
3. Results
3.1. Fire-level comparisons
Re-entry with resource objective wildﬁre on the study landscape
tended to reduce forest density and hazardous fuels compared with
single ﬁre areas; however, paired comparisons showed few statistically
signiﬁcant diﬀerences (Fig. 2). Mean tree density was 480.5 ha−1 and
440.2 ha−1 for single and re-entry ﬁres, respectively, and these were
not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from one another. Tree densities in single and
re-entry ﬁre areas were 3.5- and 3.2-fold greater, respectively, than the
upper bounds of HRV (Fig. 2a). Basal area was 18.5 m2 ha−1 in single
ﬁre areas and 19.2 m2 ha−1 in re-entry areas. Basal area means showed
no signiﬁcant diﬀerence, and were above the upper limit of HRV by
1.5–2.2 m2 ha−1 (Fig. 2b). Mean canopy fuel load was not signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent between single and re-entry areas and both were within HRV
(Fig. 2c). Canopy bulk density in single ﬁre areas was signiﬁcantly
(p < .001) greater in single ﬁre areas than in re-entry areas. In single
ﬁre areas, mean canopy bulk density was greater than the upper limit of
HRV by 26%, whereas mean canopy bulk density for re-entry areas was
within HRV (Fig. 2d). Canopy base height averaged 3.8 m in single ﬁre
areas and 4.8 m in re-entry areas but these means were not signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent and both were below HRV (Fig. 2e). Fine fuel load was sig-
niﬁcantly (p = .05) greater in single ﬁre areas compared with re-entry
areas. No HRV information for this aspect of ponderosa pine forest
structure was available for evaluation (Fig. 2f). Coarse wood loading
was not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent between single (4.0 Mg ha−1) and re-
entry (5.6 Mg ha−1) ﬁre areas.
Similar to forest structural conditions, we found few signiﬁcant
diﬀerences in simulated potential ﬁre behavior between single ﬁre and
re-entry areas (Table 3). In addition, trends in ﬁre behavior between
single ﬁre and re-entry areas as well as among ﬁre weather scenarios
were not consistent. For example, under extreme ﬁre weather, active
crown ﬁre behavior tended to occur on a larger percentage of ﬁre area
and average rate of spread appeared slightly greater in single ﬁre areas
compared with re-entry areas; however, ﬂame length, ﬁre line intensity,
and heat per unit area tended to be lower in single ﬁre than re-entry
areas (Table 3). Under 99th percentile weather, single ﬁre areas tended
to show more active ﬁre behavior than re-entry areas in general, al-
though average heat per unit area was signiﬁcantly lower in single ﬁre
areas compared with re-entry areas (Table 3). Under average ﬁre
weather, ﬂame length was signiﬁcantly lower in single ﬁre than re-
entry areas. Rate of spread was identical, but ﬁre line intensity tended
to be lower in single ﬁre areas compared with re-entry areas. Average
heat per unit area was signiﬁcantly lower in single ﬁre than re-entry
areas under simulated average weather conditions (Table 3).
3.2. Burn severity eﬀects
Both single and re-entry ﬁre areas were dominated by U/L and L
burn severity classes. For example, these classes combined made up
91.5% on average of the extents within single ﬁre areas. Classes M and
H severities made up 7% and 1.5% of single ﬁre areas, respectively.
Similarly, more than half (53%) of the total hectares in re-entry ﬁre
areas were classiﬁed as U/L burn severity after the ﬁrst resource ob-
jective ﬁres, prior to wildﬁre re-entry (Table 4). Further, areas classiﬁed
as L burn severity made up 43% of the total re-entry hectares prior to
second ﬁres. Thus, 96% of the total re-entry hectares were classiﬁed as
either U/L or L burn severity after the ﬁrst ﬁres and before re-entry.
Burn severity classes M and H represented 3% and < 1%, respectively,
of the total re-entry hectares after the ﬁrst ﬁres (Table 4). After second
ﬁre occurrence, the vast majority of re-entry ﬁre areas were classiﬁed as
either U/L or L burn severity (i.e., secondary burn severities); thus,
eﬀects of re-entry ﬁres were mainly limited to burn severity classes U/
L-U/L, (ﬁrst ﬁre severity class - re-entry ﬁre severity class; 764 ha) U/L-
L (514 ha), L-U/L (624 ha), and L-L (409 ha), which combined made up
93% of the total area where re-entry ﬁres occurred (Table 4).
Eﬀect size analysis showed that tree density was signiﬁcantly re-
duced by re-entry ﬁres in areas classiﬁed as U/L-L as compared with U/
L areas of single ﬁres (Fig. 3). No other signiﬁcant eﬀects of re-entry
ﬁres were found for reducing trees density, regardless of burn severity,
when compared with burn severity classes in single ﬁres. Moderate
burn severity areas in single ﬁres showed signiﬁcantly lower tree den-
sities than U/L-U/L, U/L-L, and L-U/L areas of re-entry ﬁres (Fig. 3a).
We found no eﬀects of re-entry ﬁre on reducing basal area regardless of
burn severity class comparison but basal area was signiﬁcantly lower in
moderate severity areas of single ﬁres compared with burn severity
classes prevalent in re-entry ﬁres (Fig. 3b). Eﬀects analysis of canopy
fuel loading showed a similar pattern to that of tree density. Re-entry
ﬁres areas classiﬁed as U/L-U/L, U/L-L, and L/U/L were eﬀective at
reducing canopy bulk density compared with single ﬁre areas classiﬁed
as U/L (Fig. 3d). Additionally, signiﬁcantly lower canopy bulk densities
were found in re-entry ﬁre areas classiﬁed as L-U/L compared with
those in single ﬁre areas classiﬁed as L. In single ﬁres, moderate burn
severity areas showed signiﬁcantly lower canopy bulk densities than re-
entry areas classiﬁed as U/L-U/L and L-/UL (Fig. 3d). Canopy base
height did not diﬀer between burn severity classes (Fig. 3e). Lastly, ﬁne
fuel loads in re-entry ﬁre areas classiﬁed as U/L-U/L were signiﬁcantly
lower than those of single ﬁre areas classiﬁed as U/L.
4. Discussion
4.1. Resource objective ﬁre eﬀectiveness
The resource objective ﬁres we studied burned under relatively mild
ﬁre weather conditions and had very low burn severities. As such,
they did not produce dramatic changes to forest structure and fuels. We
found both single ﬁre and re-entry areas to be generally outside of
historical ranges of variability; however, forest structure and hazardous
fuels attributes in re-entry areas tended to be closer to HRV compared
with single ﬁre areas (Fig. 2). Tree densities in particular remained
notably higher than HRV. Huﬀman et al. (2017) concluded that single-
D.W. Huﬀman et al.
Forest Ecology and Management 408 (2018) 16–24
20

entry resource objective wildﬁres in ponderosa pine forests of the Co-
conino and Kaibab National Forests in Arizona were 42% eﬀective
overall for meeting HRV-based targets. In their study, tree density was
within HRV only in areas classiﬁed (dNBR-based) as moderate burn
severity, but remained above the historical range in unburned/low and
low burn severity areas. Canopy fuel load, however was within HRV in
unburned/low- and low-severity areas, and canopy bulk density and
crown base height were within historical ranges in low-severity areas
(Huﬀman et al., 2017). Few other studies have assessed resource ob-
jective ﬁres for meeting HRV targets in these forests. General reductions
in tree density, basal area, and canopy fuels associated with resource
objective ﬁres in ponderosa pine and dry mixed conifer forests of the
Southwest have been described in other studies. For example, Hunter
et al. (2011) found resource objective ﬁres on the Gila National Forest
Fig. 2. Area-weighted means and standard errors for
forest structure and hazardous fuels variables in areas
experiencing single entry and re-entry (twice burned)
resource objective wildﬁres on the study landscape on
Kaibab National Forest, Arizona. Asterisks next to vari-
able
label
indicate
signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent
(p < .05)
means. Gray bands within chart areas indicate historical
ranges of variability for southwestern ponderosa pine
forests as presented in Huﬀman et al. (2017).
Table 3
Means (standard errors) for potential ﬁre behavior outputs under extreme, 99th per-
centile, and average weather conditions (see text for details) in single ﬁre and re-entry ﬁre
areas of resource objective wildﬁres on the Kaibab National Forest, Arizona. Asterisks
indicate statistically diﬀerent means (p < .05) for given variable.
Fire behavior
Single
Re-entry
Extreme weather
Active crown ﬁre (% of ﬁre area)
22.0 (0.12)
18.3 (0.04)
Flame length (m)
5.9 (2.6)
6.5 (1.1)
Rate of spread (m min−1)
52.5 (24.2)
52.2 (7.1)
Fire line intensity (kW m−1)
5728.4 (2707.5)
6941.3 (1360.0)
Heat per unit area (kJ m−2)
4403.3 (771.7)
5622.8 (690.7)*
99th percentile weather
Active crown ﬁre (% of ﬁre area)
4.3 (2.4)
1.6 (0.5)
Flame length (m)
2.6 (1.1)
2.3 (0.3)
Rate of spread (m min−1)
23.9 (11.1)
21.1 (2.9)
Fire line intensity (kW m−1)
1928.4 (910.6)
1860.3 (324.6)
Heat per unit area (kJ m−2)
3703.6 (456.2)
4757.9 (624.7)*
Average weather
Active crown ﬁre (% of ﬁre area)
< 0.1 (< 0.1)
0
Flame length (m)
0.7 (0.1)
0.8 (0.1)*
Rate of spread (m min−1)
3.4 (1.2)
3.4 (0.3)
Fire line intensity (kW m−1)
176.4 (64.4)
253.6 (56.7)
Heat per unit area (kJ m−2)
2719.2 (172.5)
3846.3 (547.4)*
Table 4
Matrix showing burn severity classes from ﬁrst entry with resource objective ﬁre to
subsequent re-entry ﬁres. Values are proportions of landscape area (hectares in margins)
from ﬁrst ﬁre burn severity classiﬁcation that remained in, or changed to, other severity
classes after re-entry by a second resource objective wildﬁres. For example, 0.58 (58%) of
1318 hectares classiﬁed as U/L after a ﬁrst ﬁre were subsequently classiﬁed as U/L after
ﬁre re-entry.
Burn severity class
after ﬁrst ﬁre
Burn severity class after second (re-entry) ﬁre
U/L
L
M
H
(Hectares)*
U/L
0.58
0.39
0.03
0.00
(1,318)
L
0.58
0.38
0.03
0.01
(1,076)
M
0.71
0.24
0.04
0.01
(78)
H
0.91
0.07
0.02
0.00
(5)
(Hectares)
(1,443)
(946)
(72)
(16)
(2,477)
* Areas (seven hectares total) not processed, or shown as increased greenness in dNBR,
not included in calculations.
D.W. Huﬀman et al.
Forest Ecology and Management 408 (2018) 16–24
21

of New Mexico signiﬁcantly reduced tree densities and crown bulk
densities, and increased canopy base heights in both low and moderate-
severity areas. Mean basal area, however, in low-severity areas was
similar to that of unburned sites (Hunter et al., 2011). On the North Rim
of Grand Canyon National Park, Fulé and Laughlin (2007) found that a
single-entry resource objective wildﬁre moved conditions within a dry
mixed conifer forest closer to historical reference conditions by redu-
cing tree density by 54% overall, and reducing basal area by 23%. The
majority of tree mortality was in smaller size classes of ﬁre-intolerant
species (e.g., white ﬁr (Abies concolor), Douglas-ﬁr (Pseudotsuga men-
ziesii), and aspen (Populus tremuloides)) (Fulé and Laughlin, 2007).
Conversely, at similar sites in Grand Canyon National Park, Higgins
et al. (2015) reported no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in white ﬁr seedling
densities between unburned areas and a single, low-severity, resource
objective wildﬁre. These authors concluded that to meet restoration
and hazardous fuels goals re-entry as well as increasing burn severity of
resource objective wildﬁres may be needed (Higgins et al., 2015).
4.2. Additive beneﬁts of ﬁre re-entry
Although we observed trends toward decreasing stand density and
hazardous fuels conditions with re-entry of resource objective wildﬁre,
we found few signiﬁcant diﬀerences between single and re-entry ﬁre
areas on the study landscape. When examined at the whole-ﬁre level,
only canopy bulk density and ﬁne fuel loading showed signiﬁcant ef-
fects of re-entry ﬁre (Fig. 2). Further, we found few signiﬁcant diﬀer-
ences in potential ﬁre behavior between single and re-entry ﬁre areas.
Re-entry areas for all simulated weather scenarios showed signiﬁcantly
greater heat per unit area than single ﬁre areas, but no other outputs
showed diﬀerences (Table 3). Diﬀerences in heat per unit area were
likely driven by slightly lower coarse wood loading in single ﬁres
compared with re-entry ﬁre areas. Similarly, Holden et al. (2007) re-
ported no signiﬁcant diﬀerences in tree density or basal area between
ponderosa pine forests that burned once versus those that had burned
twice, or by more recent (i.e., post-1950) resource objective ﬁres in the
Gila Wilderness, Gila National Forest, in New Mexico, and in Saguaro
Wilderness Area in Saguaro National Park in Arizona. Tree densities in
single ﬁres at both sites were signiﬁcantly lower than unburned areas
(Holden et al., 2007). Hunter et al. (2011), showed that canopy bulk
densities in areas that had experienced two and three ﬁre entries on the
Gila National Forest were similar to single ﬁre areas where low burn
severity was recorded. Further, areas classiﬁed as moderate burn se-
verity showed signiﬁcantly lower tree density and basal area than both
low-severity, single ﬁre areas and re-entry areas (Hunter et al., 2011).
In a second-entry ﬁre in a ponderosa pine forest on the North Rim of
Grand Canyon Park, Higgins et al. (2015) found signiﬁcantly lower tree
density and basal area, primarily driven by decreases in ﬁre-intolerant
white ﬁr, compared with a ﬁrst-entry ﬁre as well as an unburned site,
which in turn were not statistically diﬀerent. Larson et al. (2013) ob-
served that initial reintroduction of ﬁre into a ﬁre excluded ponderosa
pine forest of the Bob Marshall Wilderness Area in Montana reduced
tree densities and consumed surface fuels, but subsequent ﬁre resulted
in fewer structural changes outside of reducing tree regeneration that
had established in the interim ﬁre period. The results of these studies
Fig. 3. Eﬀect sizes for comparisons of forest structure and hazardous
fuels variables between burn severity classes in single (chart legend)
and re-entry (x-axis) resource objective wildﬁres on the Kaibab
National Forest, Arizona. Re-entry burn severity classes show ﬁrst ﬁre
burn severity class followed by secondary (re-entry ﬁre) burn severity
class (see text for details). Bars show eﬀect sizes and 95% conﬁdence
intervals (CI). Positive eﬀect sizes indicate smaller single ﬁre mean
(i.e., greater fuels reduction in single ﬁre), whereas negative eﬀect
sizes indicate smaller re-entry ﬁre mean. Asterisks indicate signiﬁcant
eﬀects (CI does not include zero) for given comparisons.
D.W. Huﬀman et al.
Forest Ecology and Management 408 (2018) 16–24
22

suggest that single moderate-severity resource objective wildﬁres are
eﬀective for reducing stand densities and hazardous fuels in degraded
ponderosa pine forests, but commonly few immediate additive eﬀects
may be seen from repeated low-severity ﬁres. By controlling tree re-
generation, re-entry ﬁres may serve a maintenance function in long-
term restoration and fuels reduction projects. In addition, repeated ﬁres
may reduce abundance of shade-tolerant and ﬁre-intolerant species in
moister forests where these species have tended to increase as a result
of ﬁre exclusion (Strahan et al., 2016). In our study, time between
wildﬁre re-entry ranged 2–11 years across the landscape, and this is
within the historical range of frequencies described for natural ﬁre re-
gimes in these forests (Reynolds et al., 2013). However, assuming that
subsequent ﬁres, managed similarly to those observed in our study,
each will reduce tree density by about 40 trees ha−1 on average
(Fig. 2), our study landscape will require more than seven additional
ﬁre entries for mean tree density to be restored to within the upper
bounds of HRV. This, in turn, may require several decades to achieve
(Table 1).
4.3. Burn severity eﬀects
Re-entry ﬁre areas on our study landscape were primarily comprised
of unburned-low (U/L) and low (L) burn severity classes after secondary
ﬁres (96%; U/L and L combined) (Table 4). Various studies have de-
monstrated inﬂuences of prior wildﬁre on subsequent ﬁre behavior and
burn severity (Parks et al., 2013; Lydersen et al., 2014; Coop et al.,
2016). For example, Parks et al. (2013) showed that burn severity
(dNBR-based) means in re-entry ﬁres within the Gila-Aldo Leopold
Wilderness (New Mexico) and Frank Church-River of No Return Wild-
erness (Idaho) were substantially lower than those of initial ﬁres, with
this eﬀect still evident after 22 years. These results suggest that re-
ductions in stand density and hazardous fuels produced by single ﬁres
temper burn severity in subsequent ﬁres for periods of time that cor-
respond
to
typical
public
land
management
planning
horizons
(∼10–20 years). Similarly, Collins et al. (2009) found that repeated
ﬁres burning over 31 years in upper elevation mixed conifer forests of
the Sierra Nevada became “self-limiting” in terms of fuel consumption,
spatial extent, and ﬁre eﬀects (i.e., burn severity). Thus, in more remote
areas, managers may allow ﬁres to burn with higher severity in order to
substantially alter structure, fuels and subsequent ﬁre behavior. We did
not speciﬁcally analyze eﬀects of ﬁrst-entry ﬁre on burn severity of re-
entry ﬁre in our study. However, we observed that 97% of all re-entry
hectares were classiﬁed as U/L or L severity (combined) after the ﬁrst
ﬁres. Thus, ﬁrst-entry ﬁres on our study landscape appeared to result in
only minor reductions in fuels and structure (Fig. 2), and low burn
severity outcomes in subsequent re-entry ﬁres likely reﬂected the mild
weather conditions under which the wildﬁres were allowed to burn. For
example, on the day of ignition (Table 1) maximum temperatures for
half the ﬁres were below the 27-year (1990–2016) June average sce-
nario that we used in FlamMap simulations (Table 2). In all the ﬁres,
relative humidities were higher and wind speeds were substantially
lower on the day of ignition than the average FlamMap scenario. Si-
milar results were report by Huﬀman et al. (2017), who described
temperatures, wind speeds, and relative humidities as generally low on
the day of ignition for single-entry resource objective wildﬁres in Ar-
izona, and correspondingly U/L and L severity classes made up 85% of
ﬁre area on average.
Most (58%) of the areas on our study site classiﬁed as U/L after the
ﬁrst resource objective ﬁres were again classiﬁed as U/L after sub-
sequent re-entry, while nearly all of the remainder (39%) of U/L hec-
tares was secondarily classiﬁed as L severity after ﬁre re-entry
(Table 4). Further, most (58%) areas classiﬁed as L after initial ﬁres
were classiﬁed as U/L after re-entry. Only 16% of the total re-entry ﬁre
hectares was classiﬁed as L-L (low severity after one ﬁre and low again
after the second ﬁre) (Table 4). We interpret these classiﬁcations, and
the thus the corresponding re-entry ﬁre landscape, in terms of
treatment implementation as follows: 1) U/L-U/L: “missed” by both the
ﬁrst as well as the re-entry ﬁres. Although within ﬁre perimeters, stand
densities in these areas remained essentially untreated (764 ha); 2) U/L-
L: “cleanup” areas; stands untreated after the ﬁrst resource objective
ﬁre, and subsequently treated by low-severity ﬁre in re-entry (514 ha);
3) L-U/L: treated by low-severity ﬁre in initial ﬁres; no detectable ef-
fects of re-entry ﬁre (624 ha); and 4) L-L: stands treated by low-severity
ﬁre after one entry, then additionally treated by low-severity ﬁre in re-
entry; areas where “additive eﬀects” may be expected (409 ha). These
additive eﬀects parallel the incremental approach to restoration sug-
gested by Allen et al. (2002). However, we found relatively few of these
areas (i.e., L-L burn severity class) on the ﬁre re-entry landscape and
variability in eﬀects was relatively high. Eﬀect size analysis indicated
that reductions in tree density and canopy fuels observed at the whole-
ﬁre level were consistently driven by areas classiﬁed as U/L (untreated)
in initial ﬁres then were secondary classiﬁed as L burn severity after re-
entry ﬁre (i.e., U/L-L burn severity). Thus, the trends toward lower tree
density and hazardous fuel loads we observed on our study landscape
appeared to be largely produced through “cleanup” eﬀects, whereby
areas with little detectable eﬀects after the ﬁrst ﬁre subsequently ex-
perienced low severity burning in a re-entry ﬁre.
4.4. Conclusions and implications
Analysis of nine unique single - re-entry ﬁre pairs on the 12,035-ha
landscape in norther Arizona showed that resource objective wildﬁre
re-entries may reduce stand densities and hazardous fuels, and may
help managers meet restoration goals by moving forests closer to his-
torical ranges of variability. However, we found few statistically sig-
niﬁcant diﬀerences between single and re-entry areas, and reaching
restoration goals at the current pace will likely require several more
decades and ﬁre entries. Minor diﬀerences in structure and fuels be-
tween single and re-entry ﬁre areas appeared to be primarily due to
eﬀects of low-severity re-entry ﬁre, burning in areas classiﬁed as U/L
severity after a ﬁrst resource objective ﬁre. Thus, these diﬀerences can
be interpreted as secondary “cleanup” eﬀects whereby wildﬁre “treat-
ment” was implemented in areas left “untreated” by preceding ﬁres.
Evidence of incremental restoration, whereby areas classiﬁed as L burn
severity after a ﬁrst ﬁre were secondarily treated by low-severity re-
entry ﬁre, was more diﬃcult to discern. Areas classiﬁed as M burn se-
verity after a single ﬁre consistently showed lower tree density, basal
area, canopy fuel loading, and canopy bulk density than areas treated
by repeated low-severity ﬁre (U/L-U/L, U/L-L, L-U/L, or L-L burn se-
verity classes). These results suggest that continuing to allow resource
objective wildﬁres to burn only under mild weather conditions may be
less eﬀective for meeting restoration targets than allowing ﬁres to burn
under more active ﬁre weather conditions (e.g., higher wind speeds and
temperatures, and lower relative humidities). Such conditions are likely
to produce greater reductions in tree density and canopy fuels, and thus
achieve a broader suite of restoration objectives. Although ﬁres of low
severity may produce conditions (e.g., reduced surface fuels) that make
achieving additional eﬀects to stand structure in subsequent ﬁres
challenging, such conditions are also likely to allow managers to
manage ﬁres for resource objectives under a wider range of weather
conditions. Allowing for more active ﬁres will increase risk of ﬁre es-
cape as well as the possibility of resource damage in high-severity burn
areas. These risks are typically not acceptable near human communities
or within ecologically sensitive areas. In many dry forests of the western
United States, the pace of ecological restoration implementation should
be increased to reduce potential for widespread crown ﬁre and abrupt
type shifts predicted with climate warming (Savage and Mast, 2005).
Reintroduction of ﬁre is a central aim in restoration of these ecosys-
tems, but managers will face challenges to balance urgency with ef-
fectiveness if relying on resource objective wildﬁres to accomplish re-
storation goals.
D.W. Huﬀman et al.
Forest Ecology and Management 408 (2018) 16–24
23

Acknowledgements
We thank staﬀand students of the Ecological Restoration Institute at
Northern Arizona University for ﬁeld support. In particular, we thank S.
Curran, J. Kursky, D. Normandin, and J.P Roccaforte for assistance in
data collection, management, and logistical help. We also thank staﬀof
the Tusayan Ranger District, especially Q. Johnson and J. Miller, for ﬁre
maps and treatment information. We acknowledge the helpful com-
ments and suggestions from three anonymous reviewers on earlier
manuscript drafts. This work was supported by a grant provided by the
US Department of Agriculture Forest Service. Northern Arizona
University is an equal opportunity provider.
References
Agee, J.K., Skinner, C.N., 2005. Basic principles of forest fuel reduction treatments. For.
Ecol. Manage. 211, 83–96.
Allen, C.D., Savage, M., Faulk, D.A., Suckling, K.F., Swetnam, T.W., Schulke, T., Stacey,
P.B., Morgan, P., Hoﬀman, M., Klingel, J.T., 2002. Ecological restoration of south-
western ponderosa pine ecosystems: A broad perspective. Ecol. Appl. 12, 1418–1433.
Bradshaw, L., McCormick, E., 2000. FireFamily Plus user's guide, Version 2.0. USDA For.
Serv. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-67-WWW.
J.K. Brown, J.K., 1974. Handbook for inventorying downed woody material. USDA For.
Serv. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-16.
Collins, B.M., Miller, J.D., Thode, A.E., Kelly, M., van Wagtendonk, J., Stephens, S.L.,
2009. Interactions among wildland ﬁres in a long-established Sierra Nevada natural
ﬁre area. Ecosystems 12, 114–128.
Coop, J.D., Parks, S.A., McClernan, S.R., Holsinger, L.M., 2016. Inﬂuences of prior
wildﬁres on vegetation response to subsequent ﬁre in a reburned Southwestern
landscape. Ecol. Appl. 26, 346–354.
Covington, W.W., Fulé, P.Z., Moore, M.M., Hart, S.C., Kolb, T.E., Mast, J.N., Sackett, S.S.,
Wagner, M.R., 1997. Restoring ecosystem health in ponderosa pine forests of the
Southwest. J. Forest. 95, 23–29.
Crosby, J.S., Chandler, C.C., 2004. Fire management notes. Get the most from your
windspeed observations. Vol. 64, No. 1, Winter 2004. Reprinted from: Fire Control
News 27, 12-13, 1966. ()
Eidenshink, J., Schwind, B., Brewer, K., Zhu, Z., Quayle, B., Howard, S., 2007. A project
for monitoring trends in burn severity. Fire Ecol. 3, 3–21.
Finney, M.A., 2006. An overview of FlamMap ﬁre modeling capabilities. In: Andrews, P.
L., Butler, B.W. (comps), Fuels Management - How to Measure Success, USDA For.
Serv. Proc. RMRS-P-41, pp. 213–220.
Forthofer, J., Butler, B., 2013. WindNinja. USDA For. Serv. Joint Fire Science Program.
Forthofer, J., Butler, B.W., McHugh, C.W., Finney, M.A., Bradshaw, L.S., Stratton, R.D.,
Shannon, K.S., Wagenbrenner, N.S., 2014. A comparison of three approaches for si-
mulating ﬁne-scale surface winds in support of wildland ﬁre management. Part II. An
exploratory study of the eﬀect of simulated winds on ﬁre growth simulations. Int. J.
Wildland Fire 23, 982–994.
Fulé, P.Z., McHugh, C., Heinlein, T.A., Covington, W.W., 2001. Potential ﬁre behavior is
reduced following forest restoration treatments. In: Vance, R.K., Covington, W.W.,
Edminster, C.B. (comps), Ponderosa Pine Ecosystems Restoration and Conservation:
Steps toward Stewardship, USDA For. Serv. Proceedings RMRSP-22, pp. 28–35.
Fulé, P.Z., Laughlin, D.C., 2007. Wildland ﬁre eﬀects on forest structure over an altitu-
dinal gradient, Grand Canyon National Park. USA. J. Appl. Ecol. 44, 136–146.
Higgins, A.M., Waring, K.M., Thode, A.E., 2015. The eﬀects of burn entry and burn se-
verity on ponderosa pine and mixed conifer forests in Grand Canyon National Park.
Int. J. Wildland Fire 24, 495–506.
Holden, Z.A., Morgan, P., Rollins, M.G., Kavanagh, K., 2007. Eﬀects of multiple wildland
ﬁres on ponderosa pine stand structure in two southwestern Wilderness areas, USA.
Fire Ecol. 3, 18–33.
Huﬀman, D.W., Sánchez Meador, A.J., Stoddard, M.T., Crouse, J.E., Roccaforte, J.P.,
2017. Eﬃcacy of resource objective wildﬁres for restoration of ponderosa pine (Pinus
ponderosa) forests in norhern Arizona. For. Ecol. Manage. 389, 395–403.
Hunter, M.E., Iniguez, J.M., Lentile, L.B., 2011. Short- and long-term eﬀects on fuels,
forest structure, and wildﬁre potential from prescribed ﬁre and resource beneﬁt ﬁre
in southwestern forests, USA. Fire Ecol. 7, 108–121.
Kolden, C.A., Smith, A.M.S., Abatzoglou, J.T., 2015. Limitations and utilisation of
Monitoring Trends in Burn Severity products for assessing wildﬁre severity in the
USA. Int. J. Wildland Fire 24, 1023–1028.
LANDFIRE, 2010. Existing Vegetation Type Layer, LANDFIRE 1.2.0, U.S. Department of
the Interior, Geological Survey. Accessed 13 February 2017 at http://landﬁre.cr.usgs.
gov/viewer/.
Landres, P.B., Morgan, P., Swanson, F.J., 1999. Overview of the use of natural variability
concepts in managing ecological systems. Ecol. Appl. 9, 1179–1188.
Larson, A.J., Belote, R.T., Cansler, C.A., Parks, S.A., Dietz, M.S., 2013. Latent resiliece in
ponderosa pine forest: eﬀects of resumed frequent ﬁre. Ecol. Appl. 23, 1243–1249.
Lydersen, J.M., North, M.P., Collins, B.M., 2014. Severity of an uncharacteristically large
wildﬁre, the Rim Fire in forests with relatively restored frequent ﬁre regimes. For.
Ecol. Manage. 328, 326–334.
Meyer, M.D., 2015. Forest ﬁre severity patterns of resorce objective wildﬁres in the
southern Sierra Nevada. J. Forest. 113, 49–56.
Miller, J.D., Thode, A.E., 2007. Quantifying burn severity in a heterogeneous lanscape
with a relative version of the delta Normalized Burn Ratio (dNBR). Remote Sens.
Environ. 109, 66–80.
Moore, M.M., Covington, W.W., Fulé, P.Z., 1999. Reference condition and ecological
restoration: a southwestern ponderosa pine perspective. Ecol. Appl. 9, 1266–1277.
Nakagawa, S., Cuthill, I.C., 2007. Eﬀect size, conﬁdence interval and statistical sig-
niﬁcance: a practical guide for biologists. Biol. Rev. 82, 591–605.
Parks, S.A., Miller, C., Nelson, C.R., Holden, Z.A., 2013. Previous ﬁres moderate burn
severity of subsequent wildland ﬁres in two large western US wilderness areas.
Ecosystems 17, 29–42.
Reeves, M.C., Kost, J.R., Ryan, K.C., 2006. Fuels products of the LANDFIRE Project. In:
Andrews, P.L., Butler, B.W. (comps), Fuels Management – How to Measure Success,
USDA For. Serv. Proc. RMRS-P-41, pp. 239–252.
Reynolds, R.T., Sánchez Meador, A.J., Youtz, J.A., Nicolet, T., Matonis, M.S., Jackson, P.,
DeLorenzo, D.G. and Graves, A.D., 2013. Restoring composition and structure in
southwestern frequent-ﬁre forests: a science-based framework for improving eco-
system resiliency. USDA For. Serv. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-310.
Roccaforte, J.P., Fulé, P.Z., Covington, W.W., 2010. Monitoring landscape-scale pon-
derosa pine restoration treatment implementation and eﬀectiveness. Restor. Ecol. 18,
820–833.
Roccaforte, J.P., Huﬀman, D.W., Fulé, P.Z., Covington, W.W., Chancellor, W.W.,
Stoddard, M.T., Crouse, J.E., 2015. Forest structure and fuels dynamics following
ponderosa pine restoration treatments, White Mountains, Arizona, USA. For. Ecol.
Manage. 337, 174–185.
Savage, M., Mast, J.N., 2005. How resilient are southwestern ponderosa pine forests after
crown ﬁres? Can. J. For. Res. 35, 967–977.
Scott, J.H., Burgan, R.E., 2005. Standard ﬁre behavior fuel models: a comprehensive set
for use with Rothermel’s surface ﬁre spread model. USDA For. Serv. Gen. Tech. Rep.
RMRS-GTR-153.
Scott, J.H, Reinhardt, E.D., 2001. Assessing crown ﬁre potential by linking models of
surface and crown ﬁre behavior. USDA For. Serv. Res. Paper RMRS-RP-29.
Strahan, R.T., Sánchez Meador, A.J., Huﬀman, D.W., Laughlin, D.C., 2016. Shifts in
community-level traits and functional diversity in a mixed conifer forest: a legacy of
land-use change. J. Appl. Ecol. 53, 1755–1765.
Stratton, R.D., 2006. Guidance on spatial wildland ﬁre analysis: models, tools, and
techniques. USDA For. Serv. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-183.
D.W. Huﬀman et al.
Forest Ecology and Management 408 (2018) 16–24
24
