The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Spatial Patterns of Ponderosa Pine Regeneration  
in High-Severity Burn Patches 
 
By Suzanne Owen, PhD student, School of Forestry, Northern Arizona University; Chemist Intern, Rocky  
Mountain Research Station 
Introduction 
Over the past three decades, wildfires in southwestern 
U.S. ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) forests have in-
creased in size and severity, leaving large, contiguous 
patches of tree mortality. Ponderosa pines evolved un-
der fire regimes dominated by low- to moderate-
severity wildfires. They are poorly adapted to regener-
ate in large patches of high-severity fire because they 
are not a sprouting species and do not have serotinous 
cones or long-lived soil seedbanks. Consequently, the 
lack of seed-producing trees in high-severity burn 
patches may prevent or significantly delay ponderosa 
pine regeneration. Previous studies have documented 
low ponderosa pine regeneration densities in large high-
severity burn patches, but less is known about the spa-
tial patterns of ponderosa pine regeneration and interac-
tions with sprouting species near residual live forest 
edges or the interiors of high-severity burn patches. 
Methods 
We established 10-acre plots in high-severity burn 
patches in two Arizona wildfires, the 2000 Pumpkin and 
2002 Rodeo-Chediski fires, to determine if: 1) distance 
from forest edge influences the spatial patterns and den-
sity of regenerating trees, 2) interactions with re-
sprouting trees affect the spatial patterns of ponderosa 
pine regeneration, and 3) distance from forest edge and 
species competition affect regenerating ponderosa pine 
height. Plots were located in high-severity burn patches 
(defined as 100 percent tree mortality). Three “edge 
plots” were established adjacent to residual live forest 
edges, and three “interior plots” were established great-
er than 650 feet from any residual live trees on each 
wildfire. We quantified the spatial location, species and 
height of all regenerating trees within each 10-acre plot and determined nearest-neighbor distances for all 
regenerating trees and distances from nearest potential seed-source trees. 
Figure 1. (A) Patterns of ponderosa pine regeneration 
(green circles) in an edge and interior plot from both wildfires 
and (B) regenerating ponderosa pine in a high-severity burn 
patch, 13 years after the 2000 Pumpkin Fire. 
December 2017 

 
Results 
 Ponderosa pines were re-establishing in all of our study plots, however regeneration densities 
were lower farther from forest edges. 
 Ponderosa pines seedlings were found in areas more than 980 feet from potential parent trees on 
all interior study plots. 
 Regenerating ponderosa pines displayed patterns of small-scale spatial aggregation in all plots, 
except one edge and one interior plot on the Pumpkin Fire, which displayed random distribu-
tions. 
 Dense re-sprouting trees dominated tree regeneration on the Rodeo-Chediski Fire, but did not 
influence the spatial location or height of regenerating ponderosa pine. 
 Regenerating ponderosa pine height was positively correlated with neighboring ponderosa pine 
densities and height. 
 
Implications 
 Tree regeneration densities and species composition in high-severity burn patches are highly 
variable in different geographic locations. 
 Regeneration patterns suggest both short- and long-distance dispersal may play important roles 
in ponderosa pine regeneration in high-severity burn patches. 
 Ponderosa pine regeneration could be more strongly influenced by intraspecific facilitation than 
interspecific competition from dense sprouting species. 
 Future forest spatial patterns and composition are still unclear, but at this stage of development, 
these heterogeneous patches, characterized by drought-tolerant sprouting species or low pine 
densities, could be more resilient to climate change and severe wildfires than the overly dense 
ponderosa pine forests that were present before the wildfires. 
 Managers may want to use a “wait and see” approach before replanting in some areas to moni-
tor natural regeneration over time. 
 
Further Reading 
Chambers, M.E., P.J. Fornwalt, S.L. Malone, and M.A. Battaglia. 2016. Patterns of conifer regeneration 
following high-severity wildfire in ponderosa pine-dominated forests of the Colorado Front 
Range. Forest Ecology and Management, 378: 57–67.  
Haire, S.L., and K. McGarigal. 2010. Effects of landscape patterns of fire severity on regenerating pon-
derosa pine forests (Pinus ponderosa) in New Mexico and Arizona, USA. Landscape Ecology 25: 
1055–1069.  
Rother, M.T., and T.T. Veblen. 2016. Limited conifer regeneration following wildfires in dry ponderosa 
pine forests of the Colorado Front Range. Ecosphere, 7: 12.  
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
Owen, S.M., C.H. Sieg, A.J. Sánchez Meador, P.Z. Fulé, J.M. Iniguez, L.S. Baggett, P.J. Fornwalt, and 
M.A. Battaglia. 2017. Spatial patterns of ponderosa pine regeneration in high-severity burn patch-
es. Forest Ecology and Management, 405: 134-149. https://www.fs.usda.gov/treesearch/
pubs/55012 
 
 
 
Contact: Suzanne Owen, smowen@fs.fed.us  
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station,  
the National Fire Plan, and Achievement Rewards for College Scientists (ARCS) Foundation.  
