The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
 
Forest Thinning Treatment Effects on Fire Behavior 
 
 
 
Historic fire regimes in southwestern ponderosa pine forests included frequent low-severity fires. 
Typically, these fires burned understory vegetation, including small tree saplings and seedlings, 
downed needles, and woody debris, which maintained relatively light fuel loads on the landscape. 
As a result, the forest was open and park-like with large, old trees and diverse grasses and flow-
ers. Today, these same forests are much denser from more than a century of fire suppression. A 
lack of fire caused an accumulation of fuels and greatly increased the occurrence of high-severity 
wildfires that endanger human lives and communities and degrade ecological health.  
 
One of the goals of forest restoration in southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems is to reduce the 
risk of unnaturally severe wildfires. Decades of ecological research shows that forest restoration 
treatments work to decrease fire severity by reducing overall fuel loads. How fire behaves on the 
landscape can be unpredictable, but people can, to an extent, control the fuels that fires need to 
spread. Forest treatments typically include the mechanical removal of trees, known as tree thin-
ning, and/or prescribed fire. 
 
Thinned ponderosa pine forests exhibit less severe fire behavior. Numerous observations of 
actual wildland fires, as well as computer modeling studies, have shown that fires burn less in-
tensely in ponderosa pine forests with a lower density of trees. Breaking up contiguous fuels in 
tree canopies is especially important in reducing fire intensity. Fuels can be both horizontally and 
vertically contiguous, and it is important to break them up in both directions to prevent the spread 
of crown fires. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Minimal Thinning. Thinning around large trees 
may spare them from fire, yet flames can still 
spread fairly readily into most tree crowns. 
Full Restoration. Fire generally remains on the 
ground; it would take a very strong wind to carry 
it through these more dispersed tree crowns. 
Burn Only. An unthinned forest burns at a high 
level of intensity during a prescribed fire. Vertical 
“fuel ladders” readily allow flames to climb from 
the ground into tree crowns, while closely ranked 
trees allow fire to spread from crown to crown 
without much wind. 

 
Thinning treatments incorporate fire in the 
long term. Treatments that combine thin-
ning with prescribed fire and that focus atten-
tion on a wide range of post-treatment condi-
tions, including herbaceous vegetation, wild-
life habitat, watershed benefits, and recreation, 
are the most effective at reducing fire danger 
and improving forest health in the long term. 
Fire is crucial in cycling nutrients and in 
maintaining forest structure. Without fire, 
thinned forests will quickly become dense 
again. Future fires, whether prescribed or 
lightning-ignited, should be part of the restora-
tion planning process. Though initial fires af-
ter thinning are often hot and/or smoky, due to 
the large quantities of needles and woody fuel 
on the ground, future fires should burn mainly 
understory vegetation and tree saplings, pro-
ducing less heat and less smoke. 
 
Treatments work. The ERI has collected 
data during three major wildfires—the 2002 
Rodeo-Chediski Fire, 2011 Wallow Fire, and 
2014 San Juan Fire (see adjacent photo)—that 
show how active crown fires dropped to the 
ground when they reached areas that previ-
ously had been thinned to reduce ground, lad-
der, and crown fuels. 
 
 
Contact: Tayloe Dubay, tayloe.dubay@nau.edu 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
Example of low-intensity fire behavior in a previously 
thinned area during the 2014 San Juan Fire in Arizona. 
Restoration treatments had been implemented recently as 
part of a study established by the ERI and the Apache-
Sitgreaves National Forest. Photo courtesy of InciWeb, 
http://inciweb.nwcg.gov/incident/photographs/3912/10/ 
A prescribed fire burns in a fully restored area in the Gus 
Pearson Natural Area near Flagstaff, AZ. Note how the 
fire stays on the ground and burns at a low intensity.   
