The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
 
Wildland Fire Basics and Home Fire Safety 
 
 
Fire always obeys the laws of physics, and is always made up of three elements: 
fuel, oxygen, and heat. How it behaves on the landscape can be unpredictable. 
Yet people can, to an extent, shape how fire moves through a landscape, even 
one as large as southwestern ponderosa pine forests. 
 
Wildland Fire Basics 
 
Fire comes in different forms: it can smolder on the ground for days or race through tree crowns in 
minutes. Ground fires that burn mainly grasses and downed pine needles are considered typical for 
healthy ponderosa pine forests in the Southwest. Today, however, many fires in the western U.S. 
are crown fires that consume entire trees and pose a danger to human lives and communities.  
 
Fire behavior changes with the fire’s environment. Topography, weather, fuel, and the fire itself 
all influence fire behavior. As these variables interact, fire behavior will change. 
 
Fire spreads most rapidly downwind and upslope. The fastest-
spreading part of the perimeter is called the front or head; the 
slowest-spreading part is called the back. The lateral portions, 
or flanks, spread at intermediate rates. Fires in the Southwest 
often move from southwest to northeast due to the prevailing 
winds during fire season in May and June. 
 
Fire doesn’t spread only along its edge. In general, fire grows 
by igniting new fuel along its outer perimeter. However, it may 
spread more rapidly by producing em-
bers or sparks that are carried by wind 
and the fire’s convection column. Fire 
can create its own environment, too. 
Heating from the fire can produce local winds, create atmospheric instabil-
ity, and cause cumulus clouds to develop. In an extreme state, a “plume-
dominated fire” can create a combustion cloud that produces lightning, 
rain, and dangerous downbursts of winds up to 60 mph, sending embers in 
all directions. 
 
Southwestern uplands are highly flammable. In late spring and early sum-
mer dry conditions, high winds, and heavy fuel accumulations combine 
with lightning and human-induced fire starts to create ideal conditions for 
large, severe fires in many southwestern ponderosa pine forests. 
A low-severity fire moves slowly on the 
forest floor, consuming understory vege-
tation and downed woody debris.  
A severe fire jumps from 
the ground to the crown of 
a tree. 

 
Home Protection and the Wildland-Urban Interface (WUI) 
 
Buildings ignite when wildland fire comes within a few feet of flammable building materials. 
Houses most often burn when grass, wood piles, wood chips, and other fuels in the yard catch 
fire, but wind-borne embers can also ignite buildings that are much farther from the fire front. 
 
Homeowners can minimize fire risk by reducing hazardous fuels around and adjacent to their 
homes to create “defensible space.” In addition, minimizing the use of highly flammable 
building materials (such as wood roofs and siding) can reduce the threat posed by wind-borne 
embers. These simple steps can allow homes to survive even some extremely severe wildfires.  
  
Creating defensible space in-
volves developing a series of 
management zones in which 
different treatments are used.  
 
Fuel breaks can be efficient and 
cost effective in protecting 
communities from catastrophic 
wildfire. However, they are not 
a replacement for a strategic 
fuels treatment program be-
cause they address neither 
homeowner responsibilities for 
fire-safe yards and houses nor 
the need to restore southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests on a 
landscape scale. They also can 
be overwhelmed by wind-
driven fires that produce embers 
and spot fires. 
 
Community protection plans 
must incorporate landscape considerations. Such factors as topography, prevailing winds, and 
fuel patterns can allow fire to travel extremely quickly. Fire protection plans for towns, subdi-
visions, and neighborhoods must consider such factors to be effective. 
 
Buildings and other structures are not the only values at risk. Many southwestern communities 
rely on surrounding forests for tourism, recreation, aesthetics, resource extraction, watershed 
protection, and other values. Protecting only developed areas, and not forests, raises the possi-
bility that fire-safe towns will be set in a landscape of burned forests and degraded ecological 
values for many decades to come. 
 
Contact: Tayloe Dubay, tayloe.dubay@nau.edu 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
Top: Create defensible 
space by managing fuels 
through treatments in 
three key zones around 
your home. For more 
info, visit 
www.firewise.org. NFPA, 
Firewise Communities 
Program.  
Bottom: A plume of 
smoke from the 2010 
Schultz Fire near Flag-
staff, AZ sends ash and 
embers into the atmos-
phere. Photo courtesy of 
Brady Smith, USDA 
Forest Service 
