The Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI) at Northern Arizona University is a federally authorized  
program under the Southwest Forest Health and Wildfire Prevention Act of 2004 (PL 108-317). The law  
directs the ERI to assist land managers, stakeholders and others to develop, transfer, implement, and 
monitor practical science-based forest restoration treatments that will reduce the risk of severe wildfires, 
improve the health of dry forest and woodland ecosystems, enhance watershed function, provide jobs, and 
improve the quality of life for communities and citizens in the West.
The ERI Bridges the Gap Between Science and Action to Restore 
Frequent-Fire Forests and Protect Communities
FACT SHEET
January 2018
Figure 1. (Left) Large trees are clearly marked as “leave” trees prior to implementation of a forest restoration 
project near Williams, Arizona. After the removal of small trees and surface fuels (right), the occurrence of 
high-intensity crown fire has been reduced. Photos courtesy of the U.S. Forest Service, Southwestern Region, 
Kaibab National Forest
ERI provides leadership and knowledge to restore forested landscapes.
 
F ERI biophysical research designs and tests treatments to restore 
ponderosa pine and mixed-conifer forests and pinyon juniper 
woodlands. By improving the ecological health of these forests 
the risk of unnatural fire is reduced, natural resource values are 
enhanced, and they are more resilient in the face of a changing  
climate (Fig. 1). ERI staff and cooperators have produced more 
than 350 peer-reviewed research articles that inform treatment 
design throughout the West.
 
F ERI supports collaboration and pilot projects selected under the 
Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration (CFLR) Act. The 
ERI is directly involved with the Four Forest Restoration Initiative 
(4FRI) (Fig. 2) and assists other CFLR projects through webinars, 
field trips, participation, and coordination of workshops and other 
services. The ERI is a knowledge expert in the area of monitoring 
and adaptive management.
Figure 2. Overview of the 4FRI area, 
which includes the Apache-Sitgreaves, 
Coconino, Kaibab, and Tonto  
national forests.
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.eri.nau/eri

ERI helps land management agencies and communities understand the benefits of restoration 
and the value of avoiding fire.
 
F ERI is working with the USFS Rocky Mountain Research Station and 
the Arizona Department of Forestry and Fire Management to facilitate 
an all-lands approach to wildfire risk reduction and restoration in  
Arizona. This work will inform how and where land managers and  
landowners can work together to lower the risk of catastrophic fire.
 
F In 2012 and 2013, the ERI worked with national fire economists to 
analyze the ecological and economic effectiveness of hazardous fuel 
reduction treatments and conduct a full cost accounting of the 15,000-
acre Schultz Fire. 
ERI innovates.
 
F In 2017, the ERI coordinated and facilitated a workshop with Forest 
Service staff from the 4FRI team, 4FRI forests, Region 3, and Washington 
Office Modernization Team to explore ways to improve the efficiency of 
project implementation.
 
F ERI has hired a Director of Forest Operations and Biomass Utilization 
(Dr. Han-Sup Han) to lead a new program that advances forest  
operations and wood utilization research, development, and  
applications in northern Arizona.
 
F In 2012 the City of Flagstaff became the first community in the United 
States to pass a proposition that extended $10 million in bonding authority to accelerate restoration 
treatments on federal land. The ERI continues to provide scientific and technical support to make the 
Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project (FWPP) a success. In 2015, ERI published a case study that ex-
amined the mechanisms used by the City of Flagstaff and the Forest Service to develop and implement 
FWPP. The case study provides a model for other communities looking for innovative ways to achieve 
fire protection through forest management. 
ERI translates and transfers its research to help land managers use the best available science to 
restore forests.
The land management professional determines how a treatment prescription is written and implemented. 
However, keeping current on scientific findings is challenging for most land managers. Through work-
shops, field trips, rapid assessments, and an array of communication tools that include online platforms, 
fact sheets, working papers, and other media, the ERI 
actively translates and transfers what land managers need 
to know now to do their job.
 
ERI is respected.
According to one individual interviewed during an inde-
pendent, five-year program assessment, “It is impossible 
to have a conversation with any Forest Service employee 
about restoration without some reference to ERI’s work.”
Figure 3. The flood waters that 
inundated properties after the 2010 
Schultz Fire contained large amounts 
of forest debris and ash, carving deep 
channels below the burn area.
Contact: Wally Covington, W.Wallace.Covington@nau.edu; Diane Vosick, Diane.Vosick@nau.edu
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.
ERI Research and Development Director Dave Huffman, 
PhD, leads a field event explaining restoration  
treatment strategies.
