ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION INSTITUTE
Working Paper 38
Reference Conditions and 
Restoration of Transitional 
Ponderosa Pine Forests in 
the Southwest
February 2018
Ecological 
Restoration 
Institute
College of Engineering, Forestry,  
and Natural Sciences

Author: David W. Huffman, Judith D. Springer, and Joseph E. Crouse
Reviewers: Lloyd R. Fuller, USDA Forest Service; Lisa Floyd-Hanna, Prescott College;  
Mary Lata, USDA Forest Service; and Diane Vosick, Ecological Restoration Institute.
Series Editor: Tayloe Dubay
Please use the following citation when referring to this report:
Huffman, D.W., J.D. Springer, and J.E. Crouse. 2018. Reference Conditions and Restoration of  Transitional 
Ponderosa Pine Forests in the Southwest. ERI Working Paper No. 38. Ecological Restoration Institute, 
Northern Arizona University. 14 pp.
Cover photo: 
Transitional ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest occur within shrub-dominated biotic communities such 
as interior chaparral and Madrean evergreen woodlands. Published studies suggest an increase in understory 
shrubs in forests where frequent surface ﬁre has been excluded, like the forest in this photo. Variability and  
a paucity of research warrant further studies of these ecosystems.
Intermountain West Frequent-fire Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native species, 
structural characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological Restoration International 
deﬁnes ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an 
ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability….Restoration attempts to return an 
ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration International Science and Policy 
Working Group 2004).
Most frequent-ﬁre forests throughout the Intermountain West have been degraded during the last  
150 years. Many of these forests are now dominated by unnaturally dense thickets of small trees, and lack 
their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible 
to damaging, stand-replacing ﬁres and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests 
centers on reintroducing frequent, low-severity surface ﬁres—often after thinning dense stands—and 
reestablishing productive understory plant communities.
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, 
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of frequent-ﬁre forests of the Intermountain West. 
By allowing natural processes, such as low-severity ﬁre, to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to 
reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The Southwest Fire Science Consortium (SWFSC) is a way for managers, scientists, and policy makers 
to interact and share science. SWFSC’s goal is to see the best available science used to make management 
decisions and scientists working on the questions managers need answered. The SWFSC tries to bring 
together localized efforts to develop scientiﬁc information and to disseminate that to practitioners on the 
ground through an inclusive and open process.
ERI working papers are intended to deliver applicable science to land managers and practitioners 
in a concise, clear, non-technical format. These papers provide guidance on management decisions 
surrounding ecological restoration topics. This publication would not have been possible without funding 
from the USDA Forest Service and the Southwest Fire Science Consortium. The views and conclusions 
contained in this document are those of the author(s) and should not be interpreted as representing the 
opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products 
does not constitute their endorsement by the United States Government or the ERI.

Table of Contents
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1
Vegetation of Southwestern Transitional Pine Forests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2
 
Interior Chaparral Transition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2
 
Madrean Evergreen Woodlands Transition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2
Historical Fire Regimes in Transitional Ponderosa Pine Forests . . . . . . .3
 
Interior Chaparral Transition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3
 
Madrean Evergreen Woodlands Transition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4
Recent Structural Changes in Transitional Forests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4
Restoration Implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5
Disturbance Responses of Major Occurring Shrubs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6
Restoration Treatments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7
 
Prescribed Fire and Repeat Burning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7
 
Mechanical Treatments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7
 
Herbicides  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .8
 
Grazing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9
Literature Cited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9
Appendix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 38    
Reference Conditions and Restoration of Transitional Ponderosa Pine Forests in the Southwest
1
Summary
Transitional ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) forests occur 
on semi-arid landscapes below the Mogollon Rim in central 
and southern Arizona and in central and southern New 
Mexico. In these ecosystems, shrubs presently dominate 
understory plant communities and increase crown fire 
behavior by contributing to vertical fuel continuity. Public 
land managers are implementing a variety of treatments, 
including tree thinning, shrub mastication, and prescribed 
burning. However, the compatibility of fuel hazard reduction 
prescriptions with ecological restoration principles is unclear, 
and thus there is strong interest in developing a better 
understanding of historical conditions, ecosystem changes 
associated with intensive land uses, and restoration responses 
for these forests. In this review, we searched bibliographic 
databases (e.g., Google Scholar, Treesearch, and Agricola) 
and summarized available literature to describe pre-Euro-
American fire regimes, historical forest structure, and impacts 
of settlement on ponderosa pine forests co-occurring with 
interior chaparral and Madrean evergreen woodland biotic 
communities. Results of the review indicated a general paucity 
of information, particularly with respect to presettlement 
structure and fire regimes of forests transitional with interior 
chaparral. Studies to date suggest that historical fire regimes 
were similar to those widely reported for montane ponderosa 
forests of the Southwest. Frequent surface fires likely kept 
forests in open structural conditions and limited abundance 
of woody understory species. In addition, expansion of forest 
trees into shrublands was indicated by our review. Due to the 
complexity of transitional forests, determining site-specific 
reference conditions is a crucial first step in a developing 
treatment strategies in a restoration project. Using multiple 
lines of evidence such as historical photographs, written 
and oral accounts, local knowledge, and on-site biological 
remnants will help land managers gain the most complete 
understanding of historical structure and composition. 
Repeated entries with mechanical cutting or mastication, 
followed by prescribed fire, may be more effective at 
controlling woody shrubs than single-entry approaches.  
Site-specific variability in species composition is an important 
factor determining outcomes. We found no studies to 
suggest that shrubs were historically absent from transitional 
ponderosa pine forests. Thus, although anthropogenic fire 
exclusion may have allowed increases in shrub abundance, an 
understory shrub component was likely an historical feature of 
these ecosystems. Thus, management objectives that include 
understory type conversion and elimination of shrub cover in 
these ecosystems are not likely to be compatible with general 
restoration principles.
Introduction
Ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa Douglas ex P. Lawson and 
C. Lawson) forests are found on roughly 8.4 million acres in 
the American Southwest states of Arizona and New Mexico 
(Brown 1994). The majority of the distribution of this forest 
type is found on montane sites extending in a contiguous 
northwest-southeast band above the Mogollon Rim in north-
central Arizona, as well as in northern New Mexico (Little 
1971). These forests are classified as Rocky Mountain and 
Madrean montane conifer forests (Brown 1994), and much 
is understood about these ecosystems in terms of ecological 
processes, historical disturbance regimes, and responses to 
management. Ponderosa pine forests are also found scattered 
throughout the rugged landscapes below the Mogollon Rim, 
within the interior chaparral of the Mogollon Highlands and 
Bradshaw Mountains, and in Madrean evergreen woodland 
biotic communities further south in southern Arizona and 
south-central New Mexico (Brown 1994). As such, these 
transitional, or “fringe” (sensu Moir et al. 1997) forests, 
commonly occur on xeric sites, and rather than the herbaceous 
communities typical of montane forests, shrubs presently 
dominate the understories of many transitional ponderosa 
pine systems. Much less is known about these ecosystems 
compared to the montane ponderosa communities, yet 
transitional forests are important components of biodiversity 
on southwestern landscapes. Because transitional forests 
occur at the environmental limits of ponderosa pine, they are 
vulnerable to rapid changes in terms of tree mortality as the 
climate warms and periodic droughts become more frequent 
and severe (Allen and Breshears 1998, Savage and Mast 2005). 
Further, tall understory shrubs may increase crown fire behavior 
by contributing to vertical fuel continuity, which allows fire 
to more easily move from the ground into the forest canopy. 
To improve tree health, reduce crown fire hazard, and protect 
human communities in the wildland-urban interface, public 
land managers are implementing a variety of treatments, 
including tree thinning, shrub mastication, and prescribed 
burning. However, the compatibility of fuel hazard reduction 
prescriptions with ecological restoration principles is unclear. 
Further, there has been increasing interest from land managers 
in developing a better understanding of historical conditions, 
ecosystem changes associated with intensive land uses, and 
restoration responses appropriate for transitional ponderosa 
pine forests of the Southwest. 
For this working paper, we conducted a literature review 
to address restoration needs and approaches for transitional 
ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest. We searched 
bibliographic databases (e.g., Google Scholar, Treesearch, and 
Agricola) and summarized available literature regarding pre-
Euro-American fire regimes, historical forest structure, and 
impacts of Euro-American settlement on interior chaparral and 
Madrean evergreen woodland biotic communities. Results from 
studies of montane ponderosa pine ecosystems and literature 
on long-needle pine dynamics at ecotones in analogous 
systems of the western United States were used for context 
and comparison. Sprouting responses to fire and thinning were 
summarized for shrub species common in transitional forests, 
chaparral and evergreen woodlands. We researched ecological 
responses and effectiveness of various hazardous fuels reduction 
and restoration treatments implemented in the Southwest and 
other regions. Information from the literature was synthesized  
to identify restoration implications and management 
strategies for these important ecological systems. 

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 38    
Reference Conditions and Restoration of Transitional Ponderosa Pine Forests in the Southwest
2
Vegetation of Southwestern 
Transitional Pine Forests
Interior Chaparral
The interior (Arizona) chaparral and chaparral-like vegetation 
types of the southwestern United States and interior regions of 
Mexico defy simple characterization and description. Interior 
chaparral consists of a mosaic of shrub-dominated patches that 
intergrade with tree species at higher elevations and grasslands or 
desert scrub at lower elevations (Brown 1994, Keeley and Keeley 
2000). Brown (1994) describes interior chaparral as covering about 
3.5 million acres from the Virgin Mountains in northwestern 
Arizona southward into Chihuahua, Mexico (Fig. 1). Lowe (1964) 
defined interior chaparral as the ecosystem between 4,000–6,000 
feet elevation, occurring from the Mogollon Rim foothills south 
to the Gila River in Arizona. Annual precipitation ranges from 
13–23 inches. A complex interplay of soil types, aspects, and 
precipitation thresholds leads to vegetation types juxtaposing 
one another across the landscape. More than 50 species of trees, 
shrubs and semi-woody species have been identified in Arizona 
chaparral (Carmichael et al. 1978). The most dominant species is 
turbinella oak (Quercus turbinella), co-existing with manzanita 
(Arctostaphylos spp.), ceanothus (Ceanothus spp.), mountain-
mahogany (Cercocarpus spp.), and sumac (Rhus spp.) (Brown 
1994, Schalau and Twaronite 2010).  
Chaparral intergrades into evergreen oaks, junipers, and 
pines as precipitation increases upslope, leading to a transitional 
vegetation type (Fig. 2, page 3). Manzanitas may also dominate 
at higher elevations or with increasing moisture (Brown 1994). 
Grasses are mostly limited to rocky outcrops, and annual and 
short-lived perennial forbs are fairly uncommon except for brief 
periods following fire (Brown 1994).  
When compared to coastal chaparral in California, interior 
chaparral in Arizona manifests more bare soil and less shrub 
basal area and contains a larger component of herbaceous species 
(Keeley and Keeley 2000, Keeley et al. 2012). Another key 
difference in these communities is that precipitation occurs in a 
bimodal pattern in Arizona, leading to a much higher level of 
post-fire plant species diversity in interior chaparral compared 
with coastal chaparral (Keeley et al. 2012).
Madrean Evergreen Woodlands
The Madrean evergreen woodland biotic community extends 
from a large region in the Sierra Madre Mountains of Mexico 
north to the sky islands of southeastern Arizona, advancing 
north and westward to Yavapai County, Arizona as well 
as east to landscapes in New Mexico and Texas (Fig. 1). 
Occurring between the plains and semi-desert grasslands or 
Chihuahuan desertscrub at lower elevations and the montane 
conifer forest at higher elevations, this zone is co-dominated 
by ponderosa pine (northern portions of the range), the 
Madrean pine species (southern range), evergreen oaks, and 
madrones (Arbutus spp.), as well as relict patches of Arizona 
cypress (Callitropsis arizonica) on north-facing aspects and 
drainages (Brown 1994). The important Madrean pine 
species include Arizona pine (Pinus arizonica var. arizonica), 
Apache pine (P. engelmannii), Chihuahuan pine (P. leiophylla), 
pino triste (P. lumholtzii), Durango pine (P. durangensis) and 
Cooper pine (P. cooperi). Although a variety of evergreen oaks 
is present regionally, the four dominant species south of the 
Mogollon Rim are Q. emoryi, Q. arizonica, Q. oblongifolia, 
and Quercus grisea (Emory, Arizona, Mexican blue, and gray 
oak, respectively). The two characteristic species of this zone 
in southeastern Arizona are Q.  hypoleucoides and  Q. rugosa 
(silverleaf oak and netleaf oak, respectively) (Brown 1994). 
Species distributions in the Sky Islands of southeastern 
Arizona are primarily controlled by elevation, but heat load, 
soil moisture, and soil type are also important drivers  
(Poulos et al. 2007). 
The Ponderosa Pine-Evergreen Oak Ecological Response 
Unit (ERU) occurs from 5,500 –7,200 feet and is dominated 
by ponderosa pine and the Madrean pines to the south. 
Similar to the description provided by Brown (1994), it also 
is commonly composed of pinyon pine (P. edulis) and alligator 
juniper (Juniperus deppeana) as co-dominant species. Although 
Brown’s classification includes only a small portion of New 
Mexico, this ERU comprises a large area of west-central 
New Mexico, and scattered pockets throughout central New 
Mexico, from north to south. Dominant understory 
shrubs are generally the same as those represented in 
the interior chaparral (Wahlberg et al. 2013). 
Biotic Community
INTERIOR CHAPPARAL
PETRAN MONTANE CONIFER FOREST
MADREAN EVERGREEN WOODLAND
Figure 1. Three major biotic communities as described by 
Brown (1994) wherein ponderosa pine forests occur in the 
states of Arizona (left) and New Mexico (right) in the American 
Southwest. Transitional forests are found within interior 
chaparral and Madrean evergreen woodland communities.

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 38    
Reference Conditions and Restoration of Transitional Ponderosa Pine Forests in the Southwest
3
Historical Fire Regimes in Transitional 
Ponderosa Pine Forests
In contrast to voluminous literature on fire regimes of montane 
forests occurring above the Mogollon Rim in Arizona, few 
studies have reconstructed historical disturbance patterns in 
transitional ponderosa pine ecosystems adjacent to chaparral or 
evergreen oak communities. 
Interior Chaparral Transition
Dieterich and Hibbert (1990) reported that mean fire return 
interval (MFI) historically ranged 1.50-1.89 years for a 247-
acre ponderosa pine stand surrounded by chaparral vegetation 
in the Battle Flat watershed of the Bradshaw Mountains in 
central Arizona (Prescott National Forest). Although sample 
size was limited in this study (n=7), evidence of frequent, low-
severity fire was noted, as one collected sample recorded 25 
separate fire dates. The historical fire regime was disrupted in 
1874. Similarly, Tuten et al. (2006) found that MFI ranged 
4.3-5.5 years between the early 1600s and the late 1800s at 
two Bradshaw Mountain sites. Further, point mean fire 
interval, determined as the number of years between 
fires on individual trees, ranged 5.0-8.5 years across four 
sites. The frequent fire regime abruptly halted between 
1878 and 1884 (Tuten et al. 2006). In a pilot study that 
included 18 scarred samples from three sites, Sneed et al. 
(2002) reported that MFI ranged 2.5-5.1 years (Weibull 
median probability interval (WMPI) ranged 2.3-3.9 
years), from 1652 until 1896, across three ponderosa 
pine sites (n=18 samples) in Prescott Basin, Arizona 
(Prescott National Forest). The authors found that late 
June through July was the season of peak fire occurrence. 
Frequent fires stopped in 1896. Sneed et al. (2002) 
also reconstructed historical chaparral fire patterns by 
analyzing growth rings on stems of several species of oak 
(Quercus sp.), and concluded the fire return interval for 
this community was 30-40 years. 
Results from fire history reconstructions on other 
interior chaparral-ponderosa pine sites in Arizona parallel 
findings of the above studies. For example, Kaib (2001) 
reconstructed fire history at four sites in east-central 
Arizona (Tonto National Forest), and reported a frequent fire 
Figure 2. Transitional ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest occur within shrub-dominated biotic communities such as interior chaparral and Madrean 
evergreen woodlands (upper left). Published studies suggest an increase in understory shrubs in forests where frequent surface fire has been excluded 
(upper right). Treatments such as mastication followed by prescribed fire can reduce shrub cover (lower left). Without repeated treatments, recovery of  
a shrub understory is likely (lower right).

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 38    
Reference Conditions and Restoration of Transitional Ponderosa Pine Forests in the Southwest
4
pattern that was interrupted in the late 1800s. Although no fire 
interval statistics were given in this report, Kaib (2001) suggested 
that frequent fires likely burned through herbaceous understories, 
and fire regime interruption was due to intensive, unregulated 
livestock grazing associated with Euro-American settlement of 
the region. Iniguez et al. (2009) found that aspect and regional 
climate played important roles in affecting fire frequency at a dry 
mixed-conifer–ponderosa pine–oak site adjacent to chaparral and 
oak-scrub communities on Rincon Peak, Arizona (Coronado 
National Forest). Although MFI varied by aspect and by time 
period examined, historical fires were frequent (9.6-34.7 years). 
Iniguez et al. (2009) also found coincident tree death dates and 
fire scars that suggested a stand-replacing fire that occurred in 
1867 at the Rincon site.   
Madrean Evergreen Woodlands Transition
Several studies have examined fire history in ponderosa pine 
(and Arizona pine (Pinus arizonica var. arizonica))-Madrean 
evergreen woodland ecotones. Results of these studies are 
similar to those reported in transitional zones with interior 
chaparral. For example, Swetnam et al. (1992) reported MFI to 
be 3.9 years in diverse, pine-dominated forests of Chiricahua 
National Monument in southeastern Arizona. Vegetation in the 
monument is primarily Madrean evergreen woodland; however, 
other communities include interior chaparral and semi-desert 
grassland. Fire scar records indicated that the historical regime 
of frequent, low-severity fires in the forests of Chiricahua 
National Monument was interrupted in the late 1800s 
(ca 1890), likely as a result of intensive livestock grazing 
(Swetnam et al. 1992). Other studies have corroborated 
these results and reported historical frequent fire regimes in 
pine forests of the Chiricahua Mountains (e.g., Kaib et al. 
1996, 1999). Similarly, Iniguez et al. (2008) reported that 
MFI ranged 9.0-9.8 years for ponderosa pine-dominated 
forests in the Santa Catalina Mountains. Danzer (1998) 
found fire frequency (Weibull median probability) ranged 
3.6-8.4 years from 1689 to 1880 across three sites in the 
Huachuca Mountains, also in southern Arizona. Fulé and 
Covington (1997) found similarly frequent historical fire regimes 
in pine forests of the Sierra Madre Occidental, Mexico.
Recent Structural Changes  
in Transitional Forests
It is well understood that 20th century fire exclusion in 
montane ponderosa pine forests has led to substantial 
increases in tree establishment and associated changes 
in ecological function (Covington et al. 1994, Fulé et al. 
1997, Moore et al. 1999, Savage and Mast 2005). Much 
less is known about historical changes associated with 
modern land use in the transitional zones where ponderosa 
pine forests abut interior chaparral or Madrean evergreen 
vegetation. Because plants are often growing at their 
environmental limits and thus can be under high levels 
of stress within ecotones, these zones where communities 
intergrade are often dynamic and fluctuate in composition over 
relatively small spatial and temporal scales (Whittaker 1975, 
Kimmins 1987). Climatic variability is a primary driver of these 
changes. For example, Allen and Breshears (1998) found 
Figure 3. Fire scars, like this one of a ponderosa pine tree from Prescott 
National Forest, are one line of evidence that help scientists reconstruct 
historical fire regimes.  Photo by ERI
that a ponderosa pine forest–pinyon-juniper woodland 
ecotone in the Jemez Mountains of New Mexico shifted 
at least 1.2 miles due to ponderosa pine mortality during 
a severe drought in the 1950s. However, intensive land 
use has also been reported to exert a strong influence on 
community change, and in some cases has overridden 
climatic effects. For example, Earl and Bash (1996) found 
evidence of repeated establishment and die-off episodes 
of alligator juniper trees over a 100-year period along this 
species’ lower elevation limit in the Organ Mountains of 
New Mexico. Although climate was a primary driver of 
these patterns, lack of fire and reduced grass competition 
resulting from livestock grazing may have allowed trees to 
survive droughts on xeric microsites (Earl and Bash 1996). 
General expansion of woody vegetation due to 
livestock grazing and lack of natural fire on semi-arid 
landscapes of the Southwest and elsewhere is well 
documented (Leopold 1924, Davis and Turner 1986, 
Miller 1999, Shaw 2006). Expansion of forest trees 
into shrublands due to fire exclusion has been reported 
in several bioregions of the western U.S. including the 
American Southwest (Brown 1994, Nagel and Taylor 
2005, Brooks and Chambers 2011). For example, 
Leopold (1924) observed evidence of recent expansion 
of ponderosa pine “downhill” into woodlands, as well as 
juniper trees overtopping manzanita shrubs in central 
Arizona. Similarly, Gasser (1982) analyzed various 
sources of cultural and biological evidence and concluded 
that only minor changes in the flora of the Copper 
Basin (Prescott National Forest) had likely occurred 
from about A.D. 800 to 1200, but 19th century fire 
exclusion and intensive livestock grazing allowed pinyon 
and juniper trees to expand distributions both upslope, 
as well as downslope, into historic grasslands, savannas, 
and shrublands. Indeed, Brown (1994) notes that lower 
chaparral sites in Arizona were heavily grazed between 
1880 and 1920, and a mohair goat industry flourished in 
these areas until around 1940. These authors suggested 

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 38    
Reference Conditions and Restoration of Transitional Ponderosa Pine Forests in the Southwest
5
that intensive grazing resulted in subsequent expansion 
of ponderosa pine trees into the chaparral community. 
Dieterich and Hibbert (1990) concluded that following 
interruption of the historic frequent fire regime in the 
Bradshaw Mountains of central Arizona, ponderosa pine trees 
subsequently expanded into the chaparral community. 
Although tree expansion into shrublands due to fire 
exclusion was indicated by our review, changes in shrub 
abundance within these transitional forest understories is 
somewhat less certain. Shrub increases within other frequent-
fire forests have been reported. For example, Engstrom et al. 
(1984) described increases in woody plants in longleaf pine 
(Pinus palustris) forests of Florida following fire exclusion. 
Similarly, both Busse et al. (2000) and Mackenzie et al. 
(2004) concluded that fire exclusion increases shrub cover 
in ponderosa pine forests of Oregon and mixed ponderosa 
pine-Douglas fir forests of Montana, respectively. However, 
Hessburg et al. (2005) surmised that shrub understories in 
many dry western forests have declined with fire exclusion 
due to competition and shading from increases in density 
of fire-intolerant trees. It is commonly understood that 
understories of montane ponderosa pine forests of the 
Southwest were dominated by grasses and other herbaceous 
plant species (Cooper 1960, Covington et al. 1997, Laughlin 
et al. 2006). Similar assumptions have been made for 
transitional forests adjacent to interior chaparral and Madrean 
evergreen vegetation (Dietrich and Hibbert 1990, Kaib 
2001), and some research has supported this. For example, 
in Madrean pine-oak forests of Mexico, Fulé and Covington 
(1998) found greater dominance of sprouting shrub species 
in forests where natural fires had been excluded, compared 
with those having uninterrupted frequent fire regimes. 
Similarly, Barton (2002) concluded that historical fires likely 
kept oak establishment in check within pine-oak forests 
of the Chiricahua Mountains in southeastern Arizona. 
Thus, it appears that cover of long-lived sprouting shrubs 
has increased in many transitional ponderosa pine forests 
as a result of fire exclusion. More research is needed to 
characterize historical cover and compositional variability in 
southwestern transitional forests. In particular, information 
concerning species-level changes due to fire exclusion 
would help land managers develop site-specific assessments 
and increase success in meeting treatment objectives. It is 
important to note, however, that we found no studies to 
suggest that shrubs were historically absent from transitional 
ponderosa pine forests. Thus, management objectives that 
include understory type conversion and elimination of shrub 
cover in these ecosystems are not likely to be compatible with 
general restoration principles. 
Restoration Implications
Although more primary research is needed to better describe 
historical disturbance regimes, structural characteristics, and 
changes in transitional ponderosa pine ecosystems due to 
modern land uses, several general patterns were apparent in 
this review. Historical fire regimes in pine forest communities 
co-occurring within interior chaparral and Madrean evergreen 
woodland appear to have been characterized by frequent 
(MFI typically < 10 years, but up to 35 years), low-severity 
surface fires similar to those widely reported for montane 
ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest (e.g., Swetnam and 
Baisan 1996, Moore et al. 1999, Fule et al. 2003). Frequent 
fires likely kept forests in open structural conditions and 
limited establishment and regeneration of sprouting woody 
species. As was prevalent in other southwestern ecosystems, 
unregulated livestock grazing in the late 19th and early 20th 
centuries apparently reduced abundance of herbaceous plants 
in ecotone communities (e.g., in both ponderosa pine forests 
and chaparral shrublands), and interrupted fire regimes. 
Intensive harvesting of ponderosa pine for mining materials 
in the mid-1800s undoubtedly contributed to later shifts in 
forest structure at some sites. Fire regime interruption in the 
Southwest appears to have allowed shrubs as well as young 
trees to increase in abundance within transitional pine forests 
(Fig. 2). Similarly, less frequent fire in shrublands allowed 
ponderosa pine trees to establish and expand into these 
communities. Active fire suppression beginning in the mid-
1900s likely exacerbated structural shifts of both pine forests 
and shrublands. The ultimate effect of these anthropogenic 
influences has been to encourage broader, more complex 
ecotones, with ponderosa pine trees found overtopping shrubs 
on both historical forest sites as well as historical shrubland 
sites. These circumstances suggest that land managers should 
use caution when assessing historical reference conditions and 
restoration needs, and developing corresponding treatments 
for any given site. 
Historical reference conditions describe a site’s 
structure, composition, function, and natural dynamics 
prior to anthropogenic disturbance. Similarly, natural 
ranges of variability (NRVs) describe how those ecological 
characteristics differed over space and time (Landres et al. 
1999). Knowledge of reference conditions can be used to 
assess ecological changes and their causes at a site, develop 
prescriptions for restoration of conditions that more closely 
resemble the pre-disturbance system, and evaluate treatment 
outcomes. Due to the complexity of changes in transitional 
forests, determining site-specific reference conditions is a 
crucial first step in a restoration project. Several important 
general concepts have been described for gathering historical 
reference condition information for southwestern ponderosa 
pine forests (Moore et al. 1999). Using multiple lines of 
evidence will help land managers gain the most complete 
understanding of a site’s historical structure and composition. 
Evidence that may be used includes historical photographs, 
written accounts, local knowledge, and biological remnants  
still occurring on-site. Biological remnants include large dead 
logs, stumps, snags, and live presettlement (ca 1870) trees.  
To date, such “rapid reconstructions” have not been utilized 
to a great degree in either interior chaparral or Madrean 
evergreen woodland-ponderosa pine transitional forests.  
In addition, fire scars detected on dead and live trees may 
suggest historical fire patterns (i.e., severity, extent, frequency) 
(Fig. 3). Due to the semi-arid climate of the Southwest, 
coupled with decay-resistant wood properties of ponderosa 
pine, large, dead tree structures that indicate historical 
structure and composition are readily detected in areas 
that have experienced little fire or large scale disturbance 
(Moore et al. 2004). For example, most live trees observed 
at the Prescott National Forest site studied by Dieterich 

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 38    
Reference Conditions and Restoration of Transitional Ponderosa Pine Forests in the Southwest
6
(Clarke et al. 2013). Three broad classes of resprouting have 
been observed: aerial, basal, and belowground (Clarke et al. 
2013). Buds are protected when aboveground by bark, leaf 
bases or other protective tissues, and when belowground, 
by soil, which is a superb insulator with its low thermal 
conductivity. The sprouting potential of shrubs, particularly 
some oak species, is tremendous and highly dependent 
on reserves of carbohydrates in roots (Engle et al. 1983, 
Harrington 1989). Clonal and thicket-forming shrubs are 
particularly long-lived (Young and Peffer 2010). A significant 
amount of biomass has been reported belowground in 
Gambel oak (Quercus gambelii) (Tiedemann et al. 1987). 
Tiedemann et al. (1987) observed as much as 72 percent of 
total underground biomass of an excavated Gambel oak was 
concentrated in a single lignotuber. Whether the underground 
network of lignotubers and roots serves as a storehouse for 
carbohydrate reserves, or a bud bank, or both, is still under 
debate (Clarke et al. 2013). 
Roots of turbinella oak (Quercus turbinella), the dominant 
woody species in Arizona chaparral, have been observed 
beneath the soil surface to a depth of more than 30 feet. 
Soil type and underlying substrate can demonstrably limit 
rooting depth and expansion of clones, with denser thickets 
occupying quartz diorite and sedimentary or volcanic substrate 
in the Black Hills near Jerome, Arizona (Saunier and Wagle 
1967). Aspect, in combination with soil type, also influences 
distribution of this species. The density and number of oak 
clumps on north-facing slopes in this area is significantly 
higher than on south-facing slopes (Saunier and Wagle 1967).
Seasonal changes in nonstructural carbohydrate content 
of roots have been observed in a number of resprouting 
clonal species such as Gambel oak, sand shinnery oak 
(Quercus havardii) and quaking aspen (Populus tremuloides) 
(Bóo and Pettit 1975, Engle et al. 1983, Harrington 1989, 
Landhäusser and Lieffers 2003). A summer carbohydrate 
depression has been noted in Gambel oak (Harrington 
1989). Severe depletion of aboveground biomass leads to 
decreased concentrations of nonstructural carbohydrates 
due to mobilization of reserves from roots toward biomass 
aboveground (Clarke et al. 2013). During midsummer, 
consecutive annual repeated prescribed burns are most 
successful at reducing this species, despite massive 
underground carbohydrate reserves (Harrington 1985, 
1989). Reserves in other species of oak vary seasonally. Sand 
shinnery oak rapidly mobilizes carbohydrate reserves in 
early spring, and total nonstructural carbohydrates (TNC) 
have been observed to be at their lowest levels in early May, 
during leaf formation (Bóo and Pettit 1975). Control of 
oaks is most effective when treatments are applied prior to 
leaf formation. Following such events as leaf flush and stem 
elongation, resprouting species remobilize and regain their 
photosynthetic capacity enough to make up for the loss in 
reserves (Clarke et al. 2013). Treatments occurring during 
periods when reserves are higher may be ineffective and 
may even result in increases of root reserve levels  
(Engle et al. 1983).
and Hibbert (1990) were less than 100 years old, whereas 
fire scar samples were collected from stumps of old (~ 300 
years) trees, apparently cut in the mid- to late-1800s to use 
for mining materials. Remnants such as these can help guide 
restoration prescriptions in terms of residual tree density, 
as well as help determine spatial arrangement of trees, tree 
group sizes, and characteristics of canopy openings (Sánchez 
Meador et al. 2011). Conversely, areas comprised exclusively 
of young trees (i.e., germination dates > ca 1870) and devoid 
of remnant tree structures should be carefully evaluated as 
they may represent historical shrublands that, because of fire 
exclusion and other land-use legacies, now exhibit forest cover. 
Thus, treatments designed to restore ponderosa pine forest 
characteristics (e.g., low shrub cover, maintenance of forest 
canopy, application of frequent surface fire) on these sites 
may in fact jeopardize parallel goals related to conservation of 
shrubland habitat. On sites lacking remnants, land managers 
should consider investigating other sources of reference 
information such as harvest and mining records, photographs, 
and land surveys before developing restoration objectives.
Disturbance Responses  
of Major Occurring Shrubs 
Most woody plant species in interior chaparral (Fig. 4) and 
associated transitional forests are well-adapted to fire, and 
these responses are summarized in Appendix I. With dense, 
compact crowns and deep roots, they sprout vigorously 
from the root crown or rhizomes, even if top-killed. Species 
displaying this strategy include alligator juniper, catclaw 
acacia (Senegalia/Acacia greggii), catclaw mimosa (Mimosa 
aculeaticarpa var. biuncifera), New Mexico locust (Robinia 
neomexicana), most oaks (Quercus spp.), California buckthorn 
(Rhamnus californica), Utah serviceberry (Amelanchier 
utahensis), mountain-mahogany (Cercocarpus montanus) and 
chokecherry (Prunus virginiana). Other species may be 
weak sprouters, but their seeds require fire for scarification 
and rapidly germinate following exposure to heat or smoke. 
Species exhibiting this less common strategy include desert 
ceanothus (Ceanothus greggii) and deerbrush (C. integerrimus). 
Still others, such as skunkbush (Rhus aromatica), employ a 
dual strategy of both resprouting and reproduction via seeds. 
Some chaparral species are intolerant of severe fire or of 
repeat burning at short intervals, with a resultant weakening 
of plants, or even high mortality. Succulents, cacti and others 
such as common sotol (Dasylirion wheeleri), sacahuista (Nolina 
microcarpa), Yucca species and prickly pear cactus (Opuntia 
spp.) follow this trend. Arizona cypress and pinyon pine are 
fire-sensitive species and may be killed by even a low-intensity 
fire. Some manzanitas and ceanothus species are considered to 
be obligate seeders. Pointleaf manzanita (Arctostaphylos pungens) 
and Pringle’s manzanita (A. pringlei) are generally killed by 
fire, due to lack of an underground burl in these species, but 
reproduce prolifically from seed when scarified by heat. 
A shrub’s resprouting capacity is constrained by availability 
of buds, level of protection for buds, and available resources 

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 38    
Reference Conditions and Restoration of Transitional Ponderosa Pine Forests in the Southwest
7
Figure 4. Most woody plant species in interior chaparral and associated transitional forests are well adapted to fire, like oak, manzanita, and buckbrush. Photos by Max Licher
Restoration Treatments
In transitional ponderosa pine forests where natural fire 
has been excluded for several decades, restoration of 
characteristics that resemble reference conditions and NRV 
involves a number of challenges. As previously described, 
tree recruitment in these systems has typically increased and 
shrubs have likely become more abundant in understory 
communities. Where reference information and/or biological 
evidence is available, restoration treatments should seek 
to approximate historical densities, spatial patterns, and 
size/age distributions of trees, amounts and sizes of coarse 
woody material such as snags and logs, and structural and 
compositional characteristics of understory vegetation. Basic 
restoration objectives include thinning young trees to create 
more open forest conditions, reintroducing frequent surface 
fire, and shifting understory species composition toward 
herbaceous species. However, tree thinning, even if coupled 
with mechanical reduction of aboveground shrub biomass, may 
allow sprouting shrubs to rapidly respond during a period of 
increased resource availability and lower competition. Similarly, 
burning treatments may be initially problematic if shrub fuel 
loading is high, or shrubs are tall and provide fuel connectivity 
with tree canopy layers. Several approaches have been tested 
for reducing shrub abundance and meeting fuel hazard 
reduction and restoration objectives in transitional forests. 
Treatments studied include: 1) prescribed fire and repeat 
burning; 2) mechanical treatments including mastication; 3) 
chemical treatments; and 4) biological control. It should be 
noted that many modern approaches employed are based on 
earlier knowledge developed for controlling chaparral and other 
woody vegetation to improve forage for livestock and attempts 
to enhance water yield (Cable 1975). 
Prescribed Fire and Repeat Burning 
Because low-severity surface fire is a key ecological process 
in southwestern ponderosa pine forests, its reintroduction is 
fundamental to ecological restoration of these systems. Fire has 
also been sought as a treatment to reduce shrub abundance 
and fuel loading. Use of a single application of prescribed 
burning may provide temporary control of chaparral shrub 
species, but is generally less effective for long-term control 
(Schmutz and Whitham 1962, Fuhrmann and Crews 2001). 
Results of repeat burning of Arizona chaparral depend on life 
history strategies (i.e., reproductive characteristics, longevity, 
and responses to disturbance) of species in the community. For 
example, Pond and Cable (1960) reported that desert ceanothus 
and pointleaf manzanita were eliminated with a single burn 
(Pond and Cable 1960). However, skunkbush was reduced only 
after three consecutive burns, Wright’s silktassel (Garrya wrightii) 
was eliminated by four consecutive annual burns, and redberry 
buckthorn (Rhamnus crocea) was reduced by two annual burns 
as well as by two burns spaced two years apart. Five consecutive 
annual burns were required to reduce stems of turbinella oak; 
interval burning of two or more years did not decrease stem 
count of this species. In California chaparral, repeated wildfires 
and increased fire frequency diminished dominant shrub species 
and led to a dramatic increase in non-native herbaceous species, 
with an overall shift in community composition (Haidinger 
and Keeley 1993). However, in Arizona, prescribed fire may be 
difficult to use repeatedly over short time periods as there is often 
a limited amount of fine fuels and some woody species exhibit 
low flammability when sprouts are young (< 10 years). It is 
thought that over time increases in dead material and pine needle 
drape may increase flammability (P. Gordon, USDA Forest Service, 
personal communication). However, a fire frequency analysis of 
10 chaparral sites in southern and central California found that 
fuel age and fire probability were not strongly related (Moritz 
et al. 2004). This work indicated that extreme fire weather 
played a larger role in determining fire probability than fuel 
age. Additional research on fuel loading over time in California 
chaparral found mixed results and high spatiotemporal variability 
related to species, aspect, field vs. remote sensing data gathering, 
and statistical methods (Uyeda et al. 2016). 
Mechanical Treatments 
Mechanical treatments such as cabling and chaining have  
been used in attempts to reduce shrub cover in chaparral 
systems but are not often feasible as a treatment in forest 
environments. In addition, cabling and chaining are 
ineffective for destroying the root crown of most shrub 
species, and in fact often result in prolific sprouting 
(Cable 1975). Root plowing has been found to eliminate  
81- 95 percent of occurring shrubs, but this treatment is 
limited to areas relatively free of rocks, drainages, and  

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 38    
Reference Conditions and Restoration of Transitional Ponderosa Pine Forests in the Southwest
8
steep slopes (Cable 1975). Mechanized cutting of shrubs and 
trees reduces stem density in the short-term, but obligate 
resprouters are stimulated by such treatments (Potts et al. 2010). 
For example, Jameson and Johnsen (1964) showed a may lead 
to a doubling of the number of alligator junipers after cutting at 
ground-level, due to basal sprouting and emergence of seedlings. 
Mastication is a technique that mechanically grinds or 
shreds vegetation into small pieces (Fig. 5), and has recently 
been widely applied to accomplish hazardous fuels reduction and 
restoration objectives in chaparral transition forest types across 
the western U.S. The mastication process changes fuel particle 
size and shape, and redistributes fuels from vegetation canopies 
to the forest floor. In terms of hazardous fuels management, 
mastication treatments can moderate fire effects and lower ladder 
fuels, but in some situations they can also be expected to increase 
solar radiation and surface winds, decrease fuel moisture, and 
increase flame length, rate of fire spread and fireline intensity 
(Kreye et al. 2014, Brennan and Keeley 2015). To date, however, 
few studies have examined effects of mastication on shrub 
understories and ecological processes in Arizona forests. Reviews 
and research available from forests in other regions may provide 
clues for land managers in the Southwest. 
Similar to other mechanical treatments, a single-entry 
mastication of woody understory vegetation without follow-up 
or complementary treatments may not prevent shrub sprouting 
and may lead to a return of the site to pretreatment conditions 
(Schwilk et al. 2009, Brennan and Keeley 2015). For example, 
Battaglia et al. (2009) observed prolific resprouting (>9,717 
stems/acre) of Gambel oak following mastication treatments 
in pinyon-juniper ecosystems of the Rocky Mountains. 
Further, an extensive review of 62 masticated sites in southern 
California chaparral determined that treatments involving a 
combination of mastication and burning, as well as second-
entry mastication sites, showed significantly lower total fuel 
loads than single-entry mastication treatments (Brennan and 
Keeley 2015). In addition, crushing significantly reduced shrub 
height as compared with mastication; however, live woody 
biomass was not significantly different among treatments. 
In contrast, following mastication and hand-cut/pile/burn 
treatments in Oregon chaparral, shrub cover was generally 
<3 percent, reflecting a removal of approximately 75 percent 
(Perchemlides et al. 2008, Sikes and Muir 2009). This decline 
was still apparent 4-7 years following the combined treatments. 
It should be noted that the primary shrub species at this site 
were buckbrush (Ceanothus cuneatus) and sticky whiteleaf 
manzanita (Arctostaphylos viscida), both obligate seeders, not 
resprouters. Native forb and grass species decreased in cover 
and increased in richness, while non-native species increased 
in cover and richness (Perchemlides et al. 2008, Coulter et al. 
2010). Increases in ceanothus seedlings were more abundant 
following mastication, perhaps due to scarification or improved 
microhabitats (Sikes and Muir 2009).
Although prescribed fire following mastication may 
increase control of resprouting species (Schwilk et al. 2009), 
burning masticated fuels has the potential to result in soil 
temperatures that are lethal to plant roots (>140 degrees 
Fahrenheit) and soil microorganisms (122- 932 degrees 
Fahrenheit), particularly when residue depths are greater  
than 2.95 inches (Busse et al. 2005, Coulter et al. 2010). 
Indications are that burning masticated woody fuels when soils 
are moist (>20 percent volumetric) will lessen the damage to 
roots and microorganisms in the top 0.8-2 inches (Busse et 
al. 2010). Differences in soil type, such as texture, porosity, 
bulk density and thermal conductivity appear to be far less 
impactful than soil moisture on soil heating (Busse et al. 2010). 
In addition, waiting to burn for a period of at least three years 
following mastication treatments may result in lessened fire 
intensity (Coulter et al. 2010). 
Effects from the season of burning following mastication 
treatments are constrained by the ecosystem type and are 
heavily climate-dependent. A comparison between prescribed 
fire and mastication in California chaparral reported higher 
shrub cover and seedling density with prescribed fire when 
compared to mastication treatments. However, the authors 
found no significant effect of season of burning or mastication 
on shrub resprouting (Potts et al. 2010). 
Herbicides 
Although no longer widely used to control chaparral species, 
herbicides have been shown to have some long-term efficacy in 
control of woody vegetation, including turbinella oak (Fuhrmann 
and Crews 2001). Herbicides tend to be most effective on the 
stems of sprouting species that emerge following fire. Large, 
woody stems of plants that have long escaped burning are much 
more difficult to treat, as are fire sprouts of resistant species 
(Cable 1975). Repeated “light” applications of herbicides for 
two or three consecutive years are more effective on controlling 
turbinella oak than either single light or “heavy” applications, or 
alternate-year light applications (Schmutz and Whitham 1962). 
However, some herbicides also effectively kill all grasses and 
forbs, leading to undesirable changes in the vegetation  
(Cable 1975). Combinations of fire and herbicides and 
mechanical plus herbicide treatments are particularly effective 
for controlling shrubs (Cable 1975). However, these sorts 
of intensive treatments may also require follow-up. For 
example, decades after aerial administration of Picloram 
(Tordon 10K) and Tebuthiuron to chaparral/grassland 
transition vegetation in Arizona, although turbinella oak had 
been controlled to a degree, invasive bromes formed a high 
component of the vegetation (Fuhrmann and Crews 2001).
Figure 5. Rubber-tired loader trucks, sometimes called industrial tractors, 
use a drum-style hydraulic mulching head attachment to masticate fuels.  
Photo courtesy of USDA Forest Service

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 38    
Reference Conditions and Restoration of Transitional Ponderosa Pine Forests in the Southwest
9
Grazing 
Use of Spanish or Angora goats to control sprouting species 
or to convert chaparral to grassland has been shown to be 
unmanageable in interior chaparral, although it is a method 
of treatment that is still in use to control invasive grasses in 
California chaparral. Goats grazed in the southwestern U.S. 
including an area near Payson, Arizona tended to prefer 
turbinella oak, sugar sumac (Rhus ovata), skunkbush, hairy 
mountain-mahogany (Cercocarpus breviflorus), Wright silktassel, 
desert ceanothus, Gambel oak, and western serviceberry 
(Amelanchier alnifolia) and nearly all herbaceous species, 
including grasses and forbs when available (Knipe 1982, Knipe 
1983, Warren et al. 1984, Riggs and Urness 1989). Most of 
the favored shrub species are also preferred by native deer and 
elk populations, and reductions in nitrogen-fixing ceanothus 
species could negatively influence long-term nitrogen cycling 
(Severson and DeBano 1991). Effects of grazing on the 
herbaceous plant community, soil erosion, shrub cover, and fire 
hazard reduction have been weak or inconclusive, and studies 
have been mostly short-term (Knipe 1982, Knipe 1983,  
Riggs and Urness 1989, Severson and DeBano 1991). 
Conclusions
Transitional ponderosa pine forests are diverse communities, 
important in terms of natural capital and biological diversity in 
the southwestern U.S. Occurring at the environmental limits of 
ponderosa pine, they are dynamic ecosystems characterized by 
rapid change and sensitivity to climate. Our literature review 
indicated that fire exclusion due to historical intensive livestock 
grazing and tree harvesting has led to a broadening of ecotone 
boundaries, with shrubs increasing within pine forests as well 
as coniferous trees expanding into chaparral and evergreen 
woodlands. Although more primary research is needed to 
better characterize historical fire regimes and quantify structure 
and composition changes in these southwestern ecosystems, 
results from studies of other, similar systems in the West 
corroborate patterns reported in Arizona and New Mexico. 
Increases in understory shrubs within transitional forests 
represent parallel increases in fuel loading and crown fire 
hazard. Thus, public land managers in the Southwest seek 
to implement fuels reduction and ecological restoration 
treatments, particularly in wildland-urban interface zones. 
Important distinctions exist between fuel hazard reduction 
approaches that have crown fire mitigation as a central 
goal and ecological restoration that is guided by historical 
reference condition information concerning forest structure, 
composition, and function. Due to complexities regarding 
historical changes, land managers seeking to implement 
ecological restoration treatments are recommended to 
use multiple lines of evidence when gathering reference 
information. Restoration objectives developed for historical 
forest environments may run counter to those appropriate 
for historical shrublands. Basic forest restoration treatments 
will include reducing densities of trees that have established 
due to fire exclusion, reintroducing frequent surface fire, 
and reducing shrub abundance to favor herbaceous species 
in understory communities. In contrast, maintaining tree 
cover where ponderosa pine has expanded into shrublands 
due to fire exclusion would not meet restoration or 
conservation objectives for shrubland ecosystems. More 
research is needed to test alternative restoration methods 
in these ecosystems. Research elsewhere has indicated that 
multiple entries with mechanical cutting or mastication, 
followed by prescribed fire, may be more effective at 
controlling woody shrubs than single-entry approaches 
(Fig. 2). However, site-specific variability in species 
composition is an important factor determining outcomes. 
Managers should understand the life history strategies of 
common species on project sites to better predict success. 
Mechanical treatments may severely reduce obligate seeders 
whereas fire may encourage increases in these species. 
Obligate resprouters may be reduced only by the most 
intensive or repeated treatments. Thus, depending on type, 
frequency, and intensity, treatments designed to control 
woody species may invariably shift understory abundance, 
composition, and structure.
Allen, C.D., and D.D. Breshears. 1998. Drought induced shift of a 
forest-woodland ecotone: rapid landscape response to climate 
variation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 
USA, 95:14839-14842.
Barton, A.M., 2002. Intense wildﬁre in southeastern Arizona: 
transformation of a Madrean oak-pine forest to oak woodland. 
Forest Ecology and Management, 165:205-212.
Battaglia, M., C. Rhoades, M.E. Rocca and M.G. Ryan. 2009. A regional 
assessment of the ecological effects of chipping and mastication 
fuels reduction and forest restoration treatments. Final report: 
JFSP Project Number 06-3-2-26.
Bóo, R.M., and R.D. Pettit. 1975. Carbohydrate reserves in roots of sand shin 
oak in West Texas. Journal of Range Management, 28(6):469-472.
Brennan, T.J., and J.E. Keeley. 2015. Effect of mastication and other 
mechanical treatments on fuel structure in chaparral. 
International Journal of Wildland Fire, 24:949-963.
Brooks, M.L., and J.C. Chambers. 2011. Resistance to invasion and 
resilience to ﬁre in desert shrublands of North America. 
Rangeland Ecology and Management, 64:431-438.
Brown, D.E. 1994. Biotic Communities: Southwestern United States and 
Northwestern Mexico. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press.
Busse, M.D., K.R. Hubbert, G.O. Fiddler, C.J. Shestak, and R.F. Powers. 
2005. Lethal soil temperatures during burning of masticated forest 
residues. International Journal of Wildland Fire, 14(3):267-276.
Busse, M.D., C.J. Shestak, K. R. Hubbert, and E.E. Knapp. 2010. Soil physical 
properties regulate lethal heating during burning of woody residues. 
Soil Science Society of America Journal, 74(3):947-955.
Busse, M.D., S.A. Simon, and G.M. Riegel. 2000. Tree growth and understory 
responses to low-severity prescribed burning in thinned Pinus 
ponderosa forest of central Oregon. Forest Science, 46:258-268.
Cable, Dwight R. 1975. Range management in the chaparral type and its 
ecological basis: The status of our knowledge. Res. Pap. RM-
RP-155. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station. 30 p.
Carmichael, R.S., O.D. Knipe, C.P. Pase, and W.W. Brady. 1978. Arizona 
chaparral: Plant associations and ecology. USDA Forest Service 
Research Paper RM-202.
Literature Cited

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 38    
Reference Conditions and Restoration of Transitional Ponderosa Pine Forests in the Southwest
10
Clarke, P.J., M.J. Lawes, J.J., Midgley, B.B. Lamont, F. Ojeda, G.E. Burrows, 
N.J. Enright, and K.J.E. Knox. 2013. Resprouting as a key 
functional trait: how buds, protection and resources drive 
persistence after ﬁre. New Phytologist, 197:19-35.
Cooper, C.F. 1960. Changes in vegetation, structure and growth of 
southwestern pine forests since white settlement. Ecological 
Monographs, 30:129-164.
Coulter, C.T., D. Southworth, and P.E. Hosten. 2010. Prescribed ﬁre and 
post-ﬁre seeding in brush masticated oak-chaparral: Consequences 
for native and nonnative plants. Fire Ecology, 6(2):60-75.
Covington, W.W., R.L. Everett, R. Steel, L.L. Irwin, T.A. Daer, and 
A.N.D. Auclair. 1994. Historical and anticipated changes in 
forest ecosystems of the Inland West of the United States. 
Journal of Sustainable Forestry, 2:13-63.
Covington, W.W., P.Z. Fulé, M.M. Moore, S.C. Hart, T.E. Kolb, 
J.N. Mast, S.S. Sackett, and M.R. Wagner. 1997. Restoring 
ecosystem health in ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest. 
Journal of Forestry, 95:23-29.
Danzer, S.R. 1998. Fire history and stand structure in the Huachuca 
Mountains of southeastern Arizona. MS Thesis. University of 
Arizona, Tucson.
Davis, O.K., and R.M. Turner. 1986. Palynological evidence for the historic 
expansion of juniper and desert shrubs in Arizona, USA. Review 
of Paleobotany and Palynology, 49:177-193.
Dieterich, J.H., and A.R. Hibbert. 1990. Fire history in a small ponderosa 
pine stand surrounded by chaparral. Poster paper presented at 
the conference, Effects of Fire in Management of Southwestern 
Natural Resources (Tuscon, AZ, November 14–17, 1988).
Earl, R.A., and D.L. Bash. 1996. Response of alligator juniper (Juniperus 
deppeana Pinaceae) to historical environmental variability in south 
central New Mexico. The Southwestern Naturalist, 41:227-238.
Engle, D.M., C.D. Bonham, and L.E. Bartel. 1983. Ecological 
characteristics and control of Gambel oak. Journal of Range 
Management, 36(3):363-365.
Engstrom, R.T., R.L. Crawford, and W.W. Baker. 1984. Breeding bird 
populations in relation to changing forest structure following ﬁre 
exclusion: a 15-year study. The Wilson Bulletin, 96:437-450.
Fuhrmann, K.N., and T.E. Crews. 2001. Long-term effects of vegetation 
treatments in the chaparral transition zone. Rangelands, 23:13–16.
Fulé, P.Z., and W.W. Covington. 1997. Fire regimes and forest structure 
in the Sierra Madre Occidental, Durango, Mexico. Acta Botánica 
Mexicana, 041:43-79.
Fulé, P.Z., and W.W. Covington. 1998. Spatial patterns of Mexican pine-oak 
forests under different recent ﬁre regimes. Plant Ecology, 134:197-
209.
Fulé, P.Z., W.W. Covington, and M.M. Moore. 1997. Determining 
reference conditions for ecosystem management of southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests. Ecological Applications, 7:895-908.
Fulé, P.Z., T.A. Heinlein, W.W. Covington, and M.M. Moore. 2003. 
Assessing ﬁre regimes on Grand Canyon landscapes with ﬁre-scar 
and ﬁre-record data. International Journal of Wildland Fire, 12:129-
145.
Gasser, R.E. 1982. Vegetation stability and change in the Prescott region 
and other areas of the Southwest. The Kiva, 48:83-97.
Haidinger, T.L., and J.E. Keeley. 1993. Role of high ﬁre frequency in 
destruction of mixed chaparral. Madrono, 40(3):141-147.
Harrington, M.G. 1985. The effects of spring, summer, and fall burning 
on Gambel oak in a southwestern ponderosa pine stand. Forest 
Science, 31(1):156-163.
Harrington, M.G. 1989. Gambel oak carbohydrate response to spring, 
summer, and fall prescribed burning. Journal of Range Management, 
42(6):504-507.
Hessburg, P.F., J.K. Agee, and J.F. Franklin. 2005. Dry forests and wildland 
ﬁres of the inland Northwest USA: contrasting the landscape 
ecology pf the pre-settlement and modern eras. Forest Ecology and 
Management, 211:117-139.
Iniguez, J.M., T.W. Swetnam, and C.H. Baisan. 2009. Spatially and 
temporally variable ﬁre regime on Rincon Peak, Arizona, USA. Fire 
Ecology, 5:3-20.
Iniguez, J.M., T.W. Swetnam, and S.R. Yool. 2008. Topography affected 
landscape ﬁre history patterns in southern Arizona, USA. Forest 
Ecology and Management, 256:295-303.
Jameson, D.A., and T.N. Johnsen. 1964. Ecology and control of alligator 
juniper. Weeds, 12:140-142.
Kaib, J.M. 2001. Fire history reconstructions in the Mogollon Province 
ponderosa pine forests of the Tonto National Forest central Arizona. 
Final Report, USDA Tonto National Forest.
Kaib, M., C.H. Baisan, H.D. Grissino-Mayer, and T.W. Swetnam. 1996. Fire 
history in the gallery pine-oak forests and adjacent grasslands of the 
Chiricahua Mountains of Arizona. USDA Forest Service General 
Technical Report GTR-RM-289.
Kaib, M., T.W. Swetnam, and C.H. Baisan. 1999. Fire history in canyon 
pine-oak forests, intervening desert grasslands, and higher-elevation 
mixed conifer forests of the southwest Borderlands. USDA Forest 
Service Proceedings RMRS-P-10. 
Keeley, J.E., and S.C. Keeley. 2000. Chaparral. In: Barbour, Michael G., and 
William Dwight Billings. North American Terrestrial Vegetation. 
Cambridge University Press. Pp. 165-207.
Keeley, J.K., C.J. Fotheringham, and P.W. Rundel. 2012. Postﬁre chaparral 
regeneration under Mediterranean and non-Mediterranean 
climates. Madroño, 59:109–127.
Kimmins, J.P. 1987. Forest ecology. London: MacMillan Publishers Ltd.
Knipe, O.D. 1982. The use of angora goats in converting Arizona chaparral to 
grassland. In Proc. 3rd Int. Con. on Goat Production and Disease, 
Tucson, AZ. Pp. 411–416
Knipe, O.D. 1983. Effects of Angora goat browsing on burned-over Arizona 
chaparral. Rangelands, 252-255.
Kreye, K., N.W. Brewer, P. Morgan, J.M. Varner, A.M.S. Smith, C.M. 
Hoffman, and R.D. Ottmar. 2014. Fire behavior in masticated fuels: 
A review. Forest Ecology and Management, 314:193–207.
Landhäusser, S.M., and V.J. Lieffers. 2003. Seasonal changes in carbohydrate 
reserves in mature northern Populus tremuloides clones. Trees, 17:471-476.
Landres, P.B., P. Morgan, and F.J. Swanson. 1999. Overview of the use 
of natural variability concepts in managing ecological systems. 
Ecological Applications, 9:1179-1188.
Laughlin, D.C., M.M. Moore, J.D. Bakker, C.A. Casey, J.D. Springer, 
P.Z. Fulé, and W.W. Covington. 2006. Assessing targets for the 
restoration of herbaceous vegetation in ponderosa pine forests. 
Restoration Ecology, 14:548-560.
Leopold, A. 1924. Grass, brush, timber, and ﬁre in southern Arizona. Journal 
of Forestry, 22:1-10.
Little, E.L., Jr. 1971. Atlas of United States Trees, Volume 1, Conifers and 
Important Hardwoods: USDA Miscellaneous Publication 1146.
Lowe, C.H. 1964. Arizona’s Natural Environment: Landscapes and Habitats. 
Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
Literature Cited

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 38    
Reference Conditions and Restoration of Transitional Ponderosa Pine Forests in the Southwest
11
Literature Cited
MacKenzie, M.D., T.H. DeLuca, and A. Sala. 2004. Forest structure and 
organic horizon analysis along a ﬁre chronosequence in the 
low elevation forests of western Montana. Forest Ecology and 
Management, 203:331-343.
Miller, M.E. 1999. Use of historic aerial photography to study vegetation 
change in the Negrito Creek watershed, southwestern New 
Mexico. The Southwestern Naturalist, 44:121-137.
Moir, W.H., B. Geils, M.A. Benoit, and D. Scurlock. 1997. Ecology of 
southwestern ponderosa pine forests. USDA Forest Service 
General Technical Report RM-GTR-292.
Moore, M.M., W.W. Covington, and P.Z. Fulé. 1999. Reference 
conditions and ecological restoration: a southwestern ponderosa 
pine perspective. Ecological Applications, 9:1266-1277.
Moore, M.M., D. W. Huffman, P.Z. Fulé, W.W. Covington, and J.E. 
Crouse. 2004. Comparison of historical and contemporary 
forest structure and composition on permanent plots in 
southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Forest Science, 50:162-176.
Moritz, M.A., J.E. Keeley, E.A. Johnson, and A.A. Schaffner. 2004. 
Testing a basic assumption of shrubland ﬁre management: how 
important is fuel age? Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 
2(2):67-72.
Nagel, T.A., and A.H. Taylor. 2005. Fire and persistence of montane 
chaparral in mixed conifer forest landscapes in the northern 
Sierra Nevada, Lake Tahoe Basin, California, USA. Journal of 
the Torrey Botanical Society, 132:442-457.
Parker, V.T., M.C. Vasey, J.E. Keeley. 2009. Arctostaphylos. In: Flora 
of North America Editorial Committee, eds. 1993. Flora 
of North America North of Mexico. New York and Oxford 
University Press. Vol. 8, pp. 406–445.
Perchemlides, K.A., P.S. Muir, and P.E. Hosten, P.E. 2008. Responses 
of chaparral and oak woodland plant communities to fuel-
reduction thinning in southwestern Oregon. Rangeland Ecology 
and Management, 61(1): 98-109.
Pond, F.W., and D.R. Cable. 1960. Effect of heat treatment on sprout 
production of some shrubs of the chaparral in central Arizona. 
Journal of Range Management, 13(6):313-317.
Potts, J.B., E. Marino, and S.L. Stephens. 2010. Chaparral shrub recovery 
after fuel reduction: a comparison of prescribed ﬁre and 
mastication techniques. Plant Ecology, 210: 303–315.
Poulos H.M., A.H. Taylor, and R.M. Beaty. 2007. Environmental 
controls on dominance and diversity of woody plant species in a 
Madrean, Sky Island ecosystem, Arizona, USA. Plant Ecology, 
193:15–30
Riggs, R.A., and P.J. Urness. 1989. Effects of goat browsing on  
Gambel oak communities in northern Utah. Journal of  
Range Management, 354-360.
Sánchez Meador, A.J., P.F. Parysow, and M.M. Moore. 2011. A new 
method for delineating tree patches and assessing spatial 
reference conditions of ponderosa pine forests in northern 
Arizona. Restoration Ecology, 19:490-499.
Savage, M., and J.N. Mast. 2005. How resilient are southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests after crown ﬁre? Canadian Journal of 
Forest Research, 35:967-977.
Saunier, R.E., and R.F. Wagle. 1967. Factors affecting the distribution of 
shrub live oak (Quercus turbinella Greene). Ecology, 48(1):35-41.
Schalau, J., and G. Twaronite. 2010. Wildﬁre Risk Reduction in Arizona’s 
Interior Chaparral. Arizona Cooperative Extension, University of 
Arizona. AZ1516
Schmutz, E.M., and D.W. Whitham. 1962. Shrub control studies in the oak-
chaparral of Arizona. Journal of Range Management, 15:61–67.
Schwilk, D.W., J.E. Keeley, E.E. Knapp, J. McIver, J.D. Bailey, C.J. Fettig, 
C.E. Fiedler, R.J. Harrod, J.J. Moghaddas, K.W. Outcalt, and C.N. 
Skinner. 2009. The national ﬁre and ﬁre surrogate study: effects 
of fuel reduction methods on forest vegetation structure and fuels. 
Ecological Applications, 19(2): 285-304.
Severson, K.E., and L.F. Debano. 1991. Inﬂuence of Spanish goats on 
vegetation and soils in Arizona chaparral. Journal of Range 
Management, 111-117.
Shaw, H.G. 2006. Wood plenty, grass good, water none – vegetation 
changes in Arizona’s upper Verde River watershed from 1850 to 
1997. USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RMRS-
GTR-177.
Sikes, K.G., and P.S. Muir. 2009. A comparison of the short-term effects 
of two fuel treatments on chaparral communities in southwest 
Oregon. Madroño, 56:8–22.
Sneed, P., L. Floyd-Hanna, and D. Hanna. 2002. Prescott Basin Fire History 
Project. Final Report. Unpublished report. Prescott College, AZ.
Swetnam, T.W., and C.H. Baisan. 1996. Historical ﬁre regime patterns in the 
southwestern United States since AD 1700. In: C.D. Allen (ed) Fire 
Effects in Southwestern Forests: Proceedings of the 2nd La Mesa 
Fire Symposium, pp. 11-32. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station, General Technical Report RM-GTR-286.
Swetnam, T.W., C.H. Baisan, A.C. Caprio, and P.M. Brown. 1992. Fire 
history in a Mexican oak-pine woodland and adjacent montane 
conifer gallery forest in southeastern Arizona. Paper presented at the 
symposium on the Ecology and Management of Oak and Associated 
Woodlands: Perspectives in the Southwestern United States and 
Northern Mexico. Sierra Vista, AZ, USA. April 27-30, 1992.
Tiedemann, A.R., W.P. Clary and R.J. Bargour. 1987. Underground systems 
of Gambel oak (Quercus gambelii) in central Utah. American Journal 
of Botany, 74(7):1065-1071.
Tuten, M., J. Bedell, C. Denton, and D. Lund. 2006. Rapid ﬁre regime 
assessment, northwest Bradshaw Mountains, Prescott National 
Forest. Misc. Report. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern 
Arizona University.
Uyeda, K.A., D. A. Stow, J.F. O’Leary, I.T. Schmidt, and P.J. Riggan. 2016. 
Spatial variation of fuel loading within varying aged stands of 
chaparral. Applied Vegetation Science. 19: 267-279.
Wahlberg, M.M., F.J. Triepke, W.A. Robbie, S.H. Strenger, D. 
Vandendriesche, E.H. Muldavin, and J.R Malusa. 2013. Ecological 
Response Units of the Southwestern United States. USDA Forest 
Service Forestry Report FR-R3-XX-XX. Southwestern Region, 
Regional Ofﬁce, Albuquerque, NM. 201 pp.
Warren, L.E., D.N. Ueckert, J.M. and Shelton. 1984. Comparative diets 
of Rambouillet, Barbado, and Karakul sheep and Spanish and 
Angora goats. Journal of Range Management, 172-180.
Whittaker, R.H. 1975. Communities and Ecosystems.  
New York: MacMillan Publishing Co., Inc. 
Young, T.P., and E. Peffer. 2010. “Recalcitrant understory layers” revisited: 
arrested succession and the long life-spans of clonal mid-successional 
species. Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 40:1184-1188.

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 38    
Reference Conditions and Restoration of Transitional Ponderosa Pine Forests in the Southwest
12
Life 
 
Scientific 
Common 
Form 
Family 
Name  
Name 
Adaptation to Fire
Top-killed by fire but sprouts vigorously from  
root crown (1, 2). Fire breaks seed dormancy (2).
Fire effects largely unknown.
Intolerant of severe fire. Sprouts from an above-
ground caudex when burned (2).
Typically only top-killed by fire, but mortality can 
be as high as 20% and plants may be weakened by 
fire (2). Sprouts from caudex (1, 2).
Weak sprouter from rhizomes and basal stem 
buds below the surface (1, 2). Seeds are apparently 
harmed by fire (2).
Generally top-killed but can survive low-intensity 
fire. However, mortality may still be at least 25%.
Not tolerant of frequent burning. Sprouts from 
rhizomes, root crown, belowground sprouts and 
undamaged stems after fire (2).
Sprouts from root crown (1).
Sprouts from root crown (1).
Reproduces from seed and sprouts prolifically 
from shallow lateral roots (1).
Most prickly pears are killed by high-severity  
fire and are decimated by frequent fire. Some 
species can sprout from buds in the root crown 
following low- to moderate-severity fire (2).
Sprouts from root crown (1). Limited seed 
recruitment (2).
Seed cones serotinous (open with fire) (1). 
Reproduces exclusively from seed and requires 
bare mineral soil for germination and seedling 
establishment (2). Least tolerant of all Arizona 
chaparral woody species to fire; neither seedlings 
nor mature trees are very tolerant (2). However, a 
lack of fire can also lead to serious decline (2).
Resistant to even high-severity fire, particularly
older trees (2): cutting also appears to be 
ineffective as a means of control (2). Prolific 
sprouting from root crown (1).
Shrub 
Anacardiaceae 
Rhus aromatica 
skunkbush
  
 
var. trilobata
Succulent 
Asparagaceae 
Agave parryi 
Parry’s agave
Succulent 
Asparagaceae 
Dasylirion 
common 
 
  
 
wheeleri 
sotol
Succulent 
Asparagaceae 
Nolina microcarpa 
beargrass
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
Succulent 
Asparagaceae 
Yucca baccata 
banana yucca
Succulent 
Asparagaceae 
Yucca elata 
soaptree yucca
Shrub 
Asteraceae 
Baccharis pteronioides 
yerba de pasmo
Shrub 
Berberidaceae 
Berberis haematocarpa 
red barberry
Shrub 
Boraginaceae 
Eriodictyon 
narrowleaf
  
 
angustifolium 
yerba santa
Cactus 
Cactaceae 
Opuntia spp. 
prickly pear
Shrub 
Cannabaceae 
Celtis reticulata 
netleaf  
 
  
 
 
hackberry 
 
 
Tree 
Cupressaceae 
Callitropsis arizonica, 
Arizona  
  
 
synonym: Cupressus  
cypress
  
 
arizonica 
  
 
Tree 
Cupressaceae 
Juniperus deppeana 
alligator juniper
Appendix I
Life history strategies of woody plants common in interior chaparral and/or
Madrean evergreen woodland communities (sensu Brown 1994) in Arizona and New Mexico.

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 38    
Reference Conditions and Restoration of Transitional Ponderosa Pine Forests in the Southwest
13
Life 
 
Scientific 
Common 
Form 
Family 
Name  
Name 
Adaptation to Fire
Reproduces prolifically from seeds which  
require heat scarification to germinate (1).  
No underground burl (3).
Reproduces prolifically from seeds which require
heat scarification to germinate; considered to 
be an obligate seeder (1, 2). Does not appear to 
sprout following fire, but does exhibit layering 
(2). Seeds viable in soil for decades (2). No 
underground burl (3).
Generally top-killed by fire (2); sprouts rapidly 
from root crown following fire (1,2). Repeated 
burning in same year required for control (2).
Top-killed by fire, but sprouts rapidly  
from root crown (1, 2).
Sprouts from root crown following fire; also 
regenerates from rhizomes (1, 2).
Small trees top-killed by fire; large trees survive 
fires of low severity (2). Prolific sprouting from root 
crown, low seedling survival following fire (1, 2).
Susceptible to top-kill by fire but strong sprouting 
response. Sprouts from root crown, bole or 
branches (1, 2). Seedling establishment arises from 
off-site sources or acorns in unburned crowns (2).
Adapted to frequent fire. Sprouts vigorously 
from root crown following top-kill (1, 2).
Whether or not trees are topkilled depends on 
fire severity and size. Sprouts from lignotuber and 
rhizomes after fire (1, 2).
Typically top-killed by fire but sprouts vigorously 
from root crown and rhizomes (1, 2); secondarily 
by seed (2).
Sprouts from root crown (1); also establishes from 
seed (2). Burning at 1–3 year intervals significantly 
reduces or kills sprouts and mature plants (2).
Sprouts from root crown after being top-killed by 
fire (1, 2). Susceptible to repeat burning (2).
Little is known about the effect of fire (2).
Sprouts from root crown (1).
Sensitive to fire and killed by even low-intensity 
fire, particularly seedlings and small trees (2). 
Reestablishment post-fire is solely by seed (2).
  
Shrub 
Ericaceae 
Arctostaphylos 
Pringle 
 
  
 
pringlei 
manzanita
Shrub 
Ericaceae 
Arctostaphylos 
pointleaf
  
 
pungens 
manzanita
Shrub 
Fabaceae 
Acacia greggii 
catclaw acacia
  
 
 
Shrub 
Fabaceae 
Mimosa aculeaticarpa 
catclaw mimosa
  
 
var. biuncifera 
Tree 
Fabaceae 
Robinia neomexicana 
New Mexico
  
 
 
locust 
 
  
Tree 
Fabaceae 
Quercus arizonica 
Arizona oak
  
 
 
Tree 
Fabaceae 
Quercus chrysolepis 
canyon live oak
Tree 
Fabaceae 
Quercus emoryi 
Emory oak
Tree 
Fabaceae 
Quercus gambelii 
Gambel oak
Shrub 
Fabaceae 
Quercus turbinella 
turbinella oak
Shrub 
Garryaceae 
Garrya flavescens 
ashy silktassel
Shrub 
Garryaceae 
Garrya wrightii 
Wright’s 
  
 
 
silktassel
Shrub 
Hydrangaceae 
Fendlera rupicola 
false mockorange
Tree 
Oleaceae 
Fraxinus lowellii/ 
single leaf ash
  
 
anomala 
Tree 
Pinaceae 
Pinus edulis 
pinyon pine

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 38    
Reference Conditions and Restoration of Transitional Ponderosa Pine Forests in the Southwest
14
Life 
 
Scientific 
Common 
Form 
Family 
Name  
Name 
Adaptation to Fire
Weak sprouter. Reproduces prolifically from seed 
following fire, germination stimulated by fire (1).
Top-killed by fire, but seeds are stored in soil 
(2). Sprouts from root crown and stems (1,2). 
Also layers and reproduces from seed, requiring 
scarification from fire or other forms of disturbance 
(2). Seed establishment seems to prevail over 
sprouting, which appears to be weak (2).
Even if top-killed in fire, sprouts vigorously from 
dormant buds on root crown (1, 2). Establishes 
from seed, but success is dependent on moisture 
and other factors (2).
Generally tolerant of fire, but sprouts from root 
crown when top-killed (1, 2).
Often top-killed by fire; extensive root system; 
sprouts from root crown and rhizomes (1, 2).  
Seed germination is thought to require high 
moisture and successful recruitment may require 
long fire-free intervals (2).
Typically top-killed by fire but sprouts rapidly and 
prolifically from root crown and rhizomes (2).
Generally killed by severe fire, and even low-
severity fire in some cases; weak sprouter 
following fire (2). Ability to survive fire or to 
sprout may have genetic component (2).
Shrub 
Rhamnaceae 
Ceanothus greggii 
desert ceanothus 
Shrub 
Rhamnaceae 
Ceanothus integerrimus 
deerbrush
Shrub 
Rhamnaceae 
Frangula/Rhamnus 
California
  
 
californica 
buckthorn 
  
 
 
 
 
Shrub 
Rosaceae 
Amelanchier 
Utah service-
  
 
utahensis 
berry
Shrub 
Rosaceae 
Cercocarpus 
mountain-
  
 
montanus 
mahogany
Tree 
Rosaceae 
Prunus virginiana 
chokecherry
Shrub 
Rosaceae 
Purshia mexicana 
Stansbury’s
  
 
var. stansburyana 
cliffrose
  
Sources used in the appendix are:
1) Carmichael et al. 1978
2) Fire Effects Information Systems: https://www.feis-crs.org/feis/#
3) Parker et al. 2009
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank external reviewers Dr. Lisa Floyd-Hanna (Prescott College), Dr. Mary 
Lata (USDA Forest Service), and Dr. Lloyd R. Fuller (USDA Forest Service). We would also like to 
acknowledge Diane Vosick (NAU ERI) for her review of the working paper and Tayloe Dubay (NAU 
ERI) for review and technical editing.

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 38    
Reference Conditions and Restoration of Transitional Ponderosa Pine Forests in the Southwest
15
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Afﬁrmative Action Institution.
This report was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.
For more information about forest restoration, contact the ERI at (928) 523-7182 or nau.edu/eri.
Working Papers in Intermountain West
Frequent-Fire Forest Restoration
 1. Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons and Adaptive Management Practices
 2. Understory Plan Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
 3. Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
 4. Fules Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Beneﬁts
 5. Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
 6. Butterﬂies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
 7. Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
 8. Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
 9. Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
 10. The Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Restoration Model
 11. Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration
 12. Restoring Forest Roads
 13. Treating Slash after Restoration Thinning
 14. Integrating Forest Restoration Treatments with mexican Spotted Owl Habitat Needs
 15. Effects of Forest Thinning Treatments on Fire Behavior
 16. Snags and Forest Restoration
 17. Bat Habitat and Forest Restoration Treatments
 18. Prescribed and Wildland Use Fires in the Southwest: Do Timing and Frequency Matter?
 19. Understory Seeding in Southwestern Forests Following Wildﬁre and Ecological Restoration Treatments
 20. Controlling Cheatgrass in Ponderosa Pine and Pinyon-Juniper Restoration Areas
 21. Managing Coarse Woody Debris in Frequent-ﬁre Southwestern Forests
 22. Restoring Spatial Pattern to Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
 23. Guidelines for Managing Small Mammals in Restored Ponderosa Pine Forests of Northern Arizona
 24. Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Burning
 25. Strategies for Enhancing and Restoring Rare Plants and Their Habitats in the Face  
  of Climate Change and Habitat Destruction in the Intermountain West
26. Wildlife Habitat Values and Forest Structure in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine: Implications for Restoration
 27. Fuel Treatment Longevity
 28. Southwestern Mixed-Conifer Forests: Evaluating Reference Conditions to Guide Ecological Restoration Treatments
 29. Post-Wildﬁre Restoration of Structure, Composition, and Function in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine  
  and Warm/Dry Mixed-Conifer Forests
 30. Impact of Forest Restoration Treatments on Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Tree Resistance to Bark Beetles
 31. Climage Change Impact on Bark Beetle Outbreaks and the Impact of Outbreaks on Subsequent Fires
 32. An Evaluation of Fire Regime Recontstruction Methods
 33. The 2012 Mexican Spotted Owl Recovery Plan Guidelines for Forest Restoration in the American Southwest
 34. Climate Change and Fire in the Southwest
 35. Carbon Cycling in Southwestern Forests: Reservoirs, Fluxes, and the Effects of Fire and Management
 36. Wildlife and Fire: Impacts of Wildﬁre Prescribed Fire on Wildlife and Habitats in Southwestern Coniferous Forests
 37.  The Inﬂuence of Restoration Treatments on Hydrologic Output in Fire-Adapted Forests of the Southwest

P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
eri.nau.edu
1003338
Ecological 
Restoration 
Institute
College of Engineering, Forestry,  
and Natural Sciences
