The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Reference Conditions Are Influenced by the Physical  
Template and Vary by Forest Type 
 
By Kyle Rodman, University of Colorado Boulder, Department of Geography  
 
Introduction 
Intact ecological systems can be characterized by variations in structure, pattern, and process, through 
space and time. A knowledge of these natural ranges of ecosystem variability (NRVs) can be helpful in 
developing management frameworks and in informing restoration practices. Many ponderosa pine-
dominated forests of the southwestern United States have experienced alteration since widespread Eu-
ro-American settlement in the late 1800s. Historically, wildfire, insects, disease, climate, soils, and to-
pography acted in concert to influence NRVs for stand densities, tree species compositions, and spatial 
patterns, leading to heterogeneity at multiple scales. In this study, we reconstructed stand structure and 
composition on 33 large (>2 acres) stem-mapped sites throughout Arizona and New Mexico, and in-
vestigated the abiotic factors that may have led to variation in NRVs among these sites.  
Methods 
 Using a combination of dendrochronology, historical records, and decomposition models, we re-
constructed late 1800s tree density (live trees ac-1 and basal area ac-1), species composition, and 
spatial pattern on 33 sites in Arizona and New Mexico.  
 The dataset included ca. 10,000 increment cores and 60,000 trees and tree remnants (e.g., snags, 
logs, stumps), and is one of the largest yet used for this purpose. 
 
Key Findings 
 NRVs for stand density and spatial pattern showed substantial variation among sites and this vari-
ability could be partially explained by abiotic factors. 
 Site moisture and species composition were related to tree spatial patterns — drier sites, dominat-
ed by ponderosa pine and oak species, showed the most clustered patterns. 
 Denser stands contained more trees in groups and fewer single trees. 
 More xeric sites showed lower increases in stand density since ca. late-1800s. 
 
Management Implications 
 Results of this study show that abiotic factors and knowledge of growth conditions on a site can 
be helpful in allowing for the generalization of historical forest conditions in an area. 
 For this reason, classifications of ecosystem type (e.g., Forest Service Terrestrial Ecosystems Sur-
veys and LANDFIRE) provide useful datasets that may be used by land managers in guiding pre-
scription development, but are not perfect predictors. 
 Heterogeneity at multiple scales should be incorporated into silvicultural prescriptions by manag-
ers in the Southwest, because variability was an inherent component of ponderosa pine-dominated 
forests. 
March 2018 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Further Reading 
Bakker, J.D., A.J. Sánchez Meador, P.Z. Fule, D.W. Huffman, and M.M. Moore. 2008. “Growing Trees Backwards”: De-
scription of a Stand Reconstruction Model. Pages 136–147in S.D. Olberding and M.M. Moore, editors. Fort Valley Ex-
perimental Forest—A Century of Research 1908-2008. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Flag-
staff, AZ. 
Larson, A.J., and D. Churchill. 2012. Tree spatial patterns in fire-frequent forests of western North America, including mech-
anisms of pattern formation and implications for designing fuel reduction and restoration treatments. Forest Ecology 
and Management, 267:74–92. 
Moore, M.M., D.W. Huffman, J.D. Bakker, A.J. Sánchez Meador, D.M. Bell, P.Z. Fulé, P.F. Parysow, and W.W. Covington. 
2004. Quantifying Forest Reference Conditions for Ecological Restoration: The Woolsey Plots. Final Report to the Eco-
logical Restoration Institute for the Southwest Fire Initiative. Flagstaff, AZ. 
Reynolds, R.T., A.J. Sánchez Meador, J.A. Youtz, T. Nicolet, M.S. Matonis, P.L. Jackson, D.G. Delorenzo, and A.D. Graves. 
2013. Restoring Composition and Structure in Southwestern Frequent-Fire Forests: A Science-Based Framework for 
Improving Ecosystem Resiliency. RMRS GTR-310. Fort Collins, CO. 
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
Rodman, K.C., A.J. Sánchez Meador, M.M. Moore, and D.W. Huffman. 2017. Reference conditions are influenced by the 
physical template and vary by forest type: A synthesis of Pinus Ponderosa-dominated sites in the southwestern United 
States. Forest Ecology and Management, 404:316–329. 
Contact: Kyle Rodman, kyle.rodman@colorado.edu 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
Figure 1: Overview map and table of study sites in AZ and NM, USA, and reconstructed stand conditions (ca. late 1800s). Each 
map ID in the table corresponds with its numeric label on the site map. Live trees ac-1 and basal area (ft2 ac-1) are given for all 
trees taller than 4.5 ft. Aggregation is an index that indicates the relative tendency of trees to grow near others on a given site, 
where higher values suggest greater clustering. Density change describes the amount to which stand density increased ca. late 
1800s to the 2000s. Higher numbers suggest greater increases in density on a given site. 
