The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Restoration Benefits of Re-Entry with Resource Objective Wildfire  
on a Ponderosa Pine Landscape in Northern Arizona 
 
By David W. Huffman, Director of Research and Development  
 
Introduction 
It is widely acknowledged that ecological restoration is urgently needed in ponderosa pine (Pinus 
ponderosa) forests of the American Southwest. Historical fire exclusion and subsequent changes in 
forest structure and function have resulted in unnatural forest conditions prone to severe wildfire. 
Restoration prescriptions generally aim to reduce tree densities, break up and reduce canopy and for-
est floor fuel loading, and safely reintroduce surface fire as a critical ecosystem process. There is in-
creasing interest in managing lightning-ignited wildfires to accomplish restoration and hazardous 
fuels reduction goals. Previous research indicates that to meet objectives based on historical ranges of 
variation, moderate burn severity, wherein tree mortality leads to reductions in stand density, is im-
portant. Allowing fires to burn with moderate severity is often not desirable on multiple-use lands 
close to human communities, and it has been suggested that restoration objectives could be met incre-
mentally by allowing repeated, low-severity fires to reburn sites. We tested this assertion in a retro-
spective study of resource objective fires on a large ponderosa pine landscape in northern Arizona. 
Methods 
In 2016, with assistance from the Forest Service, we identified a landscape of just over 29,700 acres 
that had been managed primarily with resource objective wildfires dating back to 2003 (Fig. 1, page 
2). Using data from field plots established within areas of varying burn severity, we analyzed forest 
stand structure and canopy fuels, and we modeled fire behavior to compare areas that had been 
burned by one fire (single fire areas) with those that had been burned by two overlapping fires (re-
entry areas). In addition to testing differences between the two, we evaluated conditions in single and 
re-entry fires to historical ranges of variation (HRV). 
 
Results 
 We found few statistically significant differences in forest structure and hazardous fuels charac-
teristics between single and re-entry fire areas. 
 Ninety-six to 97% of the area within re-entry fires was classified as unburned or low burn severi-
ty. 
 Conditions in re-entry areas tended to be closer to HRV but both single and re-entry fires re-
mained higher than HRV by up to 3.5 times. 
 Most modeled fire behavior variables were statistically similar between single and re-entry fire 
areas. 
 Moderate burn severity areas in single fires areas showed significantly lower stand density and 
canopy fuels levels than low burn severity areas in re-entry fires. 
March 2018 

 
 
 
Further Reading 
Allen, C.D., M. Savage, D.A. Faulk, K.F. Suckling, T.W. Swetnam, T. Schulke, P.B. Stacey, P. Morgan, M. Hoffman, and J.T. Klingel. 
2002. Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems: A broad perspective. Ecological Applications, 12:1418-
1433. 
Huffman, D.W., A.J. Sánchez Meador, M.T. Stoddard, J.E. Crouse, and J.P. Roccaforte. 2017. Efficacy of resource objective wildfires for 
restoration of ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) forests in northern Arizona. Forest Ecology and Management, 389:395-403. 
North, M.P., S.L. Stephens, B.M. Collins, J.K. Agee, G. Aplet, J.F. Franklin, and P.Z. Fulé. 2015. Reform forest fire management – agency 
incentives undermine policy effectiveness. Science 349:1280-1281. 
Reynolds, R.T, A.J. Sánchez Meador, J.A. Youtz, T. Nicolet, M.S. Matonis, P.L. Jackson, D.G. DeLorenzo, and A.D. Graves. 2013. Re-
storing composition and structure in southwestern frequent-fire forests: a science-based framework for improving ecosystem resili-
ency. USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-310. 
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
Huffman, D.W., J.E. Crouse, A.J. Sánchez Meador, J.D. Springer, and M.T. Stoddard. 2017. Restoration benefits of re-entry with 
resource objective wildfire on a ponderosa pine landscape in northern Arizona, USA. Forest Ecology and Management, 
408:16-24. 
Contact: Dave Huffman, david.huffman@nau.edu 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
Conclusions 
 
Evidence of restoration and hazardous fuels reduction objectives being met incrementally by repeated 
low-severity fire was difficult to detect on the landscape.  
 
Under similar management, several additional fire entries will be required to restore tree densities to 
within historical ranges.  
 
Our findings suggest that managing resource objective wildfires to allow for more moderate severity 
burning with a single entry may be more effective for restoring these ponderosa pine forests than re-
peated low severity entries.    
Figure 1. Map of 29,726-acre re-
source objective wildfire landscape 
on the Tusayan Ranger District 
(lighter shading within Arizona out-
line; Grand Canyon National Park 
also shown, in darker shading, for 
reference ) of the Kaibab National 
Forest in northern Arizona, USA. 
Shown are single fire areas 
(polygons without hatching) and re-
entry fire areas (hatched polygons). 
Re-entry fire areas in the legend are 
indicted by the name of the first re-
source objective fire, followed by 
the re-entry fire name (e.g., “Horse–
Hammer”). 
