The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Using Trait-Based Ecology to Restore Resilient Ecosystems 
By Daniel C. Laughlin, Department of Botany, University of Wyoming  
 
Introduction 
Ecologists around the world are engaged in an important debate about how to set and achieve restora-
tion goals in a rapidly changing climate. Historical reference conditions have long been the gold 
standard on which to base restoration objectives, but current and future environmental conditions are 
becoming increasingly different from historical environmental conditions. Rather than trying to re-
store historical assemblages that may not survive the new environmental conditions, we may need a 
more general approach that focuses on achieving functional objectives to restore resilient ecosystems. 
Examples of functional objectives in restoration include restoring ecosystems to improve soil stabil-
ity, create pollinator habitat, increase forage production, or to enhance fire resistance.  
 
Species that were dominant in historical ecosys-
tems were presumably abundant because they 
had trait values that conferred high fitness (i.e., 
survival and reproduction) in those environmen-
tal conditions. As the environment changes, the 
trait values that optimize fitness will necessarily 
change as well. If we understand which trait val-
ues optimize fitness in the new environmental 
conditions, then we can manage for species with 
more favorable trait values to reduce mortality 
risk and enhance restoration success. The objec-
tive of this work was to compare restoration pre-
scriptions based on historical reference condi-
tions of forest assemblages versus those that are 
based on traits of well-adapted species. 
 
Methods 
 First, we asked whether trait-based models could accurately derive historical species abundanc-
es in mixed-conifer forests (Figure 1). If the answer to this question is no, then trait-based mod-
els will yield unreliable forecasts of species abundances in the future. 
 Second, we asked how the desired species abundances change when traits that confer higher 
fitness under projected future conditions are used, and when other native species adapted to 
warmer climates are added to the species pool. For this analysis, we targeted thick bark because 
it confers fire resistance, and high wood density because it confers drought resistance. 
April 2018 
Figure 1. Typical stand in a mixed-conifer forest in the North-
west 3 study site on the North Rim of Grand Canyon National 
Park that was used in this analysis. 

 
 
Results 
 The model-derived species abundances were strongly correlated (R2 = 0.96) with the reconstruct-
ed historical abundances. These results imply that trait-based models may be useful for projecting 
assemblages that may be resilient to future environmental conditions. 
 The three most abundant species in the trait-based model output that exhibited both thick bark and 
high wood density, in order of decreasing abundance, were Pseudotsuga menziesii, Pinus ponder-
osa, and Quercus gambelii. In combination, these species are predicted to enhance drought and 
fire tolerance in mixed-conifer forests. 
 We considered a model where three other native species were added to the species pool to 
acknowledge the possibility that species adapted to warmer environments may be more suited to 
future conditions. The six species that had the highest abundances in the model output were, in 
order of decreasing abundance, Pinus ponderosa, Quercus gambelii, Pinus edulis, Juniperus dep-
peana, Pseudotsuga menziesii, and Abies concolor. These six species do not commonly coexist 
across large contemporary landscapes in the Southwest USA and in combination would represent 
a novel community. 
 
Management Implications 
 To restore resilient ecosystems, practitioners can select species with favorable trait combinations 
to reduce mortality risk under changing environmental conditions. 
 In the western USA where drought and fire are projected to increase in frequency, restoration can 
include managing for species with traits such as dense wood, tough leaves, and thick bark. 
 Trait-based models operationalize the process of selecting species with desirable trait combina-
tions and produce ranges of relative abundances for every species, as measured by tree density or 
basal area. 
 Management plans and policies must be revised to allow for the inevitable changes in community 
composition under environmental change and to increase the flexibility of prescriptions for resto-
ration. 
 
Further Reading 
Fulé, P.Z., A.E. Cocke, T.A. Heinlein, and W.W. Covington. 2004. Effects of an intense prescribed forest fire: 
is it ecological restoration? Restoration Ecology, 12:220-230. 
Laughlin, D.C. 2014. Applying trait-based models to achieve functional targets for theory-driven ecological 
restoration. Ecology Letters, 17:771-784. 
Laughlin, D.C., J.P. Roccaforte, and P.Z. Fulé. 2011. Effects of a second-entry prescribed fire in a mixed coni-
fer forest. Western North American Naturalist, 71:557-562. 
Strahan, R.T., A.J. Sánchez Meador, D.W. Huffman, and D.C. Laughlin. 2016. Shifts in community‐level traits 
and functional diversity in a mixed-conifer forest: a legacy of land‐use change. Journal of Applied 
Ecology, 53:1755-1765. 
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
Laughlin, D.C., R.T. Strahan, D.W. Huffman, and A.J. Sánchez Meador. 2017. Using trait-based ecology to 
restore resilient ecosystems: historical conditions and the future of montane forests in western North 
America. Restoration Ecology, 25: S135-S146. 
Contact: Daniel Laughlin, daniel.laughlin@uwyo.edu 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
