 
 
 
 
All-Lands Planning, Coordination, and Wildfire Risk 
Reduction Project Report 
 
 
 
 
 
Prepared by 
Ecological Restoration Institute 
Northern Arizona University 
PO Box 15017 
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017 
 
 
 
May 2018 
 
 
 
  
 
 

 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Executive Summary .............................................................................................................1 
Project Purpose and Need ....................................................................................................3 
Project Background ..............................................................................................................4 
Overview of Cross-Boundary Wildfire Risk Model ............................................................6 
Summary of Outreach  .........................................................................................................8 
Greater Flagstaff Project Area  ...............................................................................8 
Greater Prescott Project Area ...............................................................................11 
2nd Annual National Cohesive Wildland Fire Management Strategy  
 
Workshop – Reno, Nevada ............................................................................12 
Assessment Findings ..........................................................................................................12 
 
Summary of Findings – Flagstaff ...........................................................................13 
 
Summary of Findings – Prescott  ...........................................................................13 
 
Overall Findings ....................................................................................................13 
Lessons Learned ................................................................................................................13 
 
Effectiveness of Model and Communication Products for Motivating Action .......13 
 
Lessons Learned for Successful All-Lands Management to Reduce Fire Risk ......15 
Conclusion .........................................................................................................................16 
References ..........................................................................................................................17 
Appendices .........................................................................................................................17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider. 
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service. 
Contact: Melanie Colavito, melanie.colavito@nau.edu; Diane Vosick, diane.vosick@nau.edu

1 
 
Executive Summary 
The purpose of the All-Lands Planning, Coordination, and Wildfire Risk Reduction project was 
to identify actions that help advance an all-lands approach to restoration and wildfire risk 
reduction coordination and planning in Arizona, as well as to assess the effectiveness of a cross-
boundary wildfire risk model (henceforth, the model), designed by Dr. Alan Ager at the USDA 
Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station (RMRS), for motivating action. This work was 
conducted through coordination by the Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI) at Northern 
Arizona University, Dr. Ager at RMRS, and the Arizona Department of Forestry and Fire 
Management (ADFFM). The goals of the project included:  
 
1) To collaborate with RMRS and ADFFM to downscale and refine the RMRS cross-boundary 
wildfire risk model (Ager et al. 2018) for the greater Flagstaff and Prescott areas;  
2) To translate the outputs of the model and develop outreach materials for multiple audiences;  
3) To target and test the model with key land tenures — a combined representation of 
landownership and management — in the greater Flagstaff and Prescott areas; and  
4) To identify and communicate lessons learned for successful multi-jurisdictional collaboration 
and implementation of fire risk reduction activities and foster coordinated action among key 
land tenures.  
 
We used one-on-one meetings and a workshop with key partners and land tenures to explain the 
goals of multi-jurisdictional management — to reduce fire risk and restore forests — and to 
explain and interpret the model outputs. Our focus in the Flagstaff area was one-on-one meetings 
and a roundtable, while the focus in the Prescott area was the workshop. The outreach process 
was iterative, and we refined our messaging and communication products after each meeting. We 
also used the results from our assessment to refine our outreach.  
 
In our assessment results, we found that there was an increase in understanding of fire 
transmission concepts and an increase in motivation to participate in all-lands coordination and 
planning. In terms of communication products, most respondents preferred the burn probability 
maps, as well as maps that illustrated the potential impacts of simulated fires to housing units 
and average simulated fire sizes. Short written project summaries were also highly rated.  
 
This project was an experiment in terms of how an organization like ERI, which bridges science, 
management, and policy, can contribute to science delivery and operationalization of the best 
available science from an external science organization, in this case, the Forest Service RMRS. 
Our communication of the model outputs was successful in increasing understanding of cross-
boundary wildfire risk concepts, reinforcing existing perceptions of fire risk, and increasing 
motivation or intent to participate in multi-jurisdictional planning and coordination to reduce fire 
risk. However, in our discussions during outreach, we found that the model outputs and 
communication products alone did not lead to specific actions, as a more extended, iterative 
process is needed to refine the model and enhance understanding of its outputs. However, we did 
identify next steps toward action, such as the proposed formation of all all-lands planning 
coordination group focused on reducing cross-boundary fire risk in the Flagstaff landscape. In 

2 
 
the Prescott landscape, such a group already exists, and the next steps there are to continue the 
existing communication and discuss how best to incorporate information from the model.  
 
The key lessons learned from this project are summarized below. 
 
1) Participants emphasized the importance of regular and frequent cooperation and 
collaboration within and among land tenures and organizations involved in fire management.  
2) Most of the challenges to effective all-lands coordination and planning for fire risk reduction 
noted by participants were social barriers. It was noted that a clear strategy for working 
across jurisdictional boundaries has not yet been clearly articulated and that all-lands efforts 
are often learning as they go. Furthermore, pre-fire planning is relatively spotty due to a lack 
of time, capacity, and resources. This suggests that there is a need for robust scientific 
information that can inform prioritization of projects at a landscape-scale, which is a key 
element of the cross-boundary wildfire risk model. 
3) Many of the model outputs validated what managers already felt they knew about fire risk. 
This indicates that the model was robust and this enhanced its credibility. Although, in some 
cases, we noted that this validation led to some dismissal of the outputs as “too obvious.”  
4) It is important that the most up-to-date, accurate, and local data available are used as input in 
modeling so that model outputs are salient. In order to facilitate use of the model outputs, 
databases should be updated frequently using consistent reporting formats within and among 
land management agencies to provide robust input data for decision-support modeling. 
5) Some managers felt it would be helpful to be consulted in the model development process to 
ensure that outputs are as relevant and usable as possible in their decision context.  
6) Our experience communicating the model emphasizes the challenge of talking about scale 
and determining the appropriate scale for all-lands planning and coordination, as well as what 
type of information is useful at what scale. The model provides a landscape-scale depiction 
of fire risk and can help to demonstrate how risk is shared across large spatial areas, as well 
as among multiple communities and land tenures. However, there is a tendency to focus on 
fire risk in specific areas of interest without scaling up and looking at the broader landscape. 
7) The model outputs have different types of utility at different scales and in different places. 
For example, where there is already ongoing all-lands collaboration, the outputs might be 
helpful for funding proposals and discussions with policymakers and leadership. Where there 
is limited all-lands collaboration, the outputs might be more helpful for determining where 
fire risk is highest. 
 
In summary, the model is an example of the best available scientific information that produces 
scientifically defensible outputs. It can continue to be improved with some of the refinements 
suggested by project participants. However, the lack of specific action or proposed projects 
identified during our delivery of this best available science illustrates that science 
communication and delivery alone does not intrinsically lead to action. Applying the best 
available science in decision-making is an iterative process, as the intended users of the 
information must gain a certain level of familiarity with the information before feeling 
comfortable to use it to enhance their decision-making. Further sustained outreach in both project 
areas and refinement of the model based on feedback from its intended users would pave the way 
for more specific actions informed by the model.  

3 
 
Project Purpose and Need 
The purpose of this project was to identify actions that help advance an all-lands approach to 
restoration and wildfire risk reduction coordination and planning in Arizona and to assess the 
effectiveness of a cross-boundary wildfire risk model for motivating action. All-lands 
management refers to planning, coordination, and implementation of activities across land 
ownership boundaries with engagement of multiple partners at multiple scales. It is an explicit 
recognition that ecological processes such as wildfire do not recognize jurisdictional boundaries, 
and that risk is often shared across boundaries. It is also a recognition of the varying scale of risk 
and the need for planning to consider the potential impacts of small to large-scale disturbances. 
Engaging in all-lands management is a strategy for addressing fragmentation of land tenures — a 
combined representation of landownership and management — across the landscape with 
varying management goals, statutory requirements, and socioeconomic values and perspectives. 
Landscape fragmentation often leads to inefficient risk assessment and planning, which can 
hinder achieving fire management goals laid out in federal wildfire policy (Ager et al. 2018). For 
example, the National Cohesive Fire Management Strategy was initiated in 2009 as a three-phase 
process to advance efforts to collaborate across landscapes and live with wildland fire. It 
advances three broad but interrelated goals, including 1) Resilient Landscapes; 2) Fire Adapted 
Communities, and 3) Safe and Effective Fire Response. Efforts to achieve the National Cohesive 
Strategy are meant to be grounded in science. However, there is much to be learned about what 
information and decision-support tools managers need and would use to accomplish all-lands 
planning and coordination, how to best communicate information for decision-support, and what 
practices more broadly facilitate effective all-lands management in order to accomplish the goals 
of the National Cohesive Strategy. In short, how can we operationalize the best available science 
and technology to advance all-lands management?  
 
This project was designed to communicate the cross-boundary wildfire risk model (henceforth, 
the model), designed by Dr. Alan Ager at the USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research 
Station (RMRS), for all-lands planning and coordination, assess the effectiveness of the model 
outputs and different communication products for motivating action, and identify lessons learned 
for successful multi-jurisdictional collaboration and implementation of fire risk reduction 
activities. This project was conducted through coordination by the Ecological Restoration 
Institute (ERI) at Northern Arizona University, Dr. Ager at RMRS, and the Arizona Department 
of Forestry and Fire Management (ADFFM). The goals of the project included:  
 
1) To collaborate with RMRS and ADFFM to downscale and refine the RMRS cross-boundary 
wildfire risk model (Ager et al. 2018) for the greater Flagstaff and Prescott areas;  
2) To translate the outputs of the model and develop outreach materials for multiple audiences;  
3) To target and test the model with key land tenures — a combined representation of 
landownership and management — in the greater Flagstaff and Prescott areas; and  
4) To identify and communicate lessons learned for successful multi-jurisdictional collaboration 
and implementation of fire risk reduction activities and foster coordinated action among key 
land tenures.  
 
 

4 
 
Project Background 
In April 2015, the Forest Service, Washington Office of State and Private Forestry, and the ERI 
discussed a project to expand the scope of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI) to all-
lands in northern Arizona. The ERI was encouraged to work with Dr. Ager to translate, transfer, 
and test the impact of the cross-boundary wildfire risk model as a way to motivate coordination 
and planning of all-lands wildfire risk reduction activities. The project grew to include the 
Arizona State Forester and ADFFM staff to also determine how the model outputs could 
complement the existing Arizona Wildfire Risk Assessment Portal (AZ WRAP) and their 
geographic area of greatest interest. Funding was distributed in summer 2016 from the USFS 
through ADFFM to the ERI. The final project details and associated deliverables were agreed to 
in the fall of 2016. 
 
   
 
 
 
Figure 1. Flagstaff Project Area and Land Tenures 
 

5 
 
In the spring of 2017, ERI, RMRS, and ADFFM staff met to delineate boundaries for two project 
areas that would be downscaled from the statewide cross-boundary wildfire risk model that 
RMRS had completed for all of Arizona and to target outreach. The two project areas included 
the 4FRI boundary from the first Environmental Impact Statement around Flagstaff, as well as a 
boundary in the Prescott area that incorporated the communities of Prescott to the west, Dewey-
Humboldt to the east, Cleator to the south, and Paulden to the north. The Prescott area (Figure 2) 
was selected due to the more fragmented nature of the land tenure matrix. The Flagstaff area 
(Figure 1) was selected due to its connection with ongoing ERI work and consists of largely 
Forest Service land interspersed with state, private, and military lands.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Prescott Project Area and Land Tenures 

6 
 
Rocky Mountain Research Station then ran the model for both project areas, and the raw outputs 
were provided to the ERI in the summer of 2017 in the form of matrix tables and geospatial 
rasters. We began the iterative process of interpreting and displaying the model outputs and 
facilitated discussions with ADFFM for feedback. We determined that some of the data used for 
the statewide assessment had issues at the project scale and that there were some improved 
datasets available. The following changes were too significant for post-processing, which 
necessitated a second model run.   
 
• There were several instances in which the national level land tenure data did not reflect local 
land ownership and management. For example, a military base in the Flagstaff landscape was 
classified as Forest Service land. It was critical that the land tenure data be accurate and up-
to-date in order for the model outputs to pass the “laugh test” and be credible to local 
managers.  
• A regional fuel model and associated fire simulation modeling were available from Forest 
Service Region 3, and it was agreed that these more localized data should also be used.  
• Finally, fire district boundaries were added to the land tenure information.  
 
The process of rerunning the model was completed in October 2017, at which time we began 
meeting with managers to share the model outputs and discuss all-lands management for fire risk 
reduction and restoration.  
 
Overview of the Cross-Boundary Wildfire Risk Model  
The RMRS cross-boundary wildfire risk model provides information about: 1) fire transmission 
(i.e., how fires move across land tenures in terms of acres burned per year); 2) fire risk (i.e., 
expected loss from combining intensity, likelihood, and susceptibility); 3) fire exposure (i.e., 
exposure to fire in terms of annual housing units); and 4) where and with whom collaboration is 
needed to reduce fire risk across multi-jurisdictional boundaries. The results can be used to 1) 
inform how and where land tenures can work together to reach a cohesive fire management 
strategy; 2) to help decision-makers determine how to restore and maintain landscapes and fire-
adapted communities; and 3) to explore collaborative management opportunities across the 
landscape and opportunities to reduce fire risk. It assists managers in meeting the objectives of 
the National Cohesive Fire Management Strategy by identifying areas to strategically reduce fire 
risk and exposure, prioritize fuels and restoration treatments, and coordinate pre-fire prevention 
planning.  
 
The model used FSim large fire simulations and local land tenure and community data to 
produce matrices with predicted fire transmission, as well as geospatial rasters. The statewide 
model developed for Arizona was downscaled for the Flagstaff and Prescott project areas. The 
FSim outputs used for the model in the two project areas were obtained from the 2017 update of 
the Forest Service Southwest Region Wildfire Risk Assessment (R3v3) (Vogler et al. 2017). The 
inputs used for the R3v3 FSim run included 2012 LANDFIRE data with updates requested by 
the Forest Service Region 3 fire ecologist, historical wildfire occurrences from 1992–2015, 
historical weather data, as well as inputs for fire ignitions, fire risk, fuel moisture, and historical 

7 
 
energy release components (ERC) (Vogler et al. 2017). Fire simulations were validated by 
comparing predicted versus historical measures of fire occurrence through 2015.  
The FSim outputs were then intersected with local land tenure and community data for the two 
project areas to quantify annual area burned and annual housing units exposed to fire (Ager et al. 
2018). Communities are defined according to their Census designated boundary and a buffer that 
incorporates all SILVIS wildland urban interface (WUI) polygons outside the core community 
boundary within a 45-minute travel time. Housing units are defined as Census designated homes 
on a property, not all structures, and the model simply identifies housing units exposed to fire 
and is not meant to imply a housing unit was burned.  
 
The outputs generated for ERI from the model included matrix tables of predicted fire 
transmission in annual acres burned and annual housing units exposed to fire. The matrix tables 
included transmission among land tenures, from land tenures to community, from land tenures to 
fire districts, from Forest Service ranger districts to land tenures, from ranger districts to 
communities, among ranger districts, and from ranger districts to fire districts. The outputs also 
included the following geospatial rasters:  
 
• Burn Probability: annual probability that a fire will burn a given area, estimated from fire 
simulation modeling.  
• Mean Conditional Flame Length: the mean flame length in feet, estimated from fire 
simulation modeling.  
• Fire Size Potential Index: average fire size generated by a simulated ignition in a given place; 
shows potential fire sources. 
• Fire Size Arrival Index: average size of all simulated fires; shows what happens to a given 
place on the landscape.  
• Total Housing Unit Exposure to Fire: annual housing units exposed to simulated fires in a 
given place. 
• Relative Housing Unit Exposure to Fire: annual housing units exposed to simulated fires 
divided by housing unit density in a given place.  
• Fire Complexity Index: number of land tenures and communities impacted by simulated fire. 
• Percent of Self-Burning Fires: the percent of simulated fires that burn the same land tenure in 
which they ignite; the likelihood a fire will cross boundaries.   
 

8 
 
The results are meant 
to provide 
information for pre-
fire planning and 
coordination. They 
can be coupled with 
local information on 
community 
protection, hazardous 
fuels treatments, and 
other land 
management 
activities to enhance 
their use in planning 
(Figure 3). The 
challenge is to 
organize and 
implement landscape 
fuel and/or restoration treatments that consider fire occurrence and spread with the social 
components of what land managers are able and willing to do. 
 
Select results and sample communication products from the refined analysis for the two project 
areas can be found in Appendices 1–2.  
 
Summary of Outreach  
We used one-on-one meetings and a workshop with key partners and land tenures to explain the 
goals of multi-jurisdictional management — to reduce fire risk and restore forests — and to 
explain and interpret the model outputs. Our focus in the Flagstaff area was one-on-one meetings 
and a roundtable, while the focus in the Prescott area was the workshop. The outreach process 
was iterative, and we refined our messaging and communication products after each meeting. We 
also used the results from our assessment to refine our outreach (see “Assessment Findings”).  
 
Greater Flagstaff Project Area  
Our outreach in the greater Flagstaff area began in spring 2017 with one-on-one meetings with 
the Coconino and Kaibab National Forest Supervisors to explain the goals of the project and to 
garner support. We also met with our partners at ADFFM throughout summer 2017 during the 
refinement of the model and development of preliminary communication products.  
 
Beta Test Presentation, October 2017  
• Our first formal presentation was a beta-test to nine representatives from ADFFM, fire 
districts, and the Greater Flagstaff Forest Partnership after the model rerun was complete.  
• Because our communication products were in draft form, the purpose was to share the full 
suite of model outputs, identify questions or concerns, and gather feedback. 
Figure 3. Types of wildfire decisions and examples of where to obtain information to inform 
these decisions. 

9 
 
• Attendees shared concerns about some of the model’s parameters and input data, as well as 
the messaging on some of the communication products. 
• We used their feedback to refine our presentations and determine what issues to address 
upfront with each audience.   
 
Coconino National Forest Fuels Specialist and Camp Navajo Presentations, November 2017 
• Following the beta test, we developed a more comprehensive presentation and one-page 
summary with select model outputs to be edited with specific results for each land tenure.  
• We shared these refined products with the Fuels Specialist on the Coconino NF.  
• We also gave a presentation to eleven individuals involved in fire management at Camp 
Navajo, a military base west of Flagstaff.  
• Camp Navajo is in a unique position with respect to fire management, as they must suppress 
all fires due to firefighting dangers because of military equipment in the area.  
• The discussion at Camp Navajo focused on the limitations of the model outputs for use in a 
suppression context.  
• Because the model is meant to inform planning and not suppression, this indicated that we 
needed to refine our messaging to better highlight the intended use of the model.  
 
Kaibab National Forest Leadership Team Meeting Presentation, December 2017 
• We gave another presentation to sixteen individuals at the Kaibab Leadership Team meeting. 
• The discussion focused on barriers to all-lands management, such as dealing with smoke, 
limited prescribed burning opportunities, handling funding for fire suppression across 
boundaries, relationships with local fire districts, and questions about who “owns” fire risk.  
• The audience felt that the model outputs largely validated their perceptions of fire risk, and it 
was noted that they would be helpful in discussions with neighboring land tenures.  
• The discussion also highlighted the challenges of framing the model outputs without creating 
a sense of blame about who “owns” fire risk. The national forests, due to their sheer size in 
the Flagstaff area, had the highest predicted total acres of fire transmission, but this included 
self-burning (predicted fires that did not leave the land tenure in which they ignited).  
• This led us to re-examine the data and better account for self-burning in order to focus more 
on transmitted fire, rather than total predicted fire for a given land tenure.  
 
Coconino National Forest Leadership Team Meeting Presentation, January 2018 
• We also gave the presentation to ten individuals at the Coconino Leadership Team meeting.  
• This discussion highlighted the need of emphasizing the predictive nature of the model.  
• Attendees also brought up concerns about the model input data and parameters. One attendee 
gave the example that an area predicted to have high fire risk had received a fuel treatment in 
2015, but because the input fuel data was from 2012, this work was not reflected in the 
outputs. This is an inherent difficulty in modeling, as any model is only as good as the data 
that it uses and refinements to the fuel model used are not made on an annual basis.  
• This encouraged us to emphasize the relative scale and nature of the relationships among 
land tenures without getting too focused on specific values. 

10 
 
 
Ponderosa Fire Advisory Council (PFAC) Meeting, February 2018 
• We presented to approximately thirty individuals at PFAC, a partnership of emergency 
service organizations in the Flagstaff area.  
• We shortened our presentation and focused on the maps and predicted fire transmission 
among land tenures without self-burning to emphasize the role each land tenure plays.  
• We also provided a four-page project summary.  
• We focused on the message that although the national forests do transmit the most fire due to 
their size, private and state lands also play a significant role in fire transmission.  
• We reinforced the importance of working across boundaries prior to ignitions and supporting 
the work of interagency groups like PFAC.  
• Attendees expressed similar concerns to other meetings, but again, the outputs largely 
validated their perception of fire risk.  
 
Greater Flagstaff Area Roundtable, March 2018 
• We hosted a roundtable with eleven attendees from local land tenures and one fire district. 
See Appendix 3 for the agenda.  
• The purpose was to assess the model’s utility and discuss strategies for all-lands management 
to reduce fire risk.  
• We gave a presentation and provided the four-page summary. We then facilitated a 
discussion about the model’s utility and how it might change what attendees were already 
doing for all-lands management (Figure 4).  
• Similar to previous meetings, there were concerns about the model parameters and input 
data. For example, attendees felt the way communities were defined using a 45-minute drive 
time from the Census boundary created too much overlap and exaggerated the risk.  
• Attendees felt the model’s utility was context-specific based on an area’s unique situation. 
• Attendees expressed interest in participating in the model’s development to refine some of its 
parameters and create outputs more tailored to their decision context.  
• Attendees also described challenges to all-lands management, such as doing implementation, 
varying perspectives, even within the same land tenures, and liability agreements.  
• The point made was that with this enhanced understanding of fire risk, it is still unclear who 
is responsible for taking charge and accepting that risk. This led to the proposed formation of 
an all-lands group for the greater Flagstaff area.  

11 
 
 
Figure 4. Photograph of Whiteboard Discussion from Flagstaff Roundtable 
Greater Prescott Project Area 
Our outreach in the greater Prescott area focused on a one-day workshop, the planning for which 
began in the fall of 2017. We contracted with a professional facilitation company — Southwest 
Decision Resources (SDR) — to run the workshop. The planning team consisted of staff from 
ERI, SDR, ADFFM, and Dr. Ager from RMRS. The workshop was held at the Central Arizona 
Regional Training Academy (CARTA) in Prescott Valley on Tuesday, February 13, 2018.  
Approximately forty participants attended from all of the land tenures within the greater Prescott 
project area, including ADFFM, the Prescott National Forest, the Bureau of Land Management, 
as well as Yavapai County Emergency Management, Yavapai County Supervisors, local city 
councils, local fire districts and departments, the Prescott Area Wildland Urban Interface 
Commission, the Upper Verde River Watershed Protection Coalition, Arizona Public Service, 
the Yavapai-Prescott Indian Tribe, and the National Resources Conservation Service.  
The workshop planning team developed an agenda that included the following outcomes:  
 
1. Provide information about the cross-boundary wildfire risk framework, which addresses 
wildfire transmission, risk, and exposure across landownerships;  
2. Demonstrate how cross-boundary wildfire risk assessments may complement the Arizona 
Wildfire Risk Assessment Portal (AZ WRAP);  
3. Provide information about wildfire risk reduction efforts in the greater Prescott area that 
have occurred or are planned for the future;  
4. Assess the utility of the cross-boundary wildfire risk framework for determining where to 
coordinate and/or prioritize management activities across jurisdictional boundaries to reduce 
wildfire risk. 
 
As part of the introduction, participants were given a questionnaire with four key questions to 
consider throughout the workshop (Appendix 4). The agenda was then organized to set the 
context with the model outputs for the Prescott area and its potential management implications 

12 
 
(Appendix 5). This was followed by an overview of AZ WRAP and ongoing all-lands 
collaboration in the Prescott area. After lunch, there was a presentation focusing on how to use 
the model outputs. This was followed by small group discussions, which were based on the 
questionnaire, about the utility, benefits, and challenges of using the model outputs, the potential 
for integrating model outputs with existing tools like AZ WRAP, effective communication 
approaches, and strategies for fostering cross-boundary coordination. Finally, the group 
reconvened for a report from the small group sessions and discussion of next-steps.  
A full workshop report can be found in Appendix 6, but the key points include: 
 
• Attendees felt that for a landscape like the Prescott area where there is robust ongoing cross-
boundary coordination, the model outputs may have different utility than they might in a 
landscape without existing collaboration. For example, attendees felt that the model would be 
useful for supporting grant proposals, as well as for communicating risk with decision-
makers rather than identifying areas to work, which already have been identified.  
• Additionally, many attendees agreed that the model outputs largely validated their perceived 
risk on the landscape, which is similar to the reaction in the greater Flagstaff area. 
 
2nd Annual National Cohesive Wildland Fire Management Strategy Workshop — Reno, Nevada 
We presented an overview of the lessons learned from this project with respect to how the best 
available science and technology can be used in support of all-lands management and achieving 
the objectives of the National Cohesive Wildland Fire Management Strategy, as well as lessons 
learned communicating the model outputs, at the National Cohesive Strategy Workshop in spring 
2018. The presentation was part of a session titled, “Network perspectives on risk assessment: 
Applications of wildfire transmission networks and collaborative networks for implementing the 
Cohesive Strategy,” which included presentations from Alan Ager, Matthew Hamilton, and Tom 
Quigley, as well as an extended discussion. The discussion focused on the importance of using 
an iterative process for incorporating the best available science and technology into planning and 
decision-making and the importance of identifying the most appropriate scale for planning given 
the difficulty of determining consistent definitions for communities-at-risk.  
 
Assessment Findings 
An assessment tool was developed to look at the effectiveness of the model and associated 
communication products for explaining the concepts of wildfire transmission, exposure, and risk, 
as well as for motivating action to reduce wildfire risk across boundaries. We define motivation 
in the assessment as the degree of intent to participate multi-jurisdictional coordination and 
planning to reduce fire risk. A survey instrument was first developed for the Flagstaff area 
outreach (Appendix 6), and a second version was developed for the Prescott area workshop 
(Appendix 7). The questions are the same in both survey instruments, but the Prescott assessment 
was slightly reorganized and included a few extra questions and a section for workshop 
evaluation. In this section, we will focus on respondents’ understanding of the model and 
preferred communication products. In the following section, “Lessons Learned,” we will address 
utility of the model outputs.  
 

13 
 
Summary of Findings – Flagstaff 
In the greater Flagstaff area, respondents reported an increase in their level of understanding of 
fire transmission concepts (Appendix 7). There was an overall decrease in basic or poor 
understanding of the concepts and an increase in moderate and advanced understanding. There 
was also an increase in respondents’ level of motivation for multi-jurisdictional coordination and 
planning to reduce fire risk. In terms of the communication products, the burn probability map 
was most preferred. In fact, the top five most preferred products were maps, although the bar 
graphs were tied with two maps in fifth place. Respondents indicated that the products they least 
preferred were Sankey diagrams, which was our version of a network diagram for graphically 
representing the fire transmission quantities among land tenures.  
 
Summary of Findings – Prescott   
In the greater Prescott area, respondents also reported an overall increase in their level of 
understanding of fire transmission concepts, although to a lesser degree than in the greater 
Flagstaff area (Appendix 8). This might have been due to the makeup of the audience, 
reorganization of the survey questions about respondents’ reported level of understanding before 
and after learning about the model, or other factors. Nonetheless, there was an overall increase in 
understanding, as well as an increase in very high motivation for multi-jurisdictional 
coordination and planning to reduce fire risk. As with the greater Flagstaff area, respondents 
most preferred the burn probability map. The top three most preferred communication products 
were maps, but the oral presentation of information was tied with the written project summary in 
the fourth spot. The least preferred product was the textual summary of the fire transmission 
table information. We did not prepare Sankey diagrams for the Prescott project area due to the 
poor feedback on them in the Flagstaff project area.  
 
Overall Findings  
In general, there was an increase in understanding of fire transmission concepts and motivation 
for all-lands coordination and planning. Notably, respondents most preferred the burn probability 
maps in both project areas. The burn probability maps are not direct outputs of the cross-
boundary wildfire risk model, rather they are outputs of the fire simulation modeling. However, 
most respondents are probably already somewhat familiar with burn probability maps and may 
have indicated a preference for a product they already understood rather than any of the new 
products from the model. In terms of the model outputs, respondents on both landscapes seemed 
to prefer the maps that illustrated potential impacts to housing units and the average simulated 
fire size map. The short written summaries were also rated highly in both project areas.  
 
Lessons Learned  
Effectiveness of Model and Communication Products for Motivating Action 
This project was an experiment in terms of how an organization like ERI that bridges science, 
management, and policy can contribute to science delivery and operationalization from an 
external science organization, in this case, USDA Forest Service RMRS. As demonstrated by the 
assessment findings, our communication of the model outputs was successful in increasing 

14 
 
understanding of cross-boundary wildfire risk concepts, reinforcing existing perceptions of fire 
risk, and increasing motivation or intent to participate in multi-jurisdictional planning and 
coordination to reduce fire risk. However, in our discussions during outreach, we found that the 
model outputs and communication products did not lead to specific actions, as a more extended, 
iterative process is needed to refine the model and enhance understanding of its outputs. 
However, we did identify next steps toward action, such as the proposed formation of all all-
lands planning coordination group focused on reducing cross-boundary fire risk in the Flagstaff 
landscape. In the Prescott landscape, such a group already exists, and the next steps there are to 
continue the existing communication and discuss how best to incorporate information from the 
model. This illustrates that using the best available science in decision-making is an iterative 
process and that further sustained outreach in both project areas and refinement of the model 
based on feedback from its intended users would pave the way for more specific actions 
informed by the model. The lessons learned from this project in terms of the outreach process 
and how to most effectively operationalize the best available science and technology to advance 
all-lands management are summarized below.  
 
After the initial model refinements, we utilized an iterative science delivery process in which we 
made refinements to our messaging and communication products with each subsequent 
presentation. This iterative approach helped us learn what worked in delivering communication 
products and identifying potential management implications. There were also some challenges 
because each land tenure with whom we shared the model has different management guidelines 
and objectives, so a message or communication product that is salient to one might not be salient 
in the same way to another. Furthermore, because there was not sufficient time to do additional 
model refinements within the scope of this project, we focused on refining our communication 
approach to fit each audience as best as possible. The biggest challenge was delivering the model 
to diverse audiences at the Prescott workshop, PFAC meeting, and Flagstaff roundtable. In these 
situations, we tried to deliver the information in a way that would be accessible to everyone, 
whereas in the one-on-one meetings in Flagstaff, we were able to select results and information 
specific to a given land tenure. Nonetheless, the iterative process and active learning during 
outreach emphasized the importance of flexibility in messaging to fit the audience.  
 
Notably, many of the model outputs validated what managers already felt they knew about fire 
risk and transmission in the two project areas. This indicates that the model was robust and this 
enhanced its credibility. Although, in some cases, we noted that this validation led some project 
participants to dismiss the model outputs as “too obvious.” This could be due to the high level of 
existing knowledge of fire risk and transmission in greater Flagstaff and Prescott areas, as well. 
However, it is also common to find when delivering the best available science and technology 
that “hindsight is 20/20.”  
 
It is important that the most up-to-date, accurate, and local data available are used as input in 
modeling so that outputs are credible and salient. For example, we often spent significant time 
during outreach talking about the model’s parameters and results in specific areas rather than 
talking about the bigger picture message or strategies for all-lands management. This focus on 
the details sometimes hindered our ability to discuss management implications, but it indicates 

15 
 
that the model inputs and development are critical to perceptions of its utility for managers. In 
order to facilitate use of the model outputs, databases should be updated as frequently as possible 
using consistent reporting formats within and among land management agencies to provide 
robust input data for decision-support modeling. This is also important because the model 
outputs are meant to be used in tandem with local knowledge and information, but local data on 
fuel treatments or other management activities can be difficult to obtain or are out-of-date. It is 
unrealistic to expect that real-time data for input to modeling be available, but to the extent 
possible, it is important that input data be consistently managed to enhance modeling outputs, 
and therefore, improve the model’s credibility with managers on the ground. 
 
Some managers also felt it would have been helpful to be consulted in the model development 
process to ensure that the outputs were as relevant and usable as possible in their decision 
context. Therefore, opportunities should be provided and encouraged for collaboration 
throughout the process of developing decision-support tools.  
 
Finally, our experience communicating the model emphasizes the challenge of talking about 
scale and determining the appropriate scale for all-lands planning and coordination, as well as 
what type of information is useful at what scale. The model provides a landscape-scale depiction 
of fire risk and can help to demonstrate how risk is shared across large spatial areas, as well as 
among multiple communities and land tenures. However, there is a tendency to focus on fire risk 
in specific areas of interest without scaling up and looking at the broader landscape. This was a 
tension we faced in developing communication products, as well, because we wanted to 
highlight the landscape-scale story and the power of the model to illustrate that story and the 
concept of shared risk. Nonetheless, it was a challenge for many of the project participants to 
think about how to operationalize the information at the landscape-scale, which suggests the 
need for identifying what specific types of information are operational at different scales. In sum, 
the model outputs have different types of utility at different scales and in different places. For 
example, where there is already ongoing all-lands collaboration, the outputs might be helpful for 
funding proposals and discussions with policymakers and leadership. Where there is limited all-
lands collaboration, the outputs might be more helpful for determining where fire risk is highest.   
 
Lessons Learned for Successful All-Lands Management to Reduce Fire Risk  
Throughout the course of this project, we identified numerous strategies that can contribute to 
effective cross-boundary, multi-jurisdictional coordination and implementation of fire risk 
reduction activities. Most of these strategies are consistent with previous research about how to 
accomplish all-lands management (Davis and Hardigg 2017). For example, many of our project 
participants emphasized the importance of regular and frequent cooperation and collaboration 
within and among all of the land tenures and organizations involved in fire management. In the 
Prescott area, there is an existing collaborative group that includes all of the major land tenures 
in the area that meets twice a year to share progress and identify next steps on fuels treatments 
and cross-boundary coordination. Many Prescott respondents noted that it was important to 
continue that effort, and there was interest in the formation of a similar effort in the Flagstaff 
area. Some respondents noted that such efforts can always be improved, but in general, 
coordination of adjoining resources is key for supporting all-lands coordination and planning.  

16 
 
 
Many project participants also emphasized the importance of regular and ongoing 
communication, again within and among land tenures, as well as with the general public. There 
was also a lot of discussion as to the best approaches for communication and the need for land 
tenures to work toward a cohesive communication message, especially when working directly 
with the general public on fire risk reduction. It was emphasized that communication is really a 
never-ending process and must continue to evolve with implementation and learning.  
 
Most of the challenges to effective all-lands coordination and planning for fire risk reduction 
noted by project participants were social barriers rather than a lack of information about fire risk. 
This may be due, in part, to the advanced level of understanding of fire risk held by many of our 
project participants. In general, it was noted that a clear strategy for working across jurisdictional 
boundaries has not yet been clearly articulated and that all-lands efforts are often learning as they 
go. Furthermore, pre-fire planning is relatively spotty across the landscape due to a lack of time, 
capacity, and resources. This suggests that there is indeed a need for robust scientific information 
that can inform prioritization of projects at a landscape-scale, which is a key element of the 
cross-boundary wildfire risk model. However, in order to effectively use the model, its potential 
users must be able to see its value and be willing to accept the information it provides along with 
any caveats. Nonetheless, the robust scientific information is provides can validate and justify 
decision-making about identification and prioritization of all-lands planning and management, 
which is far more powerful than decisions made with limited or no scientific justification.  
 
Conclusion  
The purpose of this project was to identify specific actions that help advance an all-lands 
approach to restoration and wildfire risk reduction coordination and planning in Arizona and to 
assess the effectiveness of a cross-boundary wildfire risk model for motivating action. We 
learned that in order to foster all-lands coordination and planning in places where there is already 
ongoing collaboration, land tenures should continue to meet regularly and maintain 
communication. In places without ongoing collaboration, regular in-person coordination 
meetings should be initiated and communication networks established. As stated previously, no 
specific actions were identified based on our communication of the model’s outputs. Some next 
steps toward action, such as the proposed formation of an all-lands coordination group in 
Flagstaff and continuing ongoing communication in Prescott, were identified. However, the 
model was effective in motivating participants’ intent to engage in multi-jurisdictional 
coordination and planning to reduce fire risk. Further outreach and refinement of the model 
would likely lead to more specific actions informed by the model outputs. As the cross-boundary 
wildfire risk model continues to be refined, it is important that adjustments be made based on 
lessons learned in trying to operationalize it for all-lands management. There is also a great deal 
of interest in developing this type of information for smoke effects. As we begin to better 
understand the scale of fire risk across landscapes, it is important that implementation be 
prioritized strategically in order to maximize the use of limited resources and capacity, and use 
of the best available science and technology is critical to supporting prioritization.  
 

17 
 
References 
Ager et al. 2018. “Assessing transboundary wildfire exposure in the southwestern US.” In
 
Review. 
Davis, E.J., and K. Hardigg. October 2017. “How Do We Accomplish All-Lands Management?
 
Direct Insights from a Survey of Practitioners.” Rural Voices for Conservation Coalition.
 
Available online:
 
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/562e839ee4b0332955e8143d/t/59ede7cafe54ef25
 
de3c9e0/1508763595768/RVCC+Land+Report+WEB.pdf [Accessed April 6, 2018].   
Vogler, K., J. Scott, J. Gilbertson-Day. 2017. Southwest Region Wildfire Risk Assessment:
 
methods and results. Pyrologix. Prepared for T. Nicolet, USDA Forest Service
 
Southwestern Region.  
 
Appendices  
1. Project Summary for Flagstaff 
2. Project Summary for Prescott 
3. Flagstaff Roundtable Agenda  
4. Workshop Small Group Questions 
5. Workshop Agenda 
6. Workshop Report 
7. Assessment Tool & Results for Flagstaff 
8. Assessment Tool & Results for Prescott  

 
Ager, A. et al. 2018. Assessing transboundary wildfire exposure in the southwestern US. In Review. 
Contact Melanie Colavito (melanie.colavito@nau.edu) or Tzeidle Wasserman (tzeidle.wasserman@nau.edu) for more information.  
Appendix 1 
 
All Lands Planning, Coordination, and Wildfire Risk Reduction – March 2018 
The Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI) at Northern Arizona University (NAU), in coordination with Alan Ager from the Rocky 
Mountain Research Station (RMRS) and the Arizona Department of Forestry and Fire Management (AZ DFFM), is facilitating a 
conversation about an all-lands approach to wildfire risk reduction and restoration in Arizona. The purpose of our project is two-fold: 
1) to translate the outputs of the cross-boundary wildfire risk framework (Ager et al. 2018) and develop outreach materials for 
multiple audiences; and 2) to target and test this framework with key land tenures (ownership and management) in the Flagstaff/ 
Williams area. The framework assists managers in meeting the objectives of the National Cohesive Fire Management Strategy by 
identifying areas to strategically reduce fire risk and exposure, prioritize fuels and restoration treatments, and coordinate pre-fire 
prevention planning across jurisdictional boundaries.  
The framework uses 2014 LANDFIRE data, USDA Forest Service Region 3 fuel models, weather and historical fire occurrences to run 
FSim fire simulations, which were completed in 2017. Fire simulations were validated with actual vs. predicted fire perimeters and 
fire size distributions through 2015. FSim outputs were then intersected with local land tenure data. The outputs include spatial data 
and matrix tables of predicted cross-boundary wildfire affects among land tenures and quantifies wildfire transmission, risk, and 
exposure in terms of annual acres burned and annual housing units exposed to fire.  
The cross-boundary wildfire risk framework provides information about: 1) wildfire transmission (i.e., how fires move across land 
tenures); 2) wildfire risk (i.e., 
how risk is exchanged across 
land jurisdictions); 3) wildfire 
exposure (i.e., annual acres 
burned and annual housing units 
exposed to fire); and 4) where 
and with whom collaboration is 
needed to reduce fire risk across 
multi-jurisdictional boundaries.  
It provides annual predictions of 
how wildfire moves across 
jurisdictional boundaries and 
into communities from 
surrounding land jurisdictions, 
where housing units are 
disproportionately exposed to 
wildfire, and where large fires 
start and the areas on the 
landscape they tend to burn.   
The results of the framework can be used 
to 1) inform how and where land managers and landowners can work together to reach a cohesive fire management strategy; 2) to 
help decision makers determine how to restore and maintain landscapes and fire-adapted communities; and 3) to explore 
collaborative management opportunities across the landscape and opportunities to reduce wildfire risk.  
The results are meant to provide information for pre-fire planning and coordination. They can be coupled with local information on 
community protection, hazardous fuels treatments, and other land management actions, as well as information from tools like the 
Wildland Fire Decision Support System (WFDSS) to make decisions when fire incidents do occur (Figure 1). The challenge is to 
organize and implement landscape fuel and/or restoration treatments that consider fire occurrence and spread with the social 
components of what land managers are able and willing to do.  
Figure 1 - Types of wildfire decisions and examples of where to obtain information to inform these decisions. 

 
Figure 2 - Predicted Outgoing Wildfire (acres/ year) without self-burning (fires that stay on the land tenure where they start) 
Contact Melanie Colavito (melanie.colavito@nau.edu) or Tzeidle Wasserman (tzeidle.wasserman@nau.edu) for more information.  
Selected Results for the Flagstaff/ Williams Area: (results are predictions based on fire simulation modeling) 
 
Flagstaff 
City-
Owned 
Open 
Space 
Coconino 
National 
Forest 
Kaibab 
National 
Forest 
Kendrick 
Mountain 
Wilderness 
Navajo 
Army 
Depot 
Private 
Land 
State 
Trust 
Land 
Walnut 
Canyon 
National 
Monument 
Total 
Transmitted 
Flagstaff City-Owned 
Open Space 
4.35 
22.34 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
10.42 
0.22 
0.00 
37.34 
Coconino National 
Forest 
12.41 
4996.73 
137.78 
15.47 
147.33 
300.26 
222.46 
7.49 
5707.91 
Kaibab National Forest 
0.09 
329.04 
2449.43 
48.97 
83.71 
247.57 
10.98 
0.00 
3168.96 
Kendrick Mountain 
Wilderness 
0.00 
42.99 
13.58 
12.95 
0.00 
1.54 
0.00 
0.00 
71.05 
Navajo Army Depot 
2.18 
166.38 
28.99 
0.53 
169.99 
28.29 
13.95 
0.00 
408.33 
Private Land 
4.35 
245.41 
182.81 
3.69 
15.47 
101.39 
16.63 
0.49 
565.95 
State Trust Land 
4.99 
171.30 
14.00 
0.19 
54.93 
51.47 
107.82 
0.54 
403.79 
Walnut Canyon National 
Monument 
0.00 
3.25 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.33 
0.85 
0.49 
4.91 
Total Received 
28.37 
5836.84 
2826.59 
81.80 
471.43 
741.26 
372.91 
9.01 
 
Table 1– Predicted Wildfire Transmission (acres/ year) Among Land Tenures in the Flagstaff/ Williams Area 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Land tenures receiving fire 
Land tenures transmitting fire 

 
Figure 3  - Predicted Incoming Wildfire (acres/ year) without self-burning (fires that stay on the land tenure where they start) 
Figure 4 - Predicted Wildfire Exposure to Housing Units from Land Tenures to Private Land 
Contact Melanie Colavito (melanie.colavito@nau.edu) or Tzeidle Wasserman (tzeidle.wasserman@nau.edu) for more information.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Most At-Risk 
Communities According 
to Relative Size and 
Wildfire Exposure: 
1. Mountainaire 
2. Munds Park 
3. Parks 
4. Fort Valley 
5. Kachina Village 
6. Flagstaff 
7. Williams 
8. Doney Park 

 
Visit our story map: https://arcg.is/18PmXW 
 
Contact Melanie Colavito (melanie.colavito@nau.edu) or Tzeidle Wasserman (tzeidle.wasserman@nau.edu) for more information.  
 
Figure 5 -The number of housing units exposed to simulated wildfire normalized by housing unit density overlaid on a map of 
average generated fire size. This map show areas where fires of varying sizes are likely to start and where relative housing unit 
exposure to fire is higher. 

 
Ager et al. 2018. Assessing transboundary wildfire exposure in the southwestern US. In Review. 
Contact Melanie Colavito (melanie.colavito@nau.edu) or Tzeidle Wasserman (tzeidle.wasserman@nau.edu) for more information.  
Appendix 2 
 
All Lands Planning, Coordination, and Wildfire Risk Reduction – February 2018 
The Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI) at Northern Arizona University (NAU), in coordination with Alan Ager from the Rocky 
Mountain Research Station (RMRS) and the Arizona Department of Forestry and Fire Management (AZ DFFM), is facilitating a 
conversation about an all-lands approach to wildfire risk reduction and restoration in Arizona. The purpose of our project is two-fold: 
1) to translate the outputs of the cross-boundary wildfire risk framework (Ager et al. 2018) and develop outreach materials for 
multiple audiences; and 2) to target and test this framework with key land tenures (ownership and management) in the greater 
Prescott area. The framework assists managers in meeting the objectives of the National Cohesive Fire Management Strategy by 
identifying areas to strategically reduce fire risk and exposure, prioritize fuels and restoration treatments, and coordinate pre-fire 
prevention planning across jurisdictional boundaries.  
The framework uses 2014 LANDFIRE data, USDA Forest Service Region 3 fuel models, and historical fire and weather occurrences to 
run FSim fire simulations, which were completed in 2017. Fire simulations were validated with actual vs. predicted fire perimeters 
and fire size distributions through 2015. FSim outputs were then intersected with local land tenure data. The outputs include spatial 
data and matrix tables of predicted cross-boundary wildfire affects among land tenures and quantifies wildfire transmission, risk, 
and exposure in terms of annual acres burned and annual housing units exposed to fire.  
The cross-boundary wildfire risk framework provides information about: 1) wildfire transmission (i.e., how fires move across land 
tenures); 2) wildfire risk (i.e., 
how risk is exchanged across 
land jurisdictions); 3) wildfire 
exposure (i.e., annual acres 
burned and annual housing units 
exposed to fire); and 4) where 
and with whom collaboration is 
needed to reduce fire risk across 
multi-jurisdictional boundaries.  
It provides annual predictions of 
how wildfire moves across 
jurisdictional boundaries and 
into communities from 
surrounding land jurisdictions, 
where housing units are 
disproportionately exposed to 
wildfire, and where large fires 
start and the areas on the 
landscape they tend to burn.   
The results of the framework can be used 
to 1) inform how and where land managers and landowners can work together to reach a cohesive fire management strategy; 2) to 
help decision makers determine how to restore and maintain landscapes and fire-adapted communities; and 3) to explore 
collaborative management opportunities across the landscape and opportunities to reduce wildfire risk.  
The results are meant to provide information for pre-fire planning and coordination. They can be coupled with local information on 
community protection, hazardous fuels treatments, and other land management actions, as well as information from tools like the 
Wildland Fire Decision Support System (WFDSS) to make decisions when fire incidents do occur (Figure 1). The challenge is to 
organize and implement landscape fuel and/or restoration treatments that consider fire occurrence and spread with the social 
components of what land managers are able and willing to do.  
Figure 1 - Types of wildfire decisions and examples of where to obtain information to inform these decisions. 

 
Figure 2 - Predicted Outgoing Wildfire (acres/ year) without self-burning (fires that stay on the land tenure where they start) 
Contact Melanie Colavito (melanie.colavito@nau.edu) or Tzeidle Wasserman (tzeidle.wasserman@nau.edu) for more information.  
Selected Results for the Greater Prescott Area: (results are predictions based on fire simulation modeling) 
 
BLM 
Goldwater 
Lake 
AZ Game  
& Fish 
Pioneer 
Park 
Prescott 
National 
Forest  
Private 
Land 
State Trust 
Land 
Yavapai 
Prescott 
Indian 
Reservation 
Total 
Transmitted 
BLM 
71.15 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
31.04 
33.20 
34.12 
0.00 
169.50 
Goldwater 
Lake 
0.00 
0.02 
0.00 
0.00 
0.87 
0.23 
0.22 
0.00 
1.35 
AZ Game & 
Fish 
0.00 
0.00 
0.07 
0.00 
0.31 
0.87 
0.89 
0.00 
2.14 
Pioneer Park 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.54 
0.00 
1.24 
0.41 
0.00 
2.19 
Prescott 
National 
Forest 
43.39 
0.45 
0.00 
0.33 
1673.64 
268.52 
69.28 
0.06 
2055.68 
Private Land 
26.66 
0.10 
0.49 
0.89 
154.49 
531.68 
194.35 
0.20 
908.86 
State Trust 
Land 
20.94 
0.00 
0.14 
0.05 
71.44 
165.40 
162.88 
0.04 
420.88 
Yavapai 
Prescott 
Indian 
Reservation 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.03 
1.87 
0.63 
0.64 
3.17 
Total 
Received 
162.15 
0.58 
0.70 
1.81 
1931.81 
1003.01 
462.77 
0.94 
 
Table 1– Predicted Wildfire Transmission (acres/ year) Among Land Tenures in the Greater Prescott Area 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Land tenures receiving fire 
Land tenures transmitting fire 

 
Figure 3  - Predicted Incoming Wildfire (acres/ year) without self-burning (fires that stay on the land tenure where they start) 
Figure 4 - Predicted Wildfire Exposure to Housing Units from Land Tenures to Private Land 
Contact Melanie Colavito (melanie.colavito@nau.edu) or Tzeidle Wasserman (tzeidle.wasserman@nau.edu) for more information.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Most At-Risk 
Communities According 
to Relative Size and 
Wildfire Exposure: 
1. Mayer 
2. Wilhoit 
3. Williamson 
4. Prescott 
5. Dewey-Humboldt 
6. Cordes Lakes 
7. Chino Valley 
8. Prescott Valley 
9. Spring Valley 
10. Paulden 
11. Camp Verde 

 
Visit our story map: https://arcg.is/1i5a5n  
Contact Melanie Colavito (melanie.colavito@nau.edu) or Tzeidle Wasserman (tzeidle.wasserman@nau.edu) for more information.  
  
 
Figure 5 -The number of housing units exposed to simulated wildfire normalized by housing unit density overlaid on a map of 
average generated fire size. This map show areas where fires of varying sizes are likely to start and where relative housing unit 
exposure to fire is higher. 

Appendix 3 
Greater Flagstaff Area All-Lands Roundtable Agenda  
Monday, March 5, 2018 – 2-4pm  
Juniper Room (#130), DuBois Center, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff 
 
The Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI) is facilitating a conversation with landowners and managers in the greater 
Flagstaff area about how to move forward with cross-boundary planning and coordination to reduce wildfire risk across 
jurisdictional boundaries. Roundtable participants will be familiar with the results of a cross-boundary wildfire risk 
analysis produced by Alan Ager from the Rocky Mountain Research Station (RMRS) and translated and communicated by 
ERI in the Flagstaff area. The focus of the roundtable will be to: 1) assess the utility of the cross-boundary wildfire risk 
analysis for determining where to coordinate and/ or prioritize management activities across boundaries to reduce 
wildfire risk, and 2) discuss the best strategies for fostering cross-boundary coordination to reduce wildfire risk.  
 
2:00 – 2:10pm  Welcome and Introductions 
2:10 – 2:25pm  Discussion – Where is all-lands work already occurring in the greater Flagstaff area and what information 
sources are currently used in decision-making about coordinating and prioritizing efforts?  
2:25 – 2:40pm  Review – RMRS cross-boundary wildfire risk analysis outputs and implications. 
2:40 – 3:20pm  Discussion – Is the cross-boundary wildfire risk analysis useful, and if so, how would it change what 
you’re currently doing? 
• 
What cross-boundary wildfire risk analysis outputs are most meaningful and usable? For what purposes 
and for what audience?  
• 
What maps or products would be most useful for cross-boundary planning?  
• 
What are the best ways to communicate the cross-boundary wildfire risk analysis outputs? 
• 
How does the cross-boundary wildfire risk analysis complement existing information/ decision-making 
tools (e.g., on-the ground knowledge, coordination meetings, CWPP strategies, AZ WRAP, etc.)?  
3:20 – 3:35pm Discussion – What are the best strategies for fostering cross-boundary coordination to reduce wildfire 
risk (e.g., strategic coordination meetings, better planning at multiple scales, etc.)? 
• 
What are the barriers to all-lands planning? 
• 
How can the work of existing coordination groups like GFFP or PFAC be enhanced? 
• 
What approaches would encourage public/ private landowners to buy-in and take action? 
• 
What are other needs that are not yet being addressed? 
• 
How is the CWPP being used and is it appropriate to the task at hand? 
3:40 – 3:55pm Discussion – Where are critical areas to move all-lands management forward in the greater Flagstaff 
area?  
• 
Will the cross-boundary wildfire risk analysis lead to any direct change in all-lands management and 
pre-fire planning? 
• 
Other thoughts on all-lands management and pre-fire planning and coordination? 
3:55 – 4:00pm  Wrap-up and feedback. 
4:00pm  
Adjourn  
 

Appendix 4 
 
Greater Prescott Area All-Lands Cross Boundary Wildfire Risk Workshop 
Workshop Questions for Small Group Discussion 
 
1. Participants Background: What is your awareness of cross boundary fire? Are you involved in 
making decision about cross boundary fire? If yes, what do you use to make decisions? 
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________ 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________ 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
 
2. How does this transmission framework rank/integrate with other tools; e.g., AZ WRAP, on-ground 
knowledge, coordination meetings, CWPP strategies, etc.? 
a. What are the benefits and challenges of using this framework and other methods? 
b. Are there other tools that you would like to have that aren’t currently available? 
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________ 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________ 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
____________________________________________________________________________ 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
 

 
Greater Prescott Area All-Lands Cross Boundary Wildfire Risk Workshop 
Workshop Questions for Small Group Discussion 
 
3. What are the best ways to communicate this cross-boundary framework? 
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________ 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________ 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
 
4. What are the best strategies for fostering cross-boundary coordination to reduce wildfire risk; e.g, 
strategic coordination meetings, better planning at multiple scales, etc? 
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________ 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________ 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________ 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
 

 
 
Appendix 5 
 
Greater Prescott Area All-Lands Cross-Boundary Wildfire Workshop Agenda 
 
When: Tuesday, February 13, 2018, 10am – 3pm  
Where: Central Arizona Regional Training Academy, 9601 E. Valley Road, Prescott Valley, AZ 86314 
 
 
Workshop Outcomes: 
(1) Provide information about the cross-boundary wildfire risk framework, which addresses wildfire transmission, risk, 
and exposure across landownerships;  
(2) Demonstrate how cross-boundary wildfire risk assessments may complement the Arizona Wildfire Risk Assessment 
Portal (AZ WRAP); 
(3) Provide information about wildfire risk reduction efforts in the greater Prescott area that have occurred or are 
planned for the future; 
(4) Assess the utility of the cross-boundary wildfire risk framework for determining where to coordinate and/ or 
prioritize management activities across jurisdictional boundaries to reduce wildfire risk. 
 
Workshop Agenda 
 
Pre-workshop Networking 
9:30AM 
Coffee, snacks and networking 
Welcome, Introductions, Workshop Overview 
10:00AM 
 
Welcome – Jeff Whitney and Russ Shumate, AZ Department of Forestry and Fire Management 
 
Agenda Review and Participant Introductions – Andi Rogers, Southwest Decision Resources 
 
Workshop Overview – Melanie Colavito and Tzeidle Wasserman, Ecological Restoration Institute 
● All-Lands context, Cohesive Strategy, why Prescott? 
Why cross-boundary wildfire risk matters - Presentation and discussion 
10:25AM 
 
Cross-Boundary Wildfire Risk Framework – Melanie Colavito and Tzeidle Wasserman, Ecological 
Restoration Institute  
● Methodology and results 
● Potential management implications 
● Question & Answer 
11:05AM 
BREAK 
Arizona Wildfire Risk Assessment Portal (AZ WRAP) 
11:20AM 
 
AZ WRAP overview – Jim Downey and Glen Buettner, AZ Department of Forestry and Fire 
Management 
What is already being done in the Greater Prescott Area? 
11:30AM 
 
Overview of Past and Ongoing Work – Russ Shumate, AZ Department of Forestry and Fire 
Management; Pete Gordon, Prescott National Forest; and Rob Roy Williams, Bureau of Land 
Management 
● Successful collaborations  

 
 
● Challenges/barriers and strategies for addressing 
● Information used in decision-making 
Question & Answer 
12:00-12:45PM 
Lunch (participate in a sandwich order or bring your own) 
Developing fire management scenarios in the Greater Prescott Area 
12:45PM 
 
Framework Utility – Melanie Colavito and Tzeidle Wasserman, Ecological Restoration Institute 
● Example from Mayer, AZ 
Small group discussions and report back 
1:05PM 
 
Framework Discussion 
● Utility, benefits and challenges  
● Integration with other tools (i.e. AZ WRAP) 
● Best ways to communicate the framework  
● Strategies for fostering cross boundary coordination  
2:05PM 
Report Back and Discussion  
Workshop assessment and evaluation 
2:35PM 
Participants complete 
Closing and wrap-up 
2:45PM 
Next steps 
Reflections and final thoughts from participants  
2:55PM 
Closing remarks - Russ Shumate, AZ Department of Forestry and Fire Management 
3:00PM 
ADJOURN 
 

 
Appendix 6 
Greater Prescott Area All-Lands Cross-Boundary Wildfire Workshop 
Central Arizona Regional Training Academy, Prescott Valley 
February 13, 2018 
WORKSHOP REPORT 
INTRODUCTION/BACKGROUND 
Introduction 
In order to foster coordinated pre-fire planning and action to reduce wildfire risk in a multi-jurisdictional landscape, the 
Greater Prescott Area All-Lands Cross-Boundary Workshop was held February 13, 2018, at the Central Arizona 
Regional Training Academy in Prescott Valley, AZ. Over 30 participants from 20 organizations, agencies and 
institutions participated in the workshop (see participant list, last page) 
The workshop’s intent was to foster conversation and coordination among key landowners and managers in the greater 
Prescott area concerning an All Lands, All Hands approach to reduce the risk of large wildfires across the landscape and 
to advance the goals of the National Cohesive Wildland Fire Management Strategy. Workshop organizers/host were the 
Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI) at Northern Arizona University, in collaboration with the Arizona Department 
of Forestry and Fire Management (AZ DFFM). The workshop was facilitated by Southwest Decision Resources.   
Background 
Working with Alan Ager from the USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station (RMRS) and AZ DFFM, 
ERI has been translating and communicating a model that predicts where wildfire is likely to occur and quantifies cross-
boundary wildfire risk to landownerships in terms of annual acres burned and annual housing units exposed to fire. The 
results can inform where to prioritize fuels and restoration treatments, identify areas to mitigate risk and exposure, and 
coordinate pre-fire prevention planning and coordination among landowners and managers. 
WORKSHOP OUTCOMES/GOALS 
(1) Provide information about the cross-boundary wildfire risk framework, which addresses wildfire transmission, risk, 
and exposure across landownerships;  
(2) Demonstrate how cross-boundary wildfire risk assessments may complement the Arizona Wildfire Risk Assessment 
Portal (AZ WRAP); 
(3) Provide information about wildfire risk reduction efforts in the greater Prescott area that have occurred or are 
planned for the future; 
(4) Assess the utility of the cross-boundary wildfire risk framework for determining where to coordinate and/ or 
prioritize management activities across jurisdictional boundaries to reduce wildfire risk. 
WORKSHOP OVERVIEW 
The agenda (attached) was designed to foster learning about the cross-boundary wildfire risk model and assess its 
potential utility for pre-fire coordination and planning. Participants were also asked to engage in small group dialogue 
about coordination and prioritization of management activities across jurisdictions. During the workshop, ERI shared 
the results of the cross-boundary wildfire modeling for the greater Prescott area (within a landscape that incorporates 
the communities of Prescott to the west, Dewey-Humboldt to the east, Cleator to the south, and Paulden to the north). 
In addition, AZ DFFM presented information on the Arizona Wildfire Risk Assessment Portal (AZ WRAP). There 

 
were also presentations by representatives from AZ DFFM, the Prescott National Forest, and Bureau of Land 
Management (BLM) about ongoing collaborative fuel reduction and wildfire risk mitigation efforts in the Prescott area.  
PRESENTATION: WHY CROSS-BOUNDARY WILDFIRE RISK MATTERS?                               
Melanie Colavito and Tzeidle Wasserman, Ecological Restoration Institute  
 
Melanie Colavito and Tzeidle Wasserman presented the RMRS cross-boundary wildfire risk model to the group. They 
discussed the methodology and results from the model and the potential management implications, as well as took time 
for questions and answers. 
 
Questions and Discussion 
• 
Q: Why are some towns not represented on a list?  
o A: They were not specified within the census data (e.g., Walker was absorbed into Prescott because of 
the Census designated boundary); there is a state-wide assessment for towns outside the boundary. 
• 
Q: Regarding acres burned, fire frequency may be a better metric; can this be incorporated into the model? 
o A: Simulated fire size does account for frequency; larger areas in the model do show frequency.  
• 
Q: Does the model account for suppression? 
o A: Yes, suppression is accounted for in the model. 
• 
Q: Regarding model pliability – can data be added to create different outputs? 
o A: Yes, it is possible to adjust for updated data, it is more labor intensive, but it can be done. 
o Follow-up: This tool, if it could be updated as things change, would be helpful in managing lands 
moving forward – updating mastication treatments, controlled burns, other ongoing/ recent work.  
• 
Q: How do you account for missing what is happening locally (e.g., 37 FireWise communities in the Prescott/ 
Prescott Valley area, lots of acreage that has been cleared as part of FireWise)? 
o A: This is a landscape-level perspective and intended to be used in combination with local knowledge. 
• 
Discussion 
o The purpose is to transcend the biotic and physical communities to make better land management 
decisions. For example, just because there was a fire in Mayer and Goodwin, does not take those 
communities out the fire equation for this year. 
o Models are intended to help identify opportunities to enhance information that can be used for your 
management area. 
PRESENTATION: ARIZONA WILDFIRE RISK ASSESSMENT PORTAL (AZ WRAP)  
Glen Buettner, AZ Department of Forestry and Fire Management 
Glen Buettner presented on the Arizona Wildfire Risk Assessment Portal (AZ WRAP) and its potential utility in 
wildfire decision-making. The model is based on where fires have occurred in the past. The outputs can be selected in 
the portal to generate data and charts that can be used for independent reports. There is a need for more input on how 
to make the portal more accurate and user-friendly, bearing in mind that it is a model. 
DISCUSSION: WHAT IS ALREADY BEING DONE IN THE GREATER PRESCOTT AREA? 
During this session representatives from different landownerships discussed what they are doing to determine where to 
implement projects on the ground, how their work might be validated by the model, and where there are opportunities 
for future coordination and collaboration based on the successes of past work. It is important to note that collaboration 

 
efforts are currently much more organized than historically, which has increased their effectiveness. The products of the 
model were discussed as helping explain to the public about where areas of risk are located and where future projects 
will be implemented. 
 
Arizona Department of Forestry and Fire Management  
• 
Work has been occurring primarily on the Highway 69 corridor and includes fuels mastication; more units are 
planned for treatment. 
• 
AZ DFFM has been helping the fire districts. 
• 
FireWise communities have been a driving force in determining where to get projects done on the ground. 
USDA Forest Service, Prescott National Forest  
• 
There is a long history of working with partners. 
• 
Determining where to work: 
o Where are we likely to ask the firefighters to engage in fighting fires? It is important to enhance 
firefighter protection and safety. 
o Assessing highest potential for risk: 
 
Determining high probability areas, as well as low probability areas that have high 
consequence if burned. 
 
Risk assessment modeling (different sets of data as inputs) to validate where fires have been 
and where to move forward. 
o NEPA cleared areas, if compliance is completed in certain areas, those are easier to complete. 
o Leverage funding and compete for funds by demonstrating that money received goes to good work. 
o Using managed fire (e.g., lightning strike) to facilitate positive ecological outcomes. 
• 
Types of treatment: 
o Masticating treatments and prescribed burns are most common. 
• 
Research indicates areas of opportunity: 
o Working with ERI to see if the mix of treatments would work in chaparral areas; will share the results 
to coordinate better across landownerships. 
• 
Moving forward: 
o Chino landscape project (northeast part of the forest). 
o Hassayampa project. 
Bureau of Land Management 
• 
Focus on areas that are meaningful (for firefighters and for protecting communities). 
• 
Past work has been primarily grassland restoration – Agua Fria. 
• 
Projects by area: 
o Dewey-Humboldt  
 
Area planning done first so when funding is available, projects that are meaningful and 
collaborative are set to go. 
 
FireWise area and assisting with secondary fire escape type roads and hazardous fuels 
reduction. 
o Mastication north of Mayer, where the state will work in the future. 
o East of Paulden there is hazardous fuel reduction that will tie into what the state is planning. 
o Hassayampa Environmental Assessment - work will be easier after clearance. 

 
 
General Discussion 
• 
The Forest Service was able to secure strategic funding that has helped partners come together intentionally. 
o There is value in having meetings, twice per year. 
o County partners have joined, they share GIS layers, and could potentially use AZ WRAP. 
o There is a challenge of getting the GIS layers to function in the same portal/framework. 
o Finding efficiencies by meeting collaboratively. 
o When developing proposals, getting all the partners/collaborators at the table to make coordinated 
decisions is efficient and effective. 
• 
It is important that managers are coordinating the funding with the planning – equating the number of acres 
treated to a more relatable and meaningful figure/story (e.g., number of houses, acres protected, decreased 
likelihood of fire to move into neighboring area). 
PRESENTATION: FRAMEWORK UTILITY: MAYER, AZ  
Melanie Colavito and Tzeidle Wasserman, Ecological Restoration Institute - see presentation (map handouts) 
 
Melanie Colavito and Tzeidle Wasserman presented on the wildfire in and around Mayer, Arizona. This is an area of 
varying topography and high fuel loads. The area received fires from all landownerships; nearby communities share the 
high risk of being in a high burn probability area. The maps generated by the cross-boundary wildfire risk model show 
that the collaboration complexity is high due to many landownerships/ communities. The model outputs, combined 
with existing knowledge, can help inform decision-making.  
SMALL GROUP DISCUSSIONS 
The workshop participants divided into three groups to discuss workshop questions that aimed at getting information 
regarding participants’ background and decision-making capabilities, the integration of the cross-boundary wildfire risk 
framework with other tools, ways to communicating the framework, and recommendations for strategies to foster 
cross-boundary coordination and planning to reduce wildfire risk.  
PARTICIPANT BACKGROUND, AWARENESS OF CROSS BOUNDARY FIRE, INVOLVEMENT 
IN DECISION-MAKING, WHAT TOOLS ARE USED TO MAKE DECISIONS? 
Participants represented non-profit organizations, federal, state and local agencies; some focus primarily of fire and are 
highly aware of cross boundary wildfire, others focus on the logistics and finance aspects of projects. The group varied 
widely in their ability to make wildfire management decisions: those involved in all management decisions to those who 
had no official decision-making authority, advisory roles, or providing technical support. The participants stated they 
use a wide variety of tools to make decisions including: on-the-ground knowledge, personal and partner expertise, risk 
assessments, models, and geospatial platforms with fire history layers. 
HOW DOES THIS TRANSMISSION FRAMEWORK RANK/INTEGRATE WITH OTHER TOOLS 
(E.G., AZ WRAP, ON-GROUND KNOWLEDGE, COORDINATING MEETINGS, CWPP 
STRATEGIES, ETC.)? 
A) WHAT ARE THE BENEFITS AND CHALLENGES OF USING THIS FRAMEWORK AND 
OTHER METHODS? 

 
B) ARE THERE OTHER TOOLS THAT YOU WOULD LIKE TO HAVE THAT AREN’T 
CURRENTLY AVAILABLE? 
Framework integration with other tools:  
• 
Mitigation identification and planning 
o Interest in seeing an integration of the cross-boundary wildfire risk framework and AZWRAP and 
creation of linkages between Community Wildfire Protection Plan (CWPP) context, coordinated 
plans, mitigation planning and more collaborative conversation. 
o The framework outputs provide additional information to help prioritize high value fuel mitigation 
projects. 
o Framework outputs could be used for pre-season planning and coordination and identification of 
needed mitigation. 
• 
Validation of existing tools/evidence 
o The framework seems to validate historical, practical, and anecdotal evidence of fire threat, risk, and 
movement in the Prescott Basin. 
o The framework does capture similar aspects of the other tools. 
• 
Highlights areas for work and/or agreements 
o The framework points out areas that may need to be prioritized for fuel treatments, fire prevention 
work and education, suppression or staging of resources, and public education. 
o Framework outputs could be integrated into CWPP’s to identify priority areas. 
o There may be applications in Good Neighbor Authority (e.g., map areas prime for agreements 
between federal and state partners, biomass applications).  
o Integrates with Upper Verde WPC in education. 
o Bradshaw cross-boundary conservation implementation strategy.  
Identified benefits of using the framework with other tools:  
• 
Assists with ongoing coordination efforts 
o Fuel treatment coordination meetings – discussing priorities (restoration, protection) and sharing 
information of where resources can be allocated. 
o Statewide natural resources strategy? Need a venue to get all the partners in the room to think 
strategically about all-lands issues. The state has a suite of potential programs, especially Good 
Neighbor Authority. 
o Dialogue already exists between managers and elected officials in the area; relationships are there.  
o Framework could help to get all the players on the same page. 
o Framework could help to create a common operating picture and definitions. 
o Doing projects in-step is the closest anyone can get to resource sharing, meeting at the boundary.  
• 
Provides information for funding/resources 
o Allocation toll – helps indicate where to put resources. 
 
Would help to show money saved through prevention, trade-off from suppression costs. 
o The funding is limited; therefore the framework can help substantiate need and threat compared to 
other regions across the state, can help leverage needs in the area. 
o Good for communicating to leadership/regional/Washington levels to see where resources need to be 
allocated. 
o Shows areas that can use the existing money more effectively and find efficiencies in the process. 
• 
Public education opportunity 

 
o Framework could be useful in public education; generally, the public doesn’t understand fire 
management. Helps communicate influence of conditions, usefulness of certain tools over others. 
o Framework helps to demonstrate why defensible space is needed, helps express the danger levels to 
which property owners in surrounding communities are exposed. 
o Framework could be a good reference to help portray the importance of fire management to the 
public through mitigation education. 
o Great communication tool across multiple disciplines/practitioners and general public. 
o One output of interest is frequency of transmission; it could be a public education component 
showing a high number of transmissions are coming off private lands. 
• 
Validation of efforts, on-the-ground conditions, and credibility of partners 
o Validation tool – confirming the right work is done in the right place and for the right reasons.  
o Validating what the managers are doing and where they are focusing resources, adds credibility to fire 
managers’ choices. 
 
Leverage agency buy-in (cross agency), political, social, and political benefits are higher than 
manger project-based benefit.  
o Validation allocation, incorporate fuels treatment in future model runs to see if there are major 
changes.  
o Evaluate/validate the collective mitigation being done at a landscape-scale vs. site by site. 
o Model confirms that the risk is real across the county. 
o The information validates the on-the-ground information; reinforces the dangers of risk of fire in 
certain areas. 
o Shows credibility – RMRS and ERI are credible technical partners. 
Potential challenges of using the framework  
• 
Data/Inputs 
o Accuracy/timeliness of data 
 
Recent treatments are not in the dataset – if added, it could be used as a treatment 
effectiveness tool. 
o The data is not recent and doesn’t reflect major or minor changes on the landscape. 
 
The labor needed to update treatments in the model may be prohibitive. 
o Challenge is to combine mitigation/fuels treatments, fire prevention and suppression information. 
o More factors need to be added: supplemented with videos of fire behavior, topographic information. 
o It can be challenging to understand the underpinning of the framework without additional exposure, 
more information and conversation with the developers. 
• 
Outputs 
o The challenge is the complexity of the information and communicating to the public. 
o Needs to differentiate real-time forecasting vs. probability of occurrence based on historic data. 
o The cultural challenge of using predictions and/or collaborating based on predictive outcomes. 
o The scale is not fine enough for public understanding (not a backyard level). 
• 
Redundancy – same work being done by different agencies; it seems like this is duplicating efforts. 
• 
Conditions are so influential – weather, moisture. 
Suggestions of tools that are not available 
• 
Incorporate more local and recent agency data. 
• 
More interactive map programs – shared across the cooperators (not each group having the same but different 
program). 

 
• 
Scenario planning with cooperator and communities. 
• 
Need a tool to assess how treatments reduced threat of transmission, layered probability, likelihood of spread, 
protected value (property, lives, etc.), justify future investments in treatment when risk increases. 
 
WHAT ARE THE BEST WAYS TO COMMUNICATE THIS CROSS-BOUNDARY FRAMEWORK? 
• 
Community-oriented outreach/ engagement/ meetings 
o Community meetings between jurisdictions – relaying the benefit to each landownership. 
 
Use FireWise leaders to help communicate to private landowners. 
o Hands-on, public interaction, field visits. 
o Demonstrating to public where work has happened is critical. 
o Efficiency in public communication: common language, statements, verbiage, consistent messaging 
across stakeholders and agencies. 
o On-the-ground and face-to-face with the community. 
o More outreach and education material (hard copies of model outputs). 
o Making information relatable to the public, focus on their backyard. 
o Dynamic fire simulation customized to community/area level. 
 
With current aerial videography (drone). 
 
With example video of fire behavior. 
o Recognize different consumer/user groups; reduce jargon/industry terms. 
• 
Agency/ management coordination 
o Coordinated meetings with possible cooperators on a regular basis. 
o Biennial meetings among agencies to focus on hazardous fuel treatments, future work, information, 
wildland urban interface (WUI) issues. 
o This data and forum is a great way to communicate this issue, but the audience needs to be different 
(e.g., people who don’t know the Prescott area as well).  
o Fuels mitigation workshops, more integrative workshops, PAUWIC, get people in the room to talk. 
o Consistent messaging, joint communication, biannual coordination meeting around hazardous fuels. 
• 
Visually 
o “Pictures” tell the story; geospatial products. 
o Visuals are informative for the public. 
o Story maps. 
• 
Social Media/Technology 
o Relevant to generations (social media); relevant to modern technology. 
o YouTube/social media. 
o Information should be short, digestible and applicable to the social media platform. 
• 
Integration with other tools (e.g. AZ WRAP) 
o Pair with AZ WRAP, which has worked well with public. 
o Put framework outputs and other information in AZ WRAP, and it can serve as a repository.  
WHAT ARE THE BEST STRATEGIES FOR FOSTERING CROSS-BOUNDARY COORDINATION 
TO REDUCE WILDFIRE RISK; E.G. STRATEGIC COORDINATION MEETINGS, BETTER 
PLANNING AT MULTIPLE SCALES, ETC.? 
• 
Meetings/ expo/ outreach 
o Strategic coordination meetings. 

 
o Community meetings. 
o Regular meetings with decision-makers, including responders and fuels mitigation experts. 
o Annual wildfire expo each year with agency booths. 
o Communication venue each year in Prescott. 
o PAUWIC as an example of public outreach. 
• 
Communication, collaboration, and support 
o Timely decision support system. 
o Constant and consistent communication with all groups. 
o Legislative support is needed for prevention resources. 
o Support from department heads for a collective management approach county-wide. 
o Collaboration is a solution and leads to better outcomes. 
• 
Planning 
o More focused collaborative conversation about regional planning, and CWPPs may be a good starting 
point. 
o All risk planning and coordination, not just wildfire. 
o Basin-wide planning. 
o Include multiple agencies when planning and do so regularly. 
• 
Identify shared values at risk 
o Shared values at risk for critical infrastructure: roads, power, telecomm; housing units assessed value, 
APS lines, access/egress routes, telecom sites, other shared values at risk that provide opportunities for 
pooling resources for prevention around critical infrastructure.  
o Life safety – geographic (camps) and temporal (summer); movement; firefighter safety. 
o Ordinances for risk – fining properties that are not treating or mitigating their risk; hazardous fuels 
WUI code. 
• 
Funding/ resources 
o Combining the resources that are available. 
o More partnerships with DFFM to identify and keep track of resources. 
o Long-term funding, identifying grants that are not just for one-time projects. 
• 
Formal agreements 
o Good Neighbor Authority 
o Operational control – one entity is the primary coordinator on prevention activities. Direct control and 
accountability. 
• 
Use the “suppression approach” 
o Approach prevention and pre-fire mitigation in the same way we approach fire suppression (e.g., 
incident management approach). 
• 
Refining scale 
o Elimination of scale mismatches. 
o Accurate delineation of “communities”. 
o Integrate funding/valuation – magnitudes of scale. 
NEXT STEPS 
• 
ERI will be hosting a round-table in March with selected representatives in Flagstaff (complete) 
• 
Moving forward with AZ WRAP, there will need to be training, additional input, developing a potential work 
group to make it a more useful tool that can inform the CWPP process; figuring out how to best represent the 
cross-boundary data. If there is interest in AZ WRAP, supporting local groups, attending the next 
coordination/cooperating meetings, etc. please forward on the information to Glen at AZ DFFM. 

 
• 
Presentations, handouts, and the workshop summary will be distributed to the workshop participants. 
 
 

 
PARTICIPANT LIST 
Wade Ward 
 
 
 
 
Arizona Public Service 
Jeff Whitney 
 
 
 
 
Arizona State Forester 
RobRoy Williams 
 
 
 
Bureau of Land Management 
Andie Smith 
 
 
 
 
Central Arizona Fire and Medical Authority 
Glen Buettner  
 
 
 
Department of Forestry and Fire Management 
Dea Funka 
 
 
 
 
Department of Forestry and Fire Management 
Karl Gehrke 
 
 
 
 
Department of Forestry and Fire Management 
Aaron Green 
 
 
 
 
Department of Forestry and Fire Management 
Russ Shumate 
 
 
 
 
Department of Forestry and Fire Management 
Rich Van Demark 
 
 
 
Department of Forestry and Fire Management 
Terry Hudson  
 
 
 
Department of Forestry and Fire Management  
Tom Haney 
 
 
 
 
Mayer Fire Department  
Marques Munis  
 
 
 
Natural Resource Conservation Service 
Wally Covington  
 
 
 
Northern Arizona University   
Jesse Young 
 
 
 
 
Northern Arizona University 
Lois Hoskinson  
 
 
 
Prescott Area Wildland Urban Interface Committee 
Michael Orr 
 
 
 
 
Prescott Area Wildland Urban Interface Committee 
Bob Betts 
 
 
 
 
Prescott Area Wildland Urban Interface Committee 
Marsha Collier  
 
 
 
Prescott Fire Department 
Don Devendorf  
 
 
 
Prescott Fire Department 
Dennis Light 
 
 
 
 
Prescott Fire Department 
Alan Ager 
 
 
 
 
Rocky Mountain Research Station 
Terry Nolan 
 
 
 
 
Town of Dewey-Humboldt 
Lora Lee Nye 
 
 
 
 
Town of Prescott Valley 
Melody Reifsnyder 
 
 
 
Upper Verde River Watershed Protection Coalition 
Dale Deiter 
 
 
 
 
USFS – Prescott National Forest 
Sarah Tomsky  
 
 
 
USFS – Prescott National Forest 
Pete Gordon 
 
 
 
 
USFS – Prescott National Forest 
Ben DeBlois 
 
 
 
 
USFS – Prescott National Forest  
Tom Quigley 
 
 
 
 
Western Regional Strategic Committee 
Amber Tyson 
 
 
 
 
Yavapai Prescott Indian Tribe 
Hugh Vallely 
 
 
 
 
Yavapai County Emergency Management 
Ted Ralsten 
 
 
 
 
Yavapai County Emergency Management 
Brandon Van Horn 
 
 
 
Yavapai County  
Randy Garrison  
 
 
 
Yavapai County Supervisor 
Tom Thurman  
 
 
 
Yavapai County Supervisor 
 
Melanie Colavito 
 
 
 
NAU – ERI 
Tzeidle Wasserman 
 
 
 
NAU – ERI 
Bryce Esch 
 
 
 
 
NAU – ERI  
 
Facilitation 
Andi Rogers 
 
 
 
 
Southwest Decision Resources 
Carrie Eberly 
 
 
 
 
Southwest Decision Resources 

 
 
Appendix 7 
 
All-Lands Planning, Coordination, and Wildfire Risk Reduction: Wildfire Transmission Model 
Communication and Outreach 
 
Greater Flagstaff Area Assessment Results – January 2018 
 
 
 
Total Respondents: 35 - does not include beta test (IRB not yet approved), PFAC (no time allotted for survey), 
or roundtable (not administered) 
 
1. Organizational affiliation. 
• Federal government – 24 respondents (68.57%) 
• State government – 4 respondents (11.43%)  
• Local government – 6 respondents (17.14%)  
• Tribal – 0 respondents 
• University – 0 respondents  
• Non-profit organization – 1 respondent (2.86%) 
• Wood utilization industry – 0 respondents 
• Private business – 0 respondents  
• General public – 0 respondents  
 
2. Specialty area. 
• Decision-making – 9 respondents (25.71%)  
• Planning – 1 respondent (2.86%) 
• Implementation  - 5 respondents (14.29%)  
• Utilization – 1 respondent (2.86%) 
• Resource specialties – 0 respondents  
• Fire suppression – 8 respondents (22.86%) 
• Research – 0 respondents 
• Education – 0 respondents 
• Facilitation – 0 respondents 
• Private citizen – 0 respondents 
 
 
 

 
 
3. PRIOR to attending today’s All Lands Wildfire Transmission presentation, how would you rate your level 
of understanding of wildfire transmission (i.e. where fires start and where they go)? 
Advanced 
Understanding 
Moderate 
Understanding 
Basic 
Understanding 
Poor 
Understanding 
No Understanding 
11 
31.43% 
12 
34.29% 
12 
34.29% 
0 
0.00% 
0 
0.00% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. PRIOR to attending today’s presentation, how would you rate your level of understanding of wildfire 
exposure (i.e. annual acres burned and housing units exposed to fire)? 
Advanced 
Understanding 
Moderate 
Understanding 
Basic 
Understanding 
Poor 
Understanding 
No Understanding 
8 
22.86% 
14 
40.00% 
11 
31.43% 
2 
5.71% 
0 
0.00% 
 
 
5. PRIOR to attending today’s presentation, how would you rate your level of understanding of wildfire 
risk across jurisdictions (i.e. who owns fire risk and who receives fire risk)? 
Advanced 
Understanding 
Moderate 
Understanding 
Basic 
Understanding 
Poor 
Understanding 
No Understanding 
10 
28.57% 
12 
34.29% 
12 
34.29% 
0 
0.00% 
0 
0.00% 
 
 
6. PRIOR to attending today’s presentation, how would you rate your level of motivation for multi-
jurisdictional coordination and planning to reduce fire risk? 
Very High 
High 
Moderate 
Low 
Very Low 
12 
34.29% 
16 
45.71% 
7 
20.00% 
0 
0.00% 
0 
0.00% 
 
 
7. AFTER attending today’s presentation, how would you rate your level of understanding of wildfire 
transmission (i.e. where fires start and where they go)? 
Advanced 
Understanding 
Moderate 
Understanding 
Basic 
Understanding 
Poor 
Understanding 
No Understanding 
17 
48.57% 
54.55% change 
17 
48.57% 
41.67% change 
1 
2.86% 
-91.67% change 
0 
0.00% 
N/A 
0 
0.00% 
N/A 
 
 
 
 

 
 
8. AFTER attending today’s presentation, how would you rate your level of understanding of wildfire 
exposure (i.e. annual area and structures exposed to fire)? 
Advanced 
Understanding 
Moderate 
Understanding 
Basic 
Understanding 
Poor 
Understanding 
No Understanding 
16 
45.71% 
100% change 
15 
42.86% 
7.14% change 
4 
11.43% 
-63.64% change 
0 
0.00% 
-100% change 
0 
0.00% 
N/A 
 
 
9. AFTER attending today’s presentation, how would you rate your level of understanding of wildfire risk 
across jurisdictions (i.e. who owns fire risk and who receives fire risk)? 
Advanced 
Understanding 
Moderate 
Understanding 
Basic 
Understanding 
Poor 
Understanding 
No Understanding 
17 
48.57% 
70% change 
16 
45.71% 
33.33% change 
2 
5.71% 
-83.33% change 
0 
0.00% 
N/A 
0 
0.00% 
N/A 
 
10. AFTER attending today’s presentation, how would you rate your level of motivation for multi-
jurisdictional coordination and planning to reduce fire risk? 
Very High 
High 
Moderate 
Low 
Very Low 
18 
51.43% 
50% change 
13 
37.14% 
-18.75% change 
4 
11.43% 
-42.86% change 
0 
0.00% 
N/A 
0 
0.00% 
N/A 
 
11. Which output(s) from today’s presentation were most helpful in shaping your understanding of wildfire 
transmission, wildfire exposure, and transboundary wildfire risk? Check all that apply. 
• Two-page written summary – 10 respondents (28.57%) – 6th (tie) 
• Burn probability map – 20 respondents (57.14%) – 1st  
• Conditional flame length map – 10 respondents (28.57%) – 6th (tie) 
• Wildfire transmission map – 16 respondents (45.71%) – 2nd  
• Wildfire transmission tables – 9 respondents (25.71%) – 7th  
• Wildfire transmission Sankey diagrams – 7 respondents (20%) – 8th  
• Wildfire transmission bar graphs – 13 respondents (37.14%) – 5th (tie) 
• Fireshed (acres) map – 15 respondents (42.86%) – 3rd  
• Fireshed (housing units) map – 13 respondents (37.14%) – 5th (tie) 
• Collaboration hotspot map – 14 respondents (40%) – 4th  
• Fire sources and impacts map – 13 respondents (37.14%) – 5th  (tie)
 
 
 
12. In what ways could today’s presentation be refined to better communicate the concepts of wildfire 
transmission, wildfire exposure, and wildfire risk across jurisdictions?  

 
 
• Alter outputs based on managers' needs. Ask the question, what are fire dept. top needs in conducting 
both prevention and mitigation measures. 
• Clear and concise explanation of model and how it was developed/ validated. This may reduce confusion 
that can linger into presentation. Define variables used to model "burn probability", "transmission", etc. 
• Definitions, discussion of what various maps, graphs, etc. can be used for. 
• Following up on suggestions given during discussion.  
• More interpretation completed for the audience - targeted for audience knowledge level.  
• Need to be able to zoom into specific areas. Let's look at this fire district. Let's look at this community. 
• Ensure consistent definitions and boundaries between components. 
• Making changes as discussed. 
• As discussed in the meeting, clear definitions, consistent descriptions of the polygons. Really focus and 
describe/ define "models". 
• It would have been helpful if Bellemont was a separate community. 
• I like the presentation. I think having more jurisdictions in one room would help. 
• Great presentation for organizational leadership but not recommended for public consumption.  
• Products. What can you do for us to tell our story? 
• Site specific location example 
• It was very good. No recommendations. 
• Understand you're looking to hit all learning styles but makes presentation a bit redundant with same 
message graphs. Narrow down to 2 maybe that show display same info. 
• A little longer to allow for more dialogue, but you can tap into us as you develop more strategies. 
• Explanation, verbal, maps, graphs, but we didn't help that happen. 
• Information used to inform public, funding, and partnership opportunities. 
• Separate statistical from physical (fuels, topo) in explaining (discuss). 
• Emphasize all FS lands are public lands. 
• Focus the presentation on unwanted fires. These areas may be completely fine with sending "unwanted" 
fire across boundaries. 
• Including sources of ignition - natural ignitions vs. human causes 
• Explaining fire transmission to new fire folks 
• Good job 
• Seek out most up-to-date data 
• I think we covered these in the questions and suggestions we made - thanks for the presentation! 
• Emphasize modeling aspect 
 
13. In what ways could today’s presentation be refined to help advance an all-lands approach in the 
coordination and planning of restoration and wildfire risk reduction? 
• Again, ask how this info could best be used in an all lands approach. What are the key variables that affect 
this decision-making. Once this is determined, it would be a good idea to test this in the field (pre-test).  
• Bring non-fire personnel to the discussion table (i.e. resource specialists, forestry silvis, wildlife experts). 
• Helps carry forward conversation. 
• It's one thing to present the information and another to help fund and develop a format for collaborating. 
• Just data is not enough. Need some potential for next steps for action.  

 
 
• Simplify and summarize with additional info to support in-depth questions and discussion 
• Demonstrated the need through the maps and charts. 
• Create landowner-specific transmission maps 
• Being able to take the data to an "all" stakeholder meeting where true collaboration can begin. 
• Our risk are trees. Private risk is property. 
• I have no recommendations. It was well organized. 
• Present to homeowners/ communities that pop organizations. Add fire behavior on FS lands vs. other 
jurisdictions. 
• Multi-jurisdictional presentation and dialogue. 
• More discussion around each ownerships level of responsibility. 
• Be more bold in moving a well-informed audience along. 
• Include Tusayan and Payson areas within results. Because the project area is 4FRI area, it would be good to 
hear how other communities in the Flagstaff area rate in priority to Williams communities. 
• Present to multi-agency crowds. Get discussion from other agencies.  
• Help of communication strategies - how "regular people" react to this 
• Knowing where to focus 
• Good job 
 
14. In what ways do you anticipate using the information from today’s presentation?  
• I see this as very useful in applying for grants (this is more focused in the work that I specifically do). 
• Want to see final, and then be able to select items for future presentations based on audience. 
• Grant writing/ equipment need calculations. 
• For use in treatment prioritization and use in grant proposals.  
• Community education/ planning/ grant request. 
• For interagency, cross boundary cooperation in mitigation and response. 
• To better use info in future planning  
• Understand and plan potential fire spread and impacts 
• I will use it in responding to incidents and further promote interagency communications. 
• I will use the data to support requests for additional resources (i.e. additional firefighters at Camp Navajo). 
Will also use this info in collaboration with mutual aid partners and in implementing wildfire mitigation. 
• Not sure. 
• Bringing the GIS layers into our FS system. 
• I feel better informed about risk. No idea how I will use it. 
• Share with other employees, partners, local communities.  
• Somehow get over the hurdle and improve the relationship with Ponderosa Fire Department. 
• Looking into Alan Ager model. 
• Focus for further collaboration. 
• Communication with other jurisdictions. 
• 5-year planning mechanical treatments, public affairs focus, new employee info 
• Maps with partners. 
• Talking to partners, communities - looking forward to Prescott results 

 
 
• To talk with other agencies 
• Good job 
• Look forward to more regional presentations 
• Groundwork for communication 
 
15. Please share any additional comments you have: 
• Normalized data is an important part of the story. Needs to be a story. Not just data but a path needs to be 
provided.  
• Thank you for all your work. Keep it up.  
• Thank you. 

 
 
Appendix 8 
 
Greater Prescott Area All-Lands Cross-Boundary Wildfire Workshop 
 
Prescott Workshop Assessment Results (not incl. workshop evaluation) – February 2018 
 
 
 
Total Respondents: 21 
 
1. Organizational affiliation. 
• Federal government – 5 respondents (23.81%) 
• State government – 6 respondents (28.57%)  
• Local government – 6 respondents (28.57%)  
• Tribal – 1 respondents (4.76%) 
• University – 0 respondents  
• Non-profit organization – 2 respondent (9.52%) 
• Wood utilization industry – 0 respondents 
• Private business – 0 respondents  
• General public – 0 respondents  
• Other – 1 respondent (fire department) (4.76%) 
 
2. Specialty area 
• Decision-making – 2 respondents (9.52%)  
• Elected official – 1 respondent (4.76%) 
• Planning – 5 respondents (23.81%) 
• Implementation  - 2 respondents (9.52%)  
• Utilization – 0 respondents  
• Resource specialties – 1 respondent (4.76%) 
• Fire management/ suppression – 6 respondents (28.57%) 
• Research – 0 respondents 
• Education – 2 respondents (9.52%) 
• Facilitation – 1 respondent (4.76%) 
• Private citizen – 0 respondents 
• Other – 1 respondent (forestry) (4.76%) 
 

 
 
3. PRIOR to attending today’s All Lands Wildfire Transmission presentation, how would you 
rate your level of understanding of wildfire transmission (i.e. how fires move across land 
jurisdictions)? 
Advanced 
Understanding 
Moderate 
Understanding 
Basic 
Understanding 
Poor 
Understanding 
No 
Understanding 
11 
52.38% 
5 
23.81% 
4 
19.05% 
1 
4.76% 
0 
0.00% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. AFTER attending today’s presentation, how would you rate your level of understanding of 
wildfire transmission (i.e. how fires move across land jurisdictions)? 
Advanced 
Understanding 
Moderate 
Understanding 
Basic 
Understanding 
Poor 
Understanding 
No 
Understanding 
13 
61.90% 
18.18% change 
6 
28.57% 
20% change 
2 
9.52% 
-50% change 
0 
0.00% 
-100% change 
0 
0.00% 
N/A 
 
 
 
5. PRIOR to attending today’s presentation, how would you rate your level of understanding 
of wildfire exposure (i.e. annual acres burned and housing units exposed to fire)? 
Advanced 
Understanding 
Moderate 
Understanding 
Basic 
Understanding 
Poor 
Understanding 
No 
Understanding 
9 
42.86% 
8 
38.10% 
2 
9.52% 
1 
4.76% 
1 
4.76% 
 
 
 
6. AFTER attending today’s presentation, how would you rate your level of understanding of 
wildfire exposure (i.e. annual area and structures exposed to fire)? 
Advanced 
Understanding 
Moderate 
Understanding 
Basic 
Understanding 
Poor 
Understanding 
No 
Understanding 
12 
57.14% 
33.33% change 
7 
33.33% 
-12.50% change 
2 
9.52% 
0% change 
0 
0.00% 
-100% change 
0 
0.00% 
N/A 
 
 
 

 
 
7. PRIOR to attending today’s presentation, how would you rate your level of understanding 
of wildfire risk across jurisdictions (i.e. how risk is exchanged across land jurisdictions)? 
Advanced 
Understanding 
Moderate 
Understanding 
Basic 
Understanding 
Poor 
Understanding 
No 
Understanding 
10 
47.62% 
7 
33.33% 
3 
14.29% 
1 
4.76% 
0 
0.00% 
 
 
8. AFTER attending today’s presentation, how would you rate your level of understanding of 
wildfire risk across jurisdictions (i.e. how risk is exchanged across land jurisdictions)? 
Advanced 
Understanding 
Moderate 
Understanding 
Basic 
Understanding 
Poor 
Understanding 
No 
Understanding 
12 
57.14% 
20% change 
6 
28.57% 
-14.29% change 
3 
14.29% 
N/A 
0 
0.00% 
-100% change 
0 
0.00% 
N/A 
 
 
9. PRIOR to attending today’s presentation, how would you rate your level of motivation for 
multi-jurisdictional coordination and planning to reduce fire risk? 
Very High 
High 
Moderate 
Low 
Very Low 
12 
57.14% 
7 
33.33% 
2 
9.52% 
0 
0.00% 
0 
0.00% 
 
 
10. AFTER attending today’s presentation, how would you rate your level of motivation for 
multi-jurisdictional coordination and planning to reduce fire risk? 
Very High 
High 
Moderate 
Low 
Very Low 
16 
76.19% 
33.33% change 
4 
19.05% 
-42.86% change 
1 
4.76% 
-50% change 
0 
0.00% 
N/A 
0 
0.00% 
N/A 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
11. Which output(s) from today’s presentation were most helpful in shaping your 
understanding of wildfire transmission, wildfire exposure, and transboundary wildfire 
risk? Check all that apply. 
 
• Written project summary – 38.10% - 4th (tie) 
• Oral presentation of information – 38.10% - 4th (tie) 
• Burn probability map – 57.14% - 1st  
• Flame length map – 23.81% - 7th  
• Average simulated fire size map – 33.33% - 5th (tie) 
• Total housing unit exposure map – 47.62% - 2nd  
• Relative housing unit exposure map – 42.86% - 3rd  
• Cross-boundary fire map – 33.33% - 5th (tie) 
• Collaboration hot spot map – 28.57% - 6th  
• Fire sources and sinks map – 9.52% - 10th  
• Fire transmission bar graphs – 19.05% - 8th  
• Fire transmission tables – 14.29% - 9th  
• Textual summary of fire transmission tables – 4.76% - 11th (tie) 
• Other – 4.76% - Q&A – 11th (tie) 
 
Additional comments on outputs: 
• Almost no time was spent on these products, 15 seconds per at most 
• Take a closer look at the maps 
• I found the bar graphs unhelpful. Hard to understand.  
• This just one tool of many. Should help in decision-making process but should not be used 
to make up for the lack knowledge of an area.  
• Would like to see frequency of fire transmission 
• Would be useful if maps displayed existing fuels mitigation efforts (recent wildfires, fuels 
treatments, etc.) to help prioritize future implementation  
• All of value but needed further fine tuning 
• Slides were helpful to visualize, but a lot of information to process in a short time 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
12. In what ways could today’s presentation be refined to better communicate the concepts 
of wildfire transmission, wildfire exposure, and wildfire risk across jurisdictions?  
• Each of these maps needed a deeper dive 
• Include projects people have done recently 
• More story maps, fewer graphs 
• Hands on demo of online resources 
• Addition of recent treatments and priority areas 
• Prework so participants like me come with more knowledge on the subject 
• This way presented worked well with all participants because everyone is familiar with 
concepts 
• I think more on prior work/ collaboration should been incorporated. Today's format was 
more geared toward a "greener" collaboration effort. 
• This would be a better tool for areas that do not already have such great collaboration.  
• Explain sinkmaps 
• Would be useful if maps displayed existing fuels mitigation efforts (recent wildfires, fuels 
treatments, etc.) to help prioritize future implementation  
• Info as current as possible; inclusion of how area of mitigation changes model 
• More current info 
• Maybe more hands-n interaction with learning the model and its findings 
• Video of fire behavior in a give fuel type, aerial imagery (video) of landscape with 
community 
• More time to digest technical information/ data 
• Simple presentation to public 
 
13. In what ways could today’s presentation be refined to help advance an all-lands approach 
in the coordination and planning of restoration and wildfire risk reduction? 
• 
Start at further efforts focused on key players 
• 
Continue to encourage collaboration 
• 
Maybe a better understanding of what departments are involved and their authority 
• 
Prework so participants like me come with more knowledge on the subject 
• 
Sharing info electronically in advance. There was a lot of info shared very quickly.  
• 
More information on what metric were used to get output data.  
• 
Would be useful if maps displayed existing fuels mitigation efforts (recent wildfires, fuels 
treatments, etc.) to help prioritize future implementation  
• 
Info as current as possible; inclusion of how area of mitigation changes model 
• 
Study the area and communities prior to presentations, imbed local jurisdictions 
• 
Already very streamlined 
• 
Include rancher permit polygons, include critical infrastructure (telecom, power) 
• 
Use cross-boundary info to inform actual planning/ prioritization action 

 
 
 
14. In what ways do you anticipate using the information from today’s presentation? 
• 
I will use a simplified map to reinforce our message. 
• 
Ongoing education 
• 
Public presentations to garner support for work 
• 
Take back for presentation to my boss 
• 
Funding proposals and public presentations 
• 
May be a good tool to validate decisions on where we are coordinating treatment or where we plan 
to treat. 
• 
Prioritization of projects for limited funding 
• 
Validation, allocation of resources 
• 
Plan to see if AZ WRAP is a good platform to also display recent/ ongoing fuels work 
• 
Public education - will mention on upcoming radio interview 
• 
Maps and data to individual communities to show risks and importance of fire adapted communities 
• 
Planning and public education 
• 
Fire prevention and mitigation education program development 
• 
Neighborhood and community outreach; Bradshaw CIS DSS 
• 
To refine communication/ messaging 
• 
Educate our citizens and fire board 
 
15. What are your top two strategies for fostering cross-boundary coordination to reduce fire risk? 
• 
Personal and local knowledge 
• 
Collaboration with local cooperators & on the ground work with citizens 
• 
Outreach & collaboration 
• 
Cooperation on a regular basis and communication 
• 
Working with the county and city more 
• 
Developing streamlined implementation strategies to work across boundaries  
• 
Communications 
• 
Coordination meetings to ID high priority areas and attributes for prioritizing funding 
• 
AZ WRAP 
• 
1) regular/ frequent coordination meetings both to continue coordination of fuels treatments, as 
well as "care and feeding" of relationships; 2) find best platform for communication 
• 
Never-ending communication & involve the public  
• 
Prescott area is strong in collaboration, just continue doing what we are doing 
• 
1) continued interagency communication; 2) public education with fire mitigation 
• 
1) Good Neighbor Authority; 2) Operational Control 
• 
Community meetings and technical training where appropriate 
• 
Better coordination of adjoining resources 
