Review
Socioeconomic Constraints to Biomass Removal from
Forest Lands for Fire Risk Reduction in the Western U.S.
David L. Nicholls 1,*, Jeffrey M. Halbrook 2, Michelle E. Benedum 3, Han-Sup Han 4,
Eini C. Lowell 5, Dennis R. Becker 6 ID and R. James Barbour 7
1
USDA Forest Service, Paciﬁc Northwest Research Station, Sitka, AK 99835, USA
2
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, USA;
Jeffrey.Halbrook@nau.edu
3
College of Natural Resources, University of Idaho, Moscow, ID 83844, USA; mbenedum@uidaho.edu
4
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, USA;
Han-Sup.Han@nau.edu
5
USDA Forest Service, Paciﬁc Northwest Research Station, Portland, OR 97205, USA; elowell@fs.fed.us
6
College of Natural Resources, University of Idaho, Moscow, ID 83844, USA; drbecker@uidaho.edu
7
Adaptive Management, Ecosystem Management Coordination, USDA Forest Service, Washington Ofﬁce,
Washington, DC 20250, USA; jbarbour01@fs.fed.us
*
Correspondence: dlnicholls@fs.fed.us; Tel.: +1-907-738-2176
Received: 16 March 2018; Accepted: 18 April 2018; Published: 11 May 2018


Abstract: Many socioeconomic constraints exist for biomass removals from federal lands in the
western U.S. We examine several issues of importance, including biomass supply chains and
harvesting costs, innovative new uses for bioenergy products, and the policy framework in place
to provide incentives for biomass use. Western states vary greatly in the extent and utilization of
forest resources, the proportion of land under federal ownership, and community and stakeholder
structure and dynamics. Our research—which focused on the socioeconomic factors associated with
biomass removal, production, and use—identiﬁed several important trends. Long-term stewardship
projects could play a role in inﬂuencing project economics while being conducive to private
investment. State policies are likely to help guide the growth of biomass utilization for energy
products. New markets and technologies, such as biofuels, for use in the aviation industry, torreﬁed
wood, mobile pyrolysis, and wood coal coﬁring could greatly change the landscape of biomass use.
Social needs of residents in wildland urban interfaces will play an important role, especially in an era
of megaﬁres. All of these trends—including signiﬁcant unknowns, like the volatile prices of fossil
energy—are likely to affect the economics of biomass removal and use in western forests.
Keywords:
hazard fuels; ﬁre risk; biomass; bioenergy; community; socioeconomic barriers;
forest policy
1. Introduction
In the United States, the National Fire Plan of 2000 has led to federal agencies undergoing
wide-ranging efforts to reduce wildﬁre risks while improving forest health in western forests.
The 12 western states encompass close to 34 million hectare (ha) of timberland, with about
31.5 million ha (93%) being managed by federal agencies [1]. Despite several decades of mitigation
efforts, wildﬁres have persisted, with 2.78 million acres being burned in western forests during 2017 [2].
An estimated 23.9 million ha of timberland in 12 western states have been identiﬁed as having high
risks of stand-replacing ﬁres [3]. Nearly 3800 communities near federal lands in western states are
considered to be at high risk of wildﬁre [4]. At the same time, suppression costs between 2006 and
2009 ranged from $1500 to $4200 per ha [5].
Forests 2018, 9, 264; doi:10.3390/f9050264
www.mdpi.com/journal/forests

Forests 2018, 9, 264
2 of 22
Biomass utilization in western forests has been fairly limited, with the exception of California’s
use of biomass for electrical generation. Skog et al. [6] identiﬁed several classes of biomass resources
available from western U.S. forests:
•
thinnings related to hazard fuel treatments
•
logging residues remaining after conventional logging operations
•
pinyon-juniper treatments
•
thinnings on private forestlands
•
precommercial thinnings on national forestland (primarily in western Oregon and Washington)
•
wood products manufacturing residues
In many parts of the west, biomass utilization has been largely related to wood products producers,
with scant use of any of these other resources. Signiﬁcant economic barriers continue to prevent
widespread use of biomass in the western U.S. Unlike many eastern and southern locations, biomass
is a more dispersed resource in the west. Primary factors inﬂuencing the economic feasibility of
small-diameter harvests also depend on the different harvesting systems needed based on ecological
and spatial parameters and on forest productivity [7]. There is also great regional variability in the
volumes of harvest residues generated. Smith et al. [8] indicate that the volume of 2006 harvest residues
for the Paciﬁc coastal forests was about six times greater than that of the Rocky Mountain region.
It is also important to distinguish between thinnings as part of normal silvicultural treatments
and hazard fuel thinnings which are designed to reduce ﬁre risk, protect property, and increase the
safety of community residents. However, for both types of treatments, a common denominator is
the challenge of ﬁnding long-term economically viable markets. In Montana, it has been estimated
that hazard reduction thinnings could yield upwards of four times more biomass than standard
precommercial thinnings [9]. Other methods can also be used to improve the economic potential of
fuel treatments. Prestemon et al. [10] used Monte Carlo simulation to assess economic beneﬁts from
mechanical treatments on western forestlands. They found that when product sales (including some
larger trees greater than 21 inches diameter breast height (DBH)) were incorporated into prescriptions,
more than 25% of treated areas would have net economic beneﬁts. Their simulation allowed for three
alternative prescriptions: (a) larger diameter tree removals favored, based on stand density index,
(b) smaller diameter tree removals favored, also based on stand density index, and (c) thin-from-below
prescription designed to achieve fuel hazard reductions.
Similarly, Bolding et al. [11] found that mechanical treatments of non-merchantable biomass
could incur costs of up to $2394 per ha, but when including merchantable stems (greater than 7-inch
DBH) these net costs were reduced to about $240 per acre. Ince et al. [12] found that the type of
silvicultural prescription can signiﬁcantly inﬂuence project economics. Here, even-aged thinning
regimes (where 50% of original basal area was removed) were found to be less economical than uneven
age regimes.
Wood energy development in western states is hindered by a lack of wood products infrastructure,
which has been declining over much of the past 25 years [13]. Perhaps just as signiﬁcant a driver of
biomass utilization is the role of state policy, including renewable energy portfolio goals, especially in
states that have abundant biomass resources. For example, California has set an ambitious goal of 33%
renewable energy by 2020 [14], and Oregon a goal of 50% of electric use from renewables by 2040 [15].
Although these renewable goals also include wind, solar, and geothermal energy, wood is likely to play
a key role in states where the wood products industry, and related supply chains, are well developed.
Several recent developments are helping make biomass use more economically viable. On Forest
Service lands, several stewardship contracts have been completed [16]. Long-term stewardship
contracts, lasting up to 20 years, are likely to play a key role in future biomass utilization.
Long-term stewardship contracts are expected to allow time for wood products and biomass-related
businesses to become established, often a problem with short-term contracts lasting only a few years.
Other “game changers”—such as torreﬁed biomass, advanced gasiﬁcation, coﬁring wood and coal,

Forests 2018, 9, 264
3 of 22
and new classes of bio-based products and mass timber products—are helping expand the reach of
western forest products businesses. The combined effect of these factors is to augment existing value
chains and develop critical infrastructure.
Several key themes related to biomass use and wildﬁre risk reduction in the western U.S. federal
lands are examined in this synthesis. We ﬁrst consider harvesting, transportation costs, and logistics,
as well as the potential use of salvaged timber. Next, we look at both traditional and emerging wood
products and innovative bioenergy products, as well as the economic factors that could enhance or limit
their potential. Finally, we examine the role of forest policy—including federal and state policies—in
stimulating biomass use and ﬁre hazard reduction activities and reducing economic barriers.
2. Challenges and Strategies for Removing Biomass
2.1. Harvesting Systems and Logistics That Are Commonly Used to Remove Biomass
When considering biomass removals from western forests, the biomass component rarely “pays its
way out of the woods”, and in some cases the true cost can be several times the market value of
biomass. Steep terrain, road access, land ownership, and machine processing costs are leading barriers.
Despite these barriers, there are a several types of commercial harvesting systems in use, and a number
of strategies that can be used to overcome these challenges.
Mechanical removal of biomass from federal forestlands is often preferred, as this allows biomass
to be removed without generating smoke and the risk of ﬁre escape associated with prescribed
burning or pile burn. This also has the potential added beneﬁt of producing energy from a renewable
source [17]. Three types of biomass harvesting operations are commonly used to remove biomass:
slash recovery, whole-tree chipping, and integrated harvesting. Slash recovery operations focus on
residues left at landings or along the roadside from timber sales, including commercial thinning,
while whole-tree chipping systems are often used when small-diameter (less than 20 cm DBH) trees
produced from fuel reduction thinning need to be removed. Slash recovery operations take place after
harvesting sawlog materials, however, no sawlogs are harvested in whole-tree chipping operations.
Integrated harvesting operations utilize forest machinery to harvest sawlog and biomass at the same
time (i.e., with one-entry thinning).
Depending on which biomass removal system is selected, operational logistics and machinery
used are often different and highly variable, which directly effects the cost of biomass removal.
Decisions to select one of the three biomass removal systems described are made based on the amount
(e.g., tons/ha) and spatial location/distribution of biomass, material types (slash or whole trees),
economics, and work requirements. For example, a fuel reduction thinning contract in Arizona
used a whole-tree chipping method, as the thinning treatment required removal of trees less than
12 cm DBH [18]. However, a commercial thinning operation in northern California recommended
an integrated harvesting system be used, as the contract required removal of both sawlogs and biomass
within one entry and a limited time [17]. Both operations resulted in a cost that was higher than the
market values of biomass feedstock (less than $55/ oven dry ton (Odt)) in those regions at the time of
operations. Compared to whole-tree and integrated harvesting operations, slash recovery operations
often result in a lower cost (sometimes less than $22/Odt excluding hauling cost). This is because
biomass is already piled at landings or along roadsides and therefore does not require felling and
extracting from stands [19].
2.2. Challenges and Strategies for Biomass Harvesting and Transportation
Besides the low market value of biomass, high costs associated with hauling biomass to energy
markets have been identiﬁed as a major barrier making biomass utilization cost-prohibitive [20,21].
Chip vans carry a ﬁxed amount of biomass (less than 23 metric tons in California and Arizona),
and hauling cost increases with an increase of distance and travel time required to complete a round
trip. Biomass hauling cost alone (excluding harvesting and comminution costs) often determine the

Forests 2018, 9, 264
4 of 22
economic feasibility of mechanical removal of biomass for production of energy. Hauling distance on
forest roads, in particular, directly determines travel time, as average travel speeds on forest roads are
typically 16 km per hour (kph) for logging roads and less than 48 kph on graveled county roads [22].
Several strategies have been developed to reduce transportation cost, including blowing chips into
a chip van container, resulting in an increase in bulk density of chips loaded [23] (Figure 1), lowering
moisture content on site using natural air (i.e., transpiration) before comminution [24], and increasing
hauling capacity using larger containers or double trailers [25].
Accessibility to harvest sites using a chip van is often limited due to its large turning radius on
a horizontal curve and limited gradability on steep roads [26]. Forest roads have typically been used
for hauling logs using a log truck as the design vehicle, and a chip van may not be able to travel
through certain sections of roads that have less than an 18 m curve radius. A stinger-steered logging
truck (typical design vehicle) can negotiate a horizontal curve that has a radius down to 15 m [27,28].
Thus, there are several challenges with navigating mountain roads with logging trucks and/or chip
vans. Several recent innovations, however, are helping to enable these vehicles to navigate steeper
grades on more primitive roads, resulting in more economical access to biomass harvesting sites.
A rear-steerable-axle chip van was developed to reduce the issues associated with these tight curve
radii, allowing the trailer to negotiate curves similar to those of stinger steer log trucks. In addition to
turning radius issues, empty chip vans may not be able to climb steep roads (i.e., gradability) due to
lighter weight on the drive axles or slippery road conditions due to snow or water.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Transportation Cost $/Odt
One-way distance from forest to plant (km)
Conveyor-fed/Knife-edge
High Speed Blower/Knife-edge
Conveyor-fed/Carbide
High Speed Blower/Carbide
Figure 1. Transportation cost for each of the two loading methods (conveyer-fed by gravity and
blowing chips into a container) on pulpwood size class residue. A combination of knife-edge bits and
blower loading increased the bulk density of loads, resulting in $14.70/Odt for hauling pulpwood type
materials on a 200 km one-way trip. Source: Zamora et al. 2014 [23].

Forests 2018, 9, 264
5 of 22
Gradability of a chip van on a horizontal curve is further limited because “either wheel loading is
not equal or traction conditions are not uniform [26].” In addition to gradability, vertical curves often
cause drop-center trailers to contact the road surface, either damaging the trailer or causing the vehicle
to become stuck. To address this issue, an attempt was made to put a container on a stinger-steered
truck in order to travel like logging truck, locking differential(s) allowing both sides of an axle to be
powered, and reduced tire pressure was attempted to increase traction [29]. Results concluded that
a single locking differential greatly assisted the gradability of pulling an unloaded chip trailer uphill
on challenging road conditions.
When considering operational logistics, centralized biomass recovery systems have been
developed and have shown promise for both increased access to remote sites and facilitated
transportation logistics. A modiﬁed dump truck having high ground clearance and short turn radius
was cost-effectively used to deliver biomass from a biomass harvest site to a centralized grinding
site; biomass was then ground to hog fuel and loaded onto a chip van [30,31]. Anderson et al. [32]
compared two approaches using a dump truck to access harvest sites: (1) delivering loose slash
materials to a central landing where they were stockpiled then ground directly into large chip vans and
(2) grinding slash into dump trucks at the harvest site and delivering to a central landing where it was
stockpiled and loaded into chip vans using a front-end loader. They found either approach had similar
stump-to-truck costs of $26–$27 per green metric-ton; however, forwarding slash appeared to be more
productive when slash was sparsely scattered. A roll-off container truck teamed up with a small
front-end loader was cost-effectively used to remove chainsaw-felled and hand-piled biomass resulting
from shade fuel break treatments from a site where chip van access was not possible [33]. In addition to
the beneﬁts of improved access to sites, a centralized biomass recovery system has increased potential
for federal forestlands. This is because federal land management practices often favor less intensive
harvests with biomass piles tending to be more sparsely scattered over larger landscapes. By contrast,
a pile-to-pile operation (i.e., slash recovery) is often seen in industrial timber operations on private
land where clear-cut operations generate large amounts of biomass highly concentrated within one
timber harvest unit.
Recently, a group of researchers collaborated to convert biomass into pre-processed feedstock or
products at or near the forest site [34]. Two major beneﬁts were realized by integrating mobile biomass
conversion technologies with in-woods biomass operations: (1) adding value to the converted products
and (2) reduced transportation cost. Biomass materials were sorted and separated into stem wood and
slash piles (including only limbs and branches) during timber harvesting operations, which allows
lowering moisture content in biomass down to less than 20% while facilitating chipping operation to
produce quality chips uniform in size with no contamination. Those wood chips were converted into
biochar, torreﬁed wood chip, and briquettes at the conversion site located near the biomass harvest
site. The concept examined in this study showed strong promise; however, further development of
mobile biomass conversion technologies to reduce biomass conversion costs and ﬁnding markets that
are willing to pay a higher price for those products are needed to advance this technology.
Catastrophic events such as droughts, insect outbreaks, and ﬁres have occurred across many
acres within federal forestlands. Although these can create large volumes of contiguous biomass,
harvesting salvage material having a short “shelf-life” can be challenging and the value loss for
some products almost immediate [35,36]. Prestemon et al. [37] estimated that 19.7 billion cubic feet
of standing timber potentially could be salvaged across 8.2 million ha of western forestlands in
the United States. While salvaged trees can be sources of biomass feedstock, biomass recovery
rates from beetle-killed trees were lower than biomass harvesting from live forests, and a timely
harvesting decision (i.e., soon after trees are dead) is key to reducing harvesting costs [38]. Safety is
also of concern when working in stands of dead trees. Other species of trees—such as junipers
(Juniperus occidentalis var. occidentalis and Juniperus occidentalis var. australis), saltcedar (Tamarix spp.),
and Russian olive (Elaeagnus angustifolia L.)—removed from rangeland restoration treatments also
provide potential bioenergy opportunity, but are often difﬁcult to fell due to tree form and crown

Forests 2018, 9, 264
6 of 22
characteristics. In addition, these trees are expensive to extract because they are typically of low
volume and often scattered, resulting in low area volumes [39].
It is clear that “in-woods” considerations, including efﬁcient harvesting, increased road access,
and biomass pre-processing, all can have an impact on the future economics of the biomass supply
chain. Ultimately, future economic innovations in biomass harvesting and transportation could be
dictated by new products and markets.
3. Western Biomass Use and Products
3.1. Wood Products and Biofuels from Forest Harvesting Residues
Challenges ﬁnding proﬁtable uses for woody biomass are not new. It is an issue that exists
in all regions of the U.S. and can be traced back several decades. Changes in land management
objectives that focus increasingly on ecosystem services, approaches to ﬁghting wildﬁres, and shifts
in demographics as people move into the wildland urban interface, have put a different face on the
landscape. Lack of utilization opportunities has helped to increase the number of forested acres that
are densely stocked with small-diameter trees. As a result, forest health has suffered and disturbance
events such as wildﬁres and insect epidemics have increased in both size and occurrence. This is
especially true in the western U.S., where catastrophic wildﬁres are in the news more frequently and
tree mortality from insects and disease is rampant.
Biomass utilization has been seen as a way to offset the cost of restoration treatments, thus freeing
up dollars that would allow more acres to be treated [40]. However, it is not just about utilization
opportunities. Just because biomass is available does not necessarily mean the infrastructure exists to
process it. Moreover, if the infrastructure is present to process the biomass or small logs, that does not
mean they can, or are, producing a product for which there is increased market demand. Even if there
is a market, competition or demand may not make it proﬁtable to produce. Economics, speciﬁcally
proﬁtability for biomass industries, plays a major role, as does securing the capital to invest in new
enterprises. There are many aspects to consider and think about when it comes to biomass utilization.
As noted earlier, woody biomass can take several forms. It may be small logs, tops and branches
left in slash piles, chunkwood (unmerchantable or decayed pieces), or residues such as sawdust and
bark from processing [41]. Several pathways to biomass utilization and different breakdown methods
of woody material are available. Some require a simple mechanical breakdown process (e.g., lumber
or veneer) while others require a series of breakdown processes to reach a ﬁnal product (e.g., alcohols
for biofuels). Research on some these pathways and products is ongoing. Processes and products may
have demonstrated success at the pilot scale but have not yet been proven at the commercial level.
This is primarily due to lack of capital to bring to commercialization [42]. Capital investment amounts
vary—depending on which pathway you choose and whether you are starting from scratch or adding
to existing infrastructure. Some take little capital investment, while others take millions of dollars to
construct. In order to build biomass utilization capacity, there needs to be certainty that the business
will be able to operate for more than 1 or 2 years, not just handle the biomass from a current project in
the area. The scale and type of infrastructure must be a good match for material being removed [43].
What can you make from small-diameter trees and biomass removed in restoration treatments?
Figure 2, while not exhaustive, provides an overall picture of raw material input, breakdown method,
and the types of products that can be manufactured. It is not likely that one single wood product will
solve all the challenges of biomass utilization.

Forests 2018, 9, 264
7 of 22
 
Figure 2. Raw material form, breakdown processes, and products that can be manufactured from
small-diameter trees and woody biomass. Figure caption abbreviations to insert: (LVL=laminated
veneer lumber, CLT=cross laminated timber, OSB=oriented strand board, CNF=cellulosic nanoﬁbrils,
CNC= cellulosic nanocrystals, CNW=cellulosic nanowhiskers) Source: Lowell et al. [44].
One of the key considerations is ensuring that raw material characteristics match the product
that is planned for manufacturing and that the supply is sufﬁcient and consistently available.
Scale of operation is critical. Many failed attempts at biomass utilization can be attributed to supply
issues. When dealing with small-diameter trees from forest restoration treatments, there must be
a realistic knowledge of the size, quality, and quantity of material that will be removed. For example,
Table 1 illustrates the raw material requirements for different size sawmills. What scale of production
will a speciﬁc feedstock supply support?
Table 1 also points out that manufacturing does not produce just lumber. Byproducts (or residues)
of some processes, as in the case of sawmilling, will need to be handled—utilized, sold, or hauled
away—at your expense. Integration of processes and products offers one solution, but balance of
materials can be an obstacle. In some cases, especially at the rural community level, it may be best to
start small, with a proven process, and grow an industry as supply becomes stable. Lowell et al. [44]
provide a Biomass Enterprise Economic Model that allows a user to explore a phased approach to
growing an integrated biomass enterprise based on the mechanical breakdown pathway. While many
equate biomass utilization with wood energy (heat and electricity), it often is only part of the picture.
Table 1. Raw material requirements for different lumber production scenarios, ranging in size from
micro to large sawmills.
Units of Measure
Micro Sawmill
Small Sawmill
Medium Sawmill
Large Sawmill
Production/shift
Thousand board feet, lumber scale
5.0
50.0
150.0
400.0
Annual production
Million board feet, lumber scale
1.25
12.5
37.5
100.0
Chip, sawdust production
Million cubic feet
0.07
0.70
2.10
5.6

Forests 2018, 9, 264
8 of 22
Table 1. Cont.
Units of Measure
Micro Sawmill
Small Sawmill
Medium Sawmill
Large Sawmill
Annual log requirement
Million board feet, log scale
0.625
6.250
18.75
50.0
Log truckloads per year
130
1302
3906
10,417
Chip vans per year
55
549
1648
4394
Source: Nechodom et al. (2008) [45].
The bioreﬁnery concept (thermochemical breakdown) relies on producing a suite of products,
including things like chemicals, specialty products, and fuels. Many new technologies are still in
development or at the pilot stage and have not moved to commercialization because they still cannot
be produced economically. Through thermochemical breakdown, wood is broken down into its
macromolecular cell wall components of cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin plus other components
such as extractives. As with mechanical breakdown, you not only get the fraction of wood that you
plan on using to manufacture a product [46]. Byproducts must be handled as well.
Capital for developing new projects using existing technology can be scarce. It gets harder when
looking to bring a new product to market. Some products are still not at the point where they are
economically competitive (e.g., aviation jet fuel from woody biomass) [47].
Probably the easiest thing to do with some woody biomass is to burn it to generate heat and
electricity. In its raw form (hog fuel), this is the lowest value product. However, there are numerous
other pathways for wood energy that increase value, from ﬁrewood and pellets to aviation jet fuel.
3.2. Current Wood Energy Use in Western States
A total of 32 biomass electrical facilities operate in western states, with installed capacity of
847 MW (Table 2) [48]. Bioenergy use is well developed in California, where more than 18 solid-fuel
biomass electrical facilities are present, consuming more than 7 million tons of biomass and agricultural
wastes per year [49]. Many of these sites were established over 30 years ago and have contributed up
to 15% of California’s total renewable energy generation. In Oregon, wood energy use is also vibrant,
often related to the wood products industry and the residues they generate. Here, close to 14 combined
heat and power plants utilize between 2.7 and 3.6 million metric-tons of wood per year [48].
Table 2. Electric generating facilities in western states using woody biomass feedstocks.
State
Number of Facilities
Total Installed Capacity (MW)
Arizona
1
27
California
18
457
Colorado
1
11.5
Montana
1
3
Oregon
5
156
Washington
6
193
Source: compiled from Gibson 2011 [48].
Despite many economic barriers, there have been notable wood energy successes in western states.
Notable success stories for wood energy include the Fuels for Schools program, started in 2003 in
Darby, Montana. Within 7 years, more than 19 wood energy systems had been established, including
schools, a university, a landﬁll, and 2 prisons [50]. This represents a diverse group of energy users and
also demonstrates how quickly new wood energy applications can come online. Wood energy use is
more limited within the four corner states (Colorado, Utah, Arizona, and New Mexico), however, these
states typically have greater numbers of coal plants, potentially resulting in increased opportunities
for coﬁring.
Wood pellets, although more expensive than chips, are nonetheless an important wood energy
product. In western states, there are 29 commercial-scale pellet mills with a total capacity of one million

Forests 2018, 9, 264
9 of 22
metric tons per year (Table 3) [51]. The wood pellet industry in the western U.S. could beneﬁt from
several possible trends, including coﬁring biomass at coal facilities and potential export markets to
Asia. There are opportunities to use processes such as hot water extraction of wood chips in bioreﬁning,
where the woody biomass is then a byproduct that can then be used in the pellet and pulp and paper
industries. Amidon et al. [46] found that this process imparted beneﬁcial properties to the residual
woody biomass, including lower ash content and higher lignin and cellulose content.
Table 3. Pellet mills and capacity, by state, for the western U.S.
State
Number of Pellet Mills
State-Wide Pellet Capacity (tons per year)
Alaska
1
31,751
Arizona
2
72,574
California
2
154,221
Colorado
3
206,837
Idaho
7
227,400
New Mexico
3
47,173
Oregon
7
268,523
Utah
2
77,109
Washington
1
34,472
Wyoming
1
4535
Source: compiled from Anon 2017 [51].
3.3. Coﬁring Coal and Woody Biomass
In the western U.S. states, there are 128 operating coal-powered electrical facilities [52]. In coﬁring,
coal and biomass are mixed together before being combusted. However, in the U.S., coﬁring is
currently done very little on an ongoing basis, and very few plants in the west have even conducted
test-burning trials. Economic factors inﬂuencing coﬁring were evaluated by Aguilar et al. [53] and
Goerndt et al. [54]. Their econometric models evaluated plant location, the number of coal-ﬁred power
plants in a county, and availability of wood mill residues. A key ﬁnding of this research was the need
for ﬂexible design in power plants to accommodate fuel feeding, fuel handling, and transportation
systems suitable for both biomass and coal feedstocks at various ratios. Although their research focused
on the northern U.S., some of these ﬁndings could also be relevant for western states. For example,
given the distributed nature of both the forest resources and the location of power plants in western
states, ﬂexibility will be needed for power plants to economically utilize biomass.
Many western coal plants are located near national forests, offering an opportunity for
co-combusting these materials. However, due to the large size of coal-burning plants (many consume
more than 1 million tons of coal per year), coﬁring even at relatively low ratios can still require
large volumes of woody biomass. A current challenge is ﬁnding grinding equipment capable of
processing both wood and coal down to the small sizes needed for pulverized fuel injection systems.
Other economic barriers can be the capital investment needed for new fuel handling equipment. This is
often the case when coﬁring at rates greater than about 5% of energy value.
Although forest biomass removals represent a viable feedstock for coﬁring, they must also be
consistent and reliable over the long term, especially if capital investments in plant equipment are
required. For example, Nicholls et al. [55] considered the use of woody biomass from ﬁre hazard
reduction thinnings near Fairbanks, Alaska, as a coﬁring feedstock. It was found that long-term
coﬁring operations would require a range of woody materials, including forest harvesting residues,
sawmill residues, and municipal wastes. In Arizona, the Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI)
project could provide coﬁring feedstocks to one or more coal facilities over the next 20 years. Use of
salvaged timber also represents a coﬁring opportunity. Beagle and Belmont [56] evaluated ﬁve coal
power plants in Colorado and Wyoming, ﬁnding sufﬁcient beetle-killed biomass within 160 km of
each facility to coﬁre at a 20% level.

Forests 2018, 9, 264
10 of 22
Future economic trends could favor the use of torreﬁed biomass as a coﬁring feedstock. Torreﬁed
wood is simply biomass that has been heat treated at temperatures of about 300 ◦C, driving off volatile
compounds. Due to its high energy density, torreﬁed wood can be transported more economically
than traditional wood chips or harvesting residues. Torreﬁed wood is closer to the fuel density of coal
and handles much like coal, both operational advantages. Due to its water repellent properties, it can
also be stored outside longer than wood chips, eliminating the expense of building covered storage
systems. Finally, agricultural residues can also be torreﬁed, giving ﬂexibility to the feedstocks used.
Perhaps the biggest “game changer” for torreﬁed wood utilization would be if one or more western
coal plants either coﬁred or converted entirely to torreﬁed wood. This possibility is being explored
for the conversion of the Boardman, Oregon power plant away from coal (starting in 2020). However,
since the state of the art capacity for torreﬁed biomass in the U.S. is only about 45,000 metric tons
per year, numerous distributed facilities would be needed to supply a even single coal plant, even at
relatively low coﬁring rates [57]. Acharya et al. [58] reviewed six different torrefaction technologies,
including proven methods as well as those under development. Economies of scale in production
could lead to lower cost torreﬁed fuels, making them more competitive with coal.
3.4. Economic Barriers for Biomass Use on Western Forests
The economic feasibility of mechanical treatments is directly related to the value of products
removed. For example, Hartsough et al. [59] collected data from seven sites in the western U.S., ﬁnding
that the upfront costs of mechanical treatments were greater than for prescribed ﬁre, but the net costs
(after accounting for timber value removed) were often less than those for ﬁre. Of the seven regional
sites evaluated, project economics were most favorable for the southern Cascades and central Sierra
(with net proﬁts averaging about $7165 per ha).
Fried et al. [60] modeled an 11 million ha study area in Oregon and northern California, ﬁnding
that, if mechanical treatments were applied to 2 million ha, the sustained biomass yields would be
enough to fuel four 50 MW power plants. Merchantable timber products would result in net revenues
of $2.6 billion. Thus, careful site selection is critical when considering long-term planning needed
for investment in wood products and power plant infrastructure. In similar work (but over a wider
multistate area), Skog et al. [3] found that delivered values of biomass from western forests could
range from $3953 to $6424 per ha if stems greater than 18 cm DBH were utilized primarily for higher
value products. If all biomass were to be chipped, delivered values ranged from $1062 to $1581 per ha.
Skog et al. [6] also found that the potential amounts of forest biomass supplied is very sensitive
to price. In a 16-state western region, biomass supplies were relatively unaffected when prices ranged
from $30 to $50 per Odt. However, between $50 and $75/Odt, prices increased by about 64% (Table 4).
Further, terrain can greatly inﬂuence economics [61]. In this analysis of 12 western states, net revenues
from mechanical treatments were positive in all 8 types of treatments considered for slopes of less than
40% (but only 4 of 8 treatments when slopes were greater than 40%).
Table 4. Base case cumulative forest biomass supply by state and roadside cost.
Biomass Supply (oven dry tons/year) at Various Roadside Costs ($ per oven dry ton)
$30
$50
$75
Arizona
222,599
228,874
2,092,106
California
3,966,745
4,104,845
4,263,956
Colorado
279,369
341,516
1,542,596
Idaho
1,478,387
1,669,077
1,803,476
Montana
1,554,616
1,768,144
1,850,486
Nevada
7122
7195
1,370,524
New Mexico
299,745
352,722
1,675,499

Forests 2018, 9, 264
11 of 22
Table 4. Cont.
Biomass Supply (oven dry tons/year) at Various Roadside Costs ($ per oven dry ton)
Oregon
1,712,498
1,824,752
1,850,106
Utah
101,966
128,534
1,776,062
Washington
1,657,948
1,803,262
1,820,173
Wyoming
185,505
211,075
298,320
Total
11,466,500
12,439,996
20,343,304
Source: compiled from Skog et al. (2008) [6].
Thus, many variables can inﬂuence project economics for biomass removals, including type of
treatment (ﬁre versus mechanical), slope, current prices of biomass and of higher valued lumber
products, transportation costs, and the proportion of larger, higher value stems removed. One variable
that could receive future attention is accounting for ﬁre suppression costs. Larson [62] found that
small-diameter biomass utilization led to negative ﬁnancial returns in the context of the ﬁrst 10 years
of the 4FRI stewardship contract. However, when considering the avoided wildﬁre suppression
costs in the analysis, net gains were realized. Huang et al. [5] found that average suppression costs
for 2006–2009 in western forests were high, ranging from $1563/ha (ﬁscal year 2007) to $4234/ha
(ﬁscal year 2009).
3.5. Partnership Models
To address biomass utilization more holistically, partnerships that cross land ownerships have
developed at the federal level (e.g., Collaborative Landscape Forest Restoration Program), the regional
level (e.g., Four Corners Sustainable Partnership), and the local level (e.g., Applegate Adaptive
Management Area). New authorities that allow for a more stable supply over a longer period of time
have also been implemented (e.g., stewardship contracting, Good Neighbor Authority).
Stewardship projects on federal lands are a means of exchanging “goods for services”.
For example, a contractor will remove forest biomass, and in doing so reduce ﬁre risk and improve
forest health. Several notable stewardship contracts have been completed successfully in western
states, including Oregon, Idaho, Montana, Colorado, and Arizona [16]. Kerkvliet [63] found that the
Clearwater Stewardship Project in western Montana provided a $23 million increase in sales for eight
Montana counties in addition to the creation of 148 jobs. In Arizona, the White Mountain Stewardship
Project, started in 2004, became the ﬁrst 10-year stewardship project, with close to 20,000 ha treated [64].
During the ﬁrst 5 years, government funding of $30 million had generated $40 million in local
investments, expenditures, and tax revenue. Currently underway is the 4FRI stewardship contract in
Arizona. The 4FRI Stakeholder Group consists of more than 30 organizations—conservationists,
scientists, local governments, and industry leaders. A goal of 4FRI is to implement restoration
treatments across almost 1 million ha over 20 years. As the 4FRI stewardship contract progresses,
it will serve as an opportunity for more empirical research regarding the role of forest policies and also
the degree to which local (i.e., decentralized) policies can be effective.
3.6. Innovation in Biomass Utilization
Innovation will also play a key role in biomass utilization; for example, new ways of using
biomaterials. Growing demand for bio-based materials will require its efﬁcient use and could include
a technique call “cascading”. Here, materials are prioritized for use at certain life cycle stages.
For example, wood could be used for lumber in home construction, and at the end of its useful
life, chipped for energy. Nybakk et al. (2011) [65] found that innovation within the bioenergy sector
is often motivated by either new market conditions (for example, rising prices of fossil fuels), newly
available biomass sources, or were driven by changes in company strategies (including visionary
leaders). In the western U.S., this is evident in the nascent liquid fuels industry. Here, innovative
new products (i.e., jet fuels from woody biomass) will require innovations in transforming supply

Forests 2018, 9, 264
12 of 22
chains [66]. Other innovative uses of biomass include use in construction materials (i.e., plaster,
insulation, and/or concrete) [67].
Firm size and the trajectory of new business growth can also be closely related to innovation.
Wagner and Hansen [68] found that small wood products ﬁrms tend to perform well across three
types of innovation (process, product, and business systems). Larger ﬁrms, primarily due to greater
access to capital, excelled in process innovation. Innovation could also play a key role in developing
new bioenergy applications for western forests. For example, pyrolysis has been explored with
woody biomass to create liquid fuels and torreﬁed wood. Recent research has explored mobile
pyrolysis systems, an in-woods innovation, creating transportation cost beneﬁts. Brown et al. [69]
found transportation advantages when distances greater than 300 km were required (versus wood
chip delivery). Current work is underway to assess different wood fuel types, including clean wood
chips versus softwood (limbs and tops) and hardwood (limbs and tops) [70].
Bioenergy products and technologies are becoming more ﬂexible and diverse. This could bode
well for the future of biomass utilization on western forestlands because of the distributed nature of
the resource, which often leads to economic barriers. Although delivered costs of biomass are still
often higher than their market values, innovations in supply chain management could help narrow
this gap. Further, one or more “game changers” (for example, expanded use of torreﬁed wood or
aviation fuel) could alter the bioenergy landscape. Alternative and innovative uses of biomass and
biomass coproducts are likely to remain as national priorities—for example, energy security and
climate change remain on the forefront. Social barriers can also limit biomass use and acceptance.
The importance of community involvement in fuel reduction treatments has been suggested as a key
way to mitigate social barriers [71]. Further research on innovation with the forest products industry,
including biomaterials and new energy products, should help to increase diffusion and reduce barriers
across social, political, technical, and economic arenas.
4. Forest Policies and Biomass Utilization
4.1. Background
Research has identiﬁed nearly 500 state and federal policies inﬂuencing forest-based bioenergy
development [72]. These policies are organized into three approaches: incentives, regulations,
and information. Incentive policies aim to reduce the capital cost and operating expense of projects.
Regulations mandate production and consumption standards and information policies include
feasibility studies and the dissemination of information. The growth of these policies can be attributed
to a variety of policy and forest management motivations, including the use of locally available
feedstocks to reduce dependence on foreign energy sources, reduce greenhouse gas emissions [73],
and stimulate economic opportunities [74].
Utilizing low-value wood products, such as forest
residues, for energy purposes also presents an opportunity to reduce costs of fuel reduction treatments
and enhance forest restoration, offset carbon emissions [75], engage local communities, and create
permanent jobs [72,76–78]. Resulting state and federal policies affect each step in the supply chain,
regional public and private investments, and use a wide range of incentives, regulations, and other
types of mechanisms to affect wood energy development [79].
In the short run, the heightened demand for forest biomass as an energy source will depend on
age class structure of forest biomass, and the impact of price and availability of wood for traditional
wood products such as pulp and paper [80,81]. However, research conducted in Europe suggests
that multiple uses of forest residues are possible, depending on the proﬁtability of the residues for
bioenergy and the competition between end uses [82].

Forests 2018, 9, 264
13 of 22
4.2. Supply Chain
Becker et al. [79] introduced a supply chain policy framework to evaluate effects of state and
federal policies on bioenergy development, applied across all 50 states. The number of policies
affecting behaviors is important, but also the types of policies. Some states enact a higher total
number of policies for a given supply chain step, such as manufacturing, while other states are
partial to certain types of policy instruments, such as tax incentives applied to the manufacturing
sector. Every state has at least one biomass utilization policy, however, nine of these states had just
three or fewer policies. Tax incentives were the most common policy instruments across all states,
followed by technical assistance programs and procurement policies. Despite concerns about the
cost of raw material transportation, only two states were identiﬁed as having policies for offsetting
transportation cost [76,79,83,84]. In fact, high transportation cost was rated as the biggest challenge
(73%) amongst U.S. Forest Service managers; yet, policies aimed to mitigate transportation costs are
essentially nonexistent [78].
Research aids policy development, identiﬁes synergies along the supply chain, and allows
policymakers to consider the range of approaches taken to enhance forest biomass utilization.
Revealing such policy gaps in the supply chain encourages policymakers to consider the effectiveness
and interaction of individual policies, both at the state and federal level, and in context of intersectorial
linkages. Failure to coordinate policies across supply chains risks stranding investments, while failing
to leverage activities and relationships among businesses, public and private forest landowners,
and consumer [85].
Abrams et al. [85] surveyed biomass producers and users at various supply chain steps in six
states (California, Oregon, Washington Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Michigan) to explore whether and
how policy inﬂuences innovation and decision-making. The study design attempted to decipher the
effects of individual policies as well as the interaction of policies vertically (evaluating the balance of
state and federal policies) and horizontally (across the supply chain). Overall, only 12% of the responses
mentioned policies as factors inﬂuencing innovation; the remaining 88% focused on nonpolicy impacts
such as new technology or perceived market advantages. This suggests policies may be narrowly
impacting forest biomass innovation [85]. Tax policies (37% of identiﬁed policies), disbursements and
direct subsidies (34%), and rules and regulations (12%) were most frequently identiﬁed as inﬂuential.
When compared across the supply chain, power and utility producers were the most likely to be
inﬂuenced by state or federal policies.
4.3. Instruments
Policy instruments may be deﬁned as “the set of techniques by which governmental authorities
wield their power in attempting to ensure support and effect or prevent social change” [86]. The social
change in this context means change in how we generate electricity and heat, and fuel for transportation
and manufacturing. Social change can be achieved more readily through a complementary mix of policy
instruments than using individual policies because ﬁrms and individuals face different constraints
and opportunities; a single policy will not change the behavior of all relevant actors [87].
Gossum and colleagues advance a framework for analysis that identiﬁes four key features of
effective policies [88]. First, a broad range of policy instruments—such as tax incentives, regulations,
or technical assistance programs—are needed to affect social change, and that policy’s performance
will depend on the optimal pairing of these instruments with appropriate institutions at local,
state, and federal levels [89]. Second, policy instruments that invoke motivational and informative
structures are preferred to policy interventions that are highly coercive, especially when actors perceive
that there could be self interest in adopting new approaches [90]. This is the case with bioenergy
development, renewable energy generation, forest restoration, and economic development, which
collectively offers opportunities for mutual beneﬁt. Third, instruments may effectively inﬂuence
behavior of some ﬁrms but not all of them and not all the time, and therefore must be responsive
and ﬂexible to change. This is important in the context of bioenergy development because of the

Forests 2018, 9, 264
14 of 22
rapid escalation in policies, both state and federal, and the evolving context of forest management and
climate change [86,91]. Fourth, approaches that create win-win scenarios encourage actors to exceed
policy requirements. This too is relevant to providing adequate incentive for private forest landowners
to participate and is beneﬁcial where requirements on energy producers result in more efﬁcient or
diversiﬁed production.
In context of forest bioenergy, previous research highlights the importance of ﬁnancial incentives,
which generally afford ﬂexibility in design and intention and have the ability to generate information
regarding market conditions which is relevant to policymakers [78,92,93]. For example, if a ﬁnancial
incentive is too excessive or inadequate, policymakers can adjust the monetary value. Compared to
mandatory policy instruments, ﬁnancial incentives have the ability to adapt to market conditions [93].
Aside from ﬁnancial policies, USDA Forest Service managers identiﬁed developing use
of infrastructure, building partnerships, and formal agreements to develop federal biomass
supply as important strategies for increasing forest biomass use [78]. Business owners, however,
rarely mentioned government support of research, infrastructure, and procurement policies as
inﬂuencing innovation, but instead cited taxes, direct payments, and regulations as the most inﬂuential.
This inconsistency could be because policies affect businesses indirectly, which make the policies
difﬁcult to recognize [85,94].
Procurement policies focusing on energy procurement, such as net-metering on the utility grid,
may be ineffective at targeting small biomass facilities. Net-metering requires utilities to purchase
excess electricity, but small biomass facilities only produce heat for space heating needs thus causing
procurement policies to inadvertently favor larger biomass facilities [95]. This suggests that high
ﬁnancial startup costs continue to be signiﬁcant barriers to implementing new, small biomass
facilities [78,95].
While the proliferation of biomass policies suggests growth of the biomass industry, or at least
interest in seeing it grow, it also contributes a layer of complexity and possible challenges [80].
For example, incentive policies such as energy portfolios, subsidies, or tax credits could alter the
market value of the wood [76,85]. The effectiveness of a policy seems to be a result of how the policy is
designed and integrates with existing policies, rather than solely relying on the individual policy type.
Rivera et al. [92] recommends further research on the integration of new policies with existing policies
to better understand policy goals and interaction of multiple policy types.
4.4. Policy by State/Region
Policymakers should be aware of state- and region-speciﬁc challenges of biomass use to design
effective policies and foster competition among renewable energy platforms [76,79,92]. Regional
differences exist in terms of forest products and energy sectors, social and environmental concerns,
and land ownership and use [78]. In regions like the southwest, where the risk of wildﬁre is signiﬁcant,
more targeted and diverse policy instruments focusing on incentivizing biomass harvesting with fuel
reduction or forest restoration practices may be necessary to overcome barriers.
Aside from regional variations, neighboring states tend to inﬂuence one another in terms of
the number and types of policies implemented [72,79]. States actively seeking to provide incentives
appropriate for the types of forest resources present not only serve as examples for neighboring states
but will be essential in crafting legislation appropriate for the speciﬁc resources available and the scope
of the challenges.
Overall, regulatory approaches were found to be common in all states except four southern
states and Idaho. Every state has at least one incentive policy that allowed forest biomass to receive
government support, but only a limited number of states had legislation promoting forest bioenergy
speciﬁcally. Financial incentive amounts vary from state to state. For example, the maximum deduction
for wood-burning installation varies from $500 in Arizona to $20,000 in Idaho, and tax credits for
residential customers range from $500 in Montana, to $7000 or 35% of project cost in Oregon [72].

Forests 2018, 9, 264
15 of 22
4.5. Location
High costs of transportation result in a limited radius for feedstock, making the location and
scale of operation a critical factor [76,83]. The arrangement of the supply chain relies heavily on the
choice between centralized and decentralized bioenergy production [77,96]. Decision makers consider
the availability of the resource, potential price changes due to new interactions, technical restrictions,
and the material already used by the forest products industry when considering the location for
a biomass facility [76,95].
Installing biomass facilities near a sustainable supply of forest biomass is a critical component for
facility success. Areas with high proportions of federal land or fuel reduction activities on forestland
near populated areas are thought to be a signiﬁcant source of energy because these lands typically
occur near existing roads, thus enhancing transportation feasibility. There is a ﬁne line between
whether roads will increase or impede biomass facility success. Though roads are clearly required
to transport biomass, high road density may indicate urban areas that are less likely to support the
adoption of biomass facilities [95].
Some research supports the development of decentralized, small-scale biomass facilities.
The development of decentralized, small-scale biomass facilities alleviates pressure on forest resources,
decreases transportation costs, and may be resilient to supply disruptions, such as invasive species
and wildﬁre. This is supported in the western U.S., given the distributed nature of forest biomass and
the long transportation distances often required. Becker et al. [83] found that colocation of processing
facilities and shorter travel distances resulted in the largest cost reductions in the supply chain.
The depot concept, as it relates to integrated bioreﬁneries and proposed by the Northwest Advanced
Renewable Alliance Project, models solids depots (which receive and mechanically process biomass
from forest treatments) and liquid depots that can receive raw material from the forest or a solids
depot [97].
Despite these perceived beneﬁts, several small-scale plants can create negative consequences such
as heavy competition for inputs, high labor costs, and increased road congestion [98]. Regardless of the
scale, it is important to implement a replanting management plan once forest biomass harvesting takes
place, to prevent overutilization of the resource [77]. However, sustainable replanting programs would
depend on many factors including species type, land ownership, site ecology, and forest management
objectives, among other factors. In the western U.S., when thinning is done to reduce wildﬁre risk,
replanting would not be required. Ultimately, the scale of the facility depends on the conditions in
the area, technology platform, ﬁnancial conditions, and interactions with the existing wood products
industry. Research suggests establishing plants that can take numerous types of energy feedstocks
(grass, wood, agricultural residues, and more) provides one approach to mitigate this challenge [76].
Thus, several elements can shape forest policy in western states lands, including how supply
chains are structured, policies by state or region, and how policy instruments are implemented.
State policies have become especially effective, with several western states setting ambitious goals
for renewable energy use, for which woody biomass can be a key component. A key advantage of
ﬁnancial incentives (for example, Oregon’s biomass tax credit), is that the incentive amounts can be
ﬁne-tuned to achieve desired results.
5. Discussion
After several decades of mechanical fuel treatments and wildﬁre, there are still large areas of
hazard fuels remaining in western forests. This includes not only healthy forests, but large areas
of unhealthy overstocked forests as well. There are also many hectares of dead and dying trees as
a result of disturbances such as droughts, insect outbreaks, and ﬁres. Large-scale stewardship projects
(primarily in Arizona) are making signiﬁcant progress at removing biomass as well as ﬁne-tuning
administrative aspects. However, harvesting and transportation of biomass is still very expensive,
unless at least some larger merchantable stems are harvested as well. Innovative harvesting systems
can reduce costs—for example, integrated systems that remove of both sawlogs and biomass within

Forests 2018, 9, 264
16 of 22
one entry and over a limited time [17]. Other innovations have included additional biomass processing
at the forest site. Han et al. [34] sorted and separated biomass during timber harvest operations,
then converted chips to biochar, torreﬁed wood, and briquettes.
Numerous studies have evaluated costs of mechanical thinnings, demonstrating the lack of
proﬁtability when harvesting for wood chips, and the strong potential proﬁtability when including
a portion of larger merchantable stems. Other work has demonstrated that selected regions of the
west (for example, southwestern Oregon) contain enough timber and biomass for a sustainable
wood products industry and wood energy development [60]. However, many western forest types
(notably, pinyon-juniper) would have only a small fraction of this potential. When considering viable
bioenergy products, critical aspects must be considered such as the scale of operation, production
pathways, and infrastructure required. Nonetheless, more than 30 electrical wood energy facilities are
present in western states, about 30 pellet production facilities exist, and numerous wood chips thermal
systems (primarily in schools) are in place.
The use of renewable fuels, in general, continues to rise as states pursue ambitious renewable
portfolio standards. Tax incentives are commonly used to promote biomass, as are technical assistance
programs and procurement policies. However, only two states are known to have policies for offsetting
transportation cost. Since many states have multiple policies related to biomass utilization [79],
the effectiveness of a given policy often depends on how the policy integrates with other existing
policies. In western states, where biomass transportation is a major concern, carefully crafted policies
that consider the full scope of related incentives could help shape future bioenergy development.
The future use of biomass from western forests, in an era of climate change and megaﬁres,
will depend on many factors. Insect and disease epidemics, drought, and other large-scale events
could impact millions of acres, including those in sensitive wildland–urban interfaces. However,
“game changing” technologies, such as wood–coal coﬁring, large-scale torrefaction, and bioreﬁneries
could greatly alter the biomass landscape. In this scenario, biomass supply and value chains would
need to be carefully constructed to avoid over-allocating available resources. Sustainability is key.
Several changes to the manner in which biomass projects are valued—including accounting for ﬁre
suppression costs, carbon costs, and other externalities not currently considered—could also greatly
alter the economics for restoration projects.
There are also broad economic factors inﬂuencing wood ﬁber supplies, including biomass.
For example, during the 1960s–1990s, extensive forest plantations were established to ensure a steady
supply of wood. This was then followed by a period of decreased demand for newsprint, packaging,
and other ﬁber products, leading to lower prices. Thus, on many Forest Service lands, biomass and
commercial timber is not economically viable, especially on western forests, where steep slopes and
long transportation distances can increase costs. Biomass use has also met resistance from two key
national entities—environmental groups and the pulp and paper industry. In the case of environmental
groups, resistance has occurred in efforts to block biomass use for fear that energy generation may
supplant environmental considerations. In the case of the paper industry, wood ﬁber from biomass
could be seen as a competing raw material to traditional pulp wood. This ongoing resistance is one
reason why U.S. renewable energy policies have lagged behind those of the European Union (although
other factors are undoubtedly relevant also).
Developments in the fossil fuel industry have also played a role in limiting the use of biomass
for energy. First, low natural gas prices have made it difﬁcult for bioenergy to be economical without
substantial subsidies. Second, although biomass coﬁring with coal has been identiﬁed as a way to
incrementally reduce fossil fuel use, innovative uses of wood and coal have not yet resonated among
power plant managers, except for limited test burns. Perhaps the biggest wildcard, then, will be
the future course of fossil fuel prices and their interaction with biomass derived fuels. The past has
indicated a sharp interest in wood fuels when oil prices are at high levels, and vice versa when oil
prices are low. Economic measures that help to stabilize these price swings should bode well for future

Forests 2018, 9, 264
17 of 22
biomass use in the western U.S., while also continuing to improve forest health and reduce ﬁre risk for
impacted communities.
6. Conclusions
Large areas of hazard fuels, overstocked forests, and dead and dying tress remain in western
forests. However, harvesting and transportation of biomass is often cost prohibitive, particularly
in remote locations having steep topography.
Mechanical thinnings for biomass removals are
economically feasible only when including a portion of larger merchantable stems. There are enough
timber and biomass materials present in selected regions of the U.S. for both wood products industry
and wood energy development. However key factors such as the scale of operations, various pathways
of forest products, and infrastructure requirements must be considered. Evidence of successful biomass
utilization in the western U.S. is clear, with more than 30 electrical wood energy facilities, 30 pellet
production facilities exist, and numerous wood chips thermal systems are in place. The use of renewable
fuels, in general, continues to rise as states pursue ambitious renewable portfolio standards. In western
states, where high cost of biomass transportation is a major concern, carefully crafted policies that
consider the full scope of the biomass value chain is needed.
The future use of biomass from western forests, in an era of climate change and megaﬁres,
will depend on many factors, including insect and disease epidemics, drought, and other large-scale
events. However, “game changing” technologies, such as wood–coal coﬁring, large-scale torrefaction,
and bioreﬁneries could greatly alter the biomass landscape in the future. Given that western U.S. forest
landscapes are often more dispersed than other regions of the country, biomass supply and value
chains would need to be carefully constructed to optimize the allocation of resources for various scales
of operation and types of wood products and biomaterials.
Competing fuels for conventional energy use will also play a key role in biomass utilization.
Recent low natural gas prices have made it difﬁcult for bioenergy to be economical without substantial
subsidies. Perhaps the biggest unknown, then will be the future course of fossil fuel prices with respect
to biofuels. Policies that help to stabilize these price swings should encourage future biomass use in the
western U.S., while continuing to improve forest health and reduce ﬁre risk for impacted communities.
Policies that emulate the successful use of biomass and biofuels in Europe, if adopted in the U.S. could
also play a role in stimulating the bioeconomy.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Acknowledgments: The authors acknowledge the USDA Ofﬁce of Chief Economist, agreement #58-0111-17-008.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
Barbour, R.J.; Fried, J.S.; Daugherty, P.J.; Christensen, G.; Fight, R. Potential biomass and logs from
ﬁre-hazard-reduction treatments in Southwest Oregon and Northern California. For. Policy Econ. 2008, 10,
400–407. [CrossRef]
2.
National Interagency Fire Center. 2018. Available online:
https://www.nifc.gov/ﬁreInfo/nfn.htm
(accessed on 24 April 2018).
3.
Skog, K.; Barbour, J.; Abt, K.; Bilek, T.; Burch, F.; Fight, R.; Hugget, B.; Miles, P.; Reinhardt, E.; Sheppard, W.
Evaluation of Silvicultural Treatments and Biomass Use for Reducing Fire Hazard in Western States; USDA Forest
Service, Forest Products Lab.: Madison, WI, USA, 2006; 29p.
4.
U.S. Department of Agriculture; U.S. Department of the Interior. Urban wildland interface communities
within the vicinity of federal lands that are at high risk from wildﬁre. Fed. Regist. 2001, 66, 43384–43435.
5.
Huang, C.-H.; Finkral, A.; Sorensen, C.; Kolb, T. Toward full economic valuation of forest fuels-reduction
treatments. J. Environ. Manag. 2013, 130, 221–231. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Forests 2018, 9, 264
18 of 22
6.
Skog, K.E.; Rummer, R.; Jenkins, B.; Parker, N.; Tittmann, P.; Hart, Q.; Nelson, R.; Gray, E.; Schmidt, A.;
Mallory, M.-P.; et al. A Strategic Assessment of Biofuels Development in the Western States. In Proceedings
of the 2008 Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA) Symposium, Park City, UT, USA, 21–23 October 2008;
McWilliams, W., Moisen, G., Czaplewski, R., Eds.; U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky
Mountain Research Station: Fort Collins, CO, USA, 2009. Available online: https://www.fs.fed.us/rm/
pubs/rmrs_p056/rmrs_p056_44_skog.pdf (accessed on 26 February 2018).
7.
Han, H.-S.; Lee, H.W.; Johnson, L.R. Economic feasibility of an integrated harvesting system for
small-diameter trees in southwest Idaho. For. Prod. J. 2004, 54, 21–27.
8.
Smith, W.B.; Miles, P.D.; Perry, C.H.; Pugh, S.A. Forest Resources of the United States, 2007; U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Forest Service: Washington, DC, USA, 2009; 336p.
9.
Emergent Solutions and Christopher Allen & Associates. SDU Wood as Feedstock for Biomass Conversion
in Western MONTANA—Opportunities and Challenges; Final Draft; Christopher Allen & Associates:
Missoula, MT, USA, 2003; 46p, Available online: http://www.mtcdc.org/pdf/110703.pdf (accessed on
26 February 2018).
10.
Prestemon, J.P.; Abt, K.L.; Barbour, R.J. Quantifying the net economic beneﬁts of mechanical wildﬁre hazard
treatments on timberlands of the western United States. For. Policy Econ. 2012, 21, 44–53. [CrossRef]
11.
Bolding, M.C.; Kellogg, L.D.; Davis, C.T. Productivity and costs of an integrated mechanical forest fuel
reduction operation in southwest Oregon. For. Prod. J. 2009, 59, 35–46.
12.
Ince, P.J.; Spelter, H.; Skog, K.E.; Kramp, A.; Dykstra, D.P. Market impacts of hypothetical fuel treatment
thinning programs on federal lands in the western United States. For. Policy Econ. 2008, 10, 363–372.
[CrossRef]
13.
Keegan, C.E.; Sorenson, C.B.; Morgan, T.A.; Hayes, S.W.; Daniels, J.M. Impact of the Great Recession and
Housing Collapse on the Forest Products Industry in the Western United States. For. Prod. J. 2012, 61, 625–634.
[CrossRef]
14.
California Energy Commission. Renewables Portfolio Standard. 2018. Available online: http://www.energy.
ca.gov/portfolio/ (accessed on 26 February 2018).
15.
Oregon Department of Energy. 2018. Available online: http://www.oregon.gov/energy/energy-oregon/
Pages/Renewable-Portfolio-Standard.aspx (accessed on 26 February 2018).
16.
USDA
Forest
Service.
Stewardship
Contracting
Results-Success
Stories.
2018.
Available
online:
https://www.fs.fed.us/restoration/Stewardship_Contracting/results/index.shtml (accessed on 26 February 2018).
17.
Vitorelo, B.; Han, H.-S.; Elliot, W. Productivity and cost of integrated harvesting for fuel reduction thinning.
For. Prod. J. 2012, 61, 664–674.
18.
Pan, F.; Han, H.-S.; Johnson, L.; Elliot, W. Production and cost of harvesting and transporting small diameter
(≤5”) trees for energy. For. Prod. J. 2008, 58, 47–53.
19.
Han, H.-S.; Oneil, E.; Johnson, L. Biomass feedstock supply: Costs and life cycle analysis. Oral presentation.
In Proceedings of the Forest Products Society International Convention,
Washington, DC, USA,
2–5 June 2012.
20.
Lancaster, J.; Gallagher, T.; McDonald, T.; Mitchell, D. Whole tree transportation system for timber processing
depots. In Proceedings of the 2017 Council on Forest Engineering Meeting, “Forest Engineering, from where
We’ve been, to Where We’re Going”, Bangor, ME, USA, 30 July–2 August 2017.
21.
Anderson, N.; Mitchell, D. Forest operations and woody biomass logistics to improve efﬁciency, value,
and sustainability. Bioenergy Res. 2016, 9, 518–533. [CrossRef]
22.
Rawlings, C.; Rummer, B.; Seeley, C.; Thomas, C.; Morrison, D.; Han, H.-S.; Cheff, L.; Atkins, D.; Graham, D.;
Windell, K. A Study of How to Decrease the Costs of Collecting, Processing and Transporting Slash; Montana
Community Development Corporation: Missoula, MT, USA, 2004; 21p.
23.
Zamora, R.; Sessions, J.; Smith, D.; Marrs, G. Effect of high speed blowing on the bulk density of ground
residues. For. Prod. J. 2014, 64, 290–299.
24.
Ghaffariyan, M.; Acuna, M.; Brown, M. Analysing the effect of ﬁve operational factors on forest residue
supply chain costs: A case study in Western Australia. Biomass Bioenergy 2013, 59, 486–493.
25.
Zamora, R.; Sessions, J. Are double trailers cost effective for transporting forest biomass on steep terrain?
Calif. Agric. 2015, 69, 177–183. [CrossRef]
26.
Sessions, J.; Wimer, J.; Costales, F.; Wing, M.G. Engineering considerations in road assessment for biomass
operations in steep terrain. West. J. Appl. For. 2010, 25, 144–153.

Forests 2018, 9, 264
19 of 22
27.
USDA Forest Service. Road Preconstruction Handbook. FSH7709.56 Chapter 40. 2014. Available online:
https://www.fs.fed.us/dirindexhome/fsh/7709.56/wo_7709.56_40.doc (accessed on 8 February 2018).
28.
Bowers, S. Designing Woodland Roads. EC1137. 2012.
Available online: https://catalog.extension.
oregonstate.edu/sites/catalog/ﬁles/project/pdf/ec1137.pdf (accessed on 12 April 2018).
29.
Halbrook, J.; Fleming, J. An Evaluation of Methods for Improving Gradeability of Chip Vans; SDTDC-1301;
USDA Forest Service: Washington, DC, USA, 2013; 6p.
30.
Bisson, J.; Han, S.-K.; Han, H.-S. Evaluating the system logistics of a biomass recovery operation in northern
California. For. Prod. J. 2016, 66, 88–96. [CrossRef]
31.
Montgomery, T.; Han, H.-S.; Kizhakkepurakkal, A. A GIS-based method for locating and planning centralized
biomass grinding operations. Biomass Bioenergy 2016, 85, 262–270. [CrossRef]
32.
Anderson, N.; Chung, W.; Loefﬂer, D.; Jones, J.G. A productivity and cost comparison of two systems for
producing biomass fuel from roadside forest treatment residues. For. Prod. J. 2012, 62, 223–233. [CrossRef]
33.
Han, H.-S.; Halbrook, J.; Pan, F.; Salazar, L. Economic evaluation of a roll-off trucking system removing forest
biomass resulting from shaded fuelbreak treatments. Biomass Bioenergy 2010, 34, 1006–1016. [CrossRef]
34.
Han, H.-S.; Jacobson, A.; Bilek, E.M.; Sessions, J. Waste to Wisdom: Utilizing forest residues for the production
of bioenergy and biobased products. Special Collection. Appl. Eng. Agric. 2018, 34, 5–10. [CrossRef]
35.
Hadﬁeld, J.; Magelssen, R. Wood Changes in Fire-Killed Tree Species in Eastern Washington; U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Forest Service, Okanogan and Wenatchee National Forests: Wenatchee, WA, USA, 2006; 49p.
36.
Lowell, E.C.; Haynes, R.; Rapp, V.; Cray, C. Effects of Fire, Insect, and Pathogen Damage on Wood Quality of
Dead and Dying Western Conifers; U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Paciﬁc Northwest Research
Station: Portland, OR, USA, 2010; 73p.
37.
Prestemon, J.; Abt, K.; Potter, K.; Koch, F. An economic assessment of mountain pine beetle timber salvage in
the west. West. J. Appl. For. 2013, 28, 143–153. [CrossRef]
38.
Chung, W.; Han, H.; Anderson, N. Beetle-killed biomass for bioenergy: An integrated modeling approach
for feedstock supply and logistics. Oral Presentation. In Proceedings of the 125 International Union of Forest
Research Organizations (IUFRO) Congress, Freiburg, Germany, 18–22 September 2017.
39.
Klepac, J.; Rummer, B. Off-road transport of pinyon/juniper. In Proceedings of the 35th Council on
Forest Engineering Annual Meeting, Engineering New Solutions for Energy Supply and Demand,
New Bern, NC, USA, 9–12 September 2012.
40.
Patton-Mallory, M.; Nelson, R.; Skog, K.; Jenkins, B.; Parker, N.; Tittmann, P.; Hart, Q.; Gray, E.; Schmidt, A.;
Gordon, G. Strategic assessment of biofuels potential for the western U.S. In Biofuels, Bioenergy, and
Bioproducts from Sustainable Agricultural and Forest Crops: Proceedings of the Short Rotation Crops
International Conference, Bloomington, MN, USA, 19–20 August 2008; Zalesny, R.S., Jr., Mitchell, R.,
Richardson, J., Eds.; U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Northern Research Station: Newtown
Square, PA, USA, 2008; p. 42.
41.
Shelly, J.R. Woody Biomass Factsheet–WB1.
University of California Berkeley: Berkeley, CA, USA,
2011. Available online: http://www.ucanr.org/sites/WoodyBiomass/newsletters/InfoGuides43284.pdf
(accessed on 22 February 2018).
42.
Haynes, R.; Fight, R.; Lowell, E.; Stevens, J.; Barbour, J. Economic aspects of thinning and harvest for forest
health improvement in Eastern Oregon and Washington. Northwest Sci. 2001, 75, 199–207.
43.
Monserud, R.A.; Lowell, E.C.; Becker, D.R.; Hummel, S.S.; Donoghue, E.M.; Barbour, R.J.; Kilborn, K.A.;
Nicholls, D.L.; Roos, J.; Cantrell, R.A. Contemporary Wood Utilization Research Needs in the Western United
States; PNW GTR-616; U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Paciﬁc Northwest Research Station:
Portland, OR, USA, 2004; 49p.
44.
Lowell, E.C.; Yadama, V.; Schimleck, L.R.; Skog, K.E. Chapter 17: Next-generation Products and Greenhouse
Gas Implications. In People, Forests, and Change Lessons from the Paciﬁc Northwest; VanHorne, B., Olsen, D., Eds.;
Island Press: Washington, DC, USA, 2016.
45.
Nechodom, M.; Becker, D.R.; Haynes, R. Evolving interdependencies of community and forest health.
In Forest Community Connections:
Implications for Research, Management, and Governance; RFF Press:
Washington, DC, USA, 2008; pp. 91–108.
46.
Amidon, T.E.; Bujanovic, B.; Liu, S.; Howard, J.R. Commercializing bioreﬁnery technology: A case for the
multi-product pathway to a viable bioreﬁnery. Forests 2011, 2, 929–947. [CrossRef]

Forests 2018, 9, 264
20 of 22
47.
Spink, T.; Marrs, G.; Gao, A. Techno-Economic Evaluation of Renewable Jet Fuel from Softwoods: The NARA
Greenﬁeld Integrated Bioreﬁnery Process. In Proceedings of the NARA Summary Conference, Washington,
DC, USA, 17 November 2016; Available online: https://nararenewables.org/documents/2016/11/techno-
economic-evaluation-of-renewable-jet-fuel-from-softwoods.pdf/ (accessed on 12 April 2018).
48.
Gibson, L. Paciﬁc West Biomass Proﬁle. Biomass Magazine. 2011. Available online: http://biomassmagazine.
com/articles/5207/paciﬁc-west-biomass-proﬁle (accessed on 12 April 2018).
49.
Calbiomass. Biomass Operations in California. 2018. Available online: http://www.calbiomass.org/
facilities-map/ (accessed on 26 February 2018).
50.
Graff, S. Fuels for Schools Program Uses Leftover Wood to Warm Buildings. U.S. Department of Energy.
2010. Available online: https://www.energy.gov/articles/fuels-schools-program-uses-leftover-wood-
warm-buildings (accessed on 12 April 2018).
51.
Anon. U.S. Pellet Plants. Biomass Magazine. 2017. Available online: http://biomassmagazine.com/plants/
listplants/biomass/US/ (accessed on 12 April 2018).
52.
Sourcewatch.
Existing U.S. Coal Plants—State-by-State Output.
2018.
Available online: https://www.
sourcewatch.org/index.php/Existing_U.S._Coal_Plants#State-by-state_output (accessed on 26 February 2018).
53.
Aguilar, F.X.; Goerndt, M.E.; Song, N.; Shiﬂey, S. Internal, external and location factors inﬂuencing coﬁring
of biomass with coal in the U.S. northern region. Energy Econ. 2012, 34, 1790–1798. [CrossRef]
54.
Goerndt, M.E.; Aguilar, F.X.; Skog, K. Drivers of biomass co-ﬁring in U.S. coal-ﬁred power Plants.
Biomass Bioenergy 2013, 58, 158–167. [CrossRef]
55.
Nicholls, D.L.; Patterson, S.E.; Uloth, E. Wood and Coal Coﬁring in Interior Alaska: Utilizing Woody Biomass from
Wildland Defensible-Space Fire Treatments and Other Sources; U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service,
Paciﬁc Northwest Research Station: Portland, OR, USA, 2006; 15p.
56.
Beagle, E.; Belmont, E. Technoeconomic assessment of beetle kill biomass co-ﬁring in existing coal ﬁred
power plants in the Western United States. Energy Policy 2016, 97, 429–438. [CrossRef]
57.
Oregon Torrefaction. 2018. Available online: http://www.oregontorrefaction.com/home.html (accessed on
12 April 2018).
58.
Acharya, B.; Sule, I.; Dutta, A. A review on advances of torrefaction technologies for biomass processing.
Biomass Convers. Bioreﬁn. 2012, 2, 349–369. [CrossRef]
59.
Hartsough, B.R.; Abrams, S.; Barbour, R.J.; Drews, E.S.; McIver, J.D.; Moghaddas, J.J.; Schwilk, D.W.;
Stephens, S.L. The economics of alternative fuel reduction treatments in western United States dry forests:
Financial and policy implications from the National Fire and Fire Surrogate Study. For. Policy Econ. 2008, 10,
344–354. [CrossRef]
60.
Fried, J.S.; Barbour, R.; Fight, R. FIA BioSum: Applying a multiscale evaluation tool in southwest Oregon.
J. For. 2003, 101, 8.
61.
Skog, K.E.; Barbour, R.J. Estimating Woody Biomass Supply From Thinning Treatments To Reduce Fire
Hazard In The U.S. West. In Proceedings of the Fuels Management-How to Measure Success: Conference
Proceedings, Portland, OR, USA, 28–30 March 2006; Proceedings RMRS-P-41. Andrews, P., Butler, B.W., Eds.;
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station: Fort Collins, CO, USA;
pp. 657–672.
62.
Larson, C. Examining Economic Benefits of Wood to Energy Products across the Kaibab and
Coconino National Forests. Master of Forestry professional paper, Northern Arizona University.
2012.
Available online:
https://nau.edu/uploadedFiles/Academic/CEFNS/Forestry/Faculty_and_Staff/MF_
Professional_Papers/2012.ChristianLarson.ExaminingEconomicBenefitsOfWood.pdf (accessed on 12 April 2018).
63.
Kerkvliet, J. The Practice and Economics of Stewardship Contracting: A Case Study of the Clearwater
Stewardship Project. For. Prod. J. 2010, 60, 213–220. [CrossRef]
64.
Sitko, S.; Hurteau, S. The First Five Years of the White Mountain Stewardship Project—Evaluating the
Impacts of Forest Treatments. 2010. Available online: http://azconservation.org/dl/TNCAZ_White_
Mountain_Stewardship_Project_5years.pdf (accessed on 15 March 2018).
65.
Nybakk, E.; Niskanen, A.; Bajric, F.; Duduman, G.; Feliciano, D.; Jablonski, K.; Lunnan, A.; Sadauskiene, L.;
Slee, B.; Teder, M. Innovation in the Wood Bio-Energy Sector in Europe; CABI International: Wallingford,
UK, 2011; pp. 254–275.

Forests 2018, 9, 264
21 of 22
66.
Martinkus, N.; Kulkarni, A.; Lovrich, N.; Smith, P.; Shi, W.; Pierce, J.; Wolcott, M.; Brown, S. An Innovative
Approach to Identify Regional Bioenergy Infrastructure Sites. In Proceedings of the 55th International
Convention of Society of Wood Science and Technology, Beijing, China, 27–31 August 2012. Paper EC-3 1 of
11.
67.
Giglio, F. The Use of Materials from Biomass as Construction Materials. Open J. Civ. Eng. 2013, 3, 82–84.
[CrossRef]
68.
Wagner, E.R.; Hansen, E.N. Innovation in large versus small Innovation in large versus companies: Insights
from the US wood products industry. Manag. Decis. 2005, 43, 837–850. [CrossRef]
69.
Brown, D.; Rowe, A.; Wild, P. A techno-economic analysis of using mobile distributed pyrolysis facilities to
deliver a forest residue resource. Bioresour. Technol. 2013, 150, 367–376. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
70.
Das, O.; Sarmah, A.K. Mechanism of waste biomass pyrolysis: Effect of physical and chemical pre-treatments.
Sci. Total Environ. 2015, 537, 323–334. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
71.
Iversen, K.; Van Denmark, R. Integrating fuel reduction management with local bioenergy operations and
businesses—A community responsibility. Biomass Bioenergy 2006, 30, 304–307. [CrossRef]
72.
Ebers, A.; Malmsheimer, R.W.; Volk, T.A.; Newman, D.H. Inventory and classiﬁcation of United States
federal and state forest biomass electricity and heat policies. Biomass Bioenergy 2016, 84, 67–75. [CrossRef]
73.
Alig, R.; Latta, G.; Adams, D.; McCarl, B. Mitigating greenhouse gases: The importance of land base
interactions between forests, agriculture, and residential development in the face of changes in bioenergy
and carbon prices. For. Policy Econ. 2010, 12, 67–75. [CrossRef]
74.
Hjerpe, E.; Abrams, J.; Becker, D.R. Socioeconomic Barriers and the Role of Biomass Utilization in
Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Restoration. Ecol. Restor. 2009, 27, 169–177. [CrossRef]
75.
Miner, R.A.; Abt, R.C.; Bowyer, J.L.; Buford, M.A.; Malmsheimer, R.W.; O’Laughlin, J.; Skog, K.E. Forest
Carbon Accounting Considerations in US Bioenergy Policy. J. For. 2014, 112, 591–606.
76.
Aguilar, F.; Garrett, H.E. Perspectives of Woody Biomass for Energy: Survey of State Foresters, State Energy
Biomass Contacts, and National Council of Forestry Association Executives. J. For. 2009, 107, 297–306.
77.
Mafakheri, F.; Nasiri, F. Modeling of biomass-to-energy supply chain operations: Applications, challenges
and research directions. Energy Policy 2014, 67, 116–126. [CrossRef]
78.
Sundstrom, S.; Nielsen-pincus, M.; Moseley, C.; Mccaffery, S. Woody biomass use trends, barriers,
and strategies: Perspectives of US Forest Service managers. Serv. Manag. 2012, 110, 16–24. [CrossRef]
79.
Becker, D.R.; Moseley, C.; Lee, C. A supply chain analysis framework for assessing state-level forest biomass
utilization policies in the United States. Biomass Bioenergy 2011, 35, 1429–1439. [CrossRef]
80.
Abt, R.C.; Abt, K.L.; Cubbage, F.W.; Henderson, J.D. Effect of policy-based bioenergy demand on southern
timber markets: A case study of North Carolina. Biomass Bioenergy 2010, 34, 1679–1686. [CrossRef]
81.
Galik, C.S.; Abt, R.C. The effect of assessment scale and metric selection on the greenhouse gas beneﬁts of
woody biomass. Biomass Bioenergy 2012, 44, 1–7. [CrossRef]
82.
Lundmark, R. Cost structure of and competition for forest-based biomass. Scand. J. For. Res. 2006, 21, 272–280.
[CrossRef]
83.
Becker, D.R.; Larson, D.; Lowell, E.C. Financial considerations of policy options to enhance biomass
utilization for reducing wildﬁre risks. For. Policy Econ. 2009, 11, 628–635. [CrossRef]
84.
Perlack, R.; Wright, L.L.; Turhollow, A.F.; Graham, R.L.; Stokes, B.C.; Erbach, D.C. Biomass as Feedstock
for a Bioenergy and Bioproducts Industry: The Technical Feasbility of a Billion-Ton Annual Supply. 2005;
78p. Available online: https://www1.eere.energy.gov/bioenergy/pdfs/ﬁnal_billionton_vision_report2.pdf
(accessed on 26 February 2018).
85.
Abrams, J.; Becker, D.; Kudrna, J.; Moseley, C. Does policy matter? The role of policy systems in forest
bioenergy development in the United States. For. Policy Econ. 2017, 75, 41–48. [CrossRef]
86.
Vedung, E. Policy instruments: Typologies and theories. In Carrots, Sticks, and Sermons: Policy Instruments
and Their Evaluation; Bemelmans-Videc, M.R.R.C., Vedung, E., Eds.; Transaction Publishers: New Brunswick,
NJ, USA, 1998; pp. 21–58.
87.
Bemelmans-Videc, M.-L.; Rist, R.C.; Vedung, E. Carrots, Sticks & Sermons: Policy Instruments and Their
Evaluation; Transaction Publishers: New Brunswick, NJ, USA, 1998.
88.
Gossum, V.P.; Ledene, L.; Arts, B.; Langenhove, G. New environmental policy instruments to realize forest
expansion in Flanders (Northern Belgium): A base for smart regulation? Land Use Policy 2009, 26, 935–946.
[CrossRef]

Forests 2018, 9, 264
22 of 22
89.
Eliadis, P.; Hill, M.H. Designing Government: From Institutions to Governance; McGill-Queen’s University Press:
Montreal, QC, Canada, 2005.
90.
Gunningham, N.; Grabosky, P.; Sinclair, D. Smart Regulation: Designing Environmental Policy; Oxford
University Press: New York, NY, USA, 1998.
91.
Im, E.; Adams, D.; Latta, G. Potential impacts of carbon taxes on carbon ﬂux in western Oregon private
forests. For. Policy Econ. 2007, 9, 1006–1017. [CrossRef]
92.
Rivera, L.; Smith, T.; Becker, D.R. The inﬂuence of US state policy on woody bio-energy use. Manuscript in
review with Energy Policy, in review.
93.
Aguilar, F.X.; Saunders, A. Policy Instruments Promoting Wood-to-Energy Uses in the Continental United
States. J. For. 2010, 108, 132–140.
94.
Chappin, M.M.H.; Vermeulen, W.J.V.; Meeus, M.T.H.; Hekkert, M.P. Enhancing our understanding of the role
of environmental policy in environmental innovation: Adoption explained by the accumulation of policy
instruments and agent-based factors. Environ. Sci. Policy 2009, 12, 934–947. [CrossRef]
95.
Young, J.D.; Anderson, N.M.; Naughton, H.T.; Mullan, K. Economic and policy factors driving adoption of
institutional woody biomass heating systems in the U.S. Energy Econ. 2018, 69, 456–470. [CrossRef]
96.
Yilmaz, S.; Selim, H. A review on the methods for biomass to energy conversion systems design.
Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2013, 25, 420–430. [CrossRef]
97.
Austin, G.; Vachon, M.; Laninga, T.; Olsen, K. Mid-Cascade to Paciﬁc Corridor: Conceptual Design; Northwest
Advanced Renewables Alliance (NARA): Washington, DC, USA, 2015.
98.
Aguilar, F.X. Effect of centrifugal forces on cluster patterns in the softwood lumber industry of the United
States. For. Sci. 2008, 54, 242–249.
© 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
