Planning for and Implementing 
Prescribed Fire in Fire-Dependent Forests 
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION INSTITUTE
Issues in Forest Restoration

The Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, 
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of dry, frequent-ﬁre forests in the Intermountain 
West. These forests have been signiﬁcantly altered during the last century, with decreased ecological and 
recreational values, near-elimination of natural low-intensity ﬁre regimes, and greatly increased risk of 
large-scale ﬁres. The ERI is working with public agencies and other partners to restore these forests to 
a more ecologically healthy condition and trajectory—in the process helping to signiﬁcantly reduce the 
threat of catastrophic wildﬁre and its effects on human, animal, and plant communities.
Cover photo: Fireﬁghters discuss ﬁre behavior conditions and smoke dispersion during a prescribed burn 
at Gus A. Pearson Natural Area near Flagstaff, Arizona.  Photo by ERI
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
(928) 523-5088
nau.edu/eri
Publication date: June 2018
Author: Bruce Greco
Reviewers: Mike Elson, District Ranger, Coconino National Forest; Vic Morﬁn, 
Fuels Management Ofﬁcer, Coconino National Forest; Travis Woolley,  
Forest Ecologist, The Nature Conservancy
Series Editor: Tayloe Dubay
Please use the following citation when referring to this paper:
Greco, B. 2018. Planning for and Implementing Prescribed Fire in Fire-Dependent Forests.  
ERI White Paper—Issues in Forest Restoration. Ecological Restoration Institute,  
Northern Arizona University. 11 p.
Northern Arizona University is an equal opportunity provider.
In accordance with Federal law and U.S. Department of Agriculture policy, this institution is prohibited from 
discriminating on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, or disability. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all 
programs.) To ﬁle a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Ofﬁce of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten 
Building, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or (202) 720-5964 
(TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.
This publication made possible through a grant from the USDA Forest Service.

Table of Contents
Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Defining Prescribed Fire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Prescribed Fire Policy, Plans, and Authorities Across Jurisdictions . . . . . . 3
Federal Policy, Strategies That Direct Local Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Planning for Prescribed Fire: The Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Implementation — Striking the Match . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
 
Prescribed Fire Ignition Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
 
Contingency Planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
 
Managing Smoke . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
 
Unwanted Wildland Fire Declaration: The Appropriate Management Response  . . . . . 9
Action Reviews: Measuring Burn Success  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

2 
Ecological Restoration Institute
Executive Summary
Over millions of years, western forests co-evolved with fire. Regular ground fire reduced excess tree seedlings, 
released nutrients, and helped support and maintain forest health. However, due to fire suppression in the 
late 1880s, many forests of the West are overgrown and degraded, and therefore susceptible to unnatural, 
catastrophic wildfire. To restore western forests that depend on low intensity fire, land managers actively 
reduce forest density by thinning excess small trees and then conduct a prescribed fire. 
Research recommends that fire should occur on a cycle consistent with historic timeframes in order to 
promote ecosystem health (Neary et. al 2005). However, implementing prescribed fire can be a complex 
process that requires coordination of many different agencies. This white paper details the steps that are 
required in order to conduct a safe and effective prescribed burn.
Introduction
Due to more than a century of fire suppression, forests are now experiencing less frequent, but more severe 
fires. Many western forested ecosystems, such as ponderosa pine, depend on periodic ground or low-intensity 
fire to naturally remove excess tree seedlings and reinvigorate soil and grasses. When fire is excluded from 
the landscape, these ecosystems become degraded and unhealthy. One outcome is that trees and vegetation 
become stressed by overcrowding. Plant species that depend on fire can disappear, and hazardous fuels build 
up to dangerous levels. 
Prescribed fire is a valuable tool for reestablishing natural balance to fire-dependent ecosystems. An objective 
of prescribed fire is to safely return fire that is consistent with the historic intensity and frequency appropriate 
for that forest ecosystem A prescribed fire may be designed to create a mosaic of diverse habitats for plants and 
animals, benefit endangered species habitat, reduce fuels and the threat of a destructive fire, or to restore the 
natural fire regime to the landscape. All prescribed fire planning incorporates public safety as well. 
As management with prescribed fire increases, the visual and smoke impacts have become a source of public 
concern. Prior to implementing a prescribed burn, the trade-offs and benefits (such as smoke) must be carefully 
assessed and planned. Clear objectives, specific desired outcomes, application of best available science, public 
safety, and best management practices are important elements of successful prescribed fire programs.
A ﬁreﬁghter uses a drip torch to ignite a prescribed ﬁre in a wetland area.  
Photo courtesy of USDA Forest Service, Coconino National Forest

 
Planning for and Implementing Prescribed Fire in Fire-Dependent Forests 
3
Defining Prescribed Fire
Due to more than a century of fire suppression, forests are now experiencing less frequent, but more severe firIn 
1976 the US Department of Agriculture (USDA) and US Department of Interior (DOI) created the National 
Wildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG) to develop consistent standards and a framework for planning, training, 
implementing and managing fire on all lands. It includes nine member 
agencies: the Forest Service, Bureau of Land Management, National Park 
Service, Bureau of Indian Affairs, US Fish and Wildlife Service, National 
Association of State Foresters, US Fire Administration, Intertribal Timber 
Council, and the International Association of Fire Chiefs.  
The NWCG defines prescribed fire as “any fire intentionally ignited  
by management actions in accordance with applicable laws, policies, 
and regulations to meet specific objectives” (2012). Thus, a prescribed fire 
isa planned fire, often referred to as a “prescribed burn” or “controlled 
burn,” where fire managers “prescribe” the use of fire to benefit natural 
resource management or to accomplish specific management objectives, including research. It includes 
lighting a fire in a pre-designated area to achieve desired outcomes after deliberate and thorough planning 
and under carefully controlled and monitored conditions.
Prescribed Fire Policy, Plans, and Authorities Across Jurisdictions
Laws, regulations, policies, and authorities for the management of all fire, including prescribed fire, originates 
through 36 congressional legislative acts at the federal level. At the state level, prescribed fire is governed by 
statutes and policy direction promulgated by the state. Each agency, bureau, and department then provides 
specific guidelines, directives, and plans to implement federal and state policy, laws, and regulation. This 
guidance is incorporated into handbooks, manuals, and guides that are specific to regional, state, and 
local applications. There is considerable effort to standardize and coordinate fire management program 
applications between and within all federal agencies—and state and tribal programs at each level—to ensure 
clear direction and a shared vision of desired outcomes (see Box 1).  
“[To] provide national 
leadership to enable 
interoperable wildland ﬁre 
operations, among federal, 
state, local, tribal, and 
territorial partners.” 
– NWCG Mission
Federal Wildland Fire Policies
The national ofﬁces (USDA and DOI) have developed broad national standards and 
procedures for planning, establishing program priorities, and implementing hazardous 
fuels management and prescribed ﬁre programs. Collectively, these policies dictate that 
wildland ﬁre programs should be implemented equally, consistently, and concurrently, 
as a means to protect, maintain, and enhance resources (USDA; USDOI 2001).  
Federal Wildland Fire Management: Policy and Program Review (1995 and 2001)
The principles outlined in this policy guide federal prescribed ﬁre programs. 
Guidance for Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy (2009)
This policy guides federal wildland ﬁre policy.
BOX 1

4 
Ecological Restoration Institute
Federal Policy, Strategies That Direct Local Objectives
For decades, federal agencies, along with state and tribal partners, have taken the lead in promoting 
hazardous fuels management and using fire as a management tool in their Land and Resource Management 
Plans (LRMPs) and Statewide Resource Assessments. All land management agency partners coordinate 
strategically to plan and implement prescribed fire programs on a landscape scale. Strategic components of 
this collaboration include the assimilation of individual agency fire policy and directives that incorporate the 
National Cohesive Wildland Fire Management Strategy, known as the Cohesive Strategy, initiated by the 
Federal Land Assistance, Management and Enhancement (FLAME) Act of 2009 and procedural guidance 
from the NWCG (see Box 2). Guidelines from the NWCG set the standards for oversight, monitoring 
systems, risk assessment and approvals, implementation, and effectiveness reviews.
The National Wildfire Coordination Group develops operations standards with the intent of universal 
adoption by member agencies. At regional and state levels, leaders establish direction and oversight 
mechanisms to also ensure that risk-based, strategically planned and coordinated prescribed fire practices 
occur with state and local cooperators and partners.
Planning for Prescribed Fire: The Process
The prescribed fire planning and implementation process is dynamic, variable, unpredictable, and site-specific. 
It requires professional judgments and adaptability. Reasonable discretion and guidance provided by agency and 
partner directives is a critical part of the process. The guides and directives offer detailed information regarding 
best available science, best management practices, and lessons learned. The essential guidance for prescribed fire 
implementation outcomes is framed by LMRPs and agency-specific plans.
The NWCG Interagency Prescribed Fire Planning and Implementation Procedures Guide, along with the 
Prescribed Fire Plan, contains the site-specific legal implementation documents that establish minimum 
national interagency standards (NWCG 2017a). The NWCG guide develops common language and unified 
direction and guidance for all NWCG member agencies to help support informed decisions when approving 
and implementing prescribed fire actions. Agencies may choose to provide more restrictive standards and policy 
direction in addition to implementing the minimum standards. However, any organization or agency providing 
resources to fill a national interagency request for all types of wildland fire incidents must meet the minimum 
NWCG requirements.
The Cohesive Strategy: An All-Lands Approach
The Federal Land Assistance, Management and Enhancement (FLAME) Act of 2009 
established a separate federal funding account to address the escalating costs of 
suppressing wildﬁres and reduce the need to transfer funds from other agency 
programs to wildﬁre suppression. A provision of this bill required the Secretaries 
of Agriculture and Interior to develop a set of a cohesive wildﬁre management 
strategies to address national wildland ﬁre problems. The resulting National 
Cohesive Wildland Fire Management Strategy includes all stakeholders across all 
landscapes in a collaborative push to understand the complexities of managing 
wildﬁre risks across the country. The Cohesive Strategy sets the vision for national 
wildland ﬁre management policy while complementing existing federal wildland 
ﬁre policies (see Box 1).
BOX 2

 
Planning for and Implementing Prescribed Fire in Fire-Dependent Forests 
5
“To safely and effectively 
extinguish ﬁre when needed; 
use ﬁre where allowable; 
manage our natural 
resources: and as a Nation, 
live with wildland ﬁre.”
– National Cohesive  
Strategy Vision
Key documents that provide the framework for preparing individual Prescribed Fire Plans include agency 
LMRPs, Fire Management Plans, NEPA documents, State Resource Plans, and general agency policies and 
directives. Operational procedures for planning and implementing a prescribed fire project are standardized 
and inclusive of all jurisdictions affected by the project. 
Wildland fire management policy directs the use of the best available 
science and emerging technologies, direction, and guidance found in 
statutes and federal regulations. Policies are consistent throughout the 
USDA and DOI and promote and encourage interoperability with other 
non-federal wildland fire organizations and entities. Policy communication 
(handbooks, directives, initiatives, etc.) can differ between agencies,  
but the overall goal is coordinated application at the project level.
Prescribed Fire Plan
Before any prescribed fires are permitted, agencies must first complete a Fire Management Plan, or other 
comprehensive plan that provides general program objectives, and a Prescribed Fire Plan detailing site-specific 
plans and prescriptions. The Prescribed Fire Plan identifies, or prescribes, the best conditions to burn unwanted 
forest debris, trees, and other plants to safely achieve the desired results. These plans consider factors such as 
temperature, humidity, wind, vegetation moisture, and smoke dispersal conditions (NWCG 2017c). 
Prescribed Fire Plans identify the qualification level of the personnel assigned to implement the burn. Specifically, 
the burn boss, firing boss and holding boss assigned must meet the NWCG fire qualifications. These are complex 
plans that include 21 detailed sections and several appendices that cover pre-implementation data, steps to guide 
the planning and implementation process, procedures, and certifications to be completed before ignition.  
A Prescribed Fire Plan is required for each fire that is ignited by management, outside of wildfire suppression 
tactics. The plans are prepared and approved by qualified personnel, and include criteria for the conditions and 
prescriptions under which the fire will be conducted. The Prescribed Fire Plan should be reviewed and signed 
by the agency administrator annually to ensure the plan is current (e.g., identifies changes on the project, policy 
changes, new objectives, etc.). 
The Prescribed Fire Plan must be signed by qualified personnel who prepares, reviews, and approves the plan. Plans 
are generally specific to an administrative unit or a single project, but agencies are moving toward programmatic 
plans that can cover multiple jurisdictions or geographic areas. Signees must have the required training, experience, 
and current qualifications. Every plan receives a technical review prior to agency administrator approval. The 
technical reviewers and plan preparer must be qualified or have been previously qualified as a prescribed fire burn 
boss. An off-unit technical review is encouraged to provide an additional independent perspective.
The plan also includes the approved Agency Administrator Ignition Authorization, authorizing the plan to 
be implemented between specified dates. It provides direction on briefing and documentation requirements 
by fire managers. This authorization identifies and assigns responsibilities to the designated/qualified burn 
boss responsible for successful burn implementation. Also included are detailed discussion items to help guide 
discussions with the burn boss and to help the agency administrator/decision official understand the risks and 
benefits associated with the project.
Prescribed Fire Project Area Description
The project area description is a detailed summary documenting all pertinent attributes, including descriptions 
of vegetation and fuels, unique features, and natural resources. The plan requires maps of the vicinity of the burn, 
project area, ignition units, and the location of values or assets at risk. Also, commonly included are additional 
maps indicating significant or sensitive features, fuels, or fuel modeling outputs, and areas expected to be 
impacted by smoke. 

6 
Ecological Restoration Institute
Burn Prescriptions and Prescribed Fire Objectives
Burn prescriptions provide burn bosses with the data needed to understand and meet established objectives, 
manage smoke emissions, and address any identified constraints outlined by the agency administrator. The 
burn prescription outlines the criteria during which a prescribed fire may be ignited to meet the prescribed fire 
objectives. The prescription will describe the acceptable range of limits for the environmental or fire behavior 
considerations required to meet prescribed fire objectives. 
The burn boss uses information from the burn prescription as a framework, with set parameters, to guide burn 
ignition options and management considerations and ensure successful burn outcomes. The burn prescriptions 
also help guide all implementation actions deployed in the course of burn preparations, ignition, monitoring, 
assessments, and post-burn evaluations. It can be described as a scientific prescription for each fire, prepared in 
advance, describing its objectives, fuels, area, the precise environmental conditions under which it will burn, and 
conditions under which it may be suppressed.
The Go/No-Go Checklist 
The plan provides a written checklist for the burn boss to certify with a no/yes determination whether 12 
critical requirements, conditions, and steps have been satisfied prior to ignition of the burn. The burn boss 
must certify all questions can be responded to with a “yes” answer prior to ignition of a test-fire, otherwise 
implementation of the burn is not allowed. 
Pre-Ignition Considerations
Additional pre-ignition considerations are identified in 
an analysis developed to determine the complexity of the 
burn, mitigation options, and burn outcomes identified in 
the NEPA decision and plan. Spot weather or local area 
forecasts are required prior to ignition on all ignition days. 
A smoke management forecast is obtained when residual 
smoke has potential to impact smoke-sensitive areas.
The burn boss will visit the burn area prior to fire ignition 
to evaluate site conditions. This helps to plan for successful 
implementation and for contingency plans in the event 
conditions of the prescription parameters change. Some 
of the coordination required includes assessing scheduling 
and costs, assigning resources, identifying timeframes, burn 
duration, and spot/daily weather forecasts, monitoring on  
and off-site conditions, and releasing burn notifications.
Pre-implementation checklists are continually reviewed as an accountability measure. It is essential that all on-
site preparations (control fire lines, personnel, equipment, communications, values, and infrastructure, etc.), 
including back-up contingency plans, are completed and verified. Outreach to adjacent landowners, agencies, 
partners, media, the public, and smoke-sensitive individuals is also conducted prior to ignition.  
An analysis of the potential complexity of the prescribed burn informs planning for and securing needed 
resources for a successful burn. This complexity analysis helps specify the minimum required personnel 
resources, equipment, and supplies needed for each phase of the prescribed fire until the burn is declared out. 
The complexity analysis also identifies values at risk (in and out of the burn unit) and the level of technical 
difficulty required to protect them. A determination of higher levels of technical difficulty to conduct the burn 
requires more robust burn organizations and higher qualifications for key prescribed fire leadership positions.
A burn crew gathers for a brieﬁng before implementing a 
prescribed ﬁre. Photo courtesy of USDA Forest Service, Coconino National Forest

 
Planning for and Implementing Prescribed Fire in Fire-Dependent Forests 
7
Firefighter and public safety concerns are emphasized as priorities in the planning and implementation of all 
fire management activities (NWCG 2017b). All assigned personnel are briefed on the job hazard analysis or 
other agency-specific risk analysis at the beginning of each operational period. It is essential that prescribed 
fire objectives and operations are clearly defined and understood. This briefing helps ensure the organization 
and assignments follow NWCG standards. On-site pre-ignition briefings cover:
฀
•฀The฀communications฀plan,฀prescribed฀fire฀objectives,฀and฀prescription.
฀
•฀Description฀of฀the฀prescribed฀fire฀project฀area,฀including฀any฀values,฀special฀considerations,฀ 
 
and sensitive features. 
฀
•฀Expected฀weather฀and฀fire฀behavior,฀the฀ignition฀process,฀holding฀and฀contingency฀plans,฀ 
 
and assignments.
฀
•฀In฀the฀event฀the฀burn฀exceeds฀the฀prescription฀and฀cannot฀meet฀requirements฀to฀return฀it฀ 
 
to the prescription, then when, how, and who will make the wildfire declaration. 
฀
•฀Review฀of฀the฀safety฀and฀medical฀plan,฀and฀any฀local฀information฀to฀ensure฀successful฀ 
 
implementation of the burn.
Implementation — Striking the Match 
Prescribed Fire Ignition Plan
Before proceeding with burn ignition, prescribed fire specialists 
complete the Go/No-Go checklist and conduct a test fire.  
Every prescribed fire must meet all the conditions on the list. 
The test fire is ignited in a representative location where the 
fire can be easily controlled and the results are documented. 
The purpose of the test fire is to verify that the prescribed fire 
behavior characteristics will meet management objectives and to 
verify predicted smoke dispersion. Based on these observations, 
the prescribed fire burn boss determines whether to continue 
with active ignition (NWCG 2017b).
Before deciding whether to burn on a given day, specialists assess  
the results of the test burn and smoke dispersal monitoring. They then compare conditions on the ground 
to those outlined in the burn plan. Successful implementation of planned actions, after careful analysis and 
thorough preparations, can result in the right kind of fire at the right place at the right time. The firing and 
holding plan can be adapted or adjusted as conditions change during the burn, so prescriptions and desired 
objectives can be met. These adjustments may also occur during mop-up and patrol procedures. 
Contingency Planning 
The contingency plan analysis is the portion of the Prescribed Fire Plan that considers low probability, but high 
consequence, events. It identifies the actions needed to mitigate them. Contingency planning determines what 
additional actions, resources, or both are needed to keep the prescribed fire within the scope of the plan and to 
ensure preparedness for dealing with fire outside of the burn unit and/or project area.  
Contingency planning can also address other unanticipated events like not meeting prescribed fire objectives, 
and critical holding points for controlling the burn. Other important considerations include smoke management 
objectives, impacts to critical smoke receptors, burn staffing, and response plans for accidents or emergencies 
during the burn.
A ﬁreﬁghter patrols the burn area during a 
prescribed ﬁre.  Photo by ERI

8 
Ecological Restoration Institute
Managing Smoke 
All prescribed burns must conform to the federal Clean Air Act (CAA) 
requirements, which is the primary legal framework in the US. Managing 
smoke emissions from the prescribed burn is a major objective, second 
only to public and firefighter safety considerations. Each western state 
has programs or departments that provide guidance for permitting and 
assisting agencies to adhere to air quality regulations and standards in 
smoke sensitive areas. The CAA directs that states and tribes, and in 
some cases local air pollution control agencies, should take the lead 
in implementing the majority of its provisions. These departments 
coordinate procedures that mitigate the impacts of prescribed fire on 
outcomes relating to visibility and clean air in mandatory Class I smoke 
management areas. These state regulations are based on the criteria of  
efficiency, economics, law, emission reduction opportunities, land  
management objectives (including best management practices for prescribed  
burn implementation), and reduction of visibility impacts from smoke (NWCG 2006).
Depending on site-specific conditions and circumstances, other federal and state regulations or land 
management agency rules may apply as well. Since each situation is unique, addressing conflicts between 
land management policy and smoke management is usually approached on a case-by-case basis. Basic Smoke 
Management Practices (BSMPs) are applied on prescribed fire projects to mitigate the impacts of smoke to 
public health, public safety and nuisance, and visibility (NWCG 2017b).
When acquiring burn permits and approvals, fire planners must identify smoke sensitive receptors, e.g., 
population centers, recreation areas, hospitals, airports, transportation corridors, schools, etc. This assessment 
typically includes computer modeling and mitigation strategies and techniques to reduce the impacts of 
smoke production. Prescribed fire and smoke will have some effects on human, plant, or animal populations, 
but the overall effects are substantially less than those from large wildfires, which are unpredictable and often 
uncontrollable events that produce heavy smoke compared to prescribed fire (Box 3).
Living with Smoke
Fire is a part of life in southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Seasonal prescribed 
burns do produce smoke, but smoke from a prescribed ﬁre is not as heavy or long-
lasting as smoke produced from a wildﬁre because land managers plan in advance 
to mitigate such impacts. Forest managers typically give the public advance 
warning of prescribed burns and their smoke impacts. Many agencies have plans 
to notify and accommodate people sensitive to smoke.
For many, tolerating occasional light smoke from controlled ﬁres is more desirable 
than experiencing heavy smoke from unpredictable and destructive wildﬁres. 
“Particularly in the western United States, public forestlands are overgrown and 
we are confronted with a choice between smaller amounts of smoke more often, 
or large amounts of smoke less frequently, and each of these choices carries trade-
offs and long-term consequences” (Viers 2005). 
BOX 3
Managing smoke emissions is a major 
objective throughout prescribed ﬁre planning 
and implementation. Photo courtesy of USDA Forest 
Service, Coconino National Forest

 
Planning for and Implementing Prescribed Fire in Fire-Dependent Forests 
9
Unwanted Wildland Fire Declaration: The Appropriate Management Response 
The Prescribed Fire Plan specifies who has the authority to declare a prescribed fire a wildfire. A prescribed 
fire, or a portion of a prescribed fire, must be declared a wildfire by those identified in the burn plan with the 
authority to do so, when either or both of the following criteria are met: 
1) Prescription parameters are exceeded and holding and contingency actions cannot  
secure the fire by the end of the next burning period; or, 
2) The fire has spread outside the project area or is likely to do so, and the associated  
contingency actions have failed or are likely to fail, and the fire cannot be contained  
by the end of the next burning period (NWCG 2009).
A prescribed fire can be declared a wildfire for reasons other than those identified above, as determined by 
the burn boss and agency administrator. When the agency administrator is notified of a declared wildfire 
by the burn boss, they are then required to make the proper notifications in accordance with agency policy. 
This will be accomplished by analyzing key Prescribed Fire Plan and implementation criteria and gathering 
knowledge from the burn personnel and support resources. 
When burn prescriptions are exceeded, if the contingency actions are successful at bringing the project back 
within the scope of the Prescribed Fire Plan within the established timeframes, the project may continue. 
The ability to successfully manage the unexpected depends on having comprehensive contingency plans and 
updating them as needed during implementation of the prescribed fire (NWCG 2009). 
Action Reviews: Measuring Burn Success
After Action Reviews (AARs) are structured reviews of 
actions and mitigations identified from previous reviews 
of the project and a burn debrief. The AAR also evaluates 
whether the desired outcomes from the planned actions 
were accomplished, based on established performance 
standards and measurable outcomes. This review allows 
participants to discover what happened, why it happened, 
and how to improve performance and correct mistakes 
or weaknesses. After Action Reviews are effective when 
conducted with all resources involved.
After Action Reviews can occur at the end of each 
operational shift in order to recognize adaptive learning 
opportunities that increase safety and effectiveness of 
prescribed fire planning and implementation. The AAR 
can help answer questions such as, “What was planned?”; “What actually happened?”; “Why did it happen 
that way?”; “What should be sustained?”; and, “What can be improved?” The analysis and lessons learned from 
the need to declare the burn a wildfire are often well documented and disseminated for the benefit of the broader 
prescribed fire community (Black et. al 2012). 
After Action Reviews conducted at the burn site can be especially helpful in understanding and measuring burn 
impacts and determining if desired outcomes were achieved. Documentation and experience from these reviews 
and shared lessons learned can be invaluable to help guide future prescribed fire planning and implementation.
Fire personnel review a model of the burn area prior to ignition.  
Photo courtesy of Verde Valley All Hazards Training Association  
and USDA Forest Service, Coconino National Forest

10 
Ecological Restoration Institute
Conclusion
As prescribed fire applications continue to increase in the western US, it is important to recognize the importance 
and benefits of returning fire to fire-dependent landscapes. Restoring forest health and function will help avoid 
the ecologic and economic devastation experienced by catastrophic wildfire events over the past several decades. 
The principle goals in management of prescribed fires are to contain the fire within prescribed fire 
prescriptions, minimize smoke duration, and successfully accomplish the desired outcomes of the burn. 
Federal, state, and local agencies have exerted much effort and foresight into developing a framework for 
consistency and providing guidelines for successful planning and implementation of prescribed fire. 
Smoke disperses to the east from the Horseshoe Project prescribed ﬁre north of the San Francisco Peaks, Flagstaff, Arizona. 
Photo by True Brown, courtesy of USDA Forest Service, Coconino National Forest

 
Planning for and Implementing Prescribed Fire in Fire-Dependent Forests 
11
References
Barkmann, G. 2003. Air quality and smoke management. In Ecological restoration of southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests, ed. P. Friederici. Washington, D.C.: Island Press. Pp. 371–386
Black, A.E., J. Saveland, D. Thomas, and J. Ziegler. 2012. Using Escaped Prescribed Fire Reviews to 
Improve Organizational Learning. Joint Fire Science Program.  
http://www.firescience.gov/projects/10-1-05-1/project/10-1-05-1_final_report.pdf
Neary, D.G., Ryan, K.C., and DeBano, L.F. (eds.) 2005. Wildland Fire in Ecosystems: Effects of Fire 
on Soils and Water. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-42-vol.4. Ogden, UT: US Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 250 p.
National Wildfire Coordinating Group. 2018. Smoke Management Guide for Prescribed and Wildland Fire. 
NWCG, PMS 420-2. https://www.nwcg.gov/sites/default/files/publications/pms420-2.pdf
___. 2009. Guidance for Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy. National Interagency 
Fire Center. http://www.nifc.gov/policies/policies_documents/GIFWFMP.pdf
___. 2012. Glossary of Wildland Fire Terminology. National Wildfire Coordinating Group, PMS 205. 
https://www.nwcg.gov/glossary-of-wildland-fire-terminology
___. 2017a. Prescribed Fire Complexity Rating System Guide. Fuels Management Committee, National 
Wildfire Coordinating Group. http://www.nwcg.gov/pms/RxFire/complexity_analysis.pdf. PMS 424
___. 2017b. Interagency Prescribed Fire Planning and Implementation Procedures Guide.  NWCG, PMS 484. 
https://www.nwcg.gov/sites/default/files/publications/pms484.pdf
___. 2017c. Prescribed Fire Plan Template. NWCG, PMS 484-1. https://www.nwcg.gov/sites/default/files/
publications/pms484-1.docx
U.S. Department of Agriculture; U.S. Department of Interior. 2001. Review and Update of the 
1995 Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy. https://www.nifc.gov/PIO_bb/Policy/
FederalWildlandFireManagementPolicy_2001.pdf
___. 2009. Guidance for Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy. https://www.nifc.
gov/policies/policies_documents/GIFWFMP.pdf 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service; Department of the Interior, Office of Wildland Fire 
Coordination. 2011. A national cohesive wildland fire management strategy. Washington, DC: 
Wildland Fire Leadership Council. 43 p. 
U.S. Department of Interior, Office of Wildland Fire. 2017. Wildland Fire Management. Departmental 
Manual, Part 620.  https://elips.doi.gov/elips/0/fol/1854/Row1.aspx 
Viers, J.A. 2005. Smoke from Prescribed Burning. ERI White Paper: Issues in Forest Restoration. Ecological 
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 21p. 

12 
Ecological Restoration Institute
Intermountain West Frequent-Fire Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native species, 
structural characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological Restoration International 
defines ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an 
ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability… Restoration attempts to return an 
ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration International 2004).
Throughout the dry forests of the western United States, most ponderosa pine forests have been degraded 
during the last 150 years. Many ponderosa pine areas are now dominated by dense thickets of small trees, and 
lack their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible 
to damaging, stand-replacing fires and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests 
centers on reintroducing frequent, low-intensity surface fires—often after thinning dense stands—and 
reestablishing productive understory plant communities.
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, implementing, 
and monitoring ecological restoration of dry, frequent-fire forests in the Intermountain West. By allowing 
natural processes, such as fire, to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that 
provide ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The ERI Issues in Forest Restoration series provides overviews and policy recommendations derived from research 
and observations by the ERI and its partner organizations. While the ERI staff recognizes that every forest 
restoration is site specific, we feel that the information provided in the series may help decision-makers elsewhere.
This publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Service. The views and 
conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing 
the opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products does 
not constitute their endorsement by the United States Government or the ERI.

ERI—Issues in Forest Restoration
1. Forestlands Health and Carbon Sequestration: Strengthening the Case for Western Forest Restoration
2. Smoke from Prescribed Burning: Issues on Public Forestlands of the Western United States
3. Public Perceptions of Forest Restoration in the Southwest:  
A Synthesis of Selected Literature and Surveys
4. Integrating Ecological Restoration and Conservation Biology: A Case Study  
from Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
5. Communications between Forest Managers and Property Owners in Pine Flat, Arizona:  
A Case Study of Community Interactions in a High Fire Hazard Area
6. Wilderness Management and the Restoration of Fire: An Analysis of Laws and Regulations  
in Northern Arizona
7. Navigating the Motives and Mandates of Multiparty Monitoring
8. Forest Service Contracting: A Basic Guide for Restoration Practitioners
9. Case Study of Community Stewardship Success: The White Mountain Stewardship Contract
10. What to Expect from Collaboration in Natural Resource Management:  
A Research Synthesis for Practitioners
11. Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI) Biophysical Monitoring Workshop Report
12. Carbon Credits for Restored Western Forests?
13. Ecological Restoration as Economic Stimulus: A Regional Analysis
14. Exploring the Potential of Obtaining Carbon Credits for Restoration Activities on Navajo  
Tribal Forest Lands
15. Integrating Domestic and Wild Ungulate Grazing into Forest Restoration Plans at the Landscape Level 
16. Workforce Needs of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative Project: An Analysis
17. A Full Cost Accounting of the 2010 Schultz Fire
18. Forest Restoration Treatments: Their Effect on Wildland Fire Suppression Costs
19. The History of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative: 1980s–2010
20. Administrative and Legal Review Opportunities for Collaborative Groups
21. Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project: Creating Solutions through Community Partnerships
22. The Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI): The Role of Collaboration in Achieving Outcomes

P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
eri.nau.edu
1003338
