Review
Annotated Bibliography of the Global Literature on
the Secondary Transportation of Raw and
Comminuted Forest Products (2000–2015)
Anil Koirala 1,2 ID , Anil Raj Kizha 1,*, Cornelis F. De Hoop 3, Brian E. Roth 4 ID , Han-Sup Han 5 ID ,
Patrick Hiesl 6 ID , Dalia Abbas 7 ID , Shuva Gautam 8 ID , Srijana Baral 9, Steve Bick 10
and Kamalakanta Sahoo 11
1
School of Forest Resources, University of Maine, Orono, ME 04469, USA; anil.koirala@psu.edu
2
Department of Agricultural and Biological Engineering, Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, PA 16802, USA
3
Louisiana Forest Products Development Center, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA;
cdehoop@lsu.edu
4
Cooperative Forestry Research Unit, University of Maine, Orono, ME 04469, USA; brian.roth@maine.edu
5
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, USA;
Han-Sup.Han@nau.edu
6
Department of Forestry and Environmental Conservation, Clemson University, Clemson, SC 29634, USA;
phiesl@clemson.edu
7
Department of Environmental Science, American University, Washington, DC 20016, USA;
saleh@american.edu
8
College of Natural Resources, University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point, WI 54481, USA;
shuva.gautam@uwsp.edu
9
Warnell School of Forestry and Natural Resources, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA;
Srijana.Baral@uga.edu
10
Northeast Forest LLC, New York, Thendara, NY 13472, USA; steve@northeastforests.com
11
Forest Products Laboratory, US Forest Service, Madison, WI 53726, USA; ksahoo@fs.fed.us
*
Correspondence: anil.kizha@maine.edu; Tel.: +1-207-581-2581
Received: 10 June 2018; Accepted: 9 July 2018; Published: 10 July 2018


Abstract: Secondary transportation of raw and comminuted forest products is a major component
in forest harvesting operations in terms of economics, public perception, and safety. Consequently,
there is a substantial amount of literature on this topic. The existing literature has dealt with many
of the technical aspects of transportation with a majority of them focusing on improving supply
chain issues; however, there are only few speciﬁc to secondary transportation issues in general.
This annotated bibliography will help practitioners, researchers, and stakeholders gain a better
understanding of the existing literature from 2000 to 2015. To this end, we began by classifying the
selected literature into six themes: cost, roads and routes, trucking, efﬁciency and safety, other modes
of transportation, and supply chain and optimization. Woody biomass for bioenergy production was
the most researched forest product with respect to transportation. About one-third of the articles were
presented in the context of supply chain modeling and optimization. More than half of the studies
originated from Europe while the United States had the most publications for any given country.
Most articles (16) were published in 2013. Biomass and Bioenergy published the highest number of
articles (29) during the timeframe.
Keywords: forest biomass; timber harvest residue; supply chain; trucking; delivery; logging residue
Forests 2018, 9, 415; doi:10.3390/f9070415
www.mdpi.com/journal/forests

Forests 2018, 9, 415
2 of 28
1. Introduction
Transportation in forest operations can be broadly divided into two phases. The ﬁrst phase
involves moving wood from the stump to the roadside/landing sites, referred to as primary
transportation. The second phase involves the hauling of the processed forest products (sawlog,
pulpwood, or energy wood biomass) from the roadside/landing sites to the processing facilities,
referred to as secondary transportation [1]. Secondary transportation is considered to be one of the
most expensive elements in the harvesting operation, generally accounting for 30–50% of the total
cost, depending on the distance travelled and compared to the cost of the primary transportation [2–4].
Therefore, improvements in secondary transportation may yield signiﬁcant overall cost reductions.
Secondary transportation is predominantly road-based. Various factors inﬂuence the cost of
secondary transportation including—but not limited to—the road network (road types) and conditions
(infrastructure), cost of operating the truck, weight limitations, and hauling distance. Research
generally focuses on the transportation problem addressing one or some of these factors, but rarely
all at the same time. It cannot be expected that one research activity can look into all of these
factors because addressing each topic requires expertise in different domains. Nonetheless, having all
informational aspects on transportation integrated will be of great value to stakeholders.
The purpose of this study is to address this gap by proposing a classiﬁcation of a collection of
scientiﬁc literature and addressing several relevant topics in forest products secondary transportation.
It provides an overview of the current state of the art, and helps in identifying knowledge gaps that
require further attention. To this end, the objective of this article is to list the major ﬁndings from these
studies and assess the chronological development of forest products secondary transportation research
from 2000 to 2015.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Literature Review
The literature was searched using major online databases and library catalogs: CrossRef, Scopus,
Google Scholar, and Web of Science. The initial search started in November 2016 with three keywords:
“forest transportation”, “forest trucking”, and “wood supply chain”, which yielded 71 scientiﬁc
articles. After careful analysis of those articles, four more keywords, “forest optimization”, “biomass”,
“sawlogs”, and “forest roads” were used to gather more literature. Additionally, the reference section
of the previously-selected articles was also utilized for more speciﬁc search. A total of 169 scientiﬁc
articles (related to forest products secondary transportation) were identiﬁed as relevant to this process.
The four major journals with the highest publication frequency of related articles were selected and
every issue of those journals from year 2000 to 2015 was searched again (Table 1). These journals were
accessed through the University of Maine library resources from January to April 2016. A total of
369 volumes and issues of these four journals were assessed in order to include all information in these
four journals related to forest products transportation. A total of 131 articles were chosen as relevant
for the purpose of this review. The article search was limited to English-written scientiﬁc articles.
Table 1.
Peer-reviewed journals that published articles related to forest products secondary
transportation, 2000–2015.
Journal
Number of Publication
Biomass and Bioenergy
29
Croatian Journal of Forest Engineering
26
International Journal of Forest Engineering (Journal of
Forest Engineering before 2001)
25
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews
10
European Journal of Operational Research
3
Forest Policy and Economics
3
Transportation Research: Part A
2

Forests 2018, 9, 415
3 of 28
Table 1. Cont.
Journal
Number of Publication
European Journal of Forest Research
2
Canadian Journal of Forest Research
2
Journal of Cleaner Production
2
Western Journal of Applied Forestry
2
European Journal of Forest Engineering
2
Others (Journals with single publication) 1
23
Total
131
1 Publication details can be accessed from reference section.
2.2. Literature Categorization and Classiﬁcation
Based on the scope and objectives of articles identiﬁed, six major research themes emerged:
I.
Cost of transportation
II.
Roads and route planning
III.
Trucking characteristics
IV.
Efﬁciency and safety
V.
Other modes of transportation
VI.
Supply chain and optimization.
The classiﬁcation is intended to facilitate compilation and reporting. Understandably, some of the
themes overlapped. For example, there were several software and models which generated results that
could be included in Theme II—roads and route planning and VI—supply chain and optimizations.
Several articles dealt with more than one theme. Additionally, for minimizing ambiguity, no articles in
one theme have been repeated in another.
Theme I (cost) primarily dealt with articles focusing on ﬁnancial aspects of trucking operations.
The theme also included articles related to detailed time studies; strategies to minimize the overall
transportation costs; assessing the impacts of transportation distance on the ﬁnal cost of delivered
forest products; and evaluating the performance of transportation cost estimating software and
models. Theme II (roads and route planning), focused on every aspect of forest roads, including
engineering, planning, design, construction, maintenance, spatial modeling, and computer software.
Theme III (trucking characteristics) was speciﬁc to road transportation: truck size and conﬁguration,
speed at various road conditions, weight limits, payload enhancement measures, trucking performance,
and features of trailers.
Theme IV (efﬁciency and safety) dealt with fuel efﬁciency, log truck
accident analysis, social surveys with related stakeholders, evaluation of fuel consumption capacity,
and potential effects of forest road erosion on the supply chain.
Theme V (other modes of
transportation) focused on articles dealing with railways and water transportation. Theme VI (supply
chain and optimizations) included modelling supply chain in different regions, geospatial evaluations,
linear programming, strategic and tactical planning, optimization of supply chain, decision support
tools for wood procurement and management, and simulation of logistics models.
Each article was evaluated for country of study, objectives researched and major ﬁndings,
resulting in Table 2.
Table 2. Distribution of articles related to forest products secondary transportation based on the
geographic location of the study.
Region
Number of Articles
Europe
73
North America
43
Asia
8
Australia & New Zealand
3
Africa
2
South America
2

Forests 2018, 9, 415
4 of 28
3. Results
Out of the 131 articles reviewed, 127 were published in peer-reviewed scientiﬁc journals, three
in conference proceedings, and one was a cooperative extension article.
With more than 22%
publications, Biomass and Bioenergy published the highest number of articles related to the ﬁeld,
followed by the Croatian Journal of Forest Engineering (Table 1). On a regional basis, about 56% of the
research articles were published by authors based in Europe, followed by 33% from North America
(Table 2). However, the United States had the highest number of publications on a per country basis.
Several articles were authored by authors from multiple countries.
For the given period, the highest number of articles was published in 2013 (16 articles) followed by
2005 (15) (Figure 1). Hence, the interest seems to be growing. On average, eight articles related to forest
products transportation and supply chain were published per year from 2000 to 2015. Nearly 33% of
the reviews were related to supply chain logistics and optimization (Figure 2).
Figure 1. Distribution of articles related to forest products secondary transportation over the years of
publication (2000 to 2015).
Figure 2. Distribution of articles in forest products secondary transportation based on research themes.

Forests 2018, 9, 415
5 of 28
3.1. Theme I—Cost
There were 18 articles in this category, accounting for approximately 15% of the total articles
reviewed. An average of a little more than one article per year was published in this category.
A majority of the articles (more than 80%) were based on comminuted forest products, mainly wood
chips, logging, and industrial residues for bioenergy and biofuel production (Table 3). The greatest
number of publications (six articles) were based in the USA, followed by Sweden, Finland, and Austria.
3.2. Theme II—Roads and Route Planning
A total of 40 articles (about 31%) were categorized under this theme, averaging 2.5 articles
published per year. Similar to the Theme I, the greatest number of publications were from the
United States (12 articles) followed by Turkey, Croatia, Slovenia, Sweden, Iran, and Japan (Table 4).
Articles related to GIS (Geographic Information Systems/Studies) modeling and linear and mixed
integer programming to solve forest road planning problems were included in this theme instead of
Theme VI (supply chain and optimization). Similarly, for articles analyzing costs related to certain
aspects of forest roads (i.e., construction) were included in Theme II instead of Theme I (cost).

Forests 2018, 9, 415
6 of 28
Table 3. Published scientiﬁc articles handling the cost of transportation. The cost values mentioned reﬂects the actual value presented in the article.
Author(s)
Country
Wood Products *
Research Objective(s)
Major Finding(s) and/or Suggestions
Acuna et al. [5]
Australia
3
Demonstrated the beneﬁts of adjusting
efﬁciency and cost of trucking.
Model predicted a savings of 52% of costs in truck payload and 29%
in chipper utilization.
Aksoy et al. [6]
USA
4, 5
Assessed economic impacts of four different
types of bio-reﬁnery.
Average transportation distance was 52 km to the bio-reﬁnery plants.
Among different techniques evaluated simultaneous sacchariﬁcation
and fermentation (SSF) and direct spouted bed (DSB) gasiﬁcation
techniques were viable to conduct in terms of economy.
Frisk et al. [7]
Sweden
1, 2, 3
Used cost allocation method for allocating
transportation costs among forest companies.
Improved individual company-based planning saved about 5%
transportation cost while collaboration between companies saved
14% cost.
Graham et al. [8]
USA
3, 4
Estimated potential transportation costs of
energy feedstock in eleven US states.
Transportation cost was lowest in Iowa, North Dakota, and South
Dakota the highest was in South Carolina, Missouri, Georgia
and Alabama.
Grebner et al. [9]
USA
1, 2, 3
Excel-based program “Routechaser” to assess
the impacts of different variables on
transportation cost.
This tool was useful for establishing contract rates from timber
harvest units to markets.
Jones et al. [10]
USA
4
Analyzed ﬁnancial effects of changes in diesel
and delivered biomass price on transportation.
In case of lowest delivered biomass price ($32 ODT−1) and diesel
price ($0.05 L−1), the ﬁnancially viable volume was 28%; while only
6% was available with the highest diesel price ($1.32 L−1).
Junjinger et al. [11]
Sweden
4
Quantiﬁed cost savings in primary forest fuel
supply chain.
In forwarding and chipping major cost savings was obtained for
forest fuel supply chain.
Kizha et al. [3]
USA
4, 5
Identiﬁed potential biomass feedstock
available regionally based on
transportation cost.
Transportation cost zone within $20 ODT−1 had the highest potential
supply of woody biomass for the region.
Kurka et al. [12]
UK
3
Allocated biomass feedstock supply to
bioenergy plants and estimated
transportation costs.
Ten bioenergy plants could potentially produce 49 MW (megawatts)
and 129 MW of electrical and thermal energy respectively. Based on
this the transportation cost was calculated at ~$23 million year−1.
Möller and Nielsen [13]
Denmark
3
Estimated transportation costs.
Large energy plants with optimal road connections had higher costs
of fuel supply.
Paolotti et al. [14]
Italy
6
Compared and evaluated economic feasibility
of various transportation modes.
Road and water transport cost ranged between $19–120 ton−1 and
$73–88 ton−1, respectively.
Ranta and Rinne [15]
Finland
4
Proﬁtability and possible measures for
improving forest residue transportation.
Most cost-efﬁcient way to transport raw material was in the form of
bundles and most expensive was as loose residues. The difference
between options increased with increase in distance.
Rauch and Gronalt [16]
Austria
4
Impacts of increasing energy costs on forest
residue procurement costs.
20% increment in energy costs resulted in 7% increment in
procurement cost. Reducing the empty trips of trucks and trailers can
reduce procurement costs.

Forests 2018, 9, 415
7 of 28
Table 3. Cont.
Author(s)
Country
Wood Products *
Research Objective(s)
Major Finding(s) and/or Suggestions
Rauch et al. [17]
Austria
4
Cost gap between co-operative and
non-co-operative BSC (biomass
Supply Chain).
Collaboration between power plants reduced 23% transportation
costs and 26% transportation distance.
Spinelli et al. [18]
Italy and
USA
1, 2
Modelled transportation cost for short
rotation plantations.
Whole tree (WT) system proved to be cheaper in terms of
transportation than the cut-to-length (CTL) system. The pulp chips
delivered cost from WT was ~$21 GT−1 while it was $27–30 GT−1
from CTL.
Tahvanainen and Antilla [19]
Finland
3
Estimated costs of forest chips
procurement for long-distance transport.
For shorter distances (<60 km), trucking of loose residues and
end-facility comminution was most cost-effective while it was
roadside chipping with chip truck transportation, for longer
distances. For a distance range of 135–165 km, rail transportation
provided lower cost.
Yemshanov et al. [20]
Canada
4
Potential amount and ﬁnancial costs of
forest residue biomass supply.
Annual available biomass was about ~19.2–23.3 Tg year−1 and
16.5–20.0 Tg year−1. If residue extraction cost was decreased by 35%,
the residues availability would have increased by ~5.5 to 5.7 times at
$45 ODT−1 supply price and ~1.5 to 1.6 times at the $60 ODT−1
supply price.
Yoshioka et al. [21]
Japan
4
Examined the cost viability of transporting
logging residues.
Comparison between European countries and Japan showed that
there was need of a low-cost timber harvesting, transporting,
and comminution techniques in Japan.
* Type of wood products dealt in the article: sawlogs (1), pulpwood (2), wood chips (3), logging residue (4), sawmill residue (5), and wood pellets (6). ODT, oven dry ton; Tg year−1,
tera-gram per year.

Forests 2018, 9, 415
8 of 28
Table 4. Published scientiﬁc articles handling various aspects related to forest roads. The recommendation/ﬁndings are speciﬁc to the research/region and conditions
described in the article.
Authors
Countries
Objective(s)
Major Findings and/or Suggestions
Abeli et al. [22]
Tanzania
Addressed issues of road alignment and grades
on a gravel forest road maintenance costs.
Alignment and gradient of roads affected soil loss rate. Grades less than
6% and a radius more than 100 m provided fewer maintenance costs.
Akay and Sessions [23]
Turkey
Plan an alternative forest route from a software
(TRACER) to predict lowest cost in terms of
construction, maintenance and transportation.
Unit costs were $46 m−1 and $28 m−1, respectively. for two given
stations (A and B). Construction cost was the largest component,
followed by maintenance and transportation costs.
Akay et al. [24]
Turkey
Reviewed the evolution of software to design
forest roads.
Development of modern heuristics techniques such as “Tabu Search”,
“Threshold Accepting”, “Simulated Annealing”, “Genetic Algorithm”,
and their hybridization with traditional solution techniques into
meta-heuristic algorithms can offer opportunities for future research.
Aruga et al. [25]
USA
Optimized road alignments using the Dijkstra
shortest path method and cubic spline function.
The solution with a spline function was inferior compared to the
solution without it. Additional investigations using given functions
were recommended.
Beck and Sessions [26]
USA
Determining access of woods chip trailers in
forest roads utilizing Ant Colony optimization
and Breakeven analysis.
Forest transportation network that can accommodate larger trucks could
lower hauling costs. Feasibility of biomass operations were depended on
road modiﬁcation cost, transport volume, and transportation costs.
Beck et al. [27]
USA
Developing a novel algorithm using aerial
LiDAR for forest road extraction.
Comparing geometric variables from aerial and terrestrial LiDAR
datasets showed that the average difference in road width was 1.1 m,
while the slope differences of cut/ﬁll was minimum of 4%. In addition,
the difference in slope across road was only 2%.
Boston et al. [28]
USA
Discussed the potential economic gain in
construction of surface layer of roads by
improving subgrade.
Results from the study showed that a 34% saving in road aggregates cost
was possible with improvement in road subgrades.
Contreras et al. [29]
USA
Compared ant colony optimization (ACO)
meta-heuristic and mixed-integer programming
(MIP) to solve forest transportation
planning problems.
The solutions obtained from ACO were equal to or inferior to the MIP
solution. However, the ACO algorithm took less computational time
than the latter.
Contreras et al. [30]
USA
Developing a model to enhance earthwork
volume estimation for forest roads using digital
elevation model with high resolutions.
As the spacing of cross-section increased, the capability of the model to
capture differences in terrain decreased. Thus, the correctness of
earthwork volume estimation was low. As a result, short cross-section
spacing was favorable to improve accuracy in earthwork volume
estimation in the case of hilly and rugged terrain.
Demir [31]
Turkey
Analyzed forest road network system.
There was a need of ~201,000 km forest roads in Turkey. The anticipated
time to complete those planned road networks was about 20 years.

Forests 2018, 9, 415
9 of 28
Table 4. Cont.
Authors
Countries
Objective(s)
Major Findings and/or Suggestions
Devlin et al. [32]
Ireland
Comparing the existing timber transportation
routes from a central depot to other destinations
with GIS (Geographic Information System/Studies)
generated simulated routes.
The ﬁndings showed that the real GPS (Global Positioning System)
routes were not as same as the shortest route generated by the Network
Analyst Tool (NAT). Nevertheless, after manipulation of NAT the
similarity increased to more than 90%.
Ghaffarian and Sobhani [33]
Iran
Determining the best-ﬁt forest road network that
could minimize the total cost of road maintenance.
The data analysis in Network 2000 based on pre-existing forest road
network showed that the best solution can be achieved in the cost of
27.19 € m−3.
Ghajar et al. [34]
Iran
Demonstration of a procedure that incorporated
rock proportion for embankment construction in
forest roads.
This approach was useful to show the variability of rock proportion and
model excavation costs.
Greulich [35] (review paper)
USA
Analyzed the evolution of transportation network
in forest harvesting.
Theoretical basis for transportation networks in forest harvesting was
mainly developed by early European academics. From the 20th century,
this theory sustained its development in America. In the last 50 years,
there has been swift development in Europe and America, with Asia
also offering signiﬁcant contributions.
Gumus [36]
Turkey
Assessed the future use of forest road networks for
sustainable forestry.
The ﬁndings showed that most of the roads in the study area was in the
standard to fulﬁll sustainable forestry target. However, 20% of the roads
were in worse condition.
Gumus et al. [37]
Turkey
Developing a new road network planning
procedure and comparing it to pre-existing
networks for environmental impact
assessment (EIA).
More than 90% of the planned roads were in minimum negative impact
zone while only about 10% of the planned roads were in maximum risk
zone. The purposed criteria for future road development was 20 m ha−1.
Hernández-Díaz et al. [38]
Mexico
Assessing the impacts of forest roads on soil in a
timber harvesting area.
The level of ground along the truck ruts was decreased to about 38–58
mm in rainy season by run-off. Removal of some tertiary roads were
proposed for road density reduction. The expected soil loss reduction
could be 20% with this proposed plan.
Košir and Krˇc [39]
Slovenia
Presented the existing condition of forest road
design and construction in Slovenia and adopt
multi-criteria decision model to build new forest
roads.
Results showed that the terrain was suitable for the planning and
execution of forest roads construction. The model proposed could be
considered for future forest road construction in Slovenia.
Krˇc and Beguš [40]
Slovenia
Developed a model that can identify inaccessible
forests and helped in future forest roads planning.
There was still 210,385 ha of inaccessible forests. The construction of
758 km of new roads was planned at the national level to access some
parts of the inaccessible forests. The researcher believed that the model
could be used for different scenarios and for other regions in the world.

Forests 2018, 9, 415
10 of 28
Table 4. Cont.
Authors
Countries
Objective(s)
Major Findings and/or Suggestions
Lugo and Gucinski [41]
USA
Analyzed the function and effects of forest roads
on forested rural landscape.
The study suggested that a road ecosystem approach that incorporates
environmental gradient analysis should be used for planning and design
of forest roads.
Murphy and Stander [42]
USA
Developed a two-stage robust optimization
model to deal with the actual transportation
problems in forestry.
The results showed that the deterministic solution was unstable and
dependent on some degree of uncertainty, that the robust solution was
dependent on the variables used.
Najaﬁand Richards [43]
Iran and
Canada
Developed a model using mixed integer
programming to design a forest road system
including logging roads for trucking and access
spurs for skidding.
The model was able to reduce overall costs of road construction and
maintenance. High-quality solutions were obtained in considerably
less time.
Najaﬁet al. [44]
Iran
Developed a model that can evaluate the
efﬁciency of road network from the viewpoint
of cost.
The accepted network model had less environmental impacts, and the
costs of road networking were minimized.
Neveˇcerel et al. [45]
Croatia
Categorized forest roads by calculating the
trafﬁc loads and distance with GIS tools.
Designation of the forest roads by GPS and snap-back method offered a
comparatively efﬁcient technique. The ﬁndings from the trafﬁc load
examination suggested that the construction of the individual sections of
same forest road could be done differently.
Olsson [46]
Sweden
Mixed integer model (decision support system)
for strategic planning of road investments for
large areas focusing solely on gravel
road upgrading.
The study concluded that the all forest roads network should be
optimized simultaneously. Even if the study area included 440 roads, it
was expected that the approach could be useful for getting global
optimal solutions.
Olsson [47]
Sweden
Comparison of a solution from two-stage
stochastic model (SM) to optimize the
upgrading of a forest road network with that of
deterministic scenario analysis model (SAM).
The solutions obtained from SM and SAM were different. In fact, the
solution from SM model was 2.9% better than that of SAM.
Olsson and Lohmander [48]
Sweden
Optimized round wood transport and road
investments on the gravel road.
The solutions obtained were near to optimal for investment decisions for
gravel roads.
Pellegrini et al. [49]
Italy
Use of decision support system to prioritize the
maintenance of forest road network.
The ﬁndings suggested that the combined use of GIS tools and Analytic
Hierarchy Process techniques could give important decision regarding
forest road management. The priority ranking was made for road
maintenance based on actual conditions.
Pentek et al. [50]
Croatia
Analysis of the quality of existing forest road
network using GIS.
The analysis helped the forest managers to allocate resources efﬁciently
to speciﬁc forest areas. The overall relative openness of the selected
forest areas was 81.04%. The road network efﬁciency coefﬁcient obtained
from the analysis was 42.37%.

Forests 2018, 9, 415
11 of 28
Table 4. Cont.
Authors
Countries
Objective(s)
Major Findings and/or Suggestions
Pentek et al. [51]
Croatia
Analyzed and discussed the overall status of
forest roads in Croatia with focus on planned
openness, and average construction and
design cost.
An average of 272 and 319 km of lower and upper forest road layers
were constructed annually at an average cost of 118,134 and 135,020
Croatian Kuna km−1, respectively.
Péterfalvi et al. [52]
Hungary
Assessed the lime-stabilization effects on the
forest road pavement.
The bearing capacity of the lime stabilization was 500 MPa. For long
term performance, 25–35 cm of lime stabilization under the pavements
was considered good.
Potoˇcnik et al. [53]
Japan
Maintenance of forest road network in the
natural forest management conditions.
The main roads were maintained every year while the management
roads every 10 years, coinciding with the rotation year of
selection cutting.
Potoˇcnik et al. [54]
Slovenia
Analyzed trafﬁc load on forest roads due to
forest operations.
The cumulative trafﬁc load and hauled forest products quantity were
highest at the cross-section of forest roads and public roads while it was
lowest at the farthest point from public road.
Robek and Klun [55]
Slovenia
Innovations and trends in forest road
construction in Slovenia.
The study showed forest road network in Slovenia was not considered
optimal. It was becoming increasingly worn out, and the new
transportation technologies demand certain adaptations to be made in
the existing technical elements.
Saito et al. [56]
Japan
Examined a model that uses LiDAR data to
spontaneously design forest roads on shallow
landslides area.
The program that used a LiDAR-based digital terrain model could
minimize the earthwork costs while avoiding shallow landslide
risk areas.
Sessions and Boston [57]
USA
Determined optimal policies for road
aggregates management.
A mathematical model was suggested to determine optimal policies to
manage high quality durable rock aggregates resources.
Stückelberger et al. [58]
Switzerland
Estimated the life-cycle costs of forest roads.
By using location-speciﬁc slope gradients, costs reduced by 17% from
that of available practices. Nevertheless, when both slope gradient and
geotechnical formations were included, the costs decreased by 20%.
Tan [59]
Australia
Optimized internal forest road location.
A programming procedure integrated with a spatial database and
transportation network models were used to assist foresters in
determining the optimum location for a forest road.
Trzci´nski and Kaczmarzyk [60]
Poland
Evaluated the carrying capacity of forest roads
with slag and gravel pavements.
The carrying capacity of slag and gravel pavements was insufﬁcient.
The largest mean deformation module for gravel pavement was
123 MPa. The two-ply gravel pavements that was 25 cm in thickness was
only able to comply with the requirements of low trafﬁc intensity.

Forests 2018, 9, 415
12 of 28
3.3. Theme III—Trucking Characteristics
This section comprised of 14 articles which was about 11% of the total (Table 5). About 60% of
the studies were related to the transportation of sawlogs and pulpwood. A total of ﬁve studies were
carried out in the USA followed by four in Finland. Apart from trucking features, Theme III also
included topics such as GPS tracking systems, options for backhauling empty trucks, and a solution
for truck scheduling problems in forest operations.
3.4. Theme IV—Efﬁciency and Safety
There were 11 articles in this category contributing to 8% of total literature, with an average of
less than one article was published per year (Table 6).
3.5. Theme V—Other Modes of Transportation
Only ﬁve articles comprised this category which was the least of all categories (Table 7).
Even though this theme is associated with modes of transportation other than trucking, certain articles
involved trucking as internodal or intermediate transportation.
3.6. Theme VI—Supply Chain and Optimization
The supply chain logistics and optimization was the most studied topic related to forest products
transportation in the given timeline. There were 42 articles in this category with an average frequency
of 2.6 articles per year (Table 8). More than 70% of the studies were based on biomass, energy woods
and logging residues. The highest number of studies were carried out in Canada and the US with eight
articles each, followed by Sweden (six articles), and Finland and Greece (ﬁve articles each).

Forests 2018, 9, 415
13 of 28
Table 5. Published scientiﬁc articles handling various aspects related to forest trucking. The recommendations/ﬁndings are speciﬁc to the research/region and
conditions described in the article.
Authors
Countries
Wood Products *
Objectives
Major Finding(s) and/or Suggestions
Antonaide et al. [61]
Romania
1
Estimate maximum loading heights for
vehicles used in timber transportation.
The maximum truck load height for average conditions varied the
main characteristics of the loading-unloading equipment, as well as
the maximum allowable loads per axle.
Devlin and McDonnell [62]
Ireland
1
Evaluated the performance of real-time GPS
asset tracking systems for timber
hauling trucks.
The horizontal root mean square (HRMS) accuracy values were
2.55–2.47 m for public roads while, for forest road, the values were
27–41 m.
Han and Murphy [63]
USA
3
Modelled woody biomass truck
scheduling problem.
An optimization model was developed for transporting four types of
woody biomass. The model was signiﬁcantly improved by using
50-load order size within 18 s. The transportation costs and travel
time reduced by 18 and 15%, respectively.
Han et al. [64]
USA
4
Evaluate the economic feasibility of removing
hand-piled slash using a roll off trucking
system in mountainous terrains.
The overall cost to collect and haul hand-piled slash was $34 ODT−1.
The roll-off trucking system was found to be better for short hauling
distances because trucking costs signiﬁcantly increased with small
increases in distance.
Laitila and Väätäinen [65]
Finland
2
Evaluated the truck transportation
productivity for whole trees and
energy woods.
Whole-tree harvesting, chipping, and trucking near roadside landing
was the most cost-efﬁcient technique. The transportation
productivity of energy shortwood was higher than whole-tree.
Malinen et al. [66]
Finland
1, 2
Surveyed challenges related to timber trucking
in a changing operational environment.
Half of respondents thought that the proﬁtability of timber trucking
had decreased greatly. Results showed most inﬂuential infrastructure
factor affecting timber trucking was winter maintenance,
including removing snow and ice and anti-slip measures.
McDonald et al. [67]
USA
1, 2
Applying optimization techniques to reduce
the distance driven by log-truck.
The optimized route achieved a loaded-distance driven proportion of
66%, which was signiﬁcantly higher than the human-assigned routes.
This could save the ﬁrm up to 24,000 km of road per year.
Nurnimen and Hainonen [68]
Finland
1
Introduced time-consumption models for
general logs transportation in Finland.
The models included explanatory variables like driving distance,
number of log decks, log product and load volume. The models
showed optimal solution to calculate the cost and proﬁtability of
trucking activities.
Palander et al. [69]
Finland
3
Presented a backhauling model to minimize
empty travel phase of trucks while returning.
The results proved that the method was able to minimize the travel
empty route of log trucking.

Forests 2018, 9, 415
14 of 28
Table 5. Cont.
Authors
Countries
Wood Products *
Objectives
Major Finding(s) and/or Suggestions
Picchi and Eliasson [70]
Sweden
3
Evaluated the use and performance of
container handling chipper trucks (CCT).
The average productivity varied between 9.3 and 13.5 ODT PMH0
based on grapple choice. For CCT, a standard residue grapple proved
better. With wise planning and adjusting the number of container
trucks used, total waiting expenditures could be minimized.
Roscher et al [71]
Sweden
1, 2, 3
Examined transport patterns of trucks with
(ﬁrst group) or without the support (second
group) using mobile data systems (MDS).
Trucks with MDS attached were able to reach more destinations per
day than trucks without.
Shafer and Stuart [72]
USA
1, 2, 3
Developed a checklist for efﬁcient log trucking.
A guideline for efﬁcient timber trucking for the state of Virginia.
Spinelli et al. [73]
Europe
2
Tested a chipper truck performance in different
geographic conditions.
Productivity was from 13 to 19 tons green chips per hour with delays.
Fuel consumption was between 1.8 and 2.8 liter per ton of green
chips. Machine utilization was from 68 to 89%.
Thompson et al [74]
USA
2
Evaluated the transportation of in-wood
chipped biomass.
The larger trailers (94 m3) can accommodate 19% more volume than
conventional trailers (76 m3). However, it only increased the payload
by 10%. If used exclusively, larger trailers can reduce to six loads to
transport all chips from the site.
* Wood products: sawlogs (1); pulpwood (2); wood chips (3); and logging residue (4).

Forests 2018, 9, 415
15 of 28
Table 6. Published scientiﬁc articles handling various aspects related to efﬁciency in transportation. The recommendations/ﬁndings are speciﬁc to the research/region
and conditions described in the article.
Authors
Countries
Objectives
Major Finding(s) and/or Suggestions
Abbas et al. [75]
USA
Surveyed current forest operation capacity and its
supply potential for large scale startup industries.
The survey had 28% response rate. The study provided the new insight
to forest trucking in the region.
Arce et al. [76]
Brazil
Solved forest-level bucking optimization problem
by considering transportation costs.
There were two modules in the system: Cutting Pattern Generation
(CPG) and the Global Bucking Optimization (GBO). Apart from these
the biometrics, like tree height, taper, and volume, were also integrated
in the system for optimal solution.
Greene et al. [77]
USA
Analyzed log hauling vehicle accidents in
Georgia, USA.
Accidents per million tons of wood consumed had increased steadily
from 11 in 1991 to 19 in 2003.
Hall et al. [78]
New Zealand
Identiﬁed promising delivery systems of logging
residues to an energy plant and evaluate the
associated costs.
The cheapest system identiﬁed ranged from NZ$22–37 ODT−1 for
residues from the landing and NZ$29–42 per ODT for those collected
from the cutover.
Hedlinger et al. [79]
Sweden
Examined the service divergence potential of round
wood transport.
The results showed that the focus for the wood suppliers and
transporters was the mill service. The top ranked service focus was
“maintaining suitable stock level”, while the second ranked was
“delivery precision”.
Holzleitner et al. [80]
Austria
Analyzed time and fuel consumption in road
transport for round wood.
The transport distance from the forest to sawmill averaged 51 km.
The average share on forest roads within a route to the sawmill was 14%
with an average speed of 14 km per hour. Transport cost was € 11 m−3
for average load size of 25 m3. The average fuel consumption was
0.77 L km−1 of diesel.
Jerbi et al. [81]
Canada
Evaluated supply chain management policies in the
forest products industry using simulation
based framework.
The framework was based on two phases. The tactical phase was
supported by software called LogiLab. In the second phase, the user
evaluated this policy at the operational/execution level on combination
with execution policies, using a discrete events simulation supported by
Simio software.
Klvaˇc et al. [82]
Czech Republic
Evaluated fuel consumption by timber trucks.
The results showed that the fuel consumption of trucks decreased by
0.5 L m−3 by the use of new trucks and trailers during study period.
Rackley and Chung [83]
USA
Analyzed the effects of forest road erosion and
incorporated it on transportation planning.
The results indicated that by considering different environmental effects
in transportation plans, an alternative road networks could be made.
This can help reduce the loss of large amount of sediments.
Ranta and Corpinen [84]
Finland
Maximized the forest fuel supply availability to
power plants
The total availability of forest fuel to the CHP (combined heat and
power) plants was 7 TWh (terawatt hour(s)) at a maximum
transportation distance of 100 km.
Sikanen et al. [85]
Finland
Investigated an internet-based, general-purpose
logistics control system, using mobile terminals in
forest fuel chipping and transportation.
The management tool, Arbonaut Fleet Manager TM, was tailored for
forest fuel supply chain management and trailed for three months.
It was found that use of mobile handsets with GPS and map display
assisted in ﬁnding exact location of in-wood storage piles.

Forests 2018, 9, 415
16 of 28
Table 7. Published scientiﬁc articles handling various aspects related to other modes of primary transportation. The recommendation/ ﬁndings are speciﬁc to the
research/ region and conditions described in the article.
Authors
Countries
Wood Products *
Objectives
Major Finding(s) and/or Suggestions
Ackerman and Pulkki [86]
South Africa
2
Analyzed economic impact of secondary
intermediate transportation (SIT) of pulpwood.
The ﬁndings showed that the average annual penalty because of
maintaining SIT for South African forest industry was SA$4.32 million or
US $0.82 m−3. This showed the need of maintaining good quality forest
roads and eliminating the SIT system.
Asikainen [87]
Finland
1
Simulated barge transportation of wood from
forests to an island.
A new push barge system was compared to the available powered barge
system for wood transportation. Setting with three barges together gave
the lowest transportation costs when the distance was higher than
100 km. However, for shorter distance, the available system was cheaper.
Flodén and Williamsson [88]
Sweden
3
Evaluated the business models for sustainable
biofuel transport using intermodal transport.
Some of the key ﬁndings that can increase the potential of intermodal
transportation were increased cooperation, sharing of transport
resources and infrastructure, joint purchases, and others.
Gonzales et al. [89]
USA
3
Evaluate cost and productivity associated with
various mode of transportation; rail, road
and barge.
Barge transportation was the cheapest option for transporting densiﬁed
biomass feedstock from mid-west to southeast USA. Unit trains were the
cheapest mode for distance over 340 km, from mid-west to the west USA.
For shorter distances, trucking was the cheapest option.
Lautala et al. [90]
USA
3
Analyzed the role of railroads in multimodal
transportation in Michigan, USA.
Challenges associated with rail transportation of forest products were
short length of trip; many point of origins with limited shipping
volumes; difﬁculty to reach destination without rail to rail interchanges;
and lack of rail access.
* Wood products: sawlogs (1); pulpwood (2); biomass (3).

Forests 2018, 9, 415
17 of 28
Table 8. Published scientiﬁc articles handling various aspects related to forest products supply chains. The recommendations/ﬁndings are speciﬁc to the
research/region and conditions described in the article.
Authors
Countries
Wood Products *
Objectives
Major Finding(s) and/or Suggestions
Akhtari et al. [91]
Canada
3
Literature review on economic assessment of district energy
systems using forest biomass feedstock.
Bulk density showed the highest impact for the transportation cost and
choice of biomass type. Transportation cost contributed to 50% of the total
delivered costs.
Arabatzis et al. [92]
Greece
3, 5
Examined the uncertainty of demand in the biomass supply
chain (BSC).
The generated model can be used to minimize the total cost of operation,
including fuel wood transportation.
Asikainen [93]
Finland
1, 2, 3, 5
Analyzed the effects of integration of work tasks and supply
chains in wood harvesting.
At the operational level, integration enabled in improving cooperation
between the sawlog and biomass logging crews and ﬂeet.
Aydinel et al. [94]
Canada
1, 2, 3
Analyzed different options for a wood manufacturing
company for transportation of different forest products to
different customers.
Models were run, and the test results indicated the possibilities of cost
savings over the company’s current practices. The company further
customized the models. The approach resulted in real cost savings for
the company.
Beaudoin et al. [95]
Canada
1, 2, 3
Developed a detailed tactical model to support centralized
annual planning by an integrated forest company that may
own several mills, and allowed for wood exchanges
between companies.
The results showed that the purposed MIP approach could achieve 9%
proﬁt compared to deterministic model that uses average parameter value.
The sensitivity analysis showed that the accurate inventory of standing
trees and market conditions were the most important variables.
Cambero and Sowlati [96]
Canada
3
Reviewed studies focusing on the economic, social and
environmental aspects of forest BSC.
Most of the problems studied used mixed integer programming models.
The main objectives of the reviewed articles were to minimize biomass
supply chain cost and, to some extent, maximize proﬁt.
Carlsson and Rönnqvist [97]
Sweden
1, 2, 3
Developed a supply chain management model.
Five projects to improve supply chain were described. The models
provided better decision support. The major beneﬁt included objective
based discussions and decision “over the borders” between stakeholders.
Díaz-Yáñez et al. [98]
Europe
3
Reviewed the current procurement methods for wood chips.
The main source of wood chips in EU (European Union) was logging
residue which in future could be replaced by stumps and round wood.
With the development of novel technology, countries could improve the
efﬁciency of the supply.
Dumanli et al. [99]
Turkey
5
Investigated logical aspects of forest BSC.
Results showed that Turkey has good rail and road infrastructures to
transport and utilize its available biomass resources in coming future.
Eriksson et al. [100]
Sweden
3, 5
Evaluated numerous systems for stump wood transport to
minimize costs.
The results showed high variation in productivity and costs of different
systems. The system that utilized the self-loading truck was
proved efﬁcient.
Forsberg [101]
Sweden
5
Life cycle methods to analyze bioenergy transport.
The results showed that there was possibilities to transport biomass from
Scandinavian countries to Netherland without affecting the environmental
beneﬁts from it.
Frayret et al. [102]
Canada
1, 2, 3
Developing a new generic software to test forest products
distribution planning and scheduling systems.
The program presented signiﬁcant improvements in wood supply chain
than manual level of planning process.

Forests 2018, 9, 415
18 of 28
Table 8. Cont.
Authors
Countries
Wood Products *
Objectives
Major Finding(s) and/or Suggestions
Freppaz et al. [103]
Italy
3
Assessed the supply of forest biomass for thermal and
electric energy production.
The biomass resources available in the study area was split into subsections
of varying sizes. This system helped in determining and analyzing the cost
of harvesting and transporting of forest biomass for energy production.
Frombo et al. [104]
Italy
3
Detail description of strategic planning of woody
biomass logistics.
The GIS-based Environmental Decision Support System (EDSS) was able
to generate an optimal solution in terms harvesting and transportation.
Gautam et al. [105]
Canada
1, 2, 3
Analyzed scientiﬁc articles focusing on the improvement of
the agility of wood procurement systems (WPS).
The review identiﬁed opportunities to improve the agility of WPS.
The suggestion from the review was to focus on higher investments in
agility section to gain higher proﬁts in wood supply chain.
Gerasimov et al. [106]
Russia
4
Developed a GIS-based system to support planning of
shortwood transport in Russia.
The system showed an increase of 40% in the efﬁciency of shortwood
transportation. The system could be used for numerous purposes.
Gold and Seuring [107]
Germany
3, 5
Synthesized the information from scientiﬁc literatures that
covers issues of bioenergy production and BSC.
Most of the articles were from the Biomass and Bioenergy journal, whereas
the year with most publications was 2007. The primary focus was on the
system design for bioenergy production.
Gronalt and Rauch [108]
Austria
5
Designed a regional forest fuel supply network in Austria.
The overall supply chain cost decreases with reduction in distance.
The regional terminals were crucial for cost reduction. In order to obtain
an optimal supply network, the costs of transporting to terminals and to
plants should be considered.
Gunnarsson et al. [109]
Sweden
5
Mathematical model to analyze BSC.
Two modeling approaches were used. The heuristic method was two time
faster than “CPLEX 6.5” programming. The presented model could be
used for strategic and tactical planning of forest biomass supply chain.
Haartveit and Fjeld [110]
Norway and Sweden
1, 2, 3, 4
Using Wood Games (WG) approach to study the effects of
different components of supply chain on its performance.
The wood game (WG) approach was useful for ﬁnding out the challenges
associated with forest products supply chain.
Kanzian et al. [111]
Austria
5
Designed forest energy supply network using
multi-objective optimization.
The results showed that to minimize CO2 emissions, 30% of biomass
should be transported in chipped condition from the terminal, 50% in
chipped condition directly from the forest, and the remaining should be
transported in raw or solid form from forest to plant.
Kühmaier and Stampfer [112]
Austria
5
Developed a decision tool for managing energy
wood supply.
The cut-to-length and tree-length methods were more suitable than
whole-tree system. The comminution of wood was preferred at terminals
or plants rather than on forest roads.
Kurian et al. [113]
Canada
3
Reviewed the alternative logistical practices for important
ligno-cellulosic biomass feedstock.
Results showed that it was not economical to increase transportation
distance of biomass for its value addition. Involvement of locals in
biomass collection, and transportation could help to systemize the process.
Lautala et al. [114]
USA
3
Reviewed opportunities and challenges in designing BSC.
Important challenges were availability of data; lack of a mutual agenda;
and less integrated analysis.
Miao et al. [115]
USA
3
Reviewed equipment conﬁguration, regulations and
transportation costs of supplying biomass feedstock
for bioenergy.
At present, road transportation is the most used system for biomass
transport. The ﬁndings suggested to consider the use of intermodal system
(using more than one system together) in near future.

Forests 2018, 9, 415
19 of 28
Table 8. Cont.
Authors
Countries
Wood Products *
Objectives
Major Finding(s) and/or Suggestions
Nivala et al. [116]
Finland
5
Assessed the hauling of energy woods from forests to
power plants for longer distances.
Train-based system was cost efﬁcient than traditional trucking system.
The total cost of supply chain that used high-capacity transport (HCT)
vehicles of 68 and 76 tons was lower than the train-based system.
Rantala et al. [117]
Finland
6
Analyzed the cost and spatial information for long distance
seedling transportation.
Cost-effectiveness was improved by centralized transportation strategy
than decentralized transportation strategy. The cost saving observed was
from 13 to 37%, depending upon number of nurseries and other factors.
Rauch and Gronalt [118]
Austria
5
Suggested choice of spatial arrangement of terminal facility
in the forest fuel supply network.
A simulated increase made in the transportation cost of forest fuel depicted
that the presented model was stable for such increase up to 20–50%.
Ravula et al. [119]
USA
3
Simulated cotton logistics as a model for a forest biomass
transportation system.
The utilization factor of the transportation system improved to 99% by
implementing the new strategy.
Rentizelas et al. [120]
Greece
3
Compared three biomass storage techniques, in terms of
total supply chain cost.
The lowest cost storage system was the most efﬁcient solution.
However, it showed some health and safety risks.
Selkimäki et al. [121]
Finland and Sweden
3
Analyzed the trends in wood pellets supply chain logistics.
The transportation cost was lower because of the vicinity of wood pellet
plants to the source. Trucks were the primary means of transportation.
Shabani et al. [122]
Canada
3
Reviewed scientiﬁc research on deterministic and stochastic
mathematical models in BSC.
The focus of those studies was on the economic aspects of BSC. Topics like
environmental and social aspects should be considered in future studies.
Sharma et al. [123]
USA
3
Reviewed BSC design and modelling.
Approximately 41% of the work related to modelling of BSC was from
2011. Common network design for most of the models had biomass supply
sites, collection sites, and processing sites.
Stone et al. [124]
USA
3
Evaluated BSC and harvesting innovation activities among
logging contractors.
Extraordinary collaboration among the key players of BSC (landowners,
logging contractors, and biomass consuming facilities) was regarded
essential for innovations to enter the forest products industry.
Troncoso and Garrido [125]
Chile
1, 2, 3
Presented a mathematical model to solve problems related
to forestry logistics.
The validation process showed that the model was applicable to the real
world problems. The model was expected to enhance the capabilities of
forest companies.
Uusitalo [126]
Finland
1
Developed an outline for CTL (cut-to-length)-based wood
products logistics.
The future studies should focus more on improving harvesting type
classiﬁcation and available transportation systems.
Valenzuela et al. [127]
USA
1, 2, 3
Proposed a computer meta-heuristic model for scheduling
several silvicultural projects simultaneously.
A small size problem with ﬁve worksites, solutions could be obtained in
less than four minutes using the model. Larger problems with 20 worksites
took 30 min.
van Belle et al. [128]
Belgium
5
Presented a technique to create a wood-based supply chain
for power plants by taking into account of different
economic, ﬁnancial and resources constraints.
The total available wood resources in the study area was 400,000 dry tons
per year. The capital cost for equipment ranged from 45,860 to 545,366
Euros. The productivity of high cost system was 105 Euro per dry ton
while it was only 31 Euro for the least expensive system.
Van Dyken et al. [129]
Norway
3
Developed a linear mixed-integer models for biomass
supply chains.
A linear model for biomass supply chain was developed and tested for
case study. The model presented in the study was regarded as a baseline
model by researchers for future studies and development.

Forests 2018, 9, 415
20 of 28
Table 8. Cont.
Authors
Countries
Wood Products *
Objectives
Major Finding(s) and/or Suggestions
Windisch et al. [130]
Germany
1, 5
Integrated business process modeling and engineering
approaches to an integrated forest products and biomass
supply chain in Germany.
This new approach of redesigning the available business process had
potential of saving 20–39% of total costs. The study proved that a very
simple business approach could achieve substantial savings.
Wolfsmayr and Rauch [131]
Austria
5
Investigated the key issues on the transportation of primary
forest fuel to heat and/or power plants.
Key challenges were: transportation modes, terminal types, and BSC
management. The rail system and water transportation were
recommended for longer distances because of low cost and low
CO2 emissions.
Zhang et al. [132]
USA
3
Developed simulation model for biomass supply chain.
The model proved to be important for BSC management including
transportation logistics and other factors.
* Wood products: sawlogs and timber (1); pulpwood (2); biomass (3); short woods (4); bioenergy and forest fuels (5); seedlings (6).

Forests 2018, 9, 415
21 of 28
4. Discussion
The collection and classiﬁcation of scientiﬁc literature on secondary forest products’ transportation
found that more than half of the studies addressed the transportation of woody biomass from forests
and industrial residues for bioenergy generation. Generally, woody biomass generated from forest
operations and forest products industries are regarded as low-value products compared to the primary
forest products, such as sawlogs and pulpwood. This raises a question as to why the frequency of
the scientiﬁc studies was higher for transportation of low-value biomass. Woody biomass constitutes
forest residues with low bulk density that are not economically feasible to transport in the raw form.
In regions without a demand for biomass, forest residues are generally left at the harvesting site [133].
Much of the reasoning for this comes from the funding sources for research. Empirical evidence
tells us that most research funding comes from government agencies, as opposed to direct industry
input, and government policies lately have been focused more upon biomass than high-value forest
products. Much of this is driven by interests in atmospheric carbon issues and in the reduction of
hazardous forest ﬁre fuels.
Several governments have supported logistics research on national or regional grounds,
substantiating the signiﬁcance of the topic. For example, the United States has published the Billion-ton
Report which focuses on the holistic nature of logistics from a utilization perspective [134]. Even though
the results derived from these studies can be helpful in acquiring regional information, they should
still be used with caution for local research. The primary constraint in adopting these results lies in
the variation of multiple factors, including policies, road conditions, vehicles utilized, biomass yield,
transportation distance, and social aspects of the region. To a large extent, on the ground research is
also being conducted by the forest products industries; however, this knowledge remains conﬁdential
due to the inter-competition within the industry.
An important outcome of analyzing the literature was to assess the possibilities of implementing
strategies developed or applied in other regions to any given situation. Such approaches will be
crucial to policymakers, natural resource managers, and the forest product industry for the continual
improvement of the forest products supply chain. Even though abundant studies have been conducted
on the different themes discussed in the article, there was still a dearth of knowledge on the social
aspects of logistics [135]. These opinions from the stakeholders, including public, foresters, landowners,
loggers, truck drivers, and policymakers, are critical in terms of actual implementation of any research.
Another gap in the knowledge base is the lack of connection between the engineering advancements
in modern trucks and its application in forestry. There was limited scientiﬁc research conducted
on the productivity of different trucking systems (based on the products hauled) on distinct road
conditions. This aspect is a crucial input for developing accurate logistic models. Moreover, it may
not be either practical or cost effective to perform experiments to quantify transport performance.
Therefore, discrete-event simulation models for biomass supply logistics can be an inexpensive tool
to estimate transport cost and its performance. With the integration of Geographic Information
Systems, biomass logistics simulation models can provide more accurate and reliable information
regarding transport cost and identify bottlenecks. Other than cost, biomass transportation also affects
the environment (i.e., greenhouse gas emissions, forest ecology, wildlife, etc.) and social aspects of
society (job creation, fatal accidents, trafﬁc congestion, etc.), which requires further study.
On a regional basis, a higher number of studies were published from Europe, followed by North
America and Asia. This high number of articles from Europe can be attributed to the policies favoring
biomass utilization. While transportation cost is considered to be one of the major limiting factors
for biomass utilization, the feasibility also depends heavily on favorable policies. Country-wise, USA
had the highest number of publications, which could be due to the large area of managed timberland,
and a developed economy which sustains a high level of research.
The Biomass and Bioenergy journal published the highest number of articles on the subject.
This is related to the higher number of studies focusing on the transportation of forest residues.
Forest products transportation is an important component of forest engineering, thus, there was

Forests 2018, 9, 415
22 of 28
a signiﬁcant number of articles in journals like the Croatian Journal of Forest Engineering and the
International Journal of Forest Engineering.
Two of the most studied research topics on forest products transportation were supply chain
models and forest roads. Many site- and region-speciﬁc optimization and supply chain models have
been tested and presented, which increased the number of publications. Similarly, forest roads are
crucial for hauling wood materials from harvesting sites to the markets. Construction and maintenance
of roads requires huge amount of investment. In this study, there were only 14 articles directly related
to trucking characteristics, however, most of the other articles (dealt with in the study) also discussed
trucking in many different ways.
Overall, the results indicated a need for more research on increasing the efﬁciency of transportation
systems, speciﬁcally trucking. Except for one study conducted in Finland, there was no research
focusing on the overall challenges facing the forest trucking industry as a whole [66]. The cost of
transportation is also another major topic that needs to be addressed in the future.
5. Conclusions
Regardless of the categorization into different research themes, the main aim of all of the collected
articles in this study was to address the challenges faced by the secondary transportation of forest
products. Major details on each article, including research location, forest products dealt with,
primary objectives, and key ﬁndings related to transportation, were presented in tabular format.
This review is expected to help researchers by summarizing prior studies on forest transportation.
It will also serve as a repository for the strategies implemented for addressing distinct challenges.
This could eventually help in assessing the suitability of these strategies for speciﬁc on-the-ground
situations.
The variabilities and uncertainties for the forest biomass transportation cost were
due to the variability of input factors, such as biomass yield, transport distance, road conditions,
vehicle utilization, etc. More research is required in the area of the development of integrated logistics
models to provide site-speciﬁc transportation costs and its performance. The review is also expected to
provide insight on the details that are lacking in this sector and show the way ahead for future research
and innovation. This article is based on literature collection and assortment and, thus, should not be
regarded as a critical literature synthesis article.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization of this article was done by A.K. and A.R.K.; methodology, data analysis,
and manuscript preparation for this article was primarily done by A.K.; A.K., A.R.K., C.F.D.H., B.E.R., H-S.H.,
P.H., D.A., S.G., S.B. (Srijana Baral), S.B. (Steve Bick) and K.S. contributed to editing and partially to data collection;
and project administration and funding acquisition for the study was done by A.R.K.
Funding: Maine Agricultural and Forest Experiment Station Publication Number 3610. This project was supported
by the USDA National Institute of Food and Agriculture, McIntire-Stennis project number #ME041621 through
the Maine Agricultural and Forest Experiment Station.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. The funders had no role in the design of the
study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to
publish the results.
Abbreviations
BSC
Biomass Supply Chains
CHP
Combined Heat and Power
CJFE
Croatian Journal of Forest Engineering
CTL
Cut-to-length
EU
European Union
GIS
Geographic Information System/Studies
GT
Green Ton
IJFE
International Journal of Forest Engineering
Km
Kilometer
L
Liter
m
Meter
MPa
Megapascals

Forests 2018, 9, 415
23 of 28
MW
Mega Watts
ODT
Oven Dry Ton
PMH
Productive Machine Hour
Tg year−1
Tera-gram per year
TWh
Terawatt Hour(s)
WPS
Wood Procurement System
WT
Whole-tree
US/USA
United States of America
References
1.
Pentek, T.; Poršinsky, T. Forest transportation systems as a key factor in quality management of forest
ecosystems. In Forest Ecosystems—More Than Just Trees; Blanco, J.A., Lo, Y.H., Eds.; InTech: Rijeka, Croatia,
2012; pp. 433–464.
2.
Hachemi, N.E.; Gendreau, M.; Rousseau, L.-M. A heuristic to solve the synchronized log-truck scheduling
problem. Comput. Oper. Res. 2013, 40, 666–673. [CrossRef]
3.
Kizha, A.R.; Han, H.-S.; Montgomery, T.; Hohl, A. Biomass power plant feedstock procurement: Modeling
transportation cost zones and the potential for competition. Calif. Agric. 2015, 69, 184–190. [CrossRef]
4.
Koirala, A.; Kizha, A.R.; Roth, B. Forest trucking industry in Maine: A review on challenges and resolutions.
In Proceedings of the 39th Annual Meeting of the Council on Forest Engineering, Vancouver, BC, Canada,
19–21 September 2016.
5.
Acuna, M.; Mirowski, L.; Ghaffariyan, M.R.; Brown, M. Optimising transport efﬁciency and costs in
Australian wood chipping operations. Biomass Bioenergy 2012, 46, 291–300. [CrossRef]
6.
Aksoy, B.; Cullinan, H.; Webster, D.; Gue, K.; Sukumaran, S.; Eden, M.; Sammons, N., Jr. Woody biomass
and mill waste utilization opportunities in Alabama: Transportation cost minimization, optimum facility
location, economic feasibility, and impact. Environ. Prog. Sustain. Energy 2011, 30, 720–732. [CrossRef]
7.
Frisk, M.; Göthe-Lundgren, M.; Jörnsten, K.; Rönnqvist, M. Cost allocation in collaborative forest
transportation. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 2010, 205, 448–458. [CrossRef]
8.
Graham, R.L.; English, B.C.; Noon, C.E. A geographic information system-based modeling system for
evaluating the cost of delivered energy crop feedstock. Biomass Bioenergy 2000, 18, 309–329. [CrossRef]
9.
Grebner, D.L.; Grace, L.A.; Stuart, W.; Gilliland, D.P. A practical framework for evaluating hauling costs.
Int. J. For. Eng. 2005, 16, 115–128.
10.
Jones, G.; Loefﬂer, D.; Butler, E.; Hummel, S.; Chung, W. The ﬁnancial feasibility of delivering forest treatment
residues to bioenergy facilities over a range of diesel fuel and delivered biomass prices. Biomass Bioenergy
2013, 48, 171–180. [CrossRef]
11.
Junginger, M.; Faaij, A.; Björheden, R.; Turkenburg, W.C. Technological learning and cost reductions in wood
fuel supply chains in Sweden. Biomass Bioenergy 2005, 29, 399–418. [CrossRef]
12.
Kurka, T.; Jefferies, C.; Blackwood, D. GIS-based location suitability of decentralized, medium scale bioenergy
developments to estimate transport CO2 emissions and costs. Biomass Bioenergy 2012, 46, 366–379. [CrossRef]
13.
Möller, B.; Nielsen, P.S. Analysing transport costs of Danish forest wood chip resources by means of
continuous cost surfaces. Biomass Bioenergy 2007, 31, 291–298. [CrossRef]
14.
Paolotti, L.; Martino, G.; Marchini, A.; Pascolini, R.; Boggia, A. Economic and environmental evaluation of
transporting imported pellet: A case study. Biomass Bioenergy 2015, 83, 340–353. [CrossRef]
15.
Ranta, T.;
Rinne, S. The proﬁtability of transporting uncomminuted raw materials in Finland.
Biomass Bioenergy 2006, 30, 231–237. [CrossRef]
16.
Rauch, P.; Gronalt, M. The effects of rising energy costs and transportation mode mix on forest fuel
procurement costs. Biomass Bioenergy 2011, 35, 690–699. [CrossRef]
17.
Rauch, P.; Gronalt, M.; Hirsch, P. Co-operative forest fuel procurement strategy and its saving effects on
overall transportation costs. Scand. J. For. Res. 2010, 25, 251–261. [CrossRef]
18.
Spinelli, R.; Ward, S.M.; Owende, P.M. A harvest and transport cost model for Eucalyptus spp. fast-growing
short rotation plantations. Biomass Bioenergy 2009, 33, 1265–1270. [CrossRef]
19.
Tahvanainen, T.; Anttila, P. Supply chain cost analysis of long-distance transportation of energy wood in
Finland. Biomass Bioenergy 2011, 35, 3360–3375. [CrossRef]

Forests 2018, 9, 415
24 of 28
20.
Yemshanov, D.; McKenney, D.W.; Fraleigh, S.; McConkey, B.; Huffman, T.; Smith, S. Cost estimates of post
harvest forest biomass supply for Canada. Biomass Bioenergy 2014, 69, 80–94. [CrossRef]
21.
Yoshioka, T.; Aruga, K.; Nitami, T.; Sakai, H.; Kobayashi, H. A case study on the costs and the
fuel consumption of harvesting, transporting, and chipping chains for logging residues in Japan.
Biomass Bioenergy 2006, 30, 342–348. [CrossRef]
22.
Abeli, W.S.; Shemwetta, D.T.; Meiludie, R.O.; Kachwele, M. Road alignment and gradient issues in the
maintenance of logging roads in Tanzania. J. For. Eng. 2000, 11, 15–21.
23.
Akay, A.E.; Sessions, J. Applying the decision support system, TRACER, to forest road design. West. J.
Appl. For. 2005, 20, 184–191.
24.
Akay, A.E.; Boston, K.; Sessions, J. The evolution of computer-aided road design systems. Int. J. For. Eng.
2005, 16, 73–79.
25.
Aruga, K.; Tasaka, T.; Sessions, J.; Miyata, E.S. Tabu search optimization of forest road alignments combined
with shortest paths and cubic splines. Croat. J. For. Eng. 2006, 27, 37–47.
26.
Beck, S.; Sessions, J. Forest road access decisions for woods chip trailers using Ant Colony Optimization and
breakeven analysis. Croat. J. For. Eng. 2013, 34, 201–215.
27.
Beck, S.J.C.; Olsen, M.J.; Sessions, J.; Wing, M.G. Automated Extraction of Forest Road Network Geometry
from Aerial LiDAR. Eur. J. For. Eng. 2015, 1, 21–33.
28.
Boston, K.; Pyles, M.; Bord, A. Compaction of forest roads in Northwestern Oregon–room for improvement.
Int. J. For. Eng. 2008, 19, 24–28.
29.
Contreras, M.A.; Chung, W.; Jones, G. Applying ant colony optimization metaheuristic to solve forest
transportation planning problems with side constraints. Can. J. For. Res. 2008, 38, 2896–2910. [CrossRef]
30.
Contreras, M.A.; Aracena, P.; Chung, W. Improving accuracy in earthwork volume estimation for proposed
forest roads using a high-resolution digital elevation model. Croat. J. For. Eng. 2012, 33, 125–142.
31.
Demir, M. Impacts, management and functional planning criterion of forest road network system in Turkey.
Transp. Res. Part A Policy Pract. 2007, 41, 56–68. [CrossRef]
32.
Devlin, G.J.; McDonnell, K.; Ward, S. Timber haulage routing in Ireland: An analysis using GIS and GPS.
J. Transp. Geogr. 2008, 16, 63–72. [CrossRef]
33.
Ghaffarian, M.R.; Sobhani, H. Optimization of an existing forest road network using Network 2000. Croat. J.
For. Eng. 2007, 28, 185–193.
34.
Ghajar, I.; Najaﬁ, A.; Torabi, S.A.; Khamehchiyan, M.; Boston, K. An adaptive network-based fuzzy inference
system for rock share estimation in forest road construction. Croat. J. For. Eng. 2012, 33, 313–328.
35.
Greulich, F. Transportation networks in forest harvesting: Early development of the theory. In Proceedings
of the International Seminar on New Roles of Plantation Forestry Requiring A ppropriate Tending and
Harvesting Operations, Tokyo, Japan, 29 September–5 October 2003.
36.
Gumus, S. Evaluation of forest road networks located in Karadeniz Technical University Research and
Practice Forest. Eur. J. For. Eng. 2015, 1, 15–20.
37.
Gumus, S.; Acar, H.H.; Toksoy, D. Functional forest road network planning by consideration of environmental
impact assessment for wood harvesting. Environ. Monit. Assess. 2008, 142, 109–116. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38.
Hernández-Díaz, C.; Soto-Cervantes, J.; Corral-Rivas, J.; Montiel-Antuna, E.; Alvarado, R.; Goche-Télles, R.
Impacts of Forest Roads on Soil in a Timber Harvesting Area in Northwestern Mexico (a Case Study). Croat. J.
For. Eng. 2015, 36, 259–267.
39.
Košir, B.; Krˇc, J. Where to Place and Build Forest Roads—Experience From the Model. J. For. Eng. 2000,
11, 7–19.
40.
Krˇc, J.; Beguš, J. Planning Forest Opening with Forest Roads. Croat. J. For. Eng. 2013, 34, 217–228.
41.
Lugo, A.E.; Gucinski, H. Function, effects, and management of forest roads. For. Ecol. Manag. 2000,
133, 249–262. [CrossRef]
42.
Murphy, G.; Stander, H. Robust optimisation of forest transportation networks: A case study. South. Hemisph.
For. J. 2007, 69, 117–123. [CrossRef]
43.
Najaﬁ, A.; Richards, E.W. Designing a forest road network using mixed integer programming. Croat. J.
For. Eng. 2013, 34, 17–30.
44.
Najaﬁ, A.; Sobhani, H.; Saeed, A.; Makhdom, M.; Mohajer, M.M. Planning and assessment of alternative
forest road and skidding networks. Croat. J. For. Eng. 2008, 29, 63–73.

Forests 2018, 9, 415
25 of 28
45.
Neveˇcerel, H.; Pentek, T.; Piˇcman, D.; Stankic, I. Trafﬁc load of forest roads as a criterion for their
categorization—GIS analysis. Croat. J. For. Eng. 2007, 28, 27–38.
46.
Olsson, L. Road investment scenarios in Northern Sweden. For. Policy Econ. 2005, 7, 615–623. [CrossRef]
47.
Olsson, L. Optimal upgrading of forest road networks: Scenario analysis vs.
stochastic modelling.
For. Policy Econ. 2007, 9, 1071–1078. [CrossRef]
48.
Olsson, L.; Lohmander, P. Optimal forest transportation with respect to road investments. For. Policy Econ.
2005, 7, 369–379. [CrossRef]
49.
Pellegrini, M.; Grigolato, S.; Cavalli, R. Spatial multi-criteria decision process to deﬁne maintenance priorities
of forest road network: An application in the Italian alpine region. Croat. J. For. Eng. 2013, 34, 31–42.
50.
Pentek, T.; Piˇcman, D.; Potoˇcnik, I.; Dvorsˇcak, P.; Neveˇcerel, H. Analysis of an existing forest road network.
Croat. J. For. Eng. 2005, 26, 39–50.
51.
Pentek, T.; Neveˇcerel, H.; Piˇcman, D.; Poršinsky, T. Forest road network in the Republic of Croatia—Status
and perspectives. Croat. J. For. Eng. 2007, 28, 93–106.
52.
Péterfalvi, J.; Primusz, P.; Markó, G.; Kisfaludi, B.; Kosztka, M. Evaluation of the effect of lime-stabilized
subgrade on the performance of an experimental road pavement. Croat. J. For. Eng. 2015, 36, 269–282.
53.
Potoˇcnik, I.; Yoshioka, T.; Miyamoto, Y.; Igarashi, H.; Sakai, H. Maintenance of forest road network by natural
forest management in Tokyo University Forest in Hokkaido. Croat. J. For. Eng. 2005, 26, 71–78.
54.
Potoˇcnik, I.; Pentek, T.; Piˇcman, D. Impact of trafﬁc characteristics on forest roads due to forest management.
Croat. J. For. Eng. 2005, 26, 51–57.
55.
Robek, R.; Klun, J. Recent developments in forest trafﬁc way construction in Slovenia. Croat. J. For. Eng. 2007,
28, 83–91.
56.
Saito, M.; Goshima, M.; Aruga, K.; Matsue, K.; Shuin, Y.; Tasaka, T. Study of automatic forest road design
model considering shallow landslides with LiDAR data of Funyu Experimental Forest. Croat. J. For. Eng.
2013, 34, 1–15.
57.
Sessions, J.; Boston, K.; Thoreson, R.; Mills, K. Optimal policies for managing aggregate resources on
temporary forest roads. West. J. Appl. For. 2006, 21, 207–216.
58.
Stückelberger, J.A.; Heinimann, H.R.; Burlet, E.C. Modeling spatial variability in the life-cycle costs of
low-volume forest roads. Eur. J. For. Res. 2006, 125, 377–390. [CrossRef]
59.
Tan, J. Application of dynamic programming to optimum location of a forest road. J. For. Eng. 2000, 11, 33–42.
60.
Trzcinski, G.; Kaczmarzyk, S. Estimation of carrying capacity of slag and gravel forest road pavements.
Croat. J. For. Eng. 2006, 27, 27–36.
61.
Antoniade, C.; ¸Slincu, C.; Stan, C.; Ciobanu, V.; ¸Stefan, V. Maximum loading heights for heavy vehicles used
in timber transportation. Bull. Transilv. Univ. Bra¸sov. Ser. II–For. Wood Ind. Agric. Food Eng. 2012, 5, 7–12.
62.
Devlin, G.J.; McDonnell, K. Performance accuracy of real-time GPS asset tracking systems for timber haulage
trucks travelling on both internal forest road and public road networks. Int. J. For. Eng. 2009, 20, 45–49.
63.
Han, S.-K.; Murphy, G.E. Solving a woody biomass truck scheduling problem for a transport company in
Western Oregon, USA. Biomass Bioenergy 2012, 44, 47–55. [CrossRef]
64.
Han, H.-S.; Halbrook, J.; Pan, F.; Salazar, L. Economic evaluation of a roll-off trucking system removing forest
biomass resulting from shaded fuelbreak treatments. Biomass Bioenergy 2010, 34, 1006–1016. [CrossRef]
65.
Laitila, J.; Väätäinen, K. Truck transportation and chipping productivity of whole trees and delimbed energy
wood in Finland. Croat. J. For. Eng. 2012, 33, 199–210.
66.
Malinen, J.; Nousiainen, V.; Palojarvi, K.; Palander, T. Prospects and challenges of timber trucking in a
changing operational environment in Finland. Croat. J. For. Eng. 2014, 35, 91–100.
67.
McDonald, T.P.; Haridass, K.; Valenzuela, J.; Gallagher, T.V.; Smidt, M.F. Savings in distance driven from
optimization of coordinated trucking. Int. J. For. Eng. 2013, 24, 31–41. [CrossRef]
68.
Nurminen, T.; Heinonen, J. Characteristics and time consumption of timber trucking in Finland. Silva Fenn.
2007, 41, 471–487. [CrossRef]
69.
Palander, T.; Väätäinen, J.; Laukkanen, S.; Malinen, J. Modeling backhauling on Finnish energy-wood
network using minimizing of empty routes. Int. J. For. Eng. 2004, 15, 79–84.
70.
Picchi, G.; Eliasson, L. Chip truck utilization for a container handling chipper truck when chipping logging
residues and the effect of two grapple types on chipping efﬁciency. Int. J. For. Eng. 2015, 26, 203–211.
71.
Roscher, M.; Fjeld, D.; Parklund, T. Spatial patterns of round wood transport associated with mobile data
systems in Sweden. Int. J. For. Eng. 2004, 15, 53–59.

Forests 2018, 9, 415
26 of 28
72.
Shaffer, R.M.; Stuart, W.B. A Checklist for Efﬁcient Log Trucking. Available online: https://vtechworks.lib.
vt.edu/bitstream/handle/10919/54904/420-094.pdf?sequence=1 (accessed on 9 June 2018).
73.
Spinelli, R.; De Francesco, F.; Eliasson, L.; Jessup, E.; Magagnotti, N. An agile chipper truck for
space-constrained operations. Biomass Bioenergy 2015, 81, 137–143. [CrossRef]
74.
Thompson, J.D.; Klepac, J. Trucking characteristics for an in-woods biomass chipping operation.
In Proceedings of the 35th Council on Forest Engineering Annual Meeting, New Bern, NC, USA,
9–12 September 2012.
75.
Abbas, D.; Handler, R.; Hartsough, B.; Dykstra, D.; Lautala, P.; Hembroff, L. A survey analysis of forest
harvesting and transportation operations in Michigan. Croat. J. For. Eng. 2014, 35, 179–192.
76.
Arce, J.E.; Carnieri, C.; Sanquetta, C.R.; Filho, A.F. A forest-level bucking optimization system that considers
customer’s demand and transportation costs. For. Sci. 2002, 48, 492–503.
77.
Greene, W.D.; Baker, S.A.; Lowrimore, T. Analysis of Log Hauling Vehicle Accidents in the State of Georgia,
USA, 1988–2004. Int. J. For. Eng. 2007, 18, 52–57.
78.
Hall, P.; Gigler, J.K.; Sims, R.E.H. Delivery systems of forest arisings for energy production in New Zealand.
Biomass Bioenergy 2001, 21, 391–399. [CrossRef]
79.
Hedlinger, C.; Nilsson, B.; Fjeld, D. Service divergence in swedish round wood transport. Int. J. For. Eng.
2005, 16, 153–166.
80.
Holzleitner, F.; Kanzian, C.; Stampfer, K. Analyzing time and fuel consumption in road transport of round
wood with an onboard ﬂeet manager. Eur. J. For. Res. 2011, 130, 293–301. [CrossRef]
81.
Jerbi, W.; Gaudreault, J.; D’Amours, S.; Nourelfath, M.; Lemieux, S.; Marier, P.; Bouchard, M.
Optimization/simulation-based framework for the evaluation of supply chain management policies in
the forest product industry. In Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man,
and Cybernetics (SMC), Seoul, Korea, 14–17 Octber 2012; pp. 1742–1748.
82.
Klvaˇc, R.; Kolaˇrík, J.; Volná, M.; Drápela, K. Fuel consumption in timber haulage. Croat. J. For. Eng. 2013,
34, 229–240.
83.
Rackley, J.; Chung, W. Incorporating forest road erosion into forest resource transportation planning: A case
study in the Mica Creek Watershed in northern Idaho. Trans. ASAE (Am. Soc. Agric. Eng.) 2008, 51, 115–127.
[CrossRef]
84.
Ranta, T.; Korpinen, O.-J. How to analyse and maximise the forest fuel supply availability to power plants in
Eastern Finland. Biomass Bioenergy 2011, 35, 1841–1850. [CrossRef]
85.
Sikanen, L.; Asikainen, A.; Lehikoinen, M. Transport control of forest fuels by ﬂeet manager, mobile terminals
and GPS. Biomass Bioenergy 2005, 28, 183–191. [CrossRef]
86.
Ackerman, P.A.; Pulkki, R.E. Economic impact of secondary intermediate transport of pulpwood to truck
transport depots in South Africa: Three case studies. Int. J. For. Eng. 2003, 14, 53–63.
87.
Asikainen, A. Simulation of logging and barge transport of wood from forests on islands. Int. J. For. Eng.
2001, 12, 43–50.
88.
Flodén, J.; Williamsson, J. Business models for sustainable biofuel transport: The potential for intermodal
transport. J. Clean. Prod. 2016, 113, 426–437. [CrossRef]
89.
Gonzales, D.; Searcy, E.M.; Ek¸sio˘glu, S.D. Cost analysis for high-volume and long-haul transportation of
densiﬁed biomass feedstock. Transp. Res. Part A Policy Pract. 2013, 49, 48–61. [CrossRef]
90.
Lautala, P.; Pouryousef, H.; Handler, R.; Chartier, S. The role of railroads in multimodal woody biomass
transportation in Michigan. In Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Rail Conference, Philadelphia, PA, USA,
17–19 April 2012; pp. 465–473.
91.
Akhtari, S.; Sowlati, T.; Day, K. Economic feasibility of utilizing forest biomass in district energy
systems—A review. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2014, 33, 117–127. [CrossRef]
92.
Arabatzis, G.; Petridis, K.; Galatsidas, S.; Ioannou, K. A demand scenario based fuelwood supply chain:
A conceptual model. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2013, 25, 687–697. [CrossRef]
93.
Asikainen, A. Integration of work tasks and supply chains in wood harvesting-cost savings or complex
solutions? Int. J. For. Eng. 2004, 15, 11–17.
94.
Aydinel, M.; Sowlati, T.; Cerda, X.; Cope, E.; Gerschman, M. Optimization of production allocation and
transportation of customer orders for a leading forest products company. Math. Comput. Model. 2008,
48, 1158–1169. [CrossRef]

Forests 2018, 9, 415
27 of 28
95.
Beaudoin, D.; LeBel, L.; Frayret, J.-F. Tactical supply chain planning in the forest products industry through
optimization and scenario-based analysis. Can. J. For. Res. 2007, 37, 128–140. [CrossRef]
96.
Cambero, C.; Sowlati, T. Assessment and optimization of forest biomass supply chains from economic,
social and environmental perspectives—A review of literature. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2014, 36, 62–73.
[CrossRef]
97.
Carlsson, D.; Rönnqvist, M. Supply chain management in forestry—Case studies at Södra Cell AB. Eur. J.
Oper. Res. 2005, 163, 589–616. [CrossRef]
98.
Díaz-Yáñez, O.; Mola-Yudego, B.; Anttila, P.; Röser, D.; Asikainen, A. Forest chips for energy in Europe:
Current procurement methods and potentials. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2013, 21, 562–571. [CrossRef]
99.
Dumanli, A.; Gulyurtlu, I.; Yurum, Y. Fuel supply chain analysis of Turkey. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2007,
11, 2058–2082. [CrossRef]
100. Eriksson, A.; Eliasson, L.; Jirjis, R. Simulation-based evaluation of supply chains for stump fuel. Int. J.
For. Eng. 2014, 25, 23–36. [CrossRef]
101. Forsberg, G. Biomass energy transport: Analysis of bioenergy transport chains using life cycle inventory
method. Biomass Bioenergy 2000, 19, 17–30. [CrossRef]
102. Frayret, J.-M.; D’Amours, S.; Rousseau, A.; Harvey, S.; Gaudreault, J. Agent-based supply-chain planning in
the forest products industry. Int. J. Flex. Manuf. Syst. 2007, 19, 358–391. [CrossRef]
103. Freppaz, D.; Minciardi, R.; Robba, M.; Rovatti, M.; Sacile, R.; Taramasso, A. Optimizing forest biomass
exploitation for energy supply at a regional level. Biomass Bioenergy 2004, 26, 15–25. [CrossRef]
104. Frombo, F.; Minciardi, R.; Robba, M.; Rosso, F.; Sacile, R. Planning woody biomass logistics for energy
production: A strategic decision model. Biomass Bioenergy 2009, 33, 372–383. [CrossRef]
105. Gautam, S.; LeBel, L.; Beaudoin, D. Agility capabilities in wood procurement systems: A literature synthesis.
Int. J. For. Eng. 2013, 24, 216–232. [CrossRef]
106. Gerasimov, Y.; Sokolov, A.; Karjalainen, T. GIS-based decision-support srogram for planning and analyzing
short-wood transport in Russia. Croat. J. For. Eng. 2008, 29, 163–175.
107. Gold, S.; Seuring, S. Supply chain and logistics issues of bio-energy production. J. Clean. Prod. 2011, 19, 32–42.
[CrossRef]
108. Gronalt, M.; Rauch, P. Designing a regional forest fuel supply network. Biomass Bioenergy 2007, 31, 393–402.
[CrossRef]
109. Gunnarsson, H.; Rönnqvist, M.; Lundgren, J.T. Supply chain modelling of forest fuel. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 2004,
158, 103–123. [CrossRef]
110. Haartveit, E.Y.; Fjeld, D.E. Simulating effects of supply chain conﬁguration on industrial dynamics in the
forest sector. Int. J. For. Eng. 2003, 14, 21–30.
111. Kanzian, C.; Kühmaier, M.; Zazgornik, J.; Stampfer, K. Design of forest energy supply networks using
multi-objective optimization. Biomass Bioenergy 2013, 58, 294–302. [CrossRef]
112. Kühmaier, M.; Stampfer, K. Development of a multi-criteria decision support tool for energy wood supply
management. Croat. J. For. Eng. 2012, 33, 181–198.
113. Kudakasseril Kurian, J.; Raveendran Nair, G.; Hussain, A.; Vijaya Raghavan, G.S. Feedstocks, logistics and
pre-treatment processes for sustainable lignocellulosic bioreﬁneries: A comprehensive review. Renew. Sustain.
Energy Rev. 2013, 25, 205–219. [CrossRef]
114. Lautala, P.T.; Hilliard, M.R.; Webb, E.; Busch, I.; Richard Hess, J.; Roni, M.S.; Hilbert, J.; Handler, R.M.;
Bittencourt, R.; Valente, A.; et al. Opportunities and challenges in the design and analysis of biomass supply
chains. Environ. Manag. 2015, 56, 1397–1415. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
115. Miao, Z.; Shastri, Y.; Grift, T.E.; Hansen, A.C.; Ting, K.C. Lignocellulosic biomass feedstock transportation
alternatives, logistics, equipment conﬁgurations, and modeling. Biofuels Bioprod. Bioreﬁn. 2012, 6, 351–362.
[CrossRef]
116. Nivala, M.; Anttila, P.; Laitila, J. A GIS-based comparison of long-distance supply of energy wood for future
needs from young forests to the coast of Finland. Int. J. For. Eng. 2015, 26, 185–202.
117. Rantala, J.; Kiljunen, N.; Harstela, P. Effect of seedling production and long-distance transportation planning
strategies on transportation costs of a nursery company. Int. J. For. Eng. 2003, 14, 65–73.
118. Rauch, P.; Gronalt, M. The terminal location problem in the forest fuels supply network. Int. J. For. Eng. 2010,
21, 32–40.

Forests 2018, 9, 415
28 of 28
119. Ravula, P.; Grisso, R.; Cundiff, J. Cotton logistics as a model for a biomass transportation system.
Biomass Bioenergy 2008, 32, 314–325. [CrossRef]
120. Rentizelas, A.A.; Tolis, A.J.; Tatsiopoulos, I.P. Logistics issues of biomass: The storage problem and the
multi-biomass supply chain. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2009, 13, 887–894. [CrossRef]
121. Selkimäki, M.; Mola-Yudego, B.; Röser, D.; Prinz, R.; Sikanen, L. Present and future trends in pellet markets,
raw materials, and supply logistics in Sweden and Finland. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2010, 14, 3068–3075.
[CrossRef]
122. Shabani, N.; Akhtari, S.; Sowlati, T. Value chain optimization of forest biomass for bioenergy production:
A review. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2013, 23, 299–311. [CrossRef]
123. Sharma, B.; Ingalls, R.G.; Jones, C.L.; Khanchi, A. Biomass supply chain design and analysis: Basis, overview,
modeling, challenges, and future. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2013, 24, 608–627. [CrossRef]
124. Stone, I.J.; Benjamin, J.G.; Leahy, J.E. Innovation impacts on biomass supply in Maine’s logging industry.
For. Prod. J. 2011, 61, 579–585. [CrossRef]
125. Troncoso, J.J.; Garrido, R.A. Forestry production and logistics planning: An analysis using mixed-integer
programming. For. Policy Econ. 2005, 7, 625–633. [CrossRef]
126. Uusitalo, J. A framework for CTL method-based wood procurement logistics. Int. J. For. Eng. 2005, 16, 37–46.
127. Valenzuela, J.F.; Balci, H.H.; McDonald, T. A Transportation-scheduling system for managing silvicultural
projects. Int. J. For. Eng. 2005, 16, 65–75.
128. Van Belle, J.-F.; Temmerman, M.; Schenkel, Y. Three level procurement of forest residues for power plant.
Biomass Bioenergy 2003, 24, 401–409. [CrossRef]
129. Van Dyken, S.; Bakken, B.H.; Skjelbred, H.I. Linear mixed-integer models for biomass supply chains with
transport, storage and processing. Energy 2010, 35, 1338–1350. [CrossRef]
130. Windisch, J.; Röser, D.; Sikanen, L.; Routa, J. Reengineering business processes to improve an integrated
industrial roundwood and energywood procurement chain. Int. J. For. Eng. 2013, 24, 233–248. [CrossRef]
131. Wolfsmayr, U.J.; Rauch, P. The primary forest fuel supply chain: A literature review. Biomass Bioenergy 2014,
60, 203–221. [CrossRef]
132. Zhang, F.; Johnson, D.M.; Johnson, M.A. Development of a simulation model of biomass supply chain for
biofuel production. Renew. Energy 2012, 44, 380–391. [CrossRef]
133. Kizha, A.R.; Han, H.-S. Processing and sorting forest residues: Cost, productivity and managerial impacts.
Biomass Bioenergy 2016, 93, 97–106. [CrossRef]
134. Langholtz, M.H.; Stokes, B.J.; Eaton, L.M.; Brandt, C.C.; Davis, M.R.; Theiss, T.J.; Turhollow, A.F., Jr.;
Webb, E.; Coleman, A.; Wigmosta, M.; et al. 2016 Billion-Ton Report: Advancing Domestic Resources for A
Thriving Bioeconomy, Volume 1: Economic Availability of Feedstocks; ORNL/TM-2016/160; Oak Ridge National
Laboratory: Oak Ridge, TN, USA, 2016.
135. Koirala, A.; Kizha, A.; De Urioste-Stone, S. Policy Recommendation from stakeholders to improve forest
products transportation: A qualitative study. Forests 2017, 8, 434. [CrossRef]
© 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
