The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Planning for and Implementing Prescribed Fire in Fire-Dependent Forests  
 
 
Introduction 
Implementing prescribed fire1 is a complex process that requires the coordination of many different agen-
cies. Prior to implementing a prescribed burn, the trade-offs and benefits (such as smoke) are carefully as-
sessed and planned. Clear objectives, specific desired outcomes, application of best available science, pub-
lic and firefighter safety, and best management practices are important elements of successful prescribed 
fire programs. This fact sheet details the steps required to conduct a safe and effective prescribed burn. 
Prescribed Fire Plans 
To permit a prescribed fire, agencies must first complete a comprehensive plan, e.g., Fire Management 
Plan, that provides general program objectives, and a Prescribed Fire Plan detailing site-specific strategies 
and prescriptions. The Prescribed Fire Plan identifies, or prescribes, the best conditions to burn unwanted 
forest debris, trees, and other plants to safely achieve the desired results. These plans consider factors such 
as temperature, humidity, wind, vegetation moisture, and smoke dispersal conditions. The plans are pre-
pared and approved by qualified personnel, e.g., burn boss and agency administrator, and include criteria 
for the conditions and prescriptions under which the fire will be conducted. The Prescribed Fire Plan is re-
viewed and signed annually by the agency administrator to ensure the plan is current. 
 
Project Area Description 
The project area description is a detailed summary docu-
menting all pertinent attributes, including descriptions of 
vegetation and fuels, unique features, and natural resources. 
The plan requires maps of the vicinity of the burn, project 
area, ignition units, and the location of values or assets at 
risk, e.g., homes, infrastructure, utilities. 
 
Burn Prescriptions  
Detailed prescriptions for each fire are prepared in advance, 
describing the objectives, fuels, area, precise environmental 
conditions under which the fire will be allowed to burn, and 
suppression conditions. 
 
The Go/No-Go Checklist  
Prescribed fire plans provide a written checklist that the burn boss certifies whether 12 critical require-
ments, conditions, and steps have been satisfied prior to ignition of the burn. 
 
Pre-Ignition Considerations  
Additional pre-ignition considerations are identified in an analysis developed to determine the complexity 
of the burn, mitigation options, and burn outcomes identified in the National Environmental Policy Act 
(NEPA) decision and plan. 
June 2018 
Fire personnel review a project area prior to burn ignition. 
Photo courtesy Verde Valley All Hazards Training Associa-
tion and USDA Forest Service, Coconino National Forest 
1 Prescribed fire, also referred to as a prescribed burn or controlled fire, is an intentionally ignited fire managed in accordance with appli-
cable laws, policies, and regulations to meet specific objectives. 

 
Implementation: Striking the Match  
 
Prescribed Fire Ignition Plan 
 
Before ignition, prescribed fire specialists complete a Go/No-Go checklist and conduct a test fire. 
The test fire is ignited in a representative location where the fire can be controlled easily and the 
results are documented. The purpose of the test fire is to verify that the prescribed fire behavior 
characteristics will meet management objectives and to 
verify predicted smoke dispersion. Based on these ob-
servations, the prescribed fire burn boss determines 
whether to continue with active ignition.2 
 
Contingency Planning 
The contingency plan analysis is a part of the Pre-
scribed Fire Plan. It considers low probability, high 
consequence events and identifies actions needed to 
mitigate them. Other important considerations include 
smoke management objectives, impacts to critical 
smoke receptors, burn staffing, and response plans for 
accidents or emergencies during the burn. 
 
Managing Smoke 
All prescribed burns must conform to the federal Clean Air Act requirements. Managing smoke 
emissions is a major objective. When acquiring burn permits and approvals, fire planners must 
identify smoke sensitive receptor areas, e.g., population centers, recreation areas, hospitals, air-
ports, transportation corridors, schools, etc. This assessment typically includes computer modeling, 
mitigation strategies, and techniques to reduce the impacts of smoke production.  
 
Unwanted Wildland Fire Declaration 
A prescribed fire, or a portion of a prescribed fire, must be declared a wildfire by those identified 
in the burn plan with the authority to do so, when either or both of the following criteria are met:  
 
1) Prescription parameters, such as predicted fire behavior, climatic conditions, and fuel evalua-
tions, are exceeded and holding and contingency actions cannot secure the fire by the end of the 
next burning period; or,  
2) The fire has spread outside the project area or is likely to do so, and the associated contingency 
actions have failed or are likely to fail, and the fire cannot be contained by the end of the next 
burning period.3 
 
Action Reviews: Measuring Burn Success 
After Action Reviews evaluate whether the planned actions accomplished desired outcomes. This 
review allows participants to discover what happened, why it happened, and how to improve per-
formance and correct mistakes or weaknesses. After Action Reviews are effective when conducted 
with all resources involved. Documentation and experience from these reviews and shared lessons 
learned can be invaluable to help guide future prescribed fire planning and implementation. 
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following ERI white paper: 
Greco, B. 2018. Planning for and Implementing Prescribed Fire in Fire-Dependent Forests of the Intermountain West. ERI 
White Paper—Issues in Forest Restoration. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University.  
 
Contact: Diane Vosick, diane.vosick@nau.edu 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
Firefighters discuss fire behavior and smoke disper-
sion during a prescribed burn. Photo by ERI 
2 National Wildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG), Interagency Prescribed Fire Planning and Implementation Procedures Guide, https://
www.nwcg.gov/sites/default/files/publications/pms484.pdf  
3 NWCG, Guidance for Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy, http://www.nifc.gov/policies/policies_documents/
GIFWFMP.pdf  
