ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION INSTITUTE
Working Paper 39
Restoration as a Mechanism 
to Manage Southwestern 
Dwarf Mistletoe in 
Ponderosa Pine Forests
August 2018

Authors: Tzeidle N. Wasserman and Amy E.M. Waltz
Reviewers: Mary Lou Fairweather, plant pathologist, USDA Forest Service; Nicholas 
Wilhelmi, plant pathologist, USDA Forest Service; Robert L. Mathiasen, forest health/
forest pathology professor, Northern Arizona University
Series Editor: Tayloe Dubay
Please use the following citation when referencing this working paper:
Wasserman, T., and A.E.M. Waltz. 2018. Restoration as a Mechanism to Manage Southwestern Dwarf 
Mistletoe in Ponderosa Pine Forests. ERI Working Paper No. 39. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern 
Arizona University. 11 pp.
Cover photo: Southwestern dwarf mistletoe sprouts on a ponderosa pine branch. Dwarf mistletoe is an 
endemic species to southwestern ponderosa pine forests. It provides high ecological value and ecosystem 
function through wildlife habitat via food sources, nesting and hiding cover, and creates snags when older 
trees die from infestation. Photo by Mary Lou Fairweather
Intermountain West Frequent-Fire Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native species, 
structural characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological Restoration International 
deﬁnes ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an 
ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability….Restoration attempts to return an 
ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration International Science and Policy 
Working Group 2004).
Most frequent-ﬁre forests throughout the Intermountain West have been degraded during the last 150 
years. Many of these forests are now dominated by unnaturally dense thickets of small trees, and lack 
their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible 
to damaging, stand-replacing ﬁres and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests 
centers on reintroducing frequent, low-severity surface ﬁres—often after thinning dense stands—and 
reestablishing productive understory plant communities.
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, 
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of frequent-ﬁre forests of the Intermountain West. 
By allowing natural processes, such as low-severity ﬁre, to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to 
reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
ERI working papers are intended to deliver applicable science to land managers and practitioners 
in a concise, clear, non-technical format. These papers provide guidance on management decisions 
surrounding ecological restoration topics. This publication would not have been possible without funding 
from the USDA Forest Service and the Southwest Fire Science Consortium. The views and conclusions 
contained in this document are those of the author(s) and should not be interpreted as representing the 
opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products 
does not constitute their endorsement by the United States Government or the ERI.

Table of Contents
Introduction ........................................................................................ 1
The Legacy of Past Management ........................................................ 2
Ecological and Wildlife Value of Southwestern Dwarf Mistletoe in 
Southwestern Forests ........................................................................... 3
Increased Wildfire Intensity in Mistletoe Infested Stands .................. 4
Ecological Restoration and Mistletoe Management  .......................... 4
Frequent Fire and Natural Density of Tree Groups and Openings ..... 5
Management Prescriptions .................................................................. 6
Summary ............................................................................................. 9
Management Recommendations ......................................................... 9
Literature Cited ................................................................................. 10

Restoration as a Mechanism to Manage Southwestern Dwarf Mistletoe in Ponderosa Pine Forests
1
Ecological Restoration Institute  •฀฀WORKING PAPER 39  
Introduction
Forest conditions in the southwestern United States are often 
the legacy of past land use since Euro-American settlement, 
including historical ﬁre suppression, livestock grazing, and 
logging practices (Cooper 1960, Covington and Moore 1994). 
These forests are often the focus of restoration and fuels 
reduction projects to address altered stand structure and dense 
forest conditions. Increased wildﬁre activity and a higher 
frequency and intensity of ﬁre and wildﬁre risk has led to 
concerns about the effectiveness of current forest management 
practices across western landscapes. Dense stands with small-
diameter trees are more likely to experience extreme ﬁre 
behavior (Fulé et al. 2001, 2002), and these dense stands alter 
insect and pathogen/disease activity. For example, trees in dense 
stands are less resistant to bark beetle attack (Parker et al. 2006, 
Hoffman et al. 2007) and stands with severe dwarf mistletoe 
infestations have higher fuels (Hoffman et al. 2007) that may 
increase ﬁre intensity (Harrington and Hawksworth 1990, 
Conklin and Geils 2008). 
Dwarf mistletoes (Arceuthobium spp) have been recognized 
as forest pathogens since the late 1800s (Woolsey 1911, 
Hedgecock 1915). Dwarf mistletoes are endemic parasitic 
ﬂowering plants that are host speciﬁc and depend entirely 
on their host for nutrients and water. Dwarf mistletoe causes 
direct damage to trees by reducing tree growth, causing branch 
deformity and witches’ brooms, decreasing tree longevity 
and vigor, and increasing susceptibility to bark beetle attacks 
(Hawksworth and Weins 1996). Southwestern dwarf mistletoe 
(Arceuthobium vaginatum subsp. cryptopodum) is a common 
parasite of ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) in the southwestern 
United States and northern Mexico (Hawksworth and Wiens 
1996). Dwarf mistletoes spread primarily via ballistic seed, 
and spread occurs from tree to tree and within the crowns of 
previously infested trees (Conklin 2000). Spread is relatively 
slow, averaging 1–2 feet per year horizontally through a forest 
(Hawksworth and Gill 1960). Mistletoe infection is a dynamic 
process, where already infected areas tend to become more 
infected over time (Conklin 2003). However, historic levels of 
dwarf mistletoe were thought to be relatively high in the region 
(Woolsey 1911, Conklin and Fairweather 2010). Box 1 discusses 
historic and current levels of mistletoe infection.
At both the stand and landscape level the distribution 
and abundance of dwarf mistletoe is patchy and not uniform 
(Conklin and Fairweather 2010). Dwarf mistletoe is often 
characterized by infection centers of groups of trees surrounded 
by areas without the disease. This can range from just a few 
trees to a few acres of infected trees (Conklin and Fairweather 
2010). The abundance and distribution of mistletoe varies 
widely across the landscape, and efforts should focus on 
reducing levels of infestations and not eradicating the pathogen 
(Conklin and Fairweather 2010). 
It is thought that roughly one-third of the ponderosa 
pine acreage in Arizona and New Mexico has some level of 
mistletoe infestation (Andrews and Daniels 1960, Maffei and 
Beatty 1988), and up to one-half of the mixed conifer acreage 
in the Southwest has some dwarf mistletoe present (Conklin 
and Fairweather 2010), although intensity of infestation varies 
widely across the region. 
Dwarf mistletoes can substantially inﬂuence forest 
structure by causing reduced growth and seed production 
and death of severely infected trees (Hawksworth and Geils 
1990, Hawksworth and Wiens 1996, Geils and Hawksworth 
2002). Tree growth and vigor decline when more than half the 
crown is parasitized. Hawksworth (1977) developed a standard 
six-class dwarf mistletoe rating (DMR) system to quantify 
infection severity that can be characterized at the individual 
tree or stand level. Lightly infected trees (DMR 1–2) can 
survive for several decades, and generally, smaller infected 
trees die more quickly than larger infected trees (Hawksworth 
and Geils 1990). It is important to take a holistic approach to 
mistletoe management in an ecological framework and in a 
landscape context, especially in forests where timber production 
is not a primary objective.
Dwarf mistletoe also provides high ecological value and 
ecosystem function. Mistletoe provides wildlife habitat via 
food sources, nesting and hiding cover, and creates snags when 
older trees die from infestation. Stand conditions have changed 
signiﬁcantly since Euro-American settlement. Fire suppression, 
livestock grazing, and silvicultural practices have dramatically 
increased tree densities throughout many parts of the 
Southwest (Cooper 1960, Covington and Moore 1994, Saab 
et al. 1995, Mast et al. 1999, Grissino-Mayer and Swetnam 
2000). Stands with dense thickets of young small-diameter 
trees are common where small groups of large-diameter trees 
once dominated the forest. Many ponderosa pine forests in the 
Southwest are managed primarily in an ecological framework, 
and not for timber products. Ecological based forest 
management includes multiple use management that should 
incorporate dwarf mistletoe as part of the ecosystem.
Box 1: Historic and current mistletoe levels
Dwarf mistletoes are endemic to forest ecosystems 
and have evolved in western North American forests 
for tens of thousands of years (Hawksworth and Wiens 
1996). Current distribution of mistletoe is thought to be 
relatively similar to mistletoe distribution 150 years ago 
(Dahms and Geils 1997, Conklin and Fairweather 2010). 
However, mistletoe abundance is probably greater 
today than in the 1800s because the abundance of trees 
across the landscape is higher, and the density of trees 
is significantly higher in ponderosa pine forests (Conklin 
and Fairweather 2010). Historical grazing practices and 
fire exclusion have allowed natural openings to infill with 
regeneration and young established trees, thus facilitating 
the spread of mistletoe from infested stands to new 
areas. Within the landscape, dwarf mistletoe has spread 
into some previously un-infested stands, however, much 
of it is attributed to spreading into previously existing 
openings within already infested stands (Conklin and 
Fairweather 2010). Quantifying dwarf mistletoe abundance 
and distribution across the region should consider historic 
levels of infestation, the effects of past management 
efforts, and forest and landscape changes from historic 
conditions (Conklin and Fairweather 2010).

Ecological Restoration Institute  •฀฀WORKING PAPER 39    Restoration as a Mechanism to Manage Southwestern Dwarf Mistletoe in Ponderosa Pine Forests
2
Ecological restoration aims to return forest conditions 
to within the natural range of variation, including tree 
density, stand structure and composition, age and diameter 
distributions, and endemic species (Covington and Moore 
1994). Prescriptions are based on site history, using evidence 
of historical stand conditions via stumps and dendroecology 
(Kaufmann et al. 1998, Moore et al. 1999). Managing 
for groups and openings of ponderosa pine trees that are 
characteristic of southwestern forests can help moderate the 
spread and intensiﬁcation of dwarf mistletoe, helping to reduce 
impacts and promote ecological beneﬁts.
The Legacy of Past Management
When dwarf mistletoe was recognized as a forest pathogen 
in the early 1900s the focus was on controlling the damage to 
timber production, not managing it as part of the ecosystem 
(Conklin and Fairweather 2010). Removal of all heavily 
infected trees was widely implemented across southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests. Early reports and historical photos 
provide evidence of dwarf mistletoe infestation (see 
MacDougal 1899, Woolsey 1911, Korstian and Long 1922); 
however, less is known about the abundance and distribution 
of mistletoe across the region before 1850 (Conklin and 
Fairweather 2010). 
When timber production was a primary objective in the 
Southwest, severely infested stands were thought to require 
sanitation cuts, using overstory removal and seed tree cuts that 
reduced overall canopy cover and reduced the age distributions 
of trees (Herman 1961, Heidmann 1968, Conklin and 
Fairweather 2010). Overstory removal cuts were thought to 
eliminate major sources of infection, but actually stimulated 
infection already present in the understory (Conklin 2000). 
Hawksworth (1961) recommended removal of all infected 
trees with follow-up treatments 5 years later and a third entry 
within 5–10 years was needed to keep mistletoe levels at low, 
non-damaging levels. This management approach didn’t work 
because the follow-up entries using mechanical means were 
not implemented in many areas, and therefore stimulated 
new infection in these areas. Research in New Mexico and 
Arizona has demonstrated that in stands managed for timber 
commodities where all or most of infested trees were removed, 
with one or more follow-up mechanical treatments at 5 year 
intervals, dwarf mistletoe levels were decreased but never 
eliminated, and repeated entries are necessary every 5 years to 
keep levels of infestation low. Latent infections are prevalent in 
areas where mechanical treatments were used without follow-
up use of prescribed ﬁre.
Throughout the 1960s–1980s, aggressive efforts were 
made across the Southwest to control mistletoe infestations 
where selective and partial cuts were implemented to thin the 
severely infected overstory trees. While temporary reduction 
in mistletoe was achieved by removing sources of infestation 
in the overstory, high levels of infection were left in the 
understory (Conklin and Fairweather 2010). Few treatments 
in the region involved ﬁnal sanitation entries and complete 
stand replacement, instead, the dominant overstory was 
removed and replaced by younger infested stands (Conklin and 
A dwarf mistletoe shoot extends from the branch of a ponderosa pine tree. Photo by Robert L. Mathiasen

Restoration as a Mechanism to Manage Southwestern Dwarf Mistletoe in Ponderosa Pine Forests
3
Ecological Restoration Institute  •฀฀WORKING PAPER 39  
Fairweather 2010). Even-aged management was then widely 
implemented on federal lands (Beatty 1982, USDAFS 1985), 
and through the 1990s overstory removal and seed tree cuts 
were implemented across the region (Conklin and Fairweather 
2010). However, ﬁnal entries often were never completed and 
therefore left an infested understory within the stand.
Mistletoe infection levels today are a result of previous 
management practices across the West, especially selection 
cutting (Conklin and Fairweather 2010). The majority of 
stand entries in the region have been selective and partial cuts 
that tended to favor mistletoe spread and release, as it persists 
and tends to increase after harvest and mechanical thinning 
(Conklin 2003, Bickford et al. 2005). Following treatment, 
mistletoe shoot growth is greater on trees with high uptake 
of water and carbon (Bickford et al. 2005), so mistletoe 
tends to appear to increase at a faster rate following thinning 
(Conklin 2003, Bickford et al. 2005) due to latent infections 
that thrive and produce more shoots and seeds (Hawksworth 
1978, Parmeter 1978). Monitoring of ponderosa pine stands in 
Arizona and New Mexico, where all or most of visibly infected 
trees were removed, demonstrated that stand infestation 
levels return to pre-treatment levels within 20 years without 
retreatment and re-entry or use of prescribed ﬁre (Hessburg et 
al. 2008, Geils  unpub data).
Eventually, management focus moved toward ecological 
management (Dahms and Geils 1997, Conklin and 
Fairweather 2010) that incorporated dwarf mistletoe into the 
stand and landscape as having ecological function and value. 
Management efforts should be based on the speciﬁc needs and 
objectives for each area, within a framework that considers the 
overall landscape and forest conditions (Conklin 2000). While 
the number of infected trees has likely substantially increased 
across the landscape, the actual proportion of the landscape 
with mistletoe infection has likely increased only modestly from 
historic levels because of the relatively slow rate of mistletoe 
spread (Conklin and Fairweather 2010).
Ecological and Wildlife Value of 
Southwestern Dwarf Mistletoe in 
Southwestern Forests
Dwarf mistletoe is part of the forest ecosystem and increases 
biodiversity within the forest (Tinnin 1984, Bennetts and 
Hawksworth 1991, Mathiasen 1996, Watson 2001) (Box 2). 
Dwarf mistletoe is beneﬁcial to a multitude of species including 
insects, birds, and mammals by providing food sources, storage 
sites, resting areas, and nesting sites (Hawksworth and Geils 
1990, Hawksworth and Wiens 1996, Mathiasen 1996). 
Squirrels, porcupines, and deer eat dwarf mistletoe shoots and 
cambium (Hawksworth and Weins 1966, Hedwall et. al. 2006). 
Ungulates and grouse eat fruits and shoots of dwarf mistletoe 
(Severson 1986). Abert’s squirrels (Sciurus aberti) use mistletoe 
infested trees for caching, foraging, and nesting (Garnett et al. 
2006), and as the number of branches within a broom and tree 
height increase so does the probability of use by Abert’s squirrels 
(Garnett et al. 2006). Mexican spotted owls (Strix occidentalis 
lucida) and other raptors use witches’ brooms as nesting structures 
(Seamans and Gutiérrez 1995, Hawksworth and Wiens 1996 (see 
table 8.3), May et al. 2004, Ganey et al. 2013). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conservation of owl nesting habitat in the Southwest now 
includes retaining large trees with dwarf mistletoe witches’ 
brooms (Hedwall et al. 2006, Ganey et al. 2013). 
Several species of songbirds nest and forage for insects in 
witches’ brooms (Hudler et al. 1979, Bennetts 1991, Bennetts 
et al. 1996, Parker et al. 2017). Insect abundance and richness 
was greater in witches’ brooms than non-broomed branches 
in Douglas ﬁr (Smith et al. 2013). Birds use heterogeneous 
tree and canopy structures resulting from mistletoe infestation 
(Reich et al. 2000). Cavity-nesting birds nest in snags created 
by mistletoe infection, and bird abundance was higher in 
ponderosa pine stands that were severely infested by mistletoe 
in Colorado (Bennetts et al. 1996). 
Box 2: Dwarf mistletoe infestation has unique 
ecological features
Stands infested with dwarf mistletoe have positive 
attributes such as edible fruit and shoots, witches’ 
brooms, and altered forest structure (Mathiasen 1996). 
Large infested trees with witches’ brooms have high 
ecological and biodiversity value for birds and mammals. 
Witches’ brooms and snags create and enhance wildlife 
habitat by providing structural diversity (Tinnin et al. 1984, 
Bennets et al. 1996, Mathiasen 1996, Hedwall et al. 2006). 
Infested areas have tree mortality, witches’ brooms, and 
deformed branches. Over time, severe infection creates 
snags that multiple species of wildlife use to meet their 
life history needs. Infection centers are often hundreds of 
years old. Over time, these areas become more open with 
lower canopy cover and basal area than the surrounding 
forest. Some older, severely infested stands should be 
managed as long-term wildlife habitat (Conklin 2000, 
Conklin and Fairweather 2010, Parker et al. 2017).
Dwarf mistletoe can cause deformities in ponderosa pine trees, like this 
witches’ broom. Witches’ brooms create ideal nesting sites, like this 
robin’s nest. Photo by Robert L. Mathiasen

Ecological Restoration Institute  •฀฀WORKING PAPER 39    Restoration as a Mechanism to Manage Southwestern Dwarf Mistletoe in Ponderosa Pine Forests
4
Increased Wildfire Intensity in 
Mistletoe Infested Stands
While there is ecological beneﬁt of dwarf mistletoe, forests 
with severe dwarf mistletoe infestations have a higher wildﬁre 
risk and can experience more intense and severe ﬁre events 
(Harrington and Hawksworth 1990). Fuel loadings are 
higher in mistletoe infected stands (Koonce and Roth 1985, 
Harrington and Hawksworth 1990, Hoffman et al. 2007, 
Stanton and Hadley 2010, Klutsch et al. 2014), and stand-
replacing ﬁres are more likely in severely infested pine forests 
(Alexander and Hawksworth 1975, Koonce and Roth 1985, 
Harrington and Hawksworth 1990, Parker et al. 2006, Stanton 
and Hadley 2010). Branching patterns, resin accumulation, 
and increased tree mortality are factors contributing to 
increased ﬂammability (Conklin and Fairweather 2010). 
Witches’ brooms affect stand structure and tree ﬂammability 
by increasing the amount of tree resin and lowering crown 
base heights (Hoffman et al. 2007). Tree mortality from 
mistletoe infestation creates snags and enhances snag density 
that can increase fuel loads as dead trees fall to the forest ﬂoor 
(Hoffman et al. 2007). Natural ﬁres can help maintain lower 
levels of mistletoe on the landscape, and some heavily infested 
stands may warrant being deferred to mechanical treatment 
and be allowed to burn via prescribed ﬁre or natural ﬁre events.
Stands with insect outbreaks and dwarf mistletoe may 
be more susceptible to experience extreme ﬁre behavior (Fulé 
et al. 2001, 2002), and the interactions of stands impacted by 
bark beetles and other insects with pathogens such as mistletoe 
are thought to intensify ﬁre behavior and spread (Parker et 
al. 2006, Hoffman et al. 2007). Dense stands with small-
diameter trees that have also been exposed to insect and disease 
outbreaks are believed to be more likely to experience extreme 
ﬁre behavior (Fulé et al. 2001, 2002).
Ecological Restoration and  
Mistletoe Management 
The goal of ecological restoration is to return forests to pre 
Euro-American settlement forest conditions in terms of 
stand structure, density, groups and openings, and forest 
fuels (Covington et al. 1997). Variability across the landscape 
exists in terms of these factors, and the goal of restoration 
is to capture this system variability using historical site 
evidences. Treatments are designed to emulate forest structure, 
composition, and function characteristic of the natural 
evolutionary environment (Covington et al. 1994, Moore et al. 
1999). Additionally, all trees alive at the time of ﬁre exclusion 
(presettlement) are retained within the stand. Today’s forests 
are deﬁcient in large, old trees, which have unique structural 
characteristics and represent centuries of genetic diversity 
(DeWald and Mahalovich 1997, DeWald 2008). Old trees have 
greater genetic diversity than even-aged groups of young trees, 
the majority of which established post ﬁre-exclusion (DeWald 
and Mahalovich 1997). Trees that establish outside of their 
evolutionary envelope may lack key adaptive traits to survive 
natural disturbances. Additionally, trees 200+ years old have 
survived large climatic ﬂuctuations and may provide forests a 
better chance of adapting to changing climatic conditions and 
other environmental factors (DeWald and Mahalovich 1997). 
More than a century of ﬁre suppression and exclusion and an 
increased density of young trees has favored dwarf mistletoe 
abundance and distribution (Parker et al. 2006). 
In northern Arizona, past management and lack of ﬁre 
have allowed presettlement stumps, snags, and logs to persist 
on the landscape. These legacy structures can serve as a guide 
for the design of restoration treatments. Reconstructions 
using historic evidence are around 91 percent accurate in 
blind comparisons to historic stem-maps (Moore et al. 2004). 
Restoration treatments retain all presettlement trees and use 
mechanical thinning followed by prescribed ﬁre to reduce 
post-settlement stem densities and fuel loads. Restoration 
treatments that signiﬁcantly reduce tree density within a stand 
can be used to manage dwarf mistletoe abundance and spread 
(Conklin and Fairweather 2010). 
Ecological restoration treatments using mechanical 
thinning and prescribed burning treatments offer tools to 
mitigate mistletoe spread and intensiﬁcation. Dwarf mistletoe 
spreads mainly via ballistic seed; lateral tree-to-tree spread 
is common (Conklin 2000) and spread from overstory to 
understory trees is rapid (Hawksworth 1961). Some old 
presettlement trees with mistletoe infestation are often targeted 
in traditional silvicultural techniques for the management of 
mistletoe. However, some of these trees should be retained for 
ecological value and because infection growth is slower in these 
larger old trees. Maintaining the distance between neighboring 
groups of trees and infection centers, tree crowns and infested 
trees, and reducing stand density are some restoration practices 
that can aid in the mitigation of dwarf mistletoe spread (Parker 
et al. 2006, Conklin and Fairweather 2010). Facilitating 
regeneration is not a primary goal of ecological restoration. The 
goal is to reduce stand densities that are uncharacteristic of the 
site, and return the stand to presettletment tree densities and 
characteristic tree groups and openings.
Mistletoe spreads more quickly in dense stands of evenly 
spaced trees than in groups of trees and openings that were 
more common in this area before 1870 (Hawksworth 1961). 
Creating and maintaining more openings and interspaces on 
the landscape would tend to reduce overall spread (Conklin 
2000). Creating openings and interspace of 40–60 feet (or 
larger depending on the site) by thinning trees beyond margins 
of visible infections can help mitigate the effects of latent 
infections (Conklin and Fairweather 2010). In some cases, 
these openings can be used to isolate infestations, and distance 
between groups of trees can be used to prevent spread when 
groups of infested trees are far enough away from healthy 
groups of trees. Openings and interspaces without host trees 
can help prevent the spread of mistletoe if they are wider than 
the distance seeds can be disseminated (~ 40 ft) (Conklin 2000, 
Conklin and Fairweather 2010). In all cases, prescribed ﬁre will 
need to be used in these openings and interspaces either pre or 
post-treatment to prevent infected regeneration within these 
newly created openings. Multiple re-entries with prescribed 
ﬁre are necessary to inhibit new regeneration from infection in 
these sites for many years.
Data on mistletoe abundance and distribution are limited 
to research studies, often written in non-peer reviewed 
publications, and often do not exist on a stand or at the 

Restoration as a Mechanism to Manage Southwestern Dwarf Mistletoe in Ponderosa Pine Forests
5
Ecological Restoration Institute  •฀฀WORKING PAPER 39  
landscape level. Most studies on restoration treatments have 
little data on long-term monitoring, and have used models to 
simulate the spread of mistletoe over time. Some recent studies 
used the forest vegetation simulator (FVS) to model projected 
spread of dwarf mistletoe post fuels reduction and restoration 
treatments (Maloney et al. 2008, Hessburg 2008). According 
to model projections, thinning and burning treatments used 
together did provide a sanitation effect by lowering levels of 
dwarf mistletoe, and larger residual trees had lower levels of 
dwarf mistletoe infestation (Maloney et al. 2008, Hessburg 
2008). However, one entry is never enough to achieve desired 
conditions to keep dwarf mistletoe infestation at desired levels, 
and multiple follow-up treatments are needed. Dwarf mistletoe 
infestation returned to pre-treatment levels within 20–50 years 
in both on-the-ground and model projected experiments (Geils 
unpublished data, Maloney et al. 2008, Hessburg 2008).
Full ecological restoration treatments can be a viable tool 
for addressing dwarf mistletoe spread and intensiﬁcation in 
ponderosa pine forests. For example, treatment plots at Fort 
Valley Experimental Forest in Flagstaff, AZ were examined for 
pre and post-treatment differences in dwarf mistletoe spread 
and intensiﬁcation, and mortality rate of infected ponderosa 
pine trees 10 years post-treatment (Kralicek and Mathiasen 
unpublished data 2012). Treatment blocks incorporated 
thinning followed by a low-intensity prescribed ﬁre 1–2 
years after they were thinned. Plots examined DMR pre and 
post-treatment. Restoration treatments were full restoration 
(1.5/3), modiﬁed restoration (2/4), and minimal restoration 
(3/6) (See Box 3 for description). The full restoration thinning 
(1.5/3 replacement) was the most effective at reducing the 
intensiﬁcation of dwarf mistletoe. The 2/4 replacement also 
reduced mistletoe intensiﬁcation moderately over 10 years, but 
the 3/6 replacement essentially had no effect on reducing dwarf 
mistletoe intensiﬁcation treatment (Kralicek and Mathiasen 
unpublished data 2012). Dense stands of young small-diameter 
trees have less distance between trees, therefore there is no 
spacing to impede the spread of dwarf mistletoe within the 
stand. Ecological restoration treatments based on historical site 
evidences characterized by groups and openings where trees are 
spaced beyond the maximum distance of seed dispersal were 
effective in slowing mistletoe spread (Kralicek and Mathiasen 
unpublished data 2012).
Thinning treatments that focus on creating characteristic 
openings and interspaces based on historical evidence within 
the stand could be effective in mistletoe management and 
reduction. Reducing the density of trees, creating openings 
and interspaces between groups of trees, and using frequent 
prescribed ﬁre to maintain openings are effective tools in 
addressing mistletoe spread and intensiﬁcation in southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests (Conklin and Fairweather 2010). 
Ecological restoration treatments can be ﬂexible and can 
retain presettlement large-diameter ponderosa pines that are 
severely infected for ecological value, and thinning and burning 
treatments can help prolong the life of large infected trees, 
which can persist on the landscape for years or turn in to large-
diameter snags (Parker et al. 2006, Conklin and Fairweather 
2010). Maintaining less dense and more open and park-like 
forest conditions characteristic of southwestern ponderosa 
pine forests, composed of scattered groups of ponderosa pine 
trees with native grasses, forbs, and shrubs can aid in keeping 
southwestern dwarf mistletoe at acceptable levels. Some heavily 
infected stands may warrant being deferred from treatment and 
allowed to become wildlife habitat or burn in a ﬁre event.
Frequent Fire and Natural Density of 
Tree Groups and Openings 
Fire history is an important driver of dwarf mistletoe 
distribution across western forests (Alexander and Hawksworth 
1975, Koonce and Roth 1985, Hawksworth and Wiens 1996, 
Conklin and Fairweather 2010). The historical ﬁre regime in 
ponderosa pine forests in the Southwest was frequent, low-
intensity ﬁres (Covington and Moore 1994b, Swetnam and 
Baisan1996). Frequent ﬁres characteristic of the historical 
ﬁre regime often reduced mistletoe infection levels, provided 
natural control of mistletoe, and would have kept forests more 
open, limiting tree-to-tree spread. (Alexander and Hawksworth 
1975, Harrington and Hawksworth 1990, Hoffman et al. 
2007). Disruption of the natural ﬁre regime has increased the 
severity and distribution of dwarf mistletoe (Maffei and Beaty 
1988, Hawksworth and Wiens 1996, Conklin 2000, Conklin 
and Fairweather 2010). More than a century of ﬁre suppression 
has been favorable to dwarf mistletoe abundance, as the 
increased density of trees facilitates spread of the pathogen 
(Parker et al. 2006, Conklin and Fairweather 2010).
Prescribed ﬁre is a tool to directly manage and 
reduce potential spread of dwarf mistletoe (Alexander and 
Hawksworth 1975, Conklin and Armstrong 2001, Conklin and 
Geils 2008). Prescribed ﬁres are effective at reducing the spread 
of mistletoe, especially when implemented together with 
thinning treatments (Parker et al. 2006, Hessburg et al. 2008).  
Periodic, moderate intensity ﬁres can inhibit new regeneration 
in a stand, eliminate infected regeneration, and maintain 
openings (Alexander and Hawksworth 1975). Fire can prune 
Box 3: Treatment descriptions for restoration at Fort 
Valley Experimental Forest
1.5/3 (full restoration): All presettlement trees retained. 
Replacement trees left for each presettlement evidence 
dependent on size: if the replacement trees are more than 
16 inches in diameter, 1.5 trees are left standing for each 
presettlement indicator. If they are smaller, 3 trees are left 
standing for each indicator.
2/4 (modified restoration): All presettlement trees 
retained. If the replacement trees are more than 16 
inches in diameter, 2 trees are left standing for each 
presettlement indicator. If they are smaller, 4 trees are left 
standing for each indicator.
3/6 (minimal restoration): All presettlement trees retained. 
If the replacement trees are more than 16 inches in 
diameter, 3 trees are left standing for each presettlement 
indicator. If they are smaller, 6 trees are left standing for 
each indicator.

Ecological Restoration Institute  •฀฀WORKING PAPER 39    Restoration as a Mechanism to Manage Southwestern Dwarf Mistletoe in Ponderosa Pine Forests
6
mistletoe severity in all size classes and show a modeled trend 
of reduced dwarf mistletoe spread and intensiﬁcation over time 
for actively treated areas (Hessburg et al. 2008). Treatment 
effects diminish after 20 years, so re-treatment is necessary via 
multiple follow-up entries. Many southwestern ponderosa pine 
forests are currently identiﬁed to be actively managed in order 
to decrease the risk of catastrophic wildﬁre, therefore allowing 
an opportunity to effectively manage southwestern dwarf 
mistletoe and enhance wildlife habitat.
Management Prescriptions 
Here we describe ecological restoration prescriptions and 
compatible silvicultural prescriptions for dwarf mistletoe in 
southwestern ponderosa pine stands (Figure 1). Prescriptions 
should be based on stand infestation level, site productivity, 
and management objectives. A walk-through of the stand to 
determine infestation levels is always necessary before making 
prescription decisions or marking trees. Flexibility is key, as 
mistletoe infestation can be a gradient within the stand with 
severe infestation in some areas and light infestation within 
others. Management should be ﬂexible and based on improving 
forest health and achieving desired forest conditions while 
providing ecological value across the landscape. The presence 
of dwarf mistletoe in a stand should not inﬂuence treatment 
priorities (Conklin and Fairweather 2010). Use of prescribed 
ﬁre and thinning can be beneﬁcial to reduce fuels and ﬁre risk, 
provide wildlife habitat, and improve the growth of remaining 
trees and vegetation (Conklin and Fairweather 2010). On 
productive sites with effective tree spacing, tree growth will 
outpace the spread and intensiﬁcation of dwarf mistletoe. 
Larger infected trees can survive for decades, as mistletoe 
infection intensiﬁes at a slower rate in these large trees, 
and prescriptions can include retaining some large, severely 
infected presettlement trees within some groups. Severely 
infested stands may be deferred from management. Use of 
prescribed ﬁre and re-treatment is necessary.
infected trees by scorching infected branches and witches’ 
brooms, inﬂict mortality on severely infested trees, and reduce 
seed crops of mistletoe plants via smoke and heat (Koonce and 
Roth 1980, Conklin and Armstrong 2001). Prescribed ﬁres are 
necessary in severely infested stands where surface fuel levels 
are higher due to resinous witches’ brooms, dead branches, and 
snags (Conklin and Armstrong 2001, Koonce and Roth 1985).
Thinning and burning have proved to be effective 
tools toward achieving management goals and addressing 
mistletoe infection levels (Harrington and Hawksworth 1990, 
Conklin and Armstrong 2001, Conklin and Geils 2008); and 
repeated entries are needed to achieve these goals. The return 
of ﬁre to the landscape is a necessary management tool in 
addressing mistletoe spread and intensity. Moderate severity 
ﬁre, underburning, and torching of the lower branches has 
proven effective in reducing southwestern dwarf mistletoe in 
ponderosa pine forests (Alexander and Hawksworth 1975, 
Conklin and Geils 2008). Underburning and scorching of 
infected trees can help keep the disease in check if sufﬁcient 
torch levels are achieved without killing the tree. For example, 
underburning, where an average of 50 percent crown scorch 
is achieved, can set back dwarf mistletoe infection levels 10 
years (Conklin and Geils 2008). In ponderosa pine forests, 
stand level DMR declined 0.3–1.6 percent 3–8 years following 
prescribed burns, and the proportion of infected trees declined 
5–18 percent (Conklin and Armstrong 2001).
In recent years, managers recognize the need to restore 
the natural ﬁre regime to our forests by implementing fuels 
reduction and forest restoration programs in the western 
United States. The Healthy Forest Initiative (2002) and the 
Healthy Forests Restoration Act of 2003 aim to reduce wildﬁre 
risk across western forests using thinning and prescribed 
ﬁre treatments. Fuels treatments (mechanical thinning and 
burning) are common in many western forests to reduce 
wildﬁre risk and return forests to the natural range of variability 
in terms of tree density, size and age classes, and fuel loads. 
Thinning and burning treatments used together can reduce 
A young, local infection of 
southwestern dwarf mistletoe 
causes a ponderosa pine 
branch to swell. Photo by 
Mary Lou Fairweather

7
Restoration as a Mechanism to Manage Southwestern Dwarf Mistletoe in Ponderosa Pine Forests
Ecological Restoration Institute  •฀฀WORKING PAPER 39  
Figure 1. This figure portrays southwestern dwarf mistletoe within a landscape context. Prescriptions are at 
the stand level, but management goals and overall landscape objectives will need to be taken in to account. 
For example, if near the WUI, use of fire only may not be feasible. Prescriptions are flexible, and a stand walk 
through and assessment of DM infestation and DMR rating is always necessary.
Presettlement trees means all trees that established when natural disturbance processes were intact.
8
Ecological Restoration Institute  •฀฀WORKING PAPER 39    Restoration as a Mechanism to Manage Southwestern Dwarf Mistletoe in Ponderosa Pine Forests
Severe DM infestation:
Use of fire only. Severely 
infested stands may be 
deferred and allowed to 
burn or left as wildfire 
habitat.
Compatible Silvicultural 
Prescription 
Light to Moderate DM infestation:
•฀
Uneven-aged฀prescriptions฀that฀are฀
relatively open, maintaining groups of 
presettlement trees (old trees) with 
interspaces฀and฀openings฀(40-80฀ft฀
between groups).
•฀
Group฀selection฀with฀thinning฀in฀the฀matrix;฀
Retain all presettlement trees and use 
interspaces and openings with intergroup 
spacing฀of฀40-80฀ft.
•฀
Be฀flexible฀and฀take฀advantage฀of฀
opportunities to leave size/age class 
diversity.
•฀
Repeated฀entries฀with฀prescribed฀fire฀are฀
necessary to maintain openings.
Moderate to Severe DM infestation:
•฀
Even-aged฀management฀maintaining฀groups฀
of฀presettlement฀trees฀and฀openings฀(40-80฀ft฀
between groups).
•฀
Group฀selection฀with฀thinning฀between฀
groups. Retain all presettlement trees and 
remove all blackjacks. Maintain openings 
and฀interspaces฀(40-80฀ft฀between฀groups).
•฀
Be฀flexible.฀If฀DM฀infestation฀is฀patchy,฀may฀
need to divide up stand at treat accordingly. 
Take advantage of opportunities to leave 
size/age class diversity.
•฀
Repeated฀entries฀with฀prescribed฀fire฀are฀
necessary to maintain openings.
Use historic site evidences to inform stand density and presettlement leave trees. Maintain groups of 
presettlement trees with openings and interspaces. Thinning of infested understory and dense trees 
complements management. Regeneration maintained at historic levels with fire. Repeated entries with 
prescribed fire are necessary.

Restoration as a Mechanism to Manage Southwestern Dwarf Mistletoe in Ponderosa Pine Forests
9
Ecological Restoration Institute  •฀฀WORKING PAPER 39  
Summary
Southwestern dwarf mistletoe is part of the ponderosa pine 
ecosystem and should managed accordingly — whether it is 
to provide wildlife habitat, reduce ﬁre risk, or improve timber 
resources. The management objectives will determine the levels 
of dwarf mistletoe left within a stand. Dwarf mistletoe stand 
level infestation increases relatively slowly, allowing time to plan 
management activities and re-entries. Infested trees can live for 
decades and provide snags that promote structural diversity within 
a stand. Southwestern dwarf mistletoe affects all sizes and ages 
of trees. Lightly infected trees can survive for several decades, 
and smaller, severely infected trees die more quickly than larger 
infected trees (Hawksworth and Geils 1990).
The overall distribution of dwarf mistletoe and the 
percentage of the landscape affected by dwarf mistletoe 
is thought to have only modestly increased from historic 
conditions; however, the overall intensity and abundance 
of mistletoe is thought to have increased (Conklin and 
Fairweather 2010), likely due to the increased density of trees. 
Dwarf mistletoe is part of the forest ecosystem and increases 
biodiversity within the forest (Tinnin 1984, Bennetts and 
Hawksworth 1991, Mathiasen 1996, Watson 2001). Dwarf 
mistletoe is beneﬁcial to a multitude of species including 
insects, birds, and mammals by providing food sources, storage 
sites, resting areas, and nesting sites (Hawksworth and Geils 
1990, Hawksworth and Wiens 1996, Mathiasen 1996). 
Mistletoe infection levels today are a result of previous 
management practices across the West, especially selection 
cutting (Conklin and Fairweather 2010), where selective and 
partial cuts tend to favor mistletoe spread and release after 
thinning (Conklin 2003, Bickford et al. 2005). Selection cuts 
should be avoided, and prescriptions should be based on a 
stand exam of mistletoe infestation levels, site productivity, and 
management objectives. Fire suppression and selection cutting 
have been important drivers of dwarf mistletoe intensiﬁcation 
and distribution across western forests (Alexander and 
Hawksworth 1975, Koonce and Roth 1985, Hawksworth and 
Weins 1996, Conklin 2000). Disruption of natural ﬁre regimes 
has increased the severity and distribution of dwarf mistletoe 
across the landscape (Maffei and Beaty 1988, Hawksworth and 
Weins 1996, Conklin 2000, Conklin and Fairweather 2010).
Using ecological restoration principles, managers can 
design treatments that restore groups of presettlement trees 
and openings where overall stand health is improved to 
address mistletoe spread and intensiﬁcation. Reducing the 
density of trees, creating openings and interspace between 
groups of trees, and using prescribed ﬁre of sufﬁcient intensity 
to maintain openings are all effective tools in addressing 
mistletoe spread and intensiﬁcation in southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests (Conklin and Fairweather 2010). 
Healthy stands can have a manageable amount of mistletoe 
within them. Use of prescribed ﬁre can reduce the incidence 
of mistletoe, especially when used in tandem with mechanical 
thinning treatments (Parker et al. 2006, Hessburg et al. 2008). 
Periodic low-intensity ﬁres can inhibit new regeneration 
in a stand, eliminate infected regeneration, and maintain 
openings (Alexander and Hawksworth 1975). Use of 
moderate intensity ﬁre can prune infected trees by scorching 
lower infected branches and witches’ brooms, inﬂict mortality 
on severely infested trees, and reduce seed dispersal from 
mistletoe plants via smoke and heat (Koonce and Roth 1980, 
Conklin and Armstrong 2001).
Management should focus on improving the health 
of remaining trees, forest health, maintaining biological 
diversity, stand dynamics, and reducing ﬁre risk by reducing 
uncharacteristic tree densities. Management should be 
based on the speciﬁc needs and objectives for each area, 
within a framework that considers the overall landscape and 
forest conditions (Conklin 2000). Silvicultural prescriptions 
should incorporate mistletoe as an important wildlife habitat 
component, and management should focus on managing dwarf 
mistletoe as part of the stand, not controlling or eradicating it.
Climate, site microclimates, past management efforts, and 
ﬁre history are all important drivers of current dwarf mistletoe 
abundance and distribution (Parker et al. 2006, Conklin and 
Fairweather 2010). The interaction between climate, ﬁre, 
insects, and disease can have large effects on western forests 
and are likely to become more pronounced in the future, 
especially during drought years and climate oscillations. Trees 
that are stressed and weakened by insects and/or pathogens are 
more susceptible to mortality during ﬁre events (Harrington 
and Hawksworth 1990, Conklin and Armstrong 2001). 
Genetics of host and pathogen and the interactions in the 
environment will also be important variables in future dwarf 
mistletoe abundance and distribution.
Management Recommendations
• 
Forest restoration treatments that return and maintain 
ponderosa pine forests within their evolutionary envelope 
of forest structure and natural disturbances is an effective 
tool to address mistletoe spread and intensiﬁcation in 
southwestern ponderosa pine forests.
• 
In lightly and moderately infested stands, restoration treat-
ments that thin uncharacteristically dense stands can be 
effective in addressing dwarf mistletoe intensity. 
• 
Retain presettlement trees, even if dwarf mistletoe is present.
• 
Prescribed ﬁre at sufﬁcient intensity can manage dwarf 
mistletoe levels; however one entry is rarely enough to 
achieve desired conditions. Multiple entries are needed 
and should be planned for.
• 
Some severely infested stands should be deferred from 
treatment and allowed to burn or be managed for wildlife 
habitat.
• 
Be ﬂexible. If dwarf mistletoe infestation is patchy, man-
agers should divide up the stand and treat accordingly. 
Take advantage of opportunities to leave size and age class 
diversity.

Restoration as a Mechanism to Manage Southwestern Dwarf Mistletoe in Ponderosa Pine Forests
10
Ecological Restoration Institute  •฀฀WORKING PAPER 39  
Literature Cited
Beatty, J.S. 1982. Integrated forest protection guide, southwestern 
dwarf mistletoe, Arceuthobium vaginatum subsp. 
cryptopodum (Engelm.) Hawks and Wiens, in ponderosa 
pine. USDA Forest Service R3-82-13. 12 p.
Bennetts, R.E., G.C. White, F.G. Hawksworth, and S.E. 
Severs. 1996. The inﬂuence of dwarf mistletoe on bird 
communities in Colorado ponderosa pine forests.
Ecological Applications 6:899–909.
Bickford, C.P., T.E. Kolb, B.W. Geils. 2005. Host physiological 
condition regulates parasitic plant performance: 
Arceuthobium vaginatum subsp. cryptopodum on Pinus 
ponderosa. Oecologia 146:179-189.
Conklin, D.A. and W.A. Armstrong. 2001. Effects of three 
prescribed ﬁres on dwarf mistletoe infection in 
southwestern ponderosa pine. USDA Forest Service, 
Southwestern Region, Forestry and Forest Health 
Report R3-01-02.
Conklin, D.A., and B.W.  Geils 2008. Survival and sanitation 
of dwarf mistletoe-infected ponderosa pine following 
prescribed underburning. Western Journal of Applied 
Forestry 23:216-222.
Conklin, D.A., and M.L. Fairweather. 2010. Dwarf mistletoe 
and their Management in the Southwest. USDA Forest 
Service, Southwestern Region, Forestry and Forest 
Health Report R3-10-01.
Cooper, C.F. 1960. Changes in vegetation, structure, and growth 
of southwestern pine forests since white settlement. 
Ecological Monographs 30:129–164.
Covington, W.W., and M.M. Moore. 1994a. Southwestern 
ponderosa forest structure: Changes since Euro-
American settlement. Journal of Forestry 92:39-47.
Covington, W.W., and M.M. Moore. 1994b. Postsettlement 
changes in natural ﬁre regimes: ecological restoration of 
old-growth ponderosa pine forests. Journal of Sustainable 
Forestry 2:153-18 1.
Covington W.W., P.Z. Fulé, M.M. Moore, S. Hart, T. Kolb, J. 
Mast, S. Sackett, M. Wagner. 1997. Restoring ecosystem 
health in ponderosa pine forest of the Southwest. 
Journal of Forestry 95:23-29.
Dahms, C.W., and B.W. Geils. tech. eds. 1997. An assessment of 
forest ecosystem health in the Southwest. USDA Forest 
Service, RM-GTR-295. 97 p.
DeWald, L.E., and M.F. Mahalovich. 2008. Historical and 
contemporary lessons from Ponderosa pine genetic 
studies at the Fort Valley Experimental Forest, Arizona. 
In: Olberding, Susan D., and Moore, Margaret M., tech 
coords. 2008. Fort Valley Experimental Forest—A Century 
of Research 1908-2008. Proceedings RMRS-P-53CD. 
Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 408 p.
Fulé, P.Z., C. McHugh, T.A. Heinlein, and W.W. Covington. 
2001. Potential ﬁre behavior is reduced following 
forest restoration treatments. In: Vance RK, Covington 
WW, Edminster CB, Blake J (Eds.), Ponderosa 
Pine Ecosystems Restoration and Conservation: 
Steps Towards Stewardship. USDA Forest Service, 
Proclamation RMRS-P-22, pp. 28-35.
Ganey, J.L., D.L. Apprill, T.A. Rawlinson, S.C. Kyle, R.S. Jonnes, 
and J.P. Ward, Jr. 2013. Nesting habitat of Mexican 
Spotted Owls in the Sacramento Mountains, New 
Mexico. Journal of Wildlife Management 77:1426–1435.
Garnett, G.N., C.L. Chambers, and R.L. Mathiasen. 2006. Use 
of witches’ brooms by Abert Squirrels in Ponderosa pine 
forests. Wildlife Society Bulletin 34(2):467–472.
Geils, B.W, and R.L. Mathiasen. 1990. Intensiﬁcation of dwarf 
mistletoe on Southwestern Douglas-ﬁr. Forest Science 
36:955-969.
Grissino-Mayer, H.D., and T.W. Swetnam. 2000. Century-
scale climate forcing of ﬁre regimes in the American 
Southwest. Holocene 10:213–220.
Harrington, M.G., and F.G. Hawksworth. 1990. Interactions of 
ﬁre and dwarf mistletoe on mortality of southwestern 
ponderosa pine. In: Krammes JS (Ed.), Effects of Fire 
Management on Southwestern Forest Resources. USDA 
Forest Service, General Technical Report RM-191, pp. 
234-240.
Hawksworth, F.G. 1977. The 6-class dwarf mistletoe rating 
system. USDA Forest Service, General Technical 
Report RM-48.
Hawksworth, F.G., and B.W. Geils. 1990. How long do 
mistletoe-infected ponderosa pines live? Western Journal 
of Applied Forestry 5:47-48.
Hawksworth, F.G, and D. Weins. 1996. Dwarf mistletoes:  
biology, pathology, and systematics. USDA Forest 
Service, Agriculture Handbook 709.
Hawksworth, F.G., and B.W. Geils. 2002. Damage, effects, and 
importance of dwarf mistletoe. In: Geils BW, Tovar 
JC, Moody B (Eds.), Mistletoes of North American 
Conifers. USDA Forest Service, General Technical 
Report RMRS-GTR-98, pp. 57-66.
Hedwall, S.J., and R.L. Mathiasen. 2006. Wildlife use of Douglas-ﬁr 
dwarf mistletoe witches’ brooms in the Southwest. Western 
North American Naturalist 66:450–455.
Hedwall, S.J., C.L. Chambers, and S.S. Rosenstock. 2006. Red 
squirrel use of dwarf mistletoe-induced witches’ brooms 
in Douglas-ﬁr. The Journal of Wildlife Management. 
Heidmann, L.J. 1968. Silvicultural control of dwarf mistletoe in heavily 
infected stands of ponderosa pine in the Southwest. USDA 
Forest Service, Research Paper RM-36. 
Herman, F.R. 1961. Silvicultrual control of dwarf mistletoe on 
southwestern ponderosa pine. USDA Forest Service, 
Station Paper No. 62.
Hessburg, P.F., N.A. Povak, and R.B. Salter. 2008. Thinning and 
prescribed ﬁre effects on dwarf mistletoe severity in an 
eastern Cascade Range dry forest, Washington. Forest 
Ecology and Management 225:2907-2915.
Hoffman, C.M., R.L. Mathiasen, and C.H. Sieg. 2007. Dwarf 
mistletoe effects on fuel loadings in ponderosa pine 
forests in northern Arizona. Canadian Journal of Forest 
Research 37:662–670.
Hudler, G.W., N. Oshima, and F.G. Hawksworth. 1979. Bird 
dissemination of dwarf mistletoe on ponderosa pine in 
Colorado. American Midland Naturalist 102:273–280.

Restoration as a Mechanism to Manage Southwestern Dwarf Mistletoe in Ponderosa Pine Forests
11
Ecological Restoration Institute  •฀฀WORKING PAPER 39  
Kaufmann, M.R., L.S. Huckaby, C.M. Regan, and J. Popp. 1998. 
Forest reference conditions for ecosystem management 
in the Sacramento Mountains, New Mexico. U.S. Forest 
Service General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-19.
Koonce, A.L., and L.F. Roth. 1980. The effects of prescribed 
burning on dwarf mistletoe in ponderosa pine. 
Proceedings of the Sixth Conference on Fire and 
Forest Meteorology, pgs 197–203. Society of American 
Foresters, Washington, District of Columbia.
Koonce, A.L., and L.F. Roth. 1985. The effects of dwarf mistletoe 
on fuel in pre-commercial ponderosa pine stands. 
In: Proceedings of the 8th Conference on Fire and 
Forest Meteorology, Seattle WA. Society of American 
Foresters, Washington DC, pp. 66-72.
Maffei, H., and J. Beatty. 1988. Changes in the incidence of dwarf 
mistletoe over 30 years in the Southwest. Pages 88–90 
in B.J. VanDerKamp, editor, Proceedings of the 36th 
Annual Western International Forest Disease Work 
Conference. Department of Forest Sciences, University 
of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, 
Canada.
Maloney, P.E., T.F. Smith, C.E. Jensen, J. Innes, D.M. Rizzo, 
and M.P. North. 2008. Initial tree mortality and insect 
and pathogen response to ﬁre and thinning restoration 
treatments in an old-growth mixed-conifer forest of the 
Sierra Nevada, California. Canadian Journal of Forest 
Research, 38(12): 3011–3020
Mast, J.N., P.Z. Fulé, M.M. Moore, W.W. Covington, and 
A.E.M. Waltz. 1999. Restoration of presettlement age 
structure of an Arizona ponderosa pine forest. Ecological 
Applications 9:228–239.
Mathiasen, R.L. 1996. Dwarf mistletoes in forest canopies. 
Northwest Science 70:61-71.
May, C.A., M. L. Petersburg, and R.J. Gutiérrez. 2004. Mexican 
spotted owl nest- and roost-site habitat in northern 
Arizona. Journal of Wildlife Management 68:1054–1064.
Moore, M.M., W.W. Covington, and P.Z. Fulé. 1999. Reference 
conditions and ecological restoration: a southwestern 
ponderosa pine perspective. Ecological Applications 9(4), 
1999, pp. 1266–1277.
Parker, T.K., C.L. Chambers, and R.L. Mathiasen. 2017. Dwarf 
mistletoe and breeding bird abundance in ponderosa 
pine forests. Western North American Naturalist 77(1): 
40-50.
Parks, C.G., and E.L. Bull. 1997. American marten use of rust 
and dwarf mistletoe brooms in northeastern Oregon. 
Western Journal of Applied Forestry 12:131–133.
Parks, C.G., E.L. Bull, R.O. Tinnin, J.F. Shepard, and A.K. 
Blumton. 1999. Wildlife use of dwarf mistletoe brooms 
in Douglas-ﬁr in northeast Oregon. Western Journal of 
Applied Forestry 14:100–105.
Reich, R.M., J. Lundquist, and V.A. Bravo. 2000. Spatial 
relationship of resident and migratory birds and 
canopy openings in diseased ponderosa pine forests. 
Environmental Modeling and Software 15:189–197.
Parmeter, J.R., Jr. 1978. Forest stand dynamics and ecological 
factors in relation to dwarf mistletoe spread, impact, and 
control. In: Scharpf RF, Parmeter JR (Eds.), Proceedings 
of the Symposium on Dwarf Mistletoe Control Through 
Forest Management. USDA Forest Service, General 
Technical Report PSW-31, pp.16-30.
Saab, V.A., C.E. Bock, T.D. Rich, and D.S. Dobkin. 1995. Livestock 
grazing effects in western North America. Pages 311–356 
in T.E. Martin and D.M. Finch, editors, Ecology and 
management of neotropical migratory birds. Oxford 
University Press, New York, NY.
Seamans, M.E., and R.J. Gutiérrez. 1995. Breeding habitat 
ecology of the Mexican spotted owl in the Tularosa 
Mountains, New Mexico. Condor 97:944–952.
Stanton, S., and K.S. Hadley. 2010. Inﬂuence of western dwarf 
mistletoe (Arceurhobium campylopodum Engelm.) on 
surface fuels and snag abundance in mature Ponderosa 
pine and mixed conifer stands in central Oregon. 
Natural Areas Journal 30(3):261-270.
Swetnam, T.W., and C.H. Baisan. 1996. Historical ﬁre regime 
patterns in the southwestern United States since AD 
1700. Pages 11-32 in C. D. Allen, editor. Proceedings of 
the 2nd La Mesa Fire Symposium. U.S. Forest Service 
General Technical Report RM-GTR-286, Rocky 
Mountain  Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort 
Collins, Colorado, USA.
Tinnin, R.O. 1982. Witches’ broom formation in conifers 
infected by Arceuthobium spp.: an example of parasitic 
impact upon community dynamics. American Midland 
Naturalist 107:351–359.
Tinnin, R.O. 1984. The effect of dwarf mistletoe on forest 
community ecology. Pages 117–122 in F.G. 
Hawksworth, and R.F. Scharpf, technical coordinators. 
Proceedings of the symposium on biology of dwarf 
mistletoes. United States Forest Service Research Paper 
111. Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA.
Tinnin, R.O. 1998. An alternative to the 6-class dwarf mistletoe 
rating system. Western Journal of Applied Forestry 13:64–
65.
Smith, L., R. Hofstetter, and R. Mathiasen. 2013. Insect 
communities associated with Douglas-ﬁr dwarf 
mistletoe witches’ brooms in northern Arizona. 
Southwestern Naturalist 58:395–402. 

Restoration as a Mechanism to Manage Southwestern Dwarf Mistletoe in Ponderosa Pine Forests
12
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Afﬁrmative Action Institution.
This report was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.
For more information about forest restoration, contact the ERI at (928) 523-7182 or nau.edu/eri.
Working Papers in Intermountain West
Frequent-Fire Forest Restoration
 1. Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons and Adaptive Management Practices
 2. Understory Plan Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
 3. Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
 4. Fules Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Beneﬁts
 5. Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
 6. Butterﬂies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
 7. Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
 8. Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
 9. Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
 10. The Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Restoration Model
 11. Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration
 12. Restoring Forest Roads
 13. Treating Slash after Restoration Thinning
 14. Integrating Forest Restoration Treatments with mexican Spotted Owl Habitat Needs
 15. Effects of Forest Thinning Treatments on Fire Behavior
 16. Snags and Forest Restoration
 17. Bat Habitat and Forest Restoration Treatments
 18. Prescribed and Wildland Use Fires in the Southwest: Do Timing and Frequency Matter?
 19. Understory Seeding in Southwestern Forests Following Wildﬁre and Ecological Restoration Treatments
 20. Controlling Cheatgrass in Ponderosa Pine and Pinyon-Juniper Restoration Areas
 21. Managing Coarse Woody Debris in Frequent-ﬁre Southwestern Forests
 22. Restoring Spatial Pattern to Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
 23. Guidelines for Managing Small Mammals in Restored Ponderosa Pine Forests of Northern Arizona
 24. Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Burning
 25. Strategies for Enhancing and Restoring Rare Plants and Their Habitats in the Face  
  of Climate Change and Habitat Destruction in the Intermountain West
26. Wildlife Habitat Values and Forest Structure in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine: Implications for Restoration
 27. Fuel Treatment Longevity
 28. Southwestern Mixed-Conifer Forests: Evaluating Reference Conditions to Guide Ecological Restoration Treatments
 29. Post-Wildﬁre Restoration of Structure, Composition, and Function in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine  
  and Warm/Dry Mixed-Conifer Forests
 30. Impact of Forest Restoration Treatments on Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Tree Resistance to Bark Beetles
 31. Climage Change Impact on Bark Beetle Outbreaks and the Impact of Outbreaks on Subsequent Fires
 32. An Evaluation of Fire Regime Recontstruction Methods
 33. The 2012 Mexican Spotted Owl Recovery Plan Guidelines for Forest Restoration in the American Southwest
 34. Climate Change and Fire in the Southwest
 35. Carbon Cycling in Southwestern Forests: Reservoirs, Fluxes, and the Effects of Fire and Management
 36. Wildlife and Fire: Impacts of Wildﬁre Prescribed Fire on Wildlife and Habitats in Southwestern Coniferous Forests
 37.  The Inﬂuence of Restoration Treatments on Hydrologic Output in Fire-Adapted Forests of the Southwest
38. Reference Conditions and Restoration of Transitional Ponderosa Pine Forests in the Southwest

P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
eri.nau.edu
Ecological 
Restoration 
Institute
College of Engineering, Forestry,  
and Natural Sciences
