The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Using Best Available Science: Determining Best and Available  
 
By Bryce E. Esch, Program Coordinator 
 
Introduction 
Best available science information, often referred to as BASI, is the platform for well-informed decision 
making in natural resource and land use planning, policy, and management. As pressures from climate 
change, large-scale disturbance, and land use change increase, synthesizing BASI is crucial for planning 
and managing public lands and resources at large spatial and temporal scales. A single objective determi-
nation of “best” science can require rigorous methodology and capacity that is beyond most BASI users, 
so it is important for managers to consider all the science tools available. Embracing a variety of BASI 
sources and looking beyond traditional peer-review literature for additional resources can provide a wider 
range of science information options and add flexibility for land managers. 
 
Defining BASI 
The use of BASI is advised or mandated in many public land, resource management, and environmental 
laws, policies, and regulations, yet there is no single definition of “best available science” across land 
management agency directives. Agencies that use BASI in their guidance include the US National Park 
Service, the Bureau of Land Management, and the US Forest Service (USFS). In the 2012 Planning Rule, 
the USFS goes furthest in their definition, identifying BASI as the science “most accurate, reliable, and 
relevant to the issues being considered.”  
 
The academic literature defines effective BASI as credible, salient, legitimate, and usable. Credible 
information is developed according to rigorous scientific standards; salient information is relevant given 
the context; and legitimate information is that which has been produced in an unbiased and fair way. 
These terms crosswalk with the USFS terms respectively: (1) Accurate – Credible; (2) Reliable – Legiti-
mate; and (3) Relevant – Salient.  
 
Sources of Science Information 
Peer-Reviewed Literature 
Peer-reviewed articles published in academic journals are typ-
ically the highest quality sources of accurate and reliable sci-
ence information, as they are reviewed by one to three anony-
mous experts in the field and revised accordingly.  
 
Grey Literature Sources 
Grey literature is a broad category that varies from easily ac-
cessed to hard-to-find, local, and specific to broadly applica-
ble. Grey literature includes white papers, working papers, 
general technical reports (GTRs), government documents, 
theses and dissertations, and conference proceedings. The 
quality of information can be more variable than that in peer-
reviewed journals. 
August 2018 
Best available science information can come 
from many sources, including local, place-
based data  Photo by ERI 

Traditional, Local, Expert, and Institutional Ecological Knowledge Sources 
Traditional and local ecological knowledge is insight and knowledge about a species or ecosystem de-
veloped through interaction with the environment in specific places over time. Expert and institutional 
knowledge is information on a certain subject not widely known by others, and often comes from spe-
cialists in a particular field or subject. 
 
 
Weight of Evidence—Systematic Evaluation of Available Science 
The evidence-based conservation method uses a systematic review process to assess not just the availa-
ble evidence in peer-reviewed literature, but the quality based on rigorous criteria. Systematic reviews 
diverge from conventional literature reviews by differentiating between the quality of the sources and 
the rigor of the experimental design.  
 
Using Context to Determine BASI Requirements 
The quality of the information available, the timeframe of availability, and the management or policy 
question at hand are all important factors in determining BASI. While evaluating the best science in a 
scientifically defendable way is a rigorous process, not all management contexts call for, or allow for, 
this level of precision to address a science need. 
 
Management and planning issues that are supported by strong scientific consensus and low levels of 
conflict typically do not require much additional assessment. When the relevant peer-reviewed literature 
meets accuracy and reliability criteria and provides consistent answers, resource managers can easily 
justify the incorporation of that science into their management needs. 
 
When addressing contentious management issues, the BASI used should meet the highest level of 
accuracy and reliability; both peer-reviewed journals and GTRs are appropriate. Contradictory scientific 
outcomes also require a more rigorous weight-of-evidence process. Systematic reviews are the most rig-
orous way to determine the “best” component of BASI, and because of this level of rigor, systematic 
reviews are particularly useful in providing clear assessments of available science when there is conflict-
ing peer review science, when management objectives conflict, or when the total knowledge on a subject 
area is needed. 
 
Expert opinion and local and institutional knowledge can provide highly relevant science infor-
mation for the right questions, although not all sources may meet accuracy or reliability standards based 
on the USFS 2012 Planning Rule definitions. These science sources are often place-based and can be 
helpful to inform both manager and stakeholder learning for locally relevant “status of knowledge” in-
formation. 
 
When science information is lacking, co-production of science—the process of developing specific 
questions, the approach to addressing those questions, and the resulting research, analysis, and applica-
tion of findings—is used more frequently as an all-inclusive approach to developing strategies and solu-
tions to large-scale resource and land management issues. This approach could be further utilized in land 
and resource management to fill local knowledge gaps, as well as broad, pressing scientific issues. 
 
By using a flexible approach and narrowing BASI options based on management context and ques-
tions, both land managers and stakeholders can better understand what sources would best fit their sci-
ence need, which facilitates defendable decision-making. 
 
Additional Reading 
Charnley, S., C. Carothers, T. Satterfield, A. Levine, M.R. Poe, K. Norman, J. Donatuto, S.J. Breslow, M.B. Mascia, 
P.S. Levin, X. Basurto, C.C. Hicks, C. García-Quijano, and K. St. Martin. 2017. Evaluating the best available 
social science for natural resource management decision-making. Environmental Science and Policy, 73: 80-88. 
Cash, D.W., W.C. Clark, F. Alcock, N.M. Dickson, N. Eckley, D.H. Guston, J. Jager, and R.B. Mitchell. 2003. 
Knowledge systems for sustainable development. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 100(14), 
8086-8091. 
Pullin, A.S., and G.B. Stewart. 2006. Guidelines for systematic review in conservation and environmental management. 
Conservation Biology, 20(6): 1647-1656. 
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following journal article: 
Esch, B.E., A.E.M. Waltz, T.N. Wasserman, and E.L. Kalies. 2018. Using Best Available Science Information: 
Determining Best and Available. Journal of Forestry, 116(5):473–480. 
Contact: Bryce Esch, Bryce.Esch@nau.edu 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
