 
 
 
 
 
ACCELERATING RESTORATION IMPLEMENTATION WORKSHOP  
 
November 29-30, 2017 
Phoenix, Arizona 
 
 
 
 
 
Prepared by 
Ecological Restoration Institute 
Northern Arizona University 
PO Box 15017 
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017 
 
 
February 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Workshop Purpose and Need ...............................................................................................1 
Workshop Description .........................................................................................................2 
Workshop Goals ..................................................................................................................2 
Workshop Discussion ..........................................................................................................3 
Current Efforts to Increase Efficiency .....................................................................3 
What Needs to Change? ...........................................................................................6 
Participant Reactions...............................................................................................7 
Developing Innovations ...........................................................................................8 
Workshop Outcomes ............................................................................................................8 
Next Steps ..........................................................................................................................10 
Future Involvement and Communication ..........................................................................11 
Observations from the Workshop ......................................................................................11 
Conclusion .........................................................................................................................12 
Appendices .........................................................................................................................12 
Appendix A: Workshop Participants ......................................................................13 
Appendix B: Workshop Agenda .............................................................................15 
Appendix C: Actions Matrix...................................................................................19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider. 
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service. 
Contact: Melanie Colavito, melanie.colavito@nau.edu; Diane Vosick, diane.vosick@nau.edu

1 
 
Workshop Purpose and Need 
The United States Forest Service (Forest Service) is under tremendous pressure to increase the 
pace and scale of forest restoration. Fiscal Year 2017 was the most expensive fire season on 
record, yet because the escalating cost of fire gobbles up more and more of the annual budget, 
the resources needed to manage lands and prevent catastrophic fire are in steady decline. In order 
to make the most with limited funding, Forest Service processes and operations must become 
more time and cost efficient or be revamped altogether to restore southwestern forests before 
they are lost to catastrophic fire. This was the message delivered by Forest Service Chief Tony 
Tooke in September 2017 to leaders from throughout the Forest Service at a recent national 
workshop focused on identifying actions that will improve efficiency in the environmental 
analysis and decision making arena.  
 
Recent experiences in northern Arizona demonstrate that it is equally important to decrease the 
time and effort it takes to implement treatments from a signed record of decision (ROD) to the 
processing facility. This is not news to the Forest Service. Starting with a 2013 Sale Preparation 
Task Force that analyzed sale preparation and cruising costs, actions have been taken to improve 
implementation procedures. The Washington Office formed the cross-cutting Forest Products 
Modernization Team “to better align our culture, policies and procedures with current and future 
forest restoration needs, in order to increase the pace and scale of restoration.”   
 
There are more than 500,000 acres approved through NEPA and ready for implementation by the 
Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI). Unfortunately, many of these acres are characterized 
by large quantities of small diameter trees that do not provide a significant return on the 
investment needed to remove them from the forest. Cutting these trees and leaving them in place 
is not a feasible alternative either. Like many Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration 
(CFLR) programs, 4FRI is struggling to 
attract private industry that will harvest and 
utilize low value wood. Industry today is 
reticent to make large upfront investments 
where most of the wood is sourced from 
public land due to concerns about the pace at 
which the Forest Service is able to prepare, 
offer, and then implement a reliable flow of 
contracts and agreements. With so many 
acres ready for treatment, the 4FRI provides 
a perfect opportunity to identify and test 
innovative approaches to implementation 
that will reduce the time it takes to get from 
ROD to the processing facility. Lessons 
from the 4FRI experience may prove to be 
useful to projects facing similar challenges 
across the intermountain West.  
 
The 4FRI boundary includes lands from four national forests: 
Apache-Sitgreaves, Coconino, Kaibab, and Tonto.  

2 
 
Workshop Description  
In early 2016, the Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI) at Northern Arizona University 
proposed to the Forest Service 4FRI Innovations and Efficiencies Coordinator to organize a 
workshop for the Forest Service focused on improving implementation processes and 
procedures. It was apparent that changes were needed to achieve the 4FRI goal of treating 50,000 
acres each year. The need for improving the efficiency of implementation had become acute as 
the Forest Service 4FRI team and national forest staff were stretched thin between planning for 
the second 4FRI Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) while implementing the first. For 
example, in 2017, local units were oversubscribed preparing nearly 35,000 acres of contract 
offerings. Concurrently, industry was urging the Forest Service to accelerate contract offerings 
on the east side of the 4FRI landscape while The Nature Conservancy (TNC) was developing a 
Stewardship Agreement to treat 20,000 acres on the west side. TNC’s goal was to identify and 
test faster, more cost effective approaches for preparation and administration of harvest 
operations that can be adopted by the private sector, with the goal of improving profitability and 
attracting new investment to accelerate acres treated.   
 
ERI included the coordination and facilitation of the workshop in its FY17 Work Plan (required 
under PL108-317). A workshop planning group was formed that included: Forest Service 4FRI 
staff, TNC, Campbell Global (a private timber management company working with TNC), and 
an Experience Matters Fellow (an Intel program for retirees) funded by TNC.  
 
Support for the “Accelerating Restoration Implementation Workshop” was widespread. On 
November 29 and 30, 2017, USFS staff representing the 4FRI team, the 4FRI national forests, 
Region 3, and the Washington Office assembled in Phoenix, Arizona to consider opportunities 
for innovation to be tested during 4FRI implementation. Specific Forest Service staff were 
invited to participate in order to ensure diverse representation from different levels and 
disciplines of the agency and encourage the development of creative, comprehensive, and 
accomplishable actions (see Appendix A for the participant list). The workshop participants 
included line officers such as forest supervisors, staff from contracting, grants, and agreements, 
and other disciplines associated with implementation from the 4FRI team, 4FRI national forests, 
Region 3, and the Washington Office. In addition, staff from TNC, Campbell Global, and 
NewLife Forest Products were present to provide industry perspectives on implementation issues 
and potential solutions. The meeting was coordinated and facilitated by ERI.   
 
Workshop Goals 
The goals for the workshop were to:  
 
1. Understand current efforts to improve efficiency for projects designed to remove low value 
wood and biomass (Modernization Team, the 2013 and 2015 Task Force Reports, and TNC 
lessons learned); 
2. Identify specific business and implementation practices that should be changed to accelerate 
implementation; 
3. Identify solutions that are implementable and testable as a part of the 4FRI project; and 
4. Identify Forest Service staff who will move identified solutions forward.  

3 
 
The workshop was designed to first provide participants with a common understanding of the 
issues and efforts before discussing topics in greater depth and working to identify solutions. A 
plenary format was used throughout the two days in order to facilitate listening and discussion 
across functional areas and institutional hierarchy represented by the workshop participants.  
 
Workshop Discussion  
This section follows the order of the workshop agenda. See Appendix B for the agenda. 
Current Efforts to Increase Efficiency  
The workshop began with presentations that provided an overview of past and current efforts to 
modernize Forest Service implementation processes and procedures. Each presenter was asked to 
identify three to four areas where the greatest improvements could be implemented to enhance 
efficiency based on their experience. Key points of the presentations are summarized below. 
 
David Cawrse, Center Manager, Forest Management Service Center, Washington Office  
Mr. Cawrse provided a succinct overview of the 2013/2015 Task Force Report: Issues and 
concerns on costs of sale preparation and cruising in the Forest Service. The two top 
recommendations from that effort have been implemented: 1) basic training for line officers of 
the sales preparation process, and 2) new authority (through the 2014 Farm Bill) to use more 
Designation by Prescription (DxP). One participant mentioned that the Forest Service Handbook 
has not been updated to reflect the new authorities so there are inconsistencies in the policy and 
implementation. 
 
Mr. Cawrse then described the work of the Modernization Team, which is an effort to align 
traditional volume-focused timber culture, policies, and procedures with current and future forest 
restoration needs. In particular, he noted that successful restoration cannot be exclusively timber-
based; however, many of the timber sale policies, procedures and practices are based on treating 
timber as a commodity. The Modernization Team plans to identify short and mid-term actions to 
be taken in the next 120 days.  
 
Mr. Cawrse’s suggestions for greatest improvements in efficiency: 
 
1. Use DxP at a larger scale. 
2. Use more and modern technology. 
3. Increase use of Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS). 
4. Revisit certification and training requirements.  
 
Rob Marshall, Director, Forest and Climate Change Program, The Nature Conservancy (TNC)  
Mr. Marshall discussed TNC’s experience developing a Master Stewardship Agreement to 
implement a 20,000-acre project on the west side of the 4FRI landscape. The key point he made 
was that the Stewardship Agreement took much longer than expected to finalize for a number of 
reasons. He also provided the rationale for TNC’s hiring their Experience Matters Fellow, Mike 
Kirby, to provide an independent time and efficiency analysis of the implementation process.  
 

4 
 
Mr. Marshall’s suggestions for the greatest improvements in efficiency:  
 
1. The overwhelming need today is to remove low-value, small-diameter wood across millions 
of acres to reduce the risk to forests and communities from catastrophic fire and a changing 
climate. Practices that focus on maximizing value from individual logs demand considerable 
overhead in personnel, time, and infrastructure and result in a misalignment of process with 
risk. Practices should instead focus on maximizing acres treated and ensuring restoration 
goals are accomplished. 
2. At the local level, there should be a team comprised of timber contracts, acquisition contracts 
and acquisition grants personnel, line officers, resource specialists, and operations personnel 
to discuss pathways to innovation. These conversations should include personnel who can 
discuss decisions that have financial and operational implications. The agency’s incident 
command structure provides a model for how to focus resources on challenges with great 
urgency. 
3. To empower that group, there should be a stronger statement of leadership intent in writing 
and in person that is continually reinforced. 
 
Mike Kirby, Experience Matters Fellow with TNC and former Intel employee 
Mr. Kirby used his experience as a strategic planner, capacity manager and project manager at 
Intel to analyze the implementation process. The philosophy he brought from Intel is that change 
is necessary for success. Intel uses informed risk taking and a focus on efficiency to accomplish 
rapid change. Mr. Kirby collected detailed data from Forest Service staff throughout Region 3 to 
understand where the most time is spent in 
the implementation process. He found that 
task order preparation, which includes 
prescription development, timber layout, 
mark and cruise, and sale preparation takes 
the most time. The second most time-
consuming category was resource surveys. 
The third was pre-task order land and 
engineering, including landline surveys, 
rights of ways and engineering (Figure 1). 
He observed that agency structure and 
culture does not enable agile planning, 
communication and execution, all of which 
will be required to increase efficiency and 
achieve success.  
 
The time and efficiency analysis also provided a window into what will happen if current 
processes do not improve. Figure 2 arrays three pieces of information to inform the future based 
on past performance. In order to achieve the goals of 4FRI (50,000 acres a year) using current 
approaches and contract sizes, the Forest Service will need to create and manage upwards of 40 
contracts and agreements on an annual basis.  
 
Figure 1. Relative amount of time spent on tasks. 

5 
 
  
 
Based on Mr. Kirby’s analysis it will be impossible to achieve the 4FRI goal of thinning and 
burning 50,000 acres a year using current and conventional approaches.  
 
When asked how to achieve greater efficiency his response was:  
 
1. Focus attention on areas where greatest efficiency can be achieved.  
2. Seek new, efficient solutions, rather than always trying to fix the current processes. 
3. Change the “can’t do” culture that exists today with one that is positive and creative.  
4. Drive for immediate implementation of large-scale changes and innovations to meet 4FRI 
objectives and Forest Service goals. 
 
Dick Fleishman, 4FRI Operations Coordinator 
Mr. Fleishman summarized a list of recommendations that was sent to the participants prior to 
the workshop. The list was generated by analyzing and adding to existing recommendations. 
Specifically, the CFLR Annual Report identified 17 short-term needs to improve processes 
moving forward. The 4FRI Industry Working Group also developed 25 recommendations. 
Layout and marking of boundaries, paint, cruise, and check cruise are the highest costs incurred 
during implementation.  
 
Mr. Fleishman’s suggestions for the greatest improvements in efficiency: 
 
1. Understanding what authorities exist in sale layout, boundary flexibility, log accountability 
and branding waivers. 
2. Cultural change. 
3. Developing an understanding of the entire process instead of each individual focusing on 
individual components. This understanding is needed across the Forest Service to industry.  
Figure 2. This figure shows 
the past and current acres 
awarded and harvested. It 
reveals several problems. In 
order to achieve the 4FRI 
annual goal of 50,000 acres 
of mechanical treatment per 
year more markets will be 
needed to stimulate 
investment as industry is not 
harvesting as many acres as 
the Forest Service is 
awarding. In addition, based 
on current approaches the 
Forest Service will be required 
to prepare and manage many 
more contracts.   
 

6 
 
Other Innovative Efforts 
A participant from the Cibola National Forest noted that they are now measuring decks for 
volume instead of cruising.  
 
Major Discussion Themes  
A number of major themes emerged during the following discussion. Cultural issues and their 
associated challenges were a recurring theme. These challenges were acknowledged as one of the 
biggest impediments to change. One participant stated that if the Forest Service had known in the 
past the problems that would need solving today, the Forest Service would not have designed the 
implementation process as it currently exists.   
 
Industry participants expressed interest in better understanding the Forest Service valuation 
process because it has a large impact on business success. Some Forest Service participants 
responded by stating that the Forest Service focuses more on the supply side and lacks focus on 
and understanding of the demand side and the capacity of operators. The general implication is 
that previously, industry needed the Forest Service more than the Forest Service needed industry, 
but now the circumstances have changed. Industry representatives also asked questions about 
product value determinations in the absence of competition.  
 
Several comments reinforced the theme that the real economic value of a treatment is the 
restored acre not the wood removed. A restored acre means reduced fire risk and protection of 
natural resource values. Associated with this concept were ideas about changing the system and 
processes to be commensurate with the value of the wood removed, valuing a restored acre so 
that the taxpayer understands what they are getting, and doing cost comparisons of process 
compared to product value.  
 
Another theme was the issue of high transportation costs for wood removal and whether or not 
more processing could be done in the woods.  
 
What Needs to Change? 
Participants were asked to consider how their job would change if implementation shifted from 
valuing the wood removed during treatment to valuing the restored acre. The purpose of this 
exercise was to explore how a paradigm shift in how the Forest Service approaches the 
implementation process might look.  
 
The resulting discussion was largely shaped around participants’ job duties. One participant felt 
that the Forest Service has a responsibility to the taxpayer to properly value the wood. Another 
noted that the Forest Service should define what a restoration-focused industry looks like.  
 
Concern was raised by contract administrators about how you measure a restored acre, what 
success looks like, and how to value the true cost of restoring an acre. A concern was also raised 
about how infrastructure would be paid for in the future if wood has no value. One observation 
was that industry would have to do more analysis to see what they are getting (if appraisal and 
cruising processes are changed) and that risk would shift from the Forest Service to purchasers.  

7 
 
In some cases, participants stated they would shift their attention to activities they considered 
more important like getting more acres prepared or achieving better outcomes. Several 
participants believed this would lead to getting more acres treated and would reduce contract 
administration time for the Forest Service and the contractors. One participant felt they could 
provide better customer service to industry and purchasers with this change.  
 
For those involved in contracting, acquisition management (AQM), and grants and agreements, 
answers varied. For AQM, a change could have no impact or increase work due to changes in the 
goods and services. If restored acres are the deliverable, then a straight service contract with 
minor changes is all that would be needed, cutting down on administrative costs, but only if 
products stayed in the woods. However, there was frustration that staff often view contracts and 
agreements as being alike, even though they are two distinct tools with different rules.  
 
Participants involved in engineering and ecological monitoring did not think a shift from valuing 
the wood to valuing the restored acre would have much impact on their job functions. 
 
Participant Reactions 
Participant reactions to the first day of the workshop were aligned according to several major 
themes, one of which was the importance of Mr. Kirby’s time analysis of the implementation 
process. Participants were interested in understanding how that information might be used to 
catalyze larger cultural changes, as opposed to just using slightly different variations of the same 
processes used now. There was also discussion about whether or not Mr. Kirby’s analysis reveals 
a critical pathway for improvements that can be explored further.  
 
Another theme was the concern that discussing refinements to existing practices missed the 
overarching need to accelerate restoration before we lose forest cover due to catastrophic fire and 
warming and drying conditions. Several changes were emphasized as necessary to accelerate 
work. These included adjusting processes in order to work at the landscape level, working as a 
team and across all levels of the agency, and increasing accountability.  
 
The importance of valuing the restored acre rather than valuing individual logs was another 
recurring theme. Some participants emphasized that the focus should be on how to get the 
landscape treated rather than getting top dollar for each log. One participant stated that we are 
restoring forests, not selling them.  
 
With respect to industry and economics, a common theme was the need to include more industry 
in discussions about agency processes, respect industry as both customers and partners in 
restoration, and acknowledge that some of the proposed innovations would place greater risk and 
burden on industry. Concern was raised about fair market value for wood and whether or not that 
valuation led to no-bids. It was noted that there have only been six no-bids in Region 3 during 
the last three years.  
 
 
 

8 
 
Developing Innovations 
Participants worked together to develop a list of proposed innovations to discuss in greater detail. 
The purpose of this exercise was to develop specific, testable actions to be implemented in 4FRI. 
Major topics were selected based on the pre-workshop innovations summary table presented by 
Dick Fleishman and from issues raised by the presenters and the workshop discussion. The items 
in the pre-workshop innovations summary table were identified using multiple sources including: 
1) Preliminary information emerging from the Washington Office Modernization Team; 2) The 
2013 and 2015 Task Force Report on the Costs of Sale Preparation and Cruising; 3) 
Opportunities for innovation 
identified by the 4FRI Forest Service 
Team and the 4FRI Stakeholder 
Industry Work Group; 4) Lessons 
learned by TNC during the 
development of their Stewardship 
Agreement with the Forest Service; 
and, 5) A time and efficiency 
analysis done by an Experience 
Matters Fellow supported by TNC. 
A list of major topics was then 
finalized, and the group identified 
specific action items and assigned 
individuals to move those actions 
forward.  
 
 
Workshop Outcomes 
According to workshop participants, the majority of the proposed innovative actions that were 
identified prior to the workshop are already permitted by policy, the Forest Service Manual, or 
Forest Service Handbook—but are not being implemented. Participants felt that Forest Service 
culture is an impediment to change. There was general agreement that focused attention is 
needed to address the challenge. The cultural issues took several forms including:  
 
1. Reluctance to deviate from strict interpretation of the handbook and manual out of fear 
that leadership will not support risk-taking. 
2. Inconsistencies of interpretation of guidance across functional areas that lead to delays 
and confusion.  
3. Reticence or time constraints that reduce the ability for staff to reach across regions 
where innovation is already underway.  
4. Reluctance to engage industry in decision-making (within the confines of the law), 
creating an adversarial relationship with purchasers.  
5. Failure to hold people accountable for performance, and concerns about the time it will 
take to adopt new approaches.  
 
Thinned logs being processed into wood chips in the field as part of the 
White Mountain Stewardship Project. Photo courtesy of ERI 

9 
 
Together, the group systematically identified innovative actions to be tested during 4FRI 
implementation. For each action the group considered the factors below.    
 
1. Purpose (why are we doing this?),  
2. Return (expected cost/time savings),  
3. Scale (stand versus landscape), 
4. Short-term actions versus long-term actions, 
5. Cultural change that may be required for success,  
6. National role (if any),  
7. Responsibility (who); and  
8. Timeline (by when) to frame each action item.  
 
The action items were grouped under seven distinct areas, however, time allowed only five areas 
to be discussed. In total, 19 action items were identified to move forward. The detailed 
discussion can be found in Appendix C. Developing a performance metric for each innovative 
action was delegated to the individuals implementing the action.  
 
1. Sale Preparation 
a. Simplified DxP 
b. Boundary delineation 
c. Assess the need for cruise and scaled sales 
d. CCF/delegated authority 
e. Dealing with special use permits, (sales less than 2000 CCFs), that prevent staff from 
working on landscape scale implementation 
 
2. Industry Operational Changes  
a. Log accountability, branding, barcoding 
b. In-woods processing 
c. In-woods drying 
d. Transportation (road infrastructure, weights, routes) 
e. Forest road closure and safety restrictions 
f. Collaboration with industry 
g. Better use of industry resources 
 
3. Alignment in Timber Contracts/AQM Contracts and Agreements 
a. Training and cross-training  
b. Early, ongoing collaboration among contracts, agreements, and AQM personnel 
throughout projects 
c. Develop a new, blended contract instrument 
 
4. Appraisal process clarity/definition of products 
a. Appraisal unit of measure 
b. Standard rate appraising 
 
 

10 
 
5. Using new technologies (what training needs to happen) 
a. Cruise with LiDAR 
b. Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) for sale administration and monitoring 
 
6. What should we do differently—this was not discussed due to time constraints. However, 
the group identified the following topics for future consideration: 
a. Decision-making 
b. Organizational structure 
c. Team approach to projects 
d. Taking advantage of generational change 
e. Working together across the agency 
f. Moving from stand to landscape scale 
 
7. Surveys. Time did not permit the group to develop actions. However, the following topics 
were developed for future analysis.  
a. Surveys in multiple phases of analysis and action (are there opportunities to condense 
them) 
b. Surveys at the stand versus landscape scale 
c. Streamlining survey design from NEPA through implementation 
 
Next Steps 
The meeting concluded with the group committing to the following next steps:  
 
1. National webinars held by the Washington Office Modernization Effort on December 5 and 
13 included a summary of the outcomes from the workshop. Completed  
2. The ERI sent out a draft report from the workshop for feedback on December 15. Completed  
3. An executive summary of the meeting was completed and shared with the 4FRI Stakeholder 
Group, USFS employees, and others on December 15. Completed.  
4. The Action Teams will define metrics for each action item, determine how to document 
change, and define measures of success, all of which will be action specific.  
a. The Action Teams will meet and determine how to operate, take action, and 
determine what constitutes success (mid-January 2018). 
5. The workshop participants will provide feedback to the workshop draft report, and the ERI 
will complete the final report (end of January 2018). Completed 
6. The ERI will reconvene the group to assess progress (March–April 2018).  
7. The Forest Service will share the workshop report/outcomes with 4FRI Industry Roundtable 
(Spring 2018). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11 
 
Future Involvement and Communication 
Forest Service staff and partners have expressed interest in this project and have asked to be 
informed of progress and to provide feedback. Once the workshop report is complete, outreach 
activities will be planned to broaden the conversation.  
 
Identification of innovative changes will continue over time. Incorporating that learning into 
ongoing operations is crucial in order to get to the pace and scale of restoration that is needed.  
 
Observations from the Workshop 
The ERI made several observations during the planning and execution of the workshop. First and 
foremost, the Forest Service practice of focusing on the value of wood rather than the value of a 
restored forest as the primary product of restoration leads to inefficiency in sale preparation and 
the processes associated with contract implementation in places where timber has low traditional 
value, such as the 4FRI landscape. The largest monetary value (when full cost accounting is 
used) of restoration is really the treated acre.  
 
During the workshop, it was observed that some participants were uncomfortable with 
discussions suggesting that less effort be directed at valuing the wood removed during 
restoration, and the point was made that, “the wood has some value.” It was also noted that the 
wood may have more value in the future as industry develops. Identifying the level of inventory 
and appraisal commensurate with the value of the wood and identifying the efficiency trade-offs 
associated with a reduced level of effort needs further discussion. Moreover, each contractual 
and operational decision made by the agency has a financial implication to industry. In a low-
value environment, seemingly small decisions can quickly add up and undermine economic 
sustainability. These issues represent a significant culture and policy shift.  
 
It was also noted that across the Forest Service, interpretations of the Forest Service Manual and 
Handbook varies from strict adherence on the one hand to those that believe it can be flexibly 
implemented on the other. Even those that adhere strictly to the manual and handbook vary in 
their interpretations. Consistent interpretation of the manual and handbook across functional 
areas and hierarchical levels is a significant cultural issue. Risk to the individual appears to be a 
key concern to those who are predisposed to rigidly adhere to the manual and handbook. Rigid 
adherence is also the path of least resistance, which contributes to resisting change or avoiding 
questioning of the way things are done.  
 
Conflict and confusion was observed with respect to contracting, AQM, and grants and 
agreements. Staff from those functional areas expressed frustration that people do not understand 
the differences among these approaches. They also stated that too often an approach is 
determined without sufficiently involving representatives from these functional areas; however, 
others said privately this was not the case. This problem and perception leads to frustration from 
all parties when the instrument does not fit the work to be accomplished. Some approaches are 
flexible while others are not. Alternatively, statements were made that interpretation of what can 
be done with these instruments varies across the functional areas and, as a consequence, there are 

12 
 
delays until the conflict can be resolved. One participant indicated that the process is further 
confounded by confusion over who makes the final decision regarding the instrument.  
 
Finally, it was observed that industry and purchasers are eager to work collaboratively with the 
Forest Service (within legal constraints) to improve operations and efficiency. Areas where 
industry may be ahead of the Forest Service include: Use of LiDAR, UAS, and tracking loads 
and trucks. One partner noted that an attitude change is needed to shift from approaching 
purchasers and partners as adversaries to recognizing the mutual benefits that accrue through 
cooperation in achieving restoration. The adversarial tone was attributed to the time when wood 
had more value and the need to ensure an adequate return on investment to the treasury was 
paramount.    
 
Conclusion 
Four goals were established for the workshop and accomplished. These were to build a common 
understanding of current activities designed to modernize processes in the Forest Service, 
identify challenges and innovative actions to fix the challenges, and to assign responsibility to 
individuals that will lead experimentation and change.  
 
In fact, some innovation is already underway such as testing TNC tablet technology for 
implementation of DxP, testing the use of LiDAR for cruising, and increased consultation in the 
field between industry and the Forest Service to improve implementation. However, post-
workshop discussions with Forest Service implementers suggests that there are insufficient staff 
resources to take action on all the innovation steps immediately. In order to move ahead with the 
smartest actions, priorities should be set. In addition, changing Forest Service culture to 
encourage and reward innovation, especially when it includes risk, is essential to moving beyond 
outdated and inefficient processes.  
 
The 4FRI, with its large number of NEPA-approved acres, willing partners, and engaged 
industry, provides a unique opportunity for the Forest Service to change, improve, and test new 
approaches to achieving forest management and restoration goals. To be successful, support will 
be needed from the project to the highest levels of the Forest Service. This alignment can set the 
stage for success. 
 
Appendices 
A. Workshop Participants 
B. Workshop Agenda 
C. Actions Matrix 

13 
 
 
 
APPENDIX A 
 
Efficiencies Workshop Attendees 
Name 
Title 
Best, Steve Forest Supervisor, Apache Sitgreaves National Forest  
Bosworth, Neil Forest Supervisor, Tonto National Forest 
Cawrse, David Center Manager - Forest Management Service Center (WO) 
Colavito, Melanie Human Dimensions Specialist (ERI) 
Covington, Wally Executive Director (ERI) 
Cummings, Dave Timber Sale Admin. (R3) 
Dils, Cliff Director, Forest Mgt., Forest Health, Co-Op & Initial Forestry (R3) 
Dunn, Walter Program Manager (R3) 
Dyer, Bill Chief Operating Officer (New Life Products) 
Fleishman, Dick 4FRI Operations Coordinator 
Graham, Pat Arizona State Director (TNC) 
Hanna, Ehab Deputy Director, Engineering (WO) 
Hargrave, Ashton Forester, Appraisal/TIM Specialist (R3) 
Haskins, Wendy Jo Deputy Forest Supervisor, Apache Sitgreaves National Forest  
Higgins, Jeanne Acting Associate Deputy Chief (WO) 
Horner, Steve Area Manager (Campbell Global) 
Jones, Karen Measurement Specialist (R3) 
Jourden, Allison Administrative Associate (ERI) 
Kipervaser, Dan 4FRI Zone Monitoring Coordinator / Silviculturist  
Kirby, Mike Fellow with The Nature Conservancy (Formerly with Intel) 
Knight, Larry President (Knight Transportation) 
Lawrence, David Timber Sales analyst (WO) 
Maass, Carl Group Leader (WO) 
Marshall, Rob Director, Center for Science & Public Policy (TNC) 
McCarthy, Laura Associate State Director (TNC New Mexico) 
Melendez, Carmen Lead Supervisory Grants & Agreements Specialist (R3) 
Montoya, Danny Director, Engineering (R3) 
Newbauer, Kim Timber Sales Contracting Officer (R3) 
Palmer, Judy Deputy Director Fire & Aviation (R3) 
Paquin-Leon, Melissa Contracting Officer (R3) 
Provencio, Heather Forest Supervisor, Kaibab National Forest (R2) 
Provencio, Henry 4FRI Innovations and Efficiencies Coordinator 
Rathbun, Leah Regional Biometrician (R6) 

14 
 
Russell, Scott Chief Executive, 4FRI (R3) 
Sanchez, Robert Deputy Forest Supervisor, Coconino National Forest (R3) 
Scaggs, Janet Supervisory Contract Specialist (R3) 
Smith, Gavin Stewardship Procurement Analyst (WO) 
Upchurch, Jim Deputy Regional Forester (R3) 
Vosick, Diane Director of Policy & Partnerships (ERI) 
Zachary, Roberta Director, Acquisition Management (R3) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

15 
 
APPENDIX B 
 
Accelerating Restoration Implementation  
 
A workshop for the United States Forest Service that will identify strategies and 
actions to reduce the time and cost of implementing treatments that remove low or 
no value wood 
 
When:  
Wednesday, November 29, 2017 
9AM - 5PM  
Thursday, November 30, 2017 
8AM – 3PM 
 
Where: 
Drury Inn & Suites Phoenix Airport 
 
3333 E. University Drive 
 
Phoenix, AZ  85034 
602-437-8400  
 
Workshop Goals:  
 
 
1. Understand current efforts to improve efficiency for projects designed to remove low 
value wood and biomass 
2. Identify specific business and implementation practices that should be changed to 
accelerate implementation 
3. Identify solutions that are implementable and testable as a part of the Four Forest 
Restoration Initiative (4FRI) project 
4. Identify USFS staff who will move identified solutions forward  
 
DRAFT Agenda 
Day 1 – Wednesday, November 29 
Welcome – Introductions- Objectives - Goals  
9:00-9:45AM 
45 min 
Welcome and Introductions (ERI) 
 Please share why you think you are here, what you want to 
contribute. 
Defining the Problem & Goals of the Workshop (Wally Covington/ ERI) 
 The elephant in the room: the value of the wood vs the value of a 
restored acre 
 Why you were invited 
 What we hope to accomplish/ generate from this workshop  
 Clarifying questions 
 Any other items for consideration in the agenda? 
 
 

16 
 
Overview of current efforts to increase efficiency – Establishing a baseline  
9:45am 
15 min 
2013/2015 Task Force Report: Issues and concerns on costs of sale 
preparation and cruising in the U.S. Forest Service (Dave Cawrse)  
10:15am 
30 min 
Update on Forest Modernization Team  (Dave Cawrse) 
10:30am 
15 min  
BREAK 
10:45am 
15 min 
TNC 4FRI Stewardship Agreement (Rob Marshall, TNC) 
11:00am 
30 min 
TNC  Time and Effort Analysis (Mike Kirby, Experience Matters Fellow) 
11:30am 
15 min 
4FRI Specific Analysis – Based on previous work and industry discussions 
(Fleishman) 
11:45 
15 min 
Other efforts – What are we missing?  
12:00 
45 min 
Discussion – Summary of issues presented and identify the issues with 
maximum improvement potential for further discussion 
 How do issues manifest themselves? 
 Which issues are the most salient? Which issues stick out from the 
pre-work and presentations? 
12:45 
1.25 hour 
LUNCH on your own 
Current programs and operations are based on an old paradigm that logs are valuable.  
Is it time to rethink this paradigm? If so, what needs to change? 
2:00 
60 min 
Discussion 
 If so, what goals, benchmarks and processes would change? 
 What are the risks and benefits of shifting this focus? 
 Who/ what would need to change? Are these changes realistic? 
 Would this change be geographically tied to low value wood?  
 How would you shift the approach? 
 What would be the metrics that measure a restored acre from the 
Forest Service perspective? 
Afternoon will be devoted to discussing the issues with maximum improvement 
potential from the previous sessions and the work already accomplished.  What is the 
barrier? 
 Why is it an issue? Statute, Manual, Handbook, Cultural 
 What can be done to fix it? 
 Who leads the change? 
3:00 
Topic 1  

17 
 
 
Topic 2 
 
Topic 3 
3:45 
BREAK 
4:00 
Topic 4 
 
Topic 5 
 
Topic 6 
Wrap Up – Day Two review 
4:45 
15 min 
Discussion – Summarize discussion from the day. 
Things to think about tonight in preparation for tomorrow 
 
DINNER on your own 
 
Day 2 - Thursday, November 30 
 
Synthesis of Previous Day/ Set Agenda for Today 
8:00-9:00AM 
60 min 
Discuss thoughts from previous day 
 What sticks out most? Anything missing? 
What can be tested during 4FRI Implementation? 
9:00am 
60 min 
What items and changes discussed during the workshop could be 
tested during 4FRI Implementation? 
 Is a special designation required? 
 If not, how should the stage be set? Who is the project manager? 
What management structure should be established to facilitate 
experimentation with changes? 
 Teams by issue? 
 If there is a team approach do you include staff from all levels of the 
USFS? What is a most efficient configuration of staff? 
What timeline is reasonable for implementing change? 
What other actions are needed? 
 
10:00 
30 min 
BREAK 
 
 

18 
 
Next Steps – This part of the agenda will be shaped based on previous workshop 
activity 
10:30 
90 min 
Discussion 
12:00 
LUNCH on your own 
 
 
 
Communication of Workshop Outcomes 
1:00pm 
105 min 
Who should know what happened at this workshop? 
 4FRI Stakeholders and Industry? 
 Senator Flake’s staff 
 Internal USFS audiences 
Wrap Up/ Conclusion  
2:45-3:00pm 
15min 
Discussion 
 
Adjourn 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

19 
 
 
APPENDIX C 
ACTION PLAN  
 
1. Sale Preparation 
TOPIC 
PURPOSE 
RETURN 
(COST/ 
TIME 
SAVINGS) 
STAND VS. 
LANDSCAPE 
PROCESSES 
SHORT-TERM 
ACTIONS 
LONG-TERM 
ACTIONS 
CULTURAL CHANGE 
ACTIONS 
NATIONAL  
RESPONSIBILITY 
(WHO) 
TIMELINE 
(BY 
WHEN) 
a. Simplified DxP 
Use more 
DxP  
High (with 
unknown 
burden 
shift) 
Figure out 
how to use 
DxP at project 
and landscape 
scale 
-Increase 
number of 
acres in DxP 
-Need to have 
strong 
justification 
for not using 
DxP 
-Develop tool 
to measure/ 
track DxP 
outcomes (QC)  
-Reflection/ 
assessment  
-Formalize 
guidance 
related to 
digital 
prescriptions  
-Regional support 
-Letter from RF to 
authorize 
-Training for 
implementers  
-Mentoring from 
other regions using 
DxP 
-Cross train 
between sale prep 
and sale admin  
-Determine how to 
inform industry  
 
-National 
training  
-Examine 
direction 
related to tree 
measurement 
-Share lessons 
learned from 
Region 6 and 
reasons for 
using DxP  
-Regional Office 
to write RF 
letter and 
manual change  
-Deputy 
Regional Forest 
letter of intent 
on use of DxP  
-Small team 
leader  
Summer 
2018 
b. Boundary 
delineation 
Reduce 
layout 
costs/ time 
Medium  
 
-Implement 
current 
flexibilities 
-Use virtual 
boundaries  
 
-Increase comfort 
level of operators  
-Team approach on 
Kaibab 
-Share 
successes/lessons 
learned  
 
 
 
 
 
-Share lessons 
learned from 
Fremont-
Winema  
 
May 
2018 

20 
 
TOPIC 
PURPOSE 
RETURN 
(COST/ 
TIME 
SAVINGS) 
STAND VS. 
LANDSCAPE 
PROCESSES 
SHORT-TERM 
ACTIONS 
LONG-TERM 
ACTIONS 
CULTURAL CHANGE 
ACTIONS 
NATIONAL  
RESPONSIBILITY 
(WHO) 
TIMELINE 
(BY 
WHEN) 
c. 
Assess need for 
cruise and 
scaled sales 
Why cruise 
if scaling 
timber? 
Medium 
to low  
 
-Pilot a “no 
cruise” 
approach 
(make 
estimates in 
other ways to 
determine 
value) 
 
-Change comfort 
level with level of 
specificity needed 
on estimates 
-Eliminate this 
process? 
-Loosening 
sampling error 
for scaled 
sales/ examine 
minimums 
-Create 
experimentati
on/ learning 
process  
-Small team  
Summer 
2018 
d. CCF/ delegated 
authority 
Multiple 
SPA’s or 
one big 
one with 
same CCF? 
High (with 
training 
workload 
impact) 
 
 
-Determine 
how much 
authority can 
be passed 
down from 
chief’s office  
 
 
-Letter from 
WO to RO 
regarding 
volume 
authority, 
number of 
SPA’s   
 
 
e. Dealing with 
special use 
permits (sales 
less than 2000 
CCF’s) that 
prevent staff 
from working on 
landscape scale 
implementation  
Taking time 
away from 
getting to 
scale on 
restoration  
 
 
-Set standards 
for sales less 
than 2000 CCF 
-Letter of 
intent from RO  
-Examine CCF 
cap 
 
 
 
-Small team to 
explain options  
 
 
 

21 
 
2. Industry Operational Changes  
 
TOPIC 
PURPOSE 
RETURN 
(COST/ 
TIME 
SAVINGS) 
STAND VS. 
LANDSCAPE 
PROCESSES 
SHORT-TERM 
ACTIONS 
LONG-
TERM 
ACTIONS 
CULTURAL 
CHANGE 
ACTIONS 
NATIONAL  
RESPONSIBILITY 
(WHO) 
TIMELINE 
(BY 
WHEN) 
a. Log 
accountability, 
branding, 
barcoding 
Tracking 
materials 
High 
 
-Explore use of 
industry 
standard for 
tracking in FS  
-Test tracking 
options (incl. 
with respect to 
export laws) 
with industry  
-Consider using 
new tool (e.g. 
Lidar) to 
determine 
volume and 
reduce log 
accountability 
process 
-Digital 
processes 
 
 
  
-Document 
tracking process, 
consider new 
process  
Summer 
2018 
b. In-woods 
processing 
Facilitate 
industry ability 
to do work 
Low (FS), 
high 
(industry) 
 
-Clear CC Cragin 
sites in NEPA, 
measure 
outcomes 
-Evaluate Rim 
Country EIS 
candidate sites 
-Determine 
NEPA 
requirements/ 
sites/ scale 
locations on 
West side  
 
 
 
-Determine pre-
NEPA plan  
April 2018 

22 
 
TOPIC 
PURPOSE 
RETURN 
(COST/ 
TIME 
SAVINGS) 
STAND VS. 
LANDSCAPE 
PROCESSES 
SHORT-TERM 
ACTIONS 
LONG-
TERM 
ACTIONS 
CULTURAL 
CHANGE 
ACTIONS 
NATIONAL  
RESPONSIBILITY 
(WHO) 
TIMELINE 
(BY 
WHEN) 
c. 
In-woods 
drying 
Industry 
advantage in 
terms of haul 
costs, fewer 
trucks on the 
road 
High 
(industry), 
low-med 
(FS) 
 
-Monitor 
economic and 
biological a 
outcomes of 
leaving 
material (e.g. 
drying rates, 
bug activity) 
-Use industry-
desired 
authority for 
120 days of in-
woods drying  
 
 
 
-Determine 
whether use of 
in-woods drying 
feasible  
 
Ongoing  
d. Transportation 
(road 
infrastructure, 
weights, 
routes) 
Minimize the 
number of 
trips, minimize 
impacts on 
road 
infrastructure, 
reduce costs 
Low cost 
to FS, high 
benefit to 
industry 
 
-Meet with 
transportation 
engineer and 
ADOT and FHA 
engineers 
regarding 
raising load 
limits  
-Evaluate 
asphalt and 
bridge impacts  
-Allow industry 
to propose haul 
routes during 
sale prep with 
FS 
 
 
 
 
 
-Address timing 
restriction and 
cost concerns 
-Funding for 
road 
improvements 
(Congress, 
working with 
counties) 
-Continue 
conversations on 
transportation  
February 
2018 

23 
 
TOPIC 
PURPOSE 
RETURN 
(COST/ 
TIME 
SAVINGS) 
STAND VS. 
LANDSCAPE 
PROCESSES 
SHORT-TERM 
ACTIONS 
LONG-
TERM 
ACTIONS 
CULTURAL 
CHANGE 
ACTIONS 
NATIONAL  
RESPONSIBILITY 
(WHO) 
TIMELINE 
(BY 
WHEN) 
e. Forest road 
closure and 
safety 
restrictions 
 
Move more 
trucks 
High 
(industry), 
low (FS) 
 
-Come up with 
procedure for 
dealing with 
closures  
 
 
 
-Test on existing 
projects  
Spring 
2018 
f. 
Collaboration 
with industry  
 
 
 
 
-Share 
information 
about appraisal 
process from FS 
to industry  
-Allow industry 
to provide 
feedback/ offer 
help  
-Establish 
process 
-Meeting with 
industry to 
facilitate two-
way 
conversation  
 
-Communication 
 
-Spend time with 
industry to 
demystifying 
appraisal process 
at next IWG 
meeting  
Spring 
2018 
g. Better use of 
industry 
resources 
 
Collaborate 
with industry 
partners to 
bring capacity 
and learn from 
industry  
 
 
 
-Continue 
assessing the 
use partners in 
SPA prep  
 
 
 
-Small team  
Summer 
2018 
 
 
 

24 
 
3. Alignment in Timber Contracts/ AQM Contracts and Agreements  
 
TOPIC 
PURPOSE 
RETURN 
(COST/ 
TIME 
SAVINGS) 
STAND VS. 
LANDSCAPE 
PROCESSES 
SHORT-TERM 
ACTIONS 
LONG-TERM 
ACTIONS 
CULTURAL 
CHANGE 
ACTIONS 
NATIONAL  
RESPONSIBILITY 
(WHO) 
TIMELINE  
(BY 
WHEN) 
a. Training/ 
cross 
training 
 
Consistent 
interpretation 
across agency 
on authorities 
and values of 
financial 
instruments   
 
High  
 
-Facilitate a clear 
interpretation of 
financial 
instruments  
-New Stewardship 
training 
-Implementation 
training at all 
levels  
-Identify coaches/ 
mentors  
-Learn what is 
working in other 
places that can be 
used in 4FRI and/ 
or nationwide  
-Test a new 
agreement for 
4FRI  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-Understand 
the bounds of 
agreements 
 
 
-Training 
identified 
nationally  
-Different 
financial 
instruments 
and 
understanding 
of their use is 
needed, 
understanding 
should come 
from top-down  
-Share learning 
journeys  
-One stop 
shopping on 
guidance 
according to 
instrument  
 
 

25 
 
TOPIC 
PURPOSE 
RETURN 
(COST/ 
TIME 
SAVINGS) 
STAND VS. 
LANDSCAPE 
PROCESSES 
SHORT-TERM 
ACTIONS 
LONG-TERM 
ACTIONS 
CULTURAL 
CHANGE 
ACTIONS 
NATIONAL  
RESPONSIBILITY 
(WHO) 
TIMELINE  
(BY 
WHEN) 
b. Early, 
ongoing 
collaboration 
among 
contracts, 
agreements, 
AQM 
personnel 
throughout 
projects 
 
Get to the 
right 
instrument 
effectively, 
allow all 
parties to be 
heard in 
decision-
making 
 
 
-Examine out-year 
acquisition items, 
understand 
workload  
-Invite necessary 
experts to the 
table on decisions 
early 
 
-Before 
making 
decisions, 
discuss 
options with 
all relevant 
people as part 
of a team 
approach  
 
 
 
Spring 
2018 check 
in 
c. 
Develop 
new, 
blended 
contract 
instrument  
New type of 
instrument to 
accomplish 
landscape 
scale 
objectives 
 
 
-Identify issues 
with current 
instruments  
-Develop proposal 
for what new 
instrument would 
accomplish/ look 
like  
-Test a new 
instrument 
-Assess 
options for 
the right 
instruments, 
examine what 
other agencies 
are doing 
 
-Provide 
assistance  
-Proposal  
Spring 
2018 
 
 
 

26 
 
4. Appraisal process clarity/ definition of products 
 
TOPIC 
PURPOSE 
RETURN 
(COST/ 
TIME 
SAVINGS) 
STAND VS. 
LANDSCAPE 
PROCESSES 
SHORT-TERM 
ACTIONS 
LONG-TERM 
ACTIONS 
CULTURAL 
CHANGE 
ACTIONS 
NATIONAL  
RESPONSIBILITY 
(WHO) 
TIMELINE 
(BY WHEN) 
a. Appraisal 
unit of 
measure 
Clear lines of 
communication, 
change unit of 
measure to 
dollars per acre 
(focus on value of 
the desired 
outcome) 
 
Low to 
medium, 
industry 
value  
 
-Determine 
appropriate 
definitions for 
products  
-Determine if 
this can be 
done across 
4FRI footprint 
 
 
 
 
-Examine 
definitions, 
process to value 
acre  
Summer 
2018 
b. Standard 
rate 
appraising 
Streamline 
appraisal process 
 
 
 -Examine 
pros and cons 
of standard 
rate appraisal 
with industry 
partners  
 
 
 
-Discussion with 
industry partners  
 
 
 
 

27 
 
5. Using new technologies (what trainings need to happen)  
 
TOPIC 
PURPOSE 
RETURN 
(COST/ 
TIME 
SAVINGS) 
STAND VS. 
LANDSCAPE 
PROCESSES 
SHORT-TERM 
ACTIONS 
LONG-TERM 
ACTIONS 
CULTURAL 
CHANGE 
ACTIONS 
NATIONAL  
RESPONSIBILITY 
(WHO) 
TIMELINE 
(BY WHEN) 
a. Cruise with 
LiDAR 
Save time, 
high return, 
data has 
already been 
collected 
High  
 
-Compare Lidar 
data to data 
collected on 
cruises and 
determine 
outcomes  
-Utilize Lidar and 
focus on areas 
where cruises 
needed 
-Investigate RS 
tech that can 
create 
efficiencies in 
volume 
estimates  
-Share lessons 
learned from OR 
on Lidar use  
-Examine doing 
resource surveys 
with Lidar 
-Implement 
training  
 
-Develop 
demonstration 
projects using 
Lidar 
-Share learning 
from other 
regions (e.g. 
Lidar story map) 
within FS and 
with industry 
partners  
 
 
-Work together 
to find areas to 
move forward  
-Share learning 
from Williams RD 
and work with 
NAU researchers  
-Determine who 
to attend Region 
6 Lidar 
workshops  
Spring 2018  
b. Unmanned 
aircraft 
systems (UAS) 
for sale 
administration 
and 
monitoring  
Real time 
sale admin 
pattern and 
immediate 
AM 
feedback 
 
 
-Work with Mod 
team  
-Work with A-S 
on project 
proposal   
 
 
 
 
 
 
-National 
direction on use 
of UAS outside of 
fire in 
development  
-Explore changes 
needed in UAS 
policy  
 
Check in 
Spring 2018 
 
 

28 
 
6. What should we do differently - This was not discussed due to time constraints. However, the group identified the following topics for future 
consideration: 
a. Decision-making 
b. Organizational structure 
c. Team approach to projects 
d. Taking advantage of generational change 
e. Work together across agency  
f. 
Landscape scale 
 
7. Surveys - Time did not permit the group to develop actions. However, the following topics were developed for future analysis.  
a. Surveys in multiple phases of analysis and action (are there opportunities to condense them) 
b. Surveys at the stand versus landscape scale 
c. Streamlining survey design from NEPA through implementation 
 
 
Next Steps: 
1. National webinar on Modernization Effort to mention learning from workshop (Dec. 5, 13) 
2. ERI will send out draft report from workshop, distribute for feedback (Dec. 15) 
3. Executive summary to share with 4FRI SHG, USFS employees, etc. (Dec. 15) 
4. Define metrics (for each item, determine how to document change, define measurement/ success - will be dependent on topic)  
a. Action item teams should meet and determine how to operation, take action, determine what constitutes success (mid Jan 2018) 
5. Group will provide feedback, and ERI will complete final report (end of Jan 2018) 
6. ERI will reconvene the group to assess progress (March 2018)  
7. Share workshop report/ outcomes with 4FRI Industry Roundtable (Spring 2018) 
 
 
