The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Using Restoration to Manage Southwestern Dwarf  
Mistletoe in Ponderosa Pine Forests  
 
By Tzeidle N. Wasserman and Amy E.M. Waltz 
 
Introduction 
Southwestern dwarf mistletoe (Arceuthobium vaginatum subsp. cryptopodum) is an endemic patho-
gen of ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) in the southwestern United States and northern Mexico. 
Current distribution of mistletoe is thought to be relatively similar 
to mistletoe distribution 150 years ago. However, mistletoe abun-
dance is greater today than in the 1800s because the abundance of 
trees across the landscape is higher, and the density of trees is sig-
nificantly higher in ponderosa pine forests. The spread and intensi-
fication of dwarf mistletoe across western forests has been promot-
ed by fire suppression, grazing impacts, and past timber harvest 
management practices. Stand conditions have changed significantly 
since Euro-American settlement, as dense thickets of young small-
diameter trees are common where small groups of large-diameter 
trees once dominated the forest.  
 
Ecological Restoration and Southwestern Mistletoe Management 
Ecological restoration using mechanical thinning and prescribed burning offer tools to mitigate mis-
tletoe spread and intensification. Mistletoe spreads more quickly in dense stands of evenly spaced 
trees than in groups of trees and openings that were characteristic of this area before 1870. Creating 
openings and interspace of 40–60 feet (or larger depending on the site) by thinning trees beyond mar-
gins of visible infestations can help mitigate the effects of latent infestations. In some cases, these 
openings can be used to isolate infestations and distance between groups of trees can be used to pre-
vent spread when groups of infested trees are far enough away from healthy groups of trees. Several 
re-entries with prescribed fire over multiple years are necessary to inhibit new regeneration from in-
fection in these openings for many years. 
 
Key Points 
 Dwarf mistletoe is part of the forest ecosystem and increases biodiversity within the forest. It is 
beneficial to a multitude of species including insects, birds, and mammals by providing food 
sources, storage sites, resting areas, and nesting sites. 
 Management should focus on improving the health of remaining trees, forest health, maintain-
ing biological diversity, stand dynamics, and reducing fire risk by reducing uncharacteristic tree 
densities.  
August 2018 
A dwarf mistletoe shoot extends from 
the branch of a ponderosa pine tree. 
Photo by Robert L. Mathiasen 

 
 Management should be based on the specific needs and objectives for each area, within a 
framework that considers the overall landscape and forest conditions as opposed to a timber 
products approach. Silvicultural prescriptions should incorporate mistletoe as an important 
wildlife habitat component, and management should focus on managing dwarf mistletoe as 
part of the stand, not controlling or eradicating it. 
 Ecological restoration treatments are effective tools in slowing mistletoe spread. Treatments 
are based on historical site evidences (presettlement logs, stumps, and snags) characterized by 
groups and openings where trees are spaced beyond the maximum distance of seed dispersal 
are effective tools in slowing mistletoe spread. 
 Maintaining distance between neighboring groups of trees and infection centers, tree crowns 
and infested trees, and reducing stand density are some restoration practices that can aid in 
reducing dwarf mistletoe spread. The goal is to reduce stand densities that are uncharacteristic 
of the site, and return the stand to presettletment tree densities and characteristic tree groups 
and openings. 
 
Management Recommendations 
 Healthy stands can have a manageable amount of mistletoe within 
them. Use of prescribed fire at sufficient intensity can reduce the 
incidence of mistletoe, especially when used in tandem with me-
chanical thinning treatments. 
 Forest restoration treatments that return and maintain Southwest 
ponderosa pine forests within their evolutionary envelope of for-
est structure and natural disturbances are an effective tool to ad-
dress mistletoe spread and intensification.  
 In lightly and moderately infested stands, restoration treatments 
that thin uncharacteristically dense stands can be effective in ad-
dressing dwarf mistletoe intensity.  
 Retain presettlement trees, even if dwarf mistletoe is present, be-
cause presettlement trees are underrepresented on the landscape. 
 Prescribed fire at sufficient intensity can manage dwarf mistletoe 
levels; however one entry is rarely enough to achieve desired con-
ditions. Multiple entries are needed and should be planned for. 
 Some severely infested stands should be deferred from treatment 
and allowed to burn or be managed for wildlife habitat. 
 Be flexible. If dwarf mistletoe infestation is patchy, stands should be divided up and treated 
accordingly. Take advantage of opportunities to leave size and age class diversity. 
 
Additional Reading 
Conklin, D.A., and B.W. Geils. 2008. Survival and sanitation of dwarf mistletoe-infected ponderosa pine following 
prescribed underburning. Western Journal of Applied Forestry, 23:216-222. 
Conklin, D.A., and M.L. Fairweather. 2010. Dwarf mistletoe and their management in the Southwest. USDA Forest 
Service, Southwestern Region, Forestry and Forest Health Report R3-10-01. 
Hawksworth, F.G. 1977. The 6-class dwarf mistletoe rating system. USDA Forest Service, General Technical Report 
RM-48. 
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following ERI Working Paper: 
Wasserman, T.N., and A.E.M. Waltz. 2018. Restoration as a Mechanism to Manage Southwestern Dwarf 
Mistletoe in Ponderosa Pine Forests. ERI Working Paper No. 39. Ecological Restoration Institute, 
Northern Arizona University.  
Contact: Tzeidle Wasserman, Tzeidle.Wasserman@nau.edu 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
Dwarf mistletoe can cause deform-
ities in ponderosa pine trees, which 
create ideal nesting sites. Photo by 
Robert L. Mathiasen 
