ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION INSTITUTE
Working Paper 40
Resources for Predicting  
and Mitigating Smoke 
Impacts of Wildland Fires
August 2018

Authors: By Caleb Stotts, Pete Lahm, and Claudia Standish
Reviewers: Jackie Banks, USDA Forest Service; Rob Budge, USDA Forest Service; Josh Hall, 
USDA Forest Service; Roy Hall, Arizona State Forestry Division
Series Editor: Tayloe Dubay 
Cover photo: Fire managers monitor the Wallow Fire near Eagar, Arizona. The Wallow Fire of 2011 was the largest 
fire in Arizona history. Extreme smoke impacts from the fire provided significant lessons regarding public and firefighter 
health and safety impacts, further crystallizing efforts that led to the development of the Wildland Fire Air Quality 
Response Program (WFAQRP). Photo courtesy of ERI
Please use the following citation when referencing this working paper:
Stotts, C., P. Lahm, and C. Standish. 2018. Resources for Predicting and Mitigating Smoke Impacts of Wildland Fires. 
ERI Working Paper No. 40. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 11 pp.
Intermountain West Frequent-Fire Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native species, 
structural characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological
Restoration International defines ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or 
accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability….
Restoration attempts to return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration 
International Science and Policy Working Group 2004).
Most frequent-fire forests throughout the Intermountain West have been degraded during the last 150 
years. Many of these forests are now dominated by unnaturally dense thickets of small trees, and lack 
their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible 
to damaging, stand-replacing fires and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests 
centers on reintroducing frequent, low-severity surface fires—often after thinning dense stands—and 
reestablishing productive understory plant communities.
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, 
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of frequent-fire forests of the Intermountain West. 
By allowing natural processes, such as low-severity fire, to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to 
reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The Southwest Fire Science Consortium (SWFSC) is a way for managers, scientists, and policy makers 
to interact and share science. SWFSC’s goal is to see the best available science used to make management 
decisions and scientists working on the questions managers need answered. The SWFSC tries to bring 
together localized efforts to develop scientific information and to disseminate that to practitioners on the 
ground through an inclusive and open process.
ERI working papers are intended to deliver applicable science to land managers and practitioners 
in a concise, clear, non-technical format. These papers provide guidance on management decisions 
surrounding ecological restoration topics. This publication would not have been possible without funding 
from the USDA Forest Service and the Southwest Fire Science Consortium. The views and conclusions 
contained in this document are those of the author(s) and should not be interpreted as representing the 
opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products 
does not constitute their endorsement by the United States Government or the ERI.

Table of Contents
Executive Summary.............................................................................. 1
Introduction......................................................................................... 1
Smoke Impacts and Public Perception................................................. 1
The Role of Air Resource Advisors...................................................... 2
The ARA Toolkit: The Three “M”s..................................................... 4
Modeling....................................................................................... 4
Monitoring.................................................................................... 4
Messaging...................................................................................... 5
Examples from ARA Deployments...................................................... 6
Lessons from the WFAQRP for Prescribed Fires and  
Smaller Wildfires................................................................................. 8
Monitoring Lessons....................................................................... 9
Modeling Lessons.......................................................................... 9
Messaging Lessons........................................................................ 9
Conclusion and Management Implications.......................................... 9
Acknowledgments................................................................................ 9
References.......................................................................................... 10

Resources for Predicting and Mitigating Smoke Impacts of Wildland Fires
1
Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 40  
Executive Summary
Fire managers use prescribed fire and some wildfires to meet 
resource management objectives, like restoring and maintaining 
ecological processes, watershed function, and wildlife habitat, 
as well as to reduce fuels and mitigate the risk of severe 
wildfires. However, public concerns about smoke impacts 
are often a limiting factor for accomplishing fuels reduction 
and ecological restoration goals. It is vital that agency land 
managers mitigate smoke impacts from wildland fire for the 
health and safety of the public. The Wildland Fire Air Quality 
Response Program (WFAQRP) has smoke impact assessment 
and forecast tools to assist agencies in managing fire incidents 
and predicting and messaging smoke impacts to communities. 
New smoke modeling tools, along with technical specialists 
called Air Resource Advisors (ARAs), can help inform fire 
management operations and provide important information 
to air quality, public health, and safety officials and the public. 
This working paper describes how ARAs use smoke modeling 
and monitoring tools to build a toolkit for fire managers and to 
improve public communication.
Introduction
Managed fire is a valuable tool used by land managers to 
mitigate the risk of severe wildfire and to meet other resource 
management objectives, such as restoring and maintaining 
ecological processes, watershed function, and wildlife habitat. 
Fire managers use prescribed fire and some wildfires to 
accomplish these goals. However, public concerns about the 
impacts of smoke emissions are often cited by fire managers as a 
limiting factor for accomplishing fuels reduction and ecological 
restoration goals (Toman et al. 2014). The smoke produced 
from fire management actions can have negative consequences 
for public health and safety and regional economics (Fowler 
2003), which creates an imperative for agency land managers to 
mitigate smoke impacts from wildland fires (Lahm 2018).
In recent years, the development of the Wildland Fire 
Air Quality Response Program (WFAQRP) has helped 
develop smoke impact assessment and forecast tools, as 
well as other resources, to assist agencies in managing fire 
events while mitigating smoke impacts to communities 
(wildlandfiresmoke.net). Modeling tools use a variety of 
information sources to project the location and concentration 
of smoke emissions. Deployment of emergency portable 
monitoring equipment provides site-specific information 
regarding concentrations of harmful particulates. Analysis of 
this data, and that of permanent monitors, serve as the basis 
for public health messaging and evaluation of model outputs. 
For wildfire incidents, technical specialists called Air Resource 
Advisors (ARAs) are trained and developed by the program. 
They help organize this information and coordinate with 
the public and air regulatory agencies. Ordering an ARA is 
similar to ordering an Incident Meteorologist. When needed, 
an ARA is requested by name as a technical specialist (THSP) 
through the WFAQRP leader. The order is then placed into 
the national Resource Order and Status System (ROSS). 
Specialists like ARAs can help inform fire management 
operations and agency administrators. They also provide 
important information to air quality, public health, and safety 
officials and the public.
Understanding the applications of the best available tools 
and resources can help agencies and fire management teams 
better meet fire/fuels management and ecological restoration 
goals while mitigating the impacts of smoke. While there is 
a need for fire management programs to develop strategies 
to mitigate smoke impacts (Lahm 2018), there is a gap 
between many fire management operations and the most 
recent smoke management tools and resources (Figure 1). This 
working paper focuses on how ARAs use smoke modeling 
and monitoring tools to build a toolkit for fire management 
operations to better communicate internally and with incident 
management teams, cooperators, and the public. By examining 
the ARA toolkit, we highlight some of the best practices for 
predicting and mitigating smoke impacts on individuals and 
communities. During smaller wildfire events, which have less 
smoke impacts and do not warrant use of a higher cost incident 
management team (IMT) or ordering an ARA, these tools and 
practices can be employed by local land managers to alert the 
public and mitigate smoke impacts. Prescribed fire managers 
can also use these tools and practices to help address smoke 
impacts on the public. 
Smoke Impacts and Public Perception
Smoke can negatively impact human health and is of particular 
concern when the duration of exposure is prolonged and 
concentrations are high (Fowler 2003). Certain segments 
of the population are at greater risk of smoke exposure. 
Approximately one-third of US households have someone with 
existing respiratory health issues at risk of experiencing serious 
medical issues with prolonged breathing of the fine particulate 
matter (PM2.5) found in smoke (McCaffrey and Olsen 2012). 
Besides the health impacts of smoke, it can also lead to reduced 
visibility on roadways, which has been a factor in fatal traffic 
accidents throughout the US. Additionally, smoke can be a 
serious problem when it affects airports and transportation 
corridors (Matthews 2018). 
In addition to public health and safety concerns, smoke 
emissions can have economic and social impacts. One recent 
study indicates that smoke impacts on outdoor recreation, 
scenery, and school recess can be of greater concern to the 
public than impacts to personal health, particularly in rural 
communities (Blades and Hall 2012). As many communities 
in the western US are shifting to amenity-based economies 
(Winkler et al. 2007), there is increasing public concern about 
smoke effects on tourism and outdoor recreation (Blades et al. 
2012). There are also increasing concerns surrounding smoke 
impacts on firefighter health (NWCG 2012a, NWCG 2012b, 
Domitrovich et al. 2017).
Public perceptions about smoke are variable and complex. 
While some members of the public perceive the use of fire as 
discretionary (Lahm 2018), one longitudinal study focusing on 
the wildland-urban interface (WUI) showed that the public is 
generally supportive of fuels reduction treatments, including 
the use of fire to accomplish management goals (Toman et al. 
2013). Certain factors are known to increase public tolerance 

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 40    
Resources for Predicting and Mitigating Smoke Impacts of Wildland Fires
2
of smoke. These key factors include public understanding of 
fuel treatment practices and the positive effects of fire, levels of 
trust in land management agencies, and measures taken by fire 
management operations to mitigate smoke impacts (Blades et 
al. 2018, Toman et al. 2014). As Blades et al. (2018) describe 
in the National Wildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG) 
Smoke Management Guide for Prescribed Fire, “Reinforcing 
and improving public understanding about the role of fire in 
improving ecosystem health and reducing community wildfire 
risk should be a focal point of public communication aimed at 
increasing public tolerance of smoke.”	
While education about fuels and fire management 
strategies is important, advanced warning was identified in 
one study as the most important aspect of public tolerance 
of smoke from wildland fire (Blades et al. 2012). Forecasting 
smoke impacts is a valuable tool to protect public health and 
help communities cope with wildland fire smoke (Rappold et 
al. 2014). Timely smoke impact information and predictions 
reduce the public safety risk and can change behaviors and 
health outcomes (Lahm 2017). If people know what to expect, 
they can plan and react accordingly, especially those sensitive 
to high air pollution levels (Rappold et al. 2014). While early 
messaging and intervention is important, it is also important 
that messages are consistent between agencies. 
Studies emphasize the importance of smoke messaging, 
but traditionally it has not been a high priority for land 
management agencies. A multi-region analysis found that most 
agency smoke emissions and management communications 
efforts lacked funding and strategic focus, and were not well 
coordinated across agencies (Toman et al. 2014). According 
to Lahm (2018), “A lynchpin to addressing the future role of 
fire, whether through wildfires or use of prescribed fire, will 
likely depend upon land managers proactively communicating 
about and responding to public concerns about air quality.” 
Increasingly, the public expects timely communication about 
wildfire events, including smoke impacts. During wildfires, it 
is critical that land management agencies are proactive, as the 
public trusts the agencies and IMTs to provide that outreach 
(Steelman et al. 2014). 
The Role of Air Resource Advisors
Air Resource Advisors emerged in 2013 (Larkin 2013) as the 
need grew for technical specialists with expertise in air quality 
and smoke dispersion science. The USDA Forest Service 
created the Wildland Fire Air Quality Response Program 
(WFAQRP) with key cooperators, such as the National Park 
Service and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 
as a direct response to the public and firefighter health and 
safety risks posed by wildfire smoke. A key component of 
this program are ARAs. They are trained in monitoring, 
data analysis, air quality, meteorology, computer simulation 
modeling and interpretation, and effective communication on 
the health and safety impacts of smoke. They are deployed 
nationwide during large wildfire events, often at the direct 
request of IMTs or agency administrators. According to 
the NWCG, their objective is to use best available science 
to provide IMTs with timely smoke impact and forecast 
information (NWCG 2017). 
Air Resource Advisors use their diverse skillset to analyze, 
summarize, and communicate smoke impacts to IMTs, agency 
administrators, air quality regulators, public health agencies, 
and the public (Figure 1). Some of their many duties include:
• 
Determining and addressing specific wildland fire smoke 
risks at incidents.
• 
Monitoring air quality to determine effects on public 
safety and health.
• 
Working with state, tribal or local air regulators and health 
departments to determine impacts from smoke and PM2.5 
and develop joint messages to aid in reducing public 
exposure to smoke. This includes working closely with 
IMTs in the Planning Section under the Planning Section 
Chief (PSC) with Fire Behavior Analysts (FBANs) and 
Incident Meteorologists (IMETs) so the most accurate 
information about fire growth, fuels, emissions, and 
atmospheric dispersion including local and long-range 
downwind impacts all support the public messages.
• 
Working directly with Public Information Officers (PIOs) 
to disseminate the daily smoke outlook to the public, 
develop smoke mitigation plans when needed that address 
public exposure and transportation safety; and participate 
in public meetings to address local concerns.
• 
Working within the IMT to support key personnel 
participating in cooperator, planning and command meetings 
as needed so that key strategic and possibly tactical decisions 
consider smoke impacts when possible and appropriate.
• 
Routinely collecting and exchanging smoke information 
within the IMT, with the agency administrator and 
cooperating agencies to ensure dissemination of accurate 
information.
• 
Producing reports, and documentation of smoke impacts 
to support decision making and post-fire analysis of 
exceedances of air quality standards.
• 
Helping to address agency administrator smoke concerns 
and objectives as outlined in the respective Wildland 
Fire Decisions Support System (WFDSS) objectives and 
decisions.  
• 
Interpreting weather forecasts, fire behavior predictions, 
smoke dispersion prediction models, remote sensing tools, 
and different monitoring sources to evaluate smoke impacts.
• 
Notifying incident team members, including the Safety 
Officer (SOF), of conditions that contribute to hazardous 
smoke levels to fire personnel.
• 
Providing projected smoke impacts to transportation 
roadway visibility through the incident SOF to law 
enforcement, public safety, emergency management, and 
state transportation departments to alert motorists and fire 
personnel of smoke and possible unsafe driving conditions 
due to smoke reducing roadway visibility (NWCG 2017).	
“A lynchpin to addressing the future role of fire, 
whether through wildfires or use of prescribed 
fire, will likely depend upon land managers 
proactively communicating about and responding 
to public concerns about air quality.”

Resources for Predicting and Mitigating Smoke Impacts of Wildland Fires
3
Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 40  
Figure 1. Flow chart showing critical positions within the IMT planning section where the ARA works most effectively, 
information flow within the IMT, and how the elements of the WFAQRP support the ARA and IMT (Lahm 2017). 

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 40    
Resources for Predicting and Mitigating Smoke Impacts of Wildland Fires
4
The ARA Toolkit: The Three “M”s
Air Resource Advisors use a number of tools to predict and 
mitigate smoke impacts. While technology and its applications 
are constantly evolving, there are three key elements ARAs 
use to accomplish their task — modeling, monitoring, and 
messaging (Figure 2). 
Modeling
Fire managers have traditionally used simple approximation 
systems to model smoke, such as fire location information and 
weather observations. However, there have been significant 
advances in smoke prediction science over the past decade. 
According to Strand et al. (2018), “These advances can be 
attributed to faster, more sophisticated wildland fire emissions 
and smoke plume modeling systems, enhanced databases of on-
the-ground fuels, and the use of new technologies that allow 
for direct user interaction and input with smoke prediction 
tools via computer applications and the web.” Using new 
developments in technology, these complex and sophisticated 
smoke modeling frameworks take into account multiple types 
of models that influence smoke emissions, and combine the 
information to develop refined predictions for smoke location 
and concentrations (Figure 3). While it is impossible to 
accurately predict the timing, location, and concentration of 
smoke from a fire, complex modeling frameworks exhibit a 
major improvement from simple approximation systems, but 
also emphasize the need to have a trained ARA interpreting 
their outputs 
One of the most commonly used smoke prediction tools 
for wildfires and prescribed fires is known as the BlueSky 
modeling framework (www.airfire.org/bluesky) developed 
by the USDA Forest Service’s Pacific Northwest Research 
Laboratory and its AirFire Team. BlueSky is an evolving 
modeling framework that is accessible by ARAs, air resource 
managers, prescribed burn bosses, and the public. It integrates 
relevant outputs from multiple models and datasets that 
interact to influence smoke emission outputs (Figure 4). 
BlueSky represents a highly complex modeling framework 
that maximizes the quality of the prediction, integrating 
different modeling fields such as fire information, fuel 
loadings, consumption modeling, emissions modeling, time 
rate of emissions modeling, plume height estimations, smoke 
trajectory, and dispersion modeling (Figure 4) (Larkin 2017). 
The smoke modeling field is changing rapidly due to new 
field study programs and new modeling techniques (Strand et 
al. 2018), and one major benefit to the BlueSky framework is 
that it can incorporate the latest developments in these fields. 
Air Resource Advisors are highly trained in the use of the 
framework as well as other smoke modeling tools. BlueSky 
can visually display smoke predictions on different scales, 
and represents a sophisticated smoke model that provides 
information on ground-level smoke location and concentration. 
The BlueSky model and BlueSky Playground, which models 
for individual fire smoke impacts, are both useful for assessing 
smoke impacts of wildland fires.     
Monitoring
Smoke impacts are monitored through a variety of methods, 
from visual estimates based on how far one can see in low 
humidity areas to quantitative measuring devices (EPA 2016a). 
In addition to using permanent air quality monitoring site 
data, which are maintained by states and tribes to demonstrate 
compliance with the EPA’s National Ambient Air Quality 
Standards (NAAQS), ARAs have access to a national cache of 
emergency monitoring equipment that measures PM2.5. These 
monitors can be deployed in strategic locations to monitor 
smoke impacts in communities near wildfire incidents and 
are used by ARAs to support operational smoke forecasting, 
including validating and improving model performance. 
Figure 3. Simple model types require less information (left side) while more 
complex model types require additional information (right side) (Strand et 
al. 2018).
Figure 2. The three “M”s that ARAs utilize to predict and mitigate smoke 
impacts – modeling, monitoring, and messaging. 

Resources for Predicting and Mitigating Smoke Impacts of Wildland Fires
5
Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 40  
Generally, orders for monitors are tied to the overall emergency 
response of a wildfire through the interagency supply ordering 
systems that support IMTs (wildlandfiresmoke.net). Air 
Resource Advisors set up air quality monitoring equipment on 
fires to determine whether air quality standards set by state and 
federal agencies are exceeded and to better understand the level 
of smoke impacts affecting a population in a given area. 
While monitoring equipment provides valuable information 
about smoke concentrations in a small number of key locations, 
it may not capture the range of impacts to a wide area. Due 
to their limited number, monitoring equipment is assembled 
in strategic locations and other monitoring tools are used to 
fill in information gaps. Air Resource Advisors and many air 
quality regulatory agencies use a program called Monitoring 
v4.0 (https://tools.airfire.org/monitoring/v4/) developed for 
the WFAQRP by the AirFire Team to analyze the monitoring 
data and understand when smoke impacts peak and subside on 
a daily basis. This critical information forms part of the ARAs 
daily Smoke Outlook and can guide the public on when to 
avoid the peak smoke periods, thereby reducing their exposure 
to fine particulates. Personal visual observation guidelines of 
smoke may be helpful for the public to understand snap-shot air 
quality conditions, but they do not provide the quantifiable data 
needed to verify against EPA air quality index thresholds based 
on health impacts for PM2.5 concentrations. There is increased 
use of low-cost personal air quality sensors, some of which are 
helpful to understand current air quality impacts, but they are 
limited in accuracy and difficult to align to EPA’s thresholds. 
When the information tracks with nearby quantitative methods, 
both methods can help guide the public on when to reduce 
exposure. On a wildfire, ARAs combine air quality data gathered 
from the temporary and fixed monitors along with weather 
observations and forecasts, fire behavior analyses, satellite 
imagery, webcams, aircraft observations, field observations, and 
community feedback.    
Messaging
Air Resource Advisors organize modeling and monitoring 
information into a daily Smoke Outlook (Figure 5), which 
is crucial for communication and coordination. These daily 
reports illustrate smoke modeling projections and potential 
impacts for communities that are likely to experience ground-
level concentrations of fine particulates in smoke. The simple 
format of the one-page daily Smoke Outlook is designed 
to maximize usefulness as a communication tool for public 
audiences so they can plan and understand when smoke will 
be at its worst and when to use averting behavior to minimize 
exposure. These reports use the same language, classification 
metrics, and color-scheme as the EPA Air Quality Index and 
NowCast (https://airnow.gov/) to provide for cross-boundary 
and national consistency in messaging.  	
Effective communication and coordination—both 
internally within the IMT, with the agency administrator, 
and externally—is central to the role of an ARA. Within the 
IMT, ARAs tie-in daily with operations personnel (Figure 1) 
to understand the latest incident decisions and fire situation. 
Air Resource Advisors enter the most current fire information, 
i.e., fuels, fire weather, fire behavior prediction data, and fuel 
consumption, into their models to predict smoke impacts and 
relay that information to the IMT and outward to cooperators. 
If requested, ARAs can offer guidance and advice to the IMT 
regarding likely smoke impacts to base camp and nearby 
roads, and they can provide the public with information about 
different fire management strategies. 
Communications for the PIO is in the form of the daily 
Smoke Outlook. The PIO then disseminates that information 
to the public through a variety of outlets. Air Resource Advisors 
assist the PIO in message development and communications 
regarding smoke impacts and often attend public meetings to 
relay that messaging directly to the public. Air Resource Advisors 
coordinate with transportation safety agencies to help predict 
Figure 4. Factors in the BlueSky modeling chain. For each factor, there 
are different models and datasets available to develop custom smoke 
projections best suited for a particular situation (Larkin 2017).

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 40    
Resources for Predicting and Mitigating Smoke Impacts of Wildland Fires
6
fire boundary. The public typically has many questions about 
smoke and often raises concerns at community meetings hosted 
by the land management agency and IMT. The ARAs can help 
provide answers to questions by the public about smoke and 
how to avoid and mitigate its effects. The integration of ARAs 
into IMT structures is becoming typical on large, long-duration, 
smoke-producing incidents and smaller fire events that may 
significantly impact nearby towns or cities. In cases where smoke 
could adversely impact visibility on roads used by firefighters 
and/or the public, ARAs can help address this safety hazard. 
In some infrequent situations, smoke may impact base camp 
and result in concerns about personnel smoke exposure; again, 
ARAs may be able to forecast smoke levels and provide useful 
mitigation strategies in concert with appropriate personnel, such 
as the IMT’s safety officer. Smoke forecasts can also be used 
to help fire managers and IMTs relocate firefighting aircraft to 
helibases and airports with a better chance of “clean” air so that 
flight operations do not get suspended due to poor visibility. 
Just as every wildfire is unique, so is every ARA 
deployment. As the WFAQRP and the development 
of ARAs are fairly new, the technical tools, monitoring 
equipment, and roles of ARAs are evolving with each 
wildfire year. For every ARA deployment, there are 
opportunities for dialogue with communities and 
cooperators. Case studies are illustrated in Boxes 1 and 2 to 
highlight where ARAs added value to IMT functions and 
helped mitigate smoke impact on two separate wildfires.
smoke impacts to roadways and transportation corridors. This 
coordination helps agencies warn motorists of smoke impacts 
and set potentially life-saving traffic control measures.
Coordination with state, tribal, and local air quality 
regulatory agencies and health departments is another critical 
function performed by ARAs. In addition to the Smoke 
Outlook, ARAs frequently provide a more in-depth report on 
fire growth, emissions data, and projected smoke impacts to air 
quality regulatory agencies, which have their own monitoring, 
information, and outreach networks. These agencies and 
departments distribute information to community institutions 
and organizations, such as schools, that are concerned with 
populations vulnerable to smoke. Often ARAs need to 
coordinate far beyond the immediate areas of the fire, at 
times reaching out to multiple states impacted by smoke. Air 
Resource Advisors also coordinate with states that may have to 
address EPA requirements and documentation associated with 
the Clean Air Act (wildlandfiresmoke.net) and the Exceptional 
Event Rule, which is used to document when exceedances of 
NAAQS are caused by natural events such as wildfires.             
Examples from ARA Deployments
With specialized training in smoke impact assessment and 
mitigation, ARAs add significant value to an IMT. Air Resource 
Advisors can relieve the burden of trying to monitor and predict 
the ever-changing smoke situation away from the IMT and 
Figure 5. An example daily Smoke Outlook from 
the 2018 Burro and 416 fires near Durango, 
Colorado (www.wildlandfiresmoke.net).

Resources for Predicting and Mitigating Smoke Impacts of Wildland Fires
7
Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 40  
The Boundary Fire Air Quality Report and Outlook for June 17, 2017.
Box 1. The Boundary Fire      
Location: Coconino and Kaibab national forests, Arizona
Incident type: Wildfire
Cause: Lightning
Date of ignition: June 1, 2017
Date of completion: July 11, 2017
Total acres burned: 17,788*          
The Boundary Fire originated with a lighting strike 
in early June 2017, the height of tourist season in 
northern Arizona. Fire managers initially used indirect 
suppression tactics for firefighter safety and to meet 
resource objectives; however, the incident management 
team (IMT) and agency administrators understood that 
the fire was going to burn for a few weeks and smoke 
would impact several nearby communities. Smoke also 
was going to impact a heavily used road leading to 
Grand Canyon National Park. With the importance of 
smoke recognized, smoke and air quality objectives were 
included in the Wildland Fire Decision Support System 
(WFDSS) objectives by the agency administrator to 
ensure clear understanding of the issue by the IMT, 
cooperators, partners, and even the public.
Kaibab National Forest Supervisor and the fire’s 
designated Agency Administrator Heather Provencio 
noted there may be similar smoke effects to those 
that occurred during the 2015 Sitgreaves Fire, during 
which the public had been very concerned about smoke 
impacts. Provencio recognized the need to inform 
community members about Boundary Fire smoke 
impacts. “Right away we knew it would be important 
to bring in an Air Resource Advisor (ARA) to help us 
tell that story, to help us manage those expectations,” 
she said. Provencio said the ARA was especially skilled 
in communicating with the public. “We were able to 
get great soundbites from him as we put out (our) 
public messages,” she said. “He had some wonderful 
tools that helped the public understand, and had 
recommendations for what to do if you were going to 
have heavy smoke impacts.” 
According to Provencio, the ARA also provided 
valuable three-day predictive smoke outlooks that 
allowed managers to communicate when heavy smoke 
would be present and what the community could do to 
mitigate the impacts. Another benefit to having an ARA 
was communicating operational tactics to minimize 
smoke, she said. “The ARA was a huge asset to the 
entire incident management team,” Provencio said. 
“That position reported out at each of our briefings, 
and helped everyone who was on the line understand 
the story behind smoke, and be able to relay that as we 
talked with partners, as we talked with the public, and to 
think about how we might shift our tactics on the fire to 
reduce those impacts.” 
Kaibab National Forest Fire Management Officer 
Art Gonzales agreed that an ARA was a huge benefit 
to the fire team. “We knew from the beginning that we 
wanted an ARA on this fire,” Gonzales said. “It was 
so nice to have someone who was just solely focused 
on smoke, relieving that burden from other IMT 
members.” 
Ron Sherron, USDA Forest Service smoke 
coordinator for the state of Arizona, works as a 
liaison between federal and state land managers and 
the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality 
(ADEQ). Sherron helped order the ARA for the 
Boundary Fire, and by working with the ARA and 
ADEQ, he helped coordinate messages from the 
incident to communities and the county emergency 
response team. Sherron said the ARA was particularly 
valuable for reaching out to impacted communities 
on tribal lands. “For the first time, the smoke outlooks 
were translated into the Navajo language to help those 
communities understand when the smoke impacts were 
likely going to happen and what the magnitude of those 
impacts would be.” 
*Boundary Fire information from InciWeb,  
https://inciweb.nwcg.gov/

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 40    
Resources for Predicting and Mitigating Smoke Impacts of Wildland Fires
8
Box 2. Beaver Creek Fire		
	
Location: Medicine Bow-Routt National Forests, Colorado
Incident type: Wildfire
Cause: Human 
Date of ignition: June 19, 2016
Date of completion: October 13, 2016 
Total acres burned: 38,380*          
The Beaver Creek Fire was located approximately 24 
miles northwest of Walden in north central Colorado, 
just south of Wyoming. It burned in heavy beetle-killed 
lodgepole pine timber in the Medicine Bow-Routt 
National Forests and Bureau of Land Management 
lands. Agency administrators recognized the fire 
would be a long duration event and that smoke would 
eventually become an issue, and they made the decision 
to bring on an Air Resource Advisor (ARA). Concerns 
were raised from the Wyoming governor via the state 
forester that the wildfire smoke could have impacts 
on Cheyenne and its famous Frontier Days, which 
could have had substantial economic impacts on the 
region. The ARA was assigned to work for the agency 
administrator but was also tied into the incident 
management teams (IMTs).
Andrea Holland was the first ARA to work on 
the fire. Holland had a solid background as an agency 
public information officer on wildfires as well as air 
quality experience. When she came on board, she first 
introduced herself and explained that her role as ARA 
was to model, monitor, and message smoke impacts. 
She said she stressed to the team that she was not there 
to regulate smoke, but to communicate and be a part 
of the team. She asked, “How can I help your team be 
successful with its mission?” Once this “circle of trust” 
was established, Holland said it helped ensure the 
success of the entire mission. 
One of the biggest challenges on the fire was 
tracking smoke dispersal because the winds kept 
changing direction and impacts were not always 
significant. When smoke did have significant 
impacts, the ARA would communicate them with 
the appropriate entities. When acres are burning 
without significant air quality impacts, an ARA can 
help convey the critical message that fire can be used 
to meet resource objectives while not burdening 
local communities with air pollution. This relieved 
some of the pressure from the IMT and the agency 
administrator. 
Mike Broughton, Forest Service smoke coordinator 
in Colorado and ARA, worked remotely to provide 
regional oversight. Broughton said that ARAs can act 
as a bridge between an agency and local communities. 
“Having an ARA on the fire even during times when 
the smoke plumes were not that active,” he said, “created 
a significant amount of positive public good will.” 
Hahns Peak/Bears Ears District Ranger 
Chad Stewart said he believed that trust was built 
with the ARAs’ modeling outputs, products, and 
communications. “It was superior to anything seen 
before and very useful for public information officers,” 
Stewart said. “The products were very relevant and well 
received by the public.” 
Jeremiah Zamora, an agency administrator and 
district ranger for the Parks Ranger District, said the 
ARAs spent a lot of time “chasing the smoke” on the 
Beaver Creek Fire. Monitoring equipment was shifted 
to try and match where the smoke was hitting. By 
August, a few smoke warnings were issued in Laramie, 
Wyoming, and the ARAs were advising schools when 
to keep children indoors for sport practice, as there were 
some days when smoke impacts could have impacted 
their health.
“Smoke and air quality are major concerns here, as 
we have lots of Class I Airsheds,” Zamora said. Class 
I Airsheds are Parks and Wilderness Areas established 
prior to 1977 and greater than 5,000 acres. They are 
given special protection status under the Clean Air 
Act for protection of visibility and other air pollution 
impacts. He added that his experience with the ARAs 
was a positive one. “I trusted them and their knowledge 
of where to place monitors,” he said. “They worked 
through PIOs directly and helped to calm people 
down.” Zamora said he would consider using ARAs on 
fires in the future and would recommend them to other 
agency administrators. 
*Beaver Creek Fire information from InciWeb,  
https://inciweb.nwcg.gov/
Lessons from the WFAQRP for 
Prescribed Fires and Smaller Wildfires
Smoke impacts are an important consideration in the use of 
prescribed fire. Smoke impacts influence decisions on how 
much to burn, when to burn, or whether special public events, 
like holidays and graduations, allow for burning at all. Because 
minimizing smoke impacts is an important aspect of prescribed 
fire operations, smoke impacts are often relatively minor 
compared to the severe air quality impacts that often result from 
large, high-severity wildfires (Lahm 2018). Smoke management 
requirements and policies are well-defined for federal agencies 
that use prescribed fire in their agency specific manuals and 
the NWCG’s “Interagency Prescribed Fire Planning and 
Implementation Procedures Guide” where the use of Basic 
Smoke Management Practices is directed (EPA 2016b).   
Efforts to mitigate smoke impacts can help managers not 
just in the planning stage, but also during implementation, 
including contingency measures that address unplanned 
effects (Lahm 2018). The use of prescribed fire is gaining 
support among communities, and even air regulatory agencies, 
because of its ecosystem health benefits and effectiveness 

Resources for Predicting and Mitigating Smoke Impacts of Wildland Fires
9
Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 40  
in wildfire prevention (Hardy and Peterson 2018). However, 
according to Hardy and Peterson (2018), “this tentative support 
will only continue and expand if fire practitioners commit 
to continuously learning and applying the best science and 
methods for protecting air quality as well as emphasizing public 
communications and outreach to address concerns.” Building 
upon the WFAQRP approach of monitoring, modeling, and 
messaging to address smoke impacts, there are critical tools and 
lessons for smaller, less impacting wildfires and prescribed fires 
that can help land managers meet their fire objectives while 
addressing public concerns about smoke. 
Monitoring Lessons
On these less impacting fires, monitoring of smoke impacts, 
whether through quantitative measures provided by a 
PM2.5 monitor or by qualitative observation, is critical to 
understanding the effects of smoke in terms of duration and 
level of impact. Monitoring data, whether from a fixed long-
term site or from a temporary monitor, is useful for prescribed 
fire managers to quantitatively understand the degree to which 
smoke is impacting an area. A prescribed burn boss can utilize 
the monitoring tool, Monitoring v4.0, to understand when 
smoke concentrations are at their peak so they can effectively 
develop messages to inform the public, which will help them 
cope with the impact and time their daily activities accordingly.  
Modeling Lessons
On large wildfires, an ARA will forecast potential smoke 
impacts by assessing weather predictions, evaluating potential 
smoke production, and modeling smoke emissions. The same 
predictive models such as BlueSky Playground and other tools 
used by ARAs are available to prescribed burn bosses and fire 
effects monitors on prescribed fires or smaller, less impacting 
wildfires. Federal prescribed burn bosses (RXB1 and 2) should 
have exposure to some of these tools through their required 
NWCG’s RX-410 Smoke Management Techniques class. 
While weather and wind forecasts can provide fire managers 
with a simple approximation of smoke impacts during a fire, 
more complex modeling systems (i.e., the BlueSky modeling 
framework and BlueSky Playground), can provide the best 
estimations regarding the location and concentration of smoke 
emissions (Strand et al. 2018). BlueSky Playground is designed 
for rapid and simple assessment of a single fire based on many 
assumptions; or it can be customized for greater accuracy to 
give results on the location of projected impacts and their 
duration and severity. The model now has extensive help 
screens to assist in understanding options in use, and it is tied 
to finer scale weather grids allowing for improved performance. 
This impact information can be the basis for deciding whether 
to ignite a prescribed burn or to conduct a burnout operation 
on a smaller wildfire.  
Messaging Lessons
On prescribed fires or small wildfires, land management 
agencies can use monitoring and modeling information as 
critical inputs to develop a message for the public on possible 
smoke impacts. The prescribed burn boss communicating 
useful smoke impact information to their respective public 
affairs office is the same method used by ARAs on larger 
incidents so that the public can reduce their smoke exposure. 
Communicating in advance with the public so they can 
respond accordingly to minimize their exposure to smoke and 
particulates has been very successful for larger wildfires and 
can help build public support for prescribed fire operations and 
on less impacting wildfires. Even when a burn is not ignited 
because of potential adverse smoke impacts, or if ignited 
and smoke was of little impact, it can provide useful public 
information and build long-term trust with the agency. The 
principles of the one-page Smoke Outlook, where information 
about smoke impact and timing of impacts is outlined, can be 
mimicked by combining the smoke impacts information from 
a model run along with information on how to reduce exposure 
with messages crafted by a public information or public affairs 
offices. This approach can be a valuable communication and 
coordination tool to engage with communities impacted 
by prescribed fire smoke. These skills and tools are not just 
relevant for prescribed fire operations, but also for smaller 
wildfire operations that do not necessarily warrant an ARA.  
Conclusion and Management 
Implications
Ecologists and land managers understand that the increased 
use of prescribed fire and some wildfire is needed to improve 
ecosystem health and to reduce the threat of catastrophic 
wildfire. However, the public, including regulators, place a high 
value on clean air and at times lack an understanding of the use 
of fire for ecosystem health (Lahm 2018). As land managers 
increase the use of fire to restore landscapes, public concern 
about smoke impacts will likely increase (Toman et al. 2014). 
Air Resource Advisors can add much-needed capacity 
during wildfire incidents. An agency administrator can 
include smoke and air quality objectives into the WFDSS 
decision for an incident, which provides a clear direction to 
the IMT, fire managers, cooperators, and the public about this 
critically important impact. For prescribed fire and smaller, 
less impacting wildfires, managers can use the ARA toolkit 
and lessons from the WFAQRP to build skills for predicting 
smoke impacts and creating valuable public messages about 
smoke to mitigate impacts. While not all fire managers need 
to be certified as an ARA technical specialist, there are many 
training opportunities, tools, and resources to help build smoke 
management capacity. The available modeling, monitoring, 
and messaging tools and lessons allow fire and land managers 
to help the public anticipate, mitigate, and cope with smoke 
impacts while achieving fire and fuels management goals. 
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge those who advised 
and assisted in the production of this paper. Special thanks to 
Tayloe Dubay, Amy Waltz, Jackie Banks, Andrea Thode, Barb 
Satink Wolfson, Will Basye, Art Gonzales, Heather Provencio, 
Ron Sherron, Andrea Holland, Mike Broughton, Jeremiah 
Zamora, Chad Steward, and the many folks who helped 
develop the tools utilized by Air Resource Advisors.

Resources for Predicting and Mitigating Smoke Impacts of Wildland Fires
10
Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 40  
References
AirFire Team. 2017. Research Topics: Emissions and Smoke. 
USDA Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research 
Station, AirFire Team website. https://www.airfire.
org/topics/#Emissions
Blades, J., and T.H. Hall. 2012. The future is smoky: Toward 
explaining public tolerance of smoke from wildland 
fire and fuels management [Abstract]. Paper 
presented at the 3rd Human Dimensions of Wildland 
Fire Conference, Seattle, Washington.
Blades, J., T.H. Hall, and S. Shook. 2012. Deconstructing 
public preferences and tradeoffs about smoke from 
wildland fires in the Northern Rockies using conjoint 
analysis [Abstract]. Paper presented at the 3rd 
Human Dimensions of Wildland Fire Conference, 
Seattle, Washington.
Blades, J., T.H. Hall, and S. McCaffrey. 2018. Public 
Perceptions of Smoke from Wildland Fire, Chapter 
6.2. NWCG Smoke Management Guide for 
Prescribed Fire. PMS-420-2. Boise, ID: National 
Wildfire Coordination Group, National Interagency 
Fire Center. 293 p.
Domitrovich, J.W., G.A. Broyles, R.D. Ottmar, T.E. 
Reinhardt, L.P. Naeher, M.T. Kleinman, K.M. 
Navarro, C.E. Mackay, and O. Adetona. 2017. 
Wildland Fire Smoke Health Effects on Wildland 
Firefighters and the Public. Technical Report. Joint 
Fire Science Program. JFSP PROJECT ID: 13-1-02-
14. https://www.firescience.gov/projects/13-1-02-14/
project/13-1-02-14_final_report.pdf
Fowler, C.T. 2003. Human health impacts of forest fires in the 
southern United States: A literature review. Journal of 
Ecological Anthropology, 7: 39-63.
Hardy, C., and J. Peterson. 2018. Foreword. NWCG Smoke 
Management Guide for Prescribed Fire. PMS-420-2. 
Boise, ID: National Wildfire Coordination Group, 
National Interagency Fire Center. 293 p.
Lahm, P. 2017. Wildland Fire Air Quality Response Program 
– Past, Present and Future with Expectations for the 
Week. Powerpoint for 2017 ARA training program. 
Lahm, P. 2018. The Air Quality and Smoke Management 
Imperative, Chapter 1.1. NWCG Smoke 
Management Guide for Prescribed Fire. PMS-420-2. 
Boise, ID: National Wildfire Coordination Group, 
National Interagency Fire Center. 293 p.
Larkin, S. 2013. “AirFire team hosts first Air Resource Advisor 
training.” News Post, U.S. Forest Service, Pacific 
Northwest Research Station, AirFire Team. Adapted 
from the USFS Chief ’s Desk: People Places and 
Things, March 22, 2013. https://www.airfire.org/
news/airfire-team-hosts-first-air-resource-advisor-
training/
Larkin, S. 2017. Smoke Modeling Uncertainty. PowerPoint 
presentation for 2017 ARA training program. 
Matthews, A. 2018. Smoke and Transportation Safety. 
NWCG Smoke Management Guide for Prescribed 
Fire. PMS-420-2. Boise, ID: National Wildfire 
Coordination Group, National Interagency Fire 
Center. 293 p.
McCaffrey, S., and C. Olsen. 2012. Research perspectives 
on the public and fire management: A synthesis of 
current social science on eight essential questions. 
Gen. Tech. Rep. NRS-104. Newtown Square, PA: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Northern Research Station. 40 p.
National Interagency Fire Center (NIFC). 2016. Wildfire 
Talking Points: Smoke. https://www.nifc.gov/PIO_
bb/fs.html.
National Wildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG). 2012a. 
Monitoring and Mitigating Exposure to Carbon 
Monoxide and Particulates at Incident Base 
Camps. National Wildfire Coordinating Group 
Memorandum #006-2012. National Interagency Fire 
Center. https://www.nwcg.gov/sites/default/files/
memos/eb-m-12-006.pdf
______. 2012b. Monitoring and Mitigating Exposure to 
Carbon Monoxide and Particulates at Incident 
Base Camps, Attachment A. National Wildfire 
Coordinating Group Memorandum #006-2012. 
National Interagency Fire Center. https://www.nwcg.
gov/sites/default/files/memos/eb-m-12-006a.pdf
______. 2017. Air Resource Advisor. Accessed April 18, 
2018. https://www.nwcg.gov/ad-positions/thsp-air-
resources-advisor
Rappold, A.G., N.L. Fann, J. Crooks, J. Huang, W.E. Cascio, 
R.B. Devlin, and D. Diaz-Sanchez. 2014. Forecast-
based interventions can reduce the health and 
economic burden of wildﬁres. Environmental Science 
& Technology, 48(8): 10571–10579.
Steelman, T., S. McCaffrey, A.L. Velez, and J. Briefel. 2014. 
What information do people use, trust, and find 
useful during a disaster? Evidence from five large 
wildfires. Natural Hazards, 76. 615-634. 10.1007/
s11069-014-1512-x 
Strand, T., S. Larkin, M. Rorig, S. Goodrick, S. O’Neill, 
R. Solomon, J. Peterson, and S.A. Ferguson. 
2018. Smoke Prediction Models. NWCG Smoke 
Management Guide for Prescribed Fire. PMS-420-2. 
Boise, ID: National Wildfire Coordination Group, 
National Interagency Fire Center. 293 p.

Resources for Predicting and Mitigating Smoke Impacts of Wildland Fires
11
Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 40  
Toman, E., C.S. Olsen, and A. Fischer. 2014. Examining 
the influence and effectiveness of communication 
programs and community partnerships on public 
perceptions of smoke management: A multi-region 
analysis. Final Project Report: JFSP Project Number 
10-1-03-7.
Toman, E.; Stidham, M.; Shindler, B., and S. McCaffrey. 
2013. Social science at the wildland-urban interface: 
a compendium of research results. General Technical 
Report NRS-111. Newton Square, PA: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Northern 
Research Station. 75 p.
Toman, E., C.S. Olsen, and S. McCaffrey. 2012. Where There’s 
Smoke: An Introduction to Public Perceptions of 
Smoke Management. Presented at the 3rd Human 
Dimensions of Wildland Fire Conference, April 
17–19, Seattle, Washington.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 2016a. Wildfire 
Smoke: A Guide for Public Health Officials. https://
www3.epa.gov/airnow/wildfire_may2016.pdf
______. 2016b. 40 CFR parts 50 and 51. Treatment of data 
influenced by exceptional events; final rule. U.S. 
Federal Register Vol. 81 No. 191 p. 68216-68282.
Wildland Fire Air Quality Response Program (WFAQRP). 
2018. https://wildlandfiresmoke.net/. Accessed April 
18, 2018
Winkler, R., D.R. Field, A.E. Luloff, R.S. Krannich, and 
T. Williams. 2007. Social landscapes of the inter-
mountain west: A comparison of “old West” and “new 
West” communities. Rural Sociology, 72: 478–501.

Resources for Predicting and Mitigating Smoke Impacts of Wildland Fires
12
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution.
This report was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.
For more information about forest restoration, contact the ERI at (928) 523-7182 or nau.edu/eri.
Working Papers in Intermountain West
Frequent-Fire Forest Restoration
	1.	 Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons and Adaptive Management Practices
	2.	 Understory Plan Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
	3.	 Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
	4.	 Fules Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits
	5.	 Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
	6.	 Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
	7.	 Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
	8.	 Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
	9.	 Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
	10.	The Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Restoration Model
	11.	Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration
	12.	Restoring Forest Roads
	13.	Treating Slash after Restoration Thinning
	14.	Integrating Forest Restoration Treatments with mexican Spotted Owl Habitat Needs
	15.	Effects of Forest Thinning Treatments on Fire Behavior
	16.	Snags and Forest Restoration
	17.	Bat Habitat and Forest Restoration Treatments
	18.	Prescribed and Wildland Use Fires in the Southwest: Do Timing and Frequency Matter?
	19.	Understory Seeding in Southwestern Forests Following Wildfire and Ecological Restoration Treatments
	20.	Controlling Cheatgrass in Ponderosa Pine and Pinyon-Juniper Restoration Areas
	21.	Managing Coarse Woody Debris in Frequent-fire Southwestern Forests
	22.	Restoring Spatial Pattern to Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
	23.	Guidelines for Managing Small Mammals in Restored Ponderosa Pine Forests of Northern Arizona
	24.	Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Burning
	25.	Strategies for Enhancing and Restoring Rare Plants and Their Habitats in the Face  
	 	 of Climate Change and Habitat Destruction in the Intermountain West
26. Wildlife Habitat Values and Forest Structure in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine: Implications for Restoration
	27.	Fuel Treatment Longevity
	28.	Southwestern Mixed-Conifer Forests: Evaluating Reference Conditions to Guide Ecological Restoration Treatments
	29.	Post-Wildfire Restoration of Structure, Composition, and Function in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine  
	 	 and Warm/Dry Mixed-Conifer Forests
	30.	Impact of Forest Restoration Treatments on Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Tree Resistance to Bark Beetles
	31.	Climage Change Impact on Bark Beetle Outbreaks and the Impact of Outbreaks on Subsequent Fires
	32.	An Evaluation of Fire Regime Recontstruction Methods
	33.	The 2012 Mexican Spotted Owl Recovery Plan Guidelines for Forest Restoration in the American Southwest
	34.	Climate Change and Fire in the Southwest
	35.	Carbon Cycling in Southwestern Forests: Reservoirs, Fluxes, and the Effects of Fire and Management
	36.	Wildlife and Fire: Impacts of Wildfire Prescribed Fire on Wildlife and Habitats in Southwestern Coniferous Forests
	37.	The Influence of Restoration Treatments on Hydrologic Output in Fire-Adapted Forests of the Southwest
38.	Reference Conditions and Restoration of Transitional Ponderosa Pine Forests in the Southwest
39.	Restoration as a Mechanism to Manage Southwestern Dwarf Mistletoe in Ponderosa Pine Forests

P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
eri.nau.edu
Ecological 
Restoration 
Institute
College of Engineering, Forestry,  
and Natural Sciences
