 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Estimating the Effect of Forest Restoration on  
Water Resources in Northern Arizona 
By Frances O’Donnell  
INTRODUCTION 
The ponderosa pine ecosystem is a vital source of water resources. Though they cover just 20 percent of the 
watershed area, about 50 percent of the water in the Salt River originates from areas covered by ponderosa 
forest. It is possible that restoration treatments will increase the amount of streamflow coming from forests. 
By reducing forest density, thinning treatments reduce the amount of water used by trees, allowing more to 
run off into streams and recharge into aquifers. They also increase open spaces where snow accumulates and 
melts rather than being intercepted by tree canopies where a large fraction evaporates. When forest restora-
tion is performed over large areas through the Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI), which proposes to 
treat 1 million of the 2.4 million acres of ponderosa forest in northern and eastern Arizona, the effect on flow 
in major rivers may be detectable. The objective of our study was to estimate the increase in streamflow that 
can be expected following restoration.  
METHODS 
Because of the high amount of year-to-year variation, producing reliable estimates of streamflow through 
measurements in the field requires years of data collection. Therefore, actual measurements of restoration 
effects on streamflow are not currently 
available. As a substitute, we analyzed 
data from the Beaver Creek Experimental 
Watershed that was operated south of 
Flagstaff in the 1950s–80s (Figure 1). Sci-
entists installed weirs to measure flow in 
small streams and performed experi-
mental logging ranging from light thin-
nings to clearcuts on the forests upstream 
from many of the weirs. By monitoring 
streamflow following logging and com-
paring to both pre-treatment flow meas-
urements and streamflow from untreated 
forest, they determined the increase in 
flow due to logging. We used mathemati-
cal modeling to develop an equation 
based on the Beaver Creek data that pre-
dicts the increase in streamflow following 
thinning.  
 
Fact Sheet: Estimating the Effects of Forest Restoration on Water Resources in Northern Arizona
 
 
 
 
  
 
April 2014 
Figure 1. Stream-gauging weir, Beaver Creek Experimental Watershed. 
Photo courtesy Sharon Masek Lopez, Northern Arizona University 

 
RESEARCH FINDINGS 
The runoff increase depends on the amount of winter (October 
through April) precipitation received, how much basal area was re-
moved by the thinning, and the time since the thinning was per-
formed. Due to the regrowth of understory vegetation, increases in 
streamflow only persist for six to 10 years following thinning. Win-
ter precipitation is the most important determinant of streamflow 
increase, and it is possible that no increase will be observed if con-
ditions are dry in the years immediately following thinning. 
 
While our approach provides a reasonable first estimate of the ef-
fect of restoration on streamflow, there are several issues that need 
to be addressed: 
 
 The thinning techniques used at Beaver Creek were similar, 
but not identical, to modern forest restoration (Figure 2). Di-
rect monitoring of restored forests is needed to determine if 
the effect on streamflow is different. 
 
 It is possible that maintenance treatments—controlled burns 
and thinning to maintain an open forest structure—may be 
able to reverse the decline in streamflow increase that occurs 
in the years following thinning. However, no streamflow da-
ta have been collected following maintenance treatments, so 
their effect is unclear. 
 
 A large majority of precipitation in ponderosa forests is returned to the atmosphere by plant water use 
and evaporation. This amount could increase in a warmer climate, reducing the potential for stream-
flow increases. 
 
MANAGEMENT IMPLICATIONS 
 If 4FRI treatments are carried out as planned, an increase in runoff of up to 12 percent is possible, but 
the reliability of the increase is low. Little to no increase is expected in dry years when water re-
sources are most stressed. Therefore, water resource managers should not rely on increases from for-
est restoration to meet demand. 
 
 Streamflow increases are undetectable six to 10 years after treatment (Table 1), but the 4FRI is ex-
pected to take 20 years. Because only a fraction of the 4FRI treatment area will be producing in-
creased streamflow at a time, managers of water resources from large rivers, such as the Salt and 
Verde rivers, should not expect large increases, even in wet years. 
 
 Though more study is needed, our best hypothesis is that reducing understory regrowth following 
thinning will maximize runoff. Therefore, land managers wishing to maximize the hydrologic bene-
fits of forest restoration should consider including maintenance treatments in restoration plans. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contact 
Dr. Abe Springer, Abe.Springer@nau.edu  
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
  
 
 
Figure 2. (Top) Strip-cut thinning, Beaver 
Creek. Photo courtesy of USDA Forest 
Service. (Bottom ) Modern forest restora-
tion, Centennial Forest, Flagstaff, Ariz.  
Table 1. Model-based estimates of the maximum increase in runoff that can be expected and the chance that no 
increase will be observed in each year following a thinning treatment due to variability in precipitation. The values 
are based on the range of precipitation observed during the Beaver Creek Experimental Watershed Study. 
