The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Resources for Predicting and Mitigating Smoke Impacts of Wildland Fires   
 
 
Introduction 
Fire managers use prescribed fire and some wildfires to meet resource management objectives, like 
restoring and maintaining ecological processes, watershed function, and wildlife habitat, as well as 
to reduce fuels and mitigate the risk of severe wildfires. However, public concerns about smoke im-
pacts are often a limiting factor for accomplishing fuels reduction and ecological restoration goals. It 
is imperative that agency land managers mitigate smoke impacts from wildland fire for the health 
and safety of the public. The Wildland Fire Air Quality Response Program (WFAQRP) has smoke 
impact assessment and forecast tools to assist agencies in managing fire incidents and mitigating 
smoke impacts to communities. New smoke modeling tools and technical specialists, called Air Re-
source Advisors (ARAs), can help inform fire management operations and provide important infor-
mation to air quality, public health, public safety officials, and the public. This fact sheet describes 
how ARAs use smoke modeling and monitoring tools to build a toolkit for fire management opera-
tions and improved public communication. 
 
Air Resource Advisors 
Air Resource Advisors are technical experts in air quality and smoke 
dispersion science. They are trained in monitoring, data analysis, air 
quality, meteorology, computer simulation modeling and interpretation, 
and effective communication on the health and safety impacts of smoke. 
They are deployed nationwide during large wildfire events, often at the 
direct request of incident management team or agency administrators. 
 
The Air Resource Advisor Toolkit: The Three “M”s 
Air Resource Advisors use a number of tools to predict smoke impacts 
in order to help the public and professionals mitigate smoke effects. 
While technology and its applications are constantly evolving, there are 
three key elements ARAs use to accomplish their task — modeling, 
monitoring, and messaging (Figure 1).  
 
Modeling 
One of the most commonly used smoke prediction tools by ARAs for wildfires and land manage-
ment agency personnel on prescribed fires is known as the BlueSky modeling framework 
(www.airfire.org/bluesky). Air Resource Advisors are taught extensively in the use of the framework 
as well as other smoke modelling tools to determine where smoke will go and what surface-level 
smoke impacts will occur. BlueSky represents a highly complex modeling framework that maximiz-
es the quality of the prediction, integrating different modeling fields such as fire information, fuel 
loadings, consumption modeling, emissions modeling, time rate of emissions modeling, plume 
height estimations, smoke trajectory, and dispersion modeling. BlueSky is accessible by ARAs, air 
resource managers, prescribed fire burn bosses and the public.  
August 2018 
Figure 1. The three “M”s that 
ARAs utilize to predict and miti-
gate smoke impacts – modeling, 
monitoring, and messaging.  

 
Monitoring 
Smoke impacts are monitored through a variety 
of methods, from visual estimates based on how 
far one can see in low humidity areas to quantita-
tive measuring devices. Air Resource Advisors 
set up air quality monitoring equipment on fires 
to determine whether air quality standards set by 
state and federal agencies are exceeded and to 
better understand the smoke impacts affecting a 
population in a given area. Air Resource Advi-
sors and many air quality regulatory agencies use 
a program called Monitoring v4.0 (https://
tools.airfire.org/monitoring/v4/) to analyze moni-
toring data and understand when smoke impacts 
peak and subside on a daily basis. 
 
 
 
Messaging 
Air Resource Advisors organize modeling and monitoring information into daily Smoke Outlooks, 
which are crucial for public communication and cooperator coordination. These daily reports illus-
trate smoke modeling projections and the potential smoke impacts for communities likely to experi-
ence ground-level concentrations of fine particulates in smoke. An ARA uses the daily reports to 
communicate smoke impacts to Public Information Officers, transportation safety agencies, health 
departments, and state, tribal, and local air quality regulatory agencies.  
 
Management Implications  
Ecologists and land managers understand that the increased use of prescribed fire and some wildfire 
is needed to improve ecosystem health and reduce the threat of catastrophic wildfire. However, the 
public, including regulators, place a high value on clean air and at times lack an understanding of the 
effective use of fire for land management. As land managers increase the use of fire to restore land-
scapes, public concern about smoke impacts will likely increase. Timely smoke impact information 
can address these concerns, as well as reduce the public’s health and safety risk and improve public 
perception of fire and land management activities. The following recommendations can assist agen-
cies in predicting, mitigating, and communicating smoke impacts to affected communities: 
 
 Ordering an ARA can add much-needed capacity during larger wildfire incidents.  
 For prescribed fire and smaller, less impacting wildfires, managers can use the ARA toolkit to 
build skills for predicting smoke impacts and then creating valuable public messages about 
smoke to mitigate impacts.  
 In the absence of a certified ARA technical specialist, there are many training opportunities, 
tools, and resources, e.g., BlueSky, Monitoring v4.0, to build smoke management capacity.  
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following ERI Working Paper: 
Stotts, C., P. Lahm, and C. Standish. 2018. Resources for Predicting and Mitigating Smoke Impacts of 
Wildland Fires. ERI Working Paper No. 40. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona 
University.  
Contact: Caleb Stotts, Caleb.Stotts@nau.edu 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
The 2011 Wallow Fire near Eagar, Arizona was the largest fire 
in state history. Extreme smoke impacts from the fire provided 
significant lessons regarding public and firefighter health and 
safety Photo courtesy of ERI  
