J. For. 116(5):473–480
doi: 10.1093/jofore/fvy037
Copyright © 2018 Society of American Foresters
Journal of Forestry  •  September 2018    473
Received January 17, 2018; accepted July 6, 2018; published online September 18, 2018. 
Affiliations: Bryce E. Esch (Bryce.esch@nau.edu), Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, PO Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011. Amy E. M. 
Waltz (amy.waltz@nau.edu), Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, PO Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011. Tzeidle N. Wasserman (tzeidle.
wasserman@nau.edu), Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, PO Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011. Elizabeth L. Kalies (elizabeth.kalies@
TNC.ORG), Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, PO Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011. The Nature Conservancy, NC Chapter, 334 
Blackwell St, Durham, NC 27701.
Acknowledgments: The authors acknowledge Dr. Melanie Colavito, Tayloe Dubay, and two anonymous reviewers for their substantial review and suggestions for 
the manuscript. Dr. Waltz would like to thank Pete Caligiuri (The Nature Conservancy of Oregon) for the summary of the final stages of the Deschutes Forest 
Collaborative example. This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.
PRACTICE OF FORESTRY
policy
Using Best Available Science Information: 
Determining Best and Available
Bryce E. Esch , Amy E.M. Waltz, Tzeidle N. Wasserman,  and 
Elizabeth L. Kalies
Public land and natural resource management policies in the United States commonly require the use of “best 
available science information” (BASI) in planning and implementing management activities. However, there is little 
direction on what constitutes BASI and how managers should discern between science sources. While definitions of 
BASI vary across management agencies and within academia, most include criteria emphasizing accuracy, reliability, 
and relevancy. Traditional approaches to identifying BASI, such as review of peer literature sources, can be limiting 
for land managers and their stakeholders. We agree that the highest standards of accuracy, reliability, and rele-
vancy are necessary in cases where there is conflicting science or disagreement on best management options. But to 
increase the applicability of BASI for federal land managers and their stakeholders, we suggest that a broader range 
of accuracy and reliability can be used as best available science, determined by the question or need of the land 
manager. We provide examples of specific science needs and the BASI used successfully in that particular context. 
By expanding potential sources of best available science beyond the most rigorous evidence-based conservation 
approach, managers have more options for fulfilling science needs with appropriate science information.
Keywords: best available science, land and resource management, science-based management, forest planning
T
he use of “the best available scien-
tific information” (often referred to 
as BASI) is advised or mandated in 
public land and resource management by 
state, federal, and international environ-
mental laws, policies, and regulations. State 
and federal policies with BASI components 
include the US Forest Service Planning 
Rule (36 CFR Part 219  “Planning Rule,” 
USDA Forest Service 2012), US Forest 
Service Handbook (USDA Forest Service 
2013), the Endangered Species Act (ESA), 
state directives, and programs specific 
to agencies including the Collaborative 
Forest Restoration Act (CFLRP, Omnibus 
Public Land Management Act 2009)  and 
the Resilient Landscapes program (DOI 
2015), which impact the management 
of millions of acres and a wide variety of 
resources across the nation. Federal agencies 
are held accountable to these policies by the 
court systems, which require demonstra-
tion of their efforts to meet BASI standards 
(Schultz 2008). Additionally, as the expan-
sion of the role of collaboration in public 
land management has led to the inclusion 
of a much more diverse set of stakeholders, 
managers are increasingly held accountable 
by their external stakeholders, including 
elected officials, private citizens, and non-
government organizations (NGOs). Land 
managers benefit from transparent use of 
BASI with their partners and collaborative 
stakeholders. Recognition of knowledge 
gaps and data limitations can improve rela-
tionships among stakeholders and build 
trust in the decision-making process (Ryder 
et al. 2010, Webb et al. 2010). Despite the 
integration of BASI mandates across land 
and resource management agencies, consist-
ent and specific parameters for identifying 
BASI do not exist. Thus, it is unclear how 
land or natural resource managers should 
use existing available science or discern 
among available scientific information to 
identify the “best” information so that man-
agement decisions are defensible to manag-
ers and their stakeholders. The increased 
directives for collaborative and inclusive 
land management decision-making necessi-
tates shared understanding and transparent 
use of BASI between stakeholders and land 
managers. By utilizing a flexible approach 
and narrowing BASI options based on our 
proposed framework, both managers and 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/article-abstract/116/5/473/5100820 by Northern Arizona University user on 02 October 2018

474    Journal of Forestry  •  September 2018
stakeholders can better understand what 
sources would best fit their science needs.
In this article, we examine and identify 
the current definitions for BASI, the range 
of available science sources that meet BASI 
criteria, and the acknowledged barriers to 
using BASI by public land managers. We 
provide a framework for determining what 
science is best for particular use contexts 
and approaches and tools for public land 
managers and their stakeholders for best use 
of the available science. This incorporation 
of context, or the specific resource question, 
is not addressed in federal guidelines for the 
use of BASI.
BASI Definitions
Best available science is intended to be the 
platform for well-informed decision-mak-
ing in natural resource and land-use plan-
ning, policy, and management. Scientific 
inquiry provides a pathway for understand-
ing natural systems and for tracking changes 
in order to better understand causative fac-
tors and potential future conditions. As 
pressures from climate change, large-scale 
disturbance, and land-use change increase, 
synthesizing BASI is crucial for planning 
and managing public lands and resources at 
large spatial and temporal scales, where field 
experiments are too costly, site-specific, and 
slow to produce useful results.
Attributes that define “best available” 
science span from what is considered aca-
demically credible or what is convenient 
and accessible to what is actually accurate 
or acceptable to support a particular posi-
tion or agenda (Bisbal 2002, Ryder et  al. 
2010). However, there is little consensus 
on the meaning of “best” and “available” 
across state and federal agency directives. 
The quality of the information available, 
the timeframe of availability, and the man-
agement or policy question at hand are all 
important factors in determining BASI.
Federal Agencies and BASI
The US Endangered Species Act of 1973 
(ESA) created a precedent for the integra-
tion of BASI in environmental regulations 
and natural resource agency directives. The 
ESA is the law through which threatened 
and endangered species and the ecosystems 
that support them are conserved. The law 
mandates that the US Fish and Wildlife 
Service (USFWS) and the National Oceanic 
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) 
“use the best scientific and commercial data 
available” in making listing decisions (16 
USC § 1533(b)). Despite the emphasis on 
best scientific data in the ESA, the USFWS 
has not developed specific parameters to 
define what is “best” or “scientific,” and a 
significant amount of litigation regarding 
the ESA and USFWS listing decisions has 
hinged on these issues (Joly et  al. 2010, 
Murphy and Weiland 2016). The stipula-
tion that science information be “available” 
has protected the agencies from having to 
generate scientific information when none 
is available and has also been the subject 
of many ESA lawsuits (Joly et  al. 2010, 
Charnley et al. 2017).
The BASI mandate in the ESA has 
been widely adopted across federal land 
management agencies, with differing con-
texts and levels of detail. The National 
Park Service (NPS) management guide-
lines (2006) mandate the use of best avail-
able science in management planning and 
activities. The NPS defined “best available 
sound science and scholarship” as “up-to-
date and rigorous in method, mindful of 
limitations, peer-reviewed when appro-
priate and required, and delivered at the 
appropriate time in the decision-making 
process in ways that allow NPS managers to 
apply its findings” (NPS Director’s Order 
100). The Bureau of Land Management 
(BLM) is encouraged to use best availa-
ble science through agency strategies and 
plans, including the 2015 strategy for 
“Advancing Science in the BLM” and the 
2016 Greater Sage-Grouse Land Use Plan. 
Additional federal agency recognition of the 
use of BASI includes the 2003 Interagency 
Strategy for the Implementation of Federal 
Wildland Fire Management Policy, imple-
mented by the US Department of Interior 
and the US Department of Agriculture. 
The strategy includes the use of best availa-
ble science in Fire Management Plans and 
activities in its guiding principles.
The US Forest Service and BASI
The US Forest Service (USFS) has gone the 
furthest in providing parameters for BASI 
use. BASI must be used in planning, as 
stated in the 2012 Planning Rule (USDA 
Forest Service 2012):
§ 219.3 Role of science in planning. The 
responsible official shall use the best 
available 
scientific 
information 
to 
inform the planning process required by 
this subpart. In doing so, the responsible 
official shall determine what informa-
tion is the most accurate, reliable, and 
relevant to the issues being considered. 
The responsible official shall document 
how the best available scientific informa-
tion was used to inform the assessment, 
the plan decision, and the monitoring 
program as required in §§ 219.6(a)(3) 
and 219.14(a)(4). Such documentation 
must identify what information was 
determined to be the best available sci-
entific information, explain the basis for 
that determination, and explain how the 
information was applied to the issues 
considered.
Federal agencies are required by law and directed through additional programmatic goals to use the best 
available science information (BASI) to support land and natural resource management decisions. Current 
guidelines for BASI lack definitions or criteria for accessing and evaluating best available science for use 
across the multiple contexts of land and natural resource management. There is a range of appropriate 
sources of science information, with varying levels of accuracy, reliability, and relevance that can cause 
confusion among land and resource managers and their stakeholders. We suggest assessing the specific man-
agement question and context to better determine appropriate sources of science information. Management 
questions with high controversy or conflicting science require high levels of accuracy, reliability, and relevance 
to support defensible management decisions and ensure desired management outcomes. Site-specific ques-
tions or contexts that require baseline information can be enhanced with place-based sources like traditional 
ecological knowledge or expert opinion. While highly accurate and reliable science sources should be inte-
grated into land management decisions whenever possible, this level of science information is not available 
for all questions and contexts. Managers can use a wide array of science information options under federal 
agency policy. By understanding the context of the science need, managers can be more flexible and efficient 
in their use of BASI.
Management and Policy Implications
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/article-abstract/116/5/473/5100820 by Northern Arizona University user on 02 October 2018

Journal of Forestry  •  September 2018    475
Finalized in January 2015, the USFS 
Planning Directives guide the implementa-
tion of the 2012 Planning Rule and provide 
additional direction. The directives allow 
for a wide range of types of evidence to be 
used to meet BASI intent, including peer-re-
viewed publications, scientific assessments, 
expert opinion, observational data, and 
unpublished data from government agen-
cies, academia, or public surveys. The best 
available information “currently exists in a 
form useful for the planning process without 
further data collection, modification, or val-
idation. Analysis or interpretation of BASI 
may be needed to place it in the appropri-
ate context for planning” (FSH 1909.12 sec 
07.1). The directives further define the BASI 
criteria from the Planning Rule as follows:
(1)	  Accurate information estimates, iden-
tifies, or describes “the true condition 
of its subject matter” (Forest Service 
Handbook [FSH] 1909.12 sec 07.12, 
Figure  1). This can include specific 
measurements of conditions or esti-
mation of trends. Accurate scientific 
information should be quantitatively 
unbiased and free of systematic error.
(2)	  Reliable information is precise and 
unaffected by random error; multiple 
samples represent the same condition 
(Figure 1). Appropriate scientific meth-
ods, including study design, assump-
tions, 
analytical 
approach, 
and 
conclusions, should be well-referenced 
and described, with citations to rele-
vant, credible literature.
(3)	  Relevant information is that which per-
tains to the issues under consideration 
and relate to the appropriate temporal 
and spatial scales. Both accurate and 
reliable science need to be assessed for 
applicability to the management ques-
tion. This includes the ability to trans-
fer results to a management question 
from different systems, species, or geog-
raphies or via different methodologies.
The directives note that sometimes a clear 
scientific consensus might not exist, and in 
such cases, conflicting information can be 
acknowledged without necessarily choos-
ing one “best” source of information (FSH 
1909.12 sec 07.12).
Academia and BASI
The academic literature for BASI relies 
heavily on definitions that incorporate the 
scientific method, including measures of 
rigor, appropriate inference, and peer review 
to assess for bias. Ryder et al. (2010) note 
that BASI has three elements: a definition 
of what constitutes science, consideration 
of what scientific information is available, 
and an objective way of evaluating available 
scientific information in order to determine 
what is best. Effective BASI is credible, 
salient, legitimate, and usable (Clark et al. 
2002, Cash et  al. 2003). Credible infor-
mation is developed according to rigorous 
scientific standard, salient information is 
relevant given the context, and legitimate 
information is that which has been pro-
duced in a respectful, unbiased, and fair way 
(Cash et al. 2003). These terms crosswalk to 
the USDA terms respectively: (1) Accurate/
Credible, (2) Reliable/Legitimate, and (3) 
Relevant/Salient.
Clear and sound science adheres to 
scientific guidelines, includes a clear state-
ment of objectives, a thorough review of 
the literature, and other relevant informa-
tion, adheres to the well-established scien-
tific process and methodology, and logical 
deduction of results and inferences using 
valid statistical analyses, with peer review 
(Sullivan et al. 2006, Charnley et al. 2017).
Sources of Science Information
Peer-Reviewed Literature
Peer-reviewed articles published in academic 
journals largely represent the highest qual-
ity sources of accurate and reliable science 
information, as they are reviewed by one to 
three anonymous experts in the field and 
revised accordingly. These studies can vary 
in rigor of experimental design and in how 
they are received by the scientific commu-
nity after they are published, and they are 
subject to human error and bias (Lee et al. 
2013). As such, it is appropriate to evaluate 
peer-review science for accuracy, reliability, 
and relevance to planning and management 
issues. Peer-reviewed studies will provide 
the largest source of rigorous and up-to-date 
science information but may not always be 
the most available or accessible depending 
on how the science was published.
Grey Literature Sources
Grey literature is a broad category that varies 
from easily accessed to hard-to-find, local and 
specific to broadly applicable. Grey literature 
includes white papers, working papers, gen-
eral technical reports (GTRs), government 
documents, theses and dissertations, and 
conference proceedings (Prague Definition, 
Farace & Schöpfel 2010), and the quality 
of the information can be more variable 
than that in peer-reviewed journals. Agency 
reports and publications are often peer-re-
viewed, meet high accuracy and reliability 
standards, and are more broadly available to 
agency managers. For example, general tech-
nical reports are peer-reviewed within the 
Figure 1.  Reliability and accuracy (adapted from Trochim 2006).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/article-abstract/116/5/473/5100820 by Northern Arizona University user on 02 October 2018

476    Journal of Forestry  •  September 2018
US Forest Service by two in-house experts. 
Academic institutes and nonprofit organi-
zations (e.g., The Nature Conservancy) can 
also be sources for working papers, white 
papers, and fact sheets. These sources are 
often produced from analyses conducted by 
staff scientists, are peer-reviewed, and can 
meet the BASI criteria of accurate and reli-
able information. Theses and dissertations 
are grey literature that may be less widely dis-
tributed but go through a process of review 
by the committee members, often with one 
or more PhD-level faculty on the committee, 
and can also meet BASI definitions.
Grey literature resources can represent a 
large body of institutional knowledge and a 
source of highly localized or specialized infor-
mation to address issues underrepresented in 
the peer-reviewed literature. The synthesis of 
data, both published and unpublished, across 
broad ranges with context for land managers 
may not meet scientific journal publication 
criteria but represent important contributions 
to the body of literature. For example, USFS 
Rocky Mountain Research Station GTR 310 
(Reynolds et al. 2013) summarized the natu-
ral range of variability (NRV) across two for-
est types in the Southwest based on a broad 
literature review and synopsis. The document 
includes management recommendations for 
land managers seeking to incorporate NRV 
into project planning. Grey literature also 
may be specifically geared toward a man-
ager or specific user audience, increasing the 
accessibility and applicability of the scientific 
information for a particular purpose.
Traditional, Local, Expert, and 
Institutional Ecological Knowledge 
Sources
Widely used sources of science informa-
tion defined by the USFS Planning Rule 
as BASI include traditional and local eco-
logical knowledge, expert knowledge, and 
institutional knowledge. Traditional ecolog-
ical knowledge (TEK) and local ecological 
knowledge (LEK) can be rich sources of sci-
entific information. Traditional ecological 
knowledge is insight and knowledge about 
a species or ecosystem that has developed 
through interaction or engagement with 
the environment in specific places trans-
ferred over multiple generations (Berkes 
et al. 2000, Huntington 2000). Similarly, 
LEK is knowledge gained through per-
sonal interaction with local ecosystems but 
is more recent than TEK (Charnley et al. 
2017). Traditional ecological knowledge 
and LEK can vary in accuracy and reliabil-
ity and may not be statistically rigorous; 
however, these sources can provide valu-
able ecological information that is based 
on long-term observations and may be the 
only sources of place-based information in 
certain areas. Expert knowledge is infor-
mation on a particular subject that is not 
widely known by others and often comes 
from an individual or individuals who are 
specialists in a particular field or subject 
(Martin et al. 2012). Experts are solicited 
or deferred to for interpretation and con-
text. Institutional knowledge is knowledge 
within an agency, institution, research 
group, or area that holds information and 
details that are not widely known by oth-
ers outside of the institution. Institutional 
knowledge, like local and expert knowl-
edge, is often knowledge on a specific sub-
ject area or long-term history of a research 
area, plots, subject area, or landscape that 
is important to consider and can be used 
to meet BASI criteria. These sources are 
important when little information is avail-
able in the peer-reviewed literature for a 
particular landscape. These sources vary in 
their availability, depending on if and how 
the information is documented.
Weight of the Evidence—Systematic 
Evaluation of Available Science
The available sources that meet BASI 
standards can be numerous, leading to 
an overwhelming amount of information 
that may include contradictory answers to 
management questions. Evidence-based 
conservation processes develop a compre-
hensive synthesis of sound, peer-reviewed 
science based on environmental man-
agement questions (Pullin and Knight 
2003, Fazey et al. 2004, Sutherland et al. 
2004). The evidence-based conservation 
method uses a systematic review process to 
assess not only the available evidence but 
also the quality based on rigorous crite-
ria (Pullin and Stewart 2006). Systematic 
reviews differ from conventional literature 
reviews, which summarize studies by pro-
viding qualitative descriptions of research 
results without differentiating between 
the quality of the sources or the rigor of 
the experimental design. The goal in pre-
paring a systematic review is to clearly 
assess and present each line of evidence, 
and then draw conclusions that rely most 
heavily on the highest quality studies (i.e., 
a “weight of evidence” approach). In many 
respects, a systematic review parallels pri-
mary research. It includes a clear defini-
tion of the problem, a design of a research 
methodology, a collection of data (in this 
case, from the literature), the analysis of 
those data using clearly stated and accepted 
procedures, and draws inferences that are 
supported by the analysis, and it draws 
conclusions that are helpful to managers 
and stakeholders. Because of this level of 
rigor, systematic reviews are particularly 
useful when there is conflicting peer-re-
viewed science, when management objec-
tives conflict, or when the total knowledge 
on a subject area is needed.
In public land management, this tool 
is useful for assessing the effectiveness of 
land management approaches (e.g., does 
prescribed fire, thinning, or wildfire lead 
to higher frequency of invasive plant spe-
cies?) or addressing conflicting science on 
land management practices. It is also useful 
when scientific studies with management 
implications contradict each other. Not all 
management questions lend themselves to 
systematic review. For example, minimal 
criteria for a rigorous systematic review 
include having a sufficient available dataset 
of peer-reviewed articles. Like any study, 
systematic reviews require a data sample 
that meets experimental design and data 
collection assumptions and occurs at the 
appropriate scale and distribution to allow 
proper evaluation and inference power. 
Systematic reviews are also resource-inten-
sive; the approach requires technical exper-
tise and investment of time to complete the 
extensive review process. While systematic 
reviews can provide a definitive source of 
the most rigorous science, this approach 
may not be the most accessible in many 
contexts (Supplementary Materials).
Methods and Approaches: 
Suggested Question-Based 
Scaling of BASI Requirements
We suggest that methods used to meet BASI 
requirements should be dependent on the 
management or policy issue and the value 
put on it by the user (Ryder et al. 2010). 
While evaluating the best science in a sci-
entifically defendable way is a rigorous pro-
cess (e.g., evidence-based conservation), not 
all management contexts call for, or allow 
for, this level of precision to address a sci-
ence need. Land managers face significant 
barriers in identifying, accessing, assessing, 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/article-abstract/116/5/473/5100820 by Northern Arizona University user on 02 October 2018

Journal of Forestry  •  September 2018    477
and synthesizing BASI, including issues 
of access and availability, scientific dis-
agreement and uncertainty, and time and 
capacity constraints. A  flexible approach 
to determining BASI needs that integrates 
management context provides land manag-
ers with a wider range of options in fulfilling 
BASI mandates, helping to address some of 
these common issues. In-depth discussion 
of the multiple barriers to utilizing BASI for 
land management decisions is beyond the 
scope of this article and is well-captured by 
other studies; see Table 1 for a summary of 
these barriers.
On federal lands, the use of BASI is rec-
ommended across all stages of land manage-
ment activities: planning, implementation, 
and adaptive management. The increasing 
collaborative opportunities and partnership 
roles in federal land management create addi-
tional needs for identifying and communi-
cating—and potentially partnering on—the 
BASI used in all three areas. While accuracy 
and reliability are factors determined by the 
scientific research approach (e.g., experimen-
tal design, data collection methods, methods 
of analysis, etc.), determining what science 
is best depends in part on the context—the 
question or intent, the data available, any 
knowledge gaps, and if there is controversy 
or debate within the scientific community 
on a particular subject. We have categorized 
the list of available science sources in Table 2, 
linking each to a suggested intent or need 
across planning, implementation, or adap-
tive management areas. The following sec-
tion provides examples and context for BASI 
needs and appropriate use.
Consider the Body of Science: 
Assessing Quality of Evidence
Management and planning issues that are 
supported by strong scientific consensus 
and low levels of conflict do not require a 
great deal of additional assessment. When 
the relevant peer-reviewed literature meets 
accuracy and reliability criteria and provides 
consistent answers, resource managers can 
easily justify the incorporation of that sci-
ence into their management needs. Given 
the breadth of science knowledge made 
available to land and resource managers, 
BASI users may face a deluge of science 
information and should use accuracy, reli-
ability, and relevance criteria to refine what 
is available. Evaluating a single study for 
these characteristics is not the same as eval-
uating the body of science on a topic, which 
requires looking across the body of evidence 
on a particular subject. For many resource 
management issues, synthesis of relevant 
science may already be available in the 
form of evidence-based systematic reviews. 
Sources with high accuracy, reliability, and 
relevance should be prioritized.
When Uncertainty and Controversy 
Are High, Use a Rigorous  
Evidence-Based Approach
When addressing contentious management 
issues, the BASI utilized should meet the 
highest level of accuracy and reliability; 
both peer-reviewed journals and GTRs 
are appropriate. Contradictory scientific 
outcomes also require a more rigorous 
weight-of-evidence 
process. 
Systematic 
reviews are the most rigorous way to deter-
mine the “best” component of BASI and 
provide a clear assessment of available sci-
ence on management questions, providing 
a highly reliable and accurate source of sci-
ence information for managers. Conflicts in 
proposed management can occur when the 
current status or condition of a resource is 
Table 1.  Barriers to using best available science information.
Barrier
Key points
Literature
1.  Differences in access, availability 
and preference
•  Scientific journal paywalls
•  Limited distribution of white papers, TEK and LEK
•  Limited translation to management implications
•  Perceived bias based on authoring institution
Cleve et al. 2004, NRC 2005, Ryder et al. 2010, Van 
Wright 2010, Gerlach et al. 2013, Davis 2013, 
Colavito 2017
2.  Scientific timelines, disagreement 
and uncertainty
•  Assessment of management effectiveness needed on shorter 
timeline than scientific assessments
•  Scientist and Manager differences on communication of and 
comfort with uncertainty
•  Emergent theories and hypotheses create controversy
Van Cleve et al. 2004, Sullivan et al. 2006, Joly et al. 
2010
3.  Time and capacity constraints
•  Limited institution capacity for systematic or literature reviews
•  Limited capacity for data interpretation and application
Wright 2010, Cook et al. 2013, Lowell and Kelly 2016, 
Murphy and Weiland 2016, Charnley et al. 2017
Table 2.  Approaches to meet BASI requirements.
Management Scenario
BASI Source
Access
Tools
Conflict of peer-reviewed science; potential  
risk to resource objectives; high risk of 
litigation
Peer-reviewed evidence-based conservation
Select: Academic, research agencies
Systematic Reviews
Legally-defensible planning documents; project 
implementation design; conflict of stakeholder 
interests
Peer-reviewed literature, including  
journals and GTRs
Select: Academic, research agencies, 
agency
Literature search
Agency and stakeholder learning; conflict of 
stakeholder interests
Grey lit (e.g., agency or NGO reports, white 
papers, working papers, research briefs,  
thesis, dissertations)
Select: Agency, academic. Grey lit 
can be difficult to find.
Web search, literature search, 
TREESEARCH
Initiating planning, stakeholder learning; and 
effectiveness monitoring
Expert Opinion, Institutional  
Knowledge & TEK
ALL
Field Trip, Presentation Seminar
Agency and Stakeholder learning; gap assessment; Local Knowledge
ALL: Agency, stakeholders and 
partners
Field Trip, Citizen Science
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/article-abstract/116/5/473/5100820 by Northern Arizona University user on 02 October 2018

478    Journal of Forestry  •  September 2018
unknown or when proposed management 
activities are controversial and manage-
ment actions that have not been assessed for 
effectiveness may be challenged by recent 
science findings. Similar situations occur in 
implementation; assessments and adaptive 
management for best management practices 
may show conflicting results. Many of these 
guidelines were identified in the USDA 
planning rule directives. Table  3 (adapted 
from USDA Forest Service 2012) identifies 
similar guidelines and provides potential 
triggers for when a higher quality of science 
is needed to meet BASI requirements.
An example of an evidence-based 
review is a study by Kennedy and Fontaine 
(2009), who summarized the effects of fire 
and fire surrogates in dry forests of the US 
West. The Kennedy and Fontaine system-
atic review addressed specific knowledge 
gaps and sought to synthesize multiple 
findings across wildlife taxa to inform land 
management decisions related to fire and 
wildlife. The questions Kennedy and 
Fontaine sought to address included:
1.	 What information exists on the response 
of wildlife species, community, or species 
guilds in fire and fire-surrogate project 
areas to the proposed treatments?
2.	 Is there information on the species-
specific response to a treatment that 
is consistent (positive, negative, or no 
response)?
3.	 Is the response to the treatment or wild-
fire event short-term (less than five years) 
or long-term (more than 10 years)?
The authors performed an extensive survey 
of the published, peer-reviewed, scientific 
literature on wildlife response to fire and 
fire-surrogate treatments, utilizing arti-
cles that presented empirical, quantifiable 
data on wildlife population and commu-
nity-level responses (e.g., abundance, vital 
rates, and distribution) to wildland fire or 
management treatments. This approach 
addressed multiple species, including birds, 
small mammals, herpetofauna, ungulates, 
mesocarnivores, and carnivores. Of the 
more than 150 studies reviewed, a total of 
90 studies met systematic review criteria, 
resulting in 4,937 records of 313 vertebrate 
species.
Important conclusions from this large 
review maintain that fire has both positive 
and negative impacts on wildlife species 
depending upon the severity of the burn, 
spatial extent, post-fire structural and 
compositional elements, and the resulting 
habitat mosaic. Overall, the impact of fire 
as a disturbance agent on wildlife habitat 
and consequently species abundance and 
density is species-specific. To translate this 
to specific land management needs, the 
authors provided detailed tables summa-
rizing published studies and individual 
species responses from each region in the 
appendices (Kennedy and Fontaine 2009). 
The authors also acknowledge where large 
knowledge gaps existed, illuminating where 
systematic reviews can work and where 
limited data exist for a systematic review 
methodology. The results of this study and 
consecutive journal articles (see Fontaine 
and Kennedy 2012)  detail species-specific 
responses to fire and fire-surrogate treat-
ments. These findings support management 
decisions by providing information on 
the effects of disturbance, such as fire and 
mechanical treatments, on wildlife abun-
dance, density, distribution, and habitats.
Systematic reviews are dependent on 
available and existing research, so this assess-
ment approach is not possible for all man-
agement issues. Where sufficient research 
does exist, conducting a systematic litera-
ture review requires a high level of expertise 
and a significant investment of resources. 
This may be more investment than can 
be expected of land and natural resource 
managers (Cook et  al. 2013, Lowell and 
Kelly 2016, Murphy and Weiland 2016, 
Charnley et al. 2017), who typically work 
near capacity. In these cases, partnering 
with individuals or organizations that have 
the capacity and resources to do systematic 
reviews is necessary to produce meta-anal-
yses that can address relevant management 
questions.
Utilize Specific and Localized 
Knowledge Sources for Local 
Knowledge Gaps
Expert opinion and local and institutional 
knowledge can provide highly relevant sci-
ence information for the right questions, 
although not all sources may meet accuracy 
or reliability standards based on the USDA 
Planning Rule definitions. Local and expert 
knowledge is often place-based and can be 
helpful to inform both manager and stake-
holder learning for locally relevant “status 
of knowledge” information. Information 
can be delivered via field trips or workshops 
with local experts on particular land man-
agement issues.
For example, the Deschutes Forest 
Collaborative, a collaborative stakeholder 
group working on USFS landscapes in 
Oregon, enlisted local and expert knowl-
edge to answer stakeholder-developed 
questions relevant to their local landscape 
(Waltz, pers. commun., 2017). This USFS 
landscape included multiple forest veg-
etation and fire regime types, including 
frequent fire–adapted ponderosa pine and 
dry mixed-conifer forests, mesic to wet 
mixed-conifer forests, and high-elevation 
Table 3.  Guidelines for use of science to meet BASI standards.
BASI Factors
If…
If…
State of the Scientific Knowledge
Body of literature is well developed and supported.
Science findings are professionally recognized.
Science and technology is emerging.
Findings and interpretations are inconsistent.
Data Availability
Data is well developed.
Techniques are well accepted.
Data gaps exist.
The data or collection techniques are highly insufficient.
Controversy
Little to no controversy exists.
General scientific consensus exists.
The issue is highly disputed and controversial.
There is little to no scientific consensus.
Management Risk
Risk is low.
Risk is high.
Then, available science is adequate
Then, further lines of evidence are needed
Table 3 is adapted from the 2012 planning rule directives (USDA Forest Service 2012).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/article-abstract/116/5/473/5100820 by Northern Arizona University user on 02 October 2018

Journal of Forestry  •  September 2018    479
spruce fir, where historic fires were infre-
quent and often high in severity (Simpson 
2007). In 2011, the collaborative group 
developed restoration principles for each 
forest type, including mixed-conifer forests. 
Stakeholders had high uncertainty regarding 
active management in mixed-conifer forests 
and developed the following questions for 
the land manager: 1) What defines mixed 
conifer—how do wet and dry mixed-coni-
fer forests differ? and 2) What are the res-
toration needs, if any, in all mixed-conifer 
forests?
The land manager (USFS) enlisted 
the help of an agency ecologist to develop 
parameters for identifying dry and wet 
mixed-conifer forests in the field (Simpson 
2007); the local USFS silviculturists planned 
for field visits that were indicative of both 
types, with and without active management 
(e.g., thinning treatments). After field visits, 
a stakeholder group identified additional 
data gaps, and a literature review was solic-
ited by a working group of the collabora-
tive. The Nature Conservancy staff took on 
the task of addressing specific issues using 
grey and peer-reviewed literature to address 
the stakeholder questions, producing a lit-
erature review internal to the collaborative, 
but which was developed and reviewed by 
multiple stakeholders (Waltz & Caligiuri, 
pers. commun., 2017).
The goal of this process was to increase 
stakeholder learning on their local forest 
vegetation type where there were acknowl-
edged gaps. Both stakeholders and USFS 
managers contributed to the learning, but 
as science needs increased, stakeholders 
provided the extra capacity to synthesize 
available science and produced a final issue 
paper (Waltz 2017, pers. commun.). The 
process had a few unintended benefits. First, 
while it is acknowledged that disagreement 
can be a driver of specific science needs 
(Davis et  al. 2013), the Deschutes Forest 
Collaborative stakeholders saw disagree-
ment as an opportunity to work together to 
synthesize available science and increase the 
trust in a collaborative process. Second, col-
laborative stakeholders, like those found in 
the Deschutes and other funded CFLRPs, 
often access scientific information primar-
ily from university-based organizations 
and federal agencies through oral modes of 
delivery (Colavito 2017). The land man-
agers welcomed the added capacity and 
access to additional peer-reviewed sources 
(Caligiuri, pers. commun., 2017).
Local, site-specific assessment may help 
identify where broad consensus exists for 
management needs and goals or can iden-
tify where gaps or conflict exist that may 
require BASI with higher levels of accuracy 
and reliability. For BASI related to imple-
mentation needs, institutional knowledge 
or local knowledge can be highly relevant 
and applied in best management prac-
tices. Guidelines for wildlife mitigation, 
weather impacts on travel, or operational 
feasibility are incorporated regularly in 
land management. Adaptive management 
is also informed by continued acquisition 
of local knowledge, traditional ecological 
knowledge, and expert knowledge and can 
inform changes in implementation meth-
ods or treatment practices. By collecting 
and assessing place-based science informa-
tion, BASI users can reduce uncertainty 
and increase relevance of science-based 
approaches to land and resource manage-
ment questions. Collaboratively derived 
BASI can also meet multiple stakeholder 
needs, reduce preference bias, and disperse 
the work of developing and assessing BASI 
across a group, which eases the burden on 
managers.
Develop Coalitions for Production 
of Science Outcomes Relevant to 
Management and Policy Making
Coproduction of science—the process of 
developing specific questions, the approach 
to addressing those questions, and the 
resulting research, analysis, and application 
of findings—is being used more frequently 
as an all-inclusive approach to develop-
ing strategies and solutions to large-scale 
resource and land management issues (Beier 
et al. 2016). This approach could be further 
utilized in land and resource management to 
fill local knowledge gaps and broad, press-
ing, scientific issues. Additional interaction 
of researchers and managers helps to ensure 
that scientific research is relevant to fields 
of applied science, while also bolstering the 
usability of research outcomes. Coalitions, 
such as the Fire Science Consortia, bring 
scientists and land managers together to 
identify and prioritize pressing manage-
ment issues on public lands. Boundary 
organizations often act as intermediaries, or 
“knowledge transfer entities,” and can inter-
pret and communicate science for a range of 
users and needs (McNie 2007, Davis et al. 
2013). These organizations can be academic 
institutions or NGOs, such as the Climate 
Impacts Group at University of Washington, 
or advisory committees or commissions, 
such as the State of Washington Climate 
Advisory Committee, formed to address 
a specific issue. Coproduction of science, 
through collaboration or partnership, with 
individual researchers or boundary organi-
zations, provides managers with an oppor-
tunity to provide input on what science 
information will be most helpful in address-
ing management issues, ultimately leading 
to actionable science outcomes.
Conclusion
Scientific research provides the baseline 
information that land and resource man-
agers and policy makers consider in natu-
ral resource–management decision-making 
(Doremus 2004, Jennings and Hall 2011, 
Biber 2012, Lowell and Kelly 2016). Use of 
best available science information by pub-
lic land managers is required, but agency 
guidance can be vague and difficult to apply 
in practice. Multiple potential information 
sources of varying quality contribute to con-
fusion in finding and applying appropriate 
BASI, and determining objectively “best” 
science can require rigorous methodology 
and capacity that is beyond most BASI 
users. Embracing variation in BASI sources 
and looking beyond the traditional peer-re-
view sources for additional science expertise 
and resources can provide a wider range of 
science information options and additional 
flexibility for land managers. BASI require-
ments that incorporate the management 
context and resource management questions 
can make land management use of BASI 
more accessible and defendable for both 
managers and collaborative stakeholders.
Supplementary Materials
Supplementary data are available at Journal 
of Forestry online.
Literature Cited
Berkes, F., J.  Colding, and C.  Folke. 
2000. Rediscovery of traditional ecological 
knowledge as adaptive management. Ecol. 
Appl. 10(5): 1251–62. doi:10.1890/1051-
0761(2000)010%5B1251:ROTEKA%5D2.
0.CO;2.
Biber, E. 2012. Which science? Whose science? 
How scientific disciplines can shape environ-
mental law. The University of Chicago Law 
Review, 471–552.
Bisbal, G.A. 2002. The best available science for 
the management of Anadromous salmonids in 
the Columbia River Basin. Can. J. Fish Aquat. 
Sci. 59: 1952–59. doi:10.1139/f02-157.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/article-abstract/116/5/473/5100820 by Northern Arizona University user on 02 October 2018

480    Journal of Forestry  •  September 2018
Cash, D.W., W.C.  Clark, F.  Alcock, et  al. 
2003. Knowledge systems for sustainable devel-
opment. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 100(14): 
8086–91. doi:10.1073/pnas.1231332100.
Charnley, S., C.  Carothers, T.  Satterfield, 
et al. 2017. Evaluating the best available social 
science for natural resource management deci-
sion-making. Environ. Sci. Policy. 73: 80–8. 
doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2017.04.002.
Clark, W.C., R.  Mitchell, D.  Cash, and 
F.  Alcock. 2002. Information as influence: 
how institutions mediate the impact of sci-
entific assessments on global environmental 
affairs. Faculty Research Working Papers Series, 
RWP02-044. Harvard University, Kennedy 
School of Government. http://ssrn.com/
abstract_id=357521; last accessed September 
22, 2017.
Colavito, M.M. 2017. The role of science in 
the collaborative forest landscape restoration 
program. J. For. 115(1): 34–42. doi:10.5849/
jof.15-142.
Collaboration 
for 
Environmental 
Evidence. 2013. Guidelines for systematic 
review and evidence synthesis in environmental 
management. Version 4.2. Center for Evidence-
Based Conservation, Bangor University, UK. 
80 p.
Cook, C.N., M.B.  Mascia, M.W.  Schwartz, 
H.P. Possingham, and R.A. Fuller. 2013. 
Achieving conservation science that bridges 
the knowledge-action boundary. Conserv. Biol. 
27(4): 669–78. doi:10.1111/cobi.12050.
Davis, E.J., C. Moseley, C. Olsen, J. Abrams, and 
J. Creighton. 2013. Diversity and dynamism 
of fire science user needs. J. For. 111(2): 101–7. 
doi:10.5849/jof.12-037.
Doremus, H. 2004. The purposes, effects, and 
future of the Endangered Species Act’s best 
available science mandate. Environmental 
Law. 34: 397.
Farace, D.J., and J. Schöpfel (eds.). 2010. 
Grey literature in library and information 
sciences. De Gruyter Saur, Berlin. ISBN 
9783598117930.
Fazey, I., J.G. Salisbury, D.B. Lindenmayer, J. 
Maindonald, and R. Douglas. 2004. Can 
methods applied in medicine be used to sum-
marize and disseminate conservation research? 
Environ. Cons. 31(3): 190-8. doi:10.1017/
S0376892904001560.
Gerlach, 
J.D., 
L.K. 
Williams, 
and 
C.E.  Forcina. 2013. Data selection for 
making biodiversity management decisions: 
Best available science and institutionalized 
agency norms. Adm. Soc. 45(2): 213–41. 
doi:10.1177/0095399712451886. 
Huntington, H.P. 2000. Using traditional 
ecological knowledge in science: methods 
and applications. Ecol. Appl. 10(5): 1270–74.  
doi:10.1890/1051-0761(2000)010%5B1270
:UTEKIS%5D2.0.CO;2.
Jennings, E.T. Jr, and J.L.  Hall. 2011. 
Evidence-based practice and the use of infor-
mation in state agency decision making. 
J. Public Adm. Res. Theory. 22(2): 245–66. 
doi:10.1093/jopart/mur040.
Joly, J.L., J.  Reynolds, and M.  Robards. 
2010. Recognizing when the best scientific 
data available isn’t. Stanford Environmental 
Law Journal. 29: 247.
Kennedy, P.L., and J.B.  Fontaine. 2009. 
Synthesis of knowledge on the effects of fire and 
fire surrogates on wildlife in US dry forests. 
Special report 1096 Joint Fire Science Program. 
Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR.
Knapp, C. 2010. Uncompahgre Mesas forest resto-
ration project: collaborative case study. Colorado 
State University, Colorado Forest Restoration 
Institute, Fort Collins, CO. 21 p.
Lee, C.J., C.R.  Sugimoto, G.  Zhang, and 
B. Cronin. 2013. Bias in peer review. J. Am. 
Soc. Inf. Sci. Tec. 64(1): 2–17. doi:10.1002/
asi.22784.
Lowell, N. and R.P. Kelly. 2016. Evaluating 
agency use of best available science under 
the United States Endangered Species 
Act. Biol. Cons. 196: 53–9. doi:10.1016/j.
biocon.2016.02.003.
Martin, T.G., M.A. Burgman, F. Fidler, et al. 
2012. Eliciting expert knowledge in conser-
vation science. Conserv. Biol. 26(1): 29–38. 
doi:10.1111/j.1523-1739.2011.01806.x.
Matonis, M.S. 2015. Empowering collaborative 
forest restoration with locally relevant ecological 
research. Doctoral dissertation. Colorado State 
University.
McNie, E.C. 2007. Reconciling the supply of 
scientific information with user demands: An 
analysis of the problem and review of the liter-
ature. Environ. Sci. Policy. 10: 17–38.
Murphy, D.D., and P.S.  Weiland. 2016. 
Guidance on the use of best available sci-
ence under the US Endangered Species Act. 
Environ. Manage. 58: 1–14. doi:10.1007/
s00267-016-0697-z.
National Research Council. 2005. Decision 
making for the environment: Social and behav-
ioral science research priorities. Omnibus 
Public Land Management Act 2009. National 
Academies Press.
Pullin, A.S., and T.M.  Knight. 2003. 
Support for decision making in con-
servation 
practice: 
an 
evidence-based 
approach. J. Nat. Conserv. 11(2): 83–90. 
doi:10.1078/1617-1381-00040
Pullin, A.S., and G.B.  Stewart. 2006. 
Guidelines for systematic review in con-
servation and environmental management. 
Conserv. Biol. 20(6): 1647–56.
Ryder, D.S., M. Tomlinson, B. Gawne, and 
G.E. Likens. 2010. Defining and using “best 
available science”: A policy conundrum for 
the management of aquatic systems. Mar. 
Freshwater Res. 61: 821–28. doi:10.1071/
MF10113.
Schultz, C. 2008. Responding to scientific 
uncertainty in US forest policy. Environ. 
Sci. Policy. 11(3):253–271. doi:10.1016/j.
envsci.2007.09.002.
Simpson, M. 2007. Forested Plant Associations 
of the Oregon East Cascades. R6-NR-
ECOL-TP-03-2007. USDA Forest Service, 
Pacific Northwest Region, Technical Paper.
Sullivan, P.J., J.M. Acheson, P.L. Angermeier, 
et al. 2006. Defining and implementing best 
available science for fisheries and environmen-
tal science, policy, and management. American 
Fisheries 
Society, 
Bethesda, 
MD, 
and 
Estuarine Research Federation, Port Republic, 
MD.
Sutherland, W.J., A.S. Pullin, P.M. Dolman, 
and T.M. Knight. 2004. The need for 
evidence-based conservation. Trends Ecol. 
Evolut. 
19(6): 
305–308. 
doi:10.1016/j.
tree.2004.03.018.
Trochim, W.M. The Research Methods Knowledge 
Base. 2nd ed. Available at: http://www.social-
researchmethods.net/kb/ (version current as 
of October 20: 2006); last accessed September 
22, 2017.
USDA Forest Service. 2012. National Forest 
System Land Management Planning, 36 CFR 
Part 219. P. 21162–21276 in Federal Register 
Vol 77: No 68.
USDA Forest Service. 2015. Forest Service 
Handbook. USDA Forest Service.
USDOI National Parks Service. 2016. 
Director’s Order 100. December 30: 2016.
US Department of the Interior and US 
Department 
of 
Agriculture. 
2003 
Interagency strategy for the implementation of 
Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy. 
June 30: 2003.
Van Cleve, F.B., C. Simenstad, F. Goetz, and 
T. Mumford. 2004. Application of “best availa-
ble science” in ecosystem restoration: lessons learned 
from large-scale restoration efforts in the USA. 
Puget Sound Nearshore Partnership Report No. 
2004-01. Published by Washington Sea Grant 
Program, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA. Available at: http://pugetsoundnearshore.
org; last accessed September 22, 2017.
Webb, J.A., M.J.  Stewardson, Y.E.  Chee, 
E.S.G.  Schreiber, and M.C.  Jensz. 2010. 
Negotiating the turbulent boundary: the chal-
lenges of building a science–management col-
laboration for landscape-scale monitoring of 
environmental flows. Mar. Freshwater Res. 61: 
798–807. doi:10.1071/MF09059.
Wright, V. 2010. Influences to the success of fire 
science delivery: perspectives of potential fire / 
fuels science users. USDA Forest Service, final 
report to the Joint Fire Science Program, 
JFSP Project, 04-4, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/article-abstract/116/5/473/5100820 by Northern Arizona University user on 02 October 2018
