The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
 
What to Expect After Restoration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The goals of forest restoration treatments are to re-
store degraded forest health and to help solve the 
problem of unnaturally severe wildfire. Sometimes 
restoration can be achieved by fire only. However, 
where tree density and structure prohibit safe use of 
fire, mechanical thinning followed by prescribed fire 
is recommended. These treatments leave larger, ma-
ture trees and reinvigorate the understory, which in-
cludes grasses, forbs, and wildflowers. In turn, this 
diverse ecosystem supports wildlife habitat and re-
duces the threat of catastrophic wildfire.  
  
Forest restoration includes using heavy equip-
ment to mechanically remove small trees. Treat-
ments are designed to replicate conditions that 
evolved over time to be resilient to wildfire, drought, 
and insect and disease outbreaks. Thinning alone al-
ters forest structure and density, but fails to address 
the issue of returning fire to the ecosystem. Success-
ful restoration treatments permit the reintroduction 
of frequent, low-intensity fires through regular pre-
scribed burns after thinning to help shape the forest 
into the future. 
  
Treated areas look disturbed at first but quick-
ly recover. Harvested trees are often stacked and lat-
er transported to processing facilities. Residual 
branches and bark, called biomass, is either trans-
ported off-site, left in piles for burning, or scattered 
to protect the soil. Some roads are temporarily con-
structed for access to harvest areas and later decom-
missioned and rehabilitated to a natural state.  
  
The photo sequence to the right shows what 
the forest looked like before thinning operations 
(Fig. 1), immediately after thinning (Fig. 2), and one 
year after thinning and biomass removal operations 
(Fig. 3). Note the increase in understory grasses, 
flowers, and plants in Figure 3.  
Figure 1. Before thinning, Ft. Tuthill County 
Park, Flagstaff, AZ (August 2017) 
Figure 2. Immediately after mechanical thin-
ning operations, Ft. Tuthill County Park, Flagstaff, 
AZ (September 2017) 
Figure 3. One year post-thinning, Ft. Tuthill Coun-
ty Park, Flagstaff, AZ (September 2018) 
