 
 
Covington, GC Trust take off gloves 
By GARY GHIOTO 
Sun Staff Reporter 
05/26/2003 
Passage last week of the Healthy Forests Restoration Act in the U.S. House has split two 
powerful environmental allies: the Flagstaff-based Grand Canyon Trust and W. Wallace 
Covington, professor of forest ecology and director of the Ecological Restoration Institute 
at Northern Arizona University.  
The bill eases legal and regulatory requirements to fast-track "forest health" logging 
projects on 20 million acres adjacent to western communities.  
Covington backs it and the Trust opposes it, with the Trust charging that Covington is 
allowing himself to be used as a scientific "poster child" for a political bill so that 
Congress will continue to fund his local thinning and restoration projects.  
U.S. Rep. Rick Renzi, R-Flagstaff, and other Republicans on the House Resources 
Committee, believe environmental regulations that allow appeals and lawsuits have been 
abused by conservation groups that are opposed to any logging in the national forests.  
Both Covington's ERI and the Trust played roles in a bill by Colorado Republican U.S. 
Rep. Scott McInnis by providing testimony to the House Resources Committee that met 
in Flagstaff in March. Covington supported the bill and the Trust opposed it.  
Tom Robinson of the Grand Canyon Trust said it's "ironic" that Covington is on board a 
bill based on faulty data -- ERI itself found there was little or no data to support claims by 
politicians that environmental groups had filed the bulk of appeals and lawsuits 
challenging forest health logging projects.  
"Here you have a piece of legislation that is premised on the fact that we have a crisis 
based on too many environmental appeals and too much litigation. Then we have these 
incredibly detailed analyses that shows we don't have a crisis," he said.  
Robinson said Covington is backing the McInnis bill so that pending legislation 
providing funding for ERI will pass unscathed in the Republican-dominated House and 
Senate. Covington also needs congressional funding to implement his controversial pre-
settlement restoration model, said Robinson.  
"If it doesn't pass, it threatens him getting money for his institute and it certainly 
constrains where he does restoration," said Robinson.  

Added Robinson: "I'll be honest. He's being used. In my opinion, Congress ... is using a 
very well-known ... reputable scientist and holding him up as they pass this very political 
piece of legislation. He is the poster child for this bill."  
Covington said he's certainly aware of ERI's research on appeals and litigation that 
downplayed the Republican call for urgency, but that he's "not a political scientist." He 
also predicted that when the Senate takes up the bill next month, the wording about 
appeals and litigation will probably be reviewed and amended.  
As far as the Trust's claim he's being used by Republican politicians, Covington said ERI 
research is used by a variety of sources.  
"I don't think that's worthy of any particular response. That's his opinion. I've seen my 
name used in good ways and bad ways. So I really don't feel I should respond to that," 
said Covington.  
DEEPER THINNING, MORE FUNDING  
Covington argued at the hearing that the bill should go beyond simple forest thinning 
projects within a half-mile of wildfire-threatened communities and tackle a growing 
forest ecosystem crisis.  
The Trust advised the Republican-dominated House Resources Committee to reject 
claims that a law requiring comprehensive environmental review had caused "analysis 
paralysis" and hampered Forest Service approval of thinning projects.  
Then Trust spokesman Brad Ack recommended Congress provide additional funding for 
the Forest Service so it could devote more staff to fulfill requirements of the National 
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and get faster approval for thinning and fuels 
reduction projects.  
A lengthy report and suggested legislation to accomplish that was provided to Renzi and 
the Resources Committee by the Trust.  
But when the bill passed, 256-170, last week, only Covington's recommendations that 
thinning must occur around and beyond the so-called wildland urban interface and take a 
restoration bent were included in the measure.  
To the dismay of environmentalists, the bill sweeps away a NEPA requirement that the 
Forest Service analyze all the environmental impacts of logging projects aimed at 
reducing wildfire threat and insect infestation or promoting forest health restoration.  
The McInnis bill says the Forest Service can move ahead on projects without considering 
any other alternatives, including taking "no action" at all on a proposal. The bill blocks 
anyone from filing an administrative appeal with the Forest Service to block a thinning 
project covered by the legislation.  

The bill makes it harder for citizens or environmental groups to file lawsuits by requiring 
them to file within two weeks of a project's approval. The bill requires judges to expedite 
all thinning appeals cases and rule on them within two months.  
TRUST, COVINGTON PRIME MOVERS  
The Trust and Covington's ERI are the prime movers behind forest restoration in northern 
Arizona by virtue of their scientific expertise, political connections and ability to work 
with politicians, ranging from conservative Republican U.S. Sen. Jon Kyl to Democrat 
Gov. Janet Napolitano.  
Without the backing of the Trust and Covington, it's hard to imagine how forest thinning 
and restoration projects in the Flagstaff-area could have gotten off the ground.  
For example, the Trust was instrumental in establishing the Greater Flagstaff Forests 
Partnership, while ERI brought in millions of federal dollars for local thinning projects 
and research.  
When the McInnis bill passed, the Trust, which usually automatically supports forest 
health logging, unlike groups such as the Sierra Club and Flagstaff-based Southwest 
Forest Alliance, exploded in outrage.  
The McInnis bill is "politically motivated and counterproductive to the goals of forest 
restoration and community protection," said a Trust news release.  
"Despite right-wing enthusiasm, there's still no evidence that gutting environmental laws 
will make us safer from fire, "said Taylor McKinnon, Grand Canyon Trust Program 
Officer, "The Healthy Forests legislation is based on unsubstantiated assertions and 
anecdotal information."  
Bill Hedden, newly appointed executive director of the Trust, added: "We've been 
working hand in hand with the Forest Service against the clock to restore these forests 
and protect our communities from wildfires. We protest this dishonest bill that cuts the 
public out of forest management decisions and hides industrial logging of big trees 
behind a beauty screen of thinning projects. It will just snarl needed forest treatments in 
the courts."  
Covington said in an interview Friday that he supports the McInnis bill, though he would 
have preferred that it go beyond the 20 million acres around communities and call for 
thinning and restoration deep into national forests.  
For example, Covington said thinning in the deep forest eight miles from Flagstaff is 
needed to prevent a catastrophic wildfire from reaching the city and ravaging ecosystems.  
"While I understand the focus on the urban interface, mostly on communities at risk, I 
still think it's short-sighted. I've said in my testimony repeatedly is we want to protect 

human lives and houses, but we don't want to ignore the health of the landscape," said 
Covington.  
He added: "You can rebuild a house in a year, but you can't rebuild a spotted owl nest site 
in hundreds of years. An eroded watershed like those on the Rodeo-Chediski Fire will 
take thousands of years to recover. So I'm disappointed it doesn't have a broader focus 
than that. I understand politically why that's the case."  
Covington said however the major reason he's supporting the McInnis bill is because for 
the first time, a major piece of federal forest legislation talks about "forest restoration."  
"My battle for a long time has been that beyond the need to prevent fire danger, it's time 
to take a restoration focus instead of just a fuel reduction focus. Instead of piece-meal 
solutions, treating symptoms, I've been trying to get everybody to understand that this is a 
fundamental forest health crisis, it's not just that we have too much fuel and we're getting 
fires. It's also that we're getting bizarre ecosystem behavior," said Covington.  
MCINNIS BILL DOOMED?  
Trust officials maintain that the McInnis bill is doomed in the U.S. Senate because of its 
language eliminating appeals and discouraging lawsuits.  
They also say it's hard to understand how Covington can support the bill, especially since 
recent ERI research proves that appeals and lawsuits from environmentalists and others 
have not played a significant role delaying or blocking forest thinning projects.  
ERI found there was little or no data to support claims by politicians that environmental 
groups had filed the bulk of appeals and lawsuits challenging forest health logging 
projects. ERI added that politicians had successfully "demonized" conservationists during 
last year's disastrous western fire season by saying they delayed fuels reduction projects.  
Two weeks ago ERI's conclusions were bolstered by a General Accounting Office report 
found that during FY 2001 and 2002 only 24 percent of fuels reduction projects were 
appealed, and 79 percent of these were processed within 90 days.  
In contrast, only 3 percent of fuels reduction projects were litigated, but 43 percent of 
these were still in court at the time of the GAO survey.  
Gary Ghioto can be reached at 556-2253 or gghioto@azdailysun.co  
