The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Plant Community Dynamics Following Fuel Treatments and  
Mega-Wildfire in a Warm, Dry Mixed-Conifer Forest 
 
By Judith D. Springer, Sr. Research Specialist 
Introduction 
The heightened risk of unnaturally severe mega-fires in warm, dry mixed-conifer forests has led to ecological 
restoration and hazardous fuel reduction efforts across the western US. Restoration treatments typically in-
clude tree thinning, prescribed burning, and/or managed fire to restore forest structure and reduce hazardous 
fuels. Wildfires that burn over treated areas provide important opportunities to examine effects of pre-fire 
treatments on ecosystem responses. In 2004, a landscape-scale stewardship project was implemented to reduce 
hazardous fuels and to protect human communities from severe fire in the White Mountains of eastern Arizo-
na at the wildland-urban interface (WUI). Subsequent to the project, the human-caused Wallow Fire in 2011 
burned more than 450,000 acres of mixed-conifer and ponderosa pine forest and set the stage for an opportun-
istic examination of longer-term understory plant community responses to pre-fire fuel reduction treatments. 
Our main research questions included the following: 1) Were there differences in native and non-native spe-
cies cover, richness, and diversity between treated and untreated areas five years after wildfire? 2) Was there a 
convergence in species composition between treated and untreated areas? 3) What environmental factors (e.g., 
slope, aspect, tree mortality), affected species composition? 4) Were there shifts in composition toward 
drought and/or heat-tolerant species over time? 
Research Findings 
 
Five years post-fire, total plant cover in untreated 
units had increased to nearly the same levels as 
the treated units. However, total cover was signifi-
cantly greater in treated units at 22.3 percent com-
pared with untreated units at 19.6 percent.  
 
The overall mean for non-native cover was not 
significantly different between treated and untreat-
ed units. Non-native cover increased between 
2012 and 2016 in both treated and untreated units. 
 
Species cover was negatively correlated with total 
tree basal area and canopy cover in both treated 
and untreated units, and positively correlated with 
tree mortality and basal area mortality in the un-
treated units (Figure 1). 
 
Species richness showed positive correlations with 
tree mortality in the untreated units, and negative 
correlations with topographic position, insolation, 
and elevation in both treated and untreated units.  
 
Multivariate analysis using plant community data 
indicated that insolation, elevation, aspect, and slope were primary drivers of the plant community over 
time in treated and untreated areas.  
January 2019 
Figure 1. Average native and non-native aerial species cover 
within treated and untreated units. Bars represent one standard 
error of the mean (N=9). Significant differences are indicated 
by asterisks. 

 
Conclusions 
 Warmer, drier climatic conditions are likely to drive increases in large mega-fires in mixed-
conifer forests of the Southwest. Treatments that reduce overstory density and utilize prescribed 
burning are likely to lead to more resilient plant communities that are more tolerant of drought 
and warm temperatures. Additional long-term studies that elucidate interactions of wildfire, 
ecological restoration, and hazardous fuel treatments will be valuable for improving conserva-
tion of forest ecosystems in a changing climate.  
 Fuel reduction treatments led to increased cover of native species immediately following the 
fire and this increased cover was still evident five years later. These results lend weight to the 
usefulness of hazardous fuel reduction treatments in promoting native plant cover. 
 High-severity fire effects led to more 
open conditions across much of the 
fire’s footprint in both types of units. 
Non-native species such as Bromus 
tectorum (cheatgrass), Carduus nu-
tans (musk thistle), Cirsium vulgare 
(bull thistle), Poa compressa (Canada 
bluegrass), Poa pratensis (Kentucky 
bluegrass) and Tragopogon dubius 
(yellow salsify) increased in frequency 
across the entire study area in both 
treated and untreated units.  
 Our results suggest that community 
composition is driven by increased 
insolation following loss of tree cano-
py. Species that benefit from the in-
creased light and temperatures, such as 
some shrubs, wind-dispersed forbs, 
and perennial graminoids, have in-
creased in cover and frequency fol-
lowing hazardous fuel treatments and 
wildfire (Figure 2).  
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
Springer, J.D., D.W. Huffman, M.T. Stoddard, A.J. Sánchez Meador, and A.E.M. Waltz. 2018. Plant 
community dynamics following hazardous fuel treatments and mega-wildfire in a warm-dry 
mixed-conifer forest of the southwestern USA. Forest Ecology and Management 429:278-286.  
 
Further Reading 
Hurteau, S. 2016. White Mountains Stewardship Project: Evaluating the Impacts of the Nation’s First 
Long-Term Stewardship Contract. Final Report. Integrated Biological Solutions, LLC. 
Sitko, S., and S. Hurteau. 2010. Evaluating the impacts of forest treatments: The first five years of the 
White Mountain Stewardship Project. The Nature Conservancy. Phoenix, AZ. 
Waltz, A.E.M., Stoddard, M.T., Kalies, E.L., Springer, J.D., Huffman, D.W., Sánchez-Meador, A., 
2014. Effectiveness of fuel reduction treatments: assessing metrics of forest resiliency and wild-
fire severity after the Wallow Fire, AZ. Forest Ecology and Management, 334, 43-52.  
 
Contact: Judith D. Springer, Judy.Springer@nau.edu 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
Figure 2. South-facing slope with high tree mortality. It is domi-
nated by wind-dispersed heat and sun-tolerant species, such as 
native perennial grasses and Senecio wootonii (Wooton’s rag-
wort). 
