The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Assessing Trajectories Toward Resiliency Five Years 
Following the Wallow Fire, Arizona 
 
By John Paul Roccaforte, Sr. Research Specialist 
Introduction 
Warm, dry mixed-conifer forests have undergone substantial changes in disturbance regimes, forest structure, 
species composition, and surface fuel accumulation due to historical land uses and fire exclusion. These chang-
es have led to increased susceptibility to large, uncharacteristically severe wildfires and insect outbreaks. Resil-
ient ecosystems return to a similar set of structures (e.g., forest and understory composition and density) or pro-
cesses (e.g., fire, decomposition rates) following disturbances that are within the natural range of variation; 
however, uncharacteristic disturbances, such as severe crown fire in mixed-conifer forests, may cause ecosys-
tems to transition to an alternative state (e.g., type conversion). We remeasured sample plots established in 
2012 (see Waltz et al. 2014) in warm, dry mixed-conifer forest stands treated for hazardous fuels reduction 
(mechanical thinning followed by prescribed burning or mechanical residual fuel removal) prior to the 2011 
Wallow Fire (total fire size 538,049 acres) and paired untreated sites five years following the fire. Our objec-
tive was to evaluate indicators of ecosystem resiliency in terms of forest structure, bark beetle activity, and tree 
regeneration. 
Research Findings 
 
Post-treatment (2016) tree density remained sig-
nificantly lower in treated compared to paired 
untreated units and showed no differences in 
delayed large-tree mortality rates. Conifer den-
sity and basal area (BA) decreased in both treat-
ed and untreated units between 2012 and 2016. 
Diameter distributions in 2016 treated units re-
mained similar to those observed in 2012 with 
the exception of the smallest diameter at breast 
height (DBH) class (1–4-inch DBH) which in-
creased by 654 percent due primarily to the re-
cruitment of fast-growing aspens (Fig. 1). In un-
treated units, the majority of tree density reduc-
tions between 2012 and 2016 occurred in the 4–
12-inch DBH classes. 
 
Evidence of post-fire bark beetle activity was 
low and patchy throughout the study site; how-
ever, beetle activity was less widespread in 
treated units. About 9 percent (118 out of 1365) 
of trees alive in 2016 were attacked by bark beetles throughout the study area (treated and untreated units 
combined); however, activity was less widespread in treated units (15 percent of treated plots versus 69 
percent of untreated plots had at least one attacked tree). Although not statistically significant, the percent 
of residual tree density attacked by bark beetles in untreated units (15.3 percent) was twice as high as in 
treated stands (7.4 percent) (Fig. 2). Of the trees that were attacked by beetles, about half were killed in 
both treated and untreated stands. 
January 2019 
Figure 1. Forest structure in treated units remained similar from 
2012 to 2016 with the exception of increased tree density in the 
smallest DBH classes due primarily to recruitment of aspen sprouts. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tree regeneration was abundant in 2016 and occurred on >75 percent of the plots in both treated 
and untreated units. Conifer regeneration density was nearly three times greater in treated units 
compared to those that were not treated prior to the Wallow Fire. Aspen dominated the regeneration 
sampling and comprised 86 percent of regeneration density in treated units and 94 percent in untreat-
ed units. Across all sample plots, conifer regeneration was lower and hardwood regeneration was 
higher with increasing burn severity. 
 
Conclusions 
Results of this study suggest that pre-fire fuel reduction treatments contribute more in the short-term 
to resilience to high-severity fire, but that treatment effects were less apparent five years following 
initial responses. Large-tree mortality was lower in treated areas immediately after the fire (Waltz et 
al. 2014) but then tree loss stabilized in both treated and untreated areas over the subsequent five 
years. We observed trends of higher resistance to insect outbreaks in treated units five years post-
fire, which may lead to lower future tree mortality compared with untreated areas. Patterns of resili-
ency as indicated by conifer regeneration were highly variable; higher conifer seedling density was 
found in treated units than in untreated units. However, aspen dominated both treated and untreated 
units. These changing dynamics underscore the importance of monitoring indicators of both short- 
and long-term resilience to fully understand the effectiveness of restoration and fuels management 
treatments for increasing resiliency of mixed-conifer forests to wildfire. 
 
Literature Cited 
Waltz, A.E.M., M.T. Stoddard, E.L. Kalies, J.D. Springer, D.W. Huffman, and A. Sánchez Meador. 2014. Effectiveness 
of fuel reduction treatments: Assessing metrics of forest resiliency and wildfire severity after the Wallow Fire, 
AZ. Forest Ecology and Management, 334:43-52. 
 
Further Reading 
Holling, C.S. 1973. Resilience and stability of ecological systems. Annual Review, 4:1-23. 
Reynolds, R.T., A.J. Sánchez Meador, J.A. Youtz, T. Nicolet, M.S. Matonis, P.L. Jackson, D.G. DeLorenzo, and A.D. 
Graves. 2013. Restoring composition and structure in Southwestern frequent-fire forests: A science-based frame-
work for improving ecosystem resiliency. General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-310. USDA, Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, CO, p. 76. 
Savage, M., and J.N. Mast. 2005. How resilient are southwestern ponderosa pine forests after crownfires? Canadian 
Journal of Forest Research, 35: 967–977. 
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
Roccaforte, J.P., A.J. Sánchez Meador, A.E.M. Waltz, M.L. Gaylord, M.T. Stoddard, and D.W. Huffman. 2018. Delayed 
tree mortality, bark beetle activity, and regeneration dynamics five years following the Wallow Fire, Arizona, 
USA: Assessing trajectories towards resiliency. Forest Ecology and Management, 428:20-26.  
 
Contact: John Paul Roccaforte, John.Roccaforte@nau.edu 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
Figure 2. Bark beetle activity ob-
served five years (2016) after the Wal-
low Fire, expressed as a percentage of 
total live tree density (as observed post-
one-year (2012)) that were attacked and 
subsequently died (A). Waffle charts 
(B) show the proportion (one square = 
one percent) of observed post-five-year 
mortality by species of trees that were 
attacked and subsequently killed by 
bark beetles. For example, 8 percent of 
beetle-related mortality in treated units 
was comprised of white fir and the re-
maining 92 percent was ponderosa 
pine. 
