Journal of Forestry, 2019, 244–255
doi:10.1093/jofore/fvz009
Research Article - policy
Received September 4, 2018; Accepted February 5, 2019
Advance Access publication March 18, 2019
Copyright © 2019 Society of American Foresters
244
Research Article - policy
Broader-Scale Monitoring for Federal Forest 
Planning: Challenges and Opportunites
Zachary Wurtzebach ,  Courtney Schultz ,  Amy E.M. Waltz,  
Bryce E. Esch , and  Tzeidle N. Wasserman
Zachary Wurtzebach (zachary.wurtzebach@colostate.edu) and Courtney Schultz (courtney.schultz@colostate.edu), 
Colorado State University, Department of Forest and Rangeland Stewardship, 1472 Campus Delivery, Fort Collins, 
CO 80523, Amy Waltz (amy.waltz@nau.edu), Bryce Esch (bryce.esch@nau.edu), and Tzeidle Wasserman (tzeidle.
wasserman@nau.edu), Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ.
Abstract
Federal land-management agencies are increasingly developing policies to support multiscale 
monitoring for land-management planning and decisionmaking. Regulations for national forest 
planning promulgated in 2012 require US Forest Service Regions to develop “broader-scale” moni-
toring strategies conducted at scales greater than a single planning unit that can complement 
forest plan monitoring strategies. Given that this requirement is relatively new, we conducted 
research to investigate the advantages, challenges, and opportunities associated with implemen-
tation. We conducted and analyzed interviews with 95 interviewees from forest and regional levels 
of the agency, and federal, state, nongovernment, and research organizations who could provide 
insight on broader-scale monitoring challenges and opportunities. We also drew on findings from 
four interagency workshops. We found that broader-scale monitoring strategies have the potential 
to generate efficiencies for forest planning processes and improve coordination and communica-
tion across levels of the agency and with external partners. Major challenges for implementation 
relate to limited human and financial resource capacity and the agency’s decentralized organiza-
tional structure and culture. Opportunities for addressing these issues include building capacity 
for implementation through partnerships and investing in regional capacity for coordination and 
implementation.
Keywords: forest policy, forest planning, monitoring, adaptive management
In 2012, the United States Forest Service (USFS) issued 
new regulations for National Forest planning under 
the authority of the National Forest Management Act 
of 1976 (36 § CFR 219 [2012], hereafter the 2012 
Planning Rule). The 2012 Planning Rule emphasizes 
an adaptive approach to forest planning that elevates 
the importance of monitoring and evaluation (Schultz 
et al. 2013). One novel feature of the 2012 Planning 
Rule is a multiscale approach to monitoring. In add-
ition to forest plan monitoring programs developed 
on individual forests, regional foresters are required to 
develop “broader-scale monitoring strategies” for plan 
monitoring questions best answered at scales greater 
than an individual unit (35 CFR § 219.12). The 2012 
Planning Rule’s new monitoring requirements there-
fore reflect considerations from recent scholarship 
that highlight the importance of integrating ecological 
monitoring information from multiple scales into land-
management planning and decisionmaking processes 
(Lindenmayer and Likens 2010, Hutto and Belote 
2013, White et  al. 2017). However, there has been 
little investigation of the policies and administrative 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/article-abstract/117/3/244/5382400 by Northern Arizona University user on 02 May 2019

245
Journal of Forestry, 2019, Vol. 117, No. 3
practices needed to support the implementation of 
multiscale monitoring in multiple use agencies (Biber 
2013, Carter et  al. 2017). Although recent studies 
have examined the implementation of the assessment 
phase of forest planning under the new rule (Ryan 
et al. 2018), and implications for wildlife conservation 
(Schultz et  al. 2013), implementation challenges and 
opportunities associated with the new monitoring re-
quirements remain unexplored.
To address this gap, this article reports on research 
conducted in collaboration with the US Forest Service 
in support of broader-scale monitoring implementa-
tion in Regions 2 and 3 of the US Forest Service. Our 
goal was to explore challenges and opportunities for 
implementing broader-scale monitoring mandates and 
identify policy relevant recommendations that will 
help the agency meet the goals and intent of the 2012 
Planning Rule. We structured our investigation around 
three questions: (1) What are the advantages and bene-
fits of broader-scale monitoring strategies? (2) What 
are the challenges for implementing broader-scale 
monitoring strategies? (3) What are the opportunities 
for implementing broader-scale monitoring strategies?
Monitoring Implementation under the 
2012 Planning Rule
Planning under the 2012 Planning Rule involves a 
three-part iterative cycle of assessment, planning, and 
monitoring in a continuous feedback loop. The assess-
ment phase is used to develop plan components that 
maintain or restore ecosystem integrity (36 CFR § 
219.8) and species diversity (36 CFR § 219.9), pro-
vide for ecosystem services and multiple uses (36 CFR 
§ 219.10), and comply with timber harvesting require-
ments set out in National Forest Management Act 
(NFMA, 36 CFR § 219.10). Required plan components 
include desired social and ecological conditions; man-
agement objectives for achieving desired conditions; 
standards and guidelines that constrain management 
implementation and mitigate detrimental impacts; and 
suitability designations that delineate areas of the plan 
area that are suitable for specific uses (e.g., wilderness, 
timber harvesting) (36 CFR § 219.7). Monitoring is 
meant to support the assessment process over time, 
inform resource management, and allow forest staff 
to determine whether a change to plan components 
is needed by “testing relevant assumptions, tracking 
relevant conditions over time, and measuring manage-
ment effectiveness” (36 CFR § 219.5). This planning 
framework is designed to “inform integrated resource 
management and allow the Forest Service to adapt to 
changing conditions, including climate change, and 
improve management based on new information and 
monitoring” (36 CFR § 219.5 [a]).
There are two complementary tiers of monitoring 
in the new planning rule: forest plan monitoring and 
broader-scale monitoring. Forest plan monitoring 
programs are developed by staff on individual forests 
and must contain questions and indicators that can be 
used to evaluate the implementation of plan compo-
nents, and address eight required monitoring topics 
(Figure 1). Forests not undergoing plan revision are 
also required to modify or “transition” their existing 
monitoring plans so they comply with the new require-
ments. Although broader-scale monitoring is also used 
to evaluate the implementation of plan components, 
broader-scale monitoring questions are appropriate for 
Management and Policy Implications
Under the US Forest Service’s 2012 Planning Rule, regions are required to develop “broader-scale” monitoring 
strategies for plan monitoring questions best answered at scales larger than one unit. Broader-scale monitoring 
strategies may involve: aggregating and analyzing existing data collected by forest staff; leveraging existing 
data collected by regions, Forest Service research branches, or external partners; or developing new region-
ally coordinated strategies, potentially in collaboration with partners. We found that broader-scale monitoring 
strategies have the potential to generate efficiencies, provide context for forest planning processes, and im-
prove communication and coordination with external partners and stakeholders. Despite the challenges asso-
ciated with limited capacity and organizational structure, we found that there are opportunities for developing 
broader-scale monitoring strategies that leverage existing data and partnerships with Forest Service research 
branches, other land-management agencies, and nongovernment organizations (NGOs). Although realizing 
the benefits of broader-scale monitoring strategies requires leadership commitment and some investment in 
human resources at regional levels for coordination and communication, there are opportunities for building 
capacity for implementation incrementally over time.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/article-abstract/117/3/244/5382400 by Northern Arizona University user on 02 May 2019

246
Journal of Forestry, 2019, Vol. 117, No. 3
“plan monitoring questions that can best be answered 
at a geographic scale broader than one plan area” (36 
CFR § 219.12). Forest plan monitoring has historically 
not included an examination of influential factors be-
yond plan unit boundaries, i.e., outside the forest. The 
2012 Planning Rule has a focus on collaboration and 
partnerships to meet landscape-scale strategic planning 
and threat assessment goals. These are in line with the 
“all-lands” efforts found in the National Cohesive 
Strategy, developed by USFS National Forest Systems, 
USFS State Lands, and DOI agencies (USDA Forest 
Service 2011) that seek to work across boundaries to 
address ecological and social priorities including wild-
fire, climate change impacts, and societal needs.
Broader-scale monitoring expands monitoring to 
be more comprehensive by integrating monitoring 
data across forests and with partners. Broader-scale 
monitoring strategies are to be developed and imple-
mented by each of the nine Forest Service regions, 
the administrative level above individual forests. 
According to agency planning directives that provide 
guidance for implementation, the expected benefit of 
broader-scale strategies is that they will generate ef-
ficiencies for implementation and provide consistent 
and complementary information for forest plan 
monitoring across multiple forests and with partners 
(USDA Forest Service 2015). In developing forest and 
broader-scale monitoring strategies, regions are dir-
ected to collaborate with “other Forest Service units, 
Federal, State or local government agencies, scien-
tists, partners, and members of the public” (36 CFR 
§ 219.12 [b]), to use “best available scientific infor-
mation” (36 CFR § 219.3), and to ensure that moni-
toring results are integrated back into planning and 
decisionmaking cycles through biennial reporting 
cycles (36 CFR § 219).
Planning directives for monitoring under the 
2012 Planning Rule suggest that broader-scale moni-
toring strategies may encompass different types of 
substrategies that focus on specific monitoring ques-
tions and indicators. Broader-scale substrategies are 
distinguished by the degree to which they involve the 
use of existing data or the development of new data-
collection efforts, and the degree to which they are 
developed internally or in collaboration with external 
partners. One type of internal substrategy involves 
using data and information from existing national 
or regional USFS monitoring programs, such as the 
National Visitor Use Monitoring program, the Forest 
Inventory and Assessment (FIA) program, or regional 
endangered species monitoring programs. Broader-
scale monitoring substrategies may also leverage moni-
toring data and information that is relevant for plan 
monitoring questions from partner organizations, such 
as the US Geological Survey or the Environmental 
Protection Agency. Another internal substrategy might 
involve aggregating data collected by forest staff that 
is then analyzed in a unique way at the regional level; 
planning rule directives emphasize the importance of 
evaluating opportunities for using existing data stored 
in corporate databases (USDA Forest Service 2015). 
Broader-scale substrategies may also include new re-
gionally coordinated initiatives. Regions may work 
with staff on forests to identify common information 
needs and develop regional or subregional strategies 
to address them. Two or more regions may also work 
together to develop broader-scale strategies. Finally, re-
gions may collaborate with partners, such as other land 
and resource management agencies, to jointly develop 
new broader-scale monitoring substrategies (USDA 
Forest Service 2015). This last type of substrategy is 
particularly important for leveraging scarce resources 
Figure 1.    Eight required monitoring topics under the 2012 Planning Rule.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/article-abstract/117/3/244/5382400 by Northern Arizona University user on 02 May 2019

247
Journal of Forestry, 2019, Vol. 117, No. 3
for monitoring and fulfilling the intent of an “all-lands” 
approach to planning and monitoring envisioned in the 
preamble for the 2012 Planning Rule (77 FR 21161).
Types of Monitoring and 
Implementation Challenges
There are a few different types of monitoring that 
are important for natural resource management. 
Implementation monitoring involves assessing if man-
agement activities were implemented as prescribed. 
Effectiveness monitoring is designed to evaluate 
whether management actions have been successful 
in achieving desired goals or objectives (Block et  al. 
2001, Hutto and Belote 2013). Effectiveness moni-
toring can also involve assessing the detrimental ef-
fects of management (Deluca et  al. 2010), although 
some scholars prefer to call this “ecological effects” 
monitoring (Hutto and Belote 2013). Surveillance 
monitoring is designed to evaluate the long-term trend 
and condition of resources without reference to spe-
cific management actions. Surveillance monitoring is 
often conducted across broad spatial scales by govern-
ment agencies or partner networks. Examples of sur-
veillance monitoring programs include those that use 
use spatially distributed permanent plots repeatedly 
surveyed by field crews, networks of automated data 
collection stations, ecological observations from citi-
zens, or remote sensing applications (Hutto and Belote 
2013). Surveillance monitoring programs are essential 
for assessing the cumulative effects of management 
over time and identifying changing ecological condi-
tions that may warrant management intervention or 
changes to plan components (Hutto and Belote 2013, 
Potter et al. 2016). Given the scale at which it is to 
be implemented, broader-scale monitoring under the 
2012 Planning Rule would therefore likely involve 
leveraging data from both implementation moni-
toring and surveillance monitoring programs. These 
two types of monitoring are complementary (Hutto 
and Belote 2013); analyzing spatial data associated 
with implemented activities and surveillance data on 
overall trends and conditions, for example, is essential 
for tracking progress towards desired conditions and 
evaluating the effects of management implementation 
across the landscape.
There are several institutional challenges to 
implementing 
and 
using 
broader-scale 
moni-
toring to inform land-management planning and 
decisionmaking. One fundamental barrier is limited 
human, financial, and technological resource capacity. 
Agencies often lack staff with sufficient expertise 
to effectively design robust surveillance monitoring 
programs, or manage, analyze, interpret, and integrate 
information into decisionmaking processes (Doremus 
2008, Lindenmayer and Likens 2010, Biber 2013). 
Commitment is another challenge. Monitoring is often 
the first program cut when budgets are tight, and man-
agers are often reluctant to allocate scarce human and 
financial resources to monitoring when it is not le-
gally required. There are also barriers associated with 
organizational structure and culture. Decentralized 
decisionmaking structures and parochial and risk-
averse organizational cultures often create coordin-
ation, communication, and commitment challenges 
for implementation across temporal and spatial scales 
of land-management planning (Stankey et  al. 2003, 
Benson and Garmestani 2011, Biber 2013). Within the 
US Forest Service, these barriers have created signifi-
cant challenges for implementing robust monitoring 
above the scale of local management actions. Forest 
plan monitoring is often not scientifically credible, or 
substantively linked to forest plan components and 
decisionmaking processes (Nylen 2011). The system-
atic use of existing broader-scale datasets and the 
development of new internal multiunit monitoring 
strategies have been limited (Holthausen et al. 2005, 
Schultz 2010).
Methods
Data collection occurred as part of a broader research 
project supported by the Washington Office of the US 
Forest Service during three different phases from August 
2014 to December 2016. During the first phase, we 
conducted semistructured interviews with 93 respond-
ents drawn from forest, regional, and national oper-
ational and research branches of the Forest Service, 
science-based NGOs who work with the Forest Service, 
state agencies, and other federal land-management or-
ganizations (Table 1). With guides tailored to different 
groups of interviewees (i.e., internal and external to 
the Forest Service), we asked about advantages and 
information needs associated with a broader-scale 
monitoring strategy, and existing challenges, and op-
portunities; we also queried for examples of successful 
broader-scale monitoring programs in Regions 2 and 
3, other agencies, and other regions.
Our sample of interviewees was identified through 
purposive and snowball sampling techniques (Singleton 
and Straits 2009). Drawing on publicly available lists, 
we first conducted interviews with regional planners 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/article-abstract/117/3/244/5382400 by Northern Arizona University user on 02 May 2019

248
Journal of Forestry, 2019, Vol. 117, No. 3
and regional and national program managers within 
the US Forest Service (i.e., wildlife, watershed, range-
land, timber, and recreation program managers), and 
monitoring specialists at regional and national levels of 
other federal and state agencies. Through these inter-
views, we identified additional respondents from other 
relevant government and NGOs, and planners, pro-
gram specialists, and line officers on individual forests 
who could provide greater insight on challenges and 
successes in Regions 2 and 3. We also asked respond-
ents to identify examples of successful agency moni-
toring initiatives in other regions, and we interviewed 
respondents who were familiar with those initiatives. 
Interviews were conducted until we reached satur-
ation, meaning we gained few new perspectives associ-
ated with our research questions (Scott and Carrington 
2011).
Interviews were conducted over the phone or in 
person, averaged around 1 h in length, and were re-
corded and transcribed. Interview data were organ-
ized using codes linked to our research and interview 
questions, and subcategories of codes that were identi-
fied inductively over time. We also coded several texts 
together to ensure intercoder reliability, analyzed and 
grouped codes, and discussed themes that emerged from 
our analysis (Miles and Huberman 1994). Our find-
ings from this first phase were used to produce a first-
year report and develop four interagency workshops 
in Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico, and Wyoming in 
collaboration with the US Forest Service. The goal of 
the workshop phase was to explore opportunities for 
collaboration with partners and share and learn about 
innovative broad-scale monitoring practices and pro-
cedures. Break-out groups were initiated at the end of 
each workshop to capture existing opportunities for 
partnerships, and institutional needs for broader-scale 
monitoring implementation. Notes from these discus-
sions were captured through participant observation 
methods, coded, and integrated with interview results 
(Dewalt and Dewalt 2002).
Table 1.  Interviewee groups and sample questions.
General group of interviewees
No. of 
inter-
viewees
Sample questions asked of different interviewee groups
External interviewees: total
46
  NGOs
13
What are your thoughts, perceptions, or experience with forest and 
broader-scale monitoring in the US Forest Service?
  Other federal land-management 
or regulatory agencies
20
In your mind, are there obvious impediments to forest or broader-
scale monitoring? Are there things we would have to change about 
agency structure, culture, or funding to make implementation 
successful?
  State agencies
9
When you think of broader-scale versus forest-level monitoring, 
what are the differences in what these would focus on?
  Academic partners
4
How could broader-scale monitoring inform forest plans and their 
ongoing implementation approach?
Forest Service: total
47
 
  National staff
5
In your mind are there obvious impediments to forest and broader-
scale monitoring? Are there things we would have to change about 
agency structure, culture, or funding to make this successful?
  Regional staff
17
How is monitoring information currently stored and shared? How 
useful are existing corporate databases for storing or accessing 
monitoring information? Are they being utilized? What could be 
improved?
  Forest staff
20
Do you currently have the capacity to effectively analyze monitoring 
information and use it in planning? At the forest level? At the 
regional level? If not, what additional resources are needed?
  Research staff
5
Do you partner with Forest Service staff outside your forest or 
external organizations in monitoring? What kind of monitoring 
efforts are they involved with or interested in?
Totals
93
 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/article-abstract/117/3/244/5382400 by Northern Arizona University user on 02 May 2019

249
Journal of Forestry, 2019, Vol. 117, No. 3
Results
Findings presented in this section are organized ac-
cording to our research questions: advantages and 
benefits of broader-scale monitoring, challenges for 
implementation, and opportunities for implementa-
tion. In each subsection, we discuss specific themes that 
emerged from interviews and workshops.
Advantages of Broader-Scale Monitoring
When we asked interviewees about the value that 
broader-scale monitoring would bring, the most com-
monly cited advantages were efficiency and effect-
iveness in generating usable information for forest 
planning. Forest Service staff noted that by providing 
forests with information that they lack the capacity 
to generate on their own, regionally coordinated 
broader-scale monitoring strategies have the potential 
to save time and resources for forest plan assessment 
and monitoring. According to a regional planning em-
ployee, “I’m not sure that we need broad scale moni-
toring, because we need a certain set of information. 
What I’m looking at is broad scale monitoring can 
hopefully make our monitoring process more efficient 
… I  think collectively, we will improve on the per-
formance across all forests, because we’re collecting a 
set of data that’s consistent and can be used by all the 
forests.” Interviewees also highlighted the benefits of 
consistently collected data for understanding broad-
scale trends and conditions in the context of forest 
planning decisions. As a regional program manager 
noted: “these approaches that are scalable and devel-
oped to allow inferences to be made at different levels 
and comparisons … it provides another tool to under-
stand the context of that unit in the broad landscape 
and see what’s going on here versus elsewhere.” In 
addition to supporting forest planning, interviewees 
also noted that information that is consistent across 
units can be used to inform programmatic deci-
sions, such as budgetary allocation and management 
prioritization.
Another important potential benefit highlighted 
by agency and external respondents was improved 
coordination, 
collaboration, 
and 
communication 
with partners and stakeholders. Interviewees from 
other land-management agencies noted that con-
sistently collected and managed data could facilitate 
interorganizational data exchange and support an 
“all lands” cross-jurisdictional approach to land-
management planning. Another theme that emerged 
from workshops and interviews was that a broader-
scale monitoring strategy could help the agency “tell its 
story” to stakeholders and Congress. As one forest re-
source specialist noted: “we’re unable to answer basic 
questions that the chiefs should be able to answer … 
The [regions] should be able to report the status of 
[their] ecosystems. We can’t do that right now, but if 
we were coordinated and collecting information in a 
coordinated way, then when somebody asks, ‘What’s 
the status of your alpine ecosystems,’ we would be able 
to give an answer. I think there is an inherent benefit 
to that.”
Challenges for Broader-Scale Monitoring 
Implementation
Capacity and Commitment.  
According to our interviews, challenges for broader-
scale monitoring implementation are many and 
include limited capacity and commitment, and organ-
izational structure and culture. Limited human and 
financial resource capacity and commitment were the 
most commonly cited challenge. Although the 2012 
Planning Rule directs regions to develop broader-scale 
strategies, there is no additional funding to support 
implementation, and regional respondents noted that 
regional leadership is often unwilling to fund new re-
gionally coordinated monitoring initiatives unless they 
are associated with legal requirements, such as the 
Endangered Species Act. According to a regional pro-
gram lead in Region 3, “every year there’s a little bit of 
a call for projects that we feel like need to be regional-
based and take that money off there, but for the most 
part, what ends up being prioritized is implementation-
based projects instead of anything that is either plan-
ning or monitoring-based.” Regional staff also often 
have multiple responsibilities or are “on detail” filling 
in for other positions. This limits their ability to de-
velop new monitoring approaches in cooperation with 
partners, or acquire, analyze, and communicate ex-
isting information to end users on forests. In Region 
2, for instance, there is little use of monitoring data 
collected by Forest Service Research’s FIA program, an 
issue respondents from FIA noted was due in part to 
persistent vacancies in regional forest vegetation ana-
lysis positions.
Organizational Structure and Culture.
  Challenges associated with the agency’s organiza-
tional structure and culture were another prominent 
theme. Interviewees noted that agency’s decentralized 
structure and culture of local autonomy are significant 
issues for coordination and consistency in monitoring 
implementation. Across Regions 2 and 3, interviewees 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/article-abstract/117/3/244/5382400 by Northern Arizona University user on 02 May 2019

250
Journal of Forestry, 2019, Vol. 117, No. 3
noted that monitoring protocols and data-management 
strategies vary significantly across forests, which cre-
ates challenges for broader-scale strategies that involve 
“rolling up” and analyzing data from multiple units. 
Many respondents noted that agency databases are 
cumbersome, effective data management is not empha-
sized by leadership, and forest staff often lack suffi-
cient training or incentives to use corporate databases 
effectively. As one interviewee from the Washington 
Office of the agency noted: “We place such a strong 
cultural value on that decentralized model, that local 
decision making, that those things that really should be 
centralized, such as databases and those sorts of things, 
we don’t value or put the resources towards.” Indeed, 
a regional respondent from Region 3 noted that efforts 
to improve the consistency of forest resource data col-
lection through standardized protocols were compli-
cated by the tendency of local staff to modify them to 
meet the needs of specific projects.
Challenges associated with organizational struc-
ture and culture are also manifest in tensions between 
the regions and forests, and communication and data 
sharing issues. Many forest-level staff voiced concerns 
that regionally coordinated monitoring strategies 
would take inventory and monitoring funding “off the 
top” of the dedicated inventory and monitoring line 
item, thereby reducing the available funding at unit 
levels, as well as the amount of relevant local infor-
mation for forest planning. Indeed, some forest staff 
questioned the relevance of broader-scale monitoring 
information given that management priorities, funding, 
and ecological conditions often vary significantly 
across many units, such as northern and southern for-
ests in Region 2. Other interviewees highlighted bar-
riers for effective communication across levels of the 
agency. Many forest-level respondents noted that they 
were unaware of existing monitoring initiatives devel-
oped by the national office, or innovative strategies de-
veloped on other forests within the region.
Structural and cultural barriers to data sharing was 
a prominent theme in interviews with respondents 
from partner organizations. They noted that inconsist-
encies in data collection and data management across 
forests create transaction costs for acquisition, and 
that effective data exchange often depends on personal 
relations with staff on individual forests. External re-
spondents also suggested that the agency’s fear of liti-
gation and culture of risk aversion were a significant 
issue for transparency and data sharing. As one agency 
partner noted: “If you really want to incorporate other 
people’s data and other people incorporate yours, that’s 
going to be a huge transition for the agency … that’s 
something that the agency has to think about because 
scientists or analysts maybe could give them back a 
useful product if there is a way that they could actu-
ally work with that data a little more freely.” This was 
a common theme among many external partners: they 
felt they could likely assist with the analysis of agency 
monitoring data—a critical chokepoint for generating 
usable information—if there was greater consistency 
in data management and commitment to transparency.
Opportunities and Examples of Success
Partnerships and Collaboration.  
Given limited agency capacity for implementation, 
interviewees and workshop participants emphasized 
the importance of collaboration with USFS Research 
branches and external partners for building capacity 
for broader-scale monitoring design and implementa-
tion. One opportunity frequently cited by respondents 
in Regions 2 and 3 was for increased collaboration 
with staff from the Forest Service Rocky Mountain 
Research Station (RMRS) branches and FIA program. 
Although some respondents highlighted administrative 
barriers such as funding and problematic incentives, 
there was a consensus among workshop participants 
that collaboration with Forest Service research staff 
is important for prioritizing broader-scale monitoring 
questions and identifying potential broader-scale 
substrategies. As one regional specialist noted, staff at 
the RMRS “have that kind of expertise to think about 
scale and take what people want to monitor or think 
they can monitor and then try to see how it’s actually 
implemented at a very large scale.” Collaboration with 
the FIA program and the Geospatial and Technological 
Applications Center were also identified as important 
opportunities in workshops and interviews, particu-
larly give the relevance of FIA and remote sensing 
application for broader-scale assessment and moni-
toring, and its limited application in forest planning 
processes. Region 3, for instance, recently collaborated 
with staff from FIA to develop a broader-scale moni-
toring strategy that uses FIA data to evaluate trends 
in Mexican spotted owl habitat over time. A few re-
spondents also noted that there may be opportunities 
to work with agency scientists to develop decision-
support tools that promote effective analysis and com-
munication of existing data collected by forest staff. 
The RMRS’s NorWeST stream temperature moni-
toring program, some respondents noted, aggregates 
stream temperature data collected by forest staff using 
standardized methods and uses sophisticated modeling 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/article-abstract/117/3/244/5382400 by Northern Arizona University user on 02 May 2019

251
Journal of Forestry, 2019, Vol. 117, No. 3
to provide estimates of stream temperature trends 
through an accessible web-based portal.
Partnerships with other federal agencies, state wild-
life management agencies, state heritage organiza-
tions, and science focused NGOs such as The Nature 
Conservancy and the Bird Conservancy of the Rockies 
were also identified as important opportunities. Agency 
and external respondents emphasized the importance 
of leveraging partners with specialized expertise for 
specific implementation processes, such as data collec-
tion and data management, through regionally funded 
agreements. Regional respondents in both Regions 2 
and 3 noted that funding agreements with partners 
generate efficiencies and provide consistency for imple-
mentation over multiple fiscal years and across units. 
As one regional respondent noted: “Usually we can 
build agreements for up to five years so we can kind of 
allocate that money for that time-frame. While we at 
the Forest Service can’t use our own funding past the 
fiscal year, so we can’t fund our crews past that with 
that money … agreements allow us to use these monies 
that tend to show up at the end of the fiscal year and 
need to be used quickly.” Some forest-level specialists 
also noted that regionally funded strategies can help to 
ensure accountability for implementation, given that 
funding from the dedicated inventory and monitoring 
line item is often used for nonmonitoring-related activ-
ities at unit levels.
Agency staff in Regions 2 and 3 also highlighted 
several examples of existing monitoring efforts imple-
mented in collaboration with external partners. The 
Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes, respond-
ents pointed out, conduct forest vegetation moni-
toring; state wildlife and heritage agencies conduct 
wildlife and rare plants monitoring; and science-based 
NGOs such as the Springs Stewardship Institute and 
Bird Conservancy of the Rockies conduct monitoring 
across ownerships. In addition to data collection, 
many of these organizations also manage, analyze, and 
deliver information to forest staff. However, several 
respondents noted many partnerships occur at forest 
rather than regional scales and indicated there may be 
opportunities for generating efficiencies and improving 
the consistency of specific approaches through regional 
coordination and funding. Region 1, for instance, 
is developing a broader-scale carnivore monitoring 
strategy in collaboration with state wildlife agencies 
and external partners.
Several agency and external interviewees also em-
phasized the importance of collaboration with federal 
land-management agencies for “all lands” monitoring, 
particularly, since agencies such as the Bureau of Land 
Management (BLM) and the National Parks Service 
(NPS) have also developed broader-scale monitoring 
initiatives. Referencing the benefits of interagency col-
laboration and shared funding, respondents from the 
interagency Northwest Forest Plan (NWFP) moni-
toring program noted that: “Having it multi-funded, 
that means both agencies are committed because 
they’re providing money, and they’re also providing 
people, and so we’re coordinating and collaborating 
together with this information. I  think that’s one of 
the biggest successes.” However, whereas interagency 
collaboration has the potential to generate efficien-
cies through shared funding and staffing, respondents 
noted that pursuing such approaches in other regions 
would likely require leadership and commitment from 
regional or national staff.
Building Capacity: Organizational Structures and 
Process. 
Respondents from successful broader-scale monitoring 
programs highlighted the importance of building 
capacity for implementation through investment in 
structured decisionmaking processes and steering com-
mittees. Respondents from the NWFP’s interagency 
monitoring program emphasized the importance of 
iterative decisionmaking among technical advisory 
steering committees (made up of agency resource spe-
cialists and external scientists) and interagency ex-
ecutive committees (made up of line officers) for the 
design of their broader-scale monitoring strategy, now 
in its 20th year. In Region 1, broader-scale monitoring 
strategies identified by a technical steering committee 
in collaboration with external partners and scientists 
are sent to an executive committee composed of re-
gional and forest line officers. If approved, they may be 
piloted on one forest before they are adopted by others 
to ensure feasibility. In addition to ensuring broader-
scale strategies would be relevant for decisionmaking, 
interviewees noted that these formal structures and 
processes have been important for building commit-
ment for implementation by demonstrating the value 
of the program to line officers over time.
A consistent theme from interviewees and workshop 
participants was that investment in regional positions 
dedicated to monitoring is essential for implementing 
and linking broader-scale monitoring strategies to 
forest planning processes. Workshop participants 
noted that collaboration with external partners, co-
ordination and communication with agency staff, and 
data acquisition and exchange take significant time 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/article-abstract/117/3/244/5382400 by Northern Arizona University user on 02 May 2019

252
Journal of Forestry, 2019, Vol. 117, No. 3
and effort; it cannot be just another “duty as assigned” 
to staff with limited time and competing responsibil-
ities. As one regional program specialist noted, “you 
really need a regional monitoring team. It can’t just 
be done by some part-time folks … you need some-
body that can look across and say, ‘okay, here’s the 
common measurement. Here are the protocols that 
we really need. Here’s the most important questions 
we got.’” Respondents from the NWFP’s interagency 
monitoring program noted that specialized field crews, 
and full-time positions dedicated to program coordin-
ation, database management, and analysis have en-
sured consistency for implementation across units and 
over time, and generated efficiencies for monitoring 
implementation and forest plan revision. They noted 
that investment in human resources for communica-
tion and training is particularly important for linking 
broader-scale information to planning processes. For 
instance, one respondent from the NWFP monitoring 
program discussed the value of workshops that teach 
forest specialists how to integrate NWFP monitoring 
data into  analysis and documentation requirements 
associated with the National Environmental Act 
of 1969, a strategy they noted could be used to link 
broader-scale monitoring information to forest plan-
ning processes. Respondents from Region 3 also high-
lighted opportunities for generating efficiencies and 
linking broader-scale monitoring to forest planning 
through the codevelopment of regionally consistent 
plan components and broader-scale monitoring strat-
egies. Their broader-scale Mexican spotted owl (MSO) 
habitat monitoring strategy, for instance, can be used 
to evaluate the effectiveness of regionally consistent 
plan components for MSO conservation.
Respondents from Region 1 noted that the region 
has invested in a team of vegetation analysts, and de-
veloped innovative databases and decision-support 
tools that integrate standardized plot level data col-
lected by forest staff, FIA data, and remote sensing 
data—tools that have allowed staff on multiple forests 
to efficiently leverage base FIA data for forest plan re-
vision and forest plan monitoring. Staff from Region 1 
noted that whereas initial investment in administrative 
capacity for monitoring and data management was 
driven by litigation over standards for old-growth for-
ests, the region invested in additional positions once 
the benefits for efficiency and effectiveness became ap-
parent. Region 1 is also currently leveraging existing 
regional capacity to analyze and transmit broader-
scale aquatic and riparian monitoring data collected 
by the Pacific Inland Fish Biological Opinion program 
and is working with partners to develop a broader-
scale meso-carnivore monitoring strategy.
Investment in standardized monitoring protocols 
and training was another opportunity highlighted by 
several internal and external respondents that would 
require investment in human resources. Some respond-
ents noted that such approaches might appeal to local 
leadership if they presented potential resource savings. 
As one forest specialist noted, “I think we could dem-
onstrate a lot of cost savings by using existing proto-
cols that have been peer reviewed and used, maybe by 
our agency, maybe by other agencies … and having a 
crew that would be able to go out and do those con-
sistently.” While standardization would likely require 
regional or national leadership, agency respondents in 
Regions 2 and 3 also indicated there may be opportun-
ities for improving monitoring consistency opportunis-
tically through a bottom-up approach to broader-scale 
monitoring implementation, by “scaling up” innova-
tive monitoring approaches developed on individual 
forests. Several respondents also noted that there 
were likely opportunities for identifying subregional 
broader-scale strategies on adjacent or proximal for-
ests undertaking plan revision along similar timelines. 
In summary, whereas interviewees said that invest-
ment in administrative structures and processes may 
generate efficiencies, they require leadership to take an 
interest in monitoring, invest in initial positions with 
enough time and capacity to create a visible effect, and 
to exert some authority to require or incentivize units 
to participate in regionally led efforts.
Discussion
Findings from workshops and interviews indicate that 
broader-scale monitoring programs have the potential 
to generate efficiencies for forest planning processes, 
improve the consistency and effectiveness of moni-
toring implementation, and promote coordination 
and communication with partners and stakeholders 
(Figure 2). As land managers are facing cross-boundary 
threats and challenges for meeting desired conditions, 
broader-scale monitoring and partner coordination 
are particularly relevant. Yet there are significant chal-
lenges for realizing these benefits. Human, financial, 
and technological resource limitations, decentralized 
decisionmaking structures, and an organizational 
culture that emphasizes local autonomy and discre-
tion are critical barriers for implementation (Winter 
2012). Although there are opportunities for building 
capacity for implementation incrementally through 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/article-abstract/117/3/244/5382400 by Northern Arizona University user on 02 May 2019

253
Journal of Forestry, 2019, Vol. 117, No. 3
partnerships and administrative action, substantively 
addressing the requirements of the planning rule will 
likely require significant organizational change. To 
support future implementation efforts, we focus our 
discussion on critical challenges, near-term oppor-
tunities, and long-term considerations for supporting 
broader-scale monitoring implementation that can ful-
fill the intent of the 2012 Planning Rule.
Our findings suggest there are a few critical barriers 
that interact to create significant challenges for broader-
scale monitoring implementation. One is limited human 
and financial resource capacity. Although the new rule 
requires regions to develop broader-scale monitoring 
strategies, there is no provision of funding to support 
implementation. Given incentives and pressure for sub-
stantive management outputs, regional line officers are 
often unwilling to invest in monitoring related activities 
unless they are associated with legal mandates. This cre-
ates commitment challenges for building capacity for 
partner coordination and developing new broader-scale 
monitoring initiatives. Effective coordination is another 
challenge that stems from the agency’s culture of au-
tonomy and local decisionmaking. Many respondents 
noted that regional mandates and directives are often 
seen as optional by forest staff; this is a specific barrier 
for the development and use of standardized protocols 
for data collection and data management. These issues 
may also limit the willingness of regional staff to in-
vest time and effort promoting coordinated approaches 
in some contexts. Despite these challenges, however, 
there are opportunities for partnerships and capacity 
building that may be pursued incrementally, particu-
larly given the opportunities for generating efficiencies 
for forest planning processes.
Leveraging existing data and partnerships for 
broader-scale monitoring implementation are likely the 
most feasible near-term opportunities, given existing or-
ganizational constraints. Funding agreements allow the 
agency to exploit the capacity of external partners and 
ensure commitment for consistent implementation over 
multiple fiscal years and across multiple units. Although 
these approaches are the most cost-effective, they 
nonetheless require some investment in administrative 
capacity. A consistent theme from interviews and work-
shops was that leveraging partners requires staff with 
dedicated time and skills in collaboration and network 
coordination (see Ansell and Gash 2008). Similarly, ac-
quiring and analyzing existing data, and communicating 
relevant information to forests, also requires signifi-
cant time and technical expertise. Although providing 
existing staff with time to accomplish these tasks or 
investing in additional human resource capacity may be 
difficult under existing budgetary constraints, our find-
ings suggest that there are significant benefits in terms of 
efficiency and effectiveness that justify the investment; 
building technical and managerial capacity at regional 
levels can reduce transaction costs associated with col-
laboration and partnership coordination, and generate 
Figure 2.    Advantages, challenges, and opportunities associated with broader-scale monitoring implementation.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/article-abstract/117/3/244/5382400 by Northern Arizona University user on 02 May 2019

254
Journal of Forestry, 2019, Vol. 117, No. 3
efficiencies for the analysis and communication of 
broader-scale monitoring information. This is particu-
larly important given limited capacity for monitoring 
implementation and interpretation at forest levels. In 
Region 1, for example, it is far easier for forest staff to 
acquire tailored and highly credible FIA information 
through the regional office than coordinate directly 
with staff from FIA on a forest-by-forest basis. There 
may also be opportunities for leveraging interregional 
resources; Regions 8 and 9, for example, have recently 
invested in a shared FIA analyst.
Investment in formal administrative processes is also 
an important near-term opportunity for building cap-
acity for broader-scale monitoring. Our findings sug-
gest that formal advisory committees and structured 
decisionmaking processes can be used to identify and 
prioritize specific broader-scale approaches, demonstrate 
cost savings and benefits to leadership, and communicate 
the importance and relevance of broader-scale moni-
toring for decisionmaking processes. The codevelopment 
of regionally or subregionally consistent forest plan com-
ponents and broader-scale monitoring strategies is an-
other important procedural opportunity for generating 
efficiencies and linking monitoring information to forest 
plan decisionmaking. This may occur at regional levels, 
as in Region 3, or at subregional scales where adjacent 
forests are going through the plan revision process at 
similar times. Guidance and training for interpreting 
broader-scale monitoring information at forest levels 
may also be important for linking broader-scale informa-
tion to forest planning. In addition to creating efficiencies 
for both planning and monitoring, linking broader-scale 
monitoring strategies directly to plan components pro-
motes adaptive forest plan decisionmaking—a central 
goal of the 2012 Planning Rule.
There are also longer-term considerations for 
broader-scale monitoring implementation. Given scarce 
resources, limited commitment from line officers, and 
the agency’s culture of local autonomy and discre-
tion, strong leadership at national levels of the agency 
will likely be needed to address systematic database-
management issues, improve the consistency and effect-
iveness of forest-level data collection, and communicate 
the value of broader-scale and forest-level monitoring 
for land-management planning (see Moynihan and 
Landuyt 2009). Although there may be opportunities 
for improving coordination and accountability through 
performance management incentives and budgetary 
oversight, effectively generating, analyzing, and com-
municating information from multiple partner and mul-
tiple scales will likely require significant organizational 
change (Fernandez and Rainey 2006). Although the 
Forest Service has long been characterized by decentral-
ized decisionmaking structures (Kaufman 1960), invest-
ment in staff and expertise at regional levels and increased 
hierarchical coordination is needed to effectively coord-
inate monitoring and information management across 
units and levels of decisionmaking. Respondents from 
the Fish and Wildlife Service, the BLM, and the NPS 
noted that each agency has recently created new multi-
level administrative structures dedicated solely to inven-
tory and monitoring implementation (see Fancy et al. 
2009, Toevs et al. 2011). They noted that these policy 
initiatives have created efficiencies for monitoring im-
plementation and compliance with regulatory require-
ments for land-management planning. Indeed, there 
may be opportunities for leveraging existing knowledge 
and capacity across different agencies and developing 
interagency strategies for broader-scale monitoring, al-
though such initiatives will require national leadership 
and initiative from national Forest Service staff.
Conclusion
Multiscale monitoring is essential for promoting adap-
tive planning and decisionmaking in an era of rapid 
change and landscape-level events such as drought and 
wildfire, yet there has been little investigation of the or-
ganizational strategies that support effective implemen-
tation in public land-management agencies. This research 
highlights institutional challenges and opportunities for 
implementing broad-scale monitoring in the context of 
the US Forest Service. We found that despite a clear in-
tent and set of requirements in policy, limited capacity, 
decentralized organizational structures, and the agency’s 
culture of autonomy were critical institutional challenges 
for broad-scale monitoring. However, our research in-
dicates that there are also opportunities for building 
capacity for implementation through partnerships and 
investment in staff dedicated to coordination, analysis, 
and communication at regional levels of Forest Service 
administration. These strategies have the potential to 
generate efficiencies, improve the consistency, credibility, 
and effectiveness of monitoring implementation, and 
support the adaptive intent of the 2012 Planning Rule.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank staff from the US Forest and partner 
organizations for their time and participation in this re-
search. This research was funded by a grant from the USDA 
Forest Service.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/article-abstract/117/3/244/5382400 by Northern Arizona University user on 02 May 2019

255
Journal of Forestry, 2019, Vol. 117, No. 3
Literature Cited
Ansell, C., and A. Gash. 2008. Collaborative govern-
ance in theory and practice. J. Public Adm. Res. Theory 
18:543–571.
Benson, M.H., and A.S. Garmestani. 2011. Can we manage 
for resilience? The integration of resilience thinking 
into natural resource management in the United States. 
Environ. Manage. 48:392–399.
Biber, E. 2013. The challenge of collecting and using environ-
mental monitoring data. Ecol. Soc. 18:68.
Block, W.M., A.B. Franklin, J.P. Ward, J.L. Ganey, and G.C. 
White. 2001. Design and implementation of monitoring 
studies to evaluate the success of ecological restoration on 
wildlife. Restor. Ecol. 9:293–303.
Carter, S.K., N.B. Carr, J.R. Hickey, K.N. Rogers, and D.J.A. 
Wood. Understanding a landscape approach to resource 
management in the Bureau of Land Management. P. 7 in 
Multiscale guidance and tools for implementing a land-
scape approach to resource management in the Bureau 
of Land Management. Department of the Interior, Open 
File Rep. 79 p.
DeLuca, T.H., G.H. Aplet, B. Wilmer, and J. Burchfield. 2010. 
The unknown trajectory of forest restoration: A call for 
ecosystem monitoring. J. For. 108:288–295.
DeWalt, K.M., and B.R. DeWalt. 2002. Participant obser-
vation: A  guide for fieldworkers. Rowman Altamira, 
Lanham, MD.
Doremus, H. 2008. Data gaps in natural resource manage-
ment: Sniffing for leaks along the information pipeline. 
Indiana Law J. 83:407–463.
Fancy, S.G., J.E. Gross, and S.L. Carter. 2009. Monitoring 
the condition of natural resources in US national parks. 
Environ. Monit. Assess. 151:161–174.
Fernandez, S., and H. Rainey. 2006. Managing successful or-
ganizational change in the public sector. Public Adm. Rev. 
66:168–176.
Holthausen,  R.,R.L.  Czaplewski, D. DeLorenzo, G. 
Hayward, W.B. Kessler, P. Manley, D.S. Powell, and L.F. 
Ruggiero, et  al. 2005. Strategies for monitoring terres-
trial animals and habitats. USDA Forest Service Gen. 
Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-161, Rocky Mountain Research 
Station, Fort Collins, CO. 34 p.
Hutto, R.L., and R.T.T. Belote. 2013. Distinguishing four 
types of monitoring based on the questions they address. 
For. Ecol. Manage. 289:183–189.
Kaufman, H. 1960. The forest ranger: A study in adminis-
trative behavior. Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore, MD. 
259 p.
Lindenmayer, D.B., and G.E. Likens. 2010. The science and 
application of ecological monitoring. Biol. Conserv. 
143:1317–1328.
Miles, M.B., and A.M. Huberman. 1994. Qualitative data 
analysis: An expanded sourcebook. SAGE Publications, 
Thousand Oaks, CA. 338 p.
Moynihan, D.P., and N. Landuyt. 2009. How do public or-
ganizations learn? Bridging cultural and structural per-
spectives. Public. Adm. Rev. 69:1097–1105.
Nylen, N.G. 2011. To achieve biodiversity goals, the new 
Forest Service Planning rule needs effective mandates for 
best available science and adaptive management. Ecol. 
Law Q. 38:241–291.
Potter, K.M., F.H. Koch, C.M. Oswalt, and B.V. Iannone. 
2016. Data, data everywhere: Detecting spatial patterns 
in fine-scale ecological information collected across a con-
tinent. Landsc. Ecol. 31:67–84.
Ryan, C.M., L.K. Cerveny, T.L. Robinson, and D.J. Blahna. 
2018. Implementing the 2012 forest planning rule: Best 
available scientific information in forest planning assess-
ments. For. Sci. 64:159–169.
Schultz, C. 2010. Challenges in connecting cumulative ef-
fects analysis to effective wildlife conservation planning. 
Bioscience 60:545–551.
Schultz, C.A., T.D. Sisk, B.R. Noon, and M.A. Nie. 2013. 
Wildlife conservation planning under the United States Forest 
Service’s 2012 planning rule. J. Wildl. Manage. 77:428–444.
Scott, J., and P.J. Carrington. 2011. The SAGE handbook 
of social network analysis. SAGE Publications, Thousand 
Oaks, CA. 640 p.
Singleton, R.A.J.R., and B.C. Straits. 2009. Approaches to 
social research. 5th ed. Oxford University Press, New 
York. 672 p.
Stankey, G.H., B.T. Bormann, C. Ryan, B. Shindler, V. 
Sturtevant, R.N. Clark, and C. Philpot. 2003. Adaptive 
management and the northwest forest plan. J. For. 
101:40–46.
Toevs, G.R., J.W. Karl, J.J. Taylor, C.S. Spurrier, M. Karl, S. 
Sherm, M.R. Bobo, and J.E. Herrick. 2011. Consistent 
indicators and methods and a scalable sample design to 
meet assessment, inventory, and monitoring information 
needs across scales. Rangelands 33:14–20.
USDA Forest Service, Department of the Interior Office of 
Wildland Fire Coordination. 2011. A national cohe-
sive wildland fire management strategy. Wildland Fire 
Leadership Council, Washington, DC. 43 p.
USDA Forest Service. 2015. FSH 1909.12. Land management 
planning handbook, chapter  30—monitoring. Available 
online at https://www.fs.usda.gov/detail/planningrule/
home/?cid=stelprd3828310; last accessed September, 
2018.
Veblen, K.E., D.A. Pyke, C.L. Aldridge, M.L. Casazza, T.J. 
Assal, and M.A. Farinha. 2014. Monitoring of livestock 
grazing effects on Bureau of Land Management land. 
Rangel. Ecol. Manag. 67:68–77.
White, M.A., M.W. Cornett, and P.T. Wolter. 2017. Two scales 
are better than one: Monitoring multiple-use northern 
temperate forests. For. Ecol. Manage. 384:  44–53.
Winter, S.C. 2012. Implementation perspectives: Status and re-
consideration. P. 265 in The SAGE handbook of public ad-
ministration. SAGE Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA. 816 p.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/article-abstract/117/3/244/5382400 by Northern Arizona University user on 02 May 2019
