The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
 
What Are Restoration Treatments? 
 
 
 
Introduction 
Land management agencies often implement fuels reduction treatments with the primary objective of re-
ducing wildfire risk by removing hazardous fuels from the forest, such as small trees. Like fuels reduction 
treatments, restoration-based thinning treatments also remove smaller, younger trees and leave larger, older 
trees. However, they differ in that restoration treatments focus on long-term rather than short-term ecosys-
tem health. They also seek to go beyond just one objective like fuels reduction to multiple objectives, such 
as enhancing ecosystem attributes like wildlife habitat, hydrology and carbon sequestration. Restoration 
treatments vary with location, funding, and management goals, but they generally share the qualities de-
scribed below. 
 
Restoration treatments are informed by reference conditions 
Reference conditions are the forest conditions that existed before Euro-American settlers altered forest 
structure and function through overgrazing, fire suppression, and commercial logging. Historically, south-
western ponderosa pine ecosystems were subject to frequent surface fires, some ignited by indigenous peo-
ples and some by lightning. Both types of fires had the same effect: they sustained forest structure by re-
moving tree seedlings and cycling nutrients to understory plants. 
These conditions were stable for a long time. Soil analyses have 
shown that some grassy openings have existed in the same places 
for centuries, and perhaps much longer, while areas with clumps 
of pines were wooded for equally long periods. 
 
After Euro-American settlement, grazing removed the 
fine grasses that carry fire, while timber harvesting removed larg-
er trees and made way for dense stands of younger trees. Fire sup-
pression led to fuel accumulation and increases in fire intensity. 
Since settlement, forests have grown much denser, and understory 
productivity has declined. Today ecosystem conditions in many 
places are degraded and unsustainable. 
 
Knowing reference conditions is useful because they 
show what a site’s potential can be under self-sustaining condi-
tions. They can be determined by locating trees or tree remains—
which generally include living pines or snags with yellowed bark 
as well as large downed logs, stumps, and stump holes—that were present before Euro-American settle-
ment. Tree-ring records can help document past forest structure and fire history, as can historic photo-
graphs, Forest Service records, and other written records. Relatively undisturbed sites nearby can also aid 
in understanding what reference conditions may have existed on a site to be treated, though the great differ-
ences in stand density and structure that can exist on even adjacent sites must be taken into account. 
 
Reference conditions are not necessarily the same as restoration goals. Social, economic, or other 
management considerations may make it impossible or undesirable to attempt to recreate reference condi-
tions. But, knowing what a site once looked like is important for guiding management goals and strategies. 
Ecologists use reference conditions, like 
fire scars and old trees (pictured above), to 
document past fire history and forest struc-
ture. Photo by ERI 

 
Restoration treatments retain old trees 
Decades of logging in southwestern forests that emphasized cutting large trees resulted in a scarcity 
of old, yellow-barked ponderosa pines. These trees tend to be resistant to fire and often provide valu-
able wildlife habitat, as well as aesthetic benefits, but many of those that remain are in declining 
health due to increased competition with younger trees. Restoration treatments preserve old, yellow-
barked pines by cutting only younger pines. This lowers competitive pressures around old trees and 
protects these trees from fire. 
 
Restoration treatments emphasize understory restoration 
The grasses, forbs, shrubs, and other plants of the herbaceous understory comprise most of the diver-
sity in ponderosa pine forests and are important for wildlife food and cover, as well as for aesthetics. 
In addition, the understory provides fuel for the needed frequent low-intensity fires that maintain for-
est structure. For these reasons, restoration 
treatments emphasize restoring the diversity 
and productivity of these plants. In some cas-
es, this may require reseeding with native spe-
cies or removal of invasive species. 
 
Restoration treatments often emphasize 
clumps and openings 
Soils analysis has shown that some grassy 
openings in southwestern ponderosa pine for-
ests were apparently in place for very long 
periods before young pines encroached on 
them in the 20th century. Re-creating such 
openings provides habitat for many wildlife 
species, and can also reduce the risk of crown 
fires. 
 
Ponderosa pines frequently grow in small 
clumps, often with interlocking crowns, that 
provide habitat for species that use tree trunks 
and crowns. The size, density, number, and 
location of such clumps influences both wild-
life habitat and the future risk of crown fire.  
 
Restoration treatments incorporate fire in the long term 
Fire is crucial for cycling nutrients and maintaining forest structure. Without fire, thinned forests will 
quickly become dense again. Future fires, whether prescribed or lightning-ignited, should be part of 
the restoration planning process. Though initial fires after thinning are often hot and/or smoky, due 
to the large quantities of needles and woody fuel on the ground, future fires should burn mainly her-
baceous vegetation and tree seedlings, producing less heat and less smoke. 
 
Restoration treatments include monitoring programs and adaptive management practices 
Restoration is a relatively new science, and we have much to learn about it. For that reason, monitor-
ing of treatments and of their effects is urgently needed to improve treatment planning and imple-
mentation, modify future treatments, and communicate progress to practitioners and stakeholders. 
The results of monitoring programs should inform the planning of future treatments. With careful 
monitoring, the lessons we learn from current treatments will improve both our restoration practice 
and our overall management of ponderosa pine forests. 
Contact: Tayloe Dubay, tayloe.dubay@nau.edu 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
As part of a full restoration treatment, crews removed an 
abundance of small trees from this site and have regularly 
burned the area (every four years) since 1994. Note the 
abundant understory of flowers and grasses, large old trees, 
and grassy openings. Photo by ERI 
