The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Ecological Restoration at Gus A. Pearson Natural Area, 
Fort Valley Experimental Forest 
 
Introduction 
Northern Arizona is home to the largest contiguous ponderosa pine forest in the world. Most of this forest 
ecosystem is severely degraded from more than 100 years of past management actions and as a result is 
subject to catastrophic fire. In their current condition, these forests pose a threat to the social and economic 
vitality of Arizona, falling far short of their ability to provide wildlife habitat, watershed values, and the 
full complement of natural resource benefits. Although much is known about how to restore these forests, 
existing knowledge is largely unavailable in the formats needed by decision makers and the public.  
  
The Gus A. Pearson Natural Area (GPNA) is located within the Fort Valley Experimental Forest (https://
www.fs.fed.us/rmrs/experimental-forests-and-ranges/fort-valley-experimental-forest), approximately 12 
miles northwest of Flagstaff, on the Coconino National Forest. It is the oldest experimental forest in the 
United States (established in 1908). GPNA is also the site of one of the Ecological Restoration Institute’s 
oldest ecological restoration treatments. Aside from some light logging in 1894, the site has never been 
commercially harvested, and so retains its complement of mature ponderosa pines, as well as a dense 
growth of young pines originating from the seed crop of 1919. 
 
The National Science Foundation funded a research project in 1992 that was designed to compare three 
treatments: 1) tree thinning to emulate forest structure a prior to Anglo-European settlement, followed by 
fuel reduction and prescribed burning; 2) tree thinning only, without fire; and 3) a control. 
 
The Problem 
 
Before 1876, and the changes brought about by Anglo-European settlement, there were approxi-
mately 22.8 trees per acre at this site.   
 
 
After 1876, the number of trees increased to 1,253.5 trees per acre due to heavy livestock graz-
ing, an abundant seed crop in 1919, and fire suppression (Figure 1). The large number of trees out- 
compete grass and forage production, reduce plant diversity and increase the susceptibility of the for-
est to unnatural catastrophic fire, bark beetles, and disease. In addition, old growth trees are stressed 
due to competition for water and nutrients. 
 
 
 
 
 
1909, photo by Gus Pearson 
1938, photo by Gus Pearson 
2000, photo by JD Waskiewicz 
Figure 1. Historic photographs of the same photo point at the Gus Pearson Natural Area. These photos show the 
change in forest structure and an increase in ladder fuels that occurred during the last century.  
October 2018 

 
The Solution 
Forest restoration treatments that include thinning, burning or a combination of the two reduce the 
risk of unnatural crown fire and simultaneously improve forest health by reducing excess fuels (Figure 2).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Restoration treatments are site specific. They attempt to emulate historic forest patterns of clumped trees 
interspersed with grass openings. They follow research-based guidelines that include: 
 
 
Retain all old-growth trees (established prior to Anglo-European settlement). 
 
Retain post-settlement trees needed to re-establish natural structure. 
 
Thin and remove excess trees. 
 
Rake heavy fuels from the base of trees. 
 
Burn to emulate natural fire. 
 
Seed with natives to control exotic species. 
 
Ecological responses to treatments include:  
 
 
Growth. Old trees in treatment areas grew more than old trees in the control. 
 
Nutrients. Thinning and prescribed fire increase tree nitrogen uptake. 
 
Insects. Old trees in the treatment have tougher needles than trees in the untreated areas. 
Tougher needles improve resistance against insect pests. Resin flow, a mechanism of resistance 
against bark beetles, was highest in the thin and burn treatment. 
 
Regeneration. Ponderosa pine seedling recruitment was low in treated areas (average 5 trees 
per acre), although regeneration may be more than ample to sustain the open forest (~ 1.6 trees per 
acre per decade). 
 
Crown dieback. Old trees had less crown (top) dieback in the first six years following treat-
ments compared to the control. However, two trees located in treated areas were killed by windthrow 
or breakage. 
 
Grasses and flowers. The amount (in terms of tons per acre) of grasses and wildflowers in-
creased after treatment. 
 
Species diversity. The number of different plant species (diversity) increased after treatment.  
 
Contact: Dr. Wally Covington, W.Wallace.Covington@nau.edu; Diane Vosick, Diane.Vosick@nau.edu 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
Original tree density. 
Tree density prior to treatment.  
Tree density after treatment. 
Figure 2. Tree location maps of the Gus Pearson Natural Area. Red points are pre-settlement trees, and green 
points are post-settlement trees.  
