2018 Wildfire Season: An Overview
Southwestern US
june 2019

Ecological Restoration Institute
2018 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
Authors: Michael Lynch and Alexander Evans
Reviewers: Barb Satink Wolfson, Southwest Fire Science Consortium, and Abie Carabajal, US Forest Service
Cover photo: Task Force Leader Doug Niemynski scrapes a fire line around a hotspot on the 2018 Ute Park Fire,  
New Mexico. Photo by Mike McMillan, Ute Park Fire PIO. Photo courtesy of the USDA Forest Service, via InciWeb, 
https://inciweb.nwcg.gov/incident/photograph/5820/15/78317 
Please use the following citation when referring to this report: 
Lynch, M., and A. Evans. 2019. 2018 Wildfire Season: An Overview, Southwestern US. Special Report. Ecological 
Restoration Institute and Southwest Fire Science Consortium, Northern Arizona University. 19 p.
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution.
This report was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.	
In accordance with Federal law and U.S. Department of Agriculture policy, this institution is prohibited from discriminating on the 
basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, or disability. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.)
To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 1400 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice and TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.
Intermountain West Frequent-fire Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by 
reestablishing native species, structural characteristics, and ecological processes.  
The Society for Ecological Restoration International defines ecological restoration  
as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem  
with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability….Restoration attempts to  
return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration 
International Science & Policy Working Group 2004).
Most frequent-fire forests throughout the Intermountain West have been degraded 
during the last 150 years. Many of these forests are now dominated by unnaturally 
dense thickets of small trees, and lack their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, 
and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing 
fires and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers on 
reintroducing frequent, low-severity surface fires—often after thinning dense stands—
and reestablishing productive understory plant communities. 
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in 
researching, implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of frequent-fire forests 
of the Intermountain West. By allowing natural processes, such as low-severity fire, 
to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide 
ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The Southwest Fire Science Consortium (SWFSC) is a way for managers, scientists, 
and policy makers to interact and share science. SWFSC’s goal is to see the best available 
science used to make management decisions and scientists working on the questions 
managers need answered. The SWFSC tries to bring together localized efforts to develop 
scientific information and to disseminate that to practitioners on the ground through  
an inclusive and open process.

Table of Contents
Introduction................................................ 1
Wildfire Management................................ 1
The 2018 Fire Season................................. 1
Regional Context........................................ 2
Data Sources............................................... 2
Stateline Fire, New Mexico....................... 5
Rattlesnake Fire, Arizona........................... 6
Diener Canyon Fire, New Mexico.............. 7
206 Fire, New Mexico................................. 8
380 Fire, New Mexico................................. 8
OK Bar Fire, New Mexico........................... 8
Tinder Fire, Arizona.................................... 9
San Luis Fire, New Mexico...................... 10
Buzzard Fire, New Mexico....................... 11
Ute Park Fire, New Mexico...................... 12
Emily Fire, New Mexico........................... 13
Stubbs Fire, Arizona................................. 14
OBI Fire, Arizona....................................... 15
Conclusion................................................. 16
Appendix I. Fire Statistics........................ 19

Ecological Restoration Institute
2018 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US 1
Introduction
Wildfire is part of the landscape in the Southwest. It can be a 
threat to lives and property, but it is also crucial to maintaining 
healthy ecosystems. Forests in the Southwest are adapted 
to fire and many trees can easily survive low-intensity fires 
burning along the forest floor. For example, ponderosa pine 
forests need regular, low-severity fires to remain healthy. Over 
decades without fire on the landscape, fuel loads accumulated 
and facilitated more intense, high-severity fire. Each fire is 
different, and while some burn in ways that increase ecosystem 
resilience, others burn with greater severity than forests are 
adapted to, killing even the toughest trees and threatening lives 
and homes. Weather, climate, vegetation type, fuel conditions, 
and topography all influence how an individual wildfire burns 
on the landscape and whether it has beneficial effects. Some 
fires will leave many unburned patches, creating a mosaic burn 
pattern, whereas others will burn more contiguously.
This report is the sixth in a series of annual overviews available 
from the Southwest Fire Science Consortium and the 
Ecological Restoration Institute. The goal of this overview is 
to provide a concise summary of the fire season and to facilitate 
comparison with past fires. It follows the format of past years’ 
overviews1 and describes the impacts of the 13 largest fires in 
Arizona and New Mexico in 2018 (all fires greater than 8,000 
acres in the Southwest region). As in previous overviews, this 
report covers: when the fire burned, fire management costs, 
vegetation types, previous burn footprints, and burn severity, 
where available. The conclusion section summarizes these same 
measures for the large wildfires in the region and touches on 
how these fires burned in proximity to human communities. 
Wildfire Management
Managers can approach each wildfire with multiple objectives 
that range from managing the wildfire for public safety to 
managing the fire to improve natural resources. Federal 
wildland fire management policy states:
“Response to wildland fires is based on 
ecological, social and legal consequences of the 
fire. The circumstances under which a fire occurs, 
and the likely consequences on firefighter and 
public safety and welfare, natural and cultural 
resources, and, values to be protected, dictate the 
appropriate response to the fire.”2
A full range of wildland fire response strategies may be 
employed to meet these objectives, including containing, 
confining, or suppressing the wildfire. The national Incident 
Management Situation Report identifies the percentage of 
each fire managed with a monitor, confine, point protection, 
or suppression strategy. This report compiles these figures to 
better understand how fires were managed in 2018.
Wildland fire management strategies are based on a thoughtful 
and systematic risk-based approach that considers firefighter 
and public safety, cause of the wildfire, location, existing land 
management plans, availability of resources, values at risk, and 
social factors. Federal policy dictates that “initial action on 
human-caused wildfire will be to suppress the fire.”3 The same 
federal policy allows naturally ignited wildfires (or parts of 
wildfires) to be managed for resource benefits, such as mitigating 
fuel loads to reduce the risk of high severity, enhancing wildlife 
habitat, improving watershed health, and reducing risk to 
neighboring communities. Though multiple strategies are used 
to manage wildfires, it is important to note that federal agencies 
only recognize two types of fires: prescribed fires and wildfire.
The 2018 Fire Season 
In 2018, wildfire burned 547,701 acres in the Southwest 
(Arizona and New Mexico), which is 3 percent less than 2017 
and significantly less than the average for the previous 10 years 
(627,893 acres). New Mexico had more wildfire (382,345 acres) 
than its 10-year average, while Arizona had less (165,356 acres) 
than its 10-year average. Both states had less prescribed fire 
than the 10-year average (75,837 acres in Arizona and 71,027 
acres in New Mexico). 
In 2018, wildfires over 100 acres represented 93 percent of the 
total acreage burned by wildfire in Arizona and New Mexico. 
Less detailed information is available on the choice of strategies 
managers used on fires greater than 100 acres in 2018 than in 
other recent years. Of the 141,180 acres of wildfire for which 
strategy is recorded in the Southwest Coordination Center’s 
data, 97 percent were managed with a fire suppression strategy.  
3	  National Interagency Coordination Center Wildland Fire Annual 
Reports www.predictiveservices.nifc.gov/intelligence/intelligence.htm
Figure 1. Wildfires and prescribed fires acres burned in Arizona and New Mexico, 2002 to 2018.3
1	  2017, 2016, 2015, 2014, and 2013 Wildfire Season: An Overview, Southwestern 
U.S. https://cdm17192.contentdm.oclc.org/digital/search/searchterm/wild-
fire%20season%20overview/field/type/mode/exact/conn/and/order/date/ad/asc
2	  Guidance for Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy www.
nifc.gov/policies/policies_documents/GIFWFMP.pdf

Ecological Restoration Institute
2018 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
2
This overview focuses on the 13 largest fires (Figure 2), which 
includes nine New Mexico fires: OK Bar, Buzzard, 206, Ute 
Park, Stateline, San Luis, 380, Diener Canyon, Emily; and 
four Arizona fires: Rattlesnake, Tinder, OBI, and Stubbs. The 
13 largest fires in this report represent 63 percent of the acres 
burned by wildfire in 2018. 
Regional Context
Warm and dry conditions during the winter of 2017—2018 
combined with below normal precipitation resulted in a 
meager snow pack. February provided a significant mid to late 
winter precipitation across portions of central and southern 
Arizona into southern New Mexico. The El Niño-Southern 
Oscillation (ENSO) was in a neutral phase leading into the 
spring of 2018. Temperatures were above average across much 
of the region for much of the spring while precipitation in 
April was below normal. Long term drought increased across 
the region with moderate to severe drought across most of 
the region in April. Large areas of northern Arizona and 
New Mexico experienced the driest water year (October 
2017 to June 2018) on record. Hurricane Bud brought some 
precipitation to the region in June, usually a very dry month. 
Though temperatures were warmer than average in June, no 
extreme heatwave hit the region as in previous years. Though 
the monsoon season started a little later than usual, it brought 
above average precipitation to much of the region, including 
an approximately 4-inch rain event in Santa Fe, New Mexico 
that caused significant damage. 
Given the dry winter and significant fine fuel carryover from 
2017, the 2018 fire season could have been more active than 
it was. It may be that June precipitation helped moderate fire 
activity (at least in southern Arizona). It is also possible that 
though conditions were primed for more fire activity, lack of 
ignitions reduced the acreage burned. Although not easily 
quantifiable, something should be said of the efforts of federal 
and state agency fire personnel in getting the message out about 
the conditions during the mid-late spring and early summer 
4	Graphs produced by Charles Maxwell and Jay Ellington, Predictive Services 
Meteorologist, Southwest Coordination Center. For more information see http://
gacc.nifc.gov/swcc//predictive/fuels_fire-danger/nfdrs_charts/Areawide.htm
Figure 2. Map indicating the location of the 13 large fires in 2018 analyzed in this report.
to reduce human ignitions. Some restrictions and closures also 
likely played a role in reducing unwanted human ignitions.
 
The Energy Release Component (ERC) is an index that 
estimates potential available energy released per unit area in 
the flaming front of a fire based on the fuel model and live and 
dead fuel moistures. The ERC is often used to track seasonal 
fire danger focused on fuel loading, woody fuel moistures, 
and larger fuel moistures (lighter fuels have less influence and 
wind speed has no influence on ERC). A graph of ERC show 
the 2018 fire season (blue line) in comparison to the 10-year 
average (gray line) and 10-year maximums (red line).4 In much 
of the Southwest, ERCs were above the 10-year average, 
approaching the 10-year maximums, in May and June. ERCs 
dropped quickly when monsoons brought moisture in July.
Data Sources
Management, Objectives, and Cost
The InciWeb website (inciweb.nwcg.gov) provides background 
information on most large fires such as location and start date. 
InciWeb is an interagency information management system 
designed to provide the public a single source of incident-
related information. Because InciWeb only sporadically 
reports costs, Incident Status Summary (ICS-209) reports 
were collected to document suppression or management 
costs. These costs do not reflect any post-fire costs such as 
rehabilitation or soil stabilization. The cost data from each fire 
is collected in a final table at the end of the document. Incident 
Status Summaries also provide “strategic objectives,” which 
briefly describe the desired outcome for the incident, high-
level objectives, and in some cases strategic benefits. Though 
strategic objectives often change during a fire, review of the 
most common or persistent strategic objectives for each fire 
provides some insight into the overarching management goals. 

Ecological Restoration Institute
2018 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US 3
Perimeters
Boundaries for each fire were taken from the Geospatial Multi-
Agency Coordination (GeoMAC) archive of fire perimeter 
maps (rmgsc.cr.usgs.gov/outgoing/GeoMAC/). GeoMAC 
also provides perimeters of fires dating back to 2000, which 
provided a historic context for this year’s fires. 
Vegetation 
Basic information about vegetation and topography of burned 
areas was available from LANDFIRE (www.landfire.gov). 
LANDFIRE provides nationally consistent, scientifically based 
maps of existing vegetation as well as Vegetation Condition 
Class (VCC). Vegetation Condition Class was formerly referred 
to as Fire Regime Condition Class (FRCC). Vegetation 
Condition Class is a map of how existing vegetation has 
departed from an estimated natural or historic condition. In the 
Southwest, this departure is generally due to fire exclusion, past 
logging, and grazing and results in greater density of trees and 
less healthy conditions. Vegetation Condition Class is a useful 
metric because it integrates information on existing vegetation, 
historic vegetation, and fire regimes into one variable and has 
been used to help determine where to focus restoration efforts. 
The most current VCC maps (2014) were used in this report.
Soil Burn Severity
Soil burn severity maps provide Burned Area Emergency 
Response (BAER) teams a tool to quantify soil impacts and 
assess potential for post-fire erosion (https://fsapps.nwcg.gov/
afm/baer/download.php). In the immediate aftermath of a fire, 
BAER teams perform an emergency assessment of post-fire 
soil conditions based on a combination of field observations 
and remote sensing change detection products derived from 
the differenced Normalized Burn Ratio (dNBR). The dNBR 
measures change in the ratio of near infrared reflected by healthy 
green vegetation to the shortwave infrared reflected by bare soil 
and rock. Most soil burn severity maps have four classes: high, 
moderate, low, and unburned; but some combine the last two 
categories into a “low/unchanged” category. The distribution of 
soil burn severity is included in the individual fire discussions 
(where available) as well as in the final summary table.
Rapid Assessment of Vegetation Condition  
after Wildfire 
Rapid Assessment of Vegetation Condition after Wildfire 
(RAVG) maps estimate canopy mortality (www.fs.fed.us/
postfirevegcondition). The USDA Forest Service (Forest 
Service) Remote Sensing Applications Center provides RAVG 
analysis as a first approximation of areas that may require 
reforestation treatments because of canopy killed by high-
severity fire. RAVG maps are created for wildfires that burn 
greater than 1,000 acres of forested Forest Service land or for 
fires where it is requested. The maps are produced by measuring 
the change between a satellite image before and immediately 
after a wildfire using an algorithm called relative differenced 
Normalized Burn Ratio (RdNBR), which is sensitive to 
vegetation mortality resulting from the wildfire event. The 
RdNBR is derived directly from the dNBR but is more 
sensitive to vegetation mortality than the dNBR. 
While soil burn severity maps and RAVG canopy mortality 
maps use similar satellite change detection methods, they 
measure fundamentally different forest attributes. In many 
Figure 3. Energy release component (ERC) index for the 2017 fire season in the south-central mountains of New Mexico. Note the 
elevated ERCs at the start of the Buzzard Fire (black circle) and around the time of the Rattlesnake Fire (black triangle).

Ecological Restoration Institute
2018 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
4
areas, canopy mortality and soil burn severity patterns are 
similar. However, in some vegetation types, such as chaparral or 
grass, it is possible for a fire to cause complete canopy mortality 
with little effect on soils. 
Wildland Urban Interface 
Another geospatial dataset that helps put fires in context is 
the location and density of housing, often referred to as the 
wildland-urban interface, or WUI. The Silvis Lab at the 
University of Wisconsin developed a nationwide map of the 
WUI based on US Census data (http://silvis.forest.wisc.
edu/data/wui-change/). The Silvis map uses fairly standard 
definitions of the two main WUI conditions: intermix (one 
or more structures per 40 acres) and interface (three or more 
structures per acre, with shared municipal services).
Caveats
There are important caveats for all the data used in this 
summary. First, the fire information presented here was taken 
from official sources between December 2018 and February 
2019 and may not include updates or revisions. Second, the 
geospatial data used to generate the maps and tables are also 
based on the best available information, but these data have 
errors and uncertainties. For example, the remote sensing data 
used in all these datasets can include errors introduced during 
collection, processing, and interpretation. 

Ecological Restoration Institute
2018 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US 5
Stateline Fire, New Mexico
The Stateline Fire burned 28,105 acres of mostly grass 35 
miles north of Clayton, New Mexico on the Colorado and 
New Mexico state line. The fire crossed two state lines and 
ended up burning about 18,000 acres in New Mexico, 10,000 
acres in Colorado, and an additional 112 acres in Oklahoma. 
The Stateline Fire burned across state and private land. The 
fire started in Union County, New Mexico, but the cause has 
not been determined. It started on March 8 and burned for 19 
days. State and federal fire managers used a full suppression 
strategy on this fire due to the presence of some residential 
structures, remote rugged terrain, lack of communication 
system, and the potential loss of agricultural resources such as 
cattle grazing. Ultimately, only one minor abandoned structure 
was destroyed. The Stateline Fire cost $2.3 million to manage, 
or $81.84 per acre. 
Vegetation and Past Fires
Over 97 percent of the area burned by the Stateline Fire 
was grass (81 percent) or piñon-juniper (16 percent). There 
were no documented fires in the area over the last 10 years. 
Ninety-five percent of the vegetation within the Stateline Fire 
had low departure from historic conditions according to the 
LANDFIRE Vegetation Condition Class analysis (Figure 4).
Fire Severity
No fire severity data was available for the Stateline Fire. 
Figure 4. Landfire vegetation in the Stateline Fire burn area.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2018 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
6
Vegetation and Past Fires
The area effected by the Rattlesnake Fire was predominantly 
ponderosa pine (44 percent), mixed conifer (34 percent), and 
grass (13 percent) with lesser components of conifer-oak (6 
percent) and riparian forest (3 percent). The entire Rattlesnake 
Fire fell within the perimeter of the 538,000-acre Wallow Fire 
of 2011. It also shared a roughly two-mile perimeter with the 
2007 Chitty Fire and encompassed all of the 6,000-acre Reno 
Fire of 2009. Nearly half (48 percent) of the Rattlesnake Fire 
had a high departure from historic vegetation conditions based 
on the Vegetation Condition Class analysis; including nearly all 
the northern part of the burn area. 
Fire Severity
Fire severity was generally low in the Rattlesnake Fire. RAVG 
maps identified nearly three quarters of the area to have zero 
(23 percent) or less than 25 percent (51 percent) canopy 
mortality. However, 1,000 acres experienced greater than 90 
percent mortality; nearly a third of which was grass (Figure 5). 
The soil burn severity analysis indicated a lower severity fire 
with nearly all of the acres exhibiting low severity (78 percent) 
or undetected (21 percent). In fact, the soil burn severity 
analysis identified only one acre of high severity. 
Rattlesnake Fire, Arizona
The cause of the 26,000-acre Rattlesnake Fire is unknown. 
This fire started on April 11 and burned for 46 days in Apache 
County. This isolated area included sections of the San Carlos 
Apache Reservation, White Mountain Apache Reservation, 
and Apache National Forest. The area consisted of steep 
canyons and ridgetops within the 2011 Wallow Fire footprint. 
As a result of the previous high-severity wildfire, all fuel types 
were available and receptive including timber litter and heavy 
dead/down. Live fuels contributed to isolated and group 
torching and spotting.
Fire managers chose to use a 100 percent full suppression 
approach to protect the identified values and infrastructure 
from adverse fire effects while ensuring public and firefighter 
safety. The planned end-state was for the fire to burn in 
ponderosa pine, dry mixed-conifer, and aspen with mixed 
severity, including areas of low to moderate severity. No 
structures were affected by the Rattlesnake Fire, but road and 
area closures were put in place during the fire. Fifteen injuries 
or illnesses were reported for responders.  The causes varied 
from a broken hand to smoke-related asthma issues and non-
fire related illnesses. Management of the wildfire cost $11.4 
million, or $437.25 per acre. 
Figure 5. RAVG canopy mortality in the Rattlesnake Fire. Note the footprint of the 2009 Reno Fire in the center of the Rattlesnake 
Fire. The entire area was previously burned in the 2011 Wallow Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2018 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US 7
Vegetation and Past Fires
The area burned by the Diener Canyon Fire had not burned 
in the previous 10 years, nor had any of the surrounding 
landscape. The Diener Canyon Fire burned into the perimeter 
of the 2004 Sedgwick Fire. Most of the Diener Canyon area 
was ponderosa pine (82 percent) with smaller areas of mixed 
conifer (7 percent), piñon-juniper (6 percent), and riparian 
forest (4 percent). Ninety-nine percent of the Diener Canyon 
Fire showed moderate departure from historic vegetation. 
Fire Severity
The RAVG analysis indicates that nearly half of the area had 
less than 25 percent canopy mortality, while nearly a quarter of 
the area had over 90 percent mortality (Figure 6). The soil burn 
severity analysis showed a slightly different story. Nearly 80 
percent of the area was classified as low severity (50 percent) or 
unburned/undetected (29 percent). This analysis indicated only 
3 percent of the Diener Canyon Fire had high severity. This 
high severity area was concentrated to a ridge on the western 
edge of the burn area. 
Diener Canyon Fire, New Mexico
The Diener Canyon Fire was reported on April 12 about 7 
miles south of Bluewater, New Mexico on Mount Sedgwick. 
This fire predominantly burned through ponderosa pine litter 
and short grasses. Fire managers chose to use a full suppression 
strategy, using the road system as containment features to 
protect the communities of Bluewater Acres and La Jara 
Subdivision. Fire investigators determined that multiple spot 
fires from the Redondo prescribed burn started the Diener 
Canyon Fire. The fire burned for 21 days and covered 9,338 
acres. No injuries or damaged structures were reported. The 
wildfire cost $3.5 million to manage, or about $347.81per acre.
A full description of the Redondo prescribed fire and the 
escape that lead to the Diener Canyon Fire is available in the 
Redondo Escaped Prescribed Fire – Facilitated Learning Analysis.5 
The assessment of the escape concludes, “A well designed, 
well implemented 2,600-acre prescribed fire was impacted by 
mechanical failure, a larger than expected inversion, an 11-hour 
wind event with gusts in excess of 65 mph, and a suspected 
serial arsonist.” It is worth emphasizing that the Redondo 
prescribed fire was not responsible for other wildfires because 
there was significant public confusion about these other, 
human-ignited wildfires. 
Figure 6. Canopy mortality in the Diener Canyon Fire.
5	 Redondo Escaped Prescribed Fire – Facilitated Learning Analysis. 2018.
USDA Forest Service, Cibola National Forest https://www.fs.usda.gov/
Internet/FSE_DOCUMENTS/fseprd586174.pdf

Ecological Restoration Institute
2018 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
8
OK Bar Fire, New Mexico
Lightning ignited the OK Bar Fire on April 22, approximately 
40 miles south of Animas, NM on the Diamond A/Gray 
Ranch in far southwestern New Mexico, approximately 5 
miles from Mexico and 15 miles from Arizona. This Hidalgo 
County fire burned for 21 days and covered nearly 62,000 
acres. It was the largest fire in New Mexico or Arizona during 
the 2018 season. Managers working on the fire opted to use 
a combination of monitor (40 percent), confine (20 percent), 
and point zone protection (40 percent) strategies. This contain 
and confine strategy followed the guidelines of a landscape-
scale fire management plan in place for over 20 years. These 
tactics were previously used in the area and the extreme 
topography, lack of road access, and problems with logistics 
would have made it difficult to support a large management 
response. Using a small, efficient type 3 organization to burn 
out and secure the appropriate perimeter was determined 
to be the most effective way to suppress/manage this fire to 
meet resource objectives, ensure the safety of firefighters, and 
reduce cost based on the values at risk. No citizens, responders, 
or structures were affected by the OK Bar Fire. Wildfire 
management cost $1.4 million, or about $22.72 per acre. 
Vegetation and Past Fires
More than 75 percent of the OK Bar Fire burned through 
grass, with conifer-oak (11 percent), piñon-juniper (6 percent), 
and scrub (4 percent). The OK Bar fire reburned approximately 
3,000 acres of the 2016 Cowboy Fire, 11,000 acres of the 
2009 Pasco Fire, and 19,000 acres of the Center Peak Fire. It 
also shared a 1.5-mile perimeter with the 2011 Godfrey Fire. 
Ninety-six percent of the vegetation within the OK Bar Fire 
had moderate (54 percent) or low (42 percent) departure from 
historic conditions according to the LANDFIRE Vegetation 
Condition Class analysis (Figure 7). 
Fire Severity
No fire severity data was available for the OK Bar Fire. 
206 Fire, New Mexico
The cause of the 206 Fire on April 12 is unknown, but it 
spread rapidly through the grasslands between Tatum and 
Milnesand in Lea County, consuming vegetation on over 
44,000 acres of state and private land in just two days. This 
extreme running and spotting behavior led to the evacuation 
of 12 primary structures and the destruction of one primary 
structure along with two other minor structures. Aside from 
these structure losses there were no other reports of impacts on 
civilians or responders. A full suppression approach was used by 
fire managers on this fast-moving grass fire. The management 
cost of the fire was $96,000, or about $2.17 per acre. 
A fire perimeter shapefile was not made available in far eastern 
New Mexico, and therefore assessment of the vegetation and 
past fires is quite limited.
380 Fire, New Mexico
The 380 Fire started on April 17 eight miles west of Tatum 
in Lea County. The cause of the fire is unknown, but it spread 
rapidly through the area’s grasslands. It covered more than 
20,000 acres in a single day, leading the fire manager to employ 
a full suppression approach. The 380 Fire burned across state 
and private land. The cost for managing the 380 Fire was 
$38,000, or about $1.71 per acre. 
A fire perimeter shapefile was not made available in far eastern 
New Mexico, and therefore assessment of the vegetation and 
past fires is limited.
Figure 7. Landfire vegetation in the OK Bar Fire burn area.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2018 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US 9
the Tinder Fire had a high departure from historic vegetation 
conditions based on the Vegetation Condition Class analysis. 
The Tinder Fire shared a 2.4-mile boundary with the 2015 
Rebel Fire. Only about 100 acres of the Tinder Fire had burned 
in the last 10 years (small unnamed 2012 fire). Other nearby 
fires include the 2015 General Fire and the 2007 Wilkins Fire 
in the neighboring drainage.
Fire Severity
The soil burn severity maps showed about 10 percent of the 
burn area in the highest severity class (Figure 8). Eighty-six 
percent of the area was in low (64 percent) or moderate  
(22 percent) severity categories. The RAVG data indicated a 
higher severity with 27 percent (4,200 acres) of the burn area 
experiencing greater than 90 percent mortality. Ponderosa pine 
made up 82 percent of the vegetation in the Tinder Fire and 82 
percent of the highest canopy mortality class. This represented 
22 percent of the total ponderosa pine acreage.
Tinder Fire, Arizona
The Tinder Fire burned for 27 days, from April 27 to May 
24, and covered 16,309 acres in Coconino County, Arizona 
just northeast of the Blue Ridge Reservoir in the Coconino 
National Forest. This fire was caused by an abandoned illegal 
campfire. Fire managers used a full suppression strategy. Crews 
focused on protecting residential neighborhoods as the fire 
threatened more than 1,700 residencies and destroyed 33 of 
them along with 63 minor structures. There were no reported 
injuries, but 300 civilians were evacuated in response to the fire 
in addition to area and road closures. The area included many 
hazards including significant rocky slopes on the eastern flanks 
and propane tanks. The cost for managing the Tinder Fire was 
$7.5 million, or about $459.87 per acre.
Vegetation and Past Fires
The Tinder Fire burned through a primarily ponderosa pine 
(82 percent) area with scattered grasslands (7 percent) and areas 
of mixed conifer along Clear Creek. Eighty-three percent of 
Figure 8. Soil burn severity map of the Tinder Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2018 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
10
San Luis Fire, New Mexico
The San Luis Fire started in Mexico from an unknown cause 
and crossed the US/Mexico Border after Mexican Forestry 
officials were unable to control its spread. The fire started 
on May 16 and burned more than 20,000 acres in Hildalgo 
County 10 miles west of Antelope Wells over four days. 
The fire was likely much larger than 20,000 acres, as this 
only counts the area burned in the US. This fire burned on 
private lands southeast of the OK Bar Fire. Fire managers 
chose to use a combination of monitor (50 percent), confine 
(45 percent), and point zone protection (5 percent) as a fire 
suppression strategy. This contain and confine strategy followed 
the guidelines of a landscape-scale fire management plan in 
place for over 20 years. These tactics were previously used in 
the area and the extreme topography, lack of road access, and 
problems with logistics would have made it difficult to support 
a large management response. Using a small, efficient type 4 
organization to burn out and secure the appropriate perimeter 
was the most effective way to suppress/manage this fire to meet 
resource objectives, ensure firefighter, and reduce cost based on 
the value at risk. The cost to manage the fire was $300,000, or 
about $14.57 per acre. 
Vegetation and Past Fires
Nearly 88 percent of the San Luis Fire burned through grass 
with conifer-oak (9 percent) and piñon-juniper (3 percent). 
The entire area affected by the San Luis Fire had previously 
burned in the 2009 Pasco Fire or the 2011 Truck Top Fire. 
Roughly 3,100 acres burned in all three fires. Ninety-six 
percent of the vegetation within the San Luis Fire had 
moderate (62 percent) or low (34 percent) departure from 
historic conditions according to the LANDFIRE Vegetation 
Condition Class analysis (Figure 9).
Fire Severity
No fire severity data was available for the San Luis Fire. 
Figure 9. LANDFIRE vegetation in the San Luis Fire. Note: this fire extended into Mexico.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2018 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US 11
Buzzard Fire, New Mexico
The Buzzard Fire was the second largest fire in this report. It 
consumed more than 50,000 acres in a 51-day span from May 
22 to July 12. This human-caused fire burned near the Eagle 
Peak Lookout in the Gila National Forest about 10 miles east 
of Reserve, NM. Fire managers chose to use a full suppression 
approach, using multiple strategies to protect natural resource, 
cultural, and private property values within the fire planning 
area. The steep terrain and lack of road access on the western 
side of Eagle Peak led crews to monitor the fire as it progressed 
to lower elevations, where it was eventually starved for fuel. 
Crews constructed and controlled fire lines around the 
remainder of the fire. Safety concerns led to an area closure, 
which included the shutdown of several area roads and portions 
of the Continental Divide Trail. No citizens or structures were 
affected by the Buzzard Fire, but five responders suffered 
injuries or illnesses. Suppression of the Buzzard Fire cost $15.1 
million, or about $300.22 per acre.
Vegetation and Past Fires
The majority of the Buzzard Fire burned through ponderosa 
pine (64 percent, nearly 32,000 acres), mixed conifer (20 percent), 
and piñon-juniper (8 percent). Nearly half (48 percent) of the 
vegetation within the Buzzard Fire had a high departure from 
historic conditions according to the Vegetation Condition Class 
analysis. The area affected by the Buzzard Fire had not burned in 
the last 10 years, but had seen several nearby fires. The Buzzard 
Fire was only about a mile from the edge of the 2017 Kerr Fire, 
which burned nearly 12,000 acres to the north. It also shared 
nearly six miles of perimeter with the 2009 Willow Fire and 
another four miles of shared perimeter with the 2015 Pinon Fire 
to the south. These recent fire perimeters served as an effective 
break line. The Buzzard Fire also burned through the 1995 HB 
Fire perimeter, where it consumed dead and down fuel.  
Fire Severity
Nearly 75 percent of the 50,000-acre fire had less than 25 
percent mortality in the RAVG analysis (Figure 10). Nearly 
14,000 acres exhibited 0 percent mortality. However, more 
than 4,000 acres had over 90 percent mortality. These areas 
were primarily on eastern slopes with a mixed conifer or 
conifer oak component. Soil burn severity maps were not 
available for this fire. 
Figure 10. RAVG canopy mortality in the Buzzard Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2018 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
12
Ute Park Fire, New Mexico
The Ute Park Fire burned for 19 days (May 31–June 19) on 
both sides of US Highway 64 just east of the town of Ute Park 
in Colfax County, NM. The cause of this 36,740-acre fire is 
unclear. This fire moved rapidly with strong winds that led to 
spotting about a half-mile out of the flame front. The fire also 
featured two heads, one moving south and another moving 
northeast. Given the values at risk, the fire managers chose a 
full suppression approach that used direct attack tactics where 
possible. Control features to the southwest of the fire were 
limited, leading to more indirect tactics. The response to this 
fire included many fire personnel, a variety of aircraft, and the 
New Mexico National Guard, which was dispatched to assist 
law enforcement with security.
Nearly 3,500 civilians, including the residents of Ute Park and 
Cimarron and all 1,100 employees of the Philmont Boy Scout 
Camp, evacuated as a result of the fire. Fourteen outbuildings 
were confirmed destroyed, along with damage to power lines 
and fiber optic lines along US Hwy 64, which was closed 
for several days due to trees and boulders strewn across the 
road. Five responders suffered some sort of illness or injury. 
Additionally, the municipal water supplies for Cimarron and 
Philmont were impacted and several bridges were damaged by 
the fire and heavy machinery crossings. Suppression of the Ute 
Park Fire cost $10 million, or $272.18 per acre. 
Vegetation and Past Fires
The Ute Park Fire burned primarily through mixed conifer (38 
percent), ponderosa pine (32 percent), and piñon-juniper (24 
percent), with small amounts of scrub, riparian forest, and grass. 
None of the area affected by the Ute Park Fire had burned 
in the last 10 years. In fact, there had not been a significant 
fire within 35 miles of the Ute Park Fire in the last 10 years. 
Seventy-three percent of the vegetation within the Ute Park 
Fire perimeter had moderate departure from historic conditions 
according to the LANDFIRE Vegetation Condition Class 
analysis. Only 1 percent had high departure.
Fire Severity
Over 70 percent of the Ute Park Fire had high (36 percent) 
or moderate (35 percent) severity according to the Soil Burn 
Severity analysis (Figure 11). This included 80 percent of 
the mixed conifer and ponderosa pine areas. Only 13 percent 
exhibited low severity but there was a large area that remained 
unburned or undetectable north of US Highway 64. RAVG 
canopy analysis was not available for this fire. The Soil Burn 
Severity map is available because of a special request from the 
state because the fire occurred on state and private land. A 
report on the post-fire impacts noted that the Ute Park Fire 
damaged and disrupted watershed function on mostly private 
lands. Fortunately, because the fire burned through the canopy, 
watershed condition was not as severely impacted as initially 
anticipated.6 However, post-fire flooding after the Ute Park Fire 
caused a debris flow that damaged the community of Ute Park 
and is likely to continue to have significant adverse impacts to 
water quality.
6	  Ute Park Fire Damage Assessment and Burned Area Emergency Rehabil-
itation Plan https://allaboutwatersheds.org/groups/ute-park-fire-recovery/
ute-park-fire-recovery-public-group-folder/ute-park-fire-damage-assess-
ment-and-burned-area-emergency-rehabilitation-plan
Figure 11. Soil burn severity from the Ute Park Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2018 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US 13
Emily Fire, New Mexico
The Emily Fire was reported on June 28 approximately 25 
miles north of Las Vegas, NM and burned nearly 8,500 acres 
over 20 days until monsoonal rains arrived. The Emily Fire 
burned on private land. As reported in the Incident Status 
Summaries, also known as the ICS-209s, fire managers used 
a full suppression strategy with the strategic objective to 
successfully protect and eliminate damage to power lines, 
the high-value Turkey Mountain communications site, and 
private grazing land. It was also important to prevent the 
fire from impacting Interstate 25. No injuries were reported, 
unfortunately there was some structural damage to the Turkey 
Mountain repeater site. The Emily Fire cost $1.8 million to 
manage, or about $216.95 per acre.
Vegetation and Past Fires
Most of the area affected by the Emily Fire was ponderosa pine 
(45 percent) or piñon-juniper (36 percent). Riparian forest (8 
percent), scrub (7 percent), mixed conifer (2 percent), and grass 
(2 percent) were also affected. None of the area burned in the 
Emily Fire had burned in the past 10 years. Seventy percent of 
the vegetation within the Emily Fire had high departure from 
historic conditions according to the LANDFIRE Vegetation 
Condition Class analysis (Figure 12).
Fire Severity
No fire severity data was available for the Emily Fire.
Figure 12. Vegetation Condition Class showing departure from historic conditions in the Emily Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2018 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
14
Stubbs Fire, Arizona
The 8,500-acre Stubbs Fire was reported on July 8 on the 
Prescott National Forest 25 miles northwest of Prescott, 
Arizona. This lightning/natural caused fire was characterized 
by short duration understory burning with isolated torching 
in brush. Management chose a 100 percent monitor approach 
to provide for firefighter/public safety and restore fire to its 
natural role in ponderosa pine and chaparral vegetation types. 
Success of this approach was defined as reducing future risk to 
the ecosystem. The fire burned for 39 days and cost $145,000 
to manage, or about $17.06 per acre.
Vegetation and Past Fires
Approximately 15 percent (1,400 acres) of the Stubbs Fire 
burned the previous year as part of the Hyde Fire. No other 
fires occurred in this area over the last 10 years. The Stubbs 
Fire mainly burned through ponderosa pine (39 percent), 
piñon-juniper (38 percent), conifer-oak (10 percent), and 
chaparral (8 percent) but also affected small areas of riparian 
forest, grass, and scrub. One disjunct burn area to the south was 
added to the Stubbs Fire perimeter. The majority (73 percent) 
of the Stubbs Fire was mapped as low departure from historic 
conditions, yet 25 percent showed high departure. 
Fire Severity
Nearly 90 percent (7,300 acres) of the Stubbs Fire exhibited 
little to no canopy mortality. Less than 300 acres had more 
than 25 percent canopy mortality according to the RAVG 
analysis (Figure 13). Those higher severity acres were 
primarily located in and around the area that burned in the 
2017 Hyde Fire. 
Figure 13. Canopy mortality map for the Stubbs Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2018 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US 15
OBI Fire, Arizona
Lightning started the OBI Fire on July 21 and it burned until 
August 31. During those 41 days, it burned 11,656 acres on 
the Walhalla Plateau of the Grand Canyon National Park. 
This fire was managed using a 100 percent confine strategy. 
The terrain in the area made access to the fire difficult and led 
to a heavy reliance on aircraft. Grand Canyon National Park 
implemented a number of temporary closures as part of the fire 
response, but no injuries or damaged structures were reported. 
The management cost of the wildfire was $250,000, or $21.45 
per acre.
Vegetation and Past Fires
The OBI Fire mainly burned through ponderosa pine (48 
percent) and mixed conifer (38 percent) forests, but also 
affected small areas of riparian forest (6 percent), conifer-oak 
(4 percent), non-vegetated/developed (2 percent), spruce-fir 
(1 percent) and grassland (1 percent). Over half (56 percent) 
of the OBI Fire was identified as high departure from historic 
conditions according to the Vegetation Condition Class 
analysis (Figure 14). Roughly one-third of the area affected by 
the OBI Fire (approximately 4,000 acres) burned in the 2007 
Roosevelt Fire. Otherwise the area had not been burned in 
recent years; however, it shared a nearly two-mile perimeter 
with the 2016 Fuller Fire. 
Fire Severity
Fire severity information was not available for the OBI Fire. 
Figure 14. Vegetation and past fires in the OBI Fire burn area.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2018 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
16
Conclusion
This report covers the 13 largest wildfires of 2018 and 
more than half of the acreage burned. Grassland was the 
most commonly burned vegetation type closely followed 
by ponderosa pine, making up roughly 90,000 acres each 
(Figure 15). Far more acres of grassland and ponderosa pine 
were burned in the largest wildfires of 2018 than 2017, while 
fewer acres of piñon-juniper, conifer-oak, chaparral, and scrub 
burned. Nearly 50,000 more acres of ponderosa pine were 
burned in these large 2018 fires than those in 2017. Most of 
the burned grassland was from the three large fires occurring 
on the northern and southern boundaries of New Mexico. 
This number would likely have been much higher if data were 
available for the 206 and 380 fires in eastern New Mexico. 
Soil burn severity maps analyzed in this report account for 
only 16 percent of the total acres burned in 2018. For the four 
fires in this report with soil burn severity maps, 62 percent 
of the the acres burned with low or undetectable soil burn 
severity (Figure 16). Nearly 15,000 acres (17 percent) of this 
area experienced high soil burn severity. More than 87 percent 
of the high soil burn severity acres in this report were from 
the Ute Park Fire.
RAVG maps were available for five fires in this analysis and 
show the majority (68 percent) of acres analyzed experienced 
less than 25 percent canopy mortality (Figure 17). Eleven 
percent of the area analyzed burned with greater than 90 
percent canopy mortality. The Buzzard and Tinder fires 
account for nearly 72 percent of the highest canopy mortality 
areas. These fires were both primarily ponderosa pine, and 
canopy mortality can be more ecologically significant in this 
plant community than fires that mainly burn in low-statue 
vegetation (grass, scrub, chaparral). Nearly 3,500 acres of 
ponderosa pine in the Tinder Fire and an additional 1,600 
acres of ponderosa pine and 2,100 acres of mixed conifer 
in the Buzzard Fire had greater than 90 percent mortality 
(Figure 18). RAVG maps were not available for the Ute Park 
Fire but this would likely have significantly increased the 
acreage in this highest canopy mortality class.
Figure 15. Summary of acres burned in the largest fires by vegetation type. Note: Fire perimeters were not 
available for the 206 and 380 fires and were therefore left out of this analysis.
Figure 16. Summary of acres burned by soil burn severity class.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2018 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US 17
Only a quarter of the area in this analysis was highly departed 
from historic conditions based on the LANDFIRE vegetation 
condition class analysis. It is reasonable to assume that the 
high proportions of wildfire burning with low severity and the 
high portion of the area burned close to the historic condition 
are related. Most of the 68,000 acres of high departure from 
historic conditions was isolated to three fires: Buzzard (35 
percent), Tinder (20 percent), and Rattlesnake (18 percent). 
These were among the most intense fires with over 4,000 
acres of the Buzzard and Tinder fires having greater than 90 
percent canopy mortality. The Tinder Fire was also the most 
destructive fire in this report to human communities, leading to 
the loss of 33 residencies and 63 minor structures.
 
Human communities were most affected by the Tinder 
and Ute Park fires. The Tinder Fire threatened over 1,700 
residences and required the evacuation of 300 civilians, in 
addition to area and road closures. It ended up destroying 33 
of residences along with 63 minor structures. The Ute Park 
Fire led to the evacuation of nearly 3,500 civilians in Ute 
Park, Cimarron, and the Philmont Boy Scout Camp. This fire 
consumed 14 outbuildings and damaged power lines and fiber 
optic lines along US Hwy 64, which was closed for several days 
with trees and boulders strewn across the road.
The cause of most fires in this report was undetermined at the 
time of this writing. Fire investigators identified two of them 
as human caused, including the Tinder and Diener Canyon 
fires. The Tinder Fire was caused by an abandoned illegal 
campfire, while the cause of the Diener Canyon Fire was spot 
fires from a prescribed burn.
The role of past fires was highly variable in the fires 
summarized in this report. Past fires played a role in most 
fires in this analysis and in many cases the edge of these 
10-year-old or less fire scars served as a fire break within 
only limited overlap. For example, recent burn perimeters 
facilitate control of the Buzzard Fire. The Rattlesnake Fire 
burned entirely within the fire scar of the 538,000-acre 2011 
Wallow Fire. The Rattlesnake Fire is also likely an example 
of a reburn that is likely to have had low burn severity at least 
in part because of previous fires. In contrast, the Ute Park 
Fire did not interact with recently burned areas and burned at 
high severity. Of course, many factors in addition to past fires 
help determine wildfire severity. 
On the other end of this range was the Ute Park Fire, which 
burned in an area without a significant fire within 35 miles 
in the last 10 years. Further, the utility of this metric is 
particularly relevant to the woody vegetation types. The 2009 
and 2011 fires within the OK Bar and San Luis fire perimeters 
were unlikely to play a significant role in these primarily grass 
fires. Fires in this report, such as Diener Canyon and Buzzard 
Fires, burned into older fire perimeters. 
The 13 fires in this analysis cost nearly $54 million dollars to 
manage (with a range of strategies) for an average of $157 per 
acre. This was half the average cost in our 2017 analysis. As 
noted above, managers identify the most appropriate strategy 
for each part of a wildfire to minimize threats and maximize 
positive outcomes. Using the percentage of strategies reported 
in the ICS-209 forms allows a portioning of acres and costs 
by the strategy used. In 2018, managers used full suppression 
strategies on 70 percent of the acres burned in the large fires 
summarized in this report. Limited data make it difficult to 
assess how this percentage compares to all fires over 100 acres 
in the Southwest. It is worth noting that managers were able to 
use strategies other than full suppression on all three naturally 
ignited fires (OBI, Stubbs, and OK Bar). The 100,000 acres 
where managers were able to use strategies other than full 
suppression is only a third less than the number of acres treated 
with prescribed fire in the Southwest during 2018.
Figure 17. Summary of acres burned by canopy mortality class.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2018 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
18
Figure 18. Summary of acres burned by vegetation condition class. Note: Fire perimeters were not available for the 206 
and 380 fires and were therefore left out of this analysis.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2018 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US 19
Appendix 1. Fire Statistics  
General 
Vegetation Departure
Name
Acres
Cost
cost/ac
Low
Medium
High
OK Bar
 61,620 
 $1,400,000 
 $22.72 
42%
54%
4%
Buzzard
 50,296 
 $15,100,000 
 $300.22 
37%
15%
48%
206
 44,162 
 $96,000 
 $2.17 
-
-
-
Ute Park
 36,740 
 $10,000,000 
 $272.18 
24%
73%
1%
Stateline
 28,105 
 $2,300,000 
 $81.84 
95%
4%
0%
Rattlesnake
 26,072 
 $11,400,000 
 $437.25 
27%
25%
48%
San Luis
 20,586 
 $300,000 
 $14.57 
34%
62%
4%
380
 20,480 
 $35,000 
 $1.71 
-
-
-
Tinder
 16,309 
 $7,500,000 
 $459.87 
14%
2%
83%
OBI
 11,656 
 $250,000 
 $21.45 
18%
26%
56%
Diener Canyon
 9,338 
 $3,500,000 
 $374.81 
1%
99%
0%
Stubbs
 8,500 
 $145,000 
 $17.06 
73%
2%
25%
Emily
 8,432 
 $1,829,302 
 $216.95 
16%
14%
70%
Soil Burn Severity
RAVG canopy mortality
Name
Unburned
Low
Moderate
High
0%
< 25%
< 50%
< 75%
< 90%
≥ 90%
OK Bar
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Buzzard
-
-
-
-
27%
47%
9%
5%
3%
8%
206
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Ute Park
16%
13%
35%
36%
-
-
-
-
-
-
Stateline
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Rattlesnake
21%
78%
1%
0%
23%
51%
13%
7%
3%
4%
San Luis
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
380
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Tinder
3%
64%
22%
10%
2%
35%
18%
12%
6%
27%
OBI
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Diener Canyon
29%
50%
17%
3%
16%
32%
14%
10%
5%
23%
Stubbs
-
-
-
-
88%
8%
1%
1%
0%
1%
Emily
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
nau.edu/eri
