The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
 
Ecological Restoration vs. Hazardous Fuels Reduction: 
What’s the Difference? 
 
 
Introduction 
In contemporary ponderosa pine forests throughout the Southwest there is an urgent need to thin dense 
stands to reduce the risk of catastrophic fires. While many thinning prescriptions focus solely on lowering 
fire risk by removing small trees and burning dead woody debris, others explicitly aim to alter forest struc-
ture and function. Restoration treatments lower fire danger while also increasing the overall biological di-
versity and long-term health of treatment areas. 
 
Hazardous Fuels Reduction Treatments 
Mechanical fuels treatments remove small, overcrowded trees to reduce the likelihood that a surface fire, 
one that stays on the ground, will become a crown fire, one that burns through the tops of trees. They also 
reduce the connectivity of tree crowns in order to make it more difficult for a crown fire to spread through-
out the canopy. This is usually accomplished using mechanical devices, such as chainsaws, to remove low-
er branches or entire trees. The cut wood is either harvested for fuel or other uses, or burned on-site. 
 
Ecological Restoration Treatments 
Restoration treatments also mechanically remove ladder fuels and re-
duce crown connectivity; indeed, fuels treatments can be an important 
step toward restoration. But rather than focusing only on altering for-
est structure, restoration treatments also aim to alter forest function. 
For that reason, they have the potential to provide a long-term solution 
to the current wildfire problem, which is really only a symptom of a 
larger problem—namely, an unhealthy ecosystem. 
 
It is well documented that frequent surface fires played a primary role 
in maintaining the structure of southwestern ponderosa pine forests 
before fire regimes were interrupted by Euro-American livestock graz-
ing and fire suppression. Forest restoration focuses on reintroducing 
frequent, low-intensity fires, which provide a number of benefits: 
 
 
Promote the growth of herbaceous understory vegetation. 
 
Cycle nutrients from needle litter into the soil, where it can be 
used by plants. 
 
Maintain forest structure by removing most pine seedlings or 
saplings. 
 
Reduce long-term crown fire danger. 
 
Enhance the health of remaining trees by reducing competitive 
pressures. 
 
Restoration treatments, in other words, provide fire protection and additional benefits. Fuels treatments do 
reduce fire danger, but only temporarily, and they do not emphasize these other benefits. In the long term, 
restoration treatments are likely to be a far more cost-effective and ecologically sustainable solution to the 
current wildfire problem than fuels treatments alone. 
Example of forest conditions one year fol-
lowing a wildfire in areas that underwent a 
burn-only hazardous fuel reduction treat-
ment (top) and ecological restoration treat-
ment (bottom). The ecological restoration 
treatment was more resilient to wildfire. 
Photos by John Paul Roccaforte  
