ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION INSTITUTE
Working Paper 41
Restoration Prescriptions for 
Southwestern Frequent-Fire 
Adapted Forests
July 2019

Authors: Amy E.M. Waltz, Mike T. Stoddard, John P. Roccaforte, Judy D. Springer, David W. Huffman
Reviewers: Brian Bock, Fire Ecologist, Bureau of Land Management; Peter Z. Fulé, Professor,  
School of Forestry, Northern Arizona University; Bruce Greco, SW Ecology, LLC
Series Editor: Tayloe Dubay 
Cover photo: A transition in forest structure is one of the primary goals of ecological restoration prescriptions to achieve the 
desired conditions of resiliency and sustainability. Photo by Andrew Sánchez Meador 
Please use the following citation when referencing this working paper: 
Waltz, A.E.M., M.T. Stoddard, J.P. Roccaforte, J.D. Springer, D.W. Huffman. 2019. Restoration Prescriptions for Southwestern 
Frequent-Fire Adapted Forests. ERI Working Paper No. 41. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 9 pp.
Intermountain West Frequent-Fire Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native species, 
structural characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological Restoration International 
defines ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an 
ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability … Restoration attempts to return an 
ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration International Science and Policy 
Working Group 2004).
Most frequent-fire forests throughout the Intermountain West have been degraded during the last 150 
years. Many of these forests are now dominated by unnaturally dense thickets of small trees, and lack 
their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible 
to damaging, stand-replacing fires and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests 
centers on reintroducing frequent, low-severity surface fires—often after thinning dense stands—and 
reestablishing productive understory plant communities.
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, 
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of frequent-fire forests of the Intermountain West. 
By allowing natural processes, such as low-severity fire, to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to 
reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
ERI working papers are intended to deliver applicable science to land managers and practitioners 
in a concise, clear, non-technical format. These papers provide guidance on management decisions 
surrounding ecological restoration topics. This publication would not have been possible without funding 
from the USDA Forest Service and the Southwest Fire Science Consortium. The views and conclusions 
contained in this document are those of the author(s) and should not be interpreted as representing the 
opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products 
does not constitute their endorsement by the United States Government or the ERI.

Table of Contents
Restoration Prescriptions: Ponderosa Pine and  
Dry Mixed-Conifer Forests.................................................................. 1
Ponderosa Pine Frequent-Fire Forests................................................1
Dry Mixed-Conifer Frequent-Fire Forests.........................................3
Required Components for Restoration Prescriptions in  
Frequent-Fire Adapted Ecosystems..................................................... 4
Pre-Settlement and Old-Growth Trees..............................................4
Fire...................................................................................................4
Grass, Forb, and Shrub Understory....................................................5
Restoration on Public Lands: Meeting Multiple Resource  
Management Goals.............................................................................. 5
Ongoing Management and Research Questions.................................. 6
Landscape-Scale Restoration..............................................................6
Metrics of Landscape Restoration Success............................................6
Climate Change................................................................................6
Conclusion........................................................................................... 6
References............................................................................................ 8

Restoration Prescriptions for Southwestern Frequent-Fire Adapted Forests
1
Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 41 
Restoration Prescriptions: Ponderosa 
Pine and Dry Mixed-Conifer Forests
To restore frequent-fire-adapted forests across the US West, 
public land management agencies have incorporated restoration 
goals since the late 1990s. Agencies recognize that restoring 
fire-adapted forests to their natural range of variability (NRV) 
increases ecosystem resilience to wildfire and drought and 
provides important elasticity with regards to changing climate 
and disturbance regimes (Stephens et al. 2013). Many forest 
restoration goals can be met with existing silvicultural practices; 
however, a broader approach incorporating key ecosystem 
components is needed to reach restoration and resiliency goals. 
Understanding a forest ecosystem’s natural range of variability 
requires knowledge of historical forest ecology and historic 
disturbance processes and patterns. Site-specific historic forest 
remnants—including stumps, logs, and snags—can be paired 
with living trees that established prior to fire exclusion to 
characterize reference conditions (see Box 1 for terminology; 
Covington and Moore 1994). Landscape remnants are 
abundant in the Southwest, where logging, which began in 
the 1870s, left high stumps and the exclusion of fire and dry 
climatic conditions have preserved remnant historic structures 
(Covington and Moore 1994). In fact, reconstruction of forest 
structure using pre-settlement (refers to pre-Euro-American 
settlement, see Box 1 for full definition) remnants is 95 percent 
accurate (Moore et al. 2004, Fulé et al. 2003). Forest restoration 
began at small research scales, but has scaled-up on federally 
managed landscapes. For forest operations, the physical 
remnants of dead and living old growth trees are used to inform 
desired forest structure at stand scales, and can be used to 
operationalize restoration prescription principles for efficiencies 
in larger-scale projects.
The historical ecology and restoration experiment studies 
over the last 25 years have led to a rich body of literature that 
informs land management of these ecosystems. This working 
paper updates restoration prescription work (Friederici 2005) 
with prescriptions for ponderosa pine and dry mixed-conifer 
forests, and includes a short discussion on required components, 
current management, and research questions. 
Ponderosa Pine Frequent-Fire Forests
Ponderosa pine restoration prescriptions are designed with 
the objective to increase resiliency to modern disturbances 
of fire and insects by restoring forests to a structure that is 
more consistent with the period before fire exclusion. These 
prescriptions use site-specific landscape remnants as reference 
conditions in forested stands (Friederici 2004, 2005) to 
inform the degree of departure from the NRV and a desired 
condition. Using site-specific reference conditions captures 
the landscape variability in forest composition, structure, and 
spatial distribution (e.g., tree density, tree age distribution, 
species composition and distribution) across southwestern 
ponderosa pine. Although more general reference conditions 
can be developed from a collection of site-specific information 
(Reynolds et al. 2013), the individual studies are limited 
to the spatial extent and sample area of that study. Thus, 
there is no “one size fits all” set of reference conditions 
because ecosystems vary in topography, aspect, elevation, soil 
Box 1. Restoration Terminology
Evidence-based restoration – using existing live 
and dead (remnant) forest structure to guide desired 
restoration outcomes.
Fire exclusion – the removal of natural fire from 
ecosystems due to early Euro-American management 
practices; including grazing (removal of fine fuel), road 
and railway construction (fire breaks), and active fire 
suppression.
Natural range of variability (NRV) – Ecological 
conditions that existed when evolutionary processes 
were intact and relatively unaffected by people; includes 
spatial and temporal variation in these conditions 
(Landres et al. 1999). 
Old-growth – defined by spatial scale: patches are 
groups of old trees even or uneven in age, with snags and 
large dead and down material, and high variation among 
patches. Old-growth at forest scales require patches to 
occur in proportions to be reasonably representative of 
the forest type in historic times (Kaufmann et al. 2007).
Pre-settlement – Living and dead trees that established 
prior to Euro-American settlement; used to estimate the 
NRV.
Reference conditions – Historical lines of evidence, 
including ecological and cultural information, that can 
inform a system’s NRV; a NRV is not always available 
for all ecosystem attributes.
Remnant, relict, or evidence – Legacy material of pre-
settlement origin (e.g., living old-growth trees, snags, 
stumps, logs, etc.)
parent material, and other attributes. Reference conditions 
help planners and restoration ecologists determine site 
potential, set restoration goals, and, ultimately, evaluate the 
success of restoration efforts (Moore et al. 1999). Research 
and landscape experiments show that remnant-informed 
restoration prescriptions followed by low-severity fire in 
ponderosa pine are effective at reducing wildfire severity, 
restoring understory biodiversity, restoring key metrics of 
resiliency, and contributing to ecosystem sustainability (Korb 
and Springer 2003, Fulé et al. 2012, Waltz et al. 2014). 
Box 2 captures the basic restoration prescription for 
ponderosa pine with presence of deciduous trees (primarily 
Gambel oak). These restoration prescriptions have been 
implemented at several sites across northern Arizona with a 
replicated block design that often included additional treatments 
(Figure 1). These studies allowed land managers to better 
quantify trade-offs among proposed management options. 

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 41    
Restoration Prescriptions for Southwestern Frequent-Fire Adapted Forests
2
Box 2. Ponderosa pine restoration 
These guidelines were developed for ponderosa pine forests, 
with a component of Gambel oak, in restoration treatment 
areas in the Southwest (reference map, Figure 1).
Objectives:
Restore ponderosa pine forest structure consistent with 
the density, spatial distribution, and variability of trees 
at the time of frequent-fire regime disruption. Overstory 
structural restoration is one component of an integrated 
ecosystem restoration plan, which also includes forest floor 
fuel treatments, prescribed fire treatments, and possibly 
revegetation of the herbaceous understory.
Goals:
1.	
Restore tree density within the range characteristic of 
pre-settlement conditions by conserving all living trees 
established prior to the fire exclusion date and replacing 
dead pre-settlement remnants with large post-settlement 
trees.
2.	
Restore the patchy tree spatial pattern by retaining all 
living pre-settlement trees and locating replacement 
trees in close proximity of dead pre-settlement remnants.
3.	
Maintain a wide range of age classes by retaining all 
living pre-settlement trees and uneven-aged groups of 
post-settlement trees as replacements, thereby conserving 
genetic variability to the greatest extent possible.
Specific Prescription Guidelines:
1.	
Retain all old, yellow ponderosa pine, regardless of size, 
form, or damage. Also retain established after fire exclusion 
that are beginning to exhibit flat, platy, yellow bark.
2.	
Use pre-settlement remnants to determine the location 
of post-settlement replacement trees, leave groups, 
and tree densities. Use a replacement ratio of 1.5 post-
settlement replacement trees for each pre-settlement 
remnant found (1.5:1), to account for unexpected 
mortality in leave trees. 
a.	
Tree groups and clumps will vary in shape, size, and 
number and will be irregular in shape. Historical 
tree density was variable; local stand remnants can 
inform specific densities, see also Stoddard 2011. 
b.	
Post-settlement leave trees should exhibit resilient 
characteristics (i.e., thicker bark, high branches) 
with high probability of surviving first-entry fire. 
Leave trees of all age classes will be considered to 
increase age class diversity. When possible, retain 
trees that are not in the most prevalent age classes, 
such as seedlings and saplings, if they exhibit 
resilient characteristics.
3.	
Areas without snag or stump remnants of pre-settlement 
origin will be used to re-establish historical openings. 
All post-settlement trees generally will be removed from 
these areas. 
4.	
Large snags (diameter cut-off dependent on site 
availability) will be retained.
5.	
Retain all deciduous trees, including Gambel oak, 
aspen, locust, and woodland conifers, including pinyon 
and juniper, regardless of size or pre-settlement origin 
(prescribed fire will thin these species, which are less 
fire-tolerant).
Figure 1. Map of replicated restoration sites 
across the Colorado Plateau.

Restoration Prescriptions for Southwestern Frequent-Fire Adapted Forests
3
Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 41 
Dry Mixed-Conifer Frequent-Fire Forests
Forest and fire reconstructions in the dry mixed-conifer forests 
show higher variability in forest structure, species composition, and 
fire history (as summarized in Margolis et al. 2013 and citations 
therein) compared to ponderosa pine ecosystems. However, 
similar to ponderosa pine forests, historical ecology studies of dry 
mixed-conifer forests document distinct process changes following 
Euro-American settlement in the 1870s, which contributed to fire 
exclusion in these ecosystems. Contemporary species composition 
has changed and tree densities are significantly higher from forests 
with intact disturbance regimes (Heinlein 2005, Strahan et al. 
2016, Fulé et al. 2009, Huffman et al. 2015, O’Connor et al. 2014, 
Rodman et al. 2016). Reconstructions show a shift in tree species 
dominance from frequent-fire-adapted species, such as ponderosa 
pine and Douglas-fir, to species less tolerant of frequent fire and 
more adapted to stand replacing, infrequent fire such as white fir, 
white pine and spruce.
There are established dry mixed-conifer demonstration 
sites in the Pinaleños Mountains, Coronado National Forest 
and restoration experiments in Grand Canyon National Park, 
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest, Coconino National Forest 
(all in Arizona) and the San Juan National Forest, (Colorado) 
to test the potential treatments and responses to restoration. 
These site-specific prescriptions were modeled after ponderosa 
pine restoration prescriptions with additions for the intrinsic 
variability in species composition observed in dry mixed-conifer 
forests (see Box 3). Specific to the dry mixed-conifer forests, low 
numbers of post-settlement ponderosa pine replacement trees 
were found at some restoration sites due to the shift in species 
composition to white fir, white pine and in some cases, spruce. 
The restoration prescription in these cases specifies a hierarchy of 
acceptable species replacements, based on fire-adaptation traits 
(Box 3). Other key differences include using a smaller search 
radius to better reconstruct the species composition variability in 
these stands (Rodman et al. 2016, Korb et al. 2013). Dry mixed-
conifer forests in general support higher tree density than pure 
ponderosa pine forests; this made it easier to find appropriate 
replacements and meet spatial heterogeneity goals. However, 
on rare occasions when suitable trees (or species) are not found 
within 30 feet, the search radius was extended to 60 feet.   
Box 3. Dry mixed-conifer restoration 
These guidelines were developed for dry mixed-conifer 
forests that evolved with frequent fire, in restoration 
treatment areas in the Southwest (reference map, Figure 1).
Objectives: Regain ecosystem resiliency and healthy 
ecological conditions that more closely resemble those that 
prevailed under a natural frequent-fire disturbance regime. 
Remnant tree structures (e.g., live old trees, large snags, logs, 
and old stumps) that were present before the disruption of 
frequent fire (i.e., “pre-settlement”) will form the foundation 
and guide the restoration prescription.  
Goals: 
1.	
Restore tree density within the range characteristic of 
pre-settlement conditions by conserving all living trees 
established prior to fire exclusion and replacing dead 
pre-settlement remnants with an appropriate number of 
live post-settlement trees.
2.	
Restore species composition that reflects the pre-
settlement forest.
3.	
Restore historic spatial patterns by locating post-
settlement replacement trees near pre-settlement 
remnants.
4.	
Restore characteristic natural disturbances including 
frequent surface fire. 
Specific Prescription Guidelines:
1.	
Retain all living pre-settlement trees, as well as species-
appropriate replacement trees as described below. All 
snags will be marked for retention.
2.	
Use pre-settlement remnants to guide replacement 
tree selection with regard to total density, species 
composition and spatial patterns. Use a replacement 
ratio of 1.5 post-settlement replacement trees for each 
pre-settlement remnant found (1:1.5), to account for 
expected mortality in leave trees. 
• 
Retain post-settlement “replacement” trees for 
all dead pre-settlement remnants including large 
stumps and snags, dead and downed logs, and 
stump holes. 
• 
Replace all pre-settlement remnants with same 
species at a 1:1.5 ratio within 30-foot search radius. 
If none, go to 60-foot search radius.
• 
Post-settlement replacement trees should exhibit 
resilient characteristics (i.e., thicker bark, high 
branches) with high probability of surviving first-
entry fire. Leave trees of all age classes will be 
considered to increase age class diversity. When 
possible, leave trees that are not in the most 
prevalent age classes, such as seedlings and saplings, 
if they exhibit resilient characteristics.
3.	
Retain all live deciduous trees (e.g., oak, maple, aspen, 
and locust).
Modification(s): when desired replacement species is not 
present:
• 
Step 1. Locate suitable replacement tree (within 
30-foot radius) of different species based on 
hierarchical tree replacement scheme: ponderosa 
pine/Douglas-fir/southwestern white pine/white fir. 
If no replacement found, go to step 2. 
• 
Step 2. Carry over replacement(s) to next remnant 
of same species. At new location, replacements must 
be within 30 feet of remnant. If there are not enough 
replacement trees within 30 feet at new location, 
expand search to 60-foot radius. Return to marking 
guidelines when carryover numbers are fulfilled. 
• 
Upon completion of marking a treatment unit, cease 
carrying over replacement trees and begin marking 
the next unit.

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 41    
Restoration Prescriptions for Southwestern Frequent-Fire Adapted Forests
4
Evidence-based marking in dry mixed-conifer forests 
can be more challenging than in ponderosa pine forests. 
The more rapid decomposition of white fir and Douglas-fir 
may make it difficult to find intact pre-settlement remnant 
material to base appropriate replacement tree density and 
location (Fulé et al. 2009, Cocke et al. 2005, Margolis et al. 
2013, P. Fulé personal communication). Species identification 
of pre-settlement material was also more difficult; bark 
morphology was similar among many fir species (but see Fulé 
et al. 2003 for error estimates). Field and lab crews sampling 
live trees for dendrochronology and categorizing dead forest 
material identified key internal bark characteristics that 
differentiated Douglas fir stumps from white fir (Stoddard, 
personal communication). This increased confidence in the 
evidence-based restoration prescription for dry mixed conifer. 
Additionally, with these methods, estimates of reconstruction 
errors in higher elevation forests by Fulé et al. (2003) quantified 
low amounts of error; on average, reconstructed forest 
density data by species was within 5–9 percent of a historical 
1910 survey.  In more recent dry mixed-conifer restoration 
demonstrations, species-specific diameter limits have been used 
to account for the higher potential for missed pre-settlement 
evidence. Diameter-age relationships are highly variable across 
and even within sites, but can be established at specific sites 
by coring and dating a subsample of trees between 15 inches 
and 20 inches diameter at breast height (DBH). In particular, 
coring and estimating tree age can be used with multiple 
stakeholders that are vested in retaining older, larger trees. 
Required Components for Restoration 
Prescriptions in Frequent-Fire-Adapted 
Ecosystems
Restoration prescriptions require the consideration of key 
ecosystem components. These components are needed to 
achieve the desired conditions of resiliency and sustainability. 
While many existing silivicultural techniques are used to meet 
restoration goals, one can achieve desired ecological outcomes 
by incorporating the following components into traditional 
silviculture practices.
Pre-Settlement and Old-Growth Trees
A required element for successful ponderosa pine and dry 
mixed-conifer restoration is to retain any remaining old-growth 
trees in restoration prescriptions. In southwestern forests, a 
large component of pre-settlement trees were removed from 
logging practices initiated in the 1870s. These large, old trees 
were logged through the 1900s and into the 1980s. Most of the 
merchantable wood removed came from saw logs greater than 20 
inches DBH, and was met by logging the large, 120–500+-year-
old trees: “[Trees aged] from 150–200 years, depending upon 
the site and the size desired, are required to produce saw timber” 
(Pearson and Marsh 1935). There are few remnant stands in 
the Southwest that were not logged; these are often isolated 
plateaus, now under National Park Service management (Powell 
and Rainbow Plateaus, Grand Canyon National Park), in Forest 
Service experimental forests (e.g., Fort Valley and Long Valley 
experimental forests), or found on steep, inaccessible terrain. It is 
estimated that that 85–95 percent of the old-growth component 
was removed in the Southwest (NCSSF 2008). These older 
trees are now rare on the landscape, which increases their impact 
and importance to the ecosystem. Large, old trees are highly 
valued by wildlife as nesting and foraging habitat for mammals, 
passerine, and raptor birds; and their dead wood (snags, logs) 
provide shelter and foraging for ground-based mammals and 
arthropods (Kaufmann et al. 2007, NCSSF 2008). Old-growth 
trees are the most resistant to low-intensity fire, having the 
thickest bark and highest first branch stems. Additionally, 
the genetic diversity captured in a tree population with age 
distributions from 150 to 400 years is far higher than in the 
contemporary forest (Dewald and Kolanoski 2017, Kolanoski 
2002), which is dominated in the Southwest by trees establishing 
in a wet period around 1920 (Mast et al. 1999).
Old-growth trees, pre-settlement trees, and large trees 
have variable definitions dependent on the source and audience 
(see Box 1, Kaufmann et al. 2007). Because of these semantic 
issues, restoration prescriptions use pre-settlement cutoffs to 
capture the older trees, defined as trees that established while 
disturbance processes were intact (prior to fire exclusion, 
usually between 1865 and 1885 in the Southwest). This retains 
trees that established with the natural selection more similar 
to the evolutionary environment of these systems (Fulé et al. 
1997, DeWald and Kolanoski 2017, Kaufmann et al. 2007).
Fire
The reintroduction of fire is a required component in 
frequent-fire forest restoration projects. Societal and multiple 
resource values may prevent fire from playing the frequent 
role it did prior to the fire exclusion period following 
Euro-American settlement. However, there is no surrogate 
for fire’s impact on limiting overstory regeneration and 
increasing understory species diversity and decomposition 
rates. The reintroduction of fire after decades of exclusion 
can have highly variable results. Some high-value ecosystem 
components can be vulnerable to fire reintroduction, such as 
old-growth and deciduous trees (Sackett 1980). Mechanical 
thinning—and on some soil types, surface fuel treatments 
(e.g., raking of duff around trees)—aid in the conservation of 
these highly valued ecosystem components (Covington et al. 
1997, Fulé et al. 2007) during initial fire re-entry. The smaller 
restoration experiments were challenging to burn, and in the 
late 1990s existed as small islands in a matrix of dense, high 
fire risk stands. In both ponderosa pine and dry mixed-conifer 
restoration experiments, treatment units were constructed in 
ways to facilitate prescribed fire, using roads and topography 
as boundaries to aid in fire control efforts (ERI Middle 
Mountain EB Field Notebook). In recent decades, public land 
management has taken opportunities to burn larger areas, due 
both to landscape wildfire and forest thinning treatments that 
break up high fuel loads. 
Returning fire as frequently as the historical range (every 
5–10 years) is challenging on public lands due to societal 
needs and resource limitations. However, restoration thinning, 
without frequent fire, may increase fuels and subsequent 
regeneration, increasing overall fire hazard. More effectiveness 
studies in dry mixed conifer with shrub understories are needed 
to better understand impacts of restored forests on other values, 
like community protection from wildfire.

Restoration Prescriptions for Southwestern Frequent-Fire Adapted Forests
5
Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 41 
Grass, Forb, and Shrub Understory
The herbaceous and shrub understory community in frequent-
fire forests comprises the highest plant biodiversity in fire-
adapted systems (Korb and Springer 2003). Understory 
response to restoration are also variable with multiple factors 
contributing to grass and forb re-establishment. While 
thinning and burning restoration treatments can successfully 
restore understory grass, forb, and shrub communities 
(Stoddard et al. 2008, 2011, McGlone et al. 2009, Moore et al. 
2004), understory community recovery is also highly dependent 
on the initial understory community, seed bank, post-thinning 
fuel load, and subsequent fire severity (Korb et al. 2004). 
Additionally, understory responses are largely influenced by 
climate (Moore et al. 2004), with drought potentially increasing 
invasive species success at the expense of native plants 
(McGlone et al. 2009). Long-term studies, however, show 
that understory responses are resilient at the decadal scale; 
even initial increases of mullein and toadflax were overcome by 
native grasses over a 10-year span (Stoddard et al. 2011). 
In the case of highly degraded contemporary conditions, 
including high occurrence of invasive understory species like 
cheat grass, additional understory treatments may be necessary. 
These can include seeding, or invasive removal techniques. If 
restoration areas are in active grazing allotments, rest periods of 
2–3 years may be necessary, and drought can lengthen this time.
Restoration on Public Lands: Meeting 
Multiple Resource Management Goals 
Public land management agencies are mandated to manage for 
multiple resources values to sustain the health, diversity, and 
productivity of a landscape for present and future generations 
(e.g., USFS Mission, www.fs.fed.us\about-us). To accomplish 
this, federal agencies in both the Department of Interior and 
Department of Agriculture are tasked to use the best available 
science and adaptive management to better understand the 
threats to sustainability and resiliency, the effects of past 
management actions, and to determine future management 
direction. These mandates are then captured in directives 
scaled down for management. For example, Forest Service 
Handbook updates include the directive, “The Forest Service 
will emphasize ecosystem restoration across the National Forest 
System and within its multiple use mandate” (USDA 2015a). 
How to best incorporate restoration into forest and project 
planning will vary as multiple goals being met. But minimally, 
the NRV can serve as a baseline to better qualify/quantify the 
trade-offs of any departure from resilient, restored systems. 
Restoration prescriptions using landscape remnants, or 
evidence-based prescriptions, serve as the baseline for multiple 
management prescriptions, which are then modified to meet 
multiple resource goals. The body of science on treatment 
effects developed from restoration experiments has greatly 
informed the land management multiple-resource mission. 
Land managers can incorporate not just the known fire 
behavior reductions from tree thinning (Fulé et al. 2001), but 
also restoration impacts on drought tolerance (Kerhoulas et 
al. 2013), insect resistance (Kolb et al. 1998), small mammal 
response (Chambers et al. 2002, Germaine and Di Orio. 2001), 
reptile response (Knox et al 2001), insect response (Waltz et al. 
2004, Meyer et al. 2001), soil respiration and decomposition 
(Hart et al. 2006, Kaye and Hart 1998, Kaye et al. 1999, 
2005), soil microbiota (Korb et al. 2003, 2004), and understory 
response (Friederici 2002, Korb and Springer 2003, McGlone 
et al 2009, Stoddard et al. 2011a, Strahan et al 2015). The 
economics of restoration include carbon storage (Hurteau et 
al. 2011, Swetnam 2015), avoided costs (Combrink et al. 2013, 
Fitch et al 2018), and potential benefit to appropriately sized 
industry (Hurteau et al. 2015). Restoration practices serve as a 
baseline for meeting many of the multiple directives for public 
land managers.
Federal management policy and guidelines, such as the 
Healthy Forest Restoration Act (2003) and the Collaborative 
Forest Landscape Restoration Program (2009) direct 
management agencies to use restoration science to inform and 
direct management actions. However, there remain federal 
management guidelines that may conflict with restoration 
and lower the effectiveness of treatment outcomes. The 
National Forest Management Act (1976) has influenced 
the Forest Service Planning Rules and subsequently forest 
planning efforts. It specifically directs the Forest Service to 
The objective of ecological restoration treatments is to restore forest structure consistent with the density, spatial distribution, and variability of trees at the 
time of frequent-fire regime disruption. The restoration treatment in this photo series from the Fort Valley area on the Coconino National Forest in Arizona 
shows the dense forest conditions pre-treatment (left, from 1998) and restored conditions post-thinning (right, from 2011). Photo courtesy of ERI

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 41    
Restoration Prescriptions for Southwestern Frequent-Fire Adapted Forests
6
and prescribed or managed fire, is difficult for land managers that 
have seen significant workforce transitions over the last 25 years. 
The Forest Service has changed from a workforce dominated by 
forestry and natural resource skills, to a workforce that is more 
than 50 percent firefighters, combined with a 10–20 percent 
reduction in staff, since 1990 (USDA 2008, 2015b). However, 
even as large projects over 100,000 acres are planned, operational 
staff are required to visit the acres for mechanical treatment 
preparation. As prescriptions are developed to mimic the spatial 
heterogeneity of historic forests, pre-settlement evidence on 
the ground is useful for training forest staff and informing the 
scale of tree patches, openings, and tree density at a project 
or operational unit scale. Ongoing and future work is to test 
how restoration goals are effectively included in prescription 
efficiencies for larger-scale projects. For example, there is 
increasing interest to enhance efficiencies by eliminating tree 
paint and marking crew costs by passing on tree cutting decisions 
to the loggers through the use of a written prescription. Research 
and monitoring are underway to test the communication of 
restoration outcomes and the tradeoffs of efficiency among 
project preparation and implementation.
Metrics of Landscape Restoration Success
Scientists lack landscape-scale reference conditions that would 
provide metrics to assess restoration success at landscape scales 
(but see Reynolds et al. 2013 and citations therein for available 
literature). Reference conditions are readily available for stand-
scale projects, but are limited for spatial heterogeneity metrics 
captured at multiple scales with remote sensing tools. For 
example, while average historic tree patch size and density are 
available (Reynolds et al. 2013), spatial distributions of tree 
patches and opening size and shapes are not clearly defined. 
Patch descriptions for both trees and openings could inform 
implementation monitoring, with readily available remote 
sensing data, and provide adaptive management needs. Work is 
ongoing to use the limited landscape reference sites, combined 
with established restoration sites, to develop a range of spatial 
attributes that can inform landscape restoration success.
Climate Change
Southwestern ponderosa pine and dry-mixed conifer forests 
are threatened by the predicted increases in drought, warmer 
winters, declining snow packs and fires. The contemporary 
dense conditions compound this threat. While future climate 
scenarios may include shifts in potential vegetation ranges, 
restoration goals for these fire-adapted forests are viable 
strategies to increase forest resiliency to climate change, slow 
the turnover to novel systems, and protect our legacy old-
growth forests (Waltz et al. 2014).
Conclusion
Frequent-fire forests in the western United States are highly 
departed from their natural range of variation in terms of tree 
density, fuel loading, and biodiversity. Currently, these forests 
have high susceptibility to uncharacteristically severe fire, 
which is exacerbated with expected changes to temperature 
and precipitation due to climate change. Restoring these 
forests to their natural range of variability increases ecosystem 
manage forests for future sustainability through specific tree 
regeneration, re-planting, and pest management guidelines. 
Although guidelines are appropriate where single-species 
management or wood production goals are the priority, they 
can conflict in frequent-fire forests with the restoration, 
sustainability and resiliency goals for these ecosystems. 
Fortunately in the Southwest, the primary pests and pathogens 
are native to ecosystem, and restoration goals that return forest 
structure within the NRV should accommodate endemic 
population levels of these species while still increasing overall 
resilience to outbreaks (Wasserman and Waltz 2018, Conklin 
and Fairweather 2010).  
Ponderosa pine restoration outcomes can be met within a 
silvicultural, operational design that incorporates tree density, 
tree group size, and maximum opening size (Tuten et al. 
2015), without a stand-by-stand, project-by-project use of 
evidence-based methodology. However, where easily available, 
forest managers have used remnants to place tree groups in 
areas more similar to past locations. When evidence-based 
methods are not or cannot be used, there are additional ways 
to categorize and generalize the variability of the natural range 
by understanding soil types and overall stand productivity 
(Abella and Covington 2006, Abella and Denton 2009). For 
example, the NRV for ponderosa pine tree density on basalt 
soils averaged between 15–43 trees per acre, while the NRV 
for mixed-conifer forests on basalt soils had an average range 
between 21–65 trees per acre (Stoddard 2011). These methods 
can be more applicable in regions of the West where logging 
practices did not leave historic remnants intact, or subsequent 
fires consumed pre-settlement evidence. 
In mixed-conifer stands, evidence-based restoration 
techniques may be even more important to capture the historic 
species composition variability evident across the West. Mixed-
conifer stand structure can vary within and across stand scales. 
For example, the dominant species in mixed-conifer at stand 
scales may be ponderosa pine, Douglas fir, or aspen. Additionally, 
some mixed-conifer species have a higher potential for rapid 
deterioration of pre-settlement remnants (e.g., aspen), and there 
may be a need to also use additional lines of evidences to inform 
the NRV. In general, south and west aspects support the highest 
historic fire frequency, with stands dominated by fire-tolerant 
species. Adjacent north- or east-facing stands may support 
higher density with less frequent fire, even across small spatial 
scales (Margolis et al. 2013, and references therein). Where there 
is a lack of evidence, future stand conditions can be informed by 
topographic and abiotic conditions (Abella and Covington 2006, 
Cocke et al. 2015). 
Ongoing Management and  
Research Questions
Landscape-Scale Restoration
Since 2002 and the observation of fires more than 100,000 
acres (mega fires), there is increasing direction to meet forest 
restoration and fire risk reduction goals at scales comparable to 
these natural events (CFLRP). The restoration prescriptions 
using pre-settlement remnants on the ground are questioned 
for the applicability at landscape scales. Ramping up the 
restoration of forests to landscape scale, both with mechanical 

Restoration Prescriptions for Southwestern Frequent-Fire Adapted Forests
7
Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 41 
resilience to wildfire and drought (Stephens et al. 2013) and 
can mitigate climate change impacts including ecosystem type 
transitions. Using the field tested treatments outlined in this 
paper will help land managers restore function and resiliency to 
fire-adapted ecosystems and reduce risk of severe uncharacteristic 
wildfire. How to best incorporate the restoration into forest 
and project planning will vary as multiple goals are met, but 
minimally, the NRV can serve as a baseline to better qualify and 
quantify the trade-offs of any departure from resilient, restored 
systems. The NRV and needed restoration treatments in the 
Southwest are best informed by the pre-settlement remnants 
that depict structure and composition when natural processes 
were intact. Use of remnants best captures the variability 
across the Southwest due to soil type, aspect, and microclimate 
differences that influence tree density. Restoration treatments in 
the Southwest are currently being expanded into landscape scale 
efficiencies, and ongoing work continues to operationalize these 
restoration prescriptions.
Acknowledgements
The restoration prescriptions discussed in this working paper 
have been developed since the early 1990s, and are based on 
the exhaustive work of W. Wallace Covington and several 
ERI leaders and staff, with input from federal and state land 
managers. Including the authors, prescription development 
is further attributed to Peter Z. Fulé, H.B. “Doc” Smith, 
Margaret M. Moore, Thomas A. Heinlein, Matthew C. Tuten, 
Mark R. Sensibaugh. 

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 41    
Restoration Prescriptions for Southwestern Frequent-Fire Adapted Forests
8
References
Abella, S.R., and W.W. Covington. 2006. Vegetation–
environment relationships and ecological species 
groups. Plant Ecology, 185: 255–268.
Abella, S.R., C.W. Denton, D.G. Brewer, W.A. Robbie, 
R.W. Steinke, and W.W. Covington. 2009. Using 
a terrestrial ecosystem survey to estimate historical 
density of ponderosa pine trees. Res. Note. RMRS-
RN-45. Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Research Station. 9 pp. 
Chambers, C. L., V. Alm, M.S. Siders, and M.J. Rabe. 2002. 
Use of artificial roosts by forest-dwelling bats in 
northern Arizona. Wildlife Society Bulletin, 30(4): 
1085–1091.
Cocke, A.E., P.Z. Fulé, and J.E. Crouse. 2015. Forest change 
on a steep mountain gradient after extended fire 
exclusion: San Francisco Peaks, Arizona, USA. 
Journal of Applied Ecology, 42: 814–823.
Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program. 
2009. Public Law 111-11. Omnibus Public Land 
Management Act. 111th Congress. 123 Stat. 991 
(2009).
Combrink, T., C. Cothran, W. Fox, J. Peterson, and G. Snider. 
2013. A Full Cost Accounting of the 2010 Schultz 
Fire. ERI White Paper: Issues in Restoration. 
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona 
University. 48 pp.
Conklin, D.A., and M.L. Fairweather. 2010. Dwarf mistletoe 
and their management in the Southwest. USDA 
Forest Service, Southwestern Region, Forestry and 
Forest Health Report R3-10-01. 
Covington, W.W., and M.M. Moore. 1994. Southwestern 
ponderosa forest structure: changes since Euro-
American settlement. Journal of Forestry, 92(1): 39–47.
Covington, W.W., P.Z. Fulé, M.M. Moore, S.C. Hart, T.E. 
Kolb, J.N. Mast, S.S. Sackett, and M.R. Wagner. 
1997. Restoring ecosystem health in ponderosa pine 
forests of the Southwest. Journal of Forestry, 95(4): 
23–29.
DeWald, L.E. and K.M. Kolanoski. 2017. Conserving 
genetic diversity in ecological restoration: a case 
study with ponderosa pine in northern Arizona, 
USA. New Forests, 48: 337. 
Fitch, R.A., Y.S. Kim, A.E.M. Waltz, and J.E. Crouse. 2018. 
Changes in potential wildland fire suppression costs 
due to restoration treatments in northern Arizona 
ponderosa pine forests. Forest Policy and Economics, 87: 
101–114.
Friederici, P.G. 2002. Understory Plant Restoration in the 
Unikaret Mountains, Arizona. ERI Working Paper 
No. 2. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern 
Arizona University.
Friederici, P.G. 2004. Establishing Reference Conditions for 
Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests. ERI   Working 
Paper No. 7. Ecological Restoration Institute, 
Northern Arizona University.
Friederici, P.G. 2005. Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to 
Presettlement Conditions. ERI Working Paper No. 9. 
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona 
University.
Fulé, P.Z., W.W. Covington, and M.M. Moore. 1997. 
Determining Reference Conditions for Ecosystem 
Management of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine 
Forests. Ecological Applications, 7(3): 895–908.
Fulé, P.Z., A.E.M. Waltz, W.W. Covington, and T.A. 
Heinlein. 2001. Measuring forest restoration 
effectiveness in reducing hazardous fuels. Journal of 
Forestry, 99(11): 24–29.
Fulé, P.Z., T.A. Heinlein, M.M. Moore, W.W. Covington, 
and G. Verkamp. 2003. Mixed-severity fire regime in 
a high-elevation forest of Grand Canyon, Arizona, 
USA. Landscape Ecology, 18: 465–486.
Fulé, P.Z., J.P. Roccaforte, and W.W. Covington. 2007. 
Post-treatment tree mortality after forest ecological 
restoration, Arizona, United States. Environmental 
Management, 40(4), 623–634.
Fulé, P.Z., J.E. Korb, and R. Wu. 2009. Changes in forest 
structure of a mixed-conifer forest, southwestern 
Colorado, USA. Forest Ecology and Management, 258: 
1200–1210.
Fulé, P.Z., J.E. Crouse, J.P. Roccaforte, and E.L. Kalies. 2012. 
Do thinning and/or burning treatments in western 
USA ponderosa or Jeffrey pine-dominated forests 
help restore natural fire behavior? Forest Ecology and 
Management, 269: 68–81.
Germaine, S.S., and A. DiOrio. 2001. Short-term wildlife 
responses to ponderosa pine forest restoration 
treatments in the Mt. Trumbull area, Arizona. Annual 
Progress Report to Bureau of Land Management, 
Arizona Field Office. October 2000–September 2001. 
Arizona Game and Fish Department, Flagstaff, AZ.
Hart, S.C., P.C. Selmants, S.I. Boyle, and S.T. Overby. 2006. 
Carbon and nitrogen cycling in southwestern 
ponderosa pine forest. Forest Science, 52(6): 683–693.
Healthy Forest Restoration Act. 2003. Public Law 108-148. 
108th Congress. 117 Stat. 1887 (2003).
Heinlein, T.A., M.M. Moore, P.Z. Fulé, and W.W. Covington. 
2005. Fire history and stand structure of two 
ponderosa pine–mixed conifer sites: San Francisco 
Peaks, Arizona, USA. International Journal of 
Wildland Fire, 14: 307–320.
Huffman, D.W., T.J. Zegler, and P.Z. Fulé. 2015. Fire history 
of a mixed-conifer forest on the Mogollon Rim, 
northern Arizona, USA. International Journal of 
Wildland Fire. http://dx.doi.org/10.1071/WF14005. 
Hurteau, M.D., M.T. Stoddard and P.Z. Fulé. 2011. The 
carbon costs of mitigating high-severity wildfire in 
southwestern ponderosa pine. Global Change Biology, 
17: 1516–1521. 

Restoration Prescriptions for Southwestern Frequent-Fire Adapted Forests
9
Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 41 
Hurteau, S. 2015. White Mountains Stewardship Project: 
Evaluating the Impacts of the Nation’s First Long-
term Stewardship Contract. Integrated Biological 
Solutions, LLC: Albuquerque, NM.
Kaufmann, M.R., D. Binkley, P.Z. Fulé, M. Johnson, S.L. 
Stephens, and T.W. Swetnam. 2007. Defining old 
growth for fire-adapted forests of the western United 
States. Ecology and Society, 12(2): 15. 
Kaye, J.P., and S.C. Hart. 1998. Ecological restoration alters 
nitrogen transformations in a ponderosa pine-
bunchgrass ecosystem. Ecological Applications, 8: 
1052–1060.
Kaye, J.P., S.C. Hart, R.C. Cobb, and J.E. Stone. 1999. 
Water and nutrient outflow following the ecological 
restoration of a ponderosa pine-bunchgrass ecosystem. 
Restoration Ecology, 7: 252–261.
Kerhoulas, L.P., T.E. Kolb, M.D. Huteau, and G.W. Koch. 
2013. Managing climate change adaptation in forests: 
a case study from the US Southwest. Journal of 
Applied Ecology, 50(6): 1311–1320.
Knox, S.C., C. Chambers, and S.S. Germain. 2001. Habitat 
associations of the sagebrush lizard (Sceloporus 
graciosus): potential responses of an ectotherm to 
ponderosa pine forest restoration treatments. USDA 
Forest Service Proceedings, RMRS-P-22.
Kolanoski, K.M. 2002. Genetic variation of ponderosa pine in 
northern Arizona: Implications for restoration. M.S. 
thesis, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff.
Kolb, T.E., K.M. Holmberg, M.R. Wagner, J.E. Stone. 1998. 
Regulation of ponderosa pine foliar physiology and 
insect resistance mechanisms by basal area treatments. 
Tree Physiology, 18(6): 375–381.  
Korb, J.E., P.Z. Fulé and R. Wu. 2013. Variability of warm/dry 
mixed-conifer forest in southwestern Colorado, USA: 
implications for ecological restoration. Forest Ecology 
and Management, 304: 182–191.
Korb, J.E., N.C. Johnson, and W.W. Covington. 2004. Slash 
pile burning effects on soil biotic and chemical 
properties and plant establishment recommendations 
for amelioration. Restoration Ecology, 12(1): 52–62.
Korb, J.E., and J.D. Springer. 2003. Understory Vegetation. 
Chapter 14, Saving Nature’s Legacy: Restoring 
and Protecting Biological Diversity. Island Press: 
Washington DC, USA.
Landres, P.B., P. Morgan, and F.J. Swanson. 1999. Overview of 
the use of Natural Variability Concepts in Managing 
Ecological Systems. Ecological Applications, 9(4): 1179. 
Margolis, E.Q., D.W. Huffman, and J.M. Iñiguez. 2013. 
Southwestern Mixed-Conifer Forests: Evaluating 
Reference Conditions to Guide Ecological 
Restoration Treatments. ERI Working Paper No. 28. 
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona 
University.
Mast, J.N., P.Z. Fulé, M.M. Moore, W.W. Covington, and 
A.E.M. Waltz. 1999. Restoration of presettlement 
age structure in an Arizona ponderosa pine forests. 
Ecological Applications, 9(1): 228–239.
McGlone, C.M., J.D. Springer, and D.C. Laughlin. 2009. 
Can pine forest restoration promote a diverse and 
abundant understory and simultaneously resist non-
native invasion? Forest Ecology and Management, 258: 
2638–2646.
Meyer, C.L., T.D. Sisk, and W.W. Covington. 2001. 
Microclimatic changes induced by ecological 
restoration of ponderosa pine forests in northern 
Arizona. Restoration Ecology, 9(4): 443–452. 
Moore, M.M., C.A. Casey, J.D. Bakker, J.D. Springer, P.Z. 
Fulé, W.W. Covington, and D.C. Laughlin. 2006. 
Herbaceous vegetation responses (1992–2004) to 
restoration treatments in a ponderosa pine forest. 
Rangeland Ecology and Management, 59: 135–144.
Moore, M.M., W.W. Covington, and P.Z. Fulé. 1999. 
Reference conditions and ecological restoration: a 
southwestern ponderosa pine perspective. Ecological 
Applications, 9: 1266–1277. 
National Commission on Science for Sustainable Forestry 
(NCSSF). 2008. Beyond old growth. Older forests 
in a changing world: A synthesis of findings from 
five regional workshops. Washington, D.C.: National 
Council for Science and the Environment.
National Forest Management Act. 1976. Public Law 94-588. 
88 Stat. 476 (1976).
O’Connor, C.D., D.A. Falk, A.M. Lynch, and T.W. Swetnam. 
2014. Fire severity, size, and climate associations 
diverge from historical precedent along an ecological 
gradient in the Pinaleño Mountains, Arizona, 
USA. Forest Ecology and Management, 329: 264-278. 
Pearson, G.A., and R.E. Marsh. 1935. Timber growing and 
logging practice in the Southwest and in the Black 
Hills Region. US Department of Agriculture, 
Technical Bulletin 480, 79 p.
Reynolds, R.T., A.J. Sánchez Meador, J. Youtz, T. Nicolet, M. 
Matonis, P. Jackson, D.G. DeLorenzo, and A.D. 
Graves. 2013. Restoring composition and structure in 
Southwestern frequent-fire forests: A science-based 
framework for improving ecosystem resiliency. Gen. 
Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-310. Fort Collins, CO: 
USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research 
Station. 76 p.
Rodman, K.C., A.J. Sanchez Meador, D.W. Huffman, and 
K.M. Waring. 2016. Reference conditions and 
historical fine-scale spatial dynamics in a dry mixed-
conifer forest, Arizona, USA. Forest Science, 62(3): 
262–280.
Sackett, S.S. 1980. Reducing natural ponderosa pine fuels using 
prescribed fire: Two case studies. Research Note RM-
392. Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service.
Stephens, S.L., J.K. Agee, P.Z. Fulé, M.P. North, W.H. 
Romme, T.W. Swetnam, and M.G. Turner. 2013. 
Managing forests and fire in changing climates. 
Science, 342: 41–42

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 41    
Restoration Prescriptions for Southwestern Frequent-Fire Adapted Forests
10
Stoddard, M.T., C.M. McGlone, P.Z. Fulé. 2008. Effects 
of ecological restoration alternative treatments on 
non-native plants species establishment. Pages 
353–362 in S.D. Olberding and M.M. Moore, 
tech cords. Proceedings: Fort Valley Experimental 
Forest–A Century of Research 1908–2008. USDA 
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, 
Proceeding RMRS-P-53CD, Flagstaff, AZ.  
Stoddard, M.T., C.M. McGlone, P.Z. Fulé, D.C. Laughlin, 
M.L. Daniels. 2011a. Native plants dominate 
understory vegetation following ponderosa pine forest 
restoration treatments. Western Northern American 
Naturalist, 71: 206–214.
Stoddard, M.T. 2011b. Historical forest structural 
characteristics review. ERI Fact Sheet. Ecological 
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University.
Strahan, R.T., M.T. Stoddard, J.D. Springer, and D.W. 
Huffman. 2015. Increasing weight of evidence 
that thinning and burning treatments help restore 
understory plan communities in ponderosa pine 
forests. Forest Ecology and Management, 353: 208–220.
Strahan, R.T., A.J. Sánchez Meador, D.W. Huffman, and D.C. 
Laughlin. 2016. Shifts in community-level traits and 
functional diversity in a mixed-conifer forest: a legacy 
of land-use change. Journal of Applied Ecology, 53: 
1755–1765.
Swetnam, T.W. 1990. Fire History and Climate in the 
Southwest. Pages 6–12 in Effects of Fire in 
Southwestern Natural Resources. J.S. Krammes, 
Technical Editor. RM-191. Ft. Collins, CO.
Swetnam, T.L., and D.A. Falk. 2015. Carbon Cycling in 
Southwestern Forests: Reservoirs, Fluxes, and the 
Effects of Fire and Management. ERI Working 
Paper No. 35. Ecological Restoration Institute and 
Southwest Fire Science Consortium, Northern 
Arizona University. 15 p.
Tuten, M.C., A.J. Sánchez Meador, and P.Z. Fulé. 2015. 
Ecological restoration and fine-scale forest structure 
regulation in southwestern ponderosa pine forests. 
Forest Ecology and Management, 348: 57–67.
USDA Forest Service. 2008. The U.S. Forest Service – An 
Overview. https://www.fs.fed.us/sites/default/files/
legacy_files/media/types/publication/field_pdf/USFS-
overview-0106MJS.pdf. Accessed April 2, 2019.
USDA Forest Service. 2015a. Forest Service Handbook. 
USDA Forest Service.
USDA Forest Service. 2015b. The Rising Cost of Fire 
operations: Effects on the Forest Service’s Non-Fire 
Work. https://www.fs.fed.us/sites/default/files/2015-
Fire-Budget-Report.pdf. Accessed April 30, 2019.
Waltz, A.E.M., and W.W. Covington. 2004. Ecological 
restoration treatments increase butterfly richness and 
abundance: Mechanisms of response. Restoration 
Ecology, 12(1): 85–96.
Waltz, A.E.M., M.T. Stoddard, E.L. Kalies, J.D. Springer, 
D.W. Huffman, and A.J. Sánchez Meador. 2014. 
Effectiveness of fuel reduction treatments: assessing 
metrics of forest resiliency and wildfire severity after 
the Wallow Fire, AZ. Forest Ecology and Management, 
334: 43–52.
Wasserman, T.N., and A.E.M. Waltz. 2018. Restoration 
as a Mechanism to Manage Southwestern Dwarf 
Mistletoe in Ponderosa Pine Forests. ERI Working 
Paper No. 39. Ecological Restoration Institute, 
Northern Arizona University. 11 pp.


Restoration Prescriptions for Southwestern Frequent-Fire Adapted Forests
12
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution.
This report was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.
For more information about forest restoration, contact the ERI at (928) 523-7182 or nau.edu/eri.
Working Papers in Intermountain West
Frequent-Fire Forest Restoration
	1.	 Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons and Adaptive Management Practices
	2.	 Understory Plan Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
	3.	 Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
	4.	 Fules Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits
	5.	 Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
	6.	 Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
	7.	 Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
	8.	 Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
	9.	 Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
	10.	The Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Restoration Model
	11.	Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration
	12.	Restoring Forest Roads
	13.	Treating Slash after Restoration Thinning
	14.	Integrating Forest Restoration Treatments with mexican Spotted Owl Habitat Needs
	15.	Effects of Forest Thinning Treatments on Fire Behavior
	16.	Snags and Forest Restoration
	17.	Bat Habitat and Forest Restoration Treatments
	18.	Prescribed and Wildland Use Fires in the Southwest: Do Timing and Frequency Matter?
	19.	Understory Seeding in Southwestern Forests Following Wildfire and Ecological Restoration Treatments
	20.	Controlling Cheatgrass in Ponderosa Pine and Pinyon-Juniper Restoration Areas
	21.	Managing Coarse Woody Debris in Frequent-fire Southwestern Forests
	22.	Restoring Spatial Pattern to Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
	23.	Guidelines for Managing Small Mammals in Restored Ponderosa Pine Forests of Northern Arizona
	24.	Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Burning
	25.	Strategies for Enhancing and Restoring Rare Plants and Their Habitats in the Face  
	 	 of Climate Change and Habitat Destruction in the Intermountain West
26. Wildlife Habitat Values and Forest Structure in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine: Implications for Restoration
	27.	Fuel Treatment Longevity
	28.	Southwestern Mixed-Conifer Forests: Evaluating Reference Conditions to Guide Ecological Restoration Treatments
	29.	Post-Wildfire Restoration of Structure, Composition, and Function in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine  
	 	 and Warm/Dry Mixed-Conifer Forests
	30.	Impact of Forest Restoration Treatments on Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Tree Resistance to Bark Beetles
	31.	Climage Change Impact on Bark Beetle Outbreaks and the Impact of Outbreaks on Subsequent Fires
	32.	An Evaluation of Fire Regime Recontstruction Methods
	33.	The 2012 Mexican Spotted Owl Recovery Plan Guidelines for Forest Restoration in the American Southwest
	34.	Climate Change and Fire in the Southwest
	35.	Carbon Cycling in Southwestern Forests: Reservoirs, Fluxes, and the Effects of Fire and Management
	36.	Wildlife and Fire: Impacts of Wildfire Prescribed Fire on Wildlife and Habitats in Southwestern Coniferous Forests
	37.	The Influence of Restoration Treatments on Hydrologic Output in Fire-Adapted Forests of the Southwest
38.	Reference Conditions and Restoration of Transitional Ponderosa Pine Forests in the Southwest
39.	Restoration as a Mechanism to Manage Southwestern Dwarf Mistletoe in Ponderosa Pine Forests
40.	Resources for Predicting and Mitigating Smoke Impacts of Wildland Fires

P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
eri.nau.edu
