 
  Ecological  Restoration  Institute 
The  Ecological  RestoraƟon  InsƟtute  is  dedicated  to  the  restoraƟon  of  ﬁre-adapted  forests  and  woodlands.  ERI  provides  services  that  support  the  social  
and  economic  vitality  of  communiƟes  that  depend  on  forests  and  the  natural  resources  and  ecosystem  services  they  provide.  Our  eﬀorts  focus  on  science
-based  research  of  ecological  and  socio-economic  issues  related  to  restoraƟon  as  well  as  support  for  on-the-ground  treatments,  outreach  and  educaƟon.   
Ecological  RestoraƟon  InsƟtute,  P.O.  Box  15017,  Flagstaﬀ,  AZ  86011,  928.523.7182,  FAX  928.523.0296,  www.nau.edu/eri 
Field  Considerations  for  Measuring  Evapotranspiration  with  the   
Eddy  Covariance  Method 
 
By  Wonsook  Ha,  Sharon  Masek  Lopez,  and  Abe  Springer     
Iඇඍඋඈൽඎർඍංඈඇ 
In  semi-arid  ponderosa  pine  forests  of  the  southwestern  US,  up  to  90%  of  the  annual  water  budget  is  re-­
turned  to  the  atmosphere  through  evapotranspiration  (ET).  Accurate  measurements  of  this  component  of  the  
water  budget  are,  therefore,  critical  to  assess  hydrological  responses  to  planned  forest  restoration.  The  eddy  
covariance  (EC)  method  is  an  atmospheric  measurement  technique  that  yields  accurate  ET  measurements.    
The  EC  method  calculates  vertical  turbulent  fluxes  within  an  atmospheric  boundary  layer  over  natural  eco-­
systems  and  agricultural  systems  to  determine  gas  exchange  rates  (e.g.,  water  vapor  concentration,  carbon  
dioxide  (CO2)  concentration)  (Burba  2013).  Both  natural  and  human-mediated  processes  affect  forest  gas  
exchange.  Recent  studies  of  both  wildfire  and  forest  restoration  treatments  in  stands  of  ponderosa  pine  show  
a  reduction  of  ET  compared  to  an  undisturbed  forest  site  (Dore  et  al.  2010).  Application  of  EC  to  investigate  
CO2  and  water  fluxes  in  ponderosa  pine  forest  improves  understanding  of  CO2  and  water  flux  exchange  pat-­
terns.  This  fact  sheet  describes  installation  of  an  EC  system,  including  flux  tower  placement  requirements  
and  maintenance  of  scientific  instruments. 
Fඅඎඑ  Tඈඐൾඋ  Pඅൺർൾආൾඇඍ  Rൾඊඎංඋൾආൾඇඍඌ 
It  is  important  to  establish  goals  for  EC  measurement  because  the  purpose  of  the  experiment  will  affect  the  
selection  of  instruments  mounted  on  the  tower.  Project  goals  should  be  established  prior  to  tower  location  
selection  and  maintenance  plan  development  (Burba  2013).  The  tower  itself  needs  to  sustain  the  severe  en-­
vironmental  and  climatological  hardships  (Munger  et  al.  2012). 
 
1)  Location:  The  tower  must  be  located  at  a  place  where  it  optimally  represents  the  area  of  interest,  
where  the  area  is  large  enough  to  provide  a  sufficient  footprint,  and  where  the  topography  is  flat  and  
uniform  (Burba  2013;;  Munger  et  al.  2012).  Usually  the  tower  is  installed  in  the  center  of  the  study  site  
(Burba  2013).  The   recommended  uniform   upwind  fetch  is   approximately   100  times  the  instrument  
height.  (In  the  case  of  ponderosa  pine  forest  of  northern  Arizona,  this  would  be  about  600  to  900  feet)  
The  tower  should  be  located  where  a  dominant  direction  or  strength  of  wind  flow  increases  the  chance  
of  reliable  measurements.  Maximizing  the  useful  footprint  from  all  representative  wind  directions  is  
recommended.   
 
Power  availability  and  accessibility  should  also  be  considered.  Forests  are  usually  situated  in  remote  
locations;;  therefore  solar  power  systems  would  be  installed  for  operating  EC  systems.  Major  elements  
for  solar  power  system  include  solar  panels,  deep  cycle  batteries,  charge  controllers,  wires,  and  cables.  
Among  those  required  elements,  numbers  and  orientation  of  solar  panels  are  determined  based  on  the  
required   power   demand   of   the   EC   systems   and   geographic   location   of   field   (Li-Cor   Biosciences,  
2010).  Solar  power  equipment  should  be  situated  on  the  downwind  side  of  the  tower  relative  to  the  
prevailing  winds.   
      Fact  Sheet:  Field  ConsideraƟons  for  Measuring  EvapotranspiraƟon  with  the  Eddy 
      Covariance  Method  
 
 
   
 
October  2014 

 
2)   Installation:   When   installed,   the   tower   structure  
should  not  impact  the  micrometeorological  area  of  in-­
terest.  If  installed  in  a  windy  area,  the  tower  should  be  
firmly  secured  on  the  ground,  for  example,  by  using  
guy  wires.  These  wires  should  be  regularly  checked  to  
ensure  no  trees  or  branches  have  fallen  on  them.  Ap-­
propriate  grounding  must  be  installed  to  avoid  or  min-­
imize  damage  by  lightning.  A  shelter  house  is  recom-­
mended   to   store   necessary   power   and   datalogging  
equipment  nearby  the  tower.  As  with  the  solar  power  
installation,  the  datalogging  shelter  should  be  located  
downwind  of  the  tower  in  the  prevailing  wind  direc-­
tion   at   a   distance   of   three   times   the   shelter   height  
(Munger  et  al.  2012). 
 
3) Height:  The  tower  needs  to  be  tall  enough  to  meas-­
ure   fluxes   of   plant   canopy   gasses   in   the   well-mixed  
surface  layer  (a  zone  having  nearly  constant  mean  me-­
teorological   variables   due   to   the   intensive   vertical  
mixing).  The  tower  height  should  not  be  too  low  be-­
cause  measurements  could  be  affected  by  the  canopy  
roughness  layer  (a  layer  of  air  where  air  flow  is  affect-­
ed  by  roughness  elements  such  a  tree  tops).  If  the  tow-­
er  is  too  high,  this  could  cause  the  footprint  to  stretch  
beyond   the   area   of   interest   (Munger   et   al.   2012)  
(Figure  1).  Numerous  models  have  evaluated  footprint  
contribution.   One   of   the   simplest   models   calculates  
footprint  contribution  using  analytical  solutions  of  dif-­
fusion   equation   as   a   function   of   a   distance   from   the  
station  (Burba  2013);;  this  model  explains  relationships  
among   the   distance   from   the   station,   measurement  
height,  and  footprint  stretch.   
 
For  most  canopies  (such  as  cropland,  grassland,  shrub-­
land)  the  recommended  capturing  tower  height  is  1.5–
2  times  the  canopy  height  (hc)  above  the  soil  surface,  
usually   1.5hc   for   tall   canopies   (>2–3   m)   and   2hc   for  
short  canopies  (<2–3  m)  (Figure  2).  For  especially  tall  
canopies  such  as  forests,  the  zero  plane  displacement  
height  (d)  (a.k.a.  measurement  base),  is  used  in  place  of  the  ground  surface  for  calculating  instrument  
height.  The  zero  plane  displacement  height  is  the  height  above  ground  where  the  wind  speed  would  go  
to  zero  due  to  obstacles  (i.e.,  tree  canopies)  when  a  logarithmic  wind  profile  is  maintained.  In  forests,  
this  height  (d)  is  estimated  between  0.6  and  0.8  times  hc  (usually  2/3  of  hc).  Instruments  are  set  at  d+1.5
(hc–d)  (personal  communication  with  G.  Burba).  For  60–90-foot  high  ponderosa  pine  in  northern  Arizo-­
na,  the  measurement  base  (d)  would  be  40  to  60  feet  about  the  ground  surface).  The  instrument  height  
should  then  be  somewhere  in  the  range  of  70–105  feet   above  the  ground  surface,  depending  on  the  
height  of  the  canopy.   
 
4)    Base:  The  tower  should  be  wide  enough  to  provide  a  secure  and  safe  platform  ,  but  should  not  be  
too  wide  to  affect  measurement  of  interest.  To  minimize  the  uncertainty  of  tower  impacts  on  EC  meas-­
urement,  tower  base  area  should  be  no  greater  than  4  m2  (roughly  6.5  feet  by  6.5  feet).  For  forested  
sites,  tower  base  area  can  be  increased,  if  the  average  projected  area  of  one  tree  crown  is  larger  than  six  
times  the  tower  projected  area  (24  m2)  (Munger  et  al.  2012).   
 
Figure  1.  Diagram  for  footprint  (FP)  coverage  of  
higher  and  lower  sensors;;  If  sensor  is  located  too  high,  
FP  would  go  beyond  the  field  edge  (Burba  2013).   
Figure  2.  Diagram  for  recommended  tower  placement  
height  for  tall  forested  canopy;;  h:  canopy  height,  d:  zero  
plane  displacement  height  or  measurement  base  
(modified  from  Burba  2013). 

 
5)  Structure:  The  tower  must  have  safe  access  if  personnel  needs  to  climb  the  tower  for  maintenance.  
Otherwise,  instruments  should  be  able  to  be  lowered  by  rope  or  cable.  Tower  structure  must  have  mini-­
mum  sway  and  vibration  due  to  the  wind  or  snow  weight.  Guy  wires  can  help  minimize  the  vibration  
(Burba  2013).  More  detailed  structure  limitations  include  that  tower  movement  should  be  less  than  1.0  
mm  per  1  m  in  height  and  tower  should  not  oscillate  more  than  20  Hz  (oscillations  per  second)  (Munger  
et  al.  2012). 
 
6)  Other  factors  that  affect  flux  measurements:  There  are  some  other  environmental  factors  that  af-­
fect  flux  measurements.  The  tower  should  be  strong  enough  for  wind  speed  up  to  40m  s-1,  temperature  
range  -50oC  and  50oC,  rain  0–6.35  m  year-1,  and  snow  5.1  m  year-1  (Munger  et  al.  2012).  Also,  surface  
roughness  and  thermal  stability  affect  flux  measurement  (Burba  2013).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
With  or  Without  Eddy  Covariance  Method 
 
For  water-limited  semi-arid  forests,  accurate  evapotranspiration  (ET)  estimates  are  critical   for  
closing  the  water  balance,  since  as  much  as  90%  of  precipitation  received  in  Southwest  forested  
watersheds   returns   to   the   atmosphere   through   ET.   The   availability   of   water   for   additional  
groundwater  recharge  or  surface  water  discharge  hinges  on  the  amount  and  timing  of  precipita-­
tion  as  well  as  changes  in  ET  due  to  forest  restoration  treatments.  Quantifying  forest  ET  is  cen-­
tral  to  making  long  term  water  supply  projections.     
 
In  the  4FRI   Paired   Watershed   Study   researchers  hope  to  use  six  eddy  covariance  (EC)  towers  
situated  in  half  of  twelve  paired  watersheds.  These  EC  systems  would  measure  ET  in  a  variety  of  
forest   conditions   ranging   from   control  watersheds  with   no   forest   thinning  to   watersheds  with  
high-intensity  forest  thinning  (near  pre-settlement  basal  area).  The  EC  systems  would  generate  
accurate   measurements   of   evapotranspiration.   These   measurements   would   then   be   compared  
with   soil  moisture  and  tree  sapflux  data  in   the  six  EC-instrumented  watersheds  to   generate   a  
model  to  estimate  ET  based  on  soil  moisture  and  sapflux.  The  generated  model  would  be  used  to  
estimate   ET   in   the  six  watersheds   lacking   EC   but   where   soil   moisture   and   sapflux   would   be  
measured.     
 
There  are  three  foreseeable  alternatives  to  installing  six  EC  systems.  First,  the  number  of  EC  sys-­
tems  could  be  reduced  to  two  EC  towers  located  in  the  most  extreme  conditions  –  control  and  
high-intensity  treatment   –   with   regression  analysis   providing   estimates  of  intermediate  condi-­
tions.  This  approach  is  problematic  and  not  recommended  due  to  lack  of  data  for  intermediate  
treatments.  A  second  alternative,  that  would  not  require  new  EC  installations,  is  to  create  the  soil  
moisture  and  sapflux-based  model  based  on  historic  EC  data  from  the  region.  The  drawback  of  
this  approach  is  that  there  would  be  no  way  to  verify  the  new  ET  estimates  and  calibrate  the  
model  without  at  least  some  present-day  eddy  covariance  measurements.  A  third  alternative  is  to  
predict   ET   from   micrometeorological   models,   based   on   microclimate   and   stand   data.   Models  
such   as   Penman-Monteith,   McNaughton-Black,   and   Shuttleworth-Wallace   could   be   used.   For  
ponderosa  pine  forest  in  northern  Arizona,  these  models  have  been  demonstrated  to  predict  ET  
within  +/-14%  of  actual  ET  measured  by  EC.  A  combination  of  alternatives  is  also  possible.   
 
With  the  eddy  covariance  method,  the  best  measurements  of  evapotranspiration  changes  are  pos-­
sible  to  inform  the  most  useful  water  balance  models.    Without  EC,  we  can  still  generate  ET  esti-­
mates  but  those  estimates  would  be  based  on  old  data,  assumptions,  and  less  complete  measure-­
ments  of  water  and  energy  flux,  which  could  generate  considerable  error  and  confound  the  abil-­
ity  to  predict  forest  thinning  impacts  on  water  resources.     

 
Gඎංൽൾඅංඇൾඌ  ඈඇ  Iඇඌඍൺඅඅൺඍංඈඇ  ൺඇൽ  Mൺංඇඍൾඇൺඇർൾ  ඈൿ  Mൺඃඈඋ  Iඇඌඍඋඎආൾඇඍඌ   
ൿඈඋ  ඍඁൾ  Fඅඎඑ  Tඈඐൾඋ 
 
If  meteorological  instruments  are  mounted  together  on  a  horizontal  bar,  all  in-­
struments  (except  the  radiometer)  must  be  spaced  at  least  twice  the  face-width  
of  the  tower  (Munger  2012).  Each  instrument  should  be  placed  at  a  representa-­
tive  location.  Instruments  that  may  be  mounted  on  the  tower  include  the  follow-­
ing  (Figure  3)  except  for  soil  heat  flux  plates,  which  are  buried  underground: 
 
1)   Three-dimensional   sonic   anemometer:   The   3-D   sonic   anemometer  
measures  wind  speed  in  three  dimensions  and  is  mounted  on  the  windward  
side,   not   on   the   tower   side   (lateral   side)   or   leeward   side   (Munger   et   al.  
2012).  If  the  anemometer  must  be  located  on  a  bar  right  above  the  tower,  it  
should   be   placed   at   least   five   times   the   tower   diameter   above   the   tower.  
Whether  the  anemometer  is  installed  on  a  flat  or  angled  ground,  the  ane-­
mometer  head  should  be  parallel  to  land  surface.  Removing  water  droplets  
on   the   surface   of   transducers   enables   continuous   measurements   of   wind  
speed.   Wicks   can   be   attached   at   the   tips   of   transducers   to   prevent   water  
droplets  from  accumulating.  However,  wicks  should  be  removed  during  the  
wintertime. 
 
2)   Open-path   CO2   and   H2O   gas   analyzer:  Moisture  can  prevent  the  EC  
system  from  measuring  accurate  flux  by  driving  CO2  signal  strength  to  zero.  Dew  may  be  avoided  by  coating  the  sur-­
face  of  the  measurement  window  with  wax.  Also,  rain  droplets  or  snowflakes  can  be  in  the  path  of  flux  measurement  
and  affect  the  reading,  thus  these  should  be  minimized.  Tilting  the  sensor  head  to  10-15o  from  the  vertical  line  would  
help  prevent  water  droplets  or  snow  from  accumulating  on  the  surface  of  the  optical  measurement  window.  The  open-
path  gas  analyzer  is  not  sensitive  to  dust  and  pollen  as  long  as  the  particles  are  small.  But,  if  salt  deposits  exist,  re-­
moval  of  salt  deposits  is  required.  For  maintenance,  internal  chemicals  consisting  of  Ascarite  II  (a  carbon  dioxide  ab-­
sorbent)  and  magnesium  perchlorate  (a  desiccant)  need  to  be  recharged  yearly.  These  chemicals  keep  the  detectors  
free  of  H2O  and  CO2.  Open-path  gas  analyzer  is  recommended  as  apposed  to  the  close-path  one  because  open-path  
gas  analyzer  does  not  use  intake  tube  to  prevent  rain  or  snow  from  entering  the  sampling  cell  and  pump  to  pull  air  that  
causes  pressure  drop  in  the  analyzer.  Also,  the  pump  in  the  close-path  analyzer  requires  high  power  consumption;;  
therefore  operating  the  close-path  gas  analyzer  is  a  big  challenge  in  remote  locations  such  as  forests  (Burba  2013). 
 
3)  Air  temperature  and  relative  humidity  sensor:  The  relative  humidity  sensor  needs  to  be  kept  inside  a  radiation  
shield  when  it  is  used  outside.  The  ground  surface  below  the  sensor  needs  to  be  natural  earth  or  covered  by  short  
grasses  for  at  least  9  m  diameter.  The  sensor  requires  good  thermal  radiation  protection  and  satisfactory  ventilation.  
The  sensor  must  be  placed  away  from  any  nearby  obstruction;;  it  should  be  a  distance  of  at  least  four  times  the  ob-­
struction’s  height  and  also  at  least  30  m  from  any  paved  areas.  A  radiation  shield  and  the  black  screen  at  the  tip  of  the  
sensor  need  to  be  checked  for  debris  and  contaminants.  If  installed  nearby  the  ocean  or  bodies  of  salt  water,  a  salt  lay-­
er  on  sensor,  filter,  and  radiation  shield  needs  to  be  removed  for  an  accurate  measurement. 
 
4)  Net  radiometer:  The  net  radiometer  consists  of  a  pyranometer  (measuring  incoming  and  reflected  solar  radia-­
tion)  and  a  pyrgeometer  (measuring  far  infrared  radiation  from  the  sky  and  from  the  soil  surface).  No  shadow  should  
be  cast  on  the  net  radiometer  during  the  measurement.  The  net  radiometer  needs  recalibration  every  two  years.  An  
indoor  test  using  a  lamp  as  a  light  source  can  be  done.  However,  an  outdoor  test  with  more  than  45  degrees  of  solar  
elevation  above  horizon  is  preferred.   
 
5)  Soil  heat  flux  plate:  At  least  two  sensors  are  recommended  for  spatial  averaging.  A  small  shovel  is  used  to  slice  
the  soil  vertically  and  measure  the  depth  of  the  soil  profile  from  the  ground  for  the  desired  heat  flux  plate  location.  
The  soil  is  cut  horizontally  in  the  soil  profile  with  a  small  knife  to  bury  the  plate  into  the  horizontal  cut.  The  plate  
should  be  in  a  maximum  contact  with  the  soil  for  good  measurements.  Cover  the  hole  with  the  soil  after  installation  
of  plates  and  check  monthly  for  rodent  damage.   
 
 
 
     
Figure  3.  Eddy  covariance  systems  with  
major  instruments  including  A)  3-D  sonic  
anemometer,  B)  open  path  CH4  analyzer,  C)  
Humidity  sensor  with  radiation  shield,  and  D)  
Net  radiometer  (modified  from  Burba  2013). 
A 
B 
C 
D 
References 
Burba,  G.  2013.  Eddy  Covariance  Method  for  scientific,  industrial,  agricultural,  and  regulatory  applications,  LI-COR.  Biosciences. 
Dore,  S.,  T.E.  Kolb,  M.  Montes-Helu,  S.E.  Eckert,  B.W.  Sullivan,  B.A.  Hungate,  J.P.  Kaye,  S.C.  Hart,  G.W.    Koch,  A.  Finkral.  2010.  Carbon  
and  water  fluxes  from  ponderosa  pine  forests  disturbed  by  wildfire  and  thinning.  Ecological  Applications,  20,  663-683. 
Li-Cor  Biosciences,  2010.  Technical  note:  Solar  power  for  eddy  covariance  flux  stations,  http://www.instrumentalia.com.ar/uploads/
accesorios/archivos/EDDY%20COVARIANCE%20FLUX%20STATIONS.pdf;;  Accessed  in  July  2014. 
Munger,  J.W.,  H.W.  Loescher,  and  H.  Luo.  2012.  Eddy  covariance.  Springer:  New  York,  NY. 
Contact 
Dr.  Abe  Springer,  Abe.Springer@nau.edu 
 
NAU  is  an  equal  opportunity  provider. 
