The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Pinyon-Juniper Woodland Dynamics After Fuels Reduction Treatments 
 
 
By David W. Huffman, Director of Research and Development 
Introduction 
Pinyon-juniper woodlands and savannas comprise more than half the forested land in Arizona and 
New Mexico. At the landscape scale, variation in structure and composition is influenced by topo-
graphic position, soils, disturbance history, and local climate (Fig. 1). For example, persistent wood-
lands with infrequent fire regimes occur on fire-protected sites and where production of grasses and 
other fine fuels is limited. Wooded shrublands are areas of tree expansion and contraction with high 
shrub cover that experience severe, but not extensive fires. Savannas are open in structure with highly 
spaced trees and abundant grass cover, and are maintained by frequent, low-severity surface fires. 
State-and-transition models1 (STMs) suggest that pinyon-juniper woodlands of the Southwest may 
shift between persistent woodland, wooded shrubland, and savanna conditions when natural disturb-
ances drive systems over ecological thresholds. Use of STMs that describe natural ranges of variation 
can help managers evaluate treatments aimed at accomplishing both fuels reduction and conservation 
objectives.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
August 2019 
1 State-and-transition models (STMs) provide a framework for describing vegetation dynamics and responses to disturbance, including 
changes driven by management and land-use activities. States are conceptualized as stable (i.e., resilient) conditions, and pathways to new 
stable states require transition across ecological thresholds. STMs allow managers to predict effects of actions on ecosystem resilience.    
Figure 1. States identified 
in conceptual state-and-
transition model for south-
western pinyon-juniper 
ecosystems. Persistent 
woodlands (A) develop 
over long time periods 
without major disturbance. 
Savannas (B) are open 
systems characterized by 
scattered trees and abun-
dant grasses. Skeletal 
woodlands (C) result from 
stand-replacing fire, and 
can recover persistent 
woodland conditions after 
a century or more. Wooded 
shrublands (D) are domi-
nated by shrubs and young-
er trees.  

Methods 
In this study, we remeasured hazardous fuels reduction treatments in persistent pinyon-juniper 
woodlands on the Kaibab National Forest in northern Arizona. Thinning and prescribed burning 
treatments (n = 12) were applied in 2005–2006 as part of a long-term experiment. Overstory struc-
ture, tree regeneration, surface and canopy fuels, and understory vegetation were monitored for 11 
years in order to answer the following questions:  
 
1) How do stand-level dynamics differ between common fuels reduction approaches over time?  
2) How do treatment outcomes compare with a conceptual STM that describes ecosystem responses 
to natural disturbances such as wildfire, drought, and bark beetles?  
3) How effective are different treatments for meeting long-term fuels management and ecosystem 
conservation objectives?  
 
Results 
 All treatments showed fuel load reductions through the 11-year study period and minimal re-
bound of tree recruitment toward pretreatment conditions.  
 Prescribed fire alone maintained persistent woodland conditions.  
 Thinning treatments substantially reduced small tree densities and increased understory grass 
cover, producing conditions only somewhat resembling the pinyon-juniper savanna state.  
 Thinning with prescribed fire tended to produce conditions qualitatively unlike any described by 
our STM. 
 
Management Implications 
 Common treatments for hazardous fuels reduction, such as tree thinning and prescribed fire, are 
effective for reducing tree density and canopy fuel loads in persistent pinyon-juniper woodlands 
of the Southwest. 
 Comparisons with our state-and-transition model suggest that concerns regarding the creation of 
novel structural states through fuels treatments may be warranted. 
 Further research is needed to test alternative approaches for reducing fuel loading in these sys-
tems while better maintaining ecological integrity. 
 
Suggested Reading 
Agee, J.K., C.N. Skinner. 2005. Basic principles of forest fuel reduction treatments. Forest Ecology and Manage-
ment, 211:83–96. 
Bestelmeyer, B.T., J.E. Herrick, J.R. Brown, D.A. Trujillo, K.M. Havstaf. 2004. Land management in the Ameri-
can Southwest: a state-and-transition approach to ecosystem complexity. Environmental Management, 
34:38–51. 
Huffman, D.W., P.Z. Fulé, J.E. Crouse, K.M. Pearson. 2009. A comparison of fire hazard mitigation alternatives in 
pinyon-juniper woodlands of Arizona. Forest Ecology and Management, 257:628–635. 
Romme, W.H, C.D. Allen, J.D. Bailey, W.L. Baker, B.T. Bestelmeyer, P.M. Brown, K.S. Eisenhart, M.L. Floyd, 
D.W. Huffman, B.F. Jacobs, R.F. Miller, E.H. Muldavin, T.W. Swetnam, R.J. Tausch, P.J. Weisberg. 
2009. Historical and modern disturbance regimes, stand structures, and landscape dynamics in piñon-
juniper vegetation of the western United States. Rangeland Ecology and Management, 62:203–222. 
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following publication:  
Huffman, D.W., M.T. Stoddard, J.D. Springer, J.E Crouse, A.J. Sánchez Meador, S. Nepal. 2019. Stand dynamics 
of pinyon-juniper woodlands after hazardous fuels reduction treatments in Arizona. Rangeland Ecology 
and Management, 72: 757–767. 
Contact: David W. Huffman, David.Huffman@nau.edu  
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
