The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Restoration Prescriptions for Southwestern Frequent-Fire Adapted Forests 
 
By Amy E.M. Waltz, Directory of Science Delivery 
Introduction 
Public land management agencies have incorporated restoration goals to restore frequent-fire adapted for-
ests across the US West since the late 1990s. Agencies recognize that restoring fire-adapted forests to 
their natural range of variability (NRV) increases ecosystem resilience to wildfire and drought and pro-
vides important elasticity to changing climate and disturbance regimes. Many forest restoration goals can 
be met with existing silvicultural practices; however, a broader approach incorporating key ecosystem 
components is needed to reach restoration and resiliency goals. 
 
Restoration Prescriptions for Ponderosa Pine  
Frequent-Fire Forests 
Ponderosa pine restoration prescriptions use site-specific land-
scape remnants as reference conditions to inform the degree of 
departure (excess number of trees) from the NRV and a desired 
condition. Thus, there is no “one size fits all” set of reference 
conditions because ecosystems (and number of trees) vary in 
topography, aspect, elevation, soil parent material, and other at-
tributes.  
 
The restoration objective for ponderosa pine is to restore forest 
structure consistent with the density, spatial distribution, and 
variability of trees at the time of frequent-fire regime disruption. 
Overstory structural restoration is one component of an integrat-
ed ecosystem restoration plan, which also includes forest floor 
fuel treatments, prescribed fire treatments, and possibly revege-
tation of the herbaceous understory. 
 
Goals: 
1. Restore tree density within the range characteristic of pre-
settlement conditions by conserving all living trees estab-
lished prior to the fire exclusion date and replacing dead pre
-settlement remnants with large post-settlement trees. 
2. Restore the patchy tree spatial pattern by retaining all living 
pre-settlement trees and locating replacement trees in close 
proximity of dead pre-settlement remnants. 
3. Maintain a wide range of age classes by retaining all living 
pre-settlement trees and uneven-aged groups of post-settlement trees as replacements, thereby con-
serving genetic variability to the greatest extent possible. 
 
September 2019 
Figure 1. These photos demonstrate the 
dense forest conditions pre-treatment (top, 
1998) and restored conditions post-thinning 
(bottom, 2011). The objective of ecological 
restoration treatments is to restore forest struc-
ture consistent with the tree density, spatial 
distribution, and variability at the time of fre-
quent-fire regime disruption. Photo courtesy 
of ERI 

 
Restoration Prescriptions for Dry Mixed-Conifer Frequent-Fire Forests 
Forest and fire reconstructions in dry mixed-conifer forests show higher variability in forest structure, 
species composition, and fire history compared to ponderosa pine ecosystems. However, similar to 
ponderosa pine forests, studies of dry mixed-conifer forests document distinct changes following Euro-
American settlement in the 1870s, including fire exclusion. Contemporary species composition has 
changed and tree densities are significantly higher when compared to forests that did not experience 
fire exclusion. Reconstructions show a shift in tree species dominance from frequent-fire-adapted spe-
cies, such as ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir, to species less tolerant of frequent fire and more adapted 
to stand-replacing, infrequent fire such as white fir, white pine, and spruce. 
 
The restoration objective for mixed-conifer forests is to regain ecosystem resiliency and healthy eco-
logical conditions that more closely resemble those that prevailed under a natural frequent-fire disturb-
ance regime. Remnant tree structures present before the disruption of frequent fire will form the foun-
dation and guide the restoration prescription. 
 
Goals: 
1. Restore tree density within the range characteristic of pre-settlement conditions by conserving all 
living trees established prior to fire exclusion and replacing dead pre-settlement remnants with an 
appropriate number of live post-settlement trees. 
2. Restore species composition that reflects the pre-settlement forest. 
3. Restore historic spatial patterns by locating post-settlement replacement trees near pre-settlement 
remnants. 
4. Restore characteristic natural disturbances including frequent surface fire. 
 
Required Components for Restoration Prescriptions in Frequent-Fire Ecosystems 
Restoration prescriptions require the consideration of key ecosystem components, such as retaining pre-
settlement and old-growth trees, reintroducing frequent fire, and reestablishing the herbaceous and shrub 
understory community. These components are needed to achieve the desired conditions of resiliency and 
sustainability. While many existing silvicultural techniques are used to meet restoration goals, one can 
achieve desired ecological outcomes by incorporating these components into traditional silvicultural 
practices. 
 
Conclusion 
Restoring the frequent-fire forests of the western US to their natural range of variability increases eco-
system resilience to wildfire and drought and can mitigate climate change impacts, including ecosys-
tem type transitions. Field-tested restoration treatment prescriptions help land managers restore func-
tion and resiliency to fire-adapted ecosystems and reduce risk of severe uncharacteristic wildfire. Mini-
mally, the NRV can serve as a baseline to better qualify and quantify the trade-offs of any departure 
from resilient, restored systems. The NRV and needed restoration treatments in the Southwest are best 
informed by the pre-settlement remnants that depict structure and composition when natural processes 
were intact. Use of remnants best captures the variability across the Southwest due to soil type, aspect, 
and microclimate differences that influence tree density.  
 
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following publication:  
Waltz, A.E.M., M.T. Stoddard, J.P. Roccaforte, J.D. Springer, D.W. Huffman. 2019. Restoration Prescriptions 
for Southwestern Frequent-Fire Adapted Forests. ERI Working Paper No. 41. Ecological Restoration 
Institute, Northern Arizona University. 9 pp. 
Contact: Amy Waltz, Amy.Waltz@nau.edu  
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
