The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration: An Educational Demonstration Site  
at Fort Tuthill Coconino County Park 
 
By Caleb Stotts, Program Coordinator 
Introduction 
Fort Tuthill County Park, located a few miles south of Flagstaff, is a recreation hub for residents and 
tourists, hosting more than 100,000 visitors a year. In 2016, the park acquired an additional 220 acres 
of land from the state of Arizona. Much of the ponderosa pine forest in the park was dense and at a 
high risk of wildfire, which posed a significant risk to the nearby community. Efforts to minimize fire 
risk were underway on state land, and these efforts continued after the land transfer. With help from 
the Greater Flagstaff Forests Partnership (GFFP), Coconino County secured funds to mechanically 
thin approximately 363 acres to 1) reduce wildfire risk, 2) increase public safety, and 3) improve for-
est health. The high visibility and visitation of Fort Tuthill County Park provided the opportunity also 
to establish a 13-acre forest restoration demonstration site for public outreach and education. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prior to thinning operations, forest conditions at Fort Tuthill were characteristic of unnatural pondero-
sa pine forests across the West—overcrowded and dense. A large body of science developed by the 
Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI) at Northern Arizona University and other researchers shows 
that the high tree densities of today’s forests are primarily due to fire exclusion from the grazing and 
logging practices of early European settlers. Without regular, low-severity fire to regulate the growth 
of pine saplings, tree densities in these forests have increased between 5 and 100 times the density of 
historical forests (see Figure 1, page 2). 
 
September 2019 
Before thinning 
After thinning 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The ERI uses historical evidences of trees (remnants) to best approximate the site-specific forest 
conditions that existed prior to Euro-American settlement and designs restoration prescriptions based 
on these data. The resulting forest conditions can contribute to improving valuable ecological ser-
vices, such as severe wildfire risk mitigation and public safety, watershed function, wildlife habitat, 
nutrient cycling, and sustainable recreational opportunities. To learn more about the benefits of and 
the science behind restoration, visit the Fort Tuthill Restoration Demo kiosk (map below), or visit 
the online educational kiosk at http://gffp.org/kiosk/.  
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following publication:  
Stotts, C., A.E.M. Waltz, and M.T. Stoddard. 2019. Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration: An Educational Demon-
stration Site at Fort Tuthill County Park. Rapid Assessment Report. Ecological Restoration Institute, 
Northern Arizona University. 
Contact: Caleb Stotts, Caleb.Stotts@nau.edu  
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
Figure 1. Demonstrates trees 
per acre (TPA) at Fort Tuthill 
County Park prior to Euro-
American settlement (25 TPA), 
prior to thinning treatments (282 
TPA), and after thinning (50 
TPA). 
