The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Understanding LiDAR for Forest Applications 
 
By Jonathon Donager and Andrew Sánchez Meador 
What is LiDAR? 
Over landscape scales (≥ 10,000 acres), spatially explicit infor-
mation on forest conditions is necessary to achieve multiple man-
agement objectives. LiDAR (Light Detection And Ranging) enables 
land managers to make inferences on forest conditions. LiDAR sys-
tems principally operate by emitting pulses of light and recording 
the precise time it takes for that light to return to the sensor, from 
which the distance to an object is calculated. Each of these light 
pulse returns corresponds to a three-dimensional point in a LiDAR 
point cloud, a collection of many returns representing the landscape 
(Figures 1 and 2). Dense objects (tree boles, rocks and ground sur-
faces) typically result in a single return, while less dense objects 
(tree crowns and foliage), may result in multiple returns. In addition, 
energy is absorbed by the reflecting object, and the amount of ener-
gy returning to the sensor, commonly referred to as an intensity val-
ue, can help further discriminate between various objects. These da-
ta can be collected from either airborne or fixed terrestrial locations, 
and mobile terrestrial LiDAR is becoming increasingly common. 
Terrestrial LiDAR, as the name implies, is typically collected from 
multiple ground locations, then combined into a single point cloud. 
Airborne LiDAR is operated from a fixed-wing aircraft, where the 
LiDAR sensor is coupled with precise location and movement infor-
mation to accurately place the data in physical space. Airborne Li-
DAR provides data over larger areas (e.g., > 1,000 acres) at point 
densities from less than 1 point per m2, up to 15 points per m2, de-
pending on the quality level of the data collection. Terrestrial Li-
DAR typically provides data over smaller spatial extents (e.g., < 100 
acres) and at much higher point densities (e.g., 1,000 points m2). 
  
What types of data does LiDAR provide? 
Specific to forestry and landscape-scale ecological restoration, discrete-return airborne LiDAR proves to be 
the most widely used, due to large area coverage and penetration of tree canopies by multiple laser returns. 
Usage typically starts with a pre-processed (removal of spurious returns), classified (ground and vegetation 
points) LiDAR data point cloud, typically provided by a vendor. From these data, users then can create vari-
ous products, or data layers, that can be used for assessment, monitoring, and decision-making. For exam-
ple, direct outputs might include canopy height or ground elevation. Derived products, such as predicted 
basal area or biomass, could then be used to prioritize restoration treatment areas.  
 
 
October 2019 
Figure 1: Airborne and terrestrial LiDAR use 
the same principles, but collect data from differ-
ent platforms. Discrete return LiDAR uses pre-
cisely recorded travel time of light to provide 
structural (height and location) information. 
Full waveform LiDAR collects the entire profile 
of returned energy. 

 
 
 
 
 
First-order products consist of rasterized (pixel-based, like a digital image) summaries of point cloud 
properties (Figures 1 and 2). Common first-order products include digital elevation models (DEMs), dig-
ital surface models (DSMs), and the difference between the two: a canopy height model (CHM). For esti-
mating attributes associated with forest conditions, it is common to remove the effect of topography (i.e., 
transform the data from elevation to height above the ground). Users of first-order products include re-
mote sensing and spatial analysts in academia, non-government research organizations, federal research 
stations, and federal regional data centers. These technical users can then derive a variety of LiDAR met-
rics (Figure 2). These metrics are paired with field measurements to characterize forest characteristics 
over large landscapes as second-order products (Figure 2). 
 
Second-order products are derived by relating plot data (e.g., basal area, volume, mean tree size) to first-
order products then using these relationships to predict forest attributes across the landscape (Figure 2). 
While technical skillsets are needed to create second-order products, the end results can be used by feder-
al, state, tribal and other land managers to inform natural resource conditions, prioritize management 
needs, and monitor management effectiveness. Some potential applications include: 
 
 
Forest age structure and diversity 
 
Biomass, carbon, and volume estimation 
 
High-resolution habitat and potential biodiversity modeling 
 
Modeling ecosystem services across scales 
 
Forest road mapping or hydrologic flow analyses 
 
 
Contact: Tayloe Dubay, Tayloe.Dubay@nau.edu  
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
Figure 2: Diagram depicting how LiDAR data are processed to produce first-order products and LiDAR metrics, 
which are then paired with field plot data to develop predictive models to produce forest characteristics, or second
-order products, at stand to landscape scales. 
