Making the Transition from Science Delivery to Knowledge Coproduction in
Boundary Spanning: A Case Study of the Alaska Fire Science Consortium
MELANIE M. COLAVITO
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, Arizona
SARAH F. TRAINOR
Alaska Center for Climate Assessment and Policy, and Alaska Fire Science Consortium, University of
Alaska Fairbanks, Fairbanks, Alaska
NATHAN P. KETTLE
Alaska Center for Climate Assessment and Policy, University of Alaska Fairbanks, Fairbanks, Alaska
ALISON YORK
Alaska Fire Science Consortium, University of Alaska Fairbanks, Fairbanks, Alaska
(Manuscript received 16 January 2019, in ﬁnal form 23 July 2019)
ABSTRACT
Boundary organizations facilitate two-way, sustained interaction and communication between research and
practitioner spheres, deliver existing science, and develop new, actionable scientiﬁc information to address emerging
social–ecological questions applicable to decision-making. There is an increasing emphasis on the role of boundary
organizations in facilitating knowledge coproduction, which is collaborative research with end users to develop
actionable scientiﬁc information for decision-making. However, a deeper understanding of how boundary organi-
zations and knowledge coproduction work in practice is needed. This paper examines the Alaska Fire Science
Consortium (AFSC), a boundary organization focused on ﬁre science and management in Alaska that is working to
address climate impacts on wildﬁre. A case study approach was used to assess AFSC activities over time. AFSC’s
boundary spanning involves a continuum of outputs and activities, but their overall trajectory has involved a de-
liberate transition from an emphasis on science delivery to knowledge coproduction. Key factors that facilitated this
transition included a receptive and engaged audience, built-in evaluation and learning, subject matter expertise and
complementarity, and embeddedness in the target audience communities. Recommendations for boundary orga-
nizations wishing to develop knowledge coproduction capacity include knowing your audience, employing trusted
experts in boundary spanning, and engaging in frequent self-evaluation to inform change over time.
1. Introduction
Climate change is driving rapid changes in social–
ecological systems. Land managers are struggling to
keep up with these changes while working to integrate
the best available science in decision-making. This
challenge is especially poignant in ﬁre management—
the planning for and ﬁghting of wildland ﬁres—in the
United States, where there is a clear link between cli-
mate drivers and ﬁres but variability among ecological
regions (Littell et al. 2009; Marlon et al. 2009; Marlon
et al. 2012; Westerling et al. 2006). The term ‘‘wildland
ﬁres’’ (hereinafter simply ﬁres) refers to any type of ﬁre
that occurs in a vegetated area. Fire managers—the
agencies and individuals who deal with the planning for
and ﬁghting of ﬁres—are at the forefront of decisions
that inﬂuence social–ecological systems but often ﬁnd
themselves in a paradox whereby social expectations
to suppress ﬁres conﬂict with scientiﬁc evidence that
demonstrates the importance of ﬁre as an ecological
process (Ingalsbee 2017). This has led to a greater
Corresponding author: Melanie M. Colavito, melanie.colavito@
nau.edu
Publisher’s Note: This article was revised on 22 October 2019 to
replace Fig. 5, which contained a misspelling when originally
published.
OCTOBER 2019
C O L A V I T O E T A L .
917
DOI: 10.1175/WCAS-D-19-0009.1
 2019 American Meteorological Society. For information regarding reuse of this content and general copyright information, consult the AMS Copyright
Policy (www.ametsoc.org/PUBSReuseLicenses).

emphasis on adapting to ﬁre and better coexisting with
ﬁre in a changing climate to foster social–ecological
adaptation and resilience (Chapin et al. 2010; Moritz et al.
2014; Schoennagel et al. 2017).
Boundary organizations—organizations that facilitate
two-way, sustained interaction and communication
among science and decision-making spheres—are de-
signed to deliver existing science and develop actionable
scientiﬁc information to address social–ecological ques-
tions (Kocher et al. 2012). Actionable science can enhance
decision-making, especially for complex problems like
climate change (Cash et al. 2003; Clark et al. 2016; Dilling
and Lemos 2011; Knapp and Trainor 2013). Knowledge
coproduction—a collaborative research approach that
incorporates scientists and science users throughout
the research process—is increasingly advocated for
developing actionable science (Table 1) (Meadow
et al. 2015; Wall et al. 2017a). The principles of knowl-
edge
coproduction
include
long-term
relationships
between scientists and stakeholders, two-way commu-
nication, and a focus on actionable science (Meadow
et al. 2015). Far less is known, however, about how
to make knowledge coproduction work in practice
(Djenontin and Meadow 2018). A better understanding
of the potential pathways to knowledge coproduction,
the role of boundary organizations in knowledge co-
production, and how boundary organizations learn
and transition over time to facilitate the development
and application of actionable science is needed (McNie
2013; Meadow et al. 2015; Wall et al. 2017b).
This paper uses case study research to assess the
Alaska Fire Science Consortium (AFSC)—a boundary
organization focused on ﬁre science and management in
Alaska—and to develop a deeper understanding of how
boundary organizations and knowledge coproduction
work in practice. A logic model framework is used to
explore how AFSC’s historical context, inputs, outputs,
and outcomes have changed over time. AFSC’s bound-
ary spanning involves a continuum of outputs and activi-
ties and has shifted from a focus on science delivery to
knowledge coproduction. Key factors supporting this
transition are discussed as potential mechanisms to achieve
the principles of knowledge coproduction in practice.
Recommendations are offered to other boundary orga-
nizations seeking to facilitate knowledge coproduction.
2. Literature review
a. Fire and ﬁre management in Alaska
In Alaska, most ﬁre historically occurred in the boreal
forests of the interior and the Kenai Peninsula, which
experienced large but infrequent lightning-ignited ﬁres.
Alaska’s ﬁre patterns reﬂect high interannual variability
in close association with climate (Balshi et al. 2009;
Markon et al. 2012). Climate change is contributing to
altered ﬁre patterns, and models predict increasingly
severe ﬁre activity with potential dramatic shifts in vege-
tation (Chapin et al. 2010; Mann et al. 2012; Johnstone
et al. 2011; Joly et al. 2012). Since 2000, the average annual
area burned is nearly twice as much as the previous ﬁve
decades on record, and the total acreage burned is ex-
pected to increase in response to warming (Kasischke et al.
2010; Balshi et al. 2009; Calef et al. 2015). The effects of
climate change on ﬁre are diverse. For example, the record
2004 and 2005 ﬁre seasons (6.6 million and 4.7 million acres
burned respectively) extended into September when nor-
mal August rains did not fall. The second largest ﬁre
season in 2015 (5.1 million acres) was characterized by
warm, dry conditions in May and June that increased fuel
availability coupled with numerous lightning ignitions
in June. Extreme ﬁre seasons in Alaska like 2015 are 34%
to 60% more likely to occur under current conditions due
to anthropogenic climate change (Partain et al. 2016).
Fire managers in Alaska face unique challenges due
to its large geographic extent and rapid rate of climate
change. Fires pose risks for both urban and rural com-
munities (Trainor et al. 2009). Protecting communities
from infrastructure loss, disruption of travel corridors,
and smoke impacts require substantial economic in-
vestment (Melvin et al. 2017). Complicating this is the
sheer size of remote, ﬁre-adapted boreal landscapes
that surround and occupy these communities.
Fire management in Alaska has operated on a coop-
erative basis since before World War II. This inter-
agency approach was codiﬁed in the Alaska Interagency
Wildland Fire Management Plan of 1998 (AWFCG
2016). Agencies involved in ﬁre management in Alaska
include the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) Alaska
Fire Service, National Park Service, U.S. Fish and Wild-
life Service, Bureau of Indian Affairs, U.S. Department
of Agriculture (USDA) Forest Service, State of Alaska
Department of Natural Resources, Alaska Native Cor-
porations, and Native nongovernmental organizations
such as the Tanana Chiefs Conference and Chugachmiut.
These organizations coordinate their activities through
the Alaska Interagency Coordination Center and the
Alaska Wildland Fire Coordinating Group (AWFCG).
Fire managers in Alaska desire actionable ﬁre science
to support decision-making (Knapp and Trainor 2013;
Knapp and Trainor 2015; Rutherford and Schultz 2019).
AWFCG has produced a research needs list for more
than 15 years to facilitate collaboration with scientists
and meet their needs for actionable information. Climate
change has ranked in the top ﬁve AWFCG research needs
since 2008 (AWFCG 2008). Other key research needs
918
W E A T H E R , C L I M A T E , A N D S O C I E T Y
VOLUME 11

include ﬁre behavior, ﬁre danger, and fuel treatments
(AWFCG 2017). Use of the phrase ‘‘ﬁre science’’ here
includes climate science related to ﬁre, like changing
ﬁre patterns and fuel characteristics, as well as other
scientiﬁc disciplines that deal with ﬁre, like social or
economic sciences.
b. Fire Science Exchange Network and Alaska Fire
Science Consortium
Increasingly severe ﬁre seasons across the United
States have led to institutional and political support for
incorporating ﬁre and climate science into ﬁre manage-
ment and policy. In 1998, Congress created the Joint Fire
Science Program (JFSP) to serve as an interagency part-
nership between the Departments of Interior (DOI) and
Agriculture and better connect federally funded research
to practitioner needs (Maletsky et al. 2018). The 2000
National Fire Plan—developed in response to the severe
2000 ﬁre season by the Departments of Agriculture and
Interior—called for agencies to manage beyond ﬁre
suppression, base ﬁre management activities on the
best available science, and encourage timely delivery of
usable information (NIFC 2001). Additional collaborative,
interagency efforts like the National Cohesive Wildland
Fire Management Strategy effort initiated in 2009 have
continued to advance science-based ﬁre management.
Several boundary organizations have also emerged to
facilitate science-based decision-making, including the JFSP
Fire Science Exchange Network (FSEN) and National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
Regionally Integrated Sciences and Assessments (RISA)
(Maletsky et al. 2018; Parris et al. 2016; Prokopy et al.
2015). The FSEN is a national network of regionally
focused boundary organizations dedicated to making
ﬁre science available and actionable to ﬁre managers
(Hunter 2016; Kocher et al. 2012). In September 2009,
funding was provided to eight FSENs for one-year
pilot grants ‘‘to support regional consortia of ﬁre sci-
ence providers and managers to enhance ﬁre science
delivery and adoption’’ (JFSP 2009). AFSC is an
FSEN funded in the ﬁrst group of pilots. Its mission is
‘‘to strengthen the link between ﬁre science research
and on-the-ground application by promoting com-
munication between managers and scientists, pro-
viding an organized ﬁre science delivery platform, and
facilitating collaborative scientist-manager research
development’’ (AFSC 2018). The FSENs emphasize
interdisciplinary work, and AFSC engages with nu-
merous scientiﬁc disciplines, including ecology, social
science, and economics. AFSC’s geographic focus is
the State of Alaska. It is collocated at the University
of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF) with several climate-related
boundary organizations, including the NOAA RISA
Alaska Center for Climate Assessment and Policy
(ACCAP) and DOI Alaska Climate Adaptation Science
Center (AK CASC).
TABLE 1. Key modes of science production in boundary organizations as used in this paper.
Key concepts
Deﬁnition
Science delivery
A one-way delivery of scientiﬁc information (McKinley et al. 2012).
Technology transfer
A one-way delivery of scientiﬁc information that serves as the basis for the development of new
information or tools for use by professionals (McKinley et al. 2012).
Knowledge coproduction
A collaborative research approach that explicitly involves the end users of the research in all stages of
knowledge development and dissemination to varying degrees, but which maintains an emphasis
on two-way, iterative, and sustained interactions and the production of actionable science (Bremer
and Meisch 2017; Meadow et al. 2015; Wall et al. 2017b).
Boundary spanning
An interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary approach for bridging the worlds of scientists and
practitioners, which can be accomplished through information brokering, convening, mediating, and
translating (Dilling and Lemos 2011; Safford et al. 2017). Boundary spanning can include both one-
way and two-way communication and interaction with scientists and practitioners. Bednarek et al.
(2018) recently deﬁned it as ‘‘work to enable exchange between the production and use of knowledge
to support evidence-informed decision making in a speciﬁc context’’ (p. 1176). They also describe
boundary spanners as the ‘‘individuals or organizations that speciﬁcally and actively facilitate this
process’’ (Bednarek et al. 2018, p. 1176).
Actionable science
Information that ‘‘fulﬁlls stakeholders’ value demands’’ for a speciﬁc situation (McNie 2013, p. 16).
Also referred to as ‘‘usable science.’’ Scientiﬁc information is deemed actionable within the speciﬁc
context in which it is intended for use.
Boundary organization
Organizations that facilitate two-way, sustained interaction and communication among research and
decision-making spheres, deliver existing science, and develop new, actionable scientiﬁc information
to address emerging social–ecological questions applicable to decision-making (Cash et al. 2003;
Gustafsson and Lidskog 2018; Guston 2001; Kocher et al. 2012). Boundary organizations have four
key functions: convening, translating, collaborating, and mediating interactions between research
and decision-making spheres (Buizer et al. 2016).
OCTOBER 2019
C O L A V I T O E T A L .
919

c. Modes of science production in boundary
organizations
Boundary organizations are one mechanism that can
facilitate two-way, iterative engagement between scien-
tists and science users and produce scientiﬁc information
that is credible, salient, and legitimate for practitioner use
(Cash et al. 2003; Gustafsson and Lidskog 2018; Guston
2001; Meadow et al. 2015). Three characteristics have
deﬁned boundary organizations: involvement of actors
across a science–practice boundary, creation of boundary
objects or outputs to facilitate communication, and exis-
tence at the nexus of at least two different social worlds
(Guston 2001). The activities that boundary organiza-
tions sponsor, processes they use, and outputs they pro-
duce are relatively distinct but more formalized than
social networks (Crona and Parker 2012). There are
several key boundary organization functions, including
convening, translating, collaborating, and mediating in-
teractions between scientists and practitioners (Buizer
et al. 2016). Boundary organizations facilitate boundary
spanning, although boundary spanners can be located
outside of boundary organizations (Bednarek et al. 2018).
Several terms are related to the different modes of sci-
ence production in boundary organizations (Table 1). Sci-
ence delivery and technology transfer are often used
to describe one-way delivery of information from scientists
to decision-makers (McKinley et al. 2012). Knowledge
coproduction involves two-way, iterative engagement be-
tween scientists and decision-makers to develop and drive
research questions, methodology, analysis, and interpre-
tation in collaborative partnership and to build shared
knowledge and trust (Bremer and Meisch 2017; Meadow
et al. 2015). Other related terms include ‘‘translational
ecology,’’ which is the process of knowledge coproduction
applied to ecological science (Enquist et al. 2017). Disen-
tangling the multitude of deﬁnitions around science
production and use is complicated by differences in
terminology across sectors and disciplines and changes in
meaning over time (Bremer and Meisch 2017; Jacobs 2017).
There is increasing attention to boundary organiza-
tions in social science research. Early research focused
on linking science and practice in applied research con-
texts (Agrawala et al. 2001; Keating 2001). More recent
efforts have demonstrated the importance of knowledge
coproduction and fostering iterative interactions between
scientists and decision-makers to increase the usability of
information (Lemos et al. 2012; Parker and Crona 2012).
Other research has identiﬁed how multiple boundary
organizations enhance their capacity by networking and
leveraging resources and capacities (Lemos et al. 2014).
Research has also begun to investigate the evolution
of boundary organizations. Leith et al. (2016) highlight
four phases of evolution relating to boundary organi-
zation legitimacy: problem deﬁnition and framing, early
wins, reciprocal commitment among partners, and ex-
tending and stabilizing the problem. Parker and Crona
(2012) suggest boundary organizations operate within a
‘‘landscape of tensions,’’ whereby stakeholder actions,
expectations, and orientations inﬂuence boundary span-
ning activities along four continua: basic and applied,
disciplinary and interdisciplinary, long-term and real-time,
and autonomy and consultancy. Other research has high-
lighted how boundary organizations have innovated their
boundary spanning to increase the usability of climate
information (Kettle and Trainor 2015). However, there
is limited understanding of how the activities of long-
standing boundary organizations shift over time to facili-
tate coproduction of actionable science.
Evaluating boundary organization effectiveness, in-
cluding science delivery and knowledge coproduction
activities, has also received increasing attention (Fazey
et al. 2014; Maletsky et al. 2018; Meadow et al. 2015;
Wall et al. 2017b). Multiple evaluation approaches use a
logic model framework, which considers the contextual
factors, inputs, processes, outputs, outcomes, and im-
pacts of an organization (NRC 2005; Singletary et al.
2015). For example, Wall et al. (2017b) developed 45
indicators within a logic model framework to evaluate
the process of coproduction of usable climate science.
Logic models and associated indicators (e.g., Wall et al.
2017b) allow for systematic analysis of change over time
and facilitate assessment of the outcomes and impacts of
boundary organizations.
3. Methods
This analysis of AFSC uses a logic model framework.
A logic model is a graphical representation of an orga-
nization’s program theory, ‘‘an explicit theory or model
of how an intervention contributes to a set of speciﬁc
outcomes through a series of intermediate results’’ (Funnell
and Rogers 2011, p. 31). The logic model framework was
selected for multiple reasons. AFSC’s activities were
already organized in a logic model framework because
JFSP has been requiring their use in all FSENs since
2012 in order to evaluate program effectiveness. Re-
search on FSEN’s has highlighted the importance of
regular surveys to inform program effectiveness evalu-
ation and the iterative, ongoing use of logic models to
incorporate evaluation into planning (Maletsky et al.
2018; Singletary et al. 2015). A logic model framework is
also proposed by Wall et al. (2017b) as a way to evaluate
knowledge coproduction with the use of consistent in-
dicators. Logic models typically include consideration of
an organization’s context and situation, inputs (assets or
920
W E A T H E R , C L I M A T E , A N D S O C I E T Y
VOLUME 11

resources), processes (activities), outputs (what they pro-
duce), outcomes, and impacts (Funnell and Rogers 2011).
Logic models project desired short-, medium-, and long-
term outcomes. For the FSENs, short-term outcomes
represent planned ‘‘change in knowledge or the partici-
pants actually learn’’; medium-term outcomes represent
‘‘change in behavior or the participants act upon what
they’ve learned’’; and long-term outcomes occur when
‘‘societal condition is improved due to a participant’s ac-
tion’’ (Singletary et al. 2015). The logic model framework
used here includes historical context, inputs and assets,
outputs and activities, and outcomes. AFSC’s impacts
were not analyzed, as they are longer-term and more
difﬁcult to measure (Ferguson et al. 2016).
Multiple methods anchored in modiﬁed grounded
theory—a research approach that begins inductively
with questions to generate data and subsequent themes
and patterns—were used, including semistructured in-
terviews, group interview, participant observation, and
document analysis (Miles and Huberman 1994; Strauss
and Corbin 1990). These methods were selected in order
to gain a comprehensive understanding of AFSC’s ac-
tivities over time. Data were collected between March
2016 and April 2017. This research was undertaken
using the principles of knowledge coproduction and in-
volved the AFSC core team, which included the prin-
cipal investigator (PI), program coordinator, and subject
matter experts, in research design, data collection, anal-
ysis, and interpretation. The AFSC PI (a social scientist)
and program coordinator are coauthors on this paper.
A purposive sample was developed with the AFSC
core team to target respondents who had past or present
involvement with AFSC (Table 2) (Bernard and Ryan
2010). In this research, involvement includes past and
present AFSC core team members, past and present
AFSC Advisory Board members, ACCAP staff, AFSC
event participants, users of AFSC outputs, and ﬁre
management leadership. One individual declined to
participate in an interview. Interviewees (n 5 30) were
asked open-ended questions about their involvement
with AFSC, involvement with ﬁre science, perceptions
of AFSC’s effects on their work, and thoughts for im-
proving AFSC and the connections between ﬁre science
and management (Dunn 2008). Interviews were conducted
in-person or by phone and recorded for transcription.
A historical scan—a form of group interview—was
conducted with four past and present AFSC core
team members to develop a chronology of AFSC’s
history, achievements, and key inﬂuencing events
(Earl et al. 2001).
The individual and group interviews were transcribed
and coded three times by a single coder using NVivo
qualitative data analysis software. Initial coding was
conducted during transcription, detailed analytical notes
were taken, and participants were consulted throughout
coding to verify single coder reliability (Saldaña 2016).
A preliminary codebook was developed with categories
from the logic model framework and descriptive cate-
gories from the literature on knowledge coproduction
and boundary spanning (e.g., the code boundary orga-
nization had the subcodes of convening, translating,
collaborating, and mediating) (Buizer et al. 2016). The
preliminary codebook was reviewed and revised by
two AFSC core team members. The interviews were
then iteratively coded by ﬁrst assigning codes from
the codebook and then adding additional emergent,
inductive codes based on content (Bernard and Ryan
2010; Strauss and Corbin 1990). The codebook was re-
viewed and revised again by AFSC core team members,
and a ﬁnal round of coding was conducted to derive
main codes and descriptive categories.
Participant observation of AFSC’s workshops, meet-
ings, webinars, internal meetings, and other events was
conducted in Fairbanks and Anchorage, Alaska, to
examine interactions between AFSC core team mem-
bers and AFSC participants (Kearns 2008). These data
were supplemented by observations of video recordings
of AFSC workshops and webinars. Observational data
were recorded but not coded.
All written and oral outputs produced by AFSC be-
tween 2009 and 2016 were compiled. These outputs were
classiﬁed by category (e.g., workshops, webinars, ﬁeld
trips, newsletters, research briefs) through systematic
review of AFSC webpages, server folders, and hardcopy
documents. They were then tallied to examine how
output production has evolved over time (Funnell and
Rogers 2011). Letters of support written by AFSC staff
for research proposals and collaborative proposals with
AFSC participation were compiled and classiﬁed into
four categories by AFSC core team members. The AFSC
activities database—an ongoing database of all AFSC
activities and outputs used for reporting to JFSP—was
TABLE 2. Respondent demographics: science refers to respondents
who primarily conduct research, management refers to respondents
who primarily work for state and federal land management agencies,
and boundary spanner refers to respondents who work for or directly
with boundary organizations. For respondents with more than one
afﬁliation, their currentafﬁliationor the afﬁliation of the organization
in which they are employed was used for classiﬁcation.
Affiliation
Science
Management
Boundary spanner
University
7
—
7
Federal agency
3
6
2
State agency
—
3
—
Other
1
1
—
Totals
11
10
9
OCTOBER 2019
C O L A V I T O E T A L .
921

also chronologically tallied by activity categories to
understand AFSC staff interactions with the AFSC au-
dience over time. These analyses were reviewed for ac-
curacy by AFSC core team members.
Desired program outcomes as stated in the 2012 and
2015 AFSC logic models were compared to actual pro-
gram activities and achievements to assess the extent to
which AFSC achieved its goals (see Fig. 1). Analysis of
the 2017 logic model was omitted as it is too recent to
assess outcomes. Results from the JFSP biennial FSEN
surveys were reviewed but were excluded from analysis
as their major themes and results are published else-
where (Maletsky et al. 2018).
4. Findings
Findings are organized with the logic model frame-
work: historical context (factors that contributed to
AFSC’s development), past and present inputs and as-
sets (resources available to AFSC over time), outputs
and activities (what AFSC does and what it produces),
and outcomes (AFSC’s contributions to change). AFSC’s
trajectory over time is also mapped to three key periods.
a. Historical context
Interviews and the historical scan found that a foun-
dation had been laid for interagency collaboration be-
tween ﬁre science and management prior to AFSC’s
establishment. The USDA Forest Service Institute of
Northern Forestry (INF), established in 1963 but closed
in 1996 due to budget cuts, facilitated collaboration
between boreal forest managers and scientists, such
as those at the Bonanza Creek Long Term Ecological
Research Program, which addresses ecological questions
at long time scales (Viereck 1995). In response to INF’s
closure, agency staff organized mechanisms to maintain
ﬁre science capacity in Alaska, including the AWFCG
Fire Effects Task Group and a reference database and
research clearinghouse funded by JFSP.
Collaborative efforts among ﬁre managers and scientists
ramped up in 1999 when a collaborative team of scientists
and managers designed and analyzed an experimental
FIG. 1. AFSC logic model 2012. This example of an AFSC logic model was created as part of their 2012 renewal proposal to JFSP.
It illustrates a vision by AFSC to build coproduction as part of long-term outcomes.
922
W E A T H E R , C L I M A T E , A N D S O C I E T Y
VOLUME 11

burn near Fairbanks. Collaboration was further ad-
vanced in 2002, with the creation of an ecosystem model
that simulates boreal vegetation and ﬁre responses to
climate change (Rupp et al. 2000a,b), which was funded
by a JFSP grant through the Alaska Fire Service. As one
scientist said about the model, ‘‘The ﬁre management
community had gotten to a place and time where they
were starting to think critically about how the ﬁre regime
might be changing.’’ Meanwhile, ﬁre managers began to
identify, prioritize, and communicate their research
needs via the AWFCG Fire Effects Task Group, which
produced the ﬁrst ofﬁcial Research Needs List in 2003
(AWFCG 2003). In 2006, scientists and manaers col-
laborated to implement an experimental fuel treatment
and subsequent prescribed ﬁre in 2009 at Nenana Ridge
with JFSP funding.
The extreme ﬁre seasons of 2004 and 2005 contributed
to the 2006 interagency decision to move the ofﬁcial start
date of the Alaska ﬁre season from 1 May to 1 April,
illustrating a policy response to seasonal changes in ﬁre
patterns (Trainor et al. 2017). Research on ﬁre weather
and climate quickly emerged as high-priority science
needs for ﬁre managers. Climate change research has
been on each AWFCG Research Needs List since 2003
and in the top ﬁve since 2008 (AWFCG 2003, 2008).
Thus, when AFSC was established in 2009, there was
already ongoing collaboration among scientists and
managers focused on climate impacts on ﬁre.
b. Inputs and assets
AFSC’s inputs and assets include funding, evaluation
results, core team staff, and relationships and contribu-
tions from the scientiﬁc and management communities.
JFSP has been a key input by providing consistent
funding for the core ofﬁce staff, evaluation resources,
and opportunities for collaboration with other FSENs.
The ﬁrst AFSC proposal in 2009 was developed in
partnership between UAF scientists and ﬁre managers
and highlighted AWFCG’s interest in science, the need
to formalize science delivery and two-way communica-
tion, and ﬁre management challenges related to climate
change. As one boundary spanner said about the pilot
proposal, ‘‘We just collectively felt like we needed
a better platform for cooperation and collaboration.’’
JFSP funding for AFSC has continued with four sub-
sequent successful renewal proposals.
Results from internal and external evaluations are im-
portant inputs that help with long-term planning to meet
audience needs. JFSP contracts with an external evalua-
tion team that conducts annual national evaluation sur-
veys, compiles web metrics, and provides resource guides
and advice on evaluation. JFSP also requires that
FSENs conduct program and event evaluation at the
regional level. Thus, AFSC has consistently solicited
feedback from its audience, and this user input is de-
liberately used to reﬁne AFSC activities and develop
its future trajectory.
AFSC staff, with their diversity of expertise and ex-
perience in science delivery and collaboration, are an-
other key input. During AFSC’s early years, the core
team consisted of co-principal investigators (CoPIs),
an ecologist and a social scientist at UAF, and a co-
ordinator, who was supported through a two-year in-
tergovernmental agreement with BLM Alaska Fire
Service. Over time, the social scientist has taken the lead
as PI and director of the program while the former CoPI
ecologist remains on the Advisory Board. A new coordi-
nator was hired in 2013 with deep roots in the scientiﬁc
community. Staff capacities expanded over time, including
hiring part-time subject matter experts, a ﬁre ecologist
in 2013, and a ﬁre behavior analyst in 2016, both of whom
are former ﬁre managers and serve as liaisons between
the ﬁre management and science communities.
AFSC also receives inputs from a well-organized and
engaged ﬁre science and management community. The
AFSC Advisory Board, whose members represent all
federal and state ﬁre management agencies in Alaska,
advises AFSC in setting its course of action, works to
maintain connections with its audience, ensures AFSC’s
activities are relevant, and participates in AFSC activi-
ties. AFSC engagement with AWFCG further ensures
that its activities meet management research needs. In
addition to its partnership with ACCAP and other
boundary organizations, AFSC participates in national
Arctic and wildﬁre-related research initiatives, such as
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
(NASA) Arctic Boreal Vulnerability Experiment. AFSC
staff also participate in scientiﬁc meetings and engage
with visiting scientists.
c. Outputs and activities
AFSC contributes to science delivery and knowledge
coproduction by hosting webinars and workshops, pro-
ducing written products, and engaging in proposal
writing. Webinars are especially effective at encourag-
ing dialog among managers and scientists (Trainor et al.
2016). As another boundary spanner stated, ‘‘I think the
webinars are probably attended at least half by scien-
tists.’’ AFSC leverages ACCAP’s expertise and en-
hanced webinar delivery capacity to reach a larger,
geographically dispersed audience on ﬁre-climate topics
(Kettle and Trainor 2015; Kettle et al. 2017). These
shared webinars have initiated new opportunities for
AFSC. For example, one webinar on climate change and
ﬁre in Alaska hosted by ACCAP precipitated multiple
presentations to the DOI, including the Secretary of the
OCTOBER 2019
C O L A V I T O E T A L .
923

Interior in 2016, and expanded AFSC’s connections to
national-level ﬁre managers.
AFSC workshops occur in conjunction with semi-
annual interagency meetings and are codesigned with
managers to deliver science, provide in-person engage-
ment, and facilitate relationship building. AFSC’s co-
ordinator partners closely with the ﬁre management
community to organize and plan these meetings such
that AFSC workshops have been integrated into the
interagency meetings since 2014. One manager stated,
‘‘the workshops that we’ve been able to have in con-
junction with our spring and fall meetings, I think, do . . .
not just provide information to the people who are
going to use it immediately, but allow people who
aren’t at that level yet to kind of get some exposure
to ﬁre science.’’ AFSC also hosts topical workshops
to meet speciﬁc information needs. For example, the
2014 Canadian Forest Fire Danger Rating System
(CFFDRS) Summit was coordinated by AFSC in response
to requests by managers for more analysis regarding
the application of CFFDRS in Alaska. AFSC conducts
evaluations of all their events and uses the responses in
future planning.
In addition to written outputs such as research
briefs and blog posts, AFSC facilitates science delivery
through the development of peer-reviewed articles. For
example, in 2016, AFSC collaborated with ACCAP and
AK CASC, ﬁre and climate scientists, and ﬁre managers
on a paper for the Bulletin of the American Meteoro-
logical Society, which utilized attribution science to de-
termine the extent to which the exceptional ﬁre year of
2015 was due to climate change (Partain et al. 2016).
AFSC coordinated the production of the paper by con-
vening authors, facilitating collaboration, and contrib-
uting content.
AFSC also participates in collaborative research
proposals in a range of modes, including convening sci-
entists and managers in dialogue about new research,
FIG. 2. AFSC involvement in research proposals. AFSC staff identiﬁed four levels of in-
volvement in research proposals, classiﬁed by the level of coproduction in proposal development.
Science delivery: AFSC was involved only in science delivery; Support: AFSC provided a letter
of support for the proposal; Coordination: AFSC coordinated with the proposal’s primary in-
vestigators and/or participated in writing proposal content but was not formally named on
the proposal; Coproduction: AFSC staff were formally named on the proposal to provide
support for their added capacity to the proposed research. All levels assume AFSC was
involved in science delivery. The vertical red line represents the transition from the
reactionary/awareness period to the proactive/research facilitation period (Table 4). This
ﬁgure does not include AFSC renewal proposals to JFSP. There was no evidence of AFSC
involvement in collaborative proposals prior to 2011. The 2011 proposal categorized
as coproduction was submitted to JFSP for the ‘‘In a Time of Change: The Art of Fire’’
exhibition. This proposal is unique because it resulted in a highly coproduced art exhibi-
tion, but unlike the other proposals classiﬁed as ‘‘coproduction’’ it did not include funding
to support AFSC staff (AFSC 2015).
924
W E A T H E R , C L I M A T E , A N D S O C I E T Y
VOLUME 11

writing letters of support, and serving as CoPI on pro-
posals (Fig. 2). One manager said about collaborative
proposals, ‘‘the opportunity to kind of help direct whatever
project proposals and making sure that they’re actually
things that can be used by ... people in the ﬁeld ... you’re
getting the links in the chain to make it meaningful.’’
The number of funded proposals for which AFSC has
been a PI or formal collaborator has increased since 2014.
Since 2015, AFSC’s proposal involvement has expanded
beyond JFSP as funding agency to include NOAA,
NASA, and the National Science Foundation (NSF).
In 2016, a JFSP Task Statement highlighted Alaska
as a regional focus, which led to AFSC’s involvement
in eight proposals. It is too early to assess the outcomes
of these coproduced proposals, as much of the research
is ongoing.
The relative frequency of AFSC’s engagement with its
audience and its activities has also shifted over time
(Figs. 3 and 4). Initially, AFSC’s focus was science de-
livery to build awareness of and interest in existing re-
search. This is reﬂected in the emphasis on outputs like
fact sheets, research briefs, and webinars. For example,
the total number of research briefs grew steadily from
2009 to 2013 before declining (Fig. 4). This decline co-
incides with an increase in the number of collaborative
proposals and the 2014 CFFDRS Summit, both of which
required signiﬁcant staff capacity. Direct engagement
with ﬁre managers and scientists shows a marked in-
crease in 2013 (Fig. 3). AFSC’s on-going production of
outputs such as webinars and fact sheets and briefs
demonstrate the ongoing work needed to maintain
awareness of existing research even when shifting to
more time-consuming activities like collaborative pro-
posal development and workshops (Fig. 4).
d. Outcomes
As required by JFSP, AFSC created logic models for
their renewal proposals after 2012. The logic models
were created with input from the JFSP external evalu-
ation team, AFSC’s regular evaluations, and discussions
with the AFSC advisory board. The 2012 (Fig. 1) and
2015 logic models were analyzed with a focus on out-
comes related to behavior and societal conditions that
provide evidence for the established elements of knowl-
edge coproduction (Table 3) (Meadow et al. 2015). There
were also desired outcomes related to behavior and con-
ditions in 2012 and 2015 for which evidence of achieve-
ment has not yet been collected.
The logic models reveal that AFSC set knowledge
coproduction as a deliberate and clearly articulated goal
FIG. 3. AFSC staff interactions with their audience. Data in this ﬁgure are from the AFSC
activities log, which is kept by staff members, include all AFSC activities, and are used for
reporting to JFSP. This ﬁgure only includes activities representative of AFSC staff time spent
in interactions with participants. These categories were established by the JFSP core ofﬁce
in 2010 and deﬁnitions have evolved over time. AFSC reporting was also imperfect.
Nonetheless, the ﬁgure demonstrates an increase in staff interactions with participants in
2013. The vertical red line represents the transition from the reactionary/awareness period
to the proactive/research facilitation period (Table 4).
OCTOBER 2019
C O L A V I T O E T A L .
925

in both 2012 (Fig. 1) and 2015. While it can be difﬁcult to
trace causality from logic model outputs and activities
directly to outcomes (Funnell and Rogers 2011), data
collected and analyzed here (Figs. 2, 3, and 4) provide
evidence that numerous desired outcomes related to
knowledge coproduction were accomplished. Table 3
presents the desired outcomes as stated in the AFSC
logic models together with the evidence of achievement
of these outcomes as reported in Figs. 2, 3, and 4.
e. AFSC’s historical periods
AFSC’s historical trajectory can be characterized by
three key periods: the foundational period, the awareness-
building (reactionary) period, and the research facilitation
(proactive) period (Table 4).
In the foundational period, multiple preconditioning
factors contributed to AFSC’s emergence (Ferguson
et al. 2014). Prior to AFSC’s creation, existing relation-
ships, ongoing interactions, and receptivity to the use of
science in management set the stage for AFSC’s initial
focus on science delivery, including emerging science
from Alaska. In the reactionary period, AFSC’s activities
focused on developing audience recognition, increasing
awareness of existing science, and building relationships
(Figs. 3 and 4). Although AFSC’s staff were limited
during this period, their preexisting relationships with the
ﬁre management and science communities allowed them
to leverage existing networks (Lemos et al. 2014). During
this period, AFSC’s workshops served a convening
function to create a forum for engagement between the
management and science communities (Buizer et al.
2016). The webinars and fact sheets reﬂect a one-way
information push model (Cash et al. 2006). Partly due to
limited staff capacity and focus on science delivery, time
spent engaged with participants was relatively low com-
pared to later periods (Fig. 3).
The transition to the proactive period was initiated
by shifting staff inputs, including the hiring of a new
coordinator with experience in science facilitation and
subject matter experts from the ﬁre management com-
munity. New AFSC staff inputs created capacity that
was vital to a new focus on knowledge coproduction
(Bednarek et al. 2018; Brugger et al. 2016). This en-
hanced capacity allowed AFSC staff to spend more time
building relationships with their participants (Fig. 3), as
well as developing collaborative research proposals de-
signed to coproduce new knowledge, while continuing
to deliver existing science through webinars, workshops,
and research briefs (Fig. 4). The transition between the
reactionary and proactive periods is illustrated in the
following quote by a past member of the AFSC core
team, ‘‘We were almost kind of reactionary. . .we were
trying to catch up to what everyone wanted. . .versus
now, the Consortium has built their stakeholders, had
these meetings, had these conversations, that allows you
[i.e., AFSC] guys to be more proactive.’’
FIG. 4. Changes in select AFSC outputs and activities from 2009 to 2016. The vertical red
line represents the transition from the reactionary/awareness period to the proactive/research
facilitation period (Table 4). Collaborative proposals include those in the coordination and
coproduction categories in Fig. 2.
926
W E A T H E R , C L I M A T E , A N D S O C I E T Y
VOLUME 11

5. Discussion
a. AFSC transition from science delivery to
knowledge coproduction
AFSC’s focus has deliberately shifted over time
from a focus on science delivery to a focus on knowledge
coproduction (Fig. 1). The trajectory of AFSC’s ac-
tivities and outputs in the proactive, research facilita-
tion period demonstrates their shifting emphasis to
knowledge coproduction. First, AFSC’s involvement
in collaborative proposals increased ﬁvefold between
2014 and 2016 (Fig. 2). AFSC leveraged their trusted
relationships to facilitate dialog, as well as establish
and foster new relationships for collaborative proposal
development (Brugger et al. 2016). Second, AFSC’s
outputs and activities began to place greater empha-
sis on iterative, two-way interactions (Meadow et al.
2015). AFSC’s production of outputs like fact sheets
and briefs peaked in 2013 (Fig. 4). This can be attributed
to the considerable time investment needed for knowl-
edge coproduction activities like collaborative proposals
(Fig. 5) (Wall et al. 2017a). AFSC continued hosting
workshops, which allowed for one-way science deliv-
ery, as well as relationship-building, and also became
embedded in the ﬁre management community’s existing
gatherings (Djenontin and Meadow 2018; Ferguson
et al. 2014). Third, AFSC’s facilitation of webinars in-
creased (Fig. 4). These webinars increasingly fostered
TABLE 3. AFSC achieved outcomes relevant to knowledge coproduction as articulated in the 2012 and 2015 logic models.
Logic model
year
Outcome stated in logic model
Evidence of achievement
2012
Project consultations with AFSC
Activities log
Scientists seek out identiﬁed research needs for projects
Proposal meetings
Manager and scientist ‘‘coproduction of knowledge’’
Submitted and funded coproduced proposals
Research designed to meet regionally identiﬁed management
research priorities
Submitted and funded coordinated and coproduced
proposals
2015
Increased collaborative proposal submissions
Submitted coordinated and coproduced proposals
Scientists are better prepared to extend their research to
management application
Special topic workshops, coordinated and coproduced
proposals
Increased collaborative proposal success
Funded coproduced proposals
Development of science/management partnership,
functioning and productive ‘‘co-production of knowledge’’
AFSC role in organizing fall and spring ﬁre management
meetings, submitted and funded coordinated and
coproduced proposals
Research designed to meet regional management
priorities
Submitted and funded coordinated and coproduced
proposals
TABLE 4. Key periods in AFSC’s history as identiﬁed by AFSC staff during the historical scan and corresponding inputs from ﬁre
and scientiﬁc communities and AFSC staff. Each of these periods can be characterized by different inputs and characteristics. Inputs from
the advisory board have remained relatively constant and are not included in this table.
Period
Community and staff inputs
Characteristics
Foundational (1990s–2008)
Fire management community members engaged in
science
Strong historical context for science
and management integration
University staff engaged in management-relevant
research
Reactionary, awareness
building (2009–12)
AFSC coordinator on intergovernmental agreement
from BLM
Focus on building awareness and
recognition of the program
Relationship building
AFSC principal investigator with expertise in
knowledge coproduction
Delivery of existing scientiﬁc
information
Proactive, research facilitation
(2013–present)
New AFSC program coordinator with experience in
scientiﬁc community
Focus on increasing scientist/practitioner
relationships
New AFSC ﬁre ecology subject matter expert from
ﬁre management community
Increase in collaborative proposals to
address new research needs and
coproduce new knowledge
New AFSC ﬁre behavior subject matter expert from
ﬁre management community
Continued science delivery
AFSC principal investigator with expertise in
knowledge coproduction
OCTOBER 2019
C O L A V I T O E T A L .
927

two-way dialog and featured managers. They also al-
lowed AFSC to leverage trusted climate science
knowledge from other boundary organizations like
ACCAP to facilitate knowledge coproduction (Kettle
and Trainor 2015; Lemos et al. 2014). Fourth, AFSC’s
involvement in the development of peer-reviewed arti-
cles illustrates their growing emphasis on knowledge
coproduction (Knapp and Trainor 2015). The produc-
tion of the Partain et al. (2016) paper on attribution of
the 2015 ﬁre season to climate change is illustrative of
this. Fifth, AFSC staff spent increasing time engaging
with managers and scientists (Fig. 3). This engagement
was largely in person, which is critical for maintaining
relationships and facilitating the iterative, two-way
communication critical to knowledge coproduction
(Colavito 2017; Meadow et al. 2015).
b. Continuum of boundary spanning activities
Analysis of AFSC’s transition from science de-
livery to knowledge coproduction revealed a continuum
of boundary spanning activities, including translation
and communication of science, as well as building social
capital, with activities and processes commonly used
to support actionable science (McNie 2013). AFSC’s
activities included both one-way modes of engage-
ment, such as science delivery that targeted a large
audience and required minimal time to implement,
as well as two-way engagement strategies that tar-
geted smaller audiences and required higher time
investments (Dilling and Lemos 2011; Djenontin and
Meadow 2018).
Transitions in the frequency of speciﬁc boundary
spanning activities across the continuum of engagement
highlight multiple tradeoffs among the number of indi-
viduals served, level of engagement, and time required
to support engagement activities (Fig. 5). Figure 5 was
created by an AFSC subject matter expert in 2013
to facilitate discussion of proposed AFSC activities.
It illustrates an explicit awareness of the trade-off
between the number of people reached and the time
investment required as the degree of engagement in-
creases. The decrease in AFSC production of fact
sheets and briefs and increase in collaborative pro-
posals around 2013 illustrates this trade-off and an
effort to increase knowledge coproduction activities
(Fig. 4). The participant engagement and boundary
spanning activities depicted in Fig. 5 are represented
as a continuum, as there are often blurred boundaries
among participant types and modes of engagement
(Leith et al. 2018).
c. Barriers and challenges
AFSC has experienced challenges in their transition
to knowledge coproduction especially due to their lim-
ited part-time staff capacity and a ﬁre management au-
dience who simultaneously wear multiple hats and are
often stretched thin (Wall et al. 2017a). Other research
has also documented that boundary organizations face
a range of institutional challenges in developing and
applying actionable science (Lemos et al. 2014). For
example, reasons that scientiﬁc information is not used
in management may not be due to intent on the part
of managers but rather bureaucratic structures that
make it difﬁcult for managers to effectively articulate
what kinds of information would be most actionable
in decision-making (Esch et al. 2018; Owen et al. 2012;
Wright 2010). Another core challenge in the evaluation
of boundary spanning and use of logic models is the
difﬁculty attributing identiﬁed societal impacts to
any given activity or outcome or identifying causality
(Funnell and Rogers 2011; Maletsky et al. 2018). Addi-
tional evaluation challenges include tracking longer-
term impacts and identifying and understanding the
use of science in decision-making (Ferguson et al. 2016;
Hunter 2016).
FIG. 5. Continuum of boundary spanning activities. There are
multiple factors in this continuum: (left cone) audience type and
degree of engagement and (right cone) types of activities to-
gether with time required. As you move along continuum from
the bottom to the top of the diagram there are tradeoffs associ-
ated with the number of individuals served, level of engagement,
type of activity, and time required. Thus, engaging partners in
knowledge coproduction requires a larger time commitment and
reaches fewer people than science delivery. (Source: AFSC subject
matter expert.)
928
W E A T H E R , C L I M A T E , A N D S O C I E T Y
VOLUME 11

d. Key factors in the transition from science delivery
to coproduction
Knowledge coproduction requires several important
elements including understanding the knowledge and
decision-context of the user community, building trusted
relationships, and remaining ﬂexible and responsive
to new opportunities and user needs (Djenontin and
Meadow 2018; Kettle 2019; Lemos et al. 2012). In-
stitutional support, funding availability and priorities,
and changes in management also inﬂuence science de-
livery and knowledge coproduction (Leith et al. 2018;
NOAA 2017). In this section, four interrelated key
factors that facilitated development of these elements
and the transition from science delivery to a focus
on the coproduction of new knowledge in AFSC are
summarized.
1) RECEPTIVE AND ENGAGED AUDIENCE
AFSC emerged in the context of a ﬁre management
community that was aware of the importance of science
for decision-making—often because they could not rely
on information developed for the contiguous United
States—and receptive to actionable science (AWFCG
2003; AWFCG 2008; Knapp and Trainor 2015). This
receptive and engaged audience was an important pre-
conditioning factor in AFSC’s ability to transition from
science delivery to knowledge coproduction (Ferguson
et al. 2014). AFSC’s emergence created a formal, agency-
neutral structure that serves the convening, moderating,
and facilitating functions of a boundary organization
within this existing, receptive practitioner environment.
The receptive and engaged audience enabled AFSC to
work with AWFCG to advance manager-identiﬁed re-
search needs. For example, research on the attribution of
climate change to the 2015 ﬁre season (Partain et al. 2016)
contributed to understanding the climate linkages to past
and present ﬁre patterns, which was identiﬁed in the 2014
Research Needs List (AWFCG 2014). This receptive and
engaged audience provided partners eager to participate
in research opportunities, enabling AFSC to shift its focus
from science delivery to knowledge coproduction.
2) BUILT-IN EVALUATION AND LEARNING
AFSC’s shift from science delivery to knowledge co-
production has been further supported by external
evaluation and internal activities assessments, which
have provided regular, iterative feedback from its au-
dience since the beginning of the program (Maletsky
et al. 2018; Singletary et al. 2015). The external evalua-
tion team contracted with JFSP to work with the FSENs
has assisted AFSC in building skills in evaluation de-
livery and analysis. AFSC’s internal evaluations have
provided a way for the AFSC audience to provide input
and feedback on the value of AFSC programming. In-
formal, one-on-one conversations also allowed audience
input on activities and programming (Fig. 3). AFSC
used results from these evaluations to plan future ac-
tivities, remaining ﬂexible and responsive to audience
needs. For example, numerous AFSC activities were a
direct result of needs expressed in the evaluations (e.g.,
CFFDRS Summit, webinars and speakers for work-
shops, and the cultivation of coproduced proposals)
(Figs. 2 and 4). This ongoing evaluation and communi-
cation provided AFSC’s already receptive and engaged
audience opportunities to contribute to AFSC’s processes
and outputs. It has also allowed AFSC’s audience to better
understand and describe their scientiﬁc information needs
through regular feedback. The continuity of the evaluation
structure has allowed AFSC to longitudinally track its
outcomes over time.
3) SUBJECT MATTER EXPERTISE AND
COMPLEMENTARITY
Since its inception, the experience and expertise of
AFSC core team members have spanned management
and interdisciplinary science communities (Bednarek
et al. 2018; Brugger et al. 2016). The ﬁelds of science that
AFSC engages on behalf of meeting managers’ needs
span a range of disciplinary ﬁelds, including ﬁre ecology,
ﬁre behavior, smoke modeling, climate science, and
economics (see, e.g., Little et al. 2018; Rutherford and
Schultz 2019). Social science research on the process of
boundary spanning, such as this project, also informs
AFSC activities and boundary spanning strategies. AFSC’s
ﬁrst coordinator and current subject matter experts come
from ﬁre management careers, and the current coordinator
previously worked in science administration. This experi-
ence conveys the necessary legitimacy to build trust with
the management community (Pinkerton 2018). They
have worked as a team, with each contributing their
respective expertise and learning from each other. The
AFSC core team’s complementarity of experience in
both the ﬁre science and management communities in
Alaska has been a signiﬁcant factor in facilitating knowl-
edge coproduction through a boundary organization
(Evans 1996; Kettle et al. 2017).
4) EMBEDDEDNESS IN THE TARGET AUDIENCE
COMMUNITIES
With complementary experience, AFSC has become
increasingly embedded in the ﬁre science and manage-
ment communities. The ﬁre management commu-
nity has included AFSC in the planning of their spring
and fall interagency meetings, offering opportuni-
ties to integrate ﬁre science presentations and dialog.
OCTOBER 2019
C O L A V I T O E T A L .
929

AFSC’s Advisory Board members have also routinely
suggested topics and presented in AFSC webinars. AFSC
has served a ‘‘secretariat’’ role, meaning they are entrusted
with administrative duties toward maintaining agency-
neutral science–management partnerships (Buizer et al.
2016). With the increase in coproduced proposals, this
secretariat role has expanded to bridge the science and
management realms. AFSC’s collocation with key players
in the ﬁre and climate science community has facili-
tated sustained, in-person interaction and contributed
to embeddedness through science–manager relation-
ships (Colavito 2017). Both complementarity and em-
beddedness have been identiﬁed as important elements
of knowledge coproduction (Evans 1996).
e. Research limitations and suggested future research
Because AFSC is just one example of a boundary
organization, a key study limitation is that it cannot as-
sess the range of conditions under which boundary or-
ganizations operate. For example, AFSC operates in a
stakeholder context with a receptive and engaged au-
dience. Therefore, this study cannot analyze how a
boundary organization that lacks this initial condition
can work to promote knowledge coproduction. As such,
the single case study approach used allows for rich
contextual detail but cannot support broader general-
izations across multiple boundary organizations or
other natural resource sectors or regions. Furthermore,
evidence of AFSC’s shifting activities partly relies on
a self-reported activity log that is inherently prone to
human error.
Based on work to date, future research that seeks to
understand how boundary organizations transition over
time, range over varied contexts, or address boundary
spanning when the key factors that facilitated AFSC’s
transition are not present is recommended. For exam-
ple, additional case studies that compare boundary or-
ganizations working in ﬁre management across regions
can identify regional conditions such as audience re-
ceptivity, existing stakeholder networks, the constella-
tion of land ownership, and ecological factors that may
facilitate or impede knowledge coproduction. Con-
versely, future research that explores the activities of
different boundary organizations working in the same
region yet addressing different resource management
areas such as ﬁsheries, wildlife, or coastal management
with associated climate impacts would elucidate how
the awareness, assumptions, and institutional conﬁg-
uration of stakeholders, resource managers, and sci-
entists vary by resource. This may shed light on how
to build more integrated, interdisciplinary knowledge
coproduction to address the spectrum of impacts of
climate change.
Due to the difﬁculty of attributing causality from an or-
ganization’s activities (Funnell and Rogers 2011; Maletsky
et al. 2018), better methods are needed to identify and
measure causal factors that lead to societal outcomes.
Additional research is also needed to better understand
knowledge coproduction across different epistemo-
logical boundaries, such as between scientists and In-
digenous peoples (Kettle 2019; Trainor 2013).
6. Conclusions
This case study highlights the continuum of boundary
spanning activities ranging from one-way science de-
livery through two-way knowledge coproduction. This
analysis shows that boundary organizations are capable
of simultaneously engaging in multiple activities along
this spectrum, yet doing so involves trade-offs in time
required for engagement and number of audience mem-
bers reached (Fig. 5). The AFSC case study demonstrates
that boundary organizations are capable of deliberately
shifting their emphasis along this continuum over time to
transition from a portfolio comprising primarily science
delivery to one weighted toward knowledge coproduc-
tion. Key factors contributing to this transition were a
receptive and engaged audience, built-in evaluation and
learning, subject matter expertise and complementarity,
and embeddedness in the target audience.
Based on the AFSC case study, three interrelated rec-
ommendations are proposed for boundary organizations
or boundary spanners who intend to shift from science
delivery to knowledge coproduction in their activities.
1) Know your audiences. Building trusted relationships
is critical to successful boundary spanning (Bednarek
et al. 2018). Having these trusted relationships in both
the science and practitioner communities is critical for
knowledge coproduction (Brugger et al. 2016; Safford
et al. 2017). Knowing the speciﬁc decision contexts of
the user community is a core prerequisite for knowl-
edge coproduction (Trainor et al. 2019; Parris et al.
2016). Developing trusted relationships can facilitate
the development of a receptive and engaged audience
in instances where they do not already exist but does
require a signiﬁcant time investment (Wall et al.
2017a) (Fig. 5).
2) Employ trusted experts, rather than view boundary
spanning as entry-level work. Successful knowledge
coproduction requires expertise in both the subject
matter and in the realities of practitioner demands
and decision-contexts (Brugger et al. 2016; Djenontin
and Meadow 2018). While it is critical to train early-
career scientists and entry-level workers in knowledge
coproduction, employing later-career or retired
930
W E A T H E R , C L I M A T E , A N D S O C I E T Y
VOLUME 11

individuals with considerable experience in practi-
tioner realms can be an enormous asset.
3) Engage in frequent self-evaluation and adjust activ-
ities accordingly. Evaluation is a systematic process
that requires a program to set goals, identify prac-
tices to achieve those goals, monitor and evaluate
outcomes over time, and adjust to ensure goals are being
met, with periodic re-evaluation of goals (Ferguson
et al. 2016, Funnell and Rogers 2011; Maletsky et al.
2018; Singletary et al. 2015; Wall et al. 2017b).
Frequent evaluation provides an awareness and a
deliberate decision-context within which to situate
boundary spanning activities along the spectrum of
science delivery to knowledge coproduction. Solic-
iting audience input and acting on their recommen-
dations is critical, and feedback should be solicited
in multiple venues (Fazey et al. 2014). Audience
feedback should be taken seriously and used as a
guide for strategic planning.
Acknowledgments. This research was supported by
the Alaska Center for Climate Assessment and Policy
(ACCAP), a Regional Integrated Sciences and Assess-
ments Team of the National Oceanic and Atmo-
spheric Administration, Awards NA16OAR4310162 and
NA11OAR4310141. Support was also received from
Alaska EPSCoR NSF Award OIA-1208927 and the
State of Alaska. We thank Randi Jandt, Tina Buxbaum,
and Heather McFarland for their assistance with this
research and manuscript, as well as the individuals
in ﬁre science and management in Alaska who partici-
pated in this study. We also thank the Joint Fire Science
Program and the Alaska Fire Science Consortium for
providing information for this research. Finally, we thank
the anonymous reviewers for their thoughtful and
constructive feedback.
REFERENCES
AFSC, 2015: In a Time of Change: The Art of Fire. Final Report:
Joint Fire Science Program Project ID: 11-S-2-2. Alaska Fire
Science Consortium, 10 pp., https://www.ﬁrescience.gov/projects/
11-S-2-2/project/11-S-2-2_ﬁnal_report.pdf.
——, 2018: About the Alaska Fire Science Consortium. Alaska
Fire Science Consortium, accessed 8 January 2019, https://
www.frames.gov/partner-sites/afsc/about/.
Agrawala, S., K. Broad, and D. H. Guston, 2001: Integrating climate
forecasts and societal decision making: Challenges to an emer-
gent boundary organization. Sci. Technol. Human Values, 26,
454–477, https://doi.org/10.1177/016224390102600404.
AWFCG, 2003: AWFCG Fire Research Needs 2003, Alaska
Wildland Fire Coordinating Group, Fire Research Development
and Application Committee, 7 pp., https://www.frames.gov/
catalog/58632.
——, 2008: AWFCG Fire Research Needs 2008. Alaska Wildland
Fire Coordinating Group, Fire Research Development and
Application Committee, 9 pp., https://www.frames.gov/catalog/
10626.
——, 2014: AWFCG Fire Research Needs 2014. Alaska Wildland
Fire Coordinating Group, Fire Research Development and
Application Committee, 9 pp., https://www.frames.gov/catalog/
58634.
——, 2016: Alaska Interagency Wildland Fire Management Plan
2016. Alaska Wildland Fire Coordinating Group, 66 pp.,
https://ﬁre.ak.blm.gov/content/aicc/Alaska%20Statewide%
20Master%20Agreement/4.%20Alaska%20Interagency%
20WIldland%20Fire%20Managment%20Plan%20(AIWFMP)/
2016%20AIWFMP.pdf.
——, 2017: AWFCG Fire Research Needs 2017. Alaska Wildland
Fire Coordinating Group, Fire Research Development and
Application Committee, 14 pp., https://www.frames.gov/catalog/
58635.
Balshi, M. S., A. D. McGuire, P. Duffy, M. Flannigan, J. Walsh,
and J. Melillo, 2009: Assessing the response of area burned
to changing climate in western boreal North America us-
ing a multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS) ap-
proach. Global Change Biol., 15, 578–600, https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1365-2486.2008.01679.x.
Bednarek, A. T., and Coauthors, 2018: Boundary spanning at the
science–policyinterface: The practitioners’ perspectives. Sustain.
Sci., 13, 1175–1183, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-018-0550-9.
Bernard, H. R., and G. Ryan, 2010: Analyzing Qualitative Data:
Systematic Approaches. SAGE Publications, 480 pp.
Bremer, S., and S. Meisch, 2017: Co-production in climate change
research: Reviewing different perspectives. Wiley Interdiscip.
Rev.: Climate Change, 8, e482, https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.482.
Brugger, J., A. Meadow, and A. Horangic, 2016: Lessons from
ﬁrst-generation climate science integrators. Bull. Amer.
Meteor. Soc., 97, 355–365, https://doi.org/10.1175/BAMS-
D-14-00289.1.
Buizer, J., K. Jacobs, and D. Cash, 2016: Making short-term
climate forecasts useful: Linking science and action. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 113, 4597–4602, https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.0900518107.
Calef, M. P., A. Varvak, A. D. McGuire, F. S. Chapin, and K. B.
Reinhold, 2015: Recent changes in annual area burned in in-
terior Alaska: The impact of ﬁre management. Earth Interact.,
19, https://doi.org/10.1175/EI-D-14-0025.1.
Cash, D. W., W. C. Clark, F. Alcock, N. M. Dickson, N. Eckley,
D. H. Guston, J. Jäger, and R. B. Mitchell, 2003: Knowledge
systems for sustainable development. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA,
100, 8086–8091, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1231332100.
——, J. C. Borck, and A. G. Patt, 2006: Countering the loading-
dock approach to linking science and decision making: Com-
parative analysis of El Niño/Southern Oscillation (ENSO)
forecasting systems. Sci. Technol. Human Values, 31, 465–494,
https://doi.org/10.1177/0162243906287547.
Chapin, F. S., and Coauthors, 2010: Resilience of Alaska’s boreal
forest to climatic change. Can. J. For. Res., 40, 1360–1370,
https://doi.org/10.1139/X10-074.
Clark, W. C., L. Kerkhoff, L. Lebel, and G. C. Gallopin, 2016:
Crafting usable knowledge for sustainable development. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 113, 4570–4578, https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1601266113.
Colavito, M. M., 2017: Utilising scientiﬁc information to support
resilient forest and ﬁre management. Int. J. Wildland Fire, 26,
375–383, https://doi.org/10.1071/WF16158.
Crona, B., and J. Parker, 2012: Learning in support of governance:
Theories, methods, and a framework to assess how bridging
OCTOBER 2019
C O L A V I T O E T A L .
931

organizations contribute to adaptive resource governance.
Ecol. Soc., 17, 32, https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-04534-170132.
Dilling, L., and M. C. Lemos, 2011: Creating usable science: Op-
portunities and constraints for climate knowledge use and their
implications for science policy. Global Environ. Change, 21,
680–689, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2010.11.006.
Djenontin, I. N. S., and A. M. Meadow, 2018: The art of co-
production of knowledge in environmental sciences and man-
agement: Lessons from international practice. Environ. Manage.,
61, 885–903, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00267-018-1028-3.
Dunn, K., 2008: Interviewing. Qualitative Research Methods in
Human Geography, 2nd ed., I. Hay, Ed., Oxford University
Press, 79–105.
Earl, S., F. Carden, and T. Smutylo, 2001: Outcome mapping:
Building learning and reﬂection into development programs,
International Development Research Centre, 120 pp., https://
www.idrc.ca/en/book/outcome-mapping-building-learning-and-
reﬂection-development-programs.
Enquist, C. A. F., and Coauthors, 2017: Foundations of translational
ecology. Front. Ecol. Environ., 15, 541–550, https://doi.org/
10.1002/fee.1733.
Esch, B. E., A. E. M. Waltz, T. N. Wasserman, and E. L. Kalies,
2018: Using best available science information: Determining
best and available. J. For., 116, 473–480, https://doi.org/10.1093/
jofore/fvy037.
Evans, P., 1996: Government action, social capital and develop-
ment: Reviewing the evidence and synergy. World Dev., 24,
1119–1132, https://doi.org/10.1016/0305-750X(96)00021-6.
Fazey, I., and Coauthors, 2014: Evaluating knowledge exchange
in interdisciplinary and multi-stakeholder research. Global
Environ. Change, 25, 204–220, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.gloenvcha.2013.12.012.
Ferguson, D. B., J. Rice, and C. A. Woodhouse, 2014: Linking
environmental research and practice: Lessons from the inte-
gration of climate science and water management in the
Western United States. University of Arizona, Climate Assess-
ment for the Southwest, 18 pp., http://www.climas.arizona.edu/
publication/report/linking-environmental-research-and-practice.
——, M. L. Finucane, V. W. Keener, and G. Owen, 2016: Evalu-
ation to advance science policy: Lessons from Paciﬁc RISA
and CLIMAS. Climate in Context, A. S. Parris et al., Eds.,
Wiley-Blackwell, 215–234.
Funnell, S. C., and P. J. Rogers, 2011: Purposeful Program
Theory: Effective Use of Theories of Change and Logic Models.
Jossey-Bass, 550 pp.
Gustafsson, K. M., and R. Lidskog, 2018: Boundary organizations
and environmental governance: Performance, institutional
design, and conceptual development. Climate Risk Manage.,
19, 1–11, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crm.2017.11.001.
Guston, D. H., 2001: Boundary organizations in environmental pol-
icy and science: An introduction. Sci. Technol. Human Values,
26, 399–408, https://doi.org/10.1177/016224390102600401.
Hunter, M. E., 2016: Outcomes of ﬁre research: Is science used?
Int. J. Wildland Fire, 25, 495–504, https://doi.org/10.1071/
WF15202.
Ingalsbee, T., 2017: Whither the paradigm shift? Large wildland
ﬁres and the wildﬁre paradox offer opportunities for a new
paradigm of ecological ﬁre management. Int. J. Wildland Fire,
26, 557–561, https://doi.org/10.1071/WF17062.
Jacobs, K., 2017: Teams at their core: Implementing an ‘‘All Lands
Approach to Conservation’’ requires focusing on relationships,
teamwork, processes, and communications. Forests, 8, 246,
https://doi.org/10.3390/f8070246.
JFSP, 2009: Project Announcement FA-RFA09-0004. Joint Fire
Science Program, Regional Science Delivery and Outreach.
20 pp., https://www.ﬁrescience.gov/AFPs/09-4-1/09-4-1_RFA_
Requirements.pdf.
Johnstone, J. F., T. S. Rupp, M. Olson, and D. Verbyla, 2011:
Modeling impacts of ﬁre severity on successional trajectories
and future ﬁre behavior in Alaskan boreal forests. Landsc.
Ecol., 26, 487–500, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10980-011-9574-6.
Joly, K., P. A. Duffy, and T. S. Rupp, 2012: Simulating the effects of
climate change on ﬁre regimes in Arctic biomes: Implications
for caribou and moose habitat. Ecosphere, 3, 36, https://doi.org/
10.1890/ES12-00012.1.
Kasischke, E. S., and Coauthors, 2010: Alaska’s changing ﬁre
regime—Implications for the vulnerability of its boreal for-
ests. Can. J. For. Res., 40, 1313–1324, https://doi.org/10.1139/
X10-098.
Kearns, R. A., 2008: Knowing seeing? Undertaking observational
research. Qualitative Research Methods in Human Geography,
I. Hay, Ed., Oxford University Press, 192–206.
Keating, T. J., 2001: Lessons from the recent history of the Health
Effects Institute. Sci. Technol. Human Values, 26, 409–430,
https://doi.org/10.1177/016224390102600402.
Kettle, N. P., 2019: Knowledge co-production in contested spaces:
An evaluation of the North Slope Borough–Shell Baseline
Studies Program. Arctic, 72, 43–57, https://doi.org/10.14430/
arctic67804.
——, and S. F. Trainor, 2015: The role of remote engagement in
supporting boundary chain networks across Alaska. Climate
Risk Manage., 9, 6–19, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crm.2015.06.006.
——, ——, and P. A. Loring, 2017: Conceptualizing the science–
practice interface: Lessons from a collaborative network on
the front-line of climate change. Front. Environ. Sci., 5, 33,
https://doi.org/10.3389/fenvs.2017.00033.
Knapp, C. N., and S. F. Trainor, 2013: Adapting science to a warming
world. Global Environ. Change, 23, 1296–1306, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.07.007.
——, and ——, 2015: Alaskan stakeholder-deﬁned research needs
in the context of climate change. Polar Geogr., 38, 42–69, https://
doi.org/10.1080/1088937X.2014.999844.
Kocher, S. D., and Coauthors, 2012: How can we span the
boundaries between wildland ﬁre science and management
in the United States? J. For., 110, 421–428, https://doi.org/
10.5849/jof.11-085.
Leith, P., M. Haward, C. Rees, and E. Ogier, 2016: Success and
evolution of a boundary organization. Sci. Technol. Human
Values, 41, 375–401, https://doi.org/10.1177/0162243915601900.
——, R. Warman, A. Harwood, K. Bosomworth, and P. Wallis,
2018: An operation on ‘the neglected heart of science policy’:
Reconciling supply and demand for climate change adaptation
research. Environ. Sci. Policy, 82, 117–125, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.envsci.2018.01.015.
Lemos, M. C., C. J. Kirchhoff, and V. Ramprasad, 2012: Narrowing
the climate information usability gap. Nat. Climate Change, 2,
789–794, https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate1614.
——, ——, S. E. Kalafatis, D. Scavia, and R. B. Rood, 2014:
Moving climate information off the shelf: Boundary chains
and the role of RISAs as adaptive organizations. Wea.
Climate Soc., 6, 273–285, https://doi.org/10.1175/WCAS-
D-13-00044.1.
Littell, J. S., D. McKenzie, D. L. Peterson, and A. L. Westerling,
2009: Climate and wildﬁre area burned in Western U.S. ecopro-
vinces, 1916–2003. Ecol. Appl., 19, 1003–1021, https://doi.org/
10.1890/07-1183.1.
932
W E A T H E R , C L I M A T E , A N D S O C I E T Y
VOLUME 11

Little, J., R. Jandt, S. Drury, A. Molina, and B. Lane, 2018: Evaluating
the effectiveness of fuel treatments in Alaska. Final Report to the
Joint Fire Science Program, JFSP Project 14-5-01-27, 97 pp.,
https://www.frames.gov/documents/alaska/docs/little_et_al_2018_
EvaluatingEffectivenessFuelTreatmentsAlaska_jfsp-14-5-01-27.pdf.
Maletsky, L. D., W. P. Evans, L. Singletary, and L. L. Sicafuse,
2018: Joint Fire Science Program (JFSP) Fire Science Ex-
change Network: A national evaluation of initiative impacts.
J. For., 116, 328–335, https://doi.org/10.1093/jofore/fvy009.
Mann, D. H., T. S. Rupp, M. A. Olson, and P. A. Duffy, 2012: Is
Alaska’s boreal forest now crossing a major ecological thresh-
old? Arct. Antarct. Alp. Res., 44, 319–331, https://doi.org/10.1657/
1938-4246-44.3.319.
Markon, C. J., S. F. Trainor, and F. S. Chapin, Eds., 2012: The
United States National Climate Assessment—Alaska Tech-
nical Regional Report. U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1379,
148 pp., https://pubs.usgs.gov/circ/1379/pdf/circ1379.pdf.
Marlon, J. R., and Coauthors, 2009: Wildﬁre responses to abrupt
climate change in North America. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA,
106, 2519–2524, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0808212106.
——, and Coauthors, 2012: Long-term perspective on wildﬁres in
the Western USA. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 109, E535–E543,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1112839109.
McKinley, D. C., R. D. Briggs, and A. M. Bartuska, 2012: When
peer-reviewed publications are not enough! Delivering sci-
ence for natural resource management. For. Policy Econ., 21,
1–11, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.forpol.2012.03.007.
McNie, E. C., 2013: Delivering climate services: Organizational
strategies and approaches for producing useful climate-science
information. Wea. Climate Soc., 5, 14–26, https://doi.org/10.1175/
WCAS-D-11-00034.1.
Meadow, A. M., D. B. Ferguson, Z. Guido, A. Horangic, G. Owen,
and T. Wall, 2015: Moving toward the deliberate coproduction
of climate science knowledge. Wea. Climate Soc., 7, 179–191,
https://doi.org/10.1175/WCAS-D-14-00050.1.
Melvin, A. M., J. Murray, B. Boehlert, J. A. Martinich, L. Rennels,
and T. S. Rupp, 2017: Estimating wildﬁre response costs in
Alaska’s changing climate. Climatic Change, 141, 783–795,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-017-1923-2.
Miles, M. B., and A. M. Huberman, 1994: Qualitative Data
Analysis: An Expanded Sourcebook. 2nd ed. Sage Publica-
tions, 338 pp.
Moritz, M. A., and Coauthors, 2014: Learning to coexist with wild-
ﬁre. Nature, 515, 58–66, https://doi.org/10.1038/nature13946.
NIFC, 2001: Review and update of the 1995 Federal
Wildland Fire Management Policy. National Interagency
Fire Center, 76 pp., https://www.nifc.gov/PIO_bb/Policy/
FederalWildlandFireManagementPolicy_2001.pdf.
NOAA, 2017: Using boundary organizations to address complex
environmental issues: Case study of the NOAA-AOML Sea
Grant liaison position. NOAA Tech. Memo. OAR-AOML-106,
20 pp., https://doi.org/10.7289/V5/TM-AOML-106.
NRC, 2005: Thinking strategically: The appropriate use of metrics
for the Climate Change Science Program. National Research
Council, The National Academies Press, 162 pp., https://doi.org/
10.17226/11292.
Owen, G., J. D. McLeod, C. A. Kolden, D. B. Ferguson, and T. J.
Brown, 2012: Wildﬁre management and forecasting ﬁre po-
tential: the role of climate information and social networks in
the southwest United States. Wea. Climate Soc., 4, 90–102,
https://doi.org/10.1175/WCAS-D-11-00038.1.
Parker, J., and B. Crona, 2012: On being all things to all people:
Boundary organizations and the contemporary research
university. Soc. Stud. Sci., 42, 262–289, https://doi.org/10.1177/
0306312711435833.
Parris, A. S., G. M. Garﬁn, K. Dow, R. Meyer, and S. L. Close, Eds.,
2016: Climate in Context: Science and Society Partnering for
Adaptation. John Wiley & Sons, 274 pp., https://doi.org/
10.1002/9781118474785.
Partain, J. S., and Coauthors, 2016: An assessment of the role of
anthropogenic climate change in the Alaska ﬁre season of
2015 [in ‘‘Explaining Extreme Events of 2015 from a Climate
Perspective’’]. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 97 (12), S14–S18,
https://doi.org/10.1175/BAMS-D-16-0149.1.
Pinkerton, E., 2018: Legitimacy and effectiveness through
ﬁsheries co-management. The Future of Ocean Governance
and Capacity Development, International Ocean Institute–
Canada, Ed., Brill Nijhoff, 333–337, https://doi.org/10.1163/
9789004380271_056.
Prokopy, L. S., and Coauthors, 2015: Extension’s role in dissemi-
nating information about climate change to agriculture stake-
holders in the United States. Climatic Change, 130, 261–272,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-015-1339-9.
Rupp, T. S., F. S. Chapin, and A. M. Starﬁeld, 2000a: Re-
sponse of subarctic vegetation to transient climatic change
on the Seward Peninsula in North-West Alaska. Global
Change Biol., 6, 541–555, https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-
2486.2000.00337.x.
——, A. M. Starﬁeld, and F. S. Chapin, 2000b: A frame-based
spatially explicit model of subarctic vegetation response
to climatic change: Comparison with a point model.
Landscape Ecol., 15, 383–400, https://doi.org/10.1023/A:
1008168418778.
Rutherford, T., and C. Schultz, 2019: Adapting wildland ﬁre gov-
ernance to climate change in Alaska. Ecol. Soc., 24, 27, https://
doi.org/10.5751/ES-10810-240127.
Safford, H. D., S. C. Sawyer, S. D. Kocher, J. K. Hiers, and
M. Cross, 2017: Linking knowledge to action: The role of
boundary spanners in translating ecology. Front. Ecol. Environ.,
15, 560–568, https://doi.org/10.1002/fee.1731.
Saldaña, J., 2016: The Coding Manual for Qualitative Researchers.
Sage Publications, 339 pp.
Schoennagel, T., and Coauthors, 2017: Adapt to more wildﬁre in
western North American forests as climate changes. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 114, 4582–4590, https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1617464114.
Singletary, L., B. Evans, L. Sicafuse, and L. Maletsky, 2015: Eval-
uation resource guide for Joint Fire Science Program Ex-
changes. University of Nevada Cooperative Extension, 54 pp.,
https://www.ﬁrescience.gov/documents/JFSP_Evaluation_Resource_
Guide_2015.pdf.
Strauss, A. L., and J. M. Corbin, 1990: Basics of Qualitative Re-
search: Grounded Theory Procedures and Techniques. Sage
Publications, 270 pp.
Trainor, S. F., 2013: Deeper sense of place for indigenous and
Western science partners in climate change assessment
and adaptation in Alaska. A Deeper Sense of Place: Stories
and Journeys of Indigenous–Academic Collaboration,
J. Johnson and S. Larsen, Eds., Oregon State University Press,
179–194.
——, and Coauthors, 2009: Vulnerability and adaptation to
climate-related ﬁre impacts in rural and urban interior
Alaska. Polar Res., 28, 100–118, https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1751-8369.2009.00101.x.
——, N. Kettle, and B. Gamble, 2016: Not another webinar! Re-
gional webinars as a platform for climate knowledge to action
OCTOBER 2019
C O L A V I T O E T A L .
933

networking in Alaska. Climate in Context, A. Parris et al., Eds.,
John Wiley & Sons, 117–142.
——, J. E. Walsh, and J. B. Gamble, 2017: Human adaptation to
climate change in Alaska: Overview and recommendations
for future research and assessment. International Arctic Re-
search Center Tech. Rep. 16-1, University of Alaska Fairbanks,
33 pp., https://accap.uaf.edu/sites/default/ﬁles/resources/
Human_Adaptation_CC_AK_Overview_Recommendations_
Future_Research_Assessment_0.pdf.
——, T. Buxbaum, A. York, and A. Perrin, 2019: Science commu-
nication as a driver of landscape change. Drivers of Landscape
Change in the Northwest Boreal Region: A Synthesis of In-
formation for Policy and Land Management, A. L.Sesser
et al.,Eds., University of Alaska Press, 211–226.
Viereck, L., 1995: Institute of Northern Forestry to close. LTER
Network News, 18 (1), 1.
Wall, T. U., E. McNie, and G. M. Garﬁn, 2017a: Use-inspired science:
Making science usable by and useful to decision makers. Front.
Ecol. Environ., 15, 551–559, https://doi.org/10.1002/fee.1735.
——, A. M. Meadow, and A. Horganic, 2017b: Developing evalua-
tion indicators to improve the process of coproducing usable
climate science. Wea. Climate Soc., 9, 95–107, https://doi.org/
10.1175/WCAS-D-16-0008.1.
Westerling, A. L., H. G. Hidalgo, D. R. Cayan, and T. W. Swetnam,
2006: Warming and earlier spring increase Western U.S. forest
wildﬁre activity. Science, 313, 940–943, https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.1128834.
Wright, V., 2010: Inﬂuences to the success of ﬁre science delivery:
Perspectives of potential ﬁre/fuels science users. Final Report
to the Joint Fire Science Program, JFSP Project #04-4-2-01, 62 pp.,
https://www.ﬁrescience.gov/projects/04-4-2-01/project/04-4-2-01_vw_
jfsp_ﬁnal_report.pdf.
934
W E A T H E R , C L I M A T E , A N D S O C I E T Y
VOLUME 11
