Improvements in Value Recovery through
Low Stump Heights: Mechanized versus
Manual Felling
Ryan Hall, Silvicon Services, Inc., Smithers, British Columbia V0J 2N0, Canada; and
Han-Sup Han, Department of Forest Products, College of Natural Resources, University
of Idaho, Moscow, ID 83844-1132.
ABSTRACT: Stump heights were measured on two blocks harvested during the summer of 2000 in
north-central British Columbia. Each block was of similar stand and terrain characteristics, consisting
mainly of subalpine fir (Abies lasiocarpa) with minor components of white spruce (Picea glauca  P.
engelmannii) on gentle slopes. The blocks were harvested by two different contractors using different felling
methods: mechanized felling with a feller-buncher and manual felling with a chainsaw. The average
measured stump height from mechanized felling was 8.8 cm lower than that of manual felling, measuring
21.9 and 13.1 cm, respectively. When the saw kerf of felling equipment and stump-pull were included, the
average stump height of mechanized felling was shown to be 5.8 cm (17%) lower than manual felling.
High-end and low-end potential value losses were determined based on average sawlog values (Canadian
[CN] $60/m3) and pulp log values (CN$40/m3), respectively. The potential value loss from manual felling
was estimated to be up to CN$0.33/tree more than from mechanized felling. This result indicated that
mechanized felling recovered up to CN$160/ha over manual felling when an average sawlog value and the
stand density information from the study site were used in the calculation. The study demonstrated that
lower stump heights than the 30 cm maximum stump height set by the Forest Practices Code of British
Columbia are attainable with both felling methods. Sensitivity analysis was performed to determine the
potential value and volume gains for a range of stump heights from 0 to 30 cm. Operational constraints were
identified in the study, and recommendations for minimizing stump heights are presented. West. J. Appl.
For. 21(1):33–38.
Key Words: Sawlog, lumber, chip, wood use, stump-pull.
The forests in the central interior of British Columbia are
most often felled by one of two methods: mechanized
felling with a feller-buncher or manual felling with a chain-
saw. Generally, mechanized harvesting methods occur on
slopes that are 30% or less, as this is the slope range
whereby mechanized harvesting can be done in a safe and
economically efficient manner. Mechanized feller-bunchers
are usually equipped with a continuous circular-saw felling
head containing replaceable cone-shaped cutting teeth. The
head grabs the tree after felling is completed and lowers it
to the ground (Green and McNeel 1989).
Where steep terrain or management objectives limit the
use of mechanized feller-bunchers, hand felling with chain-
saws is used. Although safety hazards increase, chainsaw
felling is not as limited by ground slope or tree size as is
mechanized felling. Also, manual felling is used to meet
management objectives such as precommercial thinnings,
salvage operations, and selective harvesting (Oregon State
University Extension Service 1983). Unlike feller-bunchers,
hand-fallers must place a series of cuts at the base of the tree
to direct the fall. If the cuts do not match, the tree may not
fall in the desired direction, resulting in barber-chair or
stump-pull, where wood splits up the middle or around the
edge of the tree.
As the forest industry becomes increasingly competitive
and more strain is placed on the resource, it becomes
important to analyze current harvesting methods to improve
value recovery. Boston and Dysart (2000) stated that even
small improvements in value recovery could lead to large
improvements in financial gains. The same authors refer to
a forestry company in New Zealand that reported that a 1%
improvement in value recovery could result in financial
returns of US$1.5 million per year. In particular, identifying
NOTE:
Ryan Hall can be reached at Phone: (250) 847-3680; Fax: (250)
847-2530; hallr000@hotmail.com. We thank Jay Baker for
allowing us access to Woodlot 1507 and for providing infor-
mation on the study area. Copyright © 2006 by the Society of
American Foresters.
WJAF 21(1) 2006
33

harvesting methods that minimize stump heights may in-
crease the value of a stand because more wood volume is
used. A study in the central interior of British Columbia
cites a company that achieved an average stump height of
15.4 cm, realizing an overall gain of about 2% in its annual
harvest compared with the provincial standard of 30 cm
maximum stump heights (Fuller 2002). Murphy and Buse
(1984) also suggest that approximately 30% of the value
loss that occurs during felling results from recovering less
wood material left in high stumps.
In recent decades, mechanized felling has been replacing
manual felling because of escalating labor rates and a shift
from old-growth to second-growth harvesting (Kellogg et
al. 1992). Furthermore, a study by Shaffer and Taumas
(1992) identifies a growing question as to whether mecha-
nized felling can increase harvest production and value
recovery. The study reported that under normal operating
conditions, operators of sawhead feller-bunchers cut high
stumps because of the concern over disc damage and the
desire to achieve high production. Although the Shaffer and
Thomas study only compared stump heights of sawhead
feller-bunchers with shear feller-bunchers, the authors sug-
gested that sawhead feller-buncher operators appear to cut
higher stumps than do loggers using chainsaws.
To broaden the current knowledge of stump heights
associated with mechanized felling and manual felling, the
objectives of this study were to compare the average stump
heights resulting from mechanized felling (feller-bunchers)
and manual felling (chainsaws); to determine the amount of
wood waste and its related value associated with high
stumps; to determine the potential for value gains through
lower stump heights; and to describe operational constraints
that influence stump heights for each type of felling.
Methods
Location and Description
Two blocks from Woodlot 1507, approximately 15 kilo-
meters northeast of Smithers, British Columbia, were sur-
veyed for the study. The two blocks are located adjacent to
each other and share similar stand characteristics (Table 1).
The two blocks surveyed reflect an accurate comparison
between mechanized felling and manual felling because
they were comprised of similar species composition, terrain,
and ecological classification sites. Both blocks consisted of
subalpine fir (Abies lasiocarpa) with minor components of
white spruce (Picea glauca  P. engelmannii). The terrain
of each block consisted of similar gentle slopes, with a
southern aspect. No rocky outcrops were present in the
blocks, and no significant obstacles were noticed that might
affect stump height.
Block 1 was harvested with a Timberjack 608L mecha-
nized feller-buncher that was equipped with a continuous
disc saw containing 6-cm-thick teeth. Block 2 was manually
harvested using 61.5 cc Husky and Stihl chainsaws with
60-cm bars. The undercut method was used for all manual
felling. Both blocks were harvested during the late summer
of 2000; as a result, snow was not a factor in causing high
stumps. For each block, utilization limits were set for the
harvesting contractors in accordance with the Forest Prac-
tices Code of British Columbia. The minimum diameter at
breast height for merchantable trees was set at 17.5 cm for
all species except for lodgepole pine, which was set at 12.5
cm. The limit for maximum stump height was set at 30.0 cm
for all species. The harvesting contractors were not aware
that a study would be conducted on these blocks, therefore,
normal harvesting practices should not have been affected.
Data Collection and Analysis
A systematic sampling method with a fixed-circular plot
was used to collect data for the survey. The radius of each
plot was 4 m, which covers 50 m2 per plot. This method
helps recognize patterns specific to areas of land, such as
breaks in the terrain, which may affect the ability to cut low
stumps. Plot centers were located at an equal interval of
70 m along lines that were also located at a 70-m interval.
To establish each plot, a planting shovel with a 4-m radius
nylon cord was used. Stump heights and diameters were
measured with a measuring tape to the nearest centimeter.
The British Columbia Silviculture Survey Guidebook
suggests a sampling intensity of 1.5 plots per ha (0.75%
sampling intensity) to achieve statistical precision at a 90%
Table 1.
Stand descriptions before harvesting.
Block 1
Block 2
Felling method
Feller-buncher
Chainsaw
Species compositiona
Subalpine fir (74)
Subalpine fir (80)
(Abies lasiocarpa)
(Abies lasiocarpa)
White spruce (26)
White spruce (16)
(Picea glauca  P. engelmannii)
(Picea glauca  P. engelmannii)
Lodgepole pine (1)
(Pinus contorta var. latifolia)
Cottonwood (3)
(Populus balsamifera spp. Trichocarpa)
Area (ha)
10
13
Stems/ha
620
481
Gross merchantable vol (m3/ha)
453
442
Net merchantable vol (m3/ha)
336
334
Average age (years)
130
130
Average dbh (cm)
29.9
32.4
Average slope (%)
17
14
a
Value in parenthesis indicates the percentage of each species in the total tree population of the block.
34
WJAF 21(1) 2006

confidence interval (British Columbia Ministry of Forests
1995). For this study, two plots per ha were located to
achieve statistical precision at a 95% confidence interval,
resulting in 20 plots in Block 1 and 26 plots in Block 2. Both
blocks contain reserves where no trees were harvested.
These reserves are not included as part of the net area. No
plots were located inside the reserves; however, two plots
that landed at the edge of a reserve were offset by 10 m.
Stump height measurements followed the guideline of
the Provincial Logging Residue and Waste Measurement
Procedures Manual (British Columbia Ministry of Forests
1994). Stump heights were always measured from the high
side of the stump, excluding the top of any root flare or
obstacle such as bark, moss, duff, or other vegetation that
could be kicked away before cutting. Stumps were mea-
sured to the top of the felling cut, thus the volume of any
undercut is included in the measured stump volume. Also,
no consideration was given to brush or undergrowth that
could be removed before cutting. However, if a stump was
affected by unavoidable waste caused by physical obstruc-
tions, the stump height was measured from the top of the
unavoidable waste to the top of the stump. Trees that had
more than 50% rot were considered to have no economic
value, thus were exempt from the 30 cm maximum stump
height limit. For this reason, stumps containing 50% rot or
more were not tallied during the survey. A visual estimate
made during the survey indicated that the proportion of dead
and live trees with no economic value (50% rot) was low
for both sample areas.
Measured stump height data was used to estimate the
wood volume waste associated with each harvesting
method; however, it is also important to consider other
possible wood-wasting effects from each harvesting method
other than stump height. Feller-buncher felling causes an
inherent volume of wasted wood associated with the thick-
ness of the saw blade kerf. The saw blade on the Timberjack
608L feller-buncher was measured to be 6 cm thick. If this
thickness is added onto each stump height, then the true
value of wood waste associated with this method of har-
vesting could be substantially higher than the measured
stump height.
In the case of manual felling, the saw kerf was only 1 cm
thick. Little wood waste is associated with the thickness of
the saw; however, this method of harvesting does result in
cuts that are not always clean. Wood is often ripped away
from the center or the side of the tree and remains attached
to the stump as it falls. This increases the actual stump
height, as the wood remaining in the log is fractured and
unsuitable for use (Boston and Dysart 2000). As a result,
stumps affected by stump-pull were measured to the top of
the fractured wood to determine the actual volume of
wasted wood. However, note that this method of measure-
ment may overestimate the volume of wasted fiber, as some
of the wood affected by stump-pull might still be used
during processing at the mills.
Because measuring to the top of existing stump damage
may overestimate the volume of wasted fiber, the potential
economic losses calculated in this study are based on mea-
sured stump heights and effective stump heights. Effective
stump heights in this analysis include saw kerf because it is
a fixed value of volume loss, but assumes that no damage to
the log or stump was incurred during felling because wood
loss from stump-pull is a result of human error, which can
be eliminated. It should be noted that the potential value loss
of each felling method is dependent on the tree size and
stand density of each block, as well as species composition
and its associated value.
Two assumptions were made for the estimation of the
potential value loss: 1) high stump volume will be fully used
as a raw material for lumber or pulp-quality chips without
resulting in losses elsewhere, such as breakage, ineffective
bucking practices, and log diameter requirements, and 2)
high stump volume has the same value as the rest of the tree.
The potential value loss was estimated based on the average
prices for sawlogs and pulp-quality logs. As market prices
continually fluctuate, average values were used. Using av-
erages narrows the range of high-end (sawlogs) and low-end
(pulp-quality logs) value loss estimates; however, it pro-
vides a better overall assessment for that particular period of
time. Average sawlog and pulp log prices from the spring of
2000 to the spring of 2001 were acquired from local mills
and were used to calculate the potential value loss for each
felling method.
To determine the basal area of each stump, the stump
diameter was measured from the inside of the bark to the
nearest centimeter. Stumps with oval or irregular shapes
required measurements along the longest and shortest diam-
eter distances. These distances were then averaged to de-
termine the actual diameter. To calculate the volume of each
stump, its basal area was multiplied by its height. This
calculation assumes that the stump is a perfect cylinder with
no taper. Student’s t tests were then performed on the data
sets to determine if there were significant differences be-
tween the average stump heights of each block.
Results and Discussion
Stump Heights for Each Felling Method
Both
harvesting
methods
produced
average
stump
heights less than the 30 cm utilization limit set by the Forest
Practices Code of British Columbia. A summary of the
average tree size, stump height, and SD for each felling
method is provided in Table 2. Stumps on block 1 that were
harvested
by
mechanical
feller-buncher
were
slightly
smaller and had a higher variation in diameter than those
harvested manually on block 2. The results from the Stu-
dent’s t tests showed that mechanized felling methods pro-
duced a significantly lower average stump height when
compared with manual felling (  0.05). Measured stump
heights from mechanized felling were found to be 8.8 cm
lower and exhibited more variation than those from manual
felling. Effective stump heights were found to be 5.8 cm
lower for mechanized felling versus manual felling, with
more variation remaining in those stumps harvested me-
chanically. Adding the stump-pull, which appeared on 17%
of the manually felled stumps, and the 1-cm-thick saw kerf
of the chainsaw increased the average measured stump
WJAF 21(1) 2006
35

height from 21.9 to 24.9 cm. When stump-pull was ignored
on the average effective stump heights, mechanized felling
was able to use approximately 17% more wood than the
manual felling method.
A more detailed stump height study by Han and Renzie
(2005) indicated similar findings to those determined in this
study, especially when compared with effective stump
heights. Han and Renzie found that chainsaw felling left
higher stumps by 5.5 cm over mechanical felling (19.8 and
14.3 cm, respectively). They further indicated that stump
height was significantly affected by species, slope, and
average stump diameter. The higher stumps produced from
manual felling reduce recoverable volume and increase site
preparation and logging costs as the higher stumps become
obstacles for site preparation and logging machinery (Bos-
ton and Dysart 2000).
Potential Value Loss Associated with Each
Felling Method
Average sawlog and pulp log prices for the year 2000
were used to calculate the potential value loss for each
felling technique based on effective stump heights (Table
3). Local sawlog prices delivered for subalpine fir and
spruce in north-central British Columbia ranged from Ca-
nadian (CN) $50/m3 to CN$70/m3, with an average of
approximately CN$60/m3. Prices delivered for pulp logs
remained relatively constant with an average of approxi-
mately CN$40/m3. Note that conservative estimates based
on effective stump heights that ignore stump-pull were used
to determine potential value losses, as some of the wood in
the damaged portion of the harvested log can still be used.
Results indicated that mechanized felling recovered
CN$0.33/stump more than manual felling when considering
the high-end, or sawlog value, for the effective stump
heights of each felling technique. When considering the
low-end, or pulp log value, of the effective stump heights,
mechanized felling recovered an additional CN$0.22/stump
over manual felling. A relatively equal comparison was
made because there was little difference (0.9 cm) between
the average diameters of trees felled by each technique.
However, it was noted that this difference in diameter
equated to approximately 5% more volume for the same
stump height in the manual operation versus the mechanized
operation.
The potential value losses for mechanized felling and
manual felling were further analyzed for each block in
Table 3. Because each block was comprised of a different
stand volume, which was determined by average tree vol-
ume and stand density, a comparison could be made by
cross-referencing the average effective stump heights for
each felling method to each block. For example, the average
effective stump height of 19.1 cm, achieved in block 1 by
mechanical felling, was applied to the average basal area
and stand density of block 1, and again to the separate
average basal area and stand density of block 2. Using
CN$60/m3 as the average sawlog price, the potential value
loss associated with each felling method could be compared
to both blocks. This calculation was repeated with the
average effective height of manual felling, and the potential
value loss was determined for sawlogs and pulp logs. The
calculated values reflect the potential value loss based on
average stump heights and species composition in the
blocks surveyed.
This method of comparison indicated that mechanized
felling recovered an extra CN$160/ha on block 1 over
manual felling and an extra CN$130/ha more on block 2
when based on average sawlog values, or CN$110/ha on
Table 2.
Stump measurements for each felling method.
Felling method
Number of
stumps sampled
Stump diameter
(cm)
Measured stump height
(cm)
Effective stump heighta (cm)
Mean
SD
CV%
Mean
SD
CV%
Mean
SD
CV%
Mechanized
79
37.9
13.2
34.8
13.1
7.3
55.7
19.1 (19.1)
7.3
38.2
Manual
94
38.8
10.4
26.8
21.9
5.5
25.1
22.9 (24.9)
6.4
27.9
a
Effective stump height, including saw kerf thickness (6 cm for feller-buncher and 1 cm for chainsaw). The value in parentheses includes stump-pull and saw kerf thickness.
Table 3.
Potential value loss for each felling method based on effective height.a
Block 1
Block 2
Area (ha)
10.0
13.0
Stand density (stems/ha)
620
481
Basal area (m2/stump)
0.1128
0.1182
Average effective stump height (cm)
19.1
22.9
Potential sawlog value loss (dollars/stump)
Feller-buncher
1.29
1.35
Chainsaw
1.55
1.62
Potential chip value loss (dollars/stump)
Feller-buncher
0.86
0.90
Chainsaw
1.03
1.08
Potential sawlog value loss (dollars/ha)b
Feller-buncher
800
650
Chainsaw
960
780
Potential pulp log value loss (dollars/ha)b
Feller-buncher
530
430
Chainsaw
640
520
a
Based on the average effective stump heights of 19.1 cm for feller-buncher felling and 22.9 cm for chainsaw felling.
b
Based on average year 2000 local market values for sawlogs (Canadian $60/m3) and pulp logs (Canadian $40/m3). Average stump diameters and average effective stump
heights from each block were used to determine average tree volumes used in potential value loss calculations.
36
WJAF 21(1) 2006

block 1 and CN$90/ha on block 2 when based on average
pulp log values. When these figures of potential value
recovery were applied to the area of their respective blocks,
mechanized felling recovered approximately CN$1,600 on
block 1 and CN$1,700 on block 2 over manual felling.
Although the Forest Practices Code of British Columbia
sets the maximum stump height at 30 cm, field observations
suggest that stump heights of 5 to 10 cm are attainable on
most stumps that are not restricted by terrain or obstacles if
a mechanical felling method is used. During the survey,
stump heights as low as 3 cm were noted for mechanized
felling and 10 cm for manual felling. Although average
stump heights for each technique were higher, no obstacles
or changes in terrain were observed during the study that
may have restricted cutting lower stumps. In the case of
manual felling, it appeared that the undercuts on the stumps
could have been placed nearer to the ground, which would
result in lower stump heights.
Potential Value Gains
Sensitivity analysis was performed to determine gross
volume and potential value recovery (Table 4). Average
values from the study were used to determine stump diam-
eter, effective stump height, stand density, and stand vol-
ume with average sawlog and pulp log prices. These values
were analyzed with stump heights from 0 to 30 cm. The
sensitivity analysis assumed that stump heights of 0 cm are
attainable, which result in zero potential value loss. It is
important to note that each felling method inherently has
some unavoidable waste associated with the saw kerf from
the equipment being used. For example, if a mechanical
feller similar to that in this study is used, one must assume
that stump heights of no less than 6 cm can be attained.
Using the 30 cm maximum stump height set by the
Forest Practices Code of British Columbia as a baseline, the
results show that the average effective stump height
achieved in block 1 from mechanical felling recovered an
additional 6.9 m3/ha or 1.5% improvement in volume re-
covery. Given the composition and value of the species
harvested, mechanical felling resulted in an additional
CN$417/ha of sawlog value or CN$278/ha of pulp log
value. The average effective stump height achieved in block
2 from manual felling recovered an additional 4.5 m3/ha or
1.0% improvement in volume recovery, resulting in an extra
CN$271/ha of sawlog value or CN$127/ha of pulp log
value. Sensitivity analysis indicated that if saw kerf was
ignored, a maximum potential sawlog value recovery of
CN$1,146/ha or a maximum pulp log value recovery of
CN$764/ha could be gained by cutting stumps at ground
level over the 30 cm stump height limit.
Operational Constraints
Both harvesting methods produced a large range in
stump height: 3 to 34 cm for mechanized felling and 10 to
40 cm for manual felling. The large range in mean stump
heights for each harvesting method indicates the importance
of operators’ technique (Murphy and Buse 1984). A previ-
ous study by Boston and Dysart (2000) questioned operator
experience as a factor in stump heights from mechanized
felling; however, the results indicated no relationship.
Based on field observations from this study, the desire to
attain high production may be a more significant factor in
operator technique than experience. Setting the sawhead at
a specific height and adjusting it only when required to
avoid obstacles or maintain maximum stump height limits,
rather than being adjusted to each individual tree, may attain
higher production rates.
Reducing stump height by improving operator technique
may lead to decreased production rates; however, increases
in revenue through higher wood use and lower site prepa-
ration costs may outweigh the losses in productivity. Un-
fortunately, there is little incentive to lower productivity to
maximize wood use, as payment rates are often directly
related to production. This study has shown that lower
stump heights are achievable, therefore, regulations that
lower the current standards for maximum stump height may
provide enough incentive for operators to improve felling
technique. Fuller (2002) suggests a clause in the cutting
permit to allow the additional volume from that portion of
tree below the conventional 30 cm stump height to be used
without contributing to cut control, therefore the gain in
Table 4.
Sensitivity analysis for value and volume recovery at various stump heights.a
Stump height (cm)
Volume recovery
Gross volume
increase (%)
Sawlog value
recoveryb
Pulp log value
recoveryb
m3/stump
m3/ha
$/stump
$/ha
$/stump
$/ha
0
0.035
19.1
4.3
2.08
1146
1.39
764
5
0.029
15.9
3.6
1.74
955
1.16
637
10
0.023
12.7
2.8
1.39
764
0.93
510
15
0.017
9.6
2.1
1.04
573
0.69
382
19.1c
0.013
6.9
1.5
0.76
417
0.50
278
20
0.012
6.4
1.4
0.69
382
0.46
255
22.9d
0.008
4.5
1.0
0.49
271
0.23
127
25
0.006
3.2
0.7
0.35
191
0.00
0
30
0.000
0.0
0.0
0.00
0
1.39
764
a
Volume and value recovery estimates were based on wood volume under 30 cm, average diameters from both blocks surveyed (38.4 cm), average stand density from both
blocks surveyed (550 stems/ha), and average gross merchantable volume from both blocks surveyed (448 m3/ha), as well as local market values for sawlogs (Canadian
60/m3), and pulp logs (Canadian $40/m3).
b
Based on average year 2000 local market values for sawlog and pulp log values.
c
Average effective stump height for mechanized felling.
d
Average effective stump height for manual felling.
WJAF 21(1) 2006
37

volume would not contribute to a harvester’s annual allow-
able cut. It should be noted that some situations may require
the faller to cut higher stumps to ensure safety. The attempt
to minimize stump heights should never jeopardize the
safety of the harvesting operator.
Conclusion and Recommendations
In this study, mechanized felling produced significantly
lower stump heights than manual felling. The difference of
mean stump heights between the two felling techniques was
8.8 cm for measured stump heights and 5.8 cm for effective
stump heights. This study determined that mechanized fell-
ing recovered an additional 2.4m3/ha of wood volume over
manual felling, resulting in a potential value gain of
CN$0.33 per tree when based on value recovery calcula-
tions with a local sawlog market value of CN$60/m3. This
additional recovery equated to an extra CN$160/ha for
block 1 and CN$130/ha for block 2, given the composition
of species harvested. This difference resulted in gains of as
much as CN$1,600 and CN$1,700 for each block, respec-
tively. When considering low-end or pulp log values, the
potential value gain was CN$0.22 per tree, which equated to
an extra CN$110/ha for block 1 and CN$90/ha for block 2.
Sensitivity analysis demonstrated that there was a poten-
tial to increase volume by 4.3% on the blocks surveyed for
this study when compared with the 30 cm maximum stump
height set by the Forest Practices Code of British Columbia.
This increase in volume resulted in a gain of CN$1,146/ha
for potential sawlog value, or a gain of CN$764/ha for
potential pulp log value. The additional volume recovered
from each felling technique is not accounted for in the
timber inventory, as cruising information generally uses 30
cm as a predetermined stump height; however, this volume
does still contribute to cut control levels. Unless govern-
ment regulation sets lower stump height restrictions, re-
sponsibility to maximize wood use will remain up to the
individual operator.
No explanations were visually apparent for the large
range in stump heights for each felling method, other than
the possibility of the operator’s effort. This may be because
of concern over disc damage, a desire to achieve high
production rates, or safety. Field observations suggested
that lower stump height averages are attainable. This study
was based only on cut blocks harvested during the summer.
Because winter logging operations are common in many
places of British Columbia due to soil and water consider-
ations, further research is needed to investigate the effects of
snow accumulation on stump heights for various felling
methods.
Although this study examines the potential value gains of
lower stump heights, it should be noted that determining the
true impact on value recovery requires measuring the stem
above the stump as well as the stump itself. The analysis in
this study assumed that the additional volume gained in
lower stump heights had the same value as in the rest of the
stem; however, the additional volume might mean the dif-
ference between a high-value log being cut or not cut. As a
result, the value gains could be much greater than value of
the small volume in the stump itself. More detailed cost-
benefit analyses are required to determine how various
felling methods and production rates affect the potential
value recovery.
An effective approach to increase value returns of har-
vesting is to maximize wood use through improvements
such as minimizing stump height. Wood waste associated
with high stump heights can be prevented through proper
selection of suitable felling methods. The following are
recommendations for minimizing wood waste associated
with high stump heights, based on this study:
•
Use mechanized felling over manual felling when op-
erationally feasible.
•
Use a harvester equipped with a chain-and-bar felling
head to reduce wood waste resulting from the thick saw
kerf of feller-bunchers.
•
Maintain felling equipment. Sharp chainsaws and cir-
cular saw teeth produce cleaner cuts.
•
Educate operators on the importance of lowering stump
height.
Literature Cited
BRITISH COLUMBIA MINISTRY OF FORESTS. 1994. Provincial logging residue
and waste measurement procedures manual. British Columbia Ministry
of Forests, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada. 4 p.
BRITISH COLUMBIA MINISTRY
OF FORESTS. 1995. Silviculture surveys
guidebook. British Columbia Ministry of Forests, Victoria, British
Columbia, Canada. 109 p.
BOSTON, K., AND G. DYSART. 2000. A comparison of felling techniques on
stump height and log damage with economic interpretations. West.
J. Appl. For. 15(2):59–61.
FULLER, J. 2002. Determination of a method to realize the incremental
volume gain from low stump harvesting. Morice and Lakes Innovative
Forest Practices Agreement. Prince George, British Columbia, Canada.
No. 6:1–4.
GREEN, W.D., AND J.F. MCNEEL. 1989. Sawhead performance in southern
conditions. Paper presented at the 1989 International Winter Meeting of
the ASAE, New Orleans, LA. ASAE Paper 89-7583. 28 p.
HAN, H.-S., AND C. RENZIE. 2005. Effect of ground slope, stump diameter,
and species on stump height for feller-buncher and chainsaw felling.
Int. J. For. Eng. 16(2):81–88.
KELLOGG, L.D., P. BETTINGER, S. ROBE, ET AL. 1992. Compendium of
mechanized harvesting research. Forest Research Laboratory, Oregon
State University, Corvallis, OR. 401 p.
MURPHY, G., AND J.D. BUSE. 1984. How to reduce felling related butt
damage. Logging Industry Research Association Tech Release. 6:6,
Rotorua, New Zealand. 4 p.
OREGON STATE UNIVERSITY EXTENSION SERVICE. 1983. Felling and bucking
techniques for woodland owners. Extension Circular 1124. Oregon
State University, Corvallis, OR. 12 p.
SHAFFER, R.M., AND R.S. TAUMAS. 1992. A comparison of sheared and
sawhead-felled stump heights on six nonindustrial private timber sales
in southeastern Virginia. South. J. Appl. For. 16(3):140–142.
38
21(1) 2006
