Assessing the Potential for Log Sort Yards to Improve Financial
Viability of Forest Restoration Treatments
Woodam Chung, Tyron J. Venn, Dan Loeffler, Greg Jones, Han-Sup Han, and Dave E. Calkin
Abstract: Forest restoration and fuel reduction treatments have been widely applied in the western United
States with the purpose of reducing the size and intensity of wildfires. However, the low value of small-diameter
trees produced from such treatments has partly constrained the ability to treat all the areas identified as being in
need of treatments. The objective of this study was to analyze the potential for log sort yards to increase the
residual value of forest restoration treatments relative to a standard sort at landing in Ravalli County, Montana.
We simulated log handing and transportation under two log sorting scenarios in Ravalli County: sort at landing
resulting in two log products and sort at sort yard resulting in seven potential log products. Costs and value
recovery in each scenario were estimated, and the residual values were compared. We found that establishment
of a log sort yard in Ravalli County could increase the residual value of forest restoration treatments by 5%.
However, the benefit of the sort yard varies substantially by the forest type from which logs are harvested and
the available volume of and markets for high value products, such as house logs. FOR. SCI. 58(6):641–651.
Keywords: log sort yard, financial analysis, forest restoration treatment, spatial analysis, residual value
F
OREST HEALTH RESTORATION and fuel reduction
treatments have been widely used to limit the size
and intensity of wildfires in the western United
States (Healthy Forests Restoration Act 2003). These treat-
ments designed for the reduction of hazardous fuels and
restoration of historical fire regimes1 may include mechan-
ical thinning, prescribed fire, mastication of understory
shrubs and small trees, mulching, application of herbicide,
or a combination of these. Although the importance of such
treatments is recognized, log-value recovery is critical to the
extent and distribution of treatments (Fried et al. 2008,
Keegan et al. 2004). The ability to treat the sizeable acreage
identified as “in need” has been constrained by a combina-
tion of low-value logs harvested in forest restoration and
fuel reduction treatments and land management agency bud-
get constraints. In addition, log landings are often too nar-
row to provide space for extensive log sorting that may
improve log-value recovery. Even when more extensive
sorting is possible at the landing, extra handling of logs and
transportation to various markets may not be justifiable if
only low log volumes per product are available at the
individual landings. Consequently, unsorted logs are often
misdirected and either consumed for lower-value products
or redirected through trades between mills, resulting in extra
handling and transport costs at the mill.
Although some studies in various countries reported a
favorable increase in log value due to the sorting operation
at log sort yards (Kerrush 1984, Peterson 1986), others
indicated that costs for running a log sort yard might out-
weigh the revenue generated by sorting and preprocessing
logs (Sedney 1992, Sessions et al. 2005). It is commonly
reported in the literature that log sort yards are not war-
ranted in every case. Dramm and Jackson (2002) pointed
out that a successful log sort yard requires a good business
plan, a steady supply of raw material, product diversity, and
well-established markets.
In the western United States, interest in commercial sort
yards has increased because of declining timber resource
quality and volume, increasing diversification of log and
fiber markets, and the need to recover more value from the
available resource (Dramm et al. 2002). The USDA Forest
Service has interest in assuring that all material associated
with a timber sale is directed to its highest value use. This
has, in some instances, led to stipulations in timber offerings
that require winning bidders to use logs down to a specified
size. Cases in which the costs of removing these small logs
exceed the value the logger receives for them can result in
the US Forest Service losing revenue through reduced bids
or can deter potential buyers from bidding on timber sales.
A sort yard could mitigate or even eliminate this problem by
providing a one-stop sale yard for loggers, which reduces
the burden on loggers having to find markets for small
volumes of small or otherwise less-valuable logs. This ap-
proach may lessen the need for sales administrators to
stringently enforce log utilization standards, freeing up US
Manuscript received February 24, 2010; accepted September 21, 2011; published online February 9, 2012; http://dx.doi.org/10.5849/forsci.10-016.
Woodam Chung, University of Montana, Department of Forest Management, College of Forestry and Conservation, The University of Montana, Missoula,
MT
59812—Phone:
(406)
243-6606;
Fax:
(406)
243-4845;
woodam.chung@umontana.edu.
Tyron
J.
Venn,
The
University
of
Montana—
tyron.venn@umontana.edu. Dan Loeffler, The University of Montana—drloeffler@fs.fed.us. Greg Jones, USDA Forest Service—jgjones@fs.fed.us.
Han-Sup Han, Humboldt State University—han-sup.han@humboldt.edu. Dave E. Calkin, Rocky Mountain Research Station, USDA Forest Service—
decalkin@fs.fed.us.
Acknowledgments: This research was supported by funds provided by the Rocky Mountain Research Station, Forest Service, USDA.
This article uses metric units; the applicable conversion factors are: millimeters (mm): 1 mm  0.039 in.; centimeters (cm): 1 cm  0.39 in.; meters (m):
1 m  3.3 ft.; square meters (m2): 1 m2  10.8 ft2; cubic meters (m3): 1 m3  35.3 ft3; hectares (ha): 1 ha  2.47 ac.; kilometers (km): 1 kg  0.6 mi.
Copyright © 2012 by the Society of American Foresters.
Forest Science 58(6) 2012
641

Forest Service resources for use elsewhere, and encourage
more competitive bidding by loggers at sales.
The objective of this study was to assess whether a log
sort yard can increase the residual value of forest health
restoration treatments to landowners relative to a traditional
sort at landing. We simulated log handling and transporta-
tion under two log sorting scenarios in Ravalli County,
Montana, USA: sort at landing scenario resulting in two log
products (i.e., sawlogs and pulp logs) and sort yard scenario
resulting in seven potential log products (standing dead house
logs, green house logs, peeler logs, sawlogs, posts and poles,
stud logs, and pulp logs). Costs and value recovery in each
scenario were estimated, and the residual values were com-
pared. The detailed methods and results are described below.
Methods
Study Area
Ravalli County, Montana, has a number of issues relevant
to many other wildland-urban interface communities through-
out the inland west and northwest of the United States (Figure
1). Ravalli County has an abundance of forestland—approxi-
mately 0.5 million ha of forestland (Loeffler et al. 2006). Much
of this land is lower elevation, moderately to severely departed
Figure 1.
Map of Ravalli County, Montana, including location of treatable areas and the potential sort
yard location.
642
Forest Science 58(6) 2012

from historical fire regimes (Hardy et al. 2001, Schmidt et al.
2002), and in need of restoration treatments (Fiedler et al.
2003, 2004). Within Ravalli County, there are approximately
208,008 ha of nonreserved federal and nonindustrial private
forest lands. Among these, a total of 77,602 ha accessible
from the existing roads with ground-based harvesting sys-
tems were considered in this study as treatable areas that
could produce timber products.
The wood-processing facilities near the study area con-
stitute a diverse range of log buyers including lumber mills,
stud and plywood mills, a pulp mill, log home manufactur-
ers, and a post and pole producer. Virtually all logs har-
vested in Ravalli County are processed in five western
Montana counties (Flathead, Lake, Powell, Missoula, and
Ravalli) that are within 320 km of Ravalli County forests
(Spoelma et al. 2008). According to the Montana Manufac-
turers Information System (Montana Business Connections
and Bureau of Business and Economic Research 2009),
there were 108 primary wood processing facilities located
within these five counties in 2009, ranging from large-scale
operations with annual processing capacities greater than
0.2 million m3 to small-scale family businesses. Log home
manufacturers account for 45 of these facilities.
Most logging operations in Ravalli County are thinning
operations that generate small volumes of low-value mate-
rials at typically small and narrow landings. Consequently,
extensive log sorting at a landing is often limited, and some
logs are misdirected and either consumed for low-value
products or redirected through trades between mills, leading
to extra handling and transport costs at the mill. According
to data collected by the Bureau of Business and Economic
Research at The University of Montana (T.A. Morgan, pers.
comm., Nov. 6, 2007), approximately 1.5% of total timber
harvest volume in Ravalli County was actually redirected
from one mill to another in 2004. However, this volume
does not include timber that was misdirected from the
landing but not redirected due to handling and transport
costs that may exceed potential timber value increase.
Silvicultural Modeling and Analysis
We classified various forest stands in the study area into
five broad forest types by analyzing US Forest Service
Northern Region Vegetation Mapping Project (R1-VMP)
spatial forest vegetation coverage (Brewer et al. 2004) using
a geographic information system (GIS). Restoration thin-
ning prescriptions specific to each forest type were then de-
veloped based on the historical stand structure of each of the
five forest types (C.E. Fiedler, University of Montana, pers.
comm., May 8, 2007). Each prescription specifies a basal area
and a species preference order for the residual trees (Table 1).
To estimate the quantity of timber harvested in each
forest type, we simulated each prescription using the Forest
Vegetation Simulator (FVS) (Dixon 2003) and US Forest
Service Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA) plot data ac-
quired from the FIA Mapmaker database (Forest Inventory
and Analysis 2011). We selected the FIA plots that were
located on either nonreserved US Forest Service or nonin-
dustrial private ownership land within the following four
contiguous counties in western Montana that have similar
forest types and stand structures: Ravalli, Lake, Mineral,
and Missoula. These plot data were entered into FVS to
summarize stand conditions and provide a tree list for each
plot. This tree list was then used in the R1-VMP Stand
Classifier program (Berglund et al. 2008) to classify each
plot into one of the five forest types defined for this study.
FVS was then used to simulate each prescription and gen-
erate a cut tree list for each plot.
Qualitative assessments of logs harvested from each for-
est type were also necessary in this study, because log
quality affects determination of the highest value products
that can be derived from the log. Plot-level qualitative
variables of tree bole defects that affect log merchantability,
including crook and sweep, and tree damage from weather,
insects, disease and fire, were acquired independently from
the Interior West Forest Inventory and Analysis headquar-
ters in Ogden, Utah, and joined to the FVS tree list data. All
cut trees coded as having disease or lightning or frost crack
defects were classified as unmerchantable. These trees
could still be cut to achieve desired stand conditions, but no
merchantable product could be derived from the tree. Be-
cause of strict log quality requirements of log home manu-
facturers, cut trees that met house log specifications but
were coded with any defect were downgraded to the log
type of next highest value for which log specifications were
satisfied.
Identifying Treatment Locations
Treatable areas in Ravalli County were determined via
GIS analysis of the R1-VMP stand polygons. First, all
nonreserved US Forest Service and nonindustrial privately
owned areas in Ravalli County that are located within 600 m
of existing roads with a median ground slope of 40% or less
were selected. Then, all nonforested areas and areas burned
with high and medium fire severity during the 2000 wildfire
Table 1.
Target residual basal areas and preference orders of leave trees as restoration thinning prescriptions developed for five
forest type groups.
Forest type
Target residual basal area (m2/ha)
Leave species preference order*
Ponderosa pine
11
PP  WL  LP  DF  WP  WC  ES  AO
Dry mixed conifer
11
PP  WL  LP  DF  WP  WC  ES  AO
Douglas-fir
15
WL  PP  LP  DF  WP  WC  ES  AO
Lodgepole pine
18
WL  DF  LP  PP  WP  WC  ES  AO
Engelmann spruce-subalpine fir
21
WL  DF  LP  ES  AO
Species codes: PP, ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa); WL, western larch (Larix occidentalis); LP, lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta); DF, Douglas-fir
(Pseudotsuga menziesii); WP, white pine (Pinus monticola); WC, western red cedar (Thuja plicata); ES, Engelmann spruce (Picea engelmannii); AO, all
other species.
Forest Science 58(6) 2012
643

season were removed to identify treatable hectares in the
study area (Figure 1). From the total treatable hectares, a
subset of the R1-VMP stand polygons with the average size
of 2 ha were selected by the following procedures to spa-
tially represent a realistic amount of annually treated hect-
ares across the study area.
1.
The average number of hectares treated annually be-
tween 2003 and 2006 on both US Forest Service and
nonindustrial privately owned lands in Ravalli County
were computed (USDA Forest Service 2007, D. Rog-
ers, Montana Department of Natural Resources and
Conservation, pers. comm., Nov. 17, 2007): 418 ha in
Bitterroot National Forest and 2,068 ha in nonindus-
trial privately owned lands.
2.
The proportion of hectares within each forest type to
the total area of all forest types was computed.
3.
A random sample of treatment polygons was selected
from each forest type such that the sum of hectares
across the sampled polygons approximated the pro-
portional hectares for each forest type (Table 2). These
polygons were intended to represent a typical annual
harvest on the five forest types.
Harvest Cost Modeling
We estimated harvest costs for each FIA plot identified
in the silvicultural modeling analysis using the tractor skid-
ding cost equation developed by Keegan et al. (2002).
Harvest costs per green ton were estimated using average
dbh, volume per hectare removed, and average skidding
distance. dbh and volume removed were obtained from the
FVS output, and the average skidding distance was assumed
to be 240 m. The estimated mean harvest costs for the
sampled areas are shown in Table 2.
Haul Cost Modeling
A GIS road network data layer covering the study area
previously developed (USDA Forest Service Rocky Moun-
tain Research Station, unpublished report, Nov. 10, 2008)
was used for haul cost modeling. This road layer contains
road segments classified as either paved or unpaved. The
Forest Residue Trucking Simulator (USDA Forest Service
Southern Research Station 2009) was used to estimate haul
costs on paved and unpaved roads for log trucks with a
diesel fuel cost of $1/L. It was assumed that the average
speeds on paved and unpaved roads were 80 and 24
km/hour, respectively. Round trip haul costs were estimated
to be $2.27/km for paved road segments and $4.88/km for
unpaved road segments. Delay time including loading and
unloading was ignored in the haul cost calculation.
These GIS road data, average per kilometer haul costs,
and average harvest volumes for each of the forest types
were entered into MAGIS (Forestry Sciences Lab 2006), a
spatial decision support system for scheduling vegetation
treatments and routing through road networks (Zuuring et
al. 1995, Chung et al. 2005). MAGIS was used to simulate
applying the treatments designated for each of the forest
types, loading the logs created by the treatments onto the
road network in the vicinity of the randomly selected poly-
gons, and routing the loaded log trucks through the road
network over the most cost-effective paths. The following
specific methods were used to estimate haul costs for each
log sorting scenario.
Sort at Landing Scenario
1.
Pulp logs were routed directly to the paper mill from
the randomly selected polygons of each forest type.
The average haul cost from the randomly selected
polygons for each forest type was adopted as the pulp
log haul cost.
2.
Sawlogs were routed to a common point several miles
north of the study area from the randomly selected
polygons of each forest type. Logs hauled to each of
the candidate sawmills must travel through this com-
mon point, and the average haul cost from the ran-
domly selected polygons for each forest type to this
common point was estimated.
3.
The additional costs to haul logs from the common
point
to
each
of
the
candidate
sawmills
were
estimated.
4.
Total haul costs for sawlogs from each forest type
were estimated as the sum of 2 and 3, where 3 was the
haul cost to the candidate sawmill that generated the
highest residual value.
Sort Yard Scenario
1.
Pulp logs were routed directly from the landings to the
paper mill, and the average haul cost was estimated as
described in the sort at landing scenario.
2.
All other logs from the randomly selected polygons of
each forest type were routed to the designated sort
yard location, indicated in Figure 1. The average haul
cost from the randomly selected polygons for each
forest type to this point was estimated. In this study
area, most timber markets are north of the harvested
Table 2.
Summary information of randomly selected treatment polygons in each forest type.
Forest type
Area represented
(ha)
No. of selected
polygons
Mean harvest cost
($/ha)
SD of harvest
cost ($)
Douglas-fir
970
513
1,661
1,149
Engelmann spruce-subalpine fir
234
92
1,231
1,060
Lodgepole pine
348
169
1,888
1,297
Dry mixed conifer
323
153
2,523
1,557
Ponderosa pine
572
347
1,127
892
Total
2,447
1,274
644
Forest Science 58(6) 2012

polygons. Therefore, little rerouting of timber is re-
quired to direct timber to the sort yard.
3.
The additional costs to haul logs from the sort yard to
each of the processing mills were estimated.
4.
Total haul costs from each forest type to each process-
ing mill were estimated as the sum of 2 and 3, where
3 was the haul cost to the processing mill that gener-
ated the highest residual value.
End-User Log Specifications and Delivered
Prices
In autumn 2007, telephone and personal interviews were
conducted with 12 purchasers of logs from Ravalli County
to acquire their log specifications and delivered log prices
(Table 3). The 12 purchasers included one pulp mill, three
log home manufacturers, one posts and poles manufacturer,
one plywood manufacturer, four sawmills, and two stud
mills. The range in delivered price for a log type reflects the
variation in the willingness of mills to pay for different
species and different willingness to pay among mills. The
reported log specifications are the extreme values (i.e.,
largest maximum and smallest minimum) among the pur-
chasers of that log type. In the analysis, the specific prices
paid and log specifications applied at each mill were used in
determining the routing of logs under the sort at landing and
sort yard scenarios.
Log Bucking Simulation
To simulate bucking logs, FVS cut tree lists for each
forest type, including individual tree height and dbh data,
were entered into a spreadsheet. Tree volume and taper
equations available from the National Volume Estimator
Library housed at the US Forest Service Forest Manage-
ment Service Center (USDA Forest Service 2006) were
used to facilitate estimation of log diameters at various tree
heights and volume per log segment in cut trees. Log
bucking rules consistent with the log specifications for
each of the 12 end users analyzed were developed with a
series of “if-then-else” statements in the spreadsheet to
simulate the process of cutting a felled tree into logs
based on species, log length, and large and small end
diameters. Specific bucking rules developed for each log
sorting scenario are described below.
Sort at Landing Scenario
In this scenario, there is room for only two log piles at
the landing: sawlog and pulp log. The logic for bucking logs
into these piles is illustrated in Figure 2. All pulp logs are
directed to the one pulp mill in the study area. However,
there are four potential destinations for the sawlogs, and it
is assumed that all sawlogs at any particular landing will be
directed to only one of these mills. The bucking at the
landing logic was applied to the cut tree list from each forest
type using the log specifications for each of the four saw-
mills. The residual value for each sawmill and pulp mill
combination was then determined for each forest type,
where the residual value was estimated as the mill-delivered
value of logs, less all costs associated with delivering the
logs to the sawmill and pulp mill (i.e., harvest and haul).
The sawmill and pulp mill combination that yielded the
highest residual value for logs from a particular forest type
determined which sawmill received all sawlogs from that
forest type. The annual residual value of logs by forest type
in the sort at landing scenario was estimated as follows:
LRVft  Nft  RevSMsm,ft  RevPft  HarvCstft
 HaulCstSMft  HaulCstPft
(1)
where LRVft is residual value of logs harvested from forest
Figure 2.
Log bucking procedures developed for the sort at
landing scenario.
Table 3.
Log specifications and delivered prices by product type.
Log type
Log specifications
Delivered price
($/m3)
Species accepted
Maximum large
end diameter
Minimum small
end diameter
Maximum
length
Minimum
length
. . . . . . . . . . . .(cm). . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . .(mm) . . . . . . .
House logs
Standing dead DF,ES, LP
–
20
–
4
$96–$298
Green house logs
Dried DF, ES, LP
–
20
–
4
$123–$175
Peeler logs
DF, WL
76
19
11
5
$93
Sawlogs
All coniferous species
–
13
13
5
$48–$86
Posts and poles
LP
20
8
6
5
$84
Stud logs
LP, DF, ES, AF,WL, PP
76
11
11
3
$66–$77
Pulp logs
All coniferous species
71
6
14
4
$42
Species codes: PP, ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa); WL, western larch (Larix occidentalis); LP, lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta); DF, Douglas-fir
(Pseudotsuga menziesii); WC, western red cedar (Thuja plicata).
Forest Science 58(6) 2012
645

type, ft, when sorted at the landing, Nft is number of
hectares treated annually by forest type, ft, RevSMsm, ft is
revenue per hectare from sawmill, sm, for logs from forest
type, ft, which is calculated as the delivered price of logs
($/m3) multiplied by volume of sawlogs per hectare, RevPft
is revenue per hectare from the paper mill for logs from
forest type, ft, calculated as the delivered price of logs
($/m3) multiplied by volume of pulp logs per hectare, Harv-
Cstft is the mean harvest cost per hectare for forest type, ft,
HaulCstSMsm, ft is the mean haul cost per hectare for saw-
logs from forest type, ft, to the sawmill, sm, and HaulCstPft
is the mean haul cost per hectare to the paper mill from
forest type, ft.
Sort Yard Scenario
In the sort yard scenario, it is again assumed there is only
room at the landing for two log piles: pulp logs and logs
destined for the sort yard. Small trees that can only make
pulp logs are sent directly from the landing to the paper mill,
whereas all other logs meeting the minimum specifications
among all mills are sent to a sort yard. At the sort yard, the
logs are bucked and sorted into the following product cat-
egories, listed in descending order of value per m3: standing
dead house logs, green house logs, peeler logs, sawlogs,
posts and poles, stud logs, and pulp logs. These product
categories accounted for 99% of volume harvested in
Ravalli County in 2004 (T.A. Morgan, University of Mon-
tana Bureau of Business and Economic Research, pers.
comm., Aug. 29, 2007).
Anecdotal evidence suggests that the existing supply of
green house logs routed to log home manufacturers in the
study area is small relative to the total volume processed.
According to representatives of log home manufacturers,
this is because of the limited local supply of green house
logs, the inconvenience of having to carefully stack and
air-dry the house logs for a year before use, and the ready
availability of standing dead logs from Canada. In the sort
yard analysis, it is assumed that green house logs can be
stacked and dried for a year before sale. The specifications
for house logs are stringent, and there are some types of
defects not accounted for in the FIA data sets, such as spiral
grain, which make logs unsuitable for this product category.
In addition, there are applications for which standing dead
trees are preferred for house logs. In the absence of better
information, it is assumed that only half of the green house
log volume predicted to be available from treatments can be
marketed as house logs. The remaining green house log
volume is sorted into the next highest value product cate-
gories, principally peeler logs, posts and poles, and sawlogs.
Sorting logic similar to the sort at landing scenario was
used in this scenario. However, instead of the two potential
product categories and five potential end users described in
the sort at landing scenario, logs in the sort yard scenario
were bucked according to log specifications for seven po-
tential product categories and 12 potential end users. It is
important to note that a “bucking rule of thumb,” not
optimal bucking, was simulated in a spreadsheet for the sort
yard scenario. That is, the highest residual value product
that could be bucked from the large end of the log was cut
first. Then, starting from the large end of what remained of
the log, the highest residual value product was cut and so on
until no further product could be cut from the log. The
residual value of logs from each forest type in the sort yard
scenario was estimated as follows:
SYRVft  Nft  
m1
M
RevMm,ft  RevPMft  HarvCstft
 HaulCstSYft  HaulCstPft  
m1
M
Volm, ft  HandCst
 HaulCstMm
(2)
where SYRVft is residual value of logs from forest type, ft,
when sorted at the sort yard, RevMm,ft is revenue per hectare
from end-user mill m for forest type, ft, calculated as the
delivered price for logs at the mill ($/m3) multiplied by
volume of logs per hectare directed to that mill from the sort
yard, RevPMft is revenue per hectare from the paper mill for
forest type, ft, calculated as the delivered price for logs at
the paper mill ($/m3) multiplied by volume of logs per
hectare directed to the pulp mill from the landing and the
sort yard, HaulCstSYft is mean haul cost per hectare to the
sort yard from forest type, ft, Volm, ft is the volume in m3
going from the sort yard to end-user mill, m, originating
from forest type, ft, HandCst is the mean sort yard handling
cost per m3 for logs from all forest types, HaulCstMm is the
haul cost per m3 from the sort yard to end-user mill, m, and
M is the total number of end-user mills.
Net Change in Residual Value
To assess whether a sort yard in Ravalli County could
increase total surplus in the timber market (difference be-
tween total revenue and total cost), the net change in resid-
ual value (RV) between the sort yard and sort at landing
scenarios was determined as follows (hereafter, RV is
referred to as the net benefit of the sort yard):
RV  
ft1
5
SYRVft  LRVft
(3)
If RV is greater than 0, the sort yard generates positive
benefits for society by increasing total surplus in the timber
market. This may result in net increases in stumpage prices
paid to forest owners but will depend on the level of
competition throughout the wood products supply chain and
the relative negotiating skills of agents involved in transac-
tions from the forest owner to the final mill destination.
However, in assessing the social efficiency (as distinct from
the financial performance) of an investment in a sort yard,
which party actually benefits from the increase in surplus is
irrelevant.2 Positive RV is also likely to increase the
number of treatable hectares that can be profitably treated
relative to a traditional sort at landing. If RV  0, the sort
yard decreases the residual value of forest health restoration
treatments to forest owners relative to sorting at the landing.
Sensitivity analyses have been performed to assess the
influence of changes in total areas and volume harvested per
646
Forest Science 58(6) 2012

year, delivered prices of logs (particularly house log prices),
green house log volume, haul costs from the forest to the
end-user, and sort yard costs on RV. With the exception of
house log volume, the level of each of these parameters was
incremented and decremented by 10 and 30% from the base
levels determined for the analysis. The sensitivity of sort
yard net benefit to green house log volume was assessed for
volumes between 0 and 100% of projected green (air-dried)
house log volume.
Results and Discussion
Tables 4 and 5 report by forest type the estimated annual
area harvested, harvest costs, harvested volume by product
type, delivered prices by product type, round trip haul costs
by product type, and the residual value of logs when sorted
at the landing and sorted at the sort yard, respectively.
Harvest costs are the same in the sort at landing and sort
yard scenarios because the silvicultural prescription for each
forest type is the same for both scenarios. Delivered prices
are reported for the end user to which the logs were sold in
the model. Delivered prices for pulp logs reflect the will-
ingness of the paper mill to pay more for logs as haul
distance increases. Weighted average delivered price was
calculated by weighting the price paid for each log type in
accordance with the contribution of that log type to total
harvested volume. Round trip haul costs in Table 5 are the
sum of haul cost from the forest to the sort yard and haul
cost from the sort yard to the end user. Weighted average
harvest, haul, and sort yard cost were calculated by weight-
ing these costs for each log type in accordance with the
contribution of that log type to total harvested volume.
In this case study, total harvested volumes under the sort
at landing and sort yard scenarios are almost identical. This
is not surprising, because the paper mill in the study area
will take logs that meet their minimum length down to a
top-end diameter of 2.5 inches, providing an outlet for logs
that have no other commercial value. Small increases in
total harvested volume per hectare in the sort yard scenario
relative to the sort at landing scenario reflect differences in
residues left at the landing. In the sort at landing scenario,
all logs in the sawlog pile are shipped to the single sawmill
that pays the highest net delivered price. When all trees are
bucked into the particular log specifications of that sawmill,
greater waste can occur than in the sort yard scenario, where
each log is assessed against the specifications of all mills
analyzed in the study.
Total annual residual value in the study area across all
forest types with a sort at landing is estimated to be $5.434
million, compared with $5.693 million with a sort yard.
Thus, the sort yard is estimated to increase the residual
value of logs in Ravalli County by $0.259 million/year (5%)
or $106/harvested hectare. However, the benefit of the sort
yard varies substantially by the forest type from which logs
are harvested and the available volume of high-value prod-
ucts such as house logs.
Comparison of Tables 4 and 5 indicates that the sort yard
increased the residual value of logs harvested in Douglas-fir
and dry mixed conifer forest types by facilitating the sepa-
ration of substantial volumes of green house logs and peeler
logs, and by upgrading of pulp logs to stud logs and posts
and poles. In contrast, the sort yard decreased the residual
value of logs harvested in ponderosa pine, lodgepole pine,
and Engelmann spruce and alpine fir forest types. For the
ponderosa pine forest type, most logs in the sawlog pile in
the sort at landing scenario were also in the sawlog pile at
the sort yard. Most of the sawlog volume from the lodgepole
pine forest type was upgraded to the post and pole pile at the
sort yard because of a small increase in delivered value net
of haul costs. In the Engelmann spruce and alpine fir forest
type, 7.2 m3/ha of sawlogs was upgraded to house logs. In
Table 4.
Prices, costs, and residual values of logging operations in Ravalli County for the two-pile sort at the landing scenario.
Item
Forest type
Douglas-fir
Ponderosa pine
Dry mixed
conifer
Lodgepole
pine
Engelmann spruce
and alpine fir
Areas harvested per annum (ha)
970
572
323
348
234
Volume of timber products
Sawlog (m3/ha)
64
49
40
55
22
Pulp log (m3/ha)
14
24
95
40
55
Total (m3/ha)
78
72
135
95
77
Delivered prices
Sawlog ($/m3)
66
86
86
86
86
Pulp log ($/m3)
40
38
40
43
40
Weighted average ($/m3)
61
70
54
68
54
Harvest and haul costs
Harvest cost ($/m3)
21
16
19
20
16
Round trip haul to sawmill ($/m3)
23
16
19
22
19
Round trip haul to paper mill ($/m3)
12
9
12
14
12
Weighted average harvest and haul ($/m3)
42
29
33
38
30
Residual value
$/m3a
19
41
21
29
24
$/hab
1482
2952
2835
2755
1848
LRV ($ millions)c
1.438
1.689
0.916
0.959
0.432
a Residual value in $/m3 is weighted average delivered price less weighted average harvest and haul cost.
b Residual value in $/ha is residual value in $/m3 multiplied by total harvested volume in m3/ha.
c Total residual value per annum is log residual value in $/ha multiplied by the number of hectares harvested per annum.
Forest Science 58(6) 2012
647

all three forest types, there was a substantial volume of pulp
logs upgraded to other low-value log types. However, the
increase in the weighted average delivered price in these
forest types was not sufficient to offset the increase in the
weighted average haul and sort yard costs.
These observations highlight the fact that the potential to
separate high-value logs at a sort yard is a critical determi-
nant of whether a sort yard can increase the residual value
of the forest. It is also clear that there could be a substantial
payoff to sort yard operators and forest owners to assess
ahead of a sale whether there is a payoff to sorting the logs
at a sort yard. Given data used in this study, the residual
value of logging operations in Ravalli County can be further
increased by sorting logs from Douglas-fir and dry mixed
conifer forest types in a sort yard, while sorting logs from
ponderosa pine, lodgepole pine, Engelmann spruce, and
alpine fir forest types at the landing.
Because merchantable volumes in the sort at landing and
sort yard scenarios are virtually identical, the results of our
study indicate that a sort yard in Ravalli County is unlikely
to reduce the level of in-woods burning of forest residue and
the associated particulate matter and carbon emissions.
However, it should be noted that a sort yard can potentially
provide options for effective marketing of biomass re-
sources. Unmerchantable parts of logs due to size, breakage,
or defects that would be otherwise disposed of by open
burning can be readily ground into chips or hog fuels at the
sort yard for other biomass uses. This may reduce in-woods
burning of forest residue, resulting in reduced particulate
matter and carbon emissions, as well as saving the cost of
burning. In addition, a sort yard may redirect volume away
from the pulpwood market. In our analysis, the sort at
landing scenario generated 84,223 m3 of pulp logs/year,
compared with 20,172 m3/year in the sort yard scenario.
Table 5.
Prices, costs, and residual values of logging operations in Ravalli County for the sort yard scenario.
Item
Forest type
Douglas-fir
Ponderosa
pine
Dry mixed
conifer
Lodgepole
pine
Engelmann spruce
and alpine fir
Areas harvested per annum (ha)
970
572
323
348
234
Volume of timber products removed
Standing dead house log (m3/ha)
0
0
1
0
0
Green house log (m3/ha)
13
4
16
2
7
Peeler log (m3/ha)
27
8
30
0
0
Sawlog (m3/ha)
2
45
21
16
14
Posts and poles (m3/ha)
1
1
16
63
0
Stud logs mill 1 (m3/ha)
27
8
17
1
5
Stud logs mill 2 (m3/ha)
3
0
21
4
40
Pulp log from landing (m3/ha)
4
3
7
6
4
Pup log from sort yard (m3/ha)
3
4
6
3
5
Total (m3/ha)
78
72
137
95
77
Delivered prices
Standing dead house log ($/m3)
175
175
175
175
175
Green house log ($/m3)
118
118
118
118
118
Peeler log ($/m3)
93
93
93
93
93
Sawlog ($/m3)
86
86
86
86
86
Posts and poles ($/m3)
84
84
84
84
84
Stud logs mill 1 ($/m3)
77
77
77
77
77
Stud logs mill 2 ($/m3)
66
66
66
66
66
Pulp log from landing ($/m3)
40
38
40
43
40
Pulp log from sort yard ($/m3)
35
35
35
35
35
Weighted average ($/m3)
82
78
79
76
68
Harvest, haul, and sort yard costs
Harvest ($/m3)
21
16
18
20
16
Round trip haul cost to sort yard ($/m3)
9
5
9
11
8
Sort yard ($/m3 input to sort yard)
13
13
13
13
13
Round trip haul to log home manufacturer ($/m3)
4
4
4
4
4
Round trip haul to veneer manufacturer ($/m3)
20
20
20
20
20
Round trip haul to sawmill ($/m3)
11
11
11
11
11
Round trip haul to post and pole manufacturer ($/m3)
6
6
6
6
6
Round trip haul to stud mill 1 ($/m3)
20
20
20
20
20
Round trip haul to stud mill 2 ($/m3)
14
14
14
14
14
Round trip haul to paper mill from sort yard ($/m3)
4
4
4
4
4
Round trip haul to paper mill from landing ($/m3)
12
9
12
14
12
Weighted average harvest, haul, and sort costs ($/m3
input volume to sort yard)
57
45
51
50
48
Residual value
$/m3 input volume to sort yarda
24
34
28
26
21
$/hab
1,872
2,448
3,836
2,470
1,617
SYRV ($ millions)c
1.816
1.400
1.239
0.860
0.378
a Residual value in $/m3 is weighted average delivered price less weighted average harvest and haul cost.
b Residual value in $/ha is residual value in $/m3 multiplied by total harvested volume in m3/ha.
c Total residual value per annum is residual value in $/ha multiplied by the number of hectares harvested per year.
648
Forest Science 58(6) 2012

This redirection of logs to longer life products does consti-
tute a carbon storage benefit. These additional benefits of a
sort yard have not been accounted for in this study.
Figure 3 summarizes the sensitivity of RV to changes
in several modeling parameters. RV is highly sensitive to
delivered prices for all log types. A delivered log price
reduction of 10% is sufficient for a negative RV indicating
that sorting at the landing is better under that circumstance.
The relatively high sensitivity of RV to house log price is
due to the fact that house log price is important in the sort
yard scenario but not in the sort at landing scenario for
which only sawlogs and pulp logs are marketed.
In our study, average haul distances (and costs) are
greater in the sort yard scenario. Consequently, increases in
haul costs (e.g., diesel prices) decrease RV, the measure of
the relative advantage of the sort yard. However, the direct-
ing of logs to various end users to maximize residual value
was performed, assuming particular haul costs per kilometer
on paved and unpaved roads, and some logs may be opti-
mally redirected to other mills should haul costs rise or fall.
Consequently, RV may be underestimated for reduced and
increased haul costs. Holding log destination constant, a rise
in haul costs of less than 30% would make sorting at the
landing more attractive for forest owners.
There is uncertainty about the optimal configuration of
sort yards, which affects their costs of operation. In this case
study, the simulated sort yard was configured by expert
opinion and the Log Sort Yard Cash Flow Analysis model
(Bilek 2008) to handle 0.2 million m3/year, given the size
and species distribution of logs expected from forests in the
study area. A description of this configuration and detailed
accounting of the total (fixed and variable) sort yard han-
dling costs adopted in this study ($13/m3 of input volume)
can be found in Han et al. (2009). Anecdotal information
acquired from managers of log sort yards suggested that
$7/m3 might be more appropriate, although it is unclear
whether this estimate covers total costs of the operation. Net
benefits of the sort yard are more sensitive to sort yard costs
per unit volume handled than to haul costs or areas har-
vested, but less sensitive than delivered log prices. An
increase in sort yard costs of only 10% is enough to make
sorting at the landing a more attractive alternative to forest
owners.
Permanent changes in volume handled at the sort yard
would be addressed by changing the configuration of the
sort yard, which would also affect sort yard handling costs
per unit of input volume. Short-term changes, including
fluctuations associated with normal business cycles, are
likely to be addressed by altering levels of variable factors
of production such as labor and energy, which is addressed
in the sensitivity analysis of net benefits of the sort yard to
change in total area harvested and total volume handled.
Change in total area harvested affects the net benefit of the
sort yard by changing total delivered log revenue and by
changing sort yard costs per unit volume. For example, a
decrease in area and volume harvested reduces total deliv-
ered log revenue for the sort yard and sort yard variable
costs, but increases fixed costs (including the return on
capital invested) per unit volume handled at the sort yard.
The overall effect is a decrease in the net benefit of the sort
yard over the sort at landing scenario. However, even at a
30% reduction in volume, the sort yard still breaks even
with the sort at landing scenario. Increases in area and
volume harvested improve the performance of the sort yard
relative to a sort at the landing, because increases in total
delivered log revenue and decreases in fixed costs per unit
volume handled at the sort yard outweigh increases in
variable costs at the sort yard. Thus, the sensitivity analysis
suggests that net benefits of the sort yard are robust against
changes in area and volume harvested.
The harvested volume projection included the harvest of
650 m3 of standing dead house logs and 43,109 m3 of green
house logs per year in Ravalli County. This compares with
the annual processing capacity of log home manufacturers
in Ravalli County of 106,590 m3 and actual production of
70,110 m3 in 2004 (Spoelma et al. 2008) (a conversion
factor of 5.7 m3/1,000 board feet was applied). However,
for reasons outlined in Methods, only 50% of this green
Figure 3.
Sensitivity of the net benefit of the sort yard to changes in modeling parameters.
Forest Science 58(6) 2012
649

house log volume was assumed to be sold as house log, with
the remaining volume being sorted into peeler logs and
sawlogs. Figure 4 illustrates how RV changes as this
proportion is altered. The sort yard scenario is inferior to the
sort at landing scenario if none of the green house log
volume can be sold as house logs. However, if 75% of the
projected green house log volume can be sold as house logs,
then the net benefit of the sort yard is $0.7 million ($286/ha)
above the sort at landing scenario.
Conclusions
The analysis suggests that the establishment of a log sort
yard in Ravalli County has the potential to increase residual
value of forest health restoration treatments to forest own-
ers, improving potential financial returns from treatments
and expanding the area that is profitable to treat. However,
the benefit of the sort yard varies substantially by the forest
type from which logs are harvested and delivered log prices.
There are some notable limitations of this study that will
be addressed in future work. First, the assumption adopted
in this study that the area treated annually by forest type is
proportional to the presence of that forest type within the
treatable landscape may result in a harvest volume compo-
sition that is substantially different from the composition of
harvests in recent years. Second, the sort at landing scenario
assumed sawlog and pulp log piles only in all forest types.
Given anecdotal information about harvesting operations in
the study area, this seemed appropriate. However, on ana-
lyzing the cut tree lists by forest type, it became clear that
greater residual value from a two-pile sort at the landing
could have been obtained by assuming alternative product
combinations in the two piles for some forest types. For
example, the lodgepole pine forest type could have yielded
a greater residual value with post and pole and pulp log piles
at the landing. The Engelmann spruce and alpine fir forest
type could have yielded a greater residual value with stud
log and pulp log piles at the landing. Third, our study did
not consider optimal log bucking, which is one of the
potential advantages of operating a sort yard. However, the
benefit of optimal bucking will vary by timber value, vol-
ume processed, and cost of such equipment. Fourth, our
study used a variety of data, models, and assumptions to
estimate harvest volumes and costs for each forest type.
Whereas using models and making assumptions is inevita-
ble when outcomes of future harvest activities are estimated,
it should be noted that the results of this study rely heavily
on the input data, assumptions, and limitations of each
model used in this study. For example, we used R1-VMP
spatial data, the FVS model, and FIA data to estimate
harvest volumes by forest type. Even though these models
and data have been well-documented and widely used in
many studies in the United States, the accuracy of such data
and models can vary from site to site. We assumed that only
ground-based harvesting systems would be used and con-
sidered stand polygons located within 600 m of existing
roads with a median ground slope of 40% or less as har-
vestable areas. However, steep areas or areas far from the
existing roads can be harvested with alternative harvesting
systems. For simplification, we used an average skidding dis-
tance of 240 m to estimate harvest costs for all the selected
stand polygons. In reality, the average skidding distance per
polygon can vary widely, depending on the relative location of
the polygon and its access to existing roads.
Despite the limitations, this study provides a methodol-
ogy to spatially analyze the amount and types of material
removed from forest health restoration treatments and as-
sess whether a log sort yard can increase the residual value
of the treatments to landowners relative to a traditional sort
at landing. By directing logs to their highest value market,
sort yards can increase the value of timber harvested, im-
prove the financial viability of health restoration and fuel
Figure 4.
Relationship between sort yard net benefit and the proportion of the projected total
volume of green house log volume that can be sold as house logs.
650
Forest Science 58(6) 2012

reduction treatments, and increase the willingness of log-
gers to bid on timber sales. This approach may facilitate
greater implementation of fuel reduction and forest restora-
tion treatments on the landscape to achieve forest manage-
ment and public safety objectives without the need for
taxpayer-funded subsidization.
Endnotes
1. Heinselman (1981) defines fire regime as “the kind of fire history that
characterizes an ecosystem,” with three elements describing the fire
regime: fire type and intensity, size, and frequency.
2. An anonymous reviewer raised a concern that the sort yard could become
a monopsonist purchaser of logs from forest owners and a monopolist
supplier of logs to mills, maximizing its profit margins while driving down
returns to other sectors of the local timber industry. However, unless the
local timber industry is regulated in a way that requires all logs to be
directed through the sort yard, this is an unlikely outcome. The sort yard
will be competing with mills for logs. Loggers will choose to sell their logs
to the sort yard (not directly to mills) when it is in their financial interest to
do so. Similarly, mills will buy logs from the sort yard (not directly from
loggers) when this improves their financial performance.
Literature Cited
BERGLUND, D., R. BUSH, AND R. LUNDBERG. 2008. Region One
Vegetation Council existing forested vegetation classification sys-
tem and application to inventory and mapping. Region One Veg-
etation Classification, Inventory, and Analysis Report 08-02 ver-
sion 4. USDA For. Serv. Region One, Missoula, MT. 26 p.
BILEK, T. 2008. LSY: A spreadsheet tool to evaluate log sort yard
economics. USDA For. Serv. Forest Products Laboratory, Mad-
ison, WI. 42 p.
BREWER, K., D. BERGLUND, J. BARBER, AND R. BUSH. 2004. Northern
Region vegetation mapping project: Summary report and spatial
datasets. USDA For. Serv. Northern Region, Missoula, MT.
CHUNG, W., G. JONES, J. SULLIVAN, AND J. SESSIONS 2005. De-
veloping a heuristic solver for MAGIS: A planning tool to
integrate resource management and transportation planning on
large forest lands. In Proc. of the 28th Council on Forest
Engineering conference. Corvallis, OR. CD-ROM.
DIXON, G.E. 2003. Essential FVS: A user’s guide to the forest
vegetation simulator. Internal Rep. USDA For. Serv. Forest
Management Service Center, Fort Collins, CO. 193 p.
DRAMM, J., AND G. JACKSON. 2002. Is it time to revisit the log-sort
yard? In Proc. of the Wood technology clinic and show con-
ference. Portland, OR.
DRAMM, J., G. JACKSON, AND J. WONG. 2002. Review of log sort
yards. USDA For. Serv. Gen. Tech. Rep. FPL-GTR-132. Forest
Products Laboratory. 39 p.
FIEDLER, C.E., C.E. KEEGAN, T.A. MORGAN, AND C.W. WOODALL.
2003. Fire hazard and potential treatment effectiveness: a state-
wide assessment in Montana. J. For. 101(2):7.
FIEDLER, C.E., C.E. KEEGAN, C.W. WOODALL, AND T.A. MORGAN.
2004. A strategic assessment of crown fire hazard in Montana:
Potential effectiveness and costs of hazard reduction treat-
ments. USDA For. Serv. Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-GTR-622.
Pacific Northwest Research Station, Portland, OR. 48 p.
FOREST INVENTORY AND ANALYSIS. 2011. FIA DataMart. Avail-
able online at http://apps.fs.fed.us/fiadb-downloads/datamart.
html; last accessed Jan. 6, 2012.
FORESTRY SCIENCES LAB. 2006.MAGIS. Available online at
www.fs.fed.us/rm/econ/magis; last accessed Jan. 6, 2012.
FRIED, J.S., R.J. BARBOUR, R. FIGHT, G. CHRISTENSEN, AND G.
PINJUV. 2008. Small diameter timber alchemy: Can utilization
pay the way towards fire resistant forests? In Proc. of the 2002
Fire conference on managing fire and fuels in the remaining
wildlands and open spaces of the Southwestern United States.
USDA For. Serv. Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-GTR-189. Pacific
Southwest Research Station, Albany, CA. 363 p.
HAN, H., T. BILEK, R. DRAMM, D. LOEFFLER, AND D. CALKIN.
2009. Financial feasibility of a log sort yard handling small-
diameter logs. In Proc. of the 2009 Council on Forest Engi-
neering Conference. Corvallis, OR. CD-ROM.
HARDY, C.C., K.M. SCHMIDT, J.P. MENAKIS, AND R.N. SAMPSON,
R.N. 2001. Spatial data for national fire planning and fuel
management. Int. J. Wildl. Fire 10:353–372.
HEALTHY FORESTS RESTORATION ACT. 2003. Publ. Law 108-148,
117 Stat. 1887, US Code 16 §6501 et seq. Available online at
www.gpoaccess.gov/plaws; last accessed Aug. 8, 2011.
HEINSELMAN, M.L. 1981. FIRE AND SUCCESSION IN THE CONIFER
FORESTS OF NORTHERN NORTH AMERICA. P. 374–405 in Forest
succession concepts and applications, West, D.C., H.H.
Shugart, and D.B. Botkin (eds.). Springer-Verlag, New York.
KEEGAN, C.E., M. NICCOLUCCI, C. FIEDLER, J.G. JONES, AND R.W.
REGEL. 2002. Harvest cost collection approaches and associ-
ated equations for restoration treatments on national forests.
For. Prod. J. 52(7/8): 96–99.
KEEGAN, C.E., C.E. FIEDLER, AND T.A. MORGAN. 2004. Wildfire
in Montana: Potential hazard reduction and economic impacts
of a strategic treatment program. For. Prod. J. 54(7/8): 21–25.
KERRUSH, C.M. 1984. Centralized processing can increase log
value. World Wood 25(2):21–23.
LOEFFLER, D., D.E. CALKIN, AND R.P. SILVERSTEIN. 2006. Estimating
volumes and costs of forest biomass in western Montana using
forest inventory and geospatial data. For. Prod. J. 56(6):31–37.
MONTANA BUSINESS CONNECTIONS AND BUREAU OF BUSINESS
AND ECONOMIC RESEARCH. 2009. Montana manufacturers in-
formation system. Available online at www.mmis.umt.edu; last
accessed May 21, 2009.
PETERSON, J.T. 1986. Evaluation of processing in a central yard.
Tech. Note TN-92. Forest Engineering Research Institute of
Canada, Pointe-Claire, QC, Canada. 8 p.
SCHMIDT, K.M., J.P. MENAKIS, C.C. HARDY, W.J. HANN, AND D.L.
BUNNELL. 2002. Development of coarse-scale spatial data for
wildland fire and fuel management. USDA For. Serv. Gen.
Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-87. Rocky Mountain Research Sta-
tion, Fort Collins, CO. 41 p.
SEDNEY, D. 1992. Simulation of a log merchandising and sorting
yard. M.Sc. thesis, Univ. of Idaho, Moscow, ID.
SESSIONS, J., K. BOSTON, R. HILL, AND R. STEWART. 2005. Log
sorting location decisions under uncertainty. For. Prod. J.
55(12):53–57.
SPOELMA, T.P., T.A. MORGAN, T. DILLON, A.L. CHASE, C.E.
KEEGAN, AND L.T. DEBLANDER. 2008. Montana’s forest prod-
ucts industry and timber harvest, 2004. USDA For. Serv.
Resource Bull. RMRS-RB-8. Rocky Mountain Research Sta-
tion, Fort Collins, CO. 36 p.
USDA FOREST SERVICE. 2006. Forest Management Service
Center: Forest products measurement. Available online at
www.fs.fed.us/fmsc/measure/index.shtml; last accessed Oct.
28, 2008.
USDA FOREST SERVICE. 2007. Northern Region Forest Manage-
ment Reports. Available online at www.fs.fed.us/r1/forest_
range/timber_reports/timbersales; last accessed Nov. 10, 2008.
USDA FOREST SERVICE SOUTHERN RESEARCH STATION. 2009.
Forest residue trucking simulator. Forest Operations Research,
Auburn, AL. Available online at www.srs.fs.usda.gov/forestops/
presentations/FoRTSOverview.pdf; last accessed Sept. 5, 2009.
ZUURING, H.R., W.L. WOOD, AND J.G. JONES. 1995. Overview of
MAGIS: a multi-resource analysis and geographic information
system. USDA For. Serv. Res. Note INT-RN-427. Intermoun-
tain Research Station, Ogden, UT. 6 p.
Forest Science 58(6) 2012
651
