ACCEL: Spreadsheet-Based Cost Estimation for
Forest Road Construction
Jarel C. Bruce, Han-Sup Han, Abdullah E. Akay, and Woodam Chung
A computer program has been developed to aid forest engineers in the cost estimation of forest road construction activities. This new tool, called ACCEL, uses
Visual Basic for Applications within Microsoft Excel to compute the costs of construction components using interactive sheets, automated tasks, and advanced
computer routines. The user is guided through road construction components and prompted for cost data, earthwork quantities, survey information, and the
conditions of the construction environment to estimate total construction cost. Road design elements and site characteristics are variables used to optimize
earthwork allocation, improving on using the mass diagram method. The program also estimates clearing and grubbing areas, rock surfacing volumes, and culvert
lengths. ACCEL was validated by comparing the results to those of RoadEng (by Softree), ensuring that formulas were input correctly and showing close agreement
in results. This program was created in a recognizable format, i.e., Microsoft Excel, and builds on basic quantity and cost estimation techniques. ACCEL is intended
to improve the decisionmaking process for experienced forestry practitioners in forest road construction regardless of region, company, or agency afﬁliation
by accepting their inputs and performing the calculations for different route alternative or varying design speciﬁcations.
Keywords: earthwork optimization, forest roads, road cost modeling
F
orest roads are an integral part of forest management and
represent a signiﬁcant investment for landowners. The con-
struction and maintenance of forest roads is the most expen-
sive and time-consuming task involved in forest operations (Layton
et al. 1992, Akay and Sessions 2005). These roads allow for the
extraction and utilization of a variety of forest resources and support
other forest management activities. The impacts that these roads
have on the natural environment, as well as the management activ-
ities, are seen in the forethought placed in their design, construction,
and the related costs (Aulerich 1998).
The estimation of cost for the various components in the con-
struction of low-volume forest roads is a challenging task, compli-
cated by factors such as variable topography, soils, rock outcrops,
machinery used, and special design requirements (Layton et al.
1992). The magnitude of each of these cost components depends on
the nature, size, and location of the project, as well as the manage-
ment organization, among many considerations promoting the use
of computer-based methodologies to effectively address this vari-
ability (Akay and Boston 2005).
With better cost estimates along a particular roadway, the deci-
sionmaking capability is enhanced when choosing between tradeoffs
in road building techniques, design judgments, and route alterna-
tives (Aulerich 1998). Layton et al. (1992) suggest the need for a cost
prediction method that can be used in combination with other stand
and forest level planning models, combining the cost estimation of
road sections with other algorithms in a forest management plan-
ning tool. The primary objective of this study was to develop a
program that aids forest operations professionals with cost estima-
tion for construction of low-volume forest roads to achieve the goal
of operational efﬁciency amid increased environmental standards.
Model Development
The cost estimation methods of road construction components
have been developed through a synthesis of information collected in
a literature review and interviews with practitioners on commonly
used estimation and construction techniques in low-volume forest
road construction. A broad spectrum of estimation methods, in-
cluding route selecting and optimization models, engineer’s work-
sheets and guidebooks, and simple spreadsheet calculators using
historical road cost data, were assessed and incorporated into a pro-
gram that is designed to be easy to use and sophisticated in deter-
mining road construction costs. ACCEL produces a road construc-
tion cost estimate modeled after an engineer’s estimate that uses
historical data and includes optimization routines for the more
costly construction components, such as earthwork, all in a spread-
sheet format.
To develop the cost estimating program into a standalone appli-
cation and to embed the earthwork optimization capability, Visual
Basic for Applications (VBA) was used within the Microsoft Excel
spreadsheet. VBA is a programming language, similar to Microsoft
Visual Basic, that works within an application using programming
to solve complicated problems and automate processes, extending
the functionality of a spreadsheet (Rea 2005). ACCEL prompts
users for speciﬁc inputs under the categories of incidental construc-
tion, surveys, clearing and grubbing, excavation, drainage and
stream crossings, stabilization, and surfacing. It also derives quanti-
ties and areas from survey data and applies unit costs input by the
user. The survey data require only slight adjustment of typical road
reconnaissance and survey methods and can also be taken from the
output of other road design programs, such as RoadEng. In any case,
users can choose to input their own unit costs for quick calculation
Manuscript received April 19, 2010, accepted June 9, 2011.
Jarel C. Bruce (bruc3567@hotmail.com), Forest Products Department, College of Natural Resources, University of Idaho, Moscow, ID 83843. Han-Sup Han, Department of Forestry
and Wildland Resources, Humboldt State University, Arcata, CA 95521-8299. Abdullah E. Akay, Department of Forest Engineering, Kahramanmaras Sutcu Imam University,
Turkey. Woodam Chung, Department of Forest Management, College of Forestry and Conservation, University of Montana, Missoula, MT 59812.
Copyright © 2011 by the Society of American Foresters.
WEST. J. APPL. FOR. 26(4) 2011
189
ABSTRACT

or to use the program’s advanced estimation routines in earthwork
allocation, culvert length estimation, and clearing and stabilization
areas. ACCEL also allows for percentage adjustments for proﬁt,
overhead, and other indirect costs.
The model was validated by comparing the results with those of
RoadEng Forest Engineer (Softree 2007) in estimating construction
quantities. The earthwork allocation problem was further validated
by replicating the example provided in Mayer and Stark (1981).
Survey Data Inputs
The survey information input by the user forms the foundation
for the advanced routines of the program. The primary purpose of
this information is to develop cross sections at each station along the
roadway to institute design controls, such as cut and ﬁll slope ratio
limits based on soil classiﬁcations from available information. Sur-
vey measurements, such as road width (ft), side-slope (%), ground
and road elevations at centerline (ft), road gradient (%), and hori-
zontal section length (ft), are required to develop the dimensions for
the potential cross section types (Bruce 2007). These cross sections
are then used in determining the quantities in the individual com-
ponents, such as in earthwork, where the cross-sectional areas, or
end areas, are used to determine volumes. Care must be taken in
collecting the survey information, as the program output is highly
dependent on the quality of the input. The user must be aware that
accuracy increases with better ﬁeld measurements and unit cost
estimates and by decreasing the distance between station points.
A major assumption behind the survey inputs are that the hori-
zontal alignment of the road has been established and is ﬁxed con-
gruent with an L-line survey road location; however, the vertical
alignment of the road is allowed to change with road gradient. Other
design controls regarding vertical and horizontal alignment (e.g.,
maximum grade, vertical curve length, horizontal curve radius) are
assumed to be satisﬁed. A design program, such as RoadEng, could
be used in conjunction with the survey data to incorporate these
design controls in the ﬁnal route location to be costed (Softree
2007).
Field Surveys
The user is tasked to enter the basic unit costs per mile according
to the desired level of accuracy for preliminary and/or L-line surveys.
Additional requirements, such as slope staking, culvert staking, or
ﬁeld and laboratory sampling, should be included separately. This
unit cost is then adjusted by selecting from a range of side-slope and
ground cover characteristics and multiplied by the project length to
account for adverse conditions. The formulation of the ﬁeld survey
cost, Cfs, is as follows (Akay 2003):
Cfs  UPL  ULL  f1  f2  Lr,
(1)
where UPL and ULL are the basic survey unit costs ($/mile) for
the P-line and L-line surveys entered by the user, f1 and f2 are the
ground cover and terrain adjustment factors respectively, and Lr is
the length of the road in miles.
The ground cover factor should reﬂect the most common density
of the forest and brush along the proposed roadway. The terrain
factor is also reﬂective of the average side-slope along the roadway
(Table 1) (US Forest Service 2007). Costs such as travel and per
diem are assumed to be reﬂected in the unit cost estimate for each
respective survey, but additional costs may be added to the total if
applicable.
Clearing and Grubbing
The program approaches the clearing and grubbing component
as a single unit cost based on the right-of-way timber volume (thou-
sand board feet/ac) applied to a given clearing area between consec-
utive stations (Figures 1 and 2). The clearing width at a given station
is the distance on both sides of the centerline where vegetation is to
be cut away, and the grubbing width refers the distance from cen-
terline where stumps and other debris will be removed. This area
between stations is automatically calculated for the user from the
survey data. The formulation for the clearing area uses a modiﬁed
version of the equations developed by Durston and Ou (1983) but
averages the clearing widths at consecutive stations. The formula-
tion for calculating clearing area is as follows:
AC  WC1  WC2/2  L/43560,
(2)
where AC  clearing area (acres), WC1  clearing width at ﬁrst
station (ft), WC2  clearing width at second station (ft), WC  C1 
C2  SC
1  DC  W  SF
1  DF, C1  clearing distance beyond
top of cut (ft), C2  clearing distance below toe of ﬁll (ft) SF
1  ﬁll
slope ratio (1/SF), SF  full slope (decimal %), SC
m1  cut slope
Table 1.
Field survey cost adjustment factors (US Forest Service
2007).
Item
Classiﬁcation
Factor
Side slope
0–29%
0.9
30–50%
1
50%
1.1
Brush
Light
0.9
Medium
1
Heavy
1.2
Figure 1.
Cross section for clearing area calculation in a balanced
section.
Figure 2.
Cross section for clearing area calculation in a full-
bench section. Depth of ﬁll equals zero.
190
WEST. J. APPL. FOR. 26(4) 2011

ratio)1/SC), SC  cut slope (decimal %), W  subgrade width (ft),
DF  ﬁll depth (ft), DC  cut depth (ft), and L  section length (ft).
The clearing and grubbing cost is then estimated by multiplying
the basic unit cost per acre by adjustment factors and area in acres. A
method for determining the unit cost per acre is provided on the
basis of the US Forest Service (2007) publication, where the cost per
acre depends on the right-of-way timber volume adjusted according
to the slash treatment method and topography (Tables 2 and 3).
Earthwork
Earthwork is a major component of any road construction proj-
ect and can be optimized to improve operational efﬁciency. Guide-
lines such as following the terrain, balancing earthwork, and meet-
ing existing controls, among others, are used to meet the economic
and operational objectives. The earthwork portion of the program
determines appropriate variables for translation into site- and
situation-speciﬁc inputs by the user. The survey data entered into
ACCEL play a critical role in framing the earthwork allocation
model. Each section consists of roadway and terrain characteristics
that affect construction activities, including section length, width,
side-slope, grade-line elevations, excavation material type, and cut
and ﬁll ratios. The length of the section may be determined by the
user, but again, accuracy of estimation increases with decreasing
section lengths. Cut and ﬁll slopes vary based on material type that
the user must deﬁne by the percentage of common, loose rock, and
solid rock (rippable and blasted). ACCEL also uses this information
to weight the shrinkage and swell factors and the unit costs of exca-
vation, embankment, and haul for each section volume.
Excavation quantities are estimated at each road section using the
average end area formula, which includes the adjustment for run-
out distances (Kramer 1997). The run-out distance is the distance
between stations where the cross sections transition from cut to ﬁll
or vice versa. The earthwork volume formula for a truncated prism
is (Hickerson 1959)
Volume (cu.yds.) 
A1  A2  L
54
,
(3)
where A1  ﬁrst end area (ft2), A2  second end area (ft2), and L 
length of roadway (ft).
The prismoidal formula is
Volume (yd3) 
End Area(Base)  Run-out Distance
81
(4)
The end area (base) variable refers to the area of the base of a prism
formed by the cross section at a given station and point at which that
volume “runs out.” The formulations for the run-out distance cal-
culations are (Kramer 1997)
1. Cut and ﬁll to through cut:
AF1
AF1  AC2 
d2
D .
(5)
2. Through cut to through ﬁll:
a) Cut run-out:
AC1
AC1  AF2 
d1
D
(6)
b) Fill run-out:
AF1
AF1  AC2 
d2
D
(7)
where AC1  cut area 1 (ft2), AC2  cut area 2 (ft2), AF1  ﬁll area
1 (ft2), AF2  ﬁll area 2 (ft2), d1  cut run-out distance (ft), d2  ﬁll
run-out distance (ft), and D  section length (ft).
ACCEL assumes that the road template is a ﬂat surface, horizon-
tal alignment of the roadway is ﬁxed in most cases, and ditch volume
is ignored. In full-bench construction, the side-slope limit is set by
the user forcing cross sections to adjust horizontally. To incorporate
the added volume of ditches, turnouts, or ﬁll widening, it is neces-
sary for the user to adjust the road width accordingly at opposing
ends of a given section.
The economic distribution of cut and ﬁll quantities between road
sections is determined using a modiﬁed version of the linear pro-
gramming method developed by Mayer and Stark (1981), including
possible borrow and waste locations and various soil characteristics
along the roadway. Once excavation quantities are calculated for
each section, their difference is input into an optimization model
that uses a formulation for allocating cut volumes to ﬁll areas while
minimizing cost. Included in the optimization model are the possi-
bilities of borrow and waste sites that may be more economical. This
requires the user to specify borrow and waste locations according to
their proximity to either the start or end of the project.
Another option is to constrain the use of excavation equipment
in the transport of materials between sections. Although movement
Table 2.
Clearing and grubbing cost based on gross timber vol-
ume along the right of way (US Forest Service 2007).
Timber volume
(thousand board feet)
Cost/ac ($)
5
1,780
10
2,000
15
2,220
20
2,440
25
2,660
30
2,880
35
3,100
40
3,320
45
3,540
50
3,760
Table 3.
Clearing and grubbing cost adjustment factors (US Forest
Service 2007).
Item and Classiﬁcation
Factor
Slash treatment method
Windrow
1
Windrow large material
1.05
Deck unmerchantable
1.1
Disposal in unit
1.2
Scattering
1.25
Piling
1.3
Place on embankment
1.4
Chipping
1.75
Burying
1.8
Pile and burn
1.8
Removal
2
Topography
Gentle, 20%
1.1
Moderate, 20–45%
1
Steep, 45%
1.2
Large cut or ﬁll
1.7
WEST. J. APPL. FOR. 26(4) 2011
191

within the section is free, different unit costs for a bulldozer, exca-
vator, and a dump truck are applied on the basis of a speciﬁed
limiting haul distance beyond that section. The ﬁnal result provides
the user with the amount of material moved, where it is to be moved,
by what machinery, and the cost to do so.
The approximate cost of moving and compacting 1 cubic yard
(CY) of material from cut section i to ﬁll section j, C(i, j), is esti-
mated on the basis of unit cost of each operation, including excava-
tion (UE), haul (UH), and compaction (UC), assuming that the costs
are linearly proportional to the quantities. It is necessary to adjust
these quantities to account for material types within each section by
either a shrinkage or swell factor denoted Si
k. Material classiﬁcation
and selection must be made by the user for each road section based
on a material characteristics list from work done by Church (1981).
The unit cost to haul may vary depending on the selected hauling
equipment distance constraints. Therefore, the unit cost to haul,
UH, is separated into different units, UDH and UTH, representing
the costs for a bulldozer (or excavator) and truck, respectively. The
following adjustments are made to the original formula developed
by Mayer and Stark (1981):
CDi, j  UE  Si
hUDHDij  UC,
(8)
CTi, j  UE  Si
hUTHDij  UC,
(9)
where CD(i, j) and CT(i, j) are the costs to haul 1 CY of material
from cut section i to ﬁll section j using a bulldozer or a truck,
respectively. The variable Dij is the distance between the centers of
cut section i and ﬁll section j, and it is determined by adding the
length of sections i/2 and j/2 to the sum of any section lengths
between the two.
The unit costs of borrow, CB(p, j), and waste, CW(i, k), are de-
termined similarly. These unit costs are modiﬁed to reﬂect the dif-
ferent hauling methods, and an additional charge may be added to
these variables to include a setup cost. The example from Mayer and
Stark (1981) applies a $200 charge per 1,000 CY of material wasted.
The objective in this problem is to minimize the total cost of earth-
moving between road sections, including the possibilities to borrow
or waste. Therefore, the objective function is stated as (Mayer and
Stark 1981)
Min Z 
i 
j
CDi, jXi, j 
i 
k
CDWi, kXWi, k
(10)
 
p 
j
CDBp, jXBp, j 
i 
j
CTi, jXi, j
 
i 
k
CTWi, kXWi, k 
p 
j
CTBp, jXBp, j,
where Z represents the cost of earthmoving between road sections.
The costs of moving earth from borrow and to waste areas is deter-
mined similarly.
This function is subject to the constraint (Mayer and Stark 1981)

j
XDi,j 
k
XDWi, k 
j
XTi, j 
k
XTWi, k  QCi,
(11)
where XD(i, j) and XT(i, j) (the amount of cut moved from cut
section i to ﬁll section j by bulldozer or truck) plus XDW(i, k) and
XTW(i, k) (the amount of cut moved from cut section i to waste area
k by bulldozer or truck) are equal to the available amount of cut,
QC(i), at cut section i.

i
XDi,j 
p
XDBp, j 
i
XTi, j 
p
XTBp, j  QF j,
(12)
where XD(i, j) and XT(i, j) (the amount of cut moved from cut
section i to ﬁll section j by bulldozer or truck) plus XDB(p, j) and
XTB(p, j) (the amount of borrow moved from area p to ﬁll area j
by bulldozer or truck) are equal to the available amount of ﬁll,
QF( j), at ﬁll section j. Capacities at borrow and waste areas are not
constrained.
Nonnegativity is assumed for each decision variable in addition
to their linear nature, and is written as
XDi, j, XTi, j, XDWi, k, XTWi, k, XDBp, j, and XTBp, j  0.
(13)
When material adjustments are factored in, it is necessary to modify
the ﬁll constraints to account for the swell or shrinkage that occurs
during compaction (BC Ministry of Forests 2002). The revised con-
straints are (Mayer and Stark 1981)

i
sij
f XDi,j 
p
spj
f XDBp, j 
i
sij
f XTi, j

p
spj
f XTBp, j  Q f  j,
(14)
where sij
f X(i, j) (the adjusted amount of cut moved from cut section
i to ﬁll section j by bulldozer or truck) plus spj
f XB(p, j) (the adjusted
amount of material moved from borrow area p to ﬁll section j by
bulldozer or truck) are equal to the amount of ﬁll required, Q f( j), at
ﬁll section j. The shrinkage or swell factors for material moved from
cut section i and borrow area p are deﬁned as sij
f and s spj
f , respectively.
The Mayer and Stark (1981) example determines the optimal
allocation between road sections when cut and ﬁll quantities do not
balance within each section. In cases when cut and ﬁll volumes do
balance within the section and for that portion of the cut that is
moved within the section to a ﬁll area, a cost to excavate and embank
that material must be applied. If, for example, a section contains 100
CY of cut and 50 CY of ﬁll, 50 CY of cut will be placed in ﬁll, leaving
an additional 50 to be allocated elsewhere. As previously mentioned,
haul within sections is not charged, but a cost to excavate and em-
bank that 50 CY (the initial ﬁll volume) of material needs to be
added to the earthwork cost. Conversely, if the ﬁll volume exceeds
the cut volume, a cost for excavation and embankment must be
applied to the initial cut volume. The addition of the within-section
cost to the between-section cost nets a total cost of earthwork.
The earthwork allocation portion of ACCEL uses a dynamically
linked library (DLL) that accompanies the program. This DLL is
tasked with running the simplex algorithm as a subroutine and
solving the allocation problem. The DLL was added to extend the
capabilities of Excel, which is limited in handling very large linear
optimization problems. There are potentially thousands of decision
variables arranged horizontally across the columns resulting from
hundreds of short road sections, but Excel has only 256 columns in
versions older than 2007.
Stabilization
In calculating the cost of stabilizing a roadway following con-
struction, the area of the cut and ﬁll slopes that require grass seeding,
192
WEST. J. APPL. FOR. 26(4) 2011

fertilizing, or mulching is determined. The basic unit costs of ma-
terial and the application rate per acre (including overhead, equip-
ment, transportation, and labor costs) can be obtained from local
economic data and are required input from the user. The area cal-
culations for this component are also modiﬁed versions of the
method determined by Durston and Ou (1983) (Figure 3). The
formulation for stabilization area is
AS  WA1  WA2  WB1  WB2	/2  L/43560
(15)
where AS  stabilization areas (acres), SF
I  ﬁll slope ratio (1/SF),
SF  ﬁll slope (%), SC
1  ﬁll slope ratio (1/SC), SC  cut slope (%),
WA1  DC/cos(tan1SC
1), WA2  DF /cos(tan1SF
1), WB1 
width 1 at following station (ft), WB2  width 2 at following station
(ft), L  length of section (ft). Additional stabilization measures,
such as silt fencing or straw bales, may be included in this compo-
nent cost.
Rock Surfacing
The program calculates surfacing cost by estimating the com-
pacted surfacing volume on the basis of the method used by Durston
and Ou (1983) (Figure 4).
The formulations for rock surfacing volumes are
Base:
VBR 
WS1  WR1  WS1/2
2

WS2  WR2  WS2/2
2
2 
LDBR/12
27
,
(16)
Surface:
VSR 
WR1  WR1  WS1/2
2

WR2  WR2  WS2/2
2
2 
LDSR/12
27
,
(17)
where VSR  volume of surface rock (CY), VBR  volume of base
rock (CY), DSR  depth of surface rock (in.), DBR  depth of base
rock (in.), WR1 and WR2  surface widths of consecutive stations
(ft), WS1 and WS2  subgrade widths of consecutive stations (ft),
and L  section length (ft).
The user may choose to include the costs of a base course and
gravel surface if applicable. The program repeats the formulation for
the number of speciﬁed number of courses and applies unit costs
obtained from the user for material, loading and application, and
haul of aggregate surfacing to obtain a total surfacing cost.
The material costs are input directly by the user, who can choose
units in dollars per CY or dollars per ton. If CY units are chosen, the
user must select from a list of swell factors that will adjust the hauling
costs by inﬂating the aggregate volume. If ton units are chosen, the
user must also select the rock type to convert the volume estimate
from CY.
A load and apply cost is factored in that includes a dollar per CY
estimate for loading, spreading, rolling, grading, and compaction.
Watering cost is included by entering the operational characteristics
of development and application, including development cost, miles
watered per day, miles watered per hour, and the truck hourly rate.
In this manner, a charge is applied only for the time allotted for
usage of the water truck. Mobilization of the truck is included under
that section for the general size class of the equipment.
To determine the unit cost of hauling surfacing material, the user
ﬁrst must select the relevant truck size (12 or 20 CY), and if machine
rates have been input in the mobilization worksheet, they can be
inserted into the calculation or directly input. Next, a truck cycle
time is developed though entering load time, dump time, and the
average round trip speed and round trip distance for up to four road
segments. A haul cost is determined by multiplying cycle time by the
number of cycles required to haul the estimated quantity given the
truck size and the operator and trucks’ hourly rate.
Drainage
The drainage portion of the program includes the material and
installation costs of ditch relief, roadway drainage, and drainage
crossing structures, as well as erosion and sediment control mea-
sures. Costs for dips, waterbars, bridges, and fords are a simple unit
cost per structure multiplied by the number of structures. The costs
for culverts are calculated from the dimensions of the structure and
the unit cost of installation per foot. Installation costs of structures
may include additional materials, such as elbows, anchors, and rip
rap, that are added to the total by a material cost and application.
Material prices for culverts and accessories must be obtained from
the supplier, and prices for different varieties of culverts are not
considered.
Culvert lengths may be entered manually by diameter class, or
the user may choose to use the culvert length estimate provided by
the program at the speciﬁc station where a culvert is identiﬁed by a
true or false statement. The program calculates culvert length using
side-slope and cross-section type for four situations: cut and ﬁll with
Figure 3.
Cross section of roadway illustrating calculation of the
stabilization area. W1 and W2 are measures of slope distance.
Figure 4.
Dimensions of a road section for aggregate.
WEST. J. APPL. FOR. 26(4) 2011
193

a down-drain, cut and ﬁll without down-drain, full bench, and
through ﬁll.
The culvert gradient is assumed to be equal to the original side-
slope up to a maximum allowable gradient of 30%. If the calculated
gradient were to exceed 30%, it is assumed that the gradient is 30%
and that a down-drain would be installed. The down-drain is simply
an additional length of culvert extending from the daylight point to
the toe of the ﬁll. Culvert skew in degrees from perpendicular to the
roadway is also considered by dividing the estimated length by the
cosine of the skew angle in degrees.
The formulations are as follows (Durston and Ou 1983):
Balanced section without down-drain (Figure 5):
LC  DF
2  W  SF
1DF2	1/ 2  LA1  LA2.
(18)
Balanced section with down-drain (Figure 6):
LC  Dm
2  W  SF
1Dm2	1/ 2 
DF  Dm
sintan11/SF
1	  LA1  LA2.
(19)
Full bench (Figure 7):
LC  W  4  LA1  LA2,
(20)
where LC  length of the culvert (ft), SF
1  ﬁll slope ratio (1/SF),
SF  ﬁll slope (%), DM  0.3W/(1  0.3S1) (formula assumes a
30% culvert gradient), and W  road surface width (ft).
For through-ﬁll section and drainage crossings (Figure 8):
LX  V  W  X2  Y  U2	1/ 2  LA1  LA2,
(21)
where U  HF  (W/2  V )SX, Y  HF  (W/2  X)SX, V 
[SF
1HF

(W/2)SX SF
1]/(1

SX SF
1),
X

[SF
1HF

(W/2)SX SF
1]/(1  SX SF
1), SX  gradient of culvert (decimal per-
centage), HF  height of ﬁll at centerline (ft), LA1  additional
length required on upstream side of ﬁll (ft), and LA2  additional
length required on downstream side of ﬁll (ft).
The program prompts the user for culvert diameters ranging
from 12 to 60 in. The diameter may be selected using a drop-down
menu in the culvert length worksheet. To aid in culvert diameter
selection, a form has been incorporated into the program to calcu-
late a minimum culvert diameter on the basis of watershed charac-
teristics, storm event, and drainage area using Talbot’s formula
(Walbridge et al. 1984, North Carolina Department of Environ-
ment and Natural Resources 2007):
A  C  M3/4  R/4,
(22)
where A  required section of waterway (ft2), C  watershed rough-
ness coefﬁcient, M  watershed areas (ac), and R  rainfall event
(in.).
The result of Talbot’s formula is the area of a waterway based on
a rainfall event (in./hour). This waterway area is used to recommend
the correct culvert diameter. The lineal feet of culvert by size class is
totaled and applied to the material and installation costs, and it is
summarized in the ﬁnal output accordingly.
Mobilization
The cost of mobilization—the cost of transporting personnel,
equipment, and supplies to the site—is a function of move in dis-
tance, travel speeds loaded and unloaded, travel times loaded and
unloaded, load time, truck rate, truck driver rate, and equipment
ownership costs. This formulation requires the user to enter a mov-
ing time estimate for a lowboy loaded and unloaded.
Inputs are required for the type and number of pieces of equip-
ment being mobilized within the general range of small to large
excavators, dozers, graders, compactors, dump trucks, and water
Figure 5.
Culvert length dimensions for a balanced cross section
without a down-drain.
Figure 6.
Culvert length dimensions for a balanced cross section
with a down-drain.
Figure 7.
Culvert length dimensions for a full-bench cross section.
Figure 8.
Culvert length dimension for a through-ﬁll or stream-
crossing cross section.
194
WEST. J. APPL. FOR. 26(4) 2011

trucks. Machine rates are factored into the move-in-loaded calcula-
tion, as well as other cost components. For lowboy transport, the
mobilization cost includes a ﬁxed and variable cost to move in and a
backhaul charge for the lowboy’s return trip. A move-out charge is
assumed to be charged to the subsequent project.
The formulations are (Akay 2003)
Loading/unloading:
MF  Ulb  Eown  Llb
(23)
Travel loaded:
MV  Ulb  Eown  T1
(24)
Backhaul:
MBH  Ulb  T2
(25)
where Ulb is the scheduled hourly cost of the lowboy (includes the
hourly rate of the truck and driver), Eown is the transported equip-
ment ownership cost ($/scheduled machine hours [SMH]), Llb is
the loading hours, and T1 and T2 are the loaded and empty travel
times, respectively.
The formulation for equipment that does not require the use of a
lowboy is (Akay 2003)
Fixed cost:
MF  Eown
(26)
Variable cost:
MV  Eop  Eown  D  T1
(27)
where D is the driver’s hourly rate ($/SMH), and Eop is the equip-
ment operating cost ($/SMH). If an aggregate surfacing is applied to
the road, the mobilization cost of crushing equipment should be
applied under that component if applicable in the unit cost of rock.
Incidental Costs
The incidental costs are included in the program as both unit cost
formulations and simple additions to total construction costs. These
costs include permits, dust abatement, gates, and signs, as well as
miscellaneous costs. For the majority of these cost items, the user
simply deﬁnes each item under its heading and enters the unit cost
and quantity. The dust abatement section goes a step further to list
a series of common treatments and recommended application rates,
and it calculates quantity and cost on the basis of the speciﬁed
materials.
Model Testing
Survey and design data were entered into ACCEL to test the
output in determining construction quantities for a typical single-
lane low-volume road. The data were obtained from the design of an
actual US Forest Service project in mountainous terrain of northern
Idaho. The data were separated into four road segments for analysis,
which varied in proﬁle characteristics from gentle to moderate road
gradients (0–7%) and side-slopes (0–30%). This provided a variety
of cross section types among the road stations to challenge the pro-
gram in determining clearing areas, earthwork volumes, surfacing
volumes, stabilization areas, and culvert lengths. The four road seg-
ments equaled 1,876 ft of roadway (approximately 1/3 of a mile),
and station lengths averaged 52 ft.
The results of were tested by inputting the same traverse and
design information into the RoadEng program, a road construction
and design program that is widely used by forest engineers in more
than 1,000 companies across North America (Softree 2007). A sub-
grade width of 16 ft and surface width of 14 ft were held constant for
all stations. In both programs, the vertical alignment at each station
was adjusted according to the source design speciﬁcations where
ground and road elevations varied at centerline. Road gradients were
entered into each program for the ﬁnal vertical alignments at each
station. Cut and ﬁll slope ratios were 1:1 and 1.333:1, respectively,
assuming common material (Table 4). The estimates for each sta-
tion have been compiled with the percentage of difference between
the two programs (Table 5).
In the cases of clearing area, seeding area, and surfacing volumes,
the estimates of the programs were very close (Table 5). For the
clearing component, there was no prominent pattern of overesti-
mating or underestimating the acreage, and over the length of the
project, with a 0.2% difference, they nearly cancel each other out.
Estimated acres tended to be greater with ACCEL than with Road-
Eng, with an 8.1% difference over the project length. Differences in
seeding and clearing areas could be attributed to the end area and
cross-section formulations of each program. RoadEng allows the
side-slopes of the cut and ﬁll end areas to vary by accepting multiple
side-shots for each station in the Survey_Map module. On the other
hand, ACCEL assumes a uniform side-slope through the cross sec-
tion at each station. The result is that the lengths and depths of the
cut and ﬁll slopes differ slightly for each station. This theory was
tested for a road segment by entering a single average side-slope into
Table 4.
Cut and ﬁll slope ratios by material type (BC Ministry of
Forests 2002).
Material type
Cut slope ratio
Fill slope ratio
Common
1:1
1.333:1
Fractured rock
0.75:1
1.25:1
Solid rock
0.25:1
1:01
Table 5.
Comparison of construction quantities between ACCEL
and RoadEng. CY, cubic yard.
Segment 1
Segment 2
Segment 3
Segment 4
Design data
Length (ft)
723
395
385
373
Average side slope (%)a
6
14
17
20
Earthwork cut
ACCEL (CY)
282.5
140.8
709.4
223.9
RoadEng (CY)
279
176.0
809
375.1
Difference (%)
1.2
25.0
14.0
67.5
Earthwork ﬁll
ACCEL (CY)
73.3
128.5
190.8
345.6
RoadEng (CY)
99.3
135.3
162.1
492.2
Difference (%)
35.5
5.3
15.0
42.4
Clearing area
ACCEL (ac)
0.304
0.182
0.226
0.206
RoadEng (ac)
0.301
0.182
0.222
0.216
Difference (%)
1.0
0.1
2.0
4.6
Seeding area
ACCEL (ac)
0.051
0.048
0.132
0.104
RoadEng (ac)
0.048
0.048
0.109
0.101
Difference (%)
5.0
0.3
17.1
2.2
Surfacing
ACCEL (CY)
129.7
70.8
68.9
66.7
RoadEng (CY)
128.1
69.8
68.0
65.8
Difference (%)
1.3
1.4
1.4
1.3
a Average side slope among station points and perpendicular to the roadway.
WEST. J. APPL. FOR. 26(4) 2011
195

RoadEng and comparing the various results. The estimates were in
close agreement with each except for slight differences attributed to
rounding errors. Overall, the seeding and clearing components rep-
resent only minor costs of a construction project, and the differences
seen here would change the project costs only slightly.
The surfacing volume calculated in ACCEL was consistently
greater than that of RoadEng by about1.0%. Assuming $25,000 of
rock is placed on a mile of roadway, the cost estimated by ACCEL
would be $325 greater than that of RoadEng. However, because
ACCEL incorporates the subgrade width in the estimate of surfac-
ing volume, more signiﬁcant differences are expected to occur if the
subgrade width far exceeds the surface width at each station. This is
an area of consideration for future changes.
At eight stations, culvert lengths were estimated using both pro-
grams (Table 6). The cross section types across these stations varied
from through ﬁll, through cut, and cut and ﬁll. For each program
the culvert was assumed to extend from the ditch-line to the toe of
the ﬁll. Two-foot extensions were then added to either end of the
culverts in both estimates. Length estimates varied from as little as
1.8% to 13.1%, and in nearly all cases the RoadEng length was
greater. The major factor contributing to these differences was again
the cross-section formulations of each program. If cut and ﬁll depths
vary slightly, that difference was reﬂected in the span between the
ditch-line and toe of the ﬁll.
The greatest differences between the programs’ estimates were
seen in the earthwork volumes. Although the section volumes of cut
and ﬁll ﬂuctuated similarly between the programs’ results, the total
volumes of cut and ﬁll in ACCEL were 20.8 and 20.4% less than
that of RoadEng. The programs differed in end-area and cross-sec-
tion formulations, which caused the respective cut and ﬁll depths to
vary on the right and left roadsides, resulting in differences in vol-
ume estimates for a given road section, but was less pronounced
under moderate slope conditions. Allowing for multiple side-shots
in data collection and a varying cross section proﬁle in ACCEL is
another area of reﬁnement to consider (B.C. Ministry of Forests,
2002) (Durston and Ou, 1983). One advantage of assuming a uni-
form slope is a reduction in time collecting and inputting data.
The earthwork allocation component of the program was tested
using the method and example developed by Mayer and Stark
(1981), where the minimum cost to allocate excavation volumes
considering material properties for eight road sections (with borrow
and waste possibilities) was solved. Using the same inputs for
the unit costs, earthwork quantities, and shrinkage/swell factors,
ACCEL nearly duplicated the solution from the example. This in-
dicates the coding conforms to the earthwork model as formulated
by Mayer and Stark (1981) for earthwork quantities and cost. The
only discrepancy was attributable to the fact that in the Mayer and
Stark example, the swell factor for common material varied slightly
between road sections. ACCEL accepts only a single value for the
adjustment factors under each material type classiﬁcation. To make
this adjustment in ACCEL would entail a signiﬁcant amount of
restructuring in the code for little effect in the end result.
Conclusion
ACCEL was developed to aid cost estimation in low-volume
forest road planning, and represents a synthesis of design, quantity,
and optimization techniques, providing an alternative to more ro-
bust yet complicated and costly computer programs.
ACCEL’s utility was demonstrated by comparing its results to
that of RoadEng for quantity estimates in clearing acres, seeding
acres, culvert lengths, and earthwork volumes. Estimates in clearing
and seeding acres across four road segments were favorable, showing
0.2 and 8% differences, respectively. Eight culvert length estimates
ranged from 1.8% to 13.1% differences, with RoadEng tending to
estimate longer culvert lengths. Earthwork quantity estimates are
similar; however, RoadEng volumes of cut and ﬁll were approxi-
mately 20% greater for the four road segments. The major contri-
bution to the differences between the programs’ estimates could be
attributed to the end-area and cross-section formulations of each
program. In the determination of earthwork volumes, it is impor-
tant to understand that the program loses some accuracy by averag-
ing the transverse changes in ground elevation. This was done to
decrease the overall program size; consequently, quantity estimates
vary somewhat from a more complex program such as RoadEng. In
the future, modiﬁcations to ACCEL could be made to account for
more variation in topography, thereby reﬁning the estimates.
ACCEL’s ability to model earthwork quantities allows the user
optimize earthwork operations rather than rely on volume estimates
from similar past projects. This lends itself to the assessment of route
alternatives, minimizing a major cost in construction. The method
used closely follows the method of Mayer and Stark (1981) and
Akay (2003) that improves on the conventional mass diagram, for
example, when haul costs and soil properties vary along the roadway
and when disposal sites are proposed. Within the earthwork alloca-
tion component, there is the common assumption that the unit
costs are linear, but in reality are not likely to be so (Easa 1988).
ACCEL expands on this common limitation by offering an alterna-
tive cost for transport distance beyond a set haul limit. Also, the
inclusion of a full-bench cross section allows for horizontal adjust-
ment of alignment, expanding on the limitation of the model of
Akay (2003).
The accuracy of ACCEL’s cost estimates, as with any program, is
highly dependent on the quality of the unit cost inputs, i.e., ofﬁce or
ﬁeld veriﬁed data. On the other hand, the minimal amount of survey
data required provides a fast preliminary planning tool for later
reﬁnement.
The quantity estimation results in ACCEL can be used to opti-
mize earthwork allocation and determine total road cost, which is
not available with the RoadEng program. The setup for the earth-
work optimization problem is coded into ACCEL and is performed
at the click of a mouse, providing considerable time savings over the
Mayer and Stark example, which must be set up manually for each
Table 6.
Comparison of culvert length estimatesa between pro-
grams.
Section
Stationb
ACCEL culvert
length
RoadEng culvert
length
Difference
(%)
. . . . . . . . . . .(ft) . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1  98c
26.0
22.6
13.1
2  62d
24.0
26.3
9.6
3
0  31d
34
37.3
9.7
1  58e
26
27.2
4.6
1  99c
22
24.8
12.7
4
0  22d
30
33.3
11.0
2  30c
20
22.4
12.0
3  32d
28
28.5
1.8
Mean difference: 9.3%
a Two feet of additional length was added to both ends of each culvert.
b Station numbering is restarted for each section.
c Culvert at cut and ﬁll cross section.
d Culvert at through-ﬁll cross section.
e Culvert at through-cut cross section.
196
WEST. J. APPL. FOR. 26(4) 2011

potential alternative. The usefulness of ACCEL can also be seen in
the MS Excel format, which is widely used and allows the user to
save and share data without installing additional software, providing
a tool for more comprehensive road planning and increased opera-
tional efﬁciency in landowners’ management.
A copy of ACCEL can acquired by downloading the Excel ﬁle
and the associated DLL ﬁle at the following address: http://
humboldt.edu/fwr/faculty/detail/han_sup_han. For technical help
or other support, inquiries may be sent to ACCELQuestions@
hotmail.com.
Literature Cited
AKAY, A. 2003. Minimizing total cost of construction, maintenance, and transportation
costs with computer-aided forest road design. PhD thesis, Oregon State Univ.
229 p.
AKAY, A.E., AND BOSTON, K. 2005. The evolution of computer-aided road design.
Int. J. For. Eng. 16(2):73–79.
AKAY, A.E., AND J. SESSIONS. 2005. Applying the decision support system, TRACER,
to forest road design. West. J. Appl. For. 20(3):184–191.
AULERICH, E. 1998. Better engineering and control of construction of forest roads. In
Proc. of the Seminar on Environmentally Sound Forest Roads and Wood Transport.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Sinaia, Romania.
Available online at http://www.fao.org/docrep/X0622E/x0622e0g.htm
B.C. MINISTRY OF FORESTS. 2002. Forest road engineering guidebook. Forest Practices
Code of British Columbia Guidebook. For. Prac. Br., BC Ministry of Forests,
Victoria, BC, Canada.
BRUCE, J.C. 2007. Computer-aided cost estimation for forest road construction. Forest
Products Department, Univ. of Idaho, Moscow, ID.
CHURCH, H.K. 1981. Excavation handbook. McGraw-Hill, St. Louis, MO.
Appendix 3.
DURSTON, T.A., AND F.L. OU. 1983. Simpliﬁed cost-estimation method for
low-volume roads. Transport. Res. Rec. Report N908:47–51.
EASA, S.M. 1988. Earthwork allocations with non-constant unit costs. ASCE J.
Constr. Eng. Manag. 113(1):34–50.
HICKERSON, T.F. 1959. Route surveys and design, 4th ed. McGraw-Hill, New York.
KRAMER, B.W. 1997. Class notes for FE551. Oregon State University Book Stores,
Inc., Corvallis, OR.
LAYTON, D.B., C.B. LEDOUX, AND C.C. HASSLER. 1992. Cost estimators for
construction of forest roads in central Appalachians. Res. Paper NE-665. US For.
Serv., Washington DC.
MAYER, R.H., AND R.M. STARK. 1981. Earthmoving logistics. ASCE J. Constr. Div.
107 (C02):297–312.
NORTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES. 2007.
Talbot’s table for round culvert sizing. Available online at www.dfr.state.nc.us/
publications/WQ0107/xAppx%209%20-%20Talbots%20Culvert%20Table.pdf;
last accessed May 5, 2007.
REA, A.I. 2005. Microsoft Visual Basic for Applications 2003. Plus Series. McGraw
Hill, New York.
SOFTREE. 2007. Home page. Available online at http://www.softree.com; last
accessed May 6, 2007.
US FOREST SERVICE. 2007. Cost estimating guide for road construction. Available
online at www.fs.fed.us/r1/projects/costguide_index.shtml; last accessed May 7,
2007.
WALBRIDGE, T.A., B.D. FRANKLIN, R.C. GRIFFITHS, AND W. JARCK. 1984. Forest
road engineering. P. 1041–1087 in Forestry handbook, 2nd ed., Wenger, K.F.
(ed.). John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York.
WEST. J. APPL. FOR. 26(4) 2011
197
