Eur J Forest Eng 2015, 1(2): 46-55 
 
*Corresponding author: Tel: +12075812851 E-mail: anil.kizha@maine.edu   
Received 23 August 2015; Accepted 5 November 2015   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 
 
Abstract 
 
Woody biomass in the form of forest residues is a potential source of sustainable renewable energy. However, 
the amount of these residues recovered from timber harvesting sites is far less than what is actually generated. 
This study focuses on estimating the amount of forest residues recovered from whole-tree harvesting sites using 
ground-based shovel logged and cable yarded harvesting systems in northern California. Inventories of standing 
trees along with pre- and post-harvest downed woody debris (DWD) surveys were used to estimate the total 
amount of aboveground biomass (AGB) in the study sites. Localized allometric biomass equations were used to 
estimate the pre-harvest AGB in standing trees. The amount of sawlogs and hog fuel recovered from the 
harvesting sites was collected from scale tickets. Forest residues delivered compared to the estimated amounts of 
forest residues generated were 70 percent for the shovel logged unit and 60 percent for the cable yarded unit. The 
amount of pre- vs. post-harvest DWD estimated from the inventory analysis for the cable and shovel units was 
increased by 42 and 23 percent, respectively. The methodology used for this study could be applied in other 
research focusing on determining a more accurate estimate of biomass recoverable from various harvesting 
systems.  
 
Keywords: Biomass harvesting and supply, cable yarding, downed woody debris estimation, even-aged stand 
management, hog fuel recovered, shovel logging 
 
1. Introduction 
Forest harvesting operations such as commercial 
timber harvest, fire hazard reduction, forest restoration, 
and pre-commercial thinning typically generate forest 
residues which are widely regarded as sustainable 
sources 
for 
renewable 
energy. 
These 
residues 
predominantly come in the form of dead trees, 
branches, tree tops, chunks, non-merchantable tree 
species, and small-diameter trees. A general assumption 
is that for every cubic meter of wood extracted from the 
forest, another cubic meter of forest residues is left 
behind (Enters, 2001). Another study - estimated 
approximately 421 oven dry metric ton (ODMT) 
equivalent of forest residues generated for every million 
cubic meters of merchantable timber harvested 
(Morgan, 2009). Excessive amounts of forest residues 
lying on the forest floor also pose fire risk and hinder 
site preparation for tree planting.  
Several techniques have been developed to estimate 
the amount of forest residues left on site in various 
forest types, yielding a wide range of results. For large 
areas, remote sensing techniques have been preferred 
(Huang et al., 2009; Andersen et al., 2011). Other 
methods have involved models based on Forest 
Inventory Data, such as EVALIDator, and FIA 
DataMart tools in combination with allometric 
equations (Morgan, 2009; USDA, 2015). However, to 
empirically quantify the amount of forest residues after 
harvest, conventional techniques such as the planar 
intercept method are preferred, which employs multiple 
sampling plots and later extrapolating the downed 
woody debris (DWD) to the whole region (Oneil and 
Lippke, 2009). 
From a biomass recovery perspective, it is critical to 
quantify the recoverable amount of forest residues 
generated in order to predict financial feasibility of the 
operation and potential revenue. Recoverable forest 
residues refer to the amount of forest residues extracted, 
processed, and utilized from timber harvesting 
operations. Several studies have documented forest 
residues recovered from timber harvest sites. Perlak et 
al. (2005) estimated recovery rates approximately 65 
percent of forest residues with current timber harvesting 
practices. Another study based on the Biomass 
Opportunity Supply Model (BiOS), a software program 
developed to estimate recoverable forest residues, 
assessed between 5.5 and 50 percent recovery rates 
from whole-tree (WT) even-aged harvesting (Ralevic et 
Forest Residues Recovered from Whole-tree Timber Harvesting Operations 
Anil Raj Kizha1*, Han-Sup Han2 
1 School of Forest Resources, University of Maine, Orono, Maine, 04469 USA. 
2 Department of Forestry and Wildland Resources, Humboldt State University, Arcata, California, 95521 USA. 

Kizha and Han 
47 
al., 2010). In eastern Washington, USA, the average 
recoverable biomass across all regions, owners, and 
forest types was estimated at an equivalent of 43 green 
metric tons (GMT) per ha for commercial harvesting 
operations and 61GMT per ha for small-diameter tree 
harvests. In this case, even though 30 percent of the 
total forest residues harvested were accessible, only 20 
percent were recoverable (Oneil and Lippke, 2009). 
These findings highlight that all accessible forest 
residues are not necessarily recoverable. 
There are several limitations to the extraction of 
forest residues that can be broadly divided into three 
categories: 
technical, 
economic, 
and 
social/environmental constraints (Hohl et al., 2013; 
Parzei et al., 2014). Technical constraint is the inherent 
inability to access and/or process forest residues with 
current equipment.  For example, it may not be feasible 
to harvest residues on steep slopes (more than 40 
percent). In other cases, woody biomass could be 
accessed using current technologies, but it may be too 
far from a road or too dispersed throughout the harvest 
unit to make it economically feasible (i.e., operation 
cost being more than the market price).  Finally, some 
biomass projects may be technically accessible and 
economically viable, but are unlikely to be socially or 
environmentally acceptable, such as forest residues 
harvested from late successional forest stands.  Hence, 
models developed in the past to estimate the actual 
amounts 
of 
recoverable 
forest 
residues 
have 
incorporated a variety of “data filters” to address some 
of these constraints (Morgan, 2009). Factors affecting 
the recoverable quantity of forest residues include 
(Ralevic et al., 2010): 
•Degree of utilization (species harvested, topping 
diameter, and merchantable products extracted) 
•Silvicultural objectives, harvesting system and 
methods  
•Regional or local conditions (site quality, stand 
conditions and species) 
• Access, site conditions, seasonal factors, etc. 
• Maximum allowable delivered price 
Among the factors listed, harvesting system plays a 
significant role in determining the quantity of forest 
residues recovered. In ground-based harvesting systems 
utilizing whole-tree method, the majority of forest 
residues are concentrated at log landings, but some 
residues inevitably stay at the felling site and along 
trails. However, it is also a common practice to place 
some forest residues on the machine trails (referred to 
as a “slash mat”) to minimize soil compaction (Mann 
and Tolbert, 2000). The resulting slash mat, while 
recoverable, may often be rendered unusable because of 
dirt, rocks, and other contamination (Oneil and Lippke, 
2009). In cable yarded harvesting systems, located on 
steeper terrain (more than 40 percent slope), the units 
are often limited by landing space, thus making piling 
of biomass at the landing a challenge. The forest 
residues generated in these steep units are often 
windrow piled along road sides or pushed back into the 
units. 
The objective of this study was to estimate and 
inventory the amount of forest residues that could be 
recovered from an integrated whole-tree even-aged 
management operation using cable yarded and ground-
based shovel logging harvesting systems. The amount 
of DWD left on the ground from the operations were 
also compared between the two harvesting systems. 
While the results provided by the study might be more 
site specific, the methodology developed could easily 
be adapted to other locations and utilized by forest 
managers and researchers for estimating the actual 
amount of recovered forest residues from various 
harvesting systems and methods. 
2. Materials and Methods 
2.1. Definitions used in this study 
Biomass: All biological material from living or dead 
trees present in the harvested units, including sawlogs, 
non-merchentable tree species and small-diameter trees, 
and forest residues. 
Forest residues:  All biomass other than sawlogs 
generated during the timber harvest. Grinded hog fuels 
were the final product from recovered forest residues. 
Non-merchantable tree species: Hardwood species such 
as tanoaks (Lithocarpus densiflorus) and red alder 
(Alnus rubra) are currently not in demand in the sawlog 
market and can be comminuted to create hogfuels.  
Small-diameter trees: Trees of both non-merchantable 
and sawlog species having a diameter at breast height 
(dbh) less than 20 cm that are available for 
comminution (processing) to produce hogfuels. 
Sawlogs: Merchantable trees above 20 cm dbh, which 
will eventually be processed at a saw mill. 
Standing trees: Sawlogs, non-merchantable tree species, 
small-diameter trees, and dead trees found in the stand. 
Recoverable forest residues: Actual amount of forest 
residues that are comminuted and sent to the power 
plants for energy production. 
2.2. Stand conditions and harvesting operations of 
sawlogs and biomass 
The study sites were two even-aged management 
units on an industrial timberland property in Humboldt 
County, California (Figure 1). The site consisted 
primarily of even-aged (averaging 60 years) second- 
and 
third- 
growth 
coast 
redwood 
(Sequoia 
sempervirens), Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziessii), 
western hemlock (Tsuga heterophylla), and tanoak 
(Lithocarpus densiflorus). The sites were about 220 to 
460 m above mean sea-level and the terrain had ground 
slopes up to 111 percent (48°). The climate for the 
region is characterized by maritime influence from the 
Pacific Ocean, and receives approximately 1200 mm of 
rain annually, with an average temperature of around 
11° C (Western Regional Climate Center, 2009) 

Eur J Forest Eng 2015, 1(2): 46-55 
 
48 
 
Figure 1. Study units for the biomass recovery study located in Humboldt County, California. 
Two whole-tree harvesting systems were applied on 
the study units (Table 1): shovel and cable yarding. The 
harvest operations took place over two years starting in 
the fall of 2012. Operations for the shovel logged unit 
included falling and bunching with a feller-buncher, 
swinging the felled trees to the roadside with a John 
Deere 3554 shovel machine, and processing timber with 
a dangle-head processor at the roadside. In the cable 
yarded unit, tree felling was done manually using a 
chainsaw. A Skagit GT3 swing yarder was used for 
yarding the logs uphill and a Linkbelt 3400 Quantum 
loader was used for loading. Processing was done at the 
landing using a John Deere 892 with a dangle-head 
processor. For both units, non-merchantable species as 
well as small-diameter trees were brought along with 
the sawlogs to the landing. The main intention behind 
bringing the non-sawlog trees to the landing was to 
reduce fuel loads in the unit and further facilitate re-
planting. Other forest residues left on the landing sites 
included residues from processing sawlogs and 
materials broken off during yarding. 
During the biomass recovery operation in the 
ground-based shovel logging unit, a loader collected 
forest residues within the unit and landing. However, 
steep terrain in the cable yarded units was inaccessible 
to the loader. A modified dump truck was used to 
transport the forest residues from the unit to a grinding 
site. The ground materials (hog fuel) were later hauled 
to local wood-based power plants. 
 
 
Table 1. Descriptive statistics related to terrain features of the study area. 
Shovel 
Cable 
Area (ha) 
8.3 
10.9 
Ground slope range (%) 
3-37 
0-50 
Average slope (%) 
22 
31 
Number of sampling plots taken 
Pre-harvest a 
15 
19 
Post-harvest b 
17 
32 
a Downed Woody Debris (DWD) survey and timber cruise plots taken before harvest 
b DWD plots sampled after harvest

Kizha and Han 
49 
2.3. Data collection 
Prior to harvesting, all units were sampled to 
estimate the total aboveground biomass (AGB). The 
AGB sampling was divided into standing trees and 
downed woody debris (DWD). The standing biomass 
(live and dead trees) was estimated by timber cruising, 
while DWD was estimated using the planar intercept 
method (Brown, 1974). Planar intercept method was 
chosen over line intersect method because DWD of all 
sizes was to be inventoried. Both components were 
sampled using 11m line transects for 0.04ha fixed-
radius circular sampling plots.  These plots were located 
at evenly spaced points 76m apart on transects lines 
drawn at random azimuths. The total amount of DWD 
was estimated from the number of intersections made 
by wood pieces with the transect line. 
The line transects for the DWD summarized the 
surface biomass components into four diameter classes: 
Class I - less than 0.62cm, Class II - 0.62 – 2.51cm, 
Class III - 2.51– 7.59cm, and Class IV - above 7.62cm. 
The diameter and decay state for Class IV pieces were 
recorded. Decay states were largely qualitative 
indicators based on the physical appearance and 
structural integrity of individual pieces and were 
divided into sound and rotten. The slope of the transect 
line along with the depth of forest residues in the soil 
was also documented. The DWD estimates were 
calculated using the Equation 1 and 2 (Brown, 1974).  
   (1) 
   (2) 
Where, n = total number of DWD material 
intersected with the transect; d2 = squared average 
quadratic-mean diameters (Class I materials = 0.08cm2, 
Class II = 1.79cm2, and Class III = 18.26cm2); for Class  
IV materials, Equation 2 was used where, ∑d2 = sum of 
squared diameter of each intersected piece; s = specific 
gravity for conifers (Class I materials = 0.48, Class II = 
0.48, Class III = 0.40, Class IV (Sound) = 0.40, and 
Class IV (Rotten) = 0.30); a = average secant of non-
horizontal particle angles for correcting orientation bias 
for pre-harvest DWD materials (Class I = 1.15, Class II 
= 1.13, Class III = 1.10, and Class IV = 1.00), and for 
post-harvest DWD materials (Class I = 1.40, Class II = 
1.13, Class III = 1.10, and Class IV = 1.00); Nl = total 
length of sampling line (Classes I and II = 2m, Class III 
= 3m and Class VI = 11m); and c = correction factor. 
Equations 1 and 2 estimated the DWD in tons per acre 
which was later converted to oven dry metric ton 
(ODMT) per ha assuming a 50 percent moisture 
content. 
Following harvest, each plot was re-sampled using 
the same line transect for estimating post-harvest DWD. 
However, during timber harvest operation, large wood 
material (Class IV) was often relocated within the stand 
due to machine movement and tended to accumulate in 
greater densities at the landing or roadside due to 
processing. 
Therefore, 
additional 
transects 
were 
sampled at a higher sampling intensity to better capture 
the variation between the pre- and post-harvest DWD 
(Table 1).  DWD amounts were also estimated from the 
inventory created for the forest residues and compared 
with the DWD survey estimates. 
The timber cruise recorded species, height, and 
diameter at breast height (dbh) for all standing trees 
over 2.54cm (Table 2). Allometric equations for 
Northwestern Pacific region of the US were utilized to 
estimate standing AGB for individual tree species 
(Table 3). The major criteria (i.e., dbh range and 
ecoregion classification) were satisfied for all the 
localized biomass allometric equations used. 
 
Table 2. A summary of timber cruise for the biomass recovery study units on a per hectare basis. 
 
Material * 
Shovel 
Cable 
Basal area (m2/ha) 
S 
9 
9 
NM 
4 
2 
D 
0.4 
1 
SD 
0.5 
2 
Trees density (number of trees 
per ha) 
S 
75 
84 
NM 
45 
42 
D 
17 
23 
SD 
126 
194 
Average  DBH (cm) 
S 
35.4 
37.1 
NM 
30.5 
24.7 
D 
14.1 
14.4 
SD 
9.4 
10.2 
                   *S- Sawlog trees, NM– Non-merchantable tree species,  
      D- Dead trees, SD– Small-diameter trees 
 

Eur J Forest Eng 2015, 1(2): 46-55 
50 
Table 3. Allometric equations used to estimate the standing aboveground biomass for the major tree species for 
this biomass recovery study 
Regions 
Total aboveground biomass     
Biomass in tree component 
Douglas-fir a 
Pacific 
Northwest 
= EXP(-2.8462+1.7009*LN(DBHcm))+ 
foliage  
EXP(-3.6941+2.1382*LN(DBHcm))+ 
live branch  
EXP(-3.529+1.7503*LN(DBHcm))+ 
dead branch  
EXP(-3.0396+2.5951*LN(DBHcm))+ 
bole wood (without bark) 
EXP(-4.3103+2.4300*LN(DBHcm)) 
bark  
western 
hemlock a  
Pacific 
Northwest 
= EXP(-4.13+2.128*LN(DBHcm))+ 
foliage  
EXP(-5.149+2.778*LN(DBHcm))+ 
live branch  
EXP(-2.409+1.312*LN(DBHcm))+ 
dead branch  
EXP(-2.172+2.257*LN(DBHcm))+ 
bole wood (without bark) 
EXP(-4.373+2.258*LN(DBHcm)) 
bark  
tanoak b  
S.W. Oregon 
and N.W. 
California 
= EXP(-0.3169+2.2774*LN(DBH inches))+ 
live crown 
EXP(-2.4895+2.0374*LN(DBH inches))+ 
dead branches 
(EXP(-3.2751+2.5010*LN(DBH inches)) 
*41.62) 
total volume of bole 
Pacific 
madrone b  
S.W. Oregon 
and N.W. 
California 
= EXP(-0.7881+2.4839*LN(DBH inches))+ 
live crown 
EXP(-2.3938+2.2936*LN(DBH inches))+ 
dead branches 
(EXP(-2.8331+2.2969*LN(DBH inches)) 
*40.33) 
total volume of bole 
red alder b 
S.W. Oregon 
and N.W. 
California 
= EXP(-1.329+2.6232*LN(DBH inches))+ 
live crown 
EXP(-4.3788+2.6243*LN(DBH inches))+ 
dead branches 
(EXP(-2.9326+2.4999*LN(DBH inches)) 
*25.58) 
total volume of bole 
coast 
redwood c  
Northern 
California 
= AntiLog10(-1.9123+2.3651* 
Log10(DBHcm)+0.0054 ) 
total aboveground biomass 
a Gholz et al., 1979. 
b Snell and Little, 1983. 
c Kizha and Han, (submitted to For. Sci. Rev). 
Where EXP is exponential, LN is the natural logarithm, Log10 is the logarithm with base 10, DBH is diameter at breast height, 
and 666.7kg/m3, 645.7kg/m3, and 409.7kg/m3 is the average oven dry density for tanoak, Pacific madrone, and red alder, 
respectively. Weights in oven dry kg were converted into ODMT. 
 
Allometric equations for Douglas-fir and western 
hemlock estimated the AGB in green weight (Gholz et 
al., 1979), which was then converted to ODMT.  For 
tanoak and Pacific madrone (Arbutus menziesii), the 
volume of bole derived from allometric equations was 
converted to ODMT using density factors (Snell and 
Little, 1983). For coast redwood, equations to predict 
AGB were developed using destructive sampling 
techniques. The amount of sawlogs and hog fuel hauled 
from the sites was obtained for each harvest unit from 
respective scale tickets.  
 
2.4 Equations used for biomass inventory and 
recovery analysis 
2.4.1. Forest products inventory 
Several equations were used on a per hectare basis to 
inventory the amount of sawlogs and forest residues 
produced from the harvest units. Allometric equations 
were used to estimate the total amount of AGB for 
standing trees (Table 3).  
Total amounts of forest residues were estimated by 
summing the total AGB in non-merchantable species, 
small-diameter trees, and dead trees, along with the 
residues generated during timber processing. The 
residues from timber processing (tops, limbs, chunks, 
and other slash material) were calculated as the 
difference between the estimated total biomass in 
sawlog trees and the sawlogs delivered to the mill 
obtained from scale tickets (Equ. 3). Forest residue 
recovery rate was calculated as a percent of the total 
forest residues delivered to the total amount estimated 
(Equ. 4). 
The total standing biomass was the biomass present 
all of the standing trees. The total biomass recovery 
percentage was again calculated as a ratio of the total 
forest products delivered (sawlogs and hog fuel 
combined) to the estimated total standing biomass (Equ. 
5). 
    (3) 
(4) 
   (5) 

Kizha and Han 
51 
2.4.2. DWD inventory 
DWD generated during the timber harvest operation 
was calculated using two approaches. At first, DWD on 
a per hectare basis was estimated from the planar 
intersect survey by finding the difference between the 
average post-harvest DWD and pre-harvest DWD from 
the sample plots (Equ. 6).  
In the second approach, DWD left on the site after 
harvest was estimated from the inventory (Equ. 7). As 
the planar intersect survey could not efficiently estimate 
the overall amount of DWD generated due to the 
harvest, the total unaccounted DWD was calculated by 
subtracting the DWD (survey) from the DWD 
(inventory) and reported in ODMT per ha (Equ. 8). 
Additionally, a percentage of unaccounted DWD was 
also developed (Equ. 9). 
 
   (6) 
    (7) 
    (8) 
    (9) 
 
2.5. Statistical analysis 
Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to determine 
if significant differences (p < 0.05) existed in species 
composition, mortality, AGB for standing trees (ODMT 
per ha), and the various DWD classes (ODMT per ha) 
among the different units prior to harvesting. The post-
harvest DWD means were later compared with the pre-
harvest DWD means to examine if there was a 
significant difference due to the harvest. All the 
assumptions for parametric statistical tests were met. 
ANOVA was also done to analyse if differences existed  
 
in DWD, by diameter Classes I– IV and decay states, 
due to the treatments. If a significant difference was 
detected, Tukey-Kramer post-hoc test was performed to 
confirm where the differences occurred between 
groups.  SPSS statistical software package (IBM SPSS 
Version 21) was used for all the analyses. 
 
3. Results and Discussion 
3.1. Actual hog fuel recovered 
Higher amounts of forest residues were recovered 
from the ground-based shovel logged unit (157 ODMT 
per ha) compared to the cable yarded unit (110 ODMT 
per ha; Table 4). This situation can be attributed to 
better machine accessibility within the stand due to its 
gentle slope. The slash material left behind in the cable 
yarded unit could assist in stabilizing the forest soil in 
steeper terrain and further enhance the nutrient content 
in the soil (Brown et al., 2003).  
The percentage of total forest products delivered 
versus total standing biomass estimated was 86 and 83 
percent for the shovel and the cable yarded units, 
respectively (Table 4). Results from ANOVA done on 
the timber cruise showed there were no significant 
differences in the pre-harvest volume and mortality rate 
among the various units (p = 0.423 and 0.648). 
However, there was a significant difference in the 
species composition among the units (p < 0.05). Shovel 
logged units had more non-merchantable species 
compared to the cable yarded unit.  Both shovel and 
cable units, were dominated by tanoak, coastal 
redwoods, and Douglas-fir (Figure 2). But both units 
had no difference in the AGB for the non-sawlog trees 
(p = 0.562) (Table 2). 
 
 
Table 4. Inventory of forest residues recovered from two harvest units, shovel logged and cable yarded, in oven 
dry metric tons per hectare (ODMT per ha). Allometric equations were used to estimate the biomass values prior 
to harvest and delivered values from scale tickets. 
 
  
Shovel  
Cable  
 
Forest 
residues a 
Total standing 
biomass 
Forest 
residues a 
Total standing 
biomass 
 
ODMT per ha 
Estimated 
224 
466 
182 
417 
Delivered 
157 
399 
110 
345 
Percentage 
Recovery rate  
70 
86 
60 
83 
a Biomass generated from small-diameter trees, non-merchantable species(< 20 cm dbh),  
dead trees and limbs, tops, and chucks generated from sawlog processing. 
 

Eur J Forest Eng 2015, 1(2): 46-55 
52 
 
Figure 2. Species composition and stand density (number of trees per ha) for the two study units. 
 
3.2. DWD survey 
ANOVA done on the pre- and post-harvest DWD 
plots showed there was a significant difference for the 
first three diameter classes (Classes I to III: p < 0.05; 
Table 5). There was no significant difference in Class 
IV, and total amount of DWD for pre- and post-harvest 
for the two units (p = 0.327 and 0.942). This could be 
explained by closely observing the biomass recovery 
operation. In general, it was the large diameter wood 
pieces (Class IV) that were collected during the post-
harvest biomass recovery operation, while other small 
wood pieces (Classes I to III) were usually left behind 
unless they were bundled. Again, there was a high 
probability for the small sized wood pieces (Classes I to 
III) to break off from the main branch and remain in the 
unit during the various timber harvesting operations, 
especially primary transportation (i.e., shovel swing or 
cable yarding). 
The Tukey–Kramer post-hoc 
test showed 
a 
significant difference between the shovel logged and 
cable yarded post-harvest plots for the diameter Classes 
I, II, and III (p < 0.05) suggesting that increased 
amounts of small-diameter wood pieces were left on the 
ground in the cable yarded unit. These twigs along with 
the needles left on the ground were the tree components 
richest in nutrients. Furthermore, they decompose faster 
and could be considered as a significant source of 
nutrients (Wall and Hytönen, 2011). 
While conducting this analysis, it was observed that 
the total DWD estimates in the pre-harvest DWD 
survey were highly influenced by a few or even one 
large diameter wood piece (>38 cm). These old logs 
were intentionally left behind from a previous 
operation, as a part of a habitat conservation plan and 
dead wood management plan. The majority of these 
large diameter wood pieces remained intact during 
operation; hence they were not of major concern in 
most sampling plots. However, in some plots these 
large wood pieces were moved (out of transect line)  
during operations. As a result, the total post-harvest 
DWD was less than that of the pre-harvest for the cable 
unit, which was contrary to the situation in the field.  
Additionally, in the cable yarded unit, there were 
large diameter wood pieces surveyed during the pre-
harvest that could not be accounted for in the post-
harvest as they were buried over 75 percent in the soil. 
Hence, large diameter logs (>38cm) in the pre-harvest 
DWD survey which were buried in the ground or 
outside the transects in the post-harvest were noted. 
These plots were re-sampled to inspect these missing 
logs. The exclusion of these large diameter logs reduced 
the average pre-harvest DWD for all units by 
approximately 31 ODMT per ha. 
High amounts of DWD were estimated for shovel 
units during post-harvest survey because five of the 15 
plots were located in the landing area. Such cases have 
been reported in previous studies (Huang et al., 2009), 
where following major disturbance events (e.g. logging, 
fire, insect mortality, windstorms, etc.), large inputs of 
DWD occurred. Taking this into consideration, 
additional DWD plots were sampled post-harvest to 
increase the accuracy of the estimates because a limited 
number of sample plots may not provide reasonable 
estimates of the heterogeneity in DWD after a timber 
harvest operation (Birdsey, 2004).   
The post-harvest DWD estimate from the planar 
intercept survey did not align with the DWD estimated 
by the inventory analysis (Table 6). This further led us 
to investigate the unaccounted DWD generated during 
the operation. Results showed that around 23 percent 
for shovel and 42 for cable units’ total DWD present on 
the floor was not accounted for by the DWD survey. A 
good portion of the missing DWD could be potentially 
present in the piles left at the landing in both units. 
However, this could not be gauged as the piles were not 
sampled. Additionally this could also be attributed to 
the previously mentioned situation during the DWD 
survey. 

Kizha and Han 
53 
Table 5. Average pre- and post-harvest downed wood debris (DWD) survey results  
estimated in oven dry metric ton per hectare (ODMT per ha). 
Shovel 
Cable 
Pre 
Post 
Pre 
Post 
Class I 
0.85 
0.70 
0.61 
1.52 
Class II 
2.79 
4.39 
2.23 
4.77 
Class III 
2.70 
7.57 
2.34 
8.37 
Class IV Sound 
86.80 
65.32 
37.80 
22.53 
Class IV Rotten 
14.94 
44.69 
47.74 
48.17 
Total  
108.08 
122.68 
90.72 
85.36 
 
Table 6. A summary of downed woody debris (DWD) surveys estimating the average amount of woody 
materials in oven dry metric ton per hectare (ODMT per ha) left on the forest floor post- and pre- harvest. The 
percent changes were calculated as a ratio of pre-harvest DWD to the post-harvest DWD. 
Shovel 
Cable 
ODMT per ha 
Post-harvest survey 
123 
85 
Pre-harvest survey 
108 
91 
DWD (survey) a 
15 
-6 
Percentage change 
11% 
-6% 
DWD (inventory) b 
67 
72 
Unaccounted DWD c 
53 
77 
Percentage of unaccounted DWD 
23% 
42% 
a DWD (survey) = Post harvest DWD – Pre harvest DWD 
b DWD (inventory)=Forest residues estimated  – Hog fuel delivered  
c Unaccounted DWD = DWD (inventory) – DWD (survey) 
 
3.3. Allometric equations 
The accuracy in estimating the actual amount of 
biomass in standing trees was a crucial component for 
this study. While determining the percentage of the 
forest products recovered, the biomass in standing trees 
and the bole (stem) was needed to be accurate to predict 
the pre-harvest amounts. There were numerous 
allometric biomass equations available for predicting 
the total AGB. Therefore, priority was given to the dbh 
range, eco-region, stand condition, and R2 during the 
selection. Comparison between the national-level 
allometric equations developed by Jenkins et al. (2003) 
and localized equations showed that the former was 16-
20 percent more than the localized equation (Table 7). 
Previous studies have also recorded this inconsistency 
in AGB when using generalized equations for smaller 
areas (Fried and Zhou, 2008). 
 
3.4. Impacts on management and limitations of the 
study 
Recovery rates of forest residues could be 
effectively 
estimated 
using 
available 
allometric 
equations and information from scale tickets. However, 
forest products inventory and potential amount of forest 
residue supply based on models usually over-estimate 
the supply  
 
(Hohl et al., 2013; Parzei et al., 2014). This study 
showed that actual forest residues recovered from 
whole-tree timber harvesting sites were 40 and 30 
percent less than the estimated forest residues generated 
for cable yarded and ground-based timber harvesting 
systems, respectively (Table 4). Nutrient impacts from 
biomass removal were of less concern because even 
after the forest residue recovery operation, the DWD 
(inventory) analysis showed that almost 67 and 72 
ODMT per ha of biomass was left on site for the shovel 
and cable yard units, respectively (Table 6). 
The planar intercept method (Brown, 1974) 
commonly used for estimating residual DWD, was not 
an effective method for this study. Several large 
diameter materials during post-harvest DWD sampling, 
were not accounted for because they were 75 percent 
buried in the ground. Furthermore, several plots were 
used for piled materials during the operation, especially 
in the shovel logged unit, which resulted in 
overestimates in some plots. Conversely, there were 
other plots used as spur roads during harvest, therefore 
having no DWD. Movement of large diameter logs 
within the sampling plots during the operation also 
influenced the total amount of DWD estimation. 

Eur J Forest Eng 2015, 1(2): 46-55 
54 
 
Table 7. Comparing the total estimates predicted for the total standing biomass from national generalized Jenkins et 
al. (20003) equation  (GE) and localized allometric equations (LE) in oven dry metric tons per hectare (ODMT per 
ha) using a systematic sampling method including 0.04 ha fixed-radius plots. 
Shovel 
Cable 
OMDT per ha 
Generalized equation (GE) 
554 
521 
Localized equation (LE) 
467 
417 
Percentage difference a 
16% 
20% 
 
4. Conclusion 
Several studies have tried to estimate the forest 
residue generated from a timber harvesting operation 
using various models and methods. This study showed 
that the actual amount of forest residue delivered was 
less than the estimated amount. Therefore, forest 
products recovery rates should be based on both the 
estimates of standing tree biomass and actual amounts 
of forest products delivered. Additionally, the amounts 
of hog fuel recovered from the ground-based harvesting 
sites were higher than those from the cable yarded units. 
The DWD analysis done on the inventory of the forest 
residues showed an increase in total post-harvest DWD 
for the units. However, this trend was not captured in 
the DWD post-harvest survey for the cable yarded 
units. The study could be further strengthened by 
employing a DWD sampling method which allows 
accounting for the buried and dislocated large wood 
pieces within the plots. 
 
Acknowledgements 
This project was supported by the Agriculture and 
Food Research Initiative, Biomass Research and 
Development Initiative, Competitive Grant no. 2010-
05325 from the USDA National Institute of Food and 
Agriculture. We would also like to express our gratitude 
to Joel Bisson, Timothy Montgomery, and Heesung 
Woo, Humboldt State University, for assisting in data 
collection, Ryan Coltrin, for the role he took during the 
initial part of the study, Deborah Page-Dumroese and 
Jeffrey Kane for their valuable comments and 
suggestions during the manuscript preparation. Our 
appreciation goes to Michael Alcorn (Green Diamond 
Resource Co.) and Steven Morris (Steve Morris 
Logging) for their cooperation on the operational aspect 
of the study.  
 
References 
 
Andersen, H.-E., Strunk J., Temesgen, H., 2011. Using 
airborne light detection and ranging as a sampling 
tool for estimating forest biomass resources in the 
Upper Tanana Valley of Interior Alaska. West. J. 
Appl. For. 26(4):157–164.  
Birdsey, R., 2004. Data gaps for monitoring forest carbon 
in the United States: an inventory perspective. 
Environ. Manage. 33(1):S1–S8. 
 
Brown, J.K., 1974. Handbook for inventorying downed 
woody material. USDA Forest Service, Ogden, Utah, 
USA.  
Brown, J.K., Reinhardt, E.D., Kramer, K.A., 2003. 
Coarse woody debris: managing benefits and fire 
hazard in the recovering forest. General Technical 
Report, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Forest 
Service, United States Department of Agriculture, 
Fort Collins, CO, USA. 
Enters, T., 2001. Trash or treasure?: logging and mill 
residues in Asia and the Pacific. Food and 
Agricultural Organization of the United Nations, 
Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, Bangkok, 
Thailand. 
Fried, J.S. and Zhou, X., 2008. Forest inventory-based 
estimation of carbon stocks and flux in California 
forests in 1990. General Technical Report, USDA 
Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station, 
Portland, OR, USA. 
Gholz, H.L., Grier, C.C., Campbell, A.G., Brown, A.T., 
1979. Equations for estimating biomass and leaf area 
of plants in the Pacific Northwest. Corvallis: Forest 
Research Lab., School of Forestry, Oregon State 
University, OR, USA. 
Hohl, A., Bisson, J., Kizhakkepurakkal, A. R., 
Montgomery, T., Han, S.K. Han, H.-S., 2013. Blue 
Lake Rancheria Woody Biomass Availability Study. 
Blue Lake Rancheria Tribe, Blue Lake, CA, USA. 
Huang, S., Crabtree, R.L., Potter, C., Gross, P., 2009. 
Estimating the quantity and quality of coarse woody 
debris in Yellowstone post-fire forest ecosystem from 
fusion of SAR and optical data. Remote Sens. 
Environ. 113(9):1926–1938. 
Jenkins, J.C., Chojnacky, D.C., Heath, L.S., Birdsey. 
R.A., 2003. National-scale biomass estimators for 
United States tree species. For. Sci. 49(1):12–35. 
Kizha., A.R., Han, H.-S. Allometric equations for 
predicting 
aboveground 
biomass, 
various 
tree 
components and structural dimensions in coast 
redwood. For. Sci. Rev. (Submitted) 
Mann, L. and Tolbert, V., 2000. Soil Sustainability in 
Renewable Biomass Plantings. AMBIO J. Hum. 
Environ. 29(8):492–498. 
Morgan, T.A., 2009. An assessment of forest-based 
woody biomass supply and use in Montana. Forestry 
Assistance Bureau, Forestry Division, Montana 

Kizha and Han 
55 
 
Department of Natural Resources and Conservation, 
Missoula, Montana, USA. 
Oneil, E. and Lippke, B., 2009. Eastern Washington 
biomass accessibility. Washington State Legislature 
and Washington Department of Natural Resources, 
Seattle, WA, USA. 
Parzei, S., Krigstin, S., Hayashi, K., Wetzel, S., 2014. 
Forest harvest residues available in Eastern Canada–a 
critical review of estimations. For. Chron. 90(6):778–
784. 
Perlack, R.D., Wright, L.L., Turhollow, A.F., Graham, 
R.L., Stokes, B.J., Erbach, D.C., 2005. Biomass as 
feedstock for a bioenergy and bioproducts industry: 
the technical feasibility of a billion-ton annual supply. 
USDA and the USDOE, Oak Ridge, TN, USA.  
Ralevic, P., Ryans, M., Cormier, D., 2010. Assessing 
forest biomass for bioenergy: Operational challenges 
and cost considerations. For. Chron. 86(1):43–50. 
Snell, J.A.K. and Little, S.N., 1983. Predicting Crown 
weight and bole volume of five western hardwoods. 
United States Department of Agriculture Forest 
Service, Pacific Northwest Forest and Range 
Experiment Station, USA. 
USDA Forest Service, 2015. Forest Inventory and 
Analysis National Program, USA.  
Wall, A. and Hytönen, J., 2011. The long-term effects of 
logging residue removal on forest floor nutrient 
capital, foliar chemistry and growth of a Norway 
spruce stand. Biomass and Bioenergy. 35(8):3328–
3334. 
Western Regional Climate Center (WRCC), 2009. 
Willow Creek 1 NW, California - Climate Summary 
2009.  
 
