1
Burgeoning Biomass: Creating Efficient and Sustainable 
Forest Biomass Supply Chains in the Rockies
September/October 2014 • ISSUE 13
There is an abundant, renewable fuel 
source locked in Rocky Mountain 
forests. Most active forest management 
activities on public and private land, 
such as thinning and removing beetle-
killed trees, produce a byproduct called 
woody biomass. Also known as “slash”, 
this material includes stems, limbs, tops, 
needles, leaves, and other parts of trees 
and woody plants that are cut down 
to produce timber or meet other land 
management objectives. Though often 
burned for disposal, woody biomass can 
be collected, processed and transported 
SUMMARY
Woody biomass could be used to generate 
energy in the western US if the utilization 
process is both economically feasible and 
ecologically sustainable. The purpose 
of the RMRS-led Biomass Research 
and Development Initiative (BRDI) is 
to develop technologies, approaches, 
and new science that will help to make 
this possible. This issue of the Bulletin 
is focused on research addressing 
challenges of the biomass supply chain, 
from the time that a forest treatment 
is initiated to the time that the biomass 
residue reaches an end user (a later issue 
will address the technology of biomass 
conversion after the material is delivered). 
A major roadblock to effective biomass 
utilization is the high handling costs and 
low market value of woody biomass. As 
part of this project, new technologies are 
being developed to enhance biomass 
resources assessment, improve supply 
chain logistics, and reduce handling costs 
through equipment modification and 
more efficiently managing operations 
in forest treatment areas. To assist 
managers in inexpensively and quickly 
assessing forest biomass supplies, new 
and innovative tools are now available. 
The BRDI project also addresses the 
long-term effects of biomass utilization on 
soil and forest productivity by resampling 
research sites that were established 
and harvested 40 years ago. These 
understandings of long-term effects and 
improvements in the biomass supply 
chain have the potential to make biomass 
utilization a feasible renewable energy 
option to reduce our long-term carbon 
footprint, and address many significant 
land management challenges.
to a facility where it can be converted 
into fuel, heat and electricity. Eagle Valley 
Clean Energy in Gypsum, Colorado, 
is one such facility, and is Colorado’s 
first dedicated biomass power plant, 
producing 11.5 megawatts of electricity. 
Biomass power plants like the one in 
Gypsum can help states reach their 
renewable portfolio standard goals of 
acquiring a portion of their energy from 
renewable sources. 
However, the reality is that biomass in 
the Rockies is largely unused due to its 
Woody biomass being loaded onto a truck.  Photo credit: Rocky Mountain Research 
Station.

2
Science You Can Use Bulletin
SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2014 • ISSUE 13
high production cost and comparatively 
low market value. Before it can be used 
as fuel or raw material, woody biomass 
must be collected, chipped or ground, 
and delivered to the end user—and each 
step of the process adds to the mounting 
cost. Once delivered, the chips or ground 
fuel have low market value compared to 
logs—less than $50 per bone dry ton in 
most cases, which is often less than the 
cost of production. In this case, the least 
expensive option is to simply treat woody 
biomass as waste and either leave it in the 
forest to decompose or burn it in open 
piles for disposal. Open burning generates 
unchecked air pollution, including smoke 
and carbon dioxide, but is necessary to 
reduce fire hazard and open growing space 
for seedlings. Without an efficient supply 
chain to gather and move the material, 
and without the infrastructure to convert 
it to energy, the options for using woody 
biomass for energy in the Rockies are 
limited. 
What if we could develop a cost-
effective biomass supply chain and use 
this material for value-added energy 
and products instead of burning it or 
leaving it in the forest? In this alternative 
scenario, what is now a waste byproduct 
of forest management could be converted 
into a renewable fuel source, generating 
revenue, offsetting fossil fuel use, and 
reducing emissions from pile burning. 
To this end, research directed by the US 
Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research 
Station (RMRS) is focused on developing 
technologies, approaches, and new science 
that will allow for the economic, social, 
and environmentally sustainable harvest 
of forest biomass. 
Funded by the Biomass Research and 
Development Initiative (BRDI) of the 
USDA National Institute for Food 
and Agriculture (NIFA), a team led by 
RMRS research forester Nate Anderson, 
with Debbie Dumroese, John Hogland, 
and Bill Elliot, and collaborators Han-
Sup Han (Humboldt State University), 
Chris Keyes (University of Montana) 
and Woodam Chung (Oregon State 
University), have been evaluating major 
aspects of the biomass supply chain, with 
an eye toward optimizing operational 
efficiency and minimizing environmental 
impacts to help make biomass a viable 
renewable fuel source in the Rockies. In 
this first of a two-part Bulletin series, the 
focus is on research to efficiently harvest 
and move woody biomass from the forest 
to conversion facilities in a cost-effective 
and environmentally sustainable way. Part 
two will focus on biomass conversion 
technology and the social and economic 
aspects of conversion, and will be available 
in 2015.
WHY WOODY BIOMASS ENERGY 
RESEARCH NOW?
Woody biomass energy has great promise 
in the western United States. It can 
contribute, directly or indirectly, to 
lowering our dependence on fossil fuels, 
increasing energy security, decreasinh 
forest insect and disease outbreaks, 
lowering our long-term carbon footprint, 
and helping to reduce severe wildfire 
hazards. Consequently, the use of woody 
biomass may address many significant 
land management challenges, including 
the prevalence of large severe wildfires and 
the disposal of forest residues. Despite 
these important drivers to develop woody 
biomass as an energy source, it is difficult 
for woody biomass energy to compete 
with coal and natural gas. With existing 
infrastructure heavily oriented toward 
exploiting abundant supplies of coal and 
natural gas, the cost of production of 
these energy sources is low compared to 
woody biomass.
To overcome this fact and capture 
emission reduction benefits from 
bioenergy, many European countries 
support power plants through the use of 
feed-in tariffs (FITs) on woody biomass, 
which set a guaranteed price for electricity 
generated from a range of renewable 
technologies for a guaranteed period. This 
creates financial incentives for biomass 
power that are strong enough to move 
wood chips and pellets across the ocean 
from the US to Europe. Though FITs 
are not commonly used in the US, many 
states have adopted renewable energy 
portfolio standards requiring a certain 
percentage of power production from 
renewable sources. These standards help 
build a market for renewable energy from 
sources such as wind, biomass, and solar. 
Biomass has an advantage over solar and 
wind power because it can produce power 
on a consistent basis regardless of the 
weather, using stockpiled biomass fuel. 
According to Nate Anderson, research 
forester and RMRS BRDI project 
director.
In the US, where policy instruments to 
support bioenergy are less common than 
in Europe, research and development 
is needed to improve the economic 
feasibility of using biomass for heat and 
power, and potentially for liquid fuels 
as new conversion technologies become 
commercialized. Anderson explains that 
biomass research is concentrated in the 
“gray zone”, where biomass use is not 
yet economically feasible, but could 
“These energy sources 
are complementary to 
the current energy use 
in the US, and biomass 
can serve effectively as 
a renewable base load 
for a diversified grid,” 
Anderson states.

3
Science You Can Use Bulletin
SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2014 • ISSUE 13
Forest treatment
location is identified
Forest Management
Silvicultural treatments are prescribed to meet 
forest management objectives. Field data and 
computer models are used to guide management 
and predict treatment outcomes, including timber 
and biomass production.
Environmental Impacts
Forest treatments must be environmentally 
sustainable. Best management practices (BMP) 
are used to minimize negative impacts on soil, 
water, vegetation and other resources. Current 
studies also investigate how harvesting 
biomass affects these resources.
Biomass Logistics: Handling, Processing, and Transportation
Raw biomass is bulky and difficult to handle efficiently. A variety of equipment is used to collect, 
process, and transport biomass that has been chipped or ground into small, uniform pieces. More 
efficient logistics to reduce the costs of these steps can improve the economic viability of using 
forest biomass for bioenergy and bioproducts.
Forest Treatment
Treatments prescribed for fire risk reduction, forest restoration, and other objectives can generate 
products like logs, pulpwood, and biomass (slash). Because biomass has low economic value, it is often 
burned in piles for disposal, but this resource can be used for renewable energy.
BIOMASS SUPPLY CHAIN
The forest biomass supply chain begins with silvicultural 
treatments and uses forest operations and logistics to harvest, 
process, and deliver biomass to end users like power plants. 
Field data and models are 
used to predict outcomes, 
including estimating 
available biomass.
be possible with new technologies and 
innovations that match biomass facilities 
with efficient, environmentally-sustainable 
biomass supply chains. As a result, 
portions of this research focus on further 
developing a steady and economically 
viable woody biomass supply, or 
feedstock, with the intended effect of 
lowering its associated costs.
GAUGING THE FEEDSTOCK 
SUPPLY
When biomass is used as an industrial 
fuel or raw material, it is often referred 
to as “feedstock”. An important 
part of developing a forest biomass 
feedstock supply is to estimate how 
much biomass is on the landscape and 
how much is likely available under 
particular management objectives and 
market conditions. From an economic 
standpoint, estimates of feedstock are 
necessary to address concerns of supply 
and demand and can be used to evaluate 
the sustainability of forest practices. 
Of particular interest to many is the 
amount of woody biomass needed to 
supply emerging biomass markets and 
the potential that the demand for woody 
biomass will lead to over-harvesting or 
other types of exploitation. Anderson 
explains that this is not likely to be the 
case under current social, economic, 
and political constraints: “The scale of 
industry that most people are thinking 
of deploying in the Rocky Mountains 
is well below the stocks of biomass on 
the landscape, and also well below the 
sustained yield that forests are capable 
of producing over the long term.” In the 
USFS Northern Region, for example, the 
current levels of harvesting on national 
forests are around 10% of what they 
“Matching the scale 
of the industry 
with the ability of 
the landscape to 
supply the material 
sustainably over the 
long term is what 
we will need to do,” 
Anderson notes.

4
Science You Can Use Bulletin
SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2014 • ISSUE 13
were at their peak in the late 1970s and 
80s. “There is a lot of wiggle room to 
increase production and generate benefits, 
while simultaneously staying well below 
historic harvest levels and preventing 
environmentally damaging practices,” 
he adds. In addition to reduced harvest 
levels, current management practices have 
far less impact on soil, water, remaining 
vegetation and wildlife than was the case 
in the last century.
As a part of the RMRS BRDI project, 
John Hogland, a biological scientist 
with RMRS, has developed new and 
innovative methods for managers to 
inexpensively and quickly estimate 
forest characteristics with a high level of 
accuracy and spatial detail. Important 
characteristics include basal area per acre, 
trees per acre, and bone dry tons of above 
ground biomass per acre split between 
tree stumps, boles, tops, and foliage. His 
approach uses statistical relationships 
derived from National Agricultural 
Imagery Program (NAIP) imagery 
and existing USFS Forest Inventory 
and Analysis (FIA) program data to 
produce spatially explicit, high resolution 
maps of these characteristics by species 
across relatively large landscapes (e.g., 
a National Forest). Hogland explains, 
“You can go into any given forest and, 
given readily available data, apply these 
methods to estimate characteristics of that 
forest. From these estimates, managers 
can then simulate multiple forest 
prescriptions and quantify the impacts 
of those prescriptions in a precise, spatial 
manner.” To facilitate these new and 
innovative methods the RMRS Raster 
Utility has been developed to efficiently 
process and analyze large spatial datasets. 
Packaged as a suite of easy to use tools, 
managers can address a wide variety 
of natural resource related questions 
with the click of a button. Although 
these tools are useful for estimation and 
An example of the tools and workﬂow used within ArcGIS to create raster surfaces depicting 
Aspen, Spruce/Fir, and Pine forest community characteristics (BAA, TPA, and AGB). In 
this example FIA plot locations are used to extract and relate textural values of NAIP 
derivatives to forest characteristics measured within each plot. From those relationships, 
raster surfaces are created depicting forest community BAA, TPA, and AGB at a spatial 
resolution of 1 m2 (Image credit: John Hogland).
planning, Hogland cautions, “This is by 
no means a substitute for getting boots 
on the ground—field data collection and 
remote sensing work should happen in 
tandem.”
IMPROVING THE EFFICIENCY OF 
THE SUPPLY CHAIN
Woody biomass left behind after forest 
treatments is typically burned or piled 
and left to decompose to prepare the site 
for regeneration and to reduce fire hazard. 
With current technology and markets, 
this approach is often more economically 
feasible than removing the material for 
other uses, like fueling a power plant. 
To make bioenergy from forest biomass 
more feasible, the efficiency of logistics, 
from harvesting to transportation, must 
be increased to the break-even point 
or better, covering the added costs of 
utilization with added revenues. 
Han-Sup Han, professor of forest 
operations and engineering at Humboldt 
State University, explains that the main 
barrier to achieving this level of efficiency 
is the large, expensive equipment used 
to handle this low-value material. 
For example, a brand-new grinder to 
produce the woody biomass feedstock 
costs $650,000, while a loader, another 

5
Science You Can Use Bulletin
SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2014 • ISSUE 13
important piece of equipment to process 
the forest residues into woody biomass 
energy feedstock, runs upwards of 
$450,000. These costs are difficult for 
businesses to bear when working with 
low-value materials, and require efficient, 
high-production operations.
Compounding this challenge is the fact 
that biomass is not concentrated in one 
central location, but scattered over the 
treated area, usually a large and often 
rugged landscape. When an expensive 
machine must travel frequently to collect 
biomass, costly time and fuel are used 
unproductively, increasing the cost of 
forest operations and logistics. As Han 
put it, “It is very difficult to make any 
money doing this. There are few strategies 
in place to handle these materials cost-
effectively.
One way to decrease handing costs is 
through improved equipment selection 
and design. As part of the BRDI project, 
Han and his research team have been 
studying the efficiency of innovative 
modifications to equipment and 
operations made by forest contractors. 
For example, a contractor added skidder 
tires, tires that are more capable of riding 
over rough terrain than a standard tire, 
to a large dump truck, and also increased 
the capacity of the truck by 50% by 
adding additional side walls allowing it to 
hold forest residues. “You can move more 
volume quickly on rough terrain with 
those modified dump trucks than with a 
standard truck,” remarks Joel Bisson, who 
works on Han’s team. 
Efficiency dictates that the feedstock 
be moved quickly to a biomass facility, 
which can be difficult given most 
treatments are in remote locations 
accessed by forest roads. Long 
transportation distances at slow speeds 
on seasonally accessible forest roads 
translate to high transportation costs. The 
contractor working with Han and his 
team has started to employ an all-wheel-
drive tractor to expedite moving the 
wood chips out of the forest. This tractor 
is used to pull trailers of wood chips 
down the rough forest roads from the 
remote grinding site to a high standard 
forest road accessible to a conventional 
highway tractor-trailer. From this point, 
they can be quickly hauled to an energy 
facility. This configuration minimizes 
expensive delays in moving material from 
the grinding site to the highway and 
extends the operation range of biomass 
harvesting operations. 
A major objective of conducting this 
type of research is to provide information 
that will both improve the efficiency 
of operations with new configurations 
of existing equipment, and also 
encourage the design and development 
of new, more efficient equipment to 
meet emerging needs. For example, 
many new conversion technologies 
require drier, cleaner, smaller and more 
consistent biomass feedstocks than have 
been traditionally produced by forest 
management operations. This will require 
an evolution in logistics and technology 
to provide quality biomass feedstocks at 
the lowest cost possible.
ECOLOGICAL IMPACTS OF 
BIOMASS HARVESTING ON ROCKY 
MOUNTAIN FORESTS 
Forest and soil productivity
Most biomass harvesting removes 
twigs and foliage, which can contain 
roughly 75% of the total tree nutrients. 
Consequently, the main ecological 
concern with biomass harvesting is the 
long-term reduction of forest growth 
and productivity due to the removal of 
these nutrients. Fortunately, we have a 
unique opportunity to assess how these 
harvests impact forest soils and ecology. 
A modiﬁed dump truck equipped with higher sides (to allow it to transport forest residue) 
and skidder tires (for improved forest accessibility). (Image credit: Joel Bisson)
“A major effort of our 
study is to improve 
how we efficiently 
handle biomass in the 
field,” notes Han.

6
Science You Can Use Bulletin
SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2014 • ISSUE 13
During the oil crisis of the 1970s, 
President Carter set forth policies that 
catalyzed the bioenergy industry, including 
woody biomass utilization. In 1974 an 
experiment was established at the RMRS 
Coram Experimental Forest in Northwest 
Montana to evaluate the ecological effects 
of intensive biomass harvesting, presenting 
a unique opportunity today to collect 
long-term data to provide information 
on ecological impacts of biomass harvests 
on forest productivity. These plots have 
been comprehensively resampled by 
RMRS research soil scientist Debbie 
Page-Dumroese and research professor 
of silviculture Chris Keyes as a part of 
the RMRS BRDI project. According to 
Page-Dumroese, “The 1974 plots were 
documented well enough that we could 
go back, find the original plots, and look 
at how different levels of biomass removal 
alter below- and above-ground forest 
productivity.”
The experimental design at Coram 
Experimental Forest included four levels 
of biomass utilization up to removal of 
most of the biomass except for small tops 
followed by broadcast-burning treatments. 
Although the analysis for this study is 
ongoing, preliminary results suggest that 
past treatments may influence today’s 
forest composition. Keyes reports, “For 
study plots corresponding with lower 
utilization treatments followed by fire, 
there are more early-seral species like 
western larch and Douglas-fir, and in 
the treatments where more biomass was 
removed but the area was not burned, 
similar to modern biomass harvesting 
techniques, we found more later seral 
species like subalpine fir and Engelmann 
spruce.” The researchers have not yet 
observed any differences in forest 
productivity between the treatments, 
suggesting that a single rotation of biomass 
harvesting does not have a measurable 
negative impact on forest productivity.
Page-Dumroese has studied long-term 
soil productivity across many different 
sites, including those in Coram. She 
reports, “There’s never really been a solid 
link between biomass harvesting and soil 
nutrient depletion on a site.” One factor 
that may ameliorate the effect of more 
intensive biomass removal on both forest 
and soil productivity is that the proportion 
of nutrients within trees is very small 
compared to the pool of nutrients that 
exists in the soil. In other words, since far 
more nutrients are found in soils when 
compared to trees on these sites, removing 
most of the biomass has little bearing on 
nutrient levels in the soil. However, she 
points out, “We don’t really understand 
how multiple rotations of biomass 
harvesting would affect productivity 
because we haven’t looked at that long of a 
time-scale.” 
Forty years after biomass harvesting, most utilization treatments are at or 
above the pre-harvest levels for carbon (C) in the mineral soil and forest 
ﬂoor. Downed wood C has not returned to pre-harvest levels in the high 
utilization shelterwood and clearcut plots.  In the group selection downed 
wood C is due to recruitment from dead trees near the plots.  CC=clearcut; 
GS=group selection; SW=shelterwood.  B=burning; U=Unburned. L=low 
utilization (to a 17.8 cm diameter top); M=medium utilization (to 7.6 cm 
diameter top) and H=high utilization (to a 2.5 cm diameter top).
Soil sample from the Coram Experimental Forest, which 
is located on the Flathead National Forest in northwest 
Montana. (Image credit: Debbie Page-Dumroese)

7
Science You Can Use Bulletin
SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2014 • ISSUE 13
Harvest intensity aside, Page-Dumroese 
and Keyes stress there are tradeoffs 
associated with the soil disturbance 
that can occur during forest operations, 
whether traditional silvicultural treatments 
or biomass harvests. Retaining an intact 
forest floor is vital to maintaining the 
nutrient cycling and moisture retention 
functions of productive forest soils. On 
the other hand, mineral soil exposure is 
critical to regenerating early-seral species, 
including western larch. In the northern 
Rockies, western larch is fire-resistant 
and less susceptible to insect and disease 
outbreaks than other species, making the 
region’s mixed conifer forests more resilient 
to a range of disturbances. “In moist, cool 
temperate forest ecosystems such as those 
at Coram, designing biomass harvest 
systems that strike a balance between these 
two important objectives—protecting 
productive soils while restoring a rich 
diversity of species—will be key to their 
long-term sustainability” says Keyes.
Watersheds and soil erosion
Another important impact of biomass 
harvesting is the effects on surface water 
runoff and associated soil erosion after 
harvest. Compared to saw log harvests, 
harvesting forest biomass may result in 
increased disturbance to the forest floor 
and more bare soil exposure. When 
harvesting biomass, small diameter 
trees and crowns may be chipped and 
removed from the site rather than left 
as slash material to contribute to forest 
ground cover. In watersheds, ground 
cover plays three important roles: 1) 
by blocking raindrops from hitting the 
soil directly, ground cover helps prevent 
“surface sealing”, thereby reducing runoff 
and enabling more rainfall infiltration; 
2) ground cover decreases erosion due 
to raindrop impact on the soil; and 3) 
decreased runoff combined with increased 
surface cover will decrease concentrated 
flow erosion. In addition to impacting 
cover, biomass removal operations may 
cause soil compaction, leading to a 
decrease in soil infiltration rates and an 
increase in runoff and erosion. 
The RMRS BRDI project initiated field 
studies to better understand the impacts 
of biomass harvest on ground cover. 
Following biomass harvest, soil movement 
by water erosion using silt fences and soil 
hydraulic conductivity were measured in 
field sites located in the Boise, Colville, 
and Kalispell National Forests in Idaho, 
Washington and Montana, respectively. 
The study is ongoing, but some 
preliminary results indicate there was 
no difference in ground cover between 
treated and untreated sites over time. For 
example, on the Montana site, the ground 
cover dropped to 75 percent in the year 
following biomass harvest, but recovered 
to more than 95 percent, similar to the 
adjacent untreated area, the second year 
after biomass removal. There are unlikely 
to be any differences in soil hydraulic 
conductivity due biomass removal. Only 
the Idaho site showed any soil movement 
on access trails, which was aggravated by 
deer and elk-related soil disturbance. The 
greatest measured erosion rate was 40 kg/
ha on the Idaho site the year following the 
harvest, which is considered relatively low.
To integrate new field data with 
management tools, the BRDI project is 
developing an online erosion prediction 
interface based on measured soil 
erodability values. This is intended to be 
used by forest managers to evaluate erosion 
risks.
THE WAY FORWARD WITH 
BIOMASS UTILIZATION IN THE 
ROCKIES
This issue of the Bulletin focused on 
both the biomass supply side of forest-
based bioenergy and on some of its 
environmental impacts, which are all 
portions of the current RMRS BRDI 
project. A subsequent issue in early 
2015 will detail three other important 
components of the project: woody 
biomass conversion technology, local 
economic impacts of bioenergy, and 
social perceptions of woody biomass 
energy in the Rocky Mountains, so please 
stay tuned!
Silt fences installed on two skidder trails 
to measure soil erosion in the Payette 
National Forest, Idaho. 
“There’s never really been a solid link 
between biomass harvesting and soil nutrient 
depletion on a site,” notes Page-Dumroese. Yet 
“[w]e don’t really understand how multiple 
rotations of biomass harvesting would affect 
productivity because we haven’t looked at 
that long of a time-scale.”

8
Science You Can Use Bulletin
SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2014 • ISSUE 13
 MANAGEMENT IMPLICATIONS:
• New logistics and equipment technologies are being developed to improve woody biomass supply chains by reducing 
costs and increasing productivity.
• Removal of woody biomass after a single treatment is not likely to negatively impact forest productivity.
• Novel techniques for biomass assessment and planning have been developed to accurately estimate forest 
characteristics such as species basal area, trees per acre, and aboveground biomass per acre at fine spatial resolutions 
and across large landscapes.
• Best management practices (BMP) should always be used during forest treatments to minimize on and off site impacts.
FURTHER READING
Anderson, N., W. Chung, D. Loeffler and J.G. Jones. 
2012. A productivity and cost comparison of two 
systems for producing biomass fuel from roadside 
forest treatment residues. Forest Products Journal 
62(3): 223-233.
Bisson, J., S.K. Han, and H.-S. Han. 2014. 
Evaluating the system logistics of a biomass recovery 
operation in northern California. Proceedings of the 
Council on Forest Engineering Annual Meeting, 
Moline, IL, 22-25 June 2014.
Elliot, William J. 2010. Effects of forest biomass use 
on watershed processes in the western United States. 
Western Journal of Applied Forestry 25(1):12-17.
Han, S.K., H-S. Han, J. Bisson and T. Montgomery. 
2013. Effects of grate size on grinding productivity, 
fuel consumption, and particle size distribution. 
Proceedings of the Council on Forest Engineering 
Annual Meeting, Missoula, MT, 7-10 July 2013.
Hogland, J., N. Anderson, W. Chung and L. Wells. 
2014. Estimating forest characteristics using NAIP 
imagery and ArcObjects. Proceedings of the 2014 
ESRI User Conference, July 14–18, 2014, San Diego, 
CA.
Jang, W., C.R. Keyes, and T.E. Perry. 2013. Long-
term harvesting effects on forest productivity under 
three silvicultural systems in the northern Rocky 
Mountains. Proceedings of the Council on Forest 
Engineering Annual Meeting, Missoula, MT, 7-10 
July 2013.
Keefe, R., N. Anderson, J. Hogland and K. 
Muhlenfeld. In review. Woody Biomass Logistics. 
Chapter 14 in Cellulosic Energy Cropping Systems 
(D.L. Karlen, Ed.), John Wiley & Sons, W. Sussex, 
UK.
Loeffler, D. and N. Anderson. 2014. Emissions 
tradeoffs associated with cofiring forest biomass with 
coal: A case study in Colorado, USA. Applied Energy 
113: 67-77.
Montgomery, T. and H.-S. Han. 2013. A GIS-based 
method for locating and planning centralized biomass 
grinding operations. Proceedings of the Council on 
Forest Engineering Annual Meeting, Missoula, MT, 
7-10 July 2013.
Page-Dumroese, D. and N. Anderson. 2011. Biomass 
Utilization, Forest Restoration, and Soil Productivity 
Associated with Bioenergy Harvesting and Biochar 
Application: Field and Laboratory Strategies for 
the U.S. Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research 
Station. Research Strategy White Paper, 8pp. [28]
Page-Dumroese, D., M. Jurgensen and T. Terry. 
2010. Maintaining soil productivity during forest or 
biomass-to-energy thinning harvests in the Western 
United States. Western Journal of Applied Forestry 
25:5-11.
Wells, L., N. Anderson, and W. Chung. 2013. 
A remote sensing approach to estimating forest 
treatment residue for alternative operational 
configurations on the Uncompahgre Plateau, 
Colorado, USA. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual 
Meeting of the Council on Forest Engineering: Forest 
Operations for a Changing Landscape.  Compiled by 
Elizabeth Dodson. July 7-10, 2013, Missoula, MT.
WRITER’S PROFILE
Sue Miller is a science writer living in Fort Collins, Colorado. She received her PhD in ecology from the University of 
Georgia. Sue can be reached at millroad@comast.net.
Maureen Essen is a Research Associate cooperator with the Human Dimensions unit of RMRS. She received her MS 
in resource conservation at the University of Montana and can be reached at maureenaessen@fs.fed.us. 

9
Science You Can Use Bulletin
SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2014 • ISSUE 13
NATE ANDERSON is a Research Forester with 
the Rocky Mountain Research Station, where he studies 
forest resource management and economics. His recent 
work is focused on the use of forest biomass for bioenergy 
and bio-based products. Nate received his PhD in Forest 
Resources Management from the SUNY College of 
Environmental Science and Forestry.
WOODY CHUNG is an Associate Professor 
of Forest Operations at Oregon State University.  He 
received his Ph.D. in Forest Engineering from Oregon 
State University and now focuses on forest management 
planning and woody biomass utilization.  He has been 
developing various decision-support systems for forest 
transportation, timber harvesting, and fire management.
BILL ELLIOT is a research engineer in the Rocky 
Mountain Research Station. He has BS and PhD degrees 
in Agricultural Engineering from Iowa State University, 
and an MSc from the University of Aberdeen, Scotland. For 
more than 20 years, Bill’s research has focused on forest 
soil erosion processes and prediction.
DEB PAGE-DUMROESE is a research soil 
scientist with the Rocky Mountain Research Station.  Deb 
has a PhD in forest soils from the University of Idaho.  Her 
research efforts relate to soil productivity during harvest 
operations.  
SCIENTIST PROFILES
The following scientists were instrumental in the creation of this Bulletin:
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national origin, age, disability, and where applicable, 
sex, marital status, familial status, parental status, religion, sexual 
orientation, genetic information, political beliefs, reprisal, or 
because all or part of an individual’s income is derived from any 
public assistance program. (Not all prohibited bases apply to 
all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative 
means for communication of program information (Braille, 
large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA’s TARGET 
Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD). To file a complaint 
of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, 
1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 
or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or (202) 720-6382 (TDD). 
USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.

10
Science You Can Use Bulletin
SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2014 • ISSUE 13
Nate and John can be reached at: 
USDA Forest Service
Rocky Mountain Research Station
200 East Broadway
Missoula, MT 59802
Bill and Deb can be reached at: 
USDA Forest Service
Rocky Mountain Research Station
1221 S. Main St.
Moscow, ID 83843
PURPOSE OF THE SCIENCE YOU CAN USE 
BULLETIN
To provide scientific information to people who make and influence decisions about 
managing land. The US Forest Service RMRS Science You Can Use Bulletin is 
published regularly by:
Rocky Mountain Research Station (RMRS)
US Forest Service
240 W Prospect Rd
Fort Collins, CO 80526
Forest Service researchers work at the forefront of science to improve the health 
and use of our Nation’s forests and grasslands. RMRS is one of seven Forest Service 
R&D Stations located throughout the US. For more information about a particular 
research station, please visit their website:
Northern Research Station (NRS)
Southern Research Station (SRS)
Rocky Mountain Research Station (RMRS)
Pacific Northwest Research Station (PNW)
Pacific Southwest Research Station (PSW)
International Institute of Tropical Forestry (IITF)
Forest Products Lab (FPL)
PNW and SRS produce regular science delivery bulletins similar to the Science You Can 
Use Bulletin:
PNW Science Findings
SRS Compass Live
To receive this bulletin via email, scan the QR code below or use this link:
http://tinyurl.com/RMRSsciencebulletin
Sarah Hines, Bulletin editor; shines@fs.fed.us
Jan Engert, Assistant Station Director,
Science Application & Communications;
jengert@fs.fed.us
Connie Lemos, Layout,
cmlemos@fs.fed.us
HAN-SUP HAN is a Professor of Forest Operations 
at Humboldt State University, California. He received his 
Ph.D. in Forest Engineering from Oregon State University. 
His current research efforts focus on the production of 
quality feedstocks and development of innovative biomass 
feedstock logistic systems. Along with this effort, he is 
looking at the maximum utilization and value recovery 
from forest residues resulting from thinning treatments 
and timber operations.
JOHN HOGLAND is a biological scientist working 
for the Rocky Mountain Research Station. His research 
interests revolve around quantitative methods within 
geographic information systems (GIS) and understanding 
the relationships between landscape patterns and 
forested ecosystems processes.
CHRISTOPHER R. KEYES is Research Professor 
of Silviculture at the University of Montana, where he 
directs the Montana Forest & Conservation Experiment 
Station’s Applied Forest Management research program. 
He received his PhD in silviculture and range regeneration 
from Oregon State University.  His research focus is 
silviculture and forest stand dynamics, with emphasis on 
forest restoration and regeneration.
SCIENTIST PROFILES cont.
