Research paper
Modeling work plan logistics for centralized biomass recovery
operations in mountainous terrain
Timothy David Montgomery a, *, Han-Sup Han a, Anil Raj Kizha b
a Department of Forestry and Wildland Resources, Humboldt State University, Arcata, CA 95521, USA
b School of Forest Resources, University of Maine, Orono, ME 04469, USA
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 7 May 2015
Received in revised form
16 November 2015
Accepted 25 November 2015
Available online xxx
Keywords:
Forest residues
Network analysis
Operational planning
Supply chain modeling
System balance in decoupled biomass
operation
a b s t r a c t
Industrial timberland managers and biomass contractors are faced with a variety of challenges when
implementing biomass recovery operations in mountainous terrain. Utilizing a centralized grinding
supply chain with modiﬁed dump trucks to pre-haul loose slash and a decoupled chip truck trans-
portation system has been found to maximize the utilization rate of machines and productivity of forest
residue recovery operations in northern California. This study used a spatial analysis approach to identify
the optimal locations for centralized grinding and trailer landings based on the spatial distribution of
biomass, existing road networks, and terrain characteristics. The network analyst in ArcGIS was used to
model the supply chain logistics from the harvest unit to the energy facility. The resulting models provide
explicit details on developing an operational work plan that can be used to cost-effectively implement
large-scale centralized biomass recovery operations on industrial timberlands. Optimization of system
logistics resulted in low costs of collection and transportation as well as improved access to recoverable
forest residues. This was done by identifying the locations of landings, amount and distribution of
recoverable forest residues, and modeling an efﬁcient forest residue freight supply chain. Through the
use of spatial and network analysis, operational mangers will now be able to develop a comprehensive
work plan that provides a framework for centralized biomass recovery operations.
© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Harvesting
merchantable
sawlogs
generates
signiﬁcant
amounts of forest residues (or referred to as biomass in this paper)
that can be used as alternative energy source to fossil fuels. Forest
residues refer to low value biomass material such as treetops, limbs,
chunks, small-diameter and non-merchantable trees, that are the
byproduct of timber harvesting or thinning operations [1]. Forest
residues left from conventional timber harvesting and mechanical
fuel reduction thinning have created an opportunity to generate
renewable energy while achieving forest management objectives
[2]. However, the removal of these low value forest byproducts
from remote locations can often present both ﬁnancial and opera-
tional challenges.
The high costs of collection and transportation when coupled
with limited access to remote locations has proven to be a
signiﬁcant barrier to biomass utilization [1]. Northern Humboldt
County (41.06, 124.03) is characterized by steep mountainous
terrain that geographically isolates forest residues and restricts
road access resulting in increased transportation distance and cost.
At 100 km or less (round trip), transportation costs of “bone dry”
residues alone can exceed 30 $ t1. Transportation costs combined
with a current market price of 50 $ t1 for comminuted forest
residues in northern California creates signiﬁcant ﬁnancial chal-
lenges for biomass contractors to overcome [3]; therefore, it is
crucial to carefully plan and implement forest residue (biomass)
recovery operations due to the narrow proﬁt margins between the
delivered and market prices.
Currently, the logistics strategies of removing and utilizing
biomass for bioenergy have proven successful in Humboldt County,
California. Biomass recovery operations in timber harvested stands
could potentially yield a cost savings of 140 $ ha1 to 1120 $ ha1
compared to pile and burn site preparation. Biomass removal
eliminates the need for herbicide treatments as ﬁre adapted species
are less likely to sprout [4].
Deﬁning and modeling biomass supply chain logistics is critical
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: Tmontgomery768@gmail.com (T.D. Montgomery), Hh30@
humboldt.edu (H.-S. Han), anil.kizha@maine.edu (A.R. Kizha).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Biomass and Bioenergy
journal homepage: http://www.elsevier.com/locate/biombioe
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biombioe.2015.11.023
0961-9534/© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Biomass and Bioenergy 85 (2016) 262e270

for land managers who are interested in developing a compre-
hensive work plan which efﬁciently collects, processes, and trans-
ports forest residues for bioenergy production. Numerous geo-
spatial models have been developed to estimate forest residue
availability, optimal plant locations, plant sizing, and demand at
national and regional scales on a strategic planning level [4e9].
Though many large-scale models exist, the links between forest
residue availability, timber harvesting, and biomass supply chain
logistics on an operational level are frequently disregarded [9].
Modeling operational management requires explicit knowledge of
biomass supply chains as an ordered sequence of events beginning
from timber harvest and ultimately to energy conversion [10]. With
this regard, network analysis (ArcGIS 10.2) is a powerful tool that
has been used to dynamically model realistic road network con-
ditions such as speed, connectivity, optimal routes, shortest path,
and drive-time [4,11]. As centralized biomass recovery operations
(CBROs) continue to gain popularity, it is essential that operational
managers are aware of the necessary strategies and tools available
to plan and implement successful operations.
The objective of this study was to develop a methodology which
helps create detailed work plan logistics for CBROs by deﬁning the
strategies utilized in northern Humboldt County, California, using
spatial analysis. Inventory levels, materials and equipment man-
agement, transportation, and end-use location were all included
within the supply chain logistics boundaries. The outcome of this
study can help contractors and landowners to plan daily operations
for one or more seasons of biomass recovery. This is achieved by
modeling site speciﬁc information which includes forest residue
recoverability, centralized comminution and trailer landing loca-
tions, transportation efﬁciency, and overall operational feasibility.
The model was created through spatial and network analysis of the
entire CBRO supply chain as well as by directly linking timber
harvesting operations to biomass recovery.
2. Methodology
2.1. Study area and timber operations that generated forest residues
A spatial analysis approach was used to model centralized
grinding operations on even-aged managed industrial timberland
in northern Humboldt County, California. The study site covered
22,891 ha, of which 898 ha were available for biomass recovery
harvests. The timber harvesting system adopted for each harvesting
unit was dependent on slope conditions, which ranged from 0 to
66. Slopes less than 19 permitted ground-based shovel logging
and slopes exceeding 19 necessitated a cable yarding system.
During cable yarding, merchantable timber was assumed to be
uphill yarded and processed at the landing; the subsequent forest
residues were also piled at the landing. In shovel yarded units,
forest residues were concentrated near the road side, which tra-
verses throughout the setting [12]. Harvesting method was pre-
dominantly whole-tree harvesting for both cable and shovel logged
units. Forest residues were left in the ﬁeld to dry for one to three
years after timber harvesting occurred; furthermore, residues at
this time were assumed to have an average moisture content of
35%.
Road access within the study area was limited by steep slope
conditions, road surface, and road type. Road surfaces were pri-
marily gravel and dirt, and were designated as “mainline”, “sec-
ondary”, and “seasonal” road type. Mainline roads were two-lane,
graveled, and had low grades. Secondary roads were single-lane
and either graveled or dirt surfaces and were navigable by trucks
with off-road capabilities. Seasonal roads were the least accessible,
had dirt surfaces, steep grades, and were accessible only by modi-
ﬁed dump truck and the tracked loader.
The following terms were used to describe the CBRO that was
modeled in this study:
 Biomass/forest residues e Byproducts generated during a tim-
ber harvesting operation, which predominantly consists of
limbs, chunks, and non-merchantable trees within the harvest
unit that can be collected and comminuted
 Collection point/log landing e The point in which all the
recoverable forest residues within the harvest unit are located
 Centralized landing e The site in which forest residues are
dropped off by a modiﬁed dump truck (MDT), comminuted by a
grinder, and loaded into an all-wheel drive (AWD) chip truck
 Trailer landing e The site in which AWD chip trucks drops off
the full chip trailer and picks up an empty chip trailer. The full
chip trailers are later picked up by the highway chip trucks, thus
decoupling the CBRO supply chain
2.2. Centralized biomass recovery operation supply chain
The CBRO supply chain began with a loader (Linkbelt 3400) in
the unit, which collected, piled and loaded forest residues into a
MDT (Volvo A35C), which was modiﬁed with skidder tires for
greater traction as well as an extended rear gate and side walls for
an increased load capacity of 5.4 t1 (Fig. 1). The second phase,
referred to as pre-hauling, involved MDT hauling the forest resi-
dues to a centralized landing where they were dumped and loaded
into
the
grinder
(Peterson
Paciﬁc
5710c)
for
comminution.
Comminuted forest residues were then belt-fed directly into an
AWD chip truck with a 92 m3 capacity trailer. The AWD chip truck
traveled on forest roads to a trailer landing that was accessible by
highway capable chip trucks. Here the loaded trailers were dropped
off and empty ones were picked up for the return trip. This phase
was referred to as primary hauling for this study. Secondary
transportation refers to when the loaded trailers left at trailer
landings are ﬁnally picked up by highway chip trucks and trans-
ported to energy facilities.
2.3. Development of model parameters
The methodology for developing a work plan for CBRO logistics
began with identifying the timber harvesting systems and forest
residue collection points (log landings) through spatial analysis and
calculation of forest residues recoverable per hectare. Network
Analysis (ArcGIS 10.2) was then used to identify suitable centralized
and trailer landings based on proximity to recoverable biomass,
transportation distance, and MDT availability. The geospatial data
used for the various components in the study, such as harvest units,
roads, trailer landings, centralized landings, etc, were primarily
vector-based. Slope and elevation were estimated from raster-
based 10 m digital elevation models (DEMs), which were subse-
quently used to determine the harvesting system adopted for each
unit. All model parameters for both planning and operating stages
were based on the expertise of a biomass contractor and chief
forester with over 30 years of experience in CBROs.
2.4. Biomass recoverability and spatial distribution
The methodology for determining the spatial distribution of
forest residues was based on the distinction between harvesting
systems to accurately model pre-haul routes and forest residue
locations (Fig. 2). The harvesting system for a unit was determined
by two sets of tasks. DEMs were converted to a slope vector layer,
which was then clipped to the unit's boundary. In the next task, a
function of slope hectares to total unit hectares was developed for
T.D. Montgomery et al. / Biomass and Bioenergy 85 (2016) 262e270
263

each unit to determine the harvesting system employed. As a result,
if 50% or more of a unit's area had slopes greater than 19, the unit
was considered to be cable yarded. The model assumed that only
the predominant harvesting system, as determined by the previous
function, will be used in a given unit. Once the harvest system was
identiﬁed, a single point was created for each unit to represent a
pre-haul collection point.
For ground-based units, these points were created by converting
the unit boundary to a point vector that fell on the road segment
which was nearest to the centroid of the unit. A single point was
used to represent the average hauling distance through the setting
[5,10]. In cable yarded units, the highest point within the unit,
nearest to a road segment with ample space for landing was
selected in order to ensure uphill yarding [13,14](Fig. 3). As uphill
yarding was the common practice in northern California, roads at
the bottom of the unit generally did not have enough biomass to
justify traveling into the lower portion for collection.
The harvest method was assumed to be whole-tree, as it was
common to the region. Cable yarded units had steep slopes and
limited road access which resulted in less biomass availability
compared to shovel yarded units. Scale ticket data obtained from
the past three years of forest residue harvest seasons and covering
over 1295 ha, was used to determine the recoverable bone-dry
tonnes per hectare. The forest residue recoverability for each unit
was later derived as a function of average bone dry tonnes per
harvest system multiplied by the unit's hectares. This estimation
was a crucial component in determining the feasibility of the har-
vest operation and to make better decision on the equipment se-
lection options. As a general rule, it was only worth the move-in
cost for a centralized landing if the unit(s) took at least one 9 h work
day to complete and could supply 21 chip trailer loads with 15 t1
per day [15]. In this study, the decision of whether or not move to a
centralized landing was based on a function of time required to
collect and process forest residues at a grinding production rate of
35 t1 per productive machine hour (PMH) [16].
2.5. Modeling centralized and trailer landings
Identifying suitable locations for centralized landings was vital
to an efﬁcient operation and sound planning. DEMs were critical in
locating large and relatively ﬂat areas required for trailer and
centralized landings, which were constrained by steep slope con-
ditions and limited road access. Possible centralized landings were
chosen based on the following six key parameters (Fig. 4):
1 Slope  2 required for a stabilized grinding location and to fully
extended MDT dump bed without risk of tip over and to safely
load AWD chip truck
2 Area 930 m2 e to accommodate grinder, loader, chip truck,
MDT, and stock-piled forest residues
3 Located on a permanent road e to ensure access by AWD chip
truck
4 Through access e due to limited turn-around capabilities of
AWD chip trucks
5 Exclusion of Watercourse Lake and Protection Zones (WLPZ) or
Equipment Exclusion Zones (EEZ) in compliance with applicable
laws and regulations
6 Proximity to existing or possible landings within units e
preferred landing location as construction and maintenance was
signiﬁcantly reduced compared to creating a new centralized
landing
The four layers required to complete this analysis included a
DEM, road network, unit boundaries, and watercourse layers.
Appropriate buffers were placed over watercourses and Equipment
Exclusion Zones (EEZs) to exclude them from possible landing lo-
cations. The road network layer was modiﬁed to include only per-
manent mainline or secondary road haul routes with through
access by converting any end points, or “dangles”, into point fea-
tures. Any road segment intersecting with a “dangle” was subse-
quently removed from the analysis. Buffers of 30 m were then
created along the remaining road segments to reﬂect the two-lane
road width and ensure that landings were directly adjacent to
roads. Any area that met the slope and area requirements and fell
entirely within the 30 m road buffer were selected as potential
landing locations. Landings within biomass harvest units were
Fig. 1. Various stages involved in the centralized biomass recovery operation (CBRO)
supply chain modeled for this study.
T.D. Montgomery et al. / Biomass and Bioenergy 85 (2016) 262e270
264

selected if they met both the slope and area requirements, and
intersected with any portion of the road buffer.
A similar modeling approach to locating centralized landings
was used for identifying potential trailer landings for chip truck
trailers. The following ﬁve key parameters used for this purpose
were (Fig. 5):
1 Mainline road access e graveled double-lane roads to allow for
passing trafﬁc and better tractability
2 Through access e due to limited turn-around capabilities of
highway chip trucks
3 Slope  3 e to allow for safe transferring of chip trailers
4 Length of the trailer landing  200 m e accommodate twelve
15 m chip truck trailers with adequate spacing in between
5 Excluded bridges and culvert stream crossings
2.6. Network analysis
A network analysis approach was used to model and plan the
forest freight supply chain. Suitable centralized landing locations
were selected based on the lowest cost to haul forest residues from
collection points. Geodatabases for road networks were generated
and assimilated to the Network Analysis model. The time attribute
or “Minute” ﬁeld was added to the road network model and used to
calculate travel rates for all the MDTs and chip trucks on various
road conditions. Travel time was generated by the analysis and was
reported in km h1.
For MDT pre-hauling, a rate of travel at 8 km h1 was used [16].
The location-allocation, maximize coverage tool was used in
determining suitable landing locations based on the shortest pre-
haul distance from a centralized landing to the most recoverable
forest residue collection points [17]. The maximum search distance
was set at 4.0 km one-way to reﬂect the farthest pre-haul distance
Fig. 2. Biomass spatial distribution model used in locating collection points and harvest method for each unit.
Fig. 3. Modeling of recoverable biomass collection points for cable yarded units determined using the spatial distribution model.
T.D. Montgomery et al. / Biomass and Bioenergy 85 (2016) 262e270
265

that could be accomplished without grinder delay using three
MDTs. For this study, 94 units were available for forest residue re-
covery; furthermore, 24 centralized landings were selected to
reﬂect the number of moves in each biomass harvesting season
during 2011e13. The number of dump trucks required was based on
one-way travel distance and grinder productivity.
A similar approach was used to select optimal trailer landings
and model primary hauling routes. The maximum search distance
was set at 8.0 km, which was based on the professional expertise of
a biomass contractor. In this case, a minimum search distance was
not an option and instead, three primary haul routes were created
from each centralized landing. Additional haul routes were created
until each primary haul route had a route distance greater than
3.2 km. If a route was already between the required distance the
3.2e8.0 km, the ﬁrst route generated was selected. This ensured
that all primary haul distances were at least 3.2 km in order to avoid
delays such as truck idling and trafﬁc congestion on forest roads. To
model secondary hauling, the three wood-based biomass power
plants in Humboldt County were used as demand points to deter-
mine the distance from each trailer landing to each power plant.
Furthermore, transportation speeds for highway and AWD chip
trucks were based on road surface and type (Table 1).
3. Results and model implementation
Creating an operational work plan starts with a landowner
whose overall objective is to harvest forest residues on a large-scale
for the purpose of energy production. The harvest objective per
season should be enough to allow for at least 100 workdays with
Fig. 4. Steps and parameters used to determine the optimal location for the central-
ized landings used in a centralized biomass recovery operations.
Fig. 5. Steps and parameters used to determine optimal location for the trailer land-
ings used for centralized biomass recovery operations.
T.D. Montgomery et al. / Biomass and Bioenergy 85 (2016) 262e270
266

roughly 308 t1 recovered per day. The model determined the
hectares of each unit, the harvesting system, and the approximate
landing location for collecting forest residues within each unit. The
unit hectares and recoverable biomass were both calculated using
the attribute table and provided bone dry tonnes per hectare esti-
mates, which were summed to provide total recoverable bone dry
tonnes. If the overall recovery objective is congruent with the
estimated recoverable biomass, landowners can then proceed to
develop supply chain logistic plans for each unit.
3.1. Work hours and recoverable biomass per centralized landing
A total of 94 collection points were created for each unit based
on harvesting system; 52 collection points were created for both
cable and shovel yarded units. Recoverable forest residues per
hectare were calculated using scale ticket data from three seasons
(2010e2013) of biomass recovery operations in Northern California
covering over 1214 ha. Shovel yarded units had an average of
36.3 t ha1 and for cable yarded units had an average of 18.1 t ha1
[3]. The study area had approximately 59,260 t (80,001 green
tonnes, converted at an assumption of 35% moisture content) of
recoverable forest residues, which would take roughly two 100-day
harvest seasons to harvest, assuming 9 h work days and that all
recoverable biomass was collected.
Cable units averaged 10.5 ha with a recoverable 47 t ha1 and
shovel units averaged 8.5 ha with a recoverable 90 t ha1. Assuming
a constant grinder production rate of 35 t PMH1, it would take an
average of 14 h to collect and process recoverable forest residues for
the average cable unit and 22 h for the average shovel unit.
Recoverable biomass per unit, centralized landings, and process
time are summarized in Table 2.
3.2. Modiﬁed dump truck pre-haul
The centralized landing spatial model identiﬁed 95 possible
centralized landings and a pre-set maximum of 24 landings were
selected as optimal locations. In an average season, 48 units were
harvested which required an average of 12 centralized landings. A
total of 94 pre-haul routes were created from each collection point
to the nearest centralized landing, all of which were within the
desired 4.0 km range. The number of modiﬁed dump trucks
required for pre-hauling from each unit varied from one to three.
Thirteen out of 94 pre-haul routes required three MDTs, 56 routes
required two MDTs, and 25 routes required only one MDT. Table 3
summarizes the transportation distance, cost, and total cycle time
for MDT pre-haul.
3.3. All-wheel drive chip truck primary haul and highway chip
truck secondary haul
Fifteen trailer landings were identiﬁed using the trailer landing
spatial model, nine of which were within the desired 3.2e8.0 km
range between the centralized and trailer landings (Table 3). Sec-
ondary hauling distances and costs were calculated from each
trailer landing to each of the three energy facilities located in
Humboldt County (Table 4). The ﬁnal cost of secondary trans-
portation was inﬂuenced by total distance, speed and distance
traveled per road surface/type.
4. Discussion
A geo-spatial based model was developed for planning and
implementing CBRO logistics. The model is ﬂexible and enhances
the spatial visualization of the supply chain. The model can
potentially guide landowners as well as contractors in determining
the accessibility of CBROs; Furthermore, this model can predict
grinding delays prior to starting operations which can help to
maximize grinding efﬁciency. Pre-hauling distances less than
0.8 km required one MDT, distances of 0.8e2.4 km required two
MDTs, and distances of 2.4e4.0 km required three MDTs. Primary
one-way hauling distances averaged around 3.2e8.0 km. Distances
less than 3.2 km resulted in too much passing trafﬁc and truck
idling, while distances greater than 8.0 km caused grinding delays.
Additionally, landowners and contractors can tailor the number of
dump trucks or AWD chip trucks to the estimated hauling distance
to maintain system balance and reduce operational delays.
A decoupled transportation system with trailer landings is
pivotal to system balance as it allows for the separation of the
highway transportation system from the forest road transportation
system, thereby maximizing grinding utilization. By decoupling
these systems, trailers were always available for loading thus
reducing grinder delay. Using the appropriate number of MDTs also
Table 1
Road surface types and subsequent travel rates for highway and AWD chip truck. These values were used in network analysis to determine travel time.
Highway chip truck
AWD chip truck
Road type
Rate of travela (km h1)
Road type
Rate of travelb (km h1)
Two-lane gravel
46.7
Two-lane gravel
46.7
Two-lane highway
88.5
Single-lane gravelb
32.2
Four-lane divided highway
99.8
Single-lane dirt
32.2
a [18].
b [16].
Table 2
Summary of the forest residues recoverable per unit and the amount of forest residues processed at the centralized landing. Hours of work required to complete the operation
in the centralized landing.
Recoverable biomass per unit
(t1)
Recoverable biomass per centralized landing
(t1)
Time spent at each centralized landinga
(hours)
Units within MDTb haul
range
Average
695
2469
6
4
Minimum
294
796
23
1
Maximum 1270
4863
142
9
a Time spent at each centralized landing before moving, includes time required to collect, transport, and comminute forest residues from one or many harvest units at a
grinding rate of 34.5 t1 PMH.
b Modiﬁed dump truck.
T.D. Montgomery et al. / Biomass and Bioenergy 85 (2016) 262e270
267

helped to avoid grinding delays by matching or exceeding the
production rate of the grinder. The number of MDTs required for
pre-hauling was directly related to the one-way hauling distance
between the centralized landing and log landing [15].
4.1. Integrating productivity with logistics
The modeling approach was ﬂexible in that it can be adjusted
based on machine or truck size. For example, if a smaller capacity
dump truck were used or if there were less than three recoverable
MDT, the number of centralized landings would then be increased,
thus resulting in shorter pre-haul distances, more move-ins/outs,
and optimized system balance. The work hours at each central-
ized landing can also be adjusted based on recoverable biomass
inputs, or productivity of the grinding or chipping machine by
simply entering in alternative production rate calculations in the
harvest unit attribute table.
Currently, this work plan is only applicable to large-scale
biomass operations
on industrial timberlands;
however, the
model can be modiﬁed to accommodate various scenarios. This
supply chain model is not effective for biomass recovery operations
in fuel hazard reduction or thinnings where forest residues are
distributed over large areas and there is little availability. Moreover,
the machinery used in this model is far too large and costly to run in
small-scale operations or in situations where system balance
cannot be realized. This model is applicable because the study area
consisted of units that were relatively close together (with a
0.1e4.8 km average road distance between adjacent units) and had
large amounts of biomass left on site after the clear cut harvest,
thus allowing for system balance.
By developing a model that details the steps required to develop
a work plan, landowners and contractors will gain the knowledge
required to plan and implement a successful biomass recovery
operation. Using dump trucks to pre-haul forest residues and a
decoupled transportation system that maximizes machine utiliza-
tion rates was instrumental in overcoming the barriers of high cost
of collection and transportation and maximizing transportation
efﬁciency.
4.2. Putting the model into practice
This methodology can be applied to any large-scale industrial
timberland with similar forest residue harvesting equipment. The
model is speciﬁcally tailored to areas with steep slope conditions
where landing locations and road access are constrained by terrain
features. The inputs required to implement the methodology are
also common, though some may be proprietary.
Only one raster dataset and three vector layers were required to
run the spatial analysis and network models. Additional inputs
included recoverable forest residues per hectare, machine pro-
ductivity, and forest freight travel rates based on road surface type.
Once the necessary input layers were acquired, three models were
used to locate forest residue collection points, centralized landings,
and trailer landings. Centralized and trailer landings were then
selected using network analyst based on the lowest cost distance to
each other, as well as to sufﬁcient quantities of forest residues.
Landowners and contractors will be able to determine if a harvest
unit is economically and operationally feasible for a forest residue
recovery operation based on pre-haul and primary haul distances,
as well as by recoverable biomass that can be processed at each
centralized landing (Fig. 6).
The information generated by these models will allow con-
tractors to create timeframes for each unit, which can then be used
to generate a seasonal production timetable that is in accordance
with an overall harvest objective. This timetable allows for man-
agers to monitor their progress and identify problems as the season
progresses. The desired outcome should be an efﬁcient biomass
supply chain for all units, resulting in a high production rate that
will be in accordance with the unit and seasonal timetables, as well
as the overall harvest goal.
4.3. Implications in future studies
Prioritizing units based on temporal and spatial attributes was
not included in this study because these priorities can signiﬁcantly
vary based on the landowner, stand characteristics, and unit loca-
tion; however, including a prioritization could be a possibility for
future studies. Developing a work plan that details when and where
to move equipment based on variables such as timber harvesting
Table 3
Pre-hauling distances and cost of transportation from log landings (collection points) to centralized landings using modiﬁed dump trucks and primary hauling distance and
cost of transportation to haul forest residues from centralized landing to trailer landing using an all-wheel drive (AWD) chip truck.
One-way pre-haul
One-way primary haul
Distance (km)
Haul timea (min)
Distance (km)
Haul timeb (min)
Average
1.36
6.28
4.97
7.19
Minimum
0.16
0.76
3.24
4.71
Maximum
3.07
14.33
7.44
11.05
a Calculated using travel speed of 13 km h1 for all road types/surfaces.
b Calculated using travel speed of 32.20 km h1 on single lane gravel/dirt and 46.67 km h1 on double lane graveled [18].
Table 4
Secondary hauling distance and cost for the highway chip truck from the trailer landing to each bioenergy plant located in Humboldt County, CA.
One-way haul to energy plant
Two-Lane gravela,b (km)
Highwayc (km)
Freewayd (km)
Total (km)
Blue Lake Power, Blue Lake, CA
11
6
24
41
DG Fairhaven Power, Samoa, CA
11
19
19
49
Green Leaf Power, Scotia, CA
11
13
68
92
a Two-lane gravel road averaged travel speed of 47 km h1 [18].
b Two-lane gravel distance was the same for each route as there were only two mainline exits and all three destinations were south of the study area.
c Average single highway travel speed ¼ 89 km h1.
d Average Freeway travel speed ¼ 100 km h1.
T.D. Montgomery et al. / Biomass and Bioenergy 85 (2016) 262e270
268

schedules, and ﬁre hazard risk, aspect, can provide further insight
into developing a more comprehensive work plan. A work plan
methodology incorporating future or preliminary biomass con-
version technologies such as mobile torrefaction units is another
interesting direction that can be developed using a similar
methodology.
5. Conclusion
This study developed a spatial analysis methodology to plan
CBROs by identifying the spatial distribution and amount of
recoverable forest residues based on which timber harvesting
system is utilized. The optimized locations of possible centralized
and trailer landings were also identiﬁed through the spatial
modeling approach and selected based on network analysis. The
resulting models can be used to create a delay-free supply chain
from the harvest unit to the energy facility.
The methodology presented in this study can be applied by
landowners
and
contractors
on
industrial
timberlands
with
economically feasible amounts of recoverable biomass, limited
landing space, and geographically isolated harvest units. The model
was based on a typical biomass harvesting season for an industrial
timberland operation and has been validated with biomass con-
tractors in the region. The information generated from these
models will allow contractors to create timeframes for each unit,
which can then be used to generate a seasonal production time-
table that is in accordance with an overall harvest objective. This
process also allows for managers to monitor their efforts as the
season progresses. The desired outcome will be an efﬁcient biomass
supply chain for all units resulting in a high production rate that
Fig. 6. Centralized biomass recovery operation (CBRO) work plan was used to locate, calculate, and display the locations recoverable biomass, centralized landings, trailer landings,
recoverable biomass per centralized landing, harvesting method, pre-haul routes, amount of MDTs required per pre-haul route, and pre-haul routes to each trailer landing from a
given centralized landing. Road distance is used to calculate haul route distance.
T.D. Montgomery et al. / Biomass and Bioenergy 85 (2016) 262e270
269

will be in accordance with the unit and seasonal timetables as well
as the overall harvest goal.
Acknowledgments
Project funding was provided by the U.S. Department of Agri-
culture (USDA)’s Biomass Research and Development Initiative
Competitive Grant no. 2010-05325. The authors would like to
acknowledge Michael Alcorn of Green Diamond Resource Company
and biomass contractor Steve Morris for providing professional
insight and guidance.
References
[1] H. Harrill, H.S. Han, Application of hook-lift trucks in centralized logging slash
grinding operations, Biofuels 1 (2010) 399e408, http://dx.doi.org/10.4155/
bfs.10.16.
[2] H.S. Han, H.W. Lee, L.R. Johnson, Economic feasibility of an integrated har-
vesting system for small-diameter trees in southwest Idaho, For. Prod. J. 54
(2004) 21e27.
[3] M. Alcorn, Chief Forester, Green Diamond Resource Company, Interview,
Korbel, CA, September 2014.
[4] A.R. Kizha, H.S. Han, T. Montgomery, A. Hohl, Biomass power plant feedstock
procurement: modelling transportation cost zones and the potentials for
competition, Calif. Agric. J. 69 (2015) 184e190.
[5] C. Perpi~na, D. Alfonso, A. Perez-Navarro, E. Pe~nalvo, C. Vargas, R. Cardenas,
Methodology based on geographic information systems for biomass logistics
and transport optimisation, Renew. Energy 34 (2009) 555e565, http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2008.05.047.
[6] P.K. Rørstad, E. Trømborg, E. Bergseng, B. Solberg, others, Combining GIS and
forest modelling in estimating regional supply of harvest residues in Norway,
Silva Fenn. 44 (2010) 435e451.
[7] B. Steubing, R. Zah, P. Waeger, C. Ludwig, Bioenergy in Switzerland: assessing
the domestic sustainable biomass potential, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 14
(2010) 2256e2265, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2010.03.036.
[8] F. Zhang, D.M. Johnson, J.W. Sutherland, A GIS-based method for identifying
the optimal location for a facility to convert forest biomass to biofuel, Biomass
Bioenergy 35 (9) (October 2011) 3951e3961, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.biombioe.2011.06.006.
[9] P. Zambelli, C. Lora, R. Spinelli, C. Tattoni, A. Vitti, P. Zatelli, et al., A GIS de-
cision support system for regional forest management to assess biomass
availability for renewable energy production, Environ. Model. Softw. 38
(2012) 203e213, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2012.05.016.
[10] F. Frombo, R. Minciardi, M. Robba, R. Sacile, A decision support system for
planning biomass-based energy production, Energy 34 (2009) 362e369,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2008.10.012.
[11] T. Ranta, Logging residues from regeneration fellings for biofuel productionea
GIS-based availability analysis in Finland, Biomass Bioenergy 28 (2005)
171e182, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biombioe.2004.08.010.
[12] J.G. Fisher, Logging with a hydraulic excavator: a case study, in: Master of
Forestry Paper, Oregon State University, 1986.
[13] W. Chung, J. Sessions, H.R. Heinimann, An application of a heuristic network
algorithm to cable logging layout design, Int. J. For. Eng. 15 (2004) 11e24.
[14] M. Contreras, W. Chung, A computer approach to ﬁnding an optimal log
landing location and analyzing inﬂuencing factors for ground-based timber
harvesting, Can. J. For. Res. 37 (2007) 276e292, http://dx.doi.org/10.1139/
x06-219.
[15] S. Morris, in: Steve Morris Logging (Ed.), Biomass Contractor, Interview,
Korbel, CA, May 2012.
[16] J. Bisson, S.-K. Han, H.-S. Han, Evaluating the system logistics of a biomass
recovery operation in northern California, in: Proc Counc. for. Eng. COFE Meet.
Missoula MT 11p, 2013.
[17] ESRI,
Welcome
ArcGIS
Help
Libr,
2015.
http://webhelp.esri.com/
arcgisdesktop/10.1/index.cfm.
[18] S.-K. Han, G. Murphy, Predicting loaded on-highway travel times of trucks
hauling woody raw material for improved forest biomass utilization in Ore-
gon, West. J. Appl. For. 27 (2012) 92e99, http://dx.doi.org/10.5849/wjaf.11-
016.
T.D. Montgomery et al. / Biomass and Bioenergy 85 (2016) 262e270
270
