Evaluating the System Logistics of a
Centralized Biomass Recovery
Operation in Northern California
Joel A. Bisson
Sang-Kyun Han
Han-Sup Han
Abstract
In this study, we evaluated the productivity and cost of each component in a unique centralized biomass recovery
operation to determine cost-effective system logistics. The system was divided into three segments: collection, comminution,
and transportation. Cost analysis determined a stump-to-truck and transportation cost of $30.39 and $13.91 per bone dry ton
(BDT), respectively. These costs did not include support equipment, overhead, proﬁt, or risk allowance. Transportation cost
was evaluated for a total one-way haul distance of 15 miles. To control overall cost it is imperative to maintain maximum
productivity of processing, our most expensive component. Therefore, upstream and downstream practices were examined to
determine how they inﬂuenced the system. Analysis of the loader operation showed a 33 percent increase in cycle time when
handling hardwood whole trees piled at a landing, compared with conifer slash piled within the unit. Regression analysis of
the modiﬁed dump truck used in the prehaul conﬁrmed that distance had a signiﬁcant impact on overall centralized biomass
grinding operations. Sensitivity analysis showed that a 20 percent reduction in productivity owing to increased travel time
resulted in a 25 percent increase in grinding cost. A decoupled transport system used all-wheel drive tractors to haul
comminuted biomass from the grinder to a trailer landing, where regular highway tractors completed the trip to the power
plant. This system reduced delays in loading and improved access to the grinding location. Through an understanding of the
complete system, a manager could identify cost saving elements, adjust upstream productivity to meet demand, and reduce
the overall cost of a centralized biomass recovery operation.
The use of forest residues has great potential for
expanding biomass electric power generation on the north
coast of California. Currently, processed submerchantable
trees, limbs and tops from processing trees into sawlogs, and
mill waste supply a third, or 60 megawatts (MW), of
Humboldt County’s electric demand (Schatz Energy
Research Center 2013). The availability of woody biomass
within the county has been estimated to provide enough to
support up to 220 MW (Williams et al. 2007).
In addition to increasing the county’s power generation,
the recovery of woody biomass in the form of logging
residues beneﬁts commercial timberlands by signiﬁcantly
reducing site preparation costs. The direct cost to remove
piled residues is about the same as burning it without the
added risk of an escaped ﬁre and air quality issues (M.
Alcorn, Green Diamond Resource Company, personal
communication, 2012). In addition, the need to control ﬁre
stimulated weed species such as blueblossom (Ceanothus
thyrsiﬂorus) and manzanita (Arctostaphylos manzanita)
with herbicides is reduced. The total cost savings for
reforestation activities can range from $350 to $800 per acre
or more when consequent reductions in carbon emissions,
ﬁre risks, and herbicide application are considered in
biomass recovery (M. Alcorn, personal communication,
2012).
Beneﬁts from biomass recovery can also be realized in
the mechanical removal of slash piles created from fuel
management practices. This method has been used in
National Forests in northern California as an alternative to
The authors are, respectively, Graduate Research Associate, Dept.
of Forestry and Wildland Resources, Humboldt State Univ., Arcata,
California (jab22@humboldt.edu [corresponding author]); Assistant
Professor, Dept. of Forestry and Landscape Architecture, Korea
National College of Agric. and Fisheries, Hwaseong-Si, Gyeonggi-
Do, Republic of Korea (hsk5311@Korea.kr); and Professor, Dept. of
Forestry and Wildland Resources, Humboldt State Univ., Arcata,
California (hh30@humboldt.edu). This paper was received for
publication in July 2014. Article no. 14-00071.
Forest Products Society 2016.
Forest Prod. J. 66(1/2):88–96.
doi:10.13073/FPJ-D-14-00071
88
BISSON ET AL.

open pile burning, avoiding negative effects such as smoke
production, residual tree mortality, and the risk of ﬁre
escape (Han et al. 2010). It also reduces the time required to
proceed to the next step of understory burning, which often
follows pile burning.
Despite these beneﬁts, forest residues remain underused
because of economic and operational barriers related to the
cost of collecting, processing, and transporting a product
with low market value (Han et al. 2002). Pan et al. (2008)
reported a total production cost to feller bunch, skid, and
grind small-diameter trees (,5.0 in.) at $29.16 per bone dry
ton (BDT). Productivity of primary transport of whole trees
to the landing over an average distance of 884 feet was
17.41 BDT per productive machine hour (PMH) at a cost of
$6.08/BDT. To improve productivity and reduce costs for
the whole system, they suggested reducing operational
delays by matching the productivities of each machine in the
operation or ‘‘achieve system balance.’’ In addition, costs
could also be reduced if residues piled at the landing from
other logging operations were used.
A different study evaluated the prehaul of loose residues
densiﬁed into bundles from a landing to a centralized
grinding area using hook-lift trucks. The total production
cost for this operation was $60.98/BDT. The productivity of
loading and hauling bundles 4.5 miles to a grinder was
10.07 BDT/PMH at a cost of $16.62/BDT. Unfortunately,
the bundler and loader were not decoupled, which resulted
in a poor system balance. An improvement in the pairing of
machine capacities and operational productivity could have
resulted in a reduction of cost (Harrill et al. 2009).
In a similar study, hook-lift trucks were used to haul loose
logging slash to a centralized location for processing. The
total production cost to load, haul, and grind was $32.98/
BDT. The difference in productivity of loading (20.10 BDT/
PMH) and hauling (9.93 BDT/PMH) the loose slash led to
bottlenecks in the operation. To reduce costs, the authors
suggested carefully planning a strategic logistical arrange-
ment of machines with multiple hook-lift trucks at a
minimal travel distance (Harrill and Han 2010).
A hook-lift truck used to prehaul hand-piled slash from
shaded fuel break treatments inaccessible by typical
highway chip trucks was also studied. Collection and
prehauling to a central grinding site costs were $31.25/
BDT. It should be noted that prehaul costs were sensitive to
haul distance because of slow travel speeds on winding,
mountainous roads and low slash weight per turn (Han et al.
2010).
In a more recent study (Anderson et al. 2012), the
transportation of unprocessed slash to a concentration yard
using ﬁfth wheel end-dump trucks was compared with an in-
woods grinding system using high-sided dump trucks to
haul ground material to a concentration yard. System costs
were comparable at $23.62 and $24.52 per BDT, respec-
tively. In both cases, the system was dependent on
appropriately balancing productivity rates of individual
machines.
In all of these studies, an understanding of individual
machine productivity and cost was essential in determining
an efﬁcient system balance. To improve the knowledge of
cost reduction methods and system balance techniques, our
study investigated the production cost of collecting,
processing, and transporting forest residues from mixed
conifer even-age harvests on the north coast of California.
The emphasis of this study was to identify key variables that
inﬂuenced the productivity of individual components of the
centralized biomass recovery system. These ﬁndings could
then be used to guide recommendations on ways to establish
and manage system balance in an effort to control cost.
Methods
Study site and biomass recovery system
description
The study was conducted on private industrial timberland
in northern California that typically uses even-aged
management. Forest residues in the form of limbs, tops,
small-diameter trees, and submerchantable trees of mixed
conifer and hardwood were piled along the roadside, within
units, or scattered throughout the harvested units. Six
harvested units ranging from 7 to 33 acres in size were
selected for the study. Biomass recovery operations in all
units followed the same system logistics. The vegetation
was second growth mixed conifer consisting of redwood
(Sequoia sempervirens), Douglas-ﬁr (Pseudotsuga menzie-
sii), and tanoak (Notholithocarpus densiﬂorus). The units
were previously harvested using either a shovel logging or
cable yarding system, depending on ground slope. The
amount of biomass and location of piles was dependent on
the harvest method used. Biomass from processing trees was
typically piled in the unit for shovel logging systems.
Biomass from cable yarded units was piled at the landing.
We characterized the biomass material into three groups:
slash, whole trees, or mixed. Slash was typically limbs and
tops generated from processing logs. Whole trees were
either nonmerchantable conifer or hardwood, such as
tanoak. The amount of biomass removed from a unit ranged
from 12 to 55 BDT/acre and was dependent on harvest unit
size, harvest method, and access.
The study observed the collection, comminution (i.e.,
grinding), and transportation of forest residues (Fig. 1). The
collection segment of the operation started in the harvested
unit with a loader (Linkbelt 3400) using a rotating 10-tine
grapple. The loader collected biomass from piles at roadside
landings, piles within the unit, or scattered residues. Its
primary function was to load an all-wheel drive (AWD)
articulated dump truck (Volvo A35C or Caterpillar D300D)
modiﬁed with additional side walls and a rear gate extension
to increase the normal carrying volume to 50 cubic yards or
more (Fig. 2). In addition, the dump trucks were outﬁtted
with skidder tires for increased traction when driving off
spur roads into the harvested unit. This allowed the truck to
haul material over native surface spurs and single-lane roads
with an average grade of 64 percent to a centralized
grinding site.
The comminution segment was the core of the centralized
biomass recovery operation. It incorporated a majority of
the machines, beginning with the dump truck delivering
material to a loader. The loader (Linkbelt 3400) used a
rotating seven-tine grapple to swing dumped material 908 to
1808 onto the grinder’s (Peterson Paciﬁc 5710C) infeed
conveyer. After processing, the ground material was fed via
conveyor into a positioned chip trailer. This segment of the
operation required adequate space (approximately 10,000
ft2) to accommodate all machines, including passing log
trucks from other operations (S. Morris, Steve Morris
Logging, personal communication, 2013).
The transportation segment was decoupled using tractors
to haul chip trailers from the centralized grinding area to a
FOREST PRODUCTS JOURNAL
Vol. 66, No. 1/2
89

trailer transfer site, where additional tractors would haul the
material the rest of the distance to the power plant. AWD
tractors, modiﬁed from cement trucks (Kenworth, Peterbilt,
and Oshkosh), were used to haul loaded chip trailers an
average of 2 miles, each way, to the transfer site. Multiple
trucks were used to ensure minimal delay in the grinder’s
hot operation. The trailer transfer sites were typically
located roadside on well-traveled, two-lane, rocked roads.
The ﬁnal haul to the power plant was done using regular
highway tractors. The total observed one-way travel from
stump to power plant was 15 miles.
Data collection and analysis
Hourly cost for each machine was calculated using
standard methods (Miyata 1980, Brinker et al. 2002).
Machine rate use factored in the cost to purchase and
modify used machines (Table 1). Detailed time study data
were collected to estimate machine productivity and delays
using standard harvesting work study techniques (Olsen et
al. 1998). Time duration of cycle elements and delays for
each machine were recorded using centiminute (min/100)
stop watches. Independent variables hypothesized to have
an inﬂuence on machine productivity were also recorded for
each cycle. Data were screened for outliers and predictive
equations were developed using ordinary least squares
regression. Normality was tested using the Shapiro-Wilk
test. Homoscedasticity was conﬁrmed by visually examin-
ing residual plots. Multicollinearity within the data was
tested using both condition numbers and variance inﬂation
factors. Parameters with P , 0.05 were considered
signiﬁcant. Calculations were performed using the R
2.15.1 statistical software program (R Core Team 2012).
Moisture content of samples collected from ﬁlled chip
trailers was used to calculate weight in BDT and determine
Figure 1.—A centralized biomass recovery operation using modified dump trucks and loaders to collect and transport biomass (i.e.,
logging slash) piled in recent timber harvest units to a centrally located grinder. The grinder ‘‘hot’’ loads trailers that are pulled by all-
wheel drive tractors to a trailer transfer site. Common highway tractors are then used to pick up the trailers at the trailer transfer site
and complete the haul to a biomass energy facility.
Figure 2.—Loaded modified dump truck heading to a centralized grinding location. Note how the extended side walls and rear tail
gate increase carrying capacity..
90
BISSON ET AL.

production rates (BDT/PMH). Moisture content was calcu-
lated using a modiﬁed version of the American Society of
Agricultural Engineers (ASAE) Standard S358.2 protocols
(ASAE 2003). Samples were collected by ﬁlling a 5-gallon
bucket from three locations along the top of a chip trailer.
The sample was mixed, and a 1-gallon subsample was taken
for analysis. Samples were dried at 1038C for 48 hours, as
opposed to 24 hours per protocol. The samples were
reweighed to determine wet basis moisture content.
Calculations for transportation of slash and ground
material requiring distance, rate of speed, and road grade
were collected using a hand-held Garmin Csx60 GPS unit
and analyzed using ArcMap 10.0 (Environmental Systems
Research Institute 2011).
Loading modified dump trucks
The loader’s activities included swinging empty, grap-
pling, and swinging loaded. The swinging empty cycle
began when the arm swung away from the dump truck bed
and stopped when it made contact with material. Grappling
was timed from ﬁrst contact to when the arm began its
swing to the dump truck. Swinging loaded began when the
arm swung toward the dump truck and stopped over the
dump bed. Pile type, location of pile, species, and arm swing
degree were estimated visually as predictors for regression
analysis. Time associated with movement to a new pile and
collecting material was also recorded to evaluate its
contribution to productivity. Compacting or sorting material
was not recorded because this activity rarely occurred. To
calculate productivity, the average BDT per dump truck was
divided by the average time to load a dump truck. An
average BDT per dump truck was the average BDT per chip
trailer obtained from scale tickets divided by the average
number of dump truck loads needed to ﬁll a chip trailer.
Dump trucks prehauling forest residues to a
centralized grinding site
The round-trip dump truck cycle elements include
traveling empty, positioning empty, loading, traveling
loaded, positioning loaded, and unloading. Traveling empty
began when the dump bed returned to the lowered position
as it pulled away from the centralized grinding area and
ended when it stopped to position itself. Positioning empty
started when it began backing into position and concluded
when it stopped next to the loader. This is when loading
began, and it ended when the dump truck pulled away.
Traveling loaded ended when the dump truck stopped to
position for unloading. Positioning loaded started when the
truck began to back into position and ended when it stopped
next to the loader. Unloading began when the truck stopped
backing up and ended when the dump bed returned to the
lowered position. Slope and distance were recorded when
traveling and positioning. Material type (i.e., whole tree or
slash) loaded into the truck was also recorded.
Loader and grinder in the centralized
grinding site
Productivity of the loader and grinder, positioned at the
centralized grinding area, was calculated by dividing the
average BDT per chip trailer obtained from scale tickets by
the average time to ﬁll one chip trailer. This production rate
was assumed to be equal for both machines because any
delay in the loader would directly cause a delay with the
grinder.
AWD tractor and chip trailer shuttling
containers
The AWD tractor’s cycle elements included traveling
loaded, positioning loaded, unhooking, traveling to empty
trailer, positioning to hook up trailer, hooking up trailer,
traveling empty, positioning empty, and loading. The
traveling loaded cycle began when the truck pulled away
from the grinder and ended when it came to a stop to
position for unloading. This was the beginning of position-
ing loaded, which ended when the truck stopped moving.
Unhooking started when the truck stopped positioning and
lasted until it pulled away without a trailer. Traveling to the
new trailer ended when it stopped in front of the empty
trailer. Positioning to hook up trailer ﬁnished when it
stopped underneath the new trailer. This started the hooking
cycle and lasted until the truck pulled away with the empty
trailer. Traveling empty ended when it stopped for
positioning empty. Positioning empty ﬁnished when it
stopped in position to pull in front of the grinder. Loading
began when the trailer pulled underneath the grinder’s
conveyor. Other variables recorded were distance of each
travel segment, average road slope, and weights from scale
tickets.
Highway tractor and chip trailer hauling
ground material to a power plant
The cycle elements recorded were similar to the AWD
chip truck except when the truck was unloading at the power
plant. Unloading started when the truck stopped on the truck
tipper and ended when the tipper returned to level position.
Table 1.—Hourly cost for the machines used in the centralized biomass recovery operation.
Machine
Initial price ($)a
Utilization rate (%)b
Total hourly cost ($/PMH)c
Linkbelt 3400 loader with dump truck
345,000
80
244.57
Volvo A35C dump truck
75,000
80
115.59
Linkbelt 3400 loader with grinder
345,000
85
231.19
Peterson Pacific 5710C grinder
650,000
85
448.02
AWD tractord
80,000
50
117.62
42-ft trailer
6,000
35
3.89
Highway truck tractor
144,000
85
86.03
a Modiﬁcation cost included.
b Rates estimated by contractor.
c Labor cost included. PMH ¼ productive machine hour.
d AWD ¼ all-wheel drive.
FOREST PRODUCTS JOURNAL
Vol. 66, No. 1/2
91

The three road classes traveled (i.e., double-lane rock, two-
lane paved, or highway) were also recorded.
Total system cost
Individual productivity rates were calculated for each
machine to determine its contribution to the system. The
system cost of this hot operation was based on the grinder
and loader as the limiting production rate. When production
of other machines fell below this limit, more machines were
added. Therefore, the sum of costs of all machines ($/BDT)
was divided by the limiting production rate (BDT/PMH) to
get the system cost.
Results and Discussion
Moisture content analysis
Moisture content samples were collected from 22 trucks.
The average green weight of a chip van load was 22.5 tons
(SD ¼ 1.8 tons) with an average wet basis moisture content
of 25 percent (SD ¼ 7%). Variation in moisture content
could be a result of varying material type, species, or
environmental conditions during the operation.
Loading activity analysis
Three primary activities were observed with the loader:
loading the dump trucks, compiling scattered material, and
repositioning to a new pile. The average time spent loading
a dump truck was 4.74 minutes using an average of 10
grapple loads. The average time spent collecting material
was 3.77 minutes using an average of 9.59 grapples. The
total delay-free time recorded consisted of collecting (48%),
grappling material (21%), swinging loaded (18%), and
swinging empty (13%). Occasionally the loader would
reposition. On average this time took less than 0.30 minute.
The productivity of the loader averaged 46.57 BDT/PMH
with a production cost of $5.25/BDT. This productivity is
comparable to that found by Harrill et al. (2009) in the
Sierra Nevada Mountains when loading densiﬁed bundles of
slash into hook-lift trucks.
Regression analysis was used to see whether loaded
swing arc degree, empty swing arc degree, pile type (whole
tree or slash), pile location (in the unit, roadside, or not piled
but scattered throughout the unit), and pile species
(hardwood, conifer, or a mix) had a signiﬁcant effect on
cycle time (Table 2). Despite efforts to reduce outliers and
inﬂuential observations in the data, the model generated had
a low r2 value. The model’s inability to explain variation
does limit its ability to accurately predict, but can provide an
inference on trends in the data. Whole tree piles were found
to increase cycle time compared with slash. This may be
because the size and length of whole trees make them more
difﬁcult to handle. Pile location also had an inﬂuence on
cycle time. Material collected in the unit inﬂuenced cycle
time the least compared with roadside material. This may be
a result of the type of material handled at each location.
Roadside material was typically whole trees, which tend to
be more difﬁcult to handle and load compared with loose
slash pile in units. Scattered material increased cycle time
the greatest. Cases with mixed material were not found to be
signiﬁcant (P ¼ 0.81). In general the harvest system used
determined the locations of piled material. In ground-based
units, whole tree hardwoods and mixed conifer slash was
either piled on the roadside, piled within the unit, or
scattered throughout. Cable units typically had piles along
the roadside or landings. Our ﬁndings suggest that how and
where residuals are left can have an impact on future
biomass recovery operations, because accessibility and
organizing material into piles were found to be the greatest
inﬂuences on cycle time. In addition, harvesting method can
be a major factor affecting the amount and location of
material.
Dump truck prehauling operations
The dump truck round-trip cycle time averaged 12.69
minutes traveling an average one-way distance of 0.48 mile
on an average grade of 64 percent. It traveled at an average
speed of 9.30 miles per hour (mph) carrying 5.63 BDT per
trip. Productivity averaged 26.16 BDT/PMH, resulting in a
production cost of $4.42/BDT. This rate is more than double
the production reported from both Harrill et al. (2009)
hauling bundles with hook-lift trucks and Harrill and Han
(2010) hauling loose slash with the same types of trucks. At
this rate, a single dump truck could not meet the grinder’s
production. For this reason, two to four dump trucks were
used depending on travel distance.
On average, a delay-free cycle consisted of loading
(34%), traveling loaded (23%), traveling empty (20%),
positioning empty (13%), positioning loaded (4%), and
unloading (5%). The difference in time when traveling
loaded compared with empty was attributed to slower travel
speeds to avoid material falling off the back, especially on
steeper road grades. Slower speeds were also noticed when
empty dump trucks backed down single-lane spur roads to
position for loading. Long positioning distance due to lack
of turn around locations also increased cycle time.
Regression analysis did not show any signiﬁcant variables
(P , 0.05) inﬂuencing cycle time when the model included
traveling empty or loaded distances, slope, or material type
(Table 3). However, a reduced model regressing delay-free
time by total distance traveled was highly signiﬁcant (P ,
0.05; Table 4). A sensitivity analysis using the reduced
regression model shows production costs starting at $2.74/
BDT at a one-way distance of a quarter mile with an
increase of $0.83/BDT for every additional quarter mile.
Centralized grinding productivity and cost
The rate of production was assumed to be the same for the
loader and grinder. The two machines worked as a team, and
any delay in the loader’s production would have directly
Table 2.—Delay-free average cycle time equation (model P ,
0.05, r2 ¼ 0.1273, n ¼ 482) for loading loose logging slash or
hardwood whole trees into a modified dump truck.
Parameter
Estimate (s)
SE
F
Mean
P
Intercept
23.28
3.10
10.05
,0.05
Loaded swing arc (458–2708)
þ0.018
0.01
146
,0.05
Empty swing arc (458–2708)
þ0.006
0.01
145
0.22
Pile type (whole tree)
þ2.63
1.82
0.02
Pile type (slash)a
þ0.00
3.10
,0.05
Pile location (in unit)
3.94
3.10
,0.05
Pile location (roadside)a
þ0.00
1.86
,0.05
Pile location (scattered)
þ2.44
2.37
0.09
Pile species (conifer)a
þ0.00
3.10
,0.05
Pile species (hardwood)
þ3.08
2.20
0.02
Pile species (mix)
0.26
1.77
0.81
a Reference variables.
92
BISSON ET AL.

affected the grinder. The grinder processed an average of
17.15 BDT in 26.05 minutes for an average production rate
of 38.04 BDT/PMH. The grinder had the highest machine
cost ($448.02/PMH) compared with any other machine in
this operation. Production cost was $11.78/BDT for the
grinder and $6.10/BDT for the loader, for a total of $17.87/
BDT. Samples taken from chip trailers and analyzed in the
laboratory determined a moisture content range of 14 to 38
percent.
Transportation of ground materials to
a power plant
The AWD tractor and chip trailer had an average cycle
time of 47.99 minutes on an average one-way distance of
2.13 miles. Productivity for the tractor and trailer was 26.47
BDT/PMH. For this reason, at least two tractors were
needed to meet grinder production. Tractor and trailer
production costs were $4.44/BDT and $0.15/BDT, respec-
tively, for a total of $4.59/BDT. The greatest percentage of
time was spent waiting while being loaded (53%). Travel
time was 37 percent of overall time. Traveling and
positioning empty (15%) was similar to traveling and
positioning loaded (12%). This difference was in the extra
time needed to position the truck and empty trailer within
the limited space of the centralized grinding area. The
remaining percentage was for transferring trailers (10%) and
waiting to be loaded (9%). Sensitivity analysis shows that
production costs increase $0.44/BDT for every additional
quarter-mile one-way distance. More data would be needed
to develop a regression model and develop further analysis.
It should be noted that production cost could signiﬁcantly
increase with an increase in hauling distance. One
signiﬁcant advantage of using modiﬁed AWD tractors was
their capability of hauling loaded trailers over adverse forest
road conditions. This reduced the need to put a centralized
grinding site on a main haul road that could be accessed by
normal highway tractors. This reduced dump truck prehaul
distances and increased the cost-effective range of the
operation.
The standard highway tractors used to pick up loaded
chip trailers traveled an average of 13 miles one way with a
cycle time of 86.34 minutes. The tractors hauled 11.92
BDT/PMH at a combined tractor and trailer cost of $7.53/
BDT. Traveling empty time (29.15 min) was nearly the
same as loaded traveling time (30.65 min). The truck’s route
to the power plant was over two-lane rock and paved roads
only. The average speed on the two-lane rock road was 27
mph for a one-way distance of 9.5 miles. The average speed
on two-lane paved roads was 31 mph at a distance of 3.4
miles. Compared with AWD, highway tractors had half the
production rate even though they pulled the same weight.
This is largely because of the difference in transportation
distances and speed of travel.
System balance directly affecting
productivity and cost
This centralized biomass recovery operation involved a
combination of machines to collect, process, and transport
material. The balance of production within the system is
important because it has a direct effect on the overall
production cost. Unused capacity resulting from an
imbalanced system will reduce units of output, increasing
ﬁxed costs of underused functions, which in turn drives up
per-unit production costs (Rummer 2008).
The highest per-unit production cost observed was the
grinding operation at $17.87/BDT for both loader and
grinder (Table 5). To minimize total production cost, the
operation would ﬁrst need to maximize processing produc-
tivity by reducing any delay created between the loader and
grinder. Four percent of the total time observed was
characterized as operational delay (Table 6). A majority
(71%) of this delay represented waiting on the dump truck
to deliver more material. Delay in delivering biomass to the
grinder could have come from either the loader or the dump
truck. Observations of the loader revealed a very efﬁcient
operation with less than 1 percent delay overall. The dump
truck, on the other hand, experienced delay 17 percent of the
total time observed. A little more than half (51%) of this
delay occurred when waiting for another dump truck to
ﬁnish being loaded. The remaining delay was waiting for the
loader to compile biomass (43%) and waiting for other
operational and personal delays (6%). These ﬁndings
suggest that compiling scattered material is leading to
Table 4.—Reduced regression model to predict average cycle
time (model P , 0.05, r2 ¼ 0.78, n ¼ 70) for dump truck to
deliver material over varying distances.
Parameter
Estimate (s)
SE
F
Mean
P
Intercept
329.76
38.55
248.90
,0.05
Total distance traveled (ft)
þ0.05
0.01
2,523
,0.05
Table 3.—Delay-free average cycle time equation (model P , 0.05, r2 ¼ 0.78, n ¼ 62) for a dump truck delivering slash, whole trees,
or mixed loads to a centralized grinding site.
Parameter
Estimate (s)
SE
F
Avg. values observed
P
Intercept
396.25
90.72
19.63
,0.05
Traveling empty, distance (ft)
þ0.07
0.16
2,325
0.44
Traveling empty, slope (%)
þ46.96
143.37
1
0.59
Positioning empty, distance (ft)
þ0.13
0.16
297
0.17
Traveling loaded, distance (ft)
þ0.012
0.16
2,363
0.90
Traveling loaded, slope (%)
þ30.33
144.39
1
0.78
Positioning loaded, distance (ft)
0.08
0.46
112
0.77
Load (slash)
82.79
138.63
NAa
0.33
Load (whole tree)
þ6.46
90.72
NA
,0.05
Load (mixed)b
þ0.00
54.65
NA
0.84
a NA ¼ not applicable.
b Mixed material is a combination of whole trees and slash.
FOREST PRODUCTS JOURNAL
Vol. 66, No. 1/2
93

inefﬁciencies downstream, and therefore piling material
during harvesting activities could reduce costs in biomass
recovery operations.
Balancing the collection segment to match grinding
production can also be challenging when considering the
spatial diversity of material inﬂuencing travel time and
productivity. To assist in balancing upstream functions, a
sensitivity analysis was conducted to calculate the produc-
tivity of different truck combinations at various distances. A
single dump truck could travel 0.38 mile one way and meet
the 38 BDT/PMH grinder demand. At 1.25 miles, its
productivity drops to 19 BDT/PMH or 50 percent of the
demand, requiring an additional truck to keep the system in
balance and the overall operational cost at a minimum.
Analysis on the effects of dump truck productivity on the
combined loader and grinder cost revealed that a 20 percent
drop in dump truck production would result in a 25 percent
increase in comminution cost or $4.45/BDT (Fig. 3).
A decoupled transportation system was successfully used
to minimize potential delays between the comminution and
transportation segments. The ‘‘hot’’ load operation, where
material is directly loaded into a trailer while grinding,
required a minimum of two chip trucks to ensure an empty
one was always available for loading. During the operation,
only 2 percent of the total time observed was in delay. The
time an empty truck spent waiting for the previous truck to
ﬁnish being loaded (4.25 min) was not considered delay
time. This buffer ensured that a truck was available to load.
Managing downstream productivity required matching the
right amount of chip trucks to the distance traveled to the
transfer location.
The loaded trailer pick up at the transfer location required
that an empty trailer be available every 26 minutes. Eight
empty trailers were employed to ensure availability. The
loaded trailers were taken to one of three local power plants
located 13, 31, or 57 miles away. The destination varied
depending on the loaded material because each facility had
general feedstock demands. Delays of 12 percent while
waiting to be unloaded were observed.
The total stump-to-truck cost for this operation was
$30.39/BDT. This is greater than the reported $24.52/BDT
cost from a similar study investigating high-sided dump
trucks used to prehaul material (Anderson et al. 2012). As in
Anderson’s study, it should be noted that this study’s
estimated total cost does not include overhead, proﬁt, and
risk allowance, nor supporting equipment needed for the
operation. The total system cost including transportation
was $44.30/BDT. These cost ﬁgures can increase signiﬁ-
cantly with an increase in transportation distance.
Table 6.—Delays observed for machines used in the collection and comminution segments of a centralized biomass recovery
operation.
Machine(s)
Total time observed (min)
Total delay observed, min (%)a
Delay by type, min (%)b
Reason
Loader
227
1 (,1)
1 (100)
Operational
Dump truck
952
164 (17)
71 (43)
Waiting on loader in unit
83 (51)
Waiting on second dump truck
2 (1)
Waiting on grinder loader
7 (4)
Operational
1 (1)
Personal
Loader and grinder
139
51 (36)
36 (71)
Waiting on dump truck
5 (10)
Remove choker
6 (11)
Operational
4 (8)
Personal
a Percent delay of total time observed.
b Percent delay of total delay observed.
Table 5.—Productivity and cost of a ‘‘hot operation’’ centralized biomass recovery system with decoupled highway transportation.
Machine
Delay-free productivity (BDT/PMH)a
No. of machines
Cost ($/BDT)
Avg. distance (mi)b
Loader in unit with dump truck
46.57
1
6.43
—
Dump truck
26.16
2
6.08
0.48
Loader with grinder
38.04
1
6.10
—
Grinder
38.04
1
11.78
—
AWD truck tractorc
26.47
2
6.38
2.13
Decoupled transportation using a trailer transfer location
Highway truck tractord
11.92
1–3
7.53
13.00
Total system
38.04e
8–10
44.30f
a BDT/PMH ¼ bone dry ton per productive machine hour.
b One-way distance.
c All-wheel drive truck tractor and trailer.
d Including two trailers.
e 38.04 BDT/PMH was the limiting production rate in the system. Therefore, it was used to calculate cost for each machine in ‘‘hot’’ system. (Machine cost3
number of machines)/limiting productivity rate.
f Total cost does not include other costs such as supporting equipment (fuel, water, maintenance trucks, overhead, and risk/proﬁt allowance).
94
BISSON ET AL.

Conclusions
This study evaluated the productivity and cost of
collecting, comminuting, and transporting biomass to better
understand a centralized biomass recovery operation’s
logistics. Each component in the system was analyzed to
identify key variables that inﬂuence overall system balance.
Productivity for different machines varied from 12 to 47
BDT/PMH with a cost range of $5.87 to $11.78 per BDT.
The total stump-to-truck system cost was $30.39/BDT, with
an additional $13.91/BDT for transportation to the power
plant.
The collection segment of the operation used a loader and
two modiﬁed dump trucks to prehaul biomass at a cost of
$12.51/BDT. The type of material and location inﬂuenced
loading cycle times. Whole tree material and material
scattered within the unit both increased cycle times. In
addition, the harvesting system was found to be a major
factor affecting the amount and location of residuals. Our
ﬁndings suggest that how and where a harvest contractor
leaves residues can have an impact on a biomass recovery
operation.
Prehauling with dump trucks (26.16 BDT/PMH) over an
average one-way distance of a half mile was more
productive than other methods found in the literature.
Analysis varying the amount of truck and one-way travel
distance determined that a second truck would be needed at
1.25 miles to meet the grinder’s production rate. This type
of analysis can be important when designing a work plan to
achieve system balance.
The comminution segment was the hub of the operation.
It provided the demand that upstream and downstream
production had to meet. The loader and grinder produced
38.04 BDT/PMH at a combined cost of $17.87/BDT. The
variability of dump truck productivity (owing to distance
and number of trucks used) on comminution costs revealed
that a 20 percent drop in dump truck production would
result in a 25 percent increase in comminution cost or $4.47/
BDT. This is mainly a result of high operating costs for the
grinder and suggests that careful planning of prehaul
distances can reduce potential delay and control cost.
The transportation segment was successful in limiting
comminution delays while directly loading into the chip
trailer by using a decoupled system. This system required
two to three AWD tractors, a trailer transfer site, and
additional highway tractors to haul the remaining distance to
the power plant. The AWD tractors were capable of hauling
loaded trailers over adverse forest road conditions at a rate
of 26.47 BDT/PMH for $6.38/BDT. The ﬁnal leg of
transportation, which traveled a greater distance, had a
production rate of 11.92 BDT/PMH with a cost of $7.53/
BDT. Downstream production efﬁciency was clearly due to
a decoupling of the transportation from comminution
segment. The use of AWD tractors reduced the need to
put a centralized grinding area on a main haul route, which
reduced dump truck travel distances and increased the
overall extent of biomass recovery operation. In addition, it
decoupled the hot operation from downstream transporta-
tion, reducing potential delays. A similar system conﬁgu-
ration is recommended if the equipment is available.
This study provided a productivity and cost for each
machine in a centralized biomass recovery operation using
unique equipment. In addition, sensitivity analysis on travel
distances for transport machines provided additional
information to better understand total production costs,
which could be useful to managers when planning similar
biomass recovery operations.
Figure 3.—Regression model was used to estimate the change in the potential productivity of one or two dump trucks delivering
residues to a centralized grinder as travel distance increased. A reduction in dump truck productivity resulted in an increase in
processing cost (i.e., loader and grinder cost). The model does not consider delays caused by interaction between two dump trucks
at the loader, in transit, or at the grinder. BDT ¼ bone dry ton; PMH ¼ productive machine hour.
FOREST PRODUCTS JOURNAL
Vol. 66, No. 1/2
95

Acknowledgments
Funding for this study was provided by the Biomass
Research and Development Initiative (BRDI) of the
USDA’s National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA),
with in-kind support from the Green Diamond Resource Co.
and Steve Morris Logging.
Literature Cited
Anderson, N., W. Chung, D. Loefﬂer, and J. G. Jones. 2012. A
productivity and cost comparison of two systems for producing
biomass fuel from roadside forest treatment residues. Forest Prod. J.
62(3):222–233.
American Society of Agricultural Engineers (ASAE). 2003. S358.2—
Moisture measurement—Forages. In: ASAE Standards. 47th ed.
ASAE, St. Joseph, Michigan. 595 pp.
Brinker, R., J. Kinard, B. Rummer, and B. Lanford. 2002. Machine rates
for selected forest harvesting machines. USDA Forest Service,
Southern Research Station, Asheville, North Carolina. 32 pp.
Environmental Systems Research Institute (ESRI). 2011. ArcGIS
Desktop: Release 10. ESRI, Redlands, California.
Han, H.-S., J. Halbrook, F. Pan, and L. Salazar. 2010. Economic
evaluation of a roll-off trucking system removing forest biomass
resulting from shaded fuelbreak treatments. Biomass Bioenergy
34:1006–1016.
Han, H.-S., H. W. Lee, L. R. Johnson, R. L. Folk, and T. M. Gorman.
2002. Economic feasibility of small wood harvesting and utilization on
the Boise National Forest—Cascade, Idaho City, Emmett Ranger
Districts. College of Natural Resources, Department of Forest
Products, University of Idaho, Moscow. 61 pp.
Harrill, H. and H.-S. Han. 2010. Application of hook-lift trucks in
centralized slash grinding operations. Biofuels 1(3):399–408.
Harrill, H., H.-S. Han, and F. Pan. 2009. Combining slash bundling with
in-woods grinding operations. Lake Tahoe Council on Forest
Engineering. The 2009 COFE Annual Meeting, June 15–18, 2009,
Lake Tahoe, California. 14 pp.
Miyata, E. 1980. Determining ﬁxed and operating costs of logging
equipment. General Technical Report NC-55. USDA Forest Service,
North Central Forest Experiment Station, St. Paul, Minnesota.
Olsen, E., M. M. Hossain, and M. E. Miller. 1998. Statistical comparison
of methods used in harvesting work studies. Research Contribution 23.
Forest Research Laboratory, Oregon State University, Corvallis.
Pan, F., H.-S. Han, L. R. Johnson, and W. J. Elliot. 2008. Production and
cost of harvesting, processing, and transporting small-diameter (,5
inches) trees for energy. Forest Prod. J. 58(5):47–53.
R Core Team. 2012. R: A language and environment for statistical
computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna. http://
www.R-project.org/.
Rummer, B. 2008. Assessing the cost of fuel reduction treatments: A
critical review. Forest Policy Econ. 10:355–362.
Schatz Energy Research Center (SERC). 2013. RePower Humboldt: A
Strategic Plan for Renewable Energy Security and Prosperity. SERC,
Arcata, California.
Williams, R. B., B. M. Jenkins, and S. Kaffka. 2007. An assessment of
biomass resources in California. Prepared for the California Energy
Commission. Contract No. 500-01-016. University of California,
Davis.
96
BISSON ET AL.
